Dialogues of Sulpitius Severus (Sulpitius Severus)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

Dialogues of Sulpitius Severus.

  Dialogue I.

 Concerning the Virtues of the Monks of the East.

 Chapter I.

 When I and a Gallic friend had assembled in one place, this Gaul being
 a man very dear to me, both on account of his remembrance of Martin
 (for he had been one of his disciples), and on account of his own
 merits, my friend Postumianus joined us. He had just, on my account,
 returned from the East, to which, leaving his native country, he had
 gone three years before. Having embraced this most affectionate friend,
 and kissed both his knees and his feet, we were for a moment or two, as
 it were, astounded; and, shedding mutual tears of joy, we walked about
 a good deal. But by and by we sat down on our garments of sackcloth
 laid upon the ground. Then Postumianus, directing his looks towards me
 is the first to speak, and says,--

 "When I was in the remote parts of Egypt, I felt a desire to go on as
 far as the sea. I there met with a merchant vessel, which was ready to
 set sail with the view of making for Narbonne. [83] The same night you
 seemed in a dream to stand beside me, and laying hold of me with your
 hand, to lead me away that I should go on board that ship. Ere long,
 when the dawn dispersed the darkness, and when I rose up in the place
 in which I had been resting, as I revolved my dream in my mind, I was
 suddenly seized with such a longing after you, that without delay I
 went on board the ship. Landing on the thirtieth day at Marseilles, I
 came on from that and arrived here on the tenth day--so prosperous a
 voyage was granted to my dutiful desire of seeing you. Do thou only,
 for whose sake I have sailed over so many seas, and have traversed such
 an extent of land, yield yourself over to me to be embraced and enjoyed
 apart from all others."

 "I truly," said I, "while you were still staying in Egypt, was ever
 holding fellowship with you in my mind and thoughts, and affection for
 you had full possession of me as I meditated upon you day and night.
 Surely then, you cannot imagine that I will now fail for a single
 moment to gaze with delight upon you, as I hang upon your lips. I will
 listen to you, I will converse with you, while no one at all is
 admitted to our retirement, which this remote cell of mine furnishes to
 us. For, as I suppose, you will not take amiss the presence of this
 friend of ours, the Gaul, who, as you perceive, rejoices with his whole
 heart over this arrival of yours, even as I do myself."

 "Quite right," said Postumianus, "that Gaul will certainly be retained
 in our company; who, although I am but little acquainted with him, yet
 for this very reason that he is greatly beloved by you, cannot fail
 also to be dear to me. This must especially be the case, since he is of
 the school of Martin; nor will I grudge, as you desire, to talk with
 you in connected discourse, since I came hither for this very purpose,
 that I should, even at the risk of being tedious, respond to the desire
 of my dear Sulpitius "--and in so speaking he affectionately took hold
 of me with both his hands.

 [83] Narbona, more commonly called Narbo Martius; the modern Narbonne.

 Chapter II.

 "Truly" said I, "you have clearly proved how much a sincere love can
 accomplish, inasmuch as, for my sake, you have traveled over so many
 seas, and such an extent of land, journeying, so to speak, from the
 rising of the sun in the East to where he sets in the West. Come, then,
 because we are here in a retired spot by ourselves, and not being
 otherwise occupied, feel it our duty to attend to your discourse, come,
 I pray thee, relate to us the whole history of your wanderings. Tell
 us, if you please, how the faith of Christ is flourishing in the East;
 what peace the saints enjoy; what are the customs of the monks; and
 with what signs and miracles Christ is working in his servants. For
 assuredly, because in this region of ours and amid the circumstances in
 which we are placed, life itself has become a weariness to us, we shall
 gladly hear from you, if life is permitted to Christians even in the
 desert."

 In reply to these words, Postumianus declares, "I shall do as I see you
 desire. But I beg you first to tell me, whether all those persons whom
 I left here as priests, continue the same as I knew them before taking
 my departure."

 Then I exclaim, "Forbear, I beseech thee, to make any enquiry on such
 points, which you either, I think, know as well as I do, or if you are
 ignorant of them, it is better that you should hear nothing regarding
 them. I cannot, however, help saying, that not only are those, of whom
 you enquire, no better than they were when you knew them, but even that
 one man, who was formerly a great friend of mine, and in whose
 affection I was wont to find some consolation from the persecutions of
 the rest, has shown himself more unkind towards me than he ought to
 have been. However, I shall not say anything harsher regarding him,
 both because I once esteemed him as a friend, and loved him even when
 he was deemed my enemy. I shall only add that while I was silently
 meditating on these things in my thoughts, this source of grief deeply
 afflicted me, that I had almost lost the friendship of one who was both
 a wise and a religious man. But let us turn away from these topics
 which are full of sorrow, and let us rather listen to you, according to
 the promise which you gave some time ago."

 "Let it be so," exclaimed Postumianus. And on his saying this, we all
 kept silence, while, moving his robe of sackcloth, on which he had sat
 down, a little nearer me, he thus began.

 Chapter III.

 "Three years ago, Sulpitius, at which time, leaving this neighborhood,
 I bade thee farewell, after setting sail from Narbonne, on the fifth
 day we entered a port of Africa: so prosperous, by the will of God, had
 been the voyage. I had in my mind a great desire to go to Carthage, to
 visit those localities connected with the saints, and, above all, to
 worship at the tomb [84] of the martyr Cyprian. On the fifth day we
 returned to the harbor, and launched forth into the deep. Our
 destination was Alexandria; but as the south wind was against us, we
 were almost driven upon the Syrtis; [85] the cautious sailors, however,
 guarding against this, stopped the ship by casting anchor. The
 continent of Africa then lay before our eyes; and, landing on it in
 boats, when we perceived that the whole country round was destitute of
 human cultivation, I penetrated farther inland, for the purpose of more
 carefully exploring the locality. About three miles from the sea-coast,
 I beheld a small hut in the midst of the sand, the roof of which, to
 use the expression [86] of Sallust, was like the keel of a ship. It was
 close to [87] the earth, and was floored with good strong boards, not
 because any very heavy rains are there feared (for, in fact, such a
 thing as rain has there never even been heard of), but because, such is
 the strength of the winds in that district, that, if at any time only a
 little breath of air begins there to be felt, even when the weather is
 pretty mild, a greater wreckage takes place in those lands than on any
 sea. No plants are there, and no seeds ever spring up, since, in such
 shifting soil, the dry sand is swept along with every motion of the
 winds. But where some promontories, back from the sea, act as a check
 to the winds, the soil, being somewhat more firm, produces here and
 there some prickly grass, and that furnishes fair pasturage for sheep.
 The inhabitants live on milk, while those of them that are more
 skillful, or, so to speak, more wealthy, make use of barley bread. That
 is the only kind of grain which flourishes there, for barley, by the
 quickness of its growth in that sort of soil, generally escapes the
 destruction caused by the fierce winds. So rapid is its growth that we
 are told it is ripe on the thirtieth day after the sowing of the seed.
 But there is no reason why men should settle there, except that all are
 free from the payment of taxes. The sea-coast of the Cyrenians is
 indeed the most remote, bordering upon that desert which lies between
 Egypt and Africa, [88] and through which Cato formerly, when fleeing
 from Cæsar, led an army. [89]

 [84] "Ad sepulchrum Cypriani martyris adorare."

 [85] This was probably the Syrtis Minor, a dangerous sandbank in the
 sea on the northern coast of Africa; it is now known as the Gulf of
 Cabes. The Syrtis Major lay farther to the east, and now bears the name
 of the Gulf of Sidra.

 [86] "Ædificia Numidarum agrestium, quæ mapalia illi vocant, oblonga,
 incurvis lateribus tecta, quasi navium carinæ sunt."--Sall. Jug. XVIII.
 8.

 [87] The hut was perhaps built on piles rising slightly above the
 ground.

 [88] The term Africa here used in its more restricted sense to denote
 the territory of Carthage.

 [89] This took place in the spring of the year b.c. 47.

 Chapter IV.

 I therefore bent my steps toward the hut which I had beheld from a
 distance. There I find an old man, in a garment made of skins, turning
 a mill with his hand. He saluted and received us kindly. We explain to
 him that we had been forced to land on that coast, and were prevented
 by the continued raging of the sea [90] from being able at once to
 pursue our voyage; that, having made our way on shore, we had desired,
 as is in keeping with ordinary human nature, to become acquainted with
 the character of the locality, and the manners of the inhabitants. We
 added that we were Christians, and that the principal object of our
 enquiry was whether there were any Christians amid these solitudes.
 Then, indeed, he, weeping for joy, throws himself at our feet; and,
 kissing us over and over again, invites us to prayer, while, spreading
 on the ground the skins of sheep, he makes us sit down upon them. He
 then serves up a breakfast truly luxurious, [91] consisting of the half
 of a barley cake. Now, we were four, while he himself constituted the
 fifth. He also brought in a bundle of herbs, of which I forget the
 name, but they were like mint, were rich in leaves, and yielded a taste
 like honey. We were delighted with the exceedingly sweet taste of this
 plant, and our hunger was fully satisfied."

 Upon this I smiled, and said to my friend the Gaul, "What, Gaul, do you
 think of this? Are you pleased with a bundle of herbs and half a barley
 cake as a breakfast for five men?"

 Then he, being an exceedingly modest person, and blushing somewhat,
 while he takes my [92] joke in good part, says, "You act, Sulpitius, in
 a way like yourself, for you never miss any opportunity which is
 offered you of joking us on the subject of our fondness for eating. But
 it is unkind of you to try to force us Gauls to live after the fashion
 of angels; and yet, through my own liking for eating, I could believe
 that even the angels are in the habit of eating; for such is my
 appetite that I would be afraid even singly to attack that half barley
 cake. However, let that man of Cyrene be satisfied with it, to whom it
 is either a matter of necessity or nature always to feel hungry; or,
 again, let those be content with it from whom, I suppose, their tossing
 at sea had taken away all desire for food. We, on the other hand, are
 at a distance from the sea; and, as I have often testified to you, we
 are, in one word, Gauls. But instead of wasting time over such matters,
 let our friend here rather go on to complete his account of the
 Cyrenian."

 [90] "maris mollitie."

 [91] "Prandium sane locupletissimum": of course there is a friendly
 irony in the words.

 [92] "fatigationem," a late sense of the word.

 Chapter V.

 "Assuredly," continues Postumianus, "I shall take care in future not to
 mention the abstinence of any one, in case the difficult example should
 quite offend our friends the Gauls. I had intended, however, to give an
 account also of the dinner of that man of Cyrene--for we were seven
 days with him--or some of the subsequent feasts; but these things had
 better be passed over, lest the Gaul should think that he was jeered
 at. However, on the following day, when some of the natives had come
 together to visit us, we discovered that that host of ours was a
 Presbyter--a fact which he had concealed from us with the greatest
 care. We then went with him to the church, which was about two miles
 distant, and was concealed from our view by an intervening mountain. We
 found that it was constructed of common and worthless trees, and was
 not much more imposing than the hut of our host, in which one could not
 stand without stooping. On enquiring into the customs of the men of the
 district, we found that they were not in the habit of either buying or
 selling anything. They knew not the meaning of either fraud or theft.
 As to gold and silver, which mankind generally deem the most desirable
 of all things, they neither possess them, nor do they desire to possess
 them. For when I offered that Presbyter ten gold coins, he refused
 them, declaring, with profound wisdom, that the church was not
 benefited but rather [93] injured by gold. We presented him, however,
 with some pieces of clothing.

 [93] "non instrui, sed potius destrui."

 Chapter VI.

 "After he had kindly accepted our gifts, on the sailors calling us back
 to the sea, we departed; and after a favorable passage, we arrived at
 Alexandria on the seventh day. There we found a disgraceful strife
 raging between the bishops and monks, the cause or occasion of which
 was that the priests were known when assembled together often to have
 passed decrees in crowded synods to the effect that no one should read
 or possess the books of Origen. He was, no doubt, regarded as a most
 able disputant on the sacred Scriptures. But the bishops maintained
 that there were certain things in his books of an unsound character;
 and his supporters, not being bold enough to defend these, rather took
 the line of declaring that they had been inserted by the heretics. They
 affirmed, therefore, that the other portions of his writings were not
 to be condemned on account of those things which justly fell under
 censure, since the faith of readers could easily make a distinction, so
 that they should not follow what had been forged, and yet should keep
 hold of those points which were handled in accordance with the Catholic
 faith. They remarked that there was nothing wonderful if, in modern and
 recent writings, heretical guile had been at work; since it had not
 feared in certain places to attack even Gospel truth. The bishops,
 struggling against these positions to the utmost extent of their power,
 insisted that what was quite correct in the writings of Origen should,
 along with the author himself, and even his whole works, be condemned,
 because those books were more than sufficient which the church had
 received. They also said that the reading was to be avoided of such
 works as would do more harm to the unwise than they would benefit the
 wise. For my part, on being led by curiosity to investigate some
 portions of these writings, I found very many things which pleased me,
 but some that were to be blamed. I think it is clear that the author
 himself really entertained these impious opinions, though his defenders
 maintain that the passages have been forged. I truly wonder that one
 and the same man could have been so different from himself as that, in
 the portion which is approved, he has no equal since the times of the
 Apostles, while in that which is justly condemned, no one can be shown
 to have erred more egregiously.

 Chapter VII.

 For while many things in his books which were extracted from them by
 the bishops were read to show that they were written in opposition to
 the Catholic faith, that passage especially excited bad feeling against
 him, in which we read in his published works that the Lord Jesus, as he
 had come in the flesh for the redemption of mankind, and suffering upon
 the cross for the salvation of man, had tasted death to procure eternal
 life for the human race, so he was, by the same course of suffering,
 even to render the devil a partaker of redemption. He maintained this
 on the ground that such a thing would be in harmony with his goodness
 and beneficence, inasmuch as he who had restored fallen and ruined man,
 would thus also set free an angel who had previously fallen. When these
 and other things of a like nature were brought forward by the bishops,
 a tumult arose owing to the zeal of the different parties; and when
 this could not be quelled by the authority of the priests, the governor
 of the city was called upon to regulate the discipline of the church by
 a perverse precedent; and through the terror which he inspired, the
 brethren were dispersed, while the monks took to flight in different
 directions; so that, on the decrees being published, they were not
 permitted to find lasting acceptance [94] in any place. This fact
 influenced me greatly, that Hieronymus, a man truly Catholic and most
 skillful in the holy law, was thought at first to have been a follower
 of Origen, yet now, above most others, went the length of condemning
 the whole of his writings. Assuredly, I am not inclined to judge rashly
 in regard to any one; but even the most learned men were said to hold
 different opinions in this controversy. However, whether that opinion
 of Origen was simply an error, as I think, or whether it was a heresy,
 as is generally supposed, it not only could not be suppressed by
 multitudes of censures on the part of the priests, but it never could
 have spread itself so far and wide, had it not gathered strength from
 their contentions. Accordingly, when I came to Alexandria, I found that
 city in a ferment from disturbances connected with the matter in
 question. The Bishop, indeed, of that place received me very kindly,
 and in a better spirit than I expected, and even endeavored to retain
 me with him. But I was not at all inclined to settle there, where a
 recent outbreak of ill-will had resulted in a destruction of the
 brethren. For, although perhaps it may seem that they ought to have
 obeyed the bishops, yet such a multitude of persons, all living in an
 open confession of Christ, ought not for that reason to have been
 persecuted, especially by bishops.

 [94] "in nulla consistere sede sinerentur."

 Chapter VIII.

 Accordingly, setting out from that place, I made for the town of
 Bethlehem, which is six miles distant from Jerusalem, but requires
 sixteen stoppages [95] on the part of one journeying from Alexandria.
 The presbyter Jerome [96] rules the church of this place; for it is a
 parish of the bishop who has possession of Jerusalem. Having already in
 my former journey become acquainted with Hieronymus, he had easily
 brought it about that I with good reason deemed no one more worthy of
 my regard and love. For, besides the merit due to him on account of his
 Faith, and the possession of many virtues, he is a man learned not only
 in Latin and Greek, but also Hebrew, to such a degree that no one dare
 venture to compare himself with him in all knowledge. I shall indeed be
 surprised if he is not well known to you also through means of the
 works which he has written, since he is, in fact, read the whole world
 over."

 "Well," says the Gaul at this point, "he is, in truth, but too well
 known to us. For, some five years ago, I read a certain book of his, in
 which the whole tribe of our monks is most vehemently assaulted and
 reviled by him. For this reason, our Belgian friend is accustomed to be
 very angry, because he has said that we are in the habit of cramming
 ourselves even to repletion. But I, for my part, pardon the eminent
 man; and am of opinion that he had made the remark rather about Eastern
 than Western monks. For the love of eating is gluttony in the case of
 the Greeks, whereas among the Gauls it is owing to the nature they
 possess."

 Then exclaimed I, "You defend your nation, my Gallic friend, by means
 of rhetoric; but I beg to ask whether that book condemns only this vice
 in the case of the monks?"

 "No indeed," replies he; "the writer passed nothing over, which he did
 not blame, scourge, and expose: in particular, he inveighed against
 avarice and no less against arrogance. He discoursed much respecting
 pride, and not a little about superstition; and I will freely own that
 he seemed to me to draw a true picture of the vices of multitudes."

 [95] "mansionibus."

 [96] Otherwise, "Hieronymus."

 Chapter IX.

 "But as to familiarities which take place between virgins and monks, or
 even clerics, how true and how courageous were his words! And, on
 account of these, he is said not to stand high in favor with certain
 people whom I am unwilling to name. For, as our Belgian friend is angry
 that we were accused of too great fondness for eating, so those people,
 again, are said to express their rage when they find it written in that
 little work,--The virgin despises her true unmarried brother, and seeks
 a stranger.'"

 Upon this I exclaim, "You are going too far, my Gallic friend: take
 heed lest some one who perhaps owns to these things, hear what you are
 saying, and begin to hold you, along with Hieronymus, in no great
 affection. For, since you are a learned [97] man, not unreasonably will
 I admonish you in the verse of that comic poet who says,--Submission
 procures friends, while truth gives rise to hatred.' Let rather,
 Postumianus, your discourse to us about the East, so well begun, now be
 resumed."

 "Well," says he, "as I had commenced to relate, I stayed with
 Hieronymus six months, who carried on an unceasing warfare against the
 wicked, and a perpetual struggle in opposition to the deadly hatred of
 ungodly men. The heretics hate him, because he never desists from
 attacking them; the clerics hate him, because he assails their life and
 crimes. But beyond doubt, all the good admire and love him; for those
 people are out of their senses, who suppose that he is a heretic. Let
 me tell the truth on this point, which is that the knowledge of the man
 is Catholic, and that his doctrine is sound. He is always occupied in
 reading, always at his books with his whole heart: he takes no rest day
 or night; he is perpetually either reading or writing something. In
 fact, had I not been resolved in mind, and had promised to God first to
 visit [98] the desert previously referred to, I should have grudged to
 depart even for the shortest time from so great a man. Handing over,
 then, and entrusting to him all my possessions and my whole family,
 which having followed me against my own inclination, kept me in a state
 of embarrassment, and thus being in a sort of way delivered from a
 heavy burden, and restored to freedom of action, I returned to
 Alexandria, and having visited the brethren there I set out from the
 place for upper Thebais, that is for the farthest off confines of
 Egypt. For a great multitude of monks were said to inhabit the widely
 extending solitudes of that wilderness. But here it would be tedious,
 were I to seek to narrate all the things which I witnessed: I shall
 only touch lightly on a few points.

 [97] "scholasticus."

 [98] "propositam eremum."

 Chapter X.

 "Not far from the desert, and close to the Nile, there are numerous
 monasteries. For the most part, the monks there dwell together in
 companies of a hundred; and their highest rule is to live under the
 orders of their Abbot, to do nothing by their own inclination, but to
 depend in all things on his will and authority. If it so happens that
 any of them form in their minds a lofty ideal of virtue, so as to wish
 to betake themselves to the desert to live a solitary life, they do not
 venture to act on this desire except with the permission of the Abbot.
 In fact, this is the first of virtues in their estimation,--to live in
 obedience to the will of another. To those who betake themselves to the
 desert, bread or some other kind of food is furnished by the command of
 that Abbot. Now, it so happened that, in those days during which I had
 come thither, the Abbot had sent bread to a certain person who had
 withdrawn to the desert, and had erected a tent for himself not more
 than six miles from the monastery. This bread was sent by the hands of
 two boys, the elder of whom was fifteen, and the younger twelve years
 of age. As these boys were returning home, an asp of remarkable size
 encountered them, but they were not the least afraid on meeting it; and
 moving up to their very feet, as if charmed by some melody, it laid
 down its dark-green neck before them. The younger of the boys laid hold
 of it with his hand, and, wrapping it in his dress, went on his way
 with it. Then, entering the monastery with the air of a conqueror, and
 meeting with the brethren, while all looked on, he opened out his
 dress, and set down the imprisoned beast, not without some appearance
 of boastfulness. But while the rest of the spectators extolled the
 faith and virtue of the children, the Abbot, with deeper insight, and
 to prevent them at such a tender age from being puffed up with pride,
 subjected both to punishment. This he did after blaming them much for
 having publicly revealed what the Lord had wrought through their
 instrumentality. He declared that that was not to be attributed to
 their faith, but to the Divine power; and added that they should rather
 learn to serve God in humility, and not to glory in signs and wonders;
 for that a sense of their own weakness was better than any vainglorious
 exhibition of power.

 Chapter XI.

 "When the monk whom I have mentioned heard of this,--when he learned
 both that the children had encountered danger through meeting the
 snake, and that moreover, having got the better of the serpent, they
 had received a sound beating,--he implored the Abbot that henceforth no
 bread or food of any kind should be sent to him. And now the eighth day
 had passed since that man of Christ had exposed himself to the danger
 of perishing from hunger; his limbs were growing dry with fasting, but
 his mind fixed upon heaven could not fail; his body was wearing away
 with abstinence, but his faith remained firm. In the meantime, the
 Abbot was admonished by the Spirit to visit that disciple. Under the
 influence of a pious solicitude, he was eager to learn by what means of
 preserving life that faithful man was supported, since he had declined
 any human aid in ministering to his necessities. Accordingly, he sets
 out in person to satisfy himself on the subject. When the recluse saw
 from a distance the old man coming to him, he ran to meet him: he
 thanks him for the visit, and conducts him to his cell. As they enter
 the cell together, they behold a basket of palm branches, full of hot
 bread, hanging fixed at the door-post. And first the smell of the hot
 bread is perceived; but on touching it, it appears as if just a little
 before it had been taken from the oven. At the same time, they do not
 recognize the bread as being of the shape common in Egypt. Both are
 filled with amazement, and acknowledge the gift as being from heaven.
 On the one side, the recluse declared that this event was due to the
 arrival of the Abbot; while, on the other side, the Abbot ascribed it
 rather to the faith and virtue of the recluse; but both broke the
 heaven-sent bread with exceeding joy. And when, on his return to the
 monastery, the old man reported to the brethren what had occurred, such
 enthusiasm seized the minds of all of them, that they vied with each
 other in their haste to betake themselves to the desert, and its sacred
 seclusion; while they declared themselves miserable in having made
 their abode only too long amid a multitude, where human fellowship had
 to be carried on and endured.

 Chapter XII.

 "In this monastery I saw two old men who were said to have already
 lived there for forty years, and in fact never to have departed from
 it. I do not think that I should pass by all mention of these men,
 since, indeed, I heard the following statement made regarding their
 virtues on the testimony of the Abbot himself, and all the brethren,
 that in the case of one of them, the sun never beheld him feasting, and
 in the case of the other, the sun never saw him angry."

 Upon this, the Gaul looking at me exclaims: "Would that a friend of
 yours--I do not wish to mention his name--were now present; I should
 greatly like him to hear of that example, since we have had too much
 experience of his bitter anger in the persons of a great many people.
 Nevertheless, as I hear, he has lately forgiven his enemies; and, in
 these circumstances, were he to hear of the conduct of that man, he
 would be more and more strengthened in his forgiving course by the
 example thus set before him, and would feel that it is an admirable
 virtue not to fall under the influence of anger. I will not indeed deny
 that he had just reasons for his wrath; but where the battle is hard,
 the crown of victory is all the more glorious. For this reason, I
 think, if you will allow me to say so, that a certain man was justly to
 be praised, because when an ungrateful freedman abandoned him he rather
 pitied than inveighed against the fugitive. And, indeed, he was not
 even angry with the man by whom he seems to have been carried off."
 [99]

 Upon this I remarked: "Unless Postumianus had given us that example of
 overcoming anger, I would have been very angry on account of the
 departure of the fugitive; but since it is not lawful to be angry, all
 remembrance of such things, as it annoys us, ought to be blotted from
 our minds. Let us rather, Postumianus, listen to what you have got to
 say."

 "I will do," says he, "Sulpitius, what you request, as I see you are
 all so desirous of hearing me. But remember that I do not address my
 speech to you without hope of a larger recompense; I shall gladly
 perform what you require, provided that, when ere long my turn comes,
 you do not refuse what I ask."

 "We indeed," said I, "have nothing by means of which we can return the
 obligation we shall lie under to you even without a larger return.
 [100] However, command us as to anything you have thought about,
 provided you satisfy our desires, as you have already begun to do, for
 your speech conveys to us true delight."

 "I will stint nothing," said Postumianus, "of your desires; and
 inasmuch as you have recognized the virtue of one recluse, I shall go
 on to relate to you some few things about more such persons.

 [99] It appears impossible to give a certain rendering of these
 words--"a quo videtur abductus."

 [100] "vel sine fænore."

 Chapter XIII.

 "Well then, when I entered upon the nearest parts of the desert, about
 twelve miles from the Nile, having as my guide one of the brethren who
 was well acquainted with the localities, we arrived at the residence of
 a certain old monk who dwelt at the foot of a mountain. In that place
 there was a well, which is a very rare thing in these regions. The monk
 had one ox, the whole labor of which consisted in drawing water by
 moving a machine worked with a wheel. This was the only way of getting
 at the water, for the well was said to be a thousand or more feet deep.
 There was also a garden there full of a variety of vegetables. This,
 too, was contrary to what might have been expected in the desert where,
 all things being dry and burnt up by the fierce rays of the sun produce
 not even the slenderest root of any plant. But the labor which in
 common with his ox, the monk performed, as well as his own special
 industry, produced such a happy state of things to the holy man; for
 the frequent irrigation in which he engaged imparted such a fertility
 to the sand that we saw the vegetables in his garden flourishing and
 coming to maturity in a wonderful manner. On these, then, the ox lived
 as well as its master; and from the abundance thus supplied, the holy
 man provided us also with a dinner. There I saw what ye Gauls,
 perchance, may not believe--a pot boiling without fire [101] with the
 vegetables which were being got ready for our dinner: such is the power
 of the sun in that place that it is sufficient for any cooks, even for
 preparing the dainties of the Gauls. Then after dinner, when the
 evening was coming on, our host invites us to a palm-tree, the fruit of
 which he was accustomed to use, and which was at a distance of about
 two miles. For that is the only kind of tree found in the desert, and
 even these are rare, though they do occur. I am not sure whether this
 is owing to the wise foresight of former ages, or whether the soil
 naturally produces them. It may indeed be that God, knowing beforehand
 that the desert was one day to be inhabited by the saints, prepared
 these things for his servants. For those who settle within these
 solitudes live for the most part on the fruit of such trees, since no
 other kinds of plants thrive in these quarters. Well, when we came up
 to that tree to which the kindness of our host conducted us, we there
 met with a lion; and on seeing it, both my guide and myself began to
 tremble; but the holy man went up to it without delay, while we, though
 in great terror, followed him. As if commanded by God, the beast
 modestly withdrew and stood gazing at us, while our friend, the monk,
 plucked some fruit hanging within easy reach on the lower branches.
 And, on his holding out his hand filled with dates, the monster ran up
 to him and received them as readily as any domestic animal could have
 done; and having eaten them, it departed. We, beholding these things,
 and being still under the influence of fear, could not but perceive how
 great was the power of faith in his case, and how weak it was in
 ourselves.

 [101] Hornius strangely remarks on this, "Frequens id in Africa. Quin
 et ferrum nimio solis ardore mollescere scribunt qui interiorem Libyam
 perlustrarunt."

 Chapter XIV.

 "We found another equally remarkable man living in a small hut, capable
 only of containing a single person. Concerning him we were told that a
 she-wolf was accustomed to stand near him at dinner; and that the beast
 could by no means be easily deceived so as to fail to be with him at
 the regular hour when he took refreshment. It was also said that the
 wolf waited at the door until he offered her the bread which remained
 over his own humble dinner; that she was accustomed to lick his hand,
 and then, her duty being, as it were, fulfilled, and her respects paid
 to him, she took her departure. But it so happened that that holy man,
 while he escorted a brother who had paid him a visit, on his way home,
 was a pretty long time away, and only returned under night. [102] In
 the meanwhile, the beast made its appearance at the usual dinner time.
 Having entered the vacant cell and perceived that its benefactor was
 absent, it began to search round the hut with some curiosity to
 discover, if possible, the inhabitant. Now it so happened that a basket
 of palm-twigs was hanging close at hand with five loaves of bread in
 it. Taking one of these, the beast devoured it, and then, having
 committed this evil deed, went its way. The recluse on his return found
 the basket in a state of disorder, and the number of loaves less than
 it should have been. He is aware of the loss of his household goods,
 and observes near the threshold some fragments of the loaf which had
 been stolen. Considering all this, he had little doubt as to the author
 of the theft. Accordingly, when on the following days the beast did
 not, in its usual way, make its appearance (undoubtedly hesitating from
 a consciousness of its audacious deed to come to him on whom it had
 inflicted injury), the recluse was deeply grieved at being deprived of
 the happiness he had enjoyed in its society. At last, being brought
 back through his prayers, it appeared to him as usual at dinner time,
 after the lapse of seven days. But to make clear to every one the shame
 it felt, through regret for what had been done, not daring to draw very
 near, and with its eyes, from profound self-abasement, cast upon the
 earth, it seemed, as was plain to the intelligence of every one, to beg
 in a sort of way, for pardon. The recluse, pitying its confusion, bade
 it come close to him, and then, with a kindly hand, stroked its head;
 while, by giving it two loaves instead of the usual one, he restored
 the guilty creature to its former position; and, laying aside its
 misery on thus having obtained forgiveness, it betook itself anew to
 its former habits. Behold, I beg of you, even in this case, the power
 of Christ, to whom all is wise that is irrational, and to whom all is
 mild that is by nature savage. A wolf discharges duty; a wolf
 acknowledges the crime of theft; a wolf is confounded with a sense of
 shame: when called for, it presents itself; it offers its head to be
 stroked; and it has a perception of the pardon granted to it, just as
 if it had a feeling of shame on account of its misconduct,--this is thy
 power, O Christ--these, O Christ, are thy marvelous works. For in
 truth, whatever things thy servants do in thy name are thy doings; and
 in this only we find cause for deepest grief that, while wild beasts
 acknowledge thy majesty, intelligent beings fail to do thee reverence.

 [102] "sub nocte": this may be used for the usual classical form "sub
 noctem," towards evening.

 Chapter XV.

 "But lest this should perchance seem incredible to any one, I shall
 mention still greater things. I call Christ [103] to witness that I
 invent nothing, nor will I relate things published by uncertain
 authors, but will set forth facts which have been vouched for to me by
 trustworthy men.

 "Numbers of those persons live in the desert without any roofs over
 their heads, whom people call anchorites. [104] They subsist on the
 roots of plants; they settle nowhere in any fixed place, lest they
 should frequently have men visiting them; wherever night compels them
 they choose their abode. Well, two monks from Nitria directed their
 steps towards a certain man living in this style, and under these
 conditions. They did so, although they were from a very different
 quarter, because they had heard of his virtues, and because he had
 formerly been their dear and intimate friend, while a member of the
 same monastery. They sought after him long and much; and at length, in
 the seventh month, they found him staying in that far-distant
 wilderness which borders upon Memphis. He was said already to have
 dwelt in these solitudes for twelve years; but although he shunned
 intercourse with all men, yet he did not shrink from meeting these
 friends; on the contrary, he yielded himself to their affection for a
 period of three days. On the fourth day, when he had gone some distance
 escorting them in their return journey, they beheld a lioness of
 remarkable size coming towards them. The animal, although meeting with
 three persons, showed no uncertainty as to the one she made for, but
 threw herself down at the feet of the anchorite: and, lying there with
 a kind of weeping and lamentation, she manifested mingled feelings of
 sorrow and supplication. The sight affected all, and especially him who
 perceived that he was sought for: he therefore sets out, and the others
 follow him. For the beast stopping from time to time, and, from time to
 time looking back, clearly wished it to be understood that the
 anchorite should follow wherever she led. What need is there of many
 words? We arrived at the den of the animal, where she, the unfortunate
 mother, was nourishing five whelps already grown up, which, as they had
 come forth with closed eyes from the womb of their dam, so they had
 continued in persistent blindness. Bringing them out, one by one, from
 the hollow of the rock, she laid them down at the feet of the
 anchorite. Then at length the holy man perceived what the creature
 desired; and having called upon the name of God, he touched with his
 hand the closed eyes of the whelps; and immediately their blindness
 ceased, while light, so long denied them, streamed upon the open eyes
 of the animals. Thus, those brethren, having visited the anchorite whom
 they were desirous of seeing, returned with a very precious reward for
 their labor, inasmuch as, having been permitted to be eye-witnesses of
 such power, they had beheld the faith of the saint, and the glory of
 Christ, to which they will in future bear testimony. But I have still
 more marvels to tell: the lioness, after five days, returned to the man
 who had done her so great a kindness, and brought him, as a gift, the
 skin of an uncommon animal. Frequently clad in this, as if it were a
 cloak, that holy man did not disdain to receive that gift through the
 instrumentality of the best; while, all the time, he rather regarded
 Another as being the giver.

 [103] "Fides Christi adest": lit. "the faith of Christ is present."

 [104] Also spelt "anchoret": it means "one who has retired from the
 world" (anachoreo).

 Chapter XVI.

 "There was also an illustrious name of another anchorite in those
 regions, a man who dwelt in that part of the desert which is about
 Syene. This man, when first he betook himself to the wilderness,
 intended to live on the roots of plants which the sand here and there
 produces, of a very sweet and delicious flavor; but being ignorant of
 the nature of the herbs, he often gathered those which were of a deadly
 character. And, indeed, it was not easy to discriminate between the
 kind of the roots by the mere taste, since all were equally sweet, but
 many of them, of a less known nature, contained within them a deadly
 poison. When, therefore, the poison within tormented him on eating
 these, and all his vitals were tortured with terrific pains, while
 frequent vomitings, attended by excruciating agonies, were shattering
 the very citadel of life, his stomach being completely exhausted, he
 was in utter terror of all that had to be eaten for sustaining
 existence. Having thus fasted for seven days, he was almost at the
 point of death when a wild animal called an Ibex came up to him. To
 this creature standing by him, he offered a bundle of plants which he
 had collected on the previous day, yet had not ventured to touch; but
 the beast, casting aside with its mouth those which were poisonous,
 picked out such as it knew to be harmless. In this way, that holy man,
 taught by its conduct what he ought to eat, and what to reject, both
 escaped the danger of dying of hunger and of being poisoned by the
 plants. But it would be tedious to relate all the facts which we have
 either had personal knowledge of, or have heard from others, respecting
 those who inhabit the desert. I spent a whole year, and nearly seven
 months more, of set purpose, within these solitudes, being, however,
 rather an admirer of the virtues of others, than myself making any
 attempt to manifest the extraordinary endurance which they displayed.
 For the greater part of the time I lived with the old man whom I have
 mentioned, who possessed the well and the ox.

 Chapter XVII.

 "I visited two monasteries of St. Anthony, which are at the present day
 occupied by his disciples. I also went to that place in which the most
 blessed Paul, the first of the eremites, had his abode. I saw the Red
 Sea and the ridges of Mount Sinai, the top of which almost touches
 heaven, and cannot, by any human effort, be reached. An anchorite was
 said to live somewhere within its recesses: and I sought long and much
 to see him, but was unable to do so. He had for nearly fifty years been
 removed from all human fellowship, and used no clothes, but was covered
 with bristles growing on his own body, while, by Divine gift, he knew
 not of his own nakedness. As often as any pious men desired to visit
 him, making hastily for the pathless wilderness, he shunned all meeting
 with his kind. To one man only, about five years before my visit, he
 was said to have granted an interview; and I believe that man obtained
 the favor through the power of his faith. Amid much talk which the two
 had together, the recluse is said to have replied to the question why
 he shunned so assiduously all human beings, that the man who was
 frequently visited by mortals like himself, could not often be visited
 by angels. From this, not without reason, the report had spread, and
 was accepted by multitudes, that that holy man enjoyed angelic
 fellowship. Be this as it may, I, for my part, departed from Mount
 Sinai, and returned to the river Nile, the banks of which, on both
 sides, I beheld dotted over with numerous monasteries. I saw that, for
 the most part, as I have already said, the monks resided together in
 companies of a hundred; but it was well known that so many as two or
 three thousand sometimes had their abode in the same villages. Nor
 indeed would one have any reason to think that the virtue of the monks
 there dwelling together in great numbers, was less than that of those
 was known to be, who kept themselves apart from human fellowship. The
 chief and foremost virtue in these places, as I have already said, is
 obedience. In fact, any one applying for admission is not received by
 the Abbot of the monastery on any other condition than that he be first
 tried and proved; it being understood that he will never afterwards
 decline to submit to any injunction of the Abbot, however arduous and
 difficult, and though it may seem something unworthy to be endured.

 Chapter XVIII.

 "I will relate two wonderful examples of almost incredible obedience,
 and two only, although many present themselves to my recollection; but
 if, in any case, a few instances do not suffice to rouse readers to an
 imitation of the like virtues, many would be of no advantage. Well
 then, when a certain man having laid aside all worldly business, and
 having entered a monastery of very [105] strict discipline, begged that
 he might be accepted as a member, the Abbot began to place many
 considerations before him,--that the toils of that order were severe;
 that his own requirements were heavy, and such as no one's endurance
 could easily comply with; that he should rather enquire after another
 monastery where life was carried on under easier conditions; and that
 he should not try to attempt that which he was unable to accomplish.
 But he was in no degree moved by these terrors; on the contrary, he all
 the more promised obedience, saying that if the Abbot should order him
 to walk into the fire, he would not refuse to enter it. The Master
 then, having accepted that profession of his, did not delay putting it
 to the test. It so happened that an iron vessel was close at hand, very
 hot, as it was being got ready by a powerful fire for cooking some
 loaves of bread: the flames were bursting forth from the oven broken
 open, and fire raged without restraint within the hollows of that
 furnace. The Master, at this stage of affairs, ordered the stranger to
 enter it, nor did he hesitate to obey the command. Without a moment's
 delay he entered into the midst of the flames, which, conquered at once
 by so bold a display of faith, subsided at his approach, as happened of
 old to the well-known Hebrew children. Nature was overcome, and the
 fire gave way; so that he, of whom it was thought that he would be
 burned to death, had reason to marvel at himself, besprinkled, as it
 were, with a cooling dew. But what wonder is it, O Christ, that that
 fire did not touch thy youthful soldier? The result was that, neither
 did the Abbot regret having issued such harsh commands, nor did the
 disciple repent having obeyed the orders received. He, indeed, on the
 very day on which he came, being tried in his weakness, was found
 perfect; deservedly happy, deservedly glorious, having been tested in
 obedience, he was glorified through suffering.

 [105] "monasterium magnæ dispositionis."

 Chapter XIX.

 "In the same monastery, the fact which I am about to narrate was said
 to have occurred within recent memory. A certain man had come to the
 same Abbot in like manner with the former, in order to obtain
 admission. When the first law of obedience was placed before him, and
 he promised an unfailing patience for the endurance of all things
 however extreme, it so happened that the Abbot was holding in his hand
 a twig of storax already withered. This the Abbot fixed in the ground,
 and imposed this work upon the visitor, that he should continue to
 water the twig, until (what was against every natural result) that dry
 piece of wood should grow green in the sandy soil. Well, the stranger,
 being placed under the authority of unbending law, conveyed water every
 day on his own shoulders--water which had to be taken from the river
 Nile, at almost two miles' distance. And now, after a year had run its
 course, the labor of that workman had not yet ceased, but there could
 be no hope of the good success of his undertaking. However, the grace
 of obedience continued to be shown in his labor. The following year
 also mocked the vain labor of the (by this time) weakened brother. At
 length, as the third annual circle was gliding by, while the workman
 ceased not, night or day, his labor in watering, the twig began to show
 signs of life. I have myself seen a small tree sprung from that little
 rod, which, standing at the present day with green branches in the
 court of the monastery, as if for a witness of what has been stated,
 shows what a reward obedience received, and what a power faith can
 exert. But the day would fail me before I could fully enumerate the
 many different miracles which have become known to me in connection
 with the virtues of the saints.

 Chapter XX.

 "I will, however, still further give you an account of two
 extraordinary marvels. The one of these will be a notable warning
 against the inflation of wretched vanity, and the other will serve as
 no mean guard against the display of a spurious righteousness.

 "A certain saint, then, endowed with almost incredible power in casting
 out demons from the bodies of those possessed by them, was, day by day,
 performing unheard-of miracles. For, not only when present, and not
 merely by his word, but while absent also, he, from time to time, cured
 possessed bodies, by some threads taken from his garment, or by letters
 which he sent. He, therefore, was to a wonderful degree visited by
 people who came to him from every part of the world. I say nothing
 about those of humbler rank; but prefects, courtiers, and judges of
 various ranks often lay at his doors. Most holy bishops also, laying
 aside their priestly dignity, and humbly imploring him to touch and
 bless them, believed with good reason that they were sanctified, and
 illumined with a divine gift, as often as they touched his hand and
 garment. He was reported to abstain always and utterly from every kind
 of drink, and for food (I will whisper this, Sulpitius, into your ear
 lest our friend the Gaul hear it), to subsist upon only six dried figs.
 But in the meantime, just as honor accrued to the holy man from his
 excellence, [106] so vanity began to steal upon him from the honor
 which was paid him. When first he perceived that this evil was growing
 upon him, he struggled long and earnestly to shake it off, but it could
 not be thoroughly got rid of by all his efforts, since he still had a
 secret consciousness of being under the influence of vanity. Everywhere
 did the demons acknowledge his name, while he was not able to exclude
 from his presence the number of people who flocked to him. The hidden
 poison was, in the meantime, working in his breast, and he, at whose
 beck demons were expelled from the bodies of others, was quite unable
 to cleanse himself from the hidden thoughts of vanity. Betaking
 himself, therefore, with fervent supplication to God, he is said to
 have prayed that, power being given to the devil over him for five
 months, he might become like to those whom he himself had cured. Why
 should I delay with many words? That most powerful man,--he, renowned
 for his miracles and virtues through all the East, he, to whose
 threshold multitudes had gathered, and at whose door the highest
 dignitaries of that age had prostrated themselves--laid hold of by a
 demon, was kept fast in chains. It was only after having suffered all
 those things which the possessed are wont to endure, that at length in
 the fifth month he was delivered, not only from the demon, but (what
 was to him more useful and desirable) from the vanity which had dwelt
 within him.

 [106] "virtute," perhaps power, as in many other places.

 Chapter XXI.

 "But to me reflecting on these things, there occurs the thought of our
 own unhappiness and our own infirmity. For who is there of us, whom if
 one despicable creature of a man has humbly saluted, or one woman has
 praised with foolish and flattering words, is not at once elated with
 pride and puffed up with vanity? This will bring it about that even
 though one does not possess a consciousness of sanctity, yet, because
 through the flattery, or, it may be, the mistake of fools, he is said
 to be a holy man, he will, in fact, deem himself most holy! And then,
 if frequent gifts are sent to him, he will maintain that he is so
 honored by the munificence of God, inasmuch as all necessary things are
 bestowed upon him when sleeping and at rest. But further, if some signs
 of any kind of power fall to him even in a low degree, he will think
 himself no less than an angel. And even if he is not marked out from
 others either by acts or excellence, but is simply made a cleric, he
 instantly enlarges the fringes of his dress, delights in salutations,
 is puffed up by people visiting him, and himself gads about everywhere.
 Nay, the man who had been previously accustomed to travel on foot, or
 at most to ride on the back of an ass, must needs now ride proudly on
 frothing steeds; formerly content to dwell in a small and humble cell,
 he now builds a lofty fretted ceiling; he constructs many rooms; he
 cuts and carves doors; he paints wardrobes; he rejects the coarser kind
 of clothing, and demands soft garments; and he gives such orders as the
 following to dear widows and friendly virgins, that the one class weave
 for him an embroidered cloak, and the other a flowing robe. But let us
 leave all these things to be described more pungently by that blessed
 man Hieronymus; and let us return to the object more immediately in
 view."

 "Well," says our Gallic friend upon this, "I know not indeed what you
 have left to be said by Hieronymus; you have within such brief compass
 comprehended all our practices, that I think these few words of yours,
 if they are taken in good part, and patiently considered, will greatly
 benefit those in question, so that they will not require in future to
 be kept in order by the books of Hieronymus. But do thou rather go on
 with what you had begun, and bring forward an example, as you said you
 would do, against spurious righteousness; for to tell you the truth, we
 are subject to no more destructive evil than this within the wide
 boundaries of Gaul."

 "I will do so," replied Postumianus, "nor will I any longer keep you in
 a state of expectation.

 Chapter XXII.

 "A certain young man from Asia, exceedingly wealthy, of distinguished
 family, and having a wife and little son, happening to have been a
 tribune in Egypt, and in frequent campaigns against the Blembi to have
 touched on some parts of the desert, and having also seen several tents
 of the saints, heard the word of salvation from the blessed John. And
 he did not then delay to show his contempt for an unprofitable military
 life with its vain honor. Bravely entering into the wilderness, he in a
 short time became distinguished as being perfect in every kind of
 virtue. Capable of lengthened fasting, conspicuous for humility, and
 steadfast in faith, he had easily obtained a reputation in the pursuit
 of virtue equal to that of the monks of old. But by and by, the thought
 (proceeding from the devil) entered his mind that it would be more
 proper for him to return to his native land and be the means of saving
 his only son and his family along with his wife; which surely would be
 more acceptable to God than if he, content with only rescuing himself
 from the world, should, not without impiety, neglect the salvation of
 his friends. Overcome by the plausible appearance of that kind of
 spurious righteousness, the recluse, after a period of nearly four
 years, forsook his cell and the end to which he had devoted his life.
 But on arriving at the nearest monastery, which was inhabited by many
 brethren, he made known to them, in reply to their questionings, the
 reason of his departure and the object he had in view. All of them, and
 especially the Abbot of that place, sought to keep him back; but the
 intention he had unfortunately formed could not be rooted out of his
 mind. Accordingly with an unhappy obstinacy he went forth, and, to the
 grief of all, departed from the brethren. But scarcely had he vanished
 from their sight, when he was taken possession of by a demon, and
 vomiting bloody froth from his mouth, he began to lacerate himself with
 his own teeth. Then, having been carried back to the same monastery on
 the shoulders of the brethren, when the unclean spirit could not be
 restrained within its walls, he was, from dire necessity, loaded with
 iron fetters, being bound both in hands and feet--a punishment not
 undeserved by a fugitive, inasmuch as chains now restrained him whom
 faith had not restrained. At length, after two years, having been set
 free from the unclean spirit by the prayers of the saints, he
 immediately returned to the desert from which he had departed. In this
 way he was both himself corrected and was rendered a warning to others,
 that the shadow of a spurious righteousness might neither delude any
 one, nor a shifting fickleness of character induce any one, with
 unprofitable inconstancy, to forsake the course on which he has once
 entered. And now let it suffice for you to learn these things
 respecting the various operations of the Lord which he has carried on
 in the persons of his servants; with the view either of stimulating
 others to a like kind of conduct, or of deterring them from particular
 actions. But since I have by this time fully satisfied your ears--have,
 in fact, been more lengthy than I ought to have been--do you now (upon
 this he addressed himself to me)--pay me the recompense you owe, by
 letting us hear you, after your usual fashion, discoursing about your
 friend Martin, for my longings after this have already for a long time
 been strongly excited."

 Chapter XXIII.

 "What," replied I, "is there not enough about my friend Martin in that
 book of mine which you know that I published respecting his life and
 virtues?"

 "I own it," said Postumianus, "and that book of yours is never far from
 my right hand. For if you recognize it, look here--(and so saying he
 displayed the book which was concealed in his dress)--here it is. This
 book," added he, "is my companion both by land and sea: it has been my
 friend and comforter in all my wanderings. But I will relate to you to
 what places that book has penetrated, and how there is almost no spot
 upon earth in which the subject of so happy a history is not possessed
 as a well-known narrative. Paulinus, a man who has the strongest regard
 for you, was the first to bring it to the city of Rome; and then, as it
 was greedily laid hold of by the whole city, I saw the booksellers
 rejoicing over it, inasmuch as nothing was a source of greater gain to
 them, for nothing commanded a readier sale, or fetched a higher price.
 This same book, having got a long way before me in the course of my
 traveling, was already generally read through all Carthage, when I came
 into Africa. Only that presbyter of Cyrene whom I mentioned did not
 possess it; but he wrote down its contents from my description. And why
 should I speak about Alexandria? for there it is almost better known to
 all than it is to yourself. It has passed through Egypt, Nitria, the
 Thebaid, and the whole of the regions of Memphis. I found it being read
 by a certain old man in the desert; and, after I told him that I was
 your intimate friend, this commission was given me both by him and many
 other brethren, that, if I should ever again visit this country, and
 find you well, I should constrain you to supply those particulars which
 you stated in your book you had passed over respecting the virtues of
 the sainted man. Come then, as I do not desire you to repeat to me
 those things which are already sufficiently known from what you have
 written, let those other points, at my request and that of many others,
 be fully set forth, which at the time of your writing you passed over,
 to prevent, as I believe, any feeling of weariness on the part of your
 readers."

 Chapter XXIV.

 "Indeed, Postumianus," replied I, "while I was listening attentively,
 all this time, to you talking about the excellences of the saints, in
 my secret thoughts I had my mind turned to my friend Martin, observing
 on the best of grounds that all those things which different
 individuals had done separately, were easily and entirely accomplished
 by that one man alone. For, although you certainly related lofty deeds,
 I really heard nothing from your lips (may I say it, without offence to
 these holy men), in which Martin was inferior to any one of them. And
 while I hold that the excellence of no one of these is ever to be
 compared with the merits of that man, still this point ought to be
 attended to, that it is unfair he should be compared, on the same
 terms, with the recluses of the desert, or even with the anchorites.
 For they, at freedom from every hindrance, with heaven only and the
 angels as witnesses, were clearly instructed to perform admirable
 deeds; he, on the other hand, in the midst of crowds and intercourse
 with human beings--among quarrelsome clerics, and among furious
 bishops, while he was harassed with almost daily scandals on all sides,
 nevertheless stood absolutely firm with unconquerable virtue against
 all these things, and performed such wonders as not even those
 accomplished of whom we have heard that they are, or at one time were,
 in the wilderness. But even had they done things equal to his, what
 judge would be so unjust as not, on good grounds, to decide that he was
 the more powerful? For put the case that he was a soldier who fought on
 unfavorable ground, and yet turned out a conqueror, and compare them,
 in like manner, to soldiers, who however, contended on equal terms, or
 even on favorable terms, with the enemy. What then? Although the
 victory of all is one and the same, the glory of all certainly cannot
 be equal. And even though you have narrated marvelous things, still you
 have not stated that a dead man was recalled to life by any one. In
 this one particular undoubtedly, it must be owned that no one is to be
 compared with Martin.

 Chapter XXV.

 "For, if it is worthy of admiration that the flames did not touch that
 Egyptian of whom you have spoken, Martin also not infrequently proved
 his power over fire. If you remind us that the savagery of wild beasts
 was conquered by, and yielded to, the anchorites, Martin, for his part,
 was accustomed to keep in check both the fury of wild beasts and the
 poison of serpents. But, if you bring forward for comparison him who
 cured those possessed of unclean spirits, by the authority of his word,
 or even through the instrumentality of threads from his dress, there
 are many proofs that Martin was not, even in this respect, inferior.
 Nay, should you have recourse to him, who, covered with his own hair
 instead of a garment, was thought to be visited by angels, with Martin
 angels were wont to hold daily discourse. Moreover, he bore so
 unconquerable a spirit against vanity and boastfulness, that no one
 more determinedly disdained these vices, and that, although he often,
 while absent, cured those who were filled with unclean spirits, and
 issued his commands not only to courtiers or prefects, but also to
 kings themselves. This was indeed a very small thing amid his other
 virtues, but I should wish you to believe that no one ever contended
 more earnestly than he did against not only vanity, but also the causes
 and the occasions of vanity. I shall also mention what is indeed a
 small point, but should not be passed over, because it is to the credit
 of a man who, being possessed of the highest power, manifested such a
 pious desire to show his regard for the blessed Martin. I remember,
 then, that Vincentius the prefect, an illustrious man, and one of the
 most eminent in all Gaul for every kind of virtue, when he had occasion
 to be in the vicinity of Tours, often begged of Martin that he would
 allow him to stay with him in the monastery. In making this request, he
 brought forward the example of Saint Ambrose, the bishop, who was
 generally spoken of at that time as being in the habit of entertaining
 both consuls and prefects. But Martin, with deeper judgment, refused so
 to act, lest by so doing some vanity and inflation of spirit might
 steal upon him. You, therefore, must acknowledge that there existed in
 Martin the virtues of all those men whom you have mentioned, but there
 were not found in all of them the virtues by which Martin was
 distinguished."

 Chapter XXVI.

 "Why do you," here exclaimed Postumianus, "speak to me in such a
 manner? As if I did not hold the same opinion as yourself, and had not
 always been of the same mind. I, indeed, as long as I live, and retain
 my senses, will ever celebrate the monks of Egypt: I will praise the
 anchorites; I will admire the eremites; but I will place Martin in a
 position of his own: I do not venture to compare to him any one of the
 monks, far less any of the bishops. Egypt owns this: Syria and Æthiopia
 have discovered this: India has heard this; Parthia and Persia have
 known this; not even Armenia is ignorant of it; the remote Bosphorus is
 aware of it; and in a word, those are acquainted with it who visit the
 Fortunate Islands or the Arctic Ocean. All the more wretched on this
 account is this country of ours, which has not been found worthy to be
 acquainted with so great a man, although he was in its immediate
 vicinity. However, I will not include the people at large in this
 censure: only the clerics, only the priests know nothing of him; and
 not without reason were they, in their ill-will, disinclined to know
 him, inasmuch as, had they become acquainted with his virtues they must
 have recognized their own vices. I shudder to state what I have lately
 heard, that a miserable man (I know him not), has said that you have
 told many lies in that book of yours. This is not the voice of a man,
 but of the devil; and it is not Martin who is, in this way, injured,
 but faith is taken from the Gospels themselves. For, since the Lord
 himself testified of works of the kind which Martin accomplished, that
 they were to be performed by all the faithful, he who does not believe
 that Martin accomplished such deeds, simply does not believe that
 Christ uttered such words. But the miserable, the degenerate, the
 somnolent, are put to shame, that the things which they themselves
 cannot do, were done by him, and prefer rather to deny his virtues than
 to confess their own inertness. But let us, as we hasten on to other
 matters, let go all remembrance of such persons: and do you rather, as
 I have for a long time desired, proceed to narrate the still untold
 deeds of Martin."

 "Well," said I, "I think that your request would more properly be
 directed to our friend the Gaul, since he is acquainted with more of
 Martin's doings than I am--for a disciple could not be ignorant of the
 deeds of his master--and who certainly owes a return of kindness, not
 only to Martin, but to both of us, inasmuch as I have already published
 my book, and you have, so far, related to us the doings of our brethren
 in the East. Let then, our friend the Gaul commence that detailed
 account which is due from him: because, as I have said, he both owes us
 a return in the way of speaking, and will, I believe, do this much for
 his friend Martin--that he shall, not unwillingly, give a narrative of
 his deeds."

 Chapter XXVII.

 "Well," said the Gaul, "I, for my part, though I am unequal to so great
 a task, feel constrained by those examples of obedience which have been
 related above by Postumianus, not to refuse that duty which you impose
 upon me. But when I reflect that I, a man of Gaul, [107] am about to
 speak in the presence of natives of Aquitania, I fear lest my somewhat
 rude form of speech should offend your too delicate ears. However, you
 will listen to me as a foolish sort [108] of man, who says nothing in
 an affected or stilted fashion. For if you have conceded to me that I
 was a disciple of Martin, grant me this also that I be allowed, under
 the shelter of his example, to despise the vain trappings of speech and
 ornaments of words."

 "Certainly," replied Postumianus, "speak either in Celtic, or in
 Gaulish, if you prefer it, provided only you speak of Martin. But for
 my part, I believe, that, even though you were dumb, words would not be
 wanting to you, in which you might speak of Martin with eloquent lips,
 just as the tongue of Zacharias was loosed at the naming of John. But
 as you are, in fact, an orator, [109] you craftily, like an orator,
 begin by begging us to excuse your unskillfulness, because you really
 excel in eloquence. But it is not fitting either that a monk should
 show such cunning, or that a Gaul should be so artful. But to work
 rather, and set forth what you have still got to say, for we have
 wasted too much time already in dealing with other matters; and the
 lengthening shadow of the declining sun warns us that no long portion
 of day remains till night be upon us. Then, after we had all kept
 silence for a little, the Gaul thus begins--"I think I must take care
 in the first place not to repeat those particulars about the virtues of
 Martin, which our friend Sulpitius there has related in his book. For
 this reason, I shall pass over his early achievements, when he was a
 soldier; nor will I touch on those things which he did as a layman and
 a monk. At the same time, I shall relate nothing which I simply heard
 from others, but only events of which I myself was an eye-witness."

 [107] The word Gaul here must be taken in its more limited sense as
 denoting only the country of the Celtæ. See the well-known first
 sentence of Cæsar's Gallic War.

 [108] "Gurdonicus": a word said to have been derived from the name of a
 people in Spain noted for their stolidity.

 [109] "Scholasticus."

  Dialogue II.

 Concerning the Virtues of St. Martin.

 Chapter I.

 "Well then, when first, having left the schools, I attached myself to
 the blessed man, a few days after doing so, we followed him on his way
 to the church. In the way, a poor man, half-naked in these
 winter-months, met him, and begged that some clothing might be given
 him. Then Martin, calling for the chief-deacon, gave orders that the
 shivering creature should be clothed without delay. After that,
 entering a private apartment, and sitting down by himself, as his
 custom was--for he secured for himself this retirement even in the
 church, liberty being granted to the clerics, since indeed the
 presbyters were seated in another apartment, either spending their time
 in mutual [110] courtesies, or occupied in listening to affairs of
 business. But Martin kept himself in his own seclusion up to the hour
 at which custom required that the sacred rites should be dispensed to
 the people. And I will not pass by this point that, when sitting in his
 retirement, he never used a chair; and, as to the church, no one ever
 saw him sitting there, as I recently saw a certain man (God is my
 witness), not without a feeling of shame at the spectacle, seated on a
 lofty throne, yea, in its elevation, a kind of royal tribunal; but
 Martin might be seen sitting on a rude little stool, such as those in
 use by the lowest of servants, which we Gallic country-people call
 tripets, [111] and which you men of learning, or those at least who are
 from Greece, call tripods. Well, that poor man who had been chanced
 upon, as the chief-deacon delayed to give him the garment, rushed into
 this private apartment of the blessed man, complaining that he had not
 been attended to by the cleric, and bitterly mourning over the cold he
 suffered. No delay took place: the holy man, while the other did not
 observe, secretly drew off his tunic which was below his outer [112]
 garment, and clothing the poor man with this, told him to go on his
 way. Then, a little after, the chief-deacon coming in informs him,
 according to custom, that the people were waiting in the church, and
 that it was incumbent on him to proceed to the performance of the
 sacred rites. Martin said to him in reply that it was necessary that
 the poor man--referring to himself--should be clothed, and that he
 could not possibly proceed to the church, unless the poor man received
 a garment. But the deacon, not understanding the true state of the
 case--that Martin, while outwardly clad with a cloak, was not seen by
 him to be naked underneath, at last begins to complain that the poor
 man does not make his appearance. Let the garment which has been got
 ready,' said Martin, be brought to me; there will not be wanting the
 poor man requiring to be clothed.' Then, at length, the cleric,
 constrained by necessity, and now in not the sweetest temper, hurriedly
 procures a rough [113] garment out of the nearest shop, short and
 shaggy, and costing only five pieces of silver, and lays it, in wrath
 at the feet of Martin. See,' cries he, there is the garment, but the
 poor man is not here.' Martin, nothing moved, bids him go to the door
 for a little, thus obtaining secrecy, while, in his nakedness, he
 clothes himself with the garment, striving with all his might to keep
 secret what he had done. But when do such things remain concealed in
 the case of the saints desiring that they should be so? Whether they
 will or not, all are brought to light.

 [110] "salutationibus vacantes": this is, in the original, a very
 confused and obscure sentence.

 [111] Halm edits "tripeccias," which may have been the local patois for
 "tripetias" (ter-pes), corresponding to the Greek tripous, and meaning
 "a three legged stool."

 [112] "Amphibalum": a late Latin word corresponding to the more
 classical toga.

 [113] "bigerricam vestem."

 Chapter II.

 "Martin, then, clothed in this garment, proceeds to offer the sacrifice
 [114] to God. And then on that very day--I am about to narrate
 something wonderful--when he was engaged in blessing the altar, as is
 usual, we beheld a globe of fire dart from his head, so that, as it
 rose on high, the flame produced a hair of extraordinary length. And,
 although we saw this take place on a very famous day in the midst of a
 great multitude of people, only one of the virgins, one of the
 presbyters, and only three of the monks, witnessed the sight: but why
 the others did not behold it is a matter not to be decided by our
 judgment.

 "About the same time, when my uncle Evanthius, a highly Christian man,
 although occupied in the affairs of this world, had begun to be
 afflicted with a very serious illness, to the extreme danger of his
 life, he sent for Martin. And, without any delay, Martin hastened
 towards him; but, before the blessed man had completed the half of the
 distance between them, the sick man experienced the power of him that
 was coming; and, being immediately restored to health, he himself met
 us as we were approaching. With many entreaties, he detained Martin,
 who wished to return home on the following day; for, in the meantime, a
 serpent had struck with a deadly blow a boy belonging to my uncle's
 family; and Evanthius himself, on his own shoulders, carried him all
 but lifeless through the force of the poison, and laid him at the feet
 of the holy man, believing that nothing was impossible to him. By this
 time, the serpent had diffused its poison through all the members of
 the boy: one could see his skin swollen in all his veins, and his
 vitals strung up like a leather-bottle. Martin stretched forth his
 hand, felt all the limbs of the boy, and placed his finger close to the
 little wound, at which the animal had instilled the poison. Then in
 truth--I am going to tell things wonderful--we saw the whole poison,
 drawn from every part of the body, gather quickly together to Martin's
 finger; and next, we beheld the poison mixed with blood press through
 the small puncture of the wound, just as a long line of abundant milk
 is wont to flow forth from the teats of goats or sheep, when these are
 squeezed by the hand of shepherds. The boy rose up quite well. We were
 amazed by so striking a miracle; and we acknowledged--as, indeed, truth
 compelled us to do--that there was no one under heaven who could equal
 the deeds of Martin.

 [114] "oblaturus sacrificium."

 Chapter III.

 "In the same way, some time afterwards, we made a journey with him
 while he visited the various parishes in his diocese. He had gone
 forward a little by himself, some necessity or other, I know not what,
 compelling us to keep behind. In the meantime, a state-conveyance, full
 of military men, was coming along the public highway. But when the
 animals near the side beheld Martin in his shaggy garment, with a long
 black cloak over it, being alarmed, they swerved a little in the
 opposite direction. Then, the reins getting entangled, they threw into
 confusion those extended lines in which, as you have often seen, those
 wretched creatures are held together; and as they were with difficulty
 rearranged, delay, of course, was caused to those people hastening
 forward. Enraged by this injury, the soldiers, with hasty leaps, made
 for the ground. And then they began to belabor Martin with whips and
 staves; and as he, in silence and with incredible patience, submitted
 his back to them smiting him, this roused the greater fury in these
 wretches, for they became all the more violent from the fact, that he,
 as if he did not feel the blows showered upon him, seemed to despise
 them. He fell almost lifeless to the earth; and we, ere long, found him
 covered with blood, and wounded in every part of his body. Lifting him
 up without delay, and placing him upon his own ass, while we execrated
 the place of that cruel bloodshed, we hastened, off as speedily as
 possible. In the meantime, the soldiers having returned to their
 conveyance, after their fury was satisfied, urge the beasts to proceed
 in the direction in which they had been going. But they all remained
 fixed to the spot, as stiff as if they had been brazen statues, and
 although their masters shouted at them, and the sound of their whips
 echoed on every side, still the animals never moved. These men next all
 fall to with lashes; in fact, while punishing the mules, they waste all
 the Gallic whips they had. The whole of the neighboring wood is laid
 hold of, and the beasts are beaten with enormous cudgels; but these
 cruel hands still effected nothing: the animals continued to stand in
 one and the same place like fixed effigies. The wretched men knew not
 what to do, and they could no longer conceal from themselves that, in
 some way or other, there was a higher power at work in the bosoms of
 these brutes, so that they were, in fact, restrained by the
 interposition of a deity. At length, therefore, returning to
 themselves, they began to enquire who he was whom but a little before
 they had scourged at the same place; and when, on pursuing the
 investigation, they ascertained from those on the way that it was
 Martin who had been so cruelly beaten by them, then, indeed, the cause
 of their misfortune appeared manifest to all; and they could no longer
 doubt that they were kept back on account of the injury done to that
 man. Accordingly, they all rush after us at full speed, and, conscious
 of what they had done and deserved, overwhelmed with shame, weeping,
 and having their heads and faces smeared with the dust with which they
 themselves had besprinkled their bodies, they cast themselves at
 Martin's feet, imploring his pardon, and begging that he would allow
 them to proceed. They added that they had been sufficiently punished by
 their conscience alone, and that they deeply felt that the earth might
 swallow them alive in that very spot, or that rather, they, losing all
 sense, might justly be stiffened into immovable rocks, just as they had
 seen their beasts of burden fixed to the places in which they stood;
 but they begged and entreated him to extend to them pardon for their
 crime, and to allow them to go on their way. The blessed man had been
 aware, before they came up to us, that they were in a state of
 detention, and had already informed us of the fact; however, he kindly
 granted them forgiveness; and, restoring their animals, permitted them
 to pursue their journey.

 Chapter IV.

 "I have often noticed this, Sulpitius, that Martin was accustomed to
 say to you, that such an abundance [115] of power was by no means
 granted him while he was a bishop, as he remembered to have possessed
 before he obtained that office. Now, if this be true, or rather since
 it is true, we may imagine how great those things were which, while
 still a monk, he accomplished, and which, without any witness, he
 effected apart by himself; since we have seen that, while a bishop, he
 performed so great wonders before the eyes of all. Many, no doubt, of
 his former achievements were known to the world, and could not be hid,
 but those are said to have been innumerable which, while he avoided
 boastfulness, he kept concealed and did not allow to come to the
 knowledge of mankind; for, inasmuch as he transcended the capabilities
 of mere man, in a consciousness of his own eminence, and trampling upon
 worldly glory, he was content simply to have heaven as a witness of his
 deeds. That this is true we can judge even from these things which are
 well known to us, and could not be hid; since e.g. before he became a
 bishop he restored two dead men to life, facts of which your book has
 treated pretty fully, but, while he was bishop, he raised up only one,
 a point which I am surprised you have not noticed. I myself am a
 witness to this latter occurrence; but, probably, you have no doubts
 about the matter being duly testified. At any rate, I will set before
 you the affair as it happened. For some reason, I know not what, we
 were on our way to the town of the Carnutes. [116] In the meantime, as
 we pass by a certain village most populous in inhabitants, an enormous
 crowd went forth to meet us, consisting entirely of heathen; for no one
 in that village was acquainted with a Christian. Nevertheless, owing to
 the report of the approach of so great a man, a multitude of those
 streaming to one point had filled all the widely spreading plains.
 Martin felt that some work was to be performed; and as the spirit
 within him was thus moving him, he was deeply excited. He at once began
 to preach to the heathen the word of God, so utterly different from
 that of man, often groaning that so great a crowd should be ignorant of
 the Lord the Saviour. In the meantime, while an incredible multitude
 had surrounded us, a certain woman, whose son had recently died, began
 to present, with outstretched hands, the lifeless body to the blessed
 man, saying, "We know that you are a friend of God: restore me my son,
 who is my only one." The rest of the multitude joined her, and added
 their entreaties to those of the mother. Martin perceiving, as he
 afterwards told us, that he could manifest power, in order to the
 salvation of those waiting for its display, received the body of the
 deceased into his own hands; and when, in the sight of all, he had
 fallen on his knees, and then arose, after his prayer was finished, he
 restored to its mother the child brought back to life. Then, truly, the
 whole multitude, raising a shout to heaven, acknowledged Christ as God,
 and finally began to rush in crowds to the knees of the blessed man,
 sincerely imploring that he would make them Christians. Nor did he
 delay to do so. As they were in the middle of the plain, he made them
 all catechumens, by placing his hand upon the whole of them; while, at
 the same time, turning to us, he said that, not without reason, were
 these made catechumens in that plain where the martyrs were wont to be
 consecrated."

 [115] "eam virtutum gratiam."

 [116] The Carnutes dwelt on both sides of the Loire, and their chief
 town, here referred to, was Autricum, now Chartres.

 Chapter V.

 "You have conquered, O Gaul," said Postumianus, "you have conquered,
 although certainly not me, who am, on the contrary, an upholder of
 Martin, and who have always known and believed all these things about
 that man; but you have conquered all the eremites and anchorites. For
 no one of them, like your friend, or rather our friend, Martin, ruled
 over deaths of all [117] kinds. And Sulpitius there justly compared him
 to the apostles and prophets, inasmuch as the power of his faith, and
 the works accomplished by his power, bear witness that he was, in all
 points, like them. But go on, I beg of you, although we can hear
 nothing more striking than we have heard--still, go on, O Gaul, to set
 forth what still remains of what you have to say concerning Martin. For
 the mind is eager to know even the least and commonest of his doings,
 since there is no doubt that the least of his actions surpass the
 greatest deeds of others."

 "I will do so," replies the Gaul, "but I did not myself witness what I
 am about to relate, for it took place before I became an associate of
 Martin's; still, the fact is well known, having been spread through the
 world by the accounts given by faithful brethren, who were present on
 the occasion. Well, just about the time when he first became a bishop,
 a necessity arose for his visiting the imperial [118] court.
 Valentinian, the elder, then was at the head of affairs. When he came
 to know that Martin was asking for things which he did not incline to
 grant, he ordered him to be kept from entering the doors of the palace.
 Besides his own unkind and haughty temper, his wife Arriana had urged
 him to this course, and had wholly alienated him from the holy man, so
 that he should not show him the regard which was due to him. Martin,
 accordingly, when he had once and again endeavored to procure an
 interview with the haughty prince, had recourse to his well-known
 weapons--he clothes himself in sackcloth, scatters ashes upon his
 person, abstains from food and drink, and gives himself, night and day,
 to continuous prayer. On the seventh day, an angel appeared to him, and
 tells him to go with confidence to the palace, for that the royal
 doors, although closed against him, would open of their own accord, and
 that the haughty spirit of the emperor would be softened. Martin,
 therefore, being encouraged by the address of the angel who thus
 appeared to him, and trusting to his assistance, went to the palace.
 The doors stood open, and no one opposed his entrance; so that, going
 in, he came at last into the presence of the king, without any one
 seeking to hinder him. The king, however, seeing him at a distance as
 he approached, and gnashing his teeth that he had been admitted, did
 not, by any means, condescend to rise up as Martin advanced, until fire
 covered the royal seat, and until the flames seized on a part of the
 royal person. In this way the haughty monarch is driven from his
 throne, and, much against his will, rises up to receive Martin. He even
 gave many embraces to the man whom he had formerly determined to
 despise, and, coming to a better frame of mind, he confessed that he
 perceived the exercise of Divine power; without waiting even to listen
 to the requests of Martin, he granted all he desired before being
 asked. Afterwards the king often invited the holy man both to
 conferences and entertainments; and, in the end, when he was about to
 depart, offered him many presents, which, however, the blessed man,
 jealously maintaining his own poverty, totally refused, as he did on
 all similar occasions.

 [117] "mortibus."

 [118] "adire comitatum": this is a common meaning of comitatus in
 writers of the period.

 Chapter VI.

 "And as we have, once for all, entered the palace, I shall string
 together events which there took place, although they happened at
 different times. And, indeed, it does not seem to me right that I
 should pass unmentioned the example of admiration for Martin which was
 shown by a faithful queen. Maximus then ruled the state, a man worthy
 of being extolled in [119] his whole life, if only he had been
 permitted to reject a crown thrust upon him by the soldiery in an
 illegal tumult, or had been able to keep out of civil war. But the fact
 is, that a great empire can neither be refused without danger, nor can
 be preserved without war. He frequently sent for Martin, received him
 into the palace, and treated him with honor; his whole speech with him
 was concerning things present, things to come, the glory of the
 faithful, and the immortality of the saints; while, in the meantime,
 the queen hung upon the lips of Martin, and not inferior to her
 mentioned in the Gospel, washed the feet of the holy man with tears and
 wiped them with the hairs of her head. Martin, though no woman had
 hitherto touched him, could not escape her assiduity, or rather her
 servile attentions. She did not think of the wealth of the kingdom, the
 dignity of the empire, the crown, or the purple; only stretched upon
 the ground, she could not be torn away from the feet of Martin. At last
 she begs of her husband (saying that both of them should constrain
 Martin to agree) that all other attendants should be removed from the
 holy man, and that she alone should wait upon him at meals. Nor could
 the blessed man refuse too obstinately. His modest entertainment is got
 up by the hands of the queen; she herself arranges his seat for him;
 places his table; furnishes him with water for his hands; and serves up
 the food which she had herself cooked. While he was eating, she, with
 her eyes fixed on the ground, stood motionless at a distance, after the
 fashion of servants, displaying in all points the modesty and humility
 of a ministering servant. She herself mixed for him his drink and
 presented it. When the meal was over, she collected the fragments and
 crumbs of the bread that had been used, preferring with true
 faithfulness these remains to imperial banquets. Blessed woman! worthy,
 by the display of so great piety, of being compared to her who came
 from the ends of the earth to hear Solomon, if we merely regard the
 plain letter of the history. But the faith of the two queens is to be
 compared (and let it be granted me to say this, setting aside the
 majesty of the secret [120] truth implied): the one obtained her desire
 to hear a wise man; the other was thought worthy not only to hear a
 wise man, but to wait upon him."

 [119] Halm's text is here followed. The older texts which read "vir
 omni vitæ merito prædicandus," seem hardly intelligible.

 [120] "Quod mihi liceat separata mysterii majestate dixisse."

 Chapter VII.

 To these sayings Postumianus replies: "While listening to you, O Gaul,
 I have for a long time been admiring the faith of the queen; but to
 what does that statement of yours lead, that no woman was ever said to
 have stood more close to Martin? For let us consider that that queen
 not only stood near him, but even ministered unto him. I really fear
 lest those persons who freely mingle among women should to some extent
 defend themselves by that example."

 Then said the Gaul: "Why do you not notice, as grammarians are wont to
 teach us, the place, the time, and the person? For only set before your
 eyes the picture of one kept in the palace of the emperor importuned by
 prayers, constrained by the faith of the queen, and bound by the
 necessities of the time, to do his utmost that he might set free those
 shut up in prison, might restore those who had been sent into exile,
 and might recover goods that had been taken away,--of how much
 importance do you think that these things should have appeared to a
 bishop, so as to lead him, in order to the accomplishment of them all,
 to abate not a little of the rigor of his general scheme of life?
 However, as you think that some will make a bad use of the example thus
 furnished them, I shall only say that those will be truly happy if they
 do not fall short of the excellence of the example in question. For let
 them consider that the facts of the case are these: once in his life
 only, and that when in his seventieth year, was Martin served and
 waited upon at his meals, not by a free sort of widow, nor by a wanton
 virgin, but by a queen, who lived under the authority of a husband, and
 who was supported in her conduct by the entreaties of her husband, that
 she might be allowed so to act. It is further to be observed that she
 did not recline with Martin at the entertainment, nor did she venture
 even to partake in the feast, but simply gave her services in waiting
 upon him. Learn, therefore, the proper course; let a matron serve thee,
 and not rule thee; and let her serve, but not recline along with thee;
 just as Martha, of whom we read, waited upon the Lord without being
 called to partake in the feast: nay, she who chose rather simply to
 hear the word was preferred to her that served. But in the case of
 Martin, the queen spoken of fulfilled both parts: she both served like
 Martha and listened like Mary. If any one, then, desires to make use of
 this example, let him keep to it in all particulars; let the cause be
 the same, the person the same, the service the same, and the
 entertainment the same,--and let the thing occur once only in one's
 whole life."

 Chapter VIII.

 "Admirably," exclaimed Postumianus, "does your speech bind those
 friends of ours from going beyond the example of Martin; but I own to
 you my belief that these remarks of yours will fall upon deaf ears. For
 if we were to follow the ways of Martin, we should never need to defend
 ourselves in the case of kissing, and we should be free from all the
 reproaches of sinister opinion. But as you are wont to say, when you
 are accused of being too fond of eating, We are Gauls,' so we, for our
 part, who dwell in this district, will never be reformed either by the
 example of Martin, or by your dissertations. But while we have been
 discussing these points at so great length, why do you, Sulpitius,
 preserve such an obstinate silence?"

 "Well, for my part," replied I, "I not only keep silence, but for a
 long time past I have determined to be silent upon such points. For,
 because I rebuked a certain spruce gadding-about widow, who dressed
 expensively, and lived in a somewhat loose manner, and also a virgin,
 who was following somewhat indecently a certain young man who was dear
 to me,--although, to be sure, I had often heard her blaming others who
 acted in such a manner,--I raised up against me such a degree of hatred
 on the part of all the women and all the monks, that both bands entered
 upon sworn war against me. Wherefore, be quiet, I beg of you, lest even
 what we are saying should tend to increase their animosity towards me.
 Let us entirely blot out these people from our memory, and let us
 rather return to Martin. Do thou, friend Gaul, as you have begun, carry
 out the work you have taken in hand."

 Then says he: "I have really related already so many things to you,
 that my speech ought to have satisfied your desires; but, because I am
 not at liberty to refuse compliance with your wishes, I shall continue
 to speak as long as the day lasts. For, in truth, when I glance at that
 straw, which is being prepared for our beds, there comes into my mind a
 recollection respecting the straw on which Martin had lain, that a
 miracle was wrought in connection with it. The affair took place as
 follows. Claudiomagus is a village on the confines of the Bituriges and
 the Turoni. The church there is celebrated for the piety of the saints,
 and is not less illustrious for the multitude of the holy virgins.
 Well, Martin, being in the habit of passing that way, had an apartment
 in the private part of the church. After he left, all the virgins used
 to rush into that retirement: they kiss [121] every place where the
 blessed man had either sat or stood, and distribute among themselves
 the very straw on which he had lain. One of them, a few days
 afterwards, took a part of the straw which she had collected for a
 blessing to herself, and hung it from the neck of a possessed person,
 whom a spirit of error was troubling. There was no delay; but sooner
 than one could speak the demon was cast out, and the person was cured.

 [121] "adlambunt": perhaps only "touch."

 Chapter IX.

 "About the same time, a cow which a demon harassed met Martin as he was
 returning from Treves. That cow, leaving its proper herd, was
 accustomed to attack human beings, and had already seriously gored many
 with its horns. Now, when she was coming near us, those who followed
 her from a distance began to warn us, with a loud voice, to beware of
 her. But after she had in great fury come pretty near to us, with rage
 in her eyes, Martin, lifting up his hand, ordered the animal to halt,
 and she immediately stood stock-still at his word. Upon this, Martin
 perceived a demon sitting upon her back, and reproving it, he
 exclaimed, Begone, thou deadly being; leave the innocent beast, and
 cease any longer to torment it.' The evil spirit obeyed and departed.
 And the heifer had sense enough to understand that she was set free;
 for, peace being restored to her, she fell at the feet of the holy man;
 and on Martin directing her, she made for her own herd, and, quieter
 than any sheep, she joined the rest of the band. This also was the time
 at which he had no sensation of being burnt, although placed in the
 midst of the flames; but I do not think it necessary for me to give an
 account of this, because Sulpitius there, though passing over it in his
 book, has nevertheless pretty fully narrated it in the epistle which he
 sent to Eusebius, who was then a presbyter, and is now a bishop. I
 believe, Postumianus, you have either read this letter, or, if it is
 still unknown to you, you may easily obtain it, when you please, from
 the bookcase. I shall simply narrate particulars which he has omitted.

 "Well, on a certain occasion, when he was going round the various
 parishes, we came upon a band of huntsmen. The dogs were pursuing a
 hare, and the little animal was already much exhausted by the long run
 it had had. When it perceived no means of escape in the plains
 spreading far on every side, and was several times just on the point of
 being captured, it tried to delay the threatened death by frequent
 doublings. Now the blessed man pitied the danger of the creature with
 pious feelings, and commanded the dogs to give up following it, and to
 permit it to get safe away. Instantly, at the first command they heard,
 they stood quite still: one might have thought them bound, or rather
 arrested, so as to stand immovable in their own footprints. In this
 way, through her pursuers being stopped as if tied together, the hare
 got safe away.

 Chapter X.

 "Moreover, it will be worth while to relate also some of his familiar
 sayings, since they were all salted with spiritual instruction. He
 happened to see a sheep [122] that had recently been sheared; and,
 See,' says he, she has fulfilled the precept of the Gospel: she had two
 coats, and one of them she has given to him who had none: thus,
 therefore, ye ought also to do.' Also, when he perceived a swineherd in
 a garment of skin, cold and, in fact, all but naked, he exclaimed: Look
 at Adam, cast out of Paradise, how he feeds his swine in a garment of
 skin; but let us, laying aside that old Adam, who still remains in that
 man, rather put on the new Adam.' Oxen had, in one part, eaten up the
 grass of the meadows; pigs also had dug up some portions of them with
 their snouts; while the remaining portion, which continued uninjured,
 flourished, as if painted with variously tinted flowers. That part,'
 said he, which has been eaten down by cattle, although it has not
 altogether lost the beauty of grass, yet retains no grandeur of
 flowers, conveys to us a representation of marriage; that part, again,
 which the pigs, unclean animals, had dug up, presents a loathsome
 picture of fornication; while the remaining portion, which had
 sustained no injury, sets forth the glory of virginity;--it flourishes
 with abundance of grass; the fruits of the field abound in it; and,
 decked with flowers to the very extreme of beauty, it shines as if
 adorned with glittering gems. Blessed is such beauty and worthy of God;
 for nothing is to be compared with virginity. Thus, then, those who set
 marriage side by side with fornication grievously err; and those who
 think that marriage is to be placed on an equal footing with virginity
 are utterly wretched and foolish. But this distinction must be
 maintained by wise people, that marriage belongs to those things which
 may be excused, while virginity points to glory, and fornication must
 incur punishment unless its guilt is purged away through atonement.'

 [122] Halm has here an unintelligible reading, probably a
 misprint--"quem recens tonsam forte conspexerat."

 Chapter XI.

 "A certain soldier had renounced the military [123] life in the Church,
 having professed himself a monk, and had erected a cell for himself at
 a distance in the desert, as if with the purpose of leading the life of
 an eremite. But in course of time the crafty adversary harassed his
 unspiritual [124] nature with various thoughts, to the effect that,
 changing his mind, he should express a desire that his wife, whom
 Martin had ordered to have a place in the nunnery [125] of the young
 women, should rather dwell along with him. The courageous eremite,
 therefore, visits Martin, and makes known to him what he had in his
 mind. But Martin denied very strongly that a woman could, in
 inconsistent fashion, be joined again to a man who was now a monk, and
 not a husband. At last, when the soldier was insisting on the point in
 question; asserting that no evil would follow from carrying out his
 purpose; that he simply desired to possess the solace of his wife's
 company; and that there was no fear of his again returning to his own
 pursuits; adding that he was a soldier of Christ, and that she also had
 taken the oath of allegiance in the same service; and that the bishop
 therefore should allow to serve as soldiers together people who were
 saints, and who, in virtue of their faith, totally ignored the question
 of sex,--then Martin (I am going to repeat his very words to you)
 exclaimed: Tell me if you have ever been in war, and if you have ever
 stood in the line of battle?' In answer he said, Frequently; I have
 often stood in line of battle, and been present in war.' On this Martin
 replies: Well, then, tell me, did you ever in a line which was prepared
 with arms for battle, or, having already advanced near, was fighting
 against a hostile army with drawn sword--did you ever see any woman
 standing there, or fighting?' Then at length the soldier became
 confused and blushed, while he gave thanks that he had not been
 permitted to follow his own evil counsel, and at the same time had not
 been put right by the use of any harsh language, but by a true and
 rational analogy, connected with the person of a soldier. Martin, for
 his part, turning to us (for a great crowd of brethren had surrounded
 him), said: Let not a woman enter the camp of men, but let the line of
 soldiers remain separate, and let the females, dwelling in their own
 tent, be remote from that of men. For this renders an army ridiculous,
 if a female crowd is mixed with the regiments of men. Let the soldier
 occupy the line, let the soldier fight in the plain, but let the woman
 keep herself within the protection of the walls. She, too, certainly
 has her own glory, if, when her husband is absent, she maintains her
 chastity; and the first excellence, as well as completed victory of
 that, is, that she should not be seen.'

 [123] "cingulum": lit. a girdle, or sword-belt, and then put for
 military service.

 [124] "brutum pectus": the word seems to refer to the man as psuchikos,
 in opposition to pneumatikos.

 [125] "monasterio."

 Chapter XII.

 "I believe, my dear Sulpitius, that you remember with what emphasis he
 extolled to us (when you too were present) that virgin who had so
 completely withdrawn herself from the eyes of all men, that she did not
 admit to her presence Martin himself, when he wished to visit her in
 the discharge of duty. For when he was passing by the little property,
 within which for several years she had chastely confined herself,
 having heard of her faith and excellence, he turned out of his way
 that, as a bishop, he might honor, with pious respect, a gift of such
 eminent merit. We who journeyed with him thought that that virgin would
 rejoice, inasmuch as she was to obtain such a testimony to her virtue,
 while a priest of so great reputation, departing from his usual rigor
 of conduct, paid her a visit. But she did not relax those bonds of a
 most severe method of life, which she had imposed upon herself, even by
 allowing herself to see Martin. And thus the blessed man, having
 received, through another woman, her praiseworthy apology, joyfully
 departed from the doors of her who had not permitted herself to be seen
 or saluted. O glorious virgin, who did not allow herself to be looked
 upon even by Martin! O blessed Martin, who did not regard that repulse
 as being any insult to himself, but, extolling with exultant heart her
 excellence, rejoiced in an example only too rare in that locality!
 Well, when approaching night had compelled us to stay at no great
 distance from her humble dwelling, that same virgin sent a present to
 the blessed man; and Martin did what he had never done before (for he
 accepted a present or gift from nobody), he refused none of those
 things which the estimable virgin had sent him, declaring that her
 blessing was by no means to be rejected by a priest, since she was
 indeed to be placed before many priests. Let, I beg, virgins listen to
 that example, so that they shall, if they desire to close their doors
 to the wicked, even shut them against the good; and that the
 ill-disposed may have no free access to them, they shall not fear even
 to exclude priests from their society. Let the whole world listen
 attentively to this: a virgin did not permit herself to be looked upon
 by Martin. And it was no common [126] priest whom she repulsed, but the
 girl refused to come under the eyes of a man whom it was the salvation
 of onlookers to behold. But what priest, besides Martin, would not have
 regarded this as doing an injury to him? What irritation and fury would
 he have conceived in his mind against that virgin? He would have deemed
 her a heretic; and would have resolved that she should be laid under an
 anathema. And how surely would such a man have preferred to that
 blessed soul those virgins who are always throwing themselves in the
 way of the priest, who get up sumptuous entertainments, and who recline
 at table with the rest! But whither is my speech carrying me? That
 somewhat too free manner of speaking must be checked, lest perchance it
 may give offense to some; for words of reproach will not profit the
 unfaithful, while the example quoted will be enough for the faithful.
 At the same time, I wish so to extol the virtue of this virgin, as
 nevertheless to think that no deduction is to be made from the
 excellence of those others, who often came from remote regions for the
 purpose of seeing Martin, since indeed, with the same object in view,
 even angels ofttimes visited the blessed man.

 [126] "quemcumque," in the sense of qualemcumque, which is, in fact,
 found in some of the mss.

 Chapter XIII.

 "But in what I am now about to narrate, I possess you, Sulpitius" (here
 he looked at me) "as a fellow-witness. One day, I and Sulpitius there
 were watching before Martin's door, and had already sat in silence for
 several hours. We did so with deep reverence and awe, as if we were
 carrying out a watch prescribed to us before the tent of an angel;
 while, all the time, the door of his cell being closed, he did not know
 that we were there. Meanwhile, we heard the sound of people conversing,
 and by and by we were filled with a kind of awe and amazement, for we
 could not help perceiving that something divine was going on. After
 nearly two hours, Martin comes out to us; and then our friend Sulpitius
 (for no one was accustomed to speak to him more familiarly) began to
 entreat him to make known to us, piously enquiring on the subject, what
 meant that sort of Divine awe which we confessed we had both felt, and
 with whom he had been conversing in his cell. We added that, as we
 stood before the door, we had undoubtedly heard a feeble sound of
 people talking, but had scarcely understood it. Then he after a long
 delay (but there was really nothing which Sulpitius could not extort
 from him even against his will: I am about to relate things somewhat
 difficult of belief, but, as Christ is my witness, I lie not, unless
 any one is so impious as to think that Martin himself lied) said: I
 will tell you, but I beg you will not speak of it to any one else.
 Agnes, Thecla, and Mary were there with me.' He proceeded to describe
 to us the face and general aspect of each. And he acknowledged that,
 not merely on that day, but frequently, he received visits from them.
 Nor did he deny that Peter also and Paul, the Apostles, were pretty
 frequently seen by him. Moreover, he was in the habit of rebuking the
 demons by their special names, according as they severally came to him.
 He found Mercury a cause of special annoyance, while he said that
 Jupiter was stupid and doltish. I am aware that these things seemed
 incredible even to many who dwelt in the same monastery; and far less
 can I expect that all who simply hear of them will believe them. For
 unless Martin had lived such an inestimable life, and displayed such
 excellence, he would by no means be regarded among us as having been
 endowed with so great glory. And yet it is not at all wonderful that
 human infirmity doubted concerning the works of Martin, when we see
 that many at the present day do not even believe the Gospels. But we
 have ourselves had personal knowledge and experience, that angels often
 appeared and spoke familiarly with Martin. As bearing upon this, I am
 to narrate a matter, of small importance indeed, but still I will state
 it. A synod, composed of bishops, was held at Nemausus, and while he
 had refused to attend it, he was nevertheless desirous of knowing what
 was done at it. It so happened that our friend Sulpitius was then on
 board ship with him, but, as was his custom, he kept his place at a
 distance from the rest, in a retired part of the vessel. There an angel
 announced to him what had taken place in the synod. And when,
 afterwards, we carefully enquired into the time at which the council
 was held, we found, beyond all doubt, that that was the very day of the
 council, and that those things were there decreed by the bishops which
 the angel had announced to Martin.

 Chapter XIV.

 "But when we questioned him concerning the end of the world, he said to
 us that Nero and Antichrist have first to come; that Nero will rule in
 the Western portion of the world, after having subdued ten kings; and
 that a persecution will be carried on by him, with the view of
 compelling men to worship the idols of the Gentiles. He also said that
 Antichrist, on the other hand, would first seize upon the empire of the
 East, having his seat and the capital of his kingdom at Jerusalem;
 while both the city and the temple would be restored by him. He added
 that his persecution would have for its object to compel men to deny
 Christ as God, while he maintained rather that he himself was Christ,
 and ordered all men to be circumcised, according to the law. He further
 said that Nero was to be destroyed by Antichrist, and that the whole
 world, and all nations, were to be reduced under the power of
 Antichrist, until that impious one should be overthrown by the coming
 of Christ. He told us, too, that there was no doubt but that
 Antichrist, having been conceived by an evil spirit, was already born,
 and had, by this time, reached the years of boyhood, while he would
 assume power as soon as he reached the proper age. Now, this is the
 eighth year since we heard these words from his lips: you may
 conjecture, then, how nearly about to happen are those things which are
 feared in the future."

 As our friend the Gaul was emphatically speaking thus, and had not yet
 finished what he intended to relate, a boy of the family entered with
 the announcement that the presbyter Refrigerius was standing at the
 door. We began to doubt whether it would be better to hear the Gaul
 further, or to go and welcome that man whom we so greatly loved, and
 who had come to pay his respects to us, when our friend the Gaul
 remarked: "Even although this most holy priest had not arrived, this
 talk of ours would have had to be cut short, for the approach of night
 was itself urging us to finish the discourse which has been so far
 continued. But inasmuch as all things bearing upon the excellences of
 Martin have by no means yet been mentioned, let what you have heard
 suffice for to-day: to-morrow we shall proceed to what remains." This
 promise of our Gallic friend being equally acceptable to us all, we
 rose up.

  Dialogue III.

 The Virtues of Martin Continued.

 Chapter I.

 "It is daylight, our Gallic friend, and you must get up. For, as you
 see, both Postumianus is urgent, and this presbyter, who was yesterday
 admitted to hear what was going on, expects that what you put off
 narrating with regard to our beloved Martin till to-day, you should
 now, in fulfillment of your promise, proceed to tell. He is not,
 indeed, ignorant of all the things which are to be related, but
 knowledge is sweet and pleasant even to one who goes over again things
 already known to him; since, indeed, it has been so arranged by nature
 that one rejoices with a better conscience in his knowledge of things
 which he is sure, through the testimony borne to them by many, are not
 in any degree uncertain. For this man, too, having been a follower of
 Martin from his early youth, has indeed been acquainted with all his
 doings; but he gladly hears over again things already known. And I will
 confess to thee, O Gaul, that the virtues of Martin have often been
 heard of by me, since, in fact, I have committed to writing many things
 regarding him; but through the admiration I feel for his deeds, those
 things are always new to me which, although I have already heard them,
 are, over and over again, repeated concerning him. Wherefore, we
 congratulate you that Refrigerius has been added to us as a hearer, all
 the [127] more earnestly that Postumianus is manifesting such
 eagerness, because he hastens, as it were, to convey a knowledge of
 these things to the East, and is now to hear the truth from you
 confirmed, so to speak, by witnesses."

 As I was saying these words, and as the Gaul was now ready to resume
 his narrative, there rushes in upon us a crowd of monks, Evagrius the
 presbyter, Aper, Sabbatius, Agricola; and, a little after, there enters
 the presbyter Ætherius, with Calupio the deacon, and Amator the
 subdeacon; lastly, Aurelius the presbyter, a very dear friend of mine,
 who came from a longer distance, rushes up out of breath.  "Why," I
 enquire, "do you so suddenly and unexpectedly run together to us from
 so many different quarters, and at so early an hour in the morning?"
 "We," they reply, "heard yesterday that your friend the Gaul spent the
 whole day in narrating the virtues of Martin, and, as night overtook
 him, put off the rest until to-day: wherefore, we have made haste to
 furnish him with a crowded audience, as he speaks about such
 interesting matters." In the meantime, we are informed that a multitude
 of lay people are standing at the door, not venturing to enter, but
 begging, nevertheless, that they might be admitted. Then Aper declares,
 "It is by no means proper that these people should be mixed up with us,
 for they have come to hear, rather from curiosity than piety." I was
 grieved for the sake of those who ought not, as he thought, to be
 admitted, but all that I could obtain, and with difficulty, was that
 they should admit Eucherius from among the lieutenants, [128] and
 Celsus, a man of consular rank, while the rest were kept back. We then
 place the Gaul in the middle seat; and he, after long keeping silence,
 in harmony with his well-known modesty, at length began as follows.

 [127] The original here is very obscure.

 [128] "ex vicariis."

 Chapter II.

 "You have assembled, my pious and eloquent friends, to hear me; but, as
 I presume, you have brought to the task religious rather than learned
 ears; for you are to listen to me simply as a witness to the faith, and
 not as speaking with the fluency of an orator. Now, I shall not repeat
 the things which were spoken yesterday: those who did not hear them can
 become acquainted with them by means of the written records.
 Postumianus expects something new, intending to make known what he
 hears to the East, that it may not, when Martin is brought into
 comparison, esteem itself above the West. And first, my mind inclines
 to set forth an incident respecting which Refrigerius has just
 whispered in my ear: the affair took place in the city of Carnutes. A
 certain father of a family ventured to bring to Martin his daughter of
 twelve years old, who had been dumb from her birth, begging that the
 blessed man would loose, by his pious merits, her tongue, which was
 thus tied. He, giving way to the bishops Valentinus and Victricius, who
 then happened to be by his side, declared that he was unequal to so
 great an undertaking, but that nothing was impossible to them, as if
 holier than himself. But they, adding their pious entreaties, with
 suppliant voices, to those of the father, begged Martin to accomplish
 what was hoped for. He made no further delay,--being admirable in both
 respects, in the display, first of all, of humility, and then in not
 putting off a pious duty,--but orders the crowd of people standing
 round to be removed; and while the bishops only, and the father of the
 girl, were present, he prostrates himself in prayer, after his usual
 fashion. He then blesses a little oil, while he utters the formula of
 exorcism; and holding the tongue of the girl with his fingers, he thus
 pours the consecrated liquid into her mouth. Nor did the result of the
 power thus exerted disappoint the holy man. He asks her the name of her
 father, and she instantly replied. The father cries out, embracing the
 knees of Martin, with a mixture of joy and tears; and while all around
 are amazed, he confesses that then for the first time he listened to
 the voice of his daughter. And that this may not appear incredible to
 any one, let Evagrius, who is here, furnish you with a testimony of its
 truth; for the thing took place in his very presence.

 Chapter III.

 "The following is a small matter which I learned lately from the
 narration of Arpagius the presbyter, but I do not think it ought to be
 passed over. The wife of the courtier Avitianus had sent some oil to
 Martin, that he might bless it (such is the custom) so as to be ready
 when needful to meet different causes of disease. It was contained in a
 glass jar of a shape which, round throughout, gradually bulges [129]
 out towards the middle, with a long neck; but the hollow of the
 extended neck was not filled, because it is the custom to fill vessels
 of the kind in such a way that the top may be left free for the knobs
 which stop up the jar. The presbyter testified that he saw the oil
 increase under the blessing of Martin, so much that, the abundance of
 it overflowing the jar, it ran down from the top in every direction. He
 added that it bubbled up with the same [130] effect, while the vessel
 was being carried back to the mistress of the household; for the oil so
 steadily flowed over in the hands of the boy carrying it, that the
 abundance of the liquid, thus pouring down, covered all his garment. He
 said, moreover, that the lady received the vessel so full even to the
 brim, that (as the same presbyter tells [131] us at the present day)
 there was no room in that jar for inserting the stopper by which people
 are accustomed to close those vessels, the contents of which are to be
 preserved with special care. That, too, was a remarkable thing that
 happened to this man." Here he looked at me. "He had set down a glass
 vessel containing oil blessed by Martin in a pretty high window; and a
 boy of the family, not knowing that a jar was there, drew towards him
 the cloth covering it, with rather much violence. The vessel, in
 consequence, fell down on the marble pavement. Upon this, all were
 filled with dread lest the blessing of God, bestowed on the vessel by
 Martin, had been lost; but the jar was found as safe as ever, just as
 if it had fallen on the softest feathers. Now, this result should be
 ascribed, not so much to chance, as to the power of Martin, whose
 blessing could not possibly perish.

 "There is this, too, which was effected by a certain person, whose
 name, because he is present, and has forbidden it to be mentioned,
 shall be suppressed: Saturninus too, who is now with us, was present on
 the occasion referred to. A dog was barking at us in a somewhat
 disagreeable manner. ' I command thee,' said the person in question, in
 the name of Martin, to be quiet.' The dog--his barking seemed to stick
 in his throat, and one might have thought that his tongue had been cut
 out--was silent. Thus it is really a small matter that Martin himself
 performed miracles: believe me that other people also have accomplished
 many things in his name.

 [129] The text of this sentence is very uncertain, and the meaning
 somewhat obscure.

 [130] Here, again, the text is in confusion.

 [131] Text and meaning both very obscure.

 Chapter IV.

 "You knew the too barbarous and, beyond measure, bloody ferocity of
 Avitianus, a former courtier. He enters the city of the Turones with a
 furious spirit, while rows of people, laden with chains, followed him
 with melancholy looks, orders various kinds of punishments to be got
 ready for slaying them; and to the grave amazement of the city, he
 arranges them for the sad work on the following day. When this became
 known to Martin, he set out all alone, a little before midnight, for
 the palace of that beast. But when, in the silence of the depths of the
 night, and as all were at rest, no entrance was possible through the
 bolted doors, he lays himself down before that cruel threshold. In the
 meantime, Avitianus, buried in deep sleep, is smitten by an assailing
 angel, who says to him, Does the servant of God lie at your threshold,
 and do you continue sleeping?' He, on listening to these words, rises,
 in much disturbance, from his bed; and calling his servants, he
 exclaims in terror, Martin is at the door: go immediately, and undo the
 bolts, that the servant of God may suffer no harm.' But they, in
 accordance with the tendency of all servants, having scarcely stepped
 beyond the first threshold, and laughing at their master as having been
 mocked by a dream, affirm that there was no one at the door. This they
 did as simply inferring from their own disposition, that no one could
 be keeping watch through the night, while far less did they believe
 that a priest was lying at the threshold of another man during the
 horror of that night. Well, they easily persuaded Avitianus of the
 truth of their story. He again sinks into sleep; but, being ere long
 struck with greater violence than before, he exclaimed that Martin was
 standing at the door, and that, therefore, no rest either of mind or
 body was allowed him. As the servants delayed, he himself went forward
 to the outer threshold; and there he found Martin, as he had thought he
 would. The wretched man, struck by the display of so great excellence,
 exclaimed, Why, sir, have you done this to me? There is no need for you
 to speak: I know what you wish: I see what you require: depart as
 quickly as possible, lest the anger of heaven consume me on account of
 the injury done you: I have already suffered sufficient punishment.
 Believe me, that I have firmly determined in my own mind how I should
 now proceed.' So then, after the departure of the holy man, he calls
 for his officials and orders all the prisoners to be set free, while
 presently he himself went his way. Thus Avitianus being put to flight,
 the city rejoiced, and felt at liberty.

 Chapter V.

 "While these are certain facts, since Avitianus related them to many
 persons, they are further confirmed on this ground that Refrigerius the
 presbyter, whom you see here present, lately had them narrated to him,
 under an appeal to the Divine majesty, by Dagridus, a faithful man
 among the tribunes, who swore that the account was given him by
 Avitianus himself. But I do not wish you to wonder that I do to-day
 what I did not do yesterday; viz. that I subjoin to the mention of
 every individual wonder the names of witnesses, and mention persons to
 whom, if any one is inclined to disbelieve, he may have recourse,
 because they are still in the body. The unbelief of very many has
 compelled that; for they are said to hesitate about some things which
 were related yesterday. Let these people, then, accept as witnesses
 persons who are still alive and well, and let them give more credit to
 such, inasmuch as they doubt our good faith. But really, if they are so
 unbelieving, I give it as my opinion that they will not believe even
 the witnesses named. And yet I am surprised that any one, who has even
 the least sense of religion, can venture on such wickedness as to think
 that any one could tell lies concerning Martin. Be that far from every
 one who lives in obedience to God; for, indeed, Martin does not require
 to be defended by falsehoods. But, O Christ, we lay the truth of our
 whole discourse before thee, to the effect that we neither have said,
 nor will say, anything else than what either we ourselves have
 witnessed, or have learned from undoubted authorities, and, indeed,
 very frequently from Martin himself. But although we have adopted the
 form of a dialogue, in order that the style might be varied to prevent
 weariness, still we affirm that we are really setting forth [132] a
 true history in a dutiful spirit. The unbelief of some has compelled
 me, to my great regret, to insert in my narrative these remarks which
 are apart from the subject in hand. But let the discourse now return to
 our assembly; in which since I saw that I was listened to so eagerly, I
 found it necessary to acknowledge that Aper acted properly in keeping
 back the unbelieving, under the conviction he had that those only ought
 to be allowed to hear who were of a believing spirit.

 [132] "nos pie præstruere profitemur historiæ veritatem."

 Chapter VI.

 "I am enraged in heart, believe me, and, through vexation, I seem to
 lose my senses: do Christian men not believe in the miraculous powers
 of Martin, which the demons acknowledged?

 "The monastery of the blessed man was at two miles' distance from the
 city; but if, as often as he was to come to the church, he only had set
 his foot outside the threshold of his cell, one could perceive the
 possessed roaring through the whole church, and the bands of guilty
 [133] ones trembling as if their judge were coming, so that the
 groanings of the demons announced the approach of the bishop to the
 clerics, who were not previously aware that he was coming. I saw a
 certain man snatched up into the air on the approach of Martin, and
 suspended there with his hands stretched upwards, so that he could in
 no way touch the ground with his feet. But if at any time Martin
 undertook the duty of exorcising the demons, he touched no one with his
 hands, and reproached no one in words, as a multitude of expressions is
 generally rolled forth by the clerics; but the possessed, being brought
 up to him, he ordered all others to depart, and the doors being bolted,
 clothed in sackcloth and sprinkled with ashes, he stretched himself on
 the ground in the midst of the church, and turned to prayer. Then truly
 might one behold the wretched beings tortured with various
 results--some hanging, as it were, from a cloud, with their feet turned
 upwards, and yet their garments did not fall down over their faces,
 lest the part of their body which was exposed should give rise to
 shame; while in another part of the church one could see them tortured
 without any question being addressed to them, and confessing their
 crimes. They revealed their names, too, of their own accord; one
 acknowledged that he was Jupiter, and another that he was Mercury.
 Finally, one could see all the servants of the devil suffering agony,
 along with their master, so that we could not help acknowledging that
 in Martin there was fulfilled that which is written that the saints
 shall judge angels.'

 [133] "agmina damnanda."

 Chapter VII.

 "There was a certain village in the country of the Senones which was
 every year annoyed with hail. The inhabitants, constrained by an
 extreme of suffering, sought help from Martin. A highly respectable
 embassy was sent to him by Auspicius, a man of the rank of prefect,
 whose fields the storm had been wont to smite more severely than it did
 those of others. But Martin, having there offered up prayer, so
 completely freed the whole district from the prevailing plague, that
 for twenty years, in which he afterwards remained in the body, no one
 in those places suffered from hail. And that this may not be thought to
 be accidental, but rather effected by Martin, the tempest, returning
 afresh, once more fell upon the district in the year in which he died.
 The world thus felt the departure of a believing man to such a degree,
 that, as it justly rejoiced in his life, so it also bewailed his death.
 But if any hearer, weak in faith, demands also witnesses to prove those
 things which we have said, I will bring forward, not one man, but many
 thousands, and will even summon the whole region of the Senones to bear
 witness to the power which was experienced. But not to speak of this,
 you, presbyter Refrigerius, remember, I believe, that we lately had a
 conversation, concerning the matter referred to, with Romulus, the son
 of that Auspicius I mentioned, an honored and religious man. He related
 the points in question to us, as if they had not been previously known;
 and as he was afraid of constant losses in future harvests, he did, as
 you yourself beheld, regret, with much lamentation, that Martin was not
 preserved up to this time.

 Chapter VIII.

 "But to return to Avitianus: while at every other place, and in all
 other cities, he displayed marks of horrible cruelty, at Tours alone he
 did no harm. Yes, that beast, which was nourished by human blood, and
 by the slaughter of unfortunate creatures, showed himself meek and
 peaceable in the presence of the blessed man. I remember that Martin
 one day came to him, and having entered his private apartment, he saw a
 demon of marvelous size sitting behind his back. Blowing upon him from
 a distance (if I may, as a matter of necessity, make use of a word
 which is hardly Latin [134] , Avitianus thought that he was blowing at
 him, and exclaimed, Why, thou holy man, dost thou treat me thus?' But
 then Martin said, It is not at you, but at him who, in all his
 terribleness, leans over your neck.' The devil gave way, and left his
 familiar seat; and it is well known that, ever after that day,
 Avitianus was milder, whether because he now understood that he had
 always been doing the will of the devil sitting by him, or because the
 unclean spirit, driven from his seat by Martin, was deprived of the
 power of attacking him; while the servant was ashamed of his master,
 and the master did not force on his servant.

 "In a village of the Ambatienses, that is in an old stronghold, which
 is now largely inhabited by brethren, you know there is a great
 idol-temple built up with labor. The building had been constructed of
 the most polished stones and furnished with turrets; and, rising on
 high in the form of a cone, it preserved the superstition of the place
 by the majesty of the work. The blessed man had often enjoined its
 destruction on Marcellus, who was there settled as presbyter. Returning
 after the lapse of some time, he reproved the presbyter, because the
 edifice of the idol-temple was still standing. He pleaded in excuse
 that such an immense structure could with difficulty be thrown down by
 a band of soldiers, or by the strength of a large body of the public,
 and far less should Martin think it easy for that to be effected by
 means of weak clerics or helpless monks. Then Martin, having recourse
 to his well-known auxiliaries, spent the whole night in watching and
 prayer--with the result that, in the morning, a storm arose, and cast
 down even to its foundations the idol-temple. Now let this narrative
 rest on the testimony of Marcellus.

 [134] "exsufflans."

 Chapter IX.

 "I will make use of another not dissimilar marvel in a like kind of
 work, having the concurrence of Refrigerius in doing so. Martin was
 prepared to throw down a pillar of immense size, on the top of which an
 idol stood, but there was no means by which effect could be given to
 his design. Well, according to his usual practice, he betakes himself
 to prayer. It is undoubted that then a column, to a certain degree like
 the other, rushed down from heaven, and falling upon the idol, it
 crushed to powder the whole of the seemingly indestructible mass: this
 would have been a small matter, had he only in an invisible way made
 use of the powers of heaven, but these very powers were beheld by human
 eyes serving Martin in a visible manner.

 "Again, the same Refrigerius is my witness that a woman, suffering from
 an issue of blood, when she had touched the garment of Martin, after
 the example of the woman mentioned in the Gospel, was cured in a moment
 of time.

 "A serpent, cutting its way through a river, was swimming towards the
 bank on which we had taken our stand. In the name of the Lord,' said
 Martin, I command thee to return.' Instantly, at the word of the holy
 man, the venomous beast turned round, and while we looked on, swam
 across to the farther bank. As we all perceived that this had not
 happened without a miracle; he groaned deeply, and exclaimed, Serpents
 hear me, but men will not hear.'

 Chapter X.

 "Being accustomed to eat fish at the time of Easter, he enquired a
 little before the hour for refreshment, whether it was in readiness.
 Then Cato, the deacon, to whom the outward management of the monastery
 belonged, and who was himself a skillful fisher, tells him that no
 capture had fallen to his lot the whole day, and that other fishers,
 who used to sell what they caught, had also been able to do nothing.
 Go,' said he, let down your line, and a capture will follow.' As
 Sulpitius there has already described, we had our dwelling close to the
 river. We all went, then, as these were holidays, to see our friend
 fishing, with the hopes of all on the stretch, that the efforts would
 not be in vain by which, under the advice of Martin himself, it was
 sought to obtain fish for his use. At the first throw the deacon drew
 out, in a very small net, an enormous pike, and ran joyfully back to
 the monastery, with the feeling undoubtedly to which some poet gave
 utterance (for we use a learned verse, inasmuch as we are conversing
 with learned people)--And brought his captive boar [135] to wondering
 Argos.'

 "Truly that disciple of Christ, imitating the miracles performed by the
 Saviour, and which he, by way of example, set before the view of his
 saints, showed Christ also working in him, who, glorifying his own holy
 follower everywhere, conferred upon that one man the gifts of various
 graces. Arborius, of the imperial bodyguard, testifies that he saw the
 hand of Martin as he was offering sacrifice, clothed, as it seemed,
 with the noblest gems, while it glittered with a purple light; and
 that, when his right hand was moved, he heard the clash of the gems, as
 they struck together.

 [135] "captivum suem." Probably there is here an allusion to the
 capture of the Erymanthian boar by Hercules, with a punning reference
 to a secondary meaning of sus as a kind of fish.

 Chapter XI.

 "I will now come to an event which he always concealed, owing to the
 character of the times, but which he could not conceal from us. In the
 matter referred to, there is this of a miraculous nature, that an angel
 conversed, face to face, with him. The Emperor Maximus, while in other
 respects doubtless a good man, was led astray by the advices of some
 priests after Priscillian had been put to death. He, therefore,
 protected by his royal power Ithacius the bishop, who had been the
 accuser of Priscillian, and others of his confederates, whom it is not
 necessary to name. The emperor thus prevented every one from bringing
 it as a charge against Ithacius, that, by his instrumentality, a man of
 any sort had been condemned to death. Now Martin, constrained to go to
 the court by many serious causes of people involved in suffering,
 incurred the whole force of the storm which was there raging. The
 bishops who had assembled at Treves were retained in that city, and
 daily communicating with Ithacius, they had made common cause with him.
 When it was announced to them expecting no such information, that
 Martin was coming, completely losing courage, they began to mutter and
 tremble among themselves. And it so happened that already, under their
 influence, the emperor had determined to send some tribunes armed with
 absolute power into the two Spains, to search out heretics, and, when
 found, to deprive them of their life or goods. Now there was no doubt
 that that tempest would also make havoc of multitudes of the real
 saints, little distinction being made between the various classes of
 individuals. For in such circumstances, a judgment was formed simply by
 appearances, so that one was deemed a heretic rather on his turning
 pale from fear, or wearing a particular garment, than by the faith
 which he professed. And the bishops were well aware that such
 proceedings would by no means please Martin; but, conscious of evil as
 they were, this was a subject of deep anxiety to them, lest when he
 came, he should keep from communion with them; knowing well as they
 did, that others would not be wanting who, with his example to guide
 them, would follow the bold course adopted by so great a man. They
 therefore form a plan with the emperor, to this effect, that, officials
 of the court being sent on to meet him, Martin should be forbidden to
 come any nearer to that city, unless he should declare that he would
 maintain peace with the bishops who were living there. But he
 skillfully frustrated their object, by declaring that he would come
 among them with the peace of Christ. And at last, having entered during
 the night, he went to the church, simply for the purpose of prayer. On
 the following day he betakes himself to the palace. Besides many other
 petitions which he had to present, and which it would be tedious to
 describe, the following were the principal: entreaties in behalf of the
 courtier Narses, and the president Leucadius, both of whom had belonged
 to the party of Gratianus, and that, with more than ordinary zeal, upon
 which this is not the time to dilate, and who had thus incurred the
 anger of the conqueror; but his chief request was, that tribunes, with
 the power of life and death, should not be sent into the Spains. For
 Martin felt a pious solicitude not only to save from danger the true
 Christians in these regions, who were to be persecuted in connection
 with that expedition, but to protect even heretics themselves. But on
 the first and second day the wily emperor kept the holy man in
 suspense, whether that he might impress on him the importance of the
 affair, or because, being obnoxious to the bishops, he could not be
 reconciled to them, or because, as most people thought at the time, the
 emperor opposed his wishes from avarice, having cast a longing eye on
 the property of the persons in question. For we are told that he was
 really a man distinguished by many excellent actions, but that he was
 not successful in contending against avarice. This may, however, have
 been due to the necessities of the empire at the time, for the treasury
 of the state had been exhausted by former rulers; and he, being almost
 constantly in the expectation of civil wars, or in a state of
 preparation for them, may easily be excused for having, by all sorts of
 expedients, sought resources for the defense of the empire.

 Chapter XII.

 "In the meantime, those bishops with whom Martin would not hold
 communion went in terror to the king, complaining that they had been
 condemned beforehand; that it was all over with them as respected the
 status of every one of them, if the authority of Martin was now to
 uphold the pertinacity of Theognitus, who alone had as yet condemned
 them by a sentence publicly pronounced; that the man ought not to have
 been received within the walls; that he was now not merely the defender
 of heretics, but their vindicator; and that nothing had really been
 accomplished by the death of Priscillian, if Martin were to act the
 part of his avenger. Finally, prostrating themselves with weeping and
 lamentation, they implored the emperor [136] to put forth his power
 against this one man. And the emperor was not far from being compelled
 to assign to Martin, too, the doom of heretics. But after all, although
 he was disposed to look upon the bishops with too great favor, he was
 not ignorant that Martin excelled all other mortals in faith, sanctity,
 and excellence: he therefore tries another way of getting the better of
 the holy man. And first he sends for him privately, and addresses him
 in the kindest fashion, assuring him that the heretics were condemned
 in the regular course of public trials, rather than by the persecutions
 of the priests; and that there was no reason why he should think that
 communion with Ithacius and the rest of that party was a thing to be
 condemned. He added that Theognitus had created disunion, rather by
 personal hatred, than by the cause he supported; and that, in fact, he
 was the only person who, in the meantime, had separated himself from
 communion: while no innovation had been made by the rest. He remarked
 further that a synod, held a few days previously, had decreed that
 Ithacius was not chargeable with any fault. When Martin was but little
 impressed by these statements, the king then became inflamed with
 anger, and hurried out of his presence; while, without delay,
 executioners are appointed for those in whose behalf Martin had made
 supplication.

 [136] "potestatem regiam."

 Chapter XIII.

 "When this became known to Martin, he rushed to the palace, though it
 was now night. He pledges himself that, if these people were spared, he
 would communicate; only let the tribunes, who had already been sent to
 the Spains for the destruction of the churches, be recalled. There is
 no delay: Maximus grants all his requests. On the following day, the
 ordination of Felix as bishop was being arranged, a man undoubtedly of
 great sanctity, and truly worthy of being made a priest in happier
 times. Martin took part in the communion of that day, judging it better
 to yield for the moment, than to disregard the safety of those over
 whose heads a sword was hanging. Nevertheless, although the bishops
 strove to the uttermost to get him to confirm the fact of his
 communicating by signing his name, he could not be induced to do so. On
 the following day, hurrying away from that place, as he was on the way
 returning, he was filled with mourning and lamentation that he had even
 for an hour been mixed up with the evil communion, and, not far from a
 village named Andethanna, where remote woods stretch [137] far and wide
 with profound solitude, he sat down while his companions went on a
 little before him. There he became involved in deep thought,
 alternately accusing and defending the cause of his grief and conduct.
 Suddenly, an angel stood by him and said, Justly, O Martin, do you feel
 compunction, but you could not otherwise get out of your difficulty.
 Renew your virtue, resume your courage, lest you not only now expose
 your fame, but your very salvation, to danger.' Therefore, from that
 time forward, he carefully guarded against being mixed up in communion
 with the party of Ithacius. But when it happened that he cured some of
 the possessed more slowly and with less grace than usual, he at once
 confessed to us with tears that he felt a diminution of his power on
 account of the evil of that communion in which he had taken part for a
 moment through necessity, and not with a cordial spirit. He lived
 sixteen years after this, but never again did he attend a synod, and
 kept carefully aloof from all assemblies of bishops.

 [137] The text here is very corrupt: we have followed a conjecture of
 Halm's.

 Chapter XIV.

 "But clearly, as we experienced, he repaired, with manifold interest,
 his grace, which had been diminished for a time. I saw afterwards a
 possessed person brought to him at the gate [138] of the monastery; and
 that, before the man touched the threshold, he was cured.

 "I lately heard one testifying that, when he was sailing on the Tuscan
 Sea, following that course which leads to Rome, whirlwinds having
 suddenly arisen, all on board were in extreme peril of their lives. In
 these circumstances, a certain Egyptian merchant, who was not yet a
 Christian, cried out, Save us, O God of Martin,' upon which the tempest
 was immediately stilled, and they held their desired course, while the
 pacified ocean continued in perfect tranquillity.

 "Lycontius, a believing man belonging to the lieutenants, when a
 violent disease was afflicting his family, and sick bodies were lying
 all through his house in sad proof of unheard-of calamity, implored the
 help of Martin by a letter. At this time the blessed man declared that
 the thing asked was difficult to be obtained, for he knew in his spirit
 that that house was then being scourged by Divine appointment. Yet he
 did not give up an unbroken course of prayer and fasting for seven
 whole days and as many nights, so that he at last obtained that which
 he aimed at in his supplications. Speedily, Lycontius, having
 experienced the Divine kindness, flew to him, at once reporting the
 fact and giving thanks, that his house had been delivered from all
 danger. He also offered a hundred pounds of silver, which the blessed
 man neither rejected nor accepted; but before the amount of money
 touched the threshold of the monastery, he had, without hesitation,
 destined it for the redemption of captives. And when it was suggested
 to him by the brethren, that some portion of it should be reserved for
 the expenses of the monastery, since it was difficult for all of them
 to obtain necessary food, while many of them were sorely in need of
 clothing, he replied, Let the church both feed and clothe us, as long
 as we do not appear to have provided, in any way, for our own wants.'

 "There occur to my mind at this point many miracles of that illustrious
 man, which it is more easy for us to admire than to narrate. You all
 doubtless recognize the truth of what I say: there are many doings of
 his which cannot be set forth in words. For instance, there is the
 following, which I rather think cannot be related by us just as it took
 place. A certain one of the brethren (you are not ignorant of his name,
 but his person must be concealed, lest we should cause shame to a godly
 man),--a certain one, I say, having found abundance of coals for his
 stove, drew a stool to himself, and was sitting, with outspread legs
 and exposed person, beside that fire, when Martin at once perceived
 that an improper thing was done under the sacred roof, and cried out
 with a loud voice, Who, by exposing his person, is dishonoring our
 habitation?' When our brother heard this, and felt from his own
 conscience, that it was he who was rebuked, he immediately ran to us
 almost in a fainting condition, and acknowledged his shame; which was
 done, however, only through the forth-putting of the power of Martin.

 [138] "Pseudothyrum": Halm prefers the form "pseudoforum," but the
 meaning is the same.

 Chapter XV.

 "Again, on a certain day, after he had sat down on that wooden seat of
 his (which you all know), placed in the small open court which
 surrounded his abode, he perceived two demons sitting on the lofty rock
 which overhangs the monastery. He then heard them, in eager and
 gladsome tones, utter the following invitation, Come hither, Brictio,
 come hither, Brictio.' I believe they perceived the miserable man
 approaching from a distance, being conscious how great frenzy of spirit
 they had excited within him. Nor is there any delay: Brictio rushes in
 in absolute fury; and there, full of madness, he vomits forth a
 thousand reproaches against Martin. For he had been reproved by him on
 the previous day, because he who had possessed nothing before he
 entered the clerical office, having, in fact, been brought up in the
 monastery by Martin himself, was now keeping horses and purchasing
 slaves. For at that time, he was accused by many of not only having
 bought boys belonging to barbarous nations, but girls also of a comely
 appearance. The miserable man, moved with bitter rage on account of
 these things, and, as I believe, chiefly instigated by the impulse
 received from those demons, made such an onset upon Martin as scarcely
 to refrain from laying hands upon him. The holy man, on his part, with
 a placid countenance and a tranquil mind, endeavored by gentle words to
 restrain the madness of the unhappy wretch. But the spirit of
 wickedness so prevailed within him, that not even his own mind, at best
 a very vain one, was under his control. With trembling lips, and a
 changing countenance, pale with rage, he rolled forth the words of sin,
 asserting that he was a holier man than Martin who had brought him up,
 inasmuch as from his earliest years he had grown up in the monastery
 amid the sacred institutions of the Church, while Martin had at first,
 as he could not deny, been tarnished with the life of a soldier, and
 had now entirely sunk into dotage by means of his baseless
 superstitions, and ridiculous fancies about visions. After he had
 uttered many things like these, and others of a still more bitter
 nature, which it is better not to mention, going out, at length, when
 his rage was satisfied he seemed to feel as if he had completely
 vindicated his conduct. But with rapid steps he rushed back by the way
 he had gone out, the demons having, I believe, been, in the meantime,
 driven from his heart by the prayers of Martin, and he was now brought
 back to repentance. Speedily, then, he returns, and throws himself at
 the feet of Martin, begging for pardon and confessing his error, while,
 at length restored to a better mind, he acknowledges that he had been
 under the influence of a demon. It was no difficult business for Martin
 to forgive the suppliant. And then the holy man explained both to him
 and to us all, how he had seen him driven on by demons, and declared
 that he was not moved by the reproaches which had been heaped upon him;
 for they had, in fact, rather injured the man who uttered them. And
 subsequently, when this same Brictio was often accused before him of
 many and great crimes, Martin could not be induced to remove him from
 the presbyterate, lest he should be suspected of revenging the injury
 done to himself, while he often repeated this saying: If Christ bore
 with Judas, why should not I bear with Brictio?'"

 Chapter XVI.

 Upon this, Postumianus exclaims, "Let that well-known man in our
 immediate neighborhood, listen to that example, who, when he is wise,
 takes no notice either of things present or future, but if he has been
 offended, falls into utter fury, having no control over himself. He
 then rages against the clerics, and makes bitter attacks upon the
 laity, while he stirs up the whole world for his own revenge. He will
 continue in this state of contention for three years without
 intermission, and refuse to be mollified either by time or reason. The
 condition of the man is to be lamented and pitied, even if this were
 the only incurable evil by which he is afflicted. But you ought, my
 Gallic friend, to have frequently recalled to his mind such examples of
 patience and tranquillity, that he might know both how to be angry and
 how to forgive. And if he happens to hear of this speech of mine which
 has been briefly interpolated into our discourse, and. directed against
 himself, let him know that I spoke, not more with the lips of an enemy
 than the mind of a friend; because I should wish, if the thing were
 possible, that he should be spoken of rather as being like the bishop
 Martin, than the tyrant Phalaris. But let us pass away from him, since
 the mention of him is far from pleasant, and let us return, O Gaul, to
 our friend Martin."

 Chapter XVII.

 Then said I, since I perceived by the setting sun that evening was at
 hand: "The day is gone, Postumianus; we must rise up; and at the same
 time some refreshment is due to these so zealous listeners. And as to
 Martin, you ought not to expect that there is any limit to one talking
 about him: he extends too far to be comprised fully in any
 conversation. In the meantime, you will convey to the East the things
 you have now heard about that famous man; and as you retrace your steps
 to your former haunts, and pass along by various coasts, places,
 harbors, islands, and seas, see that you spread among the peoples the
 name and glory of Martin. Especially remember that you do not omit
 Campania; and although your route will take you far off the beaten
 track, still any expenditure from delay will not be to you of so much
 importance as to keep you from visiting in that quarter Paulinus, a man
 renowned and praised throughout the whole world. I beg you first to
 unroll to him the volume of discourse which we either completed
 yesterday, or have said to-day. You will relate all to him; you will
 repeat all to him; that in due time, by his means, Rome may learn the
 sacred merits of this man, just as he spread that first little book of
 ours not only through Italy, but even through the whole of Illyria. He,
 not jealous of the glories of Martin, and being a most pious admirer of
 his saintly excellences in Christ, will not refuse to compare our
 leading man with his own friend Felix. Next, if you happen to cross
 over to Africa, you will relate what you have heard to Carthage; and,
 although, as you yourself have said, it already knows the man, yet now
 pre-eminently it will learn more respecting him, that it may not admire
 its own martyr Cyprian alone, although consecrated by his sacred blood.
 And then, if carried down a little to the left, you enter the gulf of
 Achaia, let Corinth know, and let Athens know, that Plato in the
 academy was not wiser, and that Socrates in the prison was not braver,
 than Martin. You will say to them that Greece was indeed happy which
 was thought worthy to listen to an apostle pleading, but that Christ
 has by no means forsaken Gaul, since he has granted it to possess such
 a man as Martin. But when you have come as far as Egypt, although it is
 justly proud of the numbers and virtues of its own saints, yet let it
 not disdain to hear how Europe will not yield to it, or to all Asia, in
 having only Martin.

 Chapter XVIII.

 "But when you have again set sail from that place with the view of
 making for Jerusalem, I enjoin upon you a duty connected with our
 grief, that, if you ever come to the shore of renowned Ptolemais, you
 enquire most carefully where Pomponius, that friend of ours, is buried,
 and that you do not refuse to visit his remains on that foreign soil.
 There shed many tears, as much from the working of your own feelings,
 as from our tender affection; and although it is but a worthless gift,
 scatter the ground there with purple flowers and sweet-smelling grass.
 And you will say to him, but not roughly, and not harshly,--with the
 address of one who sympathizes, and not with the tone of one who
 reproaches,--that if he had only been willing to listen to you at one
 time, or to me constantly, and if he had invited Martin rather than
 that man whom I am unwilling to name, he would never have been so
 cruelly separated from me, or covered by a heap of unknown dust, having
 suffered death in the midst of the sea with the lot of a ship-wrecked
 pirate, and with difficulty securing burial on a far-distant shore. Let
 those behold this as their own work, who, in seeking to revenge him,
 have wished to injure me, let them behold their own glory, and being
 avenged, let them henceforth cease to make any attacks upon me."

 Having uttered these sad words in a very mournful voice, and while the
 tears of all the others were drawn forth by our laments, we at length
 departed, certainly with a profound admiration for Martin, but with no
 less sorrow from our own lamentations.
