Montague Summers, The Vampire: His Kith and Kin (1928)
==========================================================================
Summers's definitive study of vampire lore — history, folklore, and theology of the vampire across cultures. The foundational text of vampire scholarship. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

Way ted
eect “
ieee


ope


Pa


Junius Parker Fishburn
Memorial Library
Hollins College, Virginia


THE VAMPIRE


~a2ajds}juos 7 }


LOGI ‘UOTYg : YOsD suUaN” Ag
7


SAYIdWNVA FHL


r


* I HLV1d


THE VAMPIRE


HIS KITH AND KIN


By
MONTAGUE SUMMERS


Author of ‘ The History of Witchcraft,’ etc.


Scuto circumdabit te ueritas eius: non timebis a timore nocturno.
A sagitta uolante in die, a negotio perambulante in tenebris: ab
incursu, et daemonio meridiano—Psaim XC,


LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LTD.
BROADWAY HOUSE : 68-74, CARTER LANE, E.C.


1928


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY HEADLEY BROTHERS,
18, DEVONSHIRE STREET, E.C.2; AND ASHFORD, KENT


CONTENTS


CHAPTER PAGE

I. Tue ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE : : ; : 1
Il. Tue GeNERATION OF THE VAMPIRE ; : Ree (|
Ill. Tuer Traits AND PRACTICE OF VAMPIRISM . . 140


IV. Tae Vamprre In AssyRIA, THE HAST, AND SOME


ANCIENT COUNTRIES ; > ; ‘ ae BT
VY. Tae VAmprre IN LITERATURE : : : er rf
BIBLIOGRAPHY : : : ; . ’ : > Seal


INDEX ; ; p : ; : ; : . 349


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


I. Lxs Vamprres. By Etienne Csok. Picture in the


Salon, 1907. : ; ‘ Frontispiece.


FACING PAGE


Il. Tue Resuscrrarep Corpse. From the Musée
Wiertz


II. A Camp Devourrep sy A Witp Man. By Luke
Cranach .


IV. Svurcrpr. From the Musée Wiertz
V. Cavucnuemar. By Laurence Housman


VI. Hunesr, Mapngess AND Crime. From the Musée
Wiertz


>


VII. Maray Vampires. From Skeat’s “‘ Malay Magic.’
(By permission of Messrs. Macmillan & Co.,
Ltd.)


VIII. Varney THE VAMPIRE


An Assyrian Vampire. A seal in the Revue
d’Assyriologie. Appears on the Jacket.


vii


46


64


142


180


232


254


332


a


SS


Py . 5 ' Z S


INTRODUCTION


In all the darkest pages of the malign supernatural there is
no more terrible tradition than that of the Vampire, a pariah
even among demons. Foul are his ravages; gruesome and
seemingly barbaric are the ancient and approved methods by
which folk must rid themselves of this hideous pest. Even
to-day in certain quarters of the world, in remoter districts of
Europe itself, Transylvania, Slavonia, the isles and mountains
of Greece, the peasant will take the law into his own hands
and utterly destroy the carrion who—as it is yet firmly believed
—at night will issue from his unhallowed grave to spread the
infection of vampirism throughout the countryside. Assyria
knew the vampire long ago, and he lurked amid the primaeval
forests of Mexico before Cortes came. He is feared by the
Chinese, by the Indian, and the Malay alike ; whilst Arabian
story tells us again and again of the ghouls who haunt ill-
omened sepulchres and lonely cross-ways to attack and devour
the unhappy traveller.

The tradition is world wide and of dateless antiquity.
Travellers and various writers upon several countries have
dealt with these dark and perplexing problems, sometimes
cursorily, less frequently with scholarship and perception, but
in every case the discussion of the vampire has occupied a few
paragraphs, a page or two, or at most a chapter of an extensive
and divaricating study, where other circumstances and other
legends claimed at least an equal if not a more important and
considerable place in the narrative. It may be argued, indeed,
that the writers upon Greece have paid especial attention to
this tradition, and that the vampire figures prominently in
their works. This is true, but on the other hand the treatise
of Leone Allacci, De Graecorum hodie quorundam opinationibus ,
1645, is of considerable rarity, nor are even such volumes as
Father Francois Richard’s Relation de ce qui s’est passé de plus
remarquable a Sant-Erini, 1657, the Voyage au Levant (1705)


ix


x INTRODUCTION


of Paul Lucas, and Tournefort’s Relation d’un Voyage du
Levant (1717), although perhaps not altogether uncommon and
certainly fairly well known by repute, generally to be met with
in every library. The study of the Modern Greek Vampire
in Mr. J. G. Lawson’s Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek
Religion has, of course, taken its place as a classic, but save
incidentally and in passing Mr. Lawson does not touch upon the
tradition in other countries and at other times, for this lies
outside his purview.

Towards the end of the seventeenth century, and even more
particularly during the first half of the eighteenth century
when in Hungary, Moravia, and Galicia, there seemed to be a
veritable epidemic of vampirism the report of which was
bruited far and wide engaging the attention of curia and
university, ecclesiastic and philosopher, scholar and man of
letters, journalist and virtuoso in all lands, there appeared a
large number of academic theses and tractates, the majority
of which had been prelected at Leipzig, and these formally
discussed and debated the question in well-nigh all its aspects,
dividing, sub-dividing, inquiring, ratiocinating upon the most
approved scholastic lines. Thus we have the monographs of
such professors as Philip Rohr, whose “ Dissertatio Historico-
Philosophica ”’ De Masticatione Mortuorum was delivered at
Leipzig on 16 August, 1679, and issued the same year from the
press of Michael Vogt ; the Dissertatio de Uampyris Seruiensibus
of Zopfius and van Dalen, printed at Duisburg in 1733; and
the De absolutione mortuorum excommunicatorum of Heineccius,
published at Helmstad in 1709. Of especial value are Michael
Ranft’s De Masticatione Mortuorum in Tumulis Liber, Leipzig,
1728, and the Dissertatio de Cadaueribus Sanguisugis, Jena,
1732, of John Christian Stock. These dissertations, however,
are extremely scarce and hardly to be found, whilst even so
encyclopaedic a bibliography as Caillet does not include either
Philip Rohr, Michael Ranft, or Stock, all of whom should
therein assuredly have found a place. In this connexion must
not be omitted the De Miraculis Mortuorum, Leipzig, Kirchner,
1670, and second edition, Weidmann, 1687, a treatise by
Christian Frederic Garmann, a noted physician, who was born
at Mersebourg about 1640 and who practised with great repute
at Chemnitz. Garmann discusses many curious details and
continued to amass so vast a collection of notes that after his


INTRODUCTION xi


death there was published in 1709 at Dresden by Zimmerman
a very much enlarged edition of his work, “exornatum, diu
desideratum et expetitum, beato autoris obitu interueniente.”’
During the eighteenth century the tradition of the Vampire
was dealt with by two famous authors, of whom both con-
centrated upon this as their main theme, that is to say by
Dom Augustin Calmet, O.8.B., in his Dissertations sur les
Apparitions des Anges, des Démons et des Esprits et sur les
revenants et vampires de Hongrie, de Bohéme, de Moravie, e
de Sildsie, Paris, 1740, and by Gioseppe Davanzati, Archbishop
of Trani and Patriarch of Alexandria, in his Dissertazione
sopra I Vampire, Naples, 1774. As I have very fully con-
sidered both these important works they require no more
than a bare mention here.

Of a later date we find in French a few books such as the
Histoire des Vampires (1820) of the enormously prolific Collin
de Plancy, the Spectriana (1817) and Les ombres sanglantes
(1820) of J. P. R. Cuisin, and Gabrielle de Paban’s Histoire
des Fantémes et des Demons (1819) and Démoniana (1820), but
these with many more of that class and epoch, although they
are sometimes written not without elegance and industry and
one may here and there meet with a curious anecdote or local
legend, will not, I think, long engage the consideration and
regard of the more serious student.

In English there is a little book entitled Vampires and
Vampirism by Mr. Dudley Wright, which was first published
in 1914; second edition (with additional matter), 1924. It
may, of course, be said that this is not intended to be more
than a popular and trifling collection and that one must not
look for accuracy and research from the author of Roman
Catholicism and Freemasonry. However that may be, it were
not an easy task to find a more insipid olio than Vampires and
Vampirism, of which the ingredients, so far as I am able to
judge, are most palpably derived at second, and even at third
hand. Dom Calmet, sometimes with and sometimes without
acknowledgement, is frequently quoted and continually mis-
understood. In what the “additional matter’ of the second
edition consists I cannot pretend to say but I have noticed
that the same anecdotes are repeated, e.g. on p. 9 we are told
the story of a shepherd of “ Blow, near Kadam, in Bohemia,’
and the relation is said to be taken (via Calmet, it is plain,)


ee INTRODUCTION


from “ De Schartz [rather Charles Ferdinand de Schertz], in
his Magia Postuma, published at Olmutz in 1706.” On p. 166
this story, as given by “ E. P. Evans, in his interesting work on
the Criminal Prosecution and Capital Punishment of Animals,”
is told of “‘a herdsman near the town of Cadan,” and dated
1337. Pages 60-62 are occupied with an Oriental legend
related by “‘ Fornari, in his History of Sorcerers,” by which is
presumably intended the Histoire curieuse et pittoresque des
sorciers . . . Revue et augmentée par Fornari, Paris, 1846,
and other editions, a book usually catalogued under Giraldo,
as by Caillet and Yve-Plessis, although the latter certainly has
a cross-reference to Fornari. In greater detail Mr. Dudley
Wright narrates this legend which he has already told (pp.
60-62), on pp. 131-137. Such repetition seems superfluous.
In the Bibliography we have such entries as “‘ Leo Allatius,”
“ Encyclopaedia Britannica’; ‘Frazer’s Golden Bough,”
“ Nider’s Formicarius,” “ Phlegon’s Fragments,” ‘ William of
Newbury,” all of which are not merely unscholarly and slovenly,
but entirely useless from the point of view of reference. I also
remark blunders such as “ Philip Rehrius,” ‘‘ Nicolas Ramy’s
Demonolatrie,” ‘* Rymer’s Varney the Vampire.”” Who Rymer
might be I cannot tell. Varney the Vampire was written by
Thomas Preskett Prest.

It may, I think, not unfairly be claimed that the present
work is the first serious study in English of the Vampire, and
kindred traditions from a general, as well as from a theological
and philosophical point of view. I have already pointed out
that it were impossible to better such a chapter as Mr. J. C.
Lawson has given us in his Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient
Greek Religion, a book to which as also to Bernhard Schmidt’s
Das Volksleben der Neugriechen und das Hellenische Alterthum,
I am greatly indebted. But any wider survey of the vampire
tradition will soon be found to demand an examination of
legend, customs, and history which extend far beyond Greece,
although in such an inquiry the beliefs and practice of modern
Greece must necessarily assume a prominent and most material
significance.

In the present work I have endeavoured to set forth what
might be termed “ the philosophy of vampirism,” and however
ghastly and macabre they may appear I have felt that here one
must not tamely shrink from a careful and detailed consideration


INTRODUCTION xiii


of the many cognate passions and congruous circumstances
which—there can be no reasonable doubt—have throughout
the ages played no impertinent and no trivial but a very vital
and very memorable part in consolidating the vampire legend,
and in perpetuating the vampire tradition among the darker
and more secret mysteries of belief that prevail in the heart
of man.

In many countries there is thought to be a close connexion
between the vampire and the werewolf, and I would remark
that I have touched upon this but lightly as I am devoting a
separate study to the werewolf and lycanthropy.

The Vampire, his Kith and Kin will be shortly followed by
The Vampire in Europe, in which work I have collected and
treat of numerous instances of vampirism old and new, con-
cretely illustrating the prevalence and phases of the tradition
in England and Ireland, in ancient Greece and Rome as well
as in modern Greece, in Hungary and Bohemia, in Jugo-Slavia,
Russia, and many other lands. In this volume will be found
related in detail such famous cases as that of Arnold Paul,
Stanoska Sovitzo, Millo the Hungarian, the vampires of
Temeswar, Kisilova, Buckingham, Berwick, Melrose Abbey,
Croglin Grange, and many more.

A survey of ‘‘ The Vampire in Literature ” which I attempt
in Chapter V of the present volume has not, to the best of my
belief, been usefully essayed by any English writer. I cannot
hope that my purview is complete, for I feel confident that
several pieces must inevitably have escaped me. Here too
one is faced with the question what to notice and what to
exclude. Vampirism is so wide a term that in some senses it)
might arguably be held to cover no small range of ghost stories |


and witch sagas where the victims peak and pine and waste |


away until they fall into an early grave. The choice is bound |
to be somewhat arbitrary, and so open to censure and objections,

both on account of inclusions and omissions, and, superficially

at least, these criticisms will hardly seem a little rigid and unfair.

There is one vampire story, an excellent fiction and admirably

discoursed, which I heard very many years ago, and which I

believe is in print, but it has till now completely baffled all my

recent explorations. I have no doubt that some of my readers

will know the tale.

The Bibliography has offered its own difficulties with


7


A


xiv INTRODUCTION


reference to the choice of books for inclusion, and a certain
amount of selection seemed inevitable. I have, I hope, duly
listed the majority of those works which deal with the Vampire
and the vampire tradition at any length, or which even if they
devote but a few pages to the Vampire have given the subject
serious and scholarly consideration. The denizens of Grub
Street, ever busily agog, have from time to time attempted to
scribble something on sorcery, on the invisible world, on occult
crafts, and of late they seem to have been especially pretentious
and prolific. Iam well aware that in a number of trivial and
catch-penny compositions it may be found that actually more
space has been devoted to the vampire than is afforded in
several of the volumes I mention, important studies which
cover a fairly wide range in travel, in folk-lore, in demonology.
Whilst, obviously enough, all the titles I include have by no
means the same value even the least remarkable owns a
particular reason to justify its presence. Under fiction it
seemed to me that one should cast the net a little wider, and
accordingly—on account of its very rarity if for no other
reason—I have found a place for so poor a book as Smyth
Upton’s The Last of the Vampires, and what is more a rampant
tract such as The Vampyre (1858) is not excluded. It will be
remarked that many of the books to which I refer in my
chapters and whence I quote are not to be found in this
Bibliography as they lie something outside its scope. Moreover
to rehearse books of reference and the standard authors seemed
entirely superfluous.

During the course of a long and arduous task I have been
much helped by the kindly and valuable suggestions of many
friends amongst whom I must particularly mention Mrs. Agnes
Murgogi, the late Chevalier W. H. Grattan Flood, Dr. Havelock
Ellis, Dr. Rouse, Mr. Edward Hutton, Mr. W. J. Lawrence,
and Mr. N. M. Penzer. I am especially grateful to Dr. R.
Campbell Thompson for generous permission to quote at length
the exorcisms from his classic works upon Babylonian demon-
ology and Semitic magic. Both Mr. G. Willoughby-Meade and
his publishers have put me under great obligations by allowing
me so extensively to use his work Chinese Ghouls and Goblins,
Constable and Co., 1928.

I cordially thank my friend Mr. Laurence Housman for giving
me leave to reproduce his drawing ‘‘ Cauchemar,” as also


INTRODUCTION XV


Messrs. Macmillan for a similar permission with regard to the
illustration of Malay vampires, which originally appeared in
Dr. W. W. Skeat’s Malay Magic.

The little cylinder delineated upon the cover of the book
is a reproduction from the Revue d’ Assyriologie, vol. VII, and
represents a Babylonian vampire. The original is in the
Louvre collections.


In resto B.M.V. del Divino Aiuto.
1928.


THE VAMPIRE


CHAPTER I
THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE


THRovGHOUT the whole vast shadowy world of ghosts and
demons there is no figure so terrible, no figure so dreaded and
abhorred, yet dight with such fearful fascination, asthe vampire,
who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes
the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible
qualities of both. Around the vampire have clustered the
most sombre superstitions, for he is a thing which belongs to no
world at all; he is not a demon, for the devils have a purely
spiritual nature, they are beings without any body, angels,
as is said in S. Matthew xxv. 41, “the devil and his angels.’
And although S. Gregory writes of the word Angel, “‘ nomen est
officii, non naturae,”—the designation is that of an office not
of a nature, it is clear that all angels were in the beginning
created good in order to act as the divine messengers (a@yyeXou),
and that afterwards the fallen angels lapsed from their original
state. The authoritative teaching of the Fourth Lateran
Council under Innocent III in 1215, dogmatically lays down :
“Diabolus enim et alii daemones a Deo quidem natura creati
sunt boni, sed ipsi per se facti sunt mali.” And it is also said,
Job iv. 18: “Ecce qui seruiunt ei, non sunt stabiles, et in
Angelis suis reperit prauitatem.” (Behold they that serve him
are not steadfast, and in his angels he found wickedness.)
John Heinrich Zopfius in his Dissertatio de U ampiris
Serutensibus, Halle, 1733, says: “ Vampires issue forth from
their graves in the night, attack people sleeping quietly in their
beds, suck out all their blood from their bodies and destroy
them. They beset men, women and children alike, sparing
neither age nor sex. Those who are under the fatal malignity
of their influence complain of suffocation and a total
deficiency of spirits, after which they soon expire. Some


i


2 THE VAMPIRE


who, when at the point of death, have been asked if
they can tell what is causing their decease, reply that
such and such persons, lately dead, have arisen from the tomb
to torment and torture them.” Scoffern in his Stray Leaves
of Science and Folk Lore writes: “‘ The best definition I can
give of a vampire is a living, mischievous and murderous dead
body. A living dead body! The words are idle, contra-
dictory, incomprehensible, but so are Vampires.” Horst,
Schriften wnd Hypothesen iiber die Vampyren, (Zauberbiblio-
thek, III) defines a Vampire as “a dead body which continues
to live in the grave; which it leaves, however, by night, for
the purpose of sucking the blood of the living, whereby it is
nourished and preserved in good condition, instead of becoming
decomposed like other dead bodies.”

A demon has no body, although for purposes of his own he
may energize, assume, or seem to assume a body, but it is not
his real and proper body.” So the vampire is not strictly a
demon, although his foul lust and horrid propensities be truly
demoniacal and of hell.

Neither may the vampire be called a ghost or phantom,
strictly speaking, for an apparition is intangible, as the Latin
poet tells us :

Par leuibus uentis uolucrique simillima somno.*

And upon that first Easter night when Jesus stood in the
midst of His disciples and they were troubled and frightened,
supposing they had seen a spirit, He said : “ Uidete manus
meas, et pedes, quia ego ipse sum: palpate, et uidete : quia
spiritus carnem, et ossa non habet, sicut ne uidetis habere.”
(See my hands and feet, that it is I myself ; handle and see : for
a spirit hath not flesh and bone, as you see me to have.)*

There are, it is true, upon record some few instances when
persons have been able to grasp, or have been grasped by and
felt the touch of, a ghost, but these phenomena must be
admitted as exceptions altogether, if indeed, they are not to be
explained in some other way, as for example, owing to the
information of a body by some spirit or familiar under very
rare and abnormal conditions.

In the case of the very extraordinary and horrible hauntings
of the old Darlington and Stockton Station, Mr. James
Durham, the night-watchman, when one winter evening
in the porter’s cellar was surprised by the entry of a stranger


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 3


followed by @ large black retriever. This visitor without
uttering a word dealt him a blow and he had the impression
of a violent concussion. Naturally he struck back with his
fist which seemed however to pass through the figure and his
knuckles were grazed against the wall beyond. None the less
the man uttered an unearthly squeak at which the dog
gripped Mr. Durham in the calf of the leg causing consider-
able pain. In a moment the stranger had called off the
retriever by a curious click of the tongue, and both man and
animal hurried into the coal-house whence there was no outlet.
A moment later upon examination neither was to be seen.
It was afterwards discovered that many years before an
official who was invariably accompanied by a large black dog
had committed suicide upon the premises, if not in the very
cellar, where at least his dead body had been laid. The full
account with the formal attestation dated 9th December,
1890, may be read in W. T. Stead’s Real Ghost Stories, reprint,
Grant Richards, 1897, Chapter XI, pp. 210-214.

Major C. G. MacGregor of Donaghadee, County Down,
Treland, gives an account of a house in the north of Scotland
which was haunted by an old lady, who resided there for very
many years and died shortly after the beginning of the
nineteenth century. Several persons who slept in the room
were sensibly pushed and even smartly slapped upon the face.
He himself on feeling a blow upon the left shoulder in the
middle of the night turned quickly and reaching out grasped
a human hand, warm, soft, and plump. Holding it tight he
felt the wrist and arm which appeared clothed in a sleeve and
lace cuff. At the elbow all trace ceased, and in his astonish-
ment he released the hand. When a light was struck
nobody could be seen in the room.

In a case which occurred at a cottage in Girvan, South
Ayrshire, a young woman lost her brother, a fisher, owing to
the swamping of his boat in a storm. When the body was
recovered it was found that the right hand was missing.
This occasioned the poor girl extraordinary sorrow, but
some few nights later when she was undressing, preparatory
to bed, she suddenly uttered a piercing shriek which immedi-
ately brought the other inmates of the house to her room.
She declared that she had felt a violent blow dealt with an
open hand upon her shoulder. The place was examined,


4 THE VAMPIRE


and distinctly marked in livid bruises there was seen the
impression of a man’s right hand.

Andrew Lang in his Dreams and Ghosts (new edition, 1897),
relates the story of “The Ghost that Bit,” which might
seem to have been a vampire, but which actually cannot be
so classed since vampires have a body and their craving for
blood is to obtain sustenance for their body. The narra-
tive is originally to be found in Notes and Queries, 3rd September
1864, and the correspondent asserts that he took it ‘‘ almost
verbatim from the lips of the lady ” concerned, a person of
tried veracity. Emma S—— was asleep one morning in her
room at a large house near Cannock Chase. It was a fine
August day in 1840, but although she had bidden her maid
call her at an early hour she was surprised to hear a sharp
knocking upon her door about 3.30. In spite of her answer
the taps continued, and suddenly the curtains of her bed
were slightly drawn, when to her amaze she saw the face
of an aunt by marriage looking through upon her. Half
unconsciously she threw out her hand, and immediately
one of her thumbs was sensibly pressed by the teeth of the
apparition. Forthwith she arose, dressed, and went down-
stairs, where not a creature was stirring. Her father upon
coming down rallied her a little upon being about at cockcrow
and inquired the cause. When she informed him he deter-
mined that later in the day he would pay a visit to his sister-
in-law who dwelt at no great distance. This he did, only to
discover that she had unexpectedly died at about 3.30 that
morning. She had not been in any way ailing, and the shock
was fearfully sudden. On one of the thumbs of the corpse was
found a mark as if it had been bitten in the last agony.

The disturbances at the Lamb hostelry, Lawford’s Gate,
Bristol, which aroused something more than local interest
in the years 1761-62, were not improbably due to witch-
craft and caused by the persecutions of a woman who trafficked
in occultism of the lowest order, although on the other hand
they may have been poltergeist manifestations. The two
little girls, Molly and Dobby Giles, who were the subjects
of these phenomena, were often severely bitten and pinched.
The impressions of eighteen or twenty teeth were seen upon
their arms, the marks being clammy with saliva and warm
spittle, “‘ and the children were roaring out for the pain of the


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 5


pinches and bites.” On one occasion whilst an observer was
talking to Dobby Giles she cried out that she was bitten in the
neck when there suddenly appeared “the mark of teeth,
about eighteen, and wet with spittle.” That the child should
have nipped herself was wholly impossible, and nobody was
near her save Mr. Henry Durbin who recorded these events,
and whose account was first printed in 1800, the year after
his death, since he did not wish his notes to be given to the
public during his lifetime. On 2nd January, 1762, Mr.
Durbin notes: ‘ Dobby cried the hand was about her sister’s
throat, and I saw the flesh at the side of her throat pushed in,
whitish as if done with fingers, though I saw none. Her face
grew red and blackish presently, as if she was strangled, but
without any convulsion or contraction of the muscles.’
Thursday, 7th January, 1762, we have: “ Dobby was bitten
most and with deeper impressions than Molly. The impres-
sion of the teeth on their arms formed an oval, which measured
two inches in length.” All this certainly looks as if sorcery
were at work. It may be remembered that in Salem during
the epidemic of witchcraft the afflicted persons were tormented
“by Biting, Pinching, Strangling, etc.” When Goodwife
Corey was on trial, “it was observed several times, that if
she did but bite her under lip in time of examination, the
Persons afflicted were bitten on their arms and Wrists, and
produced the Marks before the Magistrates, Minister, and
others.”

In The Proceedings of the National Laboratory of Psychical
Research, Vol. I., 1927, will be found an account of the pheno-
mena connected with Eleonore Ziigun, a young Rumanian
peasant girl, who in the autumn of 1926, when only thirteen
years old was brought to London by the Countess Wassilko-
Serecki, in order that the manifestations might be investigated
at “The National Laboratory of Psychical Research,”
Queensberry Place, South Kensington. The child was said
to be persecuted by some invisible force or agent, which she
knew as Dracu, Anglice the Devil. There were many extra-
ordinary happenings and she was continually being scratched
and bitten by this unseen intelligence. It must suffice to
give but two or three instances of the very many “ biting
genni On the afternoon of Monday, 4th October,

, Captain Neil Gow an investigator in his report, notes :


6 THE VAMPIRE


3.99. Eleonore cried out. Showed marks on back of left
hand like teeth-marks which afterwards developed into deep
weals. . . . 4.12. Eleonore was just raising a cup of
tea to her lips, but suddently gave a cry and put the cup
down hastily : there was a mark on her right hand similar
to that caused by a bite. Both rows of teeth were indica e
Of the same incident, Mr. Clapham Palmer, an investigator
who was also present writes: ‘‘Eleonore was in the act
of raising the cup to her lips when she suddenly gave a little
ery of pain, put down her cup and rolled up her sleeve. On
her forearm I then saw what appeared to be the marks of
teeth indented deeply in the flesh, as if she or someone had
fiercely bitten her arm. The marks turned from red to white
and finally took the form of white raised weals. They
gradually faded but were still noticeable after an hour or so.”
Such bitings not infrequent occurred, and photographs have
been taken of the marks.

It were an interesting question to discuss the cause of these
indentations and no doubt it is sufficiently remarkable, but
however that may be such inquiry were impertinent here,
for it is clearly not vampirism, nor indeed cognate thereto.


- The object of the Vampire is to suck blood, and in these cases
- if blood was ever drawn it was more in the nature of a scratch


or slight dental puncture, there was no effusion. Again the


_ agent who inflicted these bites was not sufficiently material


to be visible, at any rate he was able to remain unseen. The
true vampire is corporeal.

The vampire has a body, and it is his own body. He is
neither dead nor alive; but living in death. He is an
abnormality; the androgyne in the phantom world; a
pariah among the fiends.

Even the Pagan poet taught his hearers and his readers that
death was a sweet guerdon of repose, a blessed oblivion after
the toil and struggle of life. There are few things more beauti-
ful and there are few things more sad than the songs of our
modern Pagans who console their aching hearts with the
wistful vision of eternal sleep. Although perhaps they them-
selves know it not, their delicate but despairing melancholy
is an heritage from the weary yet tuneful singers of the last
days of Hellas, souls for whom there was no dawn of hope in
the sky. But we have a certain knowledge and a fairer surety


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 7


for “ now Christ is risen from the dead, the first-fruits of them
that sleep.” Yet Gray, half Greek, seems to promise to his
rustics and his hinds as their richest reward after life of swink
and toil dear forgetfulness and eternal sleep. Swinburne was
glad :

That no life lives for ever ;

That dead men rise up never ;

That even the weariest river

Winds somewhere safe to sea.


Only the eternal sleep
Tn an eternal night.
Emily Bronté lusted for mere oblivion :
Oh, for the time when I shall sleep
Without identity.
And never care how rain may steep,
Or snow may cover me !
Flecker in utter despair wails out :
I know dead men are deaf, and cannot hear
The singing of a thousand nightingales
I know dead men are blind and cannot see
The friend that shuts in horror their big eyes,
And they are witless—


Even more beautifully than the poets have sung, a weaver of
exquisite prose has written: ‘“‘ Death must be so beautiful.
To lie in the soft brown earth, with the grasses waving above
one’s head, and listen to silence. To have no yesterday, and
no to-morrow. To forget time.” Poor sorry souls! How
arid, how empty are such aspirations when we think of the
ardent glowing phrase of the Little Flower: “‘ Je veux passer
mon ciel 4 faire du bien sur la terre!” And ‘“‘Even in the
bosom of the Beatific Vision the Angels watch over us. No, I
shall never be able to take any rest until the end of the world.
But when the Angel shall have said ‘ Time is no more,’ then
I shall rest, then I shall be able to rejoice, since the number of
the elect will be complete.”

So we see that even for those who take the most pagan, the
most despairing, the most erroneous views, the ideal is oblivion
and rest. How fearful a destiny then is that of the vampire
who has no rest in the grave, but whose doom it is to come forth


8 THE VAMPIRE


and prey upon the living. In the first place it may briefly be
inquired how the belief in vampirism originated, and here it is
not impertinent to remark that the careful investigations in
connexion with psychic phenomena which have been so fruitful
of recent years, and even modern scientific discovery, have
proved the essential truth of many an ancient record and
old superstition, which were until yesterday dismissed by
the level-headed as the wildest sensationalism of melo-
dramatic romance. The origins of a belief in vampirism,
although, of course, very shadowy, unformed and unrelated,
may probably be said to go back to the earliest times when
primitive man observed the mysterious relations between soul
and body. The division of an individual into these two parts
must have been suggested to man by his observation, however
crude and rough, of the phenomenon of unconsciousness, as
exhibited in sleep and more particularly in death. He cannot
but have speculated concerning that something, the loss of
which withdraws man for ever from the living and waking
world. He was bound to ask himself if there was any con-
tinuance in any circumstances at present veiled from, and
unknown to, him of that life and that personality which had -
obviously passed elsewhere. The question was an eternal
one, and it was, moreover, a personal one which concerned
him most intimately, since it related to an experience he
could not expect to escape. It was clear to him before long
that the process called death was merely a passage to another
world, and naturally enough he pictured that world as being
very like the one he knew, only man would there enjoy ex-
tended powers over the forces with which he waged such cease-
less war for the mastery during his period on earth. It might
be that the world was not so very far away, and it was not to be
supposed that persons who had passed over would lose their
interest in and affection for those who for a little while had been
left behind. Relations must not be forgotten just because
they did not happen to be visibly present, any more than
to-day we forget one of the family who has gone on a voyage
for a week or a month or a year. Naturally those whose age
and position during their lifetime had entitled them to
deference and respect must be treated with the same con-
sideration, nay, with even more ample honours since their
authority had become mysteriously greater and they would be


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 9


more active to punish any disrespect or neglect. Hence as a
family venerated the father of the house both in life and after
death, which was the germ of ancestral worship, so the tribe
would venerate the great men, the chieftains and the heroes,
whose exploits had won so much not only for their own par-
ticular houses, but for the whole clan. The Shilluk, a tribe
who dwell upon the western bank of the White Nile, and who
are governed by a single king, still maintain the worship of
Nyakang, the hero who founded the dynasty and settled this
people in their present territory. Nyakang is conceived as
having been a man, although he did not actually die but
vanished from sight. Yet he is not altogether divine, for the
great god of the Shilluk, the creator of mankind and the
world, Juok, is without form, invisible and omnipresent. He
is far greater than and far above Nyakang, and he reigns in
those highest heavens where neither the prayers of man can
reach his ears, nor can he smell the sweet savour of sacrifice.
_ Not only Nyakang, but each of the Shilluk kings after death
is worshipped, and the grave of the monarch becomes a
sanctuary, so that throughout the villages there are many
shrines tended by certain old men and old women, where a
ritual which is practically identical in each separate place is
elaborately conducted. Indeed, the principal element in the
religion of the Shilluk may be said to be the veneration of their
dead kings.°

Other African tribes also worship their dead kings. The
Baganda, whose country Uganda lies at the actual source of the
Nile, think of their dead kings as being equal to the gods, and
the temples of the deceased monarchs are built and maintained
with the utmost care. Formerly when a king died hundreds of
men were killed so that their spirits might attend upon the
spirit of their master, and what is very significant as showing
that these people believe the king and his ghostly followers
could return in forms sufficiently corporeal to perform the very
material function of eating is that on certain solemn days at
earliest dawn the sacred tomtom is beaten at the temple gates
and crowds of worshippers bring baskets of food for the dead
king and his followers lest being hungry he should become
‘angered and punish the whole tribe.®

In Kiziba, which lies on the western side of the Lake Victoria
Nyanza, the religion of the natives consists of the worship


10 THE VAMPIRE


of their dead kings, although there is a supreme god Rugada,
who created the world, man and beasts, but even their hierarchs
know little about him and he receives no sacrifice, the business
of the priests being to act as intermediaries between the people
and the dead monarchs.’

So the Bantu tribes of Northern Rhodesia acknowledge a
supreme deity, Leza, whose power is manifested in the storm,
in the torrential rain clouds, in the roar of thunder and the
flash of lightning, but to whom there is no direct access by
prayer or by sacrifice. The gods, then, whom these tribes
worship are sharply divided into two classes, the spirits of
departed chiefs, who are publicly venerated by the whole tribe,
and the spirits of relations who are privately honoured by a
family, whose head performs the sacerdotal functions upon
these occasions. ‘‘ Among the Awemba there is no special
shrine for these purely family spirits, who are worshipped
inside the hut, and to whom family sacrifices of a sheep, a goat,
or a fowl is made, the spirit receiving the blood spilt upon
the ground, while all the members of the family partake of the
flesh together. For a religious Wemba man the cult of the
spirit of his nearest relations (of his grandparents, or of his
deceased father, mother, elder brother or maternal uncle) is
considered quite sufficient. Out of these spirit relatives a man
will worship one whom he considers as a special familiar, for
various reasons. For instance, the diviner may have told
him that his last illness was caused because he had not respected
the spirit of his uncle; accordingly he will be careful in the
future to adopt his uncle as his tutelary spirit. As a mark of
such respect he may devote a cow or a goat to one of the spirits
of his ancestors.”® This custom is very significant, and two
points should be especially noted. The first is that the
deceased, or the spirit of the deceased, is not merely propitiated
by, but partakes of, blood, which is spilt for his benefit.
Secondly, the deceased, if not duly honoured, can cause illness,
and therefore is capable of exercising a certain vengeful or
malevolent power. The essential conception that underlies
these customs is not so very far removed from the tradition
of a vampire who craves to suck blood and causes sickness
through his malignancy.

Very similar ideas prevail among the Herero, a Bantu tribe
of German South-West Africa, who believe that Ndjambi


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE il


Karunga, the great good god who dwells in heaven above is
far too remote to be accessible, wherefore he neither receives
nor requires worship and offerings. “It is their ancestors
(Ovakuru) whom they must fear; it is they who are angry
and can bring danger and misfortune ona man . . . it
is in order to win and keep their favour, to avert their dis-
pleasure and wrath, in short to propitiate them, that the
Herero bring their many offerings; they do so not out of
gratitude, but out of fear, not out of love, but out of terror.’’®
The Rev. G. Viehe, a missionary among the tribe writes:
“The religious customs and ceremonies of the Ovaherero
are all rooted in the presumption that the deceased continue
to live, and that they have a great influence on earth, and
exercise power over the life and death of man.’’!°

The religion of the Ovambo, another Bantu tribe of German
South-West Africa, runs on practically the same lines. The
supreme being, Kalunga, the creator, desires neither adoration
nor fear. The whole religion is the worship, or rather the
propitiation, of the spirits of the dead. Every man at death
leaves behind him a phantom form which continues a certain
kind of life (not very clearly defined) upon earth, and this
spirit has power over the living. Especially may it cause
various kinds of sickness. The spirits of private persons can
only exert their influence over the members of their own
families ; the souls of chiefs and great warriors have a much
wider scope, they can influence the whole clan for weal or woe ;
they can even to some extent control the powers of nature
and ensure a bountiful corn-crop by their careful provision of
rain, since under their kindly direction there shall be neither
too little nor too great an abundance. Moreover, they can
ward off disease, but if on the other hand they be offended
they can visit the tribe with pestilence and famine. It may be
particularly noted that among the Ovambo the phantoms of
dead magicians are dreaded and feared in no ordinary manner.
The only way to prevent the increase of these dangerous
spirit folk is by depriving the body of its limbs, a precaution
which must be taken immediately after death. So it is
customary to sever the arms and legs from the trunk and to
cut the tongue out of the mouth, in order that the spirit may
have no power either of movement or of speech, since the
mutilation of the corpse has rendered a ghost, who would


12 THE VAMPIRE


assuredly be both powerful and truculent, inoperative and
incapable." It will later be seen that the mutilation, the
cutting off of the head, and especially the driving of a stake
through the body with other dismemberments, were resorted
to as the most effective means, short of complete cremation, of
dealing with a vampire, whilst according to Theosophists only
those become vampires who have during their lifetime been
adepts in black magic, and Miss Jessie Adelaide Middleton
says that the people who become vampires are witches, wizards
and suicides.!

Canon Callaway has recorded some very interesting details
of Amatongo or Ancestor Worship among the Zulus.* A
native account runs as follows: ‘‘ The black people do not,
worship all Amatongo indifferently, that is, all the dead of
their tribes. Speaking generally, the head of each house is
worshipped by the children of that house ; for they do not
know the ancients who are dead, nor their laud-giving names,
nor their names. But their father whom they knew is the head
by whom they begin and end in their prayer, for they know
him best, and his love for his children ; they remember his
kindness to them whilst he was living, they compare his treat- .
ment of them whilst he was living, support themselves by
it and say, ‘ He will still treat us in the same way now he is
dead. We do not know why he should regard others besides
us; he will regard us only.’ So it is then although they
worship the many Amatongo of their tribe, making a great
fence around them for their protection; yet their father is
far before all others when they worship the Amatongo. Their
father is a great treasure to them even when he is dead.” It
would appear that among the Zulus the spirits of those who are
recently deceased, especially the fathers and mothers of
families, are most generally venerated and revered. As is
natural, the spirits of the remoter dead are forgotten, for
time passes and their memory perishes when those who knew
them and sang their praises follow them into the world beyond.
As we have remarked, in nearly every case we find recognized
the existence of a supreme being, who is certainly a high
spiritual power that had never been a man, and the homage
paid to whom (in those very rare instances’* where such wor-
ship is conceived of as desirable or even possible) differs
entirely from the cult of the dead, be they family ancestors


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE = 18


some line of ancient kings. There are, of course, many
er gods in the African pantheon, and although the natives
\ ‘not allow that these were ever men, and indeed sharply
differentiate in ritual practice their worship from the cult of the
spirits and phantoms, yet in nearly all cases it is to be sus-
ted, and in many cases it is certain, that these gods were
e 20 of old whose legend instead of becoming faint with years
and Sine away grew more and more splendid until the
om onarch or the warrior passed into pure deity. A similar
process holds forth in heathen religions the wide world over.
and with regard to the Baganda polytheism the Rev. J.
é: Roscoe remarks ‘‘ The principal gods appear to have been at
one time human beings, noted for their skill and bravery, who
were afterwards deified by the people and invested with super-
natural powers.”’?°
It is said that the Caffres believe that men of evil life after
_ death may return during the night in coporeal form and attack
the living, often wounding and killing them. It seems that
_ these revenants are much attracted by blood which enables them
_ more easily to effect their purpose, and even a few red drops
_ will help to vitalize their bodies. So a Caffre has the greatest
horror of blood, and will never allow even a spot fallen from
_ a bleeding nose or a cut to lie uncovered, but should it stain
_ the ground it must be instantly hidden with earth, and if it
_ splotch upon their bodies they must purify themselves from
_ the pollution with elaborate lustral ceremonies.’ Throughout
; the whole of West Africa indeed the natives are careful to stamp
rs out any blood of theirs which happens to have fallen to the
; "ground, and if a cloth or a piece of wood should be marked
_ thereby these articles are most carefully burned.1”? They
_ openly admit that the reason for this is lest a drop of blood
might come into the hands of a magician who would make evil
use of it, or else it might be caught up by a bad spirit and would
then enable him to form a tangible body. The same fear of
‘Sorcery prevails in New Guinea, where the natives if they
lave been wounded will most carefully collect the bandages and
oy them by burning or casting them far into the sea, a
mstance which has not infrequently been recorded by
onaries and travellers.!®
ere are, indeed, few if any peoples who have not realized


——


14 THE VAMPIRE


of this belief are to be found in the history of every clime.
It is expressed by the Chinese writers on medicine’®; it was
held by the Arabs”; and it is prominent among the traditions
of the Romans.”4_ Even with regard to animals the soul or
life of the animal was in the blood, or rather actually was the
blood. So we have the divine command, Leviticus xvii. 10-14 :
“‘ Homo quilibet de domo Israel, et de aduenis qui peregrinantur
inter eos, si comederit sanguinem, obfirmabo faciem meam
contra animam illius, et dispertam eam de populo suo. Quia
anima carnis in sanguine est : et ego dedi illum uobis, ut super
altare in eo expietis pro animabus uestris, et sanguis pro
animae piaculo sit. Idcirco dixi filiis Israel: Omnis anima
ex uobis non comedet sanguinem, nec ex aduenis, qui peregrin-
anturapud uos. Homo quicumque ex filiis Israel, et de aduenis,
qui peregrinantur apud wos, si uenatione atque aucupio
ceperit feram uel auem, quibus esci licitum est, fundat
sanguinem eius, et operiat illum terra. Anima enim omnis
carnis in sanguine est: unde dixi filiis Israel: Sanguinem
uniuersae carnis non comedetis, quia anima carnis in sanguine
est: et quicumque comederit illum, interibit.” (If any man
whosoever of the house of Israel, and of the strangers that
sojourn among them, eat blood I will set my face against his
soul, and will cut him off from among his people: Because
the life of the flesh is in the blood : and I have given it to you,
that you may make atonement with it upon the altar for your
souls, and the blood may be for an expiation for the soul.
Therefore I have said to the children of Israel : No soul of you,
nor of the strangers that sojourn among you, shall eat blood.
Any man whatsoever of the children of Israel, and of the
strangers that sojourn among you, if by hunting or by fowling,
he take a wild beast or a bird, which is lawful to eat, let him
pour out its blood, and cover it with earth. For the life of
all flesh is in the blood: therefore I said to the children of
Israel; You shall not eat the blood of any flesh at all, because
the life of the flesh is in the blood, and whosoever eateth it,
shall be cut off.) The Hebrew word which is translated
“life ’’*5 in this passage and particularly in the phrase “‘ Because
the life of the flesh is in the blood,” also signifies “ Soul,” and
the Revised Version has a marginal note: “Heb. soul.”
Since then the very essence of life, and even more, the spirit
or the soul in some mysterious way lies in the blood we have


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE § 15


a complete explanation why the vampire should seek to
vitalize and rejuvenate his own dead body by draining the
blood from the veins of his victims.

It will be remembered that in a famous necromantic passage
in the Odyssey,” when Ulysses calls up the ghosts from the
underworld, in order that they may recover the power of speech,
he has to dig deep a trench and therein pour the blood of
sacrifice, black rams, and it is only after they have quafied
their fill of this precious liquor that the phantoms may con-
verse with him and enjoy something of their human powers
and mortal faculties.

Among the many references to funereal customs and the
rites of mourning in Holy Writ there is one which has a very
distinct bearing upon this belief that blood might benefit the
deceased. The prophet Jeremias in fortelling the utter ruin
of the Jews and the complete desolation of their land says:
“ Et morientur grandes, et parui in terra ista : non sepelientur
neque plangentur, et non se incident, neque caluitium fiet pro
eis.”*° (Both the great and little shall die in this land; they
shall not be buried nor lamented, and men shall not cut
themselves, nor make themselves bald for them.) And again
the same prophet tells us that after the Jews had been carried
away in captivity of Babylon: ‘“ Uenerunt uiri de Sichem
et de Silo, et de Samaria octoginta uiri: rasi barba, et scissis
uestibus et squallentes : et munera, et thus habebant in manu,
ut offerrent in domo Domini.”®* The word “ squallentes ”
which the Douai Version renders “ mourning ” is translated
by the Authorised Version as “having cut themselves” and
the same rendering is given in the Revised Version. These
customs of shaving part of the head and the beard which is
referred to in the words “ nor make themselves bald for them ”
and more particularly the practice of cutting or wounding the
body in token of mourning were strictly forbidden as savour-
ing of heathenish abuse. Thus in Leviticus xix. 28, we read :

Et Super mortuo non incidetis carnem uestrum, neque figuras
aliquas, aut stigmata facietis uobis. Ego Dominus.” (You
shall not make any cuttings in your flesh, for the dead, neither
shall you make in yourselves any figures or marks: I am the


‘a Lord.) And again (xxi. 5) the same command with regard to
_ Mourning is enforced: ‘Non radent caput, nec barbam,


meque in carnibus suis facient incisuras.” (Neither shall


16 THE VAMPIRE


they shave their head, nor their beard, nor make incisions
in their flesh.) §. Jerome, however, tells us that the
custom persisted. For he says in his Commentary on
Jeremias, xvi. 6, which may be dated 415-420 :®7 “ Mos hic fuit
apud ueteres, et usque hodie in quibusdam permanet Iudae-
orum, ut in luctibus incidant lacertos, et caluitium faciant,
quod Iob fecisse legimus.’’** And yet these observances had
been, as we saw, most sternly forbidden, nay, and that
most emphatically and more than once. Thus in Deuteronomy
they are sternly reprobated as smacking of the grossest super-
stition: ‘Non comedetis cum sanguine. Non augurabimini,
nec obseruabitis somnia. Neque in rotundum attondebitis
comam: nec radetis barbam. Et super mortuo non incidetis
carnem uestram, neque figuras aliquas, aut stigmata facietis
uobis. Ego Dominus.” (You shall not eat with blood.
You shall not divine nor observe dreams. Nor shall you cut
your hair round-wise : nor shave your beard. You shall not
make any cuttings in your flesh, for the dead, neither shall you
make in yourselves any figures or marks: I am the Lord.)
“Filii estote Domini Dei uestri: non uos incidetis, nec facietis
caluitium super mortuo. Quoniam populus sanctus es Domino .
Deo tuo : et te elegit ut sis ei in populum peculiarem de cunctis
gentibus, quae sunt super terram.” (Be ye children of the
Lord your God: you shall not cut yourselves, nor make any
baldness for the dead ; because thou art a holy people to the
Lord thy God : and he chose thee to be his peculiar people of
all nations that are upon the earth.)

Presumably these two customs were thus sternly prohibited
as largely borrowed by the Jews from the Pagan people around
them, who might indeed as having no hope make such extrava-
gant and even indecent exhibition of their mourning for the
departed, but which practices would at the least be highly
unbecoming in the chosen people of Jehovah. Assuredly, even
if they go no deeper, these observances are tainted with such
savagery and seem so degrading that it is not surprising to
find ordinances among other peoples, for instance the code of
Solon at Athens, forbidding mourners to wound and scratch
their faces and persons. The laws of the Ten Tables also
which were largely based on this earlier legislation do not
permit women to tear and disfigure their faces during the
funeral rites. These two customs, shaving the head and


‘em y


a THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 17


_ lacerating the face, are found the whole world over at all
_ times and among all races. The former hardly concerns us
here, but it is interesting to inquire into the idea which lay at
_ the root of this “cuttings in the flesh for the dead.” This
- practice existed in antiquity among the Assyrians, the Arabs,
the Scythians and such peoples as the Moabites, the Philistines,
md the Pheenicians.*® Jordanes tells us that Attila was
amented, “not with womanly wailing, empty coronach and
ears, but with the blood of warriors and strong men.’
Among many African tribes, among the Polynesians of Tahiti,
the Sandwich Islands and the whole Pacific Archipelago ;
among the Aborigines of Australia, New Zealand and Tasmania ;
mong the Patagonians ; among the Indians of California and
h America ; as among very many other races, mourning
for the dead is always accompanied by the laceration of the
body until blood freely flows, and it is even not unknown for
tives of the deceased to inflict terrible mutilations upon
mselves, and he who is most pitiless and most barbarous
esteemed to show the greater honour and respect to the
arted. The important point lies in the fact that blood
be shed, and this appears to constitute some covenant
h the dead, so that by freely bestowing what he requires
y prevent him from returning to deprive them of it
ibly and in the most terrifying circumstances. If they are
t willing to feed him with their blood he will come back and
it from them, so naturally it is believed to be far better
give without demur and gain the protection of the ghost,
than to refuse what the phantom will inevitably seize

IM vengeance and in wrath.


their bodies in the way already described,”® that is
Opening a vein of the forearm and allowing the
“9 run into a wooden bowl or some similar vessel. “It


2


18 THE VAMPIRE


is generally taken in a raw state by the invalid, who lifts it to
his mouth like jelly between his fingers and thumb.” It must
be remembered that the Aborigines firmly believe in the exis-
tence of the soul after death, and since blood during the life
proves the most helpful and sustaining nourishment it will
communicate the same vitalizing qualities if bestowed upon
one who has passed beyond, for they do not entertain the idea
that death is any great severance and separation.

This certainly gives us a clue to the belief underlying the
practice of scratching the body and shedding blood upon the
occasion of a death, and there can be no doubt that, although
possibly the meaning was obscured and these lacerations came
to evince nothing more than a proof of sorrow at the bereav-
ment, yet fundamentally the blood was offered by mourners
for the refreshment of the departed to supply him with strength
and vigour under his new conditions.** These practices, then,
involved a propitiation of the dead ; further, a certain intimate
communication with the dead, and assuredly bear a necro-
mantic character, and have more than a touch of vampirism,
the essence of which consists in the belief that the dead man is
able to sustain a semi-life by preying upon the vitality, that is
to say, by drinking the blood of the living. Accordingly we
are fully able to understand why these customs, heathenish
and worse, were so uncompromisingly denounced and forbidden
in the Mosaic legislation. It was no mere prohibition of
indecorous lamentations tinged with Paganism, but it went
something deeper, for such observances are not free from the
horrid superstition of black magic and the feeding of the
vampire till he suck his full of hot salt blood and be gorged and
replete like some demon leech.

The word Vampire (also vampyre) is from the Magyar vampir,
a word of Slavonic origin occuring in the same form in Russian,
Polish, Czech, Serbian, and Bulgarian with such variants as
Bulgarian, vapir, vepir ; Ruthenian vepyr, vopyr, opyr ; Russian
upir, upyr ; South Russian wputr ; Polish upier. Miklosich**
suggests the Turkish uber, witch, as a possible source. Another
derivation, which is less probable is from the root Pi—to
drink, with the prefix va, or av. From the root Pi—come the
Greek wivw I drink, some tenses of which are formed from the
root Po—, such as a perfect aéroxa®; a future passive
roOicoua®® ; to which must be added the perfect infinitive


‘


ee


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 19


mweroc0a** which occurs in Theognis.*7 Hence we have the
Aeolic évw, and also probably zorauds, properly perhaps of
fresh, drinkable water rériuov idwp.*

The Sanskrit is pa, pi, pi-bami (bibo); pd-nam (potus)
pa-tra (poculum); Latin po-tus, po-to, po-culum, etc., with
which are connected bibo and its many forms and compounds
(root-bi-); Slavonic, pi-ti (bibere); Lithuanian, po-ta
(ebriositas), and a vast number of other variants.

Ralston must certainly be quoted in this connexion, although
it should be borne in mind that he is a little out of date in some
details. The Songs of the Russian People from which (p. 410)
I cite the following passage was published early in 1872. Of
Vampires he writes: ‘‘ The name itself has never been satis-
factorily explained. In its form of vampir (South Russian
upuir, anciently upir], it has been compared with the Lithu-
anian wempti=to drink, and wempti, wampiti = to growl, to
mutter, and it has been derived from a root pi [to drink] with
the prefix uw = av, va. If this derivation is correct, the character-
istic of the vampire is a kind of blood-drunkenness. In
accordance with this idea the Croatians called the vampire
pijauica ; the Servians say of a man whose face is coloured by
constant drinking, that he is ‘ blood-red as a vampire’; and
both the Servians and the Slovaks term a hard drinker a
Vikodlak. The Slovenes and Kashubes call the vampire
vieszey, a name akin to that borne by the witch in our own
language as well as in Russian. The Poles name him upior or
upir, the latter being his designation among the Czekhs also.”
The Istrian vampire is strigon, and among the Wallachians
there is a vampire called murony. In Greece there are some
local names for the vampire, (Cyprus), capkwuevos, “the one
who has put on flesh” ; (Tenos), avaccaBovmevos, “he who
sits up in his grave”; in Cythnos, dAvros “incorrupt ” ;
in Cythera, avappaxo, Aduracua, and Aauracrpo, three words
of which I can suggest no satisfactory explanation and which
ever so great an authority on Greece as Mr. J. C. Lawson finds
unintelligible. Newton, Travels and Discoveries in the Levant
(I, p. 212) and more particularly Pashley, T'ravels in Crete (II,
P. 207), mention a term used in Rhodes and generally in Crete,
karaxavas, the derivation of which is uncertain. Pashley

it may have meant a “ destroyer,” but Mr. Lawson
Connects it with xara and the root xav—, I gape or yawn, in


20 THE VAMPIRE


allusion to the gaping mouth of the vampire, os hians, dentes
candidi, says Leone Allacci.

St. Clair and Brophy in their Twelve Years’ Study of the
Eastern Question in Bulgaria, 1877, have a note (p. 29, n. 1):
“The pure Bulgarians call this being [the Vampire] by the
genuine Slavonic name of Upior, the Gagaous (or Bulgarians
of mixed race) by that of Obour, which is Turkish ; in Dalmatia
it is known as Wrikodlaki, which appears to be merely a
corruption of the Romaic Bpucoda€.”

The word vampir, vampyr, is apparently unknown in Greece
proper and the general modern term is BpvxdAaxas, which may
be transliterated as vrykolakas (plural vrykolakes). Tozer
gives the Turkish name as vurkolak, and Hahn records that
amongst some of the Albanians BovpSodax-ov is used of the
restless dead. It is true that in parts of Macedonia where the
Greek population is in constant touch with Slavonic neigh-
bours, especially in Melenik in the North-East, a form Bayzvpas
or Bdurvpas has been adopted,®® and is there used as a
synonym of vrykolakas in its ordinary Greek sense, but
strangely enough with this one exception throughout the whole
of Greece and the Greek islands the form “‘ Vampire ” does
not appear. Coraes denies the Slavonic origin of the word
vrykolakas, and he seeks to connect a local variant BopSdAaxas
with a hypothetical ancient word opuodvé alleged to be the
equivalent of popsuodvky*® which is used by the geographer
Strabo, and opuodvceca used by Arrianus of Nicomedia in his
AcarpiBai ’Exixrjrov! and the more usual popsodukeiov™
found in Aristophanes, U'hesmophoriazuasae (417) :


elra dua ToUTOY Tals yuvakwritiow

ohpayidas ériBadrrovow Hbn Kat MoxAous,
Tnpouvres juas, Kat mpooere ModXortiKous
Tpépovet, MopHoAvKELA TOIs LOLXOIS, KUVAS.


The word occurs again in Plato, Phaedo**: “ rotrov ovv
reipoucOa reBew py Sedieva Tov Oavaror baTep Ta mopmoAuUKea.”
It is, of course, a derivation and diminutive of Mormo
(Mopus), a hobgoblin, or worse, a ghoul of hideous appear-
ance. The theory is patriotic and ingenious, but Bernard
Schmidt and all other authorities agree that it is entirely
erroneous and the modern Greek word vrykolakas must
undoubtedly be identified with a word which is common


St


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 21


to the whole Slavonic group of languages. This word Slo-
venian volkodlak, vukodlak, vulkodlak, is a compound form of
which the first half means “ wolf,” whilst the second half
has been identified, although the actual relation is not quite
demonstrable, with blaka, which in Old Slavonic, New Slavonic,
and Serbian signifies the “ hair ” of a cow or a horse or a horse’s
mane.** Yet whatsoever the analytical signification of the
compound may precisely be, the synthesis in the actual em-
ployment of all Slavonic tongues, save one, is the equivalent
of the English “werewolf”; Scotch “warwulf”; German
“Werwolf”’ and French “loup-garou.” The one language
in which this word does not bear this interpretation is the
Serbian, for here it signifies ‘a vampire.”*® But it should be
remarked in this connexion that the Slavonic peoples, and
especially the Serbians believe that a man who has been a
werewolf in his life will become a vampire after death, and so
the two are very closely related.“ It was even thought in
some districts, especially Elis,*’ that those who had eaten the
flesh of a sheep killed by a wolf might become vampires after
death.“ However, it must be remembered that although
the superstitions of the werewolf and the vampire in many
Frespects agree, and in more than one point are indeed pre-
cisely similar, there is, especially in Slavonic tradition, a very
great distinction, for the Slavonic vampire is precisely defined
and it is the incorrupt and re-animated dead body which returns
from its grave, otherwise it cannot be said strictly to be a
vampire.. As we shall have occasion to observe it were,
perhaps, no exaggeration to say that the conception of the
vampire proper is peculiar to Slavonic peoples, and especi-
ally found in the Balkan countries, in Greece, in Russia, in
Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia. There are, of
course, Many variants, both Western and Oriental ; and other
countries have tales of vampires which exactly fit the Slavonic
norm, but outside the districts we have specified the appear-
ances of the vampire are rare, whilst in his own domain even
now he holds horrid Sway, and people fear not so much the
ghost as the return of the dead body floridly turgescent and
foully swollen with blood, endued with some abominable and
devilish life.

Tn Danish and Swedish we have vampyr; the Dutch is
vampir ; the French le vampire ; Italian, Spanish, Portuguese,


22 THE VAMPIRE


vampiro ; modern Latin, vampyrus.*° The Oxford English
Dictionary thus defines vampire : “A preternatural being
of a malignant nature (in the original unusual form of the belief
an animated Corpse), supposed to seek nourishment and do harm
by sucking the blood of sleeping persons; a man or woman
abnormally endowed with similar habits.” The first example
which has been traced of the use of the word in literature seems
to be that which occurs in The Travels of Three English Gentle-
men, written about 1734, which was printed in Vol. IV. of the
Harleian Miscellany, 1745, where the following passage occurs :
“We must not omit Observing here, that our Landlord [at
Laubach] seems to pay some regard to what Baron Valvasor has
related of the Vampyres, said to infest some Parts of this
Country. These Vampyres are supposed to be the Bodies of
deceased Persons, animated by evil Spirits, which come out of
the Graves, in the Night-time, suck the Blood of many of the
Living, and thereby destroy them.” The word and the idea
soon became quite familiar, and in his Citizen of the World
(1760-2) Oliver Goldsmith writes in every-day phrase : “ From
a meal he advances to a surfeit, and at last sucks blood like a
vampire.”

Johnson, edited by Latham, 1870, has: “ Vampire. Pre-
tended demon, said to delight in sucking human blood, and to
animate the bodies of dead persons, which, when dug up, are
said to be found florid and full of blood.” A quotation is
given from Forman’s Observations on the Revolution in 1688,
1741, which shows that so early the word had acquired its
metaphorical sense: “ These are the vampires of the publick
and riflers of the kingdom.” David Mallet in his Zephyr, or
the Stratagem, has :


Can Russia, can the Hungarian vampire
With whom call in the hordes and empire,
Can four such powers, who one assail
Deserve our praise should they prevail ?


A few travellers and learned authors had written of
vampires in the seventeenth century. Thus we have the
famous De Graecorum hodie quorundam opinationibus of Leone
Allacci,® published at Cologne in 1645; there are some de-
tailed accounts in the Relation de ce qui s’est passé a Sant-


_ EBrini Isle de V Archipel™ by Father Frangois Richard, a Jesuit


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 28


riest of the island of Santorini (Thera), whose work was
hed at Paris in 1657; Paul Ricaut, sometime English
at Smyrna in his The Present State of the Greek and
‘an Churches Anno Christi, 1678, 8vo, London, 1679,
ons the tradition with a very striking example, but he
not actually use the word vampire. In 1679 Philip®* Rohr
hed at Leipzig his thesis De Masticatione Mortuorum,
ich in the eighteenth century was followed by a number of
mic treatises, such as the Dissertatio de Hominibus post
Sanguisugis, uulgo dictis Vampyren, by John
istopher Rohl and John Hertel, Leipzig, 1732 ; the Disser-
jo de cadaueribus sanguisugis of John Christian Stock,
plished at Jena in the same year ; the Dissertatiode Uampyris
msibus of John Heinrich Zopfius and Charles Francis van
en which appeared in the following year; all of which in
» sense paved the way for John Christian Harenberg’s
_ Vampyren.**
1744 was published at Naples “ presso i fratelli Raimondi ”
famous Dissertazione sopra I Vampiri of Gioseppe
ati, Archbishop of Trani. This book had already
circulated in manuscript—‘la sua Dissertazione
i Vampiri s’era sparsa per tutta l’Italia benché mano-
2,” says the anonymous biographer—and a copy had even
ted to the Holy Father, the learned Benedict XIV,
in a letter of 12th January, 1743, graciously thanked the
r with generous compliment upon his work. “‘ L’abbiamo
ito letta con piacere, e nel medesimo Tempo ammirata si
la dottrina, che per la vasta erudizione, di cui ella ¢
a’; wrote the Pope. It will not then be unfitting here
pply some brief notice—of the Dissertazione sopra
‘ampiri, which although it ran into a second edition,
poli. M.DCC.LXXXIX. Presso Filippo Raimondi,”
n seems almost entirely unknown since strangely
th even the British Museum Library lacks a copy. We
d premise that as the good Archbishop’s arguments
conclusions are philosophical it is quite allowable for us,
fully recognizing his scholarship and skill in handling
ats, not to accept these but rather to maintain the


sppe Davanzati was born at Bari on 29th August,
_ After having commenced his studies at the Jesuit


24 THE VAMPIRE —


College in his native town, he passed at the age of fifteen
to the University of Naples. Already had he resolved to seek
the priesthood, and after a course of three years, his parents
being now dead, he entered the University of Bologna, when
he greatly distinguished himself in Science and Mathematics.
Some few years were next spent in travelling, during which
period he made his headquarters at Paris, ‘‘essendo molto
innamorato delle maniere, e de’costumi de’ Francesi.” Spain,
Portugal, the Low Countries, Germany, Switzerland were
visited in turn, and we are told that he repeatedly expressed
his wish to cross over to England, “ nobil sede dell ’Arti
e delle Scienze’ but that by some accident his desire was
again and again frustrated. Early in the reign of Clement XI,
(1700-1721) he was recalled to Italy, and having been raised
to the priesthood by the Bishop of Montemartino (Salerno)
he was appointed Treasurer of the famous Sanctuary of
S. Nicholas at Bari. His genius speedily attracted attention,
and before long he was sent by the Pope as Legate Extra-
ordinary to the Emperor Charles VI, to Vienna, a difficult
and important mission which he discharged so admirably
well that upon his return he was rewarded with the Arch-
bishopric of Trani and other honours. This noble prelate
remained high in favour with the successors of Clement XI,
Innocent XIII (1721-1724), Benedict XIII (1724-1730),
and Clement XII (1730-1740), and when on the death of this
latter Pontiff Cardinal Prospero Lorenzo Lambertini was
elected and took the title of Benedict XIV an old and intimate
friend of his own was sitting in the chair of S. Peter. Although
five and seventy years of age, Archbishop Davanzati journeyed
to Rome to kiss the feet of the new Pope by whom he was
welcomed with the utmost kindness and every mark of distine-
tion. Upon the death of Monsignor Crispi, Archbishop of
Ferrara, the Supreme Pontiff on 2nd August, 1746, preconized
Gioseppe Davanzati as Patriarch of Alexandria, a dignity
vacant by the aforesaid prelate’s decease. Early in Feb-
ruary, 1755, Archbishop Davanzati contracted a severe
chill which turned to inflammation of the lungs. Upon the
night of the sixteenth of that month, having been fortified
with the Sacraments of the Church he slept peacefully away,
being aged 89 years, 5 months, and 16 days.

The Dissertazione sopra I Vampiri owed its first suggestion


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE ~ 25


to the various discussions which were held at Rome during
the years 1738-39 in the apartments of Cardinal Schrattem-
bach, Bishop of Olmiitz, and which arose from the official
reports of vampirism submitted to him by the chapter of
his diocese. The cardinal sought the advice and co-operation
of various learned members of the Sacred College and other
prelates of high repute for experience and sagacity. Amongst
these was Davanzati who frankly confesses that until the
Cardinal consulted him and explained the whole business
at length he had no idea at all what a vampire might be.
Davanzati commences his work by relating various well-
known and authenticated cases of vampires, especially those
which had recently occurred in Germany during the years
1720-1739. He shows a good knowledge of the literature of
the subject, and decides that the phenomena cannot enter
into the category of apparitions and ghosts but must be
explained in a very different way, He finds that with but
few exceptions both ancient and modern philosophers seem
ignorant of vampirism, which he justly argues with pertinent
references to the Malleus Maleficarum and to Delrio must
be diabolical in origin be it an illusion or no. He next con-
siders at some length in several chapters of great interest the
extent of the demon’s power. Chapter XIII discusses
“Della forza della Fantasia,” and in Chapter XIV he argues
“Che le apparizioni de’fantasmi, e dell’ ombre de’ Morti,
di cui fanno menzione gli Storici, non siano altro che effetto
di fantasia.”” Here we take leave to join issue with him, and
to-day it will very generally be agreed that his line of argu-
ment is at least perilous. Nor can we accept “Che l’appar-
izione de’ Vampiri non sia altro che paro effetto di Fantasia.”
The truth lies something deeper than that as Leone Allacci
so well knew. Yet with all its faults and limitations the
Dissertazione sopra I Vampiri is deserving of careful con-
sideration for there is much that is well presented, much that
is of value, although in the light of fuller investigations and
clearer knowledge the author’s conclusion cannot be securely
maintained.

Even better known than the volume of Davanzati
is the Dissertations sur les Apparitions des Anges, des Démons
et des Esprits, et sur les Revenants et Vampires de Hongrie,
de Bohéme, de Moravie, et de Silésie, published at Paris,


26 THE VAMPIRE


chez Debure l’ainé, 2 vols., 12mo, 1746.55 The work
was frequently reprinted, and translated into English
1759; into German 1752; second edition 1757-8. In
its day it exercised a very great influence, and as it is still
constantly referred to, it may not be impertinent to give a
brief account of the eminent authority, its author.

Dom Augustin Calmet, who is so famous as a biblical exe-
getist, was born at Ménil-la-Horgne, near Commercy, Lor-
raine, on 26th February, 1672; and died at the Abbey of
Senones, near Saint-Dié, 25th October, 1757. He was edu-
cated by the monks of the Benedictine Priory of Breuil, and
in 1688 he joined this learned order in the abbey of St. Mansuy
at Toul, being professed in the following year, and ordained
17th March, 1696. At the Abbey of Moyen-Moutier, where he
taught philosophy and theology, he soon engaged the help
of the whole community to gather the material for his vast
work on the Bible. The first volume of this huge commentary
appeared at Paris in 1707, Commentaire littéral sur tous les livres
del Ancien et du Nouveau Testament; and the last of the twenty-
three quarto volumes was published only in 1716. Several
most important reprints were issued throughout the eighteenth
century, including two Latin versions, the one by F. Vecelli
which came from houses at Venice and Frankfort, six volumes
folio, 1730 ; the other by Mansi, Lucca, 9 vols., folio, 1730-1738,
of which version there are at least two subsequent editions.
It is impossible that in some small points so encyclopedic
a work should not be open to criticism, but its merits are
permanent and the erudition truly amazing. Yet this was
only one of many learned treatises which Dom Calmet pub-
lished on Biblical subjects, and so greatly was their value
esteemed that his dissertations were rapidly translated into
Latin and the principal modern European languages. When
we add to these his historical and philosophical writings the
output of this great scholar is well-nigh incredible. So remark-
able a man could not fail to hold high honours in his own
Congregation, and it was only at his earnest prayer that Pope
Benedict XIII refrained from compelling him to accept a
mitre, since this Pontiff on more than one occasion expressed
himself anxious to reward the merits and the learning of the
Abbot of Senones.

To-day, perhaps the best known of Dom Calmet’s works


- SS


a THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE = 27


in his Traité sur les Apparitions des Esprits, et sur les Vam-
pires, and in his preface he tells us the reasons which induced
him to undertake this examination. One point which he
emphasizes must carefully be borne in mind and merits detailed
consideration. Vampires, as we have seen, particularly
infest Slavonic countries, and it does not appear that this
species of apparition was well known in western Europe until
towards the end of the seventeenth century. There un-
doubtedly were cases of vampirism, as will be recorded in their
due order, and certain aspects of witchcraft have much in
common with the vampire tradition, especially the exercise
of that malign power whereby the witch caused her enemies
to dwindle, peak and pine, draining them dry as hay. But
this is not vampirism proper. The fuller knowledge of these
horrors reached western Europe in detail during the eighteenth
century, and it at once threw very considerable light upon
unrelated cases that had been recorded from time to time, but
which appeared isolated and belonging to no particular cate-
gory. Writing in 1746, Dom Calmet, who had long studied the
subject, remarks that certain events, certain movements,
certain fanaticisms, certain phenomena, it may be in the
physical or in the supernatural order, distinguish and charac-
- terise certain several centuries. He continues: “In this
present age and for about sixty years past, we have been the
hearers and the witnesses of a new series of extraordinary
incidents and occurrences. Hungary, Moravia, Silesia,
Poland, are the principal theatre of these happenings. For here
we are told that dead men, men who have been dead for several
months, I say, return from the tomb, are heard to speak,
walk about, infest hamlets and villages, injure both men and
animals, whose blood they drain thereby making them sick and
ill, and at length actually causing death. Nor can men deliver
themselves from these terrible visitations, nor secure them-
selves from these horrid attacks, unless they dig the corpses up
from the graves, drive a sharp stake through these bodies,
cut off the heads, tear out the hearts; or else they burn the
bodies to ashes. The name given to these ghosts is Oupires, or
- Vampires, that is to say, blood-suckers, and the particulars

which are related of them are so singular, so detailed, accom-
panied with circumstances so probable and so likely, as well
as with the most weighty and well-attested legal deposition


28 THE VAMPIRE


that it seems impossible not to subscribe to the belief which
prevails in these countries that these Apparitions do actually
come forth from their graves and that they are able to produce
the terrible effects which are so widely and so positively
attributed to them. . . . The Brucolaques (vrykolakes)
of Greece and the Archipelago are Apparitions of quite a new
kind.” The author then says that he has solid reasons for
treating the subject of Vampires, and especially for dealing
with those who infest Hungary, Moravia, Silesia and Poland,
although he well knows that he is laying himself open to
damaging criticism on both sides. Many persons will accuse
him of temerity and presumption for having dared to cast
doubts upon certain details in these well-authenticated accounts,
whilst others will attack him for having wasted his time in
writing seriously on a subject which appears to them frivolous
and inept. ‘‘ Howbeit,” he continues, “‘ whatever line anyone
may choose to adopt, it is to my mind useful and indeed neces-
sary to investigate a question which seems to have an im-
portant bearing upon Religion. For if it be a truth that
Vampires may actually thus return from their graves, then it
becomes necessary to write in defence of, and to prove, this
truth ; if it be an error and an illusion, it follows in the in-
terests of religion that those who credit it must be undeceived
and that we should expose a groundless superstition, a fallacy,
which may easily have very serious and very dangerous
consequences.”

In the first chapter of his Second Volume, which section
directly discusses Vampires,—the first volume being prelim-
inary and generally concerned with apparitions of various
kinds,—Don Calmet again defines a Vampire, and at the risk
of a certain amount of repetition his words must once again
be quoted®: “The Apparitions (Revenans) of Hungary, or
Vampires . . . are men who have been dead for some
considerable time, it may be for a long period or it may be for
a shorter period, and these issue forth from their graves and
come to disturb the living, whose blood they suck and drain.
These vampires visibly appear to men, they knock loudly
at their doors and cause the sound to re-echo throughout the
whole house, and once they have gained a foothold death
generally follows. To this sort of Apparition is given the
name Vampire or Oupire, which in the Slavonic tongues means


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 29
a blood-sucker. The only way to obtain deliverance from


their molestations is by disinterring the dead body, by cutting _—


off the head, by driving a stake through the breast, by trans-
fixing the heart, or by burning the corpse to ashes.”

It may be remarked here that although in the course of
this book there will be occasion to deal with many ghosts of
the vampire family and to treat of cognate superstitions and
traditions the essential feature of the Vampire proper lies in
the fact that he is a dead body re-animated with an awful life,
who issues from his tomb to prey upon the living by sucking
their blood which lends him new vitality and fresh energies.
Since he is particularly found in Greece it is to a Greek writer
we may go for a description of this pest. One of the earliest
—if indeed he were not actually the first—of the writers of the
seventeenth century who deals with vampires is Leone Allacci,
(Alacci), more commonly known as Leo Allatius.5” This learned
scholar and theologian was born on the island of Chios in 1586,
and died at Rome 19th January, 1669. At the age of fourteen he
entered the Greek College in Rome, and when he had finished his
academic course with most honourable distinction, returned to
Chios where he proved of the greatest assistance to the Latin
Bishop Marco Giustiniani. In 1616 Allacci received the degree
Doctor of Medicine from the Sapienza, and a little later, after
having been attached to the Vatican library, he professed rhe-
toric at the Greek College. In 1622 Pope Gregory XV sent him to
Germany to superintend the transportation to Rome of the
Palatinate library of Heidelberg, which Maximillian I had
presented to the Pope in return for large subsidies that enabled
the war to be carried on against the federation of Protestant
Princes. This important task, which owing to a disturbed
state of the country was one of immense difficulty, Allacci
accomplished most successfully, and during the reigns of Urban
VIII and Innocent X he continued his work in the Vatican
library, especially concentrating upon the Palatinate manu-
scripts. In 1661 Alexander VI, as a recognition of his vast
researches and eminent scholarship, appointed him custodian of
the Library. He was an earnest labourer for reunion, in which
cause he wrote his great work De Ecclesiae Occidentalis atque
Orientalis perpetua consensione, published at Cologne in 1648, a
dissertation wherein all points of agreement are emphasized,
whilst the differences are treated as lightly as possible.


380 THE VAMPIRE


Allacci, in his treatise De Graecorum hodie quorundam opinat-
ionibus, Cologne, 1645, discusses many traditions, and amongst
others he deals at some length with the vampire, concerning
whom he says: “The vrykolakas is the body of a man of
wicked and debauched life, very often of one who has been
excommunicated by his bishop. Such bodies do not like other
corpses suffer decomposition after burial nor fall to dust,
but having, so it seems, a skin of extreme toughness become
swollen and distended all over, so that the joints can scarcely
be bent; the skin becomes stretched like the parchment of
a drum, and when struck gives out the same sound, from which
circumstance the vrykolakas has received the name tuz7avaios
(‘drum-like’).” According to this author a demon takes
possession of such a body, which issues from the tomb, and,
generally at night, goes about the streets of a village, knocking
sharply upon doors, and summoning one of the household by
name. But if the person called unwittingly answers he is
sure to die on the following day. Yet a vrykolakas never cries
out a name twice, and so the people of Chios, at all events,
always wait to hear the summons repeated before they reply
to anyone who raps at their door of a night. “This monster
is said to be so fearfully destructive to men, that it actually
makes its appearance in the daytime, even at high noon,
nor does it then confine its visits to houses, but even in fields
and in hedged vineyards and upon the open highway it will
suddenly advance upon persons who are labouring or travellers
as they walk along, and by the horror of its hideous aspect it
will slay them without laying hold on them or even speaking
a word.” Accordingly a sudden death from no obvious cause
is to be regarded with the gravest suspicion, and should there
be any kind of molestation, or should any story of an apparition
be bruited abroad they hasten to exhume the corpse which
is often found in the state that has been described. Thereupon
without any delay ‘‘ it is taken up out of the grave, the priests
recite the appointed prayers, and it is thrown on to a fiercely
blazing pyre. Before the orisons are finished skin will des-
quamate and the members fall apart, when the whole body
is utterly consumed to ashes.” Allacci proceeds to point out
that this tradition in Greece is by no means new nor of any
recent growth, for he tells us “in ancient and modern times
alike holy men and men of great piety who have received the


~~


27


ee


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 31


confessions of Christians have tried to disabuse them of such
superstitions and to root this belief out of the popular imagin-
ation.” Indeed a nomocanon or authoritative ordinance®™® of


the Greek church is cited to the following effect : ‘Concerning a


dead man, if he be found whole, the which they call vrykolakas.

“It is impossible that a dead manshould becomea vrykolakas,
unless it be by the power of the Devil who, wishing to mock
and delude some that they may incur the wrath of Heaven,
causeth these dark wonders, and so very often at night he
casteth a glamour whereby men imagine that the dead man
whom they knew formerly, appears and holds converse with
them, and in their dreams too they see strange visions. At
other times they may behold him in the road, yea, even in the
highway walking to and fro or standing still, and what is
more than this he is even said to have strangled men and to
have slain them.

“Immediately there is sad trouble, and the whole village is
in a riot and a racket, so that they hasten to the grave and they


unbury the body of the man . . . andthe dead man—one
who has long been dead and buried—appears to them to have
flesh and blood . . . so they collect together a mighty


pile of dry wood and set fire to this and lay the body upon it
so that they burn it and they destroy it altogether.”

What is exceedingly curious is that after so emphatically
declaring these phenomena to be a superstition and an idle
fantasy, the nomocanon continueth as follows: “ Be it known
unto you, however, that when such an incorrupt body shall
be discovered, the which, as we have said is the work of the
Devil, ye must without delay summon the priests to chant
an invocation to the All Holy Mother of God . . . and
solemnly to perform memorial services for the dead with
funeral-meats.”® This provision is at any rate pretty clear
evidence that the author or authors of this ordinance must
have had some belief in the vrykolakas, and it appears to me
that they would not have added so significant a cautel unless
they had deemed it absolutely necessary, and having salved
their consciences by speaking with rigid officialism, they
felt it incumbent upon them to suggest precautions in case
of the expected happening, and the consequence of difficulties
and mistrust. In fact, they were most obviously safeguarding
themselves.


82 THE VAMPIRE


Allacci, at any rate, had no hesitation about declaring his
own views, and he thoroughly believed in the vampire. He
says, and says with perfect truth: ‘It is the height of folly
to attempt to deny that such bodies are not infrequently
found in their graves incorrupt and that by use of them the
Devil, if God permit him, devises most horrible complots and
schemes to the hurt and harm of mankind.” Father Frangois
Richard, reference to whose important work has been made
above, distinctly lays down that particularly in Greece the
devil may operate by means of dead bodies as well as by
sorcerers, all this being allowed by some inscrutable design of
providence. And there can be no doubt that the vampire
does act under satanic influence and by satanic direction.
For the wise words of 8. Gregory the Great, although on
another occasion,“ may most assuredly be applied here: “Qui
tamen non esse incredibilia ista cognoscimus, si in illo et alia
facta pensamus. Certe iniquorum omnium caput diabolus est :
et huius capitis membra sunt omnes iniqui.’” All this, of
course, under divine permission. The authors of the Malleus
Maleficarum in the First Part teach us how there are “Three
Necessary Concomitants of Witchcraft, which are the Devil,
a Witch, and the Permission of God.’ So are these three
necessary concomitants of Vampirism, to wit, the Devil, the
Dead Body, and the Permission of God.” Father Richard
writes: ‘“‘The Devil revitalizes and energizes these dead
bodies which he preserves for a long time in their entirety ;
he appears with the actual face and in the likeness of the
dead, stalking abroad up and down the streets, and presently
he will parade the country roads and the fields; he bursts
his way into men’s houses, filling many with awful fear,
leaving others dumb with horror, whilst others are even killed ;
he proceeds to acts of violence and blood, and strikes terror
into every heart.” The good Father proceeds to say that at
first he believed these appearances to be merely ghosts from
Purgatory returning to ask for help, masses and pious prayers™;
but on learning the details of the case he soon found that he had
to deal with something very other, for such ghosts never
commit excesses, violent assaults, wreaking the destruction
of cattle and goods, and even causing death. These appearances
then are clearly diabolical, and the matter is taken in hand by
the priests who assemble on a Saturday, that being the only


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE — 38


day of the week on which a vrykolakas rests in his grave and
cannot walk abroad.

It may be remembered that Saturday was the one day of
the week which was particularly avoided by witches for their
assemblies, and that no Sabbat was held on this day. for Sat-
urday is sacred to the Immaculate Mother of God. “It is
well known,” says that great Doctor 8. Alphonsus, “ that
Saturday is dedicated by Holy Church to Mary, because, as
S. Bernard tells us, on that day, the day after the death of
Her Son, She remained constant in faith.” (Per illud triste
Sabbatum stetit in fide, et saluata fuit Ecclesia in ipsa sola;
propter quod, aptissime tota Ecclesia, in laudem et gloriam
eiusdem Uirginis, diem Sabbati per totius anni circulum
celebrare consueuit.)® In England this excellent practice of
devotion was known as early as Anglo-Saxon times, since
in the Leofric Missal a special mass is assigned to Saturdays in
honour of Our Lady.

Mr. G. F. Abbott, in his Macedonian Folklore, relates that
in Northern Greece “ People born on a Saturday (hence called
ZaPBariavoi or Sabbatarians) are believed to enjoy the doubtful
privilege of seeing ghosts and phantasms, and of possessing
great influence over vampires. A native of Socho assured
the writer that such a one was known to have lured a vrykolakas
into a barn and to have set him to count the grains of a heap
of millet.’ While the demon was thus engaged, the Sabbat-
arian attacked him and succeeded in nailing him to the wall

At Liakkovikia it is held that the Sabbatarian owes
his power to a little dog, which follows him every evening
and drives away the vrykolakas. It is further said that the
Sabbatarian on these occasions is invisible to all but the
little dog.”

The priests then on a Saturday go in procession to the grave
where lies the body which is suspect. It is solemnly dis-
interred, “‘ and when they find it whole, they take it for certain
that it was serving as an instrument of the Devil.”

This abnormal condition of the dead is held to be a
sure mark of the vampire, and is essential to vampirism
proper. In the Greek Church it is often believed to be the
result of excommunication, and this is indeed an accepted
and definite doctrine of the Orthodox Church, which must be
Considered in turn a little later.


ttt a to heemnesenyaain—hiltiantnienstisiil al


34 THE VAMPIRE


It is not impossible, I think, that cases of catalepsy, or
suspended animation which resulted in premature burial may
have helped to reinforce the tradition of the vampire and the
phenomenon of vampirism. Some authorities consider cata-
lepsy as almost entirely, if not wholly, psychic, and certainly
not a disease in any correct sense of the word, although it
may be a symptom of obscure diseases arising from nervous
disorders. A celebrated medical authority has pronounced
that “in itself catalepsy is never fatal.” It belongs to the
domain of hypnotism, and is said to be refreshing to the subject,
especially when he is exhausted by long mental exertion or
physical toil. Very often it arises from conscious or sub-
conscious auto-suggestion, and it has been described as “ the
supreme effort of nature to give the tired nerves their needed
repose.” No doubt the fatal mistake so often made in the
past was that of endeavouring by drastic measures to hasten
restoration to consciousness, instead of allowing nature to
recuperate at will. If the attempt is successful it comes as
a fearful shock to the nerves which are craving for rest; if
the effort is seemingly without result the patient is in imminent
danger of an autopsy or of being buried alive, a tragedy which,
it is to be feared, has happened to very many. It is clear
that as yet serious attention has not been adequately given
to this terrible accident. A quarter of a century ago it was
computed that in the United States an average of not less
than one case a week of premature burial was discovered and
reported. This means that the possibility of such danger is
appalling. In past centuries when knowledge was less common,
when adequate precautions were seldom, if ever, employed,
the cases of premature burial, especially at such times as
the visitation of the plague and other pestilences must have
been far from uncommon. ‘Two or three examples of recent
date, that is to say occuring at the end of the last century,
may profitably be quoted as proving extremely significant in
this connexion.

A young lady, who resided near Indianopolis, came to life
after fourteen days of suspended animation. No less than
six doctors had applied the usual tests, and all unhesitatingly
signed certificates to witness that she was dead. Her little
brother against this consensus of opinion clung to her and
declared that she had not died. The parents were in bitter


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE — 35


agony, but at length it was necessary to remove the body.
The boy endeavoured to prevent this, and in the excitement
the bandage which tied up the jaw was loosened and pushed
out of place, when it appeared that her lips were quivering
and the tongue gently moving. “ What do you want, what
do you want?” cried the child. “ Water,” distinctly, if
faintly, came the answer from the supposed corpse. Water
was administered, the patient revived, and lived her full span
of years, healthy and normal until she was an old woman.
A lady who is now the head matron of one of the largest
orphan asylums in the United States has been given over as
dead no less than twice by the physicians in attendance ; her
body has twice been shrouded in the decent cerements of the
grave ; and twice has she been resuscitated by her friends.
On the second occasion, in view of the former experience,
extraordinary precautions were taken. All known tests were
applied by the physicians, and humanly speaking all possible
doubt was set at rest. The doctors had actually left the house,
and the undertaker was at his sad business. It chanced that
the body was pierced by a pin, and to the joy of her friends it
was noted that a small drop of blood shortly afterwards
oozed from the puncture. The family insisted upon the
preparations being stayed; vigorous treatment was unremit-
tingly applied, and the patient returned to life. To-day she
is an exceptionally active and energetic administratrix. It
should be remarked that the lady declared that she had never
for a moment lost consciousness, that she was fully cognizant
of all that went on around her, that she perfectly understood
the meaning of all the tests which were so assiduously employed,
but that all the while she felt the utmost indifference with
regard to the result. The verdict of the physicians that she
was dead did not cause her either the slightest surprise or
the smallest alarm. A very similar accident occurred to a
gentleman of good estate, one of the most prominent citizens
of Harrisburg, in Pennsylvania. After a long illness he
apparently died from inflamatory rheumatism, which was
complicated with heart trouble. All preparations were made
for the funeral, but his wife determined that this should not
take place for at least a week, so great was her fear of premature
burial. In the course of two or three days it was noticed
that the body had moved; the eyes were wide open, and


36 THE VAMPIRE


one of the arms had altered the position in which it had been
carefully placed. His wife shrieked out his name, upon which
he slowly arose, and with assistance was supported to a chair.
Even before the arrival of the physicians, who were instantly
summoned, he had regained a marked degree of strength,
together with an ability of movement which had not been
possible throughout the whole course of his illness. He was
soon in excellent health, and what is very remarkable, he
stated that during the time of suspended animation he was
perfectly aware of everything that was going on all around,
that the grief of his family filled him with terrible agony, and
he dreaded the preparations for interment, but that he was
unable to move a muscle or utter a word.

The death of Washington Irving Bishop, the well-known
thought-reader, caused a great sensation at the time. On
many occasions he had been in a cataleptic state for several
hours, and once, at least, his trance was so long that two
physicians pronounced him to be dead. There is little doubt
that eventually the autopsy was performed with irregular
haste, and that the unfortunate subject was not dead before
the surgeon’s knife had actually penetrated his brain.

Although through the ages few cases have been actually
recorded the incidents of premature burial and of autopsy
performed on the living must be numberless. One such
accident nearly occurred to the great humanist Marc-Antoine
Muret,®® who, falling ill upon a journey, was conveyed to the
local hospital as a sick stranger, name unknown. Whilst
he lay, not even unconscious, upon the rough pallet, the physic-
ians, who had been lecturing upon anatomy and were anxious
to find a subject to illustrate their theories, gathered round in
full force. They eagerly discussed the points to be argued,
and deeming the patient dead, the senior physician gravely
pronounced, pointing to the patient: “Faciamus experi-
mentum in anima uili.” The eyes of the supposed corpse
opened widely, and a low, but distinct voice answered : “ Uilem
animam appellas pro qua Christus non dedignatus est mori.”

As was customary in the case of prelates, when Cardinal
Diego de Espinosa, Bishop of Sigeunza and Grand Inquisitor
of Spain under Philip II died after a short illness, the body
was embalmed before it lay in state. Accordingly in the
presence of several physicians the surgeon proceeded to operate


_—__—__$_$_$—$—


er ee OS See


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 387


for that purpose. He had made a deep incision, and it is
gaid that the heart had actually been brought into view and
was observed to beat. The Cardinal recovered consciousness
at the fatal moment, and even then had sufficient strength
to grasp with his hand the scalpel of the anatomist. In the
earlier years of the nineteenth century both Cardinal Spinola
and the octogenarian Cardinal della Somaglia were prepared
for embalmment before life was extinct.

In the Seventh Book of the Historia Naturalis, (liti, 52,
ed. Brotier, Barbou, 1779), Pliny relates many instances of
persons who, being deemed dead, revived. ** Auiola consularis
in rogo reuixit: et quoniam subueniri non potuerat pre
ualente flamma, uiuus crematus est. Similis causa in L.
Lamia pretorio uiro traditur. Nam C. Allium Tuberonem
pretura functum a rogo relatum, Messala Rufus, et plerique
tradunt. Hee est conditio mortalium: ad has, et eiusmodi
occasiones fortunz gignimur, uti de homine ne morti quidem
debeat credi. Reperimus inter exempla, Hermotini Clazo-
menii animam relicto corpore errare solitam, uagamque e
longinquo multa annunitiare, que nisi a presente nosci non
possent, corpore interim semianimi: donec cremato eo inimici
(qui Cantharide uocabantur) remeanti anime uelut uaginam
ademerint. Aristez etiam uisam euolantem ex ore in Pro-
conneso, corui effigie, magna que sequitur fabulositate.
Quam equidem et in Gnossio Epimenide simili modo accipio:
Puerum estu et itinere fessum in specu septem et quinquaginta
dormisse annis: rerum faciem mutationemque mirantem
uelut postero experrectum die: hinc pari numero dierum
senio ingruente, ut tamen in septimum et quinquagesimum
atque centesimum uite duraret annum. Feminarum sexus
huic malo uidetur maxime opportunus, conuersione uulue :
que si corrigatur, spiritus restituitur. Huc pertinet nobile
apud Grecos uolumen Heraclidis, septem diebus femine
exanimis ad uitam reuocate.

Uarro quoque auctor est, xx. uiro se agros diuidente Capue,
quemdam qui efferretur, foro domum remaasse pedibus. Hoc
idem Aquini accidisse. Rome quoque Corsidium matertere
sue maritum sumere locato reuixisse, et locatorem funeris ab
eo elatum. Adiicit miracula, que tota indicasse conueniat.
E duobus fratribus equestris ordinis, Corsidio maiori accidisse,
ut uideretur exspirasse, apertoque testamento recitatum


88 THE VAMPIRE


heredem minorem funeri institisse ; interim eum, qui uidebatur
extinctus, plaudendo conciuisse ministeria, et narrasse “a
fratre se uenisse, commendatum sibi filiam ab eo. Demon-
stratum preterea, quo in loco defodisset aurum nullo conscio,
et rogasse ut iis funebribus, que comparasset, efferretur.”
Hoe eo narrante, fratris domestici propere annuntiauere
exanimatum illum: et aurum, ubi dixerat, repertum est.
Plena preterea uita est his uaticiniis, sed non conferenda,
cum sepius falsa sint, sicut ingenti exemplo docebimus.
Bello Siculo Gabienus Cesaris classiarus fortissimus captus
a Sex. Pompeio, iussu eius incisa ceruice, et uix coherente,
iacuit in litore toto die. Deinde cum aduesperauisset, cum
gemitu precibusque congregata multitudine petiit, uti Pom-
peius ad se ueniret, aut aliquem ex arcanis mitteret : se enim
ab inferis remissum, habere que nuntiaret. Misit plures
Pompeius ex amicis, quibus Gabienus dixit: “‘Inferis diis
placere Pompeii causas et partes pias: proinde euentum
futurum, quem optaret : hoc se nuntiare iussum : argumentum
fore ueritatis, quod peractis mandatis, protinus exspiraturus
esset ’: idque ita euenit. Post sepulturam quoque uisorum
exempla sunt: nisi quod nature opera, non prodigia con-
sectamur.

It was truly said by Pliny that ‘‘ Such is the condition of
humanity, and so uncertain is men’s judgement that they
cannot determine even death itself.” The words of the wise
old Roman have been re-echoed by many a modern authority.
Sabetti in his Tractatus XVI, “De Extrema Unctione,”
Compendium Theologie Moralis, (ed. recognita T. Barrett ;
Pustet ; 1916; p. 776) asks: “ Quid sacerdoti agendum sit,
si ad egrotum accedat, ewmque modo mortuum, ut wulgo dicitur,
inueniat ? In the course of resolving this, he lays down:
“Tam age ex sententia plurimorum medicorum doctissimorum
probabile est homines in omnibus ferme casibus post instans
mortis, ut uulgo dicitur, seu post ultimam respirationem,
intus aliquamdiu uiucre, breuius uel diutius, iuxta naturam
causae quae mortem induxit. In casibus mortis ex morbis
lenti progressus probabile est uitam interne perdurare aliquot
momenta, sex circiter, uel, iuxta quosdam peritos, unam
dimidiam horam: in casibus uero mortis repentinae uita
interna perdurat longius, forte non improbabiliter, usque ad
putrefactionem.” Professor Huxley wrote: ‘‘ The evidence


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE — 39


of ordinary observers on such a point as this (that a person
is really dead) is absvlutely worthless. And, even medical
evidence, unless the physician is a person of unusual knowledge
and skill, may have little more value.” The British Medical
Journal™ remarks: “It is true that hardly any one sign of
death, short of putrefaction, can be relied upon as infallible.”
Sir Henry Thompson wrote: “It should never be forgotten
that there is but one really trustworthy proof that death has
oceurred in any given instance, viz., the presence of a manifest
sign of commencing decomposition.” And Professor P. Brouar-
del emphatically declares: ‘“‘ We are obliged to acknowledge
that we have no sign or group of signs sufficient to determine
the moment of death with scientific certainty in all cases.”
Colonel E. P. Vollum, M.D., Medical Inspector of the United
States Army, and Corresponding Member of the New York
Academy of Sciences, who himself was upon one occasion
almost buried alive, most emphatically declared that “even
stoppage of the beating of the heart, and breathing, for a
considerable time, with all other appearances of death, excepting
decomposition, do not make it certain that a person is dead,”
and he also added the terrible warning that ‘the suspended
activity of life may return after the body has been interred.”
It is unnecessary to enter into these painful cases of premature
burial, but there is overwhelming evidence that such accidents
were far from uncommon. Dr. Thouret, who was present at
the destruction of the famous vaults of Les Innocens, told
Mons. Desgenettes that there could be no doubt many of the
persons must have been interred alive, since the skeletons
were found in positions which showed the dead must have
turned in their coffins. Kempner supplies similar particulars
when describing disinterments which have taken place in
New York and other districts of the United States, also in
Holland and elsewhere.

The celebrated investigator, Dr. Franz Hartmann, collected
particulars of more than seven hundred cases of premature
burial and of narrow escapes from it, some of which occurred
in his own neighbourhood. In his great work Premature
Burial” he tells us of the terrible incident which happened to
the famous French tragedienne, Mlle. Rachel, who on 3rd
January, 1858, “‘ died”’ near Cannes, and who was to be em-
balmed, but after the proceedings had commenced she suddenly


40 THE VAMPIRE


returned to life, only to expire in reality some ten hours later
from the shock and from the injuries which had been inflicted
upon her. Another case which is of particular interest as
having occurred in Moravia, where the belief in vampires is
particularly strong, is that of the postmaster in a small town
who, as it was thought, died in a fit of epilepsy. About a
year afterwards it became necessary to disinter some of the
bodies from the graveyard in order to enlarge one of the
transepts of the parish church, and the dreadful fact was
revealed that the unfortunate postmaster must have been
buried whilst still alive, a discovery which so horrified the
physician who had signed the death certificate that he lost
his reason.

In the chancel of 8. Giles, Cripplegate, there is still to be
seen a monument sacred to the memory of Constance Whitney,
whose many virtues are described in somewhat rhetorical
fashion upon a marble tablet. A figure above this scroll
represents the lady in the act of rising from her coffin. This
might be taken to be a beautiful symbolism, but such is not
the case, for it represents an actual circumstance. The
unfortunate lady had been buried while in a condition of
suspended animation, and consciousness returned to her when
the sexton opened the coffin and desecrated the body in order
to steal a valuable ring which had been left upon one of her
fingers.” In former years when the rifling of tombs and body-
snatching were by no means an infrequent practice, many
similar cases came to light, and there can be no doubt that no
inconsiderable proportion of persons were buried in a state of
trance or catalepsy.

The story of Gabrielle de Launay, a lady whose cause was
tried before the High Court of Paris, about 1760, caused a
profound sensation throughout the whole of France. When
eighteen years of age Gabrielle, the daughter of M. de Launay,
the President of the Civil Tribunal of Toulouse, was betrothed
to Captain Maurice de Serres. Unhappily the latter was
suddenly ordered abroad to the Indies on active service. The
President, fearing that his child might die in a foreign land,
refused to allow the marriage to be celebrated immediately
so that she might accompany her husband under his protection.
The lovers parted heart-broken, and in about two years’ time
news reached France of the gallant young soldier’s death.


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 41


This, however, proved to be false, although his safety was
not known until, after an absence of well-nigh five years, he
presented himself once more in Paris. Here he happened
to pass the church of S. Roch, the entire facade of which
was heavily draped with black and shrouded for the funeral
of some person of distinction. Upon enquiry, he learned that
the mourning was on account of a young and beautiful lady
who had died suddenly after two days’ illness, the wife of
the President du Bourg, who before her marriage had been
Mlle. Gabrielle de Launay. It appeared that, owing to the
report of the death of Maurice de Serres, M. de Launay had
compelled his daughter to marry this gentleman, who although
nearly thirty years her senior was a figure of great wealth and
importance. As may be imagined, the young captain was
distracted with grief, but that night, taking a considerable
sum in gold, he visited the sexton of the cemetery of 8. Roch
and with great difficulty bribed him to exhume the corpse of
Madame du Bourg in order that he might once more look
upon the features of the woman whom he had so passionately
loved. With every precaution, under the pale light of a
waning moon, the terrible task was completed, the coffin was
silently unscrewed, and the unhappy lover threw himself upon
his knees in an agony of grief. At last the grave-digger sug- }
gested that everything must be replaced in order, when with a
terrible cry the young officer suddenly seized the cold, clay
body and, before the bewildered sexton could prevent him,
threading his rapid course among the tombs, with lightning speed
he disappeared into the darkness. Pursuit was useless, and
nothing remained but for the poor man to replace the empty
shell in the grave, to shovel back the earth and arrange the
spot so that there might be no trace of any disturbance. He
felt sure, at least, that his accomplice in so terrible a crime,
a sacrilege which would inevitably bring the severest punish-
ment upon those concerned in it, must maintain silence, if
only for his own sake.

Nearly five years had passed when M. du Bourg, who upon |


the anniversary of his wife’s death each June attended a
‘solemn requiem, as he was passing through a somewhat
unfrequented street in the suburbs of Paris came face to face
with a lady in whom he recognised none other than the
wife whose death he had mourned so tenderly and so long.


42 THE VAMPIRE


As he attempted to speak, she with averted looks swept past
him as swiftly as the wind and, leaping into a carriage with
emblazoned panels, was driven quickly away before he could
reach the spot. However, M. du Bourg had noticed the arms
of the noble house of de Serres, and he determined that inquiry
should at once be made. It was no difficult task for a man
of his position to obtain an order that the grave of his wife
might be examined, and when this was done the empty broken
coffin turned suspicion into certainty. The fact that the
sexton had resigned his post and had gone no one knew where,
but seemingly in comfortable circumstances shortly after the
funeral of Madame du Bourg lent its weight to the investigations
which were now taken in hand. Experienced lawyer that he
was, M. du Bourg accumulated evidence of the first importance.
He found that it was said that Captain Maurice de Serres had
married his young and lovely wife, Madame Julie de Serres,
some five years previously and, as it was supposed, then
brought her back with him from some foreign country, to
Paris.

The whole city was astounded when the President du Bourg
demanded from the High Court the dissolution of the illegal
marriage between Captain Maurice de Serres and the pretended
Julie de Serres, who, as the plaintiff steadfastly declared, was
Gabrielle du Bourg, ‘his lawful wife. The novelty of the
circumstances caused the profoundest sensation, and vast
numbers of pamphlets were exchanged by the faculty, many
of whom maintained that a prolonged trance had given rise
to the apparent death of Madame du Bourg, and it was stated
that although she had continued to exist for a great number
of hours in her grave, cases of similar lethargies had been
recorded, and even if such fits were of the rarest, yet the
circumstance was possible. Madame Julie de Serres was
summoned to appear in Court and answer the questions of
the Judges. She stated that she was an orphan born in South
America, and had never left her native country until her
marriage. Certificates were produced, and on every side
lengthy arguments were heard, which it is unnecessary to
detail. Many romantic incidents ensued, but these, however
interesting, must be passed over, for it shall suffice to say that
eventually, mainly through the sudden introduction of her
little daughter, amid a pathetic scene, the identity of Julie


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 438


de Serres with Gabrielle du Bourg, née Launay, was established
and acknowledged. In vain did her advocate plead that her
marriage to M. du Bourg had been dissolved by death, although
this fact most certainly ought to have been accepted as con-
sonant with sound theology.”* None the less the result was
that, in spite of her prayer to be allowed to enter a cloister,
she was ordered to return to her first husband. Two days
after, the President du Bourg awaited her arrival in the great
hall of his mansion. She appeared, but could scarcely totter
through the gates, for she had but a few moments previously
drained a swift poison. Crying “I restore to you what you
have lost,” she fell a corpse at his feet. At the same moment
Captain de Serres died by his own hands.

It cannot escape notice that these events very closely
resemble that novella of Bandello (II, 9), which relates the
true history of Elena and Gerardo, adventures nearly resembling
the tragic tale of Romeo and Juliet. Elena and Gerardo are
the children of two nobles of Venice, Messer Pictro and Messer
Paolo, whose palaces fronted each other on the Grand Canal.
Gerardo chances to see Elena at her window, and from that
hour he knows neither happiness nor sleep until he has declared
his consuming passion. A kindly nurse brings them together,
and in her presence they exchange rings and vows of tenderest
love before the statue of Madonna the Virgin, spending long
nights in amorous ecstasy and bliss. For these unions were
fast binding, although not a sacrament, indeed, until then
had received the benison of Holy Church. It is a common
saying to apply to any man: “Si, é ammogliato; ma il
matrimonio non é stato benedetto.” Wherefore the spousals
of the lovers remained a secret.

In a little while Messer Paolo, thinking great things of his
son’s career in the world, dispatches the young man to Beirut,
and Gerardo needs must go. But when he had been absent
some six months Messer Pictro informs his daughter that he has
appointed a day for her marriage with a young man of ancient
house and fair estate, and not daring to tell her father what
had passed, she sunk under her silent grief, and upon the
evening before her new nuptials she fell into a swoon across
her bed, so that in the morning she was found cold and stark
as a stiffening corpse. The physicians assembled in numbers
and talked learnedly ; remedies of every sort were applied


er


a ee te renee


44. THE VAMPIRE


without avail; and no one doubted she was dead. So they
carried her to church for burial and not for marriage. That
night they bore in sombre and silent procession upon a black
gondola to the Campo which is hard by San Pictro in Castello,
where lies the Sacred Body of Venice’s great patriarch, San
Lorenzo Guistiniani. They left her there in a marble sarco-
phagus outside the church, with torches blazing around.
Now it happened that Gerardo’s galley had returned from
Syria, and was newly anchored at the port of Lido. Many
friends came to greet him, and as they talked, marking the
funeral cortége, he idly asked who was gone. When he learned
it was Elena, grief fell upon him like a cloud of night. But he
dissembled until all had departed, when, calling his friend the
captain of the galley, he told him the whole story of his love,
and swore he would once again kiss his wife, even if he had to
break open her monument. The captain tried in vain to
dissuade him, but seeing it was of no avail the two men took
a boat and rowed together to San Pictro. It was long after
midnight when they landed and made their way to the place
of sepulture. Pushing back the massive lid, Gerardo flung
himself upon the body of his Elena. At length the good
captain, who feared the Signors of the Night would visit the
spot and put them under arrest, compelled the hapless lover
to return to the boat, but he could no whit persuade him to
leave Elena’s body, and this Gerardo bore in his arms and
reverently laid it in the boat, himself clasping it in his arms with
many a sad kiss and bitter sigh. The captain, much alarmed,
scarce dared to make for the galley, but rowed up and down
and out to the open lagoon, the dying husband yet laid by his
dead wife. However, the sea-breezes freshened with their
salt tang, and far over the waters the horizon lightened towards
dawn. It was then that the spark of life awoke in Elena’s
face; she moved gently, and Gerardo, starting from his
grief, began to chafe her hands and feet. They carried her
secretly to the house of the captain’s mother; here she was
put in a warm bed, possets and food were administered ;
presently she opened her eyes, and lived. A gracious and lordly
feast was made by Messer Paolo for his son’s return, and when
all the company were assembled Gerardo entered, leading Elena
in bridal array, and kneeling at his father’s feet he said: “ Lo,
my father, I bring you my wedded wife whom I have this day


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 45


saved from death.” Great were the rejoicings, and Messer
Pictro was summoned from his house of mourning to a home
of gladness. So when the whole truth had been told him
and he welcomed back not only his dead daughter but her
husband also with a joyful heart and with thanksgiving, he
blessed the young couple, and on the morrow morn Holy
Church with solemn rite hallowed the bond of matrimony
whose joys had already been sweetly consummated.

The parallels between the two adventures are very striking.
Our main interest in the sad story of de Serres and his love,
which assuredly might have ended far otherwise, lies in the
fact that the unfortunate Gabrielle du Bourg was actually
buried as dead in her coffin, and only restored to life after
several days had passed. Occasionally epitaphs may be seen
both abroad and in England, which record some premature
burial. Such a one was placed over the tomb of a Mrs. Blunden
in the cemetery of Basingstoke, Hampshire, and this tells how
the unfortunate lady was prematurely interred, but the
original inscription is to a large extent obliterated.”* Unfortun-
ately overwhelming evidence proves that such terrible accidents
are far from rare, for Mr. William Tebb, in his authoritative
work Premature Burial’ had collected of recent years from
medical sources alone two hundred and nineteen narrow
escapes from being buried alive ; one hundred and forty-nine
premature interments that actually took place ; ten cases of
bodies being dissected before life was extinct ; three cases
in which this shocking error was very nearly made ; and two
cases where the work of embalmment had already begun when
consciousness returned.

There is no greater mistake than to suppose that most cases
of premature burial, and of escape from premature burial,
happened long ago, and that even then the majority of these
took place under exceptional conditions, and for the most
part in small towns or remoter villages on the continent.
Amazing as it may appear in these days of enlightenment,
the number of instances of narrowest escapes from premature
burial, and also of this terrible fate itself, has not decreased
of recent years, but it has, on the contrary, increased. In a
letter on page 1,104 of the Lancet, 14th June, 1884, the witness
describes in detail the appearance presented by two bodies
which he saw in the crypt of the cathedral of Bordeaux, when


|


46 THE VAMPIRE


part of the cemetery there had been dug up and many graves
_disinterred. In La Presse Médicale, Paris, 17th August, 1904,
there is an article, ‘The Danger of Apparent Death,” by
Doctor Icard of Marseilles, whose study La Mort réelle et la
Mort apparente when published in 1897 attracted great attention.
The writer, an eminent figure in the medical world, describes
in detail some twelve cases of the revival of persons who had
been certified as dead by their doctors, the body in one instance
recovering consciousness when several physicians were present
and the funeral ceremonies had actually commenced. It
should be remarked that Dr. M. K. Boussakis, Professor of
Physiology at the Faculty of Medicine of Athens, was one of
the eye-witnesses upon that occasion, and a similar case is
mentioned on the authority of Dr. Zacutus Lusitanus, who
was also present. It should be remembered that Greece is the
country where belief in the vampire still most strongly survives.

A terrible case of actual interment whilst still alive is described
in a letter published in the Sunday Times, 6th September, 1896.
Some years ago the Paris Figaro, in an article of some length
considered the terrible possibilities of being buried alive, and
within fifteen days the editor received over four hundred
letters from different parts of France, and all these were from
persons who had either themselves been buried alive, or been
on the point of being so interred, or who had escaped a premature
grave through some fortunate accident.

In September, 1895, a boy named Ernest Wicks was found
lying on the grass in Regent’s Park, apparently dead, and
after being laid out in the 8. Marylebone mortuary was brought
back to life by the keeper, Mr. Ellis. When the doctor arrived
the lad was breathing freely though still insensible, and a little
later he was removed to the Middlesex Hospital. Here the
surgeon pronounced him to be “ recovering from a fit.” At
an inquest held at Wigan, 21st December, 1902, Mr. Brighouse,
one of the County Coroners for Lancashire, remarked with
great emphasis upon the extraordinary circumstances, for he
informed the jury that the child upon whom they sat had
“died ’’ four times, and the mother had obtained no less than
three medical certificates of death, any one of which would
have been sufficient for the subject to have been buried. In
1905, a Mrs. Holden, aged twenty-eight, living at Hapton,
near Accrington, “died,’’ and the doctor did not hesitate


OP °d 200f } (Zsa AX PasNW ay? Wor)
aSduOo GALV.LIOSNSaAY AHL


> —-
; FS) ae wed Fy e2,


1] ALVI1d


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE $47


to give a certificate of death, when all the arrangements for
the funeral were made. Fortunately, the undertaker noticed
a slight twitch of the eyelids, and eventually the woman’s
life was saved, and she lived well and strong under perfectly
normal conditions. On 7th January, 1907, the Midland
Daily Telegraph reported the case of a child who “to all
intents and purposes died” whilst an operation was being
performed upon it. However, the patient who had been
certified dead more than half-an-hour before recovered. On
14th September, 1908, the papers published the details of an
extraordinary trance of a Mrs. Rees, Nora Street, Cardiff,
who appeared to have had a very narrow escape from premature
burial. To go back some forty years, there may be found fully
reported in the British Medical Journal, 31st October, 1885, the
famous case of a child at Stamford Hill who fell into convulsions
and passing into a trance was supposed to have died, recovering
consciousness only after five days. Hufeland, dealing with
these instances of trance, remarks that ‘“ Six or seven days are
often required to restore such cases. Dr. Charles Londe”
says that fits of this kind “last for days and days together,”
and that ‘‘ it seems not improbable that people may have been
buried in this state in mistake for death.” A case of exceptional
interest is described as occurring in 1883 by the Professor of
Medicine in the University of Glasgow, Dr. W. T. Gairdner.”
The person whom he was treating remained in a trance which
lasted twenty-three consecutive weeks, and so remarkable a
circumstance attracted very considerable attention at the
time, giving rise to a lengthy controversy.

It should be more widely known that the ordinary simulacra
of death are utterly deceptive and Dr. John Oswald remarks
in his profound work Suspended Animal Life,”® “in conse-
quence of an ignorant confidence placed in them [the signs
of death] persons who might have been restored to life . . .
have been consigned to the grave.” In September, 1903,
Dr. Forbes Winslow emphasized the fact that “all the appear-
ances of death may be so strikingly displayed in a person in
a cataleptic condition that it is quite possible for burial to
take place while life is not extinct,” and he added “I do not
consider that the ordinary tests employed to ascertain that
life is extinct are sufficient ; I maintain that the only satis-
factory proof of death is decomposition.”


48 THE VAMPIRE


Even from this very hasty review, and examples might be
multiplied, indeed are multiplying in every direction almost
daily, terrible truth though it may be, it is obvious that prem-
ature burial is by no means an uncommon thing, whilst recovery
from catalepsy or deep trances, sometimes lasting very many
days, is even more frequent, and such cases have been recorded
in all ages, times without number. It is, 1 think, exceedingly
probable that extraordinary accidents of this kind, which
would have been gossiped and trattled throughout large
districts, and, passing from old to young, whispered round
many a winter’s fireside, were bound soon to have assumed
the proportions of a legend which must, consciously or un-
consciously, have continually gathered fresh accretions of
horror and wonder in its train. It is possible, I say, that
hence may have been evolved some few details which notably
helped to swell the vampire tradition. I do not for a moment
wish to imply that these circumstances, which we have just
considered at some length, however striking and ghastly,
were in any way the foundation of the belief in vampires. I
would rather emphasize that the tradition goes far deeper
and contains far more dark and scathful reality than this.
I would not even suggest that premature burial and resusci-
tation from apparent death added anything essentially material
to the vampire legend, but I do conceive it probable that
these macabre happenings, ill-understood and unexplained,
did serve to fix the vampire tradition more firmly in the minds
of those who had been actual witnesses of, or who by reliable
report knew of similar occurrences, and were fearful and amazed.

There are to be read examples of persons who, after death,
have given evident signs of life by their movements. One
such case is related by Tertullian,”® who tells us that he
himself witnessed it, “de meo didici.” A young woman,
who had once been in slavery, a Christian, after she had been
married but a few months died suddenly in the very flower
of her age and happiness. The body was carried to the
church, and before it was entrusted to the earth, a service
was held. When the priest, who was saying the requiem
“ praesente cadauere,” raised his hands in prayer, to the
astonishment of all the young girl who was lying upon her
bier with her hands laid in repose at her side, also lifted her
hands and gently clasped them as if she too were taking part


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 49


in the supplication of the Mass, and then toward the end she
refolded them in the original position.

Tertullian also says that on one occasion, when a body was
about to be interred, a body which was already in the grave
seemed to draw to one side as though to make place for the
newcomer.

In the life of S. John the Almsgiver, Patriarch of Alexandria,
written by Leontius Archbishop of Cyprus, we are told that
when the saint who was aged sixty-four, died at Amanthus
in Cyprus, 11th November, 616,® his body was brought with
great veneration and holy observance to the principal church
of that place. Here was opened a magnificent tomb in which
two bishops had already been buried. It is said that out of
respect the two bodies drew one to the right and one to the
left, and that this took place in the sight of all who were
present, “non unus, neque decem, neque centum uiderunt,
sed omnis turba, quae conuenit ad eius sepulturam.” It
must be remembered that Archbishop Leontius had his facts
from those who had actually been present at the interment,
and the same account may be found in the Menology of Symeon
Metaphrastes.

Evagrius Ponticus relates*! the legend of a certain Anchorite
named Thomas, who died in the Nosokomeion at Daphne, a
suburb of Antioch, where was the shrine of the martyr 8S.
Babylas.* The hermit, a stranger, was buried in that part
of the cemetery used for beggars and the very poor. In the
morning, however, the body was found to be lying by a rich
Mausoleum in the most honourable part of the grounds. It
was again interred, but when on the following day it was found
by the sexton that the same thing had happened a second
time, the people hastened to the patriarch Ephraim®® and
told him of the marvel. Thereupon the body was borne with
great rejoicing with an attendance of wax flambeaux and
fuming frankincense into the town, and honourably enshrined
with worship meet in one of the churches, and for many
years the city annually observed the festival of the Trans-
lation of §. Thomas Eremita. The same story is related
by the ascetical writer, the monk Johannes Moschus, in
his very beautiful treatise Acudév Pratum spirituale, “The
Spiritual Meadow,’’® but Moschus says that the remains of
the hermit rested in his grave whilst in veneration for his


4


50 THE VAMPIRE


sanctity the bodies of those who were buried near had been
found to have issued forth and modestly lay at some con-
siderable distance.

In Hagiology there are many instances of the dead hearing,
speaking and moving. Thus in the life of S. Donatus, the
patron of Arezzo, who succeeded the first bishop S. Satyrus
towards the end of the third century, we are told that Eustasius,
receiver-general of the revenues of Tuscany, being called away
on a journey, for safety sake left the public funds in the hands
of his wife, Euphrosina. This lady, being afraid that her house
might be robbed, secretly buried the chests in the earth. She
told the matter to no one, but unhappily before her husband’s
return she expired suddenly in the night, and it was quite
unknown where she had concealed her charge. Eustasius
was beside himself with grief and fear, for it seemed inevitable
that he should be accused of peculation by his enemies, and
condemned to death. In his despair he betook himself to
§. Donatus, and the holy man asked him that they might
visit the grave of Euphrosina. A great company gathered
in the church, when the saint, going up to the grave, said in
a loud voice that might be heard by all: “ Euphrosina, tell
us we pray thee, where thou didst put the public funds.”
The woman answered from her tomb, and certainly her accents
were heard revealing the hiding-place. S. Donatus went with
the receiver-general to the spot indicated, and there they found
the money carefully secured.

It is related in the life of the famous Anchorite, S. Macarius
of Egypt, who died a.p. 394,°° that one of the monks of his
laura was accused of murder, and as those who lay the charge
spoke with great gravity and sureness, S. Macarius bade them
all resort to the grave of the deceased, where, striking his
staff upon the ground, he adjured the dead man in these words :
“The Lord by me bids you tell us whether this man, who is
now accused of your murder, in truth committed the crime,
or was in any way consenting thereto 4 ” Immediately a
hollow voice issuing from the tomb declared : “ Of a truth
he is wholly innocent, and had no hand at all in my death.”
“Who then,” inquired the saint, “is the guilty one ?”’ The
dead man replied: “It is not for me, my father, to bear
witness ; let it suffice to know that he who has been accused
is innocent. Leave the guilty in the hands of God. Who


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 51


can say whether the all-holy and compassionate God may not
have mercy upon him and bring him to repentance.”’*”

In the history of S. Rheticus, as related by C. Vettius
Aquilinus Juvencus, the Latin poet of the fourth century,
who was so popular in the Middle Ages,®* we are told that when
the saint had expired,® his body was carried in solemn proces-
sion to the grave of his deceased wife, and suddenly, to the
amazement of all present, the dead man arose on his bier and
said: “‘ Dost thou remember well, my dear wife, that which
thou didst ask me upon thy death-bed? Lo, here am I
come to fulfil the promise made so long syne. Receive me
then whom you have sweetly expected all this while.” At
these words it appeared as if the deceased wife, who had been
dead for many years, revived again, and breaking the linen
bands which enswathed her, she stretched forth her hands
to her husband. (Deprensa est laeuam protendens femina
palmam, inuitans socium gestu uiuentis amoris.) The corpse
was lowered into the tomb, and there the twain lie in peace,
awaiting the resurrection of the just.

Not unsimilar is the legend of 8. Injurieux, whose dead
body moved out of its own grave to repose in that of his wife
Scholastica. Injurieux was a noble senator of Clermont in
Auvergne, who married in virgin wedlock a lady of rank,
Scholastica. §. Gregory of Tours, in his Historia Francorum,”
tells us that Scholastica died first, and Injurieux, standing by
the coffin in which her body was laid, as she was about to be
carried forth to burial said in the presence of all: ‘I thank
Thee, O, God, for having bestowed upon me this maiden
treasure, which I return into Thy hands unspotted, even as
I received it.”” The dead wife smiled at these words, and her
voice was heard to reply: “ Why dost thou speak, O my
husband, of these things which concern no one but ourselves 2”
Hardly had the lady been buried in a magnificent tomb, when
the husband died also, and for some reason was temporarily
interred in a separate grave, at a distance from the monument
of his wife. On the next morning it was found that Injurieux
had left the place where he had been laid, and his dead body
teposed by the side of that of Scholastica. No man dared
disturb the two corpses, and to the present day the senator
and his wife are popularly called “The Two Lovers.”’®

In his Vies des Saints®* Monsignor Guérin relates the following


52 THE VAMPIRE


story of S. Patrick: “St. Patrice commande 4 la mort de
rendre ses victimes afin que leur propre bouche proclame
devant le peuple la vérité des doctrines qu’il leur annonce ;
ou bien il s’assure si son ordre de planter une croix sur la
tombe des chrétiens, et non des infidéles, a été fidélement
exécuté, en interrogeant les morts eux-mémes, et en apprenant
de leur bouche s’ils ont mérité ce consolant hommage.”

In this connexion—the tradition of a dead person who
speaks—the story of S. Melor may be not impertinent. About
the year 400 a.D., there was a certain Duke of Cornwall named
Melian, whose brother, Rivold, conspired against him and put
him to death. The duke had left a young son, Melor, whom
the usurper feared to slay, but sent to be brought up under
the strictest rule in one of the Cornish monasteries, where the
novice continually edified the community by his holy life,
having (so it is said) the gift of miracles. After a few years
Rivold, being afraid lest the boy should depose him, bribed
a soldier named Cerialtan to murder Melor secretly. This
was accordingly done. The assassin cut off the head of Melor,
and carried it to the duke. He had murdered the boy in the
depths of the forest, whither he had enticed him, and as he
was making his way through the thicket he chanced to look
back his eyes being attracted by a great light. And lo, all
around the body stood a company of angels, robed in white
albs, and holding in their hands tapers which glistered as
golden stars. When he had gone a little further, the wretched
murderer was overcome by parching thirst, and almost fainting
on his path he cried out in an agony: “Wretched man that I
am! I die for a draught of cool water.” Then the head of
the murdered boy spoke to him, saying: “ Cerialtan, strike
upon the grass of this lawn with thy stick, and a fountain
shall spring forth for thy need.” The man did so, and having
quenched his thirst at the miraculous well, he went swiftly
on his way. Now when the head was brought into the presence
of Duke Rivold this evil tyrant smote it with his hand, but
he instantly sickened, and three days afterwards he died. The
head was then taken back to the body and was honourably
buried with it. And not many years afterwards the relics
were translated with great worship to the town of Amesbury,
which is in Wiltshire.”

In his Histoire hagiologique du diocése de Valence, l’abbé


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE = 53


Nadal tells us that when S. Paulus®’ succeeded 8S. Torquatus
as bishop of St-Paul-Trois-Chateaux, shortly after his con-
secration a certain Jew, a common usurer, came up to him
in the streets of the city and loudly demanded a large sum of
money which, as he said, had been lent to Bishop Torquatus,
the predecessor of Paulus. In order to ascertain whether
this claim was equitable or not, 8. Paulus, robed in full ponti-
ficals, visited the tomb of 8. Torquatus in the cathedral,
and touching the place of sepulture with his crozier requested
Torquatus to declare whether the money had been repaid
or no. The voice of the dead bishop immediately answered
from the grave: “ Verily hath the Jew received his money,
returned unto him at the appointed time, with interest, ay, and
double interest.’”” The chronicles tell us that this undoubtedly
took place, for many were present and bear witness that they
both saw and heard these things.

Eugippius, who succeeded the martyr S. Vigilius in the see
of Trent, has left us a life of S. Severinus, who was one of the
last Christian bishops among the Roman inhabitants of the
district of the Danube, immediately before the withdrawal
to Italy. On one occasion S. Severinus having watched all
night by the bier of a priest named Silvanus bade him at dawn
once more speak to his brethren who longed to hear his voice,
for he had been an eloquent and fervent preacher. Silvanus
opened his eyes and the saint asked him if he wished to return
to life. But the dead man answered: “My father, detain
me no longer here I pray thee, nor delay for me that hour of
everlasting rest which those who sleep in Jesus most sweetly
enjoy.” And then, closing his eyes, in this world he woke
no more.

This happening must at once bring to mind the famous
miracle of S. Philip Neri, who was the spiritual director of
the Massimo family. In 1583 the son and heir of Prince
Fabrizio Massimo died of a fever at the age of fourteen, and
when, amid the lamentations of the bereaved parents and the
weeping relatives, S. Philip entered the room, he laid his hand
upon the brow of the youth, and called him by name. Upon
this the dead boy returned to life, opened his eyes, and sat up
in the bed. “ Art thou unwilling to die?” asked the saint.
“No,” sighed the youth gently. “ Art thou resigned to yield
they soul?” “Iam.” “Then go,” said §. Philip. “ Va,


54 THE VAMPIRE


che sii benedetto, e prega Dio per noi!” The boy sank back
on his pillow with a heavenly smile, and a second time expired.
On 16th March every year a festa is held in the family chapel
within Palazzo Massimo in memory of this miracle.

It is related in the life of S. Theodosius the Cenobite, written
by Bishop Theodore of Petra® (536), that a large sepulchre
having been made near the monastery, S. Theodosius said :
“The tomb is now finished indeed, but who will be the first
among us to occupy it ?”? Whereupon a certain monk named
Basil, falling upon his knees, prayed that this honour might
be his, and within the space of about a month, without pain
or disease, he passed away as a man who takes his rest in sleep.
Yet for full forty days afterwards S. Theodosius, at matins
and at the other hours, saw the dead monk stil] occupying
his place in the choir. It was he alone who saw the monk,
but others, especially one Aetius, heard his voice. Whereupon
Theodosius prayed that all might see the apparition of Basil,
and assuredly the eyes of all were opened so that they beheld
him in his wonted place in their midst. When Aetius would
joyfully have embraced the figure it vanished from his touch,
saying the words: “Hold, Aetius. God be with you, my
father and my brethren. But me shall ye see and hear no
more.”

It was the custom of S. Gregory, Bishop of Langres,!™ to
rise from his bed at night, when everyone else was fast in
repose, and going quietly into the church to spend several
hours at his devotions. This was long unobserved, but it
so happened that one night one of the brethren lay awake,
and he observed the bishop on his way down the corridors.
From curiosity he stole softly after him, and presently saw
him enter the Baptistry, the door of which seemed to open
to him of its own accord. For some time there was silence ;
and then the voice of the bishop was heard chanting aloud
the antiphon, when immediately afterwards many voices took
up the psalm, and the singing, decani and cantori, continued
for the space of three hours. “I, for my part,” says S. Gregory
of Tours, “think that the Saints, whose Relics were there
venerated and preserved, revealed themselves to the blessed
man, and hymned praises to God in company with him.”

Examples of later date when under exceptional conditions
dead persons have returned to life, are not infrequently to


ee


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE = 55


be found. §S. Stanislaus the Martyr, Bishop of Cracow,’


had bought for church purposes very ample estates from one
Peter. This man died some few years afterwards, whereupon
his heirs claimed the property. They had discovered that
the bishop had taken no acquittance, and accordingly as he
had no document to show in proof of his right, the courts
ordered him to return the land to the plaintiffs. But the
saint went to the tomb of the deceased, and having touched
the body he bade it to arise and follow him. Peter instantly
obeyed the summons, and this pale and ghastly figure accom-
panied the bishop into the King’s Court. Whilst all trembled
and were sore amazed Stanislaus said to the Judge: “‘ Behold,
my lord, here is Peter himself who sold me the estate. He
has come even from the grave to vindicate the truth.” In
hollow accents the phantom or corpse confirmed the statement
of the bishop in every particular, and fearful as they sat the
judges reversed their former decision. When this had been
done the figure seemed to fade away from their sight. The
body had returned to the tomb, and here it lay decently
composed, having yielded up his breath a second time.’
A not dissimilar incident is said to have occurred in the
life of S. Antony of Padua, whose father was accused at Lisbon
of having been privy to the death of a certain nobleman, even
if he had not actually slain him, as was implied. The saint,
having requested that the body of the murdered man should
be brought into court, solemnly adjured him saying: “Is
it true that my father in any way consented unto or contrived
thy assassination ?”’ With a deep groan the body made
reply: “In no wise is the accusation true. It is altogether
false and framed of malice.” Whereupon the magistrates
convinced by this positive declaration set free the prisoner.1%
On 9th March, 1463, S. Catherine of Bologna, a Poor Clare,
died at the convent there, and so great was her reputation
for sanctity that rather more than a fortnight after her burial,
her body was disinterred and placed in the church upon an
open bier for the veneration of all. The vast crowds who
came were struck with the fact that her face retained a fresh
and glowing colour, far more lively, indeed, than during her
life. Amongst others who visited the remains was a little
maid of eleven years old by name Leonora Poggi. As out of
reverence she stood at some distance, it was noticed that the


——)


56 THE VAMPIRE


body not only opened wide its eyes, but made a sign with the
hand, saying: ‘“ Leonora, come hither.” The girl advanced
trembling, but S. Catherine added: ‘“‘ Do not be afraid; you
will be a professed nun of this community, and all in the
convent will love you. Nay, more, you shall be the guardian
of this, my body.” Eight years afterwards Leonora refused
the hand of a wealthy suitor of high rank, and took the veil
in the house of Corpus Domini. Here she lived for no less
than five and fifty years, reaching an extreme old age with the
love and respect of the whole sisterhood. She was indeed
for half a century the guardian of the most holy relic of the
body of S. Catherine.

Immediately after the death of that great ecstatica, S.
Maria Maddelena de Pazzi, who expired 25th May, 1607, the
body of the holy Carmelite was honourably laid upon a cata-
falque in the nuns’ church of S. Maria degli Angeli, whilst
all Florence thronged thither to kiss her feet and touch were
it but her raiment with medals and rosaries. Among the
first who visited the convent and who were favoured by being
allowed to venerate the body before the multitude won admit-
tance was a certain pious Jesuit, Father Seripandi, and in his
company chanced to be a young man of noble family whom
he was striving to turn from the most dissolute courses. Whilst
the good priest knelt in prayer the youth scanned intently
the countenance of the Saint, but she frowning slightly gently
turned away her face as if offended at his gaze. He stood
abashed and dumbfounded, when Father Seripandi said :
“Verily, my son, this Saint would not suffer your eyes to
behold her, inasmuch as your life is so licentious and lewd.”
“Tt is true,” cried the young man, “ but God helping me I
will amend my ways in every particular.” He did so, and
before long was distinguished by no ordinary piety and obser-
vance of religion.’

Similar cases of the resuscitation of the dead, corpses that
arose from their graves, the movement of dead bodies, might
indeed be almost indefinitely multiplied. And it is not at all
impossible that as these extraordinary circumstances happened
in the lives of the Saints, so they would be imitated and
parodied by the demon, for, as ‘Tertullian has said,
‘diabolus simia Dei.”

It has been well remarked that man has always held the


—————E——————————


{


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 57


dead in respect and in fear. The Christian Faith, moreover,
has its seal upon the sanctity of death. Even from the very
infancy of humanity the human intelligence, inspired by some
shadow of the divine truth, has refused to believe that those
whom death has taken are ought but absent for a while, parted


‘but not for ever. It has been argued, and not without sound


sense, that primitive man desired to keep the dead, to preserve
the mortal shell, and what are the tomb, the cave of prehistoric
man, the dolmen of the Gaulish chieftain, the pyramid of
Pharaoh, but the final dwelling-place, the last home? As
for the actual corpse, this still had some being, it yet existed
in the primitive idea. There can be nothing more horrible,
no crime more repellent, than the profanation of the dead.

Dr. Epaulard says: “Les vraies et graves profanations,
de veritables crimes, reconnaissent pour mobile les grandes
forces impulsives qui font agir l’étre humain. Je nommerai
cela vampirisme, quitte 4 expliquer par la suite l’origine de
cette appellation.

‘** L’instinct sexuel, le plus perturbateur de tous les instincts,
doit étre cité en premiére ligne comme |’un des factcurs les
plus importants du vampirisme.

“La faim, besoin fondamental de tout étre vivant, aboutit
dans quelques circonstances 4 des actes du vampirisme. On
pourait citer maint naufrage et maint siége célébre ou la
nécessité fit loi. Le cannibalisme du bien des tribes savages
n’a pas d’autre origine que la faim & satisfaire.

Chez homme se développe énormément |’instinct de pro-
priété. D’ou le travail, d’ot, chez certains, le vol. Nous
venons de voir que la coutume de tous les temps fut d’orner
les morts de ce qu’ils aimaient 4 posséder. Les voleurs n’ont
pas hésité a dépouiller les cadavres. . . . Les parlements
et les tribunaux eurent assez souvent 4 chatier des voleurs
sacriléges,.’’106

Vampirism, then, in its extended and more modern sense,
may be understood to mean any profanation of a dead body,
and it must accordingly be briefly considered under this aspect.
“On doit entendre par vampirisme toute profanation de
cadavres, quel que soit son mode et quelle que soit son origine.”

In France there have been many cases of sacriligious theft
from the dead. In 1664 Jean Thomas was broken on the
wheel for having disinterred the body of a woman and stolen


. = ee,


58 THE VAMPIRE


the jewels in which she was buried ; and well-nigh a century
before, in 1572, a grave-digger Jean Regnault was condemned
to the galleys for having stolen jewels and even winding-sheets
from corpses. In 1823, Pierre Renaud was sentenced at
Riom for having opened a tomb with intent to steal. Not
many years after, the police captured the band “de la rue
Mercadier,” seven ruffians who made it their business to violate
graves and the vaults of rich families and who thus had stolen
gems and gold to the value of no less than 300,000 francs.
It is well-known that the notorious Ravachol forced open
the tomb of Madame de Rochetaillée in the expectation that
she had been buried in her jewels, but found nothing of this
kind, as the lady was merely wrapped in her shroud of lawn.

On 12th July, 1663, the Parliament of Paris heavily sentenced
the son of the sexton of the cemetery attached to Saint-Sulpice.
This young wretch was in the habit of exhuming corpses and
selling them to the doctors. In the seventeenth century the
Faculty of Paris was allowed one dead body a year, and the
famous physician, Mauriccau lay under grave suspicion of
having illegally procured bodies to dissect for his anatomical
studies.

In England the Resurrection Men added a new terror to
death. Even the bodies of the wealthy, when every precaution
had been taken, were hardly safe against the burgling riflers
of vault and tomb, whilst to the poor it was a monstrous
horror as they lay on their sick beds to know that their corpses
were ever in danger of being exhumed by ghouls, carted to
the dissection theatre, sold to ’prentice doctors to hack and
carve. In his novel, The Mysteries of London, G. W. M.
Reynolds gives a terrible, but perhaps not too highly coloured,
picture of these loathsome thefts. Irregular practitioners
and rival investigators in the anatomy schools were always
ready to buy without asking too many questions. Body-
snatching became a regular trade of wide activities. One of
the wretches who plied the business most successfully even
added a word to the English language. William Burke, of
the firm Burke and Hare, who was hanged 28th January,
1829,1°7 began his career in November, 1827. This seems
to have commenced almost accidentally. Hare was the keeper
of a low lodging-house in an Edinburgh slum, and here died
an old soldier owing a considerable amount for his rent. With


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 59


the help of Burke, another of his guests, they carried the
corpse to Dr. Robert Knox, of 10 Surgeon’s Square, who
promptly paid £7 10s. for it. The Scotch had the utmost
horror of Resurrection Men, and bodies were not always easy
to procure, although the vile Knox boasted that he could
always get the goods he required. It is said that relations
would take it in turns to stand guard over newly-dug graves,
and the precaution was not unnecessary. Another lodger at
Hare’s fell ill, and it was decided that he should be disposed
of in the same way. But he lingered, and so Burke smothered
him with a pillow, Hare holding the victim’s legs. Dr. Knox
paid £10 for the remains. Since money is so quickly earned
they do not hesitate to supply the wares. A friendless beggar
woman; her grandson, a dumb-mute; a sick Englishman ;
a prostitute named Mary Paterson, and many more were
enticed to the lodgings and murdered. Quite callously Burke
confessed his method. He used to lie on the body while
Hare held nose and mouth; “in a very few minutes the
victims would make no resistance, but would convulse and
make a rumbling noise in their bellies for some time. After
they had ceased crying and making resistance we let them
die by themselves.”” Dr. Knox contracted that he would
pay £10 in winter and £8 in summer for every corpse produced.
At last the whole foul business comes to light.


Up the close and down the stair,
But and ben with Burke and Hare,
Burke’s the butcher, Hare’s the thief,
Knox the boy that buys the beef.


So sang the street urchins. Burke confessed, and was hanged-
Hare turned King’s evidence, but it would seem that was
hardly needed, for the suspicion which connected these ruffians
with the numerous disappearances was overwhelming from
the first, and soon became certainty. It was a grave scandal
that both the villains and their paramours, together with
Dr. Knox, who, in spite of his denials, undoubtedly was well
aware of the whole circumstances, were not all five sent to
the gallows. It is true that the mob endeavoured to catch
them and would have torn them to pieces. To the mob they
should have been duly thrown. That they escaped by some
legal quibble or flaw speaks ill indeed for the age.


60 THE VAMPIRE


That species of Vampirism known as Necrophagy or Necro-
phagism, which is Cannibalism, is very often connected with
the religious rites of savage people and also finds a place in
the sabbat of the witches. Sir Spenser St. John, in his descrip-
tion of Haiti, gives curious details of the Voodoo cult when
cannibalism mingles with the crudest debauchery. Among
the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia the cannibals
(Hamatsas) are the most powerful of all the Secret Societies.
They tear corpses asunder and devour them, bite pieces out
of living people, and formerly they ate slaves who had
been killed for their banquet.* The Haida Indians of the
Queen Charlotte Islands practise a very similar religion of
necrophagy.°® Among the ancient Mexicans the body of the
youth whom they sacrificed in the character of the god Tetz-
catlipoca was chopped up into small pieces and distributed
amongst the priests and nobles as a sacred food." In Australia
the Bibinga tribe cut up the bodies of the dead and eat them
in order to secure the reincarnation of the deceased. The
same ceremony was observed by the Arunta.’!! Casper,
Vierteljahrschrift, viii (p. 163) mentions the case of an idiot
who killed and ate a baby in order to impart to himself
the vitality of the child. It should be remarked that necro-
phagy enters very largely into the passions of the werewolf,
and there are innumerable examples of lycanthropists who
have devoured human flesh, and slain men to feed upon their
bodies. Boguet recounts that in the year 1538 four persons
charged with sorcery, Jacques Bocquet, Claude Jamprost,
Clauda Jamguillaume and Thievenne Paget, confessed that
they had transformed themselves into wolves and in this shape
had killed and eaten several children. Frangoise Secretain,
Pierre Gandillon and George Gandillon also confessed that they
had assumed the form of wolves and caught several children
whom they had stripped naked and then devoured. The
children’s clothes were found without rent or tear in the fields,
“tellement qu’il sembloit bien que ce fust vne personne, qui
les leur eut deuestus.”}”

A remarkable instance of necrophagy which caused a great
noise in the eighteenth century is said to have given de Sade
a model for Minski, “l’ermite des Appenins,” in Juliette, iii
(p. 313). The horrible abode of this Muscovite giant is amply
described. The tables and chairs are made of human bones,


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 61


and the rooms are hung with skeletons. This monster was
suggested by Blaise Ferrage, or Seyé, who in 1779 and 1780
lived in the Pyrenees, and captured men and women whom he
devoured.1!*

One of the most terrible and extraordinary cases of canni-
balism was that of Sawney Beane, the son of peasants in
East Lothian, who was born in a village at no great distance
from Edinburgh towards the close of the fourteenth century.
He and a girl in the same district wandered away in company,
and took up their abode in a cave on the coast of Galloway.
It is said this cavern extended nearly a mile under the sea.
Here they lived by robbing travellers, and carrying off their
bodies to their lair they cooked and ate them. Eight sons
and six daughters they gendered, and the whole tribe used to
set forth upon marauding expeditions, sometimes attacking as
many as five and six persons travelling in company. Grand-
children were born to this savage, and it is said that for more
than five and twenty years these cannibals killed men on the
highway and dragging the prey to their lair fed upon human
flesh. Suspicion was often aroused, and even panic ensued,
but so skilfully had nature concealed the opening to the cave
that it was long ere the gang could be traced and captured.
The whole family were put to death amid the most horrible
torments in the year 1435 at Edinburgh. It is probable
that in the first place Beane and his female companion were
driven to necrophagy by starvation, and the horrid craving
for human flesh once tasted became a mad passion. The
children born into such conditions would be cannibalistic as
a matter of course.

Sawney Beane was made the subject of a romance—Sawney
Beane, the Man-eater of Midlothian, by Thomas Preskett Prest,
who, between the years 1840 and 1860 was the most famous
and most popular purveyor of the “ shocker ” which circulated
in immense numbers. Prest’s greatest success was Sweeney
Todd, a character who was once supposed actually to have
lived, but who is almost certainly fiction. It will beremembered
that Todd’s victims Jisanpeared through a revolving trap-door
into the cellars or hi: couse. Their bodies, when stripped
and rifled, were handed over to be used by Mrs. Lovett, who
resided next door and kept a pie-shop which was greatly
frequented. Once it so happened that the supply ran short


62 THE VAMPIRE


for a while, as Todd for some reason was unable to dispatch
his customers, and mutton was actually used in the pies.
Complaints were made that the quality of the pies had deterior-
ated, the meat had lost its usual succulence and flavour.

In a manuscript, which has never been printed," written
about 1625 by the brother of Henry Percy, ninth Earl of
Northumberland,’® George Percy, who was twice Deputy-
Governor of Virginia, and entitled A T'rewe Relatyon of the
Proceedings and Occurrences of Momente which have Happened
in Virginia from . . . 1609 untill 1612, details are given
of the terrible conditions under which the early colonists
had to live. Starvation sometimes faced them, and not only
were corpses then dug out of graves and eaten, but “one of
our colony murdered his wife . . . and salted her for
his food, the same not being discovered before he had eaten
part thereof, for which cruel and inhuman fact I adjudged
him to be executed, the acknowledgment of the deed being
enforced from him by torture, having hung by the thumbs,
with weights at his feet a quarter of an hour before he would
confess the same.”’

As is often recorded in history during long and terrible
sieges, starvation has driven the wretched citizens of a beleagured
town to devour human flesh. An example of this may be
found in the Bible, which tells us of the horrors when Jerusalem
was encompassed by Benadad of Syria during the reign of
King Joram (B.c. 892), Kings IV (A.V. Kings II), vi, 24-30:
“‘Congregauit Benadad rex Syriae, uniuersum exercitum suum,
et ascendit, et obsidebat Samariam. Factaque est fames magna
in Samaria: et tamdiu obsessa est, donec uenundaretur caput
asini octoginta argenteis, et quarta pars cabi stercoris colum-
barum quinque argenteis. Cumque rex Israel transiret per
murum, mulier quaedam exclamauit ad eum; dicens: Salua
me domine mi rex. Qui ait: Non te saluat Dominus: unde
te possum saluare ? de area, uel de torculari? Dixitque ad
cam rex: Quid tibi uis? Quae respondit : Mulier ista dixit
mihi: Da filium tuum, ut comedamus eum hodie, et filium
meum comedemus cras. Coximus ergo filium meum, et com-
edimus. Dixique ei die altera: Da filium tuum ut comedamus
eum. Quae abscondit filium suum. Quod cum audisset rex,
scidit uestimenta sua, et transibat per murum. Uiditque
omnis populus cilicium, quo uestitus erat ad carnem intrinsecus.”’


a


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE — 638


(Benadad king of Syria gathered together all his army, and went
up, and besieged Samaria. And there was a great famine
in Samaria ; and so long did the siege continue, till the head
of an ass was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth
part of a cabe of pigeon’s dung, for five pieces of silver. And
as the king of Israel was passing by the wall, a certain woman
cried out to him, saying: Save me, my lord O king. And
hesaid: If the Lord doth not save thee how can I save thee ?
Out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress ? And the king
said to her: What aileth thee? And she answered: This
woman said to me: give thy son, that we may eat him to-day,
and we will eat my son to-morrow. So we boiled my son, and
ate him. And I said to her on the next day: Give thy son
that we may eat him. And she hath hid her son. When the
king heard this, he rent his garments, and passed by upon
the wall. And all the people saw the hair-cloth which he
wore within next to his flesh.)

W. A. F. Browne, sometime Commissioner for Lunacy in
Scotland, has a very valuable paper Necrophilism, which was
read at the Quarterly Meeting of the Medico-Psychological
Association, Glasgow, 21st May, 1874. He points out that
in Ireland, under the savagery of Queen Elizabeth, when the
rich pastures were burned into a wilderness, ‘‘ the miserable
poor . . . out of every corner of the woods and glens
came creeping forth upon thin hands, for their legs could not
bear them, they looked like anatomes of death; they spoke
like ghosts crying out of their graves; they did eat the dead
carrions ; happy when they could find them; yea, they did
eat one another soon after; insomuch as the very carcasses
they spared not to scrape out of their very graves.” During
the Siege of Jerusalem by Titus, during the Plague in Italy in
450, cannibalism was rife. During a famine in France in the
eleventh century “human flesh was openly exposed for sale
in the market-place of Tournus.” A man had built a hut
in the forest of Macon and here he murdered all whom he
could entice within his doors, afterwards roasting the bodies
and feeding on them. Browne says that there came under
his notice in the West Indies two females who frequented

. A graveyards at night. It does not appear that they exhumed
bodies but they used to sleep among the tombs, and these
dark wanderings, as might be expected, thoroughly scared


64 THE VAMPIRE


the native population. He also adds: ‘The abodes of the
dead have been visited, violated ; the exhumed corpses, or
parts of them, have been kissed, caressed, or appropriated,
and carried to the homes of the ravisher, although belonging
to total strangers.” He also says: ‘“‘I was much struck,
when frequenting the Parisian asylums as a student, with the
numbers of anzemic, dejected females who obtruded upon me
the piteous confession that they had eaten human flesh,
devoured corpses, that they were vampires, etc.” Dr. Legrande
du Saulle says that in many members of a Scottish family
there appeared connate necrophagism.4® Prochaska mentions
a woman of Milan also tempted children to her house and ate
them at her leisure. A girl of fourteen, belonging to Puy de
Dréme, is described as having displayed on all occasions an
extraordinary avidity for human blood and as sucking greedily
recently inflicted wounds. The brigand Gaetano Mammone,
who long terrorized South Italy, was accustomed as a regular
habit to drain with his lips the blood of his unhappy captives.”
In another instance a man who dwelt apart in a cave in the
South of France seized a girl of twelve years old, strangled
her, violated the corpse, and then inflicting deep gashes upon
it with a knife drank the blood and devoured the flesh. He
kept the remains in his retreat but subsequently interred
them. He was judged insane.!*

In the sixteenth century there dwelt in Hungary a terrible
ogress, the Countess Elisabeth Ba’thory, who for her necro-
sadistic abominations was known as “la comtesse hongroise
sanguinaire.’” The comte de Charolais (1700-1760), ‘‘de
lugubre mémoire,” loved nothing better than to mingle murder
with his debauches, and many of the darkest scenes in Juliette
but reproduce the orgies he shared with his elder brother,
the Duke of Burgundy.

Dr. Lacassagne, in his study Vacher l’éventreur et les crimes
sadiques, Lyon-Paris, 1899, has collected many cases of necro-
sadism. Joseph Vacher, who was born at Beaufort (Isére),
16th November, 1869, was guilty of a series of crimes which
lasted from May, 1894, to August, 1897. He was tramping
during those years up and down France, immediately after
his release as cured from an asylum where he had been confined
for attempting to rape a young servant who refused his hand
in marriage. Vacher’s first crime seems to have been committed


——


PLATE III


CHILD DEVOURED BY A WILD MAN


By Luke Cranach


( face p. 64


’


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE _ 65


i 19th May, 1894, when in a lonely place he killed a working girl
: of twenty-one. He strangled her and then violated the body.
On 20th November of the same year he throttled a farmer’s
daughter aged sixteen at Vidauban (Var), violated the body
and mutilated it with his knife. In the same way on Ist
September, 1895 at Bénonces (Ain), he killed a lad of sixteen,
Victor Portalier, and slashed open the stomach. Three weeks
later he strangled a shepherd boy of fourteen, Pierre Massot-
Pellet, and mutilated the body. In all some eleven murders
with violation were traced to Vacher, the last being that of
a shepherd lad aged thirteen, Pierre Laurent, at Courzieu
(Bhéne), 18th June, 1897. The body was indescribably
hacked and bitten. Probably this maniac was guilty of many
more assaults which did not come to light.

In England thesensation caused by the mysterious mutilations
by Jack the Ripper will not easily be forgotten. The first
body was found at Whitechapel, lst December, 1887; the
second, which had thirty-nine wounds, 7th August, 1888.
On 31st of the same month a woman’s corpse was found
horribly mutilated ; 8th September a fourth body bearing the
same marks, a fifth on 30th September ; a sixth on 9th Novem-
ber. On the Ist June, 1889, human remains were dredged
from the Thames ; 17th July a body still warm was discovered
in a Whitechapel slum ; on 10th September of the same year
the last body.

The classic instance of ‘‘ vampirism,” Serjeant Bertrand,
will be fully dealt with in a later chapter.

. Andréas Bickel killed women after having both raped and
mutilated them in an indescribable manner. Dr. Epaulard
quoting from Feuerbach, Ahtenmesigen Darstellung merk-
wiirdzer Verbrechen says that Bichel declared: “ Je puis dire
qu’en ouvrant la poitrine, j’étais tellement excité que je tress-
aillais et que j’aurais voulu trancher un morceau de chair pour
le manger.” In the year 1825 a vine-dresser named Léger,
a stalwart fellow of four and twenty, left his home to find
work. He wandered about the woods for a week or more,
and was then seized with a terrible craving to eat human flesh.
“Tl rencontre une petite fille de douze ans, la viole, lui déchire
les organes génitaux, lui arrache le coeur, le mange et boit son
Sang, puis enterre le cadavre. Arrété peu aprés, il fait tranquill-
ement Vaveu de son crime, est condamné et executé.”’119


5


66 THE VAMPIRE


‘A famous case was that of Vincenzo Verzeni,'” a necro-
phagist and necrosadist, who was born at Bottanuco of an
ailing and impoverished stock and arrested in 1872 for the
following crimes : an attempt to strangle his cousin Marianna,
a girl of twelve years old ; a similar attempt to throttle Signora
Aruffi; aged twenty-seven; a similar attempt upon Signora
Gala; the murder of Giovanna Motta (les viscéres et les
parties génitales sont arrachées du corps, les cuisses lacérées,
un mollet detaché. Le cadavre est nu); the murder and
mutilation of Signora Frizoni, aged twenty-eight ; an attempt
to strangle his cousin Maria Previtali, aged nineteen. Whilst
he was committing these crimes “ pour prolonger le plaisir,
il mutila ses victimes, leur suca le sang, et détacha méme des
lambeaux pour les manger.”

Those vampirish atrocities which are urged by sexual mania
are generally classified as necrophilia and necrosadism—
“La nécrophilie est la profanation qui tend a toute union
sexuelle avec le cadavre : coit normal ou sodomique, masturb-
ation, etc. Le nécrosadisme est la mutilation des cadavres
destinée & provoquer un éréthisme génital. Le nécrosadisme
différe du sadisme en ce qu’il ne recherche pas la douleur, mais
la simple destruction d’un corps humain, Les nécrosadisme
aboutit parfois 4 des actes de cannibalisme qui peuvent prendre
le nom de nécrophagie . . . . Nécrophiles et nécrosad-
iques sont la plupart du temps des dégénéres impulsifs on
debiles mentaux, ce que prouvent leur vie antérieure et leurs
tares héréditaires. Ce sont en outre bien souvent des hommes
auxquels un contact professionel avec le cadavre a fait perdre
toute répugnance (fossoyeurs, prétres, étudiants en médicine).”’
The word nécrophilie seems, to have been first suggested by a
Belgian alienist of the nineteenth century, Dr. Guislain ;
nécrosadisme is used by Dr. Epaulard.

Necrophilia was not unknown in ancient Egypt, and was
carefully provided against as Herodotus tells us, Book II,
Ixxxix: Tdsde yuvaixas Tay éripavewy avdpar, émeay TeACUTI}TwSt,
od rapavtixa diSodor Taptxevery, odd! drat av Ewor everdées KapTa
kal Adyou TAeivos yuvaixess GANeweay TpiTaiat h TeTapraiat
yevovrat, obrw Tapadidover Toict Taptxevovot. TOUTO de ToLevor
olrw Toide elvecer, va un ot of TaptxevTal micywvTat Thee yuvake:
AaugPOjvae yap Twa pact pioryduevov vexp@ TporpaTw yuvatxds
carerev O€ Tov GudTexvov. “* Wives of noblemen and women


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE = 67


of great beauty and quality are not given over at once to
the embalmers ; but only after they have been dead three or
four days; and this is done in order that the embalmers
may not have carnal connexion with the corpse. For it is
said that one was discovered in the act of having intercourse
with a fair woman newly dead, and was denounced by his
fellow-workman.”

It was said that after Periander, tyrant of Corinth, had
slain his wife he entered her bed as a husband. In the Prazis
Rerum Criminalium of Damhouder, at the end of the sixteenth
century we have: “Casu incidit in memoriam execrandus
ille Jibidinis ardor, quo quidam feminam cognoscunt mortuam.”

A very large number of cases of necrophilia has been collected
by various authorities, of which it will suffice to give but a few
examples. “En 1787, prés de Dijon, & Citeaux, un mien
aieul, qui était médecin de cette célébre abbaye, sortait un
jour du convent pour aller voir, dans une cabane située au
milieu des bois, la femme d’un bicheron que la veille il avait
trouvée mourante. Le mari, occupé 4 de rudes travaux, loin
de sa cabane, se trouvait forcé d’abandonner sa femme qui
navait ni enfants, ni parents ni voisins autour d’elle. En
ouvrant la porte du logis, mon grand-pére fut frappé d’un
spectacle monstrueux. Un moine quéteur accomplissait l’acte
du coit sur le corps de la femme qui n’était plus qu’un
cadavre.’’!21

In 1849 the following case was reported: “Il venait de
mourir une jeune personne de seize ans qui appartenait a une
des premiéres familles de la ville. Une partie de la nuit
s6tait écoulée lorsqu’on entendit dans la chambre de la
morte le bruit d’un meuble qui tombait. La mére, dont
Vappartement était voisin, s’empressa d’accourir. En entrant,
elle appergut un homme qui s’échappait en chemise du lit de
sa fille. Son effroi lui fit pousser de grands cris qui réunirent
autour d’elle toutes les personnes de la maison. On saisit
Vinconnu qui ne répondait que confusément aux questions
qu’on lui posait. La premiére pensée fut que c’était un voleur,
mais son habillement, certains signes dirigérent les recherches
@un autre cété et l’on reconnut bientét que la jeune fille
avait été déflorée et polluée plusiers fois. L’instruction apprit
= la garde avait été gagnée a prix d’argent: et bientdt
@autres révélations prouvérent que ce malheureux, qui avait


68 THE VAMPIRE


regu une éducation distinguée, jouissait d’une trés grande
aisance et était lui—méme d’une bonne famille n’en était
pas & son coup d’essai. Les débats montrérent qu’il s’était
glissé un assez grand nombre de fois dans le lit de jeunes filles
mortes et s’y était livré 4 sa détestable passion.’

In 1857 the case of Alexandre Siméon, a necrophilist who
was always feeble-minded—he was born in 1829, a foundling—
and who eventually became wholly insane, attracted consider-
able attention. His habits were of the most revolting nature,
and “Siméon, trompant la surveillance, s’introduisait dans
la salle de morts quand il savait que le corps d’une femme
venait d’y étre déposé. La, il se livrait aux plus indignes
profanations. Il se vanta publiquement de ces faits.”

Dr. Morel, Gazette hebdomadaire de médicine et de chirurgie,
13th March, 1857, relates: ‘‘ Un acte semblable 4 celui de
Siméon a été commis a la suite d’un pari monstrueux, par
un éléve d’une école secondaire de médicine, en présence de
ses camarades. II est bon d’ajouter que cet individu, quelques
années plus tard, est mort aliéné.”’

Dr. Moreau, of Tours, in his famous study Aberrations du
sens génésique, 1880, quoting from the Lvénement, 26th April,
1875, relates an extraordinary case at Paris in which the
culprit, L——, was a married man and the father of six children.
The wife of a neighbour having died, L—— undertook to
watch in the death chamber, whilst the family were arranging
the details of the interment. ‘ Alors une idée incompréhensible,
hors nature, passa par l’esprit du veilleur de la morte. at
souffla les bougies allumées prés du lit, et ce cadavre, glacé,
raidi, déja au décomposition fut le proie de ce vampire sans
nom.” ‘The profanation was almost immediately discovered
owing to the disorder of the bed and other signs. L—— fled,
but at the instance of Dr. Pousson and the husband, who was
half mad with grief and rage, he was arrested and inquiry
made. A quel délire a-t-il obéi ?

In Les causes criminelles et mondaines, 1886, Albert Bataille
gives an account of Henri Blot, “un assez joli gargon de
vingt-six ans, a figure un peu bléme. Ses cheveux sont
ramenés sur le front, ala chien. Il porte 4 la lévre supérieure une
fine moustache soigneusement effilée. Ses yeux, profondement
noirs, enfoncés dans l’orbite, sont clignotants. Il a quelque
chose de félin dans l’ensemble de la physionomie ; quelque


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE _ 69


chosi aussi de l’oiseau de nuit.” “Le 25 mars, 1886, dans
la soirée, entre 11 heures et minuit Blot escalade une petite
porte donnant dans le cimetiére Saint-Ouen, se dirige vers la
fosse commune, enléve la cloison qui retient la terre sur la
dernieré biére de la rangée. Une croix piquée au-dessus de la
fosse lui apprend que le cercueil est le corps d’une jeune femme
de dix-huit ans, Fernande Méry, dite Carmanio, figurante de
théatre, enterrée la veille.
1] déplace la biére, l’ouvre, retire le corps de la jeune fille
qu’il emporte & |’extremité de la tranchée, sur le remblai.
La, il pose, par précaution, ses genoux sur des feuilles de papier
blanc enlevées & des bouquets et pratique le coit sur le cadavre.
Ensuite, il s’endort probablement, et ne se réveille que pour
sortir du cimitiére assez & temps pour ne pas étre vu, mais
trop tard pour replacer le corps.”” A curious point is that
when the profanation was discovered a man named Duhamel
wrote a letter avowing that he had committed the violation.
He was confined at Mazas, since he gave such full details that
he was truly believed to have been guilty. Whilst under the
observation of two doctors he proved to be of unsound mind.
On 12th June Blot again violated a tomb, he fell asleep, was
‘discovered and arrested. On 27th August, when brought to
trial, and the judge expressed his horror of such acts, he
replied callously: ‘‘ Que voulez-vous, chacun a ses passions.
Moi Je cadavre, c’est la mienne!” Dr. Motet was unable
to certify him insane, and he was sentenced to two years’
imprisonment.
Dr. Tiberius of Athens communicated the following case.
A young medical student, some seven years ago, made his
| way at night into the mortuary chapel where lay the body
of a beautiful actress who had just died, and for whom he
| had long nourished an insensate passion. Covering the cold
clay with passionate kisses he violated the corpse of his inam-
orata. It should be remarked that the body had been dressed
) in the richest costume and covered with jewels, as it was to be
| carried thus in the funeral procession.
i Necrophilia is said to be common in certain Eastern countries.
) En Turquie, dans les endroits ou les cimetiéres sont mal
gardés, on a souvent vu, pardit-il d’abjects individus, la
| lie du peuple, contenter sur des cadavres qu’ils exhumaient
leurs désirs sexuels.”’


70 THE VAMPIRE


The case of Victor Ardisson, who was called by the papers
“le vampire du Muy,” and who was arrested in 1901 upon
multiplied charges of the exhumation and violation of dead
bodies, was studied in great detail by Dr. Epaulard, who
summed up his verdict in these words: ‘“ Ardisson est un
débile mental inconscient des actes qu’il accomplit. Il a
violé des cadavres parce que, fossoyeur, il lui était facile de se
procurer des apparences de femme sous forme de cadavres
auxquels il prétait une sorte d’existence.” 14

The motive of the Leopold and Loeb case which occurred at
Chicago, and which was so widely discussed throughout America
in 1924 was necrosadism. Having killed the unfortunate boy
the two wretched degenerates violated the body. It may
not untruly be said that this morbid crime sprang in the first
place from a false philosophy. With ample money at their
command, their minds rotted with the backwash of Freud,
these two young supermen conceived themselves above all
laws. They had exhausted every erotic emotion, and sought
something new to thrill their jaded nerves. These vilenesses
and abominations would be ended by a return to the true
philosophy, the lore of the Schoolmen and Doctors.

There are not unknown—in fact there are not uncommon—
amazing cases of what may be called ‘“ mental necrophilia,”’
a morbid manifestation for which suitable provision is made
in the more expensive and select houses of accomodation.

In his study La Corruption Fin-de-Siécle Léo Taxil remarks :
“Une passion sadiste des plus effrayantes est celle des détraqués
auxquels on a donné le nom de ‘vampire.’ Ces insensés
veulent violer des cadavres. Cette dépravation du sens
génésique, dit le docteur Paul Moreau de Tours constitue le
degré le plus extréme des déviations de l’appetit vénérien.”’
He also speaks of ‘chambres funébres ” as being not uncommon
in certain brothels. ‘‘ D’ordinaire, on dispose, dans une piéce
de l’établissement des tentures noires, un lit mortuaire, en
un mot, tout un appareil lugubre. Mais l’un des principaux
lupanars de Paris a, en permanence, une chambre spéciale,
destinée aux clients qui désirent tater du vampirisme.

“Les murs de la chambre sout tendus de satin noir, parsemi
de larmes d’argent. Au milieu est un catafalque, trés riche.
Une femme, paraissant inerte, est 14, couchée dans un cercueil
découvert, la téte reposant sur un coussin de velours. Tout


—< t—tS


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 71


autour, de longs cierges, plantés dans de grandes chandeliers
d’argent. Aux quatre coins de la piéce, des urnes funéraires
et des cassolettes, brilant, avec des parfums, un mélange
d’alcool et de sel gris, dont les flammes blafardes, qui éclairent
le catafalque, donnent & la chair de la pseudo-morte la couleur


cadavérique.
“Le fou luxurieux, qui a payé dix louis pour cette séance,


est introduit. Il y a un prie-dieu o7’il s’ agenouille. Un
harmonium, placé dans un cabinet voisin, joue le Dies irae
ou le De Profundis. Alors, aux accords de cette musique
de funérailles le vampire se rue sur la fille qui simule la défunte
et qui a ordre de ne pas faire un mouvement, quoiqu’il
advienne.””

It might not unreasonably be thought that the catafalque,
the bier, the black pall, would arouse solemn thoughts and
kill desire, but on the contrary this funeral pomp and the
trappings of the dead are considered in certain circles the most
elegant titillation, the most potent and approved of genteel
aphrodisiacs.


NOTES. CHAPTER I.


1 TlopeveoGe dm éudv, karnpapévot, els rd wp 7d alwuov 7d hromacpevoy TE SaBdry
| al rots dyyéAous abrod,  Discedite a me maledicti in ignem aeternum, qui
paratus est diabolo, et angelis eius.

* See Sinistrari, De Daemonialitate, xxiv (English translation by the present
writer, Demoniality, Fortune Press, 1927, pp. 11-12), for the coitus of witches
with the demon, who assumes the corpse of a human being.

% Aneid, 11, 794. Vergil repeats this line d/neid, VI, 702.

4 S. Luke, xxiv, 39.

* P. W. Hofmayr, “Religion der Schilluk,” Anthropos (Ephemeris
Internationalis Ethnologica et Linguistica), vi (1911), pp. 120-125.

® Journal of the Anthropological Institute ; Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Notes on the

. Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” xxxi (1901), p. 180; xxxii (1902),
p. 46; and The Baganda, London, 1911.

7 Hermann Rehse, Kiziba, Land und Leute, Stuttgart, 1910.

* C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, he Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia,
London, 1911, Pp. 80, seq.

Missionar J. Irle, Die Herero, ein Beitrag zur Landes-Volks-und Missions-
kunde, Giitersloh, 1906, p. 75. 3 ij e al

1” South African Folk-lore Journal, Cape Town, 1879, I, ‘‘ Some Customs of
teen Ponies’ Ctambetond

jes, Ovamboi , Land, Leute, ission, i
pp. 198-197, nj ute, Mission, Berlin, 1911],

Sage Grey an Book.

; ev. Henry Callaway, The Religious System of the Amazulu, Natal

ringvale, ete., 1868-1870, Part II, rrkrallad

Niel 5a me in the valley of the White Nile, regard this
r being, Dengdit, as their ancestor, and according] i i
to at shrines builded in his honour. ene


72 THE VAMPIRE


16 The Baganda, London, 1911, p. 271.

16 A. Kropf, ‘“‘ Die religiédsen Anschauungen der Kaffern,”’ Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, 1888,
p. 46.

17 R. H. Nassau, Fetichism in West Africa, London, 1904.

18 Pére Guis, ‘“‘ Les Nepis ou Sorciers,” Missions Catholiques, xxxvi (1904),
p. 370. And M. J. Erdweg, ‘‘ Die Bewohner der Insul Tumleo, Berlinhafen,
Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,” Mittheilungen du Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in
Wien, xxxii (1902), p. 287.

19 Professor J. J. M. de Groot, Religious System of China, Leyden, 1892.

20 J, Welhausen, Reste arabischen Heidentumes, Berlin, 1887.

21 Servius on the A/neid, V, 77-79:

Hic duo rite mero libans carchesia Baccho
Fundit humi, duo lacte nouo, duo sanguine sacro,
Purpureosque iacit flores .

Also the same commentator on A/neid, “TH, 66-68 :
Inferimus tepido spumantia cymbia lacte
Sanguinis et sacri pateras, animamque sepulcro
Condimus et magna supremum uoce ciemus.

22 Cf. Genesis, ix, 4, and 1 Kings (A.V. 1 Samuel), xiv, 33.

*3 Both Douai and A.V.

24 X, 487, seqg.,and XI. This passage is dealt with in detail in chapter III.

25 Jeremias, xvi, 6.

26 Jeremias, xli, 5.

27 Pierre de Labriolle, Histoire de la Littérature Latine Chrétienne, Paris,
1920, Tableau No. 7 (43).

%8 Migne Patrologia Latina, vol. xxiv, column 782.

*» Cf. the grief of Anna at the death of Queen Dido, -2netd, IV, 673:

unguibus ora soror feedans et pectora pugnis.

So Homer describes Briseis at the funeral of Patroelus, Iliad, xxiii, 284-5.
"Aud atr@ xunévn, MY éxwxve, Xepol S'duvoce
Uridedr’, 75 awadhy Secphu, (5t kada wpdowra.

80 De Getarum (Gothorum) Origine et Rebus Gestis, ed. Theodor Mommsen,
Berlin, 1882, p. 124.

81 A famous example is that of Innocent VITI, ob. 25th July, 1492. Infessura
says that whilst the Pope lay dying a Hebrew physician proposed to reinvigorate
him by the transfusion of young blood. Three boys in the prime of health
and strength were selected for the experiment. Each lad received one ducat.
*“ Et paulo post mortui sunt; ludzeus quidem aufugit, et Papa non sanatus
est.”

32 Ff’, Bonney, ‘‘ On some Customs of the Aborigines of the River Darling,
New South Wales.” Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xiii (1884), p. 132.

33 There can be no doubt that the clipping of the hair was also censidered
to supply the deceased with energy and vigour. The hair was regarded by
many nations as the seat of strength. Cf. the history of Samson and Delilah.

34 Btymologie W érterbuch des Slav. spr.

35 Aschylus, Septom contra Thebas, 820-821 :

Bacidéow 5 du0cmrdpow
mémuxev aiua yai’ im, ddNjAwy dévy.
- ee Uespae, 1502: aXX ovrds ye xaramroPhoerat.
- 477,

38 Yet in early geographical notions the Ocean, dxeavés, is itself roraués,
but Homer regards Oceanus as a great River which compasses the earth’s disc,
returning into itself, dydppoos, and to Ocean are given the epithets of a
river. This idea was retained in later myths where Ocean often has the
attributes of a river-god. Cf. Euripides, Orestes, 1377-79 :

movrou, 'Qxeavos dv
Taupéxpavos dyxdNats €Xlo—
owu KuKNod XOdva.

%° Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, p. 217.

49 @eographica, ed. Casaubon, p. 19.


—
i =


: \


\ THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 73


\4 Apud Schweighauser, Epictetee Philosophie Monumenta, vol. III, and
also in Coraes, Ildpepya ‘EAAnv. Bx8d.08, vol. VIII.

42 In MSS. sometimes popuodvxiov.

4377, B. Platonis Opera, “ recognouit loannes Buenet,”’ vol. I.

44 Bernard Schmidt, Das Volksleben der Neugriechen, p. 159.

“ Lawson, Modern Greek Folklore, p. 378.

46 Ralston, Songs of the Russian People, p. 409.

_ 47 Tt may be remarked that the story of the murdered Pelops who was
served up at a banquet to the gods by his father Tantalus when Demeter,
absorbed with grief for Persephone, ate the shoulder has its locale at Elis.
As soon as the lad was restored to life the goddess supplied the missing shoulder
with one of ivory, and this relic was shown at Elis even in historical times as

us: ‘‘ Et Elide solebat ostendi Pelopis costa, quam eburncam
adfirmabant.” Historia Naturalis, xxviii, 4, vij, ed. Gabriel Brotier, Barbou,
1779, vol. V, p. 112. The reading ‘‘ costa” is just possible in this passage,
as meaning the shoulder and side. But Brotier has a gloss: “‘ Pelopsis costa.
Corrupté. In MSS. Reg. Pelopis ostiliam : in editione principe, Pelopis hasta.
Emendauere recentiores, Pelopis costa. Legendum potius, Pelopis scapula.
Est enim teste Uergilio, Georg. III, 7.

Humero Pelops insignis eburno.”

One might suggest that in the editio princeps hasta was pro pene; trans-
latum a re militari, quod frequentissimum. Ausonius, Cento nuptialis, 117,
has: “‘ Intorquet summis adnixus uiribus hastam.” Joannes Secundus in his
Epithalamium writes :

Hue, illuc agilis feratur hasta,
cerebro furibunda uerset ictu

Non Martis soror, ast amica Martis

Semper laeta nouo cruore Cypris.

‘8 This belief seems mainly confined to Elis. Curtius Wachsmutt, Das alte
Griechenland im Neuen, p. 117.

ld is not recorded by Du Cange ; nor by Forcellini, ed. Furlanetto
and De-Vit, 1871; nor in the Petit Supplement by Schmidt, 1906.

50 1586-1669.

®t Relation de ce qui s’est passé de plus remarquable a Sant-Erini Isle de
v Archipel, ort Vétablissement des Peres de la compagnie de Jesus en icelle,
E aris, MDCL .

be 3 Semmens Hic Liber cui Titulus, The Present State, @c. Car. Trumball
Rev. in Christo Pat. ac Dom. Gul. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Dom. Ex Aid. Lamb,
8 Feb. 1673. Term Catalogues ; Easter (May), 1629.

*§ Rohr also wrote with John Henry Rumpel, De Spiritibus in fodinis
apparentibus, seu de Uirunculis metallicis, the first edition of which seems to
be 4to, 1668, but I have only seen those of Leipzig, 1672 and re-issue 1677.
= 8vo, tk He also wrote Philosophicae et Christianae Cogitationes de

* I have used the “ Nouvelle édition revie, corrigée and augmentée par
PAuteur.” 2 vols., Paris, Chez Debure Vainé, 1751. ; :

Vols TT, p.:2.

57 Life by Gradius in Mai, Bibliotheca Noua Patrum, vi, Rome, 1853; see
also L d’s Bibliographie hellénique du xvii siécle, Paris, 1893.

sad _Seuto circumdabit te ueritas eius: non timebis a timore nocturno.
A sagitta uolante tia negotio perambulante in tenebris: ab incursu, et

meridiano. 'salm xe.

*® Of uncertain authorship.

“° In Greece at the present day a funeral usually concludes with a distribu-
tion of baked-meats and wine to the company assembled by the grave, and
share both of food and of drink is set aside for the dead. Frequently this
is more than a light collation, and the cemetery is the scene of many a

| meal. These repasts are generally known as paxapla, whilst the
| Supper to relatives and friends which follows at home in the evening is ti
| ‘ “ P rg he
a comforting,” or rd ferrdv, “ the warming.”
discourse on the temptation of Our Lord. Homilia xvi in Evangelium.


74 THE VAMPIRE


62 Such apparitions are frequent. See Faber’s The Foot of the Cross : or,
The Sorrows of Mary, Fourth Edition, 1872, p. 209, Le Vicomte Hippolyte de
Gouvello’s Apparitions d’wne dme du Purgatoire en Bretagne, Téqui, Paris,
4me édition, 1919, may be read with profit. Dante says, Purgatorio, xi, 34-36 :

Ben si dee loro aitar lavar le note,
che portar quinci, s} che mondi e lievi
possano uscire alle stellate rote.

83 W.W. Story, Roba di Roma, 8vo, London, 1863, remarks: ‘“‘ Saturday
is considered lucky by the Italians, as the day of the Virgin.” Ona Saturday
the sun always shines, if it be but fora moment. Orlando Pescetti, Proverbi
Italiani, 12mo, Venice, 1603, has: ‘‘ Ne donna senza amore ne Sabbato
senza sole.” The Spaniards have a similar proverb, and the French rhyme
runs:

En hiver comme en été
jamais Samedi n’est passé
qué le soleil n’y ait mis son nez.
Aveyron, Proverbes et Dictous Agricoles de France, 12mo, Paris, 1872, quotes
several saws to this effect. In the Cété d’Or, Meuse, they say :
Le soleil fait par excellence
le Samedi la révérence.
Another proverb runs :
Il n’y pas de Samedi sans soleil
ni de viele sans conseil.

“4 The Glories of Mary. “Practices of Devotion. . . ~. Fourth
Devotion, of Fasting.”

°° De Passione Domini, c. ii.

88 Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, pp. 221-222.

67 F. §. Krauss, ‘‘ Vampyre im sidslavischen Volksglauben,”’ Globus, lxi
(1892), p. 326, says that in some parts of Bosnia, when peasant women pay &
visit of condolence to a house, in which a death has occurred they put a little
sprig of hawthorn behind their headcloth, and on leaving the house throw
away the flower into the street. The vampire will be so busy gathering together
the leaves and picking up the buds that he will not be able to follow them to
their own homes.

68 1526-1585. See G. Dejob, Marc-Antoine Muset, Paris, 1881.

° Historia Naturalis, VII, liii, 52.

70 31st October, 1885, p. 841.


7p. 80.

* Horace Welby, The Mysteries of Life and Death.

72 In Monsignor’s Benson’s A Winnowing, 1910, Jack Weston dies, and
returns tolife. But his death would have dissolved the contract of matrimony,
a point not appreciated by the author.

74 Cooper’s The Uncertainty of the Signs of Death.

75 Second Edition by Walter R. Hadwen, M.D., London, 1905.

78 La Morte Apparente, p. 16.

= Lancet, 22nd December, 1883, pp. 1078-80.

. 65.

9 De Anima, v.

80 Ag this is the feast of 8. Martin some Martyrologics transfer the com-
memoration of 8S. John Eleemosinarius to 28rd January, others to 3rd
February, and a few assign 13th July. Among the Greeks 1lth November
is the feast of S. Mennas, so S. John is transferred to the following day.

81 Born circa 345; died 399. One of the most important ascetical writers
of the fourth century. His works will be found in Migne, Patrologia Graeca,
xl. It must be noted, however, that 8S. Jerome (Hpistola 133 ad Ctesiphontem,
i i charges him with Originistic errors and deems him the precursor of

elagius.

82 §, Babylas, Bishop of Antioch, with other Christians, suffered during the
Decian persecution, 250 a.p. His burial-place was very celebrated. Cesar
Gallus built a church dedicated in the Martyr’s honour at Daphne to put an
end to the abomination and demonism of the famous Temple and oracle there.


THE ORIGINS OF THE VAMPIRE 75


The bones of the Saint being transferred to the new fane Apollo’s oracle ceased.
When Julian the Apostate consulted his pagan god no answer was received.
The Holy Relics of S. Babylas in after years were carried to Cremona. His
feast is kept on 24th January ; by the Greeks 4th September.

83 Ephraim of Antioch succeeded Euphrasius as Patriarch, 527. He
distinguished himself as one of the defenders of the Faith of Chalcedon (451)
against the Monophysites. Most of his writings are lost. He died in 545.

84 First edited by Frouton du Duc in Auctarium biblioth. patrum, II, 1057-
1159, Paris, 1624. Cotelier issued a superior text in Ecclesiae Grace Monu-
menta, II, Paris, 1681; and this has been reprinted by Migne, Patres Graeci,
lxxxvii, 111, 2851-3112, who in the Patres Latini, lxxiv, 121-240, also reprints
the Latin version of Blessed Ambrogio Traversari, first published at Venice,
1475 ; at Vicenza 1479.

85 Edward Kinesman, Lives of the Saints, 1623, p. 591.

86 There are two Saints of this name. Both are commemorated together
by the Greeks on 19th January. The Roman Martyrology commemorates
§. Macarius of Alexandria on 2nd January; and S. Macarius the Egyptian
on 16th January.

8? Mer. Guérin, Les Petits Bollandistes, vol. I, 2nd January.

88 Editions by Marold in the Bibliotheca Trubneriana, Leipzig, 1886; and
by Hiimer Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticonon latinorum, Vienna, 1891.

® 15 May, 334.

% This work may be spurious. Migne, Patres Latini, XIX, p. 381.
(Appendix ad opera Iuuenct.)

® Arndt and Krusch, Scriptores Renum Merouingiuanum in Monumenta
Germ. Hist. (1884-5), I, pt. 1, pp. 1-30. Historia Francorum, I, xlii.

*2 There is a poem by Guerrier de Dumast, ‘‘ The Tomb of the Two Lovers
of Clermont,”’ 1836.

% Vol. III, p. 476.

*4 387-493.

* The English Martyrologies commemorate 8. Melor on 3rd January, though
he was killed on lst October, under which date he is mentioned by Usuardus,
a monk of St. Germain-des-Prés, who died in 876. The best edition of
Usuardus is that of Solerius, Antwerp, 1714-1717. The feast of S. Melor is
3rd October, possibly because S. Rémi is lst October. Although I have given
the old English legend it is probable that S. Melor belonged to Brittany, not
Cornwall. “* L’ ue de Cornouaille ”’ (in Brittany) is referred to as “‘ tuteur
dévoué de Saint Mélar.” The shrine of S. Melor is at Lanmeur, some ten
miles from Morlaix. He is buried in the crypt of this church, and here is
venerated his statue. There can be no doubt that important Relics of the
Saint were given to Amesbury, and in Les Vies des Saints de la Bretagne we
read: ‘‘ Plusiers reliques de Saint Mélor passerent a differentis Eglises qui
les demandérent; Orleans, Meaux (chez les chanoines réguliers de Notre
Dame de Chiyes), Ambresbury en Angleterre (dans un Monastére de

), ete. *‘* There is an old fresco of 8. Melor on a pillar of Amesbury
Church. I am indebted to the Vicar of Amesbury for this item of
information. See A Pilgrimage to the Shrine of S. Melor.

= a 1855.

ichesne puts S. Paulus in the fourth or the sixth century.

* This miracle forms the subject of a fine canvas by Pomarancio in the
Oratorian Chiesa Nuova, 8. Maria Vallicella. The room, now converted into
a chapel, where the miracle took place is on the second floor of the Palazzo
Massimo. Under the date 16th March is the Diario Romano we have the entry:
Pa banat sare il eee. Marinus al Corso Vittorio Emanuele festa di
= , mr i ; ;
vita Paolo Massimo (1 (1583). racolo col quale il santo fece ritornare in

Petra is a titular metropolitan see of Palaestrina Tertia. In the seventh
century it was a flourishing monastic centre, but commercially the city had


we Pic life was written by S Gregory of Tours. The date of his death
Ww F ‘ e e date of his th i
uncertain. says 524, which must be incorrect. Some Gallican


76 THE VAMPIRE


Martyrologies have 535, but S. Gregory of Langres was present that year at
the Council of Clermont, and in 538 by his deputy, Evantius the priest, he
signed the decrees of the third Council of Orleans. However since he did not
appear at, nor send a deputy to the fourth Council of Orleans, 541, it is
probable that the see was then vacant by his death.

101 He was murdered 8th May, 1079, and canonized in 1253.

102 Flos Sanctorum by Pedro de Ribadeneira, S.J.

103 Lives of the Saints, 1623, by Edward Kinesman.

104 Vita di S. Caterina di Bologna, by Fra Paleotti, O.M. The body of
8. Catherine, which is still incorrupt, I have often venerated at the Convent
of Poor Clares, Bologna.

105 La Santa di Firenze da una Religiosa del suo Monastero, Firenze, 1906.
The incorrupt body of 8S. Maria Maddalena de Pazzi now lies under the High
Altar of the Carmelite Convent, Piazza Savonarola, Florence.

106 Hpaulard, Le Vampirisme, pp. 4-5.

107 Tt is said that an old blind man who used to beg in Regent Street, London,
was to be identified with Hare. He at length became a charge on the parish
in London, where he was sent since he had been born at Carlingford, Co.
Louth, to the workhouse at Kilheel, Co. Down, and here he ended his days,
being buried among the other paupers in the ‘“‘ Workhouse Banks.”’ The
graves lie east and west, but Hare’s grave, owing, it is said, to the doctor’s
directions, was dug north andsouth. Thisisa mark ofinfamy. It is unlucky
to be buried on the north side of the churchyard, called the devil’s side, says
Robert Hunt in his Popular Romances of the West of England, or the Drolis,
Traditions and Superstitions of Old Cornwall, London, 8vo, 1865, It has been
noted that graves facing north and south are found at Cowden (Kent) and
Bergholt (Suffolk), and are reported to be the tombs of suicides.

108 Fr. Boas, “‘ The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the U.S. National Museum for 1895, Washington,
1897; pp. 610 and 611.

109 G. M. Dawson, Report on the Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878 ; Montreal,
1880; pp. 125B; 128B.

0 Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana, lib. x. c. 14, vol. II, pp. 259 seq. ;
Madrid, 1723. See also Brasseur de Bourbourg, Histoire des Nations civiliséco
du Mexique et de ’ Amérique Centrale, Paris, 1857-1859 ; vol. III, pp. 510-512.

41 Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 473-475.

112 Boguet, Discours des Sorciers, c. xlvii. Lyons, 1603, p. 163.

113 A, Moll, Recherches sur la “‘ libido sexualis,’’ Berlin, 1898, p. 701.

ut From Petworth House, Sussex. In Sotheby’s sale, 23 and 24 April,
1928.
1S 1564-1632.

us “ Essai sur l’Anthropophagie,” par M. le Dr, Legrande du Saulle.
Annales Medico-Psychologiques, 3™ Series ; t. viii; p. 472, July, 1862.

u7 William Hilton Wheeler, Brigandage in South Italy, 1864.

us Causes Célébres, Paris, t. vii, p. 117.

119 Georget, Hxamen médical des proces criminels des nommés Léger, etc., 1825.

120 Cesare Lombroso, Verzeni e Agnoletti, Rome, 1873. There is a more
recent study by Pasquale Ponta, I pervertimenti sessuali nel uomo e Vincenzo
Verzeni strangalatore di donne, 1893.

121 Michéa, Union médicale, 17 juillet, 1849.

122 Brierre de Boismont: Gazette médicale, 21 juillet, 1849.

123 Baillanger, ‘‘ Rapport du Dr. Bédor de Troyes’ ; Bulletins del’ Académie
de médicine, 1857.

24 Vampirisme, pp. 20-37.

125 §me mille, pp. 236-245. It may be said that Taxil’s evidence is suspect.
But not upon these subjects. Moreover his statements find ample support
in other writers.


CHAPTER II
Tue GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE


Ir may now be asked how a human being becomes or is trans-
formed into a vampire, and it will be well here to tabulate
the causes which are generally believed to predispose persons
to this demoniacal condition. It may be premised that as
the tradition is so largely Slavonic and Greek many of these
causes which are very commonly assigned and accredited in
Eastern Europe will not be found to prevail elsewhere.

The Vampire is one who has led a life of more than ordinary
immorality and unbridled wickedness ; a man of foul, gross and
selfish passions, of evil ambitions, delighting in cruelty and
blood. Arthur Machen has very shrewdly pointed out that
“Sorcery and sanctity are the only realities. Each is an
ecstasy, a withdrawal from the common life.” The spiritual
world cannot be confined to the supremely good, “ but the
supremely wicked, necessarily, have their portion in it. The
ordinary man can no more be a great sinner than he can be a
great saint. Most of us are just indifferent, mixed-up creatures ;
we muddle through the world without realizing the meaning
and the inner sense of things, and, consequently our wicked-
ness and our goodness are alike second-rate unimportant . . .
the saint endeavours to recover a gift which he has lost ;
the sinner tries to obtain something which was never his. In
brief, he repeats the Fall . . . it is not the mere liar who
is excluded by those words? ; it is, above all, the “ sorcerers ””
who use the material life, who use the failings incidental to
material life as instruments to obtain their infinitely wicked
ends. And let me tell you this; our higher senses are so
blunted, we are so drenched with materialism, that we should
a fail to recognize real wickedness if we encountered

, Huysmans has said in La Bas: “Comme il est trés difficile
d’étre un saint, il reste & devenir un santanique. C’est un


77


78 THE VAMPIRE


des deux extrémes. On peut avoir l’orgueil de valoir en
crimes ce qu’un saint vaut en virtus.”

It has been said that a saint is a person who always choses the
better of the two courses open to him at every step. And so
the man who is truly wicked is he who deliberately always
choses the worse of the two courses. Even when he does things
which would be considered right he always does them for some
bad reason. To identify oneself in this way with any given
course requires intense concentration and an iron strength of
will, and it is such persons who become vampires.

The vampire is believed to be one who has devoted himself
during his life to the practice of Black Magic, and it is hardly
to be supposed that such persons would rest undisturbed,
while it is easy to believe that their malevolence had set in
action forces which might prove powerful for terror and
destruction even when they were in their graves. It was
sometimes said, but the belief is rare, that the Vampire was
the offspring of a witch and the devil.

Throughout the trials and in the confessions of witches there
are many details of the coitus of the devil and the witch, but
those examples given by Henri Boguet in his great and authori-
tative work Discours des Sorciers (Third edition, Lyons, 1590)
may stand for many. He devotes Chapter XII to the connex-
ion of the devil and the witch: “ L’accouplement du Demon
avec la Sorciere et le Sorcier . . . 1. Le Demon cognoit
toutes les Sorcieres, & pourquoy. 2. Ilse met aussi en femme
pour les Sorciers, & pourquoy. 3. Autres raisons pour les
quelles le Demon cognoit les Sorciers, & Sorcieres.’’ More
than one witch acknowledged that Satan had known her
sexually, and in Chapter XIII Boguet decides: ‘ L’accouple-
ment de Satan auce le Sorcier est réel and non imaginaire.

Les uns donc s’on mocquét . . . mais les con-
fessions des Sorciers que j’ay eu en main, me font croire qu’il
en est quelque chose. Lautant qu’ils ont tout recogneu,
quwils auoient esté couplez auec le Diable, & que la sem-
euce qu il iettoit estoit fort froide . . . Iaquema Paget
adioustoit, qu’elle auoit empoigné plusiers fois auec la main
le mébre du Demon, qui la cognoissoit, & que le membre
estoit froid comme glace, lég d’un bon doigt, & moindre en
grosseur que celuy d’vn homme: Tieuenne Paget, & Antoine
Tornier adioustoient aussi, qui le membre de leurs Demons


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 79


estoit long, & gros comme l’un de leurs doigts.” That
eminent scholar and demonologist, Ludovico Maria Sinistrari,
O.8.F., tells us in his De Demonialitate “it is undoubted
by Theologians and philosophers that carnal intercourse
between mankind and the Demon sometimes gives birth to
human beings; and that is how Antichrist is to be born,
according to some doctors, for example, Bellarmine, Suarez,
and Thomas Malvenda. They further observe that, from
a natural cause, the children thus begotten by Incubi are tall,
very hardy and bloodily bold, arrogant beyond words, and
desperately wicked.” §. Augustine, De Ciuitate Dei, XV, 23,
says: ‘“‘Creberrima fama est multique se expertos uel ab
eis, qui experto essent, de quorum fide dubitandum non
esset, audisse confirmant, Siluanos et Panes, quos uulgo
incubos uocant, inprobos saepe extitisse mulieribus et
earum adpetisse ac perigisse concubitum; et quodsam
daemones, quos Dusios Galli nuncupant, adsidue hanc
immunditiam et tentare et efficere, plures talesque ad-
seuerant, ut hoc negare impudentiae uideatur.” ‘‘ And
seeing it is so general a report, and so many view it either from
their own experience or from others, that are of indubitable
honesty and credit, that the sylvans and fawns, commonly
called incubi, have often swived women, desiring and acting
carnally with them ; and that certain devils whom the Gauls
called “Duses’ do continually practise this uncleanness and
lure others to it, which is affirmed by such persons and with
such weight that it were the height of impudence to deny
it.” Charles René Billuart, the celebrated Dominican
(1685-1757) in his T’ractatus de Angelis tells us: ‘The same
evil spirit may serve as a succubus to a man, and as an in-
cubus to a woman.” The great authority of S. Alphonsus
Liguori in his Prawis confessariorwm, VII, n. iii, lays down:
Some deny that there are evil spirits, incubi and succubi,
but writers of weight, eminence and learning, for the most
part lay down that such is verily the case.” Sinistrari, as we
have noted, says that the children born of the devil and a
witch are “desperately wicked,” and we have just seen that
persons of more than ordinarily evil life are said to become
Vampires.
wee the exception of England,—for witches were invari-


among us,—the universal penalty for witchcraft


80 THE VAMPIRE


was the stake ; and cremation, the burning of the dead body,
“is considered to be one of the few ways, and perhaps the most
efficacious manner, in which vampirism can be stamped out
_and brought to anend. That witches were hanged in England
is a fact which has often been commented upon with some
surprise, and persons who travelled in France and Italy were
inclined to advise the same punishment should be inflicted
at home as in all other countries. It was felt that unless the
body were utterly consumed it might well prove that they
had not stamped out the noxious thing. In Scotland, in
1649, when Lady Pittadro, who was incarcerated upon a
charge of sorcery, died before her trial, her body was buried
in the usual way. But considerable excitement followed
and there were instant complaints to those in high places since
the Scotch General Assembly considered that the body
should have been burned and the following entry occurs
among the records: “Concerning the matter of the buriall
of the Lady Pittadro, who, being under a great scandall of
witchcraft, and bein incarcerat in the Tolbuith of this burgh
during her triall before the Justice, died in prison. The
Commission of the General Assembly, having considered the
report of the Committee appointed for that purpose, Doe
give their advyse to the Presbyterie of Dumferling to show
their dislike of that fact of the buriall of the Lady Pittadro, in
respect of the manner and place, and that the said Presbyterie
may labour to make the persons who hes buried her sensible
of their offence in so doeing ; and some of the persons who
buried hir, being personallie present, are desired by the
Comission to show themselvis to the Presbyterie sensible of
their miscarriage therein.’”* Again in 1652 some persons
who had been resident in France and who probably had
followed the famous prosecutions at Louviers expressed their
surprise that in England the gallows and not the stake was
the penalty for this species of crime. In the Louviers case,
a horrid record of diabolism, demoniac masses, lust and blas-
phemy, on 21 August, 1647, Thomas Boullé, a notorious
Satanist, was burnt alive in the market-square at Rouen,
and what is very notable the body of Mathurin Picard who
had died five years before, and who had been buried near the
choir grille in the chapel of the Franciscan nuns which was so
fearfully haunted, was disinterred, being found (so it is said)


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE - 81


intact. In any case it was burned to ashes in the same fire
as consumed the wretched Boullé and it seems probable that
this corpse was incinerated to put an end to the vampirish
attacks upon the cloister. At Maidstone, in 1652, ‘ Anne
Ashby, alias Cobler, Anne Martyn, Mary Browne, Anne
Wilson, and Mildred Wright of Cranbrooke and Mary Read,
of Lenham, being legally convicted, were according to the
Laws of this Nation, adjudged to be hanged, at the common
place of Execution. Some there were that wished rather
they might be burnt to Ashes ; alledging that it was a received
opinion among many, that the body of a witch being burnt,
her bloud is prevented thereby from becomming hereditary to
her Progeny in the same evill.’’*

It is even recorded that in one case the witch herself con-
sidered that she should be sent to the stake. A rich farmer
in Northamptonshire had made an enemy of a woman named
Anne Foster. Thirty of his sheep were discovered dead with
their “Leggs broke in pieces, and their Bones all shattered
in their Skins.” Shortly after his house and several of his
barns were found ablaze. It was suspected that Anne Foster
had brought this about by sorcery. She was tried upon this
charge at Northampton in 1674, and “ After Sentence of
Death was past upon her, she mightly desired to be Burned ;
but the Court would give no Ear to that, but that she should
be hanged at the Common place of Execution.’”®

These two categories are those to which, it is generally
believed, cases of vampirism may be assigned, and the remain-
ing classes are almost entirely peculiar to Czecho-Slovakia,
Jugo-Slavia, Greece and Eastern Europe.

_ The vampire is believed to be one who for some reason is
buried with mutilated rites. It will be remarked that this
idea has a very distinct connexion with the anxious care taken
by the Greek and Roman of classical times that the dead should
be consigned to the tomb with full and solemn ceremony.
Example might be multiplied upon example and it will suffice
to refer to the passage in the /liad where the soul of Patroclus
18 represented as urgently demanding the last ceremonial
es at the tomb.


Hs Sleep’st thou, Achilles, mindless of thy friend,
eglecting, not the living, but the dead ?
Hasten my funeral rites, that I may pass


82 THE VAMPIRE


Through Hades’ gloomy gates ; ere those be done,

The spirits and spectres of departed men

Drive me far from them, nor allow to cross

Th’ abhorred river ; but forlorn and sad

I wander through the wide-spread realms of night.

And give now thy hand, whereupon to weep ;

For never more, when laid upon the pyre,

Shall I return from Hades ; never more,

Apart from all our comrades, shall we two,

As friends, sweet counsel take ; for me, stern Death,

The common lot of man, has op’d his mouth ;

Thou too, Achilles, rival of the Gods,

‘Art destin’d here beneath the walls of Troy

To meet thy doom ; yet one thing must I add,

‘And make, if thou wilt grant it, one request.

Let not my bones be laid apart from thine,

Achilles, but together, as our youth

Was spent together in thy father’s house,

Since first my Sire Mencetius me a boy

From Opus brought, a luckless homicide,

Who of Amphidamas, by evil chance,

Had slain the son, disputing o’er the dice :

Me noble Peleus in his house receiv 'd,

And kindly nurs’d, and thine attendant nam’d ;

So in one urn be now our bones enclos’d,

The golden vase, thy Goddess-mother’s gift.”
Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift to foot :

“ Why art'thou here lov’d being ? why on me

These several charges lay ? whate’er thou bidd’st

Will I perform, and all in one short embrace,

Let us, while yet we may, our grief indulge.”
Thus as he spoke, he spread his longing arms.

But nought he clasp’d ; and with a wailing cry,

Vanish’d, like smoke, the spirit beneath the earth.®


Having slain her husband the atrocious Clytemnestra heaps
sin upon sin and outrages not merely all decent feeling and
human respect, but in some mysterious way insults the majesty
of heaven itself in that, a supreme act of wanton insolence,
she “ dared to lay her husband in the tomb without mourning
and without lamentation or dirge,” for an adequate show of
outward grief was considered an essential and religious part
of any Greek funeral. In bitter accents Electra cries :’

iw data
advrodue warep, Satars év éxopats
dvev woduray dvaxr’,


dvev 5 wevOnudrwv
érdas dvoluwxror dvdpa Odwar,


ENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE = 83


phocles has shown us in that great drama which
without reason consider the supremest excellence
tragedy, the heroism of Antigone carries her to
dauntless strength in this cause of divine charity.
vatter a few handfuls of dust upon her brother’s body
ich lies unburied on the Theban plain, she gladly lays
her own life, she flouts the man-made law of a weak
ous tyrant, resisting him to his very face, calmly as in
ty bound without vaunt or show of audacity, appealing
the petty and precisian tribunals of a day to the eternal
ent-seat of powers more ancient and more awful
an the throne of Zeus himself, casting away her plighted

h to Hemon as though it were a trifle, and less than a
of no account, going gladly and serenely to her tragic
This contempt of human ordinances, this icy despising
n passions, of love itself, give the figure of Antigone
hing statuesque, something superbly cold in the very
iness of her nobility, and remind us, although in her
detachment even she, the purest Greek maiden, is far
elow the Spanish mystic, of S. Teresa, who in pages

chilly as ice, yet glow like fire, descants upon the
of human affections and the inflexible demand of the
Jaw. So in the grand yet hard enthusiasm of Antigone
no room for sentiment. The only touches which
m some concession to human weakness but serve
the absence of romantic sympathies more notable
® terrible. In a passage of the Kommos she bewails
Virgin knot untied, yet she has no more than some
8 to throw away upon her betrothed :


© irra’ Afuov, ds o'dryudter Trarhp.


we consider the steadfastness and inflexible purity
urpose we shall to some extent realise how tremendous
deal that inspired her, and we are able to appreciate
it seemed fitting to a Greek should be paid for the
ritual performance of the last duties to the dead.
tells us that Lysander’s honour was for ever
not because he put to death certain prisoners of
ecause “he did not even throw handfuls of earth
ead bodies.” It will be remarked that to the
even this symbolism of inhumation sufficed, if


a


84 THE VAMPIRE


nothing more could be done. Such indeed was the minimum
but it was enough, and this little ceremony was by Attic
Law enjoined upon all who happened to chance upon a corpse
that lay unburied. To us it would seem wholly inadequate,
if not nugatory and vain, but to the Greeks—and who knows
how much wiser they were in this than are we +—this act
had a mystical significance, for it was as Ailian has so happily
expressed it “ the fulfilment of some mysterious law of piety
imposed by nature.’”? It was even believed that animals
when they came upon the dead of their kind, would scrape
with their paws a little earth over the body. To the modern
man burial in the earth, or it may be cremation, is a necessary
and decorous manner for the disposal of the dead. Yet in
the Greek imagination these rites implied something far
more, and they involved a certain provision for the welfare
of that which was immaterial but permanent, the spirit
or the soul. So long as the body remains the soul might
be in some way tied and painfully linked with it, a belief
which as we have noted, was held by Tertullian and many
her of the early writers. But the dissolution of the body
/riencs that the soul was no longer detained in this world
where it had no appointed place, but that it was able to pass
without let or hindrance to its own mansion prepared for it
and for which it was prepared. Of old, men dutifully assisted
the dead in this manner as a pious obligation, and as we have
seen in the most famous case of all, that of Antigone, they were
prepared to go to any length and to make any sacrifice to
fulfil this obligation. It was in later years, especially under
the influence of Slavonic tradition that not only love but fear
compelled them to perform this duty to the dead, since it was
generally thought that those whose bodies were not dissolved
might return, reanimated corpses, the vampire eager to satisfy
his vengeance upon the living, his lust for sucking hot reeking
blood, and therefore the fulfilment of these funeral duties was a
protection for themselves as well as a benefit to the departed.
Very closely linked with this idea is the belief that those
persons become vampires who die under the ban of the church,
that is to say who die excommunicate. Excommunication
is the principal and most serious penalty that the Church
can inflict, and being so severe a penalty it naturally pre-
supposes some very grave offence. It may be roughly defined


&
3 GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 85


inishment that deprives the guilty of all participation
mmon spiritual benefits enjoyed by all the members
Christian society. There are certainly other cor-
measures which entail the loss of certain particular
and among these are such censures as suspension for
nterdict for clerics and laymen and whole communities,
arity ex delicto,and others. The excommunicated person
| not cease to be a Christian, for his baptism can never be
sd but he is considered as an exile, and even, one may say,
-existing, for a time at any rate, in the sight of ecclesi-
al authority. But such exile comes to an end, and this
Church most ardently desires, so soon as the offender has
on adequate satisfaction, yet meantime his status is that
on alien and a stranger.
excommunication is the forfeiture of the spiritual
s of a certain society, it follows that those only can be
unicated who by any right whatsoever belong to this
p Moreover, strictly speaking, excommunication can
be declared against baptized and living people, a point
considered in detail later. Moreover, in order to fall
the jurisdiction of the forum externum, which alone
ict excommunication, the offence incurring this
tust be public and external. For there is a well-
a separation between those things appertaining to the
externum, or public ecclesiastical tribunal, and the
miernum, or tribunal of conscience. At the same
the Bull “ Exsurge Domine,” 16th May, 1520, Leo X,
condemned the twenty-third proposition of Luther
§ to which “excommunications are merely external
ents, nor do they deprive a man of the common
prayers of the Church.” Pius VI, “ Auctorem Fidei,”
gust, 1794, also condemned the forty-sixth proposition
pseudo-synod of Pistoia, which maintained that the
excommunication is exterior only, because of its own
excludes only from exterior communion with the
as if, said the Pope, excommunication were not essenti-
2 spiritual penalty binding in heaven and affecting
© aforesaid proposition was therefore condemned
et perniciosa,” false and pernicious, already repro-
condemned in the twenty-third proposition of Luther,
_* ay the very least, it incurs the technical mark


os


86 THE VAMPIRE


“erronea” (erroneous), since it contradicts a certain (certa)
theological conclusion or truth which is clearly and necessarily
deducible from two premises, of which one is an article of
faith, and the other naturally certain. Most assuredly the
Church cannot (nor does she seek or wish to) oppose any
obstacle to the interior and personal relation of the soul
with its Creator. Nevertheless the rites of the Church are
the regular and appointed channel through which divine grace
is conveyed, and therefore it follows that exclusion from these
rites inevitably entails the privation of this grace, to whose
prescribed and availing sources the excommunicated person no
longer has access.

It should be mentioned that both from a moral and juridical
standpoint the guilt requisite for the incurring of excom-
munication implies various conditions of which the three most
important are, first the full use of reason ; second sufficient,
if not absolute, moral liberty ; and thirdly a knowledge of
the law and even of the penalty, for it follows that if such
knowledge be lacking there cannot be that disregard of the
ecclesiastical law known as contumacy, the essence of which
consists in deliberately performing an action whilst being
very fully aware and conscious not merely that the action is
forbidden but also that it is forbidden under a certain definite
penalty, the exact nature of which is itself defined and known.
Wherefore various causae excusantes, extenuating circumstances,
are often present, and these so mitigate the culpability that
they prevent the incurring of excommunication. It is hardly
necessary to enter into an examination of such circumstances
as in practice there may well be, and indeed are, many con-
siderations and exemptions which have to be taken into account,
but generally speaking lack of the full use of reason, lack of
liberty resulting from fear—a person whois physically constrained
or morally terrorized has no freedom of will and is not respons-
ible—or ignorance, even affected ignorance, may anyone of
them be obstacles to incurring that measure of peccability
which is requisite to deserve an extreme spiritual penalty.
Affected ignorance is a lack of knowledge in those who might
reasonably and without grave difficulty inform and enlighten
themselves, but they are not bound to do so, and since every
penal law is to be strictly interpreted, if such a statute
positively and in set terms exacts knowledge on the part of


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 87


the culprit, he is excused even by affected ignorance. Again,
excommunication may be “occult,” when the offence
entailing it is known to no one or to almost no one at all.
That is to say when no scandal has been given. This, it should
be remarked, is valid in the forum internum only, and although
he who has incurred occult communication should be absolved
as soon as possible, he is not obliged to abstain from external
acts connected with the exercise of jurisdiction, and moreover,
since he has the right to judge himself and to be judged by
his director according to the exact truth and his apprehension
thereof, consequently in the tribunal of conscience he who is
reasonably certain of his innocence cannot be compelled to
treat himself as excommunicated, albeit he must be reasonably
and justly persuaded.

It may now be briefly inquired, who can excommunicate ?
The general principle is that whoever enjoys jurisdiction in
the forum externum can excommunicate, but only his own
subjects. Therefore whether excommunications be technically
a@ ture or ab homine they may come from the supreme Pontiff
alone or from a general council for the whole Church ; from
the Bishop for his diocese ; from a Prelate nullius for quasi-
diocesan territories; and from regular Prelates for their
subjects, that is to say for religious orders. Yet further
anyone can excommunicate who has jurisdiction in the
forum externum by virtue of his office even although this be
delegated, for instance, legates, vicars capitular, and vicars-
general can exercise this power. But a parish priest cannot
inflict this penalty, nor may he even declare that it is incurred
which is to say he may not pronounce this in an official manner
as a judge. The right to absolve evidently belongs to him
who can excommunicate and who has imposed the censure,
and obviously it belongs to any person delegated by him
to this effect, since the power, being of jurisdiction, may be
committed to another. Technically, excommunications are
divided into four classes: those particularly reserved to the
supreme Pontiff; those simply reserved to the supreme
Pontiff; those reserved to the Bishop (to the ordinary) ;
and those nemini reseruatae, that are not reserved. Accord-
ingly, generally speaking, only the Holy Father can absolve

m the first two kinds of excommunication, although natur-
ally his power extends to all kinds ; Bishops (and ordinaries)


88 THE VAMPIRE


can rescind excommunications of the third class; whilst
the fourth kind, nemini reseruatae, can be revoked by any
priest having authority without the need of a particular
delegation. Over and above this, there exist in practice
certain concessions since bishops enjoy very liberal faculties
and indults, which are moreover, most widely communicable
whereby they are empowered to absolve in foro interno from
all cases except those which are most definitely and nominatim
reserved to the Supreme Pontiff. There are also the circum-
stances technically known as ‘‘ Urgent Cases,” when the power
granted is valid for all cases, without exception, legally
reserved though they may be to the highest authorities, even
to the Pope himself, and even for the absolution of an accom-
plice (Holy Office, 7th June, 1899). Finally canon law lays
down that at the point of death or in danger of death, all
reservations cease and all necessary jurisdiction is supplied
by the Church. “ At the point of death,” says the Council
of Trent (Session XIV, c. vii), “in danger of death,” says
the Rituale Romanum, any priest can absolve from all sins and
censures, even if he be without the ordinary faculty of confessor
or if he himself be excommunicated. He may even do this
in the presence of another priest who is duly and canonically
authorized, enjoying jurisdiction (Holy Office, 29th July, 1891).

It has been said by a modern historian: “The awful
import of Excommunication barely can be realized at the
present time. People idly wonder why the excommunicated
take their case so seriously—why they do not turn to find
amusement, or satisfaction, in another channel,—why they
persist in lying prone in the mire where the fulmination
struck them. And, indeed, in modern times the formal
sentence rarely is promulgated, and only against persons of
distinction like the German Dr. Ddllinger or the Sabaudo King
Vittoremanuele II di Savoja, whose very circumstances
provided them with the means to allay the temporal irritation
of the blow.”!! The immediate effects of excommunication
are summed up in the two famous verses :


Res sacrae, ritus, communio, crypta, potestas,
praedia sacra, forum, ciuilia iura uetantur.


It may be well now to glance very briefly at the history of
the actual practice of excommunication. Among the Jews


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 89


exclusion from the synagogue was a real excommunication,
and it is this to which reference is made in 1 Hsdras x,7 and 8:
“and proclamation was made in Juda and Jerusalem to all
the children of the captivity, that they should assemble
together into Jerusalem. And that whosoever would not
come within three days, according to the counsel of the princes
and the ancients, all his substance should be taken away,
and he should be cast out of the company of them that were
returned from captivity.” It was this exclusion which was
feared by the parents of the man who was born blind, who
when they were questioned by the Pharisees would give no
definite answer with reference to the healing of their son,
“because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had already
agreed among themselves, that if any man should confess him
to be Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.”
Again we are told, “ many of the chief men also believed in him ;
but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, that
they might not be cast out of the synagogue.”4* The Apostles
were told: “they will put you out of the synagogues ;
yea, the hour cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think
that he doth a service to God.’’"* This penalty exercised by
the Jews foreshadowed later censures, for it is said: ‘in
the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may stand.
And if he will not hear them: tell the Church. And if he
will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the heathen
and Publican. Amen I say to you, whatsoever you shall
bind on earth, shall be bound also in Heaven; and whatso-
ver you shall loose upon earth shall be loosed also in heaven.”’®
According to the Orthodox Church this power was transmitted
to the successors of the apostles that is to say the bishops,
80 that they too had the faculty of binding and loosing.
But something very definite was further implied. This
faculty had actual physical consequences and the Greeks held
that excommunication arrested the decomposition of a body
after death. In fact the incorruptibility of the body of any
person bound by a curse was made a definite doctrine of the
Orthodox Church. The very wording of the text certainly
admitted of such an interpretation. duy ACyw imi, doa
peg Shonre emt ris yas, Zora dedeueva ev To obpavg. Kai boa
€av AVonTe éri Tis yijs, €rrat NeAvmEeva ev To ovpavy. The
word Avw “loose ” expresses equally the ideas of dissolution


90 THE VAMPIRE


and of absolution, while dé “ bind” signifies their respective
and several opposites. Accordingly forms of absolution had
to be provided which might be read over bodies found in such
a condition, for it was thought that this might be brought
about by well-nigh any curse, although an episcopal anathema
was considered the most weighty and the most terrible.
Nevertheless it might be that these conditions resulted from
the curse of a parent even from an imprecation uttered by
a man against himself, or from the ban of a priest, for in the
Orthodox Church the power of excommunicating belonged to
priests as well as to bishops, but they should not exercise
it without episcopal sanction.1® One such absolution runs
thus: ‘“ Yea, O Lord our God, let Thy great mercy and
marvellous compassion prevail; and, whether this Thy
servant lieth under curse of father or mother, or under his own
imprecation, or did provoke one of Thy holy ministers and sus-
tained at his hands a bond that hath not been loosed, or did
incur the most grievous ban of excommunication by a bishop,
and through heedlessness and sloth obtained not pardon,
pardon Thou him by the hand of Thy sinful and unworthy
servant ; resolve Thou his body into that from which it was
made; and stablish his soul in the tabernacle of saints.”
So in the burial service an orison is made that the body may
be dissolved into the dust of which it was made, diaAveor eis
ra & dv oweréOn, and in a solemn Requiem, is offered the
supplication, ‘ Unbind the curse, be it of priest or of
arch-presbyter,” Avoov xatdapay, éite lepéws éite apxtepéws.

Naturally, as is clearly expressed, the curse which the
Orthodox Church regarded as most weighty and most effective
was the ban of excommunication by a bishop, and therefore
the formula of excommunication doomed the offender to
remain whole after death, and the body was not freed until
absolution had been read over it and the excommunication
formally revoked.

However, a considerable difficulty arose. It was discovered
that excommunication sometimes failed to produce the
expected physical result, and the body crumbled to dust in the
ordinary way. Accordingly this had to be reckoned with
and explained and Leone Allacciin his De guorundam Graecorum
opinationibus ® cites a nomocanon de excommunicatis which
sets out to explain how it is that sometimes excommunication


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 91


can fail of its result. ‘‘ Concerning persons excommunicate
the which sadly incur episcopal excommunication and after
death are found with their bodies ‘ not loosed’ (dAvra).”

Certain persons have been duly, rightly, and lawfully ex-
communicated by their bishops, as evil doers and transgressors
of the divine law, and they have without penance and amend-
ment, or without receiving absolution died in the state of
excommunication, and so have been buried, and in a short time
after their bodies have been found “loosed” (AeAuuéva)
and shredded joint from joint, bone from bone.

Exceeding strange and marvellous is this that he who hath
been lawfully excommunicated should after his death be found
with his body “loosed ” (AeAuuévos TO o@pua) and the joints
of the body separate.

So extraordinary a circumstance was immediately sub-
mitted to a conclave of expert theologians, who after long
debate decided that any excommunicated person whose
body did not remain whole had no more hope of salvation
because he was no longer in a state to be “loosed ” and
absolved by the bishop who had excommunicated him, but
that he was already damned in hell. If not absolutely
essential, the removal of the ban was if possible to be affected
by the same person who had pronounced it, and this provides,
against an excommunicated person obtaining absolution too
easily.1® Of course a superior might rescind the anathema
pronounced by one of his subjects, a bishop could always
Temove an excommunication pronounced by a simple priest,
but under certain conditions this regulation must certainly
prove excessively awkward. There is, for example, the well
known instance told by Christophorus Angelus in his
"Eyxetpistov Tept Tis KaTAaTTaTEWSs TOY oI}KLEpoV evpioKomevov
"EAAjvov,° who relates that a bishop was excommunicated
by a council of his peers, and his body remained “bound,
as it were iron, for the space of a hundred years,” after which
time a second council of bishops at the same place pronounced
absolution, and immediately as they spoke the words the
body “crumbled to dust.”

8 The nomocanon de excommunicatis goes on to say that

those that are found excommunicate, namely with their
bodies whole and ‘not loosed’ (dAvra), these require absolu-
tion, in order that the body also may attain freedom from the


92 THE VAMPIRE


bond (décuov) of excommunication. For even as the body
is found bound (éedéuevov) in the earth, so is the soul bound
(dedeutvm) and tormented by Satan. And whensoever the
body receives absolution and is loosed (Avy), from excom-
munication, by the power of God the soul likewise is set free
from the bondage of the Devil, and receiveth the life eternal,
the light that hath no evening, and the joy ineffable.”

Leone Allacci®! considered this Orthodox dogma of the physical
results of excommunication and a subsequent absolution to be
certain beyond any matter of dispute, and he mentions several
cases, which he says were well known and proved, which
demonstrate the truth of this belief. Athanasius, Metropolitan
of Imbros, recorded that at the request of the citizens of
Thasos he read a solemn absolution over several bodies, and
before the holy words were even finished all had dissolved into
dust. Very similar was the example of a converted Turk
who was subsequently excommunicated at Naples, and who
had been dead some years before he obtained absolution from
two Patriarchs, and his body dissolved, so that he was at rest.

An even more remarkable instance is that of a priest who
had pronounced a sentence of excommunication, and who
afterwards turned Mohammedan. This did not affect the
victim of his curse, who though he had died in the Christian
faith, yet remained “bound.” This circumstance which
caused the greatest alarm was reported to the Metropolitan
Raphael, and at his earnest request the Mohammedan, though
after much delay and hesitation consented to read the absolu-
tion over the body of the dead Christian. As he was pro-
nouncing the final words the body fell completely to dust,
The Mohammedan thereupon returned to his former faith.
and was put to death for so doing.

I do not know whether this is the same tradition as is recorded
by Mr. Abbott in his Macedonian Folk-lore, p. 211, but I
gather that the examples are not identical, although they have
various points of similarity. I quote Mr. Abbott’s most
striking account at length. ‘‘ How great is the dread of an
ecclesiastic’s wrath can be realized from the following anecdote
related to the writer as a ‘ true story’ by a person who enter-
tained no doubts as to its authenticity. ‘Many years ago
there was an Archbishop of Salonica who once in a moment
of anger cursed a man of his diocese: “ May the earth refuse to


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 98


receive thee.” (1) yiis va ma} oe dex7y). Years went by, and
the Archbishop embraced Islam. Owing to his erudition
and general ability, he was raised by the Mohammedans to
the office of head Mullah. Meanwhile, the individual who had
incurred the prelate’s wrath died, and was buried in the usual
fashion. Now it came to pass that when, at the expiration
of three years, the tomb was opened, the inmate was found
intact, just as if he had been buried the day before. Neither
prayers nor offerings availed to bring about the desired
dissolution. He was inhumed once more; but three years
later he was still found in the same condition. It was then
recalled to mind by the widow that her late husband had been
anathematized by the apostate Archbishop. She forthwith
went to the ex-prelate and implored him to revoke the sentence.
This dignitary promised to exert his influence, which it appears
had not been diminished a whit by his apostasy ; for once a
bishop always a bishop. Having obtained the Pasha’s per-
mission, he repaired to the open tomb, knelt beside it, lifted
up his hands and prayed for a few minutes. He had hardly
risen to his feet when, wondrous to relate, the flesh of the
corpse crumbled away from the bones, and the skeleton
remained bare and clean as if it had never known pollution.’ ”

It will not be impertinent here to give c. xiii, of the Power
of Excommunication, and upon what frivolous occasions it is
made use of, from Ricaut’s The Present State of the Greek and
Armenian Churches, 8vo, 1679.

“The Third Command of the Church is Obedience towards
their Spiritual Pastors and Teachers, 1 Cor. iv, 1, Leta man so
account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of
the Mysteries of God: which is text that they often repeat in
their Churches, and raise consequences from thence of the
sublimity of their Office, and of the reverence and honour
due from the people toward their Clergy ; so that though they
want the advantages of Riches and Ornament to render them
respected in the eyes of the Vulgar; yet their people being
affected with their divine and separated Qualifications, do not
submit only in spiritual matters, but even in Temporals refer
themselves to the determination of their Bishop, or Metropolite,
according to that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. vi. 1, Dare any of you
having a matter against another, go to Law before the unjust,
and not before the Saints? But that which most enforces this


3


— 4
-
mn


94 THE VAMPIRE


Duty of Obedience, is a sense of the Power of Excommunica-
tion, which rests in the Church, of which they so generally
stand in fear, and the most profligate and obdurate con-
science in other matters startles at this sentence, to which
whilst any is subjected, he is not only expelled the limits of
the Church, but his conversation is scandalous, and his person
denied the common benefits of Charity and assistance, to
which Christian or Humane duty doth oblige us.

“In the Exercise of this censure of Excommunication, the
Greek Church is so ready and frequent, that the common use of
it might seem to render it the more contemptible ; but that
the Sentence is pronounced with so much horrour, and the same
effects which have ensued thereupon, not only to the living,
but also to the Corps and Carcasses of such who have dyed
under Excommunication, are related with that evidence and
certainty as still confirms in the people the efficacy of that
Authority which the Church exercises therein. The form of
Excommunication is either expressive of the party with his
name and condition, secluding him from the use of Divine
Ordinances, or otherwise indefinite of any person who is
guilty of such or such a Crime or Misdemeanour. As for
Example, if any person is guilty of Theft, which is not dis-
covered, an Excommunication is taken out against him,
whosoever he be, that hath committed the Theft, which is not
to be remitted until Restitution is made; and so the fault is
published and repeated at a full Congregation, and then follows
the Sentence of Excommunication in this form.

“If they restore not to him that which is his own, and possess
him peaceably of it, but suffer him to remain injured and damni-
Syed ; let him be separated from the Lord God Creatour, and
be accursed, and uwnpardoned, and undissolvable after death
in this World, and in the other which is to come. Let Wood,
Stones, and Iron be dissolved but not they: May they inherit
the Leprosie of Gehazi, and the Confusion of Judas; may the
earth be divided and devour them like Dathan and Abiram;
may they fight and tremble on earth like Cain, and the wrath
of God be upon their heads and Countenances ; may they see
nothing of that for which they labour, and beg their Bread all
the days of their lives ; may their Works, Possessions, Labours,
and Services be accursed ; always without effect or success, and
blown away like dust ; may they have the curses of the holy


a...


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 95


and righteous Patriarchs Abram, Isaac and Jacob ; of the 318
Saints who were the Divine Fathers of the Synod of Nice, and
of all other holy Synods ; and being without the Church of
Christ, let no man administer unto them the things of the Church,
or bless them, or offer Sacrifices for them, or givethem the’ Avridwpov
or the blessed Bread, or eat, or drink, or work with them, or con-
verse with them; and after death, let no man bury them, in
penalty of being under the same state of Hxcommunication, for
go let them remain until they have performed what is here written.

“The effect of this dreadful Sentence is reported by the
_ Greek Priests to have been in several instances so evident, that
none doubts or disbelieves the consequences of all those
maledictions repeated therein; and particularly, that the
body of an excommunicated person is not capable of returning
to its first Principles until the Sentence of Excommunication
is taken off. It would be esteemed no Curse amongst us to
have our Bodies remain uncorrupted and entire in the Grave,
who endeavour by Art, and Aromatic spices, and Gums, to
preserve them from Corruption: And it is also accounted,
amongst the Greeks themselves, as a miracle and particular
grace and favour of God to the Bodies of such whom they have
Canonized for Saints to continue unconsumed, and in the
moist damps of a Vault, to dry and desiccate like the Mummies
in Egypt, or in the Hot sands of Arabia. But they believe
that the Bodies of the Excommunicated are possessed in the
Grave by some evil spirit, which actuates and preserves them
from Corruption, in the same manner as the Soul informes and
animates the living body; and that they feed in the night,
walk, digest, and are nourished, and have been found ruddy
in Complexion, and their Veins, after forty days Burial,
extended with Blood, which, being opened with a Lancet,
have yielded a gore as plentiful, fresh, and quick, as that
which issues from the Vessels of young and sanguine persons.


____ This is so generally believed and discoursed of amongst the


Greeks, that there is scarce one of their Country Villages, but
what can witness and recount several instances of this nature,

_ both by the relation of their Parents, and Nurses, as well as
___ Of their own knowledge, which they tell with as much variety
as we do the Tales of Witches and Enchantments, of which


_ it is observed in Conversation, that scarce one story is ended
_ before another begins of like wonder. But to let pass the


96 THE VAMPIRE


common and various Reports of the Vulgar, this one may
suffice for all, which was recounted to me with many assevera-
tions of its truth, by a grave Candiot Kaloir, called Sofroino,
a Preacher, and a person of no mean repute and learning at
Smyrna.

““*T knew’ (said he) ‘a certain person, who for some mis-
demeanours committed in the Morea, fled to the Isle of Milo,
where though he avoided the hand of Justice, yet could not
avoid the Sentence of Excommunication, from which he could
no more fly, than from the conviction of his own Conscience,
or the guilt which ever attended him; for the fatal hour of
his death being come, and the Sentence of the Church not
being revoked, the Body was carelessly and without Solemnity
interred in some retired and unfrequented place. In the
mean time the Relations of the deceased were much afflicted,
and anxious for the sad estate of their dead Friend, whilst
the Paisants and Islanders were every night affrighted and
disturbed with strange and unusual apparitions, which they
immediately conclude arose from the Grave of the accursed
Excommunicant, which, according to their Custom, they
immediately opened, and therein found the Body uncorrupted,
ruddy, and the Veins replete with Blood: The Coffin was
furnished with Grapes, Apples, and Nuts, and such fruit as
the season afforded: Whereupon Consultation being made,
the Kaloires resolved to make use of the common remedy in
those cases, which was to cut and dismember the Body into
several parts, and to boyl it in Wine, as the approved means
to dislodge the evil Spirit, and dispose the body to a dissolu-
tion: But the friends of the deceased, being willing and
desirous that the Corps should rest in peace, and some ease
given to the departed Soul, obtained a reprieve from the
Clergy, and hopes, that for a sum of Money (they being
Persons of a competent Estate) a Release might be pur.
chased from the Excommunication under the hand of the
Patriarch : In this manner the Corps were for a while freed
from dissection, and Letters thereupon sent to Constantinople,
with this direction, that in case the Patriarch should con-
descend to take off the Excommunication, that the day,
hour and minute that he signed the Remission should be
inserted in the Date. And now the Corps were taken into the
Church (the Country-people not being willing they should


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 97


remain in the Field) and Prayers and Masses daily said for its
dissolution, and pardon of the Offender: When one day after
many Prayers, Supplications and Offerings (as this Sofronio
attested to me with many protestations) and whilst he
himself was performing Divine Service, of a sudden was
heard a rumbling noise in the Coffin of the dead party, to the
fear and astonishment of all persons then present; which
when they had opened, they found the Body consumed and
dissolved as far into its first Principles of Earth, as if it had
been seven years interred. The hour and minute of this
dissolution was immediately noted and precisely observed,
which being compared with the Date of the Patriarchs release,
when it was signed at Constantinople, it was found exactly to
agree with that moment in which the Body returned to its
Ashes.’ This story I should not have judged worth relating,
but I heard it from the mouth of a grave person, who says,
‘That his own eyes were Witnesses thereof; and though
notwithstanding I esteem it a matter not assured enough
to be believed by me, yet let it serve to evidence the esteem
they entertain of the validity and force of Excommunication.
I had once the curiosity to be present at the opening of a
Grave of one lately dead, who, as the people of the Village
reported, walked in the night, and affrighted them with
strange Phantasmes; but it was not my fortune to see the
Corps in that nature, nor to find the Provisions with which
the spirit nourishes it, but only such a Spectacle as is usual
after six or seven days Burial in the Grave; howsoever,
Turks as well as Christians discourse of these matters with
much confidence.’

“This high esteem and efficacy being put on Excommunica-
tion, one would believe that the Priests should endeavour to
Conserve the reverence thereof, being the Basis and main
Support of their Authority; and that therefore they should not
80 easily make use thereof on every frivolous occasion, that so
familiarity might not render it contemptible and the salvation
of men’s Souls not seem to be played with on every slight
and trivial Affair: But such is the much to be lamented
poverty in this Church, that they are not only forced to sell
Excommunications, but the very Sacraments ; and to expose
the most reverend and mysterious Offices of Religion unto
sale for maintenance and support of Priesthood.


98 THE VAMPIRE


“The taking off Excommunications after death hath been
usual, but the Excommunicating after death may seem a
strange kind of severity; for so we read that Theodosius,
Bishop of Alexandria, excommunicated Origen two hundred
years after his decease.

“On the same Authority of Excommunication depends the
power of re-admission again into the Church, which according
to the Greek Canon is not to be obtained easily, or at every
cold request of the Penitent, but after proof of trial first
made of a hearty and serious conversion, evidenced by the
constant and repeated actions of a holy life, and the patient
and obedient performance of Penance imposed and enjoined
by the Church. Such as have apostatized from the Faith, by
becoming 7'urks, under the age of 14 years, upon their repent-
ance, and desire of return to the Church, sought earnestly
with tears, signified and attested by forty days fasting with
bread and water, accompanied with continual Prayer day
and night, are afterwards received solemnly into the Church
in presence of the Congregation, the Priest making a Cross on
the Forehead of the Penitent with the Oyl of Chrism, or the
pipoy Xpicuaros usually administered to such who return
from the ways of darkness and mortal sins.

“But of such who in riper years fall away from the Faith
(as many Greeks do for the sake of Women, or escape of
punishment) their re-admission or reception again into the
Church is more difficult ; for to some of them there is enjoined
a Penance of six or seven years humbling themselves with
extraordinary Fasts, and continual Prayer; during which time
they remain in the nature of Catechumeni, without the use
or comfort of the Eucharist, or Absolution, unless at the hour
of death; in which the Church is so rigorous, that the
Patriarch himself is not able to release a Penance of this nature,
imposed only by a simple Priest ; and for receiving Penitents
of this nature there is a set Form or Office in the Greek Liturgy.

“But now we have few Examples of those Apostates who
return from the Mohametan to the Christian faith ; for none
dares own such a Conversion but he who dares to dye for it;
so that that practice and admirable part of Discipline is become
obsolete and disused. Yet some there have been, even in my
time, both of the Greek and Armenian Churches, who have
afforded more Heroick Examples of Repentance, than any of


‘THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 99


those who have tryed themselves by the Rules and Canons
prescribed ; for after that they denyed the Faith, and for
some years have carried on their heads the Badge or distinction
of a Mohametan, feeling some remorses of Conscience, they
have so improved the same by the sparks of some little grace
remaining, that nothing could appease or allay the present
torment of their minds, but a return to that Faith from
whence they were fallen. In this manner, having com-
municated their anguish and desires to some Bishop or grave
person of the Clergy, and signifying with all their Courage and
Zeal to die for that faith, which they have denyed; they have
been exhorted, as the most ready expiation of their sin, to
confess Christ at that place where they have renounced him ;
and this they have resolutely performed by leaving off their
Tulbants, and boldly presenting themselves in publick
assemblies and at the time of publick prayers in the Church ;
and when the 7'urks have challenged them for having revolted
or relapsed again from them, they have owned their Con-
version, and boldly declared their resolution to dye in that old
Faith wherein they were baptized; and, as a Token or Demon-
stration thereof, being carried before the Justice of the City
or Province, they have not only by words owned the Christian
doctrine, but also trampled their Turkish Tulbants or Sashes
under their Feet, and withstood three times the demand,
whether they should still continue to be Mohametans, accord-
ing as it is required in the Mohametan Law: For which, being
condemned to dye, they have suffered death with the same
cheerfulness and courage that we read of the Primitive
Martyrs, who daily Sacrificed themselves for the Christian
Verity.

“Considering which, I have, with some astonishment,
beheld in what manner some poor English men, who have
fondly and vilely denyed the faith of Christ in Barbary and
the parts of T'urky, and become, as we term them Renegados,
have afterwards (growing weary of the Customes of TJ'urks
to which they were strangers) found means of escape, and
returned again into England, and there entered the Churches,
and frequented the Assembly of God’s people, as boldly as
if they had been the most constant and faithful of the Sheep-
fold: At which confidence of ignorant and illiterate men
I do not so much admire, as I do at the negligence of our


100 THE VAMPIRE


Ministers, who acquaint not the Bishops herewith, to take
their Counsel and Order herein: But perhaps they have
either not learned, or so far forgot the ancient Discipline
of ours, and all other Christian Churches, as to permit men,
after so abominable a Lapse and Apostasie, boldly to intrude
into the Sanctuary of God with the same unhallowed hands
and blasphemous mouths, with which they denyed their
Saviour and their Country. But what can we say hereunto?
Alas! Many are dissenters from our Church; which by
our divisions in Religion, hath lost much or its Power, Dis-
cipline and esteem amongst us; and men, being grown
careles and cold in Religion, little dream or consider of such
methods of Repentance ; for whilst men condem the Authority,
and censures of the Church, and disown the power of the Keys,
they seem to deprive themselves of the ordinary means of
Salvation, unless God, by some extraordinary light and eviction
supplies that in a sublimer manner, which was anceintly
effected by a rigorous observation of the Laws and Canons of
the Church.

“Tt is a strange Vulgar Errour that we maintain in England,
that the Greek Church doth yearly excommunicate the Roman,
which is nothing so; and common reason will tell us, That
a Church cannot excommunicate another, or any particular
Member thereof, over which it pretends no Jurisdiction or
Authority ; and that the Greek Church hath no such Claim
of Dominion or Superiority over the Roman, no more than
it own a subjection to it, is plainly evinced in the third Chapter
of this Book: and this I attest to be so, upon enquiry made
into the truth thereof, and on Testimony of Greek Priests
eminent and knowing in the Canons and Constitutions of their
Church: Though we cannot deny but that anceintly one
Patriarch might renounce the Communion of another, over
whom he had no Jurisdiction, for his notorious Heresie ; as
8. Cyril did to Nestorius before the Assembly of the Council
of Ephesus.”

It has been said that excommunication can only be
incurred by living persons, but in this the belief and practice
of the Orthodox Church differ from the Catholic Church,
since, as has already been remarked, Theodosius of Alexandria
who died in 567 excommunicated Origen who died in 253 or
254.22 Moreover, the fact that Theodosius was deposed for


en


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 101


heresy by Pope S. Agapitus I on that pontiff’s arrival in
Constantinople, in 536, would not according to the Greek
idea invalidate this excommunication. With regard to living
persons those who have never been baptized are not members
of the Christian Society, and therefore obviously they cannot
be deprived of rights they have never enjoyed ; whilst as
even the baptized cease, at death, to belong to the Church
Militant, the dead cannot be excommunicated. This is not to
say that technically, after the demise of some member of the
Christian community it may be declared that such a person
incurred excommunication whilst on earth. In the same
strict sense he may be released from excommunication after
his death, and the Rituale Romanum contains the following
right for absolving an excommunicated person already
dead.

“RITUS ABSOLUENDI EXCOMMUNICATUM IAM MORTUUM. If
it so come to pass that any excommunicated person who has
departed from this life gave evident signs of contrition, in order
that he shall not be deprived of ecclesiastical burial in con-
secrated ground, but rather that he shall be holpen by the prayers
of the Church, in so far as this may be done, let him be absolved
after this manner.

“Tf the body be not yet buried, let it be lightly beaten with a

rod or small cords after which it shall be absolved as followeth ;
and then having been absolved let it be buried in consecrated
ground.
_“ But if it hath been already buried in unconsecrated ground,
if it may be conveniently done, let the body be exhumed, and after
tt hath been lightly beaten in like manner and then absolved
let it be buried in consecrated ground ; but if the body cannot
conveniently be disinterred, then the grave shall be beaten lightly
and the absolution shall be pronounced.

“And if the body be already buried in consecrated ground, tt
shall not be disinterred, but the grave shall be lightly beaten.

“ Let the Priest say the Antiphon : The bones that have been
humbled shall rejoice in the Lord; together with the psalm
Miserere.

“And when they have made an end of the psalm let the body be
absolved, and the Priest shall say: By the authority granted
unto me I absolve thee from the bond of excommunication,
which thou hast incurred (or, which thou art said to have


102 THE VAMPIRE


incurred) on account of such and such a thing, and I restore
thee to the communion of the faithful, in the Name of the
Father,-, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

“Then shall be said the psalm, De profundis, and at the end
thereof :

V. Rest eternal grant unto him, O Lord.

R. And let perpetual light shine upon him.

Kyrie eleison. Christe eleison. Kyrie eleison. Our Father.
. And lead us not into temptation.

. But deliver us from evil.

. From the gate of hell.

. O Lord, deliver his soul.

May he rest in peace.

Amen.

O Lord hear my prayer.
And let my cry come to Thee.
. The Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us pray.

Prayer. Grant, we beseech Thee O Lord, to the soul of
thy servant, who hath been held in the bond of excommunica-
tion, a place of refreshment, rest and repose, and the brightness
of Thy eternal light. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen.”

It is now necessary to inquire into certain extraordinary
cases which are recorded and which are true beyond all manner
of doubt of persons who died excommunicated and whose
bodies were seen to rise from the tomb and leave the sacred
precincts where they were buried. In the first place we have
the very famous account given by S. Gregory the Great™
of the two dead nuns, generally called the “‘Suore Morte.”
Two ladies of an illustrious family had been admitted to the
sisterhood of §. Scholastica. Although in most respects
exemplary and faithful to their vows, they could not refrain
from scandal, gossip, and vain talk. Now S. Benedict was
the first to lay down the strictest and most definite laws
concerning the observance of silence. In all monasteries
and convents, or every order, there are particular places,
called the “ Regular Places” (the Church, refectory, dormi-
tory, etc.) and special times, above all the night hours, termed
the “Great silence,” wherein speaking is unconditionally
prohibited. Outside these places and times there are usually


SRN RNAS


——e


accorded “recreations”? during which conversation is not
only permitted but encouraged, though it must be governed
by rules of charity and moderation. Useless and idle prattling
is universally forbidden at all times and in all places. Accord-
ingly, when it was reported to S. Benedict that the two nuns
were greatly given to brabble indiscreetly, the holy Abbot
was sore displeased, and sent them the message to the effect
that if they did not learn to refrain their tongues and give
a better example to the community he must excommunicate
them. At first the sisters were alarmed and penitent, and
promised to amend their idle ways; but the treacherous
habit was too strong for their good resolves ; they continued
to give offence by their naughty chatter, and in the midst
of their folly they suddenly died. Being of a great and ancient
house they were buried in the church near the high altar ;
and afterwards on a certain day, whilst a solemn High Mass
was being sung, before the Liturgy of the Faithful began,
and the Catechumens were dismissed by the Deacon crying :
“Let those who are forbidden to partake, let those who are
excommunicated, depart from hence and leave us !”? Behold,
in the sight of all the people the two nuns rose up from their
graves, and with faces drooping and averted, they glided
sadly out ofthe Church. And thus it happened every time
_ the Holy Mysteries were celebrated, until their old nurse
__ interceded with S. Benedict, and he had pity upon them and
absolved them from all their sins so that they might rest in
peace.”°

S. Augustine tells us”” that the names of the Martyrs upon
the diptychs were recited, but not to pray for them, whilst
the names of nuns, who were recently deceased were recited in
order to offer prayers on their behalf. Perhibet praeclarissimum
testimonium Ecclesiastica auctoritas, in qua fidelibus notum
est, quo loco Martyres, et quo defunctae Sanctimoniales ad
Altaris Sacramenta recitantur. It has been suggested that it
was at this point the two nuns may have withdrawn from the
church, but S. Gregory expressly says that it was at the
moment when the Deacon chanted in a loud voice the ritual
praise bidding those who were not in full communion go forth
from the holy place.
S. Gregory also relates that a young monk left the mon-
astery without permission and without receiving any blessing


104 THE VAMPIRE


or dismissal from the Abbot. Unhappily he died before he
could be reconciled, and he was duly buried in consecrated
ground. On the next morning his corpse was discovered
lying huddled up and thrown out of his grave, and his relations
in terror hastened to S. Benedict, who gave them a con-
secrated Host, and told them to put It with all possible
reverence upon the breast of the young religious. This was
done, and the tomb was never again found to have cast forth
the body.

This custom of putting a Eucharistic Particle in the grave
with a dead person may seem to many very extraordinary,
but it was by no means unknown in former centuries. In
the Vita Basilii, the Life of S. Basil the Great, which was often
attributed to Amphilochius of Iconium,?® but is now recog-
nized to be spurious and of about the ninth century, we are
told that S. Basil reserved a portion of a consecrated Particle,
even a third part, in order that It should be buried with him.
Several Synods, howbeit assemblies of no supreme authority,
had already condemned this practice, and others of a later
date prohibited it as contrary to the end of the Blessed
Sacrament as instituted by Jesus Christ.*°

None the less in various places the custom persisted of
reverently putting Particles in the graves of persons who were
much honoured for their sanctity, and thus in the tomb of
S. Othmar (Audomar), who died 16th November, 759, on the
island of Werd in the Rhine, and whose body was transferred
ten years later to the monastery of S. Gall, being solemnly
entombed in 867 in the new Church of S. Othmar at 8. Gall,
a number of Particles were found to have been placed on the
spot where his head reposed.*?

In a life of S. Cuthbert, Bishop of Lindisfarne, Patron of
Durham, which is reprinted by the Bollandists,®* it is said that
at one of the Translations of his body a number of Particles
were found in the coffin. Amalarius of Metz, upon the
authority of the Venerable Bede says in his great treatise
De ecclesiasticis officiis** that these Particles were put upon
the breast of the saint before he was buried: “ oblata super
Sanctum pectus posita.” This circumstance however, is not
mentioned by Bede, but it occurs in the Uita S. Cuthberti,
written between 698 and 705 by a monk of Lindisfarne.
Amalarius considers that this custom was doubtless derived


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 105


from the Roman Church, and that thence it was communi-
eated to England. Nicholas-Hugues Ménard, the famous
Maurist,* in his glosses upon the S. Gregorii I Papae Liber
Sacramentorum, which he printed, Paris, 1646,°° from a manu-
script Missal of S. Eligius, states that it was not this custom
which was condemned by the various Councils, but an abuse
which had crept up and which consisted in giving communion
to the dead, and actually placing the Sacred Host in their
mouths. However that may be, we know that Cardinal
Humbert, of Silva Candida, legate of S. Leo IX, in the middle
of the eleventh century, in his answer to the various objections
and difficulties which had been raised by Michael Caerularius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, author of the second and final
schism of the Byzantine Church,*” reproached the Greeks
with the custom of burying any Particles which might remain
over after the Communion of the people at Holy Mass.

It is said that even to-day in many places throughout Greece
upon the lips of the dead is laid a crumb of consecrated bread
from the Eucharist. Out of reverence this has often been
replaced by a fragment of pottery on which is cut the sign
of the Cross with the legend I.X.NI.KA. (Jesus Christ
conquers) at the four angles. Theodore Burt, The Cyclades,
informs us that locally in Naxos the object thus employed is a
wax cross with the letters I.X.N. imprinted thereon, and this
moreover still bears the name vaiAoyv, fare, showing that the
tradition is closely connected with the old custom of placing
the “ferryman’s coin” in the mouth of a dead man, the fee
for Charon. Now Charon, who has assumed the form Charos,
is entirely familiar to the modern Greek peasant, but his is
not merely as classical literature depicts him, Portitor Stygis,
the boatman of Styx, he is Death itself, the lord of ghosts and
shadows. Until recent years, at all events, the practice
prevailed in many parts of Greece of placing in the mouth
(more rarely on the breast) of a deceased person a small coin,
and in the district of Smyrna this was actually known as
“passage-money,” To epatixiov.8® Yet strangely enough
although both custom and name survived the reason for the
coin had been forgotten, and for a century or more (save it
might be obscurely in some very remote spot)*® it was not
associated in any way with Charos. Possibly the original
Meaning of the coin has vanished in the mists of dateless


106 THE VAMPIRE


antiquity, and even in classical days the original significance
was lost, so it came then to be explained that the obol was
Charon’s fee, whereas this is but a late and incorrect inter-
pretation of a custom whose meaning went deeper than that,
which had existed before mythology knew of a ferryman of
hell.

The soul was supposed to escape by the mouth, which as it
is an exit from the body is also the entrance to the body,
and naturally it is by this path that the soul, if it were to return
to the body, would re-enter, or by which an evil spirit or
demon would make its way into the body. The coin, then, or
charm seems most likely to have been a safeguard against any
happening of this kind. In Christian days the Holy Eucharist
or a fragment inscribed with sacred names will be the best
preventative. Moreover not infrequently the piece of pottery
placed in the mouth of the dead has scratched upon it the
pentacle of magic lore. It is extremely significant that in
Myconos this sign is often carved on house doors to preserve
the inmates from the vampire, vrykolakas. So in Greece at all
events the custom of burying a consecrated Particle with a
corpse, or of putting a crumb of the Host between the dead
man’s lips originated as a spell to counteract the possibility
of vampirism.

It should be remarked that a consecrated Host placed in the
tomb where a vampire is buried will assuredly prevent the
vampire from issuing forth out of his grave, but for obvious
reasons this is a remedy which is not to be essayed, since it
savours of rashness and profanation of God’s Body.

There are in history many other examples of excommunic-
ated persons who have not been able to rest in consecrated
ground. In the year 1030, 8. Godard, Bishop of Hildesheim
in Lower Saxony, was obliged to excommunicate certain
persons for their crimes and filthy sacrileges. Nevertheless,
so powerful were the barons and over-lords, their protectors,
that they buried the bodies of their followers in the Cathedral
itself, in the very sanctuary. Upon this the bishop launched
the ban of excommunication against them also; but, none
the less, utterly disregarding the censures they forced their way
into the various churches. Upon the next high festival in
truth, the rebellious nobles were present with a throng of
armed attendants in the Cathedral itself. The aisles were


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 107
*
_ packed with worshippers, and afar off spanned by the vaulted
th the High Altar blazed with a myriad tapers whose
was reflected in the mirror of polished gold and the crystal
of great reliquaries. The Bishop, his canons around
. Bric, pontificated the Mass. But after the Gospel, S. Godard
4 turned from the altar, and in ringing tones of command bade
- all those who were under any censure or ban to leave the sacred
_ building. The living smiled contemptuously, shrugged a
little and did not stir, but down the aisles were seen to glide
in awful silence dark shadowy figures, from whom the crowds
_ shrank in speechless dread. They seemed to pass through the
- doors out of the sacred place. When the service was done
_ the bishop absolved the dead, and lo, the ghastly train
_ appeared to re-enter their tombs. Thereupon the living were
so struck with fear that they sought to be reconciled, and after
_ due penance absolution was granted them.
At the instigation of Abbot Odolric of Conques the Council
of Limoges held in 1031 proclaimed the “Truce of God ” that
is to say a temporary suspension of hostilities, and the fathers
threatened with general excommunication those feudal
lords who would not swear to maintain it. There thence
arose a consideration of the effects of excommunication, and it
_ was agreed by all that although so severe a sentence must not
_ be lightly denounced, once delivered the utmost respect
be znust be paid to its provisions. In order to illustrate this,
_ the Bishop of Cahors related a recent event which was known
" to his whole diocese and which could be proved by a number
_ of independent witnesses. For his ceaseless rapine and
repented murders, his evil examples of a lewd and licentious
_ life, his blasphemies and infidelity, a certain nobleman whose
S seiaad was hard by the city had been excommunicated, and not
afterwards he had fallen in some midnight foray. The
: of the deceased never doubted that the bishop would
ie _ give absolution, and they made great instance that he should
4 7 do : SO, in order that the dead man might be buried with solemn
_  dirge and requiem, with meed of trentals hereafter sung,
a in the vault of his ancestors, which was one of the most
a striking monuments in S. Peter’s Church. However, the
_ Whole territory had for so long been harried by marauding
_ violence that the bishop considered an example must be made
in order to teach the rest of the plundering nobles a lesson,
e


+


a


108 THE VAMPIRE


and he refused either to raise the ban or to permit the wonted
ceremonies at the funeral. Nonetheless in defiance of his
orders an armed band of soldiers marched into the town,
and buried the dead body in the tomb, carefully closing it and
mortarizing it after them. However, on the following morn-
ing the body was discovered naked, bruised and banged in
the market square as though it had been violently thrown
out of the church, although there was no mark or sign that the
tomb had been in any way tampered with or touched. The
soldiers, who had buried their leader, having opened the
monument found only the cerements in which the corpse had
been erstwhile wound, and so they buried it there a second
time, placing seals and bars upon the church door inasmuch as
it was impossible for anyone to enter. On the following
morning, however, the body was discovered to have been
thrown forth with even more contumely than before. Never-
theless they interred it a third time, but with the same result.
This was repeated no less than five times in all, and at last
they huddled the poor rotting carrion as best they might
into a deep hole dug in some lonely spot far from consecrated
ground. These terrible circumstances filled the hearts of all
with such amaze that the neighbouring barons one and all,
very humbly betook themselves to the bishop, and under most
solemn promises made a treaty binding themselves to respect
all the privileges of the church and amend their lives in every
particular.

A very remarkable incident is related in the Greek Menion*®
that is to say the collection of the twelve books, one for every
month, that contain the offices for immovable feasts in the
Byzantine rite, and which in some wise correspond to the
Propiuum sanctorum in the Roman breviary. The legend,
it is true, offers certain difficulties which will be considered
later, but it is certainly worth repeating as showing the
extreme, and indeed exaggerated views the Greeks attached
to excommunication. A certain coenobite of the desert
near Alexandria had been excommunicated by the archi-
mandrite for some act of disobedience, whereupon he forsook
his monastery, left the desert and came to the city. No
sooner, however, had he arrived here than he was arrested by
the orders of the Governor, stripped of his habit, and ordered
to offer sacrifice in the temple to idols. The Coenobite


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 109


refused, and after having been long tortured in vain, at length
he was put to death, his head being struck off, and the trunk
thrown out beyond the town walls to be devoured by the
wild beasts. But the Christians took it up during the night
and having embalmed it with rich spices and shrouded it in
fair linen, they buried it honourably in a prominent place in
the Church, since they regarded him, and with justice, as a
Martyr. But upon the next Sunday when the Deacon had
chanted the ritual formula, bidding the Catechumens and those
who should not be present to withdraw, all were sore amazed
when the tomb suddenly opened and the body of the Martyr
glided there from and was seen lingering in the narthex of the
church. When the Mass was done the body seemed to return
once more to its grave.

The whole community was filled with fearful awe and
confusion, and a Basilian nun of great piety having fasted
and prayed for the space of three days received a revelation
from an angel who informed her that the Coenobite was still
excommunicate since he had disobeyed his superior, and that
he would remain under the ban until the superior himself
granted him absolution. Thereupon a company of honour-
able persons journeyed to the monastery, and besought the
archimandrite to pronounce the words. In all haste the holy
old man accompanied them to the church. Here they opened
the tomb of the Martyr and a full absolution was pronounced.
Thereafter he lay at rest in his appointed place.

There are several details in this account which appear very
suspicious. In the first place, at the period that the desert
was the resort of Coenobites, the days of persecution, so far
as Alexandria was concerned, at any rate, were a thing of the
past. In the city complete toleration prevailed, and indeed
if there had been any prosecutions, not Christianity but the
Pagan rites would have been suppressed and the heathen
temples closed. Christianity in this century was honoured
throughout the whole of Egypt, and Alexandria was one of the
strongholds. In the second place, the monks of the desert
were not Coenobites, that is to say members of a definite
religious community having a Superior, but they were rather
solitary hermits, belonging to no religious family, each being
independent, and no hermit would have had the power to
excommunicate one of his fellows. In the third place, no


110 THE VAMPIRE


details are given with regard to the reasons why this monk
was supposed to have incurred a major excommunication, and
this, the gravest of all censures, is the only ban which excludes
from participation in the sacred Mysteries. It is true, perhaps,
that if a Religious broke his vows, left his monastery, abandoned
his habit, and disregarding the commands of the Church
betook himself to some populous city where he proceeded to
live, as a secular, a life that was far from careful, such a person
would presumably give great scandal and by his actions he
might indeed incur the major excommunication, but we are
not told that in the case of the Coenobite anything of this
sort happneed, we are not informed of aggravating circum-
stances, and further it must be borne in mind that at the period
these events were said to take place the hermits of the desert
were not, as are Religious to-day, bound by vows of stability*!
and of obedience to their Superiors, who had not the right to
pronounce a sentence of Major excommunication.

It should perhaps be explained that until recently excom-
munication was of two kinds, Major and Minor. Sabetti
thus concisely explains :* ‘‘ Excommunicatio est censura,
per quam quis priuatur communione Ecclesie ; seu censura,
qua Christianus bonis spiritualibus Ecclesise communibus,
quorum distributio ad ipsam pertinet, uel omninio uel ex
parte priuatur. Separat igitur excommunicatum a societate
seu communione uisibili fidelium et bonis que eam, ut talis
est, consequuntur.

Distinguitur excommunicatio in maiorem, que priuat omnibus
bonis Ecclesizee communibus, et minorem, que bonis aliquibus
tantum privat. Maior in iure nonnunquam anathema
uocatur ; atque tunc presertim, quando propter heresim uel
heresis suspicionem infligitur, aut peculiaribus quibusdam
‘adhibitis ceerimoniis solemnius denuntiatur—Insuper excom-
municati excommunicatione maiori, alii dicuntur folerati,
quos fideles non tenentur uitare; alii non tolerati seu
uitandi, quos uitare debent.” Briefly this is to say that minor
excommunication is a prohibition from receiving the sacra-
ments, what we call in theology the passive use of the sacra-
ments. Major excommunication is that which we have
already defined, and which now practically remains in force,
whilst the technical anathema does not differ essentially
from excommunication but is emphasized with special


Se


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE Ii11


ceremonies and the most solemn promulgation of this terrible
sentence.

In a life of S. Augustine the Apostle of England, which
has been printed by the Bollandists,4* John Brompton
relates the following history. S. Augustine had long been
endeavouring to persuade a certain nobleman of great wealth
to pay the appointed tithes, but out of obstinacy these were
constantly refused, which did great mischief and caused others
to become discontented and impudently follow so bad an
example. On a certain great feast day whilst High Mass was
being solemnly sung S. Augustine was inspired to pronounce
to the people that all who had been excommunicated must
leave the sacred edifice. To the horror and amaze of the
assistants an ancient tomb was seen to open, and there issued
forth the desiccated yet incorrupt body of a man who had been
buried a century and a half before. When the service was
done S. Augustine in solemn procession went to the tomb
whither the dead man had been seen to glide back as “ite
missa est’? was chanted, and here he solemnly adjured him,
bidding him say why he had appeared. The dead man replied
that he was excommunicate. The Saint asked where was
buried the priest who had pronounced the sentence. It
appeared that the tomb was in the cathedral at no great
distance. Going thither the Archbishop bade the priest
declare why he had excommunicated the dead man. A dark
shadowy figure was seen to hover among the pillars of the nave
and a low far-off voice answered: ‘‘I excommunicated him
for his misdeeds, and particularly because he robbed the
church of her due, refusing to pay his tithes.” ‘Let it
suffice, brother,” returned the Saint, ‘and do you now at our
bidding and at our request absolve him and free him from
the censure.” The shadowy figure repeated the loosening
words, and faded from sight. They then returned to the
tomb of the dead man, who said in a gentle whisper: “I
thank you, O my father, for now at last may I find rest and
repose.”

Certain authorities have cast very grave doubts upon this
story, for they point out that firstly, even in the time of S.
Augustine himself there was no obligation in Britain to pay
tithes, and these were most assuredly not required under pain
of excommunication. This is very true, but there is no


112 THE VAMPIRE


reason at all why the legend should not be correct in detail
although very considerably antedated. It is more than
probable that the incident occured in a far later century,
and that the chronicler of Canterbury attributed it, perhaps
in geniune error, for the tale had come down by word of mouth,
or perhaps with pardonable inexactitude, to the days of S.
Augustine around whose great and glorious figure had clustered
so many reverend legends, so many ancient traditions.

Melchior, Abbot of the Cistercian house of Zwettl, in his
work De Statu Mortuorum relates that a young scholar of
the town of Saint-Pons, having unfortunately incurred the
penalty of excommunication was killed, and shortly after-
wards he appeared to one of his friends begging him to betake
himself to the Bishop of Rhodez and from him to seek absolu-
tion. The friend did not hesitate to do as he was asked,
and although it was mid-winter with the snow lying deep
upon the ground, for it was a season of exceptional severity,
he at once set out upon the journey. When he had gone
some little distance the road branched, and he was undecided
which path to take. With much hesitancy he proceeded
towards the left, when he felt (as he thought) his cloak gently
pulled, but at first he took no notice, deeming it merely the
wind and the storm. A moment after his cloak was caught
again and there could be no mistaking the tug. He turned
and found himself gently guided into the other road. Eventu-
ally he reached the town, and obtained audience of the Bishop,
who upon hearing his tale at once raised the ban with a full
and plenary absolution. The young man discovered that had
he continued the path to the left he must have wandered far
among the snow-drifts where he would inevitably have
perished of cold and exposure. That night his friend appeared
to him with a glad and smiling countenance and thanking
him for the pains he had been at assured him that he should
by no means lose his reward.

Dom Augustin Calmet records at length a letter, dated 5
April, 1745, which he received from a correspondent who had
read with great interest the manuscript of this learned writer’s
Dissertation sur les apparitions des anges, des démons et des
esprits.“* The writer says: “A man living at Létraye, a
village which is not very many leagues from the town of
Remiremont (Vosges),*° lost his wife at the beginning of last


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 118


February, but married again in the week before Lent. At
eleven o’clock in the evening on his marriage day, the late
wife appeared and spoke to the new bride, and the result of this
was that the bride declared that she must on behalf of the
dead woman undertake to perform seven pilgrimages.*®
Since that day and always at the very same hour the ghost
has appeared and it was distinctly heard to speak by the
parish priest as well as by a number of other persons. On
the 15 March, at the very moment when the woman was about
to proceed to the church of 8. Nicolas to which the pilgrimage
was to be made, the ghost suddenly stood in her path and bade
her hasten, adding that she must not allow herself to be alarm-
ed, or in any way deterred by any accident or sickness that
might befall her on the way.

Accordingly the woman set out with her husband, her
brother-in-law and her sister-in-law, and she is very certain
that the dead wife remained by her side until she actually
came to the door of the church of 8. Nicolas. When these good
people arrived at a distance of some two leagues from the
place, S. Nicolas’ church, they were obliged to halt at an inn
by the wayside which is known as ‘“‘ The Shelter” (les Bara-
ques). Here the woman suddenly became so ill that the two
men were compelled to carry her right up to the church,
| but no sooner had she arrived at the door than she was able
to walk without any difficulty and her pain vanished in a


moment. ‘‘ This amazing occurrence was related to me and
also to the Father Sacristan by all the four pilgrims; and it
: was reported that the last thing which the dead woman told
the new bride was that when one half of the pilgrimages
had been duly accomplished she would be seen no more.
The plain and straightforward way in which these good folk
told us the story does not allow one to doubt that they were
. reporting actual facts.” Upon this relation, Calmet com-
ments: “It is not said that the young woman who died was
under any sentence of excommunication; but apparently
she was bound by a solemn promise or a vow that she must
have made to perform these pilgrimages, which she obliged
her successor to discharge on her behalf. It should be
remarked that the ghost did not enter the church dedicated to
: Nicolas, but apparently for some reason remained at the
oor.”


114 THE VAMPIRE


A very extraordinary circumstance is related by Wipert,
Archdeacon of the celebrated see of Toul, who wrote the life
of Pope S. Leo IX, a Pontiff, who had been for more than
twenty years Bishop of Toul,*’ and who died in March, 1054.
The historian* tells us that some years before the death
of 8. Leo IX, the citizens of Narni, a little burgh which is
picturesquely situated on a lofty rock at the point where the
river Nera forces its way through a narrow ravine to join the
Tiber, were one day greatly surprised and indeed alarmed to
see a mysterious company of persons who appeared to be
advancing towards the town. The magistrates, fearing some
surprise, gave orders that the gates should be fast closed,
whilst the inhabitants incontinently betook themselves to
the walls. The procession, however, which was clothed in
white and seemed from time to time to vanish among the morn-
ing mists and then once again to reappear, was obviously no
inimical band. They passed on their way without turning
to right or to left, and it is said they seemed to be defiling
with measured pace almost until eventide. All wondered
who these persons could be, and at last one of the most
prominent citizens, a man of great resolution and courage
resolved to address them. To his amazement he saw among
them a certain person who had been his host many years
before Ascoli, and of whose death he had been not recently
informed. Calling upon him loudly by his name he asked :
“Who are you, and whence cometh this throng?” “I am
your old friend,” was the reply, ‘“‘ and this multitude is phan-
tom; we have not yet atoned for the sins we committed
whilst on earth, and we are not yet deemed worthy to enter
the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore are we sent forth as
humble penitents, lowly palmers, whose lot it is with pains
and with much moil to visit the holy sanctuaries of the world,
such as are appointed unto us in order. At this hour we
come from the shrine of S. Martin, and we are on our way to the
sanctuary of Our Lady of Farfa.”*® The goodman was so
terrified at these words that he fell as in a fit, and he remained
ill for a full twelvemonth. It was he who related this extra-
ordinary event to Pope 8S. Leo IX. With regard to the com-
pany there could be no mistake ; it was seen not by one person
or even by a few, but by the whole town. Although naturally
enough the appearance of so vast a number would give rise


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 115


to no little alarm since hostile designs would be suspected,
so crowded a pilgrimage in the eleventh century would not
by any means be a unique, even if it were an exceptional event.
Whole armies of pious persons were traversing Europe from
shrine to shrine, whilst the enthusiasism for the pilgrimage
to Jerusalem was greatly on the increase and was, before
many years had passed to culminate in the Crusades.
Even by the end of the tenth century hospices had been
built throughout the whole valley of the Danube, the favoured
route to the Holy Land, where pilgrims could replenish their
provisions. In 1026, Richard, Abbot of Saint-Vannes, led
seven hundred pilgrims into Palestine, all expenses being
discharged by Richard IJ, Duke of Normandy. In 1065,
over twelve thousand Germans, who had crossed Europe,
under the command of Gunther, Bishop of Bamberg, while
on their way through Palestine had to seek shelter in a ruined
fortress where they defended themselves against troops of
marauding Bedouins. Gunther actually died in this year
at Odenberg (Sopron) in Hungary while engaged on a Crusade.
In 1073, Pope S. Gregory VII was seriously contemplating
the leading of a force of fifty thousand men to the East,
military pilgrims who would repulse the Turks, rescue the
Holy Sepulchre, and re-establish Christian unity. Therefore
in itself the appearance of this company of pilgrims outside
the walls of Narni, if remarkable, would be a very possible and
understandable circumstance.

In his Antidote against Atheism, III, 12, Dr. Henry More
relates some remarkable instances of multitudinous phantoms.
He says: ‘“‘ Our English Chronicles also tell us of Apparitions,
armed men, foo! and horse, fighting upon the ground in the
North part of England, and in Ireland, for many evenings
together, seen by many hundreds of men at once, and that
the grass was trodden down in the places where they were
seen to fight their Battles: which agreeth with Nicolea
Langbernhard her Relation of the cloven-footed Dancers, that
left the print of their hoofs in the ring they trod down for a
long time after.

“But this skirmishing upon the Earth, puts me in mind
of the last part of this argument, and bids me look up into the
Air. Where, omitting all other Prodigies, I shall only take
notice of what is most notorious, and of which there can by


116 THE VAMPIRE


no means be given any other account, than that it is the effect
of the Spirits. And this is the Appearance of armed Men
fighting and encountering one another in the Sky. There
are so many examples of these Prodigies in Historians, that
it were superfluous to instance in any. That before the great
slaughter of no less than fourscore thousand made by Antiochus
in Jerusalem, recorded in the second of Maccabees Chapter 5. is
famous. The Historian there writes, ‘That through all the
City, for the space almost of fourty days, there were seen
Horsemen running in the Air in cloth of Gold, and arm’d
with Lances, like a band of Soldiers, and Troops of Horsemen
in array, encountring and running one against another, with
shaking of shields, and multitude of pikes, and drawing of
swords, and casting of darts, and glittering of golden orna-
ments, and harness of all sorts.’ And Josephus writes also
concerning the like Prodigies that happen’d before the
destruction of the City by Titus, prefacing first, that they
were incredible, were it not that they were recorded by those
that were Eye-witnesses of them.

“The like Apparitions were seen before the Civil Wars of
Marius and Sylla. And Melanchthon affirms, that a world
of such Prodigies were seen all over Germany, from 1524 to
1548. Snellius, amongst other places, doth particularize
in Amortsfort, where these fightings were seen not much higher
than the house-tops ; as also in Amsterdam, where there was
also a Sea-fight appearing in the Air for an hour or two together,
many thousands of men looking on.”

It is not said that it was actually the bodies of those who
were dead who were thus seen passing by the walls of Narni,
on the contrary we are given to understand that it was a
spectral host, but with regard to those persons who were
excommunicated we are to believe that physically they are
bound by the ban, and that in the cases of resuscitation it is
the actual body which appears. It is related in the life of
Libentius I, Archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen, who died
4 January, 1013, ruling his see during the reign of King
Svend Tdeskaeg,®! that he excommunicated a number of
pirates, and that one of them having been slain was buried
on the Norwegian coast. Here by some chance well-nigh
fifty years later the body was dug up, and being found intact
most widespread terror ensued, until at length a bishop


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 117


was found who understanding the circumstances pronounced
the necessary absolutions, when the corpse crumbled to dust.
One account states that this prelate was Alured of Winchester,
although it seems difficult to suppose that this is correct.
It is related that the bodies of those who have been struck by
lightning are very often found intact, an opinion maintained
by the medical writer Zachias, but Ambroise Paré explained
this since he says that such persons are as it were embalmed
with the sulphur, which is a preventative of corruption
acting in the same way as salt. During a terrible fire at
Quebec in 1705, the Ursuline Convent was destroyed and
unhappily five nuns perished. More than twenty years later
their bodies which had been buried in a layer of hot ashes
were not merely found intact but even bled copiously in a
thick stream.

Malva relates in his T'urco-grecia™ that at the time of a
certain Patriarch of Constantinople, who he names Maximus
or Emanuel, and whom he places towards the end of the fif-
teenth century, the Ottoman Sultan was desirous of inquiring
into the truth of this belief which was so universally held by
the Greeks, namely that the body of a person who had died
excommunicate remained whole. The Patriarch caused to
be opened, the tomb of a woman, who was notorious as having
been the mistress of an Archbishop of Constantinople, and the
body was found entire. The Turkish officials then enclosed

it in a coffin which was bound round and hermetically sealed
with the Emperor’s own signet. The Patriarch after having
said the appointed prayers, pronounced a solemn absolution
over the dead woman, and three days afterwards when the
coffin was opened there was only to be seen a handful of dust.
Upon this Calmet aptly remarks: ‘‘I do not see any miracle
here, since everybody knows that sometimes bodies are found
entire and complete in a monument or sarcophagus, and
that they crumble to dust immediately they are exposed to the
air,” and the learned Abbot very pertinently adds : “I do not
see how the Archbishop of Constantinople could after death
validly absolve a person who was presumably impenitent and
who had diedexcommunicate.’** It willreadily be remembered
in this connexion that the famous vaults of S. Michan’s church
in Dublin, for some reason possess the horrid property of
preserving corpses from decay for centuries. As Mr. H. F.


118 THE VAMPIRE


Berry tells us in his Preface (p. vi) to The Registers of the
Church of S. Michan, Dublin, 1907: “ As is well-known the
preservative qualities of the vaults under S. Michan’s Church
are most remarkable, and decay in the bodies committed to
them is strangely arrested. The latest writer on the subject
(D. A. Chart, Story of Dublin) in a short notice of the Church,
speaks of being struck (among others) ‘“‘ by a pathetic baby
corpse, from whose plump wrists still hang the faded white
ribbons of its funeral.” This coffin bears the date, 1679;
yet the very finger and toe nails of the child are still distinct.
The antiseptic qualities are believed to be largely attributable
to the extreme dryness of the vaults and to the great freedom
of their atmosphere from dust particles.”

It is generally admitted that the circumstances which
attend the decomposition of the human body are very difficult
in their manifold complications since atmosphere, situation
with other accidents play so important and obscure a part,
whence these laws are still very imperfectly understood
owing to the immense practical difficulties, one might almost
say the impossibility, of systematic investigation. Doctors
A. C. Taylor and F. J. Smith in their Medical Jurisprudence®*
which is universally accepted as a standard and completely
authoritative work, comment on these phenomena in very
plain terms, frankly acknowledging the doubts and uncer-
tainty that still envelop the whole question. “The action
of the environment, the inherent potentialities of the microbes,
and the state of their vitality at any moment involve such an
enormous number of varying and variable factors that it
becomes quite impossible to explain on a rational basis of
ascertained fact . . . the extraordinary variations in
the circumstances of putrefaction that have been observed.”
And a little later the same authorities tell us that ‘“ sometimes
one body has been found more decomposed after six or eight
months burial than another which has lain interred for a
period of eighteen months or two years.’®> An eminent
American medical expert, Dr. H. P. Loomis, says: “I have
seen bodies buried two months that have shown fewer of the
changes produced by putrefaction than others dead but a
week.’’5¢

The Greeks, as we have seen in some detail, generally regarded
the fact that a body was found intact as a sign that the person


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 119


had died excommunicate or under some curse, and was at
any rate in a state of unhappiness, of painful detention or
probation. It is now necessary to consider an aspect of the
question which is diametrically and entirely opposed to this
idea, namely those cases where incorruption is an evidence of
extraordinary sanctity, when the mortal remains of some
great saint having been exhumed after death are found to be
miraculously preserved for the veneration of the faithful.
It is not perhaps even to-day generally recognized how solemn
and weighty, how lengthy and detailed a process is that inquiry
which must precede those decrees regarding religious honour
paid to a deceased person distinguished for eminent holiness
of life whether it be that permissive cultus known as Beati-
fication, or that complete preceptive universal cultus known
as Canonization. The real trial of a subject proposed for
Canonization may be said to begin when a number of very
exhaustive examinations have already been made, which for
all their rigour are preliminary and ordinary, and the Apostolic
process commences which investigates the Virtues and Miracles
of the person. S. Thomas defines a miracle as an effect
which is beyond the “ Order of the whole of created nature.”
And he explains this by telling us that, if a man throws a
stone up into the air, such a motion is no wise miraculous, for
though it exceed the powers in a nature of a stone, it is pro-
duced by the natural power of man, and therefore it does
not exceed the power of the whole of created nature. Besides
genuine miracles a number of marvellous phenomena may be
and indeed are exhibited, many of which are due to natural
powers, as yet imperfectly known or entirely unknown, to
hallucination, or to fraud. Therefore miracles do not con-
stitute sanctity of themselves, and Benedict XIV discusses
in his great work De Seruorum Dei Beatificatione et Beatorum
Canonizatione, IV, pars. I, c. iv, De Fine M iraculorum, et de
differentiis inter uera et falsa Miracula.” The same great
authority lays down that heroic virtues are the first and most
decisive witness to sanctity ; “‘ visions, prophecies and miracles
are only of secondary importance, and they are absolutely
ignored if proof of heroic virtues is not forthcoming.” This
is further insisted upon by Scacchus,® and Castellinus®®
prudently says: ‘‘ Not all the just are to be canonized by
the Church, but those who have shone forth with heroic


Ee


I


——-


re


120 THE VAMPIRE


virtues.”” However, the value of miracles must not be under-
estimated, and unfortunately in many directions there seems
a tendency to fall into this grave error. Benedict XIV has
a@ very important and weighty chapter, De Miraculorum
necessitate in causis Beatificationis et Canonizationis, which
might be studied with profit and instruction. It is not
possible to give in detail here the various classes of Causes
whose circumstances require a various number of miracles,
but it may suffice to say that if the virtues or the martyrdom
of the subject are proved by eye-witnesses two miracles are
required for beatification and two for canonization. If,
however, the virtues or the miracles have been established by
evidence which is not that of eye-witnesses (testes de auditu),
four miracles are required for beatification and two for
canonization. It should be remarked that in all cases the
miracles required for canonization must be wrought after
beatification, and must be proved by eye-witnesses. Among
these miracles which have to be established by evidence
before a decree of Beatification is pronounced, the super-
natural preservation of the body of a saint is sometimes
admitted, and although such a miracle is investigated with the
most scrupulous care none the less it is regarded as a high and
exceptional distinction. I1t is generally hoped that at the
exhumation of a person whose cause has been begun the body
may be found to be preserved incorrupt, but this is by no
means invariably the case. Thus Monsignor Benson in a
letter dated 4 March, 1904, written from Rome, says: “Mr.
—— and I went yesterday to the exhuming of the body of
Elizabeth Sanna,” who died thirty-five years ago in the odour
of sanctity. They hoped to find the body incorrupt ; but it
was not so . . . it was very interesting to see the actual
bones of the Saint, and the Franciscan habit in which she was
buried as a Tertiary of S. Francis; and to think that very
possibly every one of the fragments would be a venerated
relic some day.’’®

It must then be carefully borne in mind that the preserva-
tion of the bodies of saints is a very remarkable miracle,
and is in no wise to be compared with that preservation of
bodies which may occur from time to time under conditions
with which we are imperfectly acquainted. It may be well
to give a few examples of this supernatural phenomenon.


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 121


Not altogether unconnected and certainly deserving of a
brief consideration are those cases of irradiation when the
bodies or the garments, or perhaps the rooms of great saints
and mystics became luminous, emitting rays of light, a fact
which although certainly it did not originate the introduction
of the nimbus or aureola into art may probably have influenced
painting to a very large extent. It is a great mistake to say
with Gerard Gietmann™ that all such symbols are suggested
by natural phenomena, scientifically accounted for in text
books on physics. Although the nimbus was early in use in
the monuments of Hellenic and Roman art this had little,
if any, influence in the Middle Ages and in earlier Christian
times. For as Durandus tells us, and correctly, it was to
passages in the Scriptures that reference was made for authority
to depict the halo as signifying holiness and dignity.® ‘‘ Sic
omnes sancti pinguntur coronati, quasi dicerunt. Filiae
Hierusalem, uenite et uidete martyres cum coronis quibus
coronauit eas Dominus. Et in Libro Sapientiae: Iusti
accipient regnum decoris et diadema speciei de manu Domini.
Corona autem huisusmodi depingitur in forma scuti rotundi,
quia sancti Dei protectione diuina fruuntur unde cantant
gratulabundi: Domine ut scuto bonae uoluntatis tuae coronasti
nos” (For thus are all the Saints depicted, crowned, as if
they were to say: “O daughters of Jerusalem, come ye and
see the Martyrs with the crowns with which their Lord
crowned them.’’** And in the Book of Wisdom: “The Just
shall receive a kingdom of glory and a crown of beauty at the
hands of the Lord.”®® Now a crown of this kind is depicted
in the form of a round buckler, because they enjoy the
heavenly protection of God, wherefore they sing in perfect
happiness: ‘‘O Lord thou hast crowned us as with the shield
of thy good-will.”’) It may be remarked that Pope Gregory
the Great (about 600) allowed himself to be painted with a
square nimbus, and Johannes Diaconus® tells us that this was
the sign for a living person and not a crown. Other examples
of this ornamentation have come down to us from the following
centuries and they show that even children were sometimes
represented with this square nimbus.

It were impertinent to trace the development of the nimbus
halo, glory, and aureola in art, but this cannot fail to have
been affected by the irradiation of the mystics and ecstaticas.


122 THE VAMPIRE


The Dominican convent of Adelhausen, which was founded
by the Consort of Egon II of Urach, Count of Freiburg (1218-
36), is famous in the history of German mysticism and was the
theatre of the most amazing phenomena. Christina Mechthild
Tuschelin, a nun of this house who, it is said, only broke
silence once during the whole of her religious life,°’ was very
frequently illumined with such a glory of brightness that
nobody could look upon her, and at times the community
were obliged to request her to absent herself from the choir
in order that they might recite their office without distraction.

Another famous Dominican, 8. Vincent Ferrer, was often
surrounded by light, and on more than one occasion it was
thought that either he, or indeed the whole room was ablaze,
and persons ran there in great alarm to extinguish the fire,
Often too, his white habit was actually scorched although
there was no fire in the room.

It may be worth noting that the appearance of a room or
a building upon fire has been remarked under very different
conditions and proceeding from a very different origin. When
the notorious Dr. John Dee was Warden of Manchester College,
a position he obtained in 1595 and resigned on account of
failing health in 1€02 or 1€03, he often excited suspicion by
the extraordinary, and some whispered unhallowed, nature
of his studies which he often pursued in spite of his seventy
years and more until the break of day. One mid-night,
the whole college was aroused by the fierce glare of a mighty
fire, and it was seen that the warden’s lodgings were bursting
into flame in every direction. In a few moments a crowd
had hastily rushed to the spot and buckets of water were
brought, when the flames suddenly died away, and almost
immediately Dr. Dee appeared from his house to thank them
for their care and assure them that he had been able to subdue
the conflagration. It is said that on the next day the building
bore no mark of fire, which circumstance together with the
fact that he had so mysteriously extinguished the flames
went far to increase his sombre reputation in the town.

The halo is by no means merely an artistic symbolism. A
bright glow was often perceived to surround the head of S.
Rose of Lima, and the same was not infrequently remarked
in the cases of Thomas Lombard and the lay brother Barnaby
of Pistoia. This is also recorded of S. Ravello, a Bishop of


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 123


Ferrara, and of S. Afra of Augsburg, whose Passio is not
later than the end of the fourth century. The Olivetan
chronicles in their record of the founder of this austere reform,
Bernardo Ptolomei, say that he was often seen to be encircled
with light, a phenomenon which also distinguished Giovanni-
Battista de Lanuza, and the Poor Clare, Antonia of Florence,
who died in 1472. A glory in the shape of a star was observed
on the forehead of Diego Lauda, and this is also related of
that marvellous ecstatic Cecilia Baldi of Bologna. The
description of S. Dominic which Cecilia Cesarini used to give
must be very familiar to all. She loved to tell how, save
when the sorrow of others moved him to compassion, he was
always joyous and happy, and very frequently a radiant light
played about his temples and illumined his sweet smiles.
The countenance of Dominica of 8. Mary literally blazed with
light when she received Holy Communion, and the same
marvel was observed in the case of Ida of Louvain, a
stigmatized Cistercian nun of the Convent of Valrose, who died
in 1300.

There are many more recent examples of this supernatural
light, as for instance in the case of S. Alphonsus Liguori whose
countenance when he preached one day in the Cathedral of
Foggia, a ferverino in honour of Our Lady became exceedingly
luminous and beamed with rays of dazzling brilliance. Again
the Venerable Antony Claret, who died 24 October, 1870,
was not infrequently seen to be haloed in a great splendour
of golden glory whilst saying Mass in the Royal Chapel at
Madrid. This miracle was witnessed by many, and Queen
Isabella II solemnly took oath to that effect, requiring it to
be placed upon record. The same phenomenon was witnessed
by the whole congregation when the Venerable Claret was
addressing them from the pulpit in the Cathedral at Vichy.%

It will not appear surprising that this irradiation often
seems to reach its greatest intensity at the hour of death when
the last bonds which tie man to the earth are being broken.
S. John of the Cross in his last moments was surrounded by so
brilliant a corruscation that those who were present were
bound to turn away their eyes dazzled and blinded. When
a pious widow, Gentile of Ravenna was dying the whole room
appeared to shine, a phenomenon which was repeated in the
case of Diego Ortiz, whilst the same is recorded of the


124 THE VAMPIRE


Dominican nun, Maria Villani of Naples (1584-1670), who has
had few rivals in her profound works on mysticism.

Very many other examples might be given, but we will
now mention a few instances in which the irradiation continued
even after the soul had left the body. Such was the case with
S. Alfrida, a daughter of King Offa of Mercia; whilst the
bodies of S. Juventius and S. Maximus reflected so penetrating
a brilliance that nobody could bear to gaze upon them.
Similar circumstances are said to have occurred at the tomb
of S. Wilfred who was enshrined in the Church of 8. Peter at
Ripon, and also at the tomb of S. Kunigunde, who is buried
in the Cathedral of Bamberg.

Of Blessed Walter the Premonstratensian Abbot of Ilfeld
in Hanover, who died in 1229, the Nobertine chronicle tell us
that when the holy body was being carried on its bier to
the tomb, so great a glory shone all around it that the
religious who were inceding in solemn procession after
the remains of their dead father were fain to veil their eyes.
“B. Walterus. . . Moriens cum ad sepulchrum deferretur,
tanta lux diuinitus immissa defuncti corpus irradiauit, ut
religiosi adsistentes eam uix ferre possent.” Upon this an
old poet wrote the following lines :


De B. Wallero circa cuius feretrum coposia lux resplenduit.


Corporis hos radios pia gens stupet, immemor ante
Illius aetherea cor rutilasse face.
Et quid-ni stupeat, solem dum mergitur undis,
Clarius exstinctam spargere posse facem ?
Ecce suae carnis WALTERVS lege solutus,
Ad tumulum moestis fratribus abripitur.
Non patitur uirtus, indignaturque sepulcro
Claudier, in cincres, non abitura leues :
Ucrum oritur, radio circumfulgente Feretrum,
Ut solet Eois Lucifer ortus aquis.
O uir Sancte, tuis si lux hic tanta fuisti,
In coelo qualis quantaque stella micas !®


It is not surprising that persons whose holiness and asceticism
had been so great during their lives, that their bodies were
subjected to so extraordinary a phenomenon as irradiation,
should after death have remained incorrupt. The connexion
between the two is very obvious, and it should be remarked
that incorruption is one of the commonest circumstances


SS.


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 125


recorded in hagiology. Although it is impossible to give more
than a few examples from very many, it may be mentioned
that in the case of S. Edward the Confessor, who died 5 Jan-
uary, 1066, when the body was examined in 1102, it was found
to be incorrupt, the limbs flexible, and the cerements fresh and
clean; whilst two years after canonization (1161) the body,
still incorrupt, was translated to a tomb of the greatest magni-
ficence. When eighty years after the first deposition the
body of S. Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln, who died 1200 and was
buried in Lincoln Cathedral, was taken up to be translated to
a richer shrine it was found to be wholly intact. Perhaps
one of the most remarkable instances of the mortal remains of
a Saint which are yet supernaturally preserved is that of the
Poor Clare, §. Catherine of Bologna, who died 9 March, 1463
and whose body is venerated in a small yet exquisitely elegant
sanctuary attached to the convent of Corpus Domini at
Bologna. It is a remarkable circumstance that here it is not
preserved under crystal or glass but is seated, dressed in
sumptuous brocades, jewelled and crowned, in an embroidered
chair in the centre of the room. The body is desiccated, but
in no sense decayed. In the Carmelite Convent of the Piazza
Savonarola at Florence is the body of 8. Maria Madalena
de’Pazzi who died 25 May, 1607. This was exhumed in
1608, on account of the damp, when it was found to be entire
and flexible, and it was officially certified to be intact in 1639
and again in 1663. It is still perfect and whole where it
reposes in an elaborate shrine of crystal and gold. In the same
Church is the incorrupt body of Maria Bartolomea Bagnesi, a
Dominican Tertiary, whose death took place on Whit-Tuesday
1577. The body of another great Saint of Florence, S.
Antoninus, which was unburied for eight days, remained
flexible. This great Archbishop died 2 May, 1459, and in 1589,
when his tomb was examined the holy remains were found to
be ‘still intact.

In Montefalco, high among the Umbrian uplands, lies the
body of the Augustinian S. Clare, one of the glories of that
ancient Order so rich in hallowed and venerable names, and
one of the most marvellous ecstaticas of all time. Born
about 1275, perhaps a few years earlier, she became Abbess
of the Convent of Montefalco and seemed to dwell more in
Heaven than on earth. Gifted with the spirit of prophecy


126 THE VAMPIRE


and the grace of working miracles, she was the subject of
extraordinary ecstasies and raptures, which were prolonged
from days to weeks. She died, 17 August, 1308, at three
o’clock in the morning, and when her heart was extracted
from her body this was opened and therein impressed upon
the very flesh were seen a figure of Christ crucified, the
scourge, the Crown of Thorns, the column, the lance, three
nails, the sponge and reed. This relic is venerated at Monte-
falco to-day. Even now her body lies there perfect and
intact. The hands and face are clearly visible, exquisitely
pale and lovely, untouched by any fleck of corruption. It
has not been embalmed, but Lorenzo Tardy says that through-
out Italy of all the bodies of Saints which are venerated in-
corrupt the body of S. Clare of Montefalco is the loveliest
and most free from any spot or blemish during the passing
years.

Moreover when her heart was opened the blood flowed forth
in great abundance and was carefully collected in a glass vial.
Although normally coagulated it has preserved in colour a
bright fresh red as though newly spilled. At rare intervals
this blood liquefies and becomes from being opaque and
congealed, humid, lucent, transparent, and freely-flowing.
On occasion it has been known actually to spume and bubble.
There are ample records that this took place in 1495, 1500,
1508, 1570, 1600, and 1618.”

It is known that new blood has frequently oozed from the
arm of 8. Nicolas, O.S.A., which is preserved at Tolentino,
but the most famous of these blood-miracles is, of course,
that of S. Januarius, the Patron of Naples. Here the blood
of the Saint which is contained in two phials, enclosed in a
silver reliquary, is held out by the officiating priest eighteen
times in the year before the congregation in the Cathedral.
Upon the altar is exposed the silver bust containing the
Head of the Saint. After an interval, sometimes a space of
hardly more than two minutes and sometimes (but very
rarely) well nigh an hour the congealed mass in the phials
becomes crimson and liquid, and on occasion froths and
bubbles up within the ampolla.”! Science having exhausted
itself to find some explanation of the phenomenon confesses
a miracle. The same liquefaction takes place with regard
to some other Relics of peculiar sanctity, the blood of S.


—


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 127


John Baptist, of S. Stephen, the Proto-Martyr, of S. Patricia,
and especially of S. Pantaleone, Relics of whose blood pre-
served at the Convent of the Incoronazione, Madrid, at
Naples, and at Ravello, liquefy upon the feast day of the
Saint afterwards returning to a congealed substance. It
would appear a relic of the blood of S. Pantaleone at Valle
della Lucarina remains liquid all the year round. As one
might expect, sceptics both without—and alas! within the
Church have attempted to find some natural explanation,
but without avail. One notoriously rationalistic writer is
“strongly inclined to believe that such alleged blood-relics
always liquefied if they were exposed long enough to light
and air,” a suggestion which is demonstrably false. The
same maggot-monger has audaciously ventured to declare :
“If we could suppose some substance or mixture had been
accidentally discovered which hardened when shut up in the
dark, but melted more or less rapidly when exposed to the
light of day in a warmer atmosphere, it would be easy to
understand the multiplication of alleged relics of this character,
which undoubtedly seems to have taken place in the latter
part of the sixteenth century.” It is instructive to remark
what wild hypotheses men will build and what shifts men
will seek who endeavour to escape from facts.

On 20 May, 1444, the celebrated missionary and reformer
8. Bernardine of Siena died at Aquila in the Abruzzi. It was
the Vigil of the Ascension and in the choir the friars were just
chanting the Antiphon to the Magnificat, Pater, manifestaui
nomen tuum hominibus . . . ad Te uenio, alleluja. The
body was kept in the Church for twenty-six days after death,
and what is very remarkable there was a copious flow of blood
after twenty-four days. The people of Siena requested
that so great a treasure might be handed over to them, but
the local magistrates refused to do this, and with obsequies
of the greatest splendour, 8S. Bernardine was laid to rest in
the Church of the Coventuals. Six years later, 24 May, 1450,
the Saint was solemnly canonized by Nicolas V. On 17
May, 1472, the body, yet without speck or mar, was trans-
lated to the new Church of the Observants at Aquila, which
had been especially built to receive it, and here it was enclosed
in a costly shrine presented by Louis XI of France. This
Church having been completely destroyed by an earthquake


128 THE VAMPIRE


in 1703, was replaced by another edifice where the relics of
S. Bernardine are still venerated. The body was still intact
in the seventeenth century.

With regard to the flow of blood, the same phenomenon
was observed and even yet continues in the case of 8. Nicolas
of Tolentino, who died 10 September, 1306, and who is buried
in his Basilica there. Two hundred years after his death
some persons who had concealed themselves in the church
over night endeavoured to cut off an arm and carry it
as a relic. No sooner had they commenced this operation
and gashed the flesh with a knife than blood flowed freely
as from a living body.

The first Patriarch of Venice, S. Lorenzo Giustiniani, died
1 January, 1455, and so great was the concourse of people
to venerate his remains that the body lay in the Church of
San Pietro di Castello (formerly SS. Sergio e Bacco) for no
less than sixty-seven days, exposed to the air. Although it
had not been embalmed the face continued of a fresh and
ruddy complexion as in life. The body of the Franciscan,
S. John Capistran, who died 23 October, 1456, was found to
be incorrupt in 1765; and the body of the Augustinian nun,
S. Rita of Cascia is still intact in her convent shrine among
the Tuscan Hills. The body of S. Didacus, a lay brother of
the Friars Minor who died at Alcala on 12 November, 1463
was exhumed four days after death and remained above
ground for six months, supple and whole ; it was still without
blemish in 1562. As late as 1867, the body of the foundress
of the Ursulines, 8. Angela Merici, who died at Brescia,
27 January, 1540, was found to be entire.

It may not impertinently be remarked here that the
Orthodox Russian Church includes in its calendar a number
of bishops, monks, and holy hermits, whose bodies have been
discovered to be intact at some considerable period after
death, and if not actually in these days an entirely necessary
condition for canonization incorruption is at any rate regarded
as evidence of extraordinary sanctity. At Kieff there is
(or was) a famous sanctuary which contained the bodies of no
less than seventy-three venerable religious. I have been told
by those who have visited this shrine that these are incorrupt,
although dark and mummified. They are robed in rich
vestments and laid out in open coffins for general honour and


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 129


worship. Hassert speaks of the body of S. Basil of Ostrog,
which was entire although much desiccated.” At Cetienje
Schwarz saw the body of 8S. Peter I, the Vladika, who died
in 1830.%* ‘ Dieser diirre, steinharte Kadaver,” he calls it.
It should be remarked that these remains are always described
as parched, sere and withered, and in no way retaining the
freshness, the natural colour and complexion of life, which so
often distinguishes the incorrupt bodies of Saints of the
Catholic Church.

Perhaps to these mummified Relics, there could be few
contrasts more striking indeed than the body of S. Catherine
of Genoa—to take the first example that occurs—which,
when I venerated it some years ago in the chapel of her own
Ospedale seemed as though the Saint were but reposing in her
shrine, as though she might open her eyes and gently smile
upon her clients who knelt in humblest prayer. The extra-
ordinary phenomena connected with the body of S. Teresa
who died at Alba de Tormes, 4 October, 1582, are so well-
known and have been so often described in detail that it is
only necessary slightly to refer to them. The nuns fearing
that this great treasure would be taken from them hastily
buried her on the morrow after her death. A mass of
bricks, stones, mortar and lime was hurriedly piled on the
coffin lid. For many days strange knockings were heard as
from the grave itself. There issued a mysterious perfume
which varied not only in degree but in kind, for sometimes
it was like lilies, sometimes like roses, sometimes like violets
and often like jasmin. The community upbraided themselves
that they had not given their mother more honourable
burial, and at length it was resolved that the body should be
secretly exhumed. This took place on 4 July, 1583. It
was discovered that the lid of the coffin had been broken by
the rubble heaped upon it, and the wood was rotten and
decayed. The habit was stained and smelt of damp and
earth, but the holy remains were as sound and entire as on
the day they were laid in earth. They removed the moulder-
ing clothes, washed the body, scraping off the earth with
knives, and it was remarked that the scrapings of earth were
redolent of the same perfumes as filled the grave. Moreover,
both earth and cerements were saturated with a fragrant oil
that exuded from the body. Yepes who wrote in 1614, the


a 5 ee ee ee eee a +--+


130 THE VAMPIRE


year the Saint was beatified particularly draws attention to
this fragrant effusion, and later when the remains were again
examined it was found that a sheet of fair linen with which
the body had been covered was odorous from the same
defluxion. This phenomenon classes S. Teresa among the
Saints who are technically known as Myroblites (uvpoSdvuTes,)
from whose Relics exude balm and aromatic ichors. Of
these perhaps S. Nicolas of Myra, who lies at Bari, is the most
famous. There may also be named S. Willibrord, the
Apostle of Holland ; 8. Vitalian ; 8. Lutgarde ; S. Walbruga ;
S. Rose, of Viterbo; the Blessed Mathia de’ Nazzarei, a poor
Clare of Matelica; S. Hedwige, of Poland; 8. Eustochium ;
S. Agnes of Montepulciano, the Dominican nun; S. Maria
Maddalena de’Pazzi; and the ecstatic Carmelite Marguerite
Van Valkenissen, foundress of the convent of Oirschot in
Brabant.

It was this incorruptibility which was the immediate cause
of the first official steps being taken to secure the beatifica-
tion and canonization of Teresa de Jesus. Before the body
was replaced after exhumation the Provincial, Father
Geronymo de la Madre de Dios, better known as Gracian, cut
off the left hand and bore it away with him to Avila in a locked
casket, when blood flowed freely from the wound. Two years
later it was decreed by the general Carmelite Chapter that the
body should be translated to the convent of Avila, which as
the birthplace of the Saint and as her first foundation un-
doubtedly had the best claim to these Relics. But in order
to spare the nuns of Alba the fathers decided that the trans-
ference should be performed secretly, and accordingly the
officials who were entrusted with this business opened the
tomb at nine o’clock on the night of 24th November, 1585,
and in fulfilment of their orders, whilst the sisterhood was
engaged at Matins in the choir above, exhumed. the body.
To mitigate the grief of the convent it was decided that the
left arm should be severed and that they should be allowed
to retain this. Fray Gregorio de Nacianceno who was
entrusted with this overcome with emotion, drew a sharp
knife and severed the limb. He afterwards told Ribera that
it was the greatest sacrifice of himself God had ever called
upon him to make. It was remarked that the bone was
as sound, and the flesh as soft, and its colour as natura] as


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 181


if the saint were alive. When the precious remains arrived at
the convent of San José of Avila it was laid on record that the
body without sign of corruption, for when they lifted it out of
the chest it seemed that of one asleep. Ribera has left us a
minute description of the remains which he examined thor-
oughly on 25th March, 1588, and his account is so interesting
it will not be impertinent to quote it in full. He writes:
“T saw the sainted body, greatly to my satisfaction, on 25th
March of this year of 1588, as I examined it thoroughly, it
being my intention to give the testimony I give here. I can
describe it well. It is erect, although bent somewhat forward,
as is usual with old people ; and by it, it can well be seen that
she was of very good stature. By placing a hand behind it
to lean against, it stands up, and can be dressed and undressed
as if she were alive. The whole body is of the colour of dates,
although in some parts a little whiter. The face is of a darker
colour than the rest, since, the veil having fallen over it, and
gathered together a great quantity of dust, it was much
worse treated than other parts of the body ; but it is absolutely
entire, so that not even the tip of the nose has received any
injury. The head is as thickly covered with hair as when
they buried her. The eyes are dried up, the moisture they
possessed having evaporated, but as for the rest entire. Even
the hairs on the moles on her face are there. The mouth
is slightly shut, so that it cannot be opened. The shoulders,
especially, are very fleshy. The place whence the arm was
cut is moist, and the moisture clings to the hand, and leaves
the same odour as the body. The hand exceedingly shapely,
and raised as if in the action of benediction, although the
fingers are not entire. They did ill in taking them, since the
hand that did such great things, and that God had left entire,
ought for ever to have remained so. The feet are very beautiful
and shapely, and, in short, the whole body is covered with
flesh. The fragrance of the body is the same as that of the
arm, but stronger. So great a consolation was it to me to see
this hidden treasure, that to my thinking it was the best day
I ever had in my life, and I could not gaze at her enough.
One anxiety I have, lest some day they should separate it,
either at the request of great personages or at the impor-
tunity of the monasteries; for by no means should this be
done, but it should remain as God left it, as a testimony


182 THE VAMPIRE


of his greatness, and the most pure virginity and admirable
sanctity of the Mother Teresa de Jesus. To my thinking,
neither he who asks it nor he who grants it, will act like true
sons of hers.”

Having dealt with so celebrated a case in some detail we
may very briefly pass in review some four or five other instances
more premising that these have been selected from a very
great many, something at random, and not because they
present any remarkable or unique phenomena which it would
not be tolerably easy to parallel in other accounts. On the
other hand they are no less memorable than is the case of
S. Teresa herself : For example, the body of S. Pascal Baylon,
who died at Villa Reale, 15th May, 1592, although covered
with quick-lime, was found nine months later to be entire
and incorrupt, and in 1611 expert surgeons declared that the
preservation was miraculous. Again the body of 8. Philip
Neri, who died 25th May, 1595, was discovered perfectly intact
eight months after burial, and was still entire when examined
in 1599, 1602, and 1639. In the cases of two saints who died.
in 1608, Francis Caracciolo, who expired at Agnone in the
Abruzzi, 4th June, 1608 ; and Andrea Avellino, who was struck
down by apoplexy at Naples on 10th November of the same
year, there were noticed curious blood phenomena. The
body of S. Francis remained flexible, and when an incision was
made blood freely flowed. The body of 8S. Andrea was found
incorrupt more than a year after he had been buried. A
quantity of blood that had been received in a phial did not
congeal, but is constantly observed to be still liquid. In
the case of 8. Camillus de Lellis who died at Rome, 14th July,
1614, the body remained soft and flexible. At her convent
in the Umbrian aerie of Citta di Castello reposes the unflecked
and whole body of the Capuchiness, 8. Veronica Giuliani,
who died 9th July, 1727. There it may be seen, reposing as
though she were not dead, but slept.

This list might be greatly prolonged without much research
or difficulty ; however, it is no doubt already sufficiently
ample, and I have thought it worth while to treat the subject
of the incorruptibility of the bodies of saints in some detail,
as though of course, this phenomenon is in itself not to be
regarded as evidence of sanctity, the preservation of the
body of a person who has led a life of heroic virtue when this


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 1338


eminent holiness has been officially and authoritatively re-
cognized, may be admitted as a miracle, that is to say as
supernatural. More than once attention has been drawn
to the fact that there exist parodies of these phenomena, and
as incorruptibility is often attached to sanctity so is it an
essential of the very opposite of holiness, the demonism of the
vampire. It has been said that the vampire, as a demon
reanimates the corpses of entirely innocent people, but this is
very doubtful and it is probable that the only bodies thus to be
infested and preserved by dark agency are those of persons
who during their lives were distinguished by deeds of no ordin-
ary atrocity. Very often too the vampire is a corpse re-
animated by his own spirit who seeks to continue his own life
in death by preying upon others and feeding himself upon their
vitality that is to say by absorbing their blood since blood
is the principle of life.

Dr. T. Claye Shaw in his study, A Prominent Motive in
Murder™ has given us a most valuable and suggestive paper
upon the natural fascination of blood which may be repelling
or attractant, and since Dr. Havelock Ellis has acutely
remarked that “there is scarcely any natural object with so
profoundly emotional an effect as blood,” it is easy to
understand how nearly blood is connected with the sexual
manifestations, and how distinctly erotic and provocative
the sight or even the thought of blood almost inevitably
proves. It would appear to be Plumréder, who in 1830 was
the first to draw definite attention to the connexion between
sexual passions and blood. The voluptuous sensations
excited by blood give rise to that lust for blood which Dr.
Shaw terms hemothymia. A vast number of cases have
been recorded in which persons who are normal, find intense
pleasure in the thought of blood during their sexual relations,
although perhaps if blood» were actually flowing they might
feel repulsion. Yet “normally the fascination of blood,
if present at all during sexual excitement, remains more or
less latent, either because it is weak or because the checks
that inhibit it are inevitably very powerful.’’”®

Blood is the vital essence, and even without any actual
sucking of blood there is a vampire who can—consciously,
or perhaps unconsciously—support his life and re-energize
his frame by drawing upon the vitality of others. He may


134 THE VAMPIRE


be called a spiritual vampire, or as he has been dubbed a
“‘ psychic sponge.” Such types are by no means uncommon.
Sensitive people will aften complain of weariness and loss of
spirits when they have been for long in the company of certain
others, and Laurence Oliphant in his Scientific Religion has
said: ‘‘Many persons are so constituted that they have,
unconsciously to themselves, an extraordinary faculty for
sucking the life-principle from others, who are constitution-
ally incapable of retaining their vitality.” Breeders tell us
that young animals should not be herded with old ones ;
Doctors forbid young children being put to sleep with aged
individuals. It will be remembered that when King David
was old and ailing his forces were recruited by having a young
maiden brought into closest contact with him, although he
was no longer able to copulate. Et rex Dauid senuerat,
habebatque aetatis plurimos dies : cumque operiretur uestibus,
non calefiebat. Dixerunt ergo ei serui sui: Quaeremus
domino nostro regi adolescentulam uirginem, et stet coram
rege, et foueat eam, dormiatque in sinu suo, et calefaciat
dominum nostrum regem. Quaesierunt igitur adolescentulam
speciosam in omnibus finibus Israel, et inuenerunt Abisag
Sunamitidem, et adduxerunt eam ad regem. Erat autem
puella pulchra nimis, dormiebatque cum rege, et ministrabat
ei, rex uero non cognouit eam. III Kings (A.V. I Kings)
I, 1-4. (Now King David was old, and advanced in years ;
and when he was covered with clothes he was not warm.
His servants therefore said to him: “ Let us seek for our
lord the king, a young virgin, and let her stand before the
king, and cherish him, and sleep in his bosom, and warm
our lord the king.” So they sought a beautiful young woman
in all the coasts of Israel, and they found Abisag,a Sunamitess,
and brought her to the king. And the damsel was exceeding
beautiful, and she slept with the king; and served him, but
the king did not know her.) The vitality of the young and
lovely maiden served to re-energize the old Monarch, who
thus drew upon her freshness and youth, although there was
no coitus.

In an article on Vampires, Borderland, Vol. III, No. 3,
July, 1896, pp. 353-358, Dr. Franz Hartmann, mentions the
“psychic sponge” or mental vampire. He says: ‘‘ They
unconsciously vampirize every sensitive person with whom


_


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 135


they come in contact, and they instinctively seek out such
persons and invite them to stay at their houses. I know
of an old lady, a vampire, who thus ruined the health of a lot
of robust servant girls, whom she took into her service and
made them sleep in her room. They were all in good health
when they entered, but soon they began to sicken, they
became emaciated and consumptive and had to leave the
service.”

Vampirism in some sort and to some degree may be said to
leave its trace throughout almost all nature. Just as we have
the parasitic men and women, so have we the parasitic plants,
and at this point there imposes itself upon us some mention of
the animal which directly derives a name from habits which
exactly resemble those of the Slavonic Vampire—the Vampire
Bat. There has been much exaggeration in the accounts
which travellers have given of these bats and many of the
details would seem to have been very inaccurately observed
by earlier inquirers. The Encyclopedia Britannica says”
that there are only two species of blood-sucking bats known—
Desmodus rufus and Diphylla ecaudata. These inhabit the
tropical and part of the sub-tropical regions of the New
World, and are restricted to South and Central America.
Their attacks on men and other warm-blooded animals were
noticed by very early writers. Thus Peter Martyr (Anghiera)
who wrote soon after the conquest of South America, says
that in the Isthmus of Darien there were bats which sucked
the blood of men and cattle when asleep to such a degree as
even to kill them. Condamine in the eighteenth century
remarks that at Borja, Ecuador, and in other districts they
had wholly destroyed the cattle introduced by the missionaries.
Sir Robert Schomburgh relates that at Wicki, on the river
Berlice, no fowls could be kept on account of the ravages of
these creatures, which attacked their combs making them
appear white from loss of blood.

Although long known to Europeans the exact species to
which these bats belonged were not to be determined for a
long time, and in the past writers have claimed many frugivor-
ous bats, especially Vampyrus spectrum, a large bat of most
forbidding appearance, to be the true Vampire. Charles
Darwin was able to fix at least one of the blood-sucking species.
He says that the whole circumstance was much doubted in


136 THE VAMPIRE


England, but “we were bivouacking late one night near
Coquimbo in Chile, when my servant, noticing that one of
the horses was very restive went to see what was the matter,
and fancying he could detect something, suddenly put his
hand on the beast’s withers, and secured the vampire.”
(Naturalist’s Voyage Round the World, p. 22.)

Travellers say the wounds inflicted by these bats are similar
in character to a cut from a sharp razor when shaving. A
portion of the skin is taken off, and a large number of severed
capillary vessels being thus exposed, a constant flow of blood
is maintained. From this source the blood is drawn through
the exceedingly small gullet of the bat into the intestine-like
stomach, whence it is, probably, gradually drawn off during
the slow progress of digestion, while the animal sated with
food, is hanging in a state of torpidity from the roof of its
cave or from the inner side of a hollow tree.

This is exactly the Vampire who with his sharp white teeth
bites the neck of his victim and sucks the blood from the
wounds he has made, gorging himself, like some great human
leech, until he is replete and full, when he retires to his grave
to repose, lethargic and inert until such time as he shall again
sally forth to quench his lust at the veins of some sleek and
sanguine juvenal.


NOTES TO CHAPTER II.


1 Apocalypse, xxi, 8: ‘‘ But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abomin-
able, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and
all liars, they shall have their portion in the pool burning with fire and brim-
stone, which is the second death.” Also, xxii, 15: ‘“ Without are dogs, and
sorcerers, and unchaste, and murderers, and servers of idols, and everyone
that loveth and maketh a lie.”

* The House of Souls, London, 1906, pp. 113-118.

8 Scotch Historical Society, xxv, p. 348,

* A Prodigious and Tragicall History of the Arraignment . . . of six
Witches at Maidstone . . . by H. F. Gent, 1652, p. 7.

° A Full and True Relation of the Tryal, Condemnation, and Execution
of Ann Foster, 1674, p. 8.

* The Iliad of Homer, ‘‘ Rendered into English Blank Verse. By Edward
Earl of Derby.” John Murray, 1864. Vol. II, Book xxiii, ll. 82-119.

7 Choephorae, 429-433.

* One may compare the corresponding passage in the Antigone of Alfieri :

Emone, ah! tutto io sento,
Tutto Pamor, che a te portava: io sento
Il dolor tutto, a cui ti lascio.
* Pausanias, IX. 32. 6.
10 Aelian, Iept Zdwy ldiérnros, V, 49s


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 187


4 Chronicles of the House of Borgia, Baron Corvo, p. 283.

14'S. John, ix, 22, seq.

13 |S. John, xii, 42.

14S. John, xvi, 2; and S. Luke, vi, 22.

15 §. Matthew, xviii, 16-18.

16 Theodore Balsamon, I, 27 and 569; apud Migne.

7 Jacques Goar, “‘’Evxoddyiov, siue Rituale Graecorum,” Paris, 1667,

. 685.
¢} 18. C, xiii.

19 Balsamon, I, 64-5 and 437.

20 Cambridge, 1619.

2 Op. cit., xv.

22 Under Justinian, Theodore Askidas and Domitian of Caesarea refused
to condemn Origen. It remains an open question whether Origen and
Origenism were ever anathematized. Authorities are divided, and modern
writers hesitate to pronounce. The balance of opinion seems to be that
Origen was not condemned, at least it does not appear that Popes Vigilius,
Pelagius I, Pelagius II, 8. Gregory the Great, recognized any such condem-
nation.

23 Reigned 535-36.

%* Dialogues, Book II, ec. xxiii.

* The Holy Rule; especially es. vi-vii.

** This subject was painted by Lucio Massari, a pupil of Ludovico Caracci,
in the cloisters of the Benedictine convent of San Michele-in-Bosco, Bologna.
Unfortunately the fresco has perished, but it is to some extent known from
engravings.

27 De Sancta Uirginitate, xlv.

8 Dialogues, Book II, ec, xxiv.

2») Born 339 or 340; died between 394 and 403.

*° The Council of Constantinople held in 692 under Justinian II, commonly
called the Council in Z'rullo. The Orthodox Greek Church reckons this
Council to be oecumenical, but this was not so recognized in the West. S.
Bede (De sexta mundi aetate) even terms it a reprobate synod; and Paul
the Deacon (Hist. Lang., VI, p. 11) an erratic assembly.

Also the Third Council of Carthage.

F vias Aaa cult of S. Othmar began to spread almost immediately after his
eath.

84 Iso of S. Gall wrote De miraculis S. Othmari, libri duo, which is given
by Migni Patres Latini, cxxi, 779-796, and in the Monumenta Germaniae
Historiae Scriptorum, II, 47-54.

88 The Historia Translationis Sancti Cuthbertias printed by the Bollandists
and by Stevenson (Eng. Hist. Soc., 1838) is superseded by the fuller text
in ‘the Rolls Series and in the Surtees Society, LI, London, 1868.

IV, xli.

8° 1585-1644.

%° This also appears in the edition of the Works of S. Gregory of 1705.
Muratori (De rebus liturgicis, vi) highly praises the Commentary of Dom
Ménard.

8? He died 1058. See Will, Aeta et Scripta quae de controuersiis ecclesiae
graecae et latinae saeculo XI composita extant, Leipsig, 1861; and Adrian
Fortescue, The Orthodox Eastern Church, London, 1907.

88 Or rd reparixt. Schmidt, Das Volksleben der Neugriechen suggests that in
the local dialect it may be reparixw.

8° Protodikos, Ilepi rijs wap’ july raps, 1860, says that in certain districts
of Asia Minor the custom was still connected with Charos; and in the same
year Skordeles, Iavdupa, xi, p. 449, stated that “until a short time ago ”
the coin for Charos was placed in the month of the dead at Stenimachos in
Thrace.

Such a practice even prevailed in England, and in some country places was
observed far later than might be supposed. I have been shown by a friend a
silver coin of the reign of Queen Anne which was placed in the mouth of his


188 THE VAMPIRE


great -grandmother when she lay dead, and only removed immediately before
the nailing down of the coffin.

40 Menaion (unvatoy from piv “ month ”) is the name of each separate
book, whence the set of Offices is generally called Menaia. The first printed
edition was made by Andrew and James Spinelli at Venice, 1528-1596; and
reprinted, 1596-1607. The latest Greek editions were published at Venice
in 1873, Orthodox rite; and at Rome in 1888, Uniate rite.

41 The Vow of Stability, stabilitas loci, which unites the monk for life to
the particular monastery in which his vows were made, was insisted upon
by S. Benedict, who thus greatly altered the pre-existing practice and put
an end to the Sarabaites and Gyrovagi against whom the holy patriarch
inveighes so sternly in the first chapter of the Rule.

“2 Compendium Theologiae Moralis. Sabetti-Barrett. Editio Uiccsima
Quinta. Pustet, 1916, p. 984.

“8 sub die 26 Maii.

“4 First edition, 1746.

4° Remiremont, a monastery and nunnery of the Rule of 8. Benedict, was
founded by SS. Romanicus and Amatus in 620. The monastery became a
Priory of the Canons Regular of S. Augustine who, in 1623, bestowed upon
the Benedictines of the Congregation of S. Vannes. Both houses were
suppressed during the French Revolution. See Gallia Christiana, Paris,
1785, xiii, 1416; and Guinot’s ’Htude historique sur lV abbaye de Remiremont
Epinal, 1886.

4° The place of pilgrimage was Notre Dame du Trésor, one of the most
famous sanctuaries of the diocese of Sainte-Dié (S. Deodatus).

“ He was consecrated in 1027; and enthroned as Pope, 12th February,
1049.

4 Apud Watterich, Pontificum Romanorum Uitae, I, Leipzig, 1862.

« The Abbey of Farfa is about twenty-six miles from Rome. It is said
that in the days of the Emperor Julian or of Gratian Caesar the Syrian S.
Laurentius dedicated a church to Our Lady here. Archeological discoveries
in 1888 seem to show that the first monastery, devastated by the Vandals
circa 457, had been built on the site of a heathen temple. The principal
founder of Farfa was Thomas de Mauricume. He had spent three years
as a humble palmer at Jerusalem, and whilst in prayer before the Holy
Sepulchre, Our Lady appeared to him and bade him return to Italy, and
there to restore Farfa. The Duke of Spoleto, Faroald, was also commanded
to help in the good work. Since 1842 the Cardinal Bishop of Sabina, a sub-
urbicarian bishop, bears also the title of Abbot of Farfa.

The body of S. Martin was venerated in his basilica at Tours. This sanctuary
was famous as a place of pilgrimage until 1562, when the Protestant hordes
attacked and demolished it, the shrine and the Holy Relics, the special
object of their hate, being destroyed. The church was restored but again
devastated under the French Revolution. Of recent years a basilica, which
is unfortunately of small dimensions, has been erected and here, on llth
November, the solemnity of S. Martin is celebrated with much pomp and a
great concourse of the faithful.

50 Lambert of Hersfeld, apud Monumenta Germaniae Historiae Scrip-
torum, V, 168. ;

51 960-1014.

53 Lib. I, pp. 26-27.

53 Calmet, op. cit., vol. II, c. xxx, p. 125.

54 Vol. I, p. 282, ed. 1920.

5 Op. cit., p. 295.

56 Apud Witthaus and Becker, Medical Jurisprudence, Vol. I, p. 446.

57 Romas, MDCCXC, vol. VII, pp. 51-68.

58 De notis et signis Sanctitatis, c. iv, 2.

59 De certitudine gloriae Sanctorum, in app. ad. c. iv.

60 The beatification of this great Servant of God is confidently awaited.

1 The Life of Monsignor Hugh Benson, by C. C. Martindale, 8S. J., London,
1916, vol. II, p. 180.


o


THE GENERATION OF THE VAMPIRE 189


62 Professor of Aesthetics, S. Ignatius College, Valkenburg, Holland.

88 Rationale diuinorum Officiorum, I, iii, 19 seq.

64 Canticles, iii, 2.

8 Wisdom, v, 17.

66 Migne, Patres Latinit, LXXV, 231.

6? One night in summer at the conclusion of Matins when the community
were all surprised to see daylight, Mechtild involuntarily exclaimed: “ Why,
dear sisters, it is already day!” The Spirit of the Dominican Order, by
Mother Frances Raphael, O.S.D., Second Edition, London, 1910, p. 144.

8 Life of the Venerable Anthony M. Claret, by the Rev. Eugene Sugranes,
C.M.F., Texas [1921].

6° Bpigrammata de Uiris Uitae Sanctimonia Illustribus ex Ordire Premon-
stratensi, Augustini Wickmans, C.R.P., Taminiae, 1895, p. 30, and pp. 16-17.

70 Vita di Santa Chiara di Montefalco . . . scritta dal Rmo. P. Maestro
Lorenzo Tardy. Roma, 1881.

71 Memorie Istoriche della Vita, Miracoli, e Culto di S. Gianuario Martire
os raccolte da D. Camillo Tutini. Napoli, 1710.

78 Reise Luich Montenegro, Vienna, 1893, p. 27.

73 Montenegro, Leipzig, 1883, pp. 81-82.

7% The Lancet, 19th June, 1909.

% Studies in the Psychology of Sex. Vol. III. ‘“‘ Analysis of the Sexua
Impulse,” pp. 120-121. Second Edition. Philadelphia. 1926.

78 Dr. Havelock Ellis, op. cit., p. 121.

™ Whence I take the following account of the vampire bat.


CHAPTER IIT


Tur TRAITS AND PRACTICE OF VAMPIRISM


Ir was generally supposed that all suicides might after death
become vampires; and this was easily extended to those
who met with any violent or sudden death. Mr. Lawson
tells us that there persists a tradition in Maina, where the
Vendetta is still maintained, that a man whose murder has
not been avenged is liable to become a vrykolakas.1 The
Mainotes who derive their name from the place Maina, near
Cape Taenaron (Matapan), even yet preserve many of the
customs and characteristics of their ancestors, and historically
are known to be of a more pure Greek descent than the inhabit-
ants of any other district. Indeed, the peninsula which thrusts
into the sea the headland of Taenaron has both social and
religious customs of its own. The population is distributed
into small villages, while here and there a white fortress will
denote the residence of a chief. A traveller writing in 1858,
remarks: “The Maina country is wild and beautiful, singu-
larly well cultivated, considering the difficulties to be sur-
mounted, and producing crops that put to shade the rich
plains of Argos and Arcadia ; whilst the interesting mountain
people exercise the highland virtues of hospitality and independ-
ance to an extent unknown in the low countries.” It has been
said that the last traveller who saw Maina while retaining some
remains of its primitive cateran glories was Lord Carnarvon,
who in 1839 explored the Morea and has left us an extra-
ordinarily interesting account of his journey.

The population of this district continued the worship of the
Pagan deities for full five hundred years after the rest of the
Roman Empire had embraced Christianity, and they were not
finally converted until the reign of the vigorous Emperor
Basil I, 867-886. Gibbon described them as ‘‘a domestic
and perhaps original race, who, in some degree, might derive
their blood from the much-injured Helotes.”® And even yet


140


wo


yr


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 141


they boast of their descent from the ancient Spartans, whilst
the histories of Leonidas and Lycurgus, who figure partly as
saints and partly as gallant brigands, are still retold round
the winter fireside. The whole district, including Kaka
Voulia (the Land of Evil Counsel), is formed by the hummocks
and escarpments of Mount Taygetos, and, with the exception
of a long strip of coast line, which the Venetians called Bassa
Maina, it is steep and hilly and for the most part barren.
The conquest of the Morea was completed by Mahomet IT
in 1456-1460, but Maina could never be thoroughly subdued,
and its inhabitants remained as entirely independent as were
the Highlanders before Culloden.

As has been remarked, ancient traditions still persevere,
and among these customs not the least obstinate is the
Vendetta. A man who has been murdered is unable to rest
in his grave until he has been avenged. Accordingly he issues
forth as a vampire, thirsting for the blood of his enemy.
In order to bring about his physical dissolution and to secure
his repose it is necessary for the next of kin toslay the murderer,
or at least some near relative of the murderer. Unless this
is done the man upon whom the duty of avenging blood
devolves is banned by the curse of the dead, and if so be that
he is himself cut off before he can satify the desires of the
deceased, the curse will yet cling to him even in death, and he
too must become a vampire. It should be remarked that this
view of blood-guilt is found in the Attic dramatists, and is in
fact the mainspring of the whole story of Orestes. In the
tragedy of this name by Euripides, Tyndareus, the father of
Clytemnestra, remonstrates very reasonably, and indeed
unanswerably with Orestes. But the hero replies and argues
that if he has not avenged his father

Had not his hate’s Erinyes haunted me ?°

Again in the Choephoroe of Aeschylus Orestes pursues the
same idea saying that unless he avenges his father, a stern
duty which has devolved upon him, he will be punished in
turn by the avengers of his father’s wrongs. It may be
remarked that in Maina to-day no recourse must be had to
law for such cases, nor must the injured person satisfy himself
by calling upon the aid of the police. To do this were incred-
ibly base, the subterfuge of a recreant and a craven. Even
if it be a life’s whole work a man is expected, either secretly


142 THE VAMPIRE


or by an open attack, to slay the murderer of his relative,
and he is highly applauded when he has accomplished this
pious deed. It must be appreciated that he is regarded as
herein directed and inspired by the dead man who returns
from his grave as a vampire craving for blood. Even if no
other motive or incentive prevailed, in spite of natural shrinking
and may be even cowardice, a man would undoubtedly prefer
to shed blood for blood, especially when this might be done
in secrecy or by craft, rather than run the terrible risk of him-
self becoming a vampire, finding no rest in the grave, but
returning to haunt and persecute even those who were most
dear to him, an unclean thing accursed of God, a foul goblin
of dread most hateful to man.

So great is the horror which the act of suicide, although
considered admirable in the decadence of Greece and Rome,
inspires in every man of sane mind that it is not at all sur-
prising it should be deemed that the unfortunate wretches who
have destroyed themselves become vampires after death.
According to the Zoroastrian creed, suicide is a most fearful
crime, and is classed among the marg-arzan, the abominable
offences. Aristotle in his Ethics, V, xv, terms suicide a sin
against the State, and as Cicero tells us Pythagoras forbade
men to depart from their guard or sentry-go in life without an
order from their commanding-officer, who is God. “ Uetatque
Pythagoras iniussu imperatoris, id est, dei, de praesidio et
statione uitae decedere.”’ (De Senectute, XX, 73). The highest
pagan argument against suicide will be found in Plato’s
Phaedo (615-628), but it is drowned in the mighty voice of the
great Saint of Hippo, which peals in no unwavering tones
down the centuries: “For if it be not lawful for a private
man to kill any man, however guilty, unless the law have
granted a special allowance for it, then surely whosoever
kills himself is guilty of homicide: and so much the
more guilty doth that killing of himself make himself,
by how much the more guiltless he was in that cause
for which he killed himself. For if the act of Judas
be worthily detested, and yet the Truth saith, that by
hanging of himself, he did rather augment than expiate
the guilt of his wicked treachery, because his despair of
God’s mercy in his damnable repentance, left no place in
his soul for saving repentance ; how much more ought he to


ZHI dF 200f) (291 \ aasnJy ay2 Wosy)


AdIDINS


AI FLV1d


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 148


forbear from being cause of his own death, that hath no guilt
in him worthy of such a punishment as death; for Judas
in hanging himself, hanged but a wicked man and died guilty,
not only of Christ’s death, but of his own also; adding the

' wickedness of being his own death, to that other wickedness
of his, for which he died.” (De Ciuitate Dei, I, xvii.)

It may be well very briefly to present the teaching of the
Church concerning positive and direct suicide. If done
without God’s permission this always constitutes a grave
injustice towards Him. To destroy a thing is in effect to
dispose of it as an absolute master and to act with regard to
it as one who has full and independent dominion over it.
But God has reserved to Himself dominion over life. Man
cannot create life, and he does not possess this full and
absolute right over his own life. Consequently suicide must be
reckoned as an attempt against the dominion and right of
ownership of the Author of life. To this injustice is super-
added a serious offence against the charity owed by man to
himself, since by self-murder he deprives himself of the
greatest good in his possession. Moreover this sin may be
aggravated by other circumstances, such as an offence against
conjugal, paternal, or filial duty ; an offence against justice or
charity; if by taking his own life a man eludes existing
obligations of justice or acts of charity which he could and
should perform. That suicide is unlawful is the general
teaching of Holy Scripture which condemns the act as a
most terrible crime, and to arouse the horror of all against
Holy Church denies the suicide the rites of Christian burial.
Again, suicide is directly opposed to the most natural and
powerful tendency of all created things, and especially of
intelligent man, the preservation of life. Indeed very large
numbers of physicians, moralists, and jurists lay it down
as a general rule that suicide is always due to dementia, so
great is the horror which this atrocious deed inspires in every
man of sane mind. As a generalization this may be admitted
to be true, for it is impossible to think that those who have
the calm and right use of their reason should deliberately
destroy themselves, and the conditions which are necessary to
incur the full culpability of an act can only in exceptional
instances be conceived of as being present in the case of a

Suicide. Sabetti inquires: “ Quaenam ad peccatum mortale


144 THE VAMPIRE


requirantur ?”’ And his answer is given as follows: “ Tria
necessario requiruntur, scilicet materia grauis uel in se, uel ob
circumstantias; aduertentia plena ad malitiam grauem
actus; consensus plenus uoluntatis in preuaricationem.
Itaque,

Requiritur 1°. materia grawis, secus non posset haberi lex
obligans sub graui.

Requiritur 2°. plena aduertentia mentis, secus non habebitur
plena deliberatio.

Requiritur 3°. plenus consensus uoluntatis, quia nisi peccator
cum pleno consensu plenaque deliberatione obiectum peccati
Deo preferat, et sic finem suum ultimum in creatura constituat,
nequit dici a Deo totaliter recedere. Insuper a bonitate diuina
prorsus alienum est, hominem «tern damnationi addicere siue
propter transgressionem leuem siue propter actum non per-
fecte liberum et uoluntarium.—Cf. S. Alphons, nn. 5, 6 et
lt

The Christian Middle Ages were free from the terrible tend-
ency of suicide, but with the loss of Faith it re-appeared, and
Masaryk in his study Der Selbtsmord als sociale Massener-
scheinung der modernen Civilisation (Vienna, 1881), considered
it to be the special evil of these later days. Sad to relate
self-destruction has fearfully increased since the Great War,
but it may perhaps be mitigatingly advanced that the reason
of the world tottered almost to eternal delirium during the
chaos and welter of blood, and the balance is not recovered
yet.

It is true that among certain nations there appears to be
an indifference to human life, nay, a contempt of death
itself, which often takes the most extravagant and the most
outrageous forms. The Goths, the heathen Vandals, and
Norse savages not only approved but sought suicide and
violent death. It is, of course, only among the utterly
benighted that it is possible for such abominable ideas to
obtain. For example, there existed among a tribe of robbers
in Southern India customs of the utmost ferocity. Such
practices as the following certainly prevailed during the
eighteenth century, but they have no doubt, long since been
happily suppressed. If two persons had quarrelled, sometimes
for the most trifling reasons, a man would kill himself merely
in order to be revenged on his adversary. He believed that


ES


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 145


his ghost would be able to return and harry the surviver, or at
least that some dire retribution must fall on the head of his
enemy who drove him to such extreme measures.° Again,
custom required that if a man committed suicide, letting it be
known that it was on this account, the person with whom
he had had the difference that led to this abominable act must
immediately follow his example.’

Lord Avebury’s statement :° “It is said that in China, if a
rich man is condemned to death, he can sometimes purchase
a willing substitute at a very small expense,” has been
traversed and Professor Parker would not commit himself
any further than by saying: “It is popularly stated that
substitutes can be bought for Taels fifty, and most certainly
this statement is more than true, so far as the price of human
life is concerned ; but it is quite another question whether
the gaolers and judges can always be bribed.”® Dr. W. T. A.
Barber, who had been a missionary in China, relates that he
had known very large numbers of persons who committed
suicide out of spite against some one else, “the idea being,
first, the trouble given by minions of the law to the survivor ;
second that the dead would gain a vantage ground by becom-
ing a ghost, and thus able to plague his enemy in the flesh.’’°

Tt is not surprising to learn that in ancient times, before
the advent of Christianity, among such savage people as the
Celts and the Thracians suicide was not only common but
treated with the most appalling lightness and even flippancy.
Thus Athenzus, speaking of the banquets of the Thracians,
quotes from Seleucus as follows: “ And Seleucus says, ‘ that
some of the Thracians at their drinking parties play the game
of hanging ; and fix a round noose to some high place, exactly
beneath which they place a stone which is easily turned round
when any one stands upon it ; and then they cast lots, and he
who draws the lot, holding a sickle in his hand, stands upon
the stone, and puts his neck into the halter ; and then another
person comes and raises the stone, and the man who is sus-
pended, when the stone moves from under him, if he is not
quick enough in cutting the rope with his sickle, is killed ;
and the rest laugh, thinking his death good sport.’ 11

Upon the authority of the famous Stoic philosopher, Posidon-
ius, Athenzeus tells us of similar brutalities which took place
among the Celts. He writes: “ But Posidonius,!” in the


10


146 THE VAMPIRE


third, and also in the twentieth book of his Histories, says
‘The Celtee sometimes have single combats at their enter-
tainments. For being collected in arms, they go through the
exercise, and make feints at, and sometimes they even go so
far as to wound one another. And being irritated by this,
if the bystanders do not stop them, they will proceed even to
kill one another. But in olden times,’ he continues, ‘ there
was a custom that a hind quarter of pork was put on the table,
and the bravest man took it; and if any one else laid claim
to it, then the two rose up to fight till one of them was slain.
And other men in the theatre having received some silver or
gold money, and some even for a number of earthen vessels
full of wine, having taken pledges that the gifts promised
shall really be given, and having distributed them among their
nearest connexions, have laid themselves down on doors with
their faces upwards, and then allowed some bystander to cut
their throats with a sword.’

“« And Euphorion the Chalcidian, in his Historical Memorials,
writes as follows: ‘ But among the Romans it is common for
five mine!’ to be offered to any one who chooses to take it,
to allow his head to be cut off with an axe, so that his heirs
might receive the reward : and very often many have returned
their names as willingly, so that there has been a regular
contest between them as to who had the best right to be
beaten to death.’”!4 These atrocious examples serve to
show us something of the evil and the corruption of which
Christianity cleansed the pagan world, although it is to be
feared that the battle is not yet won, since it is a notorious
and deplorable fact that at the hour of such a crisis as the
Great War the respect due to human life became cheapened
in men’s eyes, with the consequence that murder and deeds
of violence once more broke out in every direction showing
that savage instincts were dominated indeed, but in many
cases not wholly eradicated. It does not require a keen
perception to see the direct agency of the devil here, and these
atrocities which bred so callous and cruel a spirit are by no
means altogether unconnected with the recrudescence of
necromancy and black magic which fov] arts once more
grew green and were almost openly pursued on every side.

The belief that a man has not complete dominion over his
own life and that it is unlawful for him to take it is certainly a


a


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 147


feeling naturally implanted in the human breast, and it was
only when nations were entirely barbarian or had became
decadent and corrupt that the notion of suicide was held up
as noble and even heroic. Whatever certain among the later
Greeks may have practised and taught, in earlier days, as we
have seen, the act of suicide was regarded as a dark and pre-
sumptuous deed. They truly felt that there was in it some-
thing of acéBea, something of that %8pis which so surely
stirred the wrath of heaven and inevitably called down
righteous vengeance. Indeed the evil and malice of suicide
did not end with death but continued beyond the grave.
The umbra of a man who had slain himself was dreaded and
feared. So in ancient Athens it was the custom to cut off the
hand of a suicide and to cremate it or at least to bury it far from
his body, the object of such mutiletion being to prevent his
ghost from attacking the living.!®

Similar beliefs exist among native African tribes. Thus
the Wajagga of East Africa dread the spectres of suicides.
When a man has hanged himself a certain complicated cere-
monial becomes imperative. They take the rope from his
neck and suspend a goat in the noose, after which the animal
is swiftly slain. The idea seems that hereby the phantom
will be in some way appeased, and he will not be so likely to
tempt human beings to follow his evil example.”

The Baganda of Central Africa have an even greater horror
of the ghosts of suicides, and the most elaborate precautions
are invariably taken to protect themselves against these
dangerous visitors. The body of a man who has destroyed
himself is removed as far from all human habitation as possible,
to waste land or to a cross-road, and there is utterly consumed
with fire. Next the wood of the house in which the horrid
deed has been done is burned to ashes and scattered to the
winds ; whilst if the man has hanged himself upon a tree this
is hewn to the ground and committed to the flames, trunk,
roots, branches and all. Even this is hardly deemed to be
sufficient. Curiously enough there is a lurking idea that the
ghost of a suicide may survive after the cremation of the body,
so horrible is this crime felt to be and so irradicated the taint
that this terrible deed establishes. This is extremely signi-
ficant since the cases in which cremation, a complete purga-
tion and destruction by fire, cannot obliterate guilt and


148 THE VAMPIRE


destroy the evil infection are indeed exceptional, and it
might be no easy task to find a parallel instance. However,
the Baganda when passing by the spot where the body of a
suicide has been burned always take good care to pelt it with
sticks and clods of earth to prevent the ghost from catching
them. Although these places in particular are dangerous
to. the last degree, there are other graves that may be
haunted by phantoms, which as they have no bodies are not
strictly vampires, but which certainly belong to the vampire
family. Such are those remote places where persons who have
been accused of black magic and who failed to satisfy the ritual
ordeals have been burned to death, as also those spots where
persons of evil and atrocious life have been cremated or
interred.18 The Maraves, a tribe of South Africa, who also
burned witches alive, whenever they had occasion to pass the
place of doom, pelted it with stones, and it is said that in some
instances of spots considered particularly ill-omened a regular
cairn or tumulus of loose stones has arisen.” In Mada-
gascar too, certain solitary graves bear an exceedingly ill-
repute, so that the chance traveller with averted face throws
stones at them or large lumps of earth in order to prevent the
ghost following in his tracks and seizing on him.” It must
be remarked, and this is very important, that the sticks
and stones, or heavy clods of earth with which a grave is
pelted are not meant merely as a symbolical insult and
expression of righteous indignation, but are actually missiles
which will strike and hurt the being who haunts the spot
of interment. So since the haunter can be struck and injured
by these very material objects,—the heavier they are the better,
—he must himself possess a certain concrete substantiality,
and inasmuch as objects make an impression upon him he
must exist under some kind of physical condition. Doubtless
the exact idea is not very clearly defined in the minds of those
who are so careful to pelt the grave, yet if stones will not
merely ward off an attack from the haunter, but when in the
course of time they become piled up into a small cairn they
serve to keep the deceased in his place, that is to say in the
grave, there must be some sort of material entity which can be
so materially frustrated and obstructed. Here then we have
the essential and complete vampire.

It is recorded by a traveller about the middle of the last


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 149


century that when he was journeying in company with two
Mussulmans from Sidon to Tyre, as he drew near the latter
city he noticed a great pile of stones by the wayside, where-
upon his companions began to pick up all the loose pebbles
that came to hand and discharged them violently at the
heap at the same time uttering the most fearful imprecations.
When they had passed and were at some little distance they
explained that a notorious brigand, whose hands were stained
with the hideous cruelties and innocent blood, had been slain
there, and buried on the spot half a century before. The
stones they threw and their curses were directed against this
villain. It might be thought in this case that the missiles
were a mark of loathing and contempt, but it seems far more
probable that they were intended to serve a very utilitarian
purpose, that is actually to keep off the wretch who would still
be haunting the pit into which his body had been cast fifty
years since.”

It even appears that in many parts of Syria when brigands
are killed by the highway, or vagrom murderers are dispatched
in the open country side beyond the walls of a city the body
is left to rot unburied where it lies, and after a while it is
merely covered over with a heap of stones ; moreover every-
one who passes by is bound to quoit a stone or stick to add
to the pile under the penalty of incurring some dreadful
misfortune. It is supposed that heaven will horribly curse
the person who fails to throw his flinty tribute as he goes.”

It is not only among rude African tribes and in the East
that the graves of persons who have led cruel and anti-social
lives, particularly the spots where suicides have been buried,
are thus places of execration and fear, but in Pomerania and
in West Prussia, not to instance many other districts, the
spots where persons who have wrought their own destruction
happen to be interred are regarded as unlucky in the highest
degree, and there is no more malevolent and harmful spectre
than the suicide’s ghost. A man who has destroyed himself
must not defile God’s acre, in no wise may he be buried in
the churchyard but at the place where the desperate deed
was done, and everybody who passes by will cast a stone on
the spot unless he wishes the ghost of the suicide to plague
him nightly and to give him no rest until he is driven to the
same dreadful fate. It is said that, as in Africa piles of sticks


150 THE VAMPIRE


and stones accumulate to a great size, so similar cairns rise
upon these haunted spots in the more remote districts along
the cold shores washed by the Baltic Sea.

It is not surprising to find that in a country such as Russia,
which through the ages has so often tottered to madness
and of late years fallen into stark lunacy, during the seventeenth
century an epidemic of suicide raged. It persisted, indeed,
at spasmodic intervals throughout the eighteenth and even
the nineteenth centuries, but it was somewhat earlier than this
that the troubles of that luckless nation blazed out in furious
frenzy. As when the year 1000 approached a fearful apoca-
lyptic mania inflamed many parts of Europe, and men
imagining that the world was about to come to an end, that
almost any hour, any moment the Angel’s clarion would
blare, heaven and earth shrivel like some parching scroll
and the Judge be set on His awful throne, in their hundreds
deserted cities and homes to wander abroad preaching
fevered repentance and the most extravagent forms of penance,
or else in frantic despair abandoned themselves to debauchery
and violence, so in Russia some mad visionary who proclaimed
that the crack of doom was appointed for the year 1666
set the whole country aflame with terror. In many parts,
men ceased to labour in the fields, relinquished their businesses
and all social intercourse, barricaded themselves in their
houses behind closed windows and fast-barred doors, await-
ing the end with the gloomiest forebodings. As might have
been expected, great numbers completely lost their senses
and scores of dangerous lunatics not only infested the high-
road but even invaded villages and towns preaching that
the only way to escape the wrath to come was to prevent the
final day by self-destruction. They were, moreover, very
willing and eager to help those who shrank from so severe a
test, and before long red murder was rife in every direction.
Their services, however, were not required as frequently as
might have been supposed for the delirium spread with such
alarming rapidity that not merely households but whole
communities eagerly devoted themselves to death. If in
some paroxysm of wild hysteria a man had declared his inten-
tion of becoming a martyr, for so these poor wretches were
deemed, the pious duty devolved upon his friends and relations
of seeing that he scrupulously fulfilled his vow. Should he


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 151


wish to change his mind or in any way seek to escape his fate
he was pursued and saved in spite of himself by being put to
death in the most atrocious torments. A veritable reign of
terror ensued, and northern Russia seemed well-nigh depopu-
lated. It were superfluous to enter into the horrible details,
but it may suffice to say that at first starvation was the usual
method by which these maniacs committed suicide. In the
forest of Vetlouga, one fanatic at huge expense actually
built a tower without doors and windows, into the body of
which persons were lowered through a trap in the roof. But
this was too long a process; it gave space for reflection and
with the pangs of hunger reason resumed her sway. Those
within yelled to be released, but all in vain. To shouts and
clamour succeeded groans and fainter lamentations, until as
the days passed all was still. Another remedy was found and
presently the method which was preferred and which was
officially prescribed as safer and more pleasing to God was
immolation by fire. Accordingly, the missionaries of this
horrible impiety proclaimed safety through the flame ; as the
prophet Elias had ascended to heaven in a blazing chariot,
so the deluded wretches were taught they would ascend to a
glorious and delightful eternity from the midst of the con-
flagration. Hundreds and even thousands perished in huge
holocausts. Whole areas were strictly enclosed, the candi-
dates took their places therein and the compound having been
previously drenched with pitch, bitumen, and inflammable
oils torches were applied at many points. If any overcome
by agony escaped with scorched and blackened limbs they
were caught and hurled back into the heart of the pyre.
These immolations generally took place during the dark
winter season and from midnight until the faint streaks of
dawn the red glow of these horrid furnaces could be seen in
every direction. For hundreds of verstas the land became
a veritable Tophet. As the morning broke, hordes of wolves
attracted by the stench of roasting flesh assembled to pull
trunks and limbs from the embers ; a dark cloud of suffocating
smoke, greasy with human fat that fouled both ground and
houses, hung low in the sky, and ere many days were past the
plague was stalking abroad with fatal voracity. It was not
until the most vigorous measures had been taken that these
terrible practices could be checked, and it seems that the


152 THE VAMPIRE


venom of the madness persisted long and late, for as recently
as 1860, fifteen persons in the district of Olonetz committed
suicide by fire, whilst during the winter of 1896-1897, twenty-
four religious fanatics buried themselves alive in a pit near
Tiraspol.** The monk, Falaley, constantly preached that
death was man’s only means of salvation and that he must
have done with this life of sin. One night under his influence,
eighty-four persons congregated near the river Perevozinka
and began to pray. Many of them were already half-crazed
through excessive fasting, and they almost covered themselves
with brambles and brushwood to which fire was to be set at
a given signal. A woman, taking alarm at the thought of
so horrible a death, escaped and informed the authorities.
When the police arrived the fanatics shrieked that Anti-
christ was approaching, and setting fire to the pile most
perished in the flames. A few who were rescued received
sentences of imprisonment and deportation, but a fanatic
called Souchkoff, managed to escape and continued to preach
the gospel of death. Maddened by his doctrine in one
locality alone, sixty families resolved to commit suicide at a
certain moment, and a peasant, named Petroff, entering a
neighbour’s house cut down his wife and children with a hatchet.
In a barn hard by,a dozen men with their wives had assembled
and amid hymns of triumph they laid their heads upon an
improvised block to be hacked off by Petroff. In another
hut a woman and three children were dispatched at their own
earnest request. At length when he was weary, Petroff
himself kneeled down and was slain by Souchkoff. Between
1860 and 1870, a maniac named Chadkin, proclaimed that
Antichrist was here, and all most follow him to the forests
and there die of hunger. A large number assembled and his
most devoted followers saw to it that nobody could escape.
After a few days the sufferings of the crowds were fearful
and the place rang with their screams and groans. Never-
theless Chadkin and his apostles did not waver. When some
poor creature, frantic with agony, managed to break away
and informed the police, the devotees at once began to kill
all who had gathered together, and by the time the
authorities had arrived in the utmost haste there were found
but three survivors.

Buddhist monks in China are often recorded to have


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 153


sought their Nirvana through an act of self-immolation by
fire, and it is said that every year among the lamaresais of
Tien-tai, in the province of Tai-chow, some half-a-dozen
bonzes thus devote themselves to death. These unfortunate
persons believe that their voluntary destruction crowns the
monastery with honours and blessing, they are aware that
they will be worshipped after their suicide, and they suppose
that they will become the divinities of the district and possess
the power to protect the whole neighbourhood, to grant fair
weather and lucky seasons, a bounteous harvest and all
prosperity. Such public incinerations are conducted with
great ceremony, and take place upon a major festival which is
bound to attract crowds of pilgrims and reverent suppliants
to the spot.” It is said that among the Eskimo of Bering
Strait a sorcerer has been known to burn himself alive, fully
believing that thus he will return to life as a shaman with
much greater powers and a far fuller knowledge of magic
than he had hitherto enjoyed.** It may be remembered
that even such low motives as vanity and a craving for mere
notoriety have proved an incentive sufficiently powerful to
induce men to seek a dramatic, if painful death by fire. Thus
the charlatan Peregrinus after a career of the most braggart
ostentation courted undying fame by self-immolation upon a
pyre at the Olympic festival, which extraordinary perform-
ance attracted throngs not only of sensible persons who
despised and mocked him but of encomiasts and apologists
who regarded him as at the least a hero, if not something
nearly approaching to deity.?’ It can hardly be argued that
higher motives inspired Empedocles if the account preserved by
Diogenes Laertius** to which Horace *® makes reference be
true, namely that hoping by a sudden disappearance he
might be accounted a god, the philosopher flung himself
into the crater of Mount Aetna, but that the suicide was
revealed owing to the fact that the volcano almost immediately
after threw up one of his sandals, and thus betrayed the
manner of his death.

Josephus states that the Jews used not to bury the bodies
of those who had destroyed themselves until after sunset.
In Scotland it is still thought that the body of a suicide will
not fall to dust until the time when he should have died in the
order of nature,*® and it is very generally held that a such


154 THE VAMPIRE


a one must be buried with the grave facing north and south.
This belief also existed in England and there are graves facing
north and south to be seen at Cowden (Kent) and Bergholt
(Suffolk), which are locally said to be those of persons who
have destroyed themselves, for it is almost universally
declared that Christian burial should be with the head in
west, looking eastward*'. Asis well-known, in England until
the time of George IV, it was the general practice to bury
suicides at the cross-roads, where a stake was driven through
the body. In the year 1823, it was enacted that the body
of a suicide should be buried privately between the hours
of nine o’clock and twelve at night with no religious ceremony.
In 1882, this law was altered, and the body may now be
committed to the earth at any time and with such rites or
prayers those in charge of the funeral think fit or may be
able to procure. In certain country places it is still supposed
that the spirit of the last person buried in a graveyard has
to keep watch lest any suicide should be interred there.
One explanation of the reason why persons who had taken
their own lives should be buried at the cross-roads was that
the ghosts of murdered persons were supposed to walk until
the bodies had been recovered and committed to the church-
yard with Christian rites, and since this was impossible in the
case of suicides, a stake was driven through them when
deposited at the cross-roads in order to keep the ghost from
wandering abroad.** It is certain that the idea here is the
same as that of driving a stake through the vampire, for
sometimes this precaution was taken in the case of persons
who might perchance become vampires, an operation per-
formed not as an indignity but as a preventitive. Burchard
of Worms tells us: “‘ Cum aliquis femina parere debit, et non
potest, in ipso dolore si mortem obierit, in ipso sepulchro
matrem cum infante palo in terram transfigunt.” And
again: “‘Fecisti quod quaedam mulieres instinctu diaboli
facere solent, cum aliquis infans sine baptismo mortuus
fuerit, tollunt cadauer paruuli, et ponunt in aliquo secreto
loco, et palo corpusculum transfigunt, dicentes, si sic non
fecissent, quod infantulus surgeret et multos laedere posset.”
The reason for the selected spot of the suicide’s grave being a
cross-road is further explained by the belief that when the
ghost or the body issues from the grave and finds that there


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 155


are four paths stretching in as many directions he will be
puzzled to know which way to take and will stand debating
until dawn compels him to return to the earth, but woe betide
the unhappy being who happens to pass by when he is linger-
ing there perplexed and confused. Accordingly after sunset,
every sensible person will avoid all crossroads since there are
no localities more certainly and more fearfully haunted and
disturbed. It will readily be remembered that the Romans
were far more precise than we used to be in their definition
of cross-roads and employed no less than three terms,
biuwium when the road branched into two, triuiwm when the
road forked into three, and quadriuiwm when the intersection
of the ways gave four arms. The prophet Ezechiel tells us
that Esarhaddon took his stand in biwio when he wished to
divine: ‘‘ Stetit enim rex Babylonis in biuio, in capite duarum
uiarum, diuinationem quaerens, commiscens  sagittas:
interrogauit idola, exta consuluit.” (xxi, 21.) “‘ For the king
of Babylon stood in the highway, at the head of two ways,
seeking divination, shuffling arrows: he enquired of the
idols, and consulted entrails.” Trivia is the common name
given to Diana, when as Hecate she was invoked at the cross-
ways. Chariclides Comicus in Meineke’s Comicorum Fragmenta,
IV, p. 556, has rpodizis, and invokes : “Exarn tprodéri, Tpimop¢e,
TplT porwrre.

Varro, De Lingua Latina, VII, 16, writes: ‘‘ Titanis Triuia
Diana est, ab eo dicta Trivia, quod in triuio ponitur fere in
oppodis Graecis, uel quod luna dicitur esse, quae in caelo
tribus uiis mouetur in altitudinem et latitudinem et longitud-
inem.” Macrobius, Saturnalia, I, ix, notes: ‘‘ Dianae uero
ut Trivuiae uiarum omnium iidem tribuunt potestatem.”

In Wales it was said that witches slept by day under any
boulder that might be at a cross-road, and when dusk had
fallen they crept forth to steal little children and feast upon
their flesh. The gallows was often erected at the cross-roads,
and here the criminal hung in chains, and nourished by his
rotting flesh the mandrake grew. Many are the superstitions
which cluster around the mandrake or mandragora—“ the
semi-human ”’ as Columella (De re rustica, x, 19) calls it. It
was the plant of fertility, the plant of magical virtue and
occult power. In Germany it bears the name of the Little
Gallows Man, and it was believed that when a murderer or


156 THE VAMPIRE


thief was hanged and his semen or urine fell to the ground
there grew up the mandrake. In England the same super-
stition prevailed, and in his pasquil A Character of an Ugly
Woman or a Hue and Cry after Beauty, 1678, the Duke of
Buckingham wrote: “‘Jmprimis, as to her Descent, some
Heralds derive her Pedigree from that of the Scotch Barnacles,
and say, that she dropt from some teeming Gallows, or sprung
up like Mandrakes from the S of some gibbitid Ragga-
muffian.” No one must dare uproot the mandrake for it
moans and shrieks so fearfully that the digger will die with the
yells ringing in his ears. A dog is taken and round his tail
is tied a string, one end of which is attached to the plant.
A man whose ears are fast stopped with wax and wool, tempts
the dog away with some dainty. As the animal tugs at the
cord the mandrake will be pulled from the ground, but the poor
beast will fall dead at the horrid scream it gives. But there
has been secured a talisman, nay, more a familiar.

Even in the mythology of Ceylon the cross-roads play an
ominous part. Thus in the Yakkun Nattanawa, which is
defined by its translator, John Callaway, as “‘a Cingalese
poem descriptive of the Ceylon system of demonology,”
it is said of the Black She-Devil: ‘“‘ Thou female Devil, who
acceptest the offerings at the place where three ways meet,
thou causest the people to be sick by looking upon them at the
place where four ways join together.” The devil Maha-
Sohon watches “‘ to drink the blood of the elephant in the place
where the two and three roads meet together.” Maha-
Sohon is the devil of the tombs, “therefore go not in the
roads by night: if you do so you must not expect to escape
with your life.” Another devil, Oddy, stands where three
ways meet, watching, and hot for mischief. Again the Devil of
the Victim “ watches and looks upon the people, and causes
them to be sick at the place where three roads meet, and
where four ways meet.”

Ralstan** says that it is a common Russian belief that at
cross-roads, or in the neighbourhood of cemeteries, an animated
corpse often lurks watching for some unwary traveller whom
it may be able to strangle and devour, eagerly quafling the
warm blood from his veins. In Cornwall to-day cross-roads
are most carefully avoided after night-fall,°* but this may be
because it is commonly accepted that at the cross-roads


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 157


witches from all the world over assemble for their sabbat. It
seems more likely that these particular spots are avoided
because of the vampires, for Henry Boguet tells us: “‘ Les
Sorciers tiennét leurs sabbats indifferemét en tous lieux.”*
Bernhard Ragner says that if you go to a cross-road between
eleven o’clock and midnight on Christmas eve and listen, you
will hear what most concerns you for the coming year.*°
It may be pointed out that this is the one night throughout
the year when strange wonders happen. It is then that the
thorn that sprang at Glastonbury from the Sacred Crown
which the holy old man, S. Joseph of Arimathea, brought
with him from Palestine, when Avalon was still an island,
bourgeons into fragrant blossoms. The Cornish miners seem
to hear the sound of singing choirs that arise from submerged
churches by the shore, and others said that bells, beneath
the ground where villages had been, upon that eve yearly
ring a glad peal. At midnight the oxen, the cattle, and all
the beasts kneel and adore, as they adored in the stable-cave
at Bethlehem. No evil thing hath power, and as the Officer
in Hamlet*’ tells us :


Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes
Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,

The bird of dawning singeth all night long ;

And then, they say, no spirit can walk abroad ;
The nights are wholesome ; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallow’d and so gracious is the time.


In certain districts of East Prussia on Christmas Eve candles
are kept burning all night in the houses and no window is
shuttered. It is supposed that the spirits of the dead will return
in friendly-wise and the opportunity is given to them to
warm themselves, so that on future occasions when they haunt
the villages with more malicious intent they may remember
those who are kind to them Christmas after Christmas and
spare those houses from molestation and injury.*®

Not only are those who die excommunicate, that is to say
solemnly and officially cursed by the Church, liable to become
vampires, but more, those who die under any kind of such ban,
especially if it be the malison of a parent, or if it be a man
who has perjured himself in a grave matter and called down
upon his own head damnation and all manner of evil should


158 THE VAMPIRE


what he asseverate be untrue. The belief in the fearful power
of a curse, especially the curse of a father or a mother, which,
whether rightfully or wrongfully adjured, works out its
vengeance through the whole stock of kith and kin, involving
in misfortunes and destruction, innocent and guilty alike,
finds supreme illustration in the masterpieces of Greek
tragedy. It is the mighty theme of the trilogy of the Oresteia,
for from the very outset of the Agamemnon there is a brooding
and oppressive sense of multitudinous crimes, of sins done
long years ago which have swelled and accumulated their
guilt like some black cloud of transgressions about to burst
over the doomed race in a welter of tragedy and blood. The
evil wrought by Thyestes, the crimes of his grandsire Tantalus,
the atrocious banquet of Atreus, have yet to be expiated in
misery, in anguish and affliction. When the weird Trojan
woman approaches the threshold she scents the carnage of
the shambles and horrors manifold, and as the pang of inspira-
tion thrills her she shrieks aloud: “The Furies are in this
house ; blood-surfeited, but not assuaged, they hold perpetual
revel here. It is the crime of Atreus and of Thyestes which
they hunt, and woe will follow woe.”


Thy "yap oreyny TV” ovror’ exetrret Xopos
ciuployyos ouK evpeovos: ov yap eb Neyer,
Kal way TeT@KeS Y, tos Opaciver Oat a)éor,
Bporeiov aina Ka@mos év Sopot pevet,
dvomeuTros &w, cvyyovev 7E pwvov.


Sophocles also no less fearfully shows us the tale of Oedipus
and his children, the legend of the house of Laius, whose
family was as equally famous among the Greeks as the stock
of Atreus for its overwhelming disasters, the bitter fruit of an
undying curse which destroyed the whole race. Laius, the
son of Labdacus, had wrought a mighty evil. Lusting after the
beauty of Chrysippus, the son of Pelops, with violence he
raped the lad who belonged to another, and thus had sinned
the sin of 8s since he both betrayed another’s love and
used brute force in doing so.*° For this crime his whole
progeny was involved in destruction. He married Jocasta,
the sister of Creon of Thebes, and the oracle warned him that
his son should kill him. When a boy was born to the royal
pair they cruelly exposed their child, a helpless infant, to the


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 159


wild beasts on Mount Cithaeron, but the will of heaven is
not frustrated by the impotence of man. Many years after
as King Laius is riding privately in his chariot attended by
only five servants they meet a young man upon the road.
The king bids him make way, commanding him in rough and
insolent terms. A quarrel arises. The stranger, a stalwart
warrior, strikes down the master and certain of the servants,
but one escapes and fled away for his life. Presently Oedipus
solves the riddle of the monstrous Sphinx, when the Thebans,
in gratitude, since their old monarch has been slain by robbers
on the highway elect him to rule over them, giving him the
lady Jocasta to wife. He governs the state in great prosperity,
and four children are born to him, two sons, Polyneices and
Eteocles; two daughters, Antigone and Ismene. It is the
calm before the storm ; a fearful plague afflicts the city, and
when the divine Phoebus Apollo is consulted he answers
that the murderer of Laius must be driven from the land.
The old prophet, Teiresias, the mystic whose converse is in
heaven, but who yet in his stern pride still retains much of
humanity, is asked to rede the enigma. He answers with deep
sighs and groans, seeking to be led home again, until goaded
by the impatience and hot temper of the king he flashes forth
the truth. But it is not immediately recognized, and Oedipus
begins formally to inquire into the circumstances of the death
of his predecessor. Detail is heaped upon detail and at last
the horrible revelation forces itself wpon his soul. Mad with
terror, Jocasta hangs herself within her bed-chamber, and
Oedipus tearing from her dress the buckles and clasps of
gold strikes out his eyes that are unworthy to look upon
the golden light of day. One moment a king, the next a
beggar, red with parricide, polluted with the fires of incest,
accursed of Godand man, in the bitterness of utter dereliction
he must go forth desolate and alone. He dare not even bid
farewell to his sons and daughters for they are the children of
doom, seed of that admixture too fearful to be named. In
the next play, the Oedipus Coloneus, we find him many years
afterwards, a mysterious figure set apart by beaven in awful
loneliness. He is waiting in a place of peculiar sanctity, the
reverent groves of the Semnai Theai, the holy goddesses of
divine retribution, waiting for his silent passage to the shadowy
world. And even here the evil ambitions of his sons would


160 THE VAMPIRE


fain disturb him at the end. But he is far removed from the
strife and passion of this world, and when young Polyneices,
fair, false and fickle, endeavours to enlist his father’s sym-
pathies the lad receives the awful answer: ‘‘ Dry were your
eyes, hard as stone your heart, dumb your lips, when I went
forth from Thebes friendless and alone. Here then is your
reward: before the Walls of Thebes you shall perish, pierced
by your brother’s hand, and there your brother shall die slain
by. you.” This terrible imprecation is only too terribly
fulfilled, and defying the laws of King Creon, who would have
the curse-polluted ghosts of the brothers seek for rest in vain
even in Hades, Antigone meets her doom. Nor does Creon,
the respectable Creon, weak and spiteful, impotent, yet a
tyrant, escape scathless. His malice is sharply punished,
owing to his own folly and cruelty he loses both wife and son,
for he has forgotten that great truth which 8. Thomas enunci-
ated, that ‘‘ reason is the first principle of all human works,’’*?
and “the secular power is subject to the spiritual even as the
body is subject to the soul.” So owing to his impiety he is
left without child to carry on his name, bereaved of all, broken
and collapsed, piteously confessing himself—uaraov avdpa—
a feckless and foolish old man.

It has seemed worth while thus very briefly and inadequately
to review these two great themes of Greek tragedy, since
in both instances they set forth in detail the terrible and
relentless working of a curse, which it may be said has something
of that divine vengeance that visits “the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth genera-
tion.” And so something of this old Greek doctrine was very
true, for who can foresee the end of the working of a curse ?
Even to-day there are places and there are properties in
England which owing to deeds of blood and violence in their
acquisition entail some dire misfortune upon all who seek
to enjoy and possess them. Such a place is the ruined Abbey
of Glastonbury, and of many another house—Tintern, New-
stead, Cowdray, Waverley, Barlings, Croxton, Dureford—
the tale is true. De male quaesita non gaudet tertius haeres,
says the old adage, and it is well known that lands wrested
from the Church will not descend in due course owing to a
failure of heirs. Such a case has come under my own observa-
tion, and Aubrey in his Miscellanies cites Hinton Charterhouse


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 161


on Mendip and Butleigh, near Glastonbury as never having
passed to the third generation. So did Cromwell’s generals
and adherents transmit a troubled inheritance to their descend-
ants. Fairfax House, Putney, had its haunted chamber
which was never used.

It must be remembered that a solemn curse is not merely
an expletive or an imprecatory exclamation, perhaps quite
meaningless, but it is far more than this; it is significant and
operative. The malediction is conceived as having a certain
efficacious power, and it may be noted that this force if rightly
launched does not seem to exhaust itself. No more terrible
fate could be imagined than for a man to become a vampire,
and this was the inevitable consequence if he were not cleared
of a merited malison. The old proverb says :

Curses are like young chicken
And still come home to roost.*!

This adage is terribly exemplified in the vampire who is
supposed when he returns from his grave first to attack those |
who on earth have been his nearest and dearest. Of all curses
the parental malediction is most dreaded, and curiously
enough in Macedonia, Mr. Abbott tells us that a godfather is
regarded with even greater respect than the actual parents
and his “ malediction is dreaded even more than that of a
Bishop.” At the present day in Greece many of the usual
imprecations definitely refer to the fact that the person so
cursed will become.a vampire after death. Such impreca-
tions as the following are in common use. “May the earth
not receive him,” (Na wij tov deyry 4 vis) ; “May the
ground not consume him” (Na piv tov gayy TO youa) :
“May the earth not digest thee ” (H' yij va pr} oe xovey):
“May the black earth spew thee up” (H' pavpy yi vac
ava€epacy); “ Mayest thou remain incorrupt,” (Na jeivys
fikvwros); “May the earth not loose thee” which is to say
may the body not decompose (Na ju} ce Avdsy } yi); May
the ground reject thee” (Na ce Byddy 76 x@ua); ‘ Mayest
thou become in the grave like rigid wood ” (Kovrove: va Bynis) ;
“May the ground reject him wholly ” (‘Ts xaua *Eepac’ réve),
which last phrase is the most terrible of all since it is nothing
other than an unspeakably impious parody of the prayer
which is uttered by the mourners at every Greek funeral
O'Ocds ’xwpéa’ réve, “May God forgive him.”


il


162 THE VAMPIRE


Since even the curse uttered by a man in moments of anger
and impatience may have such terrible effects, in Greece it
is necessary that there should be some expedient which may
dissipate and dispel the forces to which these words have
given an impetus capable of producing the most serious
and horrible results. Accordingly at a Greek death-bed
there is carried out a certain ritual to attain this end. A
vessel of water is brought to the bedside and he throws into it a
handful of salt, and when this is dissolved the sick man sprinkles
with the lymph all those who are present saying: “As this
salt dissolves so may my curses dissolve” ; ws Avevet 7 adart,
va Avwarovy 7 KaTapag pov. This ceremony absolves all
persons whom he may have cursed in his lifetime from the
evil of a ban which after death he would no longer be able to
revoke. The relations and friends then solemnly forgive the
dying man for ought that he may have done against them and
all present declare that they bear no grudge nor anger in their
hearts. It is said that if the passage be a difficult one it is
supposed that somebody whom the sick man has injured has
not forgiven him. If it can be guessed who this may be,
he is if possible, brought to the bed-side to declare his forgive-
ness of any injury he may have suffered. If, however, he
be dead a portion of the cerements must be sought and burned
to ashes in the bed-chamber of the dying person, who is
fumigated with the smoke. These elaborate precautions and
the extraordinary care which is taken, for it must often be a
matter of very great difficulty either to secure the attendance
of the living individual or to get hold of a portion of the
necessary shroud, serve to show what immense importance
the modern Greek attaches to the absolution from a curse,
and what horror the thought of a vampire inspires.

It is obvious that those who die unbaptized or apostate
will be liable to become vampires after death, and throughout
the south of Europe there still persist large numbers of
ceremonies and superstitions connected with a christening
whose object it is to secure the child a long, happy and
healthy life.

In England as in many other countries it is thought lucky
to be born on one of the great church festivals, especially if it
be a Sunday. In certain districts of Yorkshire even to-day
it is commonly said that “ Sunday children are secure from


EEE


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 168


the malice of evil spirits.’”“* Again a child born on a Saturday,
although he may have “to work hard for his living” is con-
sidered to enjoy occult powers, to have the faculty of second
sight, to be able to see ghosts and phantoms, and indeed to
be so attuned to the supernatural that he can never be harmed
even by the vampire. It is very probable that as Saturday
is the seventh day of the week those born upon this day are
considered as akin toa seventh son, who was so popularly
believed to possess extraordinary powers of healing and the
like. The old English rhyme is well known, and perhaps
the following is one of the most usual forms :


Monday’s child is fair of face,

Tuesday’s child is full of grace,
Wednesday’s child is sour and grum,
Thursday’s child has weleome home,
Friday’s child is free in giving,

Saturday’s child works hard for his living.
And the child that is born on Christmas Day
Is great, and good, and fair, and gay.


Although, as we have said, in England it is considered an
omen of a happy life to be born upon some festival the exact
opposite is the case in Slav countries. In Greece, particularly,
nothing could be more disastrous, and of all seasons Christmas
Day is the most unlucky. In many districts it is accounted a
terrible thing for any child to be born at any time between
Christmas and the Epiphany; such babies are called
éopromiacuara or “ feast-blasted,” and after death they will
assuredly become vampires. Even during life such a child is
a Callicantzaros.

The Callicantzaros is one of the most extraordinary and
most horrible of all the creatures of popular superstition.
Leone Allacci says that they only appear and have power during
the week from Christmas to New Year’s Day,*® but other
authorities extend this time until Twelfth Night. During
the rest of the year it is vaguely supposed that they sojourn in
some mysterious Hades or under-world. Local traditions
differ as to whether they aro actually demons or whether
they are human. Allacci, who certainly inclines to the latter
view, says that children born in the octave of Christmas are
liable to be seized with a terrible mania, that they rush to and
fro with the most amazing speed, that their nails grow to a


164 THE VAMPIRE


terrible length like the talons of a bird of prey whilst their
hands become as crooked claws. If they meet any person on
the highway they seize him and put the question : “Tow or
lead?” If he answer: “Tow” he may escape unharmed,
but if he be inadvertent enough to reply: “ Lead,” they grip
him with terrible force, mangle him with their talons and often
tear him to pieces, devouring him wholemeal.** During the
seventeenth century this belief so strongly prevailed that the
most cruel precautions were taken in the case of children who
might be suspected to be liable to become Callicantzari,
since the soles of their feet were exposed to a fire until the nails
were singed and so their claws clipped, and even to-day in
parts of Greece these practices prevail in a highly modified
form, for among the Aigean islanders it is said that the small
Callicantzari are particularly prone to attack and devour
their own brothers and sisters, which is another strong link
with the tradition of the vampire who, as we have noted before,
seeks the destruction of his own kin.“

It is difficult to convey any idea of the popular notions
concerning the appearance of a Callicantzaros, as almost every
local account differs from others in almost every particular.
For the most part they are considered to be very gaunt *
and of enormous strength. On the other hand there are
some who are dwarfed and stunted. The larger variety
generally appear as ineffably hideous monsters with black
distorted faces, eyes glaring red like fire, huge ears such as
those of a donkey, great gaping mouths furnished with a
slobbering scarlet tongue and sharp gleaming teeth, from
which streams their fetid breath in horrid gusts. Again the
pigmy Callicantzaros may appear in the shape of a child,
but in this case it is usually deformed in some grotesque and
painful manner. On the other hand they are sometimes
harmless hobgoblins, full of mischief maybe, but objects of
laughter rather than fear, though they may play many a
naughty and tiresome trick not unlike the kobold and the
leprechaun. A hundred tales are told of their pranks, but it is
the more gruesome and the fiercer monsters with whom we are
mainly concerned since it is from their ranks that the vampire
is recruited, for most of them become vampires after death
(a fact which seems to point to their human origin), and
not infrequently they are supposed to indulge their vampirish


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 165


fancies during life. It will be noticed that in the various
accounts of the Callicantzari there exist many contradictions,
and we must bear in mind that such diversities are often due
to the original conception of these creatures, whether they are
regarded as demons or monsters who are suffered to plague
the countryside for a certain number of days during the
Christmas season, or whether they are regarded as human
beings afflicted with a terrible curse, the victims of a most
horrible possession, doomed never to rest not even in the grave.

Near akin to the latter conception is the werewolf, who may
be regarded as a man or woman, who either of his or her own
will through black magic is able to change into the form of a
wolf, or who in classical times was believed to be so changed
owing to the vengeance of the gods; and in later days was
believed to be so changed owing to the enchantment of a witch
or some manner of diabolic possession. Moreover, a were-
wolf may be a person who without any actual metamorphosis
is obsessed with all the savage passions and ferocity of a
wolf, so that he will attack human beings in the same way as
the actual wild animal.

It may be asked, is it possible that a person should be so
transformed ? Henry Kramer and James Sprenger, the learned
authors of the supremely authoritative Malleus Maleficarum,
in discussing the question distinctly answer “No, it is not
possible.” They allow that by horrid charms and spells
a certain subjective delusion or glamour may be caused, so
that by the evil art of a sorcerer a man may appear to himself
and to all others who gaze upon him to be a wolf, or indeed
another kind of animal, but there cannot be any actual
physical change of a man into an animal. This glamour or
ocular illusion is sometimes known as “ sight-shifting,” a
convenient correlative to the accepted term “ shape-shifting ”
which is conceived of as an objective fact. Moreover, in his
De Ciuitate Dei, XVIII, 18, 8. Augustine says: “Nor can
the devils create anything (whatever shows of theirs produce
these doubts) but only cast a changed shape over that which
God has made, altering only in show. Nor do I think the
devil can form any soul or body into bestial or brutal members,
and essences ; but they have an unspeakable way of transport-
ing man’s phantasy ina bodily shape, unto other senses (this
though it be not corporal, yet seems to carry itself in corporal


166 THE VAMPIRE


forms through all these things) while the bodies of the men
thus affected lie in another place, being alive, but yet in an
ecstasy far more deep than any sleep. Now this phantasy
may appear unto other senses in a bodily shape, and a man
may seem to himself to be such an one as he often thinks
himself to be in his dream, and to bear burdens, which if they
be true burdens indeed, the devils bear them, to delude men’s
eyes with the appearance of true burdens, and false shapes.”
We must bear in mind that these explanations come from the
highest authority, one of the greatest Doctors of the Church,
and will, I think, very fairly cover most of the cases of the
werewolf.

In early days it was recognized that a werewolf might be a
person who was afflicted with a horrible mania, and Marcellus
Sidetes, who lived in the reigns of Hadrian and Antoninus
Pius, circa A.D. 117-161, wrote Ilepi AveavOpdrov, a long
medical poem in Greek hexameter verse, consisting of forty-
two books, of which only a couple of fragments remain. He
says that Lycanthropy is a disease, a kind of insanity or mania
when the patient was aftlicted with hideous appetites, the
ferocity, and other qualities of a wolf. He further tells us
that men are attacked with this madness chiefly in the begin-
ning of the year, and become most furious in February ;
retiring for the night to lone cemeteries and living precisely
in the manner of ravening wolves.

Under Lycanthropia, Burton*® notes as follows: ‘ Lycan-
thropia, which Avicenna calls Cucubuth, others Lupinam
Insaniam, or Wolf-Madness, when men run howling about
graves and fields in the night, and will not be persuaded but
that they are wolves, or some such beasts. Aetius (Lib. 6,
cap. 11) and Paulus (Lib. 3, cap. 16) call it a kind of melan-
choly ; but I should rather refer it to madness, as most do.
Some make a doubt of it whether there be any such disease.
Donat ab Altomari (Cap. 9, Art med.) saith, that he saw
two of them in his time: Wierus (De praestig. Daemonum,
1, 3, cap. 21) tells a story of such a one at Padua, 1541, that
would not believe to the contrary, but that he was a wolf.
He hath another instance of a Spaniard, who thought himself
a bear; Forrestus (Obseruat. lib. 10, de morbis cerebri, cap. 15)
confirms as much by many examples ; one amongst the rest of
which he was an eye-witness, at Alemaer, in Holland, a poor


—-


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 167


husbandman that still hunted about graves, and kept in church-
yards, of a pale, black, ugly, and fearful look . . . this
malady, saith Avicenna, troubleth men most in February,
and is now-a-days frequent in Bohemia and Hungary, accord-
ing to Heurnius (Cap. de Man.). Schernitzius will have it
common in Livonia. They lie hid most part all day, and go
abroad in the night, barking, howling, at graves and deserts ;
they have usually hollow eyes, scabbed legs and thighs, very
dry and pale (Ulcerata crura, sitis ipsis adest immodica, pallidi,
lingua sicca) saith Altomarus (Cap. 9, Art. Hydrophobia) ;
he gives a reason there of all the symptoms, and sets down a
brief cure of them.” It is remarkable that most of these
features are found in the vampire, especially the unquench-
able thirst, “‘sitis immodica’”’ which is emphasized by the
famous physician Antonio Donato Altomari, who was one of
the most learned authorities of his day. It is also remark-
able that the malady is reported as being very prevalent in
Bohemia, Hungary, and Livonia, countries in which the vampire
is most frequently found. There is in fact a very close
connexion between the werewolf and the vampire, and the ©
lycanthropist is liable to become a vampire when he dies.

In parts of Greece, particularly in Elis,” it is said that even
those who eat the flesh of a sheep that has been killed by a
wolf are apt to become vampires after their death, and this
serves to show how powerful the pollution of the werewolf
was supposed to be. In Norse saga, Ingiald, the son of King
Aunund, was timid whilst a boy, but after eating the heart of a
wolf he gained strength and courage and became the boldest
of heroes.*' It might be thought that so far from inspiring
@ person with a thirst for blood the flesh of a sheep would
homeeopathically infuse qualities of gentleness, and indeed
the Abipones of Paraguay were most careful to avoid mutton
lest it should make them slack and fearful in the fight.>* But
in this instance it will be seen that the characteristics of a
sheep have been absorbed, so to speak, and infected by the
ferocity of the wolf. Curiously enough in Uganda the
Baganda greatly fear the ghosts of sheep, which they believe
would return and kill a man if they saw him give them the


fatal blow. Hence when a sheep is to be killed one man


occupies its attention in some way and another, whose pre-
sence the animal must not suspect, swiftly slaughters it before


168 THE VAMPIRE


a glimpse of him can be caught. In this way the sheep is
tricked because the ghost does not know whom to haunt
and punish for its death. Moreover, sheep give health and
protection to cattle, and a ram is almost invariably sent into
the pastures with a herd of cows. Should a sheep die in a
house nobody must dare openly to mention the fact, which
may only be alluded to in the most covert and circumlocu-
tionary phrase, for were anyone to say, “the sheep is dead,”’
its ghost sorely angered would assuredly afflict the unlucky
speaker with some disease and possibly even kill him out-
right.°> It is worth noting that among the ancient Greeks
it was thought that any garment made from the fleece of a
sheep which had been worried or torn by a wolf would have a
bad effect upon the wearer and set up some roseola and an
intense irritation of the skin.** It is certainly curious to note
the whole mass of tradition which, as it would seem, the wide
world over is connected with the sheep, and in particular when
this animal has been attacked or slain by a wolf.

Even as some kind of vampirish infection was held to
proceed from the wolf, the vampire himself will even more
strongly convey this taint, and therefore, unless the most
drastic and immediate remedies are applied, a person who is
attacked by a vampire and whose blood has been sucked
will become a vampire in turn imbued with a craving to
pass on the horrible pollution. This is perhaps, and with
good reason, the most dreaded quality of the vampire, and
examples thereof occur again and again in legend and
history.

It is far more curious that it should be thought that those
over whose dead bodies a cat or any other animal has passed
should become vampires. This belief widely exists amongst
Slavonic peoples, and is to be found in some parts of Greece.
It also prevails in China where a cat is never allowed to enter
a room with a corpse for the body still contains the Kuei,
the lower or inferior soul of Yin original, and by leaping over
it the cat will impart something of its original savage or
tigerish nature and the dead man may become a vampire.™
It should be explained that it is a common belief among the
Chinese that there are two “souls”; the higher soul which
after death seeks the divine life, the heavenly source of its
being; and the lower soul, which is gross, returning to the


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 169


earth and dwelling in the grave until the complete dissolution
of the corpse.

It is believed among Slavonic nations, as it was firmly
believed throughout England and in many districts of France,
that witches turn themselves into cats, and among the
Oraons (or Uraons) a primitive hill tribe of Bengal, we have a
vampire cat who is a Chordewa, a witch who is able to change
her soul into a black cat and who then visits and frequents
the houses where there are sick and dying people. Such a
cat has a peculiar way of mewing quite differently from the
noise of other cats, and is easily recognized. It steals quietly
into a house almost like a shadow leaps lightly on the bed,
eats of the food that has been prepared for the sick man
and gently licks his lips. When it is able to accomplish
this latter the invalid has no chance of recovering, in which
connexion we must remember, as has been remarked before,
that the soul is supposed to take its departure from the mouth
of a dying person. Even if this cat be seen it is extra-
ordinarily difficult to catch it, since it has a supernatural
activity and will fight and scratch with the malice of a demon.
However, they say that persons have sometimes succeeded,
and then the woman out of whom the cat (her soul) has come
remains insensible, in a state of coma as deep as death, until
the cat re-enters her body. Any wound inflicted upon the cat
is produced upon her. For example if they cut it, or break a
leg, or destroy its sight, the woman will simultaneously suffer
the same mutilation. So great a horror had the Oraons of
these witches that formerly they used to burn any person that
was suspected to be a Chordewa.*®

It is a circumstance of very frequent occurrence in the witch
trials of all countries that a witch who has appeared in the
likeness of a cat, a hare, or any other animal and has met
with an accident or been mutilated under that form is found
to be marked with the same wound or to be suffering from the
same harm in her human shape when this is resumed.*”

It is not difficult then to see why, if some animal of ill-omen,
—and the cat seems to be particularly unfortunate,—leaps
over a corpse, the dead person should be considered in danger
of becoming a vampire. In Greece, particularly in Macedonia,
the most pious care is taken to prevent any such calamity.
The body is watched all night long by relatives and friends,


170 THE VAMPIRE


and this is deemed a work of true charity by which they
acquire great merit, it brings a blessing upon their own souls
(Yuxuxd), if, in spite of all their care some cat does jump
across the body, the dead man must be pierced through
with two long “sack-needles” (caxcoppapas), in order
to secure his rest and to guard against his return. It is well
to scatter mustard seed on the roof and on the threshold, and
the wise man will barricade his door with brambles. and
thorns. Should the vampire return he cannot fail to occupy
himself with counting the seeds, and it will be dawn, when
he must return to his grave, long before he completes the tale.
Should he endeavour to pass through the bushes he will
inevitably be caught and held fast by the briars. Ralston
tells us that the Serbs and the Bulgarians keep this vigil even
more carefully than the Greeks. ‘‘In some places the
jumping of a boy over the corpse is considered as fatal as that
of a cat. The flight of a bird above the body may also be
attended by the same terrible results; and so may—in the
Ukraine—the mere breath of the wind from the Steppe.”
What is extremely curious is that this tradition still lingers
in the north of England, and if a cat or dog pass over a corpse
the animal must be killed at once. The reason for this has been
entirely forgotten, but the survival is very remarkable as
showing that once there existed a dread of vampires in England
which to-day is entirely forgotten. Thomas Pennant says that
in Scotland: “No dog or cat must be allowed to leap over the
corpse or enter the room. It is reckoned so ominous, their
doing so that the poor animal is killed without mercy.’
It is even still the custom that all animals shall be shut up till
the funeral procession has left. It is believed that a cat will
not remain in the house with an unburied corpse; and
rooks (we know) will abandon the place till after the funeral,
if the rookery be near the mansion. The explanation given
by John Jamieson” that if a cat has leapt over a corpse the
first person on to whose lap he may afterwards jump, or who
may take him up in his arms, is stricken with blindness
would seem to be a later invention, a reason made up to
explain the ill-omen, when the vampire tradition had
disappeared, and so the real reason had been entirely
forgotten.

Having investigated the various reasons why any person


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 171


should become a vampire, and discussed the fatal accident
which may bring about this terrible doom various points
present themselves which invite some inquiry. Although
the belief varies in different parts of the world, and it is gener-
ally understood that vampires only operate by night, as King
David says: “Non timebis a timore nocturno” (Thou
shalt not be afraid of the terror of the night), yet it is also
supposed that under certain conditions vampires may wander
abroad during the day, and that the vampire truly is daemon-
ium meridianum (the noonday devil). Therefore we may
ask by what signs, if any, is a vampire to be recognized.
Again, how does a vampire leave his grave? For we must
remember that the vampire is tangible, and can make his
presence felt in a very unmistakable and terrible manner.
This difficulty has been very clearly stated by Dom Calmet
who writes as follows: ‘“‘ How can a corpse which is covered
with four or five feet of earth, which has no room even to
move or to stretch a limb, which is wrapped in linen cerements,
enclosed in a coffin of wood, how can it, I say, seek the upper
air and return to the world walking upon the earth so as to
cause those extraordinary effects which are attributed to it ?
And after all that how can it go back again into the grave,
when it will be found fresh, incorrupt, full of blood exactly
like a living body ? Can it be maintained that these corpses
pass through the earth without disturbing it, just as water
and the damps which penetrate the soil or which exhale
therefrom without perceptibly dividing or cleaving the ground ?
It were indeed to be wished that in the histories of the Return
of Vampires which have been related, a certain amount of
attention had been given to this point, and that the difficulty
had been something elucidated.

“Let us suppose that these corpses do not actually stir
from their tombs, that only the ghosts or spirits appear to the
living, wherefor do these phantoms present themselves and
what is it that energizes them ? Is it actually the soul of the
dead man which has not yet departed to its final destination,
or is it a demon who causes them to be seen in an assumed
and phantastical body? And if there bodies are spectral,
how do they suck the blood of the living ?. We are enmeshed
in a sad dilemma when we ask if these apparitions are natural
or miraculous.


172 THE VAMPIRE


“A priest, who is recognized as possessing intellectual quali-
ties far beyond the ordinary, told me that some little time
since when he was travelling in Moravia, Mgr. Jeanin, a Canon
of the Cathedral of Olmutz, asked for his company to a village
named Liebava, which the good canon was officially about to
visit as Commissary of the Episcopal Court to investigate
the well-authenticated reports concerning a Vampire who
had recently caused much trouble and disorder in the village
Liebava.

“They journeyed thither; witnesses were cited and heard;
the ordinary canonical procedure was observed in every
detail. The witnesses gave evidence that a certain well-
known citizen who had formerly resided at Liebava after his
death had sorely tormented the whole district, inasmuch as
for a space of three or four years he had issued forth from the
cemetery and had entered several houses. It was true these
visitations were now ceased, because a certain Hungarian
who passed through the village at the time when the terror
was at its height avowed that he could cope with the evil and
lay the Vampire to rest. In order to fulfil his promise he
mounted the clock-tower of the church, and watched for the
moment when the vampire came out of his grave, leaving
behind him in the tomb his shroud and cerements, before he
made his way to the village to plague and terrify the
inhabitants.

“When the Hungarian from his coin of vantage had seen the
Vampire depart on his prowl, he promptly descended from
the tower possessed himself of the shroud and linen carrying
them off with him back to the belfry. The Vampire in due
course returned and not finding his sere-clothes cried out
mightily against the thief, who from the top of the belfry
was making signs to him that he should climb and recover
his winding-sheet if he wished to get it back again. The
Vampire, accordingly, began to clamber up the steep stair
which led to the summit of the tower, but the Hungarian
suddenly gave him such a blow that he fell from top to bottom.
Thereupon they were able to strike off his head with the sharp
edge of a sexton’s spade, and that made an end of the whole
business.

“The priest who related this history to me, himself saw
nothing of these happenings, neither was anything witnessed


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 173


by the Right Reverend Canon who was acting as Episcopal
Commissioner. They only received the reports of the
peasants of that district, a folk who were very ignorant, very
credulous, very superstitious, and brimful of all kinds of
wonderful stories concerning the aforesaid Vampire.

“For my part I think the whole history vain and utterly
without foundation, and the more absurd and contradictory
are the various tales which were told, the more strongly am
I confirmed in the opinion which I have formed.

“Supposing, indeed, there were any truth in the accounts of
these appearances of Vampires, are they to be attributed to
the power of God, to the Angels, to the souls of those who
return in this way, or to the Devil? If we adopt the last
hypothesis it follows that the Devil can endue these corpses
with subtilty and bestow upon them the power of passing
through the earth without any disturbances of the ground,
of gliding through the cracks and joints of a door, of slipping
through a keyhole, of increasing, of diminishing, of becoming
rarified as air or water to penetrate the earth; in fine of
enjoying the same properties as we believe will be possessed
by the Blessed after the Resurrection, and which distinguished
the human Body of our Lord after the first Easter Day,
inasmuch as He appeared to those to whom He would show
Himself for ‘ Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in
the midst, and said: Peace be to you,’ Jesus uenit ianuis
clausis, 8. John, xx, 26.

“Yet even if it be allowed that”the Devil can re-energize
dead bodies and give them movement for a certain time can
he also bestow these powers of increasing, diminishing, becom-
ing rarified, and so subtle that they can penetrate the earth,
doors, windows? We are not told that God allows him
the exercise of any such power, and it is hard to believe that
a material body, gross and substantial can be endowed with
this subtility and spirituality without some destruction or
alteration of the general structure and without damage to
the configuration of the body. But this would not be in
accord with the intention of the Devil, for such a change
would prevent this body from appearing, from manifesting
itself, from motion and speech, ay, indeed from being eventually
cut to pieces and burned as so often happens in the case of
Vampires in Moravia, Poland, and Silesia.’


174 THE VAMPIRE


These difficulties which Dom Calmet with little perception
has raised can be very briefly answered, and they are not only
superficial, but also smack of heterodoxy. In the first place,
the story that he tells is far from satisfactory, and even if it
were—what it may be—much exaggerated one can hardly
brush aside the vast vampire tradition because one instance
proves to be overdrawn. In any case the business of the
watcher from the belfry and the demand that the Vampire
should regain his shroud by climbing the stairs to the top of
the tower do not bear the mark of truth, but what is certainly
significant is that the Vampire was decapitated and that then
the hauntings ceased. I conceive that the story of the
cerements is mere elaboration, but that the grave of the
Vampire was traced, opened, and that his head was severed
from his body. This eliminates some highly charged details
whilst it does not touch the facts of the case. So we see that
the story when divested of these trappings offers nothing
impossible, that is to say nothing extraordinary or unusual
in such histories.

Dom Calmet asks are the appearances of Vampires to be
attributed to God, or to the souls of those who return or to the
Devil? I answer that for the hauntings of a Vampire, three
things are necessary: the Vampire, the Devil, and the
Permission of Almighty God. Just as we know, for we learn
this from the Malleus Maleficarum, that there are three
necessary concomitants of witchcraft, and these are the
Devil, a Witch, and the Permission of Almighty God (Part I).
So are these three necessary concomitants of Vampirism.
Whether it be the Demon who is energizing the corpse™ or
whether it be the dead man himself who by some dispensation
of Divine Providence has returned is a particular which must
be decided severally for each case. So much then for Dom
Calmet’s question, to whom are the appearances of Vampires
to be attributed.

Can the Devil endow a body with these qualities of subtilty,
rarification, increase, and diminishing, so that it may pass
through doors and windows ? I answer that there is no doubt
the Demon can do this, and to deny the proposition is hardly
orthodox. For S. Thomas says of the devil that “just as he
can from the air compose a body of any form and shape,
and assume it so as to appear in it visibly, so, in the same way,


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 175


he can clothe any corporeal thing with any corporeal form,
so as to appear therein.” Moreover almost any séance will
be sufficient reply to Dom Calmet’s question. In his Modern
Spiritism (1904), Mr. T. Godfrey Raupert says: ‘ Photo-
graphs, or small drawing-room ornaments have thus been seen
to change their places, and articles kept in a room other than
that occupied by the sensitive, have been brought through
closed doors and deposited at a spot previously indicated—
in some instances placed into the hands of the person requesting
the apport of the article. Many such remarkable instances
of apport and of matter passing through matter have been
observed under the strictest possible test conditions, and
will be found recorded in the late Leipzig Professor Zoellner’s
deeply interesting work T'ranscendental Physics. The writer
has himself observed one instance of this kind in a private
house, and in circumstances entirely precluding the possi-
bility of deception. There is, perhaps, no phenomenon which
so distinctly exhibits the action of extraneous and independent
intelligence as this one.” (pp. 35-36.) Matter, then, can pass
through matter, and the séance answers Dom Calmet. We
may, if we will, adopt the ectoplasmic theory to explain the
mode whereby the Vampire issues from his grave, but although
this is very probably true (in some instances at all events)
it is not necessarily the only solution of the problem. Accord-
ing to Catholic theologians evil spirits, if permitted to mater-
ialize their invisible presence, to build up a tangible and active
body, do not absolutely require the ectoplasm of some
medium.

Not very dissimilar to the dilemma of Dom Calmet are the
views held by an eminent authority, Dr. Herbert Mayo, who
was sometime Senior Surgeon of Middlesex Hospital, Professor
of Anatomy and Physiology in King’s College, Professor of
Comparative Anatomy in the Royal College of Surgeons,
London. In his well-known work, On the Truths contained
in Popular Superstitions, he devotes his second Letter, or
tather Chapter, to “ Vampyrism,” concerning which he says
“The proper place of this subject falls in the midst of a philo-
sophical disquisition,’ but he adds for the benefit of the
inquirer that it is “a point on which, in my time, school-boys
much your juniors entertained decided opinions.” He con-
tinues to inform us that during the middle of the eighteenth


176 THE VAMPIRE


century: ‘‘ Vampyrism spread like a pestilence through
Servia and Wallachia, causing numerous deaths, and dis-
turbing all the land with fear of the mysterious visitation,
against which no one felt himself secure.

“Here is something like a good solid practical popular
delusion. Do I believe it? To be sure I do. The facts are
matter of history : the people died like rotten sheep ; and the
cause and method of their dying was, in their belief, what has
just been stated. You suppose, then, they died frightened
out of their lives, as men have died whose pardon has been
proclaimed when their necks were already on the block,
of the belief that they were going to die ? Well, if that were all,
the subject would still be worth examining. But there is
more in it than that.” He then gives an account in very
full detail of a Vampire at Belgrade in the year 1732, he
describes the circumstances in which the body was disinterred,
It leaned to one side, the skin was fresh and ruddy, the nails
grown long and evilly crooked, the mouth slobbered with
blood from its last night’s repast. Accordingly a stake was
driven through the chest of the Vampire who uttered a
terrible screech whilst blood poured in quantities from the
wound. Then it was burned to ashes. Moreover, a number
of other persons throughout the district had been infected
with vampirism. Of the facts there can be no question
whatsoever. The documents are above suspicion, and in
particular the most important of these which was signed by
three regimental surgeons, and formally counter-signed by a
lieutenant-colonel and sub-lieutenant. Even Dr. Mayo is
obliged to allow: ‘‘ No doubt can be entertained of its auth-
enticity, or of its general fidelity ; the less that it does not
stand alone, but is supported by a mass of evidence to the
same effect. It appears to establish beyond question, that
where the fear of Vampyrism prevails, and there occur
several deaths, in the popular belief connected with it, the
bodies, when disinterred weeks after burial, present the
appearance of corpses from which life has only recently
departed.” It is very instructive to note how the writer
proceeds with the greatest subtility and no little cleverness
to extract himself from logical consequences it might have
seemed impossible to avoid, and how he explains an excep-
tional circumstance by circumstances which are far more


————-


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 177


amazing and difficult to believe. With the utmost suavity
and breadth of mind he continues: ‘‘ What inference shall
we draw from this fact —that Vampyrism is true in the popular
sense ?—and that these fresh-looking and well-conditioned
corpses had some mysterious source of preternatural nourish-
ment ? That would be to adopt, not to solve the superstition.
Let us content ourselves with a notion not so monstrous,
but still startling enough : that the bodies, which were found
in the so-called Vampyr state, instead of being in a new or
mystical condition, were simply alive in the common way
or had been so for some time subsequently to their interment
that, in short, they were the bodies of persons who had been
buried alive, and whose life, where it yet lingered, was finally
extinguished through the ignorance and barbarity of those
who disinterred them. . . . We have thus succeeded in
interpreting one of the unknown terms in the Vampyr-theorem.
The suspicious character, who had some dark way of nourish-
ing himself in the grave, turns out to be an unfortunate
gentleman (or lady) whom his friends had buried under a
mistake while he was still alive, and who, if they afterwards
mercifully let him alone, died sooner or later either naturally
or of the premature interment—in either case, it is to be
hoped, with no interval of restored consciousness.” I submit
that Dr. Mayo has not succeeded in solving any difficulty
at all connected with vampirism. No doubt, as we have
already considered in some detail, cases of premature burial,
which were far more common than was generally supposed,
would have helped to swell the tradition, but that they can
have originated it is impossible, and it is absurd to put forward
the terrible accident of premature burial as an explanation
to cover all the facts. It is quite impossible that a person
who had been interred when in a coma or trance should have
survived in the grave.

Before we deal with the signs by which it is reputed a
vampire may be recognized ; the method in which a vampire
presumably leaves his grave ; and the way by which a vampire
may be released or destroyed, we will briefly inquire into

- Mayo’s explanation of the actual visit of the vampire to a
victim and the subsequent consequences, the terrible anemia
and hemoplegia which may result in death followed by
the vampire infection. And here we find that Dr. Mayo


12


178 THE VAMPIRE


quite honestly and frankly confesses that he is completely
at a loss to give any solution of the difficulty. It is most
instructive to read those inconclusive pleas which he is driven
to put forward but which his own good sense cannot accept.
He writes : ‘“ The second element which we have yet to explain
is the Vampyr visit and its consequences,—the lapse of the
party visited into death-trance. There are two ways of dealing
with this knot ; one is to cut it, the other to untie it.

“ Tt may be cut, by denying the supposed connexion between
the Vampyr visit and the supervention of death-trance in the
second party. Nor is the explanation thus obtained devoid
of plausibility. There is no reason why death-trance should
not, in certain seasons and places, be epidemic. Then the
persons most liable to it would be those of weak and irritable
nervous systems. Again, a first effect of the epidemic
might be further to shake the nerves of weaker subjects.
These are exactly the persons who are likely to be infected
with imaginary terrors, and to dream, or even to fancy,
they have seen Mr. or Mrs. such a one, the last victim of the
epidemic. The dream or impression upon the senses might
again recur, and the sickening patient have already talked
of it to his neighbours, before he himself was seized with death-
trance. On this supposition the Vampyr visit would sink
into the subordinate rank of a mere premonitory symptom.

“To myself, I must confess, this explanation, the best I
am yet in a position to offer, appears barren and jejune ;
and not at all to do justice to the force and frequency, or, as
tradition represents the matter, the universality of the
Vampyr visit as a precursor of the victim’s fate. Imagine
how strong must have been the conviction of the reality of
the apparition, how common a feature it must have been,
to have led to the laying down of the unnatural and repulsive
process customarily followed at the Vampyr’s grave, as the
regular and proper preventive of ulterior consequences.”’
Dr. Mayo proposes therefore “to try and untie this knot”
a result which he singularly fails to achieve. He quite
erroneously states “in popular language, it was the ghost
of the Vampyr that haunted its future victim.” This is
exactly what the Vampire is not. As we have seen there is
some divergence of view whether the Vampire is the actual
person, energized with some horrible mystical life in death


* as
¢
Ya


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 179


who visits his victims, and there can be no doubt at all that
this is the true and proper Vampire, or whether it is a demon
who animates and informs the body. But in no circum-
stances whatsoever is the Vampire a phantom or ghost, save
by a quite inadmissible extension of the term, which then
may practically be regarded (as indeed it is often most mis-
takenly and reprehensively regarded) as covering almost any
malignant supernatural phenomenon. So an _ explanation
which confuses a Vampire with a ghost is entirely impertinent.

We will now proceed to inquire into those physical traits
by which a Vampire may be discerned.

A Vampire is generally described as being exceedingly
gaunt and lean with a hideous countenance and eyes wherein
are glinting the red fire of perdition. When, however, he has
satiated his lust for warm human blood his body becomes
horribly puffed and bloated, as though he were some great
leech gorged and replete to bursting. Cold as ice, or it may be
fevered and burning as a hot coal, the skin is deathly pale,
but the lips are very full and rich, blub and red; the teeth
white and gleaming, and the canine teeth wherewith he bites
deep into the neck of his prey to suck thence the vital streams
which re-animate his body and invigorate all his forces
appear notably sharp and pointed. Often his mouth curls
back in a vulpine snarl which bares these fangs, “a gaping
mouth and gleaming teeth,” says Leone Allacci, and so in
many districts the hare-lipped are avoided as being certainly
vampires. In Bulgaria, it is thought that the Vampire
who returns from the tomb has only one nostril; and in
certain districts of Poland he is supposed to have a sharp
point at the end of his tongue, like the sting of a bee. It is
said that the palms of a Vampire’s hands are downy with
hair,® and the nails are always curved and crooked, often
well-nigh the length of a great bird’s claw, the quicks dirty
and foul with clots and gouts of black blood. His breath is
unbearably fetid and rank with corruption, the stench of
the charnel. Dr. Henry More in his An Antidote against
Atheism, III, ix, tells us that when Johannes Cuntius, an
alderman of Pentsch in Silesia and a witch returned as a
Vampire he much tormented the Parson of the Parish. One
evening, “when this Theologer was sitting with his wife and
Children about him, exercising himself in Musick, according


180 THE VAMPIRE


to his usual manner, a most grievous stink arose suddenly,
which by degrees spread itself to every corner of the room.
Here upon he commends himself and his family to God by
Prayer. The smell nevertheless encreased, and became above
all measure pestilently noisom, insomuch that he was forced
to go up to his chamber. He and his Wife had not been in bed
a quarter of an hour, but they find the same stink in the bed-
chamber ; of which, while they are complaining one to another
out steps the Spectre from the Wall, and creeping to his bed-
side, breathes upon him an exceeding cold breath, of so intoler-
able stinking and malignant a scent, as is beyond all imagina-
tion and expression. Here upon the T'heologer, good soul,
grew very ill, and was fain to keep h.s bed, his face, belly,
and guts swelling as if he had been poysoned ; whence he
was also troubled with a difficulty of breathing, and with a
putrid inflamation of his eyes, so that he could not well use
them of a long time after.”°° In the Malleus Maleficarum,
Part IJ, Qn. 1., Ch. 11, the following is related: “In the
territory of the Black Forest, a witch was being lifted by a
gaoler on to the pile of wood prepared for her burning and
said: ‘I will pay you,’ and blew into his face. And he was
at once afflicted with a horrible leprosy all over his body and
did not survive many days.” Boguet, Discowrs des Sorciers,
gives as his rubric to Chapter XXV, Si les Sorciers tuent de
leur souffle & haleine. He tells us: “Les Sorciers tuent
& endommagent de leur souffle & haleine: en quoy Clauda
Gaillard dicte la Fribolette nous seruita de tesmoignage ;
car ayant soufflé contre Clauda Perrier, qu’elle r’encontra
en |’Eglise d’Ebouchoux, tout aussi tost ceste femme tomba
malade, & fut rendue impotente, & en fin mourut apres auoir
trainé par l’espace d’vn an en toute pauurieté, & langueur :
de mesme aussi comme Marie Perrier luy eut vne fois refusé
Yaumosne, elle luy souffla fort rudement contre, de fagon
que Marie tomba par terre, & s’estant releuée ause peine elle
demeura malade par quelques iours, & iusques 4 tant que
Pierre Perrier son neueu eut menacé la Sorciere.”

Sinistrari in his Demoniality (24) says that if we ask how it is
possible that the Demon, who has no body, yet can perform
actual coitus with man or woman, most authorities answer that
the demon assumes or animates the corpse of another human
being, male or female, as the case may be, and Delrio


PLATE V


CAUCHEMAR


By Laurence Housman


[ face p. 180


*
4


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 181


(Disquisitiones Magicae, Liber II, Q. xxviii, sec. 1). comments :
“Denique multae falsae resurrectiones gentilium huc sunt
referendae ; & constat cum sagis ut plurimum induto cad-
auere diabolum sine incubum, sine succubum, rem habere ;
unde & in hoc genere hominum, cadauerosus quidam faetor
graueolentiae, cernitur.”

Some remoter country districts, indeed, are apt to regard —
any poor wretch who is sadly deformed as a Vampire, —
especially if the distortion be altogether unsightly, pro-
minent, or grotesque. It has even been known that a
peasant whose face was deeply marked with wine-coloured
pigment, owing it was thought to some accident which
befell his mother during her late pregnancy,” was shunned
and suspected of being a malignant vrykolakas. Chorea,
they say, is a certain sign of vampirism, and it may
be remarked that in Shoa this disorder is regarded as the
result of demoniacal possession, or due to the magic spell
of an enemy’s shadow having fallen, upon the sufferer.
An epileptic there is also often considered as being in the power
of some devil, and unless proper precautions are taken he
will assuredly not rest in his grave. The Vampire is endowed
with strength and agility more than human, and he can run
with excessive speed, outstripping the wind.

It is curious to find that in many countries persons with
blue eyes are considered extremely liable to become vampires.°?
This is the case in some parts of Greece, but there does not
seem to be preserved any oral tradition to explain the
particular belief. It may, of course, have arisen owing to the
fact that persons with eyes of this colour would seldom, if
ever, have been met with, and a stranger with blue eyes
would be regarded with wonder and awe. (Thus in Ireland
persons with bluish-grey eyes, especially if there be a streak of
black on the pupil, which is common, are accounted to have
the power of seeing ghosts.) We cannot, I think, connect the
Greek idea with the Homeric epithet for the goddess Athene,
YAaveéris} which has been rendered “ bright-eyed,’’”® “ grey-
eyed” or “blue-eyed,” an old interpretation that proves
utterly erroneous, since there can be no doubt that yAavKkwris
means “owl-faced” (yAavé;) and originally Athene was a
deity who was literally imagined and represented as having
the face of an owl, even if she did not, as is most probable,


182 - THE VAMPIRE


actually appear in the shape of an owl. Among the Austra-
lian aborigines the owl is regarded as a sex totem of women
and is most jealously protected by them.”’ We find too,
that the owl is a sacred bird among the Indians of North-West
America, and in their ritual dances a solemnity revealed to
them, as they suppose, by their guardian spirits, wherein they
mime ancient story, the masqueraders often personate by
dress, voice, and gesture the owl. “ The dukwally (i.e.,
lokoala) and other tamanawas” performances are exhibitions
intended to represent incidents connected with their mytho-
logical legends. . . An Indian, for instance, who has been
consulting with his guardian spirit, which is done by going
through the washing and fasting process before described,
will imagine or think he is called upon to represent the owl.
He arranges in his mind the style of dress, the number of
performers, the songs and dances or other movements, and,
having the plan perfected, announces at a tamanawas meeting
that he has had a revelation which he will impart to a select
few. These are then taught and drilled in strict secrecy,
and when they have perfected themselves, will suddenly make
their appearance and perform before the astonished tribe.””®
The owl gives mystic qualities ; for in Northern India it is
believed that a man who eats the eyes of an owl will be able
to see, even as that bird, in the dark.* In Nigeria, the owl
is regarded with great awe, and the natives tremble even to
pronounce its name on account of the ill omen, preferring
to speak of “the bird that makes one afraid.””° It may be
remembered that Vampires are credited with being able to see
n the dark, and that in many countries peasants dread to utter
the word, employing some elaborate and often not very intellig-
ible periphrasis.

Those whose hair is red, of a certain peculiar shade, are
unmistakably vampires. It is significant that in ancient
Egypt, as Manetho tells us, human sacrifices were offered
at the grave of Osiris, and the victims were red-haired men
who were burned, their ashes being scattered far and wide
by winnowing-fans. It is held by some authorities that
this was done to fertilize the fields and produce a bounteous
harvest, red-hair symbolizing the golden wealth of the corn.
But these men were called Typhonians, and were representa-
tives not of Osiris but of his evil rival Typhon, whose hair


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 183


was red.”° Francesco Redi says: “ Fra gli Egizii era tradizione
che Tifone, il genio della distruzione, simile al Arimane Persiano
al Satano Ebriaco fosse di pelo rosso, forse per memoria di
invasioni di barbari di pelo rosso e presso noi dura tutta via
la tradizione, ‘Guardati dal pelo rosso né valse e toglierla la
barba rossa del Redentore.’’’’? Red wasthe colour of the hair
of Judas Iscariot,” and of Cain, and an old Latin rhyme of
the thirteenth century has:


Monet nos haee fabula rufos euitare
Quos color et fama notat, illis sociare.


The Italians say :


Capelli rossi
o tutto foco, o tutto mosci.


John Wodroephe in The Spared Hours of a Soldier in his
Travels, Dort, 1623, quotes: ‘‘ Garde toi bien des hommes
rousseaux, des femmes barbues, et des ceux qui sont marqués
au visage.””® I have not met with the following tradition
save orally, but it is believed in Serbia, Bulgaria, and Rumania,
that there are certain red-polled vampires who are called
“Children of Judas,” and that these, the foulest of the foul,
kill their victim with one bite or kiss which drains the blood
as it were at a single draught. The poisoned flesh of the
victim is wounded with the Devil’s stigmata, three hideous
scars shaped thus, XXX, signifying the thirty pieces of silver,
the price of blood.

It is curious to note that the ancient ideas of the physio-
gnomy of amorous persons are not at all unlike the distinctive
marks of the vampire. The old belief has thus been summed
up by G. Tourdes, “‘ Aphrodisie,” Dictionnaire Encyclopédique
des Sciences Médicales: ‘‘The erotic temperament has been
described as marked by a lean figure, white and well-ranged
teeth, a developed hairy system, a characteristic voice, air,
and expression, and even a special odour.”

Since the vampire bites his prey with sharp teeth and
greedily sucks forth the blood it is not surprising to find that
those who are born with teeth in their heads are considered
to be already marked down as vampires. Even in countries
where the vampire belief was lost this circumstance was
considered of the unluckiest,®° and in Chapman and Shirley’s®


184 THE VAMPIRE


Chabot, Admiral of France, V, 2, Master Advocate exposing
the villainies of the Chancellor declares: ‘‘He was born
with teeth in his head, by an affidavit of his midwife, to note
his devouring, and hath one toe on his left foot crooked, and
in the form of an eagle’s talon, to foretel his rapacity. What
shall I say? branded, marked, and designed in his birth
for shame and obloquy, which appeareth further, by a mole
under his right ear, with only three witch’s hairs in it;
strange and ominious predictions of nature!” According to
Allacci those children who were thought likely to become
Callicantzari were taken to a fire which had been lighted in
the market-square, and here the soles of their feet were held
to the flames until the nails were singed and the danger of
their attacks averted. The allusion in Chabot to the “toe
on his left foot crooked, and in the form of an eagle’s talon”
is particularly interesting in this connexion. It is evident
that the old physical characteristics which mark a creature
of demoniacal propensities had been remembered as of ill-
omen and horror when exactly what they portended and
betrayed had been lost in the mists of ancient lore. Moreover
it should be noted that persons and animals attack with the
hands or the claws, not generally with the feet to scratch and
rend. Accordingly the custom in the days even of Allacci
was practised but not understood, and it points to some
belief reaching back to old Greek mythology, it is probably
some link between the Callicantzaros and the Centaurs as
Lawson suggests in well-founded detail.

The vampire is, as we have said, generally diettnwed to
embrace his victim who has been thrown into a trance-like
sleep, and after greedily kissing the throat suddenly to bite
deep into the jugular vein and absorb the warm crimson
blood. It has long since been recognized by medico-psycho-
logists that there exists a definite connexion between the
fascination of blood and sexual excitation. Owing to custom,
to inhibitions and education this emotion generally remains
latent, although a certain mental sadism is by no means a
mark of degeneracy. Dr. Havelock Ellis says: “It is
probable that the motive of sexual murders is nearly always
to shed blood, and not to cause death,’®* an extremely
significant fact. Since the vampire is generally held to seize
the throat it is very striking that Leppmann® points out


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 185


that such murders are almost always produced by wounds in
the neck or mutilation of the abdomen, never by wounds of
the head.

Paul d’Enjoy defines the kiss as ‘a bite and a suction,’’®4
and a high authority says: ‘‘ The impulse to bite is also a part
of the tactile element which lies at the origin of kissing.’
The tactile kiss which doubtless is very primitive has developed
into the olfactory and gustatory, extending thence into many
elaborations and variants. Under the stress of strong sexual
emotion when love is closely knit with pain there is often an
overwhelming tendency to bite the partner of the act, and the
love-bite is often referred to in Latin literature. Thus
Plautus, Pseudolus, I, 1,11. 62-66, speaks of amorous dalliance :


Nunc nostri amores, mores, consuetudines,
Iocus, ludus, sermo, suauis suauiatio
Compressiones arctae amantum comparum,
Tencris labellis molles morsiunculae,
Papillarum horridularum oppressiunculae.


And Catullus, VIII, 17, 18, writes after a quarrel :


Quem nunc amabis ? cuius esse diceris ?
Quem basiabis ? cui labella mordebis ?


In a well-known Ode, Horace Carmin I, xiii, 11, 12:


siue puer furens
impressit memorem dente labris notam.


which Francis Englishes :


I burn, when in excess of wine

He soils those snowy arms of thine,
Or on thy lips the fierce-fond boy
Marks with his teeth the furious joy.


Tibullus, I, vi, 14, 15, writes :


{3 . .. Tune succos herbasque dedi, queis liuor abiret,
Quem facit impresso mutua dente Uenus.


And again, I, viii, 35-38 :


At Uenus inueniet puero succumbere furtim,
Dum tumet, et teneros conserit usque sinus.

Et dare anhelanti pugnantibus humida linguis
Oscula, et in collo figere dente notas.

But fav’ring Venus watchful o’er thy joy,

Shall lay thee secret near th’ impassion’d boy ;


186 THE VAMPIRE


His panting bosom shall be prest to thine,
And his dear lips thy breathless lips shall join ;
With active tongue he’ll dart the humid kiss,
And on thy neck indent his eager bliss.


Ovid, Amores, III, xiv, 34, asks his mistress :


Cur plus, quam somno, turbatos esse capillos ;
Collaque conspicui dentis habere notam ?


which is rendered by the translator in Dryden’s Ovid, “ by
many hands” :


Why do your locks and rumpled head-clothes show
*Tis more than usual sleep that made them so ?
Why are the kisses which he gave betray’d,

By the impression which his teeth has made ?


Many further passages from the older Latin poets might
be quoted, and amongst the moderns, Joannes Secundus®®
and Jean Bonnefons*’ have not neglected to celebrate the love-
bite in their verses. From the latter it will suffice to cite
the elegant Basium IV, Execratur dentes, quibus inter osculan-
dum papillas Dominae laeserat, which commences :


O dens improbe, dire, ter sceleste,

Dens sacerrime, dens inauspicate,
Tun’ tantum scelus ausus, ut papillas,
Illas Pancharidis meae papillas,

Quas Uenus ueneratur et Cupido,
Feris morsibus ipse uulnerares ?


Of Joannes Secundus the Basium VII in the Basiorum
Liber is very celebrated :


Quis te furor, Neaera,
Mepta quis iubebat,

Sic inuolare nostram

Sic uellicare linguam,
Ferociente morsu ?

An, quas tot unus abs te
Pectus per omne gesto
Penetrabileis sagittas,
Parum uidentur ? istis.
Ni dentibus proteruis
Exerceas nefandum
Membrum nefas in illud,
Quo saepe solo primo,
Quo saepe solo sero,
Quo per dieisque longas
Nocteisque amarulentas
Laudes tuas canebam ? |


a
3


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 187
This has been charmingly tuned by Nott :


Ah! what ungovern’d rage, declare,
Neaera, too capricious fair !

What unrevenged, unguarded wrong,
Could urge thee thus to wound my tongue ?
Perhaps you deem th’ afflictive pains

Too trifling, which my heart sustains ;

Nor think enough my bosom smarts

With all the sure, destructive darts
Incessant sped from every charm ;

That thus your wanton teeth must harm,
Must harm that little tuneful thing,

Which wont so oft thy praise to sing ;
What time the morn has streak’d the skies,
Or evening’s faded radiance dies ;

Through painful days consuming slow
Through ling’ring night of amorous woe.


Dorat, Baiser XI, has daintily paraphrased, Secundus :


Tes dents, ces perles que j’adore,
D’ous’échappe & mon oeil trompé
Ce sourire développé,

Transfuge des lévres de flore ;
Devroient-elles blesser, dis moi,
Une organe tendre et fidelle,

Qui t’assure ici de ma foi,

Et nomma Thais la plus belle ?


The Supplementum Lexicorum Eroticorum Linguae Latinae,
Paris, 1911, has: ‘‘ Morsiunculae.—Gallice : Sugons.”. Much
Oriental erotic literature gives attention to this subject.
The Indian Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana devotes no less than
one chapter to the love-bite, and there are many references
to be found in such manual as the Arabic Perfumed Garden of
the Sheik Nefzaoui. When it is borne in mind how markedly
Slavonic a tradition is the bite of the vampire it becomes
extremely significant to know that biting in amorous embraces
is very common among the Southern Slavs.

The peasant women of Sicily, especially says Alonzi,® in
the districts where crimes of blood are prevalent often in their
affection for their children kiss them violently, even biting
them and sucking their blood until the infant wails in pain.
If a child has done wrong they will not only strike it, but also
bite it fiercely on the face, ears, or arms, till blood flows.
Both men and women often use the threat: ‘I will drink


188 THE VAMPIRE


your blood.”’ There is ocular evidence that a man who had
knifed another in a quarrel licked the hot blood from the
victim’s hand.

A very curious case was reported in the London police news
of 1894. A man aged thirty, was charged with ill-treating
his wife’s illegitimate daughter, aged three. The acts had
lasted over a period of many months; her lips, eyes, and
hands were bitten and covered with bruises from sucking,
and often her little pinafore was stained with blood. ‘‘ Defend-
ant admitted he had bitten the child because he loved it.”
Here we have true vampirish qualities and inclinations.

The Daily Express, 17th April, 1925, gave the following :
“VAMPIRE Bratn. PLAN TO PRESERVE IT FOR SCIENCE.”

Berlin. Thursday, April 16th. The body of Fritz Haar-
mann, executed yesterday at Hanover for twenty-seven
murders, will not be buried until it has been examined at
Gottingen University.

“Owing to the exceptional character of the crimes—most
of Haarmann’s victims were bitten to death—the case aroused
tremendous interest among German scientists. It is probable
that Haarmann’s brain will be removed and preserved by
the University authorities —Central News.”

The case of Fritz Haarmann, who was dubbed the ‘“‘ Hanover
Vampire’ was reported in some detail in The News of
the World, 2lst December, 1924, under the heading :
“ Vampire’s Victims.” Haarmann was born in Hanover, 25th
October, 1879. The father, ‘Olle Harmann,’’ a locomotive-
stoker, was well-known as a rough, cross-grained, choleric man,
whom Fritz, his youngest son, both hated and feared. As a
youth, Fritz Haarmann was educated at a Church School, and
then at a preparatory school for non-commissioned officers at
New Breisach. It is significant that he was always dull and
stupid, unable to learn ; but it appears a good soldier. When
released from military service owing to ill-health he returned
home, only to be accused in a short while of offences against
children. Being considered irresponsible for his actions the
Court sent him to an asylum at Hildesheim, whence however
he managed to escape and took refuge in Switzerland. Later
he returned to Hanover, but the house became unbearable
owing to the violent quarrels which were of daily occurrence
between him and his father. Accordingly he enlisted and was


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 189


sent to the crack 10th Jager Battalion, at Colmar in Alsace.
Here he won golden opinions, and when released owing to
illness, with a pension his papers were marked “ Recht gut.”
When he reached home there were fresh scenes of rancour whilst
blows were not infrequently exchanged, and in 1903 he was
examined by a medical expert, Dr. Andrae, who considered
him morally lacking but yet there were no grounds for sending
him to an asylum. Before long he sank to the status of a
tramp; a street hawker, at times; a pilferer and a thief.
Again and again he was sent to jail, now charged with larceny,
now with burglary, now with indecency, now with fraud.
In 1918, he was released after a long stretch to find another
Germany. He returned to Hanover, and was able to open a
small cook shop in the old quarter of the town, where he also
hawked meat which was eagerly sought at a time of general
hunger and scarcity. He drove yet another trade, that of
“ copper’s nark,” an old lag who had turned spy and informer,
who gave secret tips to the police as to the whereabouts of
4 men they wanted. ‘‘ Detective Haarmann” he was nick-
named by the women who thronged his shop because he
always had plenty of fresh meat in store, and he invariably
contrived to undersell the other butchers and victuallers of
the quarter.

The centre of Hanover was the Great Railway Station, and
Hanover was thronged especially at its centre with a vast
ever-moving population, fugitive, wanderers and homeless
from all parts of dislocated Germany. Runaway lads from
towns in every direction made their way here, looking for work,
looking for food, idly tramping without any definite object,
without any definite goal, because they had nothing else to do.
It can well be imagined that the police, a hopelessly inadequate
force, kept as sharp a watch as possible on the Station and its
purlieus, and Haarmann used to help them in their survey-
ance. At midnight, or in the early morning he would walk
up and down among the rows of huddled sleeping forms in
the third-class waiting halls and suddenly waking up some
frightened youngster demand to see his ticket, ask to know
whence he had come and where he was going. Some sad
story would be sobbed out, and the kindly Haarmann was
wont to offer a mattress and a meal in his own place down
town.


190 THE VAMPIRE


So far as could be traced the first boy he so charitably took
to his rooms was a lad of seventeen named Friedel Rothe,
who had run away from home. On 29th September, 1918,
his mother received a postcard, and it so happened the very
same day his father returned from the war. The parents
were not going to let their son disappear without a search,
and they soon began to hunt for him in real earnest. One
of Friedel’s pals told them that the missing boy had met a
detective who offered him shelter. Other clues were traced
and with extraordinary trouble, for the authorities had more
pressing matters in hand than tracking truant schoolboys,
the family obliged the police to search Cellarstrasse 27, where
Haarmann lived. When a sudden entry was made Haar-
mann was found with another boy in such an unequivocal
situation that his friends, the police, were obliged to arrest
him there and then, and he received nine months imprison-
ment for gross indecency under Section 175 of the German
Code. Four years later when Haarmann was awaiting trial
for twenty-four murders he remarked : “‘ At the time when the
policeman arrested me the head of the boy Friedel Rothe was
hidden under a newspaper behind the oven. Later on, I threw
it into the canal.”

In September, 1919, Haarmann first met Hans Grans, the
handsome lad, who was to stand beside him in the dock.
Grans, the type of abnormal and dangerous decadent which
is only too common to-day, was one of the foulest parasites
of society, pilferer and thief, bully, informer, spy, agent
provocateur, murderer, renter, prostitute, and what is lower
and fouler than all, blackmailer. The influence of this
Ganymede over Haarmann was complete. It was he who
instigated many of the murders—Adolf Hannappel a lad of
seventeen was killed in November, 1923, because Grans
wanted his pair of new trousers; Ernst Spiecker, likewise
aged seventeen was killed on 5th January, 1924, because Grans
coveted his “ toff shirt ”—it was he who arranged the details,
who very often trapped the prey.

It may be said that in 1918, Hanover, a town of 450,000
inhabitants was well-known as being markedly homosexual.
These were inscribed on the police lists no less than 500
“Mannliche Prostituierten,” of whom the comeliest and best-
dressed, the mannered and well-behaved elegants frequented


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 191


the Café Kriépcke in the Georgstrasse, one of the first boule-
vards of New Hanover; whilst others met their friends at
the andrygonous balls in the Kalenberger Vorstadt, or in the
old Assembly Rooms; and lowest of all there was a tiny
dancing-place, ‘‘ Zur schwiilen Guste,”’ ‘“‘ Hot-Stuff Gussie’s ”’
where poor boys found their clientele. It was here, for
example, that Grans picked up young maa Spiecker whose
tawdry shirt cost him his life.

With regard to his demeanour at the trial nes contemporary
newspapers? write: ‘‘ Throughout the long ordeal Haar-
mann was utterly impassive and complacent. . . The
details of the atrocious crimes for which Haarmann. will
shortly pay with his life were extremely revolting. All his
victims were between 12 and 18 years of age,” and it was
proved that accused actually sold the flesh for human consump-
tion. He once made sausages in his kitchen, and, together
with the purchaser, cooked and ate them. . . Some
alienists hold that even then the twenty-four murders cannot
possibly exhaust the full toll of Haarmann’s atrocious crimes,
and estimate the total as high as fifty. With the exception of
a few counts, the prisoner made minutely detailed confessions
and for days the court listened to his grim narrative of how
he cut up the bodies of his victims and disposed of the frag-
ments in various ways. He consistently repudiated the imputa-
tion of insanity, but at the same time maintained unhesitatingly
that all the murders were committed when he was in a state
of trance, and unaware of what he was doing. This contention
was specifically brushed aside by the Bench, which in its
judgement pointed out that according to his own account of
what happened, it was necessary for him to hold down his
victims by hand in a peculiar way before it was possible for
him to inflict a fatal bite on their throats. Such action
necessarily involved some degree of deliberation and conscious
purpose.” Another account says with regard to Haarmann :
“The killing of altogether twenty-seven young men is laid at
his door, the horror of the deeds being magnified by the
allegation that he sold to customers for consumption the flesh
of those he did not himself eat. . . With Haarmann in
the dock appeared a younger man, his friend Hans Grans,
first accused of assisting in the actual murders but now charged
with inciting to commit them and with receiving stolen


192 THE VAMPIRE


property. The police are still hunting for a third man,
Charles, also a butcher, who is alleged to have completed the
monstrous trio. . . . the prosecuting attorney has an
array of nearly 200 witnesses to prove that all the missing
youths were done to death in the same horrible way.
He would take them to his rooms, and after a copious meal
would praise the looks of his young guests. Then he would
kill them after the fashion of a vampire. Their clothes he
would put up on sale in his shop, and the bodies would be
cut up and disposed of with the assistance of Charles.”’ ‘‘ In
open court, however, Haarmann admitted that Grans often
used to select his victims for him. More than once, he
alleged, Grans beat him for failing to kill the ‘ game’ brought
in, and Haarmann would keep the corpses in a cupboard
until they could be got rid of, and one day the police were
actually in his rooms when there was a body awaiting dis-
memberment. The back of the place abutted on the river,
and the bones and skulls were thrown into the water. Some
of them were discovered, but their origin was a mystery until
a police inspector paid a surprise visit to prisoner’s home
to inquire into a dispute between Haarmann and an intended
victim who escaped.” Suspicion had at last fallen upon him
principally, owing to skulls and bones found in the river
Seine during May, June, and July, 1924. The newspapers
said that during 1924, no less than 600 persons had disappeared,
for the most part lads between 14 and 18. On the night
of 22nd June at the railway station, sometime after midnight,
a quarrel broke out between Haarmann and a young fellow
named Fromm, who accused him of indecency. Both were
taken to the central station, and meanwhile Haarmann’s
room in the Red Row was thoroughly examined with the
result that damning evidence came to light. Before long
he accused Grans as his accomplice, since at the moment they
happened to be on bad terms. Haarmann was sentenced
to be decapitated, a sentence executed with a heavy sword.
Grans was condemned to imprisonment for life, afterwards
commuted to twelve years’ penal servitude. In accord-
ance with the law, Haarmann was put to death on Wednesday,
15th April, 1925.

This is probably one of the most extraordinary cases of
vampirism known, The violent eroticism, the fatal bite in


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 1938


the throat, are typical of the vampire, and it was perhaps
something more than mere coincidence that the mode of
execution should be the severing of the head from the body,
since this was one of the efficacious methods of destroying
@ vampire.

Certainly in the extended sense of the word, as it is now
so commonly used, Fritz Haarmann was a vampire in every
particular.

To return to the more restricted connotation, we find that,
as has been mentioned above, Dom Calmet in his famous
work more than once emphasized that his great difficulty
in accepting the tradition of the vampire, that is to say the
vampire proper and not a mere malignant phantom, lies in
the fact that it is physically impossible for a dead body to
leave its grave since (he argues) if it has corporeity it cannot
have subtilty, that is to say the power of passing through
material objects.

Accordingly in the second volume of his great treatise he
gives as the rubric to Chapter LX, Impossibilité morale, que
les Revenans sortent de leurs tombeaux.** He commences :
“T have already raised a serious objection, which is the
impossibility that vampires should leave their graves, and
should return thither, without any obvious disturbance of
the ground, either when they are passing forth or when they
are finding their way back again. Nobody has ever met
this difficulty, and nobody ever will be able to meet it. To
maintain that the devil subtilizes and renders unsubstantial
the body of the vampire is merely an assertion which is made
without any foundation and which is unsustained and untrue.

“The fluidity of the blood, the healthy red colour, and the
absence of rigidity in the case of vampires are not circum-
stances which need cause us the slightest wonder, any more
than the fact that the hair grows, and the bodies remain
without dissolution. It is a matter of daily occurrence that
bodies are found which do not crumble to dust and which for
a very long time after death preserve the appearance of life.
This is not in the least surprising in the cases of those who
die suddenly without any illness, or indeed as the consequence
of certain diseases which are well-known to medical men,
sicknesses which do not affect the circulation of the blood or
the elasticity of the body.


18


194 THE VAMPIRE


“ With regard to the growth of hair this is quite a natural
condition.

“ One might even compare these facts with the flowers, and
in general with everything which depends upon the luxuri-
ance of vegetation among the fauna and flora of nature.”

These objections thus stated may seem very weighty, but
perhaps if they are impartially examined it may be found
that the good Benedictine has been a little too dogmatic in
his assertions. The phenomenon that the soil of the grave
was almost invariably undisturbed by the exit of the Vampire,
who further could make his entry through doors and windows
without opening or breaking them may yet admit of an explana-
tion which will go far to solve the-difficulty Don Calmet and
many others have regarded as insurmountable. In the first
place it is hardly correct so sweepingly to assert that the
ground is wholly undisturbed. Where careful investigation
was made it was generally found that there were discovered
four or five little holes or tunnels, not much larger indeed
than a man’s finger which pierced through the earth to a very
considerable depth. And here, perhaps in this one little
detail, we may find the clue to the whole mystery. The wide
spread growth of spiritualism has made even the ordinary
public fairly familiar with the phenomena of a séance where
materialization takes place, and where physical forms are
solidly built up and disintegrated again within an exceedingly
short space of time. This is done by some power or entity
which awails itself of the body of the passive medium and
utilizes the ectoplasm which it can draw thence. Professor
Ostwald writes: ‘‘ Certain human beings are capable of trans-
forming their physiological store of energy (which, as we know,
is almost exclusively present in the form of chemical energy),
of transmitting it through space, and of transforming it at
prescribed points back into one of the known forms of energy.
It results from this, that the mediums themselves are usually
much exhausted, i.e., that they use up their bodily energy.
A transformation into psychic energy seemsalso to be possible.”
The extreme exhaustion of a medium after such investigation
and the production of forms of organic matter is a matter of
common knowledge. Of one of the most famous mediums,
Eusapia Paladino it is reported: ‘‘ Eusapia during the sittings
fell into a deep hysterical somnambulism, and was often in


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 195


slightly dazed condition after the close. When the trance set
in, she turned pale, and her head swerved to and fro, and
the eyes were turned upwards and inwards. She was hyper-
sensitive, especially to the touch, and also to light; she had
hallucinations, delirium, fits of laughter, weeping, or deep
sleep, and showed other typical hysterical convulsions.
Digestive troubles also sometimes set in, especially when she
had eaten before the sitting. In a sudden light, or at a
sudden rough touch, she cried out and shuddered, as she
would under unexpected violent pain.”®* And again: “ Eusapia
Paladino used to be very exhausted after every successful
sitting, especially after she had been in a state of trance.
She sometimes slept until the next mid-day, and was for the
rest of the day apathetic, peevish, and monosyllabic. Her
skin was usually cold after the sittings, her pulse rapid
(100° per minute), and she had a strong feeling of fatigue.
Her subsequent sleep was often restless and interrupted by
vivid dreams.’ Speaking of another famous medium the
same authority says: “In the case of Eva C. also, where the
number of negative sittings is very considerable, she feels
much exhausted, according to the degree of her performances,
and after exhaustive positive sittings she usually needs from
twenty-eight to forty-four hours to recover the deficit in her
strength. Also, she is often, on the following day, dazed,
and complains of headache and lack of appetite.”® It is
extremely significant, and one might say even more signifi-
cant that these are the very symptoms exhibited by those
who have been attacked by a Vampire.

Another fact which must be borne in mind is that the
Vampire was often a person who during life had read deeply
in poetic lore and practised black magic. For the connexion
between spiritism and black magic one may refer to my
History of Witchcraft when the matter is very amply discussed
and made plain.

With these pregnant and remarkable details in mind we
may consider the explanation of vampirism given by Z. T.
Pierart,*’ a well-known French spiritualist and sometime
editor of La Revue Spiritualiste. He writes as follows: “ As
long as the astral form is not entirely liberated from the body
there is a liability that it may be forced by magnetic attraction
to re-enter it. Sometimes it will be only half-way out when


196 THE VAMPIRE


the corpse, which presents the appearance of death, is buried.
In such cases the terrified astral soul re-enters its casket,
and then one of two things happen: the person buried either
writhes in agony of suffocation, or, if he has been grossly
material, becomes a vampire. The bi-corporeal life then
begins. The ethereal form can go where it pleases, and as
long as it does not break the link connecting it with the body
can wander visible or invisible and feed on its victims. It
then transmits the results of the suction by some mysterious
invisible cord of connexion to the body, thus aiding it to per-
petuate the state of catalepsy.’”’ Duly discounting the peculiar
phraseology of ‘astral soul”’ and ‘ethereal form ” this comment
seems to point towards a possible and correct explanation.

There remain three hypotheses to be considered. Does
the body of the Vampire actually dematerialize and then
re-integrate outside the grave ? Or, is another body built up
by the Vampire quite independently of the body which remains
behind in the grave ? Thirdly, does the spirit of the Vampire
withdraw ectoplasmic material from his own body, which
enables him to form more permanent corporeity by drawing
yet further material from his victims ? The second of these
suggestions we may dismiss without much consideration since
it is not borne out by any of the facts which have been
investigated with regard to the subject, and the truth seems
to lie between the first and the third hypotheses, partaking
of both. The body of the Vampire under certain conditions
acquires subtilty and therefore it is able to pass through
material objects, but in order to ensure not only its vitality
but the permanence of this subtile quality it must draw this
energy, no doubt very often in an ectoplasmic form, from its
victim, as well as what is necessary for its rejuvenescence.
The continual demand which a Vampire makes both physically
and spiritually upon its victims must speedily result in the death
of these persons, who being infected with the poison will in
their turn visit others upon whom they will prey.

It must always be remembered that the word vampire is
used so loosely that there are traditions and legends which
hardly require even one of these three hypotheses for their
explanation, and which, one cannot too frequently repeat
the caution, refer to phantoms of the vampire family rather
than to the Vampire proper.


eee eC » tees 7 i 8


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 197


It certainly seems a possibility, and something more than a
possibility, that vampiric entities may be on the watch and
active to avail themselves of the chances to use the ectoplasmic
emanations of mediums at séances, and thiscertainly constitutes
a very formidable danger. It is even a fact that if a person
who, consciously or unconsciously possesses the natural
qualities of a materializing medium, is placed in certain
nocuous circumstances, for example if he visits a house which
is powerfully haunted by malefic influences, especially if he
be fatigued and languid so as to offer little or no resistance,
a vampirish entity may temporarily utilize his vitality to
attempt a partial materializaticn. This seems clear from
the many instances of persons who for no obvious reason are in
certain spots, it may be a place, a house, or even a room over-
come with a depression, which if they do not shake off by an
act of will or by leaving the particular locality may develop
into actual debility and enervation. A very striking example
of an entity who in this way made an attempt at materializa-
tion is recorded by Miss Scatcherd in her contribution to
Survival, a symposium which was published under the
editorial care of Sir James Marchant. Miss Scatcherd
relates: “‘I saw ectoplasm in solid form for the first time
when looking for rooms in the neighbourhood of Russell
Square. My friend, many years older than myself, was tired.
She wore a black velvet cloak, and was sitting on a high chair,
so that her mantle hung in long folds to the ground, while the
light from the large windows fell full on her face. Suddenly
I observed, on her left side, just above her waist, a patch of
cloudy white substance, becoming bigger and denser as I
watched its uncanny growth. Meanwhile, I was discussing
terms with the landlady, a frail little woman, when a look of
terror came into her eyes. She, too, was staring transfixed at
the globular mass of white substance on my companion’s black
mantle. For out of it looked a living face, normal in size—a
man’s face with rolling eyes and leering grin that made one’s
blood runcold. When I mentally ordered him away, he grinned
defiance. Fearing to startle my friend, I took the landlady
aside and asked what was the matter. She burst into tears.

“*Oh, miss! did you not see him? He was my first. He
come like this several times, and has never forgiven me for
marrying again.’


198 THE VAMPIRE


“What do you mean?’ I asked again, severely.

“*QOh!’ she wailed. ‘You must have seen his wicked face
glaring at us from your friend’s cloak, and now you will not
take the rooms.’ ’’®

In some traditions the Vampire is said to float into the


house in the form of a mist, a belief which is found in coun-


tries so far separate as Hungary and China. In the latter
empire wills-o’-the-wisp are thought to be an unmistakable
sign of a place where much blood has been shed, such as an
old battle field, and all mists and gaseous marsh-lights are
connected with the belief in vampires and spectres which
convey disease. Since the effluvia, the vapour and haze
from a swamp or quaggy ground are notoriously unhealthy
and malarial fevers result in delirium and anemia it may be
that in some legends the disease has been personified as a
ghastly creature who rides on the infected air and sucks the
life from his victims. But all this is mere fancy, and only
deserves a passing mention as belonging to legend and story.
Of the same nature is the notion that Vampires can command
destructive animals and vermin such as fiies, and, in the East
the mosquito, whose bite may indeed convey some fever to
the veins and whose long proboscis sucks the blood of animals
and man. We may remember that at Accaron Beelzebub
was the Lord of flies, and these insects were often regarded
as having something of a diabolical nature. Pausanias V,14,
tells us that the people of Elis offered sacrifice to Zeus, Averter
of Flies, a ceremony which is also mentioned by Clement of
Alexandria in his Ilporperrixds mpos “EXAnvas, I, 38 (ed.
Potter, p. 33). Pliny Historia Naturalis (X, 75), says: “The
Eleans invoke the fly-catching god, because the swarms of
these insects breed pestilence; and as soon as the sacrifice
is made to the god the flies all perish.” Pausanias (VIII, 26-7)
further notes that at Aliphera in Arcadia the festival of Athene
began with prayer and oblation to the Fly-catcher, and after
this rite the flies gave no more trouble. Aelian(De Animalium
Natura, XI, 8), tells us that at the festival of Apollo in the
island of Leucas an ox was actually sacrificed to the flies,
who when glutted with the warm blood, incontinently dis-
appeared. Julius Solinus in his Collectanea Rerum Memora-
bilium (I, xi, ed. Th. Mommsem, Berlin, 1864), records that
all flies were carefully excluded from the shrine of Hercules


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 199


in the Forum Bovarium at Rome because when Hercules
was handing the flesh to the priests he had prayed aloud to
the Fly-catcher. It may be noted that when the demon,
under whatsoever guise or name he might be adored, had
received those divine honours he ever covets and filches to
himself by so woefully deceiving his worshippers he with-
draws his emissaries the tormenting flies who are often his
imps in the form of insect. By their means he has striven to
vex and molest the Saints—S. Bernard, by excommunicat-
ing the flies that buzzed about him struck them all down
dead upon the floor of the church.

It now remains to inquire how the grave of a Vampire may be
recognized, and in what way this terror may be checked and
destroyed.

In this connexion it will not be impertinent to give a letter
“d’un fort honnéte homme et fort instruit de ce qui regarde
les Revenants”’ which is cited at length by Dom Calmet.
The letter is addressed to a near relative of the writer. “It
is your wish, my dear cousin, that I should give you exact
details of what has been happening in Hungary with regard
to certain apparitions, who so often molest and slay people
in that part of the world. Iam ina position to afford you this
information, for I have been living for some years in those
very districts, and I am naturally of an inquiring disposition.
From the time when I was a mere boy I have heard numbers
of stories of ghosts and witches, but not once in a thousand
have I believed one of them ; it seems to me that it is almost
impossible to be too careful in the investigation of matters
where it is so easy to be mistaken or deliberately tricked.
However there are certain facts so well vouched for that one
cannot but accept them as true. As to the apparitions of
Hungary this is the usual account. A person is attached by ©
a great languor and weariness, he loses all appetite, he visibly (
wastes and grows thin, and at the end of a week or ten days, ~~~
may be a fortnight, he dies without any other symptom save ae
anemia and emaciation.

“In Hungary they say that a Vampire has attacked him
and sucked his blood. Many of those who fall ill in this way
declare that a white spectre is following them and cleaves
to them as close as a shadow. When we were in our Kalocsa-
Bacs quarters in the County of Temesvar® two officers of


200 THE VAMPIRE


the regiment in which I was Cornet died from this languor,
and several more were attacked and must have perished had
not a Corporal of our regiment put a stop to these maladies
by resorting to the remedial ceremonies which are practised
by the local people. These are very unusual, and although
they are considered an infallible cure I cannot remember even
to have seen these in any Rituale.

“They select a young lad who is a pure maiden, that is to
say, who, as they believe, had never performed the sexual act.
He is set upon a young stallion who has not yet mounted his
first mare, who has never stumbled, and who must be coal-
black without a speck of white; the stud is ridden into the
cemetery in and out among the graves and that grave over
which the steed in spite of the blows they deal him pretty
handsomely refuses to pass is where the Vampire lies. The
tomb is opened and they find a sleek, fat corpse, as healthily-
coloured as though the man were quietly and happily sleeping
in calm repose. With one single blow of a sharp spade they
cut off the head, whereupon there gush forth warm streams
of blood in colour rich red, and filling the whole grave. It
would assuredly be supposed that they had just decapitated
a stalwart fine fellow of most sanguine habit and complexion.
When this business is done, they refill the grave with earth
and then the ravages of the disease immediately cease whilst
those who are suffering from this marasmus gradually recover
their strength just as convalescents recuperating after a long
illness, who have wasted and withered. This is exactly
what occurred in the case of our young officers who had
sickened. As the Colonel of the regiment, the Captain and
Lieutenant were all absent, I happened to be in command
just then and I was heartily vexed to find that the
Corporal had arranged the affair without my knowledge.
I was within an ace of ordering him a severe military
punishment, and these are common enough in_ the
Imperial service. I would have given the world to have
been present at the exhumation of the Vampire, but after
all it is too late for that now.”

It has already been remarked that in a cemetery there were
often found to be a number of small passages of the size of a
man’s finger pierced through the earth, and it was considered
that the presence of such a soupirail in a grave was a certain


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 201


sign that if investigation were made a body with all the marks
of vampirism would be descovered lying there.

When the corpse is exhumed, even though death has taken
place long before there will be no decay, no trace of corruption,
or decomposition, but rather it will be found to be plump
and of a clear complexion ; the face often ruddy ; the whole
person composed as if in a profound sleep. Sometimes the
eyes are closed; more frequently open, glazed, fixed, and
glaring fiercely. The lips which will be markedly full and red
are drawn back from the teeth which gleam long, sharp, as
razors, and ivory white. Often the gaping mouth is stained
and foul with great slab gouts of blood, which trickles
down from the corners on to the lawn shroudings and linen
cerements, the offal of the last night’s feast. In the case of an
epidemic of vampirism it is recorded that whole graves have
been discovered soaked and saturated with squelching blood,
which the horrid inhabitant has gorged until he is replete
and vomited forth in great quantities like some swollen leech
discharges when thrown into the brine. In Greece it is thought
that the corpse’s skin becomes exceedingly tough and distended
so that the joints can hardly be bent; the human pelt has
stretched like the vellum tegument of a drum, and when struck
returns the same sound; whence the Greek vrykolakas has
received the name tuuravaios (drum-like).1° It was not
infrequently seen that the dead person in his grave had
devoured all about him, grinding them with his teeth, and
(as it was supposed) uttering a low raucous noise like the grunt-
ing of a pig who roots among garbage. In his work, De
Masticatione Mortuorum in tumulis, Leipzig, 1728, Michael
Ranft treats at some length of this matter. He says that it is
very certain that some corpses have devoured their cerements
and even gnaw their own flesh. It has been suggested that
this is the original reason why the jaws of the dead were
tightly bound with linen bands. Ranft instances the case
of «a Bohemian woman who when disinterred in 1355 had
devoured the greater part of her shroud. In another instance
during the sixteenth century both a man and a woman seemed
to have torn out their intestines and were actually ravening
upon their entrails. In Moravia a corpse was exhumed which
had devoured the grave-clothes of a woman buried not far from
his tomb.


202 THE VAMPIRE


The authors of the Malleus M. alificarum, Part I, Question xv,
under the rubric, It is shown that, on account of the Sins of
Witches, the Innocent are often Bewitched, yea, Sometimes
even for their Own Sins, relate an instance which came under
their own observation. They say :

“Also the sin of one is passed on to another in the way of
desert, as when the sins of wicked subjects are passed on to a
bad Governor, because the sins of the subjects deserve a bad
Governor. See Job: ‘He makes Hypocrites to reign on
account of the sins of the people.’ t

“Sin, and consequently punishment, can also be passed on
through some consent or dissimulation. For when those in
authority neglect to reprove sin, then very often the good are
punished with the wicked, as S. Augustine says in the first
book de Ciuitate Dei. An example was brought to our notice
as Inquisitors. A town once was rendered almost destitute by
the death of its citizens ; and there was a rumour thata certain
buried woman was gradually eating the shroud in which she
had been buried, and that the plague could not cease until she
had eaten the whole shroud and absorbed it into her stomach.
A council was held, and the Podesta, with the Governor of the
city dug up the grave, and found half the shroud absorbed
through the mouth and throat into the stomach, and con-
sumed. In horror at this sight, the Podesta drew his sword and
cut off her head and threw it out of the grave, and at once the
plague ceased. Now the sins of that old woman were, by
Divine permission, visited upon the innocent on account of
the dissimulation of what had happened before. For when
an Inquisition was held it was found that during a long time
of her life she had been a Sorceress and Enchantress.”

If it were suspected that a man might return as a Vampire
or that his ghost would prove troublesome precautions were
taken to prevent this. In the first place the grave must be
dug twice as deep as usual. Indeed in Oldenburg the chances
are that if the grave be shallow any ghost may walk.!° The
Chuwashé, a tribe in Finland, actually nail the corpse to
the coffin.1* The Burmese tie together the two big toes, and
usually also the two thumbs of the corpse.! The Arabs fasten
the feet ; in Voigtland it is considered sufficient to secure the
hands." The Californians'* and Damasas!” break the
dead man’s spine. In his Travels into Dalmatia (English


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 208


translation, London, 1778), Alberto Fortis says : ‘“When a
man dies suspected of becoming a Vampire or Vukodlak,
as they call it, they cut his hams, and prick his whole body
with pins, pretending that, after this operation, he cannot
walk about. These are even instances of Morlacchi, who,
imagining that they may possibly thirst for children’s blood
after death, intreat their heirs, and sometimes oblige them
to promise, to treat them as Vampires when they die.”

When the Vampire was tracked to his lair one of the most
approved methods to render him harmless was to transfix the
corpse through the region of the heart with a stake which may
be of aspen or maple as in Russia, or more usually of hawthorn
or whitethorn. The aspen tree is held to be particularly
sacred as according to one account of this was the wood of the
Cross. In her Wood-walk, Mrs. Felicia Hemans says: “The
aspen-tree shivers mystically in sympathy with the horror
of that mother-tree in Palestine, which was compelled to
furnish materials for the Cross.”!°° With regard to hawthorn
de la Charbonelais Chesnil tells us: ‘Cet arbre est regardé
comme le privilegié des fées qui se rassemblant, dit-on, sous
ses rameaux embaumées. En Normandie on croit aussi que
la foudre ne le frappe jamais parcequ’on suppose, mais sans
aucun fondement qu’il servit 4 former la couronne de Christ.”
And again: ‘Dans plusiers contrées, ce vegetal [Mepsilus
pyraneatha] est l’objet d’une sorte de vénération parcequ’on
croit que c’est dans un buisson de cette espéce qui Dieu
apparut & Moise et que c’est pour cette raison que ses feuilles
demeurent toujours vertes, et que ses fruits ne se detachent
point de l’arbre durant Vhiver.” Of whitethorn Sir John
Mandeville says :° “Then was our Lord yled into a gardyn,
and there the Jewes scorned Hym and maden Him a crown
of the branches of the Albiespyne, that is, Whitethorn that
grew in the same gardyn, and setten yt upon His heved. And
therefore hath the Whitethorn many virtues. For he that
beareth a branch on hym thereof, no thundre, ne no maner
of tempest may dere him, ne in the house that is yane may non
evil ghost enter.” The ancient Greeks believed that branches of
whitethorn or buckthorn (rhamnus) fastened to a door or
outside a window prevented the entry of witches and guarded
the house against the evil spells of sorcerers.” Hence they
suspended branches of it above their lintels when sacrifices


204 THE VAMPIRE


were offered for the dead lest haply any vagrom ghost should
be tempted to revisit his old home or make entry into the
house of some other person.” The atheist Bion, as atheists
use, when he was dying clutched at any superstition and asked
for boughs of buckthorn and branches of laurel to be attached
to the door to keep out death.4? It should be remarked that
the old Greek custom is widely practised among the peasantry of
Europe to-day, and in Fletcher’s The Faithfull Shepherdesse,"4
II, when Clorin is sorting her herbs she says :


these rhamnus’ branches are,
Which, stuck in entries, or about the bar
That holds the door fast, kill all enchantments,charms—
Were they Medea’s verses—that do harms
To men or cattle.


Fanshaw in his elegant translation" has :


Hi rami sunt mollis Acanthi,
Qui si uestibulis aut postibus affigantur,
Unde fores pendent, incantamenta repellunt
Omnia, pestifere facient licet illa MEDEz,
Quae laedunt homines pecudesue.

In Dalmatia and Albania for the wooden stake is sometimes
substituted a consecrated dagger, a poniard which has been
laid upon the altar and ritually blessed by the priest with due
sacring of holy orison, of frankincense and lustral asperges.

It is highly important that the body of the Vampire should
be transfixed by a single blow, for two blows or three would
restore it to life. This curious idea is almost universally
found in tradition and folk-lore."* In The Thousand and One
Nights (Burton, Vol. VII, p. 361) we have the story of ‘ Sayf-
al-Muluk and Badion al Jamal” where the hero cuts the
ghoul in half by a single stroke through the waist. The
ghost yells at him: ‘Oman, an thou desire to slay me,
strike me a second stroke.”” The youth is just about to give
the second slash with his scimitar when a certain old blind
beggar whom he has befriended warns him. “Smite not a
second time, for then will he not die, but will live and destroy
us.” He accordingly stays his hand and the ghoul expires.

Among Galland’s manuscripts was a tale of the three sons
of the Sultan of Samarcand. In the course of various
adventures the third son, Badialzaman engages in a contest
with the Djin Morhagean. The youngest daughter of the


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 205


Djin who loves the prince informs him that her father can
only be slain if he is dealt one single blow—no more—with the
sword which is hanging at his head whilst he sleeps.

When the stake has pierced the Vampire he will utter the
most terrible shrieks and blood will jet forth in every direction
from his convulsed and writhing limbs as he impotently
threshes the air with his quivering hands. There is a tradi-
tion that when he has been dead for many years and his
mysterious life in death is thus ended the corpse has been
known immediately to crumble into dust.

In some countries this operation usually takes place soon
after dawn, as the Vampire may only leave his grave with the
dusk and must return at cock-crow, so he will be caught
when he has come back torpid and heavy from his night’s
banquet of blood. But, as we have mentioned in another
place, this belief that his ravages are confined to the dark
hours is by no means universal, for Paul Lucas in his Voyage
au Levant, speaking of Corfu says: “Des personnes qui
paroissent avoir le bon sens parlent d’un fait assez singulier
qui arrive souvent en ce pays, aussi bien que dans l|’Isle
Santeriny ; des gens morts disent-ils, reviennent, se font voir
en plein jour, & vont méme chez eux, ce qui cause de grandes
frayeurs & ceux qui les voyent.”!”7 Accordingly the Vampire
may walk in full daylight. Yet he may not, so they hold in
Epirus, in Crete, and among the Wallachians, leave his tomb
on a Saturday. ‘‘ Many believe that, even in the day-time,
it is only once a week, on the Saturday, that he is allowed to
occupy his burial-place. When it is discovered that such a
Vurvilukas is about, the people go, on a Saturday, and open his
tomb, when they always find his body just as it was buried,
and entirely undecomposed.”"* Tozer, Researches in the
Highlands of Turkey (11, p. 91) writes: “ Saturday is the day
of the week on which the exorcism ought by right to take
place, because the spirit then rests in this tomb, and if he is
out on his rambles when the ceremony takes place, it is un-
availing. In most parts of the country, as the Vampire is
regarded as only a night-wanderer, he has to be caught during
the night between Friday and Saturday ; but in some places
when he is believed to roam abroad by day as well, the whole
of Saturday is allotted to him for repose, and consequently is
suitable for his capture.”


206 THE VAMPIRE


When the stake has been thrust with one drive through the
Vampire’s heart his head should be cut off, and this is to be
done with the sharp edge of a sexton’s spade, rather than
with asword. Ralston !° tells us that to transfix the Vampire
with a pile is not always considered effectual. “A strigon
(or Istrian vampire) who was transfixed with a sharp thorn
cudgel near Laibach in 1672, pulled it out of his body and
flung it back contemptuously ’”’.!2° The only certain methods
of destroying a Vampire appear to be either to consume him
by fire, or to chop off his head with a grave-digger’s shovel.
The Wends say that if a Vampire is hit over the back of the
head with an implement of that kind, he will squeal like a
pig.” It may be noted that the heads of murderers or
warlocks were often struck off and destroyed, or else set
between the legs or directly underneath the body.!24

To burn the body of the Vampire is generally acknowledged
to be by far the supremely efficacious method of ridding a
district of this demoniacal pest, and it is the common practice
all over the world. The bodies of all those whom he may
have infected with the vampirish poison by sucking their
blood are also for security sake cremated. Leone Allacci
writes: ‘‘ Quare ciues, cum uident homines, nulla grassante
infirmitate, in tanta copia emori ; suspicati quod est, sepulchra,
in quibus recens defunctus sepultus est, aperiunt ; aliquando
statim, aliquando etiam tardius, cadauer nondum corruptum,
inflatumque comperiunt; quod e sepulchro extractum, preci-
busque eflusis a sacerdotibus, in rogum ardentem coniiciunt ;
et nondum completa supplicatione, cadaueris iuncturae sensim
dissoluuntur, et reliqua exusta in cineres conuertuntur.’!22
Any animals which may come forth from the fire—worms,
snakes, lice, beetles, birds of horrible and deformed shape—
must be driven back into the flames for it may be the Vampire
embodied in one of these, seeking to escape so that he can
renew his foul parasitism of death. The ashes of the pyre
should be scattered to the winds, or cast into a river swiftly
flowing to the sea.

Sometimes the body was hacked to pieces before it was cast
into the fire; very often the heart was torn from the breast
and boiled to shreds in oil or vinegar. Quantities of boiling
water or boiling oil were also poured into the grave. Mr.
Abbott in his Macedonian Folklore (1903) tells us of a


=


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 207


ceremony which took place when a Vampire had been tracked.
He writes: 1° “I was creditably informed of a case of this
description occurring not long ago at Alistrati, one of the
principal villages between Serres and Drama. Someone
was suspected of having turned into a Vampire. The corpse
was taken out of the grave, was scalded with boiling oil, and
was pierced through the navel with a long nail. Then the
tomb was covered in and millet was scattered over it, that, if
the Vampire came out again, he might waste his time in picking
up the grains of millet and be thus overtaken by dawn. For
the usual period of their wanderings is from about two hours
before midnight till the first crowing of the morning cock.
At the sound of which “fearful summons” the Vrykolakas
like the Gaelic sithehe, or fairy, vanishes into his subterranean
abode.”

The Turks on occasion have had recourse to the remedy
of burning to put to rest a Greek Vampire, for Crusius in his
Turco-Graecia relates:1** ‘In sabbato pentecostes Turcae
combusserunt Graecum, biennio ante defunctum : quod uulgo
crederetur noctu  sepulcro egredi, hominesque occidere.
Alii autem ueram causam perhibent, quod quindecim pluresue
homines spectrum eius uidentes mortui sint. Sepulcro ex-
tractus, consumpta carne cutem ossibus adhaerentem integram
habuit.”


William of Newbury speaking of the vampires which infested —


England in the twelfth century says that similar molestations
had often happened and there were on record very many famous
cases. The only way in which a district could be completely
secured and an end put once and for all to these hideous
visitations was by exhuming the body and burning the Vampire
to ashes.!*

The following form of exorcism is described as having been
employed in Rhodes on a woman who returned as a Vrykolakas.
“The priest of the village laid on the ground one of the dead
woman’s shifts, over the neck of which he walked, held up by
two men, for fear the vampire should seize him. While in
this position he read verses from the New Testament, till the
shift swelled up and split. When this rent takes place the
evil spirit is supposed to escape through the opening.”’”6

The first precaution taken by the Wallachians to prevent
the Vampire from ravaging is to drive a long nail through the


208 THE VAMPIRE


skull and to lay the thorny stem of a wild rose bush upon the
body, so that its winding sheet may become entangled with it
should there be any attempt to rise.!””

In Bulgaria “There is yet another method of abolishing
a Vampire—that of botiling him. There are certain persons
who make a profession of this; and their mode of procedure
is as follows: The sorcerer, armed with a picture of some
saint, lies in ambush until he sees the Vampire pass, when he
pursues him with his Hikon ; the poor Obour takes refuge
in a tree or on the roof of a house, but his persecutor follows
him up with the talisman, driving him away from all shelter,
in the direction of a bottle specially prepared, in which is
placed some of the vampire’s favourite food. Having no
other resource, he enters this prison, and is immediately
fastened down with a cork, on the interior of which is a
fragment of the Hikon. The bottle is then thrown into the fire,
and the Vampire disappears for ever.”

With reference to this enclosing of the Vampire in a bottle
it may be remembered that it was once a common practice of
sorcery to imprison familiar spirits in a vial. Among the
articles put forth by Don Alfonso Manriquez, who on 10
September, 1523, succeeded as Grand Inquisiter Adrian,
Bishop of Tortosa,!** was the following which a man in duty
bound must reveal to the Holy office should he become aware
of any such offence: “If any person made or caused to be
made mirrors, rings, phials of glass or other vessels therein
to contain some spirit who should reply to his inquiries and
aid his projects.” !”°

Newton in his 7’ravels and Discoveries in the Levant (Vol. I.,
p- 213) says that in Mitylene the bodies of those who will
not lie quiet in their graves are transported to a small adjacent
island, a mere eyot without inhabitants where they are
re-interred. This is an effectual bar to any future molestation
for the Vampire cannot cross salt water. Running water too
he can only pass at the slack or the flood of the tide.

As all other demoniacal monsters the Vampire fears and
shrinks from holy things. Holy Water burns him as some
biting acid; he flies from the sign of the Cross, from the
Crucifix, from Relics, and above all from the Host, the Body
of God. All these, and other hallowed objects render him
powerless. He is conquered by the fragrance of incense.


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 209


Certain trees and herbs are hateful to him, the whitethorn
(or buckthorn) as we have seen, and particularly garlic.
Often when the Vampire is decapitated his mouth is stuffed
full with garlic ; garlic is scattered in and all over the coffin
by handfuls ; and he can do no harm. In China and among
the Malays to wet a child’s forehead with garlic is a sure pro-
tection against vampires. The West Indian negroes to-day
smear themselves with garlic to neutralize the evil charms of
witches and obeah men. It may be noted that the Battas
or Bataks of Sumatra ascribe pining and wasting away, sick-
ness, terror and death to the absence of the soul (Tendi) from
the body and the soul must be lured back to his tenement.
One of the most powerful soul-compelling herbs which is used
by them in their mystic rites on these occasions is garlic.*
At the 8. John (Midsummer) Festival of fire, on the Vigil of
the Major solemnity of that Saint, 23rd June, at Dragingnan,
Var, the people roasted pods of garlic by the bonfires. These
pods were afterwards distributed to every family, and were
believed to bring good luck.!*4

In countries which are non-Christian the practices are
naturally somewhat different, although it should be remarked
that burning the body of the Vampire is universal. In China,
corpses suspected of potential vampirism were allowed to
decay in the open air before burial, or, when buried, were
exhumed, as in other countries, and cremated. In the absence
of the corpse from its grave the lid of the coffin was removed,
since it was thought that the circulation of fresh air would
prevent the Vampire from returning to it. Rice, red peas
and scraps of iron were also scattered round the grave. These
formed a mystical barrier the dead man could not surmount,
he fell to the ground stiff and stark, and then could be taken
up and burned to ashes.1%”

In some Slavonic countries it is thought that a Vampire,
if prowling out of his tomb at night may be shot and killed
with a silver bullet that has been blessed by a priest. But
care must be taken that his body is not laid in the rays of the
moon, especially if the moon be at her full, for in this case he
will revive with redoubled vigour and malevolence.

It should perhaps be mentioned that the Macedonians
believe in the existence of a vrykolakas of sheep and cattle
as well as the more formidable vrykolakas who drains human


14


210 THE VAMPIRE


blood. The vrykolakas of animals rides upon their shoulders
and as the ordinary vampire sucks a vein, killing the unfortun-
ate beasts and leaving them a mere fibrous mash of skin and
bone. Vagrant Mohammedan dervishes profess to have
the power of exterminating these inferior vampires, whence
they are often saluted as “‘ vampire-killers,” and they tramp the
countryside ostentatiously exhibiting an iron rod which ends
in a sharp point (shish) to pierce through and destroy the pest,
or a long lance-like stick furnished at the top with a small
axe to strike him down.’** But here we have descended to
mere quackery. Although as we have seen there are many
methods and many variants, it is certain that an effectual
remedy against the Vampire is to transfix his heart with a
stake driven through with one single blow, to strike off his
head with a sexton’s spade, and perhaps best of all to burn him
to ashes and purge the earth of his pollutions by the incineration
of fire.


NOTES TO CHAPTER III.


1 Modern Greek Folklore, p. 375.

2c. liii.

® ovx dv me muody dvexdpev’ "Epwiow ; Orestes, 581.
‘ll, 924-925.


Ky. dpa, pidatat unrpds éyxérous kivas.
Op. ras rot rarpds 5é rGs piyw, maps rade ;


5 Compendium Theologiae Moralis, Sabetti-Barrett. Editio Uiccsima
Quinta; Pustet; 1916. p. 115.

* “ Rache als Selbstmordmotiv,” R. Lasch; Globus, Ixxiv (1898), pp.
37-39.

7 Lettres édifantes et curieuses, Nouvelle édition, xi, Paris, 1781, pp. 246-
248. The letter in question was written by Fr. Martin, S.J., at Marava,
in the mission of Madura, 8th November, 1709.

§ Origin of Civilization, pp. 378 seq.

® China Past and Present, London, 1903, pp. 378, seg. Professor Parker
was Professor of Chinese at the Owens College, Manchester.

10 In a letter, 3rd February, 1902, to Sir James George Frazer, which is
cited by the latter.

11 T quote the translation by C. D. Yonge, Bohn’s Classical Library, London,
1854, vol. I, pp. 250-251, The Deipnosophists, IV, 42.

12 Of Apamea in Syria. He was born circa B.c. 135, and died at Rome
soon after B.c. 51. His knowledge was very varied and remarkable. None
of his writings have come down to us entire, but the fragments were collected
by Bahe, Lugduni Batauorum, 1810.

13 About £20.

14 Deipnosophists, IV, 40, Yonge’s translation, vol. I, pp. 248-249.

15 [mpiety ; and later, as in Dio Cassius lvii, 9, disloyalty to the Emperor
(as eds).


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 211


i. Aeschines, Contra Ctesiphontem ; 244, p. 193. Ed. F. Franke, Leipzig,
iS.

17 “ Trauer und Begrabnissitten der Wadschagga,”’ B. Gutmann. Globus.
(Illustrierte Zitschrift fir Lander—und Vélkerkunde). Ixxxix ; 1906; p. 200.
8 The Baganda; Rev. J. Roscoe, London, 1911.

29 ““ Der Muata Cazembe und die Vélkerstiimme der Maraves, Chevas,
Muembas, Lundas, und andere von Siid-Afrika,” Zeitschrift fir allgemeine
Erdkunde, vi, (1856), p. 287.

20 Les Missions Catholiques, vii (1875), p. 328. Article by Fr. Finaz, S.J.
21 A note by G. P. Badger, p. 45, The Travels of Ludovico di Varttema,
Hakluyt Society, 1863.

22 “ Beitrage zur Kenntniss abergliubischer Gebrauche in Syrien,” Eijiib
Abéla. Zeitschrift des Deutschen Palaestina-Vereins, 1884, vii, p. 102.

23 Satan is bound for a thousand years; The Apocalypse, xx, 1-3, “‘ And
after that, he must be loosed a little time.’”’ The number of the beast “ is
six hundred sixty-six.”’ Apocalypse, xiii, 18.

24 Tvan Stchoukine, Le Suicide collectif dans le Raskol russe, Paris, 1903.
25 The Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal, xix, 1888, pp. 445-451 ;
502-521. ‘‘ Self-immolation by Fire in China,’’ by D. 8. Macgowan, M.D.
26 Highteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, Part I,
pp. 320; 433, seg. (Washington, 1899). ‘The Eskimo about Bering
trait,” by E. W. Nelson.

27 Lucian, De morte Peregrini. Cf. Tertullian, Ad Martyres, iv: ‘ Peregrinus
qui non olim se rogo immisit.”

28 VIII, 57-74.
29 Ars Poetica, 464-466 :
deus immortalis haberi

dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem frigidus Aetnam

insiluit.
30 Notes and Queries, vi, 216.
31 §. Bede, In Die S. Paschae, writes: ‘‘ Debet autem quis sic sepeleri, ut
capite ad occidentem posito, pedes dirigat ad orientem, in quo quasi ipsa
positione orat: et innuit quod promptus est ut de occasu festinet ad ortum :
de mundo ad saeculum.”
32 John Brand, Popular Antiquities of Great Britain ; Preface dated London,
1795. (First edition, 2 vols., 1813.) Edited by W. E. Hazlitt, 3 vols.,
London, 1870. Vol. iii, 67.
%8 Folk Tales of the Russians, p. 311.
34 Folk Lore Journal, v, 218.
%5 Discours des Sorciers, Lyons, 1603, p. 58, exx. Marginal note: ‘Du
lieu du Sabbat.” There were, of course, favourite spots for the rendezvous
of witches.
36 Legends and Customs of Christmas in The Chicago Tribune, European
edition, Christmas Number, 1925.

37 T, i, 158-164.

, %8 Dr. A. Wuttke ; Der Deutsche Volksaberglaube der Gegenwart, Hamburg,
860.

39 Athenaeus, xiii, 79, notes: ‘* The fashion of making favourites of boys
was first introduced among the Grecians from Crete, as Timaeus
informs us. But others say that Laius was the originator of the custom, when
he was received in hospitality by Pelops ; and that having become passionately
enamoured of his Chrysippus, he put the lad in his chariot and so bore him
away and fled with him to Thebes. But Praxilla the Sicyonian says that
Chrysippus was carried off by Jupiter.” Plato, Laws, i, 636, speaks of 6 mpd
rod Aaod vduos, but Plutarch in his Life of Pelopidas (Clough, vol. 1i,
p. 219) argues against the view. Aeschylus wrote a Laius which probably
dealt with this incident, and we know that it formed the subject of a
tragedy by Euripides, Chrysippus, of which one only line is preserved :

yoounv Exovra mw’ } ptows Sidferas.
Cicero, Tusculanarum Disputationum, Liber iv, xxxiii, writes: “‘ Atque ut
muliebres amores omittam, quibus maiorem licentiam natura concessit :


212 THE VAMPIRE


quis aut de Ganymedis raptu dubitat, quid poetae uclint ; aut non intelligit
quid apud Euripidem et loquatur et cupiat Laius ? ”

40 §. Thomas, Summa, i-ii, 58, a. 2.

“1 Quoted in Kwong Ki Chiu, A Dictionary of English Phrases, etc., London
and New York, 1881, 8vo.

42 Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, Cambridge, 1903.

“8 William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern Counties of
England and the Borders, London, 1866, 8vo.

‘* In the case of many superstitions and omens a diametrically opposed
explanation is often given in several countries. Thus for an English girl
to dream of roses means the best of good luck, but roses if seen in sleep by a
Breton maid bode dire misfortune.

45 De quorumdam Graecorum opinationibus, ix.

46 Allacci, op cit., x.

47 “Ce rédivive ou Oupire sorti de son tombeau, ou un Démon sous sa
figure, va la nuit embrasser & serrer violemment ses proches ou ses amis, &
leur suce le sang, jusqu’a les affoiblir, les exténuer & leur causer enfin la mort.
Cette persécution ne s’arréte pas 4 une seule personne; elle s’étend jusqu’a
la derniére personne de la famille.”’—Calmet, Traité sur les Apparitions

. ed. 1751; II, ce. xiii; pp. 60-61.

48 So metaphorically the name “ Callicantzaros” is sometimes applied to a
very lean man. [loXirys, Hapaddces, II, p. 1293.

*° Anatomy of Melancholy, Part 1; Sect. 1; Mem. 1; Subs. 4.

5° The belief is Slavonic, and Elis being particularly subject to Slav
influence, acquired the tradition.

51 P. E. Miller, Saxo Grammaticus, Historia Danica, Copenhagen, 1839-
1858, vol. ii. p. 60.

52 M. Dobrizhotfer, Historia de Abiponibus, Vienna, 1784; I, 289, 3qq-

58 Rev. J. Roscoe, The Baganda, London, 1911; pp. 288 sqq.

4 Aelian, Le natura animalium, I, 38 (ed. R. Hercher. Paris, Didot, 1858).

5° G. Willoughby-Meade, Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, 1928; chap. ix,
p. 223.

56 “ Religion and Customs of the Uraons,”’ by the Rev. P. Dehon, 8.J.,
apud the Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. i, No. 9, (Calcutta
1906), p. 141.

5? Well-nigh innumerable examples might be cited, for the belief seems
universal. In Petronius the soldier who was a werewolf when wounded one
night in his animal form by a thrust in the neck from a pike, on the next
morning lay in bed “ like an ox in a stall” whilst the surgeon dressed a gash
in his neck. Delrio, Disquwisitiones Magicae, Liber II, q. xviii, discussing
lycanthropy says: ‘‘ Hoc autem ultimo casu nihil mirum est, si postmodum
uere inueniantur saucii illis membris humanis quae in ferino corpore exceperant.
Nam & leuiter cessit circumiectus aér, & uulnus uero corpori inhaesit. Uerum
quando uerum corpus abfuit, tune Diabolus in absentium corpore eam partem
consauciat quam scit in ferino corpore sauciatam fuisse.” Bartolomeo de
Spina in his De strigibus, xix, relates a case which came to his knowledge when
at Ferrara, a hideous cat entered a house but was attacked, wounded and
driven from a high window. The next day, an old hag, long suspect of witch-
craft, was discovered in bed with bruised and broken limbs. “ Etenim per-
cussiones & plagae, quae in catto infixae sunt, in illa uetula sunt inuentae
quoad membrorum correspondentium.” Bodin, De la Demonomanie des
Sorciers, II, vi, writes: “‘ veu que ceux qui ont esté blessez en forme de bestes,
se sont apres estre rechangez, trouuez blessez en forme humaine.’”? In the
Malleus Maleficarum, Part IT, Qn. 1, Ch. 9. (translation by the present author,
John Rodker, 1928, pp. 126-127) is told the history of the three cats who
attacked a woodeutter. He drove them away with many blows, and after-
wards it came to light how three respected matrons who were so bruised that

_ they had to keep their beds complained that the workman had assaulted and
beaten them. Glanvil in his Saducismus Triumphatus, London, 1681, Part
II, p. 205, when relating the famous case of Julian Cox, a Somersetshire
witch who was hanged at Taunton in 1663, speaks of “ the Body of Julian


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 213


being wounded by a stab at her Astral Spirit, as it is found also in Jane Brooks,
and an old woman in Cambridgeshire, whose Astral Spirit coming into a Mans
house, (as he was sitting alone at the fire) in the shape of a huge cat, and setting
her self before the fire, not far from him, he stole a stroke at the back of it with a
Fire-fork, and seemed to break the back of it, but it scrambled from him, and
vanisht he knew not how. But such an Old Woman, a reputed Witch, was found
dead in her Bed that very night, with her Back broken, as I have heard some years
ago credibly reported.” J. Ceredig Davies, Folk-lore of West and Mid-Wales,
Aberystwyth, 1911, p. 243, says that throughout Wales “ the possibility of
injuring or marking the witch in her assumed shape so deeply that the bruise
remained on her in her natural form was a common belief.”

58 W.R.S. Ralston. Songs of the Russian People. London, 1872.

5° Thomas Pennant, A Tour in Scotland, 1769. 8vo. Chester, 1771.

% Htymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language, 2 vols. Edinburgh,
1808 ; (and supplement, 2 vols., 1824).

*1 Psalm xc.

82 Delrio, Disquisitiones Magicae, Liber II, Q. xxvii, sec. 2, speaks of the
especial ferocity of the noonday devil: ‘‘ A tempestate diei dicitur meridianus,
eo quod hoe genus daemonum meridiano tempore & apparere solitum, &
homines crudelius acriusque infestare; tum spirituali tentatione ac
praelio, maxime luxuriae & acediae stimulis, quae duo peccata urgent
uchementius hominem cibis distentum plenumque ut recte Nicetas in Nazian,
orat. citatam [De sacro Baptismate], & Euthy. ac Theodoret, in Psal. tum
etiam corporeis afflictionibus, quod potest collegi ex ucterum gentilium opinione
qui Pana (daemonum meridianorum hic unus) tum maxime iracundum &
formidabilem credebant, ut testatur Theocritus eidyl, 1 & colligitur ex
historiis.”

Op. cit. ed., 1751, vol. II, c. 11.

* The Devil can effect no real resurrection of a dead person, that is he
cannot restore to life, for this is the power of God alone. Delrio Disquisitiones
Magicae, Liber II, q. xxix, sec. 1, asks: An diabolus possit facere ut homo uere
resurget ? This great scholar says some very valuable things in this con-
nexion. He writes: ‘“‘ Censeo minimam, uel nullam daemonis esse potestatem.
Non potest facere ut homo a mortuis resurgat: siue non potest facere, ut
anima hominis suum corpus subintret, & illud uiuificet,informetque . . .
Posset daemon, si Deus permitterit, cogere animam damnatam subire corpus,
ut illud moucat, & in illo actiones aliquas demonstret ; quia sic ipse potest
subire, & hance animam inuitam cruciatu ad hoc posset compellere. Possunt
etiam magi (ex pacto) per superiores daemones cogere inferiores, ut cadauer
ingressi, illud gestent, moueant, ceteraque ad tempus faciant, quibus uid-
eantur uiuere.”’

% Venette in his Géneration de ’ Homme remarks that men who have much
hair on the body are usually very amorous. It is indeed a widespread belief
that in ardent natures the pilous system is notably luxuriant.

66 1653; Second edition with Appendix, 1655.

8? The phenomenon of the psychic state in pregnancy, the French enwie
and German Versehen, has been fully discussed by Dr. Havelock Ellis, Studies
in the Psychology of Sex, vol. v, Philadelphia, 1927.

88 W. Cornwallis Harris, The Highlands of Aethiopia, i, p. 158, London,
1844,

® Ottolenghi, Archivio di Psichiatria, facs. vi, 1888, p. 573 notes that
whilst normal persons only show twenty per cent. of blue eyes and criminals
generally thirty-six per cent., the sexual offenders show fifty per cent. of
blue eyes.

7 Dr. Georg Autenrieth, An Homeric Dictionary, translated by Robert Porter
Keep. London, 1896, s.u.

71 James Dawson, Australian Aborigines, p. 92. Melbourne, Sydney, and
Adelaide, 1881,

72 A Chinook term signifying ‘‘ guardian spirits.”

%3 James G. Swan, The Indians of Cape Flattery, p. 66. Report of the United
States National Museum for 1895. Washington, 1897.


214 THE VAMPIRE


74 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India, i, p. 279.
Westminster, 1896.

% A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, British Nigeria, p. 285 ; London, 1902.

76 Plutarch, Isis et Osiris, 33, 73 ; Diodorus Siculus, i, 88.

77 Francesco Redi, Bacco in Toscana, London, 12mo, 1804.

78 In Middleton A Chaste Maid in Cheapside, 4to, 1630 (acted perhaps twenty
twenty years before), iii, 2, at the christening we have the prattle of the
gossips :

‘3 Third Gossip : Now, by my faith, a fair high-standing cup
And two great postle spoons, one of them gilt.
First Puritan ; Sure, that was Judas then with the red beard.

Cf. Dryden’s lines on Jacob Tonson, the publisher :

With two left legs and Judas-coloured hair.

In As You Like It, iii, 4, Rosalind says : ‘‘ His own hairs of the dissembling
colour,” to which Celia replies : ‘‘ Something browner than Judas’s.””

Martial, xii, liv, has an epigram :

Crine ruber, niger ore, breuis pede, lumine laesus
Rem magnam praesta, Zoile, si bonus es.
Upon which Lemaire glosses (Martialis Epigrammata; Parisis 1825, iii,
p- 48): “Crine ruber. Hoc semper in malam partem acceptum, et ut
nips ita bonae indoli contrarium uisum. Et apud nos hodie exstat
itum prouerbium quo improbitatis arguuntur qui crinem rubrum habent.”
In folk-lore red hair is regarded as a mark of great sexuality, Kpurrdéu,
vol. ii, p. 258.
Le eye
8° Cf. Shakespeare, 3 Henry VI, v.6:
Thy mother felt more than a mother’s pain,
And yet brought forth less than a mother’s hope ;
To wit, anindigest deformedlump . . .
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
To signify thou camest to bite the world.


For I have often heard my mother say

I came into the world with my legs forward
The midwife wonder’d, and the women cried
“Oh! Jesus bless us! he is born with teeth ! ”
And so I was: which plainly signified

That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog.

8 The Tragedie of Chabot Admirall of France: As it was presented by her
Majesties Servants, at the private House in Drury Lane. Written by George
Chapman and James Shirley. 4to, 1639. This Tragedy was licensed by the
Master of the Revels 29 April, 1635.

8 Studies in the Psychology of Sex, vol. iii. Philadelphia, 1926, p. 121. n?.

88 Bulletin Internationale de Droit Pénal, vol. vi, 1896, p. 115.

s* “* Le Baiser en Europe et en Chine,” Bulletin de la Société d’ Anthropologie,
Paris, 1897, fase. 2.

8° Studies in the Psychology of Sez, vol. iv, Philadelphia, 1927, p. 216.

8¢ Johannes Secundus Everard, 1511-1536.

8? Jean Bonnefons,born at Clermont inAuvergne, 1554 ; died 1614.

88 G. Alonzi, Archivio di Psichiatria, vol. vi., fasc.4.

8° News of the World, 21 December, 1924. Under heading, “‘ Vampire’s
Victims.”

*° This is hardly correct. Hans Sennenfeld, who frequented “ Zur
Schwiilen Guste ” was twenty years old. Another victim, Hermann Bock,
aged twenty-three, was a young rough, “a fellow well able to take care of
himself.”

*1 News of the World, 7 December, 1924.

* Traité surles Apparitions, . . . Tomeii, Paris,1751,p. 299.

*% Phenomena of Materialisation by Baron von Schrenck Notzing. Trans-
lated by E. E. Fournier d’Albe. London. Kegan Paul, 1923, p. 10.

* Op. cit, p. 26.


TRAITS AND PRACTICE 215


* Op cit., p. 26.
86 London, 1926. c. vi. ‘‘ Diabolic Possession and Modern Spiritism,”
especially pp. 248-269.

97 M. Pierart was a professor at the College of Maubeuse, and afterwards
secretary to Baron du Potet. He founded La Revue Spiritualiste in 1858, and
was esteemed as the rival of Allan Kardec. He died in 1878.

% Survival. By various Authors. Edited by Sir James Marchant,
K.B.E., LL.D. Putnams, London and New York.

9° See Schwicker, Geschichte des Temeser Banates, Nagy-Becskerek, 1861.

100 Afanasief, Poeticheskiya Vozzryeniya Slaryan na Prirodu [“ Poetic
Views of the Slavonians about Nature ”’], 3 vols., Moscow, 1865-69, 8vo,
vol. iii, p. 576, quotes Vuk Haradjic to this efiect.

101 Leone Allacci, De quorumdam Graecorum opinationibus, cap. xii, 8qq.

102 T,, Strackerjan, Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, 1867, I, p. 154.

103 M. Alex. Castron, Vorlesungen iiber die finnische Mythologie. St. Peters-
burg. 1853. p. 337.

104 Shway Yoe (Sir T. G. Scott), The Burman ; His Life and Notions, London,
1882, ii, p. 338. Captain C. J. F. S. Forbes, British Burma, London, 1878,
p- 93.

105 J, A. E. Kohler, Volksbrauch Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Uberlie-
ferungen im Voigtland ; Leipzig, 1867, p. 251.

106 Adolf Bastian, Die Mensch in der Geschichte. Leipzig, 1860. ii, p. 331.

107 ©, J. Anderson, Lake Ngami, Second Edition, London, 1856, p. 226.

108 An old line runs: Ligna Crucis palma, cedrus, cupressus, oliva. The
gipsies say that the Cross was of ash-wood. According to Wiliam Ellis,
The Timber-tree Improved, London, 1738, 8vo, p. 178, there was a local belief
in Herefordshire that the Cross was of service wood. Some think the Cross
was of pine.

109 Dictionnaire des Superstitions, Erreurs, Préjuges et Traditions populaires,
Troisiéme et derniére Encyclopedic Théologique. 2 vols., 4to, 1855.

0 The Voyage and Travails, first printed Westminster, 4to, 1499. A
convenient edition is London, 8vo, 1725.

Ul Dioscorides, repl “LAns "Iarpucfjs, De arte medica, I, 119, Ed. Sprengel,
Leipzig, 1829-30.

12 The scholiast on the Onpiaxd (1. 861) of Nicander of Claros. Keil’s
revision (1856) of the 1816 edition of Schneider, Leipzig.

U3 Diogenes Laertius, Uitae philosophorum, iv, 54-57. Ed. C. G. Cobet,
Paris (Didot), 1878.

14 The first quarto has no date, but is probably 1609-10. I quote from
Dyce’s recension.

115 La Fida Pastora. 12mo. Londoni, 1658, p. 21.

us &.§. Harland The Legend of Perseus, London, 1896. Vol. iii., p. 23.

117 Voyage du Sieur Paul Lucas au Levant. Ala Haye. MDCCV. Vol.
ii, p. 209.

te R. Pashley, Travels in Crete, Cambridge and London, 1837. Vol. ii,

. 201.

P 9 Russian Folk Tales. London, 1873, p. 323.

120 Cf. c. vii. p.

181 The Cardinal Bishop of Olmutz gave Gioseppe Davanzati, Archbishop
of Trani, the following account of the methods of dealing with vampires in
his German diocese. Tribunals were summoned to take information and decide
upon the course of action. ‘I ministri di questi predendone esatta infor-
mazione, e formandone un giuridico processo ne vengono ad una sentenza
finale contro al sudetto Vampiro, mediante la quale viene solennemente
e con tutte le formole legali decretato : che il publice Carnefice portandosi al
luogo, ove si trova il Vampiro, apra il sepolero, e con una sciabla o larga spadaa
vista di tutto il popolo spettatore recida il Vampiro il capo, e dopo con una
lancia gli apri il petto, e trapassi col ferro da parte a parte il cuore del
Vampiro strappandoglielo dal seno e poi ritorni di nuovo a chuidere Vavello.
In tal maniera, mi disse il Porporato, cessava affatto di pit comparire il


216 THE VAMPIRE


Vampiro, quantunque molti altri di questi, che non erano stati ancora
giustiziati, né esecutoriati non cessavano di comparire, e di produrre i
calamitosi effeti come i primi. Ma quel, ch’era da notarsi, e di maraviglia
insieme, secondo il medesimo Autore si era, che molti de’detti Vampiri
giustiziati, si trovano ben colorati, rubicondi, con occhi aperti, e turgidi di
vivo sangue, come se fossero attualmente vivi, e di prospera salute ; asegno
tale, che alcuni di questi al colpo della lanciata, che loro veniva inflitta,
mandavano uno spaventoso grido, e scaturivano dal petto un copioso ruscello
di sangue, il quale per la copia arrivava ad innaffiare non solo il catalette, ma
spargendosi al di fuori guingeva a bagnare il prossimo terreno. Cosa non
men orrida, e spaventosa a vedersi, che orribile a descriversi ed a concepirsi.””
122 De Quorundam Graecorum Opinationibus, p. 142.
183 pp, 218-219.
124 vii, p. 490. Compare Heineccius, De absolutione mortuorum . . .,
p. 20.
8) Ohronica rerum Anglicarum, Liber V,c. xxii. ‘‘ Talia saepius in Anglia
~~ eontigisse, et crebis clarere exemplis, quietem populo dari non posse, nisi
miserrimi hominis corpore effosso et concremato.”

426 H. F. Tozer, Highlands of Turkey, ii, 91, quoting Newton, Travels and
Discoveries in the Levant (i. p. 212).

127 Arthur and Albert Schott. WalachischeMaehrehen, p. 298.

128 Who ascended the Papal Chair as Adrian IV, 9 January, 1522.

12) In the Uniculum Spirituum it is related that Solomon imprisoned three
millions of infernal spirits with seventy-two of their kings in a bottle of black
glass, which he cast into a deep well near Babylon. The Babylonians, how-
ever, hoping to find a treasure in the well, descended, and broke the bottle,
thus releasing these legions of darkness. The story of the Djin and the
Fisherman is one of the most familiar tales of The Thousand and One Nights.
The idea of enclosing spirits in a bottle would seem to be Oriental. Don
Cleofas, the hero of Hl Diabolo Coruelo, by Luis Velez de Guevara (first printed
in 1641) having accidentally entered the house of an astrologer, delivers from
a bottle where he had been confined by a potent charm el diabolo coxuelo who
appropriately rewards his liberator. The situation is even better known
owing to Le Diable Boiteux and the release of Asmodée, which Le Sage has
amply borrowed from the Spanish romance. In China there is the story of a
Vampire who is caught and imprisoned in a jar which is thrown into Lake
T’ai. See G. Willoughby-Meade, Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, pp. 235-37.

130 Dr. R. Romer, “ Bijdrage tot de Geneeskunst du Karo-Batak’s,”
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde, i, (1908), pp. 212, sqq.

131 Aubin-Louis Millin, Voyage dans les Départemens du Midi de la France,
Paris, 1807-1811. Vol. iii, p. 28.

132 J. J. M. de Groot, The Religious System of China, v. 725, 744, 749, sqq.

133 G, F. Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, p. 221.


CHAPTER IV


THe VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, THE EAST, AND SOME ANCIENT
CouUNTRIES


Among the elaborate and extensive demonology of Babylonia
and Assyria the Vampire had a very prominent place. From
the very earliest times Eastern races have always held that
belief in the existence of dark and malignant powers, evil
spirits and ghosts which is, we cannot doubt it, naturally
implanted in the heart of man and which it remains for the
ignorance and agnosticism of a later day to deny. The first
inhabitants of Babylonia, the Sumerians, recognized three
distinct classes of evil spirits, any one of whom was always
ready to attack those who by any accident or negligence laid
themselves open to these invasions. In particular was a
man who had wandered far from his fellows into some haunted
spot liable to these onsets, and Dr. R. Campbell Thompson
tells us that this ‘‘ is the interpretation of the word muttaliku,
‘ wanderer,’ which occurs so often in the magica] text to indicate
the patient.” Of the Babylonian evil spirits the first were
those ghosts who were unable to rest in their graves and so
perpetually walked up and down the face of the earth; the
second class was composed of those horrible entities who
were half human and half demon; whilst the third class were
the devils, pure spirits of the same nature as the gods, fiends,
who bestrode the whirlwind and the sand-storm, who afflicted
mankind with plagues and pestilence. There were many
subdivisions, and in fact there are few evil hierarchies so
detailed and so fasciculated as the Assyrian cosmorama of the
spiritual world.

The evil spirit who was known as Utukku was a phantom
or ghost, generally but perhaps not invariably of a wicked
and malevolent kind, since it was he whom the necromancers
raised from the dead, and in an ancient Epic when the hero,
Gilgamish, prays to the god, Nergal to restore his friend


217


218 THE VAMPIRE


Ea-bani, the request is granted, for the ground gapes open
and the Utukku of Ea-bani appears “like the wind,’ that is,
says Dr. Campbell Thompson, “ probably a transparent spectre
in the human shape of Ea-bani, who converses with Gilgamish.”
The Ekimmu or Departed Spirit, was the soul of the dead
person which for some reason could find no rest, and wandered
over the earth lying wait to seize upon man. Especially did
it lurk in deserted and ill-omened places. Dr. Thompson
tells us that it is difficult to say exactly in what respect the
Ekimmu differed from the Utukku,? but it is extremely
interesting to inquire into the causes owing to which a
person became a Ekimmu, and here we shall find many parallels
with the old Greek beliefs concerning those duties to the
dead which are paramount and for which a man must risk his
life and more. It was ordinarily believed among the Assyr-
ians that after death the soul entered the Underworld, ‘“ the
House of Darkness, the seat of the god, Irkalla, the House from
which none that enter come forth again.”” Here they seem
to have passed a miserable existence, enduring the pangs of
hunger and thirst, and if their friends and relatives on earth
were too niggardly to offer rich meats and pour forth bountiful
libations upon their tombs they were compelled to satisfy
their craving with dust and mud. But there were certain
persons who were yet in worse case, for their souls could not
even enter the Underworld. This is clear from the description
given by the phantom of Ea-bani to his friend, the hero
Gilgamish :

The man whose corpse lieth in the desert—

Thou and I have often seen such an one—
His spirit resteth not in the earth ;
The man whose spirit hath none to care for it—
Thou and I have often seen such an one,


The dregs of the vessel— the leavings of the feast,
And that which is cast out into the street are his food.‘


“The Hkimmu-spirit of an unburied corpse could find no
rest and remained prowling about the earth so long as its body
was above ground.”’® This is exactly one phase of the Vampire,
and in the various magical texts and incantations are given
lists of those who are liable to return in this manner. As
well as the ghosts of those whose bodies were uncared for or
unburied, that is to say those who were lost or forgotten, there


wt 2


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 219


were the spirits of men and women who died violent or pre-
mature deaths, or who had left certain duties undone, and even
youths or maidens who had loved but who had been snatched
away before they had known happiness. In an exorcism
yarious spirits are addressed individually :


Whether thou art a ghost unburied,

Or a ghost that none careth for,

Or a ghost with none to make offerings to it.

Or a ghost that hath none to pour libations to it,
Or a ghost that hath no prosperity.


Other phantoms who can obtain no rest are :


He that lieth in a ditch

He that no grave covereth

He that lieth uncovered,

Whose head is uncovered with dust,

The king’s son that lieth in the desert,

Or in the ruins,

The hero whom they have slain with the sword.


And again :


He that hath died of hunger in prison,

He that hath died of thirst in prison,

The hungry man who in his hunger hath not smelt the
smell of food,

He whom the bank of a river hath made to perish,

He that hath died in the desert or marshes,

He that a storm hath overwhelmed in the desert,

The Night-wraith that hath no husband,

The Night-fiend that hath no wife,®

He that hath posterity and he that hath none.


If the spirit of the dead man be forgotten and no offerings
were made at the tomb, hunger and thirst would compel
it to come forth from its abode in the Underworld to seek the
nourishment of which it has been deprived, and, according
to the old proverb, since a hungry man is an angry man it
roams furiously to and fro and greedily devours whatsoever
it may. “If it found a luckless man who had wandered far
from his fellows into haunted places, it fastened upon him,
plaguing and tormenting him until such time as a priest should
drive it away with excorcism.” This is clear from two
tablets which have been translated as follows :


220 THE VAMPIRE


The gods which seize (upon man)
Have come forth from the grave ;
The evil wind-gusts
Have come forth from the grave ;
To demand the payment of rites and the pouring out
of libations,
They have come forth from the grave ;
All that is evil in their hosts, like a whirlwind
Hath come forth from their graves.
Or again :
The evil Spirit, the evil Demon, the evil Ghost, the evil
vil,
From the earth have come forth ;
From the Underworld unto the land they have come forth ;
In heaven they are unknown,
On earth they are not understood,


They neither stand nor sit,
Nor eat nor drink.”


Even as the Vampire of Eastern Europe to-day, the Babylon-
ian Ekimmu was the most persistent of haunters and the most
difficult to dislodge. If he could find no rest in the Under-
world he would speedily return and attach himself to anyone
who during life had held the least communication with him.
Man’s life was certainly surrounded with dangers when the
mere act of sharing just once food, oil, or garments with
another person gave the spirit of this individual a claim to
consort with his friend, or it might be even the casual acquaint-
ance, who had shown him some slight kindness. The link
could be slighter yet than that since in a long and elaborate
formula of priestly conjuration, a particularly solemn and
ritual incantation for the exorcizing of evil spirits, especially
Vampires, it is plainly said that merely to have eaten, to have
drunk, to have anointed oneself, or dressed oneself in the
society of another was enough to forge an extraordinary
spiritual copula. In this imprecatory orison, which assumes
a strictly liturgical character, various kinds of vampirish
spectres are banned :


Whether thou are a ghost that has come from the earth,
Or a phantom of night that hath no couch,

Or a woman (that hath died) a virgin,

Or a man (that hath died) unmarried,

Or one that lieth dead in the desert,


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 221


Or one that lieth dead in the desert, uncovered with earth,
Or one that in the desert
(hiatus)

Or one that hath been torn from a date palm,

Or one that cometh through the waters in a boat,

Or a ghost unburied,

Or a ghost that none careth for,

Or a ghost with none to make offerings,

Or a ghost with none to pour libations,

Or a ghost that hath no posterity,

Or a hag-demon,

Or a ghoul,

Or a robber-sprite,

Or a harlot (that hath died) whose body is sick,

Or a woman (that hath died) in travail,

Or a woman (that hath died) with a babe at her breast,

Or a weeping woman (that hath died) with a babe at her
breast,

Or an evil man (that hath died),

Or an (evil) spirit,

Or one that haunteth (the neighbourhood),

Or one that haunteth (the vicinity),

Or whether thou be one with whom on a day (I have eaten),

Or whether thou be one with whom on a day (I have drunk), f

Or with whom on a day I have anointed myself,

Or with whom on a day I have clothed myself,

Or whether thou be one with whom I have entered and
eaten,

Or with whom I have entered and drunk,

Or with whom I have entered and anointed myself,

Or with whom I have entered and clothed myself,

Or whether thou be one with whom I have eaten food when
I was hungry,

Or with whom I have drunk water when I was thirsty,

Or with whom I have anointed myself with oil when I was
sore,

Or with whom when I was cold I have clothed his naked-
ness with a garment,

(Whatever thou be) until thou art removed,

Until thou departest from the body of the man, the son
of his god,

Thou shalt have no food to eat,

Thou shalt have no water to drink,


If thou wouldst fly up to heaven

Thou shalt have no wings,

If thou wouldst lurk in ambush on earth,

Thou shalt secure no resting-place.

Unto the man, the son of his god— come not nigh,


222 THE VAMPIRE


Get thee hence!

Place not thy head upon his head,

Place not thy (hand) upon his hand,
Place not thy foot upon his foot,

With thy hand touch him not,

Turn (not) thy back upon him,

Lift not thine eyes (against him),

Look not behind thee,

Gibber not against him,

Into the house enter thou not,

Through the fence break thou not,

Into the chamber enter thou not,

In the midst of the city encircle him not,
Near him make no circuit ,

By the Word of Ea,’

May the man, the son of his god,
Become pure, become clean, become bright !


May his welfare be secured at the kindly hands of the
gods.®

This incantation is extremely important as here we see many
of the ideas which have persisted through the ages. The
Vampire, or restless spirit might be a man whose lay body
dead in the desert, uncovered with earth, “‘ a ghost unburied,”
and it is readily remembered that among the ancient Greeks
there was no more reverent duty than to bury the dead.
Again, to-day, the Slavs consider that brigands and high-
waymen whose lives are passed in deeds of violence and rapine
after death will probably in another mode continue their
predatory habits as Vampires; so the Assyrian Vampire
might be “a robber-sprite.” It will be remarked that the
threat which drives away the Ekimmu is that until he has
departed no libation shall be poured over his grave, no baked
meats offered there, and no saving rites performed.

It was even held that if a man but looked upon a corpse he
established that mysterious psychic connexion which would
render him liable to be attacked by the spirit of the deceased.
Among the Ibo people in the district of Awka, Southern
Nigeria, one of the most important taboos which has to be
preserved by the priest of the Earth is that he may not see a
corpse, so terrible is held to be the spiritual contagion. Should
he by an unlucky chance meet one upon the road he must
at once veil his eyes with his wristlet.° This wrist-band or
bracelet is a most important periapt or charm since it is


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 223


regarded as a spiritual fetter keeping the soul in the body,
and to bind such a talisman upon the wrist is particularly
appropriate, since many peoples believe that a soul resides
wherever a pulse is felt beating. Moreover, not only does
this amulet guard the soul securely within the body but it also
keeps evil spirits and demons out of it, and therefore at the
ceremonies of the cutting of hair of Siamese children, which
is an extremely important and symbolical rite, a magic cord
is tied round the wrist of the child to protect him from malign-
ant and foul spectres who would invade him.” Accordingly
by shrouding his eyes with his wristlet the Ibo priest protects
himself against any molestation by the spirit of the corpse.
Very similar protective powers are also ascribed to finger rings,
and among the Lapps the person whose business it is to shroud
a corpse receives from some relative of the departed a brass
ring which he must wear fastened to his right arm until the
funeral rites are over. This ring is believed to shield him
from any onset on the part of the ghost.” In the Tyrol a
woman—-particularly if she be pregnant or in travail—
must never take off her wedding-ring, or else witches and
vampires will have power over her.’* In England it is con-
sidered to be courting disaster if a woman takes off her wedding-
ring, whilst actually to lose the wedding-ring is one of the
worst possible misfortunes. It may be mentioned that to-day
the Greeks of the Isle of Karpathos (Scarpanto) never bury a
body which has rings upon it ; “ for thespirit, they say, can even
be detained in the little finger, and cannot rest.”"* It is not
suggested that anything so horrible might happen as that the
spirit should become evil or a Vampire, but certainly it would
not be in the full enjoyment of happiness and peace.

Among the Assyrians the Ekimmu might appear in a house.
Just as the Vampire, it would pass through walls or doors, and
whether it merely glided about as a silent phantom, or whether
it gibbered uttering unintelligible and mocking words with
hideous mop and mow, or whether it seemed to ask some
question that required a response, in any case such an appari-
tion was terribly unlucky. The direst misfortunes followed,
certainly involving the destruction of the house, and it was
seldom that the owner, if not many of his family as well would
not die within very short space of time. It seems, indeed,
that the Ekimmu would drain the life out of a household,


224 THE VAMPIRE


which is purely a vampirish quality, although perhaps it does
not appear that this was always a physical operation, the actual
sucking of blood, as is believed to be the case with the
vrykolokas. But Dr. Campbell-Thompson tells us that there
were few superstitions which had obtained such a hold over
the Assyrians as the belief in the Ekimmu-spirit.
One incantation speaks of the meat and drink of the evil

spirit :

Thy food is the food of ghosts,

Thy drink is the drink of ghosts.


In another “ Prayer against the Evil Spirits ” the Vampires
are spoken of in the plainest terms. This incantation is as
follows :

Spirits that minish heaven and earth,

That minish the land,

Spirits that minish the land,

Of giant strength,

Of giant strength and giant tread,

Demons (like) raging bulls, great ghosts,

Ghosts that break through all houses,

Demons that have no shame,

Seven are they!

Knowing no care,

They grind the land like corn ;

Knowing no mercy.

They rage against mankind :

They spill their blood like rain,

Devouring their flesh (and) sucking their veins.

Where the images of the gods are, there they quake

In the Temple of Naba, who fertilises the shoots of
wheat.

They are demons full of violence

Ceaselessly devouring blood.

Invoke the ban against them,

That they no more return to this neighbourhood.

By heaven be ye exorcised ! By Earth be ye exor-
cised !1


These Seven Spirits re-appear both in Syriac and in
Palestinian magic. In his exhaustive and authoritative
work Semitic Magic (p. 52) Dr. Campbell Thompson says :
“Their predilection for human blood, as described in the
cuneiform incantation, is in keeping with all the traditions of
the grisly mediaeval Vampires.” An Ethiopic charm pre-
scribes the following invocation: “Thus make perish, O


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 225


Lord, all demons and evil spirits who eat flesh and drink
blood : who crush the bones and seduce the children of men ;
drive them away, O Lord, by the power of these thy names
and by the prayer of thy holy Disciples, from thy servant.”
In an even more curious Syriac exorcism the Seven Spirits
are described in detail almost exactly as they were pictured
by the earlier inhabitants of Mesopotamia. The charm is to
protect the flocks and herds, and it may be noted that there
has come down to us an Assyrian protective incantation
which is almost exactly similar. The Syriac runes go thus:
“ For the fold of cattle. ‘Seven accursed brothers accursed
sons ! destructive ones, sons of men of destruction! Why do
you creep along on your knees and more upon your hands ?’
And they replied, ‘We go on our hands, so that we may eat
flesh, and we crawl along upon our hands, so that we may
drink blood.’ As soon as I saw it, I prevented them from
devouring, and I cursed and bound them in the name of thy
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, saying: ‘May you not
proceed on your way, nor finish your journey, and may
God break your teeth, and cut the veins of your neck, and
the sinews thereof, that you approach not the sheep nor the
oxen of the person who carries (sc. these writs)! I bind you
in the name of Gabriel and Michael, I bind you by that Angel
who judged the woman that combed (the hair of) her head on
the eve of Holy Sunday. May they vanish as smoke from
before the wind for ever and ever, Amen’ ”’

The twenty-second formula of the Cuneiform Inscription of
Western Asia, which was published by Sir Henry Rawlinson
and Mr. Edwin Morris in 1866 contains the following curse
against a Vampire :

The phantom, child of heaven,
Which the gods remember,

The Innin (hobgoblin) prince

Of the lords

PRG aaah

Which produces painful fever,
The vampire which attacks man,
The Uruku multifold

Upon humanity,

May they never seize him !

The earliest Vampire known is that depicted upon a pre-
historic bowl, an engraving of which has been published in


15


226 THE VAMPIRE


the Délégation en Perse © where a man copulates with a
vampire whose head has been severed from the body. Here
the threat of cutting off her head is supposed to frighten her
away from the act represented and Dr. R. Campbell-Thompson
suggests’’ that “quite probably the man may have drunk
from this bow] as helping the magic (although this is a doubt-
ful point).”” A vampire is depicted among the Babylonian
cylinder seals in the Revue d’Assyriologie, 1909,° concerning
which the same great authority has given me the following
note: ‘The idea is, I presume, to keep off the nocturnal
visits of Lilith and her sisters. Just as the prehistoric or
early people showed pictures of enemies with their heads cut
off (in order that what they were there showing might by
sympathetic magic actually happen), so will the man troubled
by nightly emissions attributed to Lilith, depict on his amulet
the terrors which are in store for these malignants.”

The Hebrew Lilith is undoubtedly borrowed from the Baby-
lonian demon Lilitu, a night spirit, although it is not probable
that the Lilith has any connexion with the Hebrew Lailah,
“night.” It was perhaps inevitable that the Rabbis should
assume some such derivation, and it must be allowed that the
comparison seemed plausible enough, although it has been
shown, on the evidence of the Assyrian word Lili, that the old
theory must no longer be maintained, and Lilith is almost
certainly to be referred to Jali, “luxuriousness,”’ and lulti,
“‘lasciviousness, lechery.” This night ghost is mentioned
in Isaias xxxiv, 14, where the Vulgate has: ‘Et occurrent
daemonia onocentauris, et pilosus clamabit alter ad alterum :
ibi cubauit lamia, et inuenit sibi requiem.” Which Douay
translates: ‘“‘ And demons and monsters shall meet, and the
hairy ones shall cry out one to another, there hath the lamia
lain down, and found rest for herself.’ The Authorised
Version has: ‘“‘ The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet
with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to
his fellow ; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for
herself a place of rest.”” Upon screech owl there is a marginal
note: ‘Or, night monster.” The Revised Version prefers :
“And the wild beasts of the desert shall meet with the
wolves, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow ; yea, the night-
monster shall settle there, and shall find her a place of rest.”
There are marginal notes; satyr, “or, he-goat’’; the


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 227


night-monster, “Heb. Lilith.” In classical Latin, lamia is
defined by Lewis and Short as “a witch who was said to suck
children’s blood, a sorceress, enchantress.”’ I doubt whether
this is a very accurate definition, although possibly it will
cover the meaning in Horace, Ars Poetica, 340 :


Ne quodcumque uelit poscat sibi fabula credi,
Neu pransae lamiae puerum uiuum extrahat aluo.


Which Francis translates :


The probable maintain,
Nor force us to believe the monstrous scene,
Which shows a child, by a fell witch devour’d,
Dragg’d from her entrails, and to life restor’d.


Apuleius, Metamorphoses, I, has: ‘‘ Quo (odore spurcissimi
humoris) me lamiae illae infecerunt.” Here lamia is hardly
the equivalent of anything more than “witch.” So the
meaning of Vampire had been to a large extent lost or sub-
merged. This idea, however, seems to have remained in
Aristophanes, when in the Wasps (1177) Philocreon boasts
what tales he can tell :

mparov pev ws 4 Adu adovo’ érépdero.

Liddell and Scott define Adaua as: “a fabulous monster
said to feed on man’s flesh, a bugbear to frighten children with,”
referring to this passage in Aristophanes, which does not seem
a very satisfactory or scholarly explanation. Tertullian,
Aduersus Ualentinianos, which de Labriolle dates at 208-211,
uses the phrase lamiae turres as nursery tales, Contes de
nourrice, contes bleus. Theil in his Grand Dictionnaire de la
Langue Latine terms lamia by “amie, sorciére, qui sugait,
disait-on, le sang des enfants; magicienne.” These lexico-
graphers for some extraordinary reason do not appear to have
remarked the use of the word in the Vulgate. Gervase of
Tilbury in his Otia Imperialia has some account of lamias,
so called, he states, because they lacerate children: ‘ lamiae
uel laniae, quia laniant infantes.’”” In country places even
yet many an old nurse dares not trust a child in a cradle
without a candle or lamp in the room for fear of the night-
hag.

Rabbinical literature is full of legends concerning Lilith.
According to tradition she was the first wife of Adam and, the


228 THE VAMPIRE


mother of devils, spirits, and lilin, which is the same word as
the Assyrian Lilu. From Jewish lore she passed to medizval
demonology, and Johann Weyer says that she was the princess
who presided over the Succubi. It is true that the LXX
translates in this passage of the prophet Isaias the Hebrew
Lilith by Lamia, but it has been suggested that the nearest
Latin equivalent might be sériz, for although striz may be
properly a screech owl, yet the Latins believed that these
drained the blood of young children, and Ovid, Fasti, VI,
131-140 has:


Sunt auidz uolucres; non que Phineia mensis
Guttura fraudabant : sed genus inde trahunt.
Grande caput: stantes oculi: rostra apta rapine :
Canities pennis, unguibus hamus inest.

Nocte uolant, puerosque petunt nutricis egentes ;
Et uitiant cunis corpora rapta suis.

Carpere dicuntur lactentia uiscera rostris ;
Et plenum poto sanguine guttur habent

Est illis strigibus nomen : sed nominis huius
Causa ; quod horrenda stridere nocte solent.


But it is clear that the Strix was not always a bird, for in
the Lombard Code we find the expression ‘‘ Strix uel masca.”
Thiel has: ‘‘ masca (mascha), sorciére, ML. De ld le frangais :
masque.” In fact masca has the same meaning as Larua
which signifies a ghost, or as in the well-known line of Horace,
a mask :

Nil illi larua et tragicis opus esse cothurnis.”®


In the Breuiarium Romanum, pars aestiua, die 30 Augusti,
ad Matutinum, in 11 Nocturno, lectio V, it is said of S. Rose of
Lima, ‘“‘laruas daemonum, frequenti certamine uictrix,
impauide protriuit ac superauit.”

Moreover, the Strix was a vampire, and it may not be
superfluous again to quote the well-known Saxon Capitulary of
Charlemagne, 781, Liber I, 6: “Siquis a diabolo deceptus
crediderit secundum morem Paganorum, uirum aliquem aut
feminam Strigem esse, et homines comedere, et propter hoc
ipsum incenderit, uel carnem eius ad comedendum dederit,
uel ipsam comederit, capitis sententia puniatur.”

As has been remarked the earliest known representation of
a vampire shows her in the act of copulation with a man and
we have just observed that Weyer regards the Hebrew Lilith


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 229


as queen of the Succubi, The connexion here is very plain,
for Martin Delrio, 5, 7, in his Disquisitionwm Magicarum
Libri Sex, I, 178, (Louvain, 1599), definitely states : “ Axioma
I sit, solent Malefici et Lamiae cum daemonibus, illi quidem
succubis, hae uero incubis, actum Uenerium exercere.

Axioma II potest etiam ex huiusmodi concubitu daemonis
incubi proles nasci.” Michael Psellus (Mcyay 6 WVeddos),
the famous Byzantine scholar of the tenth century, in his
treatise, De Operatione daemonum dialogus (graece et latine
cum notis Gaulmini, Paris, 1615), says that a monk of
Mesopotamia, named Marcus, informed him that demons here
capable of sensual passions, *“Quemadmodum et sperma
nonnulli eorum emittunt et uermes quosdam spermate
procreant. At incredibile est, inquam, excrementi quicquam
daemonibus inesse, uasaue spermatica et uitalia. Uasa quidem
eis, inquit ille, huiusmodi nulla insunt, superflui autem seu
excrementi nescio quid emittunt hoc mihi asserenti credito.”
The learned authors of the Malleus Maleficarum discuss,
“‘ Whether Children can be Generated by Incubi and Succubi ”
_ (Part I, Question iii), and ‘‘ By which Devils are the Functions of
Incubus and Succubus Practised” (Part I, Question iv).
Appeal is made to the authority of 8. Augustine, who, De
Trinitate, III, says “That devils do indeed collect human
semen, by means of which they are able to produce bodily
effects : but this cannot be done without some local movement,
therefore demons can transfer the semen which they have
collected and inject it into the bodies of others.’”? Moreover,
Sprenger and Kramer inquire: “Is it Catholic to affirm
that the functions of Incubi and Succubi belong indifferently
and equally to all unclean spirits ?”” They reply : * Tt seems
that it is so; for to affirm the opposite would be to maintain
that there is some good order among them.” Now the
vampire is certainly an unclean spirit, whether it be that the
body is animated by some demon, or whether it be the man
himself who is permitted to enter his corpse and energize it
and accordingly it is Catholic to believe that a vampire can
copulate with human beings. Nor are there lacking instances
of this. We have the well-known history related by Phlegon
of Tralles where Machates enjoys Philinnion, who has returned
(albeit he knows it not) from her tomb ; and in modern Greece
it is quite commonly held that the vrykolakas will revisit


230 THE VAMPIRE


his widow and know her, or he even seduces other women
whilst their husbands are away, or what is more striking
still he will betake himself to some town where he is not
recognized, and he will even wed, children being born of such
unions. Mr. Lawson (Modern Greek Folklore) informs us
that in Thessaly he was actually told of a family in the neigh-
bourhood of Domoko, who reckoned a vrykolakas among their
ancestors of some two or three generations ago, and by virtue
of such lineage they inherited a certain skill which enables
them to deal most efficaciously with the vrykolakas who at
intervals haunt the country-side, indeed so widely was their
power esteemed that they had been on occasion summoned
as specialists for consultation when quite remote districts
were troubled in this manner.

Alardus Gazaeus in his Commentary on Cassian’s Collationes,
VIII, 21, (Migne, Patrologia Latina, xlix) plainly teaches:
“Devils, although incorporeal and spiritual, can take to
themselves the bodies of dead men, and in such bodies can
copulate with women, as commonly with striges and witches, and
by such intercourse can even beget children.’”’ The Strix we
have just considered, and in the passage quoted from Gazaeus
it would not, I think, be far amiss simply to translate striges
as “‘vampires.” If it be asked how an incubus or succubus,
or a vampire, can fornicate with human beings we may refer
to the famous treatise by the learned Ludovico Maria Sinistrari,
the De Daemonialitate where that great Franciscan theologian
has in detail discussed and admirably resolved these
difficulties.

Tt has been said that “there is no trace of vampires in
Jewish literature,” but this would not appear to be strictly
accurate for, Proverbs xxx, 15, we have: ‘‘ Sanguisugae duae
sunt filiae, dicentes: Affer, Affer.’ The LXX has Bdé\Xy
for the equivalent of the Hebrew oprby which the Vulgate
renders sanguisuga. Douay translates: ‘The horseleach
hath two daughters that say: Bring, bring.”” The Authorised
Version renders: ‘‘The horse-leach hath two daughters,
crying: Give, give.” The Revised Version prefers: ‘The
horseleach hath two daughters, crying, Give, give.’ There
are marginal notes, upon horseleach, “ Or, vampire.”” Upon
crying ; “ Or, called.” This sanguisuga is probably a vampire
or blood-sucking demon, and thus the passage is explained by


’


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 281


Miihlau, De Prowerbiis Aguri et Lemuelis (42 sqq.), Leipzig,
1849; and Wellhausen, Reste arabische Heiderstums, p. 149 ;
(2te Auflage), Berlin, 1897.

In ancient Egypt we can trace certain parallels to the
Assyrian beliefs, for the ancient Egyptians held that every
man had his ka, his double, which when he died lived in the
tomb with the body and was there visited by the khu, the
spiritual body or soul which at death departed from the
body, and although it might visit the body, could only be
brought back from its habitation in heaven by the ceremonial
performance of certain mystic rites. Yet from one point of
view the soul was sufficiently material to partake of the
funeral offerings which were brought to the tomb for the refresh-
ment of the ka. One of the chief objects of these sepulchral
oblations was to maintain the double in the tomb so that it
should not be compelled to wander abroad in search of food.
But, as in Assyria, unless the ka were bountifully supplied
with food it would issue forth from the tomb and be driven
to eat any offal or drink any brackish water it might find.
The ka occupied a special part of the tomb, “the house of the
ka,” and a priest called “‘ the priest of the ka” was appointed
specially to minister to it therein. The ka snuffed up the
sweet smell of incense which was very agreeable to it when
this was burned on certain days each year with the offerings
of flowers, herbs, meat and drink in all of which it took great
delight. The ka also viewed with pleasure the various
scenes which were sculptured or richly painted on the walls of
the tomb. In fact it was not merely capable, but desirous
of material consolations. It would appear even that in later


_ times the khu was identified with the ka.


G64-


In Arabic the word for horse-leach is gs, while gy ,
formed from the same root “to hang,’’ means the kind of
Jinn called Ghoul ( fj). The Ghoul appears as a female
demon who feeds upon dead bodies and infests the cemeteries
at night to dig open the grave for her horrid repasts. Some-
times she would seem to be a woman, half-human, half-fiend,
for in story she is often represented as wedded to a husband
who discovers her loathsome necrophagy. She can bear
children, and is represented as luring travellers out of the
way to lonely and remote ruins when she falls upon them
suddenly and devours them, greedily sucking the warm blood


282 THE VAMPIRE


from their veins. The Ghoul is familiar from The Thousand
and One Nights as is the story of the Prince who having pur-
sued a strange beast whilst hunting was carried to a great
distance, and chanced to see by the wayside a lovely maiden
who sat and wept. She told him that she was the daughter of
an Indian king who had been lost in this desert spot by her
caravan. The chivalrous youth takes her upon his horse,
and a little later pleading a certain necessity she descends—
latrines are particularly considered to be haunts of evil spirits
and malignant entities, and Jean de Thévenot in his J'ravels
into the Levant (“‘ Newly done out of French, folio, London,
1687), says: “The Kerim Kiatib, merciful scribes wait upon
him [the Turk] in all places, except when he does his needs,
when they let him go alone, staying for him at the door
till he comes out, and then they take him into possession again ;
wherefore when the Turks go to the house of office they put
the left foot foremost, to the end the Angel who registers their
sins may leave them first ; and when they come out they set
the right foot before, that the Angel who writes down their good
works may have them first under his protection.”

The young man hears voices in the haunted latrine, the
feigned Indian lady cries: “Children, to-day I have brought
you a fat and comely juvenal.’’ And several answer: “ Bring
him along, Mother, bring him along for our bellies ery for
food.” At these words he trembled exceedingly for he saw
he had to do with a ghoul and when she returned he lifted up
his voice in prayer: “O thou who art ever ready to hearken
to the oppressed who calls upon Thee and Who dost unveil
all deceit, grant me to triumph over mine enemy, and keep all
evil far from me, for Thou canst all that Thou dost desire.”
When the ghoul heard these words she vanished from sight,
and the prince is able to make his way back home. (The
Fifth Night. Les Mille Nuits et Une Nuit. trs. Dr. J. C.
Mardrus, Vol. I, 1899, pp. 57-59, “‘ Histoire du Prince et de la
Goule.’’)

In the story of Sidi Nouman a young man marries a wife
named Amine, who to his surprise when they are set at dinner
only eats a dish of rice grain by grain, taking up each single
grain with a bodkin, and “instead of partaking of the other
dishes she only carried to her mouth, in the most deliberate
manner, small crumbs of bread, scarcely enough to satisfy


zZEz 4 20nf) (AIIM aasnW 243 Wor)
AWIYD ANY SSHNGVW “YAONNH


IA ALV1d


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 233


a sparrow. The husband discovers that Amine steals out at
nights and on one occasion he follows her. Sidi Nouman
is relating these adventures to the Caliph Haroun Alraschid
and he continues: ‘‘I saw her go into a burying place near our
house; I then gained the end of a wall, which reached the
burying place, and after having taken proper care not to be
seen, I perceived Amine with a female Ghoul. Your Majesty
know that Ghouls of either sex are demons, which wander
about the fields. They commonly inhabit ruinous buildings,
whence they issue suddenly and surprise passengers, whom
they kill and devour. If they fail in meeting with travellers,
they go by uight into burying places, to dig up dead bodies,
and feed upon them. I was both surprised and terrified,
when I saw my wife with this Ghoul. They dug up together
a dead body, which had been buried that very day, and the
Ghoul several times cut off pieces of the flesh, which they
both ate, as they sat upon the edge of the grave. They
conversed together with great composure, during their
savage and inhuman repast; but I was so far off that it was
impossible for me to hear what they said, which, no doubt,
was as extraordinary as their food, at the recollection of
which I still shudder. When they had finished their horrid
meal, they threw the remains of the carcase into the grave,
which they filled again with the earth they had taken from
it.” (Arabian Nights Entertainments, translated by the
Rev. Edward Forster. New Edition. London, 1850, p. 399.)

When they are next at dinner Sidi Nouman remonstrating
with his wife asks if the dishes before them are not as palat-
able as the flesh of a dead man. In a fury she dashes a cup
of cold water into his face and bids him assume the form of a
dog. After various adventures as a mongrel cur, he is restored
to his original shape by a young maiden skilled in white
magic, and this lady also provides him with a liquid which
when thrown upon Amine with the words: “ Receive the
punishment of thy wickedness” transforms this dark
sorceress into a mare. This animal is promptly led away to
the stable,

This tale is not dissimilar to a history which is related by
the Dominican, Mathias de Giraldo, who was an exorcist of
the Inquisition, in his Histoire curieuse et pittoresque des
sorciers, devins, magiciens, astrologues, voyants, revenants


234 THE VAMPIRE


dimes en peine, vampires, spectres, esprits malins, sorts getes
exorcismes, etc., depuis VAntiquité jusqu’a nos jours, (Kd.
Fornari Paris, 1846.)

It may be taken as an example of many Oriental fictions
which are significant since they show the popular belief in
vampires. About the beginning of the fifteenth century there
lived in a pleasant suburb of Bagdad an elderly merchant who
by his diligence throughout the years amassed a very con-
siderable fortune, and who had no heir to his wealth save a
son whom he tenderly loved. Wishing to see the young man
happily married, he decided that he would arrange a match
with the daughter of another merchant, a friend of old stand-
ing, who like himself had prospered exceedingly in commerce.
Unfortunately the lady was far from comely, and upon being
shown her portrait the youth, Abdul-Hassan by name, asked
for a certain delay that he might consider the proposed
union.

One evening when, according to his wont, he was rambling
alone in the light of the moon through the country near his
father’s house, he heard a voice of enchanting sweetness which
rendered with great skill and tenderness certain love lyrics to
the accompaniment of a lute. The youth, leaping a garden
wall, found that the singer was a maiden of extraordinary
beauty, who was seated in the balcony of a small but elegant
house and who, unconscious of her audience, continued to
fascinate him by her enchanting voice almost as much as by
her dazzling charms. On the following morning, after his
devotions, Abdul-Hassan proceeded to make inquiries con-
cerning the lady. But so retired a life did she lead that it was
not for some while he was able to ascertain that she was
unmarried and the only daughter of a philosopher, whose
learning was said to be of the most profound, although he
could bestow scant dowry upon his child, a paragon instructed
in every art and science. From this moment the marriage
which had been suggested became impossible to the young
man, and realizing that concealment would be useless he
boldly approached his father, confessed his love and besought
that he might be allowed to choose his own wife. As until
that time he had in every way obeyed his doting parent
and the father found it impossible to deny a first request in
so important a particular. Accordingly he determined to put


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 285


no obstacle in the way of his son’s happiness, and paying a
visit to the house of the philosopher he formally demanded for
his son the hand of this sage’s daughter. After a brief court-
ship the marriage was celebrated with much splendour,
and several weeks passed in an extreme of happiness. Abdul-
Hassan presently noted that his wife, Nadilla, would never
partake of an evening meal, for which singularity she excused
herself on account of the somewhat frugal and severe regimen
she had always followed under her father’s roof. One night,
however, after but a few weeks had passed, Abdul-Hassan,
awakening from a deep sleep found that he was alone in the bed.
At first he took no heed, but he grew anxious as the hours
wore away, and his bride did not return until shortly before
dawn. Resolved to fathom the mystery he still feigned to be
fast in slumber, but on the following night when he had
pretended to close his eyes he carefully watched the actions
of his wife. After a little while, no sooner did she deem herself
unobserved than throwing over her a long dark cloak she
silently slipped away. He rose, hastily dressed himself,
and followed her at some little distance. To his surprise
she soon left the main streets of the town and made her way
to a remote cemetery which had a very ill repute as being
darkly haunted. Tracking her very carefully he perceived
that she entered a large vault, into which with the utmost
caution he ventured to steal a glance. It was dimly lighted
by three funerary lamps, and what was his horror to behold
his young and beautiful wife seated with a party of hideous
ghouls, about to partake of their loathsome feast. One of
these monsters brought in a corpse which had been buried that
day, and which was quickly torn to pieces by the company,
who devoured the reeking gobbets with every evidence of
satisfaction, recreating themselves meanwhile with mutual
embraces and the drone of a mocking dirge. Fearing that he
might be caught and even destroyed, as soon as possible the
youth escaped back to his home, and when his wife returned
he appeared deep in unbroken sleep until the morning.
Throughout the whole of that day he gave no sign of what he
had discovered, but in the evening as Nadilla was excusing
herself from joining him at supper, according to her custom,
he insisted that she should eat with him. None the less
she steadfastly declined, and at last filled with anger and


236 THE VAMPIRE


disgust he cried: ‘‘So then you prefer to keep your appetite
for your supper with the ghouls.” Nadilla turned pale, her
eyes blazed, and she shook with fury, but she vouchsafed
no reply and retired in silence. However, about midnight
when she thought that her husband was fast asleep she
exclaimed: “Now wretch receive the punishment for thy
curiosity.” At the same time she set her knee firmly on his
chest, seized him by the throat, with her sharp nails tore open
a vein and began greedily to suck his blood. Slipping from
beneath her he sprung to his feet, and dealt her a blow with
a sharp poniard wherewith he had been careful to arm himself,
so that she sank down dying at the side of the bed. He called
for help, the wound in his throat was dressed and on the
following day the remains of this vampire were duly interred.

However, three nights afterwards, although the doors were
locked, Nadilla appeared exactly at twelve o’clock in her
husband’s room and attacked him with superhuman strength
and ferocity, tearing at his throat. His weapon proved
useless now and the one chance of safety lay in speedy flight.
On the following day they caused her tomb to be opened, and
the body was discovered apparently asleep since it seemed
to breathe, the eyes were open and glared horribly, the lips
were blub and red, but the whole grave was swimming in
newly-spilled blood. After this they repaired to the house
of the old philosopher and he, when pressed revealed a most
remarkable history. He said that his daughter, who, as he
suspected, had devoted herself to the study of black magic,
had been married some few years previously to an officer of
high rank at the court of the Caliph. She forthwith, however,
gave herself over to the most abominable debauchery and
had been killed by her outraged husband, but coming to life
again in the grave she returned to her father’s house and
dwelt there. Upon hearing this tale it was determined that
the body must be exhumed and cremated. A great pyre
of dry wood was built with frankincense, aloes, and costly
spices, the corpse, writhing and foaming at the mouth, was
placed thereon and reduced to ashes, which were collected and
scattered in the Tigris to be borne away and dispersed amid
the waves of the Persian Sea.

This is an extremely typical legend of an Oriental vampire,
and we find the same details repeated again and again both


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 287


in Eastern stories, and in those imitations which were so
popular throughout Europe when once Antoine Galland had
given France his adaptation of The Arabian Nights. Thus
in Les Contes Orientaux of the Comte de Caylus, which are
related to a King of Persia, afflicted with insomnia, in order
to lull him to sleep, there is the story of a vampire who is
only able to prolong this existence by devouring from time
to time the heart of a comely young man. It would not be
difficult to quote similar fictions but they are often derived
at second, or even third hand, and accordingly are of little
evidential value merely being devised for the entertainment
of the reader.

Throughout the ancient Empire of China and from the
earliest times the belief in vampires is very widely spread,
and sinologists have collected many examples, some of which
occur in myth and legend and some of which were related as
facts, showing us that the Chinese Vampire lacks few, if any
of the horrible traits he exhibits in Greek and Slavonic
superstition.!®

The Chinese Vampire, Ch’ing Shih, is regarded as a demon
who by taking possession of a dead body preserves it from
corruption owing to his power of preying upon other corpses
or upon the living. The Chinese believe that a man has two
souls: the Hun, or superior soul, which partakes of the quality
of good spirits ; and the P’o, or inferior soul which is generally
malignant and may be classed among the Kuei, or evil spirits.
It is thought that whilst any portion of a body, even if it be
a small bone, remained whole and entire the lower soul can
ulilize this to become a vampire, and particularly should the
sun or the moon be allowed to shine fully upon an unburied
body the P’o will thence acquire strength to issue forth and
obtain human blood to build up the vitality of the vampire.
The belief,—which has some natural foundation,—that the
sun can convey strength and vitality, is to be found, in one
form or another, in very many lands.

Thus among the Chacu Indians of South America a newly
married couple must sleep the first night on a mare’s or bullock’s
skin with their heads towards the west, for the marriage was
not fully ratified, nor would the wife conceive until the rays
of the sun had touched their feet the following morn.” During
the Impregnation-rite (Garbhadhdna) which was a part of old


238 THE VAMPIRE


Hindoo marriages, the bride was required to look towards the
sun or to be exposed to its rays so that she might become
fruitful, and bear her husband stout boys. In parts of
Siberia it was the custom for a young couple to be led forth
with some ceremony and rejoicing on the morning after the
nuptials to greet the sun and bask in his rays. This is still
observed in Iran and Central Asia where it is believed that
the clear beams of the sun will impregnate the bride.”

There is an old myth amongst the Indians of Guacheta
that the daughter of a certain chief having climbed a hill top
when she was touched by the first rays of the sun conceived
and gave birth to an emerald, which in a day or two became
a child who grew to be a mighty hero, Garanchacha, the Son
of the Sun.** In Samoan legend a damsel named Manga-
mangai finds herself pregnant through gazing at the Sun at
dawn, and bears a male baby, the Child of the Sun.

The Phrygians thought of the Moon as a Man,™ and the
same idea prevails or formerly prevailed among the Green-
landers who imagined that the Moon was a brisk youth and
he “ now and then comes down to give their wives a visit and
caress them; for which reason no woman dare sleep lying
upon her back without she first spits upon her fingers and rubs
her belly with it. For the same reason the young maids are
afraid to stare long at the moon, imagining they may get a
child by the bargain.”** It is said that in some parts of
Brittany it was once supposed by the peasants that a girl
who exposed herself naked in the moonlight might find herself
pregnant by it and give birth to a monster.2’ In England
the same belief existed, and the old term ‘ moon-calf,”
partus lunaris, signified a false conception—mola carnea,
or foetus imperfectly formed, being supposed to be occasioned
by the influence of the moon.**

In appearance the Chinese monster is very like the European
vampire, for he has red staring eyes, huge sharp talons or
crooked nails, but he is also often represented as having his
body covered with white or greenish white hair. In his
standard work on 7'he Religious System of China, Dr. de Groot
suggests that this last characteristic may be due to the fungi
which grow so profusely on the cotton grave-clothes used by
the Chinese. In some cases, if he be particularly potent for
ill, the Vampire is able to fly with speed through the air, which


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 289


may be compared with the faculty ascribed to vampires by
Serbian legend, that of penetrating a house or vanishing away
in a swiftly floating mist or vapour.

A few anecdotes, which I owe to Mr. G. Willoughby-Meade’s
Chinese Ghouls and Goblins,®® will show the close similarity of
vampirish activities in China to those which are recorded
in the tales of other lands. In the South-West of China a
man added to his other villainies the study of black magic
which enabled him to perpetrate the most abominable crimes.
Having been caught in the very act of murder he was executed
but within three days he had returned to earth and was
terrorizing the whole neighbourhood. With infinite difficulty
he was yet again made a prisoner, and this time he was drowned
in a mighty river, which, it was hoped, would bear his body
away on its foaming stream. Yet the third day had hardly
come when it was reported that he was scouring the country-
side and committing fresh deeds of violence and blood. Once
more was he taken and put to death, only to re-appear and
infest both hamlets and villages. At last when he had been
seized and his head struck from his body, this was buried
on the spot where he had fallen, whilst the severed head was
conveyed to a great distance. Within forty-eight hours he
was again seen, apparently as powerful and savage as ever,
but it was noted that his neck was marked around by a thin
streak of red. At last his mother, whom he had beaten,
resorted to a mandarin of great honour and worship and gave
him a mysterious vase, which was hermetically sealed. She
explained that she had reason to believe that this through
enchantment contained the superior soul of her son, whilst
the inferior soul continued to animate and would persist in
re-energizing his body, influencing him to commit these
atrocities. “If you but break this little vase,’ said she,
“you can dissipate both souls, and then you may execute him
once and for all.” The vessel, tied fast and painted with
cabalistic signs, was forthwith shattered into a thousand
pieces. The offender was caught with far less difficulty than
had been supposed possible, he was put to death, and in a few
days the body crumbled to dust, nor did he ever again re-visit
the earth.

Although this story may be held strictly not to be a Vampire
legend it is certainly closely analogous, and the following


240 THE VAMPIRE


narrative contains details which we meet in a thousand tradi-
tions of Hungary and Moldavia. A tutor named Liu, who
was resident in a family that lived at some distance from his
native place, was granted a holiday in order that he might
perform his devotions at the tomb of his ancestors. On the
morning when he was to resume his duties his wife entered his
chamber very early to call him so that he might set forth in
good time on his journey, but to her horror when she approached
the bed she saw stretched thereon a headless body, although
there was no spot or stain of blood. Half mad with fear she
at once gave the alarm, yet the circumstances were so sur-
prising that the Magistrate gave orders for her arrest upon the
suspicion of having murdered her husband, and in spite of the
fact that she vehemently protested her innocence she was
detained in custody until the fullest inquiries had been made.
However, nothing immediately transpired to throw light
upon the mystery, and it was not until two or three days later
that a neighbour who was gathering firewood on a hillside
hard by perceived a great coffin with the lid partly raised,
that seemed to have been curiously placed near an old and
neglected grave. His utmost apprehensions being aroused
he called a number of persons together from the village before
he dared investigate the cause of this unusual circumstance.
They approached the coffin and quickly removed the cover.
Within reposed a corpse which had the face of a living man,
unspeakably brutish and horrible. Its angry red eyes glared
fiercely upon them, long white teeth champed the full red lips
into a foam of blood and spittle, and within its lean bony hands,
armed with long nails like the claws of a vulture it held the
missing head of the unfortunate Liu. Some at once ran to
the authorities, who upon hearing the report hastened to the
hill with an armed guard, reaching the place well before
sunset. It was found impossible to detach the head without
severing the arms of the corpse, and when this was done
the crimson gore gushed out in a great flood swilling the
coffin. The head of Liu was found to be desiccated, sucked
dry, and bloodless. Command was forthwith given that the
coffin and its contents should at once be burned to ashes on
a mighty pyre, whilst the tutor’s widow was immediately
released from custody.

Another story, which for its macabre details might have


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 241


come from the pages of Apuleius and indeed something
reminds us of the adventures of Aristomenes in the hostelry at
Hypata, is that of four travellers who, late one night, when
very weary and almost fainting for want of food, knocked
at the door of an inn at Ts’ai Tien, Shan Tung. There was
no accommodation to be had, every room was full, the place
was crowded from cock-loft to cellar. However, our travellers
were so wayworn that they refused to budge, and they pressed
Boniface to find them at least some nook or corner, they were
not nice and they did not mind what or where. At last after
being persuaded with many words and well-nigh as many
coins he very reluctantly led them to a lonely house at a
little distance where, so he curtly muttered, his daughter-in-
law had recently died. The room was only lighted by the
flicker of one poor lamp which was all he could allow them
and behind a heavy curtain was laid the uncoffined body of
the girl. Four pallets, not altogether uncomfortable, with
blankets and a rug or two had been provided, and ina very few
minutes three of the travellers were fast asleep. A strange
sense of evil seemed to oppress the fourth, and in spite of his
fatigue fear prevented him from shutting his eyes for some
little while. Yet the leaden weight that lay heavy on his
lids could not be resisted long and he had already fallen into
a doze when he heard what seemed to be an ominous rustling
sound behind the curtain as though somebody was stirring
very softly. Cold with horror, he peered out from half-closed
eyes and he distinctly saw a horrible stealthy hand thrust
itself from behind the curtain which was noiselessly drawn
aside. There stood the livid corpse gazing into the room
with a baleful glare. It approached softly and stooping
over the three sleepers seemed to breathe thence upon their
faces. The man who was awake horror-struck buried his
head under the quilt. He felt that the corpse was bending
over him, but after a few moments as he lay in an agony of
terror there was the same gentle rustle as before, and anon
cautiously peeping he noticed that it had returned to its bier
and was stretched out stark and still.

He crept from his place and not daring to whisper shook
each one of his comrades, but could not make them move.
He then reached for his clothes, but the gentle rustling
sounded once more and he realized that he had been observed.


16


242 THE VAMPIRE


In a moment he flung himself back on the bed and drew the
coverlet tightly over his face. A few moments later, he
felt that the awful creature was standing by his side. How-
ever, after a scrutiny it seemed to retire again, and at length
half-mad with fright he put out his hand, grasped some
clothes which he huddled on and rushed bare-foot from the
house, the door of which he was able to bolt and bar just as
the corpse leaped at him with demoniacal fury. As he ran at
full speed under the light of a waning moon to put as great a
distance between himself and the haunted house as possible,
he chanced to glance back and shricked aloud with fear to find
that the corpse was not only hard at his heels but gaining
upon him rapidly. In desperation he fled behind a large
willow-tree which grew at the side of the road, and as the
corpse rushed in one direction he darted rapidly in the other.
Fire seemed to glint from its red eyes, and as it swooped upon
him with hideous violence he fell senseless to the ground, so
that missing its aim it clasped the tree in a rigid gripe. At
daybreak they were found, and when the corpse was pulled
away it was seen that its fingers had impaled and riddled
the tree with the force of a sharp wimble. The traveller
after many months recovered his health, but his companions
were all found to be lying dead, poisoned by the fetid breath of
the Vampire. It should be remarked that here we have a
detail, repulsive enough but altogether in keeping, which we
also find in Hungary, namely the carrion stink of a vampire’s
breath. This certainly seems to be one of the most horrible,
as it is one of the most significant stories in the whole library
of Chinese vampire legend.

It hardly seems necessary to give in detail the history of
Lu, who whilst watching one night in his orchard saw a terrible
spectre, a hideous hag clothed in red. (It may be remarked
that among certain tribes, such as the Borana Gallas and the
Masai, warriors who have slain a foe in fight are painted
with vermilion,®° but it is curious to find that in China this
evil apparition should have worn red since this is the lucky
Yang, or solar colour, and considered to be of efficacy against
the darker powers.) A thief who entered Lu’s garden to rob
the fruit was discovered mad with terror since in one of the
alleys he had encountered a man without a head. That part
of the ground whence these phantoms seemed to spring was


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 248


dug up, and they soon came across a red coffin containing the
body of a woman, together with a black coffin in which
was the corpse of a man who had been decapitated. Both
bodies were as perfectly preserved as though they had been
buried that very day. The coffins and bodies were burned to
ashes, whereupon the hauntings ceased.

This story might be paralleled from ghost tales the whole
wide world over, but the following seems more particularly
to belong to the Vampire legends. In the year 1751, a
courier called Chang Kuei was sent express from Peking with
a most urgent government dispatch. Late one night after
he had passed through Liang Hsiang a fierce storm arose,
and the gusts of wind completely extinguished his lantern.
Fortunately he perceived at some little distance a humble
khan whither he made his way as it was absolutely impossible
to proceed in the darkness. The door was opened by a young
girl who ushered him in and led his horse to a little stable.
That night she admitted him to her bed promising to set him
well on his way at dawn, but he did not wake in fact until
many hours after, when he was not only benumbed with cold
but to his surprise found himself lying stretched upon a tomb
in a dense thicket, while his horse was tied to a neighbouring
tree. His dispatch was not delivered until twelve hours after
the time when it was due, and accordingly, being questioned
and asked what accident had delayed him, he related the
whole circumstance. The magistrate ordered that inquiries
should be made locally, and they discovered that a girl,
named Chang, a common strumpet, had hanged herself
in the wood some years before, and that several persons had
been led aside to enjoy her favours, and so been detained in
the same way as the imperial courier. It was presently ordered
that her tomb should be opened, and when this had been done
the body was found therein perfectly preserved, plump and
of a rosy complexion, as though she were but in a soft slumber.
It was burned under the direction of the authorities, and from
that time the spot ceased to be so terribly haunted.

These particulars are in some respects not altogether unlike
a legend which is related of a certain S. Hilary,** who was
one of the earliest missionaries in the Alpine districts of
North Italy. The story goes that after they had journeyed
for many days into the heart of a most desolate country


244 THE VAMPIRE


they came one eve of S. John® to a remote village of some
size as it appeared where the people were holding a mid-
summer festival, but with strange pagan rites. Here at
eventide they were greeted by a grave man saluting them
most courteously and saying that he was the steward of the
Lady Pelagia, who wished to give them entertainment in her
palace. The missionaries, grateful of this kindness, were
received with gracious welcome, and the mistress of the house,
a patrician who was of the most surpassing beauty, led them
to a banquet which had been made ready. Here Hilary sat
beside her and she talked of many things, so that the good
Bishop was moved with a great tenderness at her youth and
her beauty. She thanked them in all humility for the honour
they had done her villa, pressed them to sojourn long as her
guests, and asked them many questions which the learned
man was delighted to answer, whilst his companions sat as it
were spell-bound by her charms. Presently, however, the
conversation took a deeper turn and the lady poised shrewd
problems in science and in theology, difficulties which S.
Hilary was well-nigh hard put to it to solve neatly and in
simple words. Yet she spake with such modesty and with
such an air of seeking to know more of divine things that the
holy Hilary was glad to expound these matters, albeit he
thought the argument savoured somewhat of sophistry and
wordy skill. At length she said in honeyed phrase, “I pray
thee, good father, rede me this question aright : What is the
distance between heaven and earth?” The Saint gazed in
some wonder, when suddenly a voice, menacing and loud,
was heard to thunder through the hall : ‘‘ Who can tell us that
more certainly than Lucifer who fell from heaven?” The
Lady Pelagia arose and flung up her lovely white arms with
an exceeding bitter cry, but the voice continued: ‘ Breathe
on her, Hilary, breathe upon her the breath of the Name of
Christ !”’ And the Bishop, rising, fortified himself with the
sign of redemption and breathed upon the beautiful woman in
the name of the Lord. Instantly the light died from her eyes
and the life left her limbs, and there was no longer the Lady
Pelagia but a statue of marble which glistened exceeding
white and fair. And Hilary knew it to be a statue of the
goddess whom men worshipped in Greece as Aphrodite, but
in Rome as Venus, who is also Pelagia, born of the sea, At


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 245


that moment the statue fell prone in a thousand pieces, the
lamps were extinguished, and they saw in the east the grey of
dawn. As the sun rose they beheld they were in the midst
of the ruins of an ancient Roman city, and their feet stood
in the courts of a marble temple, broken and decayed, o’er-
grown with high grass and rankest weeds. This had been the
. fair hall where they feasted,** and all around were scattered
the fragments of the statue of the Lady Pelagia. So they bent
the knee in prayer and in thanksgiving that they had been
delivered from the wiles of the Temptress, and anon they
passed on their way lauding Christ in sweet hymns and melody
of many canticles.

A Chinese story which is referred to the eighteenth century
tells us of a Tartar family living at Peking, a house of the
highest importance, whose son was betrothed to a lady of
lineage equally aristocratic and equally ancient. Upon the
wedding day, as is the Chinese custom, the bride was brought
home in the ceremonial sedan-chair and this according to
wont was carefully curtained and closed. It so happened
that just as they were passing an old tomb there sprung up
for a moment a sharp breeze which raised a cloud of thickest
dust. When the cortége reached the bridegroom’s house there
stepped out of the sedan two brides identical in every detail
both of feature and dress. It was impossible at that point to
interrupt the nuptials, but later in the evening the most
piercing screams were heard from the bridal chamber. When
the door of the room had been quickly broken open the husband
was stretched unconscious on the ground, while one of the
brides lay with her eyes torn out and her face covered with
blood. No trace of the second bride could be seen. But
upon search being made with lanterns and torches a huge and
hideous bird, mottled black and grey, armed with formidable
claws and a beak like a vulture was discovered clinging to a
beam of the roof. Before they could fetch weapons to attack
it, the monstrous thing disappeared with exceeding swiftness
through the door, When the husband recovered his senses
he related that one of the brides had suddenly struck him
across the face with her heavily embroidered sleeve and that
the jewels and passementerie stunned him for the moment.
A second afterwards a huge bird swooped upon him and pecked
out his eyes with its beak. So this horrible Vampire blinded


ee


246 THE VAMPIRE ,


the newly married pair. The circumstance of the dust-cloud
is exactly similar to the mist wherein the Slavonic Vampire
conveys himself, but the transformation of the Vampire into
a bird is scarcely to be met with in European tradition.
Crows, rooks, and ravens may sometimes vaguely held to be
unlucky, but they are generally associated with weather-lore,
although Justus Doolittle in his Social Life of the Chinese™
says that the appearance of a crow at a wedding in China was
always considered most ominous. In various parts of England,
particularly in Essex, to see a crow flying alone, or if a crow
flies towards you, it is considered a sign of bad luck. In
Worcestershire they say that: ‘‘ When a single crow flies over
you, it is the sign of a funeral ; two are a certain prognostica-
tion of a wedding.”** The old saw is well-known with reference
to crows :°°

One’s unlucky,

Two's lucky,

Three is health,

Four is wealth,

Five is sickness,

Six is death.


The raven was often held to denote sickness and death and
his croak sounded a knell. So in The Jew of Malta, Marlowe
has :

Let the sad presaging raven that tells
The sick man’s passport in her hollow beak,


And in the shadow of the silent night
Doth shake contagion from her sable wings.””


On the other hand rooks are far more lucky. In East
Anglia, and indeed in many other parts of England, it bodes
good fortune if rooks settle near a house,”* for this bird always
begins to build on a Sunday, and when rooks desert a rookery,
it foretells the downfall of the family owning the property ;°° in
some counties even they are said as a sign of grief to abandon
their nests at the approach of death to the head of the family,
and not to return to the ancestral domain until after the
funeral at soonest. An actual instance was given of this
occurrence as having happened in 1874, on the death of Sir
John Walsham, at his seat, Knill Court, in Herefordshire.*°
In Cornwall rooks are believed to forsake an estate if on the
death of the proprietor no heir can be found to succeed him.


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 247


So it will be seen that a black bird need by no means invariably
be of ill-omen. Propertius speaks of the crow as “innocent ”
(cornix immerita). In his denunciation of the bawd and witch
Acanthis “1 he mentions that the eyes of the crow were often
used to confect a magical charm.


Posset ut intentos astu caecare maritos,
Cornicum immeritas eruit ungue genas,

Consuluitque stryges nostro de sanguine, et in me
Hippomanes foetae semina legit equae.


This passage is to be taken literally, although no doubt
there is also an allusion to the proverb cornicum oculos configere
“to delude or deceive the most wary,” as we say “to catch a
weasel asleep,” which no doubt arose from its custom of
attacking prey first in the eyes. Beroaldus and Passerat
would explain the allusion of Propertius metaphorically,
but this is only a secondary allusion.

There is related a curious story of a Chinese temple which
was haunted by a Vampire. This fane was dedicated to three
heroes of the third century a.pD., who had been deified on
account of their prowess during the civil wars of that most
troubled period. It seems that the place was always kept
locked except on the great solemnities of the spring and
autumn sacrifices, and not even a priest would venture to
sleep there. In the year 1741 a shepherd asked and obtained
permission to spend his nights in the shelter of the temple.
Many people told him that it was terribly haunted, but nobody
seemed exactly to know in what manner. Accordingly taking
his big leather whip and having provided himself with a lantern,
after he had collected his flock at evening he entered and
proceeded to settle for the night. However, when all was
darkest and most still it seemed that something stirred near
the three statues. On a sudden there rose up out of the
ground near the pedestal a very tall man of hideous aspect,
gaunt and lean, his body covered with matted green hair.
His glowing eyes seemed to flash fire when he caught sight
of the intruder, and darting forth a claw-like hand armed
with the nails of a bird of prey he almost succeeded in seizing
the shepherd, who leapt nimbly to one side and lashed out
with his heavy whip. The spectre, however, grinned hideously
showing rows of shark-like teeth and the heavy leather fell


248 THE VAMPIRE


harmlessly upon him. Rushing to the door the shepherd
was just in time to evade a second clutch. Hardly knowing
what he did he clambered up a large tree in the courtyard, and
looking down he saw that the horrible figure was standing
in the doorway glowering with rage, but did not appear able
to advance beyond the threshold. All night the poor wretch
clung there, and as the day broke the spectre vanished into
the recesses of the building. It was early when various
persons came to inquire how the bold man had fared, and
finding him half distraught with terror they soon learned
what had happened during the night. The next proceeding
was to examine the base of the statute, and when this had been
cautiously done it was remarked that a curious black vapour
rose from the ancient fissures in the stone. The local authori-
ties investigated these circumstances, and gave instructions
that the pedestal should be broken down to discover what
was lurking beneath it. After digging a little depth they
found the body of a tall man of most hideous appearance,
fetid and desiccated, covered with a green pile, just as the
shepherd had described. The magistrates immediately
commanded that a pyre should be built. The corpse was
set thereon, and torches applied at every corner. The
Vampire writhed and whistled with a screeching sound ;
blood poured from it in streams, and the bones crackled
sharply. Once the body had been consumed, the hauntings
entirely ceased but it was long before the temple lost its sombre
reputation.

It will be seen that the Chinese beliefs are linked with
the Babylonian ideas on the one hand, for as the Ekimmu
was driven from the Underworld by hunger and thirst, when
no offerings were made at the tomb, and it came forth to wander
on earth and attack those whom it might devour, so ghosts en-
during the Buddhist purgatory of physical want are obviously
imagined to seize living persons that they may refresh and
energize themselves with human blood. Again, as in Western
Europe to-day, so in China, the Vampire is most powerful
for evil between sunset and sunrise. His dominion commences
when the sun sinks to rest, and he is driven back to the lair
of his grave with the first rays of the dawn. One prominent
feature of the European Vampire, a circumstance which
affords an additional reason why he is dreaded and shunned,


a


_


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 249


perhaps even more than any other demon or phantom of the
night is that he infects with his pollution his luckless victim
who in his turn also becomes a vampire. In China this does
not appear to be a feature of the Vampire manifestation.
Something of the kind, however, may be traced among the
Karens of Burma. For a Karen wizard will snare the wander-
ing soul of a sleeper and by his art transfer it to the body of
a dead man. The latter, accordingly, returns to life as the
former expires. But the friends of the sleeper in their turn
engage another sorcerer who will catch the soul of another
sleeper, and it is he who dies as the first sleeper comes to life.
Apparently this process may be continued almost indefinitely,
and so it may be presumed that there takes place an indeter-
minate succession of death and resuscitations.

With regard to another Chinese Ghoul, Mr. Willoughby-
Meade tells us: “the Préta, or suffering soul of a suicide
seeking a substitute, isnot quite a parallel to the true vampire.’’*

The Préta also appears in Southern India, but the Indian
Vampire which may now be briefly considered, however
interesting, will hardly be found to have those features in
common with the Western Vampires as are so strikingly to be
noticed in the Chinese variety. Indeed, it may be said that
the Indian Vampire is practically a demon, and that only in a
few minor details does he essentially approximate to the true
European species. Mr. N. M. Penzer in a note upon The
Ocean of Story says: “‘ As far as the Ocean of Story is concerned,
the ‘Demons’ which appear are Rakshasa, Pisacha, Vetala,
Bhuta, Dasyus, Kumbhanda and Kushmanda. Of these that
most resembling the European Vampire is probably the
Rakshasa,” of which a very horrible description is given.

“Now the Vetala, which is seen in all its glory in the
present work (The Ocean of Story) is a curious individual.
He is the Deccan Guardian, in which capacity he sits on a
stone smeared with red paint, or is found in the prehistoric
stone circles scattered over the hills. In fiction, however, he
appears as a mischievous goblin, and that is how we find him
in the Ocean. A study of his actions will show him to be quite
above the ordinary run of such demons. He is always ready
to play some rather grim practical joke on any unwary person
who chances to wander near burning-ghats at night, for here
are corpses lying about or hanging from stakes, and what


250 THE VAMPIRE


more effective means could be formed to frighten the life out
of humans than by tenanting a corpse !

“T would describe the Vetala as ‘sporting,’ in that he has
an inate admiration for bravery and is perfectly ready to own
himself beaten, and even to help and advise. In the Vetala
tales . . . we shall see that as soon as the Vetala dis-
covers the persistence and bravery of Trivikramasena, he at
once warns him of the foul intents of the mendicant. We
have also seen that even the Rakshasa can become quite
tame, and act the part of a kind of Arabian jinn who appears
on thought. Thus we see that the Vetala of Hindu fiction
is by no means an exact counterpart of the blood-sucking
vampire of Eastern Europe who never had a good intention or
decent thought in his whole career.’

In a private letter to myself Mr. Penzer writes: “ It is the
Rakshasas who are the more prominent among malicious
demons. Their name means ‘the harmers’ or ‘ destroyers’
as their particular delight is to upset sacrifices, worry ascetics,
animate dead bodies, etc. They date in India from Rig-
Vedic days.

‘In the Atharva Veda they are described as deformed, of
blue, green, or yellow colour, with long slit eyes. Their
nails are poisonous and are dangerous to the touch. They
eat human and horse flesh, the former of which they procure
by prowling round the burning-ghats at night. They possess
great wealth, and bestow it on those they favour. Their
chief is Ravana, the enemy of Rama. See Crooke, Folk-
Lore of Northern India, Vol. 1, p. 246 sqq.

“The Pisachas are very similar to the above, while the
Vetalas are perhaps more like Vampires.”

In the Preface to Vikram and the Vampire, ‘“‘ Tales of Hindu
Devilry ” (Adapted by Richard F. Burton), London, 1870,
p. xiii, Sir Richard Burton says: “ The Baital-Pachisi, or
Twenty-five (tales of a) Baital—a vampire or evil spirit which
animates dead bodies—is an old and thoroughly Hindu
repertory. It is the rude beginning of that fictitious history
which ripened to the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, and
which, fostered by the genius of Boccaccio, produced the
romance of the chivalrous days, and its last development,
the novel—that prose-epic of modern Europe.” Baital in
Sankrit is Vetala~pancha-Vinshati. “ Baital” is the modern


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 251


form of “ Vetala.”” When the Raja encounters the Baital it
was hanging “ head downwards, from a branch a little above
him. Its eyes which were wide open, were of a greenish-
brown, and never twinkled ; its hair also was brown and
brown was its face—these several shades which, notwith-
standing, approached one another in an unpleasant way, as
in an over-dried cocoa-nut. Its body was thin and ribbed
like a skeleton or a bamboo framework, and as it held on to a
bough, like a flying-fox, by the toe-tips, its drawn muscles
stood out as if they were ropes of coir. Blood it appeared
to have none, or there would have been a decided determina-
tion of that curious juice to the head; and as the Raja
handled its skin, it felt icy cold and clammy as might a snake.
The only sign of life was the whisking of a ragged little tail
much resembling a goat’s. Judging from these signs the
brave king at once determined the creature to be a Baital—
a Vampire.”

A belief in Vampires is very firmly established among the
Malays of the Peninsula, and there are a number of magic
rites which must be performed to protect both women and
children.“ Probably the spirit most resembling a European
Vampire is the Pénanggalan, which is supposed to resemble
a trunkless human head with the sac of the stomach attached
thereto, and which flies about seeking an opportunity of sucking
the blood of infants. There are, however, other spectres which
are dangerous to children. There is the Bajang, which
generally takes the form of a polecat*® and disturbs the
household by mewing like a huge cat. The Langsuir is seen
as an owl with hideous claws which perches and hoots in a most
melancholy way upon the roof, Her daughter, a still-born
child, is the Pontianak or Madi-anak, who is also a night-owl.
The Polong is a kind of goblin, and the Pélésit corresponds
most closely to the familiar of the English witches.

The Bajang is generally said to be a male demon and the
Langsuir is considered as the female species. Both of these
spirits are supposed to be a kind of demon-vampire, and are
often handed down in certain families as heirlooms, in exactly
the same way as in English trials we find that the familiar
descended from mother to daughter. Thus at Chelmsford
“at an examination and confession of certaine Wytches,”
26 July, 1566,47 Elizabeth Francis confessed to various


252 THE VAMPIRE


“vilanies,” amongst the rest that ‘she learned this arte of
witchcraft at the age of xii yeres of hyr grandmother whose
nam mother Eue of Hatfyelde Peuerell, disseased. Itm
when shee taughte it her, she counseiled her in the lykenesse
of a whyte spotted Catte.” In 1582, during the celebrated
St. Osyth prosecutions Ales Hunt confessed that she enter-
tained two familiars, and “saith, that her sister (named
Margerie Sammon) hath also two spirites like Toads, the one
called Tom, and the other Roddyn: And saith further, her
sayde Syster and shee had the sayd spyrites of their Mother,
Mother Barnes.’’ That a familiar should have been handed
down in this manner seems to have been a well-known custom
among the Lapps, for in his notes upon the De Prodigiis of
Julius Obsequens,** J. Scheffer‘? quoting Tornaeus says :
“the Laplanders bequeath their Demons as part of their
inheritence, which is the reason that one family excells
another in this magical art.”

With regard to the Bajang, Sir Frank Swettenham further
gives the following account: ‘Some one in the village falls
ill of a complaint the symptoms of which are unusual; there
may be convulsions, unconsciousness, or delirium, possibly
for some days together or with intervals between the attacks.
The relatives will call in a native doctor, and at her (she is
usually an ancient female) suggestion, or without it, an
impression will arise that the patient is the victim of a bajang.
Such an impression quickly develops into certainty, and any
trifle will suggest the owner of the evil spirit. One method
of verifying this suspicion is to wait till the patient is in a
state of delirium, and then to question him or her as to who
is the author of the trouble. This should be done by some
independent person of authority, who is supposed to be able
to ascertain the truth.

“A further and convincing proof is [then to call in a
‘ Pawang’ skilled in dealing with wizards (in Malay countries
they are usually men), and if he knows his business his power
is such that he will place the sorcerer in one room, and,
while he in another scrapes an iron vessel with a razor, the
culprit’s hair will fall off as though the razor had been applied
to his head instead of to the vessel! That is supposing that
he is the culprit ; if not, of course he will pass through the
ordeal without damage.


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 258


“T have been assured that the shaving process is so efficaci-
ous that, as the vessel represents the head of the person stand-
ing his trial, wherever it is scraped the wizard’s hair will
fall off in a corresponding spot. It might be supposed that
under these circumstances the accused is reasonably safe,
but this test of guilt is not always employed. What more
commonly happens is that when several cases of unexplained
sickness have occurred in a village, with possibly one or two
deaths, the people of the place lodge a formal complaint
against the supposed author of these ills, and desire that he
be punished.

“ Before the advent of British influence it was the practice
to kill the wizard or witch whose guilt had been established
to Malay satisfaction, and such executions were carried out
not many years ago.

““T remember a case in Perak less than ten years ago, when
the people of an up-river village accused a man of keeping a
bajang, and the present Sultan, who was then the principal
Malay judge in the State, told them he would severely punish
the bajang if they would produce it. They went away hardly
satisfied, and shortly after made a united representation to
the effect that if the person suspected were allowed to remain
in their midst they would kill him. Before anything could be
done they put him, his family, and effects on a raft and started
them down the river. On their arrival at Kuala Kangsar
the man was given an isolated hut to live in, but not long
afterwards he disappeared.”®°

The same authority tells us: ‘“ Langsuior, the female
familiar, differs hardly at all from the bajang, except that she
is a little more baneful, and when under the control of a man
he sometimes becomes the victim of her attractions, and
she will even bear him elfin children.” The original Langsuir,
legend says, was a woman of the most superb beauty, who
died from the shock of hearing that her child was still-born,
and had taken the shape of the Pontianak. When this
terrible news was reported to her, she “ clapped her hands,”
and without further warning “ flew whinnying away to a tree,
upon which she perched.” She always wears a robe of
exquisite green. Her tapering nails are of extraordinary
length, which is considered among the Malays a mark of dis-
tinction and beauty, and which may be compared with the


Pid, De! 1s) Th Se ee “ tet (on Ta se ei a... V.-eroe CS


254 THE VAMPIRE


talons of the European Vampire. She has long jet black
tresses which flow down even as far as her ankles, but these
serve to conceal the hole in the back of her neck through
which she sucks the blood of children. Yet her vampirish
qualities can be destroyed if the right means are adopted,
and in order to effect this she must be caught, and her nails
and flowing hair cut quite short, the tresses being stuffed into
the hole of her neck, in which case she will become quiet and
domesticated, just like an ordinary woman, and she will be
content to lead a normal life for many years together. Story
relates that the Langsuir returned to civilization until she
was allowed to dance at a village festival, when for some
reason her savage nature re-asserted itself and with wild
screams she flew off into the depths of the dark forests from
whence she had come. Dr. Skeat says that a Malay peasant
once told him how exceedingly fond of fish these women-
vampires are, and how not infrequently they may be seen
“sitting in crowds on the fishing-stakes at the river mouth
awaiting an opportunity to steal the fish.” This seems
completely to explain the following rune by the recital of
which a Langsuir may be laid :


O ye mosquito-fry at the river’s mouth

When yet a great way off, ye are sharp of eye,

When near, ye are hard of heart.

When the rock in the ground opens of itself

Then (and then only) be emboldened the hearts of my foes
and opponents !

When the corpse in the ground opens of itself

Then (and then only) be emboldened the hearts of my foes
and opponents ! :

May your heart be softened when you behold me,

By grace of this power that I use, called Silam Bayu.


The ‘‘ mosquito-fry at the river’s mouth” is no doubt an
allusion to the Langsuir who were swarming round the fishing-
stakes, endeavouring to devour the fish.

Sir William Maxwell in the Journal of the Straits Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society, Singapore (1878-1899), No. VU,
p. 28, thus describes the Langsuir: “If a woman dies in
childbirth, either before delivery or after the birth of a child,
and before the forty days of uncleanness have expired, she is
popularly supposed to become a langsuyar, a flying demon of
the nature of the ‘white lady’ or ‘banshee.’ To prevent


a


PLATE VII


MALAY VAMPIRES


(From Skeat’s Malay Magic)
(By permission of Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Ltd.)


[ face p. 254


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 255


this a quantity of glass beads are put in the mouth of the
corpse, a hen’s egg is put under each arm-pit, and needles are
placed in the palms of the hands. It is believed that if this
is done the dead woman cannot become a langsuyar, as she
cannot open her mouth to shriek (ngilai) or wave her arms
as wings, or open and shut her hands to assist her flight.”

The Penanggalan is a sort of monstrous Vampire who
delights in killing young children. One legend says that long
ago in order to perform a religious penance (dudok bertapa)
a woman was seated in one of the large wooden vats which are
used by the Malays for holding the vinegar which proceeds
from draining off the sap of the thatch-palm (menyadap nipah).
Quite unexpectedly a man came along, and finding her seated
there, asked: ‘What are you doing here?” She replied
very shortly: ‘‘ What business is that of yours 2” But
being very much startled, she leaped up and in the excite-
ment of the moment kicked her own chin with such force
that the skin split all round her neck and her head with the
sac of the stomach hanging to it actually became separated
from the body, and flew off to perch upon the nearest tree.
Ever since that time she has existed as a malign and danger-
ous spirit, brooding over the house, screeching (mengilat)
whenever a child is born, or trying to force her way up through
the floor in order to drain its blood.

Among the Karens of Burma we meet with the Kephn, a
demon which under the form of a wizard’s head and a stomach
attached devours human souls.

Mr. Hugh Clifford in his study In Court and Kampong,
London, 1897, speaks of “‘ The Penangal, that horrible wraith
of a woman who has died in child-birth, and who comes to
torment small children in the guise of a fearful face and bust,
with many feet of bloody, trailing entrails in her wake.”

The following description which is almost entirely parallel
to that of the most deadly European Vampires is quoted by
Dr. Skeat in his Malay Magic, London, 1900, p. 328, n.1.:
“He” (Mr. M.) said, “ Very well then, tell me about the
penanggalan only, I should like to hear it and write it down
in English so that Europeans may know how foolish those
persons are who believe in such things.” I then drew a picture
representing a woman’s head and neck only, with the intestines
hanging down, Mr, M, caused this to be engraved on wood


256 THE VAMPIRE


by a Chinese, and inserted it with the story belonging to it
in a publication called the Anglo-Chinese Gleaner. And I
said, “Sir, listen to the account of the penanggalan. It
was originally a woman. She used the magic arts of a devil
in whom she believed, and she devoted herself to his service
night and day until the period of her agreement with her
teacher had expired and she was able to fly. Her head and
neck were then loosened from the body, the intestines being
attached to them, and hanging down in strings. The body
remained where it was. Wherever the person whom it wished to
injure happened to live, thither flew the head and bowels
to suck his blood, and the person whose blood was sucked
was sure to die. If the blood and water which dripped from
the intestines touched any person, serious illness followed
and his body broke out in open sores. The penanggalan
likes to suck the blood of women in child-birth. For this
reason it is customary at all houses where a birth occurs
to hang up jeruju [a kind of thistle] leaves at the doors and
windows, or to place thorns wherever there is any blood,
lest the penanggalan should come and suck it, for the penang-
galan has, it seems, a dread of thorns in which her intestines
may happen to get caught. It is said that a penanggalan
once came to a man’s house in the middle of the night to suck
his blood, and her intestines were caught in some thorns
near the hedge, and she had to remain there until daylight,
when the people saw and killed her.

“The person who has the power of becoming a penanggalan
always keeps at her house a quantity of vinegar in a jar or
vessel of some kind. The use of this is to soak the intestines
in, for when they issue forth from the body they immediately
swell up and cannot be put back, but after being soaked
in vinegar they shrink to their former size and enter the body
again. There are many people who have seen the penanggalan
flying along with its entrails dangling down and shining at
night like fire-flies.

“Such is the story of the penanggalan as I have heard it
from my forefathers but I do not believe it in the least. God
forbid that I should.” (Hikayat Abdullah, p. 148.)

It may be remembered that the Greeks thought that
branches of buckthorn (rhamnus) fastened to doors and
windows kept out witches, as Discorides tells us, De Materia


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 257


Medica, 1,119. At the time of woman’s delivery also they
smeared pitch upon the houses to keep out the demons
(eis améAacw Tov Sauovwy) who are wont to attack mothers
at this period, which the patriarch, Photius, notes in his
Lexicon (ninth century) when he discusses the word fapvos.
The Serbians to-day paint crosses with tar on the doors of
houses and barns to guard them from vampires. On Walpurgis
Night the Bohemian peasant never neglects to strew the
grunsel of his cow-sheds and stables with hawthorn, branches
of gooseberry bushes, and the briars of wild rose-trees so that
the witches or vampires will get entangled amid the thorns
and can force their way no further. The tar of the Serbian
will glue them fast in like manner. It was formerly believed
among the Scotch Highlanders, and the custom may yet
linger that tar daubed on a door kept away the witches.
The horse shoe, at any rate, is still commonly to be seen so
affixed, not as in England for good luck, but with the very
definite object of protecting the house against warlocks and
witches. Alexander Burnes, TJ'ravels in Bokhara, 1834, I,
p- 202, says: “Passing a gate of the city of Peshawur I
observed it studded with horse-shoes, which are as super-
stitious emblems in this country as in remote Scotland.”
The bawds of Amsterdam believed that a horse-shoe, which
had either been found or stolen, placed on the chimney-
hearth would bring many clients to their stew and keep away
witches, say the author of Le Putanisme d’ Amsterdam, 1687.
“The horse-shoe,” writes William Henderson in his Notes
on the Folk-lore of the Northern Counties of England and the
Borders, London, 1866, “‘is said to owe its virtue chiefly to
its shape. Any other object presenting two points or forks,
even the spreading out of the two forefingers, is said to possess
similar occult power, though not in so high a degree as the
rowan wish-rod. In Spain and Italy forked pieces of coral
are in high repute as witch-scarers. A crescent formed of two
boars’ tusks is frequently appended to the necks of mules as
a charm.” In many countries mountain ash (or rowan) is
held to be most efficacious against witches and vampires.
If an Irish housewife ties a sprig of rowan on the handle of
the churn-dash when she is churning no witch can steal her
butter. In a local ballad made on the case of Mary Butters,
the Carnmoney witch, when in August, 1807, Alexander


17


258 THE VAMPIRE


Montgomery’s cow was enchanted so no butter could be
made from her milk the following lines occur :


It happened for a month or two

Aye when they churn’d they got nae butter.
Rown-tree tied in the cow’s tail,

And vervain glean’d about the ditches ;
These freets and charms did not prevail,

They could not banish the auld witches.


Gay in his Fables, X XIII, ‘‘ The Old Woman and her Cats ”
mentions the horse-shoe as a protection against witches :


Straws laid across, my pace retard ;

The horse-shoe’s nail’d (each threshold’s guard) ;
The stunted broom the wenches hide,

For fear that I should up and ride.

They stick with pins my bleeding seat,

And bid me show my secret teat.

In Polynesia we pretty generally find the ti, who under
some aspects is a kind of vampire-demon and Dr. R. H.
Codrington in his The Melanesians: Studies in their Anthro-
pology and Folk Lore, says, ‘‘ There is a belief in the Banks
Islands in the existence of a power like that of Vampires.
A man or a woman would obtain this power out of a morbid
desire for communion with some ghost, and in order to gain
it would steal and eat a morsel. The ghost then of the dead
man would join in a close friendship with the person who
had eaten, and would gratify him by afflicting any one against
whom his ghostly power might be directed. The man so
afflicted would feel that something was influencing his life,
and would come to dread some particular person among his
neighbours, who was, therefore, suspected of being a talamaur.
This latter when seized and tried in the smoke of strong-
smelling leaves would call out the name of the dead man
whose ghost was his familiar, often the names of more than
one, and lastly the name of the man who was afflicted. The
same name talamaur was given to one whose soul was supposed
to leave the grave and absorb the lingering vitality of a
freshly dead person. There was a woman, some years ago,
of whom the story is told that she made no secret of doing
this, and that once on the death of a neighbour she gave
notice that she would go in the night and eat the vitality.
The friends of the deceased therefore kept watch in the house


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 259


where the corpse lay, and at dead of night heard a scratching
at the door, followed by a rustling noise close by the body.
One of them threw a stone and seemed to hit the unknown
thing; and in the morning the talamaur was found with a
bruise on her arm, which she confessed was caused by a stone
thrown at her whilst she was eating the vitality. Such a
woman would feel a morbid delight in the dread which she
inspired, and would also be secretly rewarded by some whose
covert spite she gratified.”

In his Ashanti Proverbs, “Translated from the Original
(The Primitive Ethics of a Savage People),” p. 48, Mr. R.
Sutherland Rattray speaks of the Asasabonsam, ‘“‘ a monster
of human shape, which living far in the depths of the forest,
is only occasionally met by hunters. It sits on tree tops, and
its legs dangle down to the ground and have hooks for feet
which pick up any one who comes within reach. It has
iron teeth. There are female, male, and little sasabonsam.”
Mr. Rattray also describes the obayifo, which word is derived
from bayi, “sorcery.” This is “a kind of human vampire
whose chief delight is to suck the blood of children, whereby
the latter pine and die. Men and women possessed of this
power and credited with volitant powers, being able to quit
their bodies and travel great distances in the night. Besides
sucking the blood of their victims, they are supposed to be
able to extract the sap and juices of crops. Cases of coco
blight are ascribed to the work of the obayifo. These witches
are supposed to be very common, and a man never knows
but that his friend or even his wife may be one. When
prowling at night they are supposed to emit a phosphorescent
light. An obayifo in every day life is supposed to be known
by having sharp, shifty eyes, that are never at rest, also by
showing an undue interest in food, and always talking about
it, especially meat, and hanging about when cooking is
going on, all of which habits are therefore purposely avoided.”

A striking similarity to the beliefs of the Malay Peninsula
is to be traced among the horrible superstitions of ancient
Mexico. The Mexican religion presents an extremely com-
plex system with a crowded pantheon and displays a corres-
ponsive ceremonial of the most elaborate nature and exacting
service. There existed a certain kind of monachism, and the
sacerdotal caste is particularly distinguished by being


260 THE VAMPIRE


deeply learned in myth and symbolism reduced to the most
unyielding dogma, thus involving practices, sometimes pleasing
and poetical, sometimes abhorent in their excess of savagery
and barbarism, but which one and all were not merely so much
upheld as rigorously enforced by the state authorities of a
great empire, which determined an essential unity of religious
conception throughout its furthermost borders. There were
of course, beneficent deities such as the Sun god, Tonatiuh,
who was also called Xipilli ‘the Turquoise,’ whose festival
Clavigero tells us®*! ‘‘ which was celebrated every fifty-two years,
was by far the most splendid and most solemn, not only among
the Mexicans, but likewise among all the nations of that
Empire, or who were neighbouring to it . . . every place
resounded with the voice of gladness and mutual ,congratula-
tions on account of the new century which heaven had granted
him. The illuminations made during the first nights were
extremely magnificent ; their ornaments of dress, entertain-
ments, dances, and public games were superiorly solemn.”
But even here we find that human sacrifice was offered.
There were also goddesses such as Xochiquetzal, ‘‘ Flower
Feather’ who is considered by Diego Mufioz Camargo as
corresponding to Venus, and whom he thus describes: ‘‘ She
dwells above the nine heavens in a very pleasant and delectable
place, accompanied and guarded by many people and waited
on by other women of the rank of goddesses, where are many
delights of fountains, brooks, flower-gardens, and without
her wanting for anything.’ There was also Macuilxochitl,
‘* Five Flower,” the god of pleasure, whose festival, one of the
movable feasts, was the Xochilhuitl, the Feast of Flowers, con-
cerning which Sahagun says that: “the great folk made a
feast, dancing and singing in honour of this sign, decorating
themselves with their feathers and all their grandeur for the
areyto [sacred dance]. At this feast the king bestowed
honours upon warriors, musicians and courtiers.’®* There
exists an elegant little song of this debonair god who is the
Lord of Music and Games, which commences thus :


Out of the place of flowers [ come,
Priest of the Sunset, Lord of the Twilight.


Quails were offered to him at midday, but even this
solemnity was not without some sombre incident, for it was


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 261


the occasion when all the nobles in Mexico who lived near
the frontiers of an enemy brought the slaves whom they had
captured to the capital for sacrifice.

When we find that some circumstance of cruelty even
intrudes upon the worship of the kindliest and most joyous
gods it may well be supposed that the demonology of Mexico
is grim in the extreme, nor can we be at all astonished that the
first explorers and the earlier Spanish authors again and
again expressed their horror of the terrible imagination and
primitive fears which peopled the gloom of a Mexican mid-
night with the abominable shapes of foulest devils and venge-
ful dead. Probably the most horrible, as he is possibly the
most powerful, of the Mexican gods was Tezcatlipoca of
whom Bernal Diaz says: “And this Tezcatepuca was the
god of hell and had charge of the souls of the Mexicans, and
his body was girt with figures like little devils with snakes’
tails.”°* This hideous figure, it is very significant to remark,
particularly favoured cross-roads, where the Ciuateteo, who are
vampire-witches, held their sabbat. Tezcatlipocd was also
known as Yaotzin, “The Enemy” and in a thousand horrid
phantom shapes he haunted the woods during the dark hours.
He bore in his hand a magical instrument. From him pro-
ceeded those eerie and mysterious sounds which are heard at
night and which fill with strange forebodings not only luckless
travellers but even those who shudder when sheltered in their
homes. He would often utter the howl of the jaguar, and the
ill-omened cry, “‘ yeccan, yeccan”’ the screech of the wactli
bird, a species of hawk, whose note sounded a swift death to
him who heard it. Another of his guises was the Youalte-
puztli, or “ax of the night.’”’ When all was most silent and
most still there might be heard near some remote temple a
sound as if an ax were being laid to the roots of the trees.
Should anyone dare to investigate the cause of the noise he
was suddenly caught by Tezcatlipocd who appeared as a
decomposing headless corpse in whose mouldering breast
were set ‘‘ two little doors meeting in the centre,” and it was
the swift opening and shutting of these which produced the
sound of a man hewing down the trees. If some brave hero
could plunge his hand into the aperture and clutch the black
heart he might demand what ransom he would ere he let the
demon go. But he must be one to whom fear was unknown


262 THE VAMPIRE


for most persons who caught sight of this hideous phantom
perished in an extremity of terror.

The true Mexican Vampires were the Ciuateteo whom we
have mentioned above, women who had died in their first
labour,” and over whose revels this devil-deity presided.
They were also known as the Ciuapipiltin, or princesses, in
order to placate them by some honourable designation, as
in the same way Ciuateteo signifies “Right honourable
mother.” Of these Sahagun says: “The Ciuapipiltin, the
noble women, were those who had died in childbed. They
were supposed to wander through the air, descending when
they wished to the earth to afflict children with paralysis and
other maladies. They haunted cross-roads to practise their
maleficent deeds, and they had temples built at these places
where bread offerings were made to them, also the thunder
stones which fall from the sky. Their faces were white, and
their arms and hands were coloured with a white powder
ticttl (chalk).”” These haunting women celebrated their own
sabbat, and it is curious to remark that it was thought of as
being a meeting of the dead rather than, as in Europe, an
infernal company of the living. The representations of the
Ciuateteo in the ancient paintings are extremely hideous
and repulsive. They often wear the dress and are distin-
guished by the characteristics of the goddess, Tlazolteotl,
whose priests were the Cuecuesteca, and who was the goddess
of all sorcery, lust, and evil. The learned friar who inter-
preted the Codex Telleriano-Renensis certainly speaks of the
Ciuateteo as witches, who flew through the air upon their
broom-sticks and met at cross-roads, a rendezvous presided
over by their mistress Tlazolteotl. It may be remarked that
the broom-stick is her especial symbol, and that she is often
associated with the snake and the screech-owl. Under one
aspect, also, she is regarded as a moon-goddess, and may,
indeed, be fairly closely parallelled with the Greek Hecate.
These animals, which were considered unlucky also often
accompanied the Ciuateteo, who, moreover, carried a witch’s
broom, and upon whose garments crossbones were painted.
They were essentially malignant, and sought to wreak their
vengeance upon all whom they might meet during the dark
hours. In the native huts the doors were carefully barred
and every crack or cranny carefully filled up to prevent


ee i eet


i


eS S.Ct Se


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 268


these vampire-witches from obtaining entrance. Occasion-
ally, however, they would attack human dwellings, and did


' they obtain ingress the children of the household would pine


and dwindle away owing to the blight that these loathsome
creatures cast upon them. Accordingly in their shrines
where four cross-roads met men heaped up enticing and
substantial food offerings, in order that these malignant dead
might so satisfy their hunger that they would not seek to
make an onset upon the living. One explanation why the
shrine should be at cross-roads was in order that the Ciuateteo
might be confused and not knowing which way to take to
the nearest human habitation, be surprised by dawn before
she could set out to seize her prey. We find this exact reason
is given in Greece and in other countries for burying the
body of a suicide, who will almost certainly become a vampire,
at four cross-roads.

With regard to Mexican Vampire-witches, who it appears
partook in almost equal quantities the nature of both these
evil things, Sahagun records: ‘It was said that they vented
their wrath on people and bewitched them. When anyone
is possessed by the demons, with a wry mouth and disturbed
eyes, with clenched hands and inturned feet, wringing his
hands and foaming at the mouth, they say that he has linked
himself to a demon ; the Ciuateteo, housed by the cross-ways,
has taken his form.”

But this was not the only vampire known to the mythology
of Mexico. The Lord of Mictlampa (the Region of the Dead)
certainly has vampirish attributes. He is often depicted as a
complete skeleton (Codex Borgia, sheet 14), and sometimes
he has a bunch or broom of malinalli grass, which was associated
with witchcraft. In another representation he appears with
a skeleton head but a black body, and at the side is seen a
skull swallowing a man who falls into its bony jaws. In the
Codex Magliabecchiano® he is depicted as a blue-grey form
with enormous talons upon his hands that are markedly reminis-
cent of the claws of a Vampire. He sits in the portico of a dark
temple and before him are his worshippers, a number of men
and women, who feast upon human flesh, tearing heads, legs,
and arms which they snatch from several earthen vessels.
His wife was Mictecaciuatl, ‘ Lady of the Place of the Dead,”
and she is often represented as wearing for ornaments the paper


264 THE VAMPIRE


flags, which were generally put upon corpses prepared for
cremation. She is sometimes seen to be thrusting a mummy


into the earth, and there is a reference to her as the “ earth-~


monster.”’

It would, perhaps, be hardly too much to say that in ancient
Mexico all magicians were regarded as Vampires, a tradition
which long survived even after the conversion of the country
so that one of the regular questions which the Spanish priests
used to put to those of whose faith they were suspicious was :
“Art thou a sorcerer ? Dost thou suck the blood of others ? ”
That such interrogations were not superfluous is shown by the
terrible occurrence at the end of the sixteenth century when
Cosijopii, formerly King of Tehuantepec, was discovered
amid a throng of his ancient courtiers and a concourse of people
taking part in an idolatrous ceremony of peculiar horror.
Even in the seventeenth century the priests of the Province of
Oaxaca learned that numbers of Indians congregated secretly
at night to worship their idols. It is true that the famous
letter of Bishop Zumarraga to the Chapter of Tolosa, written
in 1531 says that: “‘ quingenta deorum templa sunt destructa
et plusquam uicesies mille figurae daemonum, quas adorabant,
fractae et combustae.” But Fray Mendieta mentions certain
idols of paper®’ which seemed to have been for a while preserved,
and possibly new figures were clandestinely sculptured in the
traditional manner to supply the place of those which had
been so properly and so religiously destroyed. Such cere-
monials were, of course, clear witchcraft, and the Mexican
sorcerer or naualli seems to have been credited with taking
the shape of a wer-coyote, the prairie wolf, as well as to have
practised vampirism. So here too in Mexico we find a close
connexion between the wer-animal and the Vampire. Sahagun
notes: “ The naualli or magician is he who frightens men and
sucks the blood of children during the night.” It appears that
these sorcerers lived in separate huts built of wood very brightly
painted, and that those who wished to bargain with them were
wont to resort to these accursed houses under the cover of dark.
Not superfluously then does the Vade mecum of a missionary
who was engaged in the work of evangelizing the native
Mexicans include such questions as: “ Art thou a diviner ?”
“Dost thou suck the blood of others, or dost thou wander
about at night, calling upon the demons to help thee ? ”


—_—_ —- FT ——"


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 265


- Of all the many and dark superstitions that prevail in the
West Indies none is more deeply rooted than the belief in the
existence of vampires, and as this tradition was brought from
Guinea and the Congo and maintained for more than two
centuries by the hundreds of thousands of African slaves who
were so constantly being imported from this native continent
it may not impertinently be considered here. In Grenada,
particularly, the vampire is known as a “ Loogaroo,” a
corruption of lowpgarou, and the attributes generally assigned
to the loogaroo as well as the current stories told of these
ghastly beings not infrequently recall the pages of De Lanere,
clearly showing that the demonology of the French colonists
of the seventeenth century was soon welded with negro witch-
craft and voodoo. The West Indian natives, and above all
the black, Quashee as he is called, hold that loogaroos are
human beings, especially old women, who have made a pact
with the devil, by which the fiend bestows upon them certain
magic powers on condition that every night they provide him
with a quantity of rich warm blood. And so every night the
loogaroos make their way to the occult silk-cotton-tree (bombax
ceiba, often known as the Devil’s tree or Jumbie® tree), and
there, having divested themselves of their skins, which are
carefully folded up and concealed, in the form of a ball of
sulphurous fire they speed abroad upon their horrid businesses.
Even to-day visitors to Grenada have been called out of the
house late at night by the servants to see the loogaroos, and
their attention is directed to any solitary light which happens
to flash through the darkness, perhaps the distant lantern of
some watchman who is guarding a cocoa piece. Until dawn
the loogaroos are at work, and any Quashee who feels tired
and languid upon awaking will swear that the vampire has
sucked his blood. Doors and shutters are no barrier to the
monster who can slip through the tiniest chink, but if only rice
and sand are scattered before a cabin the loogarroo must perforce
stay until he has numbered every grain, and so morning will
assuredly surprise him ere the tale is told.

Mr. H. J. Bell recounts the following anecdote which is
sufficiently striking as reproducing in actual belief of to-day
more than one of the old witch traditions. A native gardener
pointed out to Mr. Bell a hideous beldame walking along the
highway. This hag, who wore a bandage over one eye, was


266 THE VAMPIRE


reputed to be a loogaroo of the most infamous and evil kind.
It happened that one day upon awakening the gardener had
felt extraordinary weak and supine. To his horror he
remarked a slight stain of blood on his clothes, and he at once
realized he had been the victim of a vampire. The following
night he refrained from sleep, preserving a silent vigil. A
little after twelve-o’clock there came a faint scratching in the
thatch of the roof. As this grew louder the man guessing that
the loogaroo was about to enter thrust through the spot with
his cutlass. A stifled screech fell to hideous moans, and rushing
out of the hut he heard the sound die away in the distance,
whilst a blue marish light vanished into the house where this
ancient sibyl dwelt. The next day she was found lying in
bed, half blind from an injury to one of her eyes. This she
vowed had been caused during the night owing to a fall over
the sharp stump of a tree whilst she was chasing some strayed
chickens. Nobody believed her, and the gardener was praised
for having so deservedly punished the vampire for her foul
sorceries.

It is said that the human skin of a loogaroo has been found
hidden in the bushes under a silk-cotton-tree. In this case it
must be seized fast and pounded in a mortar with pepper and
salt. So the vampire will be unable to assume a human shape
and will perish miserably.

Now and again negroes have been discovered bold enough
to play the loogaroo in order to cover up their nightly depreda-
tions. Two confederates will plan the robbing of a cocoa piece,
and whilst one fellow will climb the tree to strip off the pods
his friend will pass softly up and down in the vicinity waving a
lantern fashioned from an empty dry calabash cut to imitate
grotesque and gargoyled features, and lighted by a candle set
in a socket which has been cleverly inserted.

The tradition, however, has its more serious sides and
obscene, if not bloody, rites are practised in secret places where
the white man will hardly venture. On one occasion a witch
was seen at midnight dancing naked round a fire, and as she
leaped to the drone of foul incantations she ever and anon cast
strange substances into the flame which blazed up into a
myriad colourings.

The loogaroo is particularly obnoxious to dogs, and any
person at whom apparently without cause dogs will bark


~~


ogee i he ee ee! ee ee ee ee i a le Oe 8 ih


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 267


furiously or even endeavour to attack is incontinently accounted
infect with the vampire taint.

It is supposed that the loogaroo will frequently molest
animals of all kinds, and indeed in Trinidad and especially on
the Spanish Main the horses suffer greatly from the attacks
of large vampire bats. It is necessary that all the windows
and ventilation holes of the stables and cattle pens should be
firmly secured by wire netting to prevent the entrance of the
bats, which are able greatly to harm any animal in whose flesh
they manage to fasten their teeth.

It may seem that the superstition of the Quashee, although
grosser and more ignorant, lacks some of the crueller and more
abominable traits of the tradition in other countries. This is
merely owing to the fact that it has largely been driven under
ground by energetic and repressive measures. Pére Labat in
his Nouveaux voyages aux Isles d’ Amérique (1712) gives the
story of a vampirish black sorceress who used to threaten to
eat the hearts of those who offended her, and almost invariably
they soon after began to waste away in great agony. When
their bodies were opened it was seen that the heart and liver
were drained dry as parchment. He further says: ‘“ Nearly
all the negroes who leave their country, having attained the
age of manhood, are sorcerers, or, at all events, are much
tainted with magic, witchcraft and poison.” Even half a
century ago an important ordinance was passed in all the West
Indian colonies imposing heavy penalties on any person found
guilty of dealing in Obeah. Writing as lately as 1893, Mr.
H. J. Bell says of Hayti, one of the most beautiful of the West
_Indies, an island possessing an area almost equal to that of
France : “ Dreadful accounts reach us of thousands of negroes
having gone back to a perfectly savage life in the woods, going
about stark naked, and having replaced the Christian religion
by Voodooism and fetish worship. Cases of cannibalism have
even been reported, and nowhere in the West Indies has
Obeah a more tenacious hold on high and low than in Hayti.”

By a comparison of the beliefs in these many lands, in ancient
Assyria, in old Mexico, in China, India and Melanesia, although
details differ, but yet not to any marked degree, it will be seen
_ that the superstition and the tradition of the Vampire prevail
to an extraordinary extent, and it is hard to believe that a
phenomenon which has had so complete a hold over nations


ee


268 THE VAMPIRE


both old and young, in all parts of the world, at all times
of history, has not some underlying and terrible truth how-
ever rare this may be in its more remarkable manifestations.


NOTES TO CHAPTER IV


1 R. Campbell Thompson. The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia,
London, 1903, vol. I, p. xxviii, n.

2 Leonard W. King. Babylonian Religion, p. 75.

3 Op. cit., p. Xxv-

4 King, Babylonian Religion, p. 176 ; Gilgamish Epic, Tablet xii.

5 Campbell Thompson, op. cit., p. Xxx.

® The Night-fiend idlu lili is the male counterpart of the Night-wraith,
ardat lili. Idlu is the word used for a grown man of full strength.

7 Ea was the great god whose emanation always remained in water, and
accordingly who was invoked with lustrations and aspersions of lymph.

8 Campbell Thompson, op. cit., pp. 37-49.

® Northcote W. Thomas, Anthropological Report on the Ibo-speaking
Peoples of Nigeria, London, 1913, I, 57sqq.

10 Le Sieur de la Borde, ‘“ Relation de lOrigine, Moeurs, Coustumes,
Religion, Guerres et Voyages des Caraibes sauvages des Isles Antilles de
l’Amerique,” Recueil de divers Voyages faits en Afrique et en VAmerique, qui
n'ont point esté encore publiez. Paris, 1684.

u #8. Young, The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe, Westminster, 1898.

12 Y, Scheffer, Lapponia, Frankfort, 1673, p. 313.

13 Ignaz V. Zingeric, Sitten, Braiiche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes,
2nd edition. Innsbruck, 1871.

4 “On a Far-off Island,” Blackwood’s Magazine, February, 1886; p. 238.

15 Campbell Thompson, op. cit., I, pp. 69-71.

16 Among the illustrations of prehistoric utensils.

17 In a private letter to myself, 24th March, 1928.

18 Satirae, I, v, 64.

1° For much relating to Chinese Vampires I am indebted to Mr. G. Willough-
by-Meade’s Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, Constable, London. Published
March, 1928.

20 Thomas J. Hutchinson, ‘On the Choco and other Indians of South
America,” Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London, N.S. iii (1865),


> Bots
21 Monica Williams, Religious Thought and Life in India, London, 1883,
p- 354.

22H. Vambery, Das Tiirkenvolk, Leipsic, 1885, p. 112.

28 H. Ternaux-Compans, Essai sur l'ancien Cundinamara, Paris, (s.d.), p. 18.

24 George Turner, LL.D., Samoa, a Hundred Years ago and long before,

London, 1884, p. 200.

28 W. Drexler apud W. H. Roscher, Ausfihrliches Lexikon der griechischen

und rémischen Mythologie, s.u. “‘ Men.” —

20 Hans Egede, A Descriptign of Greenland, London, 1818, p. 209.

27 Revue des Traditions Populaires, xv (1900), p. 471.

28 Cf. The Tempest, U1, 2, where Caliban is alluded to as a “ moon-calf.”
Stepheno: “ How cam’st thou to be the siege of this moon-calf ? ”
Trinculo: “I hid me under the dead moon-calf’s gaberdine for fear

of the storm.” In Dryden and Davenant’s The Tempest, or the
Enchanted Island, 4to, 1670, II, Trincalo calls Caliban “ perverse
Moon-ecalf.”
The same phrase is reproduced in Shadwell’s operatic The Tempest
or, The Enchanted Island, 4to, 1674.

29 Constable’s, London, 1928.


THE VAMPIRE IN ASSYRIA, ETC. 269


%0 Ph. Paulitschke, Hthnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die materielle Cultur

des Danakil, Galla, und Somél, Berlin, 1893.
A. C. Hollis, The Masai, Oxford, 1905.

81 Apparently not S. Hilary of Arles, nor S. Hilary of Poictiers.

82 The custom of gathering various herbs, especially S. John’s Wort,
nies and mugwort on S. John’s eve, 23 June, as a protection against

lis was almost universal throughout Europe as it was believed that
oe war cn a and witches were especially active. An immense library of
folk-lore is concerned with this day. R. Kiihnau, Schlesische Sagen, Berlin,
1910-1913, iii, p. 39, n.1894, says: ‘On S. John’s Night (between the 23rd
and 24th of June) the witches busily bestir themselves to force their way
into the houses of men and the stalls of cattle.”

33 The deception was wrought by glamour. Algernon Blackwood has
made excellent use of such a magical delusion i in his occult studies, Dr. John
Silence, 1908, Case iv, “‘ Secret Worship.

34 Two vols. New York, 1862. Vol. ‘IL, p- 327.

35 J. Noake, Worcestershire Notes and Queries, London, 12 mo, 1856, p. 169.

86 T quote the version given by J. O. Halliwell, but there are many variants.

- ‘Ace II. The soliloquy of Barabas as he is prowling outside the convent
toward midnight. One may compare Shakespeare’s “The nightly owl or
fatal raven,” Titus Andronicus, II, iii. 97. Also in Othello, IV, i, 21:

Oh! it comes o’er my memory
As doth the raven o’er the infected ‘house,
Boding to all.
And Lady Macbeth’s (Macbeth, I, v, 35) :
The raven himself is hoarse
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements.
Tickell, Colin and Lucy, has:
Three times, all in the dead of night,
A bell was heard to ring,
And at her window, shrieking thrice,
The raven flapp’d his wing ;
Full well the love-lorn maiden knew,
The solemn-boding sound.


Much of interest might be written on this aaliact of which it has been
possible for me en passant barely to touch the fringe.

38 Robert Forby, Vocabulary of East Anglia, 2 vols., London, 8vo, 1830.

3° William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern Counties of
England and the Borders, London, 8vo, 1866. Harrison Ainsworth’s fine
romance, Rookwood, first published in April, 1834, may be noted in connex-
ion with this tradition.

40 The Animal World, vi, p. 29.

a-¥, vy.

42 G. Willoughby-Meade, Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, pp. 234-35.

43 Op. cit., p. 236.

44 The Ocean of Story, pp. 139-140. Note II, Chapter LXXIITI.

45 W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic, London, 1900, pp. 320-331.

46 In 1644, Elizabeth Clarke, a notorious witch, confessed to Matthew
Hopkins that amongst other familiars she entertained our ‘‘ Newes, like a
Polcat.”

“7 The examination and confession of certaine Wytches at Chelmsforde in the
Countie of Essex before the Quenes Maiesties Judges the XXVI daye of July
anno 1566.

48 Nothing is known of this writer who probably compiled his book in
the fourth century. The De Prodigiis or Prodigiorum Libellus contains
a record of the phenomena classed by the Romans under the general heading
of Prodigia or Ostenta. The series extends in chronological order from the
consulship of Scipio and Laelius, B.c. 190, to the consulship of Fabius and
Aelius, B.c. 11. The materials are derived from an abridgement of Livy,
whose very phrases are continually employed.


270 THE VAMPIRE


49 Amsterdam, 1679.

50 W. W. Skeat, op. cit., p. 234.

51 Francesco Saverio Clavigero, Storia Antico del Mexico, Cesona, 1780.
English translation by Charles Cullen, 2 vols., London, 1787.

52 Diego Muiioz Camargo, Historia de Tlascala, Book I, c. xix. Edited
by A. Chavero, Mexico, 1892.

58 Bernardino de Sahagun, Historia Universal de Nueva-Espana. Mexico,
4829; London, 1830, in vol. vi of Lord Kingsborough’s Antiquities of Mexico.
French translation by Jourdanet and Siméon, Paris, 1880.

54 Bernal Diaz del Castillo. Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de Nueva-
Espaia. Translated by A. P. Maudslay as The True History of the Conquest
of Mexico. Hakluyt Society, London, 1908.

55 In Ireland hagiographical lore mention is made of a special burying-
place for women who die in childbirth. Lives of the Cambro-British Saints,
Ed. Rev. W. J. Rees, 1853, p. 63.

56 Reproduced by the Duc de Loubat, Rome, 1904. And also reproduced
by Zelia Nuttall as The Book of the Life of the Ancient Mexicans, Berkeley,
California, 1903. This codex is accompanied by a contemporary gloss in
Spanish.

57 G. de Mendieta, Historia Ecclesiastica Indiana. Icazbaleeta, Mexico,
1870.

58 The West Indian ‘Jumbies” or ‘‘Duppies” are ghostly visitants,
malignant and terrific spectres. Many of the old houses in the West Indies
have the reputation of being haunted in a most unpleasant way.


i iil il Tt Ni a i A i a ig Rs i a es le Sl i i Ae


ae aS ”6h!PlhClUC Te I eS mc eC CU mm e.D!hUmL CCU


CHAPTER V


THe VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE


A CONSIDERATION of the Vampire theme in literature must of
necessity be somewhat eclectic, if not even arbitrary in the
selection of works which it reviews and with which it sets out
to deal. Any exhaustive inquiry is well-nigh impossible,
and this not so much, perhaps, on account of the wealth of
the material, although indeed there is a far vaster field than
might generally be supposed, as owing to the very vague
definition and indeterminate interpretation one is able to
give to vampirism from a purely literary point of view. It is
the craft of an artist in the telling of ghost-stories to see that
his colours should not be too vivid and too clear, and no
mean skill is required to suggest without explanation, to
mass the shadows without derangement, to be occult yet not
to be obscure. Accordingly it would be a matter of extreme
difficulty to differentiate the malignant and death-dealing
spectre or it may be even corpse who returns to wreak his foul
revenge from the Vampire,—using this latter word in its widest
Sense, a5 one must employ it when speaking of literature,
@ caution which here given as regards this Chapter will serve
once for all. In such a story, for example, as Dr. M. R.
James’ Count Magnus‘ is the horrible revenant a ghost or
a vampire? The writer has left the point ambiguous. It is
of the very essence of his happy invention that he should do
so, and the deftly veiled incertitude adds to the loathly terror
of the thing. It will be readily remembered that the story
relates how a traveller in Sweden about the middle of the last
century whilst staying near an ancient manor house in
Vestergothland obtains permission to examine the family
papers and among these he comes upon the traces of a certain
Count Magnus de la Gardie who in the year 1600 had built
the house or herrgard. Even after the lapse of two and a half
centuries dark traditions are still lingering concerning this


271


272 THE VAMPIRE


mysterious nobleman, whose body lies in a richly ornate copper
sarcophagus that stands the principal feature of a domed
mausoleum at the eastern end of the church. Reluctantly the
landlord tells a story which happened in the time of his grand-
father ninety-two years before. Two men determined to
go at night and have a free hunt in the woods upon the estate.
They are warned: “‘ No, do not go; we are sure you will meet
with persons walking who should not be walking. They
should be resting, not walking.”” The two men.laughed and
cried: ‘The Count is dead; we do not care for him.” But
in the night the villagers ‘‘ hear someone scream, just as if
the most inside part of his soul was twisted out of him.”
Then they hear a hideous laugh, “it was not one of those two
men that laughed, and, indeed, they have all of them said
that it was not any man at all.’ In the morning they go out
with the priest, and they find one of the men dead, killed in so
terrible a fashion that they buried him on the spot. “He
was once a beautiful man, but now his face was not there,
because the flesh of it was sucked away off the bones.” The
other man is standing with his back against a tree, “ pushing
with his hands—pushing something away from him which
was not there.”’

There was some vague gossip that the Count had been
“on the Black Pilgrimage, and had brought something or
someone back with him.” During his investigation of the
papers the English traveller, Mr. Wraxall, found a Liber
nigrae peregrinationis, or at least a few lines of such a document
indicating that the Count had once journeyed to the city of
Chorazin and there adored the prince of the air. In careless
mood as he is passing near the mausoleum, Mr. Wraxall
exclaims: ‘Ah, Count Magnus, there you are. I should
dearly like to see you.” He is indiscreet enough to cry out
thus flippantly on two further occasions, and at last he is
thoroughly alarmed by hearing the sound of metal hinges
creaking and he knows that the sarcophagus is slowly opening
wide. In a state of frenzied fear he sets out for England the
next day, yet turn and double as he will he is everywhere
haunted by two hideous figures, a man in a long black cloak
and a broad-leafed hat and something in a dark cloak and
hood. Upon landing at Harwich he makes his way across
country to a neighbouring village, when on looking out of the


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 278


carriage window he sees at a cross-road the two horrible
creatures. He finds a lodging, but within the next forty-
eight hours his pursuers fall upon him. He is discovered
dead, and in the district it is still remembered how “the
jury that viewed the body fainted, seven of ’em did, and none
of ’em wouldn’t speak to what they see, and the verdict
was visitation of God; and how the people as kep’ the
‘ouse moved out that same week and went away from that
part.”

This story may, I think, certainly be considered as Vampire
lore, and although it must, of course, be perfectly familiar
to all who delight in tales of the supernatural I have related
it at some little length here, partly because it is told so
excellently well, and partly because it so admirably fulfils
and exemplifies the qualities that this kind of literature should
possess. It is brief and succinct, although there are many
details, but every touch tells. No ghost story should be of
any length. The horror and the awe evaporate with pro-
lixity. The ghost is malevolent and odious. In fiction a
helpful apparition is a notable weakness, and the whole
narrative becomes flabby to a degree. The authentic note
_of horror is struck in the eerie suggestion which, as we have
noticed, is of intent left ill-defined. Nothing could be more
crude than an explanation, and it is this banality that often
ruins a story which otherwise might be of the very first
order.

To review the traces of vampire legends which appear in
sagas, and which are in truth but few and unimportant, seems
to be outside our province here, and even more foreign to
our purpose would be the present examination of the vampire
legend in folk-lore since this has already been dealt with in the
course of the preceding chapters, and to regard such traditions
merely as literature would be not only to look at them from a
wrong perspective but to misrepresent their quality and
essentially to pervert their purpose.

Since some point must be chosen at which to consider vam-
pirism in literature we may most fairly recall to mind the many
academic and philosophical treatises upon the Vampire
which were rehearsed and discussed in German Universities
during the earlier part of the eighteenth century, and these
startling themes soon began to attract the attention of poets

18


274 THE VAMPIRE


and literary men. Thus among the poems of Heinrich
August Ossenfelder? we have a short piece entitled Der Vampir,
which is as follows:


Mein liebes Magdchen glaubet
Bestindig steif und feste,

An die gegebnen Lehren

Der immer frommen Mutter ;
Als Volker an der Theyse

An tédtliche Vampiere
Heyduckisch feste glauben,
Nun warte nur Christianchen,
Du willst mich gar nich lieben ;
Ich will mich an dir richen,
Und heute in Tockayer

Zu einem Vampir trinken.

Und wenn du sanfte schlummerst,
Von deinen sch6nen Wangen
Den frischen Purpur saugen.
Alsdenn wirst du erschrecken,
Wenn ich dich werde ktissen
Und als ein Vampir kiissen :
Wann du dann recht erzitterst
Und matt in meine Arme,
Gleich einer Todten sinkest
Alsdenn will ich dich fragen,
Sind meine Lehren besser,

Als deiner guten Mutter ?


The poet Wieland® has a passing reference to the Vampire :


Der Jiingling aus den Wolken

Herab gefallen, stumm und bleich,

Als hatt’ ein Vampyr ihm die Adern ausgemolken,
Steht ganz vernichtet von dem Streich.‘


It would be an exaggeration to say that the Vampire entered
German literature with Goethe’s famous ballad Die Braut von
Korinth, but it would be difficult to over-estimate the influence
and the popularity of this piece, the subject of which is directly
derived from Phlegon of Tralles. The young Athenian who
visits his father’s old friend to whose daughter he has been
betrothed receives at midnight the Vampire body of the girl
whom death has prevented from becoming his bride, and who
declares :

Aus dem Grabe werd’ ich ausgetrieben,
Noch zu suchen das vermifste Gut,
Noch den schon verlornen Mann zu lieben


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 275


Und zu saugen seines Herzens Blut.
Ist’s um den geschehn,

Muss nach andern gehn,

Und das junge Volk erliegt der,Wut.*


Even more famous are the charnel horrors of Biirger’s
Lenore which was first printed in 1773 in the Gottinger Musenal-
manach and which notwithstanding the legions of hostile
comments and parodies whereof Brandl gives an ample list®
has remained a household word.

In spite of the immense enthusiasm at that date in con-
temporary England for German romantic literature it is
remarkable that no translation of Lenore was published here
until 1796, when William Taylor of Norwich printed in the
Monthly Review of March his rendering which in some respects
must be called an adaptation. He had, however, by his
own account written the translation as early as 1790,’ and there
can be no doubt that very shortly after its completion it was
declaimed, applauded and much discussed in Norwich literary
circles. We know that Mrs. Barbauld who visited Edinburgh
“about the summer of 1793 or 1794’ read aloud Taylor’s
version to a number of enthusiastic admirers. This event
was described to Sir Walter Scott by Miss Cranstoun, after-
wards Countess Purgstall,® although Scott himself mentions
that his curiosity “ was first attracted to this truly romantic
story by a gentleman, who, having heard Lenore once read in
manuscript, could only recollect the general outline, and
part of a couplet, which, from the singularity of its structure,
and frequent recurrence,!? had remained impressed on his
memory.’’! This gentleman was Mr. Cranstoun, the brother
of Countess Purgstall, and so her statement is no doubt
accurate as Scott might well have received his account both
from the brother as well as from the sister. It was in the
course of 1794, or at any rate early in the following year that
Scott made his own rendering of the ballad. The account
of Taylor’s version, Ellenore, which “clectrified” the
assembled company at Dugald Stewart’s house when read
by the famous Anna Letitia Barbauld had given him the
strongest desire to see the original. Just about this time,
however, it was a difficult matter to procure books from the
continent, and it was not until after some delay that a copy
of Biirger’s works was conveyed to him from Hamburg. He


276 THE VAMPIRE


immediately devoured the German ballad and was so im-
pressed that he forthwith set about Englishing it. “I well
recollect” he writes, “that I began my task after supper,
and finished it about daybreak next morning.’”!” Scott’s
friends privately printed a few copies of the poem as a surprise
for the author," and as it went from hand to hand it met
with the most flattering reception. In 1796, besides the public
issue of the translations from Biirger by Taylor and by Scott,
no less than three other versions appeared, from the several
pens of W. R. Spencer, H. J. Pye and J. T. Stanley. The
translation by the last named author was given to the public
in an édition de luxe at five shillings, as well as in the ordinary
edition of half a crown.'* In 1797, a pasquil followed, Miss
Kitty : a Parody on Lenora, a Ballad, ‘ Translated
from the German, by several Hands,’’ whilst in the following
year, Mrs. Taylor turned the popular poem into Italian as a
“Novella Morale.”® Probably the most faithful, if not the
most spirited translation, was that by the Rev. J. Beresford
which was published in 1800.

It was in 1797 that Coleridge wrote the first part of
Christabel, and German critics have somewhat superfluously
endeavoured to emphasize herein the influence of Lenore,
since upon examination it would hardly seem that such is
present even in the smallest degree. For example, if the
narrative of Geraldine be carefully read’® it must be evident
that the following judgment of Professor Brandl is without
foundation. This critic writes: ‘‘Ihre Vorgeschichte (of
Geraldine) schépfte er grossentheils aus Biirgers ‘ Lenore’ in
Taylors Uebersetzung: die Dame ist, wenigstens ihrer
Erzahlung nach, auf einem windschnellen Ross entfiihrt und
halbtodt vor Furcht hier abgesetzt worden; statt des sch-
warzen Leichenzuges, der Lenoren auf ihrem Ritt durch die
Mondnacht aufstiess, will sie ‘den Schatten der Nacht’
gekreuzt haben; noch zittert das verdorrte Blatt neben ihr
wie aus Herzenangst.’’!”

As we might expect, the young Shelley was enchanted by
Lenore, and Medwin relates how the poet long treasured
“a copy of the whole poem, which he made with his own
hand.’’* Dowden tells the story how one Christmas Eve
Shelley dramatically related the Biirger ballad with appro-
priate intonation and gesture ‘‘ working up the horror to


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 277


such a height of fearful interest’”’ that the company fully
expected to see Wilhelm stalk into the parlour.’ In his
study of Shelley, Charles Middleton has remarked: “It is
hinted, somewhat plausibly, that the Leonora of Biirgher
first awakened his poetic faculty. A tale of such beauty and
terror might well have kindled his lively imagination, but his
earliest pieces, written about this time, and consisting only of
a few ballads, are deficient in elegance and originality, and
give no evidence whatever of the genius which soon after
declared itself.”*° To suggest, as Zeiger would have it,”
that Lenore influenced the poem which in the romance St.
Irvyne* Megalina inscribes on the wall of her prison, and
which commences :


Ghosts of the dead! have I not heard your yelling
Rise on the night-rolling breast of the blast,


is the merest ineptitude, since these verses are taken almost
word for word from “ Lachin y Gair” in Byron’s Hours of
Idlen.ss, and that had been published some four years
previously.”*

As I have elsewhere shown in some detail, Shelley’s two
juvenile romances owe not only their inspiration but a great
deal of their phrasing and noctivagations to Charlotte
Dacre’s Zofloya: or The Moor, which appeared in 1806, and
which, as the poet himself declares “quite enraptured ”
him.** It is a very remarkable circumstance that in spite
of the extremely plain hint which might profitably have been
taken from such poems as Die Braut von Korinth and Lenore
the novelists of the Gothic school, soaked though they were
in German literature, searching the earth and the depths of
the earth for thrills and sensation of every kind, do not seem
to have utilized the tradition of the Vampire. It is a puzzle
indeed if we ask how it was that such writers as Monk Lewis,
* Apollo’s sexton,” who would fain “make Parnassus a
churchyard ” ;° and Charles Robert Maturin who, as he him-
self confessed, loved bells rung by viewless hands, daggers
encrusted with long shed blood, treacherous doors behind
still more treacherous tapestry, mad nuns, apparitions,”
et hoc genus omne ; the two lords of macabre romance, should
neither of them have sent some hideous vampire ghost raven-
ing through their sepulchral pages. In the Gothic romance


278 THE VAMPIRE


we have horror heaped on horror’s head ; mouldering abbeys,
haunted castles, banditti, illuminati, sorcerers, conspirators,
murderous monks and phantom friars, apparitions without
number until the despairing reviewers cried aloud: “Surely
the misses themselves must be tired of so many stories of
ghosts and murders.” We have such titles as the famous
Horrid Mysteries ; The Midnight Groan ; The Abbot of Mont-
serrat, or, The Pool of Blood; The Demon of Venice; The
Convent Spectre ; The Hag of the Mountains ;*" and a hundred
such lurid nomenclatures, but until we come to Polidori’s
novel which will be considered later, nowhere, so far as I am
aware, do we meet with the Vampire in the realm of Gothic
fancy. So vast, however, is this fascinating library and so
difficult to procure are these novels of a century and a quarter
ago that I hesitate sweepingly to assert that this theme was
entirely unexploited. There may be some romance which
I have not had the good fortune to find where a hideous
vampire swoops down upon his victims, but if such be the
case I am at least prepared to say that the Vampire was
not generally known to Gothic lore, and had his presence made
itself felt in the sombre chapters of one votary of this school
I think he would have re-appeared on many occasions, for
the writers were as accustomed to convey from one another
with an easy assurance, as they were wont deftly to plunder
the foreign mines. Inevitably one of the band, T. J. Horseley
Curties, Francis Lathom, William Herbert, Edward Montague,
Mrs. Roche, Eliza Parsons, Miss M. Hamilton, Mrs. Helme,
Mrs. Meeke, Isabella Kelley, and many another beside
insatiably agog for horrid phantasmagoria would have
utilized the Vampire in some funereal episode.

One might even have supposed that the notes to Southey’s
Thalaba the Destroyer, must have put them on the track,
and surely stanzas eight, nine and ten in Book VIII could
not have passed unnoticed :


A night of darkness and of storms !
Into the Chamber of the Tomb
Thalaba led the Old Man,
To roof him from the rain.
A night of storms! the wind
Swept through the moonless sky,
And moan’d among the pillar’d sepulchres ;


m Pee SN ee ee eee a0, Cee ian” ee ee


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE = 279


And in the pauses if its sweep
They heard the heavy rainy
Beat on the monument above.
In silence on Oneiza’s grave
Her father and her husband sate.
The Cryer from the Minaret
Proclaim’d the midnight hour.
“Now, now!” cried Thalaba ;
And o’er the chamber of the tomb
There spread a lurid gleam,
Like the reflection of a sulphur fire ;
And in that hideous light
Oneiza stood before them. It was She . . .
Her very lineaments. . . . andsuch as death
Had changed them, livid cheeks and lips of blue ;
But in her eye there dwelt
Brightness more terrible
Than all the loathsomeness of death.
“ Still art thou living, wretch ? ”
Tn hollow tones she cried to Thalaba ;
* And must I nightly leave my grave
To tell thee, still in vain,
God hath abandoned thee?”


“ This is not she ! ” the Old Man exclaim’d ;
“A Fiend; a manifest Fiend !”
And to the youth he held his lance ;
“ Strike and deliver thyself!”
“ Strike HER!” cried Thalaba,
And palsied of all power,
Gazed fixedly upon the dreadful form.
“ Yea, strike her!” cried a voice, whose tones
Flow’d with such a sudden healing through his soul,
As when the desert shower
From death deliver’d him ;
But obedient to that well-known voice,
His eye was seeking it,
When Moath, firm of heart,
Perform ’d the bidding : through the vampire corpse
He thrust his lance ; it fell,
And howling with the wound,
Its fiendish tenant fled.
A sapphire light fell on them,
And garmented with glory, in their sight
Oneiza’s spirit stood.


It is important to remark that in his notes” upon this


passage Southey cites at considerable length various cases of
vampirism, particularly from the Lettres Jwives, the Vampires


280 THE VAMPIRE


of Gradisch, also the history of Arnold Paul, and the very
ample account given by Tournefort. He further says: ‘The
Turks have an opinion that men that are buried have a sort
of life in their graves. If any man makes affidavit before a
judge, that he heard a noise in a man’s grave, he [i.e., the
body] is, by order, dug up and chopped all to pieces. The
merchants (at Constantinople) once airing on horseback, had,
as usual, for protection, a Janisary with them. Passing by
the burying place of the Jews, it happened that an old Jew
sat by a sepulchre. The Janisary rode up to him, and rated
him for stinking the world a second time, and commanded him
to get into his grave again —Roger North’s Life of Sir Dudley
North,”*°

It might perhaps not unfairly be argued that the two notor-
ious romances of the Marquis de Sade Justine, on les Malheurs
de la Vertu and Juliette depict scenes of vampirism, and if we
are to take the word in any extended sense this is certainly
the case. In the first place it must be remembered that as it
passed through various editions—it was first issued in 1791,
2 vols., 8vo,—until it appeared in its final and complete
form in 1797 as La Nouvelle Justine, on les Malheurs de la
Vertu, suivie de l Histoire de Juliette, sa soeur, 10 vols., 18mo
(of which Justine occupies four and Juliette six) Justine
was added to and augmented until the last version is practic-
ally double the length of the first, and the book has been
entirely re-written. In Justine we have the episodes in the
house of Monsieur Rodin, and more particularly the orgies
of the Comte de Gernade who takes a lustful pleasure in
watching the blood flow from the veins of his victims, as also
the cruelties of the monster Roland all of which may well be
esteemed vampirism. Many similar scenes are described
with great prolixity in Juliette, and this romance is distinguished
by such horrible figures as the Muscovite giant Minski, whose
favourite meat is human flesh, and in whose castle the table
and chairs are made of bleaching bones, and Cordelli, the
necrophilist of Ancona.

In The New Monthly Magazine, 1 April, 1819, was pub-
lished The Vampyre: a Tale by Lord Byron, which although
it may seem to us—steeped in Le Fanu and M. R. James—
a little old-fashioned, at the time created an immense sensa-
tion and had the most extraordinary influence, being even


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 281


more admired and imitated on the Continent than in England.
It was almost immediately known that actually the story
did not come from the pen of Lord Byron, but had been
written by Dr. John William Polidori, physician-companion
to the poet. Byron had, as a matter of fact, been writing a
work of the same title in imitation of Mrs. Shelley’s Franken-
stein, but he denied the authorship of this piece in the famous
letter facsimilied in Galignani’s edition of his works. A
first printed, The Vampyre forms a part of extracts from
“A letter from Geneva, with Anecdotes of Lord Byron.”
Here is to be read that “‘ among other things which the lady,
from whom I procured these anecdotes, related to me, she
mentioned the outline of a ghost story by Lord Byron. It
appears that one evening Lord Byron, Mr. P. B. Shelley, the
two ladies and the gentleman (the daughters of Godwin
and Dr. Polidori) before alluded to after having perused a
German work, which was entitled Phantasmagoriana® began
relating ghost stories; when his lordship having recited the
beginning of Christabel, then unpublished, the whole took
so strong a hold of Mr. Shelley’s mind, that he suddenly started
up and ran out of the room. The physician and Lord Byron
followed, and discovered him leaning against a mantlepiece
with cold drops of perspiration trickling down his face. After
having given him something to refresh him, upon enquiring
into the cause of his alarm, they found that his wild imagina-
tion having pictured to him the bosom of one of the ladies with
eyes (which was reported of a lady in the neighbourhood
where he lived) he was obliged to leave the room in order to
destroy the impression. It was afterwards proposed in the
course of conversation, that each of the company present
should write a tale depending upon some supernatural agency,
which was undertaken by Lord Byron, the physician, and
Miss M. Godwin. My friend, the lady above referred to,
had in her possession the outline of each of these stories,
I obtained them as a great favour, and herewith forward them
to you, as I was assured you would feel as much curiosity as
myself, to peruse the ébauches of so great a genius, and those
immediately under his influence.” Upon this the Editor
has the following note: ““We have in our possession the
Tale of Dr. as well as the outline of that of Miss
Godwin. The latter has already appeared under the title of


282 THE VAMPIRE


‘Frankenstein, or the modern Prometheus’; the former,
however, upon consulting this author, we may, probably,
hereafter give to our readers.”

The Vampyre is introduced by several paragraphs which
deal with the tradition. This preamble commences: ‘The
superstition upon which this tale is founded is very general
in the East. Among the Arabians it appears to be common ;
it did not, however, extend itself to the Greeks until after
the establishment of Christianity ; and it has only assumed
its present form since the division of the Latin and Greek
churches ; at which time, the idea becoming prevalent, that a
Latin body could not corrupt if buried in their territory, it
gradually increased, and formed the subject of many wonderful
stories, still extant, of the dead rising from their graves, and
feeding upon the blood of the young and beautiful. In the
West it spread, with some slight variation, all over Hungary,
Poland, Austria, and Lorraine, where the belief existed, that
vampyres nightly imbibed a certain portion of the blood of
their victims, who became emaciated, lost their strength, and
speedily died of consumptions; whilst these human blood-
suckers fattened—and their veins became distended to such
a state of repletion as to cause the blood to flow from all the
passages of their bodies, and even from the very pores of their
skins.”

The Editor then recounts the famous instance of Arnold
Paul, and continues: ‘“‘We have related this monstrous
rodomontade, because it seems better adapted to illustrate
the subject of the present observations than any other instance
we could adduce. In many parts of Greece it is considered as
a sort of punishment after death, for some heinous crime
committed whilst in existence, that the deceased is doomed
to vampyrise, but be compelled to confine his visitations
solely to those beings he loved most while on earth—those to
whom he was bound by ties of kindred and affection. This
supposition is, we imagine, alluded to in the following fear-
fully sublime and prophetic curse from the ‘ Giaour.’**


But first on earth, as Vampyre sent,
Thy corse shall from its tomb be rent ;
Then ghastly haunt thy native place,
And suck the blood of all thy race ;
There from thy daughter, sister, wife,


a ena ee ee ee eS ee ee ee ene ae ee


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE — 288


At midnight drain the stream of life ;
Yet loathe the banquet, which perforce
Must feed thy livid living corse,

Thy victims, ere they yet expire,

Shall know the demon for their sire ;

As cursing thee, thou cursing them,
Thy flowers are withered on the stem.
But one that for thy crime must fall,

The youngest, best beloved of all,

Shall bless thee with a father’s name—
That word shall wrap thy heart in flame !
Yet thou must end thy task and mark
Her cheek’s last tinge—her eye’s last spark,
And the last glassy glance must view
Which freezes o’er its lifeless blue ;

Then with unhallowed hand shall tear
The tresses of her yellow hair,

Of which, in life a lock when shorn
Affection’s fondest pledge was worn—
But now is borne away by thee
Memorial o thine agony !

Yet with thine own best blood shall drip
Thy gnashing tooth, and haggard lip ;
Then stalking to thy sullen grave
Go—and with Ghouls and Afrits rave,
Till these in horror shrink away

From spectre more accursed than they.”


After an allusion to Southey’s Thalaba, Tournefort’s Travels,
-and Dom Calmet’s classical work, the editor concludes:
“We could add many curious and interesting notices on this
singularly horrible superstition, and we may, perhaps, resume
our observations upon it at some future opportunity ; for the
present, we feel that we have very far exceeded the limits of
a note, necessarily devoted to the explanation of the strange
production to which we now invite the attention of our
readers; and we shall therefore conclude by merely remark-
ing, that though the term Vampyre is the one in most general
acceptation, there are several other synonimous with it, which
are made use of in various parts of the world, namely,
Vroucolocha, Vardoulacha, Goul, Broucoloka, &c.”

The story tells how at the height of a London season
“there appeared at the various parties of the leaders of the
ton a nobleman, more remarkable for his singularities, than his
rank. He gazed upon the mirth around him, as if he could not
participate therein. Apparently, the light laughter of the


284 THE VAMPIRE


fair only attracted his attention that he might by a look
quell it, and throw fear into those breasts where thoughtless-
ness reigned. Those who felt this sensation of awe, could
not explain whence it arose; some attributed it to the dead
grey eye, which fixing upon the object’s face, did not seem
to penetrate, and at one glance to pierce through to the inward
working of the heart ; but fell upon the cheek with a leaden
ray that weighed upon the skin it could not pass.” This
original is invited to every house, and in the course of the
winter he meets ‘‘ a young gentleman of the name of Aubrey ”
he was an orphan left with an only sister in the possession of
great wealth, by parents who died while he was yet in child-
hood.” Aubrey is greatly fascinated by Lord Ruthven, for
this is the name of the mysterious nobleman, and intending
to travel upon the Continent he mentions this intention to my
Lord, and is “surprised to receive from him a proposal to
join him. Flattered by such a mark of esteem from him who,
apparently, had nothing in common with other men, he gladly
accepted it, and in a few days they had passed the circling
waters.”

As they travelled from town to town, Aubrey notices the
peculiar conduct of his companion who bestows largess upon
the most worthless characters, broken gamblers and the like,
but refuses a doit to the deserving and virtuous poor. However
the recipients of this charity ‘‘inevitably found that there
was a curse upon it, for they all were either led to the scaffold
or sunk to the lowest and the most abject misery.” Eventu-
ally the travellers arrive at Rome, and here Aubrey receives
letters from his guardians who require him immediately
to leave his companion as since their departure from London
the most terrible scandals, adulteries and seductions, have
come to light. At Rome Aubrey is able to foil Lord Ruthven’s
plans, frustrating an intrigue designed to ruin a heedless young
girl, and then he “ directed his steps towards Greece, and,
crossing the Peninsula, soon found himself at Athens.”
Here he lodges in the house of a Greek, whose daughter Ianthe
is a paragon of the most exquisite beauty. As he sketches the
ruins of the city she is wont to entertain him with Greek legend
and tradition, and “often, as she told him the tale of the
living vampyre, who had passed years amidst his friends, and
dearest ties, forced every year, by feeding upon the life of a


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 285


lovely female to prolong his existence for the ensuing months,
his blood would run cold, whilst he attempted to laugh her
out of such idle and horrible fantasies ; but Ianthe cited to
him the names of old men, who had at last detected one
living among themselves, after several of their relatives and
children had been found marked with the stamp of the fiend’s
appetite ; and when she found him so incredulous, she begged
of him to believe her, for it had been remarked, that those
who had dared to question their existence, always had some
proof given, which obliged them, with grief and heart-breaking
to confess it was true. She detailed to him the traditional
appearance of these monsters, and his horror was increased,
by hearing a pretty accurate description of Lord Ruthven ;
he, however, still persisted in persuading her, that there could
be no truth in her fears, though at the same time he wondered
at the many coincidences which had all tended to excite a
belief in the supernatural power of Lord Ruthven.”

Before long it becomes evident that Aubrey is in love with
Ianthe, “‘and while he ridicules the idea of a young man of
English habits, marrying an uneducated Greek girl, still he
found himself more and more attached to the almost fairy
form before him.” He endeavours to occupy his time with
antiquarian excursions which lead him farther and farther
afield, and at length he determines to proceed to a point beyond
any he has as yet visited. When Ianthe’s parents hear the
name of the place he proposes to visit they most earnestly
implore him on no account to return when once dusk has
fallen, “as he must necessarily pass through a wood, where
no Greek would ever remain after the day had closed, upon any
consideration. They described it as the resort of the vampyres
in their nocturnal orgies, and denounced the most heavy evils
as impending upon him who dared to crosstheir path. Aubrey
made light of their representations, and tried to laugh them out
of the idea ; but when he saw them shudder at his daring thus
to mock a superior, the very name of which apparently made
their blood freeze, he was silent.”

Having given his promise to Ianthe that he will be back
well before evening he sets out very early. The exploration,
however, takes longer than he has supposed, and when he
turns his horse homeward the darkness is already hurrying on
urged by a terrific storm. The steed, alarmed at the battle


286 THE VAMPIRE


of the elements dashes off at breakneck pace and only halts
trembling and tired before a distant hovel in the heart of a
solitary wood. ‘“ As he approached, the thunder, for a moment
silent, allowed him to hear the dreadful shrieks of a woman
mingling with the stiffled exultant mockery of a laugh,
continued in one almost unbroken sound.” With a terrific
effort Aubrey burst open the door and rushing into the dark-
ness “found himself in contact with someone, whom he
immediately seized, when a voice cried “‘ again baffled,” to
which a loud laugh succeeded, and he felt himself grappled by
one whose strength seemed superhuman: determined to sell
his life as dearly as he could, he struggled ; but it was in vain ;
he was lifted from his feet and hurled with enormous force
against the ground ; his enemy threw himself upon him, and
kneeling upon his breast, had placed his hand upon his throat,
when the glare of many torches penetrating through the hole
that gave light in the day, disturbed him—he instantly rose
and, leaving his prey, rushed through the door, and in a
moment the crashing of the branches, as he broke through the
wood was not longer heard.” Several peasants now hastened
into the hut bearing flambeaus which illuminate the scene,
and to the horror of all there is discovered hard by, the lifeless
body of Ianthe. A curious dagger lies near, but her death
was not the result of a blow from this weapon. ‘“‘ There was
no colour upon her cheek, not even upon her lip; yet there
was a stillness about her face that seemed almost as attaching as
the life that once dwelt there : —upon her neck and breast
was blood, and upon her throat were the marks of teeth having
opened the vein :—to this the men pointed, crying, simultane-
ously struck with horror, ‘a Vampyre, a Vampyre!’” It
appears that Ianthe had followed the traveller to watch
over his safety. Aubrey is carried back to the city in a raging
fever, and the parents of the unfortunate girl die broken-
hearted owing to so terrible a loss.

Whilst Aubrey lies ill Lord Ruthven arrives in Athens and
establishing himself in the same house nurses the invalid
with such care that past differences are forgotten, since Aubrey
not only becomes reconciled to his presence but even seeks his
company. Together they travel into the wildest interior
of Greece, and here in some mountain pass they are attacked
by brigands, from whose guns Lord Ruthven receives a shot


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE ~ 287


in the shoulder. His strength strangely decreasing, a couple
of days later it is plain to all that he is at the point of death.
He now exacts a terrific oath that his companion shall conceal
all that is known of him and that the news of his death shall not
be allowed to reach England. “Swear!” cried the dying
man, “Swear by all your soul reveres, by all your nature
fears, swear that for a year and a day you will not impart your
knowledge of my crimes or death to any living being in any
way, whatever may happen, or whatever you may see.”
Aubrey binds himself most solemnly by the prescribed oath,
and in a paroxysm of hideous laughter Ruthven expires.

According to a promise which has been obtained from the
robbers by a heavy bribe the body was conveyed to the
pinnacle of a neighbouring mount, that it should be exposed
to the first cold ray of the moon which rose after his death.
Aubrey insists that it shall be interred in the ordinary way,
but when he is conducted to the place it is found that the body
has disappeared, and in spite of the protestations of the band
he is convinced that they have buried the corpse ‘for the sake
of the clothes. One circumstance, however, gives Aubrey
much food for thought. Among the effects of the deceased
he discovered a sheath of most curious pattern and make
which exactly fits the dagger that had been found in the
deserted hut upon the occasion of Ianthe’s death.

Returning to England, as he retraces his journey through
Rome to his horror Aubrey discovers that in spite of the
precautions he had so carefully taken, Lord Ruthven succeeded
only too well in his bad designs and now there is bitter sorrow
and distress where once reigned peace and happiness. The lady
had not been heard of since the departure of his lordship,
and Aubrey instinctively divines that she has “fallen a victim
to the destroyer of Ianthe.”

Upon his arrival in London the traveller is greeted by his
sister, whose presentation into society had been delayed
until her brother’s return from the Continent, when he might
be her protector. “It was now, therefore, resolved that the
next drawing room, which was fast approaching, should be
the epoch of her entry into the busy scene.” Upon this
gay occasion the crowd was excessive, and as Aubrey heedless
and distracted is watching the gay throng a voice which he
recognizes only too well, whispers in this ear: “ Remember


288 THE VAMPIRE


your oath.” Turning he sees Lord Ruthven standing near
him. A few nights later at the assembly of a near relation
among the crowd of admirers by whom his sister is surrounded
—the most prominent of the throng—he again perceives
the mysterious and horrible figure. Hurrying forward he
seizes his sister’s arm and requests her immediately to accom-
pany him home. However, before they have had time to
retire again does the voice whisper close to him : “‘ Remember
your oath!”

Aubrey now becomes almost distracted. He sees no
remedy against a monster who has already once mocked at
death. Even if he were to declare all that he knew it is pro-
bable that he would hardly be believed. Whenever he attends
a social gathering his looks as he scans the company become
so suspicious and strange that he soon acquires a reputation for
great eccentricity. As the months go on his loathing and
his fears drive him well-nigh to madness, so that eventually
a physician is engaged to reside in the house and take charge
of him. He is a little consoled by the thought that when the
year and the day have passed he will at least be able to un-
burden his mind and be at any rate freed from his terrible
oath. It so happens that he overhears a conversation
between the doctor and one of his guardians who enlarges
upon the melancholy circumstance of her brother being in
so critical a state when Miss Aubrey is to be married on the
following day. He instantly demands the name of the bride-
groom and is told the Earl of Marsden. He requests to see
his sister and in an hour or two she visits him. As they are
conversing she opens a locket and shows him a miniature of
the man who has won her affections. To his horror he per-
ceives that it is a portrait of Lord Ruthven and falling into
convulsions of rage he tramples it under foot. In twenty-four
hours the period of his oath will have expired, and he implores
them to delay the wedding at least for that time. Since
there seems no good reason for doing this the request is dis-
regarded, upon which Aubrey falls into so sad a state of utter
depression succeeded by an outburst of fury that the physician
concludes him to be not far removed from lunacy and doubles
the restraint. During the night the busy preparations for
the nuptial are ceaselessly continued. It appears that upon
the pretext of being her brother’s dearest friend and travelling


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 289


companion Lord Ruthven had visited the house to inquire
after Aubrey during his supposed derangement, and from
the character of a visitor gradually insinuated himself
into that of an accepted suitor. When the bridal party has
assembled Aubrey, neglected by the servants, contrives to
make his way into the public apartments which are decorated
for the nuptials. Ere he can utter a cry, he is, however,
at once perceived by Lord Ruthven who with more than
human strength thrusts him, speechless with rage, from the
room, at the same time whispering in his ear: “‘ Remember
your oath, and know, if not my bride to-day, your sister is
dishonoured. Women are frail!’ The attendants at once
secure the unhappy man, but he can no longer support his
distress. In his agonies a blood vessel breaks and he is
incontinently conveyed to bed. This sad accident is kept
from his sister; the marriage was solemnized, and the bride
and bridegroom left London.

“ Aubrey’s weakness increased; the effusion of blood
produced symptoms of the near approach of death. He
desired his sister’s guardians might be called, and when the
midnight hour had struck, he related composedly what the
reader has perused—he died immediately after.

“The guardians hastened to protect Miss Aubrey; but
when they arrived it was too late. Lord Ruthven had
disappeared, and Aubrey’s sister had glutted the thirst of a
Vampyre!”

It were not easy to overestimate the astounding sensation
which was caused by this story, and the narrative is certainly
not without considerable merit, for in places the eerie atmos-
phere is well conveyed, Nor is it difficult to understand the
extraordinary influence of the tale, since it introduced a
tradition which had been long forgotten and which promised
infinite possibilities in the way of that sensation and melo-
dramatic calentures which the period craved. The first
separate edition of The Vampyre appeared in 1819, and was
published by Sherwood. The first issue of this, which is now
very rare, contains a certain amount of preliminary matter
concerning the Shelleys, Byron and Godwin. This was
omitted in later issues, and accordingly one often finds that
copies of The Vampyre are described as First Edition, which
is strictly quite correct, although they are the Second Issue,


19


290 THE VAMPIRE


and naturally of far less value in a bibliographer’s eyes. A
large number of reprints increased with amazing rapidity
and in the same year the novel was translated into French
by Henri Faber, Le Vampire, nouvelle traduite de Vanglais de
Lord Byron, Paris, 1819. In February, 1820, there followed
under the aegis of Charles Nodier a very obvious imitation,
or rather continuation by Cyprien Bérard, Lord Ruthwen
ou les Vampires. “Roman de C. B. Publié par l’auteur de
Jean Sbogar et de Thérése Aubert.** Paris, 1820.” In 1825,
a new translation of Polidori’s story was given by Eusébe de
Salles. Nor was Germany behind hand, for Zhe Vampyre
was first translated in 1819: Der Vampyr. Hine Erzahlung
aus dem Englischen des Lord Byron. Nebst einer Schilderung
seines Aufenthaltes in Mytilene. Leipzig, 1819. In the
following year there appeared at Frankfort a version by J.V.
Adrian of Byron’s poems and prose, wherein was included
Der Blutsuger. In a collection of Byron’s work the first
volume of which was published at Zwickau in 1821, The
Vampyre again found a place in volume V (1821), translated
by Christian Karl Meifsner as DerVampyr. The tale has also
been included in various other continental collections and
translations of Byron’s work even until a recent date.

Yet it was well-known all the while that Polidori was the
author of the story, but as Byron’s was by far the greater
name, so this sensational novella must be attributed to the
cavaliero whose romantic adventures and the scandal of whose
amours were thrilling the whole of Europe. Writing in
the same year as the great poet’s death Amédée Pichot of the
University of Marseilles in his Hssai sur le génie et le caractére
de Lord Byron*®* declared that this spurious issue “a autant
contribué & faire connaitre le nom de lord Byron en France,
que ses poémes les plus estimés.” Publishers insisted upon
Le Vampire, “nouvelle,” being included among Byron’s
works, and it is said that Ladvocat was furious when it was
represented to him that since it was openly acknowledged
that Polidori had written The Vampire, the translation should
properly be no longer given among the poet’s work nor put
forth under his name.

As might have been expected it was not long before the
Vampire appeared upon the stage, and the first play of this
kind would seem to be the famous melodrama by Charles


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 291


Nodier (with Achille Jouffroy and Carmouche) which with
music by Alexandre Piccini and scenery by Ciceri, was pro-
duced in Paris on 13th June, 1820, at the Théatre de la Porte-
Saint-Martin, whose directors were the popular M. M.
Croznier and Merle. The réle of Lord Rutwen was taken by
M. Philippe ; the celebrated Madame Dorval was Malvina ;*
and the new play had an extraordinary success.

It was immediately published as Le Vampire, mélodrame
en trois actes avec un prologue, Par MM. . . .; Musique de
M. Alexandre Piccini ; Décors de M. Ciceri. This might be
purchased at 1 fr. 25cs. ‘‘au magasin général de piéces de
Théitre, Chez J.-N. Barba, Libraire, Palais Royal, derriére
le Théatre Frangais, No. 51.’ The characters in the Prologue
are Ituriel, ange de la Lune, Mlle. Descotte ; Oscar, génie des
Mariages, M. Moéssard; and Un Vampire, M. Philippe.
The scene opens in “une grotte basaltique,” the Caledonian
caves of Staffa. Oscar and Ituriel discourse of Vampires, and
the latter asks: ‘‘ Serait-il vrai que d’horribles fantémes
viennent quelquefois, sous l’apparence des droits de Vhymen,
égorger une vierge timide, et s’abreuver de son sang ?”’
This is indeed the case, and it is significant that on the
morrow Malvina (Miss Aubray) is to wed “le comte de
Marsden.” A vision of the sleeping Malvina appears when
“Un spectre vétu d’un linceuil s’échappe de la plus apparente
de ces tombes”’ and rushes upon her. He is swiftly repulsed by
Oscar, the good genius and the curtain falls. The characters
in the play are: Lord Rutwen, M. Philippe; Sir Aubray,
M. Perrin ow Théringy; Malvina, Mad. Dorval ; Brigitte,
Mad. St. Amand; Edgar, M. Edmon; Scop, M. Pierson ;
Petterson, M. Dugy; Lovette, Mlle. J. Vertpré; Oscar, M.
Moéssard ; with attendances of Domestiques and Villageois.
The drama to a certain extent adroitly follows the lines of
the Polidori novel, but with notable changes, which are well
contrived and introduced. Lord Rutwen and Aubray have
been fellow travellers, but the latter has no suspicion of
Rutwen’s real nature. In fact he holds him in the dearest
affection since once he was saved from death by his friend who,
whilst shielding him from a brigand’s attack, fell by a chance
shot. When Lord Rutwen arrives to claim Malvina’s hand
it is with delight Aubray hails his preserver on whom he sup-
posed killed by the bandit’s gun. It is cleverly explained how


292 THE VAMPIRE


the wound did not after all prove fatal, whereupon “Rutwen,
mes desirs sont remplis” cries Aubray, “nous allons étre
fréres’”’ (Ils s’embrassent). Lovette a farmer’s daughter of
the Marsden estate is to wed Edgar, and Rutwen graciously
presents himself at the marriage feast. As Lord of the Manor
he is received with every respect and homage, but he immedi-
ately proceeds to attempt Lovette’s virtue. Oscar “un
viellard dont la téte vénérable inspire le respect. Sa démarche
a quelque chose d’imposant et de mystérieux,” has already
warned the maiden, and she coldly avoids such ardent import-
tunities. Whilst Rutwen is actually pursuing the coy lass
who shuns his embrace, Edgar in a fury fires a pistol at the
seducer and he falls crying, “Je meurs.” Aubray hastening
to the spot is barely in time to receive him in his arms, and
with dying lips Rutwen adjures him to swear the following
oath. ‘“‘Promets-moi que Malvina ne saura point ce qui
m’est arrivé ; que tu ne feras rien pour venger ma mort avant
que la premiére heure de la nuit n’ait sonné. Jure-moi le
secret sur ce coeur expirant.’”’ Aubray much moved cries,
“Je te le jure,” and as Rutwen expires they lay the body
gently on the ground. ‘‘ A‘ce moment on voit la lune planer
entiérement sur le corps de Rutwen, et éclairer les glagons
de la montagne. La toile tombe.”

Act III. “ représente un grand vestibule gothique, la porte
de la chapelle se voit au fond.” Oscar solemnly utters words
of warning to Brigitte, who is already full of fears which are
not unnoticed by Malvina. When Aubray meets his sister
she speaks joyfully of her marriage but as he is about to tell
her of the fatal happening suddenly Rutwen appears and
seizing his arm “lui dit d’une voix sombre: ‘Songe 4 ton
serment’!” Aubray now realizes that there is some horrid
secret and displays violent emotion crying out in broken tones :
“‘’Floigne-toi fantome! . . ma soeur . . . dérobe-
toi, aux poursuites de ce monstre . . . il te dira qu’il est
ton époux . . . refuse ton serment . . . cet hymen
est un crime!” At length he is carried off by the servants
who fear that he has lost his senses, an idea Rutwen encourages.
In spite of this disorder the bridegroom now hotly presses on
the nuptials; the great doors are opened “et laisse voir la
chapelle éclairée,” Rutwen and Malvina approach the altar.
With a wild cry Aubray rushes in to intercept the ceremony,


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE — 298


upon which the monster drawing his dagger is about to
plunge it deep into Malvina’s heart when one o’clock strikes,—
his power is gone.” II laisse tomber son poignard et cherche
& s’enfuir, des ombres sortent de la terre et l’entrainent avec
elles ; ’Ange exterminateur parait dans un nuage, la foudre
éclate et les Ombres s’engloutissent avec Rutwen. Pluie
de feu. TABLEAU GENERAL.”

The dialogue of this melodrama is spirited, the situations
striking and well managed, and even in reading the play,
one can clearly visualize that upon the stage it must have been
extraordinarily effective, especially when set off with all the
attractions of the scene painter’s glowing perspectives, the
magic craft of the subtle machinist, and the richest adornment
of romantic costume.*’ Even before he had introduced the
Vampire on to the boards Nodier had prophesied that this
macabre monster would win a veritable triumph, and his
prediction was amply fulfilled. “Le Vampire épouvantera,
de son horrible amour, les songes de toutes les femmes, et
bientdt sans doute, ce monstre encore exhumé prétera son
masque immobile, sa voix sépulcrale, son oeil d’un gris mort,

tout cet attirail de mélodrame 4 la Melpoméne des
boulevards ; et quel succés alors ne lui est pas réservé ! a
On Ist July, 1819, writing in the Drapeau Blanc he was far more


serious and far more emphatic: ‘‘ La fable du vampire est
peut-étre la plus universelle de nos superstitions. . . Elle


a partout l’autorité de la tradition: elle ne manque ni de celle
de la théologie ni de celle de la médicine. La philosophie
méme en a parlé.”

All Paris flocked to see Le Vampire, and nightly the Porte-
Saint-Martin was packed to the doors. Philippe and Madame
Dorval were applauded to the echo by enthusiastic audiences
who recalled them again and again after the final tableau.
Even the book of the play had an immense circulation and
every morning Barba’s counter was freshly stocked with huge
piles of the duodecimo, which rapidly diminished during the
day.

Not a few critics, however, adopted a very uncompromising
attitude, and were unsparing in their condemnation of so
popular a melodrama. In Les Lettres Normandes, 1820,
(tome XI, p. 93) Le Vampire was thus noticed : ‘‘ Le mélo-
drame du Vampire dans lequel on voit paraitre un monstre


294 THE VAMPIRE


qui suce le sang des petites filles et qui offre des Tableaux
qu’une honnéte femme ne peut voir sans rougir, est l’ouvrage
de MM. Ch. Nodier, rédacteur du Drapeau Blane; Achille
Jouffroy, rédacteur de La Gazette et auteur des Festes de
Vanarchie ; et Carmouche autre rédacteur du Drapeau Blane.”
This censure is, however, wholly inspired by political feeling
which thus inveighed against the royalist Nodier, and which
not unmingled with green jealousy we also find prominent
in the Conservateur littéraire of April, 1820 (Tome II, p. 245)
where we had : “ Pour balancer le succés du Vampire mélo-
drame dégotitant et si monstreux que les auteurs MM. Ch.
Nodier et Carmouche m’ont pas osé se faire connaitre, le
théatre de la Porte-Saint-Martin se prépare a représenter la
traduction littérale, en prose, de la Marie Stuart de Schiller.”

Yet another critic is even more trenchant and severe :“ Le
Vampire Ruthwen veut violer ou sucer dans les coulisses une
jeune fiancée qui fuit devant lui sur le théatre : cette situation
est-elle morale? . . . Toute la piéce représente indirecte-
ment Dieu comme un étre faible ou odieux qui abandonne le
monde aux génies de I’enfer.’’®®

Yet all these attacks served but to enhance the attraction,
and it is remarkable for how many years this continued un-
diminished. In 1823 a revival of Le Vampire with Philippe
and Madame Dorval again thronged the Porte-Saint-Martin
to excess. Alexandre Dumas, who was present at this
production has recorded how vast was his delight, how ineffable
his thrills during the sombre scenes of this sepulchral melo-
drame. How the theatre applauded the lean livid mask of
the Vampire, how it shuddered at his stealthy steps! There
are, perhaps, to be found throughout the whole of the many
works of Alexandre Dumas few pages more entertaining than
those chapters in his Memoires which relate with rarest humour
and not a few flashes of brilliant wit his adventures at a per-
formance of Le Vampire at the Porte-Saint-Martin in 1823. It
would be difficult to find a livelier, and yet at the same time
entirely serious and even critical, account of a theatrical
performance. Unfortunately it is too long to give in full.
In the edition of Mes Mémoires, Troisiéme Série, Michel Lévy,
Paris, 1863, it occupies no less than five chapters, LX XIII-
LXXVII, and these are none of the shortest, (pp. 136-193).
One is tempted to quote some delicious passages, but the


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE = 295


account might lose thereby ; it must be read as a delightful
whole. Yet there is one extract which may certainly be
‘made without impertinence, the story of the Vampire which
was related to Dumas by his neighbour “le monsieur poli qui
lisait un Elzévir.” They have discussed the tradition at
some length, and incidentally the good bibliophile refers his
young acquaintance to the work of Dom Calmet, from whom
he gives ample citations. He further remarks that he has
resided in Illyria for three years, and he very sharply anim-
adverts upon certain details on Nodier’s melodrama which
are foreign to the vampire tradition. ‘“‘ You speak of
vampires as though they really existed,” remarks Dumas.
“ Of course they exist,” said his neighbour dryly. “ Have you
ever seen one then?” “ Most certainly I have.” ‘‘ That was
whilst you were in Illyria?” “ Yes.”

“Et vous y avez vu des vampires ?”

“Vous savez que c’est la terre classique des vampires,
Vlllyrie, comme la Hongrie, la Servie, la Pologne.

“Non, je ne sais pas . . . jenesaisrien. Ou étaient
ces vampires que vous avez vus ?

“A Spalatro. Je logeais chez un bonhomme de soixante-
deux ans. Il mourut. Trois jours aprés avoir été enterré, il
apparut la nuit & son fils et lui demanda & manger ; son fils
le servit selon des desirs; il mangea et disparut. Le lende-
main, le fils me raconta ce qui lui était arrivé, me disant que
bien certainement son pére ne reviendrait pas pour une fois,
et m’invitant a me mettre, la nuit suivante, & une fenétre pour
le voir entrer et sortir. J’étais curieux de voir un vampire.
Je me mis & la fenétre; mais, cette nuit-la, il ne vint pas.
Le fils me dit, alors, de ne pas me décourager, qu’il viendrait
probablement la nuit suivante—La nuit suivante, je me
remis donc a ma fenétre, et, en effet, vers minuit, je reconnus
parfaitement le vieillard. I venait du cdté de cimetiére ;
il marchait d’un bon pas ; mais son pas ne faisait aucun bruit.
Arrivé a la porte, il frappa ; je comptai trois coups ; les coups
résonnérent secs sur le chéne, comme si ]’on eut frappé avec
un os, et non avec un doigt. Le fils vint ouvrir la porte, et
le vieillard entra. . . .

“ Jécoutais ce récit avec la plus grande attention, et je
commengais 4 preférer les entr’actes au mélodrame.

“ Ma curiosité était trop vivement excitée, reprit mon voisin,


296 THE VAMPIRE


pour que je quittasse ma fenétre; j’y demeurai donc. Une
demi-heure aprés, le vieillard sortit; il retournait d’ov il
était venu, c’est-a-dire du cété du cimetiere. A langle d’une
muraille, il disparut. Presque au méme instant, ma porte
souvrit. Je me retournai vivement, c’était son fils. TI]
était fort pale. ‘ Et bien, lui dis-je, votre pére est venu ?—Oui
é L’avez-vous vu entrer? Entrer et sortir.
Qu’a-t-il fait aujourd’hui? Il m’a demandé a& boire et a
manger, comme |’autre jour. Et il a bu et mangé ? Ila bu et
mangé . . . Mais ce n’est pas le tout. . . voici ce
qui, m‘inquiéte. . . Il.m’a dit... «4: Ah ib -vousea
parlé pour autre chose que pour vous demander a boire et a
manger? . . . Qui, il m’a dit: ‘Voici deux fois que je
viens manger chez toi. C’est & ton tour maintenant de venir
manger chez moi.’ Diable! . . . Je attends aprés
demain a4 la méme heure. Diable! Diable! Eh! oui,
justement, voila ce qui me tracasse.’ Le surlendemain, on le
trouva mort dans son lit! Ce méme jour, deux ou trois autres,
personnes du méme village qui avaient vu aussi le vieillard,
et qui lui avaient parlé, tombérent malades et moururent A
leur tour. II fut done reconnu que le vieillard était vampire.
On s’informa auprés de moi; je racontai ce que j’avais vu et
entendu. La justice se transporta au cimetiére. On ouvrit
les tombeaux de tous ceux qui étaient morts depuis six
semaines; tous ces, cadavres étaient en décomposition.
Mais, quand on en vint au tombeau de Kisilova,—e’était le
nom du vieillard,—on le trouva les yeux ouverts, la bouche
vermeille, respirant 4 pleins poumons, et cependant immobile,
comme mort. On lui enfonga un pieu dans le coeur ; il jeta
un grand cri, et rendit le sang par le bouche ; puis on le mit
sur un bicher, on le réduisit en cendre, et l’on jeta la cendre
au vent. . . . Quelque temps aprés, je quittai le pays ;
de sorte que je ne pus savoir si son fils était devenu vampire
comme lui.

“ Pourquoi serait-il devenu vampire comme lui ?: demandai-
je.

“Ah! parce que c’est Vhabitude, que les personnes qui
meurent du vampirisme deviennent vampires.

“ En vérité, vous dites cela comme si c’était un fait avéré.

“ Mais c’est qu’aussi c’est un fait avéré, connu, enregistré |!”

It will readily be remembered that in Monte-Cristo when


\ THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE = 297


during the performance of Parisina at the Teatro Argentino,
Rome, the Count and Haidée enter their box, the Countess
G—— directing her opera-glass in that direction asks Franz
d’Epinay who they may be remarking that as for herself,
“ All I can say is that the gentleman whose history I am unable
to furnish seems to me as though he had just been dug up ;
he looks more like a corpse permitted by some friendly grave-
digger to quit his tomb for a while, and revisit this earth of
ours, than anything human. How ghastly pale he is! ”
“Oh, he is always as colourless as you now see him,” said
Franz. “Then you know him ?”’ almost screamed the coun-
tess. “Oh! pray do, for Heaven’s sake, tell us all about—
is he a vampire or a resuscitated corpse, or what?” A few
moments later when the lady has carefully studied the loge
of their mysterious vis-a-vis, Franz demands: ‘“ Well, what
do you think of our mysterious neighbour ? ” “ Why, that he is
no other than Lord Ruthven himself in a living frame,” was
the reply. This fresh allusion to Byron drew a smile to
Franz’s countenance ; although he could not but allow that
if anything was likely to induce belief in the existence of
vampires, it would be the presence of such a man as the
mysterious personage before him. . . . “Is it possible,”
whispered Franz, “that you entertain any fear?” “I'll tell
you,” answered the countess. ‘‘ Byron had the most perfect
belief in the existence of vampires, and even assured me he
had seen some. The description he gave me perfectly corres-
ponds with the features and character of the man before us.
Oh! it is the exact personification of what I have been led
to expect. The coal-black hair, large bright, glittering eyes,
in which a wild, unearthly fire seems burning,—the same
ghastly paleness ! ’’4°

Nearly thirty years after Dumas in collaboration with
Maquet utilized the theme of Le Vampire for his own drama
of the same name which was given at the Ambigu-Comique,
20th December, 1851, and which may conveniently be con-
sidered here.

Le Vampire is described as a “ Drame Fantastique en Cing
Actes, en Dix Tableaux ” and there are very many characters
in this remarkable play. The principal parts were taken as
follows: Lord Ruthwen, M. Arnault; Gilbert de Tiffauges,
M. Goujet; Juan Rozo, a Spanish inn-keeper, M. Coquet ;


298 THE VAMPIRE


- Botaro, his son-in-law, M. Curey; Lazare, M. Laurent ;
Lahennée, M. Thierry ; Jarwick, M. Lavergne ; the Ghoul,
Mme. Lucie Mabire ; Héléne de Tiffauges, Mlle. Jane Essler ;
Juana, Mile. Marie Clarisse ; Antonia, Mlle. Daroux ; Petra,
Rozo’s daughter, Mlle. Heloise ; and the mystic fairy Mélusine,
Mlle. Isabelle Constant. Lazare is a capital character, but
the intrusion from Oriental legend of the ghoul cannot be
considered happy. On the other hand the appearance of
Mélusine, whose legend was collected about the end of the
fourteenth century by Jean d’Arras, is certainly effective
and entirely in keeping with the history, since according to
Paracelsus she was an occult power, and in folk lore she is
often represented as protecting ancient houses—in Belgium she
is the guardian of the old family de Gavre,—whilst one of her
four sons became King of Brittany.

It is hardly necessary to do more than give the very briefest
outline of the story as Dumas tells it. The play opens with
a crowded scene of merrymakers in the patio of Juan Rozo’s
inn. They are celebrating the nuptials of his daughter
with young Botaro, and every room is occupied by his friends
and acquaintance in festive mood. Juana, who is staying
at the hostlery seeks for a guide to the castle of Tormenar,
which lies at some little distance, for there she is to meet
Don Luis de Figuerroa, whom she will wed upon the following
day. She has secretly left the convent of Annunciades,
where she was a boarder, since her father has other designs for
her hand, and accordingly it is necessary that she should
meet her betrothed in some lonely spot. But nobody, not
even the good-natured Lazare, the servant of the inn, will
conduct her to the haunted castle, “un chateau qui est en
ruine, un chateau qui ne loge que des reptiles, et qui n’héberge
que des fantémes.”” However, a numerous company, amongst
whom is Gilbert de Tiffauges, arrives at the inn, and these
travellers on being told that they cannot be accommodated
in spite of the fact that night is falling, incontinently resolve
to take up their quarters in Tormenar, so in spite of the
warnings about ghosts and goblins, having once well stocked
themselves with wine and food they merrily set forth, Gilbert
taking charge of Juana who has confided to him her story.
However, a mysterious figure, a lady, apparently of rank,
who has been staying at the inn watches them as they take


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 299


_ their departure and mutters to herself as she fixes her gaze
upon Juana: “Il te faut deux heures pour aller retrouver
 tonbeaufiancé. . . . Jel’aurai joint dans trois minutes ! ”
_ She is in fact the ghoul, a female vampire, and with the speed
of lightning she has gone to destroy the unfortunate Don Luis.
In the second Act we see the huge Gothic hall of the old
_ castle. A door opens and from an inner chamber the ghoul
_ rushes out exclaiming : “ I] était jeune! I était beau !

Me voila redevenue jeune et belle!” The voice of Gilbert |
is now heard, and with the cry, “ A l’an prochain, Gilbert.” |
she disappears from sight. It will be remarked that in his
treatment of the vampire tradition Dumas has adopted the |
legend that the vampire must year by year rejuvenate his |
waning forces by absorbing the life of another and sucking

_ from another’s veins fresh blood, a detail which although it
_ +may recommend itself to, and legitimately be used by,

_ the dramatist and the writer of romances is actually inexact |
and but rarely to be met with, and only then in folk-lore not |
of the first value. The travellers, no small party, spread |
their provisions upon the huge tables in the old hall and |
laughing at the stories of ghosts and apparitions are soon in
convivial mood. The conversation, however, eventually
turns on the supernatural and Gilbert tells of his old home
in Brittany, where one room in the castle is hung with the
tapestry of the Fairy Mélusine, representing this lady and all
her attendants. The story goes that if any of the family
sleeps in that room she will descend from the tapestry and
reveal his fortune, warning him of danger should such threaten.

Another companion who has sojourned in Epirus speaks of
the vampires, the women who will attack men and leave them
dead and sapless ; the men who will attack women to drink
their blood. Just as the words are uttered Lord Ruthwen
enters and announces himself as a belated traveller, who
finding no room at Rozo’s inn down in the village has made his
way thither,—he has even taken Lazare into his service.
Presently the company disperse to their several rooms to
make themselves as comfortable as may be for the night in such
difficult circumstances. To his horror Gilbert discovers in the
chamber he is to occupy the body of a young man, strangely
pale, with a slight wound in the throat. By a letter he finds
near upon the body it is plain that this can be none other


800 THE VAMPIRE


than the unfortunate Don Luis. At the same moment a
piercing cry is heard, and Juana ghostly pale and dying
totters from her room. Gilbert rushes to her assistance just
in time to see Lord Ruthwen dart out after her as she falls
dead at his feet. In a moment he has drawn his sword and
strikes Ruthwen to the heart, before he recognizes who it may
be. In faltering accents Ruthwen explains that hearing a cry
he has gone to the assistance of the lady, and with his last
breath he implores Gilbert, who is well-nigh distracted at
the unhappy accident, to bear his body to the hillside, where
it may be bathed in the earliest rays of the new moon. This
Gilbert promises, and in the final tableau we see the body of
Lord Ruthwen laid upon the mountain. The moon slowly
issues from the clouds, and as its silver light falls upon the
corpse it seems as though the eyes opened and the mouth
smiled. A moment more and the Vampire leaps to his feet
re-vitalized and with fresh energy for some new demoniac
enterprise.

In Act III. we find ourselves in Brittany, about a year
later, at the chateau de Tiffauges where Héléne awaits her
brother’s return. After an affectionate greeting he confides
to her the secret of his love for Antonia a lady of Spalatro in
Dalmatia, and she in her turn informs him that she is about
to give her hand to the Baron de Marsden. This latter proves
to be none other than Lord Ruthwen, who informs Gilbert that
he was sore wounded indeed at Tormenar, but that certain
kindly shepherds finding him on the mountain side nursed
him back to life. Moreover, he explains his change of name
by informing them that his elder brother having recently died,
he has succeeded to the title and estates. Visiting Tiffauges
in the hope of meeting Gilbert once more, he has fallen a victim
to the charms of Héléne. The explanation is cleverly con-
trived, but at the same time Gilbert is hardly convinced ; he
feels that there is some mysterious and terrible secret lurking
in the background. A happy idea strikes him. He will sleep
that night in the tapestry chamber of the lady Mélusine.
The scene that follows must have been extraordinarily
effective upon the stage. Gilbert is slumbering, and from
their places in the tapestry step forth Mélusine and her court
to warn the scion of her house that danger is near. From
the framed canvas and the panels descend with stately stride


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 301


the old barons to tell their descendant of the horror that
encompasses him, Mélusine reveals the secret :
“Prions, pour qu’ a Gilbert Dieu tout-puissant inspire
Un généreux effort...
Ruthwen est un démon, Ruthwen est un vampire ;
Son amour, c’est la mort!”
(One cannot but recall the famous scene in Gilbert and
Sullivan’s Ruddigore with its subtle admixture of beauty,
fantasy and humour.)

In Act IV of Le.Vampire we are shown the accomplishment
of Ruthwen’s designs against Héléne. Gilbert’s frenzied
warnings and denunciations are heard with alarm but with un-
belief. They whisper that he is a lunatic, and when Ruthwen
relates a cunning story of a mischance in Spain which tempor-
arily unsettled Gilbert’s reason, a story that seems borne out
in every detail by the unhappy brother’s horror and despair,
the attendants for his own safety seek to restrain their young
master. Ruthwen triumphs. But now the ghoul appears
and bids him take heed how he seeks Gilbert’s life for that is
hers, and she will not likely relinquish her prey. Ruthwen
defies her and the two vampires part in horrid enmity. Lazare
cautions Héléne that her brother’s story is no figment, but it
is too late, the vampire seizes his victim and as midnight strikes
he destroys his hapless bride and quaffs his fill from her veins.
Too late Gilbert succeeds in forcing an entrance. There is a
terrific struggle, and Ruthwen is hurled from the window
into the depths of a tremendous valley.

In the last act we find that in order to escape the pursuit
of Ruthwen, who has extricated himself unhurt but filled with
designs of even more malignant vengeance, Gilbert has trans-
ported Antonia to Circassia. Here, however, we meet the
ghoul who, disguising herself under the name of Ziska, obtained
admittance to the castle in the quality of an attendant upon
Antonia. She informs Gilbert that she alone can save his
betrothed from the vampire, and at that moment the ghastly
face of Ruthwen is actually seen peering through the window.
She demands that he shall relinquish Antonia’s hand, and
accept her love though it be to death. He refuses to betray
Antonia, and at length by a supreme act of renunciation
she divulges the secret whereby the Vampire may be annihil-
ated, although this revelation must put an end to her own


302 THE VAMPIRE


existence. Ziska explains how Gilbert’s sword is to be blessed
by a priest with a certain occult formula and if the weapon
thus consecrated be driven through the Vampire’s heart it
will once and for all rid the world of this infernal pest. Yet
as she speaks she seems to vanish in flames and they hear her
last sad sigh ; “ Adieu pour ce monde! Adieu pour l’autre !
Adieu pour I’éternité ” !

The final scene is a deserted cemetery. “‘'Tombes, cyprés.
Fond sombre et fantastique ; neige sur la terre; lune rouge
au ciel.” The Vampire lies half in and half out of his grave,
grinning hideously. Gilbert is standing near. ‘“ Pour la
derniére fois, adore Dieu!” he adjures. ‘ Non,” yells the
monster. ‘‘ Alors, desespére et meurs”! cries Gilbert and.
plunges the hallowed sword into the monster’s heart. The
Vampire falls back into the grave, howling fearfully, and a
heavy stone closing him in fast seals him there in the womb
of the earth for ever and ever. “Au nom du Seigneur,
Ruthwen, je te scelle dans cette tombe pour l’éternité ’’, et
Gilbert trace sur la pierre une croix que devient lumineuse.
A great aureola fills the sky and multitudes of rejoicing
angels are seen. Among them are Héléne and J uana, smiling
in happiest benison, whilst there rises from the earth the body of
Ziska, radiant and beautiful, to join the glorious throng
among whose immortal ranks she is enrolled by the merits of
her great act of renunciation and unselfish love.

This drama of Dumas is infinitely more elaborate than the
play of Nodier, but I am not altogether certain whether
it is in some respects so good a work. The first two acts
attain a high level; the scene in the tapestry chamber would
be most picturesque upon the stage ; there are several other
telling situations and effective speeches, but as a whole it is
too prolix, and we feel that the episode of Antonia in parti-
cular is an anti-climax. Nor, as I have remarked before,
although material use is made of the character, can one
consider the figure of the ghoul entirely in keeping with the
rest. Had the level of the opening scenes been maintained
we should possess an excellent piece of work. But without
concentration and compression that was hardly possible,
and here we have the secret of Nodier’s success. Although
he has an occasional crudity, it may be, which Dumas might
not have tolerated, so swift is his action, as is essential to


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE — 303


_ melodrama, so cleverly does he engage the interest of his
audience, that we have no time to criticize a roughness here
and there, but are rather intent to follow the next turn of
the tale.

Immediately upon the furore created by Nodier’s Le
Vampire at the Porte-Saint-Martin in 1819 vampire plays of
every kind from the most luridly sensational to the most
farcically ridiculous pressed on to the boards. A contempor-
ary critic cries: ‘‘ There is not a theatre in Paris without its
Vampire! At the Porte-Saint-Martin we have le Vampire;
at the Vaudeville le Vampire again; at the Variétés les trois
Vampires ou le clair de la lune.”

Jean Larat* further mentions a play by Paul Féval, Le
fils Vampire. The version by John Wilson Ross of The Loves of
Paris, a romance, published by G. Vickers, 3, Catherine Street,
Strand, 1846, is said to be “ Translated from the French of
Paul Féval, author of ‘The Vampire,’ ‘The Loves of the
Palais-Royal,’ ‘The Receipt at Midnight,’ ‘Stella,’ ‘The
Son of the Devil,’ etc., ete.”, but it does not appear whether
“The Vampire” mentioned here is a play or a romance.
Probably it is the latter but no such translation is known.

; Le Vampire which was produced at the Vaudeville, 15 June,
___ 1820, is a comédic-vaudeville in one act by Scribe and
‘ Mélesville. The scene is laid in Hungary, “une salle d’un
chateau gothique,” and the characters are as follows: Le
Comte de Valberg, feld-maréchal, M. Guillemin ; Adolphe de
Valberg, son néveu, M. Isambert; le Baron de Lourdorff,
M. Fontenay; Saussmann, concierge du chateau, M. Hip-
polyte ; Charles, valet du comte, M. Fichet; un Notaire,
M. Justin ; Hermance de Mansfred, Madame Riviére ; Nancy,
sa soeur, Madame Lucie; Péters, filleul de Saussmann,
Madame Minette ; with attendance of domestics and wedding
guests. This elegant little piece opens with nuptials of Herm-
ance de Mansfred at the castle of the Baron de Lourdorff,
to whom she is betrothed. It appears that she has something
____ trifled with the affections of Adolphe de Valberg, now supposed
¥ dead. Her sister, Nancy, acknowledges that she loved
Adolphe, but kept silence owing to his courtship of Hermance.
Adolphe’s uncle, the Count de Valberg, who knows nothing of
the two ladies, fearing his nephew is unworthily entangled
has had him held in military detention at Temesvar, whence


304 THE VAMPIRE


however he has disappeared. The intrigue of the seventeen
scenes, although clearly unravelled in the play, is a little
complicated, and it must suffice to relate by an accident
Adolphe appears at the castle. Upon being asked his name
he answers: “ Lord Ruthwen. An Englishman,” whereupon
he is immediately taken to be a Vampire and the servants are
thrown into a state of panic. Eventually he is reconciled to
his uncle who recognizes him as the brave young hero by whom
his life was saved on a recent battlefield ; Nancy’s fidelity is
rewarded with the hand of the man she loves, and who now
realizes that Hermance’s heart was never his; so that the
curtain falls upon a double wedding.

Several pretty lyrics are interwoven with the dialogue and
Nancy’s first song, to the air ‘‘ De sommeiller, encor ma chére ”
from Fanchon la vielleuse, is as follows :


Oui, ces paysans respectables

Nous rapellent le bon vieux temps :
Chez eux on croit encore au diable,
Aux vampires, au revenants ;

On croit & toutes les magies,

Aux amours, aux soins assidus,

Aux grands sorciers, aux grands genies
Bref & tout ce qu’on ne voit plus !


Les Trois Vampires, ou le clair de la lune* which was being
played at the Variétés is a thoroughly amusing farce in one
act by Brazier, Gabriel,and Armand. It shows the adventures
of a bon bourgeois, M. Gobetout, who has so distracted his brain
by reading stories of Vampires and ghosts that when one night
he sees in his garden three shadowy figures he is well nigh
beside himself with terror as he supposes they can be no
other than three vampires infesting his house. A little later
he catches sight of his two daughters and their abigail who
appear actually to be eating with the mysterious strangers.
“Les vampires qui soupent avec mes filles!’ he groans in
accents of despair. However it proves that the supper is
very material, cold chicken and a glass of good wine, whilst
the rendezvous is of an amorous nature, since the visitors
are two young sparks and their valet. So the play ends with
a triple marriage. One remark of the worthy M. Gobetout was,
it is said, nightly greeted with a hurricane of applause. He
was wont to murmur in pensive accents: “‘ Les vampires


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE _ 305


ae il nous viennent d’Angleterre . . . C’est encore
une gentilesse de ces Messieurs . . . ils nous font de jolis
cadeaux !”

Another farce, Encore un Vampire, which when produced
in 1820 at Paris, met with considerable success, was published
as by Emile B. L., and yet another vampire burlesque was
contributed by A. Rousseau. Les Etrennes d’un Vampire
at @ minor theatre was billed as from a manuscript “ trouvé
au cimitiére de Pére-Lachaise.”

More amusing is the work of Désaugiers who in August,
1820, gave Cadet Buteux, vampire, avec relation véridique
du prologue et des trois actes de cet épouvantable mélodrame
écrit sous la dictée de ce passeux du Gros Caillou, par son secré-
taire, Désaugiers. When published by Rosa, 1820, this
libretto bore the motto: ‘ Vivent les morts !”

Yet another burlesque published by Martinet, 1820, is
Le Vampire, mélodrame en trois actes, paroles de Pierre de la
Fosse de la rue des Morts.** A few verses from this vaudeville
may be interesting to quote, particularly as showing the long
continued popularity of Nodier’s melodrama.


Lisant pour un sou d’politique

Plac’ Royale, sur un banc,

J’tombe, le tour est diabolique,

A’ point nommé, sur I’Drapeau blanc.


J’prends un billet, non pas pour le parterre,
Ces places sont réservées aux amis,

Sans I’secours de l’abbé Saint-Pierre,

Avec treiz sous’ j’monte au paradis.


Au dernier banc, paix, qu’chacun s’taise !
A’ bas la gueule on crie du premier rang,
L’rideau s’léve et quoique trés mal a l’aise,
Le croirez-vous, j’vois le Pére Lachaise,
Du dernier banc.


The Vampire is described as “ d’échappé de corbillard,”’
One sees everywhere


Des fantéms, des revenans,
Mettant la téte a la fenétre,
Afin d’regarder les passans.


There was even a Polichinel Vampire which when performed
at the Circus Maurice in 1822 attracted all who had a mind


806 THE VAMPIRE


for a hearty laugh, and a contemporary visitor“ to Paris
merrily wrote that “ Polichinel is the very jolliest fellow
in the world.’

A comic operetta in one act, Le Vampire by Martin Joseph
Mengals which was produced at Ghent, 1 March, 1826, deserves
no more than passing mention.

James Robinson Planché speedily adapted Nodier’s Le
Vampire as The Vampire, or, The Bride of the Isles, and his
version with music by Joseph Binns Hart*’ was brought out at
the English Opera House, 9th August, 1820, with T. P. Cooke*
as Ruthven, Earl of Marsden, the Vampire. Owing to his
fine acting in the part, and perhaps a little to the scenic
effects—the scene is laid in the Caverns of Staffa—the play
was given nightly to packed houses. It is interesting to remark
that for this piece the celebrated vampire trap was invented.
Of this I quote the following simple description : “‘ A vampire
trap consists of two or more flaps, usually india-rubber,
through which the sprite can disappear almost instantly,
where he falls into a blanket fixed to the under surface of the
stage. As with the star trap, this trap is secured against
accidents by placing another piece or slide, fitting close
beneath when not required, and removed when the prompter’s
bell gives the signal to make ready.”

The following account of the production of The Vampire is
given by Planché in his Recollections and Reflections, Chapter
III.*° Having just spoken of an Easter piece with which
he had furnished Drury Lane, Abudah, or, The Talisman of
Oromanes,© founded upon one of the Tales of the Genii®
and which although it had a run of nine nights Planché calls
a very poor piece, “ miserably put on the stage,” he continues
to speak of a subsequent success, and tells us: ‘A more
fortunate melodrama of mine, ‘‘ The Vampire, or The Bride of
the Isles,” was produced at the Lyceum, or English Opera
House, as it was then called, 9th August, 1820. Mr. Samuel
James Arnold, the proprietor and manager, had placed in
my hands, for adaptation, a French melodrama, entitled
“Le Vampire,” the scene of which was laid, with the usual
recklessness of French dramatists, in Scotland, where the
superstition never existed. I vainly endeavoured to induce
Mr. Arnold to let me change it to some place in the East of
Europe. He had set his heart on Scotch music and dresses—


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE _ 307


4 the latter, by the way, were in stock—laughed at my scruples,


oi ~ assured me that the public would neither know nor care—and


in those days they certainly did not—and therefore there was
nothing left for me but to do my best with it. The result
was most satisfactory to the management. The situations were
_ novel and effective ; the music lively and popular; the cast
_ strong, comprising T. P. Cooke, who made a great hit in the
_ principal character, Harley, Bartley, Pearman, Mrs. Chatterley

and Miss Love. The trap now so well known as “the Vam-
pire trap ”’ was invented for this piece, and the final disappear-
ance of the Vampire caused quite a sensation. The melo-
drama had a long run, was often revived, and is to this day
a stock piece in the country. I had an opportunity many years
afterwards, however, to treat the same subject in a manner
much more satisfactory to myself, and, as it happened, in the
same theatre, under the same management; but of that
anon.”

The full cast of The Vampire, or, The Bride of the Isles was
originally as follows: “In the Introductory Vision” ; Unda,
Spirit of the Flood, Miss Love; Ariel, Spirit of the Air, Miss
Worgman ; The Vampire, Mr. T. P. Cooke ; Lady Margaret,
Mrs. Chatterly. ‘Inthe Drama”: Ruthven, Earl of Marsden,
the Vampire, Mr. T. P. Cooke; Ronald, Baron of the Isles,
Mr. Bartley ; Robert, an English Attendant on the Baron,
Mr. Pearman; M’Swill, the Baron’s Henchman, Mr. Harley ;
Andrew, Steward to Ruthven, Mr. Minton; Father Francis,
Mr. Shaw; Lady Margaret, Daughter of Ronald, Mrs.
Chatterly ; Effie, Daughter of Andrew, Miss Carew ; Bridget
Lord Ronald’s Housekeeper, Mrs. Grove. With regard to the
costumes of which Planché speaks it is interesting to remark
that the principal characters Ruthven and Lady Margaret
are described as follows: Ruthven, Silver breast plate, studded
with steel buttons; plaid kilt; philibeg; flesh arms and
leggings; sandals; Scotch hat and feathers; sword and
dagger. Lady Margaret, white satin dress, trimmed with
plaid and silver; plaid silk sash; Scotch hat and feather.
This is in the true transpontine tradition of Ossianic attire.
The play is timed to take one hour and thirty minutes in
representation—and Planché has done his work of adaptation
very well, although I doubt whether his few slight departures
from the original are improvements. Nevertheless he has


808 THE VAMPIRE


given the dialogue a native turn and an ease which were
at this period too often lacking in similar versions from the
French.

In 1825, T. P. Cooke visited Paris and appeared as Le
Monstre at the Porte-Saint-Martin in Planché’s melodrama
which proved a remarkable success, running for no less than
eighty nights.

The Vampire or The Bride of the Isles has its place among the
repertory of Hodgson’s ‘“‘ Juvenile Drama,” and this in itself
is an indication of no small popularity.

In The Second Maiden’s Tragedy,” a Globe play of 1611,
licensed for the stage by Sir George Buc on 31st October of that
year, a macabre drama now generally attributed to Tourneur,®*
there are some remarkable scenes which culminate in something
very like necrophilia, and a perverse ill-omened melancholy
pervades the whole action. In Act IV the Tyrant, a usurper,
ordering soldiers to attend him with ‘‘ Lanthornes and a
pickax ” makes his way at midnight to the Cathedral, crying :


Death nor the marble prison my love sleeps in
Shall keep her body lockt up from mine arms.
I must not be so cozened.


A little later : “ Enter the Tirant agen at a farder dore, which
opened, bringes hym to the Toombe wher the Lady lies buried ;
The Toombe here discouered ritchly set forthe.” He adjures
the sepulchre :


The house of silence and the Calms of rest
After tempestuous life, I claim of thee

A mistress one of the most beauteous sleepers
That ever lay so cold.


The vault is forced, whilst the lover soliloquizes :


O the moon rises ; what reflection

Is thrown about the sanctified building,

F’en in a twinkling, how the monuments glisten
As if Death’s palaces were all massy silver

And scorned the name of marble. Art thou cold ?
I have no faith in’t, yet I believe none.

Madam ; ’tis I, sweet lady, pry’thee speak

’Tis thy love calls on thee ; thy king, thy servant.
No! not a word, all prisoners to pale silence

I'll prove a kiss.


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE _ 309


First Soldier :


Tyrant :


After a


Here’s chill venery !
*Twould make a pandar’s heels ache. I’ll be sworn
All my teeth chatter in my head to see’t.


By th’ mass, thou’rt cold indeed. Beshrew thee for’t,
Unkind to thine own blood? Hard hearted lady,
What injury hast thou offered to the youth

And pleasure of thy days: refuse the Court

And steal to this hard lodging, was that wisdom ?

; ; F . Since thy life has left me
I'll clasp the body for the spirit that dwelt in’t,
And love the house still for the mistress’ sake.
Thou art mine now spite of destruction

And Govianus ; and I will possess thee.

I once read of a Herod whose affection

Pursued a virgin’s love as I did thine,

Who for the hate she owed him killed herself

(As thou too rashly didst), without all pity ;

Yet he preserved her body dead in honey,

And kept her long after her funeral :

But I'll unlock the treasure house of art

With keys of gold and bestow all on thee ;

Here slaves receive her humbly from our arms,

: ; ; . So reverently

Bear her before us gently to our palace.

Place you the stone again where we first found it.


while the scene is in the palace: ‘ They bringe the


Body in a Chaire drest up in black veluet which setts out the
pailenes of the handes and face, And a faire Chayne of pearle
crosse her brest and the Crucyfex aboue it ; He standes silent
awhile letting the Musique play, becknyng the soldiers that
bringe her in to make obeisaunce to her, and he hym self makes
a lowe honour to the body and kisses the hande. A song
within in Voyces.


Song :


Tyrant :


O what is Beauty that’s so much adored
A flattring glass that cozens her beholders.
The Night of Death makes it look pale and horrid
The Daynty preseru’d flesh how soone it molders
To loue it lyuinge it bewitchett manye
But after life is seldom heard of any.”


How pleasing art thou to us even in death
I love thee yet, above all women living
And shall do seven years hence.


810 THE VAMPIRE


I can see nothing to be mended in thee

But the too constant paleness of thy cheek.

I'd give the kingdom, but to purchase there

The breadth of a red Rose, in natural colour,

And think it the best bargain that ever king made yet,
But Fate’s my hinderer,

And I must only rest content with Art,

And that I'll have in spite on’t.


Accordingly an artist in painting and perfumery is summoned
to adorn the face of the corpse and give it a fresh lively red
colour. However this merchant of cosmetics is none other
than Govianus, the rightful heir, disguised, and he fucuses the
dead cheeks and lips with a peter which is confected with a
strong poison, so that when the Tyrant lustfully kisses the
cold flesh, he is blasted with the venom and falls in the agonies
of death. The incident is extremely powerful, if extremely
horrible. As the Tyrant expires Govianus taunts him thus :


O thou sacrilegious villain,

Thou thief of rest, robber of monuments,
Cannot the body after funeral

Sleep in the grave for thee? Must it be raised
Only to please the wickedness of thine eye ?
Does all things end with death and not thy lust ?
Hast thou devised a new way to damnation,
More dreadful than the soul of any sin

Did ever pass yet between earth and hell ?


A very large number of plays are founded upon what may be
termed the ‘“‘ Romeo and Juliet’ motive, the awakening, or
the restoration to life in some sort, of a loved one supposed
dead, arousing from a trance, it may be, or a coma, a theme
admitting almost innumerable variants. In the Italian,
French and German theatres alone—nor does this rough list
pretend to be exhaustive—we have Sforza d’ Oddi’s Imorti vivi
(1576); Pagnini’s Imorti vivi (1600); Rota’s La morta viva
(1674); Douville’s Les morts vivans (1654); Quinault’s Le
fantome amoureux (1659); Boursault’s Le mort vivant (1662) ;
Sedaine’s Der Tote ein Freyer (1778); Kurlander’s Der tote
Neffe ; Friedrich Rambach’s Der Scheintote ; Leopold Huber’s
Der Scheintote; Theodore Friedrich’s Die Scheintoten; F. L. W.
Meyer’s Der Verstorbene; G. Lebrun’s Die Verstorbenen ;
Tenelli’s Der Verstorbene ; Holbein’s “‘ romantisches Gemilde ”’
Der Verstorbene; Paers’ opera Die lebenden Toten ; and a ballet


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 3811


(1803) Der lebendige Tote ; cum multis alits quae nunc perscribere
longum est.

It may be convenient here briefly to review the progress of
the Vampire in the theatre, at least in his most important
appearances.

An Italian opera, J vampiri, the work of the much applauded
Neapolitian composer Silvestro di Palma, which was per-
formed at the Teatro San Carlo in 1800 did not of course
take anything from the novel by Polidori which indeed, it
preceded by nearly twenty years. but was rather inspired
by the famous treatise of Guiseppe Davanzati: Dissertazione
sopra i Vampiri di Gioseppe Davanzati Patrizio Fiorentino
e Tranese, Cavaliere Gerosolimitano, Arcivescovo di Trani,
e Patriarca d’Alessandria. (Seconda  edizione.) Nalopi.
M.D.CC.LXXXIX. Presso Fiippo Raimondi. Con licenzi
de’ Superiori.

On 28th March 1828,55 at Leipzig, was produced an opera,
‘Grosse romantische Oper,” Der Vampyr, founded on the original
French melodrama, the scene being changed from Scotland
to Hungary. The libretto is by Wilhelm August Wohlbriick
and the music by his yet more famous brother-in-law Heinrich
August Marschner. Der Vampyr was an enormous success.
A free adaptation of this being made by J. R. Planché, and
produced at the Lyceum, 25th August, 1829, it ran for sixty
nights. In his Recollections and Reflections which have before
been quoted, Planche commences Chapter X by some account
of this. “In the summer of 1829 I had the opportunity of
treating the subject of ‘The Vampire ’ in accordance with my
own ideas of propriety. The French melodrama had been
converted into an opera for the German stage, and the music
composed by Marschner.

‘“Mr. Hawes, who had obtained a score of it, having induced
Mr. Arnold to produce it at the Lyceum, I was engaged to
write the libretto, and consequently laid the scene of action in
Hungary, where the superstition exists to this day, substituted
for a Scotch chieftain a Wallachian Boyard, and in many other
respects improved upon my earlier version. The opera was
extremely well sung, and the costumes novel as well as correct,
thanks to the kindness of Dr. Walsh, the traveller,®* who gave
me some valuable information respecting the national dresses
of the Magyars and the Wallachians.


812 THE VAMPIRE


“T am surprised that Marschner’s most dramatic and
melodious works, ‘Der Vampyr,’ ‘ Die Judin,’ &c., have not
been introduced to our more advanced musical audiences at
one or other of our great operatic establishments.

“The production of ‘Der Vampyr’ was followed by that
of ‘ The Brigand ’ at Drury Lane,”

Polidori’s tale formed the basis of a romantic opera in three
acts, the libretto of which was from the pen of C. M. Heigel,
and the music by P. von Lindpaintner. This was seen at
Stuttgart on 21st September, 1828, and it proved a remarkable
success. It was announced as being from ‘“‘ Byron’s famous
tale,” although at this date such an attribution can hardly
have deceived any.

On 25th May, 1857, there was produced in Berlina ““Komischen
Zauber-Ballet Morgano” by Paul Taglioni with music by
J. Hertzel. The scene is laid in Hungary during the seventeenth
century, and in the sixth tableau Elsa dances an infernal
lavolta with the vampires in their haunted castle, but she is
rescued by her lover, Retzka, who slays the vampire Morgano
with a consecrated poniard. In 1861] at Milan appeared a ballet
by Rotta, Jl vampiro, with music by Paolo Giorza. Guten
Abend Herr Fischer! oder, Der Vampyr is a light vaudeville
in one act by G. Belly and G. Lofiler, with music by W. Telle,
which had some success in its day. Hin Vampyr by Ulrich
Franks (Ulla Wolf) given at Vienna in 1877 is a farce taken
from Scribe.

In England Dion Boucicault’s®’ The Vampire, in three acts
was produced at the Princess’s Theatre, London, 19th June,
1852, when the author made his first appearance before a
metropolitan audience. Of this drama the following criticism,
if criticism it may be called, was given by Henry Morley in his
Journal of a London Playgoer. It must be remembered that
Morley continually shows himself extremely prejudiced and
his censure must not be taken any more seriously than we
regard the ill-word of many critics to-day, for example, the
shrill petulant piping and the childish miffs of St. John
Ervine in the sullens. Under 19th June Morley writes: “If
there be any truth in the old adage, that ‘when things
are at the worst they must mend,’ the bettering of Spectral
Melodrama is not distant ; for it has reached the extreme
point of inanity in the new piece which was produced on


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE = 3818


Monday at the Princess’s Theatre, under the attractive title
of The Vampire.

“Tts plot is chiefly copied from a piece which some years ago
turned the Lyceum into a Chamber of Horrors ; but it has been
spun out into three parts, facetiously described as ‘Three
Dramas’: the little period of a century has been interposed
betweeneach part; and, in order that the outrage on the possible
shall be complete, the third part is projected forward into the
year that will be 1860! By this ingenious arrangement, the
resuscitation of the original Vampire has been enabled to supply
the lovers of the revolting at the Princess’s with three acts of
murder—that is, two consumated, and one attempted ; but,
as the delicate process of vampirical killing is exactly after the
same pattern in each case, the horror is quite worn out before
the career of the creature terminates. Nothing but tedious
trash remains.

To ‘an honest ghost’ one has no objection; but an animated
corpse which goes about in Christian attire, and although never
known to eat, or drink, or shake hands, is allowed to sit at good
men’s feasts ; which renews its odious life every hundred years
by sucking a young lady’s blood, after fascinating her by
motions which resemble mesmerism burlesqued ; and which,
notwithstanding its well-purchased longevity, is capable of
being killed during its term in order that it may be revived by
moonbeams—such a ghost as this passes all bounds of
toleration.

“The monster of absurdity was personated by its reviver
Mr. Boucicault, with due paleness of visage, stealthiness of pace,
and solemnity of tone ; the scenery, especially a moonlit ridge
amidst the heights of Snowdon, was beautiful, and the costumes
were prettily diversified; but the dreary repetition of
fantastical horror almost exhausted even the patience which a
benefit enjoins. Unfortunately, the mischief of such a piece,
produced at a respectable theatre, does not end with the
weariness of the spectators, who come to shudder and remain
to yawn; for it is not only ‘ beside the purpose of playing,’
but directly contravenes it ; and though it may be too dull to
pervert the tastes of those who witness its vapid extravagances,
it has power to bring discredit on the most genial of arts.”

It may be pointed out that this account, probably through
ignorance, possibly of intent, is deliberately inaccurate.


314 THE VAMPIRE


Although confessedly a poorer play than Planché’s The Vampire
Dion Boucicault’s drama is not derived from the earlier piece,
but both are taken from the same source, Polidori’s romance.
Seeing that Henry Morley was Emeritus Professor of English
Literature in University College, London, it were reasonable
to suppose that he should have been acquainted with Polidori’s
novella. Or perhaps I rather ought to say that therefor it
was not to be expected he should have known of this famous
work.

Boucicault afterwards revived The Vampire as The Phantom,
and this was given in London with good applause. The
American cast of the characters of The Phantom, “ As
Produced at Wallack’s Theatre, New York City,” is as follows :
In Act I (1645), The Phantom, Dion Boucicault ; Lord Albert
Clavering, Mr. J. B. Howe; Sir Hugh Neville of Graystock
Mr. Ralton ; Sir Guy Musgrave, Mr. Etynge ; Ralph Gwynne,
Mr. Levere ; Davy, Mr. T. B. Johnstone ; Lucy Peveryl, Miss
Agnes Robertson; Ellen, Miss Alleyne; Maud, Miss Ada
Clare; Janet, Mrs. H. P. Grattan. In Act II (1750), Alan
Raby, Dion Boucicault ; Colonel Raby, Mr. Ralton ; Edgar,
his nephew, Mr. J. B. Howe ; Dr. Rees, Mr. Burnett ; Curate,
Mr. Paul; Corporal Stump, Mr. Peters; Ada Raby, Miss
Agnes Robertson ; Jenny, Mrs. L. H. Allen.

Subsequently, I presume when The Phantom was given in
London, some modifications were made which seem to me most
decidedly to be improvements. The first act was placed in the
latter part of the reign of Charles II, and two hundred years
were supposed to elapse between the first and the second acts.
This necessitated trifling changes in the dialogue at certain
points ; and naturally a complete alteration of costume to a
modern style for Act II. In fact the script of the play which
is printed in Dicks’ Standard Plays, No. 697, (c. 1887) under
“Costume ” gives the following direction®®: “The costumes
in the First Act are of the period of the latter part of the reign
of Charles the Second. In the Second Art the respective
characters are dressed in the provincial costume of Wales at the
middle of the present century. The following description of
Alan Raby’s costume for each act will show the necessity of a
complete change in the style of dress which this drama requires.

Alan Raby.—First Act: A Puritan’s suit of black serge,
bound with black velvet—cloak and breeches to match—black


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE — 3815


belt and buckle—black gauntlets—shirt collar thrown back so
as to show the throat bare—black stockings—black velvet shoes
with strap across the instep—black sugar-loaf hat and broad
riband and steel buckle—phosphoric livid countenance—slightly
bald head—long black lank hair combed behind the ears—
bushy black eyebrows and heavy black moustache. 2nd dress :
Black dress coat and overcoat of the same colour—black
trousers—black waistcoat—black kid gloves, white wristbands
over them—white cravat and black German hat—all modern,
and such as would be worn by a gentleman at the present time.”
In the theatre such a contrast would have proved very effective.

I notice that Boucicault has in certain scenes borrowed his
situations pretty freely from Le Vampire of Dumas, and
occasionally he has even conveyed actual dialogue from the
French play.

At the commencement of T'he Phantom we are shown a room
in a Welsh inn, and it appears that Davy and Janet the hostess
have just been married. A sudden storm sends Lucy Peveryl
thither for shelter, and she confides to Janet that she is on her
way to meet at sundown her cousin Roland Peveryl, who is a
fugitive and proscribed. On this account he dare not openly
seek her hand, but the lovers are secretly betrothed. He has
promised to meet her, in order to bid her farewell for a time,
in the most unfrequented spot, the ruins of Raby Castle. No
sooner does Janet hear that name than she cries out with horror,
and speaks of a fearful story connected with the place. They
are interrupted by the arrival of Lord Clavering with a party of
guests, amongst whom are friends of Lucy. She frankly
informs them of her rendezvous, and they decide to accompany
her, more especially as the inn has not sufficient accommodation
for the travellers, who resolve to take provisions and wine and
spend the night in the deserted chambers of the old castle.
Davy endeavours to prevent them, nor are his efforts altogether
selfish. He tells them : ‘‘ No one ever sought a night’s shelter
in the ruins of Raby Castle, that ever lived to see the morning.

Within the ruins of Raby dwells some terrible thing—
man or fiend! . . . No traveller that knows the road will
ever venture near that spot after nightfall; but strange
wayfarers, benighted in the storm have wandered to this place
of shelter, and the next morning they are found—dead—each
with a wound in his throat in the right side, from which they


816 THE VAMPIRE


have evidently bled to death ;—but no blood is spilt around,
the face is white and fixed, as if it had died of horror.” “ And
he, my betrothed,” cries Lucy, ‘‘ Roland is there.” Neverthe-
less the company laugh at these old stories and determine to
make their way to the old castle. This they actually find in
far better state than they have been led to expect, and their
servants who have insisted upon Davy showing them the way
soon get a very fair supper from the provisions they have
purchased at his inn. Roland Pevery] is not to be found, but
whilst they are cating a stranger enters, a Puritan, and
announces himself as Gervase Rookwood, a traveller who has
lost his way in the mountains. Davy, however, almost
collapses with terror. He recollects that many years before
the castle belonged to Sir Owen Raby, a noble cavalier, while
Alan Raby, his younger brother had joined the forces of
Cromwell. Taking advantage of this difference the traitor
one midnight with a band of Puritan soldiers surprises the
castle, and butchers the sleeping garrison, killing his brother
with his own hand. About a year later, however, the tables
are turned, the Royalists recapture the place, Alan Raby is
seized, and in their rage they hurl the fratricide from a window
which hung shudderingly over a fearful precipice. Curiously
enough no trace of the body could ever be recovered. But
Davy recognizes that Gervase Rookwood is none other than
Alan Raby. Here we have the old belief that a man guilty of
some monstrous crime, in this case rebellion against the King
and the murder of a brother, is compelled to return asa vampire.
When the company disperse to their various apartments for
the night Lord Clavering is horrified to discover in his room
the dead body of young Roland Peveryl, “a wound deep in
his throat, but bloodless.” At the same moment a piercing
scream is heard and Lucy Peveryl rushing from her chamber
with her hands wildly clasping her neck falls dead in Lord
Clavering’s arms. Seeing as he thinks a shadowy form that
steals from her room he draws a pistol and fires. When the
company hurry in with lights they discover Alan Raby has been
shot. In faltering accents the dying man explains that hearing
a cry for help he hastened to the lady’s assistance. He will
only forgive Lord Clavering on one condition. ‘ When I have
breathed my last, let my body be conveyed amongst the peaks
of Snowdon, and there exposed to the first rays of the rising


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE = 317


moon which touch the earth.” This is done, and the first act
concludes with a tableau of the peaks of Snowdon, whilst from
behind the clouds there sails high in the heaven a silver sickle
that strikes the corpse with her argent shaft of mystic light.
The vampire wakes, and leaps to his feet crying in exultant
tones: “ Fountain of my life: once more thy rays restore me.
Death ! I defy thee!”

It cannot escape notice that in this act there are many
parallels with Le Vampire of Dumas. Raby Castle is the Castle
of Tormenar ; Lucy Peveryl is Juana ; Roland Peveryl, Don
Luis de Figuerroa ; Lord Clavering, Gilbert de Tiffauges ; and
Davy the gracioso Lazare.

Two centuries have flown. Raby Castle is now inhabited in
possession of Colonel Raby, whose daughter is betrothed to
her cousin Edgar. It has been falsely reported that this latter
fell in battle, but the scene opens with his return. When the
sad news first arrived Ada Raby was stricken almost to death,
and, as they believed, actually died ; but she was recalled to
life by a mysterious stranger, since which hour she seems to
have fallen completely under his influence and in some extra-
ordinary way only to respond to his power. This is none other
than Gervase Rookwood, who now appears and informs
Colonel Raby that he and none other is the lawful lord of Raby
Castle. The Colonel’s claim lies in the fact that when years
before the last of the old Raby family, Sir Alan Raby died,
or rather was killed, and no will could be found, the estate
reverted to a distant branch of the Rabys, now represented by
the Colonel. However, a document is produced in the hand-
writing of Alan Raby, his will, wherein he bequeaths the estate
to Gervase Rookwood and the Rookwood successors. It
seemed as though such a title cannot be resisted, but Doctor
Rees, a scholar of occultism, is filled with the gravest suspicions
of the stranger. Ina “ Dictionary of Necromancy, a rare work
by Dr. Dee,” he has read of vampires, and he divines the
demoniac nature of the pretended Rookwood. Ina trancelike
state Ada Raby has rejected Edgar and is to be given to the
stranger, when Dr. Rees examining the documents discovers
that the will of Sir Alan Raby, which must be some two hundred
years old, although the hand is doubtless that of Raby as the
archives prove, is written upon paper which has a watermark
of 1850, “scarcely five years old.” The vampire who


818 THE VAMPIRE


endeavours to assassinate Edgar, is killed by a charmed bullet.
Whilst his limbs relax in death the hypnotic spell vanishes
from Ada’s mind and she is united to her lover. But to their
horror they notice that as the moonlight touches the body of
Alan Raby where he has fallen, his members begin to twitch
anew with life. Dr. Rees seizes the vampire and hurls the body
into the darkest chasm of the mountain side, where no beam
nor ray can ever penetrate or find the smallest chink of entrance.

The Phantom is, of course, somewhat old-fashioned and a
little stilted, as was the mode, in its diction. No doubt some
of the situations could be revised and far more neatly turned,
yet on the whole I conceive that it should prove of its kind
excellent fare in the theatre, and some scenes, at least, in
capable hands were not without emotional appeal, I had almost
said a certain impressiveness. Far worse dramas have (not
undeservedly) earned their meed of approbation and applause.

On 15th August, 1872, was advertised: “ Royal Strand
Theatre. Production of a Bit of Moonshine in Three Rays,
entitled ‘The Vampire,’ written by R. Reece.” There was
indeed a bounteous bill of fare. At seven was given a farce,
The Married Bachelor ; at 7.30 Byron’s Not Such a Fool as He
Looks ; “‘ At Half Past Nine the new and original Burlesque,
a little Bit of Moonshine in Three Rays, called The Vampire,
written by R. Reece. The new Music by John Fitzgerald, the
New Scenery Painted by H. P. Hall; Dresses by May, Mrs.
Richardson and Assistants ; Machinery by Wood ; Properties
by Ball. The Piece produced under the direction of Mrs.
Swanborough, Mr. J. Wallace, and Mr. Reece.” The house,
says the Hra, 18th August, 1872, was crowded for this “ satirical
burlesque.” His play, the author wrote, was founded upon
“‘a German legend, Lord Byron’s story, and a Boucicaultian
drama.” The Vampire, according to Reece, is a plagiarist
who lives on other people’s brains. The title réle was acted
by Edward Terry who kept the audience in roars of laughter.
“Mr. Terry’s make-up as the Vampire was something extra-
ordinary, and he worked with unflagging energy to add ‘go ’
to the novelty.” During a picnic in the ruins of Raby Castle
the Vampire endeavours to steal the note books of Ada Raby
(Miss Emily Pitt) and Lady Audley Moonstone (Mrs. Raymond)
two lady novelists, so that he may utilize their efforts for his
weekly instalment of the “ penny dreadful ”’ and other fiction.


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE — 319


He is attacked by the two lovers of the ladies, Lord Albert
Clavering (Miss Bella Goodall) and Edgar (Miss Topsy Venn),
and a good deal of broadest farce follows. “The author was
cordially greeted upon his appearance before the curtain, and
the latest Strand burlesque may be noted as an undoubted
success.” The Illustrated London News, 24th August, 1872,
although very justly doubting the propriety of the subject as a
theme for travesty highly praised Edward Terry “as the
Hibernian plagiarist with the broadest of brogues and the most
ghastly of faces.” As Allan Raby he haunts the ruins of Raby
Castle, Raby Hall, and the Peak of Snowdon, seeking to filch
the notebooks of tourists, “from which he may gather materials
for a three-volume novel which he has been engaged by a
publisher to compose.”

On Monday, 27th September, 1909, at the Paragon Theatre
was produced The Vampire, a ‘‘ two-scene sketch,” adapted by
Mr. José G. Levy from the French of Mme. C. le Vylars and
Pierre Souvestre. “It is a capitally written little piece con-
ceived in the grand Guignol vein;” The Stage, 30th September,
1909. The first scene is Harry le Strang’s smoking-room.
Harry has been infatuated with a demi-mondaine named
Sonia, who shot herself in a fit of remorse. The despairing
lover is in communication with a Hindoo spiritualist Seratsih,
who has evoked the spirit of the dead woman, now become a
vampire and preying upon Harry’s vitality and reason. An
old friend, Jack Harlinger, in order as he thinks to save the
situation persuades his own fiancée, Olga Kay, to personate
the ghost of Sonia. The result is swift tragedy, for the
maddened Harry le Strang shoots her dead destroying the
vampire, whilst he himself falls at the revolver of Jack
Harlinger. Harry le Strang was played by Charles Hanbury ;
Jack Harlinger, Lauderdale Maitland ; Seratsih, Clinton
Barrett ; and Olga Kay, Janet Alexander. The piece was very
well received.

The Vampire, a Tragedy in Five Acts, by St. John Dorset
(the Rev. Hugo John Belfour), Second Edition, 1821, does
not appear to have been acted. It was dedicated to W. G.
Macready, Esq., whose kindness the author acknowledges in
most grateful terms. The story is Oriental, the same being
laid in Alexandria, and it is a ‘‘ moral” vampire that is shown
by the poet. In his “advertisement” he quotes a passage


820 THE VAMPIRE


from the Examiner, when noticing Planché’s melodrama wrote :
“There are Vampires who waste the heart and happiness of
those they are connected with, Vampires of avarice, Vampires
of spleen, Vampires of debauchery, Vampires in all the shapes
of selfishness and domestic tyranny.” This is his theme, and
although his pages have considerable merit I do not conceive
that his scenes would have been entirely successful on the stage,
since they are poetical and reflective rather than dramatic.

In Germany sensational fiction was long largely influenced
by Polidori, and we have such romances as Zschokke’s Der tote
Gast, Spindler’s Der Vampyr und seine Braut, Theodor Hilde-
brand’s Der Vampyr, oder die Totenbraut. Edwin Bauer’s
roman & clef the clever Der Baron Vampyr," which was
published at Leipzig in 1846, hardly concerns as here, whilst
Ewald August Kénig’s sensational Ein moderner Vampyr,”
which appeared in 1883, or Franz Hirsch’s Moderne Vampyr,
1873, productions which only use in their titles the word
“Vampire ” to attract,—one might say, to ensnare attention,
are in this connexion no more deserving of consideration than
mere chap-books and pedlar’s penny-ware such as Fiorelli’s
Der Vampyr, and Dr. Seltzam’s pornographic Die Vampyre
der Residenz.

Undoubtedly the vampire tradition has never been treated
with such consummate skill as by Théophile Gautier in his
exquisite prose poem La Morte Amoureuse, which first appeared
in the Chroniquede Paris on 23rd and 26th June, 1836, when the
young author was not quite twenty-five. Although the theme
is not original yet perhaps nowhere beside has it been so
ingeniously moulded with such delicacy of style, with such
~ rich and vivid colouring, with such emotion and such repres-
sion. The darker shadows of the tradition are suggested rather
than portrayed, yet none can deny that there is an atmosphere
of sombre mystery, even a touch of morbid horror which with
complete artistry the writer allows us to suspect rather than to
comprehend. The very vagueness of the relation adds to the
illusion. We hardly know whether Romuald is the young
country priest occupied in prayer and good works, or whether
he is the Renaissance seignior living a life of passion and hot
extravagance. As he himself cries: ‘‘ Sometimes I thought
I was a priest who dreamed every night that he was a nobleman,
sometimes that I was a nobleman who dreamed that he was a


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 3821


priest. I could no longer distinguish dreams from real life ;
I did not know where reality began and illusion ended. The
dissolute, supercilious young lord jeered at the priest, and the
priest abhorred the dissipations of the young lord.”” But were
he humble priest, or were he profligate patrician, one emotion
remained eternally the same, his love for Clarimonde. At
length the Abbé Serapion dissolves the glamour. Sternly he
bids young Romuald accompany him to the deserted cemetery
where Clarimonde lies buried; he exhumes the body, and as he
sprinkles it with holy water it crumbles into dust. Then also
has the lord Romuald gone for ever. There only remains the
poor priest of God broken and alone, who grows old in an
obscure parish in the depths of a wood, and who well-nigh
half a century after scarcely dares to stir the ashes of that
memory.

There are in English not a few stories which deal with the
vampire tradition, and many of these are well imagined and
cleverly contrived ; the morbid horror of the thing has often
been conveyed with considerable power, but yet it will, I think,
be universally allowed that no author has written pages
comparable to this story of Gautier. It is hardly to be disputed
that the best of the English vampire stories is Sheridan Le
Fanu’s Carmilla, which the authorities upon the bibliography
of this author“ have not traced further back than its appear-
ance in the collection entitled In A Glass Darkly, 1872,%
Carmilla which is a story of some length, containing sixteen
chapters, is exceedingly well told and it certainly exhibits that
note of haunting dread which is peculiar to Le Fanu’s work.
The castle in Styria and the family who inhabit it are
excellently done, nor will the arrival of Carmilla and the
mysterious coach wherein sat ‘‘ a hideous black woman, witha
sort of coloured turban on her head, who was gazing all the time
from the carriage window, nodding and grinning derisively
towards the ladies, with gleaming eyes and large white eye-
balls, and her teeth set as if in fury,” easily be forgotten.

It must suffice to mention very briefly but a few short
stories in English where the vampire element is present.
KE. F. Benson has evoked real horror in his The Room in the
Tower and the horrible creature tangled in her rotting shroud
all foul with mould and damp who returns from her accursed
grave is loathly to the last degree.


21


822 THE VAMPIRE


The Flowering of the Strange Orchid, by H. G. Wells, intro-
duces a botanical vampire. An orchid collector is found dead
in a jungle in the Andaman Islands, with a strange bulb lying
near him. This is brought to England and carefully tended by
a botanist until it comes to flower. But when at last the
blossoms burst open great tendrils suddenly reach out to grasp
the man sucking his blood with hideous gusts. The unfortunate
wretch has to be violently torn away from the plant which
drips with blood scarce in time to save his life.

This idea closely resembles Fred M. White’s story, The
Purple Terror, which appeared in the Strand Magazine,
September, 1899, Vol. xviii, No. 105. Here Lieutenant Will
Scarlett, an American officer and a number of his men have to
make their way across a certain tract of Cuban Territory.
Spending the night in a country posada they are attracted by
a pretty dancing girl who is wearing twined round her shoulders
a garland of purple orchids larger than any known variety.
The blossoms which a blood-red centre exhale a strange exotic
perfume. Scarlett is fired with the enthusiasm of giving a
new orchid to the horticultural world, and on the following
morning a native, named Tito, undertakes to guide him to the
spot. He learns that the natives call them ‘the devil’s
poppies” and that the flowers grow in the high trees where
their blossoms cling to long green tendrils. As night falls
the little company arrives at a plateau ringed by tall trees
whose branches are crowned with great wreaths of the purple
flower nestling amid coils of long green ropery. To their alarm
they note that the ground is covered with bleaching bones,
the skeletons of men, animals, and birds alike. Yet perforce
they must camp there rather than risk the miasma of the lower
valley. Scarlett keeps watch. In the darkness there is a
rustling sound and suddenly a long green tendril furnished at
the end with a sucker armed with sharp spines like teeth
descends and snatches one of the men from the ground. As it
is about to withdraw Scarlett with inconceivable swiftness
slashes it through with his knife. But the man’s clothing has
even in that moment been cut through by the razor spines
and his body is marked by a number of punctures where his
blood is oozing in great drops. Immediately half-a-dozen and
more lithe living cords with fanged mouths fall groping for
their prey. The men are hurriedly awakened and with


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 828


difficulty they extricate themselves by sending their whingers
ripping and tearing in every direction. It appears that the
vampire poppies at night send down these tendrils to gather
moisture. Anything which the fearful suckers can catch they
drain dry, be it man or beast or bird. Lieutenant Scarlett and
his men have been deliberately led into this trap by Tito, who
is madly jealous of their compliments to Zara, the dancing-
girl. They hold him prisoner and threaten him — condign
punishment at headquarters.

Algernon Blackwood brings together two types of vampires
in his story The Transfer. One is a human being, the psychic
sponge, who absorbs and seems to live upon the vitality of
others. He is thus described by the governess: ‘“‘ I watched
his hard, bleak face ; I noticed how thin he was, and the curious
oily brightness of his steady eyes. And everything he said or
did announced what I may dare to call the suction of his
presence.” There is also a yet more horrible monster, if one
may term it so, the Forbidden Corner, an arid barren spot in
the midst of the rose garden, naked and bald amid luxuriant
growth. A child who knows its evil secret says: ‘It’s bad.
It’s hungry. It’s dying because it can’t get the food it wants.
But I know what would make it feel right.”” When the human
vampire ventures near this spot it exerts its secret strength
and draws him to itself. He falls into the middle of the patch
and it drinks his energy. He lives on, but he seems to be
nothing more than a physical husk or shell without vitality.
As for the Forbidden Corner “ it lay untouched, full of great,
luscious, driving weeds and creepers, very strong, full fed and
bursting thick with life.”

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in his little story, The Parasite,
has depicted a human vampire or psychic sponge in the person
of Miss Penelosa, who is described as being a small frail creature,
“‘ with a pale peaky face, an insignificant presence and retiring
manner.” Nevertheless she is able to obsess Professor Gilroy
who says: “She has a parasite soul, yes, she is a parasite;
a monster parasite. She creeps into my form as the hermit
crab creeps into the whelk’s shell.” To his horror he realizes
that under her influence his will becomes weaker and weaker
and he is bound to seek her presence. He resists for a while,
but the force becomes so overmastering that he is compelled
to yield, loathing himself as he does so. When he visits her,


824 THE VAMPIRE


with a terrific effort he breaks the spell and denounces her
unhallowed fascination in burning words. However, his
victory is short indeed. She persecutes him most bitterly,
and when he unburdens his troubles to his college professor
the only result is a prescription of chloral and bromide, which
promptly goes into the gutter. With devilish craft the
vampire destroys his reputation as a scholar, and brings about
ill-natured gossip and comment. She is able to confuse his
brain during his lectures, so that he talks unintelligible nonsense
and his classes become the laughing-stock of the university,
until at length the authorities are obliged to suspend him from
his position. Almost in despair he cries: “And the most
dreadful part of it allis my loneliness. Here I sit in a common-
place English bow-window looking out upon a common-place
English street, with its garish buses and its lounging policemen,
and behind me there hangs a shadow which is out of all keeping
with theageand place. Inthehome of knowledge I am weighed
down and tortured by a power of which science knows nothing.
No magistrate would listen to me. No paper would discuss
my case. No doctor would believe my symptoms. My own
most intimate friends would only look upon it as a sign of brain
derangement. Iam out of all touch with my kind.”

The unfortunate victim is driven even deeper still by this
unhallowed influence, which causes him to rob a bank, violently
assault a friend, and finally to come within an ace of mutilating
the features of his betrothed. At length the persecution ceases
with the sudden death of the vampire, Miss Penelosa.

The True Story of a Vampire is a pathetic little story, very
exquisitely told, in Studies of Death, by Stanislaus Eric, Count
Stenbock, who wrote some verses of extraordinary charm in
Love, Sleep, and Dreams; Myrtle, Rue, and Oypress ; The
Shadow of Death ; and who at least once in The Other Side told
a macabre legend with most powerful and haunting effect.
A mysterious Count Vardaleh visits the remote styrian castle
of old Baron Wronski, and before long attains an occult
influence over the boy heir, Gabriel. The lad wastes away,
and Count Vardaleh is heard to murmur: “ My darling, I fain
would spare thee ; but thy life is my life, and I must live, I who
would rather die. Will God not have any mercy on me? Oh,
oh! life; oh, the torture of life! . . . O Gabriel, my
beloved! My life, yes, life—oh, my life? I am sure this is


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 3825


but a little I demand of thee. Surely the superabundance of
life can spare a little to one who is already dead.” As the boy
lies wan and ill, the Count enters the room and presses a long
feverish kiss upon his lips. Vardaleh rushes forth, and can
never be traced again. Gabriel has expired in the agony of
that embrace.

In a novel, The Vampire, by Reginald Hodder, a woman who
is the leader of an occult society is forced to exercise her powers
as @ vampire to prevent the ebbing of her vitality. Here her
ravages are pyschic rather than physical, albeit in fact the two
so closely commingled that they are not to be separated. A
curious feature in the tale is that this woman is represented as
putting forth her energies through the medium of a metallic
talisman, and various struggles to gain possession of the
object form the theme of the story. It falls into the
hands of persons who would employ it for evil purposes,
when it constitutes a very formidable menace, but at the
last after a number of extraordinary happenings it is happily
recovered.

The traditional, but yet more horrible vampire is presented
to us by F. Marion Crawford in For the Blood Is the Life. Here
a young man, who has been loved by a girl whose affection he
was unable to return, is after her death vampirised by her,
and when his friends suspect the truth they determine to
rescue him. They find him upon her grave, a thin stream of
blood trickling from his throat. “‘ And the flickering light of the
lantern played upon another face that looked up from the
feast,—upon two deep, dead eyes that saw in spite of death—
upon parted lips redder than life itself—upon gleaming teeth
on which glistened a rosy drop.” The situation is effectively
dealt with according to the good old tradition. A hawthorn
stake is driven through the heart of the vampire who emits
a quantity of blood and with a despairing shriek dies the last
death.

Almost equally vivid in its details must be accounted the
tale, Four Wooden Stakes, by Victor Roman. The ghastly
events in the lonely old house with its little grey crypt, some
ten miles from the small town of Charing, a place of not more
than fifteen hundred souls, are most vividly described. There
lived the Holroyds, the grandfather, the father, and three
brothers. Whilst in South America the grandfather “ was


826 THE VAMPIRE


attacked while asleep by one of those huge bats. Next morning
he was so weak he couldn’t walk. That awful thing had
sucked his life blood away. He arrived here, but was sickly
until his death, a few weeks later.” So says Remson Holroyd,
who is left the sole survivor of the family, and who has sum-
moned his old college friend to help him solve the secret of the
hideous doom which is taking toll one by one. The grandfather
was not buried in the usual way ; but, as his will directed, his
remains were interred in the vault built near the house.
Remson Holroyd continues : “ Then my dad began failing and
just pined away until he died. What puzzled the doctors was
the fact that right up until the end he consumed enough food
to sustain three men, yet he was so weak he lacked the strength
to drag his legs over the floor. He was buried, or rather
interred with grand-dad. Thesamesymptoms were in evidence
in the cases of George and Fred. They are both lying in the
vault. And now, Jack, I’m going, too, for of late my appetite
has increased to alarming proportions, yet I am as weak as a
kitten.” The next morning the visitor finds himself so weak
that he is hardly able to rise and he feels a slight pain in the
neck. “TI rushed to examine it in the mirror. Two tiny dots
rimmed with blood—my blood—and on my neck! No longer
did I chuckle at Remson’s fears, for it, the thing, had attacked
me as I slept.’ The host himself is in a state of utter exhaus-
tion. That night watch is kept by the friend, and as from his
concealment he is gazing into Remson’s room he notices “a
faint reddish glow outside one of the windows. It apparently
emanated from nowhere. Hundreds of little specks danced and
whirled in the spot of light, and as I watched them fascinated,
they seemed to take on the form of a human face. The
features were masculine, as was also the arrangement of the
hair. Then the mysterious glow disappeared.” After a few
moments there appears a vague form of which the watcher is
able to distinguish the head, and to his horror he sees that the
features are the same as those of a portrait of the grandfather
which is hanging in the picture gallery of the house. ‘ But oh,
the difference in expression! The lips were drawn back in a
snarl, disclosing two sets of pearly white teeth, the canines over
developed and remarkably sharp. The eyes, an emerald green
in colour, stared in a look of consuming hate.” The horror is
revealed. The house is infested bya vampire. Inthe morning


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 827


the two friends visit the vault. ‘‘ As if by mutual understand-
ing, we both turned toward the coffin on our left. It belonged
to the grandfather. We unplaced the lid, and there lay the
old Holroyd. He appeared to be sleeping ; his face was full
of colour, and he had none of the stiffness of death. The hair
was matted, the moustache untrimmed, and on the beard were
matted stains of a dull brownish hue. But it was his eyes that
attracted me. They were greenish, and they glowed with an
expression of fiendish malevolence such as I had never seen
before. The look of baffled rage on the face might well have
adorned the features of the devil in hell.” They drive a stake
through the living corpse, which shrieks and writhes, whilst
the gushing blood drenches coffins and floor spurting out in
great jets over the very walls. The head is severed from the
body, and “as the final stroke of the knife cut the connexion
a scream issued from the mouth; and the whole corpse fell
away into dust, leaving nothing but a wooden stake lying in
a bed of bones.” The remaining three bodies are treated in
the same way, and thus the thrall of the curse is lifted from
the old house, ten miles from the little town of Charing.

Although the genius of Charles Baudelaire, when his art
required it, shrank from no extremity of physical horror, yet
in his exquisite poem Le Vampire he has rather portrayed the
darkness and desolation of the soul :


Toi qui, comme un coup de couteau,
Dans mon coeur plaintif est entrée ;
Toi qui, forte comme un troupeau
De démons, vins, folle et parée.


De mon esprit humilié

Faire ton lit et ton domaine ;
—Infame a qui je suis lié
Comme le forgat a la chaine,


Comme au jeu le joueur tétu,
Comme 4 la bouteille livrogne,
Comme aux vermines la charogne,
—Maudite, maudite sois-tu !


J’ai prié le glaive rapide

De conquerir ma liberté

Et j’ai dit au poison perfide
De secourir ma lacheté.


828 THE VAMPIRE


Helas ! le poison et le glaive
Mont pris en dédain et m’ont dit :
Tu n’es pas digne qu’on t’enléve
A ton esclavage maudit.


Imbécile !—de son empire
Si nos efforts te délivraient,
Tes baisers ressusciteraient
Le cadavre de ton vampire !


In England there is a poem—truly of a very different kind—
which appears in the life of the famous scientist, James Clerk
Maxwell, by Lewis Campbell and William Garnett, verses
written by Maxwell in 1845 when he was fourteen years of age.
The verses should not perhaps, because of the youth of the
author, be criticized too sharply, and although they show
Wardour Street fustian and gimcrack, since the piece is
of no great length it may pardonably be quoted here. It is
not entirely without a certain feeling after the right atmosphere,
and much will be forgiven on account of the precocity. It is
grandiosely entitled The Vampyre: ‘‘ Compylt into Meeter by
James Clerk Maxwell.”


Thair is a knichte rydis through the wood,
And a douchty knichte is hee.

And sure hee is on a message sent,
He rydis sae hastilie.

He passit the aik, and hee passit the birk,
And hee passit monie a tre,

Bot plesant to him was the saugh sae slim,
For beneath it hee did see

The boniest ladye that ever hee saw,
Scho was sae schyn and fair.

And thair scho sat, beneath the saugh,
Kaiming hir gowden hair.

And then the knichte—‘ Oh ladye brichte,
What chance has broucht you here ?

But sae the word, and ye schall gang
Back to your kindred dear,”’

Then up and spok the ladye fair—
“ T have nae friends or kin,

Bot in a little boat I live,
Amidst the waves’ loud din.”

Then answered thus the douchty knichte—
“T’ll follow you through all,

For gin ye bee in a littel boat,
The world to it seemis small.”


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 3829


They goed through the wood, and through the wood,
To the end of the wood they came :
And when they came to the end of the wood
They saw the salt sea faem.
And when they saw the wee, wee boat,
That daunced on the top of the wave,
And first got in the ladye fair,
And then the knichte sae brave.
They got into the wee, wee boat
And rowed wi’ a’ their micht ;
When the knichte sae brave, he turnit about,
And lookit at the ladye bricht ;
He lookit at her bonnie cheik,
And hee lookit at hir twa bricht eyne,
Bot hir rosie cheik growe ghaistly pale,
And schoe seymit as scho deid had been.
The fause, fause knichte growe pale with frichte.
And his hair rose up on end,
For gane-by days cam to his mynde,
And his former love he kenned.
Then spake the ladye—‘ Thou, fause knichte,
Hast done to me much ill,
For didst forsake me long ago,
Bot I am constant still ;
For though I ligg in the woods sae cald,
At rest I canna bee
Until I sucks the gude lyfe blude
Of the man that gart me dee.”
Hee saw hir lipps were wet wi’ blude,
And hee saw hir lufelesse eyne,
And loud hee cry’d, “‘ get frae my syde,
Thou vampyr corps encleane ! ”
But no, hee is in hir magic boat,
And on the wyde, wyde sea ;
And the vampyr suckis his gude lyfe blude,
Sho suckis him till hee dee.
So now beware, whoe’er you are,
That walkis in this lone wood :
Beware of that deceitfull spright,
The ghaist that suckis the blude.


The Vampire Bride, a ballad by the Hon. Henry Liddell,
has considerable merit. It may be found in The Wizard of the
North, The Vampire Bride, and other Poems, Blackwood,
Edinburgh, and Cadell, London, 1833. These stanzas are
founded upon the old tale of the knight who having placed a ring
—some say his wedding-ring—around the finger of the statue
of Venus whilst he is a quoiting, when he would reclaim it


880 THE VAMPIRE


finds that the finger is crooked so that the jewel may not be
withdrawn, whilst that night a phantom claims him as her
spouse. With difficulty is he freed from the thrall of the
succubus.

In 1845 there was published at the Columbian Press Weston-
super-mare, a little book entitled The Last of the Vampires, by
Smyth Upton. The chief, some critics might say the only,
merit of this tale is its excessive rarity. The narrative is
somewhat curiously divided into Epochs, the first of which
takes place in 1769, the second in 1777, the third and last in
1780. Chapter I opens in an English village named Frampton,
but in Chapter II “we find ourselves upon the borders of
Bohemia” in the Castle Von Oberfels. Four chapters of no
great length and somewhat disconnected in their sequence
comprise the First Epoch. A little later we meet with the
mysterious Lord de Montfort, and apparently he has just
committed a murder, since he is one of the two men who stand
in a dreary outhouse adjoining Montfort Abbey. ‘“‘ Red blood,
yet warm, stains their murderous hands, and is seen also in
pools upon the floor ; the same marks are observable, also, on
their clothes.” ‘The scene is a fearful one; it is one of
those of which the mere recital makes the blood run cold,”
and the writer wisely does not attempt the task. In the
penultimate chapter of this extraordinary production we are
introduced to “a certain young German, the Baron Von
Oberfels,” who weds Mary Learmont, the elder daughter of
“Sir James Learmont, who being a Baronet, was, moreover,
a Knight of the Bath and M.P.” Unfortunately the Baron
“was one of that horrible class, the Vampires! He had sold
his soul to the evil one, for the enjoyment of perpetual youth ;
being bound, besides, to what are understood to be the
penalties of that wretched and accursed race. Every tenth
year a female was sacrificed to his infernal master. Mary
Learmont was to be the next victim; may she escape the
threatened doom.” But apparently, so far as I can gather,
she is not so lucky for we are vaguely told: ‘“‘ The Baron and
his bride departed on his wedding tour. Her father and
mother never hear of her more.” A page or two later there is
“a midnight wedding ”’ at the Castle Von Oberfels. Of the
bride we are told nothing save that she had a “ fair presence.”
“The Baron Von Oberfels was there, once more arrayed in the


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE = 331


garments of a bridegroom.” The ceremony proceeds. The
grand organ peals; the heavenly voices of white-robed
choristers added greatly to the beauty of the scene. “ But
hark! another noise is heard; sulphureous smoke half fills
the sacred building; the floor opens for an instant; and
mocking shrieks are audible as the spirit of the Last of the
Vampires descended into perdition.”

I am bound to acknowledge that after a somewhat careful
reading of this curious and most disjointed little piece of
seventy-six pages the only impression with which I am met is
that Mr. Smyth Upton knew nothing whatsoever of what the
word vampire connotes. The idea of the victims who are
sacrificed for the sake of eternal youth is, of course fairly
common and was very effectively utilized by G. W. M. Reynolds
in his romance The Necromancer, which ran in Reynolds’s
Miscellany from Saturday, 27th December, 1851, to Saturday,
31st July, 1852. Incidentally it may be remarked as a some-
what curious fact that this prolific novelist never availed
himself of the vampire tradition in his melodramatic chapters.

The Vampyre. ‘“ By the Wife of a Medical Man,” 1858, is a
violent teetotal tract, of twenty-seven short chapters presented
in the guise of fiction. The villain of the piece is “The
Vampyre Inn,” and the dipsomaniac hero—if it be allowable
to use the term in such a context—is given to ravings such as
these: ‘‘ They fly—they bite—they suck my blood—lI die.
That hideous ‘ Vampyre!’ Its eyes pierce me thro-—they are
red—they are bloodshot. Tear it from my pillow. I dare
not lie down. It bites—I die! Give me brandy—brandy—
more brandy.”

A Vampire of Souls, by H. M. P., published in 1904, is a book
of little value. The hero, George Ventnor, when aged twenty,
is killed in a railway accident, and the narrative consists of his
after experiences which are singularly material and crude.
There is, perhaps, a good touch here and there, but the thing
certainly does not deserve to be rescued from oblivion.

It will have been noticed that beyond the titles these two
last works have really little or nothing to do with vampires at
all, but we may now consider a romance which may at least be
ranked as a very serious rival to—in my opinion it is far
ghostlier than—its famous successor Dracula. Varney the
Vampire, or, The Feast of Blood, is undoubtedly the best novel


832 THE VAMPIRE


of Thomas Preskett Prest, a prolific writer of the fourth and
fifth decades of the nineteenth century. It is true that his
productions published by the well-known Edward Lloyd, of
231, Shoreditch, may be classed as simple “ shockers,” but
none the less he has considerable power in this kind, and he
had at any rate the craft of telling his story with skill and
address. There is a certain quality in his work, which appeared
during the years from 1839 to the earlier fifties, that is entirely
lacking in the productions of his fellows. To him have been
ascribed, doubtless with some exaggeration, well nigh two
hundred titles, but the following list comprises, I believe, his
principal romances : Hla, the Outcast, or, the Gipsy of Rosemary
Dell ; Angelina, or, the Mystery of S. Mark’s Abbey, “a Tale
of Other Days”; The Death Grasp, or, A Father's Curse ;
Ernnestine De Lacy, or, The Robbers’ Foundling ; Gallant Tom,
or, The Perils of a Sailor Ashore and Afloat, “an original
nautical romance of deep and pathetic interest”; Sweeney
Todd, the Demon Barber of Fleet Street (the most famous of
Prest’s novels) ; Newgate (which has some capital episodes) ;
Emily Fitzormond ; Mary Clifford ; The Maniac Father, or,
The Victim of Seduction ; Gertrude of the Rock ; Rosalie, or,
The Vagrant’s Daughter ; The Miller’s Maid ; Jane Brightwell ;
Blanche, or, The Mystery of the Doomed House ; The Blighted
Heart, or, The Priory Ruins ; Sawney Bean, the Man-eater of
Midlothian ; The Skeleton Clutch, or, The Goblet of Gore ; The
Black Monk, or, The Secret of the Grey Turret® ; The Miller
and His Men, or, The Secret Robbers of Bohemia. To Prest
also has been attributed, but I conceive without foundation,
Susan Hoply, an audacious piracy upon the famous novel by
Mrs. Crowe, Susan Hopley.

Varney the Vampire, or, The Feast of Blood, was first pub-
lished in 1847. It contains no less than CCXX chapters and
runs to 868 pages. The many incidents succeed each other
with such breathless rapidity that it were well-nigh impossible
to attempt any conspectus of the whole romance. The very
length would make this analysis a work of extreme difficulty,
and incidentally we may note the amazing copiousness of Prest
which must ever remain a matter for wonderment. Such a
romance, for example, as Newgate runs to no less than one
hundred and forty-nine chapters comprising 772 pages. Th ¢
Maniac Father has fifty-four chapters, each of considerabl


PLATE VIII


No. 1)


Nos, 2, 3 and 4 are Presented, Gratis, with this No. _ (Price 1d,


Sones |


Peas NS SOS SSS SSS’ TSS SSS


~


BY THE AUTHOR OF
“ GRACE RIVERS; OR, THE MERCHANT'S DAUGHTER.”


LONDON: EB, LLOYD, SALISBURY-SQUARE, AND ALL BOOKSELLERS,


VARNEY THE VAMPIRE


[ face p. 332


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE — 338


length, which total 604 pages, and I have not selected these on
account of their exceptional volume.

Varney the Vampire was among the most popular of Prest’s
productions, and on account of its “ unprecedented success ”
it was reprinted in 1853 in penny parts. To-day the book is
unprocurable and considerable sums have been for many years
in vain offered to secure a copy. Indeed, it may be noted that
all Prest’s work is excessively scarce.

It is hardly an exaggeration to affirm that of recent years
there have been few books which have been more popular than
Bram Stoker’s Dracula, A tale, and certainly there is no
sensational romance which in modern days has achieved so
universal a reputation. Since it was first published in 1897,
that is to say one and twenty years ago, it has run into a
great number of editions, and the name has veritably become a
household word. It will prove interesting to inquire into the
immediate causes which have brought this book such wide and
enduring fame. It has already been remarked that it is well-
nigh impossible for a story which deals with the supernatural or
the horrible to be sustained to any great length. Elements
which at first are almost unendurable will lose their effect if they
are continued, for the reader’s mind insensibly becomes inured
to fresh emotions of awe and horror, and Dracula is by no means
briefly told. In the ordinary reprints (Tenth Edition, 1913)
it extends to more than four hundred pages, nor does it escape
the penalty of its prolixity. The first part, “* Jonathan
Harker’s Journal,” which consists of four chapters is most
admirably done, and could the whole story have been sustained
at so high a level we should have had a complete masterpiece.
But that were scarcely possible. The description of the
journey through Transylvania is interesting to a degree, and
even has passages which attain to something like charm.
“ All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which
was full of beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little
towns or castles on the top of steep hills such as we see in old
missals ; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed
from the wide stony margin on each side of them to be subject
to great floods. It takes a lot of water, and running strong,
to sweep the outside edge of a river clear.” Very effective is
the arrival of the English traveller at the “ vast ruined castle,
from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose


ee SS eR I OTE Nee eS


334 THE VAMPIRE


broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit
sky.” Very adroitly are the various incidents managed in
their quick succession, those mysterious happenings which at
last convince the matter-of-fact commonplace young solicitor
of Exeter that he is a helpless prisoner in the power of a relent-
less and fearful being. The continual contrasts between
business conversations, the most ordinary events of the
dull listless days, and all the while the mantling of dark
shadows in the background and the onrushing of some
monstrous doom are in these opening chapters most excellently
managed.

So tense a strain could not be preserved, and consequently
when we are abruptly transported to Whitby and the rather
tedious courtships of Lucy Westenra, who is a lay figure at
best, we feel that a good deal of the interest has already begun
to evaporate. I would hasten to add that before long it is
again picked up, but it is never sustained in the same degree ;
and good sound sensational fare as we have set before us,
fare which I have myself more than once thoroughly enjoyed,
yet it is difficult not to feel that one’s palate has been a little
spoiled by the nonpareil of an antipast. This is not to say that
the various complications are not sufficiently thrilling, but
because of their very bounty now and again they most palpably
fail of effect, and it can hardly escape notice that the author
begins to avail himself of those more extravagant details of
vampirism which frankly have no place outside the stories told
round a winter’s hearth. It would have been better had he
confined himself to those particulars which are known and
accepted, which indeed have been officially certified and
definitely proved. But to have limited himself thus would
have meant the shortening of his narrative, and here we return
to the point which was made above.

If we review Dracula from a purely literary point of approach
it must be acknowledged that there is much careless writing
and many pages could have been compressed and something
revised with considerable profit. It is hardly possible to feel
any great interest in the characters, they are labels rather than
individuals, As I have ‘said, there are passages of graphic
beauty, passages of graphic horror, but these again almost
entirely occur within the first sixty pages. There are some
capital incidents, for example the method by which Lord


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE = 885


Godalming and his friend obtain admittance to No. 347
Piccadilly. Nor does this by any means stand alone.

However, when we have—quite fairly, I hope—thus criticized
Dracula, the fact remains that it is a book of unwonted interest
and fascination. Accordingly we are bound to acknowledge
that the reason for the immense popularity of this romance,—
the reason why, in spite of obvious faults it is read and
re-read—lies in the choice of subject and for this the author
deserves all praise.

It might not have seemed that Dracula would have been a
very promising subject for the stage, but nevertheless it was
dramatized by Hamilton Deans and produced at the Wimbledon
Theatre on 9th March, 1925. This version was performed in
London at the Little Theatre, 14th February, 1927. On the
preceding Thursday the Daily Mirror published a photograph
of the late Mr. Bram Stoker accompanied by the following
paragraphs. ‘‘ Herewith, one of the very few photographs of
the late Bram Stoker, who, besides being Sir Henry Irving’s
manager for years, was an industrious novelist. As I have
already said, a dramatic verson of his most famous book,
‘ Dracula,’ is to be done at the Little on Monday, and the scene
of the Grand Guignol plays is appropriate, for the new piece,
I hear, is so full of gruesome thrills that, in the provinces
women having been carried fainting from the auditorium.
Truly we take our pleasures sadly.

“The dramatic adaptation is by Hamilton Deans, whose
grandfather, Colonel Deans, and the Rev. Abraham Stoker,
Bram’s father, lived on adjoining estates in County Dublin.
Young Bram and Hamilton Deane’s mother, then a young
girl, were great friends. Stoker had the book “Dracula ’ in his
mind, and the young people used to discuss its possibilities.
Strange that it should be young Hamilton Deane who has
dramatized the book and brought the play to London.”

At the Little Theatre the cast of Dracula was as follows :
Count Dracula, Raymond Huntley ; Abraham van Helsing,
Hamilton Deane; Dr. Seward, Stuart Lomath; Jonathan
Harker, Bernard Guest ; Quincey P. Morris, Frieda Hearn ;
Lord Godalming, Peter Jackson; R. M. Renfield, Bernard
Jukes ; The Warden, Jack Howarth ; The Parlourmaid, Hilda
Macleod ; The Housemaid, Betty Murgatroyd ; Mina Harker,
Dora Mary Patrick.


836 THE VAMPIRE


By no stretch could it be called a good play, whilst the
presentation, at the best, can hardly be described as more
than reasonably adequate. In one or two instances the
effects, upon which so much depends and which obviously
demanded the most scrupulous care, were so clumsily contrived
as to excite an involuntary smile. ‘It was only a step from
the devilish to the ridiculous on Monday night,” said the Era,
16th February, 1927. Very remarkable was a lady, dressed in
the uniform of a hospital nurse who sat in the vestibule of the
theatre, and it was bruited that her services were required by
members of the audience who were overcome owing to the
horrors of the drama. I can only say that I find this canard
impossible to believe, guodcewmque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus
odi. Asan advertisement, and it can surely have been nothing
else, the attendance of a nurse was in deplorable taste. I am
informed that after the first few weeks a kind of epilogue was
spoken when all the characters were assembled upon the stage,
and it was explained that the audience must not be distressed
at what they had seen, that it was comically intended for their
entertainment. So gross a lapse of good manners, not to speak
of the artistic indecorum, is hardly credible.

Confessedly the play was extremely weak, and yet such is
the fascination of this subject that it had an exceptional
success, and triumphantly made its way from theatre to
theatre. On 25th July, 1927, Dracula was transferred to the
Duke of York’s ; on the 29th August, following to the Prince
of Wales; on 10th October to the Garrick; and all the while it
was given to thronging houses. It has also toured, and at the
present moment is still touring the provincial theatres with the
most marked success, the drama being given with more spirit
and vigour than originally was the case at the Little, and
Wilfrid Fletcher in particular playing the lunatic Renfield with
a real touch of wistful pathos and uncanny horror. This is
is extremely instructive, and it is curious that the vogue of
the “vampire play” in London should be repeated almost
exactly after the interval of a century. On 5th November, 1927,
a new version of Dracula by Charles Morrel was presented at
the Court Theatre, Warrington.

In America the dramatization of Dracula was produced at
the Shubert, New Haven, 19th September, 1927. This was
given at the Fulton, New York, upon the following 5th October.


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE 387


Jonathan Harker was acted by Terence Neil; Abraham Van
Helsing by Edward Van Sloan ; Renfield by Bernard Jukes ;
and Count Dracula by Bela Lugoni.

As I have before remarked, the striking fact that an in-
different play should prove so successful ean, I think, only be
attributed to the fascination of the theme. Consciously or
unconsciously it is realized that the vampire tradition contains
far more truth than the ordinary individual cares to appreciate
and acknowledge. “La fable du vampire est peut-étre la plus
universelle de nos superstitions. . . . Elle a partout
Yautorité de la tradition: elle ne manque ni de celle de la
philosophie ni de celle de la médicine. La théologie méme en
a parlé,”’


NOTES TO CHAPTER V


* Ghost Stories of an Antiquary (Second Impression), London, 1905

. 149-179. .

PP Der Naturforscher. Achtundvierzigstes  Stiick, Leipzig, Sonnabend,
den 25 des Mays, 1748.
* Werke, Géschen, 1857, XI, 260.
* Cf. also Schach Lolo: Werke, Hempel, XII, 39.
Nicht Menschen mehr, Vampyre nur erblickt,
Die an ihm saugen und an ihm liegen.
* The following but poorly expresses the original :
From my grave to wander I am fore’d,
Still to seek The Good’s long-sever’d link,
Still to love the bridegroom I have lost,
And the life-blood of his heart to drink ;
When his race is run,
I must hasten on,
And the young must ’neath my vengance sink.

* In Schmidt, Charakteristiken, Berlin, 1886, pp. 246-247.

” In his Historic Survey of German Poetry, London, 1830, in a note upon his
translation Hllenore (p. 51) Taylor says: “No German poem has been
so repeatedly translated into English as Ellenore : Eight different versions
are lying on my table, and I have read others. It becomes not me to appre-
ciate them ; suffice it to observe that this was the earliest of them all, having
been communicated to my friends in the year 1790, and mentioned in the
preface to Dr. Aikin’s poems which appeared in 1791. It was first printed
in the second number of the Monthly Magazine for 1796. The German title
is Lenore, which is the vernacular form of Eleonora, a name here represented
by Ellenore.” Taylor compares Lenore with “an obscure English ballad
called the Suffolk miracle,” and he reprints (p. 52) this ample poem in full ;
The Suffolk Miracle: Or a relation of a young man, who, a month after his
death, appeared to his sweetheart, and carried her on horseback behind him for
forty miles in two hours and was never seen after but in his grave,

* Lockhart, Memoirs, vol. I, p. 204,

* Captain Basil Hall’s Schloss Hainfeld : or, a Winter in Lower Styria,
Edinburgh, 1836, p. 332.

22


338 THE VAMPIRE


10 The whole stanza is repeated thrice, xxxix ; xlviii; and liv, with extra-
ordinary effect :

Tramp, tramp, across the land they speede ;
Splash, splash, across the sea ;

Hurrah! the dead can ride apace ;
Dost feare to ride with mee ?

In a note Taylor says: “ By shifting the scene to England, and making
William, a soldier of Richard Lionheart, it became necessary that the ghost
of Ellenore, whom Death, in the form of her lover, conveys to William’s
grave, should cross the sea. Hence the splash! splash! of the xxxix and
other stanzas, of which there is no trace in the original; of the tramp !
tramp! there is. I could not prevail upon myself to efface these words,
which have been gotten by heart, and which are quoted even in Don Juan.”
The Don Juan reference is Canto X, lxxi:

On with the horses! Off to Canterbury !
Tramp, tramp o’er pebble, and splash : splash ! through puddle.

11 Introduction to The Chase and William and Helen, Edinburgh, 1807,

Cavs

12 Seott, Imitations, p. 39.

13 So Captain Basil Hall, Schloss Hainfeld, p. 332.

44 The publisher was Miller.

18 Bleonora. Novella Morale scritta sulla traccia d’un Poemetto Inglese
tradotto dal Tedesco. Trattenimento Italico di Mrs. Taylor, In Londra,
1798.

16 Christabel, I, 79-103.

17 Coleridge, p. 224.

18 Medwin, Life of Shelley, Vol. I, p. 62.

18 Dowden, Life of Shelley, Vol. Il, p. 123.

20 Charles Middleton, Shelley and His Writings, 1858, vol. I, p. 47.

*1 Beitrage, p. 61.

22 St. Irvyne ; or, The Rosicrucian, “ By a Gentleman of the University of
Oxford,” was published by J. J. Stockdale, 1811.

23 Newark, 1807.

24 See my Introduction to Zofloya, or The Moor, Fortune Press, 1928.

2 Byron, English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, 259-276.

26 British Review, 1818, vol. XI. p. 37.

2° Horrid Mysteries, of which there is a reprint in two volumes with Intro-
duction by myself, 1927, was first published in 1796 as “ From the German of
the Marquis of Grosse by P. Will.” he Midnight Groan, or The Spectre
of the Chapel, 1808, is anonymous. The Abbot of Montserrat, 2 vols., 1826,
is by William Child Green. The Demon of Venice (a redaction of Zofloya),
1810; The Convent Spectre, 1808, and The Hag of the Mountains (1798 1)
were all published without the authors’ names. :

28 Thalaba was commenced on 12th July, 1799, and finished at Cintra in
July, 1800. It was published in the following year.

2) T have used “The Poetical Works of Robert Southey Collected by
Himself,” ten volumes, 1837-38. Zhalaba occupies vol. IV.

8° Vol. IV, p. 305 of this edition of Southey.

31 Vol. XI, no. 63.

82 Dr. Stefan Hock has not traced the German original. The French
version is known to me: Fantasmagoriana, ou Recueil d’ Histoires d@appari-
tions de spectres, revenans, fantémes, etc. Traduit de Vallemand par un
Amateur [Eyriés]. Paris, F. F. Schoell, 2 vols, 12 mo, 1812. I also have in
my collection Tales of Terror, or More Ghosts ; Forming a Complete Phantas-
magoria, 1802. This bears as a motto upon the title page :

Twelve o’Clock’s the Time of Night
That the Graves, all gaping wide,

Quick send forth the airy Sprite
In the Church-way Path to glide.

The book is embellished with a frontispiece representing a most entirely
typical white-robed spectre.


{


THE VAMPIRE IN LITERATURE = 839


** Byron signs the dedication of The Giaour to Samuel Rogers, May, 1813,
In 1815 it had reached a fourteenth edition.

%* Jean Sbogar and Thérése Aubert are two well-known works by Nodier.

38 Paris, 1824.

%¢ Philippe, who was a universal favourite, died 16th October, 1824. “Sa
mort fit presque autant de bruit que sa vic,” says Dumas, who gives a vivid
picture of the unhappy scandals and delays which, owing to the ill-advised
conduct of certain Jansenistic fanatics, profaned the funeral on the 18th
October, following. The famous actor was interred at Pére-Lachaise, the
obsequies being attended by more than three thousand people. Amélie
Delaunay when quite young married an actor of medium attainments
Allan-Dorval. She was soon left a widow, and after a hard struggle obtained
recognition of her genius. Dumas who admired her immensely speaks of her
as ‘‘l’Eve qui devait donner le jour & tout un monde dramatique.”

*7 “ Quant & Philippe, qui l’écraisait, & cette époque, de la dignité de son
pas et de la majesté de son geste, c’était la représentation du mélodrame pur
sang Pixérécourt et Caignez. . . Nul ne portait, comme Philippe la
botte jaune, la tunique chamois bordée de noir, la toque & plume et I’épéea
poignée en croix.” Dumas, Mes Memoires, Troisiéme Série, lxxvii.

88 I quote from the article as reprinted in the Mélanges, I, 417.

8° Histoire des Vampires et des spectres Malfaisans, Paris, 1820.

‘0 Le Comte de Monte-Cristo, Chapter xxxv. I quote from the English
translation issued by Collins’ Clear Type Press, vol. I, pp. 466-68.

“| La Tradition et V Exotisme dans lV euvre de Charles Nodier, (1780-1844).
1923, p. 124.

“2 Oeuvres complétes de Eugéne Scribe, Paris, Dentu, 1876. 2m™* Serie,
VI, pp. 41-84.

‘8 Folie vaudeville en un acte. Paris, Barba, 1820.

44 Paris, Martinet, 1820.

‘5 Borne, Schilderungen aus Paris (1822 and 1823),

‘6 “ Polichinel ist die beste Seele von der Welt.”

47 1794-1844,

‘8 Thomas Potter Cooke was born April, 1786, and died April, 1864. His
historic début seems to have been made at the Royalty in January, 1804,
but his first marked success was in the réle of Lord Ruthven, which won
him great applause. The best known character of this famous actor was
William in Douglas Jerrold’s Black-ey’d Susan, or, All in the Downs, produced
at the Surrey Theatre, 8th June, 1829, when it ran for nearly a year. It was
frequently revived and never failed of an enthusiastic reception.

** 2 vols., London, 1871.


°° This was first produced on 13th April, 1819, as an after-piece to Jane
Shore in which Mrs. W. West had appeared for the first time in the title-réle.
In Abudah, H. Kemble acted Abudah ; Bengough, the genius Barhaddan ;
Harley, Fadlahdallah ; Miss Cooke, Selima; and Mrs. Bland, Zemroude.
Genest says that the little fairy tale was given thirteen times.

5! The Tales of the Genii : or, The Delightful Lessons of Horam the Son of
Asmar. Translated from the Persian by Sir Charles Morell. This book was
written by a young clergyman, the Rev. James Ridley, son of Dr. Gloster
Ridley, Chaplain to the East India Company. ‘ Horam” and “ Sir Charles
Morell” are mere fictions. James Ridley died in 1765 immediately after
the completion of the first edition of his Tales, which proving very popular
have been often reprinted.

52 The play is preserved in MS. Lansdowne 807, British Museum, a volume
said to contain the few remains of John Warburton’s collection which escaped
the kitchen fire at the hands of his cook. Sir George Buc in his note written
at the end of the piece refers to “‘ this second Maidens tragedy ” apparently
in allusion to the famous drama by Beaumont and Fletcher, and although not
very apposite the name has continued. A scholarly and well-edited reprint
of The Second Maiden’s Tragedy has long been a desideratum. The issue
which was prepared for the Malone Society in 1910 by Mr. W. W. Greg is
eminently unreadable, nor has the petty recension of the text any real value


22a


340 THE VAMPIRE


being the mere tricks in hand of an arid and sterile pedantry. Such spade
work might be used by a scholar as the basis for his edition.

58 On the last page, folio 56b, the authorship has been assigned to
Thomas Goff. This name, however, was erased and that of George Chapman
substituted. This again was deleted and the words “ By Will Shakspear”
inscribed. It is probable that the earliest attribution was made some fifty
years or more before the two later, which may belong to the eighteenth
century.

54 Founded by Charles III in 1738 and built by Angelo Carasale.

58 Some authorities say 29th March.

56 Rev. Robert Walsh, LL.D., author of “ A Residence in Constantinople,”
and other similar works. (Planché.)

87 Dion Boucicault (or Bourcicault), playwright and actor, was born at
Dublin, 20th December, 1822, and after a most distinguished career, died
18th September, 1890.

58 Journal of a London Playgoer from 1851 to 1866, London, 1891, pp. 45-64.

59 Tt may be remarked that the drawing which illustrates the last scene of
the play in the Dicks’ Edition is inconsistent, as it shows the characters in
costumes of circa 1750.

®0 The first edition was of the same year. In 1822 this author published
a second tragedy, Montezuma. Hugo John Belfour was born in 1802, he was
ordained in 1826, and died young in the following year.

61 Ein Kulturbild aus der Gegenwart.

62 Sozialer Roman. Als Manuskript Gedruckt. Oberhausen und Leipzig,
1883.

63 Novelle aus der Gegenwart. In Das neue Blatt. “Ein illustriertes
Familien-Journal,”’ IV (1873), p. 209-408.

64 Mr. S. M. Ellis, who contributed a bibliography of Le Fanu to the
Irish Book Lover in 1916. Dr. M. R. James in his Epilogue to the reprint
Madam Crowl’s Ghost and Other Tales of Mystery, London, 1923.

65 Three volumes, Bentley; also in one volume. A modern re-issue in
two parts by Newnes. Also reprinted in one volume, Eveleigh Nash and
and Grayson, London, 1923.

66 Vol. VI, p. 181; vol. IX, p. 212.

*?7 And afterwards of 12, Salisbury Square, Fleet Street.

*8 Occasionally attributed to G. W. M. Reynolds, who, however, more
than once denied the authorship.

89 This Epilogue was generally delivered in the provinces and so banal
an anti-climax completely ruined the play.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Abhandlung des Dasenns der Gespenster Nebst einem Anhange vom
Vampyrismus. Augsburg, 1768

Actenmassige und umstiéndliche Relation von denen Vampyren. Leipzig, 1732

Autacci, Leone (Lno AtLatius). De Graecorum hodie quorundam opination-
ibus, Cologne, 1645

ANDREE, Richard. Zthnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche. 2 vols.,
Stuttgart, 1878-89

Arnason, J. Icelandic Legends : translated by G. Powell and E. Magnusson,
London, 1864-66

BarrTets, M. and Pross, H. H. Das Weib. Berlin, 1913

Basin, Bernardus. De artibus magicis. 1482; also Paris, 1506

Basttan, Adolf. Der Mensch in der Geschichte, II Band: Psychologie und
Mythologie. Leipzig, 1860

Bett, H. J. Obeah. Witchcraft in the West Indies. London, 1893.

Brucuat, H. Manuel d’ archéologie americaine (Amérique Pré-historique ;
Civilisations disparues). Paris, 1912

Beaumont, John. An Historical, Physiological, and Theological Treatise of
Spirits, Apparitions, Witcherafts, and other Magical Practices. London,
1705

Bernt, J.T. The Cyclades. London, 1885

Bernonli, Giuseppe Don. Leggende popolari Veneziane. Venezia, Antonelli,
1814


BovurEuLLE, De. “La démonologie de Dom Calmet”’—in the Bulletin de
la Société Philomatique Vosgienne, 1887. Saint-Dié. Impr. Humbert.

BreeneE, R. 8. An Irish Vampire—in The Occult Review, October, 1925,
pp. 242-5

Brownu, W.A.F. “ Necrophilism ”’—in Journal of Mental Science, Ji anuary,
1875, pp. 551-560

Catmet, Augustin Dom (0.S.B.) Traité sur les Apparitons des Esprits, et
sur les Vampires, ou les Revenans de Hongrie, de Moravie, etc. Nouvelle
édition, revue, corrigée, d& augmentée par |’ Auteur. 2vols. Paris, 1751.
(The first edition is Paris, 1746; and there was an edition Einsiedeln,
Dans la princiére abbaie par Jean Everhard Kalin, 2 vols., 1749)

Castren, M. A. Vorlesungen iiber die finnische Mythologie : deutsch von
A. Schiefner. St. Petersburg, 1853

Crynowa, Flor. De terrae Pucensis incolarum superstitione in re medica.
Berlin, 1851

Christliche Betrachtungen iiber die wunderbarliche Begebenheit mit den Blut-
saugenden Todten in Servien. Leipzig, 1732

Coprineron, R. H.(D.D.). The Melanesians : studies in their Anthropology
and Folk Lore. Oxford. Clarendon Press, 1891 -

Cottin pe Prancy, J. A. S. Dictionnaire Infernal. Editio princeps. 2
vols. Paris, 1818. (I have used the sixth, and last, edition, 1 vol., 4to,
1863. The six editions differ widely from one another. This famous
work is valuable, but uncritical and even erroneous)

Histoire des Vampires. Paris, 1820
(This work, which has been erroneously attributed to Dr Polidori, is now
considered almost certainly to be by Collin de Plancy)

Crowe, Catherine. Light and Darkness. 3 vols. London, 1850.

Cuisin, J. P. R. Les ombres sanglantes, galerie funébre de prodiges, événements
merveilleux, apparitions nocturnes, songes épouvantables, délits mysterieux,


341


842 BIBLIOGRAPHY


phenoménes terribles, vengeances atroces, et combinaisons du crime, forfaits

historiques, cadavres mobiles, tétes de la terreur. 2 vols. 12mo. Paris, 1820
Spectriana, on recueil d’histories et d’aventures surprenantes, merveilleuses

et remarquables, de spectres, revenans, esprits, fantémes, diables, et démons.

Manuscrit trouvé dans les catacombes. Paris, Lécrivain, 1817

Curieuse Relation von denen sich in Servien erzeigend habenden Bluts-

augern. Leipzig, 1732

Curtin, J. Tales of the Fairies and of the Ghost World. London, 1895

Davanzatt, Gioseppe. Dissertazione sopra i Vampiri di Gioseppe Davanzati,
Patrizio Fiorentino, e Tranese, Cavaliere Gerosolimitano, Arcivescovo
di Trani e Patriarcad’ Alessandria. Secondaedizione. Napoli. MDCC.
LXXXIX. Presso Filippo Raimondi. Con licenza de’ Superiori. 8vo.
pp. xxx, 230

Daviss, T. Witton. Magic, Divination, and Demonology among the Hebrews
and their Neighbours. London and Leipzig, s.d. (1898)

Dawgs, R.M. Modern Greek in Asia Minor ; with a chapter on folk-tales
by W. R. Halliday. London, 1916

De Gvarra, Stanislas. Hssais de sciences maudites. I. Paris, Carré 1886;
Carré, 1890; Chamuel, 1895; II, Paris Chamuel, 1891; III, Paris,
Chamuel, 1897,

Demetrius, Christoph Friedrichs. Philosophischer Versuch, ob nicht die
merkwurdige Begebenheit der Blutsauger oder Vampyren aus den principtis
naturae hergeleitet werden konne. Vienna, 1732

Drerericn, Albrech. Nekyia. Leipzig, 1893

Dissertatio physica de cadaueribus sanguisugis, sub praesidio Jon. Christ.
Stockii. Jena, 1732

Dozon, A. Contes albanais. Paris, 1881

Eaves, A. Osborne. Modern Vampirism. Talisman Publishing Company,
Harrogate, England. 1904

Ennemoser, Joseph. The History of Magic : translated from the German by
William Howitt. 2vols. London, Bohn, 1854

Faurren. Chansons populaires de la Gréce Moderne. Paris, 1824-5

Frirscu, John Christian. Zines Weimarischen muthmassliche Gedancken
von den Vampyren oder Blutsaugenden Todten, Leipzig, 1732

Garmannvs, Christ. Frider. De Miraculis mortuorum. Lipsiae, 1670

Gizs, H. A. Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, London, 1909

Grraxpo (0.P.) le R. P. Mathias de. Histoire curieuse et pittoresque des sorciers
devins, magiciens, astrologues, voyants, revenants, dmes en peine, vampires,
spectres, esprits, malins, sorts jetés, excorcismes, etc., depuis Vantiquité
jusqu’a nos jours. Revue et augmentée par Fornari. Paris, Renault, 8vo,
1846. There were other editions, 1849 and 1854, of this popular work.
Fra Giraldo is described as “ dominicain, ancien exorciste de |’ Inquisi-
tion,” but his actual existence is something more than suspect. Fornari
writes himself ‘‘ Professeur de Philosophie hermétique 4 Milan,” and
this is ornamental.

Globus :Illustrierte Zeitschrift fiir Lander-und Volkerkunde

Gorrxs, Johann Joseph. Die Christliche Mystik. 4vols. 1836-42. French
translation: La Mystique Divine, Naturelle, et Diabolique . . . 5
vols. Paris, 1861

Grant, James. The Mysteries of all Nations: Rise and Progress of Super-
stition. Leith, Edinburgh, and London. n.d. 2nd ed. (Preface
signed, January, 1880)

Groor, J. J. M. De. The Religious System of China. Leyden, 1892-1910

The Religion of the Chinese. New York, 1910
Grunprvic, N. F. 8. Danske Kempeviser. No. 90. Copenhagen, 1847
Haun, J.G. von. Albanesische Studien. Jena, 1854

Griechische und Albanesische Mdrchen. Leipzig, 1864

Hanvusu, 8. Slavische mythologie.

Hare, Augustus. Story of my Life, 6 vols. 1896-1900

Harenperc, John Christian. Verninfftige und christliche Gedanken tiber die
Vampyrs oder Blutsaugenden Todten. Wolfenbittel, 1732


BIBLIOGRAPHY 848


Havutrecorur, Henry. Le Folklore de Ile de Kythnos. Bruxelles, 1898

HavuxTHAUSEN, Baron August von. Transcaucasia ; Sketches of the Nations
and Races between the Black Sea and the Caspian. London, 1854

Herecctivus, J.M. De absolutione mortuorum excommunicatorum, seu tympan-
icorum in ecclesia Graeca. Helmstad, 1709

HEtLWALD, F. von. Die Welt der Slaven. Berlin, 1890

Heum, K. Altgermanische Religioneschichte. Heidelberg, 1913

Hertz, Wilhelm. Der Werwolf. Stuttgart, 1862

Hock, 8S. Die Vampyrsagen und ihre Verwertung in der deutschen Litteratur.
Berlin, 1900

Horst, Georg Conrad. Zauber-bibliothek ; oder von Zauberei, Theurgie, und
Mantik, Zauberern, Hexen, und Hexenprocessen, Dimonen, Gespenstern,
und Geistererschein ungen. 6 vols., Mainz, 1821

Histoire prodigieuse d’un gentilhomme auquel le Diable s’est apparu et avec
lequel il a conversé sous le corps d’une femme morte, aduenue a Paris le
premier de janvier mil six cens treize. Paris, 8vo, 1613. Reprinted by
Lenglett-Dufresny, Recueil de dissertations. Tome I, Part 2 (pp. 69-71

Hoss, C. and Mepoueatn, W. The Pagan Tribes of Borneo. London, 1912

Hovorka, O. von, and Kronrretp, A. Vergleichende Volksmedizin. 2 vols.
Berlin, 1908-9

Hupson, Thomson Jay. The Law of Psychic Phenomena. Putnam, 1905.
(c. xxi: ‘* Suspended Animation ”’ )

Hunt, R. Popular Romances of the West of England. London, 1865

Ion Greanga. Edited by Tudor Pamfile (Roumanian periodical of peasant
art and literature)

Ives, George. A History of Penal Methods. London, 1914

Joycr, Thomas Athol. Mexican Archeology : an introduction to the Archeo-
logy of the Mexican and Mayan Civilizations of pre-Spanish America.
London, 1914

Kart, O. F.(Karl Otto). Danziger Sagengesammelt von O.F. Karl. Danzig, 1843

Keane, A.H. Man, Past and Present. London, 1920

Kornmann. De miraculis mortuorum. 1610

Krauss, F. 8. ‘ Vampyre im siidslavischen Volksglauben ”—in Globus, 1xi
(1892)

LatstneR, Ludwig. Das Rathsel der Sphynx : Grundztige einer Mythenges-
chichte. Berlin, 1889

LANcE.IER, Charles. Historie mystique de Shatan. Daragon, Paris, 1905.
(3me partie : Le Vampire)

Lawson, John Cuthbert. Modern Greek Folk Lore and Ancient Greek Religion.
Cambridge, 1910

Leaxe, W.M. Travels in Northern Greece, 4 vols. London, 1835

Leg, Frederick George. The Vampyre. In Reynold’s Miscellany. Vol. I,
No. 28. (New Series.) Saturday, 20th January, 1849 (pp. 444-445)

Lresrecat, F. Zur Volkskunde. Heilbronn, 1879

Lucas, Paul. Voyage du Sieur Paul Lucas au Levant. 2 vols. A La Haye.
1705


Lycanthropist (The). In Reynolds’ Miscellany, Vol. V, No. 125. (New Series.)
Saturday, 30th November, 1850 (pp. 293-295)

Maccuttocn, J. A. ‘“ Vampire”—article in Encyclopedia of Religion and
Ethics, edited by James Hastings. Vol. XII, pp. 589-591. Edinburgh, 1921

Macnat, J. Slavic Mythology, Boston, 1918

Matirvus MatericarumM—». Sprenger and Kramer

Mannuarpt, W. Uber Vampyrismus—in Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Mythologie
und Sittenkunde. Vol. iv, pp. 259-82. Gdéttingen, 1858

Map, Walter. De Nugis Curialium. Edited by M. R. James. (Anecdota
Oxoniensia : Medieval and Modern Series, Part XIV) Oxford, 1914

De Nugis Curalium (Courtiers’ Trifles). Englished by Frederick Tupper

and Marbury Bladen Ogle. London, 1924

Mayo, Herbert. On the Truths contained in Popular Superstitions. Second
Edition. London, 1851. (These papers were first published in Black-
woods’ Edinburgh Magazine, 1847-8)


344 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Mianz, M. L’abbé. Encyclopédie Théologique, Tome Quarante—Neuviéme :
Dictionnaire des Sciences Occultes. Paris, 1860. Vampires, 783-798.
See also: Paul, Arnold, 263; Plogojowits, Pierre, 323-324; Polyinte,
325-326. And in Tome Quarante-Huitcime, Harppe, 803; Katha
hanes, 918-919

Morg, Henry. An Antidote against Atheism ; or An Appeal to the Natural
Faculties of the Mind of Man, whether there be nota God. 1653. Second
Edition with Appendix, 1655

Moreton, Andrew. The Secrets of the Invisible World Disclosed ; or, an
Universal History of Apparitions Sacred and Prophane. The third
edition, London, 1738

Muraocr, Agnes. “The Vampire in Roumania ”* —in Folk-Lore, vol.
xxxvii, No. 4, 31 December, 1926: pp. 320-49

Newton. Travels and Discoveries in the Levant. 2 vols., London, 1866

Nuno, de A. Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi. G. Barbera, Florence, 1891

Noprer, Charles. Infernaliana. Paris, Sansom et Nadau, 12mo, 1882

Occult Review (The)
Ocean of Story (The)—v. Somadeva

Orzsov, I. Credintele Téranului Roman despre Cer si Stele. (Roumanian
Academy phamphlet)

Ottonis Graben zum Stein unverlornes Licht und Recht derer Todten unter den
Lebendigen. Wittenberg, 1732

P[apan], Madame Gabrielle de. Histoire des Fantémes et des Démons qui
se sont montrés parmi les hommes, ou choix d’anecdotes et de contes, de faits
merveilleux, de traits bizarres, d’aventures extraordinaires sur les revenans,
les fantémes, les lutins, les démons, les spectres, les vampires et les apparitions
diverses, etc. Paris, 12mo,1819. (Quérard tells us that Collin de Plancy
who was a cousin of the writer, collaborated in this work)

Démoniana, ou Nouveau choix d’anecdotes surprenantes, de nouvelles pro-
digieuses, d’aventures bizarres, sur les revenans, les spectres, les fantémes,
les démons, les loups garous, les visions, etc. ; ouwvrage propre a rassurer les
imaginations timorees contre les frayeurs superstitieuses. Paris, 18mo,
1820. (Graesse mistakenly attributes this work to Collin de Plancy :
Bibliotheca Magica, p. 88)

Pasutny, Roperr. TravelsinCrete. 2vols. Cambridge and London, 1837.

Perronivus. Satire, tertium edidit Franciscus Buecheler. Berolini, 1895

Puimostratus. The Life of Apollonius of Tyana, translated by F. C. Cony-
beare, 2 vols. (Loeb Classical Library), London, 1926

PHiLEGON TRALLIANUS—apud Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, ed. Carolus
Mullerus, vol. III, pp. 602-24, Paris, Didot, 1849

PiummeEr, Charles. Uitae Sanctorum Hiberniae. 2 vols. Oxford, 1900

Pontius, M. John Christopher. Dissertatio de hominibus post mortem san-
guisugis. Leipzig, 1742

Pourrres, N. P. Tapaddcers rod éAAnuixod Aaod. Athens, 2 vols., 1904

Pourongus. Besondere Nachrichten von denen Vampyrs. Leipzig, 1732

Ratston, W.R.8. Russian Folk Tales. London, 1873

—. ogg De Masticatione Mortuorum in Tumulis Liber. Leipzig,
17

aie von dem Kauen und Schamtzen der Todten in Grabern. Leipzig,

1734

Rarrray, R. Sutherland. Ashanti Proverbs : translated from the original.
(The Primitive Ethics of a Savage People.) Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1916

Réalité de la magie et des Apparitions, ou Contre-poison du Dictionnaire

Infernal. Paris, 1819

Revue d’ Assyriologie, 1909, 61

Ricavut, Paul. ‘T'he Present State of the Greek and Armenian Churches, Anno
Christi, 1678. London, 1679

Ricuarp, §. J., Francois. Relation de ce qui s’est passé de plus remarquable a
Sant-Erini Isle de V Archipel, depuis Vétablissement des Peres de la
compagnie de Jesus en icelle. Paris, MDCLVII.


BIBLIOGRAPHY B45


Ropert, Cyprien. Les Slaves de Turquie, 2 vols. Paris, 1844
Ropp, Sir Rennell. The Customs and Lore of Modern Greece. London, 1892
Rour, M. Philip. De Masticatione Mortuorum (Dissertatio Historico-Philo-
sophica). Leipzig, 1679
RovaHeEaD, William. Burke and Hare (Notable British Trials). Glasgow,
Hodge, 1919
Rzazeynscl, 8. J. Gabriel. Historia naturalis curiosa regni Poloniae. San-
domiriae, 1721
Sr. Crarr, 8. G. B. and Bropuy, Charles A. Twelve Years’ Study of the Eastern
Question in Bulgaria : being a revised Edition of A Residence in Bulgaria
(1869). London, 1877
Scu»mmpr, Bernhard. Griechische Mdrchen, Sagen, und Volkslieder. Leipzig,
1877
Sonor, Arthurand Albert. Walachische Mdhrchen. Stuttgart and Tibingen
1845
Schreiben eines guten Freundes an einen anderen guten Freund, die Vampyren
betreffend. Frankfort, 1732
Simon, jun., Friedrich Alexander. Der Vampirismus im neunzehnten Jahr-
hundert. Hamburg, 1831. (A medical pamphlet dealing with the abuse
of excessive letting of blood by physicians)
Srmmon, Paul Max. Crimes et délits dans la folie. 1886
Smmocg, C. J. Handbuch der deutschen Mythologien. Bonn, 1874
SrnistRaRi, O. F. M., Ludovico Maria. Demoniality. Translated from the
Latin by the Rev. Montague Summers with an Introduction and Notes.
The Fortune Press, London, 1927
Sxrat,W.W. Malay Magic, being an Introduction to the Folklore and Popular
Religion of the Malay Peninsula. London. 1900
SomapERA. The Ocean of Story, translated by C. H. Tawney; edited with
Intruduction by N. M. Penzer, 10 vols. London, Sawyer, 1924
Sommitres, M. Le Colonel L. C. Vialla de. Voyage Historique et Politique
au Montenegro. 2 vols., Paris, 1820
Spencn, Lewis. An Encyclopedia of Occultism. London, Routledge, 1920
The Gods of Mexico. London, Unwin, 1923
The Myths of Mexico and Peru. London, Harrap, 1913
SPRENGER (O.P.), James and Kramer (Institor), Heinrich. Malleus Male-
ficarum : translated from the Latin by the Rev. Montague Summers,
with an Introduction and Notes. John Rodker, London, 1928
SrmpuHen, H. J. Commentaries on the Laws of England. London, 1868
Srocx, John Christian. Dissertatio de Cadaueribus Sanguisugis. Jena, 1732
Sroxtn, Otto. Suggestion und Hypnotismus in der Vélkerpsychologie. Leipzig,
1894
Srrack, Hermann, L. The Jew and Human Sacrifice. Translated from the
8th Edition by Henry Blanchamp. First publishedin England, May, 1909
SwerrenHamM, Frank A. Malay Sketches. London, 1895
Trss, W. and Vottum, M.D. (Colonel). Premature Burial and How It May
Be Prevented. 2nd edition by W. R. Hadwen, M.D., London, 1905
TrrTuLLian. De Anima—apud Migne, Patres Latini, II, 687-798
Tuompson, R. Campbell. The Devils and Dvil Spirits of Babylonia. 2 vols.
London, 1903-1904
Semitic Magic : its Origins and Development. London, 1908
Tuurston (S. J.), H. Broucolaccas: A Study in Mediaeval Ghost Lore. In
The Month. November, 1897. Vol. XC. (pp. 502-520)
TournErort, M. Pitton de. Relation d’un Voyage du Levant, 2 vols. Paris,
1717
Tozmr, Rev. Henry Fanshawe. Researches inthe Highlandsof Turkey . . .
with Notes on the Ballads, Tales, and Classical Superstitions of the Modern
Greeks. 2 -vols., London, 1869
Travels of Three English Gentlemen from Veniceto Hamburgh being the grand Tour
of Germany in the Year (1734). Harleian Miscellany, vol. IV sqq., 1745
Uisus et repertus tiber die so genannten Vampyren. Nuremberg, 1732
Vatvasor, Iohannes Weichardus. Gloria Carniolae Explicata. 4to. 1689


346 BIBLIOGRAPHY


VirteMmaRQut, T. Hersart de la. Barzaz-Breiz: Chants populaires de la
Bretagne, 4th edition, 2 vols. Paris, 1846

Vorerts, Gottlieb Heinrich. Kurtzes Bedencken von den Relationen wegen der

Vampyren. Leipzig, 1732

Wacusmuta, C. Das alte Griechenland im neuem. Bonn, 1864

Wittetm Parur pE Newsuranu. Historia Rerum Anglicarum : recensuit
Hans Claude Hamilton. 2 vols. Londini, 1856

WittoucHBy-MEADE, G. Chinese Ghouls and Goblins. London, 1928

Winstept, R. O. Shaman, Saiva, and Sufi: a Study of Malay Magic.
London, 1928

Wricut, Dudley. Vampires and Vampirism. 1914. Second Edition,
enlarged, 1924

Wricut, Thomas. Zssays on Subjects connected with the Literature, Popular
Superstitions, and History of England in the Middle Ages. 2 vols. Lon-
don, 1846

W.S.G.E. Curieuse und sehr wunderbarliche Relation von denen sich
neuer Dinge in Servien erzeigenden Blutsaugern oder Vampyrs, aus authen-
tischen Nachrichten mitgetheilet und mit historischen und philosophischen
Reflexionen begleitet. Leipzig, 1732

Zeer, Martin. Trauergeschicten. 3 vols., 1625

Zorrt, John Heinrich. Dissertatiode Uampiris Seruiensibus. Halle, 1733


POETRY; FICTION; DRAMA


ARNOLD, Theodor Ferdinand Kajetan. Der Vampir. Schneeburg, 1801
Benson, E.F. The Face, and No Bird Sings. Both in Spook Stories, 1928
The Room in the Tower—in The Room in the Tower and other Stories, 1912
Mrs. Amworth—in Visible and Invisible, 1923
B&rarp, Cyprien. Lord Ruthven ou les Vampires. Roman de G. B. Publié
par l’auteur de Jean Sbogar et de Thérése Aubut. Paris, 1820. (Feb-
ruary, 1820. Second Edition with Notes on Vampirism, July, 1820)
Buackwoop, Algernon. . The Transfer—in Pan’s Garden,1912.
The Strange Adventures of a Private Secretary in New York—in The Empty
House, 1906 .
Blutsauger (Die) Roman. Quedlinburg und Leipzig, 1821
Bovorcautt, Dion. The Phantom: a Drama in Two Acts. New York.
Samuel French, 1856. No. CLXV French’s Standard Drama. Also
Dick’s Standard Plays, No. 697
BRappon, Miss [Mary Elizabeth]. Good Lady Ducayne—in The Strand Maga-
zine. February, 1896, vol. XI, pp. 185-199
Brazier, GABRIEL, et ARMAND. Les Trois Vampires, ou le clair de la lune.
Folie vaudevilleenunacte. Paris, Barba, 1820 (Produced at the Variétés)
Burton, Sir Richard. Vikram and the Vampire or Tales of Hindu Devilry
(Adapted by Richard F. Burton, F.R.G.S. etc.). London, 1870 [1869]
Byron, Lord. The Giaour. ‘A Fragment of a Turkish Tale.” London,
Murray, 1813. ‘“‘A New Edition, with Some Additions,” (71 lines at
the beginning of the poem, the amended dedication and the advertise-
ment). London, Murray, 1813
Cadet Buteux Vampire; ou Relation véridique du prologue et des trois
actes de cet épouvantable mélodrama écrite sous la dictée di ce passeux
du Gros-Caillou par son sécretaire Désaugeirs. Paris, 1820 (A parody on
Nodier)
Cosmar and Krause. Der Vampyr: Trauerspiel in 5 Abteilungen ; nach
einen Spindlerschen Erzahlung bearbeitet. Berlin, 1828
Crawrorp, F. Marion. For the Blood is the Life—in Uncanny Tales, 1911
Dann, F. Der Vampyr. (Werke, vol. XVII, 1898, p. 233)
Der Vampyr, oder die blutige Hochzeit mit der schénin Kroatin: eine sonderbare
Gerchichte von béhmischen Wissenpater. Erfurt. 1812
Der Vampyr, oder die todten Brant : Romantisches Schauspiel in drei Acten.
Brunswick, 1822


BIBLIOGRAPHY 347


Dorset, St. John [Rev. Hugo John Belfour]. The Vampire : a Tragedy in
Five Acts. First{Second] Edition. London, MDCCCXXI. C.and J. Ollier.

Doyts, Sir A. Conan. The Parasite. 1891

Dumas (Pére), Alexandre. Le Vampire; Drama fantastique en 5 actes et,
10 tableaux par Alexandre Dumas et Auguste Maquet, répresenté le
20 décembre, 1851 sur le théatre de l’Amtigu-Comique. Thétére Complet
de Alexandre Dumas. Onziéme Série. Paris, Michel Lévy, 1865

Dunn, Gertrude. The Mark of the Bat. London, 1928

eg ae Friederike. Der Vampyr. Mainz, 1827 (A translation from
Scribe)

Faser,H. Le Vampire, nouvelle traduite del’anglaisde Lord Byron. Paris 1819

Farrrietp, Henry W. A. Only by Mortal Hands (as told to Harold Standish
Corbin). ‘‘ Ghost Stories,” vol. ITI, No. 4. October, 1927. Construc-
tion Publishing Company. Washington and South Aves.

Févar, Paul H.C. La Ville Vampire. Paris, Dentu, 1875. (This is ingen-
uously stated to be a romance by Mrs. Radcliffe, who recounted it to the
writer’s aunt from whom he heard the tale)

Foss, Pierre de la. Le Vampire ; Mélodrama en 3 actes. Paroles de M.
Pierre de la Fosse de la rue des Morts. (Pseudonym). 1820

Gautier, Théophile. La Morte Amoreuse. Originally appeared in the
Chronique de Paris, 23rd and 26th June, 1836

The Beautiful Vampire. London, 1927. (A translation of La Morte
Amoreuse, by Paul Hookham. There is also a translation by G. Burnham
Ives as The Dead Leman, Putnam, New York and London, 1903. Other
English versions have been published)

GorrHe, Johann Wolfgang von. Die Braut von Corinth

HavusHorer, Max. Die Verbannten. Leipzig, 1890

Hercet, C.M. Der Vampyr: Romantische Oper in drei Aufziigen. Nach
Byrons Dichtung von C. M. Heigel ; Musik von P. V. Lindpaintner,
1829 (Produced at Stuttgart, 21 September, 1828)

Herotp, A. Ferdinand. Les Contes du Vampire. Paris, Mercure de
France, 1891. Second edition, 1902. (Indian tales)

Heron, E.andH. The Story of Baelbrow in Ghost Stories, London, Pearson,
1916. (Reprinted from Pearson’s Magazine, April, 1898)

Hitpresranps, Theodor. Der Vampyr oder die Totenbraut ; ein Roman nach
neugriechischen Volkssagen. Leipzig, 1828

H.M.P. A Vampire of Souls. 1904 (A semi-apocalyptic novel)

Hopper, Reginald. The Vampire. London, 1913

Hu«o, Victor. Hand’Islande. 4 vols., Paris, Persan, 1823

James, M. R. Count Magnus in Ghost Stories of an Antiquary. London.
Arnold, 1905. An Episode of Cathedral History—in A thin Ghost and

~~. Others. London, Arnold, 1919.

Keats, John. Lamia. Published July, 1820

Kitraty, M. de. Le Dernier du Beaumanoir. (185072). [Founded on the
following incident : Peu d’années avant le révolution de 1789 un prétre
fut convaincu d’avoirassouri sa passion brutale sur le cadavre encore chaud
d’une femme auprés de laquelle il avait été placé pour reciter des get

Kina, Frank. The Ghoul. London, 1928 (This is a mystery novel. The
Ghoul is a nickname given to a master-criminal)

Le Fanv, Sheridan. Carmilla—In a Glass Darkly. 3 vols., London, Bentley,
1872. Also in one volume, 1872. Reprinted in two parts by Newnes.
Reprinted Eveleigh Nash, 1923

LippEtt, Hon. Henry. ‘‘ The Vampire Bride ”—in The Wizard of the North ;
The Vampire Bride, and other Poems. Blackwood, Edinburgh; and
Cadell, London, MDCCCXXXTIT

Meneaats, Martin Joseph. Le Vampire: Comic Opera in one Act. 1826.
(Produced Ist March, 1826)

Mérimiz, Prosper. La Guzla, ou, Choix de Poésies Illyriques, 1827

Nerupa, Jan. The Vampire, pp. 847-849 of Great Short Stories of the World.
London, New Impression. November, 1927


848 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Noprer, Charles. Le Vampire (A melodrama in a Prologue and three Acts.
Music by Alexandre Piccini. Produced at the Porte-Saint-Martin, Paris,
13th June, 1820). Paris, 1820

Pama, Silvestro di. I Vampiri. (1800)

Pianos, James Robinson. The Vampire. or the Bride of the Isles. Produced
at the English Opera House, 9th August, 1820. 8vo. 1820. Also Dicks”
Standard Plays, No. 875

Ponrport. The Vampyre. Originally published in the New Monthly Maga-
zine, April, 1819. First separate edition, London, Sherwood, 1819

Prest, Thomas Preskett. Varney the Vampire, or The Feast of Blood. 1847.
Reprinted in Penny Numbers, 1853

PrzypyszEwski. De profundis. Leipzig and Berlin, 1895

Racumpe. La Tour d'Amour. Paris, 1891 (Necrophilia)

Roman, Victor. ‘Four Wooden Stakes ””—in Not at Night, London, 1925

Rorra. Il Vampiro: Ballet with music by Paolo Giorza. Milan. 1861
(Produced at Milan in 1861)

Souusin, Ossip. Vollmondzauber. Stuttgart, 1899

Scorr, G. A. Dawson. The Vampire: a Book of Cornish and other Stories.
London, 1925. (The only Vampire in this book seems to be a
metaphor)

Scrrpn, Eugéne. Le Vampire : Comédie-Vaudeville en un acte de Scribe
et Mélesville. Thédtre du Vaudeville. 15 June, 1820. Oeuvres com-
plétes de Eugéne Scribe. Comédies. Vaudevilles. 2me Série, VI.
(Paris, Dentu, 1876)

Second Maiden’s Tragedy (The). Licensed 31st October, 1611. MS.
Lansdowne 807. British Museum. (This drama has been several
times printed. It was first given to the press in Baldwin’s The Old
English Drama, Vol. I, 1825. Among the later reprints is that of the
Malone Society, 1909, Edited by W. W. Greg. A scholarly recension
of this play is a desideratum)

Suirzam, Dr. Die Vampyre der Residenz : Wahre Skandalgeschichten und
sensationelle Enthiillungen von Dr. Seltzam (pseudonym ?). 2 Parts.
Berlin, 1900. (A pornographic piece of no value)

Sourugy, Robert. Thalaba the Destroyer. 1801 (Finished July, 1800) |

SPINDLER. Der Vampyr und seine Braut : Nachtstiick aus der neuesten zeit—
in Zwillinge. Zwei Erzihlungen, nebst einem Anhange von Originalbricfen.
Hanover, 1826 ,

Srengock, Eric Stanislaus, Count. The True Story of a Vampire. In
Studies of Death. London, Nutt, 1894.

Sroxrr, Bram. Dracula. A tale. pp. ix, 390. London, Constable, 1897.
Tenth edition, Rider, 1913

Dracula’s Guest and other Weird Stories. London, Routledge, 1914

SruckeN, Edouard. Die Vampyrkatze—in Balladen, Berlin, 1899

Taationt, Paul. Morgano : Comédie-ballet in four acts and seven tableaux ;
with music by J. Hatch. 1857. (Produced at Berlin, 25th May, 1857)

Totusro1, Alexei. Oupir (a short story) .

Turcentey, 1.8. Apparitions. tr. by P. Merimée. In Nouvelles Muscovites.
2°ed. Paris, 1868 ©

Upton, Smyth. The Last of the Vampires. Columbian Press, Weston-Super-
Mare, 1845

Vacano, E. Schwarze Melancholie (A Short Story). 1865 ‘

Vampyre (The). By the Wife of a Medical Man. 1858. (A frantic teetotal
tract, presented as fiction)

Vaupere, J. dela. Le mystérede Karme. Paris, 1901

WacHENHUSEN, Hans and May Karl. In den Schluchten des Balkan. Stutt-
gart and Leipzig. n.d.

Waxerretp, H. R. The Seventeenth Hole at Duncaster—in They Return at
Evening, 1928 :

Wes, H.G. The Flowering of the Strange Orchid—in The Stolen Bacillus, 1895

Woutsriicx, Wilhelm August. Der Vampyr: an opera. Music by Mar-
schner. 1828. (Produced 28th March, 1828)

X.L. AutDiabolus aur Nihil: “The Kissof Judas.” London, Methuen, 1894


INDEX


Abbot of Montserrat, The, 278
Abbott, G. F., 33, 92, 161, 206
Abipones, tribe of Paraguay, 167
Abisag the Sunamitess, 134
Absolution of one who has died
excommunicate, 101-2
Adelhausen, Dominican convent at,


Agamemnon, 158

Agapitus I, Pope S., 101

Agnes of Montepulciano, S., 130

Alardus Gazaeus, 230

Alfrida, S., 124

Aliphera (festival of fly-catcher at),
198

Allacci, Leone, 20, 22, 25, 29, 30-3,
90, 92, 163, 179, 206

Alphonsus Liguori, 8., 33, 79, 123,
144

Altomari, Antonio Donato, 166-7

Amatongo (Zulu Ancestor Worship),
12-3

Anatomy of Melancholy, 166-7

Andrea Avellino, 8., 132

Angela of Merici, S., 128

Angels, 1, 7

Angelus, Christophorus, 91

Antidote against Atheism, 115, 179-80

Antigone, 83

Antonia of Florence 123

Antoninus of Florence, O.P., S., 125

Antony of Padua, 8., 55

Apuleius, 227, 241

Ardisson, Victor, 70

Aristophanes, 20, 227

Aristotle (on suicide), 142

Arrianus of Nicomedia, 20

Arunta tribe, 60

Asasabonsam
259

Ashanti proverbs, 259

Aeschylus, 141

Athenaeus, 145-6

Attila, 17

Aubrey, John, 160

Augustine of Canterbury, S., lll

Augustine of Hippo, S., 79, 103,
142-3, 165, 202, 229

Australian tribes (blood remedies), 17

Avebury, Lord, 145

Awemba tribe, 10


(Ashanti vampire),


Baganda tribe, 9, 147-8, 167-8

Bagnesi, B. Maria Bartolomea, 125

Baital (Vetala), 249-51

Bajang, 251-52

Baldi, Cecilia, 123

Bandello, O. P., Matteo, 43

Bantu tribes, ancestral worship of,
10-2

Barbauld, Anna Letitia, 275

Barlings, 160

Barnaby of Pistoria, 122

Baron Vampyr, Der, 320

Basil I, 140

Basil of Ostrog, S., 129

Bat, vampire, 135-6, 267

Ba’thory, Countess Elizabeth, 64

Baudelaire, Charles, 327

Bauer, Edwin, 320

Beane, Sawney, 61

Beelzebub, lord of flies, 198

Belfour, Rev. Hugo John, 319-20

Belgrade (vampire at), 176

Bell, Mr. H. J., 265, 267

Benadad of Syria, 62

Benedict XIV, 23, 24, 119, 120

Benedict, S., 102-3

Benson, E. F., 321

Bérard, Cyprion, 290

Beresford, Rev. J., 276

Bernard, S., (of Clairvaux), 33, 199

Bernardine of Siene, S., 127-8

Bernardo Ptolomei, 8., 123

Beroaldus, 247

Bickel, Andréas, 65

Billuart, O. P., Charles René, 79

Bishop, Washington Irving, 36

Blackwood, Algernon, 323

Blood, offered to spirits, 10; attracts
ghosts, 13; forbidden by divine
commands, 13-5; shed at
funerals, 17; as medicine, 17 ;
drunk, 64; connected with
sexual impulse, 133

Blot, Henri, 68-9

Blue eyes (a sign of vampirism),
181-2

Blunden, Mrs., (epitaph of), 45

Boguet, Henri, 60, 78-9, 180

Bonney, F’. (Australian traveller), 17

Bonnefons, Jean, 186

Boucicault, Dion, 312-5


Boussakis, Dr. M. K., 46
Braut von Korinth, Die, 274-5, 276


350


Bristol (Lawford’s Gate), hauntings
at, 4-5

Brompton, John, 111

Bronté, Emily, 7

Browne, W. A. F., 63

Buckthorn (contra magos), 203-4, 256

Buddhist monks (self-immolation of),
152-3

Bulgaria (method of destroying
vampires in), 208

Bullet (charmed to kill vampire), 209

Birger, Gottfried August, 275-7

Burial, premature, 34—48

Burke, William (and Hare), 58-9

Burnes, Alexander, 257

Burton, Robert, 166-7

Butleigh (Somerset), 160

Butters, Mary, 257-8

Byron, Lord, 280-1, 289-90


C., Eva, (medium), 195

Cadet Buteux, vampire, 305

Caftres (dread of blood), 13

Cain, 183

Callaway, Canon, 12

Callicantzaros, 163-5

Calmet, Dom Augustin, 25-9, 112,
171-5, 193-4, 199, 283, 295

Camargo, Diego Mufioz, 260

Camillus de Lellis, 8., 132

Campbell Thompson, Dr. R., 217,
218, 224, 226

Cannock Chase, hauntings at, 4

Carmilla, 321

Carnarvon, Lord (in Greece, 1839),
140


Cat (vampire), 169

Catherine of Bologna, 8., 55-6, 125

Catherine of Genoa, S., 129

Catullus, 185

Caylus, Comte de, 237

Cesarini, Cecilia, 123

Ceylon, demons of, 156

Chabot, Admiral of France, 184

Chacu Indians, 237

Chadkin, 152

Chapman, George, 183

Character of an Ugly Woman, A,
(1678), 156

Charon’s fee, 105-6

Chariclides Comicus, 155

Charolais, comte de, 64

Chesnil, de la Charbonelais, 203

Children of Judas (vampires), 183

China (suicide in), 145

China, vampires in, 237-49

Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, 239

Ch’ing Shik (Chinese vampire), 237—49

Choephoroe, 141

Chordewa (witch), 169


INDEX


Chorea (a sign of vampirism), 181

Christabel, 276

Christmas Eve, legends of, 157

Church lands, a curse upon, 160-1

Chuwashé (Finnish tribe), 202

Cicero (on suicide), 142

Ciuateteo, 261-3

Clare of Montefalco, O.S.A.,S., 125-6

Claret, Ven. Antony, 123

Clavigero, 260

Clement of Alexandria, 198

Clifford, Mr. Hugh, 255

Codrington, Dr. R. H., 258

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 275

Collationes (of Cassian), 230

Columella, 155

Compendium Theologiae Moralis
(Sabetti), 38

Contes Orientaux, 237

Convent Spectre, T'he, 278

Corey, Goodwife (of Salem), 5

Corfu, 205

Cosijopii, 264

Count Magnus (Dr. M. R. James),
271-3

Cowdray, 160

Cranstoun, Mr., 275

Crawford, F. Marion, 325

Cross, made from what tree, 203

Cross-roads, burial at, 154-6; augury
at, 155; shrines at, 263

Crowe, Catherine, 332

Crows (omens drawn from), 246

Croxton, 160

Cuecuesteca, 262

Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western
Asia (Rawlinson and Morris),
226

Cuntius, Johannes, 179-80

Curses, (dreaded in Greece), 161-2

Cuthbert, S., 194

Cutting the flesh (in mourning), 15-
17


Dacre, Charlotte, 277

Dagger (consecrated to transfix
vampires), 204

Dalen, Charles Francis van, 23

Darlington Station, hauntings at, 2-3

Darwin, Charles, 135-6

Davanzati, Archbishop Gioseppe,
23-5 ‘

David, King of Israel, 134, 171 :

De Prouerbiis Aguri et Lemuelis
(Mihlau), 231

De Daemonialitate (Sinistrari), 230

De Ecclesiae Occidentalis atque


Orientalis consensione, 29
De ‘Graecorum - opination-
ibus, 22
De Lancre, 265
De Materia Medica, 256


INDEX 351


De Prodigiis (Julius Obsequens), 252

De Trinitate (S. Augustine), 229

Deans, Hamilton, 335

Dee, Dr. John, 122

Délégation en Perse, 226

Demon of Venice, The, 278

Delrio, S. J., Martin, 180-1, 229

Desmodus rufus (blood-sucking bat),
135

Devil’s tree (silk-cotton-tree), 265

Didacus of Alcala, S., 128

Diphylla ecaudata (blood-sucking
bat), 135

Discorides, 256

Dissertatiode UampirisSeruiensibus, 1

Dissertazione sopra I Vampiri, 23,
24-5

Dominica of 8. Mary, 123

Donatus, S., 50

Doolittle, Justus, 246

Dorat, Jean, 187

Dorset, St. John (Hugo John
Belfour), 319-20

Dorval, Madame, 291, 293, 294

Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, 323-4

Dracula, 331, 333-7

Dracula (dramatic version), 335-7

Dreams and Ghosts, 4

Dumas, Alexandre (pére), 294-303

Durandus, 121

Dureford (Sussex), 160

Durham, Mr. James (sees ghost), 2-3


Ea-bani, 218

Easter, the first, 2, 173

Edward the Confessor, S., 125

Egyptian ka, 231

Ekimmu (Departed spirit), 218,
220, 222-4, 248

Elena and Gerardo (Bandello), 43-4

Elis (vampire tradition in), 167;
(festival of god of flies at), 198

Ellenore (Lenore), 275-7

Ellis, Havelock, 133, 184

Empedocles, 153

Encore un Vampire, 305

Epaulard, Dr. A., 57

Eskimo sorceress (suicide of), 153

Espinosa, Cardinal Diego de, 36—7

Etrennes d’un Vampire, Les, 305

Eugippius, 53

Euphorion of Chalcis, 147

Euripides, 141

Eustasius (and Euphrosina), 50

Eustochium, S., 130

Evagrius Ponticus, 49

Excommunication, 84-90; in the
Greek Church, 93-100


Faber, Henri, 290
Fables (Gay), 258 :
Fairfax House (haunting of), 181


Faithfull Shepherdesse, The, 204

Falaley (Russian monk), 152

Familiars, 251-2

Ferrage, Blaise, 61

Féval, Paul, 303

Fils vampire, Le, 303

Fiorelli, 320

Flecker, James Elroy, 7

Fletcher, John, 204

Flies (evil spirits and), 198

Flowering of the Strange Orchid, The,
322

Fly-catcher (Zeus the), 198

For the Blood Is the Life, 325

Fornari, 234

Fortis, Alberto, 203

Foster, Anne, 81

Four Wooden Stakes, 325-7

Francis Caracciolo, 8., 132

Francis, Elizabeth, 251-2

Frankenstein, 281


Gabienus, 38

Galland, Antoine, 237

Gandillon, Pierre and George, 60

Garanchacha (Son of the Sun), 238

Garlic, shunned by vampires, 209

Gaulminus, Gilbertus, 229

Gautier, Théophile, 320-1

Gay, John, 258

Gentile of Ravenna, 123

Gerardo and Elena (Bandello), 43-5

Geronymo de la Madre de Dios
(Gracian), 130

Gervase of Tilbury, 227

Ghouls, 231-7

Giaour, The, 282-3

Gietmann, S.J., Gerard, 121

Giles, Molly and Dobby (of Bristol),

5


rs

Gilgamish, 217-8

Giraldo, Mathias de, 233

Girvan (Ayrshire), hauntings at,
3-4

Glastonbury, 160

Godard, S., 106-7

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 274-5.

Gow, Captain Neil, 5-6

Grans, Hans, 190-2

Graves, ill-omened, 148; of mur-
derers, 149-50; pelted with
stones, and why, 149-50

Greenlanders (impregnation legends
among), 238

Gregorio de Nacianceno, 130

Gregory J, S., 1, 32, 102, 121

Gregory VII, 8., 115

Gregory of Langres, S., 54

Gregory of Tours, S., 51

Groot, Dr. T. T. M. de, 238

Guérin, Monsignor, 51

Gunther of Bamberg, 115


a a EE ee "


852 INDEX


Haarmann, Fritz., 188-93

Hag of the Mountains, The, 278

Haida Indians, 60

Hamilton, Miss M., 278

Hanover, the Vampire of, 188-93

Hare (and Burke), 58-9

Harenberg, John Christian, 23

Hartmann, Dr. Franz, 39, 134

Hayti (obeah in), 267

Hedwige, 8., 130

Helme, Mrs., 278

Hemans, Felicia, 203

Henderson, William, 257

Herbert, William, 278

Herero tribe (ancestral worship), 10-
ll

Hermontinus, 37

Herodotus, 66—7

Hertel, John, 23

Hilary, 8. (and Pelagia), 243-5

Hildebrand, Theodor, 320

Hinton-on-Mendip, 160

Hirsch, Franz, 320

Histoire curieuse . . des sorciers
(Giraldo-Fornari), 233-6

Historia Francorum, 51

Historia Naturalis (Pliny), 37-8,


History of Witchcraft (Montague
Summers), 195

Hodder, Reginald, 325

Horace, 153, 185, 227

Horrid Mysteries, 278

Horse-shoes (to bring luck), 257

Horseleach (Proverbs xxx, 15), 230-1

Horseley Curties, T. J., 278

Horst, Georg Conrad, 2

Host, Sacred, put in tombs, 104-5

Hours of Idleness, 277

Hugh of Lincoln, S., 125

Humbert, Cardinal, 105

Hunt, Ales (of St. Osyth), 252

Huysmans, J.-K., 77


Ibo (Nigerian tribe), 222

Icard, Dr. (of Marseilles), 46

Ida of Louvain, 123

Impregnation (by sun and moon),
237-8


In a Glass Darkly, 321

In Court and Kampong (Clifford),
255

Incorruption of bodies, 124-8

Incubi (procreation by), 228-30

Ingiald, 167

Injurieux, S., 51

Innocent ITI, 1

Irradiation, mystic, 121-4


Jack the Ripper, 65
James, Dr. M. R., 271-3, 280
Jamguillaume, Clauda, 61


Januarius of Naples, S., 126

Jeremias, 15, 16

Jerome, S., 16

Jerusalem, Siege of (under Joram)
62-3; (by Titus), 63, 116

Jew of Malta, The, 246

Jews (refrain from blood), 14

Joannes Secundus, 186-7

Johannes Diaconus, 121

Johannes Moschus, 49

John Capistran, S., 128

John of the Cross, 8., 123

John the Almsgiver, 49

Johnson, Dr., 22

Joram, king of Judah, 62-3

Jordanes, 17

Judas Iscariot, 183

Juliette, ou, les Prospérités du Vice,
60, 64, 280

Julius Obsequens, 252

Julius Solinus, 198

Jumbie-tree (in West Indies), 265

Jusk (god of Shilluk), 9

Justine, ou les Malheurs de la Vertu,
280

Juvencus, C, Vettius Aquilinus, 51

Juventius and Maximus, SS., 124


Kalunga (god of Ovambo), 11

Kama Sutra, 187

Karens (Burmese tribe), 249, 255

Karpathos (Scarpanto), 223

Kelley, Isabella, 278

Kiss, the, 185-8

Kiziba, natives of, 9

Knill Court (Herefordshire), 246

Knox, Dr. Robert (of Edinburgh),
59


Kénig, Ewald August, 320
Kunigunde, 8., 124
Kwakiutl Indians, 60


Labat, Pére, 267

Lacassagne, Dr., 64

Laius, the sin of, 158

Lambertini, Cardinal, see Benedict
XIV

Lamia, 226-8

Lamia, L., 37

Lang, Andrew, 4

Langsuir, 251, 253-4

Lanuza, Giovanni-Battistade, 123

Lapps (finger-ring custom of), 223
(familiars among the), 252

Larat, Jean, 303

Last of the Vampires, The, 330-1

Lateran Council, Fourth (1215), 1

Lathom, Francis, 278

Lauda, Diego, 123

Launay, Gabrielle de, 40-3

Lawson, J.C., 19, 184, 230

Le Fanu, Sheridan, 280, 321


INDEX


Lenore, 275-7

Leo IX, 8., 105, 114

Leo X, 85

Leontius of Cyprus, 49
Leopold (and Loeb), 70
Lettres Juives, 229

Lewis, Matthew Gregory, 277
Lexicon (of Photius), 257
Leza (god of Bantu tribe), 10
Liddell, Hon. Henry, 329
Liebava (vampire at), 172-3
Lilith, 226-9

Lindpaintner, P. von, 312
Lombard Code, 228

Londe, Dr. Charles, 47
Loogaroo, 265-7

Lorenzo Guistiniani, 8., 128
Louviers (witchcraft at), 80
Loves of Paris, The, 303
Lucas, Paul, 205
Lusitanus, Dr. Zacutus, 46
Lutgarde, 8., 130
Lycanthropia, 166-7


Macarius, S., 50-1

Macedonia, 20

Macedonian Folklore, 33, 206-7

i ie Major C. G. (and ghosts),


Machen, Arthur, 77

Macrobius, 155

Macuilxochitl, 260

Mahomet II, 141

Maidstone (witches hanged at), 81

Maina (local tradition in), 140-1

Malay Magic (Skeat), 255

Malleus Maleficarum, 25, 32,

174, 180, 202, 229

Mammone, Gaetano, 64

Mandeville, Sir John, 203

Mandrakes, 155-6

Manetho, 182

Maniac Father, The, 332

Manriquez, Don Alphonso, 208

Maraves, African tribe, 148

Marcellus, Sidetes, 166

Marguerite Van Valkenissen, 130

Maria Maddalena de’ Pazzi, S., 56
125, 130

Marlowe, Christopher, 246

Masticatione Mortuorum, De, 23

Masticatione Mortuorum, De (Ranft),
201

Mathia de’ Nazzarei, B., 130

Maturin, pe Ge” ate 277

Mauriccau, Dr.,

Maxwell, James Check, 328-9

Maxwell, Sir William, 254

Mayo, Dr. Herbert, 175-9

Meeke, Mrs., 278

Meifsner, Christian Karl, 290

Melanesians, The, 258


165,


853


Melchior of Zwettl, Abbot, 112
Melor, 8., 52

Ménard, Nicholas-Hugues, 105
Mendicta, Fray, 264

ey (Symeon Metaphrastes),


Pe ES. Symeon, 49

Michael Caerularius, 105

Michan’s Church, S. (Dublin), 117-8

Mictecaciuatl, 263

Mietlampa, 263

Middleton, Charles, 277

Middleton, Jessie Adelaide, 12

Midland Daily Telegraph, 47

Midnight Groan, The, 278

Minski, 60

Miracles in causes for canonization,
120

Miss Kitty (parody), 276

Mist (vampire as a ), 198

Mitylene, 208

Moabites, 17

Modern Spiritism (Raupert), 175

Moderne Vampyr, 320

Moderner Vampyr, Bin, 320

Montague, Edward, 278

Monte-Cristo, 296-7

More, Dr. Henry, 115-6, 180

Moreau, Dr. Paul, 68, 70

Morgano, 312

Mormo 20

Morte, Amoureuse, La, 320-1

Morley, Henry, 312-4

Mort réelle et la Mort apparente, La
(Icard), 46

—_—s practises (laws to regulate),

16


Mihlau, 231

Muret, Mare-Antoine, 36

Mussimo, Fabrizio (raised to life),
53-4

Mysteries of London, The (G. W. M.
Reynolds), 58


Narni (apparitions before), 114-5

Naxos, (local custom in), 105

Necromancer, The, 331

Necrophagy, 60-6 (

Necrophilia, 66-71

Nergal, 217

New Guinea er" feared in), 13

Newstead, 160

Newton (Travels i in Levant), 208

Nicholas V, 127

Nicolas of Myra, S., 130

Nicolas of Tolentino,
126, 128

Nimbus in art, 121

Nordier, Charles, 290-1, 294

Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern
Counties of England, 257

Nott, Dr. John, 187


O.8.A., 8.,


—— eS et


B54


Nouveaux voyages
d’ Amérique, 267
Nyakang (deified hero), 9


Obeah, 265-7

Ocean of Story, 249-50
Odolrie of Conques, 107
Odyssey, 15

Oedipus, the saga of, 158-60
Oliphant, Laurence, 134
Oraons (tribe of Bengal), 169
Orestes (and blood-guilt), 141
Ortiz, Diego, 123
Ossenfelder, Heinrich August, 274
Oswald, Dr. John, 47
Othmar, S., 104

Otia Imperialia, 227

Ovambo tribe, 11—2

Ovid, 186, 228

Owl, regarded as sacred, 182


aux Isles


Paladino, Eusapia, 194-5

Palmer, Mr. Clapham, 6

Pantaleone, S. (Relics of blood of),
127

Parasite, The, 323-4

Paré, Ambroise, 117

Parsons, Mrs. Eliza, 278

Pascal Babylon, 8., 132

Pashley, Robert, 19

Passerat, 247

Patrick, S8., 52

Patroclus (demands funeral rites),
81-2

Paul, Arnold, 280, 282

Pausanias, 83, 198

Pawang (Malay wizard), 252

Pelesit, 251

Penanggalan, 251, 255-6

Penzer, Mr. N. M., 249-50

Perey, George (Deputy Governor
of Virginia), 62

Peregrinus, 153

Perfumed Garden, The, 187

Periander of Corinth, 67

Petroff, 152

Peter I., S., (the Vladika), 129

Phaedo, 142

Phantom, The, 314-8

Philinnion and Machates, 229

Philip Neri, 8., 53-4, 132

Philippe, Mons., 291, 293, 294

Philistines, 17

Phlegon of Tralles, 229, 274

Pheenicians, 17

Pichot, Amédée, 290

Pierart, Z. T., 195

Pilgrimages to Palestine, 115

Pittadro, Lady (witch), 80

Pius VI, 85

Planché, J. R., 306-8, 311-2

Plato, 20, 142


INDEX


Plautus, 185

Pliny senior, 37-8, 198

Plumréder, 133

Polichinel Vampire, 305

Polidori, Dr. John William, 280-90

Polong, 251

Pontianak, 251, 253

Present State of Greek and Armenian
Churches, 1678, 23

Prest, Thomas Preskett, 61, 332

Preta, 249

Prodigies seen in the air, 116

Propertius, 247

Psellus, Michael, 229

Pseudolus, 185

Physical Research, Proceeding of
National Laboratory of, 5-6

Purgstall, Countess, 275

Purple Terror, The, 322-3

Putanisme d Amsterdam, le, 257

Pye, H. J., 276


Quashee (West Indian native), 265-7


Rachel, Mlle., 39-40

Ranft, Michael, 201

Ralston, W. R. S., 19, 206

Rattray, Mr. R. Sunderland, 259

Raupert, T. Godfrey, 175

Ravachol, 58

Ravello of Ferrara, S., 122

Real Ghost Stories (W.T. Stead), 3

Red hair (regarded as sign of
vampirism), 182~3

Redi, Francesco, 183

Rees, Mrs. (of Cardiff), 47

Regnault, Jean, 58

Rélation de ce qui est passé a Sant-
Erini, 22

Relics, potent against vampires, 208

Religious System of China (de Groot),
238

Renaud, Pierre, 58 ;

Researches in the Highlands of Turkey
(Tozer), 205

Reste arabische Heiderstums (Well-
hausen), 231

Resurrection Men, 58-59

Revue d’ Assyriologie, 228

Reynolds, G. W. M., 331

Rheticus, S., 51

Rhodes (vampire exorcized in), 207

Ricaut, Paul, 23, 93

Richard, 8. J., Father Frangois, 22,


32

Richard of Saint-Vannes, 115

Rings, magic properties ascribed to,
223


Rita of Cascia, O.S.A., 8., 128
Rochtaillée, Mlle. de, 58

Roche, Mrs. Regina Maria, 278
Rohl, John Christopher, 23


INDEX 3855


Rohr, Philip, 23

Roman, Victor, 325-7

Romeo and Juliet (similar themes in
literature), 310-1

Rooks (omens drawn from), 246

Room in the Tower, The, 321

Roscoe, Rev. J., 13

Rose of Lima, 8., 122, 228

Rose of Viterbo, S., 130

Rothe, Friedel, 190

Russia, outbreaks of murderous
fanaticism in, 150-2


Sabbatarians, those born on a
Saturday, 33, 163

Sabetti, 8.J., Aloysius, 38, 143-4

Sade, Marquis de, 60-1, 280

St. Irvyne, 277

Salem witchcraft, 5

Sanna, Elizabeth (serva Dei), 120

Santorini, isle of, 23, 205

Saturday, why holy, 33

Saulle, Dr. Legrande du, 64

Seacchus, 119

Scatcherd, Miss Felicia, 197

Scheffer, J., 252

Scholastica, wife of S. Injurieux, 51

Schomburg, Sir Robert, 135

Schrattembach, Cardinal, 25

Scott, Sir Walter, 275-6

Scribe, Eugéne, 303-4

Scripandi, 8.J., Father, 56

Second Maiden’s Tragedy, The, 308—
10

Selbtsmond, Der (Marsaryk), 144

Seltzam, Dr., 320

Semitic Magic (Campbell-Thompson),
224


Serres, Maurice de, 404-3

Seven Spirits, the, 224

Severinus, S., 53

Seyé (Blaise Ferrage), 61

Shaw, Dr. T. Claye, 133

Shelley, Mary, 281

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 276-7, 281,
289


Shilluk tribe (hero worship), 9

Shirley, James, 183

Siamese (cutting of hair among),
223


Siméon, Alexandre, 68

Sinistrari, Ludovico Maria, 79, 180,
230

Skeat, Dr. W. W., 254, 255

Social Life of the Chinese (Doolittle),
246

Solon, code of, 16

Somaglia, Cardinal della, 37

Songs of the Russian People, 19

Souchkoff, 152

Southey, Robert, 278-9

Souvestre, Pierre, 319


Spared Hours of a Soldier (1623), 183

Spencer, W. R., 276

Spinola, Cardinal, 37

Stanislaus of Cracow, 8., 55

Stanley, J. T., 276

Stenbock, Stanislaus Eric, Count,
324

Stewart, Dugald, 275

Sting (vampires with a), 179

Stock, John Christian, 23

Stoker, Bram, 333, 335

Strix, 228, 230

Studies of Death, 324

Suicide (ethics of), 142-4

Suicides (graves of), 154

Sunday, child born on, 162

Suore Morte, 102-3

Survival (ed. Sir James Marchant),
197

Sweeny Todd, 61-2, 332

Swettenham, Sir Frank, 252-3

Syriac exorcism, 225


Taboo (among the Ibo), 222-3

Taglioni, Paul, 312

Taylor, William (of Norwich), 275-6

Ten Tables, laws of the, 16

Teresa of Avila, S., 129-32

Terry, Edward, 318-9

Tertullian, 48, 49, 56, 84, 227

Tezcatlipocd, 261-2

Thalaba the Destroyer, 278-9, 283

Theodore of Petra, 54

Theodosius of Alexandria, 100

Theodosius the Cenobite, 8., 54

Thérése de Enfant Jésus, 8. (The
Little Flower), 7

Thévenot, Jean de, 232

Thomas, Jean, 57

Thomas (the Anchorite), 49

Thomas Aquinas, 8., 119, 160, 174

Thomas Lombard, 122

Thouret, Dr., 39

Thousand and One Nights (Burton),
204; (Mardrus), 232; (Forster),
233

Tiberius, Dr. (of Athens), 69

Tibullus, 185

Tintern, 160

Tlazolteot], 262

Tonatiuh, 260

Tornaeus, 252

Torquatus, 8., 53

Tournefort, M. Pittonde, 280, 283

Tozer, H. F., 205

Transcendenial Physics (Zoellner),
175

Transfer, The, 323

Travels and Discoveries in the Levant
(Newton), 208

Travels in Bokhara, 257

Travels into Dalmatia (Fortis), 202-3


356


sins into the Levant (Thévenot),

3 -

Travels of Three English Gentlemen
(c. 1734), 22

Trois Vampires, Les, 303, 304-5

True Story of a Vampire, The, 324

Truths Contained in Popular Super-
stitions, On the (Mayo), 175-9

Turco-Graecia, 207

Tuschelin, O. 8S. D., Christina Mech-
thild, 122

Two Lovers, The, 51

Typhon, 182-3

oar (a wedding ring custom of the),

23


Upton, Smyth, 330-1
Utukku (a phantom), 217-8


Vacher, Joseph, 64-5

Vacher Véventreur (Lacassagne), 64

Vampir, Der (Ossenfelder), 274

Vampire, Le (Baudelaire), 327-8

Vampire, Le (burlesque, 1820), 305

Vampire, Le (Charles Nodier, Jouffroy
and Carmouche), 290-6

Vampire, Le (Dumas and Maquet),
297-303, 317

Vampire, Le (Mengals), 306

Vampire, Le (Scribe andMélesville),
303-4

Vampire, The (Boucicault), 312-4

Vampire, The (Hodder), 325

Vampire, The (José G. Levy), 319

Vampire, The (Planché), 306-8

Vampire, The (Reece; burlesque),

18


INDEX


318-9
Vampire, The (St. John Dorset),


319-20

Vampire Bride, The, 329-30

Vampire Bats, 135-6

Vampire-killers (dervishes), 210

Vampire of Souls, A, 331

ampires, definition, 1-2; deriva-

tion and discussion of word, 18-
22; early treatises upon, 22-3 ;
precautions to prevent return of
persons as, 202-10; attacking
animals, 209-10; earliest re-
presentation of, 225

Vampiri, 1 (di Palma), 311

Vampirisme, le, defined

paulard, 57

Vampiro, Il (Rotta), 312

Vampyr, Der (Fiorelli), 320

Vampyr, Der (Hildebrand), 320

Vampyr, Der (Wohlbriickand Marsch-
ner), 311

Vampyr, Bin (Ulrich Franks), 312

Vampyr und Seine Braut, Der, 320

Vampyre, The (By the Wife of a

Medical Man), 331


by Dr.


Vampyre, The (Maxwell), 328-9

Vampyre, The (Polidori), 280-90;
(translated), 290

Vampyre der Residenz, Die (Seltzam),
320

Vampyrus Spectrum (bat), 135

Varney the Vampire, 331-3

Varro (De Lingua Latina), 155

Vendetta (in Greece), 141

Veronica Giuliani, S., 132

Verzeni, Vincenzo, 66

Vetala (Indian vampire), 249-51

Viehe, Rev. G., 11

Vikram and the Vampire
250-1

Villani, Maria, 124

Vincent, Ferrer, O.P., S., 122

Vitalian, S., 130

Vollum, M.D., Colonel E. P., 39

Von Vampyren (Harenberg), 23

Voodoo, 265-7

Voyage au Levant (Lucas), 205

Vylars, Mme. C. le, 219


(Burton),


Wajagga tribe, 147

Walburga, S., 130

Walpurgis Night, 257

Walsham, Sir John, 246

Walter, C. R. P., Bl., 124

Wassilko-Serecki, Countess, 5.

Water, vampires unable to cross, 208

Waverley, 160

Wedding-ring (traditions connected
with the), 223

Wells, H. G., 322

Wellhausen, 231

Werewolf, connected with vampires,
21: actual change deni&d,
165-7

Weyer, Johann, 228

White, Fred M., 322-3

Whitney, Constance, 40

Wicks, Ernest, 46

Wieland, Christoph Martin, 274

Wilfred, 8., 124 .

William of Newbury, 207

Willibrord, S., 130

Willoughby-Meade, Mr. G., 289

Winslow, Dr. Forbes, 47


Xipilli, 260 ;
Xochilhuitl, 260
Xochiquetzal, 260


Zauber-bibliothek (Horst), 2
Zephyr, or the Stratagem, 22
Zoellner, Professor, 175
Zofloya : or, the Moor, 277
Zopfius, John Heinrich, 1-2, 23
Zschokke, 320 f
Ziigun, Eleonore, 5-6
Zumarraga, Juan de, 264


ta


YU


Be
NM


DATE DUE
