Montague Summers, The Geography of Witchcraft (1927)
==========================================================================
Summers's survey of witchcraft across nations — England, Scotland, France, Italy, Spain, and the New World. The companion volume to his History, essential for comparative witchcraft studies. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

[nae t adel tenet, pepe aw posepinsas eranponr™: SoTere


pir tabpesspussenareraeseseesteemtnepeneseteeest


rurale:


SURI pe ar Mase sesh yteaseneatsspesiyeeeses sepa)
ieeeat Barney


Fibres


Easel Hoenn gees
Berperrer giisecsesriiets
Erp sereeoe


ppesipresescoete


apenas Sikerabel
prmawas wocepsemesereras peta iessasabeSehm es tess


sranphacewsoeess aa:
papesi pap saasepiaazhsSzepepe se settee ese


soraestreaiee


Sse eeee eee eee eee
SEsEghccoee coeds Des aEab cE PSS EE SPEte Ne eseP ast ree PUTS ESTEESS ECE EEE


Es saad eamtersosees ea ensies-tesestpiapittapieeesestea ees eraapEEEEEE
Serie esrerese SEE: =


beerertescetee
pesepereriees Sou ss Seefateteecta ea ierioann sess tttestaeT


papi trcebPes Sebeber sat SDR aESECEAES
ara a


renee
SS
pbrprpe dette pea noebanePes arene}


peeps inh
as5 HS


Ms psbintietinee tent on =pensnapeeesr eee neswpe pene eee
= Pepmsbirct cir Setar Ee
pp EE RIES SSE as


= 6


eptyessoesrat Sonots
SSeS


SS


phibterrisctsapesars peahisessaeseiepsstcsersen a ppigssresttcrrers,
petit atetstetitetsse tatters teete =
Seteet SESEEIEIE SSD)


staies
Sabre ape bab esa tenas SEES
pipcpcrsessesnsre-Dapepepepeseanotbee barter aeneebsteBER r= BtReEsEeeB?
aaa STS ETE


ae
prserers


eotrbesers=Sesshetssarn


plpbpepepisseser sarah bseeheeseeb ea PbaPsasberad


BaSbabiEsseEed
Epepeotpceepesereretereterey
at


Hz .
serpyibsberrrpsseri sore
SS


Beapipepeatense pesbpentpepepapepesebaesbghaberteresbies)


fre
Spageetitiestatateeregtgtateeriees
Saberseebpiysasteaeensrerzetesestlos


Sapp peeteneitcbstabessteeeres


gerpiesapeetieetsesbese?


weabeosderarcttticesDccrscterncns
ER ES
Bsitsests riot Eeertecsetterscers


opus gee Se eS
Le 9 = eae


133.4
S955g


133.4
S955w


‘ BORROWER'S NAME
ey


Summers
The geography of
witchcraft


Summers
Witchcraft and black
magic


NUMBER


CHRISTIAN HERITAGE COLLEGE
2100 Greenfield Dr.
El Cajon, CA 92021


THE
GEOGRAPHY OF
WITCHCRAFT


_THE
GEOGRAPHY OF
WITCHCRAFT


MONTAGUE SUMMERS


Et infecta est terra in sanguinibus, et contaminata
est in operibus eorum.—PSALM CV
Non declinetis ad magos, nec ab hariolis aliquid sciscitemini,


ut polluamini per eos. Ego Dominus Deus Uester.—


LIBER LEUITICI, XIx, 31


/ROBERT M. GUERNSEY


UNIVERSITY BOOKS ee New Hyde,Park, New York
5


THIRD PRINTING, FEBRUARY 1970


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 1965
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 58-8303
Manufactured in the United States of America


DILECTO DESIDERATISSIMO
D. D. D.


AUCTOR


Vill.


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
GREECE AND ROME
ENGLAND
SCOTLAND

NEW ENGLAND
FRANCE

GERMANY

ITALY

SPAIN

INDEX


xi


INTRODUCTION


THE present work may be regarded as a complementary
volume to, or even a second volume of, my History of Witch-
craft and Demonology. There I spoke of general principles ;
here I give particulars. It is obvious that a choice must be
exercised in treating of so world-wide a subject, and it is
impertinent to arraign me because I have not dealt with
China and Peru, with Morocco and Senegambia.

The Introduction to the previous volume clearly indicates
the lines upon which I approach Witchcraft, an attitude
doubtless open to criticism, as indeed are all points of view.
To compile an encyclopedia is for practical reasons not now
possible ; to do less is to expose the joints of one’s harness to
every man who lists to draw a bow at a venture.


In Fzsro S. Parris n. Ioannis A Orvok Oonf. et Eccl, Doctoris.
1926.


~
4 My
; = i
+
<a ‘ es
4 a
= ; e
=> *
ma a
a S ws
=< 4 y ok | 4) "=
it wite awe
; Se et 1,
‘ey # wi) we@eaheowiad Ree.
oe as at 2 ee


4 i Avt@w more, a4


P : ¥ * a Be st )
' i “eI on io oF
Ps a ee
! F s dora) tomy :
_ ‘ - 7 or ys
, 4 jit, old oom dece gp el AT oe
vy : § eas
mS") » oe! & enh ap %


- : = ¥ © - * Se


ae


THE
GEOGRAPHY OF
WITCHCRAFT


CHAPTER I


GREECE AND RoME


From the very earliest times there were inextricably
reticulated in the complex Greek systems of universal
mythology and symbolistic religious ceremonial various
aboriginal beliefs and curious practices of ancient superstition
which formed a primitive order of magic; in later days to
be elaborated, to be augmented from Pheenicia and from
Egypt, to be studied in schools, to be glossed and codified.
Nature taught man the drama of the Sacrifice, some vague
shadow, as it might be, of the Good Things that were to come ;
some antepast of that Banquet which alone can satisfy the
hunger of his soul. The Greek sacrifice, even in its crudest
stages, was inevitably accompanied by ancillary rites, which,
however trivial, had as their end the object either of dis-
covering the god’s will or of placating the divinity. It soon
followed that there must be those who were able to acquire
by intensive meditation the means of interpreting the
expression of that will, of recognizing when the efforts of the
worshipper had been crowned with success, when his deity
was regarding him with favour and approval. And accord-
ingly there came to be a caste of persons who made these things
their principal concern, wise men (wizards), priests who from
their daily and intimate communion with the god, from living
in his presence, were regarded as partakers of his sanctity,
protected by him, inspired by him, his friends and servants.
The priests were not vagrant, not irresponsible Gyrovagi and
Sarabaitz, but stable men, dwellers in one place. Whence
the locality where they abode also in its degree reflected their


2 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


mysterious power, it was aureoled with supernaturalism ;
thither resorted the individual who wished to learn Heaven’s
will, and before many generations had passed these places
were famous as oracles, as shrines, as centres of pilgrimage.

Naturally in the course of years the priest would take care
to fix his abode in some spot which, it might be for its remote-
ness, the beauty or grandeur of its landscape, the loneliness
of its woodland glades, the terror of its beetling crags, the
reverence of its snow-capped hills, or for some accidental
reason altogether, was most suited to his purpose, most
impressive to the plastic mind of the inquirer, whether he
came from near or far. And so we have the oracle of Dodona
amid the forest of huge-girthed oaks; Apollo speaks from
the chasm of legend-haunted Delphi where Parnassus towers
above ; horned Hammon is sought amid the sandy wastes
of distant Libya; the phallic Baal upon the lonely heights
of Peor in the Moabitish land.

The priests to whose charge these sanctuaries belonged
were veritable sorcerers. They delivered the oracles; they
chanted incantations as the smoke of sacrifice ascended ;
they directed, they expounded, they advised ; they healed,
they dispensed noxious draughts ; they pretended to lord it
over nature by their arts ; they tamed wild beasts and they
charmed serpents, as Pliny tells ;1 they controlled the winds
just as the witches of Lapland and Norway were wont to do ;
they could avert the hail-storm (yaAafogvAakes),2 or on the
other hand they could cover a smiling sky with the menace
of dark clouds and torrential rain (vepeAodi@xrar) 33 ** In
augurum certe disciplina constat, neque diras, neque ulla
auspicia pertinere ad eos, qui quamque rem ingredientes,
obseruare se ea negauerint : quo munere diuine indulgentiz
maius nullum est. Quid ? non et legum ipsarum in duodecim
tabulis uerba sunt? ‘ Qui fruges excantasset.’? Et alibi,
‘Qui malum carmen incantasset.’ ’’4

These priest-sorcerers> had, moreover, the power to turn
human beings into brute animals ; a superstition upon which
S. Boethius philosophizes aptly in the Fourth Book of his
De Consolatione Philosophie, when he says that man’s evil
passions, if uncurbed, degrade him lower than the beasts.
** Kuenit igitur, ut quem transformatum uitiis uideas hominem
eestimare non possis. Auaritia seruet alienarum opum


GREECE AND ROME 3


uiolentus ereptor? lupi similem dixeris . . . Insidiator
occultis surripuisse fraudibus gaudet ? Uulpeculis exeequa-
tur.° Ire intemperans fremit? leonis animum gestare
credatur. . . . Ita sit, ut qui, probitate deserta, homo esse
desierit, cum in diuinam conditionem transire non possit,
uertatur in belluam.” This legendary power of metamor-
phosis seems to be closely connected with the animal disguises
ritually worn by the priest when engaged in his worship.
The custom is of the remotest antiquity, for such masqued
men are found even among the paleolithic drawings in France,
the animal represented being the original totem of the tribe.
Often the god himself was adored under the animal form, a
variant which, although continually met with, is perhaps most
generally known as having moulded the representation of the
deities of Egypt and the Nile. This ritual disguise offers, no
doubt, in part at least, an explanation of the innumerable
myths of the Greek pantheon which tell how Zeus enjoyed
Kuropa as a bull, Leda as a swan, Asterie as an eagle, Deois
as a speckled serpent ; how Poseidon as a bull seduced Arne,
as aram Theophane ; how Chronos as a horse covered Philyra
and begat the centaur Chiron; and a thousand ancient
legends more.

The power of transforming men to beasts particularly
occurs in the legend of Circe, which, with the story of the
enchantress Medea,? whom Diodorus® calls Hecate’s own
daughter, is amongst the earliest Greek sagas. Even so
revolutionary a commentator as Kirchhoff,® who puts forward
the view that the Odyssey is mainly made up with large late
additions by a compiler from a number of early poems, a
nucleus which he calls the “‘ Elder Odyssey,” is of opinion
that this ‘‘ Elder Odyssey ” contains material of an almost
primitive date and to this kernel belong the adventures of
Odysseus with Circe. A very close analogy may be found in
the Indian collection of Somadeva, which, although as a
whole of the thirteenth century, A.D., comprises myths that
have descended from remotest antiquity. Here the witch,
after changing a company into four-footed beasts, is van-
quished by a magical formula in the mouth of a young
traveller, whom she then admits to her bed.

Number six of the eight epics which made up the Trojan
cycle was known as the Nosto?, the history of the return home


4 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of certain Greek heroes, especially Menelaus and Agamemnon,
after Ilium had fallen. The author of the Nostoi, a poem in
five books, was Agias of Troezen, c. 750 B.c., but he is a mere
name to us. In some way, as appears from the Scholiast’s
Argument to the Medea of Euripides, Medea was brought into
the old epic and the incident of the restoration of Aeson to
youth was therein related. Pausanias,1° who had read the
poem, tells us that it contained an account of Hades, and
it may be guessed that much light would have been thrown
thence on Greek magic and eschatology.

It should incidentally be mentioned that in addition to the
priest-sorcerers there grew up another class of wizards, who,
however, held a very inferior place in the public estimation,
and who were, it seems evident, on occasion addicted to
jugglery and the most bare-faced charlatanry. These were
the “‘ goetes ” (ydntes), whose name was derived from the
wild shrieks and howls—Seneca’s barbaricus ululatus—with
which they chanted their incantations.14_ Yet they were
feared almost as much as they were disliked, for, in spite of
their impostures, it was believed that they had malevolent
powers not to be despised with impunity, and they were in
fact generally accredited with the most mischievous and
unlucky intentions. They were the confectioners of philtres
and poisons; they peddled their craft for money; they
raised jars, jealousies, strifes, like a thick scurf o’er life. The
goetes were indeed most like the witch of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, the Sawyers, Demdikes, Cullenders,
and the hags whom Bodin and De Lancre burned. The
priests hated their tradition, and more than once laws were
passed to check their activities.12 The cynic philosopher,
Oenomius?* (A.D. 150 ?) wrote a treatise Pdpa yonrwy (The
Goetes Unveiled) in which he exposed their frauds and quackery.

It is supposed that the goetes were the indigenous wizards
of Greece and that their arts preserved some rude aboriginal
superstitions, whilst the more sober and solemn magic of the
priests was if not actually in its origin, at least in its develop-
ment, Oriental. Pliny (Historia Naturalis, XXX, 1) attributes
the importation of systematized magic into Greece to
Osthanes, a soothsayer who accompanied Xerxes on his
expedition against the West, 480 B.c., and he tells us that
Osthanes was a disciple of Zoroaster. But this is uncritical,


GREECE AND ROME 5


and such an attribution must be centuries too late. “ Quod
certum est, hic maxime Osthanes ad rabiem, non auiditatem
modo scientiz eius, Grecorum populos egit.” Pliny held
Zoroaster to be in effect the first magician, but this Osthanes
could not have been his pupil, inasmuch as although the
Pahlavi books traditionally place this master’s era between
the earlier half of the seventh and the sixth century, most
scholars have no hesitation in assigning him to a hundred
years, or even several hundred years, before this date.
Apuleius (De Magia, XXVI) mentions Zoroaster and
Oromazus as the inventors of sorcery: ‘Do you not know
that magic . . . is an art pleasing to the immortal gods .

a science which has been noble and reverend from the very
times of Zoroaster and Oromazus, who invented it, a science
which is the handmaid of the lords of heaven ?”’!4_ He classes
Osthanes with Epimenides, Orpheus, and Pythagoras ‘‘ eos
uero uulgo magos nominent” (whom the vulgar term
magicians too).

S. Augustine, De Ciuitate Dei, VII, 35, quoting Varro, says
that various kinds of divination, used both in Greece and
Rome, were of Eastern origin. ‘‘ For Numa himself, being
not instructed by any prophet or Angel of God was fain to
fall to hydromancy : making his gods (or rather his devils)
to appear in water, and instruct him in his religious institu-
tions. Which kind of divination, says Varro, came from
Persia, and was used by Numa and afterwards by Pythagoras,
wherein they used blood also, and called forth spirits infernal.
Necromancy the Greeks call it ; but necromancy or hydro-
mancy, whether you like, there it is that the dead seem to
speak.”’15

One of the earliest and incidentally one of the most
important scenes of necromancy in Greek literature is to be
found in the Odyssey, Book XI. Odysseus has been advised
by Circe—the witch, be it noted—to take counsel from the
shade of Tiresias, the famous seer, and so he makes his way
to the shores of eternal darkness, the home of the Cimmerians,
where he lands and seeks the poplar groves that skirt the
house of Hades.1* Between earth and the realm of Hades
is an intermediate region of ghosts, Erebus. Tartarus, the
prison of the Titans, and other rebels against divine pro-
vidence, is as far below Hades as he is below the earth.1? In


6 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the realm of Hades the spirit of the dead has the form, the
rank, and the occupations which were those of the living man.
But the spirit is a mere semblance or wraith. “ The living
heart is not in it ” (Iliad, XXIII, 103), it is “ strengthless.”’
When Odysseus seeks to call up the spirits of the dead he
digs a pit, a cubit square, into which flows the blood of the
sheep that he sacrifices to Hades and Proserpine. A crowd
of silent shadows evoked by his prayers come up and crave
to taste the blood, but with drawn sword he keeps them at
bay until Tiresias shall appear. Even the ghost of his mother
has to be warded off from the trench. Finally the old prophet
is seen hovering near, and is allowed to drink “ that I may
tell sooth.”’? He then delivers his oracle, and further explains
that all the shades upon quaffing the blood will recover some
of the faculties of the living and be able to hold converse
awhile. The dead mother now is enabled to talk with her son,
but when they strive to embrace all is vain, he clasps the
empty air. It is interesting to observe that in this long and
fully detailed scene, where we already have much of the
ritual of medizeval and modern Witchcraft, lines 868-641
have been regarded as an ‘“Orphic interpolation,” for
Orpheus was said to be the composer of various incantations
and rhythmic charms, and fragments of the Orphie poetry
which was known to Plato still remain.

The Greek goddess of necromancy and all Witchcraft was
the mysterious Hecate. The name at least seems to be
Greek, }8 and it may be an epithet denoting “‘ the far-off one,”’
“the one who stands aloof,” but whilst no explanation that
has yet been suggested is very significant, an even greater
obscurity covers the origin and character of this deity. There
is no mention of her in the Homeric epics, she has no legend,
she has no genealogy, facts which are surely not without
deep meaning when we consider the mysterious and secret
cult of this awful power. The two earliest references in
literature are the quotation in Pausanias from the catdAoyos
yevaixev attributed to Hesiod, which connects Hecate with
Artemis and Iphigenia; and the well-known passage in
the Theogony,’® probably the first reference in known
Greek literature. At Aegina, where she was specially
honoured, her mysteries were established at least in the fifth
century, and the tradition was locally ascribed to the Thracian


GREECE AND ROME i


Orpheus. In Samothrace the cult was amalgamated with
the occult rituals of the Cabiri. In certain parts of Caria she
seems to have had eunuchs as her priests, which certainly is
connected with the Corybantes of Cybele. Everything points
to the fact that Thrace was the first home of Hecate, and the
Thracian goddess Bendis may be Hecate venerated under
another name. It should be remarked that the hound was
the animal sacred to Hecate, and black dogs often precede
the coming or manifestation of the divinity. The statue of
Hecate Lampadephoros at Byzantium commemorated the
good service of the dogs who aroused the citizens on the
occasion of a night attack by Philip of Macedon.

At some period before the Peloponnesian War, Hecate had
become identified with Artemis.2° Probably in the first
instance this was not because both were moon-goddesses—for
such was in fact not originally the case—the usual, and rather
superficial, explanation ; but rather not on account of any
deep essential affinity so much as that the torches, wandering
by night, hounds, and wild nature of Hecate admirably suited
Artemis as well. It is true, however, that in later years both
Hecate and Artemis were worshipped as lunar deities. And
soon her ghostly character becomes very prominent. Euripides
speaks of her as “‘ Queen of the phantom-world ”; and on
black-figured vases she is depicted in company with Perse-
phone, Demeter, and Hermes. We find her allied with those
wilder gods whose rites were mystery, who drove the impious
that dare profane the orgies, mad, Pan and Cybele; and at
Tralles even with Priapus,?! a most important fact when we
remember that sexual debauchery has always been a feature
of Witchcraft throughout the ages. In Lucian, Philopseudes,
nightly Hecate is evoked by a sorcerer and she appears
terrible to see, in the form of a woman, half a furlong high,
snake-footed, snakes in her hair, a torch in her left hand, a
mighty sword in her right.

Horror, fear, and darkness rapidly accumulated about her :
at Tarentum she was adored as a¢patros, “the nameless
one’; at Terina and Hipponium in the fourth century as
awavoewa, ‘all terrible.”? Her statue of triple form,?* the
queen of three worlds,”? Selene in heaven, Artemis on earth,
Persephone in hell, stood at the cross-roads, a haunted spot,
where, according to Plato (Laws 878b), might be thrown the


8 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


corpse of the murderer after execution, unwept, unburied,
the prey of daws and crows. Her rites were monstrous, but
to be respected and revered ; her worshippers were accursed,
but to be dreaded and placated ; her prayers blasphemy ;
her sacrifices impious and terrible. It was in truth the very
cult of hell.

Hecate in vengeance sent spectres and ghostly phantoms
which filled men’s hearts with hideous fear and drove them
to madness and despair. These were the éw7ides, the
silent watchers of the night. Other of her train were the
’"Eurovca?4 (Empusas), monstrous hobgoblins with the feet
of donkeys, who might, on a sudden, take a thousand forms
to scare belated travellers; the Kepxwis?5 (Cercopis), a
poltergeist, who haunted four cross-ways ; and, most dreaded
of all, Mopuaé2* (Mormo), a foul and loathly ghoul.

Eusebius has preserved an answer which, according to
Porphyry,2? was given by Hecate to one of her votaries.
The worshipper is bidden to carve him a statue of well-planed
wood according to certain mystic formulas. The figure is to
be smeared with rue, and then with a paste to be compounded
of lizards,?® myrrh, storax, and incense grains, which must be
confected what time the new moon hangs a sickle in the sky.
When the moon is full, ‘‘ vow thy solemn vows in these
words.” This phrase unfortunately has not been preserved
to us. ‘ Build a shrine and deck it with wild laure] boughs,
set therein my image which adore with fervent orison, and
in thy sleep I will stand before thee.”” Probably the invoca-
tion which Eusebius omitted, is that we find in the Philo-
sophumena® of S. Hippolytus. ‘‘ Come, infernal, terrestial,
and heavenly Bombo, goddess of the broad roadways, of the
cross-road, thou who goest to and fro at night, torch in hand,
enemy of the day, friend and lover of darkness, thou who
dost rejoice when the bitches are howling and warm blood
is spilled, thou who art walking amid the phantom and in
the place of tombs, thou whose thirst is blood, thou who dost
strike chill fear into morta] heart, Gorgo, Mormo, Moon of a
thousand forms, cast a propitious eye upon our sacrifice.”

As in medieval times it was often believed that super-
natural powers were the heritage of certain families, descend-
ing from one generation to another, and that all Lap women®
in particular were born witches, so the Greeks considered


GREECE AND ROME 9


that the Thessalian dames were above all other folk skilled
in sorcery and enchantments. They were equally deft at
brewing a love philtre or a poison, and by their litanies and
charms they could draw the very moon from the skies. Pliny
tells us (Historia Naturalis, XXX, ii, 2) that Menander in his
comedy Thessala (The Thessalian Woman) brought on the
stage a sabbat scene in which the enchantress compelled the
moon to obey her magic: ‘‘ Miror equidem Achillis populis
famam eius in tantum adhesisse, ut Menander quoque
literarum subtilitati sine semulo genitus, Thessalam cogno-
minaret fabulam, complexam ambages feminarum detra-
hentium Lunam. Orphea putarem e propinquo primum
intulisse, ad uicina usque, superstitionem ac medicine pro-
fectum, si non expers sedes eius rota Thrace magices fuisset.”’
And so essential a feature of Witchcraft did this fascination
of the moon become, so typical an exploit of necromancers,
that Nonnus actually attributes it to the Brahmin priests.®4
Lucian, when he is to tell a story of enchantment, at once
sends his hero to Thessaly, the most appropriate locale, and
Apuleius, who turned the tale into finest gold, writes:
“‘ Extremely desirous of becoming acquainted with all that
is strange and wonderful, I called to mind that I was in the
very heart of Thessaly, celebrated by the unanimous consent
of the whole wide world as the land where the spells and
incantations of the art of magic are, so to speak, indigenous

. accordingly excited in the highest degree by my eager-
ness and my ardent temperament I examined everything in
detail with closest curiosity.’’ 3?

The second idyll of Theocritus, the Pharmaceutria, gives a
vividly realistic and impassioned picture of Greek sorcery.
Simaetha, a proud Syracusan lady, has been forsaken by her
lover Delphis, and driven to madness by the vehemence of
her desire, she resorts to the terrible rites of magic to win
him to her bed again. She stands at midnight upon the
deserted shore, the wind has dropped and all is still, there is
scarcely a ripple upon the moonlit sea, there is no sound save
the gentle lap of the water that softly kisses the sand, all
nature is husned in sleep. Yet her bosom throbs with agony ;
for her there is no rest, no quiet ; love has sucked her blood
like a leech; her very skin is jaundiced and sere, hot with
fever, burning to the toucn. A fierce fire blazes red upon the


10 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


beach, and in its light she twirls her charmed wheel, adjuring
it to bring false Delphis to her home.


~ A A | »#
yé® Ede TU Tivov €uov ToTt 6ama Tov avdpa.


Thestylis, her attendant, muffled in a mantle and shuddering
from the chilly air or with fear, casts meal upon the flames,
meal that typifies the bones of Delphis ; a green laurel bough
that crackles in the heat and stands for his supple young
limbs ; pure wax which melts as his strength shall fade and
fail. The girl hesitates for a moment, and Simaetha upbraids
her with cold and cruel words. New ingredients are brought ;
bran, and spurge which sets mares on heat ; the border of
the recreant’s mantle is rent into shreds and scattered into
the glowing heart of the fire. Presently Thestylis is dis-
patched in hot haste to smear the doors of Delphis with a
sympathetic ointment, and thrice is she to spit** and say
‘**T anoint the bones of Delphis.” Simaetha, all alone, turns
to the argent disc of the Moon, clear and calm above her,
journeying in majestic state through the Sicilian skies, and
to her she pours forth the story of her love.


ppateo wev Tov épwO’ dOev ixero, oTva Ledava.


About the middle of the road, just where Lycon’s house
stands, she first saw Delphis. He was walking with his friend
Kudamippos. Fair were their locks in the sunlight; they
moved with the immortal grace of gods. Then follows a tale
of hot southern passion ; gladly she yields him her virginity,
oversoon, for satiety and neglect follow on the one side,
mistrust and bitter revenge on the other. Once he scarce
could bear to be an hour from her; now, twelve days have
past and he has not crossed her threshold. Can it be he loves
another ? And will her incantations prevail? If not, there
are at any rate poisons swift and sure, there are phials which
she keeps in a box, drugs an Assyrian stranger once taught
her to brew, quick dispatch to the gate of hell, potions such
as were wont to be distilled by Circe, or Medea, or Perimede
of the golden hair.%5

With the exception of a few inconsiderable circumstances
all the terrible and loathsome rites of ancient magic rehearsed
in this magnificent monodrama may be closely and immedi-
ately paralleled in the lore of modern Witchcraft. We have


GREECE AND ROME 11


the time, midnight. The place, upon the seashore. Wax is
consumed in the fire. The Aberdeen witches in 1596 assembled
“att tuelff houris at eevin or thairby.”* In the pamphlet
Newes from Scotland (1591) the Berwick coven are represented
as forgathering upon the Lothian beach at North Berwick.
The use of waxen images in Witchcraft is of the highest
antiquity, and there is no property, perhaps, more frequently
to be met with in the records and inquiries of all ages and
all countries. We know that such figures, both to do good
and to do evil, were employed in the pre-dynastic days of
Egypt, when the Egyptians were slowly emerging from a
state of semi-barbarism into civilization. In the Western
Papyrus*’ there isa story of the reign of Nebka or Neb-hau-Ra,
a king of the Third Dynasty (about 3880 B.c.), in which such
a model plays an important part. The wife of a certain high
official, Aba-aner,#® becomes enamoured of a soldier of the
royal guard. Aba-aner, discovering this, fashions a crocodile
of wax, of which material he has a supply in an ebony box,
seven spans long, and having recited certain spells says:
** When the man cometh down to bathe in my waters seize
thou him.” The crocodile is cast into the river whilst the
lover is swimming there. It instantly turns into a living
monster, seven cubits (about twelve feet) in length, and drags
its prey down under the water. Seven days later the King
and Aba-aner are walking by the stream, when the latter
calls to the crocodile, which appears bringing the soldier in
its mouth. Aba-aner has but to touch the reptile and lo!
there is only a small model of wax. He relates to Nebka
what has happened, and when the king cries to the beast,
“Take that which is thine and begone!” the huge jaws
in a moment close upon its victim and the crocodile dis-
appears for ever into the depths of the Nile. The guilty wife
was by the royal command punished with death. It should
be noticed that the narrative represents Aba-aner as having
by him a box of wax which he specially keeps for performing
feats of magic, and that the king does not appear to attach
any evil or reproach to such acts and practices.

When the famous conspiracy was formed against Rameses
III, about 1200 z.c., the official account of the trials mentions
that a certain high official, Hui, resorted to magic to obtain
his ends. He procured from the royal library a book of


12 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


spells, and then set to work to make little figures of men in
wax, and so succeeded in carrying out all the “ horrible
things and all the wickednesses which his heart could
imagine.” He is more than once definitely accused of making
these men of wax, which should cause the human beings
they represented to become paralysed, helpless, and sick to
death. The conspiracy was discovered, and Hui, who had
made a wax image to bring suffering and destruction upon
the king himself, was compelled by the judges to commit
suicide.

Wax figures were largely employed in the liturgy of the
god Amen-Ra, whose great temple was at Thebes. One
feature of the daily worship consisted in elaborate ritual acts
whose object was to free the Sun, deified under the form of
Ra, from the attacks of a hideous human dragon named
Apep, storm-clouds and darkness. By the time of the
Ptolemies there had been compiled a manual of twelve
chapters The Book of Overthrowing Apep. The litanies and
orisons of Ra are given, the words of power, and then the
rubric runs : ‘If thou wouldest destroy Apep, thou shalt say
this chapter over a figure of Apep, which hath been drawn
in green colour upon a sheet of new papyrus, and over a wax
figure of Apep upon which his name hath been cut and inlaid
with green colour; and thou shalt lay them upon the fire
so that it may consume the enemy of Ra.” This charm is to
be repeated at dawn, at noon, at evening, at midnight, and
oftener, every hour in fact, if deemed necessary.

Ovid’s Medea employed figures of wax which she pierced
with a needle :


Deuouet absentes: simulacraque cerea figit,
Et miserum tcnues in iecur urget acus.


So writes Hypsipyle to Jason of the foreign whore her faith-
less lover has brought home with him. (Heroides, VI, 91-2.)

From ancient Egypt the magic use of wax figures passed to
Greece, and thence to Rome. From Rome it passed into
Western Europe. About the end of the seventh century the
life of King Duffus of Scotland was attempted in this way.
“A company of hags roasted his image made of wax upon
a wooden spit, reciting certain words of enchantment, and
basting the figure with a poisonous liquor. These women,


GREECE AND ROME 13


when apprehended, declared, that as the wax melted, the
body of the king should decay, and the words of enchantment
prevented him from the refreshment of sleep.”®* The figure
was destroyed ; the witches burned at Forres in Murray; and
the king recovered his health. The witches of North Berwick
made a similar figure of James I, which was to be melted
before a fire to destroy that king, who in his Demonologie
(1597) ascribes such practices to the Devil, and says in
describing what things witches may “ effectuate by the power
of their master”: ‘To some others at these times hee
teaceth, how to make Pictures of waxe or clay: That by
the rosting thereof, the persones that they beare the name
of, may be continuallie melted or dryed awaie by continuall
sicknesse.’’4° Reginald Scot tells us that when a young girl
named Stuppeny of New Romney, Kent, fell sick her parents
consulted a certain Mother Baker, who at once accused a
neighbour of bewitching their daughter. She said that this
woman had made a wax heart and pierced it with pins to
accomplish the enchantment. In order to prove the accusa-
tion Mother Baker in the meantime had concealed a wax
heart in the house of the woman she accused, and then
pretended to find it. But the spot she chose had been
previously searched, so the malicious old crone was caught
and compelled to confess her trick.44 In 1664 the chief
indictment against Christian Green and Margaret Agar of
Brewham, Somerset, was that they had made “pictures ”’
of wax into which they stuck thorns and needles, whereby
those whose figures the models were languished and pined
to death, being forespoken from that hour.*?

Simaetha crushes a lizard to confect her charm ; the hags
of Nogaredo in 1647 confessed that newts and _ lizards‘**
were powerful ingredients in their hell-broth, And if her
spells are of no effect, the jealous dame will have resource to
some swift venom. Professor A. J. Clark, who has analysed
the “flying ointments ” of more modern sorceresses, writes
of their three formule: ‘‘ These prescriptions show that the
society of witches had a very creditable knowledge of the
art of poisoning.”

The mention of the Assyrian stranger is particularly
interesting. As we have seen, tradition assigned the intro-
duction of Oriental magic into Greece to the year 480 B.c.,


14. THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and Theocritus was writing some two hundred years later.
By that time the very name xa\daios, a Chaldean, was
used as a synonym for an astrologer, a fortune-teller. So
Cicero in the De Diuinatione, I, 2, has: ‘‘ Gentem quidem
nullam uideo . . . que non significari futura, et a quibusdam
intelligi, preedicique posse censeat. Principio Assyrii .. .
traiectiones motusque stellarum obseruitauerunt. . . . Qua
in natione Chaldzi, non ex artis, sed ex gentis uocabulo
nominati, diuturna obseruatione siderum, scientiam putantur
effecisse, ut predici posset, quid cuique euenturum, et quo
quisque fato natus esset.”” Juvenal, also (VI, 552-4), writes :


Chaldaeis sed maior erit fiducia : quidquid
Dixeri Astrologus, credent a fonte relatum
Hammonis, quoniam Delphis oracula cessant.


(More Credit, yet, is to Chaldeans giv’n ;

What they foretell, is deem’d the Voice of Heav’n.
Their Answers, as from Hammon’s Altar, come ;
Since now the Delphian Oracles are dumb.)


DRYDEN.


And again (X, 92-4), in allusion to Tiberius :
tutor haberi
Principis Augusta Caprearum in rupe sedentis
Cum grege Chaldaco.


(And keep a prince in ward, retired to reign
O’er Capree’s crags, with his Chaldean train ?)
GIFFORD.


Tacitus in the sixth book of the Annals also speaks of
Tiberius, who “ scientia Chaldeorum artis . . . magistrum
Thrasyllum habuit.” This Thrasyllus is mentioned by
Suetonius, and praised by Pliny.

In English, too, the name ‘‘ Chaldean ” came to be used
for a soothsayer, a magician. In James Shirley’s comedy
The Sisters (8vo, 1652) III, Giovanni exclaims : ‘‘ They call
him a Chaldean, a great scholar. . . . My lady hath given
the Chaldean her nativity, who is to consult with the
ephemerides.’’44

The Chaldean astrologer Berosus was said to have founded
a school of astronomy and divination at Cos, and Pliny relates
that the Athenians esteemed him so highly as to honour him
by erecting his statue, furnished with a tongue of gold, in


GREECE AND ROME 15


the public Gymnasium. “ Astrologia [enituit] Berosus, cui ob
diuinas preedictiones Athenienses publice in gymnasio statuam
inaurata lingua statuere.”45 Other famous Chaldeans were
Astrampsychos, Gobryas, and Pazalas,4® under whose names
in later days went various collections of spells and prophecies,
just as in England similar chap-books were ascribed to Merlin
or Mother Shipton, and in France every little Merveilleux
Trésor de la Magie was fathered upon Cornelius Agrippa,
le Petit Albert, or Nostrodamus.

Egyptian magic*? and astrology became known to the
Greeks at a comparatively early period. Some authorities
find traces of Egypt among the Orphic Hymns, but from
every point of view such a line of argument offers consider-
able difficulties.

Especially famous in Greek tradition was Nectanebus, the
last native king of Egypt, about 358 3.c., and a master
magician. By means of his wisdom he was lord of all the
earth, and his enchantments could rule the mightiest
monarchs. For if he was threatened with an invasion he
sent out no soldiers to repel his foe, but retiring to a certain
secret chamber, and having brought forth a great bowl kept
for the purpose, he filled this with pure water. He then made
small wax figures of the ships and men of the enemy, and
also of his own men and ships, setting them all upon the
water in the bowl, his host on one side, the fleet of the enemy
opposite them. Next he robed himself in his mystic mantle
and took his wand of ebony. Speaking the words of power,
he summoned the winds, the subterranean demons, and the
gods themselves to his aid. The wax poppets sprang into
life, the ships of wax began to move, and they fought upon
the water; but the figures which represented his own men
vanquished the enemy, and as the foreign vessels and warriors
sank to the bottom of the bowl, so did the real ships and
crews of his adversary sink to the floor of the ocean. It
happened that one day certain scouts came to Nectanebus
and told him that all the nations of the East had leagued
against him, and were hard by the frontier, an army thick
as locusts, and as the sands of the desert in number. The
magician laughed scornfully awhile, and having gone into his
private chamber, poured water into the bowl, and proceeded
with the charm. When he looked at the wax figures, however,


16 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


he saw to his dismay that the gods of Egypt were steering
the enemies’ navy against himself and that he could not
cause their ships to founder in the usual way. Accordingly he
knew that the end of the kingdom of Egypt was at hand,
so hastily leaving his palace he shaved off his hair and beard,
and taking with him much gold he fled, disguised in common
apparel, and sailed to Pella in Macedonia, where he estab-
lished himself as a physician, and as an Egyptian soothsayer,
winning great renown.

In the fourth chapter of Pseudo-Callisthenes we have an
account of the casting of the nativity of Olympias by
Nectanebus, who also sent a dream to the queen by means
of a wax figure. His object was to persuade her that she
should be visited by the god Amen (or Hammon) that night.
Accordingly, having collected a number of herbs, he made
a wax figure of a woman upon which he wrote the name
Olympias. This he anointed with the juice of the herbs, and
invoked certain demons by whose power she dreamed that
the god Amen came to her, and having had connexion with
her, announced that from his divine embrace she should give
birth to a man-child (Alexander the Great), who should
avenge her on her husband Philip.

Of Alexander himself various legends are related, and one
of these, possibly derived from an Egyptian source, is
particularly interesting since here we have so great a name as
Aristotle himself in the réle of a wizard. The Arab writer
Abu-Shaker, who lived in the thirteenth century, mentions a
tradition that Aristotle gave Alexander a number of wax
figures nailed down in a box fastened by a chain, and which
he strictly bade him never to let go out of his hand, or at
least only to entrust it to his most confidential and trusted
servants. Alexander was to carry the box with him always,
and whenever he took it up or set it down he was to recite
a certain formula or incantation.48 The figures were those
of the various kinds of armed men that were likely to be his
foes. Some of the models held leaden swords pointing back-
wards ; others had spears without heads; other had bows
with cut strings ; all these and many more were laid down-
ward in the box. It is clear that in providing Alexander
with these models and teaching him the words of power to
say over them, Aristotle believed that he was giving his


GREECE AND ROME 17


pupil the means of making his enemies become like the dummy
soldiers, and so they would be unable to attack him or to
withstand his arms.

Occasionally the Greek witch met with the same fate as
her sister of a thousand years later, for Theoris, “‘ the Lem-
nian woman,” Demosthenes calls her, was publicly tried in
Athens and burned for her sorceries.

From Greece Witchcraft sensibly penetrated to Rome
about the third century B.c., and with it in full force came
Oriental magic, although the superstitions of the East had
already begun to percolate through independent channels.
There were also, of course, native and indigenous traditions,
such as the mysterious cults and mythology of the Etruscans,
with their “‘ Shrouded Gods,” the books of Tages, and the
schools of the Lucumones. There lingered, moreover, the
legends and lore of yet older races and primitive civilizations.
But it is now generally acknowledged that from the Etruscans
the Romans derived their early belief in and solemn rites of
divination, so integral a part of the official religion.

Tages was a supernatural being,*? who, as Cicero writes, °?
once appeared suddenly in a field to a Tuscan ploughman,
and taught him and all the people of Etruria the art of the
haruspices. ‘“‘Is autem Tages, ut in libris est Etruscorum,
puerili specie dicitur uisus, sed senili fuisse prudentia . .
tum illum plura locutum multis audientibus, qui omnia eius
uerba exceperint, litterisque mandauerint: omnem autem
orationem fuisse eam, qua haruspicine disciplina contineretur :
eam postea creuisse rebus nouis cognoscendis, et ad eadem
illa principia referendis. Hzc accepimus ab ipsis; hec
scripta conseruant : hunc fontem habent discipline.”

The fearful veneration paid to the Lemures, who were
malignant spirits, with their high festival the Lemuria®? held
on the ninth, eleventh, and thirteenth of May, to propitiate
the ghosts of the departed ; the cult of the Manes, the deified
souls of the dead, benevolent spirits ; and the more domestic
rites of the Lares, with their feast the Laralia,®* celebrated
on the first of May; were all largely associated and mixed
up with magical observances. Of these spirits S. Augustine
writes: Plotinus ‘says also that men’s souls are demones,
and become lares if their merits are good; if evil lemures
goblins; if uncertain manes.”5 Apuleius in his De Deo


18 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Socratis Liber (XV) has the following: “I find that the
human soul after it has performed its duties in the present
life, and quitted the body is called in the ancient Latin
language by the name of Lemur. Now, of the Lemures, the
one who, undertaking the guardianship of his posterity,
dwells in a house with propitious and tranquil influence, is
called the “ familiar” Lar. But those who, having no fixed
habitation of their own, are punished with vague wandering
as with a kind of exile, on account of the evil deeds of their
life, are usually called Larve, thus becoming a vain terror
to the good but a source of punishment to the bad. But
when it is uncertain what is the allotted condition of any one
of these, and whether it is a Lar or Larva, it is called a God
Manes ; the name God being added for the sake of honour.”

The Lares belonged originally to the Etruscan religion, and
were worshipped as the presiders over and protectors of a
particular locality.54 They might be patrons of a city and
its suburbs, ‘“‘ Lares Putcolone ciuitatis ’ ;5>5 of a village,
‘“* Lares uicorum ”’ ;5° of cross-roads, “‘ Lares compitales,”’5?
whose statues Augustus, when he became Pontifex Maximus,
ordered to be decked for their festival twice a year in spring
and summer with garlands of fragrant flowers ; of the road-
side ‘‘ Lares uiales ” ;58 lords of the sea, ** Lares permarini ’’;5®
and one inscription even gives them the epithet “ celipo-
tentes.”’®° But more usually they were ‘“‘ familiaris ’ or
‘* domestici,”’ the guardians of one family or one home. Such
is the Lar Familiaris who speaks the prologue to the Aulularia.


Ego Lar sum familiaris, ex hac familia,

Unde exeuntem me aspexistis, Hance domum
Iam multos annos est cum possideo, et colo
Patrique, auoque iam huius qui nunc hic habet.


(1 am the Lar Familiaris of this family from
whose abode ye have secn me just coming out.
For many a long year have I been the guardian
of this house, and I have watched over the
father, ay, and the grandsire too of him who is
now master thereof.)


To drive away the Larve, ghouls, and goblins, it was
sometimes necessary to offer sacrifice with a complicated
ceremonial of expiation and exorcism.*! The ancient Italian
goddess Mana (Genita Mana) or Manuana was queen of the


GREECE AND ROME 19


Manes and Summanes. As the witch goddess she is some-
times identified with Hecate, although this is merely a late
and uncritical confusion. Her worship was secret and
mysterious. To her were offered young puppies, as Pliny
tells us: ‘‘Catulos lactentes adeo puros existimabant ad
cibum, ut etiam placandis numinibus hostiarum uice uteren-
tur his. Genitee Mane catulo res diuina sit, et in ccoenis deum
etiamnum ponitur catulira.’’®2 An even more awful and
shadowy figure was the dark Summanus, who hurled loud
crashing thunderbolts and sent red forked lightning through
the midnight sky.

Pliny writes, ‘‘ The Tuscan rituals state that nine gods
have power o’er the levin . . . they say that Jove hurls his
bolts during the day, but Summanus wields the thunder at
night.’’®3 Varro tells us that the worship of this deity was
introduced by Tatius the Sabine, and here he is evidently
repeating some very ancient legend. The temple of Sum-
manus was near the Circus Maximus, and S. Augustine says
that in later times he had few worshippers, at any rate that
is to say few acknowledged devotees.** The fact is this
horrid cult was conducted with such secrecy and so carefully
was his loathly ritua] guarded that even the curious in such
matters could ascertain no particulars. This was the case
with Ovid, who quite frankly writes :°


Reddita, quisquis is est, Summano templa feruntur,
Tum, cum Romanis, Pyrrhe, timendus eras.


(A temple is said to have been dedicated to Sum-
manus, whoever he may be, at that season when
thou, O Pyrrhus, wast our dread.)


Other authors are equally vague, but it is significant that
Martianus Capella®* the Carthaginian, who flourished towards
the close of the fifth century of our era, identifies Summanus
with Pluto, lord of hell. Fastus speaks of cakes superstitiously
offered to Summanus, “‘ Summanalia liba farinacea in modum
rote ficta ”? ;°7 and we known from Pliny that his rites were
accompanied by circumstances of hideous cruelty.®* Assuredly
in the worship of Summanus we have sheer demonolatry.

Livy has preserved to us more than one legend which shows
that during the period of the kings of Rome Etruscan
divination had gained a great hold upon the growing city.


20 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Particularly striking is the account of Numa Pompilius and
the nymph Egeria, with whom he was wont to commune in
the hallowed grove of the Camenz, near the Porta Capena.”
Varro explains this story by saying that Numa practised
hydromancy, divination by water, a charm of Persian origin,
since Egeria was the nymph of a sacred stream.

Commenting upon which S. Augustine cries: “ Necro-
mancy, the Greeks call it, but necromancy or hydromancy,
whether you like, there it is that the dead seem to speak.”
It is obvious that the holy doctor considers Numa to have
been nothing more nor less than a wizard. Varro further
relates that a certain Terentius was the owner of some fields
on Mount Janiculum, which when his servants were one day
ploughing they turned up, near the tomb of Numa, some old
parchments and scrolls written by that monarch. Terentius
took them to the Preetor, who laid them before the Senate,
by whose command they were immediately destroyed. Then
we have the Saint’s burning words: ‘‘ So either were these
books filled with the Devil’s bestial desires, and thereby all
the politic theology that presents them such filthinesses made
altogether execrable, or else the gods were shown by them, to
be none but men departed whom worm-eaten antiquity
persuaded the world to be gods, whereas they were devils
that delighted in those obscene ministries, and under their
names whom the people held divine, got place to play their
impostures, and by elusive miracles to captivate all their
souls.”?*1_ Whatever we may think of Varro’s suggestion—
and it seems quite possible—whether there be any truth or
subtratum of truth in the Numa legends at all, it is undeniable
that from very early times a tradition of magic was handed
down in Rome.

Malevolent spells were punished by death by the Law of
the Twelve Tables?2 which the Duumvirs drew up in the
fifth century B.c., and from time to time severe statutes were
passed, being especia]]ly directed against those who attempted
to injure crops and vines, to spread sickness amongst sheep
and cattle.78 In 189 B.c. the Pretor Cornelius Scipio Hispalus
issued an edict that all Chaldeans should leave Rome and
even Italy within ten days.’4 But his efforts were fruitless ;
the astrologers swarmed back in even greater numbers when
the first alarm was over. At the time of Marius and in the


GREECE AND ROME 21


days of Catiline, periods of civil war, intense political excite-
ment, and lightning changes of fortune, necromancers,
diviners, soothsayers, fortune-tellers, oneirocritics, seers,
occultists, mages, infested every alley and street-corner and
the people eagerly flocked to pay their fees and drink in their
predictions. The astrologers began to compose almanacs
and books, which they openly vended up and down. Such
a one, no doubt, was the work of Nigidius, from which Varro
quotes: “Is namque numerus [septem] septemtriones
maiores minoresque facit in clo, item Vergilius, quas
mdeadas Greci uocant ; facit etiam stellas, quas alii erraticas,
P. Nigidius errones appellat.”’ 75

The witches described by the Roman writers are sometimes
mysterious and stately women, sometimes foul and filthy
hags, but both seem equally terrible and potent for evil. Of
the former class we have in Vergil the Libyan sorceress, and
the Sibyl Deiphobe, to whom have been revealed the awful
secrets of the pit, whose eyes have seen unmoved the torments
of dunnest hell. Ovid’s Colchian Medea, again, is all dignity
in her despair, and her cry when she first yields to her passion
has found an echo in many a throbbing heart :*6


Uideo meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor.


Lucan’s Erichtho is a ghastly figure, reeking of death and
corruption. She prowls amongst the tombs, and gathers from
the gallows-tree its obscene fruit, the rotting limbs of long-
executed criminals.

Immersitque manus oculis ;*” gaudetque gelatos

Effodisse orbes : et siccz pallida rodit

Excrementa manus: laqueum, nodosque nocentes

Ore suo rupit : pendentia corpora carpsit,

Abrasitque cruces : percussaque uiscera nimbis

Uulsit, et incoctas admisso sole medullas.

Insertum manibus chalybem,*® nigramque per artus

Stillantis tabi saniem, uirusque coactum

Sustulit et neruo morsus retinente pependit.


The Saga of Tibullus is as well versed in enchantments as
any medieval witch, or any beldame burned under James I.
She can control the weather and evoke the dead :


Iam ciet infernas magico stridore cateruas.”®
(With her magic runes she can evoke the hosts of the dead.)


22 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Ovid’s Dipsas is a drunken old crone and a bawd to boot,
yet

Illa magas artes, Meaque carmina nouit.®°

(Magic spells doth she ken, such charms as Aiean Circe knew.)


One of the most famous sabbat scenes in Latin literature
is the midnight incantation of Canidia and Sagana upon the
Esquiline hill before the wooden statue of Priapus.** Horace
has spared us no hideous detail, and the extreme coarseness
of certain lines seems but to add a shade of yet more revolting
loathliness and disgust. Their faces pale and frightful to see,
with naked feet and dishevelled hair, swathed in dingy sable
cerements, the two witches uttering hoarse cries dig up the
soil with their long sharp nails and begin to rend to pieces a
black lamb, now and again thrusting a raw gory gobbet into
their gaping jaws. The warm blood pours down into the
trench ; one hag shrieks foul invocation to Hecate, the other
mutters a blasphemous prayer to fierce Tisiphone. A waxen
figure is melting fast before a hastily kindled fire.

That unique and inimitable fragment the Satyricon of
Petronius contains two wonderful ghost stories told at
Trimalchio’s banquet, the werwolf and the witches. Niceros
relates that one evening wishing to visit his mistress Melissa
he persuades a soldier to accompany him on his Jonesome
country jaunt. The silver moon is shining at her full; and
when they have reached a spot in the road remote from the
town his companion suddenly turns aside to the hedges,
strips himself stark-naked (cireumminxit uestimenta sua),
and in a flash a huge wolf leaps with a fierce howl into the
depths of the wood. Bathed in a cold sweat, Niceros, dazed
and confounded, makes his way to the villa of the Jady, who
greets him with the tale of a wolf which has attacked the
farm and torn the sheep, but it was driven off by a servant
who armed with a pike dealt the animal a sharp thrust. At
dawn, when the sun has fully risen, Niceros ventures back
to town, and he shudders to notice a pool of blood in the place
where the clothes lay by the wayside. On reaching home
he finds the soldier in bed and a surgeon dressing a deep
gash in his neck.

The word used by Petronius for a werwolf in this passage
is “‘ Uersipellis,”” one who is able to change his skin. Such


GREECE AND ROME 23


an anecdote of lycanthropy is of especial interest, for it
shows that the belief not only existed but was implicitly
accepted in ancient Rome. In the old legend Lycaon
(Aveawy, an animal of the wolf kind), father of Callisto, was
turned into a wolf by Jupiter, who was worshipped under the
title Lyceus. This points to the primitive cult of a wolf god
in Arcadia. Pliny, Historia Naturalis, VIII, xxiv, 22, writes :
“ Homines in lupos uerti, rursumque restitui sibi, falsum esse
confidenter existimare debemus. . . . Itaque Agriopas, qui
Olympionicas scripsit, quod Arcades Ioui Lycaeo humana
etiam tum hostia faciebant, immolati pueri exta degustasse,
et in lupum se conuertisse : eumdem decimo anno restitutum
athleticz, certasse in pugilatu, uictoremque Olympiareuersam.”
Pliny has, indeed, several anecdotes of werwolves, and it is
obvious that amongst the Arcadian mountains they were
shunned and feared. This superstition is, indeed, found in
almost all countries, and at every period of the world’s
history. It is as firmly credited in modern Greece as it was
in the Greece of Herodotus and Plato. Esthonia, Montenegro,
Hungary, Austria, Germany, Spain, Scandinavia, Iceland,
Lapland, Finland, all have an hundred legends of werwolves.
In France these monsters were supposed to infest the woods
and valleys of Brittany and Burgundy, the Landes, and the
mountainous regions of the Céte d’Or and the Cevennes.
The loup-garou when detected was sent to the stake. At
Déle in 1578 a certain Gilles Garnier was accused of this
offence. Several witnesses swore that in a vineyard near the
wood of la Serre he had devoured a little girl of eleven,
“‘ qu’il avait tuée et occise tant avec des mains semblans
pattes qu’avec ses dents.” The indictment, which was drawn
up by Henri Camus, doctor of laws and Councillor of the King
to the parliament of Déle, further set forth that Garnier
prowled about at night to satisfy his horrid lust, and on one
occasion, eight days before the feast of All Saints, he was seen
to catch another little girl with his teeth, but three country-
folk rescued her, and he escaped. Fifteen days after Hallow-
mas he strangled a boy ten years old, stripped him and
devoured his thighs and the fleshy part of his legs. He
confessed that he had also caught a boy of thirteen in a
thicket near the village of Pérouse, and that he had already
begun to eat his breast and arms “ nonobstant qu’il fust


24 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


jour de vendredy,” when he was disturbed and fled. Con-
victed of the ‘abominable crimes of lycanthropy and
witchcraft,” Garnier was burned alive and his ashes scattered
to the wind on 18 January, 15738.

In 1578 the Parliament of Paris was for several days
occupied with the trial of a man named Jacques Rollet or
Roulet. Found guilty of being a loup-garou and of devouring
a little boy he was burned alive in the Place de Gréve.

In the following year a number of werwolves were dis-
covered in the neighbourhood of Melun and sent to the stake.
In 1583 a loup-garou was burned at Orleans, and in 1588
at Riom in Auvergne the wife of a well-known citizen was
convicted of assuming the form of a beast, and executed.
One of the most remarkable cases was that of Jean Garnier
at Bordeaux in 1603. The accused, a lad of fourteen,
described as extraordinarily agile of limb, and most strikingly
handsome with dark, flashing eyes and very sharp white
teeth, gave long and detailed descriptions of the manner in
which he attacked various young children, of whom he had
eaten more than fifty. The court condemned him to death.

On 10 July, 1847, a certain Sergeant Bertrand was tried
before a military tribunal presided over by Colonel Manselon.
For many months the cemeteries in and around Paris had been
the scene of frightful violations, but in no case could the
culprit be traced. Graves were secretly dug up, coffins burst
open, the contents gnawed, nibbled, and scattered over the
ground. The watch on Pére la Chaise was doubled, but to
no purpose. At last one night a number of detectives saw a
figure scale the walls of the cemetery where they had been
posted ; they fired, and a trail of blood and torn uniform
proved at least that the marauder was a soldier. Still he
could not be traced, until a grave-digger happened to hear
some sappers of the 74th Regiment say that one of their
comrades had been badly wounded a night or two before.
This was Sergeant Bertrand, who was proved to be the author
of these hideous crimes. He freely confessed his guilt,
alleging that he was driven to it by external powers he could
not resist. He tore up the soil with his nails as a wild beast
scratches the earth. He was unable to describe his sensations,
he only knew he ravened for the dead. After these nocturnal
excursions he generally fell into a deep sleep, when a change


GREECE AND ROME 25


seemed to come over him. The following evening his ghastly
desires would return, and often he passed for a short while
into a kind of trance, during which, as it appeared to him,
he underwent some strange metamorphosis. The court
interrogated him closely, and he informed them that as a
child he had always preferred to human society the company
of wild animals, over whom he possessed a magnetic power.
These obsessions, which were most marked after sunset, had
first manifested themselves when he was quite young, and,
increasing in strength, at last proved irresistible. His com-
rades gave evidence that amongst them he was most popular,
always showing himself good-natured to a degree, thoroughly
liked, in fact, both by officers and by men. In the end he
was sentenced to a year’s imprisonment, and after his release
he immediately left the vicinity, never being heard of again.
Here we have a case of necrophily and lycanthropia, which,
although happily rare, one need not suppose unique, a case
quite sufficient to account for all the old tales of werwolves
and the loup-garou.

With regard to England, Gervase of Tilbury (c. 1150-1220)
in his Otia Imperialia®® writes: ‘‘ Uidimus enim frequenter
in Anglia per lunationes homines in lupos mutari, quod
hominum genus gerulphos Galli nominant, Angli uero were-
wolf dicunt.” (For in England at changes of the moon we
have often seen men transformed into wolves, and these folk
the French call gerulphi, but the English were-wolves.)
Reginald Scot’? discusses lycanthropy, and Burton®* has
left us a passage of great interest upon the subject, in con-
nexion with which he quotes Altomari, Weyer, Bodin, Sprenger,
and many other well-reputed authorities. He inclines to
think it a form of lunacy. In a famous scene Webster intro-
duces this horrid circumstance as the madness of Ferdinand :8°


Pescara. Pray-thee, what’s his disease ?
Doctor. A very pestilent disease, my lord,
They call it licanthropia.
Pes. What’s that ?
I need a dictionary to’t.
Doc. T’ll tell you:
In those that are possess’d with’t there oreflowes
Such mellencholly humour, they imagine
Themselves to be transformed into woolves,
Steale forth to church-yards in the dead of night,


26 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


And dig dead bodies up: as two nights since
One met the duke, ’bout midnight in a lane
Behind St. Markes church, with the leg of a man
Upon his shoulder ; and he howl’d fearefully :
Said he was a woolffe: onely the difference
Was, a woolffes skinne was hairy on the outside,
His on the in-side: bad them take their swords,
Rip up his flesh, and trie.


This was perhaps suggested by the following passage from
Grimeston’s translation (1607) of Simon Goulart’s Thrésor
Whistoires admirables et memorables de nostre temps (1606) :8¢
“‘ For there be Licanthropes in whom the melancholike humor
doth so rule, as they imagine themselves to be transformed
into Wolues . . . and all night doe nothing but runne into
Churche-yardes, and about graues . . . one of these melan-
cholike Licanthropes . . . carried then vpon his shoulders
the whole thigh and the legge of a dead man. Beeing care-
fully looked vnto, hee was cured of this disease.”

The reverence shown by the African negro to the fetish
leopards, hippopotami, crocodiles, and other animals is closely
connected with the belief in the power of Ngoi, Moloki,
N’doshi or Uvenwega ; to wit, that certain possessors of evil
spirits have ability to assume the shape of a beast of prey
and at will return to the human form. So in Ashangoland
the natives fear the wer-leopard, in Arawak the wer-jaguar,
and in Malaysia the wer-tiger. No doubt this superstition
is largely due to leopard and tiger societies formed by young
savages to satisfy their craving for cannibalism. Dressed in
skins they steal through the woods at night to attack any
solitary pedestrian or an isolated household. After killing
their victims they cut off those portions of the body they
fancy for their eating and scoring the mutilated corpse with
the signia of the society, deep scratches and wounds to
imitate the tearing of claws and teeth, they retire to some
secret retreat in the heart of the vast forest to devour the
tit-bits at leisure.

The second weird story told at Trimalchio’s table is related
by the host himself. A certain lad dies, and amid the
lamentations of his mother and friends is laid out for burial.
On a sudden the hideous howling of the banshees (strige)®?
is heard in the courtyard of the house. A young soldier drawing
his sword throws open the door and boldly leaps out, thrusting


GREECE AND ROME 27


right and left. A deep groan is heard; staggering back
covered with wounds and livid bruises he throws himself
Swooning upon a couch. They hasten to bar the door again
and make it doubly fast. But when the wretched mother
approached the bier to give her boy one last kiss they find
the body is gone, nothing but a mere mawkin, a poppet
stuffed with straw lies there, the hags have carried off the
corpse to use the heart and entrails for their sabbat charms.
The soldier, a few days after, expires in agony, raving mad.
Surely all this might be the unvarnished evidence at a witch-
trial in the sixteenth or seventeenth centuries, grimly noted
down by Sebastian Michaelis, o.p., by Scipion du Pleix, or
Henri Boguet.

Of immense value in the history of classical Witchcraft
and of equal value in Latin literature is that superb and
exquisite romance, which time has so happily spared to us,
the Metamorphoses of Apuleius. Perverse and exotic are its
pages, and—here for once one may rightly use that much
overworked word—truly decadent, carrying the nouella
elocutio, a thing of rarest beauty, to the highest point of
polished perfection. Born about the year 125, Apuleius was
of African origin; semi-Numida and semi-Getulus he calls
himself. The Metamorphoses, his greatest work, was probably
written at Rome before he was thirty, soon after he had
completed his course of study at Athens. The thread of the
main story is, no doubt, borrowed from that Greek tale
whence also Lucian took his version, rewriting the original
in his own limpid and racy style with all the wit and salt and
sceptic wickedness of Voltaire. For him the supernatural
was no more true and could be no more true than were the
pretty adventures of La Chatte Blanche or Babiole to the
graceful Comtesse d’Aulnoy. Apuleius, however, was
evidently attracted by that very quality Lucian despised ;
the occult element with its infinite possibilities would appeal
to him as a professed mystic and something more than a
dabbler in necromancy and the astral sciences. ‘In the
Metamorphoses,” it has been admirably said, ‘“‘a brooding
spirit of magic is over the whole narrative.”

To do anything like justice to the romance of Apuleius
and to show how every page is steeped in the supernatural
would demand a detailed analysis, here out of place. It


28 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


must be sufficient to touch upon a few episodes. The scene
opens in Thessaly, the home of magic, and after the briefest
premium the traveller Aristomenes tells Lucius his tale. At
Hypata Aristomenes has befriended Socrates, and seeks to
rescue him from Meroe, “saga et diuina, potens celum
deponere, terram suspendere, fontes durare, montes diluere,
manes sublimare, deos infimare,®* sidera extinguere, Tartarum
ipsum inluminare.’’®® When midnight strikes the doors of
the room where they are lodging fly open and two hideous
beldames appear, the one carrying a naked blade, the other
asponge. Whilst his companion lies there quaking with fear,
they approach Socrates, who is plunged in a hypnotic trance,
and with bitter taunts drive the sword to its hilt through
his neck. They catch the spouting blood in a bottle, until
one hag closes the wound with the sponge, muttering: ‘‘O
sea-born sponge beware lest thou cross running water.”
Presently they vanish, and Aristomenes attempts to leave
the accursed spot. The porter, however, refuses to let him
go before daybreak, and whilst they are wrangling Socrates
awakes to abuse them both for disturbing his repose. In
high glee Aristomenes realizes that he has suffered from a
vivid nightmare, and presently the two friends cheerily set
out on their journey. Nevertheless he cannot forbear to
take a keen look at his comrade’s neck; but there is no red
mark, no scar, no injury, no trace of a wound. Under a
clump of plane trees they stop to breakfast, and Socrates eats
with the keen appetite of a man who has walked briskly his
eight or ten miles in the clear morning air. Feeling thirsty
after the meal, he goes to the waterside and bends over to
drink. No sooner do his lips touch the stream than a gaping
wound bursts open in his throat, the sponge drops down, and
without even a cry he falls dead upon the shelving bank.
When Lucius arrives at Hypata he is the guest of a usurer
named Milo, whose wife Pamphile is a notorious witch,
“maga primi nominis et omnis carminis sepulchralis magi-
stra” (II, 5). He is warned against her enchantments, and
at a supper he hears the adventures of a young student
named Thelyphron, who having run through his cash under-
takes for a fee to watch all night a body to preserve it against
the attack of witches who are wont to tear off the nose, ears,
lips, and pieces of the face from corpses to employ them in


GREECE AND ROME 29


the confection of their spells. He is told to watch with
unceasing vigilance since they may enter the room under the
form of dogs, birds, mice, and even flies or smaller insects to
effect their horrid purpose. He does indeed perceive a little
weasel, but this he scares away. In the morning the dead
man is found unmutilated, but it proves that the sorcerers
have deprived the unfortunate guardian of his nose and
ears, deftly fitting wax models in their places.

In this connexion the Rev. John Gaule’s comment upon
the practices of Master Matthew Hopkins is not wholly
impertinent : ‘‘ Having taken the suspected Witch, shee is
placed in the middle of a room upon a stool, or Table, crosse-
legg’d, or in some other uneasie posture, to which if she
submits not, she is then bound with cords; there is she
watcht and kept without meat or sleep for the space of 24
hours. . . . A little hole is likewise made in the door for the
Impe to come in at ; and lest it might come in some lesse
discernible shape, they that watch are taught to be ever and
anon sweeping the room, and if they see any spiders or flyes,
to kill them. And if they cannot kill them, then they may
be sure they are her Impes.’”’®° A weasel was a very common
form assumed by witch or familiar. Thus in 1588 an Essex
crone confessed that she nourished three spirits, one a cat,
the second a toad, “ the third like a Weasill, which she called
Makeshift. . . . There was one olde mother W. of great T.
which had a spirite like a Weasill.’’®4

Whilst Milo’s guest, Lucius intrigues with the wanton
Fotis, the serving-maid, who allows him to see her mistress
Pamphile change herself into a bird. In order to complete
this metamorphosis Pamphile anoints herself with ointment,
stripping naked, and smearing herself all over from head to
foot so that she may fly through the air.°? Burning with
curiosity Lucius begs Fotis to allow him to essay the same
experiment. But the wrong unguent is used, and he is
promptly transformed into an ass, which shape he can only
lose if he eat roses, since this flower alone can dissolve the
magic. During that night the house is burgled, and the
thieves loading the ass with their prey drive him to their
mountain cave. Adventure follows adventure and episode
episode as the picaresque panorama unfolds before our eyes.
Some are of the most exquisite beauty; some are grossly


30 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


obscene; some are romantic as a canvas of Salvator Rosa,
some are realistic in exactest detail as an interior of Gerard
Terborch ; some are mere thumb-nail sketches; some are
of considerable length ; some arise directly out of the main
narrative ; some are introduced almost accidentally; all
are of such surpassing interest that we feel none to be super-
fluous; there is not a dull page, not a dull line anywhere.
The conclusion, the whole of the eleventh book, rises to a
strain of rapturous mysticism, where the words often melt
into an ecstasy of Platonic loveliness. The prayer of Lucius
on the moonlit shore and the vision of the goddess “‘ seculorum
progenies initialis, summa numinum, regina manium, prima
celitum, deorum dearumque facies uniformis ” (XI, 5), whose
feet are swift upon the waves of the sea, whose robe is the
light of the stars, whose mantle is as the beauty of nature,
at morning, at noontide, and at the setting of the sun, who
is all things and in whom all things live, are conceived in a
strain of etherial ecstasy, and it was passages such as these
which caused Apuleius to be regarded as a mighty magician
in his life, and after his death in some sort as a rival of the
true God, as Antichrist himself.°* Not without reason in
those dangerous days did the Fathers and early Christian
writers look askance at the philosopher of Madaura and his
works. ‘“‘ Aut indicauit aut finxit,’’®4 shrewdly comments
S. Augustine with reference to the Metamorphoses, implying
that there is something more than a substratum of truth
under the most extraordinary adventures. Lactantius regards
Apuleius with horror. He is a worthy compeer of Apollonius
of Tyana, both avowed enemies of the Cross. He was a
sorcerer, Of whom wonderful things are related, diabolic
crafts. ‘‘ Mirum quod Apuleium pretermisit, cuius solent et
multa et mira memorari.’’5

The Apologia (De Magia) of Apuleius hardly permits of
more than brief mention here. It is a long and elaborate
literary amplification of the successful defence he made before
Maximus Claudius, the proconsul of Africa, when he was
accused of sorcery, of having gained the affections of the
widow Pudentilla by unlawful charms, and of having poisoned
his stepson Pontianus. The whole speech well repays detailed
study. We have the most trifling matters mixed up with
charges of the greatest gravity. Apuleius reminds the court


GREECE AND ROME 31


that according to many authorities in Persian a magician
“magus ” means a priest, and that magic is an art dear to
the immortal gods. “ Nam si, quod ego apud plurimos lego,
Persarum lingua magus est, qui nostra sacerdos quod tandem
est crimen sacerdotem esse? ... auditisne magiam, qui
eam temere accusatis, artem esse dis immortalibus accep-
tam ?”’®6 He soon disposes of the suspicion that he had
been buying, for magical purposes,®’ rare fish, especially the
“ueretillum ” and the “ uirginal,’” upon which the pro-
secutors foolishly attempted an obscene play of words, trying
to give infamous hints of clandestine debauchery. Thallus,
a boy whom he was supposed to have bewitched, was proved
to be an epileptic long before Apuleius had ever seen or heard
of him, and of several other lads upon whom, as it was alleged,
he had cast the evil eye not one was forthcoming. There was
question of a mysterious little image, which Apuleius had
ordered to be secretly made of the costliest wood for purposes
of goetic ritual; it was said to be in the form of a carious
skeleton, gaunt and loathly. This he worshipped in a private
chapel, calling it Pacire’s, the King.°® The sculptor,
Cornelius Saturninus, had already been summoned and was
in court; the figure was produced and shown to be Hermes,
nude and lovely in the bloom of immortal youth. From
beneath his petasus curled the crisped locks, a smile was on
his lips, laughter in his eyes. In fine, it seems as though from
first to last Apuleius was secure of the issue; he merely
played with his adversaries, laughed at his accusers, covered
them with ridicule, and availed himself to the utmost of this
golden opportunity to display all the flowers of his ornate
and embroidered rhetoric.

That Apuleius should have been accounted a magician is
hardly surprising, but that Vergil should be regarded by the
medizval imagination as an adept in occultism is indeed an
extraordinary circumstance. Yet it is not difficult to
appreciate how this came about in the course of time. His
undisputed supremacy in Latin literature and the mysticism
of his greatest lines (VIth Aineid) soon spread the idea of
a cryptic meaning in his verses, an idea which is assuredly
not without foundation. Minucius Felix, Lactantius,
S. Augustine, and not a few early fathers distinctly separate
Vergil from all other Latin authors. Messianic prophecy was


32 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


read into the Fourth Eclogue; Vergil and the Sibyl were
actually regarded as witnesses to a coming Messiah along
with the Prophets of the Old Testament and the Saints of
the Old Dispensation. The piety and pity for Vergil regarded
him as a gentle soul who had barely missed the salvation
offered by Christ. Had not S. Paul visited his tomb at
Naples ? And upon the Feast of the Apostle year by year
the Canons of the church of San Paolo in Mantua in the
sequence at Holy Mass sang :°°


Ad Maronis mausoleum
Ductus fudit super eum
Piz rorum lacryme ;
Quem te, inquit, reddidissem
Si te uinum inuenissem
Poetarum maxime !


Statius owed his conversion to reading the Fourth
Eclogue :1°° the martyr Secundianus, venerated at Toscanella,
is said to have embraced Christianity after its perusal. It
was on the strength of this poem that Vergil’s likeness was
set among the carven seers in the Cathedral of Zamora ; it
was on the strength of this poem that in the Cathedrals of
Limoges and Rheims the Christmas appeal was made:
“*O Maro, prophet of the Gentiles, bear thou thy witness unto
Christ.” “In every age of Christianity,” continues Mr.
Myers, ‘‘ from S. Augustine to Abelard, from the Christmas
sermon of Pope Innocent III to the Prelectiones Academice
of the late Mr. Keble, divines and fathers of the Church have
asserted the inspiration of this marvellous poem.” The
Fourth Eclogue, in truth, formed a link between the old
faith and the new.

There is also the story of S. Cadoc!®! who used to make
his scholars learn Vergil by heart; and one day whilst
walking, his 4ineid under his arm, with his friend and com-
panion S. Gildas!°* upon the seashore at Llancarvon, the
holy abbot began to weep at the thought that the poet,
whom he loved so much, might perhaps never attain to the
bliss of Heaven. At the moment when S. Gildas sternly
reprimanded him for his “ perhaps,” saying that assuredly
Vergil would in nowise find entrance into the kingdom of
God’s elect, a sudden gust of wind tossed S. Cadoe’s book
into the sea. ‘If that book return to thee,” said S. Gildas,


GREECE AND ROME 33


“then will I believe that Vergil may be saved.” But
S. Cadoc, who was deeply moved, withdrew to his cell, and
throwing himself upon his knees before the Crucifix, prayed,
** Lord Jesus, Thou didst die for all. I will not eat a mouthful
of bread nor drink a drop of water, until I know truly what
fate God has allotted to one who sang upon earth as the
Angels sing before His throne.”’ And as he cried to God


a clear sweet voice said, but very softly: ‘‘ Pray for me.
Pray for me. Never be weary of praying. I shall yet sing
eternally the mercy of the Lord.” The next morning a


fisherman brought the abbot a mighty salmon he had taken,
and when they opened the fish they found therein, unharmed,
the book which the breeze had snatched from the Saint’s
hands.

Already under the Roman empire it was common to peer
into the future and discover the secrets of fate by that peculiar
mode of divination known as the “ Sortes Uergiliane,”’ that
is to say by opening the poems at random to find some omen
or message. There is a story that when Charles I consulted
a Vergil in the Bodleian Library at Oxford he lighted upon
the passage in the Fourth Book of the Aneid, which
commences (615-20) :


at bello audacis populi uexatus et armis,
finibus extorris .. .


Throughout the ages this strange invocation has been
addressed to Homer, Vergil, and the Bible alone, and it is
a singular illustration of the mysterious spell exercised by
the Roman poet’s name that he should have kept his place
side by side with the Bible itself as an oracle of destiny.
But common tradition also represented Vergil as a wizard,
a past master of the black art. Professor Comparetti has
shown that this legend first grew out of popular Neapolitan
folklore, although curiously enough the earliest literary
accounts are not Italian.1°? The first writer to mention it is
John of Salisbury, in his Polycraticon de Nugis Curialium et
Uestigiis Philosophorum (1156), who describes Vergil as
fashioning for Marcellus a magic fly which would destroy all
other insects. In the letters of Conrad of Querfurt, after
wards Bishop of Hildesheim, the representative at Naples
of the Emperor Henry VI, many more details are given, the


34 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


talismans and charms wrought by Vergil are described, such
as the statue of an archer whose arrow pointing to Vesuvius
prevented the eruption of that mountain. These stories with
many fantastic accretions occur again in the Benedictine
Alexander Neckam’s De Naturis Rerum (c. 1200), in the Otia
Imperialia (1210-14), and in the French poem Image du
Monde (1245), in which latter we first read of the famous
brazen head. In the rhymed Weltbuch of Johann Enenkel
of Vienna (1250) Vergil is represented as having found the
Devil imprisoned in a glass bottle and as only releasing him
when he had learned all magic. Here also occurs the extremely
popular story of his assignation with a Roman lady, who
fools him at the tryst, and exposes him to public ridicule by
leaving him hanging half up to her window in a basket. This
foolish jape was even carved on the misereres of churches.
The Roman de Cleomandes of Adenés li Rois (c. 1290) first
mentions Vergil’s famous figure holding the mirror which
showed at Rome if treason were hatching anywhere—the
Saluacio Rome. All the old fables are related in the French
romance of the Renard Countrefait (c. 1319), whilst the
German fourteenth-century poems Reinfrit von Braunschweig
and the Wartburg-knig enlarge upon his compacts with the
Devil in great detail. The prose Cronica di Partenope of
Bartolomeo Caracciolo (1882) seems to be the first Italian
attempt to weave together the Vergilian legends. In the
Process of the Seven Sages (1880) the ninth tale relates the
“‘ nigromancie ”’ of Vergil at Rome, and the same anecdotes
reappear in the Gesta Romanorum (No. 27). Later stages of
the legend are seen in Le Myrem des Histors written at Liege
by Jean d’Outremeuse in the fourteenth century; in the
English Lyfe of Virgilius (1510) ; its French version, the Faicts
Merveilleux ; and in the Spanish romance of Virgilius (1550).

According to the Faicts Vergil carried off the beautiful
daughter of the Soldan of Babylon, baffled her father by
sorcery, built Naples, and established a flourishing school of
magic there. During the sixteenth century the legend was
immensely relished by the vulgar, and we meet with such
productions as a black-letter volume with the title This boke
treateth of the lyfe of Virgil, and of his death, and many other
marvayles that he did in his lyfe-time by witchecrafte and negro-
mancy, through the develles of hell.


GREECE AND ROME 35


It is worth remark that even Horace is said to have been
reputed a benevolent magician by the peasants in the neigh-
bourhood of Palestrina.1°4

Pliny in the opening chapters of Book XXX (‘“ Medicine
ex animalibus per morbos digest ”’) of his Historia Naturalis
discussed magic more fully, perhaps, than any other ancient
writer, only to decide that all occultism is imposture, “ fraudu-
lentissima artium.” That it is so universally believed and
practised is, he says, not in the least surprising, since it
satisfies three imperative needs of humanity. First, it is
credulously thought to have strange curative powers and to
be a kind of potent medicine ; secondly, by the allurements
and fascinating hopes of the future which it holds out it
ministers to man’s sickly craving for the supernatural, and
adds “uires religionis, ad quas maxime etiamnum caligat
humanum genus.” Thirdly, by means of astrology it pro-
fesses to discern what is to come, and is greedily embraced
by those who wish to know their destiny and the luck which
the years may bring. Pliny considers that Zoroaster was the
first magician, and so that magic is of Persian origin. His
disciple Azonaces handed on the tradition. The philosopher
does not forget to point out that the Iliad has no reference
to magic, whilst the Odyssey contains many allusions to
Witchcraft ; Proteus, and the song of the Sirens, Circe, and
the evocation of the dead. He suggests that Orpheus may
have carried the superstition into Thessaly. Thence he
passes on to history, to Osthanes, the wizard who accom-
panied Xerxes; Pythagoras; Empedocles; Democritus ;
Moses; Jannes the Egyptian ;1°° and a second Osthanes
who lived in the days of Alexander the Great.

The evidence of the Twelve Tables as to indigenous magic
in Italy is not overlooked: “‘ Exstant certe et apud Italas
gentes uestigia [magices] in duodecim tabulis nostris.”
During the consulship of Cnaeus Cornelius Lentulus and
Publius Licinius Crassus a law was passed “‘ne homo
immolaretur.”

But in spite of Pliny’s scepticism his book is a regular
storehouse of charms and magic recipes. Thus, if you have
gout rub the limb with oil in which have been distilled the
intestines of frogs and a dead toad burned to ashes. Or apply
the Aplysia dépilans to the affected part (XXXII, 26). If


36 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


you have a fever, “‘ wear as an amulet the carcass of a frog,
minus the claws and wrapped in a piece of russet-coloured
cloth” and you will be cured (ibid. 28). The liver of a
dolphin will be found efficacious if there are violent symptoms,
or any convulsion.

Under the early emperors “ malefici ” and ‘‘ mathematici ”
were repeatedly banned, and from time to time there were
sporadically severe prosecutions, but even the Czsars them-
selves dabbled in magic all the while. Augustus, although
he made a huge bonfire of all the grimoires in Rome,1°* was
the most superstitious of men: ‘‘ Whilst he was living in
retirement at Apollonia in company with Agrippa he con-
sulted a famous fortune-teller named Theogenes, who upon
casting his horoscope instantly knelt before him and hailed
him as emperor.”

Signs and omens he regarded as infallible, and he always
paid particular attention to dreams, often allowing his plans
to be regulated by what he conceived to be their signification.
He likewise had his lucky and unlucky days, and nothing
would induce him to settle any important business or com-
mence an undertaking on one of the latter. Livia, also, was
largely guided by the advice of astrologers and diviners.
Before the birth of Tiberius she employed every known mode
of ascertaining the future of her child, amongst other things
taking an egg from a hen that was sitting and keeping it
warm in her hands and those of her maids by turns until
a fine young cockerel with a large comb was hatched. When
she was brought to bed the baby was at once carried to
Scribonius, a famous Chaldean, who prophesied that one day
the highest honours awaited him. Tiberius forbad persons to
consult fortune-tellers or occultists alone without a witness. 107
But the emperor himself, although at one time he banished
all public professors of astrology from Rome,1* kept a
certain Thrasyllus in constant attendance, and so great was
the influence of this adept that, Suetonius says, he often
checked the emperor’s cruelties and persuaded him to pardon
many whom he had condemned. Claudius would not repeal
the decree of banishment, but even reinforced it with a further
statute, “‘ senatus consultum atrox et irritum.’’19

Under Nero Rome again swarmed with occultists of every
kind, and although he repeatedly declared he had no faith


GREECE AND ROME 37


in anything of the sort,!2° he anxiously consulted an astrologer
named Babilus with regard to the appearance of a blazing
comet, and when this man announced that such an omen
must be expiated by noble blood, without hesitation he
butchered half the aristocracy of the city.11!_ At the same
time Musonius, a Babylonian, was imprisoned on a charge
of necromancy,!!? probably because he was suspected of
being in the employ of the emperor’s enemies. Tacitus tells
us that the house of Poppza was always thronged with packs
of astrologers, whom she consulted at every turn, and that
one of these, an Egyptian, Ptolemy, predicted to Otho, about
the time of his Spanish expedition, that he would return to
Rome as Cesar. It is certain that Otho in his short reign
of ninety-five days consorted with magicians and afforded
them every encouragement to exercise their arts. Vitellius,
however, gave them short shrift ; there was, in fact, no class
of persons whom he more heartily detested, and if they were
accused before him he sent them to death without even a
pretence of trial or justice. Immediately upon his arrival in
Rome he had issued a proclamation ordering all astrologers
to leave the city by the first of October, and during the night
a mysterious bill was posted in prominent places up and
down the streets, which ran: ‘‘ Notice. The Chaldeans
decree that on the said day of the said month Vitellius
Germanicus shall be no more.” This drove the emperor to
madness, and he wreaked his vengeance upon all who fell
into his clutches. Yet gossip said that he had been guilty
of his mother’s death by withholding sustenance when she
was seriously ill, since long before a German witch had
prophesied that if he survived his mother he would reign
for many years in peace and prosperity.114 Vespasian
enforced the sentence of banishment promulgated by his
predecessor, although retaining a certain Barbillus, a fortune-
teller, always about his person.145 Under Titus those who
ventured to return began to be openly tolerated, whilst under
Domitian they were royally encouraged.

A famous passage in the Sixth Satire of Juvenal gives a
realistic and striking picture of the superstitions of Rome at
this period. The lady is at her toilet, she is in haste having
an assignation at the temple of Isis, and half a dozen maids
are busy tiring her head. An ancient matron gravely directs


388 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and approves the anxious operation whilst curl is deftly built
upon curl, and the whole attendance watch in breathless
suspense as though their mistress’ very life were at stake.
A thundering knock at the door interrupts so serious a
business. With haughty stride a tall priest of Cybele enters.
Forgetful of her coiffure the lady leaps to her feet, and with
clasped hands seems to hang upon his lips. Yes; he has
consulted the goddess, but the omens alas ! are not altogether
favourable; there will be sickness early in September, she
must avoid the autumn winds; but there is a way, he can
find a way. If she will present an hundred eggs, and also
bestow some of her garments, the murrey-coloured robe will
serve, he will charm the disease so that it will pass into the
dress and she will clean escape the danger. Were he to bid
her break the ice that coats Tiber in mid-winter and dip thrice
into the shivering water at dawn, were he to bid her crawl on
her tender hands and knees round the Campus Martius, or
journey to Egypt to bring back a libation of hallowed lymph
from the Nile at distant Meroe, all this would she do, for by
the mouth of that swarthy eunuch clad in fair white linen
with the nodding tiara upon his head speaks Isis herself,
mystic Isis commands. Presently there creeps in cringing
and courtesying a humble Jewess whose sweaty palm is
crossed with a silver coin, and whose garlic breath whispers
promises of luck and fortune. Or the Armenian soothsayer
must be visited, but very secretly. He will deftly open a
dove or a chicken with his knife and peering into the quivering
entrails read whether young Postumus be false or true.
Would you learn more and can you pay well, a child may
be sacrificed ; it is the surer way, but it is dangerous, for the
seers have been known to blackmail their wealthy clients.
Best of all, by heavy fees a Chaldean may be won to read
the stars, but he must be one who has suffered for his magic
skill, who was imprisoned under Nero and narrowly ’scaped
death under Vitellius. He will tell you to a day how long
your old mother will live, if your husband is likely to last,
if that rich uncle will go off this winter, and perchance-—who
knows ?—the cunning man may help you with a sleepy
medicine.

Lucian, with his flippant yet caustic mockery, in his
Menippus ridicules the astrologers, sons of Zoroaster; and


GREECE AND ROME 39


more than once takes occasion to flout the charlatans and
magic quacks with their brew of love philtres, their incanta-
tions to injure an enemy, spells to discover hidden treasure,
their talismans, their periapts, their amulets and trumpery,
but his sarcasm and laughter fell upon deaf ears. The belief
in magic was too fascinating, it had its roots too deep in the
cravings and curiosity of human nature to fall before a jest.
And soon, moreover, the occult was to take a terrible and
a darker shade. No doubt, as is hinted from time to time,
human sacrifices had been offered in remote and barbaric
districts, even in Rome itself, under conditions of inviolable
secrecy or when some crueller tyrant had brief but bloody
sway, but we find that now the human sacrifice is coming to
be regarded as the quintessence of divination, the cream of
the goetic art, a bribe whereby alone the true decrees of fate
can be wrested from the lips of dim shadowy powers. The
decadent and weary Hadrian sat upon the Imperial throne,
an unquiet dreamer of strange dreams, who in the midst of
conquests, restless travelling to and fro, and grave state-
cares, was deeply influenced by the mysterious and sym-
bolical creeds of a dimly apprehended East, and greatly
desired to see that neo-Hellenism which was already moulding
the fantastic imaginations of the Alexandrian Platonists.
Such an esthete would undoubtedly be addicted to every
superstition, and all antiquity agreed about this trait in his
character. ‘‘In summa familiaritate,’’ wrote Spartianus,
** Epictetum et Heliodorum philosophos, et (ne nominatim de
omnibus dicam) grammaticos, rhetores, musicos, geometros,
pictores, astrologos, habuit : pree ceteris (ut multi asserunt)
eminente Fauorino.”!!6 Ammianus Marcellinus spoke of
him as “ futurorum sciscitationi nimie deditum.” Tertullian
described him as “‘ curiositatem omnium exploratorem.” It
was he who established the exotic cult of Antinous, of which
Dion Cassius, who wrote less than a century after the events
related, and who in compiling Hadrian’s life had beneath his
eyes the emperor’s own Commentaria published under the
name of the freedman Phlegon, gives the following account :
“In Egypt he also built the city named after Antinous. Now
Antinous was a native of Bithynium, a city of Bithynia,
which we call also Claudiopolis. He was Hadrian’s favourite,
and died in Egypt: whether by having fallen into the Nile,


40 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


as Hadrian writes, or by having been sacrificed as the truth
was. For Hadrian, as I have said, was in general overmuch
given to superstitious subtleties, and practised all kinds of
sorceries and magic arts. At any rate he so honoured
Antinous, whether because of the love he felt for him, or
because he died voluntarily, since a willing victim was needed
for his purpose, that he founded a city in the place where he
met this fate, and called it after him, and dedicated statues,
or rather images, of him in, so to speak, the whole inhabited
world.” Aurelius Victor, also, has the following significant
phrase: ‘“‘ Others maintain that this sacrifice of Antinous was
both pious and religious; for when Hadrian was wishing to pro-
long his life, and the magicians required a voluntary vicarious
victim, they say that, upon the refusal of all others, Antinous
offered himself.” To discuss at length the mystery of the
death of Antinous would be impertinent, more especially as
upon a candid inquiry there is surely little mystery but much
misunderstanding. I have no doubt at all that Antinous was
accidentally drowned, and for this simple and straightforward
view there is the authority of Hadrian himself: fs tov
NetAov exrecwy are the emperor’s words as quoted by Dion.
I do not for a moment believe that Hadrian immolated the
boy whom he so dearly loved, and, in the pathetic phrase of
Spartianus, “quem muliebriter fleuit.”” The most important
point, however, as far as we are immediately concerned is
that Hadrian was so notoriously given to the black art that
even when his favourite happened to slip from the royal barge
to perish beneath the green waves of the Nile popular rumour
soon connected the lad’s death with some horrid ceremony
of necromantic lore. Dion, it is true, uses the word
‘epovpynOets and seems inclined to believe that Antinous
fell a victim to some act of divination, whilst Aurelius Victor
holds the same view in a modified form. Yet their evidence
may be largely discounted in this particular. For Dion has
come down to us merely in fragments and in the careless
epitome of John Xiphilinos of Trapezus, a Byzantine Basilian,
whose abridgement allowed of any and every kind of inter-
polation and abuse. Aurelius Victor (fl. a.p. 360) compiled
his history at too distant a date to be of authoritative value,
and the integrity of his work, moreover, has been gravely
questioned by scholars. It is only fair to add that by a law


GREECE AND ROME 41


of Hadrian, human sacrifices, dvOpwroOvala, were most
strictly forbidden throughout the Roman empire, as Porphyry
tells us.

The insane Commodus (a.p. 180-92), who had himself
initiated in the rites of Mithra, was deterred by no scruples,
and drunk with the omnipotence of his own assumed divinity,
he ordered that youths, and those not the least comely, should
be selected as victims for his altars. ‘‘ Sacra Mithriaca
homicidio uero polluit,” says Lampridius.117_ These abomina-
tions were largely practised for the sake of eatispiciwm, an
examination of human entrails for the sake of divining the
future.

M. Didius Salvius Julianus, who bought the Roman empire
of the preetorian guards, when it was put up to sale after the
death of Pertinax (A.D. 198), but who only reigned two months
from 28 March to 1 June, being assassinated by the soldiers,
was excessively given to magic, and resorted to the same
hideous sorceries.

“¢ Julianus was also given to a particular kind of madness,
the consultation of magicians before he undertook any
business and the conduct of affairs under their direction,
since hereby he imagined that he could either assuage the
dislike the people bore him or else curb the violence of the
soldiery. For his satellites were wont to offer in sacrifice
victims clean contrary to any Roman custom, they also made
trial of foreign spells and incantations, and dabbled in that
kind of sorcery called Katoptromancy, which is to say that
boys, when they have been blindfold for a while and certain
runes recited over them, see the future in a mirror. Thus a
boy is said to have seen the murder of Julianus and the
accession of Severus.’’118

Caracalla, a sadist, whose reign (A.D. 211-17) drenched
Rome in blood, continued the same horrible practices.
Lampridius in his life of Heliogabalus relates how that
Cesar impurissimus was in the habit of slaying handsome
and noble youths : “‘Cedit et humanas hostias lectis ad hoc
pueris nobilibus et decoris per omnem Italiam patrimis et
matrimis, credo ut maior esset utrique parenti dolor. Omne
denique magorum genus aderat illi operabaturque quotidie,
hortante illo et gratias diis agente quod amicos eorum
inuenisset,!19 quum inspiceret exta puerilia, et excuteret?”


42 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


hostias ad ritum gentilem suum.”!21_ (He also slew human
victims, searching throughout all Italy for the comeliest
youths of high rank whose fathers and mothers were yet alive,
in order (as I believe) that he might the more grieve these
wretched parents. He kept swarms of sorcerers of every kind
daily at his side and constantly employed their services,
encouraging them in their dark crafts and often giving thanks
to the gods, inasmuch, as he said, he had made friends of the
friends of heaven, since he was so entirely devoted to the
inspection of the entrails of human victims for purposes of
divination and was wont to offer.)

Maxentius (A.D. 306-12) is credited with the same loathly
mania; veoyray omrayxva Bpépwv Stepevvouévov, are the
words of Eusebius, and there can be no doubt that human
sacrifices were, in blind obedience to the soothsayers and
magicians, not infrequently offered by the apostate Julian
(A.D. 3861-3). The Byzantine emperor Constantine V,
Copronymus (741-75), whose life was as filthy as his name,
and whose reign is one monotonous chronicle of persecution
and blood, although utterly void of religion was nevertheless
addicted to necromancy and the foulest goetic superstitions.
Whilst seemingly little better than an atheist, in secret he
practised conjurations and ceremonial magic, and was covertly
notorious as given to human sacrifices, immolating his tender
victims with prolonged and most exquisite tortures.1??
Despots, for ever trembling for their lives, half-maddened by
their debaucheries and cruelties, in their corroding anxiety
to read the book of fate and secure their own safety have
stopped at no crime to be assured of length of years and
unshaken power. The eatispicitum was not unknown to
princes of later centuries, to Ezzelino da Romano, Sigismondo
Malatesta of Rimini, Pier Luigi Farnese, and this is certainly
the true explanation of the mysterious murder of the beautiful
Astorre Manfredi by Cesare Borgia in Hadrian’s Mausoleum. 128
Perhaps the most striking instance of this monstrous crime
is met with in Gilles de Rais, who is known systematically
to have murdered several hundred children of both sexes,124
victims of his diabolical lust, for purposes of magic. During
the outbreak of sorcery (1679-82) at Paris under Louis XIV
there are innumerable cases of children, generally of a tender
age, being sacrificed at the blasphemy of the Messe Noire.


GREECE AND ROME 43


The abbé Guibourg, the abbé Lemaignan, the abbé Cotton,
and several other priests, concerned in these foul mysteries,
confessed to having killed infants during the clandestine
liturgy. In 1650 at Bologna two renegade religious, two
loose women and their two gallants were prosecuted for
profaning the Blessed Sacrament by giving It to a goat and
to a goose, and also for the slaughter of three children from
whose entrails they endeavoured to read the future, there-
after distilling them in an alembic to confect a charm. Pope
Innocent X was so horrified at the confessions that he
directed the Roman Inquisition specially to inquire into the
case.125 In December, 1924, Fritz Haarmann, the “‘ Hanover
Vampire,” was condemned to death at Berlin for twenty-four
murders, seven-and-twenty being charged against him. It
was believed that he was guilty of at least fifty in all. The
victims were invariably young fellows between twelve and
eighteen years of age, and Haarmann alleged that he attacked
them whilst in a state of trance. The full details could not
be generally reported, but it seems most probable that we
here have a similar case to that of Gilles de Rais. Some
hideous belief impelled this fiend to commit these atrocious _
deeds. I suggest that Haarmann and his young confederate
Hans Granz, whose sentence of death was commuted to
twelve years’ penal servitude, were Satanists. Possibly it is
not without significance that in December, 1919, the authori-
ties broke up a gang of devil worshippers at Berlin. A
numerous gathering was surprised at midnight whilst their
orgies were being celebrated at the Café Kerkau. After a
feeble resistance the police, who were more than a hundred
strong, drew their revolvers and the whole assembly sur-
rendered. There were present two hundred men and two
hundred and fifty women, of whom the majority were nude,
others being scantily draped in the most fantastic garments.
All were conveyed to prison in covered motor-lorries and it is
said that several army officers were among the prisoners.1?¢

That, even to-day, the foul superstition of human sacrifice
is sometimes attempted an extraordinary story, which comes
from New York, conclusively shows. On Sunday, 17 January,
1926, the Central News (Westminster Gazette, 18 January)
reported :

“Police, attracted by the screams of a woman, broke into


44 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


a house in Park Street, Brooklyn, yesterday, just in time to
save the life of a Mrs. Parello, who was being ‘ sacrificed ’
by a man named Joseph Musca and his wife.

‘They found in a room, dimly lighted and with heavy
curtains drawn across the windows, Mrs. Parello being held
in a chair by a man, who was at the same time uttering an
unearthly chant and stabbing at the woman with a knife,
aided in his incantations and murderous work by the woman.

“In the room was an altar of strange shape and on it a
lamp, while round the walls were bones and grotesque objects.

‘““The two fanatics were executing a ghastly dance and
throwing tufts of the victim’s torn-out hair on the lamp flame.

“The police seized them and pulled them back from the
victim, who was by that time unconscious.

‘“* Mrs. Parello was taken to a hospital, and is in a serious
condition. Musca and his wife are under mental examina-
tions?

It would indeed be surprising if magic had not flourished
throughout the empire with the direct encouragement of
Cesars such as Commodus, Caracalla, and Heliogabalus.
Even the stoical Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, “ the Philos-
opher,”’ favoured astrologers, resorted to them for counsel,
and followed their injunctions. For when the Empress
Faustina, having fallen ill of a languishing complaint which
the doctors were unable to diagnose or cure, confessed to
him that she was pining for love of a certain handsome
gladiator upon whom she had cast her lustful eyes, and must
assuredly expire unless he were admitted to her bed, the
anxious wittol hastened to the Chaldeans, since they were
famous for their skill in compounding philtres to assuage
amorous desire. A remedy was promptly prescribed. The
unfortunate athlete was to be slain, and the empress was
directed to bathe her body in his reeking blood. This was
accordingly done, and she forthwith declared herself cured
of her passion.1?7._ There can be no more striking example
of the implicit trust which was put in the power of the
astrologers than that at their mere word such a savage
barbarity should have been enacted without scruple or
hesitation and that Faustina should have agreed to so loath-
some a remedy. It is possible, of course, that Capitolinus
has not told us the whole tale. It may be the story of


GREECE AND ROME 45


Phedra and Hippolitus once more, of Joseph and Potiphar’s
wife, of Circe and Encolpius, and the empress was, perhaps,
avenging herself for the gladiator’s disdain and rejection
of her favours. In any case the incident clearly shows that
even a spirit such as that of Marcus Aurelius, whom Niebuhr
called the noblest character of his time, could be swayed by
the most degrading and horrible superstition.

Even to-day human sacrifice is not unknown, and Sir
Harcourt Butler, the Governor of Burma (according to the
Daily Express, 25 March, 1925), reports that it prevails among
the wild tribes of the Naga Hills on the borderland of Assam,
a people nominally under the British flag. The Nagas, even
as the primitive Shans and the Singphos, who roam the dense
jungles of Hukawng Valley, worship dark and terrible deities
whom in times of scarcity or during an epidemic of disease
of any kind they find it necessary to propitiate. When simple
offerings of fruit, grain, or goat’s flesh fail to move their gods,
the Nagas send forth the ‘‘ head-hunters ”’ to make a human
capture.

Stern efforts have been made to stamp out these hideous
rites. As lately as 1917 an average of twenty boys and thirty
girls were kidnapped annually from Assam and sacrificed.

Many other border tribes are infected by similar beliefs.
It is not long since a Khasi cowherd of Wahumar, in the
Shillong district, was tried for making a human sacrifice to a
local hill deity in the belief that the rite would bring him
prosperity. Orissa, on the Bay of Bengal, has been the scene
of many such sacrifices, but they have been conducted with
so much secrecy that the offenders have rarely been traced.
At Dacca not long ago one man and thirteen women were
sacrificed to appease a local deity who had smitten a village
with cholera.

In spite of sternest prohibition and every precaution
similar rites continue to be common almost all over Africa.
Three years ago, in 1923, six chiefs of the Mashonas of the
Mount Darwen district of Rhodesia were sentenced to death
for sacrificing a girl who lived in a cave in the hills, in order
to bring to an end a protracted drought. They urged in their
defence that the day after the sacrifice abundant rain
actually fell.

Instances have even occurred in Europe. In September,


46 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


1920, the Madrid authorities investigated the sacrifice of a
young shepherdess in the province of Estremadura, and in
October, 1921, at Hoog Soeren, in Central Holland, a religious
fanatic buried two children alive in order that “ the village
might be saved from the wrath to come.” Fortunately, the
act was discovered, and the children were rescued.

Septimius Severus (193-211) fiercely attacked the Chal-
deans and fortune-tellers, condemning many to death as well
as executing those who had consulted them. But this was
not so much that he hated occultism, as that he feared
conspiracies against his power, and was suspicious lest per-
tinent questions should be asked and omens observed with
regard to the length of his reign. ‘‘ Multos etiam quasi
Chaldeos aut uates de sua salute consuluissent, interemit,”
says Spartianus in his life of that emperor (15). And
Tertullian in his Apology writes: “‘ Eadem officia dependunt
et qui astrologos et haruspices et augures et magos de
Cesarum capite consultant.”

Less than a quarter of a century later, Alexander Severus
was not only tolerating astrologers and magicians, but even
helping them with gifts of money and, in some cases at least,
with regular salaries for their services. ‘“‘ Rhetoribus, gram-
maticis, medicis, haruspicibus, mathematicis, mechanicis,
architectis, salaria instituit.’’128 Nevertheless we find the
two great jurists, Ulpian, the chief adviser of the emperor,
scriniorum magister, and Julius Paulus, a prominent member
of the Consilium, prefectus preetorio, both formally and
officially condemning the use of grimoires or books of spells,
‘libros improbate lectionis”’ is the phrase of Paulus.12®
And Ulpian lays down that the possession of such volumes
is in itself illegal. If such are found in any house the owner
is to be mulcted in a heavy fine and sent into exile; if he
be of low estate or a slave he is to be punished with death.
The books themselves are to be publicly burned. The
suspicion was always present that those who consulted
wizards might be aiming at the prince’s life, and Paulus
rules: “ Qui de salute principis, uel de summa reipublicse
mathematicos, hariolos, haruspices, uaticinatores, consulit,
cum eo qui responderit, capite punitur,’’19°

Gordian the Elder (4.p. 288) who is always accounted an
excellent prince, was wont to consult astrologers on affairs


GREECE AND ROME 47


of moment, although sometimes he does not seem to have
taken their predictions very seriously. ‘When Gordian
the Elder once consulted an astrologer about the birth of his
son, it is said that the wise man answered ‘ The child will
be the son of an Emperor, and himself an Emperor.’ The
story goes that Gordian laughed heartily, but the astrologer
showed him a bright star which was then high in the heavens,
and appealed to certain old books to prove that he was
speaking the truth. Moreover with that unflinching con-
fidence which is born of absolute conviction he foretold both
the day and manner of their deaths to the elder as well as
to the younger, nay, he named the very places where they
would severally end their lives.”’131

Aurelian (4.D. 270), immediately after his election as
emperor by the legions on the Danube, secretly sought
certain Gaulish sybils, Druidesses, to inquire of them whether
the throne would remain in his family, to which they replied
that in the whole history of Rome there should be no names
nobler than those of his house. A prophecy which the
courtly, not to say sycophantic, historian Flavius Vopiscus
sees fulfilled in Constantine. In his reign the Marcomanni,
a powerful German tribe, swiftly debouched upon Italy, and
the Senate in obedience to the emperor’s command at once
ordered the Sibylline Books to be examined, in whose cryptic
pages they found that if sacrifices were offered in certain
spots the invaders would be checked and overcome, and, says
Vopiscus, ‘‘ ita barbaris restiterunt, quos omnes Aurelianus
carptim uagantes occidit.”132. The speech made on that
occasion, 9 January, by Fulvius Sabinus, the Preetor Urbanus,
has been preserved and commences thus :

‘“* We commend to your attention, O Conscript Fathers, the
advice of the Pontifical College and the letters of Cesar
Aurelian, wherein he gives orders that the Sibylline Books be
examined since herein under divine guidance may be ascer-
tained some prospect of concluding hostilities.’’*%%

When appointing his officer Saturninus commander of the
Eastern frontier Aurelian with great contempt scarified the
Egyptians as “uiri uentosi, furibundi, iactantes, iniuriosi,
atque adeo uani, liberi, nouarum rerum usque ad cantilenas
publicas cupientes, uersificatores, epigrammatarii, mathe-
matici, haruspices, medici.”’+34


48 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


It would seem that throughout these centuries there were
recognized by the Romans two forms of occultism, whtich we
may roughly define as ‘“‘ white magic’ and “ black magic,”
although the line of demarcation between the two was often
at vanishing point. White magic was, generally speaking,
allowed and often encouraged; black magic, of which the
chief exponents were the ‘‘ Mathematici,” was forbidden and
condemned, 1** save, indeed, during the reign of an Augustus
such as Heliogabalus, when all cults, pure and impure alike,
were poured into the Eternal City to froth and spume there,
to mix or antagonize at will. Black magic, indeed, is con-
demned in trenchant terms by Diocletian (A.D. 284-305) :
‘* Artem geometrie discere atque exercere publice interest,
ars autem mathematica damnabilis interdicta est omnino.’’!°8

Superstition was never more rife and magic practices of
every kind, from the comparatively harmless charm of healing
to the foulest infamy of perverted lust and human sacrifice,
were never more shamelessly and impudently pursued than
in the decadent and debauched days of the later Roman
empire, when the old civilization, corrupt to the core, for all
its glamour and beauty, was crumbling into universal ruin.
Men’s bodies were old and tired with insatiate venery ; their
minds were dull and heavy with agnostic philosophies and
the atheism of despair ; their emotions numb and senseless ;
their passions etiolated and fatigued ; hardly could the sight
of blood flowing over writhing white limbs lend a fillip to
their jaded appetites; they only lived because to live was
less exertion than to die. Small wonder then that they
sought hope and interest in something which pointed to, even
if it did not promise, other spheres of thought and action
than this outworn, outmoded world. Magic was at least an
adventure, and if forbidden by the law, why, that gave it
an added piquancy when all else was sapless and husked long
ago. The abnormal, the fascination of sheer physical dread
and repulsion, the black shadows of dissolution and decay,
the intangible spiritual atmosphere of unknown fear, all
these were an excitement which must be essayed, and
gradually the cult of magic absorbed its votaries. Just in
the same way do we find to-day that Spiritism often seems
the last resource of those who merely crave for some new
interest. Without any very definite aim or object, if there


GREECE AND ROME AQ


is nothing better to do at the moment, they will for the
novelty’s sake attend a séance, not a little incredulous, not a
little scornful at first. And then the neophyte begins to
speak of his experiences with some faint warmth, and in a
very short time it will be found that he is wholly wrapped
up in his new pursuit, he can think and talk of nothing else,
Spiritism has become an intoxication, an obsession, more
often than not to his moral deterioration, the ruin of his
bodily health and happiness.

Under the Roman emperors there were two great influences
at work, each of which had in its way an important effect
upon magic; the one being ephemeral and the nurse of
enchantments, neo-Platonism with the rites of Mithra; the
other eternal and the enemy of sorcery, Christianity with the
Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.

Neo-Platonism was a system of idealistic and spiritualistic
theosophy, deeply tinged with an indeterminate mysticism,
which sought to restore the vitality of Greek thought by an
essential infusion of Oriental religious conceptions. As the
last effort of Hellenic ideals and ideas, it became necessary
that in order to combat Christianity the intellectual world
should show that paganism was not entirely bankrupt, and
therefore the official polytheism of the State had to be
reformed and explained by an interpretation which should
be acceptable in philosophy. It derives its name from the
fact that its first representatives drew their inspiration from
Plato’s doctrines, although it is now recognized that many
of the treatises on which they relied cannot be claimed as
genuine. Among the more or less eclectic Platonists who are
regarded as forerunners of the neo-Platonic school are
Plutarch, Maximus, Apuleius, A‘nesidemus, Numeninus.
Philo the Jew, who flourished in the middle of the first
century, also helped to mould neo-Platonic thought, and it
is not improbable that his doctrine of the mediation of the
Logos had a direct influence on Plotinus. Ammonius Saccas,
a public porter on the quays of Alexandria, who was born
of Christian parents but who reverted to paganism, is con-
sidered to have been the true founder of the neo-Platonic
school. Plotinus (A.D. 205-70) was the first systematic
philosopher of neo-Platonism, and other great names are
Porphyry (A.D. 283-c. 808), a bitter opponent of Christianity,


50 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Iamblichus, his pupil (ob. c. A.D. 880), Proclus (a.p. 410-85),
the last distinguished representative of the school, whose
disciple Marinus taught Damascius, who was lecturing at
Athens when the academies were suppressed by Justinian in
529. Porphyry it is, in particular, who lays great stress upon
the importance of theurgic practices. Asceticism is the
starting-point on the road to perfection, but as a means of
further advancement the neophyte must cultivate self-
contemplation, and then proceed by the consultation of
oracles, divination, bloodless sacrifices to the superior gods
and bloody sacrifices to the daimons or inferior power, in
fact by sorcery.

The neo-Platonist had evolved a new mythology. The
Supreme Being, God, the One, the Absolute, the Infinite,
exceeds all the categories of human thought. But there are
beneath him a multitude of supernatural powers, to whom
were given the name of daiuwy, who can and do concern
themselves with the affairs of men, and with whom men can
establish some connexion. These daiuoves were by the
Romans often confounded with the Manes, Lares, and Genii.13?
Some daiuoves are adeficaxor, they protect man and watch
over him, they deliver him from trouble (Avcto:); others
delight in blood, murder, and evil (tpoorporaot, tadapvaior).
Proclus is of the opinion that these wicked genii tempt men
to impiety and all kinds of wickedness, and he is right, for
they are indeed just devils.

The neo-Platonists, then, conceived a new hierarchy of
daimons, who were in truth pagan gods under a _ philo-
sophical disguise A deity was catalogued as a\e€icaxos or
mportporaos according to the general point of view from
which he had been traditionally regarded, the character of
his worship, his attributes and qualities. Thus Porphyry
ranges the Egyptian god Serapis amongst the black daimons,
since he had come to be considered as the lord of the under-
world, of the dead, darkness, mystery, and night, and was to
a large extent identified with Hades or Pluto. Already in
Porphyry this tendency towards theogony is strongly marked ;
in Proclus we find a regular demonology. Neo-Platonism, as
might have been expected, soon became superstitious, one
could truly say spiritistic, to a degree; all the old magical
ceremonies were preserved, half-forgotten rites rescued from


GREECE AND ROME 51


oblivion, the ancient formule of divination studied and
perpetuated, sacrifices offered anew to the infernal powers,
the evocation of spirits and necromancy assiduously practised
and warmly recommended. It is true that the more cultured
and intellectual neo-Platonists deprecated those sorceries
which might be supposed to summon evil influences and
malign astral entities to assist the disciple in any criminal
action or schemes of vengeance, and they thought that ill
effects could be nullified by benevolent charms and incanta-
tions ; but none the less it is very certain that frequently
this philosophy was embraced and exploited by many who
were merely attracted owing to the thaumaturgies, or who
hoped to acquire material advantages and the realization of
their bad wishes by means of a mastery over spirits, who
could be compelled indifferently to execute their commands
whether the word was to bless a friend or to bane a foe.
Mithraism, the cult of the ancient Indo-Iranian Sun-god
Mithra, entered Europe from Asia Minor, where it had taken
root after the conquests of Alexander, and rapidly spread
over the whole Roman empire. It seems to have been
actually first introduced to the Romans through the wars of
Pompey with the Cilician pirates,13* and during the first and
second centuries of the Christian era its influence was con-
tinually increased by the legionaries returning home from
Eastern service. Special stress was laid by the worshippers
upon the idea of fraternity, and some secret bond, with signs
and passwords, “‘ signa oris, manus, et sinus,” conjoined the
members and served to make them known one to another.
Of these we know little or nothing, and it is only natural to
suppose that such significant gestures and shibboleths would
have been safeguarded with the utmost secrecy. There were
seven degrees of initiation, the first being ‘‘ mystes”’ and
the last ‘‘ pater.”” These ‘ fathers ” conducted the worship,
and their chief, who was called “ Pater Patrum ” or “ Pater
Patratus,” always lived at Rome. The members below the
degree of pater called one another brother, and all social
distinctions were forgotten in Mithraic unity. It should be
remarked that these communities allowed no women to enter
their ranks. No woman might be present at or have any
knowledge of the mysteries of Mithra, The theosophy of the
cult was an elaborate and involved system. Mithra, the


52 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


friend and saviour of man, was born with the Phrygian cap
on his head and a knife in his hand. In some sense he is
identified with the Sun, his father or comrade, for he was
worshipped as “HAros MiOpas. The central dogma of Mith-
raism was his struggle with the bull, whom Mithra pursued,
overcame, dragged to his cave, and sacrificed by plunging
his steel into its throat. This was said to be symbolic of
man’s life of labour and effort on earth. The bull, resigning
itself to death, was transported to the heavenly spheres.
The exact ritual of initiation is unknown, but it included
lustration and bathing, branding with a red-hot iron, and
above all the taurobolium. This ceremony consisted in the
sacrifice of a bull, the blood of the animal being allowed to
flow down through a floor riddled with eyelets and holes, so
that it streamed in a drenching rain upon the worshippers
in the chamber beneath ; which was deemed a purification
of sacramental power and efficacy. These mysteries were
always performed in caves, of which a large number have
been found. There were no less than five at Ostia alone, but
they were small and could perhaps hold at most two hundred
persons. In the entrance to the cave stood the stone sculp-
ture of Mithra, a handsome curly-headed youth in Phrygian
dress and cap, slaying the bull. There were other symbols
and paintings which represented the heavens, constellations,
zodiacal signs, the seasons, and various grotesque personi-
fications. In its later developments Mithraism borrowed
much from Christianity ;15° Mithra, for example, was a
mediator between God and man; Mithraism celebrated a
sacred banquet of bread and wine; Mithra saved the world
by the sacrifice—of a bull; it is, in truth, hardly possible to
conceive a wider gulf than that between the imaginary
Mithra taurochtonos!° and Christ Crucified.

Before the triumph of Christianity the cult of Mithra
vanished. It is true that under Julian it had once more a
short lease of life, but the laws of Theodosius the Great
finally closed its mystic caves. It has been contended that
Mithraism was originally a pure and noble form of worship,
although it is hard to see how this can ever have been the
case, and it is beyond question that it eventually became
permeated with theurgic ideas and was not slow to incorporate
magical ceremonies and the foul dregs of occultism. There


GREECE AND ROME 53


is, I think, more than a suspicion of gross immorality.
Human victims were offered in these esoteric assemblies, and
it was not the blood of bulls alone that sprinkled the neophyte
in his subterranean shrine. Both Theodoret!4! and S. Gregory
of Nanzianus'*? accuse Julian of having immolated youths
and children during his secret celebrations of the Mithraic
rites at Charres. S. Cyprian of Antioch,143 after his conver-
sion and renunciation of sorcery, confessed that he had taken
part in the worship of Mithra. He describes the abomina-
tions, which were commonly practised at that time by the
wizards and astrologers, who stole small children or enticed
boys to their lairs that they might cut them to pieces upon
their demoniac altars and make oblation of their blood to
the fiends.144

It was this goetic Mithraism upon which neo-Platonism, in
some of its developments at any rate, relied to combat
Christianity.145 But magic was also beginning to join hands
with heresy. Gnosticism, in all its myriad branches, had
eagerly absorbed a thousand occult fantasies and interwoven
them with the fabric of its own delirious philosophy, further
commingled with shreds and scraps of Christian doctrine.
So when Witchcraft was under one aspect wellnigh extermi-
nated by the destruction of paganism, it had by this time
already been deeply planted in another fertile soil to bear
its rank crop of evil in the days that were to come.

By the famous Edict of Milan in a.p. 8138, it might have
seemed for a while that religious toleration was to prevail
and the equality of almost all forms of worship would be
allowed. In 319-21, however, a number of laws were passed
against astrology and magic which struck hard at the very
essentials of paganism. It is true that heathen emperors
had, as we have noted, often legislated in the same way, but
the edicts of Constantine were different in their interpretation
from any statutes which had ever been enacted before.
Constantine forbids the diviners or haruspices to enter for
the exercise of their art any private house under pain of
death. Whoever persuaded a haruspex to break the law
should suffer at the stake. Whosoever desired to follow
non-Christian usages must do so openly. He was by no
means let or forbidden in any way, but he must go in the
broad noon to the public altars and sacred places and there


54 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


perform the ancient rites. ‘‘ Let no haruspex on any account
frequent any house other than his own; all friendship, of
howsoever long a date, with men of this avocation must be
repudiated ; the haruspex who frequents the house of another
shall die at the stake.’’146

Any sorcerer who attempted by his charms the life of a
citizen, or who essayed to tempt a youth or maiden to
impurity was to be visited with the severest penalties.
‘“‘ Korum et scientia punienda et seuerissimis merito legibus
uindicanda, qui magicis accincti artibus aut contra salutem
hominum moliti, aut pudicos animos ad libidinem deflexisse
detegentur’’: “‘ The craft of magic is to be penalized and
deservedly punished with the utmost rigour of the law. This
is to say the science and practice of those who in any way
attempt human life or health, or are discovered to have
enticed the innocent by their philtres to the allurements of
lust. None the less by this statute are in no wise let remedies
which may be confected for bodily ailments, or those pre-
cautions whereby in country districts the ripe vintage may be
in seemly wise protected from showers of rain or the violence
of hailstorms ; those traditional invocations are also held to
be allowable whereby no man is hurt in person or repute, but
which essay to prevent the good gifts of God and the toil
of man’s hands from injury or harm.”’!4?

A most important edict, and one which throws considerable
light upon the estimation in which sorcerers were held. But
Libanius bears witness (Oratio pro Templis) that certain forms
of divination were still permitted, cata vouovs.

Constantius (837-61), in 8538, directed a law against
sacrifices at night. Those sacrifices at night which were
permitted by Magnentius, are to cease entirely, ‘“‘ henceforth
let all such abominations be suppressed.’!48 In 357 he
absolutely forbad all divination of whatsoever kind. ‘‘ There
shall be no more divination nor curious inquiries, nevermore.
Whosoever shall dare disobey this statute shall lose his head
by the avenging sword of the executioner.’’!49 The various
kinds of sorcerers were explicitly named: ‘Let no man
consult any haruspex, let no man consult any astrologer :
fortune-tellers, augurs, seers, and the whole dark fraternity
shall exercise their arts no more. We utterly and entirely
suppress all Chaldeans and diviners, who, indeed, on account


GREECE AND ROME 55


of their black sciences, are even now commonly regarded as
evil-doers and criminal.’’15°

During the short reign of Julian, 861-8, who, assuming the
duties of Pontifex Maximus, commanded all temples to reopen
for pagan worship, astrologers, magicians, and soothsayers
met with the warmest encouragement from emperor, patrician
and plebeian, senator and dame, citizen and good wife, alike,
and in a few months they appeared as many as before, nor
was the number of their clients one whit diminished. Jovian,
his successor, apparently, aimed at a universal toleration,
which he reintroduced upon the lines laid down by
Constantine in the Milan Edict of 313. In principle he forbad
magical sacrifices, but divination was at any rate tacitly
permitted, for in the year 363 there were at least two astrol-
ogers who enjoyed an immense reputation; a Lydian,
Patricius, than whom none was more skilled to read the face
of the heavens or cast a horoscope, and Hilary of Phrygia,
clairvoyant, psychometrist, and teller of fortunes to every
aristocrat and cyprian in Rome.

Under Valentinian I, 364, with whom by his own favour
was associated his brother Valens, this state of things soon
altered, and the former laws in every article of their severity
were put into active operation against professing soothsayers
and diviners.

The immediate occasion was the indiscreet carriage and
talk of Theodorus, a prominent official of the court, who had
been told both by Patricius and Hilary that he should
succeed Valens on the throne. In 367 there took place at
Antioch a curious anticipation of modern “ spirit rapping,”’
when a spirit asked to spell the name of him who should
follow Valens was supposed to have rapped out the Greek
letters OEOA which begin Theodorus. It is, however, more
than probable that this psychic communication meant to
indicate Theodosius.

The matter became known and was inquired into, the lives
of all concerned were forfeited, and as a result Valens resolved
once and for all to exterminate the whole race of occultists
and magicians. The sanguinary crusade that followed recalls
the worst days of Calvinistic Scotland, the Salem witch-trials,
or the zealous prosecutions of Master Matthew Hopkins and
his jackal John Stearne. There can be no doubt that many


56 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


guilty, but more innocent, perished. One old crone was put
to death because she was commonly reputed to be able to
cure fevers by the recitation of certain magic rhymes and
runes; a youth was condemned because he was caught
placing the palms of his hands upon a marble pillar and then
laying them upon his breast. Meanwhile he chanted a
formula that had been taught him, believing this operation
would cure him of some gastric complaint.151 A certain
Palladius was commissioned to see that the laws were
enforced, and the informers by whom he was constantly
surrounded are said to have bribed servants to secrete
parchments upon which were written spells and other similar
objects in the houses of wealthy merchants, so that when the
official searchers came to examine the premises, these docu-
ments and amulets were soon discovered, and no mean
blackmail could be safely levied. Large numbers of persons
destroyed their books and many other possessions lest some
matter for accusation might be traced amongst them. A
hideous panic swept through the Eastern world. Each man
mistrusted his neighbour, his friends, his relatives, his slaves,
those of his own household.

The attack even menaced philosophers and the most dis-
tinguished names in literature.15? Libanius and Iamblichus
were charged with having plotted against the emperor’s life,
and with having attempted to discover his successor by
means of that mode of divination known as alectromancy.153
It is said that the latter poisoned himself rather than face
the consequences of so terrible and fatal a charge. Sozomen154
tells us that many persons who had been wont to wear the
fringed cloaks so generally favoured by philosophers, hastily
discarded these in dread of their lives, lest they should be
accused of sorcery on that account alone. It must be
remembered that in spite of his adopted Roman gentile name
Valens was a rough and brutal barbarian. He had been born
in Pannonia, and at the time of his elevation to the throne
was an ignorant pagan. <A wild and savage heathen he
remained all his life, for although he was baptized by the
Arian patriarch of Constantinople, Eudoxius, it was impossible
that he should have learned from this source even the
elements of Christianity.


The laws of Gratian (867), and Valentinian II (875) who


GREECE AND ROME 57


was never much more than a nominal ruler, again forbid the
uetita sacrificia, the necromantic sacrifices, and this reiterated
prohibition shows that the evil thing still persisted in spite
of continued repression and legislature. Gratian, the first
emperor to refuse the title and insignia of Pontifex Maximus,
further enforced the laws of his predecessors, and pagan
sorcery was soon, as such, to become extinct and wholly to
merge itself in the pest of heresy.

Theodosius (879-95) by an edict of 20 December, 381,
sternly prohibits any nocturnal sacrifice or meetings at night
in old temples, where the Sabbat was secretly celebrated.
Ten years later he commands that all pagan sanctuaries shall
be definitely closed. On 25 May, 385, he had forbidden magic
sacrifices and eatispiciwm on pain of an ignominious death.

Let no one defile himself by offering sacrifice, let no one
slay an innocent victim, let no one dare to enter the temples
and venerate those images and pictures which mere mortal
hands have made, lest by so doing he be adjudged a criminal,
accounted guilty by all laws, human and divine. So runs
the law of 391.155 Honorius (895-423) by a statute of 399
recapitulates the penalties directed against those who offer
unhallowed sacrifices, the pagan altars are to be destroyed,
but the temples or any objects of beauty may remain as
public monuments. Valentinian III (425-55), on the other
hand, directs his laws in all their rigour against the Mani-
chees,15® declaring them guilty of sacrilege, and forbidding
them to dwell in cities. Only a brief space of five-and-twenty
years more and the imperial line of the empurpled Cesars,
lords of the known world, was to flicker out in failure and
feebleness. Romulus Augustulus, a lad of fourteen, last
ruler of the Western Roman empire, trembling and fearful
awaited Odoacer at Ravenna, and the Goth was content to
send him to live in rustic retirement upon his estate in
Campania. The old paganism was dead, a thing of the past,
vanished utterly.15? Witchcraft was no longer the science
of the heathen, but the portion of the heretic.


NOTES TO CHAPTER I


1 Crates Pergamenus in Hellesponto circa Parium, genus hominum fuisse
tradit, quos Ophiogenes uocat serpentium ictus contactu leuare solitos et
manu imposita uenena extrahere corpori. Uarro etiamnum esse paucos ibi,
quorum saliue contra ictus serpentium medeantur. (Crates of Lavinium tells
us that there dwelt in the neighbourhood of Parium on the Propontis [now


58 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Kamares] a certain tribe of men whom he calls Ophiogenes. These were wont
to heal the bites of serpents by stroking the place, and to draw out the viperous
venom from the bodies of those who had been wounded. Varro, moreover,
says that there were folk in those districts who could cure the bite of a snake
by their spittle.) Historia Naturalis, VU, 2.

2 Seneca, Queestiones Naturalis, 1V, 6.

3 §. Justin Martyr, Questio al Orthodoxos; ascribed by Harnack to
Diodorus of Tarsus; by the Constantinople MS. to Theodoret, an unlikely
attribution.

4 Pliny, Historia Naturalis, XXVIII, 2.

5 Apuleius, De Magia (XXV), writes: Nam si, quod ego apud plurimos
lego, Persarum lingua magus est, qui nostra sacerdos, quod tandem est crimen
sacerdotem esse et rite nosse atque scire atque callere leges ceremoniarum,
fas sacrorum, ius religionum? (For if, as I have read in many authors, a
magician means, in the language of the Persians, the same thing that the word
Priest does in ours, what crime can there be, pray, in being a magician ? What
is the crime in thoroughly knowing and clearly understanding, and being well
versed in the laws of ceremonial, the due order of the sacred ritual, and
holy ordinances of the gods ?)

6 Soin Greek fable Lycaon was changed into a wolf; Alopis became a fox.
Cf. Milton’s Comus, lJ. 51-77.

7 Certe quid non repleuere fabulis Colchis Medea, alizeque, in primis Itala
Circe, diis ctiam adscripta? (Are there not in truth a thousand legends of
Medea the Colchian witch, and many others, amongst whom one of the most
famous is our Italian Circe, a kinswoman of the gods?) Pliny, Historia
Naturalis, XXV, 5.

STV, 45.

® Die Homerische Odyssee.

10 X, 28, 7. Wilamowitz Moellendorff (Homerische Untersuchungen) quite
gratuitously casts grave doubt on the veracity of Pausanias, which there is, as
a matter of fact, no reason whatsoever to suspect.

11 Lonrela d€ xadécra dd TOy yowy Kal Opjvwy, Cedrenus.

12 Plato, Leges, XI.

13 Apud Eusebium, Preparatio Euangelica, V, 10.

14 audistisne magiam . . . artem esse dis immortalibus acceptam . . . a
Zoroastro et Oromazo auctoribus suis nobilem, celitum antistitam ? ”

16 Healey translation, 1610.

16 In Homer, Hades “ the Unseen ” is always a proper name denoting tho
god Pluto.

17 So Vergil, Aneid VI, 577-9:

; Tum Tartarus ipse
bis patet in preceps tantum tenditque sub umbras,
quantus ad xtherium caeli susceptus Olympum.
(Then Tartarus with sheer descent
Dips neath the ghost-world twice as deep
As towers above earth’s continent
The height of heaven’s Olympian steep.) Conington.

18 Preller and Welcker are inclined to believe in a foreign origin.

*° The lines can scarcely be the composition of the author of the kaTdXoyos
yovark@y,
os * From the fifth century onwards. Euripides, Phenisse, 108.

KATO,

Ae An inscription. Bull. de Corr. Hell., 1880, p. 337. I[pidmiov cat ‘Exaréou
avdj. (2nd or 3rd century A.D.)

#2 The genius of Alcamenes finally decided this type.

28 Although disputed, this still seems the likeliest interpretation.


_. ** Aristophanes, Ranw, 293; Ecclesiazusew, 1056. The Empusa is’ OvockeNs
Ovoxw\n. ,


25 Suidas.
6 Equites, 890. Lucian, Philopseudes.
*7 Porphyry apud Eusebium, Praparatio Huangelica, V, 8.


at Aarods


GREECE AND ROME 59


28 So Theocritus, II, 58:
gatpov rot TplWvaca KkaKxdy tordy atipov olod,

29 Kara macav aipécewy 2ceyxos. Some MSS. name Origen as the author
of the first book. Photius attributes the work to Caius, a priest of Rome in the
Se century. Others think that either Tertullian or Novatian may be the
author.

8° The dramatists, Fletcher, The Chances, V; Mrs. Behn, The Dutch Lover,
V; Congreve, Love for Love, III, and many poets (Paradise Lost, II, 666) have
constant reference to this proverbial tradition.

31 Dionysiaca, XXXVI, 27 seqq.

82“ Nimis cupidus cognoscendi que rara miraque sunt, reputansque me
media Thessaliz loca tenere, quo artis magice natius cantamina totius orbis
consono ore celebrentur . . . suspensus alioquin et uoto simul et studio
curiose singula considerabam.” Metamorphoseon, II, 1.

83 “O wryneck, draw thou him whom I love swiftly to my house.”

_ The wryneck, so called from its cry, whilst the English name comes from the
jerky movements of its head. The ancient witches used to bind it to a wheel,
which they turned round, believing that they drew men’s hearts along with it,
and charmed them to obedience. Hence it was much used to recover unfaithful
lovers, This operation was called é\xew iyya éri tu, to set the magic
bird or wheel a-going against some. Xenophon, Memorabilia, III, xi, 17.

34 Ter cane, ter dictis despue carminibus. Tibullus, I, ii, 56.

85 Propertius II, iv, 7.

Non hic herba ualet, non hic nocturna Cytzis,
Non Perimedea gramina cocta manu.


The scholiast says that Perimede is the witch whom Homer calls
Agamede, the daughter of Augeias, granddaughter of the Sun God, and spouse
of Moulios.

MotAcov aixunrhy* yapSpds 6 Av’ Avyeiao,
mpecBurarny 6¢ Ov-yarp’ etxe EavOhy Ayaundny,
i} Toca pappaka 76n boa Tpeper etipeia xOwv.
Iliad, XI, 739-41.

36 Spalding Club Miscellany, I, p. 97.

37 Eid. Erman, pp. 7 and 8.

38 He is described as Kher heb, the priestly official who performed the
funeral ceremonies. He was always a man of great learning, and generally of
high rank.

39 ©. K. Sharp, Witchcraft in Scotland, London, 1884, p. 21.

40 Second Booke, Chapter V.

41 Discoverie of Witchcraft, pp. 258-9.

42 Glanvil, Sadducismus Triumphatus, London, 1681, II, pp. 137-8 and 164.

43 Soin Macbeth, IV, 1, a “‘ Lizard’s leg ” is thrown into the caldron “ For
a charm of powerful trouble.” In Middleton’s The Witch Heccat compounds
“lizard’s-brain ’’ in a charm.

44 Licensed by Sir Henry Herbert, 26 April, 1642. First printed with
separate title, 1652, in Sia New Playes, 8vo, 1653.

45 Historia Naturalis, VII, 37.

46 Diogenes Lertius, Prowmion, 2. Proclus, In Timeum, IV, 285.

47 Allimportant as Egypt is in the History of Magic, to say that Egypt was
the Source of Magic and religion, a thesis propounded by Mr. W. J. Perry in
his The Origin of Magic and Religion, London (Methuen and Co.), 1924, is not
merely a gross and impossible exaggeration, but unscholarly and uncritical
to a degree. ;

48 The Greeks used incantations very early. For an example see Pindar,
Pythia, IV, 213. This poet lived in the first half of the fifth century before
Christ.

49 “Si autem homo ille Tages fuit quonam modo potuit terra oppressus
uidere? unde porro illa potuit, que docebat alios, ipse didicisse?” De
Diuinatione, II, xxiii, 51.

50 De Diuinatione, II, xxiii, 50.


60 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


51 Ovid derives the name of this festival from the solemnities celebrated by
Romulus at the death of Remus, and says that Remuria became Lemuria.
Fasti, V, 421-2, 451 sqq., and 483 sqq.

Ritus erit ueteris nocturna Lemuria sacri :
Inferias tacitis Manibus illa dabunt.


Romulus obsequitur, lucemque Remuria dixit
Illam, qua positis iusta fenentur auis.

Aspera mutata est in lenem tempore longo
Littera, que toto nomine prima fuit.

Mox etiam Lemures animas dixere silentum,
Is uerti sensus, uis ca uocis erat.


(There will be the rites of your ancient ceremonial feast of the Lemures ;
this feast will present the offerings to the silent shades. . . . Romulus obeyed,
and he called that day on which the prescribed rites are performed in honour
of the buried dead ‘‘ Remuria.’? The harsh letter, which was the first in the
entire name, in lapse of time was changed to one of softer articulation. After-»
wards they called the ghosts of the silent shades demures ; this was the meaning
of the word ; this did the expression import.)

52 Festus, ed. Karl Ottfried Miller, p. 253.

53 De Ciuitate Det, IX, 11, trans. Healey (1610).

54 “ Tares’? was in old Latin ‘“‘ Lases.”” Etruscan ‘“ Lalan,’’ or “ Laran.”’

55 Inscriptiones, J. G. Orelli, No. 1670.

56 Arnobius, III, 41.

5? Suetonius, Augustus, XXI. Also called ‘‘ Lares compitalicii,” Philargus
ad Vergilium. Georgicon, II, 381.

58 Plautus, Mercator, V, 11, 24, where Charinus exclaims :

Tnuoco
Uos, Lares uiales, ut me bene iuuetis.

59 Livy, XL, 52.

60 Tertullian, De Spectaculis, V.

61 Dionysus Halicarnassus, Antiquitates Romane, V, 54.

62 Pliny, Historia Naturalis, X XIX, xiv, 4.

63 Pliny writes: ‘‘ Tuscorum litters nouem deos emittere fulmina existi-
mant... diurna adtribuentes Ioui, nocturna Summano.’” Historia
Naturalis, II, liii, 52.

64 De Ciuitate Dei, IV, 23.

85 Fasti, VI, 731-2.

Cams it

87 Festus, ed. Karl Ottfried Miller, pp. 348-9.

68 Historia Naturalis, XXIX, xiv, 4.

: vat story of the Etruscan augur Attus Navius and Tarquinius Priscus
7° Since Egeria was also worshipped at Aricia, according to one account it
was here that Numa met her. Ovid, Fasti, III, 259 sqq.

71 De Ciuitate Dei, VII, 34, 35.

72 “ Quid ? non et legum ipsarum in duodecim tabulis uerba sunt ?” ‘Qui
fruges excantasset.’’ Et alibi, ‘‘ Qui malum carmen incantasset.” Pliny,
Historia Naturalis, XXVIII, 4.

78 Livy, IV, 50; XXV,1; XXXIX, 16.

74 Valerius Maximus, I, iii, 2.

75 Apud Aulum Gellium, ITI, x.

76 Metamorphoseon, VII, 21,

77 Pharsalia, VI, 541-9.

78 Clauos ferreos, quibus fixi, qui in cruce pendebant.

10 T, i1,°48.

° Amores, I, viii, 5.

81 Sermonum, I, 8.

_*? Written 1210-14. Monumenta Germanic historica, XXVII, ed. Pauli and
Liebermann,


GREECE AND ROME 61


88 Discouerie of Witchcraft, V, chap. i, 6. 1584.

84 Anatomy of Melancholy, Part I, Sect. i, Mem. 1, Subs. 4.

85 The Dvtchesse of Malfy, V.2. 4to. 1623.

86 I have used the 1620 edition of the Thrésor, Genéve, Samuel Crespin,
4 vols., 8vo. In Vols. I and II we have: Apparitions sataniques (p. 45) ;
Démoniaques, illusions sataniques (p. 142) ; Efficace étrange de Satan (p. 178) ;
Sorcellerie, illusions de Satan (p. 464); Enchanteurs et Magiciens punis
(p. 718) ; Lycanthropie (pp. 720-1) ; Fureur du Malin Esprit (p. 790); and in
volumes III and IV: Fantéme avertisseur (p. 191) ; Magiciens punis (p. 278).
There is another edition of the Thrésor, Paris, Houzé, 1618, 2 vols., 12mo.

87 The Glossarium Philoxeni defines striga as yur) g¢apyaxis, but the word
means more than that here, and, I think, ‘‘ banshee ”’ or “ ghoul ” expresses
the meaning as accurately as may be.

8° This is the reading of V (codex Vaticanus). F (codex Florentinus) has
“infirmare.”’

8° IT, 8. Metamorphoseon. Recensuit J. van der Vliet, Lipsiz, Teubner,
1897.

90 John Gaule, Select Cases of Conscience Touching Witches and Witchcraft,
London, 1646, pp. 78-9.

91 George Gifford, Dialogue concerning Witches, 1603.

82 With which compare the ‘flying ointment”? of the later witches.
Queverdo’s picture Le Départ pour le Sabbat represents this operation.

*8 Father Martindale (article Paganism) has well written: ‘‘A pure
mysticism and sublimity of emotion barely to be surpassed had been achieved ;
in the Metamorphoses of Apuleius the syneretistic cult of the Egyptian
goddess expresses itself in terms of tenderness and majesty that would fit the
highest worship, and in the concluding prayer of the Apuleian Hermes, an
ecstatic adoration of God is manifested in language and thought never
equalled, still less surpassed, save in the inspired writers of the Church.”

94 De Ciuitate Det, XVIII, 18. Hither he told a true tale or gave us fiction.

85 Diuinarum Institutionum, V, De Lustitia. It is remarkable that he has
omitted Apuleius of whom many wonders are told.

96 Apologia, XXV, XXVI.

9? Ibid., XXIV. ’ ae

*§ Unum etiam crimen ab illis... de cuiusdam Sigilli fabricatione
prolatum est, quod me aiunt ad mazica maleficia occulta fabrica ligno exquisi-
tissimo comparasse, et cum sit sceleti forma turpe et horribile, tamen impendio
colere et Greco uocabulo Bacikéa nuncupare. (There was one charge brought
by them .... about a certain little image, which they say I ordered to be
secretly made, of the most costly wood, for purposes of black magic. They
assert too that although it was the baleful and malefic figure of a carious
skeleton I was wont to venerate it with honour extraordinary, saluting it by
the Greek name of Bacihvés, or King. Apologia, XXIV.

oe When to Maro’s tomb they brought him

Tender grief and pity wrought him
To bedew the stone with tears ;
What a Saint I might have crowned thee,
Had I only living found thee,
Poet first and without peers. (Trans. J. A. Symonds.)

100 Much the same may be said of Father Ronald Knox. The very title
of his autobiography, d/neid, tells ba own tale. The book is steeped in

il. ‘‘ Maria undique et undique celum.” .
ven. Cadoc (c. 532-90), feast 24 January, is in the English and Gallican
martyrologies. He is venerated in Brittany at Belz and 8. Cadou. See
Rees, Lives of the Cambro-British Saints, and La Villemarqué, La Légende
ary Gildas ‘‘ the Wise,” born c. 516, died at Houat, Brittany, 570. Feast
29 January. There were important Relics in the Cathedral (S. Pierre) at
Vannes. The Saint is venerated at Bieuzy, Tonquedec, Loeminé, and Carnoet,
where there is a Pardon on the Feast. A commemoration of the Translation of
the Relics is made on 11 May.


62 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


108 Gabriel Naudé, Apologie pour tovs les grands hommes . + + soupconne:
de magie, Paris, Targa, 1625 (ch, 21), considers that Vergil’s reputation as a
sorcerer arose from the Eighth Eclogue and the Sixth Book of the Zneid. It has
been suggested that Vergil has been confused with S. Vergilius, Bishop of
Salzburg, who died 27 November, as nee : great name for learning.

104 Warton, History of Poetry, ed. , LI, 62 n. :

105 ** Jannes et Mie eectnat Moysi.” Ep. B. Pauli, Ap. ad
Timotheum, II, iii, 8.

106 Suetonius, Augustus, XXXI. ‘ ; siaag

107 Haruspices secreto ac sine testibus consuli uetuit. Suetonius, Tiberius,
LXITI. :

108 Tt is said that no less than four thousand persons, magicians and their
devotees, took refuge in Sardinia. Tacitus, Annales, I, 75.

109 Tacitus, Annales, XII, 52.

110 Pliny, Historia Naturalis, XXX, 5.

111 Suetonius, Nero, XXXVI.

112 Philostratus, Uita Apollon. Tyan., IV, 55.

113 Historiarum, I, 23.

114 Suetonius, Ujitellius, KIV. ‘‘ Uaticinante Catta muliere.” _These
foreign sibyls were highly esteemed. Galba had been encouraged to seize the
empire owing to the predictions of a Spanish seeress.

118 Dio Cassius, LXVI, 10.

116 Spartianus, Adrianus Cesar, 16.

117 Lampridius, Commodus, 9.

118 Fuit preterea in Iuliano hec amentia, ut per magos pleraque faceret,
quibus putaret uel odium populi deliniri, uel militum arma compesci. Nam et
quasdam non conuenientes Romanis sacris hostias immolauerunt,! et carmina
profana incantauerunt,? et ea quae ad speculum dicunt fieri,* in quo pueri
preligatis oculis incantato uertice respicere dicuntur, Iulianus fecit. Tuncque
puer uidisse dicitur et aduentum Seueri et Iuliani decessionem.*

119 “Nam ueram magiam Persarum Plato pronuntiat deiv Oepamelay”
Casaubonus in Lampridium ad locum.

120 Salmasius prefers the MS. reading ‘‘ excruciaret.”

121 Lampridius, Antoninus Heliogabalus, 8.

122 Giorgius Cedrenus, V, ii. p. 1., ed. Bekker, Bonn, 1838-9.

123 1501. Guicciardini writes: ‘‘ Astorre, che era minore di diciotto anni
e di forma eccellente . . . condotto a Roma, saziata prima (secondo che si
disse) la libidine di qualcuno, fu occultamente insieme con un suo fratello
naturale privato della vita.”” Nardi (Storie Fiorentine, lib. iv, 13) plainly states
that Czsar Borgia violated and murdered the boy.

224 Most authorities say about eight hundred. In the official process at his
trial one hundred and forty were named, but it is recognized that this only
represents a tithe of the whole.

126 Histoire veritable des crimes horribles commis . . . sur le S. Sacrament de
ee . . . et sur trois enfans, . . . Iouxte la copie imprimée a Paris, 1651,

0, 7 pp.

126 The Daily Express, 9 December, 1919. Surely in a case such as this an
expert theologian should sit as assessor at the trial.

127 OCapitolinus, M. Anioninus Philosophus, 19. The Chaldeans advised
“ut occiso gladiatore, sanguine illius sese Faustina sublauaret [ru picw], atque
ita cum uiro concumberet. Quod quum esset factum, solutum quidem amorem,
natum uero Commodum gladiatorem esse non principem.” Human blood was
often used for healing purposes. Pliny (Historia Naturalis, XXVIII, 1) says :


1 Pueros multos mactauit. Casaubon.


Ps " Magicas émwdds uocat carmina profana ; ut Romanis sacris non conuenientia sed Barbaricis.
vd,

* John of Salisbury, De uestigiis philosophorum, I, 12, writes: ‘‘Specularios uocant, qui in
corporibus leuigatis et tersis, ut sunt lucidi enses, pelues, cythi, speculorumque diuersa genera,
diuinantes curiosis consultationibus satisfaciunt.” (Scryers (specularii) is the name given to those
who by gazing at some shining and polished object, it may be a bright sword, a glittering basin,


@ cup, and any kind of reflecting mirror, divine and thuswise satisf i
who consult them as to the future.) ahead eo


“ Spartianus, Didius Julianus, 7.


GREECE AND ROME 63


“Thus epileptics even drink theblood of gladiators, and indeed out of living
goblets. . . . They consider it the most effective method of cure to swallow
down the blood, when it is still warm, still bubbling, out of the man himself.”
Scribonius Largus (First Century) the author of Medicamentorum Composi-
tvones, recommends human blood as a cure for epilepsy. Physicians of the
Byzantine period (third to sixth centuries) such as Aétius and Alexander of
Tralles give the same prescriptions.

128 Lampridius, Alexander Seucrus, 44.

; ane Julius Paulus, Sent. recept, V, xxiii, 17, 18. Apud, Jurisperiti Ante-
justiniant (p. 511), ed. Schulting, Lipsiz, 1728.

190 Seut. recept., V, xxi, 3.

731 Quum senior Gordianus mathematicum aliquando consuleret de genitura
huius [Gordiani tertii], respondisse ille dicitur hunc et filium imperatoris, et
ipsum imperatorem futurum. Et quum senior Gordianus rideset, ostendisse
constellationem mathematicum ferunt, et de libris ueteribus dictasse, ita ut
probaret se uera dixisse. Qui quidem et seni et iuueni et diem et genus mortis,
et loca quibus essent perituri, obstinata constantie ueritate predixit.
Capitolinus, Gordianus Iunior, 20.

132 Vopiscus, Diuus Aurelianus, 18.

183 Referimus ad uos P. C. Pontificum suggestionem et Aureliani principis
literas, quibus iubetur ut inspiciantur fatales libri quibus spes belli terminandi
sacrato deorum imperio continetur. Vopiscus, Diwus Aurelianus, 19.

134 Vopiscus, Saturninus, 7. During the reign of Probus (A.D. 276-82)
Saturninus was proclaimed Emperor at Alexandria, but he was soon slain by
the soldiery.

1385 T have tried to generalize as far as possible, but exception might be
taken even here as Alexander Severus helped the “‘ mathematici ’’ with money.
Or, perhaps, in this instance Lampridius is using the word loosely. In Cicero
and Seneca ‘‘ mathematicus ’? means a mathematician, but in later Latin it
always signifies an astrologer, a wizard. Cf. the use of the English word
*‘ Geometry,” as in Mrs. Behn’s The Luckey Chance; or, An Alderman’s
Bargain, 4to, 1687, IV, 1, when Gayman says :

By Magick Art I was conducted—I know not how
To an inchanted Palace in the Clouds,


. . . e .


But for the amorous Devil—the old Proserpine

She was laid in a Pavilion, all form’d of gilded Clouds, which hung by Geometry.
136 Cod. Justin., L. IX, tit. xviii, 2; The Twelve Tables, 10; Beugnot,

Histoire de la destruction du paganisme en Occident, Paris, 2 vols. 8vo., 1835.

137 Quos Greeci da/uovas appellant nostri opinor lares. Cicero, De Universo
(Timeus). Lactantius, Diuinarum Institutionum, II, 14, speaks of “ spiritus
contaminati ac perditi... sibi geniorum nomen assumunt. Sic enim
Latino sermone demonas interpretantur. In inscriptions Diis Manibus is
termed by Aaluooww eiceBéow. Maffei, Museum Ueronense, CCCXVI.

138 Plutarch, Pompeius, 24.

139 [t is hardly worth noting that some unscholarly and unscientific writers
have endeavoured to show that the Church borrowed from Mithraism.

140 In reality a mere abstraction ; a personification, not even of the sun,
but of diffused daylight.

141 Historia Ecclesiastica, III, 27.

142 Orationes, IV, 92.

143 Martyred 26 September, 304.

144 Bollandists, Acta Sanctorum, 26 September.

145 To Tertullian Mithra was a demon, and the adaptation of Christian rites
by his worshippers simply devilish. De Prescriptione Hereticorum (c. 200),
XL; S. Justin holds much the same view, Apologia, XVI.

146 Nullus haruspex limen alterius accedat, nec ob alteram causam; sed
huiusmodi hominum, quamuis uetus, amicitia repellatur : concremando illo
haruspice, qui ad domum alienam accesserit. Codex Theodosianus, Lib. IX,


tit, xvi, 1. 1.


64 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


147 Nullis uero criminationibus implicanda sunt remedia humanis quesita
corporibus, aut in agrestibus locis, ne maturis uindemiis metucrentur imbres,
aut ruentis grandinis lapidatione quaterentur, innocenter adhibita suffragia,
quibus non cuiusque salus, aut existimatio lederetur, sed quorum proficerent
actus, ne diuina munera et labores hominum sternerentur. Codex Theodosianus,
Lib. XI, tit. xvi, 1. 3. :

148 Aboleantur sacrificia nocturna, Magnentio auctore permissa, et nefaria
deinceps licentia repellatur. Codex Theodosianus, Lib. XVI, tit. x.

149 Sileat omnibus perpetuo diuinandi curiositas. Etenim supplicium
capitis feret, gladio ultore, prostratur quicumque iussis obsequium denegauerit.
Ibid., Lib. IX, tit. xvi, 1. 4.

150 Nemo haruspicem consulat, aut mathematicum nemo, hariolum,
augurem et uatem, praua confessio conticescat ; Chaldzi, et magi, et ceteri quos
maleficos ob facinorum magnitudinem uulgus appellat. Ibid.

151 Ammianus Marcellinus, X XIX, 2.

152 Zosimus, Historie Nouce, IV, Oxonii, 1679.

153 Joannes Zonaras, Annales, XIII, 16.

154 Historia Ecclesiastica, VI, 35.

155 Nemo se hostiis polluat, nemo insontem uictimam cxdet, nemo delubra
adeat, templa perlustret et mortali opere formata simulacra suscipiat ne
ee eee humanis sanctionibus reus fiat. Codex Theodosianus, Lib. XVI,
tit. x, 1. 10.

166 They had previously been banned by Valentinian I, Theodosius, and
Honorius, but it is during the reign of Valentinian III that they may be said
to be overtly regarded as wholly antagonistic to Christianity as paganism
once was. In fact, Manichzism in some sense took the place of paganism.

157 This is, of course, a generalization ; as such, true. In obscure localities
pagan superstitions lingered for long centuries. Thus S. Benedict (ob. 543)
destroyed the ancient chapel upon the crest of Monte Cassino where the foolish
and simple country folk worshipped Apollo and built there oratories of
S. John and S. Martin.


CHAPTER II
ENGLAND


THE word Witchcraft itself belongs to Anglo-Saxon days,
although magic played an important part in the Druidie
mysteries, and certain obsolete superstitions are possibly to
be referred back through the centuries to their ancient and
cryptic lore. According to Whitely Stokes the Irish Druids
were never even a hierarchy or separate priestly clan as in
Britain, but were merely regarded as enchanters and medicine-
men. Strabo the geographer in the first century! writes :
puoi eivat vicov mpos tH Bpitravicy Kab’ Gmora toils év
LamoOpaxy wept ryv Aruntpay cat rhv Kopyy tepororéerat.
(They say that there is an island near Britain, where Demeter
and Kore are worshipped with rites similar to the orgies of
Samothrace.) As has been before noted Samothrace was
the chief seat of the worship of the Cabiri, KaSepo:, with
whose occult ritual was closely associated the cult of Hecate. ?

In the seventh century was composed the Liber Poenitenti-
alis of S. Theodore, seventh Archbishop of Canterbury,* the
earliest collection of ecclesiastical disciplinary laws for
England. No less than the whole of one section is concerned
with magic practices and ceremonies, a penance being duly
assigned for each offence. The thirty-seventh Book has as
its rubric, “Of Idolatry and Sacrilege, and of those who
pay divine honours to certain Angels, and evil-doers, sooth-
sayers, poisoners, charmers, diviners, and those who vow
their vows otherwise than to Holy Church, and the man who
on the Kalends of January goeth about in the masque of a
stag or a bull-calf, as also of astrologers, and those who by
their craft raise storms.’ There are six-and-twenty heads,
and of these many are so important that the more significant
provisions of the principal enactments must at least be given.
‘Tf anyone sacrifices to demons, one year of penance if he
be a clown of low estate, if he be of higher degree, 10 years.
If anyone sacrifice a second or a third time to demons he shall
do penance for 8 years. If anyone commits sacrilege, that

66


66 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


is if he consulteth soothsayers who divine by birds or in any
other forbidden way he shall do penance 8 years, and of these
one shall he fast on bread and water. It is unlawful for any,
cleric or layman, to exercise the craft of a seer or a charmer,
or to make philtres, and all such as practise such arts or
use them we order to be expelled from the church. If anyone
by evil spells hath slain another. ... If anyone hath
poisoned another from jealousy and yet hath not slain him.
... If anyone hath procured abortion. ... If anyone
frequents seers, whom men call diviners, or hath practised
any charms, for this is devilish. . . . If anyone hath made a
trial of those lots, which are wrongly called the Holy Lots,
or hath cast any lots at all, or hath with evil intent cast lots,
or hath divined. . . . If any woman hath divined or hath
used devilish evocations. . . . If any woman hath placed
her son or daughter upon the house-top or in the oven in
order to ensure them health. . . . If anyone hath burned
wheat upon the spot where a man hath died in order to ensure
the health and prosperity to his household. . . . If anyone
in order to ensure health to his young son hath passed the
baby upwards through some cavity in the earth, and then
hath closed fast the hole behind him with thorns and brambles
. . . anyone who hath had resource to diviners and cleaveth
to the traditions of the heathen, or hath brought men of this
craft into his house in order to find out some secret by their
evil science, or in order to expiate some wrong. . . . Ifanyone
hath vowed a vow and hath fulfilled the same at a clump
of trees, or a spring of water, or at certain rocks, or at a spot
where boundaries meet, or at any other place whatsoever,
save in God’s house, the church, he shall do penance fasting
on bread and water for 8 years, since this is sacrilege, and
verily devilish. Who hath eaten or drunk in honour of idols
one year shall he do penance fasting on bread and water.
If anyone at the Kalends of January goeth about as a stag
or a bull-calf, that is, making himself into a wild animal, and
dressing in the skins of a herd animal, and putting on the
heads of beasts ; those who in such wise transform themselves
into the appearance of a wild animal, let them do penance
for three years, because this is devilish. If anyone be a
wizard, that is, if by the invocation of demons he hath
wrought upon any man’s mind. . . . If anyone hath raised


ENGLAND 67


storms by his evil craft. . . . If anyone hath tied the knot
(ligaturas fecerit) because this is devilish.”5 S. Augustine
(In Ioannem, VII) uses the word ligatura for an amulet bound
about one, and by “‘ ligaturas facere ’’® we are here to under-
stand sexual magic, nouer l’aiguillette. The ligatura was both
used for casting a spell upon a man, or for freeing him from
the effects of a charm. So in Petronius, Satyricon, 181, the
old witch in order to restore Encolpius “took out of her
bosom a hank of various colours and bound it round my
neck.”? Upon which passage Turnebus (1512-65) glosses :
““In spells and charms hanks or threads of various colours
are employed, not only to bind and make fast a spell as in
the Pharmaceutria but also to loose and undo as here, whence
these threads are called ligatures (ligatura).’’® George Erhard
notes: “ This little old woman was skilled in magic spells,
and so she undertook to cure the sexual frigidity of Polyaenus
[Encolpius], whose virility was, as he himself acknowledged,
cold and dead. Witches can heal diseases by ligatures . .
especially venereal complaints. . . . These hanks (Licia) the
writers of the Middle Ages call ligatures (ligaturas).’’®

Maurus in a letter to Bonosus quotes the following phrase
of Mark of Rheims with reference to the repudiation of his
queen Thietberga by the licentious Lothair II in 860: ‘“‘ Ad
hee non pertinent ligature exsecrabilium remediorum, quee
ars medicorum commendat, siue in precantationibus.” A
slight variation of the same erotic charm is alluded to in
Vergil’s famous lines :

Terna tibi hee primum triplici diuersa colore

licia circumdo, terque hee altaria circum

effigiem duco ; numero deus impare gaudet.

Ducite ab urbe domum, mea carmina, ducite Daphnim.

Necte tribus nodis ternos, Amarylli, colores ;

necte, Amarylli, modo et ‘“ Ueneris ” dic “ uincula necto,”’?°


(Around his waxen Image first I wind

Three woollen Fillets ; of three Colours join’d :

Thrice bind about his thrice-devoted Head,

Which round the sacred Altar thrice is led.

Unequal Numbers please the Gods: My Charms,

Restore my Daphnis to my longing Arms.

Knit with three Knots the Fillets, knit ’em straight ;

Then say, These Knots to Love I consecrate.

Haste, Amaryllis, haste; Restore, my Charms,

My lovely Daphnis to my longing Arms. DRYDEN.)


68 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


The clause in S. Theodore’s Penitential which forbids anyone
at the Kalends of January to go about as a stag or a bull,
that is, making himself into a wild animal and dressing in
the skins of herd animals and putting on the heads of beasts,
and assigns three years of penance to those who in suchwise
transform themselves into the appearance of a wild animal,
since the practice is devilish, is of especial importance and
interest, since here we probably have the explanation of the
greater part of these accounts which record that the Demon
appeared as a goat, a rampant bull, a huge black ram, whilst
his satellites particularly favoured the shape of monstrous
cats. The individual clad in a beast-skin or mask is the
worshipper putting himself by personal contact under the
influence and protection of his deity. In Italy, in Gaul, in
parts of Germany, in England, and in Spain men decked
themselves for licentious assemblies and obscene rites which
they performed at Christmas and early in the New Year,
shielding themselves under the kindly egis of the Church’s
festivals. They clad themselves in hairy and horned skins,
in hides with immense tails, they smutted their faces or
bedaubed them with filth, and donned the most hideous
masks imagination could conceive. These performances
seem, indeed, almost universal, and they are denounced again
and again. ‘‘ Lo, the day is close at hand,” writes Severian,
‘* yea, the Kalends are here, and the whole devilish procession
will come forth, the very fountain-head and workshop of
idols will go in full parade. The New Year is hallowed by old
blasphemies. They appear as Saturn, they show us Jupiter,
they display Hercules, they present Diana with her huntress
train, they exhibit Vulcan spouting the vilest obscenities, and
many more beside, whose names I will not utter, for they
are monstrous lewd. Ofa verity those beastlinesses which are
unknown to nature do they endeavour to fashion by their
craft and purblind skill, abnormal, epicene. Moreover men
are dressed like herd animals, they turn men into women,
I say, they laugh at decency, they break all laws, they laugh
at public opinion, they riot and roister whilst the whole world
looks on, and those who commit these abominations declare
"tis but a jest. No jest, forsooth, but black sin and shame.
Men are transformed into idols. And, if it be a crime to
resort to idols, what think ye is it to become an idol? ...


ENGLAND 69


For when they would assume the likeness of these heathen
gods, if pigments and charcoal, wherewith to caulk and smear
their faces, are found to be lacking, that they may make.
their appearance more quaint and horrid, they not only tire
themselves in hides, in rags and tatters, but deck themselves
out with straw and bedaub their countenances all over with
excrement or any other filthy ordure which they can light
upon anywhere.”!1_ S,. Maximus of Turin (c. 412-65) re-
peatedly reprobates similar ceremonies: ‘‘ Are not indeed,”
he cries, ‘‘ all those rites and ceremonies which the devil’s
own servants enact on those days frantic folly ? . . . What
is it but frantic folly when men created by God and in the
image of God transform themselves to herd animals or to
wild beasts or to some monstrous shapes? . . . These gecks
and losels say that they are observing omens and judging
of the length of their lives from some empty and idle signs,
for how shall the events of the coming year be ascertained
by the vague betokenings of beast or bird.”!? S. Peter
Chrysologus (406-50), Doctor of the Church, writes in the
same strain: ‘“‘ The man who puts on the guise of an idol
has no wish to be in the image and likeness of God. Who
jests with the Devil cannot rejoice with Christ. . . . Where-
fore let the father strive to convert his son, the master his
servant, the kinsman his relation, the citizen his fellow-
citizen, each man his fellow-man, and the Christian all, all who
have masqueraded in the likeness of animals, who have
metamorphosed themselves as draught-cattle, who have
assumed the shape of herd animals, who have turned them-
selves into devils.’’}3

S. Caesarius of Arles (470-542) is not one whit less emphatic:
““Is there any sensible man,” he asks with biting irony,
‘‘ who could ever believe that there are actually rational
individuals willing to put on the appearance of a stag and
to transform themselves into wild beasts? Some dress them-
selves in the skins of herd animals; others put on the heads
of horned beasts ; swelling and wildly exulting if only they
can so completely metamorphose themselves into the animal
kind that seem to have entirely abandoned the human shape.”
And again he warns the faithful: “‘Wherefore if ye abhor any
participation in their sins, ye will not suffer these human
stags or bull-calves or other monsters to approach you, nay,


70 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


not so much as to come nigh your dwellings.”!4 And again
he warns the faithful: ‘‘Et ideo si in peccatis eorum participes
esse non uultis, ceruulum uel iuuencam,!> aut alia quelibet
portenta, ante domos uestras uenire non permittatis.”1° He
also writes: ‘‘ I would fain believe that so foul a tradition,
so evil a custom . . . hath been abolished ; but if ye know
of any who practise this most heinous abomination of guising
themselves as a roebuck or a musonned stag... do ye
chastise such with sore stripes.” +7

In spite of the denunciations of the Fathers and Doctors
these buffoon but evil rites persisted, although shorn to some
degree of their primitive offence, and they are found inter-
mixed with the medieval Feast of Fools, festum stultorum or
fatuorum, the Feast of Asses, asinaria festa, with which the
inferior clerics in cathedrals and collegiate churches were
wont riotously to usher in the New Year. At these outrageous
and extraordinary festivals hideous and repulsive masks were
often worn, persone, or monstra lauarum as they are termed
by Pope Innocent III, who issuing a decretal to the arch-
bishop and bishops of the province of Gnesen in Poland,
directed that all such grotesque clowning should be at once
discontinued.!8 No doubt there were beast-masks, furnished
with the most fantastic corniculate projections, a remnant
of the actual skins and hides of animals. Some writers have
found an Oriental origin for the Feast of Fools, but this does
not seem probable, although similar mock revels were held
in Constantinople, and in the twelfth century the Patriarch
Balsamon unavailingly combated an ancient custom which
the clergy of S. Sophia refused to abandon. They claim the
right at Christmas and Candlemas to wear masks, and to
enter the sanctuary in the guise of soldiers, or of monks, or
of four-footed beasts, ‘‘ aAAa Kai twes KAypikol Kata Twos
€opTas Tpos Siapopa peracxnuariforvta tporwréta, KaL TOTE MeV
Eipijpers Ev TH petovaw Ts éxkAyolas MeTa OTpPaTwTiKaV audlov
eisépxovTat, ToTe dé Kal ws ovaxot mpoodevovew F Kat ws koa
teTparroéa.”19 There was no abuse amid all the indecorum
of these burlesque celebrations which was reproved with
greater severity and visited with sterner censure by the
Church, and this, no doubt, because such a masquerade was
definitely traceable to the old superstitions of Witchcraft,
although the evil of the connexion had in actual fact and


ENGLAND 71


practice entirely disappeared, and on the face of it at worst
1t was mere ribald mumming.

S. Aldhelm of Malmesbury and Sherbourne (c. 639-709),
writing about 685, has: “Et ubi pridem eiusdem nefande
natricis ermuli®° ceruulique cruda fanis colebantur stoliditate
in profanis, uersa uia discipulorum gurgustia (imo alme
oraminum edes) architecti ingenio fabre conduntur.”’2!

The Laws of Withraed, King of Kent, in 690, ordain: “If
a theow make an offering to devils let him make a bot of
vi shillings, or his hide.’’22

In the Confessional of Ecgberht, Archbishop of York??
(734-66) the following significant clauses appear: ‘27. If
any woman practise any magic arts, or spells, and work evil
charms, let her fast for a twelvemonth, or for three canonical
fasts, or for xl days: let the heinousness of her. offence be
computed. If she has slain any one by her evil charms, let
her fast for vii years. And 82. If anyone be found who hath
offered sacrifice to devils, no matter on howsoever trifling an
occasion let him fast for 1 year. If he hath made any precious
offering let him fast x years.”?4 And in the law of the
Northumbrian priests it is ordered: ‘‘If anyone be found
that shall henceforth practise any heathenship, either by
sacrifice or by fyrt, or in any way love witchcraft, or worship
idols, if he be a king’s thane let him pay x half marks; half
to Christ, half to the king.”’?5

In the ninth century the Penitential of Pseudo-Theodore
renews these prohibitions. This Penitentiale has been quoted
by Tille2* and other authors as being English, although it is
really Frankish, and to some extent, although not in these
sections, based upon the genuine Penitential of S. Theodore.
It may be remarked that very many Penitentials?’ particularly
denounce and forbid the masquerade of the Ceruulus and
Uetula. Their ultimate authority may be the Council of
Auxerre, held under S. Annacharius in 578 (or 585),8 a canon
of which directs: ‘‘ It is forbidden to masquerade as a bull-
calf or a stag on the first of January or to distribute devilish
charms, but if gifts are to be given on that day let them be
bestowed as on other days.’’”®

The Venerable Bede, Doctor of the Church (died 735), in
his great Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum mentions
devil-worship, and says that Redwald, King of the East


72 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Saxons, and his court ‘“‘ in eodem fano et altare haberet ad
sacrificium Christi, et arulam ad uictimas demoniorum.”*°
(‘In the same temple had an altar to sacrifice to Christ, and
another small one to offer victims to devils.’’)

Again in the Laws of Edward and Gunthrun of the tenth
century (after 901) it is enacted: ‘‘ If witches or diviners,
perjurers, or morth-workers, or foul, defiled, notorfous adul-
teresses, be found anywhere within the land; let them be
driven from the country and the people cleansed, or let them
totally perish within the country, unless they desist, and the
more deeply make bét.’? In those of King Atthelstan, “‘And
we have ordained respecting witchcrafts and lyblacs and
morth-deds: if any one should be thereby killed, and he
could not deny it, that he be liable in his life. But if he will
deny it, and at the threefold ordeal shall be guilty, that he
be exx. days in prison: and after that let his kindred take
him out, and give to the king cxx. shillings, and pay the
wer to his kindred, and enter into borh for him, that he
evermore desist from the like.”

The ecclesiastical statutes of King Edgar, 959, direct ‘* that
every priest zealously promote Christianity, and totally
extinguish every heathenism ; and forbid well worshippings,
and necromancies, and divinations, and enchantments, and
man worshippings, and the vain practices which are carried
on with various spells, and with frith-splots, and with elders
and also with various other trees, and with stozes, and with
many various delusions, with which men do much of what
they should not. . . . And we enjoin, that on feast days there
be complete abstinence from heathen songs and devil’s
games.”

This enactment is repeated in the laws of King Ethelred
and in those of Cnut. The latter adds, “‘ and we earnestly
forbid every heathenism. Heathenism is, that men worship
idols ; that is, that they worship heathen gods, and the sun
or moon, fire or rivers, water-wells or stones, or forest-trees
of any kind ; or love witch-craft, or promote morth-work in
anywise ; or by blot, or fyrht, or perform anything pertaining
to such illusions.”

The fearful prevalence of Witchcraft in England, and the
survival of heathen superstitions which it so readily adopted
and moulded to its own evil, could not more plainly be


ENGLAND 73


demonstrated than in this catena of ordinances, both ecclesi-
astical and civil, extending from the seventh to the eleventh
centuries. There is no doubt that from the time that
S. Augustine landed on the Isle of Thanet in the spring of 597
the Christian monks and missionaries had continually to
battle with the dark opposing powers, who were not easily
to be driven from the fair land of Britain, whose inhabitants
already knew and dreaded their influences, as is shown by
the fact that King Athelberht immediately suspected the
Roman stranger himself to be some mighty magician and
insisted that their first meeting should take place under a
spreading oak tree where no incantations could prevail.

Although Witchcraft in England had not even by the
eleventh century become so elaborated and organized as in
later years, nevertheless we clearly distinguish in Anglo-Saxon
days far more than the germ which soon developed so
systematically and so rapidly when it was fostered and given
a terrible impulse by the Satanism of the Gnostic heretics
who appeared in parts of Europe as early as 1038. Professor
Notestein, who seeks to differentiate between the earlier and
later Witchcraft, remarks that in Anglo-Saxon days “* Nothing
is yet said about the transformation of witches into other
shapes, and there is no mention of a compact, implicit or
otherwise, with the Devil.’ But he has either overlooked
the anathematization of the Ceruulus and Uitula, or else
ignored the signification of these prohibitions in the Peni-
tentials, whilst surely such an alliance with the Devil is
overtly expressed in the worship of demons. “ There is no
allusion,’ he continues, ‘‘ to the nocturnal meetings of the
Devil’s worshippers and to the orgies that took place on these
occasions ; there is no elaborate and systematic theological
explanation of human relations with demons.” Demonology
had not, from the very nature of things, been studied in such
scholastic detail and so judicially codified as by Sprenger and
Bodin, but there are continual references in the Fathers to
man’s commerce with the demon, which is, for example,
discussed at some length by S. Augustine in the twenty-third
chapter of the fifteenth Book of his De Ciuttate Det.

With reference to the nocturnal meetings and orgies there
is a decree of a General Council of Ancyra, which passed into
the De ecclesiasticis disciplinis ascribed to Regino of Prim


74 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


(906), and thence to the canonists S. Ivo of Chartres and
Johannes Gratian. Section 364 of the Benedictine Abbot’s
work relates that ‘‘ certain abandoned women turning aside
to follow Satan, being seduced by the illusions and phantasms
of demons, believe and openly profess that in the dead of
night they ride upon certain beasts with the pagan goddess
Diana and a countless horde of women, and that in these
silent hours they fly over vast tracts of country and obey
her as their mistress, while on other nights they are sum-
moned to pay her homage.”’??. John of Salisbury, who died
in 1180, in his Policraticus** speaks of the popular belief in
a witch-queen named Herodias, who called together the
sorcerers to meetings by night when they had feasting,
sacrificed babes to ghouls and ghosts, and gave themselves
up to blasphemies and debauchery, in a word the Sabbat.
He writes: ‘‘ Quale est quod noticulam quandam uel
Herodiadem, uel presidem noctis dominam, consilia et
conuentus de nocte asserunt conuocare: uaria celebrari
conuiuia: ministeriorum species diuersis occupationibus
exerceri: et nunc istos ad pcenam trahi pro meritis, nunc
illos ad gloriam sublimari. Przterea infantes exponi lamiis,
et nunc frustratim discerptos edaci ingluuie in uentrem tra-
jectos congeri, nunc preesidentis miseratione rejectos in cunas
reponi.”

There are indeed many allusions to Herodias, or Diana, or
Habundia, queen of the Sabbat, and the good-women,*4 as
they were euphemistically called, who attended her. Thus
in Le Roman de la Rose (1. 18,624), which was written in the
thirteenth century, occur these lines :

Maintes gens, par lor folie,
Cuident estre par nuit estries
Errans avecques dame Habonde ;
Kt dient, que par tout le monde
Li tiers enfant de nacion

Sunt de ceste condicion,

Qu’il vont trois fois en la semaine,
Si cum destinée les maine,

Et par tous ces ostex se boutent,
Ne elés ne barres ne redoutent,
Ains s’en entrent par les fendaces,
Par chatiéres et par crevaces,

Et se partent des cors les ames,
Et vont avec les bonnes dames


ENGLAND 75


Par leus forains et par maisons ;
Et le preuvent par tiex raisons,
Que les diversités veues

Ne sunt par en lor liz venues.


The following passages from a manuscript De Sortilegis
seemed worth transcribing at some length, as not only do
they speak of Herodias and of hags, who mounted upon
beasts fly through the air during the dark watches of winter
nights, but it also preserves some curious ecclesiastical super-
stitions not unworthy of notice: ‘‘ With regard to priests
and religious from whom holy vessels, church ornaments, or
similar furniture have secretly been stolen; or even with
regard to lay folk from whom property has secretly been
stolen; may they inquire into these matters by using the
astrolabe or some such instrument ? All authorities agree in
their answer to this question, namely, that if there be any
invocation of demons or any other superstitious rite, such
inquiry is wholly unlawful and he who attempts it sins most
grievously. Indeed if anyone even in the ignorance of youth
and with the best intentions has thus sought a reply he shall
be suspended from his function and his benefice. If, however,
such an inquiry be made merely by astronomy, if there be no
invocation of any demon and no superstitious rite performed,
then perchance, as some say, although it seem barely consonant
with the ecclesiastical decrees, it is allowable, and yet these
astrological sciences inasmuch as they contain much dubious
matter should not be too closely studied and ensued. Again,
we must consider the case of priests who on account of some
private grief, denude the altar of its coverings, or clothe it in
some sad-coloured frontal, or extinguish the sanctuary lamps
and the altar candles, or perchance hang the altar and the
crucifix with thorns and briars.

‘* What are we to say with regard to those who with a full
intent and wilfully sing a solemn requiem or set a catafalque
in the midst of the church and sing the Office of the Dead,
inserting the names of those whom they hate, or perform
some similar funereal ceremony, that their enemies may die
swiftly and soon? The reply to this is that if a priest
performs any of these rites in such circumstances and with
such object as we have just rehearsed on account of a private
quarrel he sins mortally and unless he do canonical penance


76 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


he should be deprived. If, however, he performs any of these
rites for some just reason, as, for example, if the person
devoted be any enemy to the Faith, or a public enemy, or
one who will plunder the church, then by no means does he
sin, because it is indeed his humility which is apparent through
his placing the event in God’s hands rather than any resent-
ment or anger. This is plainly according to the mind of the
Church, since we sing Psalm Ixxviii, Deus uenerunt Gentes,
and on Good Friday we strip our altars in token of mourning.
Yet this distinction will not cover those who knowingly and
of purpose celebrate the Office of the Dead for the living.
For such, if they be discovered, assuredly must be deprived
and must do condign penance, both the priest himself and he
who incited the priest to chant the dirge, they must be
condemned to exile, a sentence not to be rescinded, or confined
within some monastic house. The Council of Toledo expressly
lays this down in the twenty-sixth canon.

‘*We next inquire concerning certain wicked crones who
believe and profess that in the night time they ride abroad
with Diana, the heathen goddess, or else with Herodias, and an
innumerable host of women, upon certain beasts, and that in
a silent covey at the dead of night they pass over immense
distances, obeying her commands as their mistress, and that
they are summoned by her on appointed nights, and they
declare that they have the power to change human beings
for better or for worse, ay, even to turn them into some other
semblance or shape. Concerning such women I answer
according to the decrees of the Council of Alexandria that the
minds of the faithful are disordered by such fantasies owing
to the inspiration of no good spirit but of the Devil. For the
Devil when wishing to win over any soul by evil superstition
of this kind transforms himself into an angel of light, and
changes himself into the semblance and shape of various
individuals so that he deludes and mocks the mind, deceiving
a person by many subtle sleights, nor ought any man or
woman to be so blindly besotted as to believe all this,
which can only happen in dreams and sick imagination,
actually takes place in the body, when Blessed Paul would
not assert that he was in rapture in the body. [I know a
man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the body,
I know not, or out of the body, I know not; God knoweth,


ENGLAND aa


such a one caught up to the third Heaven. 2 Corinthians
xii. 2.] Wherefore if any man believe such follies or maintain
them, out of all question he is a heretic and worse than a
heathen. For when, as has recently been laid down, we
declare that no faith must be put in auguries, the casting of
lots, and any other kind of divination whatsoever, although
since much which is thus foretold may not infrequently come
to pass, and although charmers may often heal the sick or
even send diseases, S. Augustine who has discussed this
problem conclusively settles it, for the holy doctor says that
these wonders happen by divine permission, since all who see
or hear them may approve their faith and glorify God. This
he proves by the authority of Deuteronomy : If there arise
in the midst of thee a prophet or one that saith he hath
dreamed a dream, and he foretell a sign and a wonder, and
that come to pass which he spoke, and he say unto thee: Let
us go and follow strange gods, which thou knowest not, and
let us serve them: thou shalt not hear the words of that
prophet or dreamer: for the Lord your God trieth you, that
it may appear [that is to say to those who are thus and to
other men, not to God, since He knows all things before they
come to pass] whether you love Him with all your heart, and
with all your soul or not. (xiii. 1-8.) ”’ 35

The witch of Berkeley, who inspired Southey’s ballad, is
traditionally said to have lived about the middle of the ninth
century. She is a shadowy figure enough, although she is
still well remembered in the West-country, and it is just
possible there may have been some such person about whom
the legend encrusted. She had been wealthy, but on her
death-bed she confessed that her riches were derived from
a compact with the Devil. Accordingly she bids them sew
her body in the hide of a stag%* and place her in a stone
coffin, binding it with heavy chains of iron. Fifty psalms
are to be sung each night, and fifty masses to be said each
morning, and if her body can be thus kept safe for three
nights, upon the fourth day they may bury it deep in the
churchyard, the Devil will have sought and not have found.

The bier is laid before the high altar, and on the first night
monks and nuns chant their nocturns, whilst the demons
wail and howl outside the church. On the second night the
fiends grow more powerful and burst open the doors and


78 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


invade the cloister, but prayer prevails. On the third night
the monastery is shaken to its foundations by a hideous
tempest, the religious white to the lips and trembling with
fear can scarce intone the dirge, the yells of the demons
sound fiercer and nearer, unti! at length with an awful crash
the gates fly open and a devil, more terrible than any who
had yet been seen, stalks up the aisles to where the wretched
woman lay. In a voice of thunder he bids her rise and follow
him. Piteously she pleads she cannot, she is held by the
iron bands. In a moment he snaps them as if they were
burned thread, and wrenches open the coffin. Livid and
stark, in sore affright, the stiffening corpse uprose, and the
Devil taking her by the hand led her to the door, where stood
a gigantic black horse, impatiently pawing the ground and
breathing flame. Like a flash he vaults into the saddle and
throws her across before him ; away they speed swifter than
the wind, whilst earth and heaven ring with the hopeless
shrieks of the tortured soul.37 An idle story, and grossly
immoral, since evil triumphs over repentance and prayer.
The narrative told by William of Malmesbury in his Gesta
regum (1125), who says he had it from an eye-witness, is also
found in Olaus Magnus and in the Nuremburg Chronicle. It
is also contained in the Flores Historiarum® sub anno 852.
but is generally better known owing to Southey’s ballad.®9
The pseudo Matthew of Westminster’s account, not without
a certain vigour and grim power, runs as follows: ‘‘ A.D.
852. At that time, there is said to have lived in the village,
which is called Berkeley, a certain woman of evil life, a
glutton and wanton, pursuing her wickedness and practising
the black art even in her old age, persisting in her whoredoms
until the hour of her death. On a day as she sat at meat,
her pet crow began to chatter something or the other, where-
upon the knife fell from her hand, and her face grew ghastly
white. ‘Alas!’ she cried, ‘to-day some sore hurt will hap
to me; to-day my plough hath turned its last furrow.’ Even
as she said these words a messenger bearing ill-tidings entered
the room, and when she asked what news he brought, ‘ Thy
son is dead,’ he replied, ‘and his whole household also,
since the four corners of his house and the roof-tree were
smitten, and fell upon them, so they are not.’ The woman,
vexed to the soul at his words, forthwith went up to her bed,


ENGLAND 73


and lay very sick. When she knew furthermore that this
sickness was to death, she caused letters to be sent calling
her two surviving children, to wit a monk and a nun. To
whom she spake with bitter tears and grievous lament, saying,
* Alack, my children, this doom have I surely deserved owing
to my long continuance in wizardry; I am the sink and
sewer of all evil, I was the mistress of all whoredoms. Yet
I ever placed as my succour between me and the wickedness
I wrought the buckler of your holy profession, whereby
I comforted my unhappy soul: to you do I look to defend
me mightily against the demons; ye are my champions
against my cruel and most fierce foe. Now therefore inasmuch
as I am come to the end of my life, I beseech you by the
womb that bare ye, that ye should try to deliver me from
my torment. When I am dead sew my body in the hide of
a stag, place it in a sarcophagus of stone, which make fast
with iron and molten lead, binding around the stone three
iron chains of the stoutest forge. Let fifty chauntry priests
sing Dirige for three days, and let as many priests say
exequial masses for the repose of my soul, in order that the
dread onset of mine enemies may be driven back, and if
I lie for three nights in peace unharmed, on the fourth day
ye shall bury me in the ground.’

““It was done as she had commanded. Alack the day!
Nor prayer, nor tears, nor did the stout chains avail. On the
first and second nights, indeed, whilst the quiristers and
clerics were singing their office, a host of Demons, gathering
without the church, burst open the door which was fast shut
with bolts and bars, and rushing up to the bier broke asunder
the two chains which bound the coffin, albeit the third chain
baffled their rage. On the third night, however, a hideous
spectre, a devil of gigantic form and baleful countenance,
shivered the church doors into fragments with a violent blow.
Both priests and people were sore afraid so that their hair
bristled with fear and the psalm died in their throat. The
devil, approaching the tomb with a haughty and mocking
gesture, calling the woman by name, bade her come forth.
And when she replied she could not seeing she was bound
fast by the chain, ‘I will release thee from that hindrance,’
quoth he, and presently he brake the chain which had
withstood the strength of the howling fiends as though


80 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


it were a thread of tow. The covering of the sepulchre he
spurned aside with his cloven foot, and in the sight of all
raised up the wretched woman, drawing her to the church
door where stood a coal-black steed that neighed lustily, all
beset, as it seemed, with huge iron hooks, gaunche-like, and
great nails, upon which he flung his miserable burthen, and
both vanished clean away from the eyes of all that were
present. But they say that for wellnigh four miles shrieks
of agony were heard, and cries for help.

‘In truth this story which is told cannot be accounted
other than true, for blessed Gregory has written in one of his
dialogues that a man, who was buried in a church, was cast
out of the holy place by a horde of devils. Charles Martel,
too, King of the Franks, a hero of no mean prowess, who drove
back into Spain the Saracens when they invaded France, is
said to have been buried, when he had finished his course, in
the cathedral of S. Denis. But since he had grievously sinned
in that he robbed nearly all the churches of France of their
revenues and tithes to pay his soldiers, his body was torn
from its resting-place by devils in most horrid wise, and it
hath not been found even unto this day.’’*°

During the reign of King John, in 1209, a case of Witch-
craft came before the courts, when Agnes, the wife of Odo,
a substantial merchant, charged with this crime a certain
Galiena, who, however, was acquitted when tried by the
ordeal of hot iron. ‘‘ Placita apud Westmonast. in octab.
Sancti Hilarii anno regni regis Iohannis decimo. Norf. Agnes
uxor Odonis mercatoris appelauit Galienam de sorceria, et
ipsa liberta est per iudicium ferri. Et ideo Agnes remanet
in misericordia.”’ 41

In 1279 a man accused of killing a witch, who had assaulted
him in his house, was fined, but he had already fled from
justice.

Less than a quarter of a century later, in 1803, a great
noise was made by the charges brought against one of the
chief men in the realm, Walter Langton, Bishop of Lichfield
and treasurer of Edward I. He was accused before Boniface
VIII of demonolatry and of paying shameless homage to the
Devil, with whom he held long midnight conferences and
consultations, “erat in regno Angliz et alibi publice defa-
matus quod diabolo homagium fecerat et eum fuerat osculatus


ENGLAND 81


in tergo eique locutus multotiens.” The Pope commanded
that a searching inquiry should be made, but the incriminated
prelate was able successfully to clear himself with the
compurgators.

Two very important cases of Witchcraft loom largely in
the legal records of 1824. In the first of these no less than
twenty-seven defendants were tried at the King’s Bench for
murder by fashioning and tormenting a wax image. Upon
the eve of All Hallows, Richard Latoner, Geoffrey Frebern,
Robert Palmer, Adam Wolreston, Henry Hinton, and a
number of their friends, Coventry men, went privately to the
house of a famous “ nigromauncer,” John of Nottingham,
who was living in their town, and having bound him and his
man, Robert Marshall from Leicester, to closest secrecy, paid
him a large sum of money to undertake the slaying of King
Edward II ; the two le Despensers, father and son ; the Prior
of Coventry ; his steward Nicholas Crump; his manciple;
and various other officials, who, as they asserted, ground
them to the earth under imposts and heaviest taxation.
Nothing loath, John the wizard and his servant commenced
operations. They were well fed from time to time, and
provided with seven pounds of wax and two ells of superfine
canvas to make the various images as required, the king with
a crown on his head, and the rest. The confession of Marshall
who betrayed the whole gang to the authorities, gives ample
details of their sorceries. A remote old manor-house under
Shorteley Park, about half a league out of Coventry, was put
at the service of Master John, and there he and Marshall,
worked assiduously to fashion there puppets, “from the
Monday after the Feast of S. Nicholas,” 6 December, until
‘“‘ the Saturday after Ascension Day,”’ which seems an extra-
ordinarily long time, and suggests that they could not have
been very proficient at their modelling. In any case they
resolved that they would first make trial of the efficacy of
their enchantments upon the image of a hated courtier,
Richard de Sowe. Accordingly at midnight on the Friday
preceding the Feast of Holy Rood (3 May) Master John gave
Marshall a long leaden pin and bade him thrust it boldly
two inches deep into the forehead of the figure representing
their intended victim. The next morning, the servant being
dispatched to de Sowe’s house to see how he fared, found


82 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


him writhing on his bed in agony, uttering piercing cries,
with burning pains in his head, and frantically delirious. And
so he lingered, until some days later the wizard drew the pin
from the brow and struck it into the heart of the image.
Whereupon de Sowe expired, and Marshall, who it is plain
was by now thoroughly frightened, confessed what had
been going on, which immediately resulted in the arrest of
Master John and all concerned, those who were not able to
find substantial bail being held in custody. Richard Latoner
and his friends soon produced sureties, good men and true,
but the ‘‘ nigromauncer ”’ was not so lucky, and, indeed, he
died in prison before the day of the trial. Marshall stuck to
his story, but the accused strenuously denied the allegations
in every particular and were honourably acquitted. The
unlucky wight who blabbed seems to have come off worst in
the end, for “‘ quibusdam certis de causis ”’ he was sent back
to jail by the court.

The trial is so full of interest that it will assuredly not be
impertinent to give an extract from the Parliamentary
Writs 42 of the time. ‘“‘On Wednesday, the Vigil of All
Hallows, in the eighteenth year of the reign of King Edward,
Robert Marshall of Leicester confessed before Simon Crozier,
deputy magistrate of our Lord the King, that when he was
dwelling in the house of Master John of Nottingham, who
practised magic and dwelt at Coventry, there came thither
Richard Latoner, Geoffrey Frebern, Robert Palmer, Adam
Wolreston, Henry Hinton, Hugh Tuwe, John Sifflet, William
Gloucester, John Stoneley, Richard Taylor a hosier, John
Waller servant to Alice la Honte, Henry Pake, Robert Stowe,
Robert Lichfield, Robert Mercer, who is married to the
daughter of Adam Lyndsay, Piers Baron, Philip Hosier,
Walter Chubbock, Roger Bray, John Frebern, Reynold
Alesleye, William Waller, Richard Grauntpé, John the son
of Hugh de Merington, a page at the court, William
Russell, Richard Greene, and John Redeclerk, a hosier of
Coventry, and that these on the Wednesday next before the
feast of S. Nicolas in the seventeenth year of our Lord the
King, came to Coventry to the aforesaid Master John of
Nottingham and Robert Marshall, and inquired of them
whether they would conceal what was to be unfolded to them,
whence they would derive great profit. And Master John


ENGLAND 83


faithfully promised them that he would discover nothing ;
and the aforesaid Robert promised the aforesaid Master John
that he would keep counsel. When this compact had been
made between them, the aforesaid Richard Latoner and
others informed the aforesaid Master John and Robert that
they could not live on account of the hard treatment which
the Prior of Coventry had dealt them and was daily dealing
them, and on account of the favour and support that our
Lord the King, Monsieur Hugh Despenser Earl of Winchester,
and Monsieur Hugh Despenser his son, gave to the said Prior
to their great hurt and the great hurt of the city of Coventry,
wherefore they prayed Master John if at their entreaty he
would undertake to kill the King, Monsieur Hugh Despenser
Karl of Winchester, the Prior of Coventry, and others whom
they named, by his nigromancy and his art. And he said Yes,
and agreed thereto ; whereupon they made a covenant with
him, that he should have xx pounds sterling, and his lodging
in any house of religious which he desired to appoint in
England, and that the aforesaid Robert should have xv
pounds sterling to aid and abet them in the aforerehearsed
crimes, of which sum the aforesaid Richard and others paid
to Master John at Coventry eleven marks, on the Sunday
next after the feast of S. Nicolas in the seventeenth year of
our Lord the King, as part payment of the aforesaid xx
pounds, and to the said Robert four pounds of the aforesaid
xv pounds on the same day of the same year at the same
place, by the hands of John son of Hugh de Merington and
John Redeclerk at the house of Richard Latoner, and seven
pounds of wax and two ells of canvas, of which wax the said
Master John and Robert made seven figures, one of our Lord
the King crowned in wax, another of the Earl of Winchester,
the third of Monsieur Hugh, the fourth of the Prior of
Coventry, the fifth of the Cellarer, the sixth of Nicholas
Crump the Prior’s seneschal, and the seventh of a courtier
named Richard de Sowe, by experimenting upon whom with
the image made in his likeness, they wished to essay the
other images whether they were efficacious or impotent and
this they did with the full assent of the said Richard and the
others. And the said Robert hath confessed that he and the
said Master John began to perform their craft in the aforesaid
manner on the Monday next after the feast of S. Nicolas, in


84 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the xviith year, with the assent of the aforesaid Richard
Latoner and the others in an old house about half a league
from the town of Coventry, under Shorteley Park, and there
they abode wholly occupied with their work until the
Saturday next after the following Ascension Day. Moreover
he confessed that as the aforesaid Master John and he were
at the aforesaid old house busy upon their work on the Friday
next before the Feast of Holy Cross, about midnight the said
Master John gave the said Robert a curious pin wrought of
sharp lead, and bade him thrust it two inches deep into the
forehead of the image made in the likeness of Richard de Sowe,
by which proof they were to try the others; and he did as
he was bid; and on the morrow morn the said Master John
sent the said Robert to the house of the said Richard de Sowe
to see how he fared, and the said Robert found the said
Richard shrieking and shouting without being able to recog-
nize any man, for his memory was distraught, and so the
said Richard pined and waxed weaker until the Sunday before
the feast of the Ascension, when the said Master John drew
the said leaden pin out of the forehead of the said image
made in the likeness of the said Richard, and thrust it into
the heart. And so the said pin remained in the heart of the
said image until the next Wednesday following, upon which
day the said Richard died. This trial was made of the said
Richard in the way aforesaid with the full assent of the
aforesaid Richard [Latoner] and others, and they were fully
cognizant of all these proceedings.’’4%

It is pretty clear, I think, that in spite of their stout
denials and the fact they were acquitted a very elaborate
conspiracy against the King and his friends was being brewed.
It is most noticeable how frequently politics are mixed up
with Witchcraft.

A little more than a century later we have another striking
example of this in the reign of Henry VI, the prosecution of
the Duchess of Gloucester ; the connexion of Francis Stewart,
Earl of Bothwell, with the North Berwick witches and their
plots to kill James I (VI) were notorious ; the conspiracy of
Giacinto Centini against Urban VIII involved the fashioning
of a wax image of that pontiff which was repeatedly stabbed
with a sharp knife to cause his death by sympathetic magic ;
the black masses of the abbé Guibourg and his fellow-


ENGLAND 85


Satanists had as their object the perpetuation of Madame
de Montespan’s ascendancy over Louis XIV, whom indeed
they at one time thought to poison; and very many more
eases might be cited from every country and every century
to show how repeatedly those who sought the death of the
sovereign had resource to the black art to achieve their ends.
Robert Marshall’s story bears the stamp of truth. In 1324
rebellion against Edward II was already seething furiously,
and not for the first time; his favourite Hugh le Despenser
was bitterly hated; the barons were rousing themselves
effectually to pull his throne from under him ; and it is very
certain that these well-pouched burgesses of Coventry, who
could not openly take the field against their liege lord went
their own tortuous way to work. When their dark deeds
were discovered money tactfully placed here and there
secured their safety ; their tool, the warlock, conveniently
died in prison, perhaps not without some helping draught to
speed him forth, whilst the unfortunate varlet, poor and
friendless, was left to face the consequences as best he might,
the veriest scapegoat for worthy Richard Latoner, Robert
Palmer, and their wealthy friends. Thus it happens again
and again: Dr. Fian is tortured and burned, Bothwell goes
' free; La Vigoureaux expires on the rack, La Voisin is
executed, but the Comtesse de Soissons retires from court,
and Madame de Montespan’s name must not so much as be
breathed in connexion with the accused.

During the late spring of 1324, constant reports came to the
ear of Richard de Ledrede, a Friar Minor, Bishop of Ossory, *4
that sorcery was being practised in his diocese, and accordingly
the accused were presently haled before the spiritual court.
Upon inquiry a round dozen individuals proved to be impli-
cated, some being of quality and no little reputation. The
chief witches were Dame Alice Kyteler “ domina diues ” of
Kilkenny,*®—Kyteler is apparently her maiden name—
William Outlawe her son, a banker “‘ amicos sibi faciens de
mammona iniquitatis ’; and Robert of Bristol,*® a cleric in
minor Orders. With them were concerned Alice, wife of Henry
Faber, John Galrussyn, Helen Galrussyn, Syssoh Galrussyn,
Petronilla de Meath and her daughter Sarah, *’ William Payne
de Boly, Eva de Brounestoun, and Annota Lange.

Dame Alice Kyteler was indicted on various counts, and


86 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


very amply detailed are the accusations brought against her.
Both she and her accomplices in order to obtain their ends
by means of black magic had renounced the Christian faith,
absenting themselves from Mass, in some cases for months at
a time, in others for a whole year, refusing to adore the
Most Holy Sacrament, ay, even to enter a church door,
never taking the blessed bread,*® nor using holy water.
Further they had sacrificed to the Demon live animals whom
they tore limb from limb, diwidebant membratim,* and offered
them at the cross-ways to a spirit who bade them call him
“son of Art,” qui se facit appellari Artis Filium. It would
be interesting indeed to discover the identity of this mysteri-
ous personage. They had practised divination and sought
oracular responses from evil spirits, casting spells upon those
whom they sought to injure by cursing them and naming
each separate member, holding the while candles in their
hands which they extinguished at the end of the ceremony,
in mockery of ecclesiastical excommunication. Moreover,
they confected love charms and made certain unguents from
loathsome ingredients, the flesh of unbaptized babes, the hair
of criminals who had been hanged, the nails of dead men’s
fingers, the intestines of animals, and noxious herbs. Dame
Alice herself entertained a familiar, a quo cognosci carnaliter
se permittit,°° who was named “ Son of Art’? and sometimes
““ Robin, son of Art.”” He appeared to her in various guises,
as a cat, as a large black shock-dog, as a huge negro with
two gigantic attendants, one of whom carried an iron rod,
in specie cuiusdam ethiopis cum duobus sociis ipso maioribus
et longioribus, quorum quilibet uirgam ferream portat in
manibus, and to him she had devoted herself body and soul,
since she averred that it was he who was the source of all her
wealth and good fortune. Dame Alice had been married
four times, first to William Outlawe of Kilkenny, a banker
and rich money-lender, who was dead before 1802 ; secondly
to Adam le Blund of Callan (Le Blond or Le White he is
sometimes called), who was dead before 1811; thirdly to
Richard de Valle (or Wall); and in 1824 she was wife to
Sir John le Poer. At least two of her husbands had been
widowers with children, and these sons and daughters now
loudly accused their stepmother before the Bishop of having
killed their fathers by Witchcraft, whilst John le Poer was


ENGLAND 87


himself wasting away under a terrible and unnatural sickness
during which the nails dropped from his fingers and feet, and
the hair from his head. A maidservant, however, had
opportunely given him something more than a hint of what
might be going on, and violently possessing himself of his
wife’s keys, which he actually wrenched from her hands in
spite of her struggles and resistance, he promptly opened the
boxes and chests in her bower, to find the mysterious vials
and elixirs, strange instruments and ghastly relics of mor-
tality, the whole of which he packed up and dispatched to
the Bishop under the charge of two trusty friars.

All this detailed contemporary evidence is of the first
importance. It has not infrequently been stated that the
various practices of Witchcraft which loom so largely in the
Elizabethan and Stuart trials, as well as in French and other
continental records, which are reiterated again and again, the
commerce with familiars, sacrifices to the Demon, the making
of potions and lotions from obscene and foul recipes, the
slaying of enemies by lingering disease, and many black
secrets beside, were hardly known amongst us until the reign
of Elizabeth, when sorcery took on a darker and more
criminal colour. The trial of Dame Alice Kyteler is
demonstrative proof of the contrary.

Raphael Holinshed in his Chronicle of Ireland (London,
1587, p. 69) gives the following account of these proceedings,
wherein will be noticed even further particulars.

“1323. In the eighteenth yere of King Edward II, his
reigne, the Lord John Darcie came into Ireland, and to be
lord justice, and the Kings lieutenant there. In these daies
lived in the diocesse of Ossorie the Lady Alice Kettle, whom
the bishop asscited to purge herselfe of the fame of inchant-
ment and witchcraft imposed unto hir and to one Petronill
and Basill hir complices. She was charged to have nightlie
conference with a spirit called Robert Artisson, to whome she
sacrificed in the high waie nine red cocks and nine peacocks
eies. Also that she swept the streets of Kilkennie betweene
compleine and twilight, raking all the filth towards the doores
of hir sonne William Outlawe, murmuring secretlie with hir
selfe these words :


** To the house of William my sonne,
Hie all the wealth of Kilkennie towne.


88 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


At the first conviction they abjured and did penance, but
shortlie after they were found in relapse, and then was
Petronill burnt at Kilkennie, the other twaine might not be
heard of. She at the hour of hir death accused the said
William as privie to their sorceries, whome the bishop held
in durance nine weeks, forbidding his keepers to eat or to
drink with him, or to speake to him more than once in the
daie. But at length, thorough the sute and instance of Arnold
le Powre then seneschall of Kilkennie, he was delivered, and
after corrupted with bribes the seneschall to persecute the
bishop ; so that he thurst him into prison for three moneths.
In rifling the closet of the ladie, they found a wafer of sacra-
mental bread, having the divels name stamped thereon in
steed of Jesus Christ, and a pipe of ointment, wherewith she
greased a staffe, upon which she ambled and gallopped
thorough thicke and thin, when and in what manner she
listed. This businesse about these witches troubled all the
state of Ireland the more, for that the ladie was supported
by certeine of the nobilitie, and lastlie conveied over into
England, since which time it could never be understood what
became of hir.”

Although it has been suggested that Holinshed immediately
derived his account from the Latin Annales Hibernic, which
probably received their ultimate form in the fifteenth century,
they incorporate, at least, much contemporary matter, and
there can scarcely be any doubt that the above is an excerpt
from the actual testimony of witnesses at the trial. Two very
prominent particulars at once call for notice: the Host
stamped with some mysterious evil name; the staff which
was greased with magic ointment. The Devil’s wafer im-
pressed with strange characters or of grotesque shape is
frequently mentioned in the witch trials. Bocal and Migalena,
two apostate priests of the Basses-Pyrénées, confessed that
they celebrated Mass with triangular hosts whilst the
diabolists at the elevation cried ‘‘ Corbeau noir! Corbeau
noir!” ; Gentien le Clerc, condemned at Orleans in 1614,
frequented Sabbats “ quand il veut leuer l’Hostie & le Calice,
qui sont noirs”; Thomas Boullé, who was executed on
21 August, 1647, and his superior l’abbé Picard, parish-priest _
of Mesnil-Jourdain, had both used blood-red hosts at their
profane celebrations ; in the Mass of S. Sécaire the host is


ENGLAND 89


triangular with three sharp points, and black. Similar
abominations are not unknown among the Satanists to-day,
so Dame Alice Kyteler is linked up with the twentieth
century.

The staff, and the riding thereon, a hobby-horse ritual
which has survived, innocently enough, in the Mummers’
Play, is the familiar broomstick, the magic weapon of the
witch throughout all ages. In the Plough Monday play of
Cropwell,®! Nottinghamshire, as in the Lutterworth variety,
Beelzebub himself actually appears and, what is very signifi-
cant, he bears a besom.

It must be noticed that throughout the whole of the
Kyteler trial considerable emphasis is laid upon the heresies
of the accused, showing that earlier than the fourteenth
century heresy and sorcery were inextricably commingled.
They are termed “ heretici sortilege quamplures, diuersis
utentes sortilegiis, que sapiebant diuersas hereses.” Alice
Kyteler is “heeresibus uariis irretitam.’”’ Again, when the
Bishop is pressed to stay the proceedings for a while, he
pertinently replies: ‘‘Si perpendere possint heretici pro-
cessus ecclesiz contra ipsos, fugient ad partes alias sine mora.”
Dame Alice’s advocate, Roger Outlawe,®? and his juniors
*‘ allegarunt quod in crimine tam detestabili sicut est crimen
heresis non tenebatur ipsa personaliter, sed sufficiebat per
procuratorem comparere.” Alice Kyteler is expressly
described as “‘ sortilega et hzretica ” ; she is excommunicated
for forty days “‘ in causa heresis ’’ ; she and her companions
are ‘‘ persone de heresibus notatz,’’ and the Archbishop of
Dublin sends a mandate to Kilkenny directing the attachment
of ‘‘ Alicia Kiteler, mater Willelmi Outlawe, Willelmus
Outlawe filius eiusdem, Iohannes Galrussyn, etc., [qui] super
criminibus heereticee prauitatis coram ipso [episcopo Ossori-
ensi] sunt irretiti.”” The account in the Annales Hibernie
commences: ‘‘ Richardus Lederede episcopus Ossoriensis
citauit dominam Aliciam Ketyll de heretica prauitate et
ipsam coram se comparere fecit.”’

The trial, however, did not take place without serious
delays and difficulties, the chief obstacles being the extra-
ordinary influence brought to bear on behalf of William
Outlawe, whose great wealth won him many adherents, both
high and low, until it seemed as if he were almost able to


90 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


defy justice. At length, however, the Bishop, who was not
easily turned from his purpose, seized the haughty and purse-
proud banker, whom he kept in durance until his prisoner,
broken and humbled, begged to be reconciled and released.
Pardon was not too easily granted, but at length Outlawe
was permitted publicly to recant and adjure his heresies in
the Cathedral Church of S. Mary, Kilkenny, when he was
formally reconciled, sub conditionibus, of which one was that
he should roof the Cathedral with lead, and another that he
should go on a pilgrimage to the shrine of S. Thomas at
Canterbury, fasting every Tuesday®* until he had duly per-
formed that penance. Dame Alice Kyteler herself, who on
2 July was found guilty,°4 ‘“‘ propter sortilegia diuersa et
heresim multimodam et sacrificia dsemonibus immolata,”
had already taken ship for England having with her Basilia
(Sarah) de Meath.5®> The rest of the coven®® were not so
lucky. Some were burned, others publicly whipped in the
market-place and through the streets of Kilkenny, others
banished and declared excommunicate.

Petronilla de Meath, ‘“‘ heretica, una de sodalibus dictz
domine Alicie,” was burned on Saturday, 8 November.5?
She had confessed her misdeeds in full. She had renounced
the Christian faith, and on three occasions sacrificed to the
Devil; she had brewed philtres composed of adders, spiders,
the herb cinquefoil, the brains of an unbaptized babe, and
other ingredients for love or hate; she had consulted and
commerced with demons and familiar, actually being present
when Robin, son of Art, had copulated with the Lady Alice,
‘et post tantum scelus locum turpitudinis cum kaneuacio
lecti sui manu propria tersit ’’ ; she had performed diabolical
ceremonies with a ritual of lighted candles and spittings to
cast a spell upon her enemies, ay, even upon her own husband.
She boasted that she was a mere novice in comparison with
Dame Alice, who had taught her every secret of this evil
craft, and than whom she averred there was not a more
powerful and cunning witch in the realm of England itself,
not in the whole wide world. Glorying in her iniquities,
refusing the Sacrament of Penance, spurning priest and friar
who sought to assoil her, this unhappy witch was burned at
the stake, “‘cum debita solemnitate” in the presence of an
immense and awe-struck throng. ‘‘ Et hee est prima sortilega


ENGLAND 91


heretica inter tot et tantas que unquam combusta fuit in
Hybernia,”’ concludes the old chronicler.

The most singular and significant figure throughout the
whole proceedings, however, is not Dame Alice Kyteler, nor
William Outlawe, but the mysterious familiar, the incubus,
Robin, son of Art.58 Who, we might well ask, was he?
He visits Dame Alice in various animal disguises, as a cat,
a big black dog, or again as a tawny Ethiop with two atten-
dants who carry iron rods—probably some kind of javelin
or other weapon. Petronilla de Meath bawds for him; the
noble and wealthy dame prostitutes herself to him; they
offer him sacrifice, and regard him with the utmost veneration
as the author of all their good. The most intensive and
prolonged study of the evidence has not afforded a single
clue, and yet beyond a doubt here is the key to the situation.
He is said to be “‘ ex pauperioribus inferni.”” If we suggest
that Robin was some lusty young peasant that line is full of
difficulties. He must have been possessed of keenest wit and
resource to keep outside the trial, for Bishop Ledrede threw
his net wide; he must have been endowed with remarkable
strength of character and fascination for his followers were
true to him to ruin and death. Surmise is useless; we can
only confess ourselves baffled; and indeed there are not
sufficient data to enable us to arrive at any conclusion.

The records of sorcery in Ireland are scanty, and it may
be convenient here to pass them briefly in review. The
Statute Rolls of the Parliament (ed. H. F. Berry) for the
year 1447 contain remonstrances drawn forth by the fact
that some man of rank had been accused of the intent to do
grievous harm to his enemy by unholy spells. John, Arch-
bishop of Armagh and others declare that by such charges
which are nothing save “‘the subtle malice and malicious
suits of certain persons slandering a man of rank this land
was entirely slandered, and still is in such slanderous matters
as never were known in this land before, as in ruining or
destroying any man by sorcery or necromancy.” The
Kyteler scandals had been forgotten, or were at any rate
conveniently unknown.

No further cases of Witchcraft are to be traced until 1544
when we have the following entry in the table of the red
council book of Ireland: A letter to Charles Fitz Arthur for


92 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


sendinge a witch to the Lord Deputie to be ewamined. The red
council book has been lost, and we possess but an abstract
of the contents, so further details of this witch cannot be
ascertained. In 1578 a trial for sorcery took place at Kilkenny,
though, here again, nothing but the bare fact can be known.
In November of that year sessions were held by Lord Justice
Drury and Sir Henry Fitton, who in a letter to the Privy
Council upon the 20 of the said month report: “ Thirty-six
persons were executed, amongst whom were some good ones,
a blackamoor and two witches by natural law for that we find
no law to try them by in this realm.”°® An omission soon
to be remedied, since in 1586 a Statute “‘ against the practices
of the wicked offences of conjurations, and of invocations of
evill spirites, and of sorceries, enchantments, charms, and
witchcrafts,” was passed by the Irish Parliament, all who
were found guilty of destroying any person by spells or
charms being condemned to suffer paines of death as a felon
or felons. Those who hurt or lamed, or sought treasure by
goetic crafts were to be punished in the pillory upon the first
conviction, but if twice found guilty were to be executed.
An Act of 1634 also makes mention of Witchcraft as one of
the recognized methods by which one man may take the
life of another. It would seem, indeed, from incidental
notices in writers of the latter half of the sixteenth century
that sorcery was regarded as very prevalent in Ireland about
that period. Barnabe Rich, for example, says in his descrip-
tion of Ireland: ‘‘ The Irish are wonderfully addicted to give
credence to the prognostications of Soothsayers and Witches.”
Stannihurst, again, writes that in his day (1547-1618) there
were many sorcerers and warlocks among the Irish.

Gerald, sixteenth Earl of Desmond, the ‘‘ Great Earl,’? who
was betrayed and killed in 1583, has largely passed from the
clear vision of history to the mystic clouds of legend. He is
supposed yet to lie enchanted at the bottom of Lough Gur,
a lonely lake some miles from Limerick. Once in seven years
he rises and rides by night upon his white horse round Lough
Gur. The steed is shod with silver shoes, and when these are
worn out the spell will be dissolved and the Earl will regain
possession of his vast estates and semi-regal power. In the
early years of the nineteenth century a blacksmith named
Teigue O’Neill claimed to have seen the ghostly cavalcade,


ENGLAND 93


which actually stopped at the door of his lonely forge that
overlooked the waters of the lake.

In 1606 “ on the Saturday next after the three weeks of
Easter”? John Aston, a clergyman, “late of Mellifont,
Co. Louth,” was examined before the King’s Court upon a
charge of having used certain conjurations and invocations
to recover a stolen silver cup, to obtain certain treasures of
gold concealed in the earth at Mellifont and Cashel, and to
ascertain where Hugh, Earl of Tyrone, was abiding. The
prisoner “by warrant of the Lord King was sent into
cecal but nothing further has been traced concerning

im.

Holy Cross Abbey, the famous Cistercian house, about
three miles south-west of Thurles, Tipperary, was enriched
with a shrine of the Holy Cross, the Relic, which had been
presented by a Plantagenet queen,®! being one of the most
considerable throughout all Christendom. For three and a
half centuries this pillared shrine in the north transept
was assuredly the favourite pilgrimage place in Ireland.
Although suppressed in 1536 under the evil fiat of the godless
Henry VIII the Abbey still maintained its existence in some
sort, for Holy Mass was said or sung there as late as 1633,
and 1632 seems to have been the last date when the Relic
was solemnly exposed for public veneration. In 1609
Anastasia Sobechan, a pilgrim from Callan, Kilkenny, who
had long been tortured by magical spells (weneficits incanta-
tionibus collisa), worshipped at the shrine, when the Lord
Abbot Bernard [Foulow] placed a girdle which had touched

the Wood of the Cross about her body. At that moment by
virtue of the Rood of Calvary she was cured and set free
from every vexation.®?

The Rey. Alexander Colville, D.D., who was ordained in
Episcopal orders in 1622, and subsequently held the vicarage
of Carnmoney, the prebend of Carncastle, and the Precentor-
ship of Connor, common gossip held to be a wizara of no
mean powers who had made a compact with the Devil and
choused the old enemy at last by a subtle sleight. He was
a man of considerable wealth, which rumour attributed to a
demoniac source. The truth is simple. As a prominent
member of the Establishment Dr. Colville was known to be
a stout and stalwart enemy to the Presbyterianism at that


94 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


time vermiculating all Ulster. Indeed he opposed the
sectarians with all his might, and in return his opponents
whose empty heads were always teeming with noisome and
morbid stories of hell’s influence, quickly sowed lies right and
left accusing him of communion with evil spirits and
Assyrians.

In 1661 we have one of the most important cases in the
history of Irish sorcery, the extraordinary tale of Florence
Newton, the witch of Youghal and her cantrips. The details
are in truth exactly similar to those which were so meticu-
lously rehearsed time after time in the majority of English
cases, and as the reports are redundant even to excess it is
hardly needful to do more than epitomize the events and
the evidence. The beldame seems to have been indicted
upon two separate counts, viz. with bewitching Mary Long-
don, serving-maid to John Pyne, a man of some importance
who was Bailiff of Youghal in 1664, and with causing the
death by occult arts of David Jones. She had been com-
mitted to prison by Richard Mayne, Mayor of Youghal, on
24 March, 1661, and she was tried at the Cork Assizes, on
11 September following, before Judge Sir William Aston, who
had borne arms for King Charles I, and on 8 November, 1660,
was appointed senior puisne Judge of the Chief Place.*
Such comment had been excited by the proceedings that the
Attorney-General himself went down to prosecute.

It should be remarked that there was at Youghal a coven
of suspected witches, two of whom, Goody Halfpenny and
Goody Dod, were confronted with the afflicted girl, who,
however, identified Gammer Newton as the author of her
sickness. About Christmas, 1660, Florence Newton presented
herself at the house of John Pyne and demanded a piece of
beef out of the powdering (pickling) tub, which was refused,
whereupon she tottered away mumbling curses. A week or
two later she met Mary Longdon, whom she suddenly grasped
tightly and kissed with some violence saying, ‘‘ Mary, I pray
thee let thee and I be Friends.” Within a few days Mary
Longdon was vexed by strange visions. A woman in a veil
stood by her bedside, and when the veil was removed she saw
it was old Mother Newton. Next she was taken with fits,
trances, cramps, and vomitings, whilst uncanny poltergeist
tricks began to take place in the house, stones flying about


ENGLAND 95


and hurting her, the furniture being shifted from room to
room without visible cause, feather beds being thrown at her
as though to stifle her beneath them. In her paroxysms she
cried out on Florence Newton, who when requested to visit
the house curtly refused. The matter became serious and
was presently investigated by the authorities. The mayor
ordered the suspected woman to be brought to Pyne’s house
and taken into the wench’s chamber. When this was done
the convulsions and chorea were redoubled until the patient
twisted and writhed as in an agony with foaming lips and set
sightless eyes. The mayor upon examining the case and
hearing various witnesses committed Florence Newton to
Youghal Prison, 24 March, 1661. In the April following,
however, she bewitched one David Jones to death by kissing
his hand through the bars of the gate. Elinor Jones, the
widow, at Cork Assizes, alleged that her husband and Francis
Besely had watched the woman one night in her prison, and
that when her husband, who had desired to teach Newton
the Lord’s Prayer, stood by the grate, resting his hand on
the bars, the hag suddenly kissed his hand. He returned
home restless and ill, and greeted his wife with ‘‘ She hath
kiss’'d my Hand, and I have a great pain in that arm, and
I verily believe she hath bewitch’d me, if ever she bewitch’d
any Man.” All that night and thereafter he grew sicker,
complaining of strange numbness in his arm. At the end of
seven days the agony increased, and he then kept his bed,
grievously afflicted, and crying out against Florence Newton.
Fourteen days later he died.

Valentine Greatrakes, the well-known healer or “‘ stroker,”’
was one of the witnesses at the trial. In the company of
two persons of local prominence, Edward Perry and Mr.
Blackwall, they essayed certain approved tests upon the
witch, and were soon convinced that the charges brought
against her were only too just. Unfortunately there seems to
be no record of the result of the trial, but if Florence Newton
were found guilty, and there can be little doubt that such was
the case, she would have been sentenced to death under the
Elizabethan statute of 1586.

There are not a few stories of enchantments, but these
belong to fery rather than to sorcery; we have accounts of
meetings with the Devil or his henchmen, apparitions,


96 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


banshees, and a dozen other such spectres, but to meet the
actual witch in Irish records is rare indeed. In 1670, an Irish
clergyman, the Rev. James Shaw, Presbyterian minister of
Carnmoney, ‘“‘ was much troubled with witches, one of them
appearing in his chamber and shewing her face behind his
cloke hanging on the clock-pin, and then stepping to the door,
disappeared . . . he sickens and dyes; his wyfe being dead
before him, and, as was supposed, witched.”

About the same time “‘ In Ireland there was one Thomas
Moor, who had his wife brought to bed of a child, and not
having made use of her former midwife, who was male fame,
she was witched by her so that she dies.” In 1685-6, at Cork,
when the son of Christopher Crofts fell sick with a convulsion
of eight or nine hours, his mother and several others were
of opinion that he was bewitched by old Gammer Welsh, a
notorious hag who had been recently committed to Bridewell
by Crofts. In a letter to Sir John Perceval, however, the
father avows ‘“‘I have not faith to believe it was anything
but the hand of God.’’®4

A witch is said to have been apprehended, condemned,
strangled at the stake, and burned to ashes at Antrim in
1699 for casting a spell upon a young girl some nine years
old.®

The last instance of witches being tried and convicted in
Ireland as offenders against the laws of the realm is the
celebrated Island-Magee case. In September, 1710, Mrs.
Anne Haltridge, widow of the Rev. John Haltridge, late
Presbyterian minister of Island-Magee, whilst staying in the
house of her son James Haltridge, suffered continual vexa-
tions at night by the throwing about her room of turf from
the heath and stones. No visible agent could be traced, and
she was obliged to seek another chamber. In December, as
she sat before the fire, a little boy of some twelve years,
having an old black bonnet on his head with his face concealed
in a torn blanket he wrapped about him, suddenly entered
and took his place near her. When she questioned him in
surprise he made no answer, but nimbly leaped about the
room and then ran out of the house, not, however, before the
servants saw him and ran after him, only to find he had
vanished. On 11 February, 1711, the disturbances were
renewed. Books were snatched from the hands of readers


ENGLAND 97


and found stowed away in odd corners. Stones were flung,
windows broken, the clothes suddenly snatched from the beds
and thrown in a heap, and other phenomena, not unusual in
this kind of disturbance, were experienced. Several persons
of repute visited the house to investigate such extraordinary
happenings. Not unnaturally trickery was suspected, but
no amount of watching or inquiry could trace anything of
the kind. One night Mrs. Haltridge, who had gone to bed as
usual in the haunted room, uttered a loud cry and screamed
out that she had been stabbed by a knife. The violent pain
never left her and at the end of the week, 22 February, she
died.

Some ten days later, a girl about seventeen years of age,
Miss Mary Dunbar, came to stay with Mrs. Haltridge to keep
her company after the death of her mother-in-law. On the
night of her arrival her trunk was secretly burst open and
the contents scattered over the house. An apron was found
to be tied up by a string which had nine curious knots
fastened in it. This was a baleful charm. the witches’ ladder,
la ghirlanda delle strege. It seems at once to have operated,
since Miss Dunbar was seized with hideous convulsions in
whieh she cried out that three women were tormenting her.
About midnight another fit succeeded, and she gave the
names of seven or eight hags whom she saw mocking her and
consulting over the progress of her disorder. She also added
a close description of their persons. They were Janet Liston,
Elizabeth Cellor, Kate M‘Calmont, Janet Carson, Janet Mean,
Jane Latimer, and one who was termed Mrs. Ann. Without
the knowledge of Miss Dunbar, Jane Latimer was brought
to the house, whereupon the ailing girl was thrown into the
most alarming paroxysms, and shrieked out that Latimer
was torturing her. At one time, moreover, she singled one
of her tormentors from among thirty women who had been
collected to see if she could be deceived either in the name
or description. Between the 8 and 24 of March depositions
relevant to various aspects of the case were sworn to by
various persons, and the Mayor of Carrigfergus issued a
warrant for the arrest of all those suspected. Seven were at
once taken: Janet Mead, of Braid Island; Jane Latimer, of
Irish quarter, Carrigfergus; Catherine M‘Calmont, of Island-
Magee; Janet Liston, alias Sellar ; Elizabeth Sellar ; Janet


98 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Carson; and Margaret Mitchell of Kilroot, who proved to be
the Mrs. Ann, so dubbed by the rest of the coven. The
accused were brought up for trial before Judges Antony Upton
and James Macartney at Carrigfergus, 831 March, 1711. The
proceedings commenced at six in the morning and lasted
until two in the afternoon. Judge Upton was of opinion that
the prisoners could not be brought in guilty upon the sole
testimony of Miss Dunbar’s trances, but Judge Macartney
differed from him altogether, and thought that the jury might
well return a verdict of guilty. This was accordingly done
and in accordance with the existing statute the gang, one
and all, were sentenced to a year’s imprisonment and to
stand in the pillory four times during that period.

Almost a century after, in March, 1818, Mary Butters, the
notorious ‘‘ Carnmoney witch,” was put forward for trial at
the Spring Assizes of Carrigfergus. A tailor, Alexander
Montgomery, whose cow had in his opinion been bewitched,
applied to Mary Butters, well known in the district as a
‘“‘wise-woman,” to raise the spell. Mary Butters ordered
Montgomery and a young man named Carnaghan to watch
in the cow-house, whilst she herself, an old woman named
Lee, Montgomery’s wife and son, remained indoors to confect
the counter-charm. Montgomery and his companion kept
vigil until dawn, when, becoming alarmed at receiving no
summons, they knocked loudly at the door of the house. No
answer was given, and peering through the kitchen window
they beheld the four inmates lying on the floor as dead.
Admittance was at once forcibly gained, and it was found
that the wife and son had actually expired, Margaret Lee
only survived a few minutes. Mary Butters was thrown out
by the roadside and shortly recovered. The house was filled
with a fetid stench, and on the fire a large pot wherein were
found milk, needles, pins, crooked nails, with other ingredients,
was smoking furiously. At the inquest held at Carnmoney
on 19 August the jurors gave as their opinion that the three
victims had been suffocated owing to Mary Butters having
made use of some noxious gallimaufry, which she cooked as
a charm to recover a sick cow. Her story was that a gigantic
blackamoor had appeared before them armed with a huge
bludgeon, and in a moment he had killed the three persons
by his blows, stunning herself. She was brought up at the


ENGLAND 99


Assizes but discharged by proclamation. The affair caused
much talk, and a racy lilting ballad, composed by some
resident in the district, which jestingly describes the scene,
was long sung up and down the countryside.*¢

That Mother Butters merely used the traditional and old
practised method of delivering the cow is shown by a case
which occurred at Newtownards in January, 1871. A farm-
hand brought an action against his master for wages alleged
to be due. In the course of the evidence it transpired that
on one occasion he had been set to drive away the witches
who were harming the cattle. All left the house except the
operator, who, having locked himself in, closed the windows
and stopped up every crack and crevice, even blocking the
chimneys with sods. He then placed upon the peat fire a
large pot of new milk, into which he threw three rows of pins
which had never been used and three packets of bright needles.
All these boiled fast for an hour, and, as there was no outlet
for the smoke, the man narrowly escaped being choked by
the fume.®?

In June, 1890, at Dungannon Quarter Sessions, before Sir
Francis Brady, one farmer sued another for breach of
warranty in a cow. It was stated that the animal had been
** blinked ”? or bewitched, and the defendant described how
a visit had been paid to a wise-woman, who instructed him
in an elaborate curative charm.

In 1892 a man related that a friend of his dwelling in the
Aran Islands was stricken by an incurable disease, and having
been given over by his doctor, he sought the services of a
cailleach, an old woman able by her occult power to transfer
the malady from the sufferer to some healthy person who
would ail fast and die in consequence. Her method was to
go to a field adjoining the highway, and here to pluck certain
herbs from the ground, gazing up the public road as she did
so. The first passer-by upon whom her malignant glance
lighted would in twenty-four hours take the sick man’s
illness and swiftly die, the patient mending apace as the
unconscious victim languished.

“ Burying the sheaf,” a practice of the black art, was still
used in 1898, in Co. Louth. The person essaying the charm
first visits the chapel, where facing withershins, with back
mockingly turned to the altar, as witches use, certain words


100 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


are muttered. A sheaf of wheat is selected and shaped like
the human body, the heart being made of plaited straw.
Into this and at the various joints pins are deeply thrust, and
with horrid invocations of the Devil the sheaf is buried near
the house of the individual whose death is desired. As the
wheat rots the victim will languish, to expire when it has
wholly decomposed. If the sheaf be buried in damp ground
it will fast rot, and so the forespoken wight will fade fast ;
but if the victim is to perish slowly and linger on in pain
a dry spot should be chosen for the sepulture of the moppet.
A case where one woman tried to kill her rival by this magic
came to light during certain police court proceedings at
Ardee in 1893.%

The terrible Baltyvadhen tragedy which was heard at
Clonmel in 1895, and which is continually referred to as a
‘* witch-burning,”’ is wholly misnamed. The poor woman who
was placed upon the kitchen fire by her own family and
burned so that she died was not tortured because she was a
witch, but in the belief that the real wife had been taken
away and a fairy changeling substituted in her place;
when the latter was subjected to the ordeal of fire it would
vanish, and the wife would be restored.

In 1911 an unhappy old creature was tried for killing
another such crone, an old-age pensioner, in a fit of insanity.
One of the witnesses deposed that on the morning of the
murder he met the accused in the highway. She was mutter-
ing to herself: ‘‘ I have the old witch killed. . . . She came
to me at three o’clock yesterday, and told me to kill her, or
I would be plagued with rats and mice.” To another person
she said: ‘‘ We will all be happy now. I have the devils
hunted away. They went across the hills at three o’clock
yesterday.” ®

One authority tells us that the law against Witchcraft
lasted in Ireland until 1821,”° but another authority writes
that “ though the Statutes against witchcraft in England and
Scotland were repealed (the latter very much against the
will of the clergy), it is said that that passed by the Irish
Parliament was not similarly treated and consequently is,
theoretically, still in force. Be that as it may . . . witch-
craft is still [1913] officially recognized in Ireland as an
offence against the law. In the Commission of the Peace the


ENGLAND 101


newly appointed magistrate is empowered to take cognizance
of amongst other crimes “ Witchcraft, Inchantment, Sorcery,
Magic Arts.”’71

To return to the ample annals of English sorcery, in the
forty-fifth year of the reign of Edward III, 1871, there was
brought before the King’s Bench, in circumstances which
might have been thought to be absolutely incriminating, a
Southwark man discovered with not only a dead man’s head
in his possession but a grimoire to boot. Accordingly he was
arrested on suspicion of black magic, but discharged on
swearing he would never be a sorcerer. ‘‘In Trinity term
of the xlvth year of the reign of Edward III. Note, a man
was arrested at Southwark with a skull and the head of a
corpse, and with a book of spells in his wallet, and brought
before Sir J. Knivet the king’s justice of peace, but no official
indictment was charged against him, wherefore the magis-
trates made him swear that he would never practise sorcery,
and he was released from prison, and the head and book
were burned in Tothill fields.”’2 Two hundred years later
-he would almost certainly have been hanged, and it is
astonishing that the ecclesiastical courts did not take up the
matter. Their powers were considerably increased and
quickened by the statute De heretico comburendo passed in
1401, which was mainly the work of Archbishop Thomas
Arundel, the primate, although in fact nothing more than
the application to England of the general law of Christendom.

When the so-called ‘‘ Good Parliament”? met in April,
1876, one of the first persons against whom they concentrated
their attacks was the lovely Alice Perrers, the royal favourite.
They were manifestly determined to put an end to her
‘“*dyshonest malapertnes,”’ and the accusations they brought
forward were many and grave. Her exhortations and rapacity
were cited; a special statute was passed to prevent her
interference with the course of justice; she had brought
dishonour to the King’s soul and disease to his body, they
said, by her lewdness. Her power over Edward was attri-
buted to Witchcraft, and orders were issued for the appre-
hension of the necromancer who aided her wiles. Some
members of Parliament declared that the lady had long
maintained in her house a mysterious Dominican, “ whoe in
outwarde show professed physicke & practised the same arte,


102 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


but he was a magician, gaven to wicked enchantments, by
whose experiments Ales allured the Kynge to her unlawfull
love, or els, as I may trulyer say, into madnes, for a young
man riotous syneth, but an olde man lecherous outragiously
dootethe.” This friar, following the lore of an Egyptian
wizard, named Vertebanus, had made pictures of Edward
and Alice, which, with the help of herbs and incantations,
gave her complete power over her lover. He had also made
rings of memory and forgetfulness, the virtue whereof was
to keep the King ever mindful of his mistress.

It was decided that the magician must be had before the
Parliament, but as it was difficult, if not impossible, to seize
him in Alice’s house, he was lured thence by two knights
who feigned to be sick and offered large sums for their cure,
and his person promptly attached. ‘‘ And when without
remedye he lamented hys taikynge, a certayne mayd sayd
unto hym: What ys the matter, father, that you so lament ?
what have you now cause to feare ? could you not fore see
these thyngs, that were accustomed to tell unto others
thynges to come? to whom he answered, I dyd foresee
trewely these thynges, but when they sholde chaunce I wist
not, for I tolde of a Parliament to come, wherein both I &
my mystres sholde suffer many adversatyes.’’ Brought before
the Council he could say little to defend himself, and it seems
that he would have suffered at the stake had it not been
for the opposition of the mild and gentle Archbishop of
Canterbury, Simon of Sudbury.’8 This prelate very properly
handed over the accused to the Superiors of his own Order,
by whom he was relegated under strict supervision to a
distant house. “Ales Peres, whoe alwayes before had
prefered wantownesse to servitude, hearynge of the appre-
hension of her frere, bigan vehemently to feare, & her colour
wanied.”” Although the other charges against Alice Perrers
were pressed at the moment, that of sorcery was not pursued,
especially since the triumph of the “‘ Good Parliament ” was
short-lived, and the lady, after a brief exile from court,
returned to the King’s side to punish her foes.

In 1406 when Henry IV was informed that the diocese of
Lincoln was infested by sorcerers, wizards, magicians, necro-
mancers, diviners, and soothsayers of every sort, he sent a
letter dated 2 January to the Bishop, Philip Repington, his


ENGLAND 103


own chaplain and confessor, requiring him to search for any
such occult practisers and straightway commit them to
prison.

On the 7 May the King addressed a letter to John Colepeper
and Robert Passemer bidding them immediately to arrest
and bring before the Privy Council a Dominican friar of
Worcester, Thomas Northfield, and to seize all his books
pertaining to magic, his curious instruments, and similar
furniture. The result of this examination does not appear to
be recorded. The letter, printed in Rymer’s Federa”4, is as
follows :

The King. To his well-beloved and faithful John Colepeper
and beloved Robert Passemere, his esquire, Greeting. Ye
know that for certain particular reasons which were laid
before Us and before Our Council, We did bid you, jointly
and severally, attach and arrest Thomas Northfield, professor
of theology, of the Order of Preachers, now dwelling in the
city of Worcester, and furthermore that ye should attach,
seize, impound, and closely examine, all his books treating
of the evil science of magic, and that with all possible dis-
patch ye should bring Brother Thomas himself with any and
every suspect book, safe and sound, before Our Council, that
he may answer to these charges which there and then will be
objected to him, and that moreover he may make such
satisfaction and receive such sentence as We and Our Council
deem fitting in this matter: and therefore We do command
you that with all diligence ye perform this business and that
ye execute and carry it out in the prescribed form: Where-
fore We require Our Knights of the Shire, Our justices,
bailies, apparitors, and all other officers, summoners, con-
stables, and all within Our jurisdiction, collectively and
severally, all and each, as well within as without the liberties,
by the tenour and mandate of these presents, to lend you
furtherance, assistance, and aid, as often as, and whensoever,
they shall be called upon by one of you, or both, to do Us
service, and shall be duly and officially advised of the same.
In which, &c. In the presence of Us, the King. Given at
Westminster, on the seventh day of May.”®

In connexion with the measures taken against Witchcraft
in the reign of Henry IV, it may not impertinently be
remembered that this monarch was active in the suppression


104 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of the Lollard nuisance, and by their abuse of the Sacraments
and all things holy—Our Lady of Walsingham was blas-
phemously termed the Witch of Walsingham by these mis-
creants—there seems little doubt that their practices were
akin to Satanism.

On the 9 May, 1432, Walter Hungerford, the Constable of
Windsor, brought before the Privy Council three persons
suspected ‘“‘ pro sorcerye,”’ whose operations had been per-
formed within his jurisdiction, namely, Margery Jourdemain,
a married woman ; John Virley, a cleric ; and John Ashwell,
a Crutched Friar.76 They were all dismissed; Margery
Jourdemain upon being bailed by her husband, and the two
men upon giving security.??

Nine years after, in 1441, a much more important case was
brought before the ecclesiastical courts, ‘“‘ the duchesse of
Gloucestre was arested and put to holt, for she was suspecte
of treson.”” The hand of the enemies of Duke Humphrey is,
of course, to be seen in such an attack. Their first move was
to arrest a member of the duke’s household, Roger Boling-
broke, an astrologer, ‘‘ for werchyrye of sorcery against the
king.” It was declared that he had cast the horoscope of
the Duchess with a view to ascertain her chances of succeeding
to the throne, which he had plotted to secure for her by
bewitching Henry VI to death according to the orthodox
fashion of melting a waxen image of the monarch. With
Bolingbroke were implicated Thomas Southwell, a canon of
S. Stephens; Sir John Hume or Hun, a priest; and one
William Wodham. Margery Jourdemain was also charged,
and this time she received short shrift, being burned in
Smithfield on 27 October. On the 18 November, Bolingbroke,
who had been compelled to ask pardon at Paul’s Cross, was
hanged at Tyburn, beheaded, and quartered, his head being
set on London Bridge, and his body being distributed to
Hereford, Oxford, Cambridge, and York, to deter those who
were inclined to mix treason and Witchcraft. Thomas
Southwell died in prison.

Eleanor Cobham was first brought before “ certayne
bisshoppis of the kyngis,” and there closely examined by
Robert Gilbert, Bishop of London; William of Alnwick,
Bishop of Lincoln ; and Thomas Brown, Bishop of Norwich.
By these three prelates she was found guilty of high treason


ENGLAND 105


and sorcery, and condemned to do public penance. On a
Monday, barefoot and bareheaded, carrying a taper of two
pounds weight, she was landed at the Temple, whence she
walked through Fleet Street to S. Paul’s and there offered
up her taper at the High Altar. On the Wednesday she
landed at the Swan in Thames Street and proceeded by way
of Bridge Street and Gracechurch Street to Leadenhall. On
Friday she passed from Queenhithe down Cheapside to
S. Michael’s, Cornhill. On each occasion she was accompanied
by the mayor and sheriffs. She was then imprisoned for life
at Chester, or more probably at Peel Castle in the Isle of Man.

Ladies of high estate seem to have been particularly
implicated in accusations of Witchcraft, obviously for
political reasons, and we find that in 1478 Jaquet, Duchess
of Bedford, complains to the Privy Council concerning the
rumours which are being spread abroad to the effect that she
was a witch and by her enchantments had fascinated the
King, causing him to dote on her daughter Elizabeth, whom
he had made his queen, although he had actually been troth-
plight to Eleanor Butler, daughter of the Earl of Shrewsbury,
The Privy Council clears the lady and orders their decision
to be officially recorded. The original documents (Rolls of
Parliament, 9 Edward IV) present features of considerable
interest :

‘Edward by the grace of God, kyng of Englond and of
Fraunce, and lord of Irland, to the reverent fader in God
Robert byshope of Bathe and Wells, oure chaunceller, greting.
Forasmoche as we send unto you within these oure lettres the
tenure of an acte of oure grete counsail, amonge othir thinges,
' remaynyng in thoffice of oure privé seal, in fourme as folowith :
In the chambre of the grete counsaill, callid the parliment-
chambre, within the kyngs paleis att Westminster, the x. day
of Februarie, the ixth yere of the regne of oure soveraygne
lord the kyng Edward the IIIIth, in the presence of the same
oure soveraigne lord, and my lordis of his grete councail, whos
names ben under writen, a supplicacion addressed unto oure
said soveraygne lord, on the behalf of the high and noble
princesse Jaquet duchesse of Bedford, and two sedules in
papier annexed unto the same supplicacion, were openly, by
oure saide soveraygne lordis commaundement, radde; and
aftirward his highnes, by thavis of my said lordis of his grete


106 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


counsaill, acceptyng eftsones the declaracion of my said lady
specified in the said supplicacion, accordyng to the peticion °
of my said lady, commaunded the same to be enacted of
record, and therupon lettres of exemplificacion to be made
under his grete seal in due fourme ; the tenure of the suppli-
cacion and cedules, wherof above is made mencion, hereafter
ensue in this wyse. To the kyng oure soveraygne lord ;
shewith and lamentably complayneth unto your highnes your
humble and true liegewoman Jaquet duchesse of Bedford,
late the wyf of your true and faithfull knyght and liegeman
Richard late erle of Ryvers, that where shee at all tyme hath,
and yit doth, treuly beleve on God accordyng to the feith of
Holy Chirche, as a true cristen woman owith to doo, yet
Thomas Wake squier, contrarie to the lawe of God, lawe of
this land, and all reason and good consciens, in the tyme of
the late trouble and riotous season, of his malicious disposicion
towardes your said oratrice of long tyme continued, entendyng
not oonly to hurt and apaire her good name and fame, but
also. purposed the fynall distruccion of her persone, and to
that effecte caused her to be brought in a comune noyse and
disclaundre of wychecraft thorouout a grete part of this youre
reaume, surmytting that she shuld have usid wichecraft and
sorcerie, insomuche as the said Wake caused to be brought to
Warrewyk atte your last beyng there, soveraigne lord, to
dyvers of the lords thenne beyng ther present, a image of
lede made lyke a man of armes, conteynyng the lengthe of
a mannes fynger, and broken in the myddes, and made
fast with a wyre, sayyng that it was made by your said
oratrice to use with the said wichcraft and _ sorsory,
where she, ne noon for her ne be her, ever sawe it, God
knowith. And over this, the said Wake, for the _per-
fourmyng of his malicious entent above said, entreted oon
John Daunger, parishe clerk of Stoke Brewerne, in the counte
of Northampton, to have said that there were two other
images made by your said oratrice, oon for you, soveraygne
lord, and anothir for oure soveraigne lady the quene, wherunto
the said John Daunger neyther coude ne wolde be entreted
to say. Wheruppon it lykid your highnesse, of your noble
grace, atte humble sute made unto your highnesse by your
said oratrice, for her declaracion in the premisses, to send for
the said Wake and the said John Daunger, commaundyng


ENGLAND 107


them to attende upon the reverent fadir in God the bishop
of Carlisle, the honorable lord therle of Northumberland, and
the worshipfull lords lord Hastyngs and Mountjoye, and
mayster Roger Radclyff, to be examined by them of such as
they coude allegge and say anenst your said oratrice in this
behalf; thaxaminacions afore them had apperith in wrytinge
herunto annexed ; wherof oon bill is conteyning the sayings
of Wake, and writte with his owne hand; and anothir
shewyng the saiyngs of the said Daunger, and wrete in the
presence of the said lords ; which seen by your highnesse, and
many othir lords in this your grete councell, the xx day of
January last passed, then beyng there present, your said
oratrice was by your grace and theime takyn clerid and
declared of the said noises and disclaundres, which as yet
remaygneth not enacted; forsomuch as divers your lords
were then absent. Wherfor please it your highnesse, of your
most habundant grace and grete rightwisnesse, tenderly to
consider the premisses, and the declaracion of your said
oratrice had in this behalf, as is afore shewid, to commaunde
the same to be enacted in this youre said grete counsaill, so
as the same her declaration may allway remaigne there of
record, and that she may have it exemplified undir your grete
seall: And she shall continually pray to God for the pre-
servacion of your most royal estate.

“Thomas Wakes bille. Sir, this ymage was shewed and
left in Stoke with an honest persone, which delyverid it to
the clerk of the said chirche, and so shewid to dyvers neigh-
bours, aftir to the parson in the chirche openly to men both
of Shytlanger and Stoke ; and aftir it was shewed in Sewrisley
a nounry, and to many other dyvers persones, as it is said, &c.
And of all this herd I nor wist no thyng, till after it was sent
me by Thomas Kymbell from the said clere, which I suppose
be called John Daunger, which cam home to me, and told me
as I have said to my lord of Carlille and to your maistershipp,
from which saying as by herdsay I neither may nor will vary.
And yf any persone will charge me with more than I have
said, I shall discharge me as shall accord with my trouthe
and dutee.

“ John Daungers bille. John Daunger, of Shetyllanger,
sworn and examined, saith, that Thomas Wake send unto
hym oon Thomas Kymbell, that tyme beyng his bailly, and


108 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


bad the said John to send hym the ymage of led that he had,
and so the said John sent it by the said Thomas Kymbell, att
which tyme the same John said that he herd never noo
wichecraft of my lady of Bedford. Item, the same John
saith, that the said ymage was delyvered unto hym by oon
Harry Kyngeston of Stoke ; the which Harry fonde it in his
owne hous after departyng of soudeours. Item, the same
John saith, that the said Thomas Wake, after he cam from
London, fro the kyng, send for hym and said that he had
excused hymsylf and leyd all the blame to the said John ;
and therfor he bad the said John say that he durst not kepe
the said image, and that he was the cause he send it to the
said Thomas Wake. Item, the same John saith, that the
said Thomas Wake bad hym say that ther was two othir
ymages, oon for the kyng, and anothir for the quene; but
the said John denyed to say soo. Present my lords whos
names foloweth ; that is to say, my lordis the cardinall and
archebishop of Caunterbury [Thomas Bourchier], tharche-
bishop of York [Lawrence Booth], the byshops of Bathe,
chauncellor of Englond, Elye [William Grey], tresorer of
Englonde, Rouchester [John Russell], keper of the privie
seall, London [Thomas Kempe], Duresme [William Dudby],
and Karlill; therls of Warrewyk, Essex, Northumberland,
Shrewsbury, and Kent ; the lords Hastings, Mountjoye, Lyle,
Crowmell, Scrope of Bolton, Say, &c.”

These charges were revived during the troubles after the
King’s death, as we learn by the “‘ Act for the Settlement of
the Crown upon the King and his issue, with a Recapitulation
of his Title,” whence the following is taken.

‘Over this, amonges other things, more specially wee
consider, howe that, the tyme of the reigne of kyng Edward
the iiijt® late deceased, after the ungracious pretensed
marriage, as all England hath cause soo to say, made betwixt
the said king Edward and Elizabeth sometyme wife to sir
John Grey knight, late nameing herself and many years
heretofore quene of Englond, the ordre of all poletique rule
was perverted, the lawes of God and of Gods church, and also
the lawes of nature and of Englond, and also the laudable
customes and liberties of the same, wherein every Englishman
is inheritor, broken, subverted, and contempned, against all
reason and justice, soo that this land was ruled by selfewill


ENGLAND 109


and pleasure, feare, and drede, all manner of equite and lawes
layd apart and despised, whereof ensued many inconvenients
and mischiefs, as murdres, extorsions, and oppressions ;
namely, of poore and impotent people, soo that no man was
sure of his lif, land, ne lyvelode, ne of his wif, doughter, ne
servaunt, every good maiden and woman standing in drede to
be ravished and defouled. And besides this, what discords,
inward battailles, effusion of christian mens blode, and
namely by the destruction of the noble blode of this londe,
was had and comitted within the same, it is evident and
notarie thourough all this reame, unto the great sorowe and
hevynesse of all true Englishmen. And here also we considre,
howe that the seid pretensed mariage betwixt the above-named
king Edward and Elizabeth Grey was made of grete pre-
sumption, without the knowyng and assent of the lords of
this lond, and also by sorcerie and wichecrafte, committed by
the said Elizabeth and her moder Jaquett duchesse of Bedford,
as the common opinion of the people, and the publique voice
and fame is thorough all this land; and hereafter, if and as
the caus shall require, shall bee proved sufficiently in tyme
and place convenient. And here also we consider, howe that
the said pretensed marriage was made privatly and secretely,
without edition of banns, in a private chamber, a prophane
place, and not openly in the face of the church, aftre the lawe
of Goddes churche, but contrarie thereunto, and the laudable
custome of the church of Englonde. And howe, also, that at
the tyme of contract of the same pretensed marriage, and
bifore and longe tyme after, the said king Edward was and
stode maryed and trouth-plight to oone dame Elianor Butteler,
doughter of the old earl of Shrewesbury, with whome the
same kyng Edward had made a precontracte of matrimonie,
longe tyme bifore he made the said pretensed mariage with
the said Elizabeth Grey, in manner and fourme abovesaid.
Which premisses being true, as in veray trouth they been
true, it appeareth and followeth evidently that the said king
Edward duryng his lif, and the seid Elizabeth, lived together
sinfully and dampnably in adultery, against the lawe of God
and of his churche; and therefore noo marvaile that, the
souverain lord and the head of this land being of such ungodly
disposicion, and provokyng the ire and indignacion of oure
Lord God, such haynous mischieffs and inconvenients, as is


110 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


above remembred, were used and comitted in the reame
amongs the subgects. Also it appeareth evidently and
followeth that all thissue and children of the seid king Edward
been bastards, and unable to inherite or to clayme any thing
by inheritance, by the lawe and custome of Englond.””®

It was now that Jane Shore was charged with sorcery by
the Protector, Richard of Gloucester, who accused her before
the Privy Council on the morning of 18 June, 1483. “* What
are they worthy to have that compass and imagine the
destruction of me, who am so near of blood unto the king,
and Protector of his royal person and realm?” he cried.
‘It is yonder sorceress, my brother’s wife, and others with
her. Ye shall all see in what wise that sorceress and that
other witch of her council, Shore’s wife, with their kind, have
by their sorcery and witchcraft wasted my body.”’ There-
upon he pulled up his left sleeve, and exhibited “‘ a werish
withered arme and small.” It was, of course, well known to
all present that the duke’s left arm had been so malformed
from birth. And presently Lord Hastings, “‘ a good knight
and a gentle . . . a louing man and passing wel beloued,”
lost his head to clear the way for Richard to seize the throne.
It is difficult to account for the malevolence with which the
Protector regarded his brother’s mistress. The unfortunate
Jane Shore was tried before the court of the Bishop of London,
Thomas Kempe, and one Sunday morning, clad only in her
kirtle and carrying a lighted taper, she walked as a penitent
to S. Paul’s, after which Richard kept her a close prisoner in
Ludgate jail. When released under Henry VII she was
reduced to absolute penury, and, writes Blessed Thomas More
in his History of Richard III,’® ‘“‘ At this daye shee beggeth
of many at this daye living, that at this day had begged, if
shee had not bene.’’ When at last she died, about 1527, she
must have been nearly eighty years of age.

In 1521 the most eminent nobleman in England, Edward
Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, Lord High Constable of the
realm, was condemned to death on a charge of high treason
simply because King Henry VIII vaguely suspected he was
aiming at the succession to the throne and had determined
he must die. Late in 1520 it reached Wolsey’s ears that in
“his fumes and displeasures ’’ the Duke had railed not only
against the Cardinal but against the King. It soon became


ENGLAND 111


known that Buckingham was out of favour, and enemies at
once pressed forward with accusations. Robert Gilbert, his
treacherous chancellor, swore that he had heard his master
say that the Cardinal was an idolater and a sorcerer “ taking
counsel of a spirit how he might continue to have the king’s
favour.”’ Another informer was John Delacourt, the Duke’s
chaplain, who deposed that on 24 April, 1518, the Duke
had sent him from Thornbury to the Charterhouse of Hinton
in Somerset to consult secretly with Nicholas Hopkins, one
of the community there. Dom Hopkins seems to have had
some reputation as a mage, and to have been generally
credited with the gift of prophecy. At any rate Delacourt
swore that the message he received for the Duke was that
His Grace “ should have all,” and later, Buckingham himself
interviewed the monk to be assured that if the King died
leaving no son he should ascend the throne. Again we find
divination commingled with alleged treason, and on 18 May
the Duke was brought into Westminster Hall to be tried
upon an indictment which rested upon the depositions of
three discontented servants, fomented by Henry’s savage
jealousy and fears. Buckingham was allowed no counsel, he
was found guilty—a foregone conclusion, and his head fell
upon Tower Hill.

It is curious to note that on 29 January, 1536, the day of
Queen Catherine’s funeral, when the syphilitic monster who
terrorized England was already growing somewhat weary of
the gospel light which beamed from Bullen’s eyes, he told
some one in great confidence that as regards his second wife®®
he had ‘‘ made this marriage seduced by witchcraft; and
that this was evident because God did not permit them to
have any male issue.’’8!_ Such a speech undoubtedly shows
that Henry VIII was swayed by the meanest superstitions
and incidentally how prevalent and ever present was the
belief in black magic and spells. Before the birth of Elizabeth
on Sunday, 7 September, 1533, a whole horde of diviners and
occultists had been consulted as to the sex of the child, and
when the royal mistress was delivered of a daughter it was
felt to be to ‘“‘ the great reproach of the astrologers, sorcerers,
and sorceresses,’’8? who had affirmed that the infant would
be a male.

In 1541 Lord Hungerford was beheaded “ for procuring


112 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


certain persons to conspire that they might know how long
the King’s Grace should live,” and in the same year an act**
was passed: ‘‘ Where dyvers and sundrie persones unlaw-
fully have devised and practised Invocacions and conjuracions
of Spirits, . . . and also have used and occupied wichecrafts,
inchauntmentes, and sorceries to the distruccion of the
neighbours persones and goodes. . . . And for execucion of
their saide falee devyses and practises have made or caused
to be made dyvers Images and pictures of men, women,
childrene, Angelles or develles, beastes or fowles . . . and
gyving faithe and credit to suche fantasticall practises have
dygged up and pulled downe an infinite nombre of Crosses
within this Realme”’ all such proceedings are considered
felony. This piece of legislation is absolute; there are no
gradations of offences; the law is plain and absolutely
sweeping. But within six years this statute, VIII 33 Henry
VIII, was annulled. The schismatical Nicholas Ridley, who
had been thrust into the see of London ; Thomas Goodrich,
the protestant Bishop of Ely; the notorious Master John
Scory, who called himself Bishop of Chichester ; John Shypp,
who uncanonically held the see of Hereford; and their
partisans could ill brook the clauses which forbade the
destruction of calvaries and roods, and so the whole statute
was clean repealed.

It was at the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth that
definite and severe penalties were enacted for Witchcraft,
conjuration, and all related arts. A bill was draughted very
soon after the accession of the new queen, although actually
it was not until 1563 that the measure finally passed on to
the statute-book and became English law. It was enacted
that those who “ shall use, practise, or exercise any Witche-
crafte, Enchantment, Charme or Sorcerie, whereby any
person shall happen to be killed or destroyed . . . their
Concellors and Aidours . . . shall suffer paynes of Deathe as
a Felon or Felons.” It was further declared that those by
whose acts any person was wasted, consumed, or lamed,
should suffer for the first offence one year’s imprisonment
and should be placed in the pillory four times. For the second
offence death was the penalty. It was also provided that
those who by Witchcraft presumed to discover treasure or to
find stolen property or to “‘ provoke any person to unlawfull


ENGLAND 113


love” should suffer a year’s imprisonment and be pilloried
at each quarter. It may not unfairly be said that with this
distinctive and comprehensive legislation the prosecution of
Witchcraft in England as a secular crime to all practical
intents was begun. It is true that some few cases had
occurred before this date, but they are comparatively un-
important : in 1558 John Thirkle “ taylour, detected of
conjuringe ”’ was examined, as also were various persons who
were sent to Edmund Grindall on the same charge.’ In 1559
certain persons, probably including Lady Frances Throg-
morton, were vehemently suspected and officially questioned,®®
whilst George Throgmorton and the daughter of Lady
Chandos were actually imprisoned.8* In the following year
humbler game was started. Old Mother Burke of S. John’s,
Kent, fell under the censure of the ecclesiastical authorities ;87
whilst at London in 1561 a company of ten men, arraigned
before the Queen and council on charges of ‘‘ trespass, con-
tempt, conjuration, and sorceries,” were punished with the
pillory and compelled solemnly to renounce any such occult
proceedings for the future.

The immediate occasion of the statute of 1563 is not far
to seek. At the death of Queen Mary the whole gang of
seditious recalcitrants, who had taken refuge from the law
in Switzerland and South Germany, swarmed back to England
in full force, eager to feather their nests to the very fullest
advantage. Unscrupulous and of conscience none too nice,
they were just the pliant tools Elizabeth required, and they
immediately became prominent in Church and State. From
24 June, 1559, the Mass and all other Catholic services were
forbidden in England. Of the twenty-seven sees of England
ten, including Canterbury, were vacant owing to deaths of
those who had occupied them. Fifteen of the seventeen
bishops then living were deposed by the Queen before 29
December, 1559, and men who would accept the new religion
appointed in their place.2® Thus Thomas Bentham,” who
was to occupy the see of Coventry and Lichfield whence
Bishop Ralph Bayne had been ejected, and John Parkhurst
appointed to Norwich, had both settled in Zurich, a hot-bed
of dissensions. John Scory, the new bishop of Hereford, made
Geneva itself his headquarters. Richard Cox, who possessed
Ely instead of Bishop Thomas Thirlby, and Edmund Grindall,


114 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


who replaced Bishop Edmund Bonner in London, sojourned
in Strassburg and Frankfort. Miles Coverdale, who in 1551
had been intruded into the see of Exeter, and who took no
inconsiderable part in the consecration of Archbishop Parker,
found Geneva under the iron tyranny of Calvin, with the
companionship of sour John Knox, and the unhappy Servetus
writhing in the flames as a sight to see, most agreeable to
his feelings during his enforced absence from England.
There can be no doubt that during their residence in such
towns these divines must have become intimately familiarized
with the propaganda against Witchcraft that was raging
throughout this decade, a movement their old ally Martin
Bucer had so urged and excited not many years before. It
is natural that when they returned to England and had a
large and influential share in the direction of the laws their
thoughts should revert to the subject of sorcery, to them
a very real and pressing danger, and beyond all question the
Calvinistic John Jewel’s notorious sermon, which seems
actually to have brought the statutes of 1563 into force,
admirably sums up and expresses the opinions of the rest.
John Jewel was born in Buden, Devon, on 2 May, 1522.
In 1535 he entered Merton College, Oxford, whence four years
later he removed to Corpus Christi, and in 1544 commenced
master, having been admitted a fellow and appointed a tutor
of that foundation. He acquired considerable influence
throughout the university, and tirelessly propagated the
doctrines of Luther and Zwingli. When the apostate Peter
Martyr came to Oxford in 1549 he found no more fervent
disciple than this rancorous polemic, and together the precious
pair seem to have wrought incalculable mischief. At the
time of the trials of Cranmer and Ridley, Jewel acted as their
secretary, and attracted so much attention by his extreme
partisanship of the accused that he was himself examined
by Dr. Marshall, Dean of Christ Church and Vice-Chancellor,
and obliged to sign a profession of belief. This proved to be
utterly insincere, as at the first opportunity he made off in
hot haste for the Continent, first visiting Frankfort, and later
Strasburg and Zurich, in both of which towns he boarded in
the house of Peter Martyr. Upon the death of Queen Mary
(17 November, 1558) he came back to England, and was at
once employed in a visitation of the western counties, whence


ENGLAND 115


he returned late in October, 1559.9 His mind was already
fully occupied with the horrors of Witchcraft, as is shown by
a letter 2 November, where he writes in churlish strain: “ We
found in all places votive relics of Saints, nails with which
the infatuated people dreamed that Christ had been pierced,
and I know not what small fragments of the Sacred Cross.
The number of witches and sorceresses had everywhere
become enormous.”

There is, in truth, no controversialist of the day who
exceeds Jewel in the reckless violence of his abuse. His
impudence, profanity, unblushing mendacity, and downright
forgery are beyond belief. There are, moreover, to be dis-
cerned in the cold concentration of his hate a bitter cynicism
and a mocking impiety which one can only stigmatize as
devilish, and which go far to prove that the man held no faith
at all. Constructive ideas he has none, he is essentially
Mephistopheles, “‘ the Spirit that Denies.”” When he has to
speak of Holy Mass he blasphemes like a maniac, as in a
letter to Peter Martyr, probably to be dated May, 1559, where
he writes: ‘‘ This it is to have once tasted of the Mass! He
who drinks is made mad by it. Depart from it, all ye who
value a sound mind; who drinks is made mad by it. They
perceive that when that palladium is removed every thing
else will be imperilled.’®? Again describing the state of
England on his return he says: ‘‘ No part of religion was yet
restored ; the country was still everywhere fouled with the
Mass,” eadem erat ubique missarum prolwuvies,®? a phrase
which seems to me the extreme of criminal blasphemy. The
insincerity of the man is frankly appalling. Ten years after
his death Blessed Edmund Campion wrote: ‘“‘ When I was
young, John Jewell, the Calvinist leader in England, was
impudent enough to challenge the Catholics to a proof of
their respective tenets from the works of the Fathers of the
first six centuries.°4 The challenge was accepted by some
well-known men then in exile and poverty at Louvain.
I venture to say that Jewell’s craft, ignorance, roguery, and
impudence, as exposed by these writers, did more good to
the Catholic cause than anything within my remembrance.
A proclamation was immediately posted on the doors that
none of the answers should be read or kept, though they had
been squeezed out by a direct challenge.”®* It is important


116 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


that we should appreciate a just character of the man to whom
the witch-trials in England are largely due, not that he acted
from any hatred to Witchcraft and Satanists, but solely
from political motives.

As early as the summer of 1559, just before his western
circuit, Jewel had been nominated Bishop of Salisbury, and
although his masque of narrow Calvinism demurred, or at
any rate pretended to demur for bare form’s sake, against
the prescribed episcopal dress which he had erstwhile harshly
denounced, he conveniently allowed his scruples to be over-
come and was consecrated in January, 1560. His discourse
against witches seems to have been delivered some time
between November, 1559, and 17 March, 1560, probably in
February of the latter year. At this time the ecclesiastical
and civil authorities were in close touch, and no doubt the
way was being laid for drastic legislation on the subject of
sorcery. A sermon delivered by a famous court preacher, a
newly made Bishop, would carry great weight. And Jewel
vehemently urged immediate action. It was, he told the
Queen, “the horrible using of your poor subjects ” that
forced him to be round and plain. ‘‘ This kind of people
(I mean witches and sorcerers) within these few last years are
marvellously increased within this Your Grace’s realm. These
eyes have seen most evident and manifest marks of their
wickedness. Your Grace’s subjects pine away even unto
death, their colour fadeth, their flesh rotteth, their speech is
benumbed, their senses are bereft. Wherefore, Your poor
subjects’ most humble petition unto Your Highness is, that
the laws touching such malefactors may be put in due
execution.”’°* Strype certainly says that this sermon was the
occasion of the law passed in the fifth year of Elizabeth’s
reign, by which Witchcraft was again made a felony, as it had
been in the reign of Henry VIII.9

Another important factor in the crusade against witches
lay in the suspicion that sorcery was frequently mixed up
with treasonable practices and plots, since it was common
knowledge that magic had been constantly employed in
attempts against the life of the sovereign. The accession of
Elizabeth brought many violent changes of every kind, which,
as might well be supposed, were not effected without much
opposition, whilst her cruel tyranny bred continual discontent.


ENGLAND 117


Venal poets might sing of her as Gloriana, Belphcebe, Pandora,
Cynthia, Astrea, a Goddess divine ;°8 a lewd old strumpet
might be acclaimed as a Virgin Queen; her court might be
blazoned with all pomp and circumstance, with wanton
dames and roving buccaneers, a very galaxy of tinsel beauty
and cardboard chivalry ; but there was another and a darker
side to the picture, as the old fox Cecil and the gutter-rat
Walsingham with their spies and butchers knew only too
well. Conspiracy succeeded conspiracy, and conjuration
conjuration. As early as November, 1558, Sir Antony
Fortescue,®® member of a famous Catholic family, was arrested
together with several accomplices on a charge of casting the
horoscope of the Queen’s life. He was soon released, but in
1561 he was again in custody with several other persons of
note, alleged to be implicated in an elaborate design which
even involved the French and Spanish ambassadors. It was
reported that two conjurers in his employ, John Prestall and
Edmund Cosyn, with the assistance of a “‘ wicked spryte,”’
had discovered Elizabeth would shortly die a natural death.
The accused were for the most part executed, but Fortescue
himself, owing to influence in high places, seems to have
escaped such punishment. Throughout the whole of the
reign and especially during those years when the Scottish
Queen was held a prisoner, 1568-87, the English Privy Council
pretended to be extraordinarily anxious with regard to any
sorceries that might touch the health of Elizabeth. This
astute policy they adopted and widely advertised for purposes
of their own. There were, of course, plots to liberate the
captive Queen, but Elizabeth’s life was never for a moment
in danger. The Act of 1581, 23 Eliz. Cap. II, is merely a
piece of diplomatic bluff: ‘‘ That if any person . . . during
the life of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen’s Majesty that
now is, either within her Highness’ dominions or without,
shall by setting or erecting any figure or by casting of
nativities or by calculation or by any prophecying, witch-
craft, conjurations, or other like unlawful means whatsoever,
seek to know, and shall set forth by express words, deeds, or
writings, how long her Majesty shall live, or who shall reign
a king or queen of this realm of England after her Highness’
decease . . . that then every such offence shall be felony,
and every offender therein, and also all his aiders [etc.], shall


118 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


be judged as felons and shall suffer pain of death and forfeit
as in case of felony is used, without any benefit of clergy or
sanctuary.”’ 100

The new statute passed in 1563 was the beginning of a
drastic and searching prosecution by the State of witches
and all who consulted or consorted with them. In 1565
Agnes Mondaye, a Dorset witch, was to be apprehended for
casting a spell on one Mistress Chettell,1°! and in the same
year Jennet Pereson!°? was delated to the Durham ecclesi-
astical authorities, but the first case of any importance seems
to have taken place three years later at Chelmsford. A full
account is given in a black letter pamphlet, 1°* The examination
and confession of certaine Wytches at Chensforde in the
Countie of Essex before the Quenes maiesties Judges the xavi
daye of July Anno 1566. The accused Elizabeth Francis,
Alice Chandler, and old Mother Waterhouse were examined
before a distinguished court consisting of Sir John Fortescue,
keeper of the great wardrobe; Sir Gilbert Gerrard, the
Queen’s attorney ; Justice Southcote, a judge of the Queen’s
Bench; and Dr. Thomas Cole, rector of Stanford Rivers, a
parish about ten miles from Chelmsford. Elizabeth Francis
glibly confessed to many “ vilanies.’’ She freely acknowledged
that “she learned this arte of witchcraft at the age of xii
yeres of hyr grandmother whose name mother Eue of Hat-
fyelde Peuerell, disseased. Item when shee taughte it her,
she conseiled her to renounce GOD and his worde and to
geue of her bloudde to Sathan (as she termed it) whyche she
delyuered her in the lykenesse of a whyte spotted Catte.’’ 104
Apparently she asked this familiar for whatsoever she
required—a husband who as a matter of fact led her anything
but a quiet life, as also to avenge herself on her enemies.
After keeping the cat fifteen years she turned it over to
Mother Waterhouse: “‘ she came to one Mother Waterhouse
her neighbour she brought her this cat in her apron and
taught her as she was instructed by her grandmother Eue,
telling her that she must cal him Sathan and geue him of
her bloude and bread and milke as before—Mother Water-
house said, she receyued this cat of this Frances wife in the
order as is before sayde.”1°5 She employed it to kill the
geese, swine, and cattle of those who offended her. In some
mysterious way the cat became a toad, and this at her


ENGLAND 119


command killed her husband. The woman’s eighteen-year-old
daughter Joan confessed that she had pledged her soul to
this toad, and confirmed her mother’s statements in every
particular. Sir Gilbert Gerrard questioned Mother Water-
house: ‘‘ When dyd thye Cat suck of thy bloud ? ” “ Never,”
she replied, but upon inspection the witch marks upon her
body where she had cut and pricked herself for the evil spirit
were discovered. So she was convicted and hanged.196

Thirteen years later, Elizabeth Francis, whose reputation
as a dangerous woman had evidently been long established,
was again in trouble, and brought to trial before the judges
on circuit. As before, she was ready to tell a long story and
to involve others in her mischiefs. The result is not clear.
Three of the accused were found guilty and executed, and
of these she may have been one; a poor drab named Elleine
Smith, daughter of a woman who had been hanged for a
witch, was certainly another; whilst Mother Staunton was
released because ‘“‘ manslaughter or murder was not objected
against her.’’10?

During episcopal visitations unremitting search after
witches was enjoined. Thus in 1577 Whitgift inquires in the
diocese of Worcester for known or suspect users of Witchcraft,
charms, enchantments, or unlawful invocations for those who
took on themselves to tell destinies or to find things lost. In
the Lichfield diocese seven years later inquiries were especially
directed against magical practices of midwives, a very signi-
ficant article.1%

The Chelmsford district in particular was a veritable hotbed
of sorcery, as in 1589 there was yet a third alarm, when a
beldame named Joan Cunny was convicted, largely on the
evidence of a lad of some eleven years, the elder bastard of
her ‘‘lewde”’ daughter’s two illegitimate children. At the
same time Joan Upney was accused of nourishing familiars
in the shape of toads, and Joan Prentice, who lived in an
Essex almshouse, harboured and fed her familiars as ferrets.
All three were hanged.

It will be seen that most of the persons concerned in these
trials were the very dregs of society, ‘‘ namelie leud miserable
and envious poore people,”!1° many of them dependent upon
organized charity, ignorant, idle, malignant, doting crones
and pot-house whores.


120 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


During the forty years from 1568 to 1603 alone the details
of more than two hundred cases are definitely known, a
number which obviously precludes chronological treatment
here, whilst the pamphlet literature, although of the greatest
value, is also far too voluminous for any detailed examination.
It must be remembered, moreover, that this matter only
presents a tithe of what doubtless exists, and even barely to
enumerate the recorded trials were no easy task, whilst to
ascertain the exact sum total of witches involved in these
cases rendered impossible by such entries as that relating to
Samuel Coewra (1579), who was paid for “searching for
certen persons suspected for conjuracion,’’!11 or in 1580 at
Kent, when several persons were to be apprehended for
conjuration,!12 or in Essex during the same year “‘ sondery
persons ’’ were charged with sorcery.!1% In 1584 ‘“ the oulde
witche of Ramsburg”? and many “ oulde witches and sor-
cerers ’’ fell under grave suspicion ;114 in 1595 several persons
were committed at Bristol touching the Earl of Derby’s
death ;115 in 1600 several conjurers were detected at Ipswich.

There remains, no doubt still unexamined, a whole mass of
English local evidence in the municipal archives of county
towns, in the jail delivery records, in old legal documents,
among the MSS. to be found in private collections, and not
until all these have been scrupulously searched and codified
can we venture exactly to estimate the number of Elizabethan
witch-trials and condemnations. When we remember that
although Mother Gabley of King’s Lynn was hanged in
1582-8, and Anne Kerke of Bokes-wharfe was executed at
Tyburn in 1599, and hundreds such of poor wretches paid
the penalty of penury and guilt, my Lady Hatton, whose
heart the demon at the expiration of their contract tore from
her bosom in Bleeding-heart Yard, and a score of proud court
dames were dabbling in the black art and consulting sorcerers
with impunity or, at least, without discovery, we realize how
terrible and how widespread a plague was Witchcraft in
Elizabethan days. Did not the Queen herself favour Dr.
John Dee, a master of hermetic mysteries, who with his
speculator, as Lilly dubs him, Edward Kelly, was wont to
converse familiarly with spirits and read the future in his
magic shew-stone ?116

The very titles of the contemporary pamphlets often give


ENGLAND 121


data of considerable interest. Thus we have: The Examina-
tion and Confession of a notorious Witch named Mother Arnold,
alias Whitecote, alias Glastonbury, at the Assize of Burntwood
in July, 1574: who was hanged for Witchcraft at Barking
(1575). As also: An Account of Margaret Hacket, a notorious
Witch, who consumed a young Man to Death, rotted his Bowells
and back bone asunder, who was executed at Tiborn, 19 Feb.,
1585. (London, 1585.) And again: The Arraignment and
Execution of 8 detestable Witches, John Newell, Joane his wife,
and Hellen Calles ; two executed at Barnett, and one at Brayn-
ford, 1 Dec., 1595. Another very curious pamphlet is: The
most wonderfull and true storie of a certaine Witch named Alse
Gooderidge of Stapenhill, who was arraigned and convicted!!*
at Darbie, at the Assizes there. As also a true Report of the
strange Torments of Thomas Darling, a boy of thirteen years
of age, that was possessed by the Devill, with his horrible Fittes
and terrible apparitions by him uttered at Burton upon Trent,
in the Countie of Stafford, and of his marvellous deliverance.
(London, 1597.)118

One of the most remarkable of all Elizabethan cases was
that in 1582 of the witches of S. Oses, or S. Osyth’s, a
hamlet to the north-east of Chelmsford. The trouble began
when Grace Thurlow, a “‘ poore and needie woman,” as she
described herself, laid information before the magistrates
concerning one Ursley Kemp, alias Gray, who had long borne
a very dubious reputation, and who eked out a scanty main-
tenance by acting as midwife, nursing children, harlotry, and
various kinds of white magic, which included “ unwitching ”
the sick. It appeared that Grace Thurlow’s son, Davy, had
been taken with a strange illness and hideously convulsed.
Ursley Kemp came to see him with other neighbours, and
after taking the lad by the hand and muttering some
mysterious words, she said to the mother: “I warrant thee,
I, thy childe shall doe well enough.” The boy was almost
immediately restored to health, but Grace Thurlow was
suspicious, and she refused to allow Ursley Kemp the nursing
of a newly born baby girl. Soon afterwards the infant fell
out of its cradle and broke its neck. Then a violent quarrel
and a “ fratch ” ensued, during which Ursley threatened her
with lameness, and she answered sharply enough: “ Take
heed, Ursley, thou has a naughtie name.” But soon enough


122 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Grace Thurlow was crippled with pain, and could scarcely
drag herself along on her hands and knees. A complaint was
accordingly made, Ursley Kempe was formally accused, and
committed to the assizes by the justices. Here she appeared
before Justice Brian Darcy, who promptly examined her
eight-year-old ‘“‘ base son ” Thomas Rabbet, and he confessed
that his mother “ hath foure seuerall spirites, the one called
Tyffin, the other Tittey, the third Pigine, and the fourth
Iacke : and being asked of what colours they were, saith that
Tyttey is like a little grey Cat,11® Tyffin is like a white lambe,
Pygine is black like a Toad, and Iacke is black like a Cat.
And her saith, her hath seen his mother at times to giue the
beere to drinke, and of a white Lofe or Cake to eate, and
saith that in the night time the said spirites will come to his
mother, and sucke blood of her vpon her armes and other
places of her body.” He further declared that the spirits had
been given to “‘ Godmother Newman,” who had carried them
away in an earthen pot, and so Ales Newman was also appre-
hended. One Laurence then appeared to give his testimony
against Ursley Kempe, who had bewitched his wife to death.

At first Ursley Kempe denied all the accusations brought
against her, but presently upon Justice Darcy “ promising
to the saide Ursley that if she would deale plainely and
confesse the truth that she should haue fauour, so by giving
her faire speeche she confessed as followeth,” and acknow-
ledged that the indictment of Witchcraft and murder was
correct in every particular. The death of Grace Thurlow’s
baby would have been easy to accomplish, and we may well
suppose that Ursley Kempe, who seems to have been the
chief of the St. Osees’ witches, was initiated into all the secrets
of poisoning, which horrid art was universally practised by
the wise-women and conjurers of the day, both at home and
abroad. Her story, as well as the confessions of the other
witches, tallied exactly with the accusations of the witnesses,
. and it would clearly have been impossible that such should
be so concisely the case if the narratives were mere fiction
and wild romance. Ursley Kempe went on to incriminate
other women who were guilty of these heinous crimes, and
soon a whole coven was sought out and brought before the
Justice. Among them were Ales Hunt, and her sister
Margerie Sammon, who had “ two spirites like Toades, the


ENGLAND 123


one called Tom, and the other Robbyn.” These two were
the daughters of old Mother Barnes, a notorious witch, who
was said to have bequeathed them her familiars. Febey Hunt,
a lass of about eight years old, deposed that her stepmother
Ales Hunt, had two little things, one black and one white,
““ the which shee kept in a little lowe earthen pot with woll,
colour white and black . . . and saith, that shee hath seene
her mother to feede them with milke.” Elizabeth Bennet
acknowledged that she had two “ spirits, one called Suckin,
being blacke like a Dogge, the other called Lierd, beeing red
like a Lion.” Ales Mansfielde had lamed Joan Chester’s cattle
because she was refused some curds; Joan Robinson had
bewitched geese and a litter of pigs, drowned cows, struck
horses with spavins, and men with a wasting sickness ; Annis
Herd, according to her little ‘‘ base daughter ” aged seven,
had six avices or blackbirds as her imps, and six more who
lay in a box lined with black and white wool. And so the
trial proceeded with guilty confessions, accusations, bitter
recriminations, and counter-accusations until sixteen persons,
one of whom was a man, were involved, of whom thirteen, as
it was proved, were held to be guilty of murder owing to
their sorceries. It is uncertain how many were executed
According to some accounts the thirteen were put to death,
but Scot12° who had followed the case with unusual care says
at least seventeen or eighteen paid the penalty. That the
trial excited unusual interest is plain, and both Scot and
George Gifford, the author of A Dialogue concerning Witches, ‘*1
seemed to have attended some of the hearings.

Perhaps the best summary of the trials, certainly the best
summary of what was believed at the time, is the singular
table drawn up at the end of the pamphlet, evidently written
(in part at any rate) by Justice Darcy himself, to whom it
is dedicated, and entitled :

A true and iust Recorde of the Information, Examination, and
Confession of all the Witches, taken at St. Osees in the countie of
Essex ; whereof some were executed, and other some entreated
according to the determination of lawe. Wherein all men may
see what a pestilent people Witches are, and how vnworthy to
lyve in a Christian Commonwealth. Written orderly, as the
cases were tryed by euidence by W. W. Imprinted in London at
the three Cranes, in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson. 1582.


124 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


The conspectus of the whole affair runs thus :

“The names of xiii Witches and those that have been
bewitched by them.

‘The Names of those persons that have beene bewitched
and thereof haue dyed, and by whome, and of them that haue
receyved bodyly harme, &c. As appeareth vpon sundrye
Enformations, Examinations, and Confessions taken by the
worshipfull Bryan Darcey, Esquire ; and by him certified at
large vnto the Queene’s Maiestie’s Justices of Assise of the
Countie of Essex, the xxix of Marche, 1582.


S. Osythes. The Witches. Bewitched { Kempes wife,
1. Ursley Kempe, Thorlowes Childe,
alias Gray. } to death and Strettons wife.


and  Ursley :
Pes to death and Strettons wife.


Confessed by\ The said Ales : Strattons Childe, f whereof they
Ursley and and  Ursley } vewitenea eo Thorlowe, \ did languish.
Elizabeth. Kempe . .


2. Ales ones } bewitched fLetherdalles childe,


William Byet, and Joan his wife,
8. Elizabeth bewitched and iii of his beasts.

Bennet . . to death | The wife of William Willes, and
William Wittingalle.

William Bonners Wife, John

| Seckee } bewitehea { Butler, Fortunes Childe ;

en lel whereof they did languish.
, John Johnson and his Wife, and
Ales Newman sf rome her own Husband, as it is


thought.
Confessed bewitched f Rebecca Durrant and vi beasts of
the cattell Va. Ales Hunt. . { to death one Haywardes.
bewitched
5. Cysley Celles af to death \ Thomas Deaths Childe.


Oyeley Celles « whereof they did languish.
Cysley ane yaa, Richard Rosses horse and beasts


Tattle ar} hewitched ba Mayde, Mary Death,
and and caused their Impes to burne a barne
Thorpe. 6. Ales Manfielde. with much corne.


Confessed of Ales Naaret } bewitched {Robert Chesson,


rosie’ Man- reo tpeth ea to death ‘Land Greuell husband to Margaret.


Ales Manfielde ( bewitched the widdow Chesson, and her hus
and Margaret: band, v beasts and one bullocke and seuerall
Greuell brewinges of beere, and batches of bread.
Thorpe 8. Elizabeth i bewitched f Robert Stannevettes Childe,
Ewstace . . to death \and Thomas Crosse.
bewitched Robert Stanneuet, vii milch beasts,
wo gaue blood in steede of milke, and seuerall
of his Swine dyed.
ewitoned { Richard Harrisons wife, and two


Little Okley. 9. AnnysHerd . wives of William Dowsinge, as
to death | it is supposed.


Elizabeth
Ewstace .


bewitched Corhvistt two beasts, made,

sheepe, and lambes xx; West swine, and

Annys Herd . pigs; Diborne, a brewing of beere, and
seuerall other losses of milke and creame.

bewitched beasts, horses, swine, and pigs, of


Walton. 10. Joan Robinson meuRTRI HEY


“The sayd Ursley Kemp had foure spyrites, viz. their
names Tettey a hee like a gray cat, Jack a hee like a black cat,
Pygin a she like a black toad, and Tyffin a she like a white


ENGLAND 125


lambe. The hees were to plague to death, and the shees to
punish with bodily harme, and to destroy cattell.

“ Tyffyn, Ursley’s white spirit, did tell her alwayes (when she
asked) what the other witches had done: and by her the
most part were appelled, which spirit telled her alwayes true.
As is well approved by the other witches confession.

“The sayd Ales Newman had the sayd Ursley Kemps spirits
to vse at her pleasure. Elizabeth Bennet had two spirits, viz.
their names Suckyn, a hee like a blacke dog : and Lyard, red
lyke a lyon or hare.

** Ales Hunt had two spirits lyke colts, the one blacke, the
other white.

“11. Margery Sammon had two spirits lyke toads, their
names Tom and Robyn.

*“ Cysley Celles had two spirits by seuerall names, viz.
Sotheons Hercules, Jack, or Mercury.

*“ Ales Manfield and Margaret Greuell had in common by
agreement, ilii spirits, viz. their names Robin, Jack, Will,
Puppet, alias Mamet, whereof two were hees, and two were
shees, lyke vnto black cats.

*“ Elizabeth Ewstace had iii impes or spirits of colour white,
grey, and black.

** Annis Herd had vi impes or spirites, like auises and black
byrdes, and vi other like kine, of the bygnes of rats, with
short hornes ; the auises shee fed with wheat, barley, otes,
and bread, the kine with straw and hay.

roe ae J These have not confessed anything touching
12. Joan Pechey at the hauing of spirits.
sd el alee ‘ Mychell Steuens Childe.
cocks. J aesth iin vages Che

A case, which attracted unusual attention at the time, was
that which had its scene at Warboys in Huntingdonshire.
Joan, the eldest daughter of Sir Robert Throckmorton, the
head of a prominent county family, being a child about ten
years old, was taken with sudden fits during which she
““ sereeked ”’ loud and long. It so happened that a neighbour,
Gammer Alice Samuel, called at the house, and the hysterical
girl cried: ‘“‘ Did you ever see one more like a witch then
she is: take off her blacke thumbd cap, for I cannot abide
to looke on her.” ‘‘ The old woman hearing her, sat still,


126 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


without saying a word, yet looked very dismally, as those
that saw her remembered very well.” Nothing was thought
of it, however, at the time, and when Dr. Barrow, an eminent
physician of Cambridge, who had treated the child without
success, asked the parents if Witchcraft might not be
suspected they promptly answered in the negative. Young
Joan now particularly complained that Mother Samuel was
trying to force a cat, a frog, or sometimes a toad into her
mouth to suffocate her, obviously the hysterical ball, “ palla
isterica,”’ one of the most marked and commonest somatic
indications of acute hysteria. But when two or three of their
other neurasthenic daughters were seized with the same strange
disorder and fell into frantic convulsions, crying out that
Mother Samuel was tormenting them, the suspected woman
was forcibly brought into their presence by Gilbert Pickering,
an uncle of the children, who thereupon instantly scratched
her, as by shedding the witch’s blood those who were for-
spoken might obtain some temporary relief. Meantime Lady
Cromwell!2? visited the Throckmortons, and found the sick
girls so racked with aches and twisted with pain that she
could not refrain from tears. She insisted upon seeing Mother
Samuel, whose good man was a tenant of her husband, and
she succeeded after a struggle in cutting off a lock of the
crone’s grey hair. That very night she had horrible dreams,
and awoke in a panic, sweating and screaming. By day she
pined and languished, at night she scarce dared seek her
couch, and at length exhausted with suffering and fear she
died a bare fifteen months after her interview with the witch,
by whom the whole countryside believed she had been done
to death. Henry Pickering, a cousin of the Throckmortons,
and several Cambridge scholars, next examined Mother
Samuel, it being the winter of 1591, but they merely received
tart and angry replies which convinced them that she was
indeed a baleful witch. And now the children could only
be well when she was present, and the wretched old creature
was harried on every side to confess that it was she who had
wrought all this mischief. At length completely “‘ dazed and
mazed ” with the screams of the hysterical girls, their sham
paroxysms and wild imaginings, the threats and entreaties,
the anger and the din, the shouting and ranting and exhorta-
tions of that disordered household, she gave way and


ENGLAND 127


exclaimed : ‘ Oh, sir, I have been the cause of all this trouble
to your children.”” Soon both she and her daughter, Agnes,
were in close custody and on their way to Dr. William
Wickham, Bishop of Lincoln, before whom she made a
confession, avowing that she entertained three familiars,
Pluck, Catch, and White, that she had sold her soul to the
Devil, that she had killed Lady Cromwell, cast a spell upon
the Throckmorton family, and in fine anything else they
asked her to avow. Inevitably she was imprisoned with her
daughter and her husband John Samuel, who was now also
accused by the children, and all three were tried before Judge
Fenner at the Huntingdon assizes. The trial lasted five hours
and the accused were found guilty, condemned to be hanged,
and their bodies burned. The poor old woman, half crazed
with her agony, set up a plea of pregnancy, though she was
wellnigh fourscore years of age. The whole court was
convulsed with laughter, in which the unfortunate victim
herself joined.as merrily as any, and this was, of course, an
extra proof that she was a sorceress. The daughter was
urged to make this defence, but she stoutly replied, ‘‘ It shall
never be said that I was both a witch and a whore.” The
whole family was executed on 7 April, 1598. An agreement
is still preserved in the archives of the Huntingdon corpora-
tion providing that the town shall pay as bequeathed by
Sir Samuel Cromwell forty pounds annually to Queen’s
College, Cambridge, in order that a sermon shall be preached
at Huntingdon on each Lady Day by a divine of the College,
who is to take Witchcraft as his theme. The annual sermon
on this endowment was still being delivered in the earlier
years of the nineteenth century when the preachers were
wont vigorously to attack the belief in Witchcraft. The
persecution of the Samuels is, in truth, one of the most sordid
of tales. The evidence reeks with the hysteria of disordered,
mentally unbalanced children; a record of ignorance,
trickery, lies, and imposture. ‘A special characteristic of
hysterical persons,” says Tardieu, “‘ is instinctive dissimula-
tion, an inveterate and unceasing impulse to lie by word and
deed.” ‘“ The sagacity and inconceivable tenacity,” continues
Charcot, “‘ with which they deceive others is quite wonderful.”
“‘ And these falsehoods,” adds Richet, ‘‘ are told with such
audacity, indifference, and assurance as to throw you


128 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


completely off your guard.” The Warboys’ manifestations
could hardly be summed more tersely or with greater
exactitude.!?4

King James I upon his accession to the throne of England
gave additional impetus to the witch trials and condemna-
tions. He had quite definite opinions with regard to the
subject ; he felt very deeply on the matter ; and expressed
his views with much weight and detail in his Demonologie,1*4
especially penned “‘ against the damnable opinions of two
principally in our age, whereof the one called ScoT an
Englishman, is not ashamed in publike print to deny, that
ther can be such a thing as Witch-craft : and so mainteines
the old error of the Sadducees, in denying of spirits. The
other called Vviervs, a German Phisition, sets out a publick
apologie for al these craftes-folkes, whereby, procuring for
their impunitie, he plainly bewrayes himselfe to haue bene
one of that profession.” 12°

Reginald Scot was a Kentish man of quiet and secluded
life. He had kept several terms at Hart Hall, Oxford, but
left the University without proceeding to a degree, and
settling down at Scots Hall devoted himself to the manage-
ment of his estate. His love for his native countryside is
shown in A Perfect Platforme of a Hoppe-Garden and necessary
instructions for the making and maintaining thereof, which first
published in 1574 ran into three editions within five years.
In 1584 there came from the Press his Discoverie of Witchcraft,
a subject which he seems to have studied, and concerning
which he had in a somewhat desultory fashion been collecting
notes for a long period. It is obvious that the immediate
occasion of publication was the S. Oses affair,12* and the
greater part of the Discoverie was most certainly written in
1583, in some haste, no doubt, to strike lustily whilst the iron
was hot. For years before he put pen to paper he had been
investigating on his account alleged cases of Witchcraft,
attending trials,12” closely questioning magistrates and
divines. His mind was naturally sceptical, and in religion
he would nowadays be a pseudo-scientific modernist. That
is to say, he was utterly without imagination, a very dull,
narrow, and ineffective little soul. When he has exposed
certain egregious impostures of contemporary date, enlarged
upon card tricks and prestidigitation at inordinate length,


ENGLAND 129


attributed the appearance of Samuel in the cave of Endor
to ventriloquism, and more than hinted that possession in
the New Testament merely means disease, this myopic
squireen deems that the whole matter is settled once and for
all. It is true that he gives us an ample bibliography, over
two hundred Latin and thirty English titles, but he came
to the subject with a deeply prejudiced mind and was deter-
mined not to find in any author other than what he sought.
Had he dared, Scot would have openly denied the super-
natural, of that I make no doubt ; and to-day he might have
shone in the company of Mr. Clodd and Mr. McCabe.

Johann Weyer!#8 was born in 1516 at Gran in North
Brabant. He studied medicine at Paris and Orleans, and
about 1545 settled as a physician at Arnheim, whence he was
called to Dusseldorf, to be body-physician to Wilhelm IV,
Duke of Jiilich, Cleves, and Berg, to whom he dedicated his
famous treatise De prestigiis demonum et incantationibus ac
uenefictis, Basel, 1563. This was followed by other works
upon the same lines. No doubt there is something in these
works which curbed the extravagances of the day, and
although Weyer was a Protestant he is careful not to show
himself too audaciously sceptical. It is true that he insinuates
more than he affirms or denies, and probably in print he did
not go so far as he really wished. He was safe under the
protection of the Duke, who favoured him and mourned his
death, which took place on a journey in Seeklenburg, 24
February, 1588.

It is natural that when King James came to England his
Demonologie should have been accepted by officials as a
text-book whose authority was enhanced by the sovereignty of
the author. But his most direct influence was the passing
of a new law, which was taken in hand by the House of Lords
when his first Parliament had been but eight days in session.
The Elizabethan statute made killing by Witchcraft a capital
offence, whilst to inflict an injury by charm or spell meant
a year’s imprisonment. James felt that this in practice was
but the law against murder, and did not punish the crime
of Witchcraft, commerce with the Devil, harbourage and
employment of familiars. Accordingly the new Bill went to
a large committee which included Sir Edmund Anderson, the
Lord Chief-Justice of the Common Pleas ; Sir Edward Coke,


130 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the Attorney-general ; twelve bishops, and six earls. On
9 June it passed its final reading in the Lords. The Eliza-
bethan statute was repealed and it was enacted that “ If any
person or persons shall use, practise or exercise an Invocation
or Conjuration of any evill and wicked Spirit, or shall consult,
covenant with, entertaine, employe, feede, or rewarde any
evill and wicked Spirit to or for any intent or purpose; or
take up any dead man, woman, or child out of his, her, or
their graue, or any other place where the dead body resteth,
or the skin, bone, or any part of any dead person to be
employed or used in any manner of witchcraft, enchantment,
charm, or sorcerie, whereby any person shall be killed,
destroyed, wasted, consumed, pined, or lamed in his or her
body, or any part thereof, every such offender is a felon
without benefit of Clergy.” Even the finding of treasure or
lost goods by Witchcraft, as well as “‘ the intent to provoke
any person to unlawfull love,” and the harming of cattle,
were punishable with one year’s imprisonment with the
pillory at each quarter, and upon a second offence, death.
It is fairly obvious that most offenders must at any rate come
under these latter provisions, for it is not to be supposed
that a witch would only once make use of her powers.

We have recorded some fifty cases of witches executed in
King James’s reign. Of these about thirty suffered for causing
actual death by sorcery: 1608, Yorkshire, Mary Pannel,
executed for killing in 1598 ;129 1606, Hertford, Johanna
Harrison and her daughter ;12° 1607, Derbyshire, several
witches were put to death at Bakewell ;131_ 1612, Lancaster,
the famous Pendle trials, ten persons executed, Alice Nutter,
Alizon Device, Elizabeth Device, James Device, Anne Whittle
(Chattox), Anne Redfearne, Isobel Robey, John Bulcock,
Jane Bulcock, Katherine Hewitt, whilst Elizabeth Demdike
died in prison ;18? 1612, Northampton, Agnes Browne, Joan
Vaughan (or Browne), Mary Barber, Hellen Jenkenson, and
Arthur Bill, were executed on 22 July for bewitching “‘ the
body of a young child to the death ” ;183 1612, York, Jennet
Preston ;184 1618, Bedford, Mother Sutton, and Mary her
daughter, of Milton Miles, hanged ;135 1615, Middlesex, Joan
Hunt of Hampstead, hanged ;18° 1616, Middlesex, Elizabeth
Rutter of Finchley, hanged for laming and killing three
persons ;**” 1619, Lincoln, Margaret and Philippa Flower,


ENGLAND | 181


hanged, their mother, Joan Flower, died on the way to
prison ;13° 1619, Leicester, three women, Anne Baker, Joan
Willimot, Ellen Green, accused and confessed, and were
executed ;139 1621, Middlesex, Elizabeth Sawyer of Edmon-
ton, “indicted for that she the said Elizabeth Sawyer, by
Diabolical help, and out of her malice-aforethought, did witch
unto death Agnes Ratcleife, a neighbour of hers, dwelling in
the toun of Edmonton,” hanged at Tyburn, Thursday,
19 April of the said year.14°

The records of those condemned to suffer for Witchcraft
whereby death was not actually caused are very few. In
1607 the local authorities at Rye, Sussex, would have sent
to the gallows two women who resorted to spirits in order
“to gain wealth,” but it seems that they were discharged
owing toa mandate from London.!41 In 1616 Agnes Berrye
of Enfield was hanged for laming and causing to languish.142
And in the same year Mary Smith, the wife of a Norfolk
glover, Henry Smith, was hanged at King’s Lynn for causing
four people to languish by her enchantments.143 A few
months later nine women were hanged at Leicester on the
accusation of a lad, some twelve or thirteen years old, who
fell into hideous convulsions, which he said were caused by
spirits whom they set on him. Six more women were in jail
and would probably also have suffered had not the King in
his northward progress, whilst staying in the town, examined
the boy and detected imposture. What punishment was
meted out to him is not stated, but the judges were
disgraced.144

At Bristol in 1624 two witches were executed, but there are
no details given of their trial.14° Edward Poeton, also, in
the Winnowing of White Witchcraft,1** tells us that two women
were hanged for their sorceries, but again there is merely
this bare record.

These, of course, were the more serious cases, and we have
a large number of minor trials in which the accused was
sentenced to a year’s imprisonment ; such for example was
the punishment awarded to Margaret Pearson at Lancaster
in 1612, and to Dorothy Magick of S. Andrew’s parish,
Holborn, in 1614. Very often the prisoners were acquitted.
Alice Bradley of Hampstead who was arraigned in 1607 was
discharged ; so also were Margaret Pilton of Warminster,


1382 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Wilts, in 1613 ; Anne Branche of Tottenham in 1617 ; Agnes
Miller of Finchley in 1619; Anne Beaver of Middlesex in
1621 ;147 and very many more.

When we consider that in the Valais from 1428-34 at
least two hundred witches were put to death; whilst at
Briangon in 1487 one hundred and fifty were executed ; that
in the year 1524 alone, according to Fra Bartolomeo Spina,
the erudite Dominican, no less than a thousand persons
suffered the extreme penalty for Witchcraft in the northern
provinces of Italy; that Nicolas Remy says he convicted
and burned nine hundred sorcerers during a decade and a
half ; and at Bamburg, in Bavaria, the executions from 1610
to 1840 were at the rate of about a hundred annually ; even
if we allow for some exaggeration—although the evidence is
plain and there is no need for such precaution—it will appear
that the popular ideas concerning the holocausts in the reign
of James I are anything but historically exact, and instead
of shuddering at the large numbers who perished we may
well be surprised that the executions in England were so
few. Moreover it is said that towards the end of his reign the
King was by no means so firm a believer in Witchcraft as he
had formerly been. Fuller, in his Church History of Britain,
has the following truly remarkable passage : ‘‘ The frequency
of such forged possessions wrought such an alteration upon
the judgement of King James that he, receding from what
he had written in his Demonology, grew first diffident of,
and then flatly to deny, the workings of witches and devils,
as but falsehoods and delusions.’’!48 Francis Osborne also
writes that the King would have gone as far as to deny any
such operations ; but out of reasons of State and to gratify
the Church.149

Such a complete change of opinion is hardly credible. No
doubt the King modified his belief, but it is almost impossible
to accept these statements as they stand. That the author
of the Demonologie should become a sceptic seems an
unprecedented revolution, and we may well be excused if we
feel mistrustful before we subscribe to so sweeping an
assertion. Yet we may appreciate the truth that no doubt
underlies the report, and the falling off of prosecutions, the
numerous acquittals, towards the latter end of the King’s
reign, may or may not have any bearing upon this point.


ENGLAND 183


By far the most important of the witch-trials under James I
was that of the Pendle coven in 1612,1° and this not only
created a tremendous stir at the time and was to give matter
and melodrama for romance and the theatre in future days,
but it even contributed a phrase to the English language, for
The Lancashire Witches has become proverbial in its use and
popularity.

In the lonely forest of Pendle, among the wild hills of
eastern Lancashire, there eked out her wretched sustenance
a blind beggar of some fourscore years, a “‘ wicked fire-brand
of mischiefe,” generally acknowledged to be “‘ a genrall agent
for the Deuill in all these partes,” Elizabeth Southernes or
Demdike. This ancient crone had been a witch longer than
memory could serve, and she had dedicated her children and
grandchildren to the service of Satan. Her bitter rival in
age, influence, and evil was a hag named Anne Whittle, or
rather Chattox, ‘‘a very old, withered, spent, and decreped
creature, her sight almost gone; a dangerous witch of very
long continuance; always opposite to old Demdike; for
whom the one fauoured the other hated deadly: and how
they curse and accuse one another in their examinations may
appear. In her witchcraft always more ready to doe
mischief to men’s goods than themselves; her lippes ever
chattering and talking ; but no man knew what. She lived
in the Forest of Pendle amongst this wicked company of
dangerous witches . . . from these two sprung all the rest in
order; and even the children and friendes of these two
notorious witches.”

There was, in fact, a deadly feud between the two families,
and both having been long exercised in supernatural practices
and devoted body and soul to the Demon, fearful was the
mischief they wrought in their angry struggles for supremacy
in wickedness. Moreover there were the usual quarrels over
petty pilferings among country-folk in ignorant hamlets.
Demdike’s daughter had missed clothing, some of which, a
coif and band, had (they said) been found in the possession
of Chattox’s daughter, and ceaseless disputes and brawls
took place in consequence. Even a third family was involved.
The Nutters were well-known well-to-do county gentry, but
dashing young Robert Nutter, who no doubt thought it
shame a witch should not be a whore, attempted to seduce


184 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Chattox’s comely daughter, and when to his extreme surprise
his advances were repulsed he threatened one day to evict
the whole family since the land where they dwelt would be
his property. Old Chattox promptly set about contriving
Nutter’s death by witchcraft, and in less than three months
he was in his grave, accusing her of his bewitchment with his
latest breath. Some years before Chattox had killed John
Device, the son-in-law of Demdike, in similar fashion, because
he had omitted to pay her a yearly tax of “‘ one aghen-dole
of meale,’’ which she extorted under a promise to do him and
his no harm. She had slain Anne Nutter, too, for laughing at
and mocking her; as also John Morris’ child whom she had
caused to pine and dwindle by piercing a clay image with
sharp pins. As for Demdike, the “rankest hag that ever
troubled daylight,” her iniquities were legion. She ‘“‘ brought
vp her owne Children, instructed her Graundchildren, and
tooke great care and paines to bring them to be Witches.”
Little wonder that Master Roger Nowell, an active and
austere magistrate, suddenly swooped down upon this com-
munity of Satanists and in a very short space of time he had
Elizabeth Demdike with three other women securely lodged
in Lancaster Castle.

As might be supposed the whole witch community was
now seriously alarmed, and Demdike’s daughter hurriedly
summoned a meeting of the gang on Good Friday, which
seems to have been one of the principal dates whereon the
Pendle witches were wont to foregather in full force, at her
abode, the lonely Malking Tower. Here they plotted a
scheme for the release of Mother Demdike, and considered
how they might kill the governor and jailer and blow up the
Castle. They then sat down to a hearty meal. ‘‘ The persons
aforesaid had to their dinners Beefe, Bacon, and roasted
Mutton : which Mutton (as this Examinates said brother said)
was of a Wether of Christopher Swyers of Barley: which
Wether was brought in the night before into this Examinates
mothers house by the said Iames Deuice, this Examinates
said brother: and in this Examinates sight killed and eaten.
. . . And before their said parting away, they all appointed
to meet at the said Prestons wiues house that day twelve-
moneths ; at which time the said Prestons wife promised to
make them a great Feast.’’151


ENGLAND 135


But long before that they had all been arrested, and had
been put on their trial before Sir Edward Bromley and Sir
James Altham, the Justices of the northern circuit, who
reached Lancaster on the sixteenth of August. Mother
Demdike had died in prison, but her depositions, especially
as regards her familiar, who “ appeared vnto her in the
likenes of a broune Dogg, forcing himselfe to her knee, to
get blood vnder her left Arme,” had been taken down before
the magistrates and covered her memory with execration.
Five members of the two rival Pendle broods made ample
confession.152 Mother Chattox153, Elizabeth Device, Alizon
and Jennet, a child aged nine, her daughters; and their
brother James. They involved one another in the most
hateful sorceries, and in spite of many grotesque, but not
necessarily untrue, details the tale they told was foul and
horrible to a degree. All the bestial malice, crass stupidity,
empty revenge, and besotted superstition of the remote
countryside are there compounded. Especially remarkable
is the testimony of James Device, a lad who can at most have
barely been out of his teens: ‘“ that vpon Sheare Thursday:
was two yeares, his Grand-Mother Elizabeth Southernes,
alias Demdike, did bid him this Examinate goe to the Church
to receiue the Communion (the next day after being Good
Friday)15* and ther not to eate the Bread the Minister gaue
him, but to bring it and deliuer it to such a thing as should
meet him in his way homewards; Notwithstanding her
perswasions this Examinate did eate the Bread: and so in
his comming homeward some fortie roodes off the said Church,
there met him a thing in the shape of a Hare, who spoke vnto
this Examinate, and asked him whether he had brought the
Bread.” It is not surprising that he was condemned for “ as
dangerous and malicious a witch as ever lived in these parts
of Lancashire, of his time, and spotted with as much innocent
bloud as euer any witch of his yeeres.”’

Alice Nutter of Rough Lee was also implicated, for Eliza-
beth Device accused her of having assisted Old Demdike to
bewitch a man to death ; she had further attended the Sabbat
feast at Malking Tower. ‘‘ She was,” says Potts, ‘a rich
woman, had a great estate and children of good hope.” She
showed herself ‘‘ of good temper, free from envy and malice.”

The Pendle cases were interrupted on the third day by the


136 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


trial of three women from Salmesbury, who pleaded not
guilty. The charges against them chiefly rested upon the
evidence of a single witness, Grace Sowerbutts, who declared
that she had been tormented and vexed for three years. No
‘‘ matter of witchcraft,’”? however, was proved, and the
accused were discharged. This acquittal surely shows that
the judges and court were not merely actuated by the blind
fury and insensate to which sentences of condemnation are
usually attributed by modern historians.

Of the Lancashire coven ten were executed: Mother
Chattox and her daughter Anne Redfearne; Alice Nutter;
Elizabeth Device15® and two of her children, Alizon and
James; Katherine Hewit, alias Mouldheels, a fearful bel-
dame; John Bulcock and his mother Jane; Isobel Roby.
Mother Demdike had died in prison, and Jennet Preston, one
of the gang, was some three months later sent to the gallows
at York for the murder by noxious spells of Master Thomas
Lister. So ended this famous trial, by some accidental chance,
for there were many other cases equally interesting, equally
fantastic, and equally terrible, perhaps the most famous
witch-trial among English records.

It seems very dubious if the Boy of Bilston, one William
Perry, a thirteen-year-old lad of Bilston in Staffordshire, was
in truth the impostor he is alleged to have been. It is true
that a hag named Joan Cocke was accused of having forespoken
him,1°° yet even if we allow this to be fantasy the fact remains
his case seems to have been one of genuine possession, whether
it had any connexion with Joan Cocke’s sorceries or no.

It should be remembered that our only accounts are from
violently prejudiced sources. The contemporary pamphlet
The Boy of Bilston (London, 1622) was actually prepared by
Richard Baddeley, secretary to Bishop Morton,15? and is
absolutely unreliable in its presentation of the case. Arthur
Wilson in his Life and Reign of James I (London, 1658) tells
us that he heard the story ‘ from the Bishop’s own mouth
almost thirty years before it was inserted here’ ; most partial
testimony. John Webster’s The Displaying of Supposed
Witchcraft, which mentions the incidents, was not published
until 1677,15° and in any case the man was a crass rationalist,
a muddy materialist, whose conclusions are hardly worth
consideration. It is obviously impossible that more than


ENGLAND 137


three hundred years after we can investigate the details of a
ease of extraordinary difficulty, and indeed delicacy, which
occurred in 1620—especially when, as I believe, those details
have been cleverly perverted—with any degree of exactitude
and caution that will warrant us in pronouncing upon its
genuineness, how far it was uncounterfeit, and in what, if
any, particulars it was exaggerated or misreported. Never-
theless the impression is strongly conveyed to my mind that
Bishop Thomas Morton, or more particularly perhaps Mr.
Secretary Baddeley, made no fair use of young William Perry,
and moulding him by threats, ‘“‘ for he brast out into plentiful
teares ’” and they obviously bullied him soundly, obliged the
poor lad to confess that the very truth was trickery and
sleight, a cunning device indeed and a weapon meet to be
employed in their anti-Catholic crusade.

The charges brought in 1622 by Edward Fairfax of Knares-
borough against six women, whom he accused of sorcery
and who were indicted for bewitching his children, soon fell
to the ground. These women had been examined by the
local magistrates, by whose command one was publicly
searched for the Devil’s mark, and committed to the assizes.
At the April session, however, four were released, two of
them on bond. Two seem to have been already allowed to
return home. Fairfax was far from satisfied, and had
sufficient influence to ensure that they were again brought
up in August. The judge at the outset warned the jury to
be very careful, and, after hearing some of the evidence,
dismissed the prisoners on the ground that what was alleged
‘reached not to the point of the statute.” This is indeed
remarkable, and indicates a considerable, if temporary, change
in public opinion. The case in itself is interesting owing to
the fact that it is an episode in the life of the translator of
Tasso, but otherwise it presents no special features which call
for comment or examination.

During the reign of Charles I, which for our purpose may
fairly be reckoned as not extending beyond 1642, the outbreak
of the rebellion when the Puritans assumed responsibility for
the government, there was only one notable witch alarm in
England, whilst there are but seven recorded executions and
two at least of these rest upon most insufficient evidence.
In 1630 a wizard named Utley, a professed conjurer, alleged


1388 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


to have bewitched Richard Assheton to death, was hanged
at Lancaster ;159 in the same year a woman was hanged at
Sandwich in Kent ;!®° in 1631 in Wiltshire ‘‘ John Barlowes’
wife ”’ is stated to have suffered ;1§1 in Somerset one person
was executed ; and at Taunton, a sorcerer, probably Edmund
Bull, who had been under grave suspicion in 1626, went to
the gallows.162 In 1641 one Hammond of Westminster was
tried and perhaps hanged,1®? but this is quite uncertain, as
also is a story given at third hand of a woman who was put
to death at Oxford.1®4 The one resounding scandal was the
notorious recrudescence of the Pendle tradition in 1633-4,
when young Robinson set the county aflame with his lies,
and as many as seventeen suspected persons were tried and
condemned only to be reprieved by the King. The case has
been discussed at length in connexion with Heywood and
Brome’s topical drama The late Lancashire Witches, produced
at the Globe in 1634.19

Many stories are told of the necromantic powers of Dr.
Lamb, who was high in the Duke of Buckingham’s favour.
He is said, upon what appears to be wholly insufficient
evidence, to have dealt in poisons and to have been of the
same fraternity as “‘ sweet father’? Foreman, who was so
deeply implicated in the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury
and the Somerset scandals.1®* But the popular hate, which
had impotently assailed his patron, proved fatal to Lamb.
At length he could not venture to appear in the streets of
London with safety, and one day in 1640 whilst walking
abroad under a disguise he was recognized and hooted by
some idle boys. As he sought to escape a crowd collected
and pursued him. He was seized in Wood Street, and dragged
through the kennels to S. Paul’s Cross, where the brutal mob
beat and stoned him to death with hideous yells of “* Kill the
wizard ! Kill the poisoner!”’ Charles I, hearing of the riot,
rode from Whitehall to quell it, but he arrived too late to
save their victim. The City, which protested its inability to
deliver up the ringleaders to justice, was very properly fined
six hundred pounds for so infamous an outrage.16? In
1653 Anne Bodenham, who had been Dr. Lamb’s servant,
but then lived at Fisherton Anger in Wiltshire, was hanged
at Salisbury upon an absurd and unsubstantiated charge of
witchcraft. She was accused of nourishing familiars; and


ENGLAND 139


when she was searched in jail the women who performed
this office swore that they had found two unnatural teats or
witch-paps upon her body, the one on her shoulder, the other
im uerendis. She was said to have made a particular contract
with the Devil, by whose help she could transform herself
“into the shape of Mastive Dog, a black Lyon, a white Bear,
a Woolf, a Bull, and a Cat,” although it does not appear how
such metamorphoses would benefit her, and one might imagine
that a black lion, a white bear, or even a wolf must attract
considerable attention if met with in a Wiltshire lane. Such
a tissue of absurdities was the evidence, and the whole trial
is indeed a glaring example of judicial murder, which is
perhaps hardly surprising when one considers that it took
place under Cromwell’s tyranny.

Almost immediately upon the outbreak of the Rebellion
in 1642,1°° there was, as might have been expected when
England fell gradually into the hands of gloomy and grossly
superstitious fanatics as cruel as Calvin and as very knaves
as Knox, a hideous epidemic of blind and bloody persecution.

Now also appears upon the scene the most notorious figure
in the whole annals of English Witchcraft, a worthy emissary
of the rebel Parliament. Matthew Hopkins1’° was the son of
James Hopkins, minister of Wenham, Suffolk. It is evident
from his writings that he had received some education and
was able to wield a facile and forcible enough pen in vulgarly
fluent fashion. An orthodox Puritan of narrowest views,1!7!
which were certainly adopted for convenience rather than
from conviction, he was energetic enough so far as his own
pockets were concerned, and his crusade up and down the
eastern counties, which created something like a reign of
terror at the time, has caused his name to stink in the nostrils
of all decent persons ever since. -

Little is known of Hopkins’ early life, but it seems probable
that he practised the law, at Ipswich for a while, and
afterwards at Manningtree, Essex. It was in his own town
that his attention was first drawn to Witchcraft, for a whole
coven was wont to meet near his house. ‘‘ In March, 1644,
he had some seven or eight of that horrible sect of Witches
living in the Towne where he lived, a Towne in Essex called
Manningtree, with divers other adjacent Witches of other
towns, who every six weeks in the night (being alwayes on


140 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the Friday night) had their meeting close by his house, and
had their severall solemm sacrifices there offered to the
Devill, one of which this Discoverer heard speaking to her
Imps and bid them goe to another Witch, who was thereupon
apprehended.”172 Elizabeth Clarke, a wretched hag, was
taken into custody, she was searched, ‘“‘ found to have three
teats about her, which honest women have not,” kept “ from
sleep two or three nights ” and on the fourth night confessed
that she nourished five familiars, Holt, ‘‘ a white kitling ” ;
Jarmara, ‘‘a fat spaniel”; Vinegar Tom, “a long-legg’d
Greyhound with a head like an Oxe with a long taile and
broad Eyes’’; Sack and Sugar, ‘‘a black Rabbet ”; Newes
“like a Polcat.” No less than eight people swore they had
seen these familiars. Other witches, Anne West, her daughter
Rebecca, Anne Leech, and her daughter Helen Clarke,
Elizabeth Gooding, were arrested and revealed the names of
their imps, Elemanzer, Pyewacket, Peck in the Crown,
Grizzel Greedigut, ‘‘ which no mortall could invent.”” Hopkins
continues, ‘“‘in our Hundred in Essex, 29 were condemned at
once, 4 brought 25 Miles to be hanged,—where their Discoverer
lives, for sending the Devill like a Beare to kill him.”
Elizabeth Gooding refused to acknowledge her guilt, but
the others confessed so fast that ere long amid the meshes
of charges and counter-charges more than twenty-three
persons were involved. The accused were searched, the
Devil’s marks and teats discovered. The trials were held at
Chelmsford on 29 July, 1645, Robert Rich, Earl of Warwick,
a venomous Presbyterian, being President of the Court. In
those troublous times the ordinary assizes had been suspended.
Twenty-nine were condemned, four of whom were hanged at
Manningtree and ten at Chelmsford, the others presumably
being executed in various hamlets and villages throughout
the locality. Meantime Hopkins, who had got great glory,
was extending his operations into Suffolk. Four searchers
were appointed, two men and two women, “ who take the
partie or parties so suspected into a Roome, and strip him,
her, or them, starke naked.’!72 Another speciality of
Hopkins’ craft was the watching of witches: “ Having taken
the suspected Witch, shee is placed in the middle of a room
upon a stool or table, crosse-legg’d, or in some other uneasie
posture, to which if she submits not she is then bound with


ENGLAND 141


cords; there is she watcht and kept without meat or sleep
for the space of 24 hours. . . . A little hole is likewise made
in the door for the Impe to come in at; and lest it might
come in some less discernible shape, they that watch are
taught to be ever and anon sweeping the room, and if they
see any spiders or flyes to kill them. And if they cannot kill
them then they may be sure they are her Impes.’’!73 ‘“ Beside
that unreasonable watching, they were extraordinarily walked
till their feet were blistered, and so forced through that cruelty
to confess.” 174 But the chief test of all was swimming the
witch, the water-ordeal, which indeed was popularly con-
sidered to be so supremely efficacious a test that it was still in
use, albeit wholly illegal, of course, among rustics as late as
the nineteenth century. The witches tied with “ their
thumbes and great toes . . . acrosse’ and steadied by ropes—
(“a roape tyed about their middles ’’)—were let down into the
water, some running stream or pond. If she sank the suspect
might be cleared ; if she swam her blackest guilt was evident.
For water was a holy element, it had become instinct with
life whilst the earth was yet barren and uninhabited ; and as
the witch had rejected the sacramental water of Baptism, so
that pure lymph would refuse to receive her into its bosom.1?*
The first record of the use of the water-ordeal in England is,
so far as we know, in 1612, when the Northampton witches
were thus tested. It was employed officially by command
of a justice, probably in compliment to King James, who so
strongly recommends it in his Demonologie. The royal author
also mentions the Devil’s mark, and the supposition that a
witch is incapable of shedding tears. He says: “I think
it hath ben seldome harde tell of, that any whome persones
guiltie of that crime accused, as hauing knowen them to be
their marrowes by eye-sight, and not by hear-say, but such
as were so accused of Witch-craft, could not be clearely tryed
vpon them, were at the least publickly knowen to be of a
very euil life & reputation: so iealous is God I say, of the
fame of them that are innocent in such causes. And besides
that, there are two other good helpes that may be vsed for
their trial: the one is the finding of their marke, and the
trying the insensiblenes thereof. The other is their fleeting
on the water: for as in a secret murther, if the deade carcase
be at any time thereafter handled by the murtherer, it wil


142 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


gush out of bloud, as if the blud wer crying to the heauen for
reuenge of the murtherer, God hauing appoynted that secret
super-naturall signe, for tryall of that secrete vnnaturall
crime, so it appeares that God hath appoynted (for a super-
naturall signe of the monstruous impietie of the Witches) that
the water shal refuse to receiue them in her bosom, that haue
shaken off them the sacred Water of Baptisme, and wilfullie
refused the benefite thereof: No not so much as their eyes
are able to shed teares (thretten and torture them as ye
please) while first they repent (God not permitting them to
dissemble their obstinacie in so horrible a crime) albeit the
women kinde especially, be able other-waies to shed teares
at euery light occasion when they will, yea, although it were
dissemblingly like the Crocodiles.” +7°

Bodin also writes: ‘‘ L’autre presomption est, si la sorciere
ne pleure point, qui est vne des plus fortes presumptions que
Paul Grilland, & les Inquisiteurs ont remarqué pour en auoir
fait executer bien grad nombre. Le Lieutenant de Ribemont
[Antoine de Loan], duquel i’ay parlé cy dessus, m’a dit que
l’vne des Sorcieres, aus quelles il a faict le procés, confessa
qu’elles ne peuuent ietter que trois larmes de l’ceil dextre :
ce qui m’a semblé digne d’estre remarqué.”’!??

Hopkins was accompanied in his visitations by John
Stearne,?78 an unctuous rascal, who strenuously aided and
seconded him, and by an assistant, Goody Phillips, whose
special province lay in discovering the witch-mark on the
bodies of the accused. It was a very profitable business, and
it has been calculated that between them the gang netted
well-nigh a thousand pounds, no inconsiderable sum. Their
rapacity was recognized even at the time and towards the
end of his career Hopkins was openly accused of fleecing East
Anglia to fill his own pockets. It may well be asked how it
was possible such knavery should continue unchecked. It must
be remembered that 1644-8 England was almost in a state
of anarchy, the witch-finder was a fine specimen of Puritan
tyranny and he battened richly after the manner of his kind.

In Suffolk Hopkins caused an immense sensation by dis-
covering that John Lowes, minister of Brandeston, an old
man of eighty who had occupied the living for half a century,
since the days of Elizabeth, was a foul witch. He had been
a quarrelsome old fellow, it appears, misliked by many in his


ENGLAND 143


parish, and although at first he stoutly denied his guilt, when
thoroughly taken in hand by the most approved methods,
* till he was weary of his life and scarce sensible of what he
said or did,’’1”9 he confessed his sorceries and went to the
gallows at Bury.

By this time there were nearly two hundred people shut
up in the county jail. In spite of the unhappy distractions
of the day this state of affairs made some noise, and Parliament
granted a special ‘“‘ Commission of Oyer and Terminer ”’18°
for the trials. Serjeant John Godbolt, the local justices, and
two ranting divines, Samuel Fairclough and Edward Calamy
(the elder), composed this special court. It is true that an
end was put to the swimming tests, which must have caused
Hopkins no small displeasure, but eighteen persons who
“dyed . . . very desperately ’18! were hanged. The sessions
however were adjourned in a hurry, as the royal forces were
approaching Bedford and Cambridge. When they sat again
some fifty more witches were executed.

Hopkins was now hurrying from place to place at break-
neck speed and urging on trials with fatal rapidity. Before
26 July twenty witches were executed in Norfolk: he was
at Yarmouth, by special demand from the corporation, in
September, and again in December ; he was then at Ipswich,
and shortly afterwards at Aldeburgh, whence he journeyed
to Stowmarket, where he received twenty-three pounds for
his services,182 which means that no small number perished.
King’s Lynn and many other towns as well as the smaller
villages were visited, a trail of blood and misery marking his
passage throughout the countryside. Somewhere about
March, 1645-6, he was active in Northamptonshire, and a
little later he crossed into Huntingdon, but here in spite of
the fact that the justices of the peace were not backward
he met with opposition which seems to have turned the scale.
Mr. John Gaule, the minister of Great Staughton, not only
preached against the witch-finder but sharply criticized his
proceedings. Hopkins, although he had been asked to visit
Great Staughton, hesitated, and seems to have contented
himself with a blustering letter!8* addressed to one of the
parishioners :

‘‘ My service to your Worship presented. I have this day
received a Letter, &c., to come to a Towne called Great


144 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Staughton, to search for evil disposed persons, called Witches
(though I heare your Minister is farre against us through
ignorance :) I intend to come the sooner to heare his singular
Judgment on the behalfe of such parties; I have known a
Minister in Suffolke preach as much against their discovery in
a Pulpit, and forcid to recant it (by the Committee) in the
same place. I much marvaile such evil Members should have
any (much more any of the Clergy) who should dayly preach
Terrour to convince such Offenders, stand up to take their
parts, against such as are Complainants for the King and
sufferers themselves, with their Families and Estates. I
intend to give your Towne a Visite suddenly. I am to come
to Kimbolton this weeke, and it shall bee tenne to one, but
I will come to your Town first, but I would certainely know
afore, whether your town affords many Sticklers for such
Cattell, or willing to give and afford es good welcome and
entertainment, as other where I have beene, else I shall wave
your Shire (not as yet beginning in any part of it myselfe)
and betake me to such places, where I doe, and may persist
without controle, but with thanks and recompense. So I
humbly take my leave and rest, your Servant to be Com-
manded, MattrHew Hopxins.”
Gaule answered with his Select Cases of Conscience Touching
Witches and Witchcerafts, London, 1646, an utter repudiation
of Hopkins’ methods and an insistence upon the exercise of
the utmost caution in admitting evidence. This seems to
have had considerable effect, for it is clear that during the
summer and autumn of 1646 Hopkins was no longer active
in his pursuit of prey, indeed he might almost be said to have
retired. He may have been concerned in the Ely discoveries
of 1647, but if so it was his last effort. He died within the
year at his old home in Manningtree. Stearne relates that
he passed away “‘ peaceably, after a long sicknesse of a Con-
sumption.” 184 But Hutchinson tells us that Hopkins himself
was seized upon by the irate people, accused of being a witch,
and put to the water-ordeal, when he was drowned, and this
is commonly accepted. Another story!®® said that Hopkins
had stolen the Devil’s roll of all the witches in England, and
so was casting out Beelzebub by means of Beelzebub. Pro-
bably Stearne is correct, and the other tales merely show how


ENGLAND 145


infamous his name had become. Butler’s famous lines18¢
hardly need convey more than that Hopkins had fallen from
his high estate and died in obscurity and disgrace.

Hath not this present Parl’ament

A Lieger to the Devil sent,

Fully impower’d to treat about

Finding revolted Witches out ?

And has he not within a year

Hang’d threescore of them in one Shire ?

Some only for not being drown’d,

And some for sitting above ground

Whole days and nights upon their Breeches,

And feeling pain, were hang’d for Witches.

And some for putting knavish Tricks

Upon green Geese or Turkey Chicks ;

Or Pigs that suddenly deceast

Of griefs unnatural, as he guesst ;

Who after proved himself a Witch,

And made a rod for his own Breech.


Matthew Hopkins was an ideal type of the Puritan under-
ling in power, and I should hesitate to say that he differed
very much in cruelty and bigotry from the rest of his Genevan
brethren. The brute instincts of primitive man are but
insecurely disguised under the cloak of religious principle,
and a garnish of Gospel texts may satisfy the canter but only
serve more deeply to offend the impartial judge. Ireland
yet remembers the tender mercies of Cromwell. The Round-
heads found it their duty and their pleasure to butcher any
Catholic priest who fell into their hands. An actor was to be
shot through the head after he had laid down his arms upon
a promise of quarter.18’ The victors of Naseby massacred
in cold blood a hundred Irish women whom they found
among the baggage, contenting themselves only with slashing
and cutting open the faces of the English camp-followers. It
was to be expected that after the fall of Oxford in 1646,
which finally gave the ‘“‘ Good old Cause ”’ its sovereignty, the
savagery of the witch-trials should most fearfully increase.
So we find that two women were burned alive at Norwich
in 1648 ;18 John Palmer and Elizabeth Knott, “ two
notorious Witches,” were hanged at S. Albans in 1649 ;189
whilst in July the gild of Berwick invited a common pricker,
“an artist that way,”!9° a Scotchman, to assist them in
discovering witches. The fellow was promised twenty shillings


146 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


a witch, and soon enough he was stripping naked suspected
persons, men and women, and probing them with a needle
to find the insensible spot where the Devil had marked his
own. Presently he went back home with thirty pounds in
his pocket. But before long, March, 1649-50, he was sum-
moned to Newcastle at the same rate together with fees for
his journey to and fro. Thirty women were collected at the
town-hall “‘ and stript, and then openly had pins thrust into
their bodies, and most of them were found guilty.”191 Four-
teen women and one man, Matthew Bulmer, were hanged.
Later the witch-finder was arrested, ‘‘ indicted, arraigned,
and condemned for such like villanie exercised in Scotland.
And upon the Gallows he confessed he had been the death
of above two hundred and twenty women in England and
Scotland, for the gain of twenty shillings a peece, and
beseeched forgiveness. And was executed.’’19?

After 1642 indeed, as Eachard well remarks, “‘ Blasphemies,
Heresies, Enthusiasms, and Witchcrafts were in a full tide,’’19%
and so universal were the holocausts of witches during the
Commonwealth and Protectorate that it is well-nigh impos-
sible to calculate the numbers who perished. Dr. Zachary
Grey, in the notes to his edition of Hudibras, II, Canto iii,
143-4, says: ‘“‘ Dr. Meric Casaubon in his Preface to Dr.
Dee’s Book of Spirits observes ; That nine hundred Men and
Women suffer’d in Lorain for Witchcraft in the Compass of
a few Years: And Ludovicus Paramo, that the Inquisition,
within the space of one hundred and fifty Years, has burnt
thirty thousand Witches. Baker’s History of the Inquisition,
p. 186. But our enthusiasts much exceeded both. Mr. Ady
says that in Scotland some thousands were burnt in those
Times. (Dr. Hutchinson, p. 88.) I have somewhere seen an
Account of betwixt three and four thousands, that suffer’d in
the King’s Dominions from the Year 1640 to the King’s
Restoration.”’1%4

The Puritans were scouting in all directions, and it must
suffice to mention but some few victims of their blood lust
and ignorant rage. In 1650 Joan Allen was hanged at the
Old Bailey.°° Two years later “‘ The Witch of Wapping,”
Joan Petersen, was upon her trial before the Recorder of
London. It is obvious that the accusation was the outcome
of an almost overt conspiracy. Witnesses against her were


ENGLAND 147


bribed in advance ; those who might have given evidence in
her favour were intimidated into staying away from the
Courts ; Sir John Danvers, a member of Cromwell’s council,
whose interest it was to see that Mistress Petersen was found
guilty, “‘came and sate upon the Bench at her Trial, where
he hath seldom or never been for these many years ” to see
justice done. And so in April, 1652, Joan Petersen, who
‘“ seemed not to be much above 40 years of age, and was not
in the least outwardly deformed as those kind of creatures
usually are,”’ was hanged at Tyburn tree.19* In the following
July six women, Anne Ashby, alias Cobley, Anne Martyn,
Mary Browne, Mildred Wright, and Anne Wilson of Cran-
brook, with Mary Reade of Denham, were indicted at the
Maidstone assizes before Sir Peter Warburton, charged with
““the execrable and diabolicall crime of witchcraft.’ Anne
Ashby ‘“‘ was the chief actresse ’”’ and made a full confession.
She nourished a familiar, called Rug,19? who possessed
her and used to come out of her mouth like a mouse.
“Anne Ashby, Anne Martyn, and one other of their
Associates, pleaded that they were with child pregnant, but
confessed it was not by any man, but by the Divell....
Anne Ashby and Anne Martyn confessed that the Divell had
known them carnally, and that they had no hurt by it.’’1%
When pricked neither Mary Browne, nor Anne Wilson, nor
Mildred Wright, felt any pain or lost blood; whilst Mary
Reade “had a visible Teat, under her tongue, and did show
it to many.” They were all hanged at the common place
of execution, although many were of opinion that they should
have been burned alive.

In the summer of 1652, also, at Worcester was hanged
Catherine Huxley of Evesham on the charge of bewitching
Mary Ellins, a lass of nine years.1® A little later in the same
year Francis Adamson and one Powle were executed at
Durham.2 The following year there was an alarm in
Cornwall. A hag who dwelt in a lonely hovel near Land’s End
was accused as a notorious and known witch. She retaliated
by naming others and shortly eight persons were lodged in
Launceston jail. It is uncertain how many—probably all—
suffered.2°! In 1658 Elizabeth Newman of Whitechapel was
hanged, 2°? and in the same year Anne Bodenham, whose case
has been mentioned above, was executed at Salisbury.


148 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Bury S. Edmunds saw old Mother Boram and her daughter
led to the gallows in 1655.2 On 26 March, 1658, Jane Brooks
of Shepton Mallet was hanged on the charge of having
afflicted Richard Jones, “‘ a sprightly youth of twelve,” with
strange disorders. Alice Coward, the witch’s sister, was also
involved.2°4 In fact, once the deadly accusation had been
launched it was impossible to say who might not be caught
as the circle widened and widened throughout the little
village or neighbouring market-town, nay, throughout the
whole countryside. 2°

In 1658 at Salisbury an aged widow named Orchard was
executed ;2°* and in the same year Mary Oliver was burned
at Norwich.?°?

It is hardly surprising that amid this pandemonium of
Witchcraft and terror legend should have attached the name
of sorcerer to Oliver Cromwell himself. The story goes that
on the morning of 8 September, 1651, Cromwell, whilst it
was yet early dawn, bade a trusted officer, one Colonel
Lindsey, attend him, and rode off to the confines of a lonely
little wood not far from the camp. Here they alighted, and
having secured their horses, walked some way down the
silent glades. Presently the colonel began to shake and
tremble with unwonted fear, until at length he was unable to
proceed farther, and fell pale and half-swooning against a
tree. A mysterious dread overcame him, but Cromwell
sternly strode on muttering “‘ Faint-hearted fool!” At that
moment there advanced from behind a huge-girthed oak a
grave elderly man who held a parchment in his hand. The
general eagerly approached him and they talked together
awhile in low earnest tones. ‘ This is but for seven years,”
cried Cromwell ; ‘“‘ I was to have had it for one-and-twenty.”’
The other peremptorily answered it could be for no longer
term. “ It shall last fourteen years,’ was the reply. ‘‘ Seven,
and no more,”’ returned the stranger in a voice of harsh
rebuke, and seemed as if about to retire, upon which Cromwell
snatched the parchment, and hurrying back to where Lindsey
stood, shouted in a triumphant voice, ‘‘ Now, the battle is
our own!” They left the wood, but seeking his opportunity
Lindsey slipped quietly away and never drew rein until he
was come into Norfolk, to the house of an intimate friend, one
Master Thoroughgood, minister of the parish of Grimstone.


ENGLAND 149


““How now, Colonel?” cried he. ‘We hear there is likely
to be a battle shortly: what, fled from your colours ?”
““A battle,’ said the other, “ yes, there has been a battle
and I am sure the King is beaten. But if ever I strike a stroke
for Cromwell again, may I perish eternally! For I am sure
he has made a league with the Devil, and the Devil will have
him in due time.” So at Grimstone, Lindsey lay perdu until
he could cross out of England. And when Cromwell died
that day seven years, at three of the clock on 8 September,
1658, there had raged for many hours a fearful storm round
Whitehall ; the Devil had come for his own, folks said.
Aniles fabule, old wives’ trattles round the winter fireside ;
““fashious and feckles to recite”? wise King Jamie might
comment. But even gossip sometimes has its value. At any
rate it marks the estimation in which Cromwell was popularly
held, and a fairy tale may be morally, although not literally,
true.

It was not, of course, possible that the witch alarms should
die away simultaneously with the Restoration, and in rural
districts suspected persons were continually being haled
before the justices but only to be acquitted. There were
some significant happenings, however, as when Joan Bibb
of Rushock in 1660 received twenty pounds damages for
being ducked,?°* and in the following year Frances Bailey of
Broxbourn made an official complaint before the magistrates
against those who had called her witch.* In 1665 three
persons were convicted of murder and hanged for killing
a supposed witch.?1°

Several witches are said to have suffered at Canterbury in
1660, but the record is possibly in error and may refer to a
slightly earlier date.244_ In 1663 Julian Cox was executed at
Taunton ; the following year saw the condemnation at Bury
S. Edmunds of the Lowestoft witches, Amy Duny and Rose
Cullender, the most important case during this later period ;
in 1674 Ann Foster was hanged at Northampton on a charge
of bewitching a flock of sheep, but there was also the crime
of arson proved against her, for barns and standing corn had
been fired; and in 1682,212 at Exeter Assizes, Temperance
Lloyd, Mary Trembles, and Susanna Edwards were sent to
the gallows, this being almost certainly the last execution for


Witchcraft in England.


150 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


In the trials of 1663-4 the evidence revealed that
beyond all question a gang of Satanists flourished in Somerset,
held their Sabbats, and were eager to spread their accursed
propaganda.#18 They were discovered by an active magis-
trate named Robert Hunt, who committed them to the
Taunton Assizes, where they appeared before Justice Archer.
Elizabeth Style died in prison, but Julian Cox, who had met
the Demon, or the Grand Master of the company, “‘ in the
shape of a black Man,” who had signed a written contract
with him, and attended countless Sabbats in Brewham Forest,
was hanged. The Somerset gangs were especially skilled in
the fashioning of clay and wax figures, which they baptized
with impious rites to make the charm more deadly and more
devilish.?14

The trials at Bury S. Edmunds in 1664 are of the greatest
importance and interest, largely from the position of the
presiding judge, Sir Matthew Hale, chief baron of the
exchequer, and one of the greatest lawyers of the seventeenth
century, a period singularly prolific in famous names. On
10 March, Amy Duny and Rose Cullender, two widows of
Lowestoft, were indicted for bewitching Elizabeth and Ann
Durent, Jane Bocking, Susan Chandler, Elizabeth Pacy,
Deborah Pacy, and William Durent, an infant. Amy Duny
had long been reputed a witch and a “person of very evil
behaviour.” One of the chief witnesses against her was
Samuel Pacy, upon whose two daughters Elizabeth, aged
about eleven, and Deborah, aged nine, she had cast the evil
eye. The younger girl had already been taken ill, when one
morning Amy Duny came to buy some herrings, which were
refused her. She turned away muttering curses and threats,
whereupon “‘ the child was taken with the most violent fits,
feeling most extream pain in her stomach, like the pricking
of pins, and shrieking out in a most dreadful manner, like
unto a whelp, and not like unto a sensible creature.” The
hag was at once suspected, and when a few days later
Elizabeth Pacy fell into hideous convulsions, vomiting
crooked pins and broad-headed nails, the neighbours con-
sidered that sorcery was plainly at work. Both girls were
seized with paroxysms of pain, during which they cried out
continually that Amy Duny and Rose Cullender were tor-
menting them. There were strange stories, too, of spectral


ENGLAND 151


mice, a toad, and poultry that haunted the house, running
hither and thither. Upon a warrant granted by Sir Edmund
Bacon, a Suffolk justice, six women searched Rose Cullender
and found the Devil’s mark, and other damning proof that
she had nourished familiars. Sir Thomas Browne, then
Dr. Browne, who was present at the trials, being a “ person
of great knowledge,” was ‘‘ desired to give his opinion what
he did conceive of them: and he was clearly of opinion that
the persons were bewitched . . . for he conceived that these
swooning fits were natural, and nothing else but that they
call the mother, but only heightened to a great excess by the
subtilty of the Devil, co-operating with the malice of these
which we term witches, at whose instance he doth these
villainies.”” The prisoners being asked what they had to say
replied ‘nothing material to anything that was proved
against them.” After an absence of half an hour the jury
brought the two women in guilty upon thirteen indictments.
“‘ This was upon Thursday in the afternoon 18 March, 1665.”
The two witches were much urged to confess, but would not
‘“*, . . no reprieve was granted: And they were executed on
Monday the 17th of March following, but they confessed
nothing.”’215

The Witchcraft of Ann Foster who was hanged at North-
ampton in 1674 may be explained by other crimes, but there
seems little doubt that this vicious beldame was at any rate
a witch in will if not in deed. A rich farmer had in some
way offended her, and a little later thirty of his sheep were
found dead with their ‘‘ Leggs broke in pieces and their Bones
all shattered in their Skins.”’ Soon after his house and barns
were set on fire. Ann Foster was indicted for bringing about
these mischiefs by her sorceries, she made ample confession,
and went to the gallows.?1°

In August, 1682, at the Exeter Assizes, Temperance Lloyd,
Mary Trembles, and Susanna Edwards were indicted before
Sir Thomas Raymond and Sir Francis North, the circuit
judges, upon multiplied charges of sorcery. Temperance
Lloyd, who long lived in the worst repute at Bideford and
was looked upon as the woman that did debauch the other
two, was accused of having cast a spell on Mrs. Grace Thomas,
who had been seized with “ sticking and pricking pains, as
if pins and awls had been thrust into her body, from the


152 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


crown of her head to the soles of her feet, and she lay as if
she had been upon arack.” It seemed that the witch possessed
a piece of leather and in this she had stuck nine pins to
destroy her victim. She had, she frankly acknowledged,
caused William Herbert to languish some twelve years before,
and but three years since she had destroyed Anne Fellows,
yet although suspected, and even arraigned, on both occasions,
she managed to escape justice for the time. According to
custom she was searched by Anne Wakely and the witch
mark was found. ‘‘ Upon search of her said body she this
informant did find in her secret parts, two teats hanging nigh
together like unto a piece of flesh that a child had suckt.
And that each of the said teats was about an inch in
length.”2!7_ Temperance Lloyd also confessed that she had
met the Devil “‘ in the shape or likeness of a black man, about
the middle of the afternoon of that day [80 September] in
a certain street or lane in the town of Biddiford aforesaid,
called Higher Gunstone lane.” She further admitted con-
nexion with evil spirits. Dixit enim Diabolum in forma
leonis (ut putabat) domum intrasse, et secum concubuisse
corpus foedissime subigitando. Que cum fecisset tam
uiolenter eum pudenda suxisse ut pro dolore magnos se
edidisse clamores. (She saith and confesseth that the Devil
hath had carnal knowledge of her body three other times. . . .)

Susanna Edwards, “‘ did meet with a gentleman in a field
called the Parsonage Close in the town of Biddiford. And
saith that his apparel was all of black. Upon which she did
hope to have a piece of money of him. Whereupon the gentle-
man drawing near unto this examinant, she did make a
curchy or courtesy unto him, as she did use to do to gentlemen.
Being demanded what and who the gentleman she spake of
was, the said examinant answered, and said, that it was the
Devil.”?!8 It was she who had persuaded Mary Trembles
to join the coven, and they both stated that shortly after
they had seen the Devil as a lion, by which no doubt a large
cat is intended. Later she confessed that “‘ there was some-
thing in the shape of a little boy which she thinks to be the
Devil came into her house and did lie with her.” These two
seemed to the judge to be ‘‘ overwhelm’d with melancholy
and waking Dreams.” All three were condemned on
25 August, 1682, and executed eleven days later, The case


ENGLAND 153


certainly presents many curious features, and there was a
considerable amount of evidence which it is impossible to
dismiss lightly. The witches’ own confessions point to a
coven, and there can be little doubt that it was only by
chance many other persons were not implicated. There are
three contemporary pamphlets which report the case, the
fullest (40 pages) and most correct of these being 4 True and
Impartial Relation of the Informations against Three Witches,
viz., Temperance Lloyd, Mary Trembles, and Susanna Edwards,
who were Indicted, Arraigned, and Convicted at the Assizes
holden... at... Exon, Aug. 14, 1682. With their several
Confessions . . . as also Their . . . Behaviour, at the...
Execution on the Twenty fifth of the said Month. London, 1682.

Notestein gives it as his definite opinion that these were
the last persons put to death for Witchcraft in England, and
he makes out an excellent case. The witch who was con-
demned at York in 1687 was almost certainly reprieved,?1®
as also was Margareta Young, a Wiltshire witch, two years
later.2?° In 1693 the Widow Chambers of Upaston, Suffolk,
was committed, but died in jail.2?!_ In the following year
Ann Hart of Sandwich was convicted, but went free under
a general act of pardon.??? In 1712 Jane Wenham was
condemned at the Hertford Assizes, but reprieved.

There remain two cases which call for more detailed
comment: Elinor Shaw and Mary Phillips, “‘ two notorious
Witches,” are said to have been burned at Northampton on
Saturday, 17 March, 1705, for bewitching a woman and two
children ; and on Saturday, 28 July, 1716, Mary Hicks and
her daughter Elizabeth, aged nine, are reported to have been
executed at Huntingdon. There are two pamphlets, London,
1705, which purport to relate the first case; and one pam-
phlet, apparently published in 1716, is brought forward as
proof of the second.

As the pamphlet is of the last rarity, the only known copy
being in Bodley’s Library, Oxford, the full title will doubtless
be found of interest.

“ The whole Trial and Examination of Mrs. Mary Hicks and
her Daughter Elizabeth, But of Nine Years of Age, who were
condemn’d the last Assizes held at Hunting-ton for Witchcraft ;
and there executed on Saturday the 28th of July, 1716.

“ With an Account of the most surprising pieces of Witchcraft


154 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


they play’d, whilst under their Diabolical Compact, the like never
heard of before ; their Behaviour with Several Divines who came
to converse with ’em whilst under Sentence of Death ; and last
Dying Speeches and Confession at the place of Execution.

“‘ London: Printed by W. Matthews in Long Acre.” 12mo,
8 pp.

Eon internal evidence it may be taken as clearly estab-
lished that the Northampton pamphlets are a reworking of a
pamphlet published in 1700, The Full Tryals, Examination
and Condemnation of Four Notorious Witches, At the Assizes
held in Worcester on Tuesday the 4th of March,??* which is
itself but a slightly adapted version of a witch-trial and
execution at Chelmsford in July, 1645. This at once casts
something more than suspicion upon the authenticity of the
affair.

Miss Murray in her usual inaccurate slap-dash fashion
writes: ‘‘ Elinor Shaw and Mary Phillips were executed at
Northampton in 1704,”??4 giving a reference to ‘“‘ Witches of
Northampton, p. 6,” whilst in her Bibliography she cites
“* Witches of Northamptonshire. London, 1612.” Here we
have confusion worse confounded, as in any case the two
women are said to have suffered in March, 1705.

To turn for a moment to the Huntingdon pamphlet.
Various details, small in themselves but in the aggregate not
without weight, have been questioned. A “‘ Justice Wilmot ”
is mentioned, who seems to have conducted the examination
preliminary to the assizes. Such a magistrate would have
surely belonged to a county family, or at any rate to some
well-known house. No such name as Wilmot occurs among
all the records and histories of Huntingdonshire so far as can
be traced. Nor is Hicks to be discovered. These points are,
of course, not conclusive, but they seem to make the story
more improbable.

James Crossley, the scholar and a high authority on Witch-
craft, writing to Notes and Queries (1st series, V, 514, 29 May,
1852), gives several reasons for doubting the truth of the
Huntingdon narrative. In the first place Francis Hutchinson,
who made a chronological table of cases, published his
Historical Essay on Witchcraft in 1718. He had the help in
his compilations of Chief Justices Parker and King, and of
Chief-Baron Bury, and yet he says the last execution in


ENGLAND 155


England for Witchcraft was in 1682. He spared neither pains
nor time in finding out all details. He had investigated the
ease of Sarah Moordike, who having been before acquitted
at Guildford, in 1701-2, appealed to a justice in London
against her persecutor.225 He had collected with the nicest
discrimination all the evidence concerning Jane Wenham
in 1712, he had even interviewed and questioned her closely.
He had, in fact, made a personal inquiry into all cases and
trials that could be remembered by his contemporaries. “ It
is scarcely possible,” says Crossley when speaking of the
noise of the Wenham case and the rain of pamphlets, “ that
in four years after two persons, one only nine years old .. .
should have been tried and executed for witchcraft without
public attention being called to the circumstance.’ Moreover,
neither the Historical Register for 1716 nor the files of two
London newspapers for that year, although enumerating
other convictions on the circuit, record the supposed trials.22¢
It will be seen that the argument with reference to
Hutchinson equally applies to the Northamptonshire witches,
It is impossible to believe that he should have quite over-
looked these executions. In the Northamptonshire Historical
Collections, 1st series (Northampton, 1896), there is a chapter
on Witchcraft in Northamptonshire, copied from the North-
amptonshire Handbook for 1867. That chapter gives the trials
in detail with copious extracts from the pamphlets. In a
footnote the writers say: “To show that the burning
actually took place in 1705, it may be important to mention
that there is an item of expense entered in the overseers’
accounts for S. Giles parish for faggots bought for the
purpose.” Professor Notestein, however, applied to the
Reverend R. M. Serjeantson, who examined the parish
register of S. Giles Church, and stated: “ The S. Giles accounts
briefly state that wood was bought from time to time—
probably for melting the lead. There is no mention of faggots
nor witches in the Churchwardens’ overseers-for-the-poor
accounts.”227. It is obvious that the compilers of the
Northamptonshire Handbook for 1867 have blundered.
Moreover, witches in England were not burned but hanged.
It is true that in 1645 at Ipswich, Mother Lakeland was
burned. But this was because she had killed her husband
by Witchcraft. Burning was the penalty appointed for


156 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


heresy ;228 and both for high and petty treason, 7.e. murder
of a husband by a wife, murder of a master or mistress by
a servant ;229 and several offences against the coin. Thus on
the 16 July, 1546, Anne Askewe was burnt to death at
Smithfield for obstinately maintaining theological opinions
tantamount to a denial of Christianity. A woman was burned
in 1571 and another in 1575.29 On 10 May, 1652, Evelyn
notes in his Diary, ‘‘ Passing by Smithfield I saw a miserable
creature burning, who had murdered her husband.” The
sentence upon Alice Lisle, who was convicted of high treason,
was commuted to beheading, and she suffered at Winchester,
2 September, 1685. Elizabeth Gaunt, an Anabaptist fanatic,
who was guilty of the same crime perished at the stake at
Tyburn, 23 October in the same year. Culprits were generally
first strangled by the executioner, although the law seems
to have made no such provision. In the case of the notorious
Catherine Hayes the hangman bungled and the wretched
woman was actually burned alive at Tyburn, 3 November,
1726. Ann Whale, who murdered her husband by adminis-
tering white mercury in gruel, was executed on Broadbridge
Heath Common, near Horsham, in August, 1752. She “‘ was
led to the stake, her back chained thereto, and then strangled,
and in about five minutes the fire was kindled, and her body
consumed to ashes.”’23!_ Tennyson’s grandmother saw a
young widow, who had killed her husband, on her way to be
strangled and burned. This would be about 1760.28? On 21
March, 1764, Mary Saunders, a servant, was burnt at Mon-
mouth for the murder of Mrs. Jones, with whom she lived.233
In 1776 a hag of eighty, Anne Cruttenden, who had cut the
throat and mutilated the dead body of her husband, a man
half her age, was sentenced at the Horsham Assizes on 5
August by Lord Mansfield. ‘‘ Let her be drawn on a hurdle
to the place of execution on Thursday next and there to be
burnt with fire until she be dead.”234 John Baker in his
Horsham Diary**® says that a little after noon on 8 August she
was “ hanged and burnt.”” A woman was burned at Ipswich
in 1788, and one Mary Bayley at Portsmouth in 1784. The
last execution of this kind was that of Christian Bowman, the
paramour of a coiner named Hugh Murphy, who was hanged.
The details are given in a contemporary chap-book: ‘ The
Life and Death of Christian Bowman, alias Murphy ; Who


ENGLAND 157


was burnt at a Stake, in the Old Bailey, on Wednesday the
18th of March, 1789, for High Treason, in feloniously and
traitorously counterfeiting the Silver Coin of the Realm.
Containing her Birth and Parentage, youthful Adventures, Love
Amours, fatal Marriage, unhappy Connections, and untimely
Death.” Christian Bowman was hanging forty minutes before
the faggots were fired. The law was altered by 30 George III.
e. 48 (1790), which provided that after 5 June, 1790, women
under this sentence should be hanged.

It is, I think, plain that the Northamptonshire witch
pamphlets of 1705 dealing with Mary Phillips and Elinor
Shaw are purely fictitious, as also must be accounted the
Huntingdonshire narrative of 1716. During the last decade
of the seventeenth century the belief in Witchcraft had fast
begun to decline, and with the eighteenth century the possi-
bility of Satanism was very generally being flouted. This is
hardly surprising when we remember the flood of scepticism
and polite indifference which was about to stagnate the
anemic creed and religious practice of England. Men such
as Charles Blount, Toland, Anthony Collins, Tindal, Wool-
ston, Thomas Chubb, Thomas Morgan, Peter Annet, Conyers
Middleton, had no sort of use for the supernatural. There
had been some extravagances and credulity at which it was
so absurdly easy to mock and sneer. The reality of the
darker side of the picture these narrow minds would have
deemed impossible.

Now and again in some remote country districts accusa-
tions of Witchcraft were bruited, but officially these almost
invariably fell through upon inquiry. At the accession of
William and Mary, Sir John Holt became Chief Justice of
the King’s Bench and he was a notorious sceptic. His
opinions were very decided ; his disbelief in Witchcraft very
pronounced, and naturally from his authority and position
his influence was felt far and wide. In 1694 he tried Mother
Munnings at Bury S. Edmunds and secured her acquittal.
In 1696 at Exeter he plainly?*° refused to accept the evidence
against Elizabeth Horner, and she was brought in not guilty.
His example spread throughout the country.

Thus at Launceston in 1695 Mary Guy or Daye was
acquitted ; in 1698-9 Ruth Young, a Wiltshire woman, was
discharged ; 287 in 1701-2 Susanna Hanover of Devonshire


158 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


was acquitted, as also six years later was Maria Stevens of
Somerset.

Addison, in one of his Roger de Coverley papers (Spectator,
No. 117, Saturday, 14 July, 1711), gives a very apt description
of the feelings still excited among the rustics by these crones
who lay under an imputation of Witchcraft. In company
with Sir Roger, Mr. Spectator visits the hovel of a hag, named
Moll White. ‘‘ In our Return home Sir Rocer told me, that
old Moll had been often brought before him for making
Children spit Pins, and giving Maids the Night-Mare: and
that the Country People would be tossing her into a Pond
and trying Experiments with her every Day, if it was not for
him and his Chaplain. I have since found, upon Enquiry,
that Sir RocER was several times staggered with the Reports
that had been brought him concerning this old Woman, and
would frequently have bound her over to the County Sessions
had not his Chaplain with much ado persuaded him to the
contrary. I have been the more particular in this Account
because I hear there is scarce a Village in England that has
not a Moll White in it.”

When he expresses himself seriously upon the question of
Witchcraft Addison, as we might expect, hedges and utters
vague ambiguities. ‘‘ There are some Opinions in which a
Man should stand Neuter, without engaging his Assent to
one side or the other.”” This may be, but only in matters
of indifference. Yet he continues: “It is with this Temper
of Mind that I consider the Subject of Witchcraft. . . . In
short, when I consider the Question, whether there are such
Persons in the World as those we call Witches ? my Mind is
divided between the two opposite Opinions; or rather (to
speak my thoughts freely) I believe in general that there is,
and has been such a thing as Witchcraft ; but at the same
time can give no Credit to any Particular Instance of it.’’238
Which just means nothing at all.

The trial of Jane Wenham, the ‘‘ Wise Woman of Wal-
kerne,”’ on 4 March, 1711-12, before Mr. Justice Powell at
Hertford Assizes, roused extraordinary interest not only
throughout the district, but in London too, for ere long the
accused had become “ the discourse of the town.’”? For some
years since Jane Wenham had been vehemently suspect, and
when Matthew Gilson, whom she had rated and threatened,


ENGLAND 159


began to behave in a very odd and crazy manner, honest
Farmer Chapman hailed the angry beldame as a witch.
Thereupon she applied to Sir Henry Chauncy, a local justice,
for a warrant against her adversary on the score of defama-
tion. He was fined one shilling; whilst Mr. Gardiner, a
well-known clergyman, read her a sound lecture upon living
more peaceably, which she much resented. Anne Thorne,
servant at the parsonage, next fell into fits and told a story
of having been to a remote lane, where she saw “a little
Old Woman Muffled in a Riding hood,” who gave her a large
crooked pin. Shortly afterwards the maid met Jane Wenham,
who abused her roundly in the street, and presently she fell
into fresh paroxysms. The reputed witch was now clapped
up in custody, Sir Henry Chauncy being assisted by the
rector of Walkerne, Mr. Francis Bragge, and Mr. Strutt,
vicar of Audley. A few days later in the presence of the
justice and three local ministers the accused made a halting
and equivocal confession. The assizes were thronged. ‘‘ So
vast a number of People have not been together at the
Assizes in the memory of Man.’’28° In spite of the preliminary
investigations the one charge brought was that Jane Wenham
entertained a familiar in the shape of a cat. There was a
curious story of cakes of small feathers set in an elaborate
pattern and clotted together with some viscous matter, the
Devil’s unguent made of dead men’s fat, which were found
in Anne Thorne’s pillow. From the first Justice Powell set
himself against a conviction, but the evidence proved over-
whelming and Jane Wenham was formally condemned, only
to be reprieved forthwith and soon pardoned. After her
release she was taken under the protection of Colonel Plummer
of Gilston, and upon his death she was allowed a small
pension by the Earl and Countess of Cowper. She lived until
1780.24° The case provoked a pamphlet controversy and
there was nothing more loudly discussed at the time. Mr.
Bragge’s A Full and Impartial Account of the Discovery of
Sorcery and Witchcraft, Practis’d by Jane Wenham of Walkerne
in Hertfordshire, upon the bodies of Ann Thorn, Anne Street,
&ec.... till she . . . receiv’d Sentence of death for the same,
March 4, 1711-12, ran into no less than five editions within
the year, 1712. It was answered by such pieces as A Full
Confutation of Witchcraft... proving that, Witchcraft is


160 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Priestcraft, London, 1712, a contemptible brochure ; and
The Impossibility of Witchcraft, Plainly Proving, From Scrip-
ture and Reason, That there never was a Witch, London, 1712,
which is sufficiently narrow and inept.?41 It seems very
possible that Jane Wenham was a medium possessed of
hypnotic powers, one who had attempted to meddle with
dark secrets. No doubt the fright she received restrained her
from any such dangerous essays in the future.

It is said that in 1717 Jane Clark and her daughter appeared
at the Leicester Assizes.242_ In any case the last witch-trial—
or more precisely commitment for trial—in England was
that of an old woman and her son at Leicester Assizes in
September, 1717, before Lord Parker. Information had also
been laid against the daughter, who, however, was not
committed by the Justice. There were twenty-five infor-
mants, and it was deposed that the witches were swum
crosswise and “‘ that they Swam like a cork, a piece of paper,
or an empty barrell, tho: they Strove all they could to
Sinck.” It was asserted that several persons had been
afflicted with strange diseases, but upon applying to “a
Cunning man or white witch ” he prescribed various counter-
charms of a crude, but apparently effective, nature, such as
boiling the patients’ urine, which invariably brought the
witches helter-skelter into the room. ‘‘ Sometimes in the
Shape of a cat & sometimes a dog who would run in panting
as if He was upon a hard chase, and these dogs and cats
would come in tho: the doors and windows were shut and
all passages Except Keyholes & chimneys Stopt & could
never be catch¢ but would grin furiously, and approaching
near the bewitch’d persons give them great pain and so
vanish.” The time-honoured remedy of drawing blood from
the witches was essayed, and the constable helped to hold
them during these experiments. ‘‘ The old woman’s Skin
was so tough that they could get no Blood of her by scratch-
ing so they used great pins & such Instruments for that
purpose.” ‘Searching the old witch publickly before a
great number of good women in that town they deposed
there were found on her Secret parts two white pieces of
flesh like paps and some swore tney were like the teats of an
ewe, & some like the paps of a Cat.”” The bill was not found,
and so the trial did not come on, but these MS. notes were


ENGLAND 161


made by Sir George Beaumont for the private use of the
Judge, who preserved them with some care.243

At this point it may be well most briefly to pass in swift
review one or two names of those who, particularly during
the seventeenth century, have written in English specifically
upon the subject of Witchcraft. To give detailed criticism
of a vast library of authors, however interesting, were here
impertinent, but some cursory mention of a few more remark-
able literary men would seem to be useful. Reginald Scot,
whose Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584,244 is one of the earliest
and most famous of these treatises, has already been con-
sidered. He found a disciple in George Gifford, a non-
comformist minister, who resolutely seconded the opposition
to the prevalent belief. Three years after the publication of
Scot’s book he produced A Discourse of the Subtell Practises
of Devilles by Witches, which he followed in 1593 with
A Dialogue concerning Witches.*4> Gifford accepts the fact
that there are witches, but they are deluded by the Devil,
and all their practice is mere phantasmagoria. He seems to
consider prosecution unjustified. Henry Holland in his
A Treatise against Witchcraft, Cambridge, 1590, takes the
same line. He does not reduce Witchcraft to a “‘ cozening
or poisoning art’ as did Scot; he allows there may be a
real ‘‘ confederacie with Satan himself,”’ but he avers that—
nowadays at any rate—the proof of such a bargain cannot
be sustained. Thomas Potts’ The Wonderfull Discoverie of
Witches in the countie of Lancaster, London, 1613, an able
book, concentrates, of course, upon the one Pendle case.
A Discourse of the Damned Art of Witchcraft, by the well-known
Calvinist minister William Perkins, was published in 1608,
six years after the author’s death. His point of view is
mainly Biblical, and he discounts entirely such tests as the
scratching of witches and the swimming ordeal. John Cotta,
a Northampton physician, wrote The Triall of Witchcraft,
1616, to put forward what may roughly be termed the
medical aspect of these cases. Thus he explains possession
largely as a subject for the doctor, and although he allows
there are witches, he thinks it very hard to distinguish the
many impostors from the devoted bond-slave of Satan.
A Treatise of Witchcraft, 1616, by Alexander Roberts,
“‘ minister of God’s word at King’s Lynn,” and the Reverend


162 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Thomas Cooper’s The Mystery of Witchcraft, 1617, are both
thoroughly conservative in their approach to the problem.
Richard Bernard, the vicar of Batcombe, Somerset, shows
the true Anglican caution when he published in 1627 A Guide
to Grand-Jurymen ... in cases of Witchcraft. He hedges
and multiplies reservations, excepts and cavils, until he
reaches conclusions with which he hopes no one can disagree.
A most unsatisfactory attitude. Of far higher value is the
Platonic Henry More’s An Antidote against Atheism: or, An
Appeal to the Natural Faculties of the Mind of Man, whether
there be not a God, 1658,24* More justly regards the phenomena
of Witchcraft as part of the evidence for the reality of the
unseen world. He has absolute proof of the “ nocturnal
conventicles ’’ of witches. It should be superfluous, but may
not be irrelevant, once again to emphasize that only the
illogical and circumscribed materialist would now venture to
deny these, and he is generally impervious to demonstration.
Nathaniel Homes, minister of S. Mary Stayning’s, was inclined
to suppose that evil spirits did many of their tricks by
jugglery and deception. There is much truth in his views
which he elaborates in Demonologie and Theologie. The first,
the Malady. . . . The Second, the Remedy, 1650. Sir Robert
Filmer’s Advertisement to the Jurymen of England, 1653, may
be dismissed as a thoroughly unreliable and uncritical com-
pilation, a thing of no account, whilst Thomas Ady’s A Candle
in the Dark, 1656, which has been much admired, although
perhaps not read, by some modern sceptics, has a great many
dogmatic assertions but very little evidence of impartial
inquiry and investigation. A shiftless empty piece. The
profound Burton in the Anatomy of Melancholy assuredly
accepted the dark fact of Witchcraft. ‘‘ Many deny witches
at all,” he says,?4? “ or if there be any they can do no harm ;
of this opinion is Wierus, lib. 8, cap. 58, de prestig dem.,
Austin Lerchemer, a Dutch writer, Biarmanus, Ewichius,
Kuwaldus, our countryman Scot, . . . but on the contrary
are most lawyers, divines, physicians, philosophers, Austin,
Hemingius, Daneus, Chytreus, Zanchius, Aretius, &c.,
Delrio, Springer, Niderius, lib. 5, Fornicar, Guiatius, Bartolus
consil. 6, tom. 1, Bodine, dsemoniant. Lib. 2, cap. 8, Godelman,
Damhoderius, &c., Paracelsus, Erastus, Scribanius, Camera-
rius, &c.”248 And in another place he poises: ‘*‘ Whether


ENGLAND 163


by these diabolical means, which are commonly practised by
the Devil and his ministers, sorcerers, witches, magicians, &c.,
by spells, cabilistical words, charms, characters, images,
amulets, ligatures, philtres, incantations, &c., this disease
and the like may be cured ?”’ He discusses and decides that
magicians can remedy certain harms, and “ Hoc posito, they
can effect such cures, the main question is, whether it be
lawful in a desperate case to crave their help, or ask a wizard’s
advice.” The answer is: never, in no imaginable circum-
stances, for so to do is a mortal sin.

In 1636 was born at Plymouth Joseph Glanvill, who is
undoubtedly the most able as he is the fairest-minded English
writer upon Witchcraft in the seventeenth century. An
undergraduate of Exeter College, Oxford, he proceeded B.A.
in 1655, and having shortly after moved to Lincoln, M.A. in
1658. For a short time he was chaplain to Francis Rous,
Provost of Eton, but in 1660 he was presented to the Rectory
of Wimbish, Essex. In 1661 he published The Vanity of
Dogmatizing and in the following year Lux Orientalis. Some
three years after the formation of the Royal Society he was
elected a member of that body, and in 1666 he received the
important appointment of Rector of the Abbey Church, Bath.
The same year saw a tentative volume Some Philosophical
Considerations touching Witches and Witchcraft, but unfor-
tunately the first edition almost entirely perished in the
Great Fire. Immediately reprinted, it had reached a fourth
issue in 1668-9 when it took a new title 4 Blow at Modern
Sadducism.2* In the spring of 1681 the work was republished
as Saducismus Triumphatus, “‘ or A full and plain Evidence
concerning Witches and Apparitions. In Two Parts. The
First treating of their Possibility ; the Second, of their real
Existence. By Jos. Glanvill, late Chaplain to his Majesty, etc.
With a Letter to Dr. Hen. More on the same Subject ; and
an Authentick and Wonderful Story of Sweedish Witches,
Englished by Anthony Horneck. In Octavo. Printed for
J. Collins, under the Temple Church ; and S. Loundes, near
the Savoy in the Strand.’’?°° The work became extremely
popular and went through several more revisions and
reimpressions (1683, 1689, 1700, 1726). It has in truth proved
to be Glanvill’s not unworthy and substantial title to fame.
In 1672 Glanvill was appointed Chaplain in Ordinary to


164 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Charles II, and six years later he was installed Prebendary
of Worcester. On 4 November, 1680, he succumbed to a
fever, and is buried in the Abbey Church, Bath.?°?

The Sadducismus Triumphatus is a weighty, an important,
an authoritative book.252 Even the work of obtaining and
verifying the many accounts of psychic phenomena therein
recorded was very laborious and long. The author was
resolved to submit each narrative to the most searching
scrutiny, to test it in every possible way, not to spare himself
letters and inquiries of every kind which might serve to throw
some light upon the problems in hand. He meets every twist
and turn of the opponents’ argument, and is more than ready
for them at every point. How clinchingly does he argue:
‘* Matters of Fact well proved ought not to be denied, because
we cannot conceive how they can be perform’d. Nor is it a
reasonable method of inference, first to presume the thing
impossible, and thence to conclude that the fact cannot be
proved. On the contrary, we should judge of the Action by
the evidence, and not the evidence by the measures of our
Fancies about the Action.’ 258

And again with most topical pertinence in reply to those
shallow minds who, because of many fraudulent cases in the
region of psychic phenomena, with entire lack of logic and
perception jump to the conclusion that all must be trickery,
he remarks: ‘‘ Frequency of deceit and fallacy will warrant
a greater care and caution in examining; and scrupulosity
and shiness of assent to things wherein Fraud hath been
practised, or may in the least degree be suspected: But to
conclude, because that an old Womans Fancy abused her, or
some Knavish fellows put Tricks upon the Ignorant and
timorous ; that therefore whole Assizes have been a thousand
times deceived in Judgments upon matters of Fact, and
numbers of sober Persons have been forsworn in things
wherein Perjury could not advantage them; I say, such
Inferences are as void of Reason, as they are of Charity and
good Manners.’’254

To me Glanvill’s line of argument and many of his particular
instances appear conclusive. 255

Meric Casaubon’s Of Credulity and Incredulity in things
Natural, Civil, and Divine: wherein the denying of Spirits,
Witches, etc., is confuted,?5* is a meritorious work, which


ENGLAND 165


again emphasizes the fact that many cases of charlatanry do
not establish a complete negative. Casaubon considers the
cumulative evidence of cases which have been proven
authentic to be overwhelming, as indeed it is.

John Wagstaffe, a graduate of Oriel College, Oxford, in
1669 published The Question of Witchcraft Debated, a sour and
crooked polemic, which need not detain us. He ingenuously
suggests that coincidence may account for much that is
inexplicable in the witch-trials.

Professor Notestein finds “ no little brilliance and insight ”
in John Webster’s The Displaying of Supposed Witchcraft,
1677,*°” but I confess that these qualities entirely escape me.
Personally I am conscious of a singular lack of sustained
argument, not a few unsupported asseverations, and a number
of suggestions which have already been fully answered by
Glanvill and Casaubon. It will hardly be believed that
Webster declares the impurity of Witchcraft and the abomin-
able orgies of the Sabbat are of themselves proofs that it does
not exist. ‘‘ Surely even the impurity of it may be sufficient
to overthrow the credibility of it, especially among Chris-
tians.’’258 This fatuity shows that he has not even an
elementary grasp of his subject. Does he look for purity
and holiness among the bond-slaves of the Devil? Are not
rather their lusts and obscenities the very hall-mark of their
profession? As Madame Chantelouve said to Durtal:
‘* Pensiez-vous rencontrer ici des Saints?” It is a terrible
side, and a hideous side, but it is one which the scholar and
the historian may not ignore.

The prolific Baxter’s Certainty of the World of Spirits, 1691,

a stout defence of the supernatural; John Beaumont’s
' Treatise of Spirits, 1705 ; and Richard Boulton’s A Compleat
History of Magic, 1715; must be passed over with a bare
mention. They are in the main sound treatises of a reasonably
conservative tendency.

It is hardly necessary to pursue the discussion of works
upon Witchcraft after the trials had themselves ceased, for
any literary arguments and pamphlets must for many long
years to come have merely a theoretical value. Francis
Hutchinson’s Historical Essay on Witchcraft appeared in 1718,
the year following the committal of the old woman and her
son at Leicestér, when no bill was found to go for trial. The


166 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


author, who was afterwards Bishop of Conmore and Down,
shows himself of unwearied industry, and his collections make
his work of no small value. No doubt some of his observa-
tions are sound. There were abuses, there was cruelty, there
were extravagances. But the obscurantist spirit which
sweeps away all evidence is intellectually just as illogical as
the fanaticism of the Parliament or the Scotch Calvinists.
Hutchinson’s arguments are unbalanced and oblique. Under
the specious guise of common-sense they too often appeal to
the half-educated, the superficial. Notestein, who is patently
uncritical, writes : ‘‘ Hutchinson’s work was the last chapter
in the witch controversy. There was nothing more to say.”
And yet to-day psychologists and scientists are discussing
the truth of spiritistic phenomena, exploring the twilight land
of those intimate half-guessed connexions between spirit and
matter, are with pains and patience spending month after
month, it may be, in the observation of some one extra-
ordinary manifestation. Then we hear that as long ago as
1718 ‘“‘ there was nothing more to say’! So far as actual
legislation in England is concerned the Act of James I was
repealed under George II in 1736, when a new Act was intro-
duced based on the assumption that there is no such thing as
Witchcraft, and therefore aimed against any pretence to the
exercise of a non-existent power, or in other words, against
fraud. It is entitled an Act for punishing such persons as
pretend to exercise “‘ any kind of witchcraft, sorcery, enchant-
ment, or conjuration,” and it lays down that in order to
prevent any pretences to such arts or powers, if a person
pretends to exercise any kind of witchcraft, sorcery, enchant-
ment, or conjuration, or undertakes to tell fortunes, such
person is to be imprisoned for a year, and to be set in the
pillory at every quarter.

Proceedings against professional fortune-tellers, palmists,
and consulting mediums of any kind, are now generally taken
under the Vagrancy Act of 1824, the title of which is: “ An
Act for the punishment of idle and disorderly persons, and
rogues and vagabonds.” Various classes of individuals are
specified who are to be deemed “idle and disorderly ” or
‘rogues and vagabonds ” within the meaning of the Act,
including “‘ every common prostitute wandering in the streets
and behaving in a riotous or indecent manner,” every person


ENGLAND 167


lodging in any unoccupied building, or in any cart or wagon,
not having visible means of subsistence and not giving a good
account of himself, and every person in the possession of an
instrument with intent to break into a dwelling-house.

Mixed up with these definitions are the words under which
mediums are prosecuted: ‘‘ Every person pretending or
professing to tell fortunes, or using any subtle craft, means,
or device, by palmistry or otherwise, to deceive and impose
on any of his Majesty’s subjects.”’

Having regard to the object of the statute and the colloca-
tion of the words in the above clause with the other definitions
given in the Act it is reasonable to suppose that the Act was
not intended to apply to anyone having no intention to
deceive. It has been held, however, by the divisional court,
in a comparatively recent case, that a person “telling
fortunes,”” however honestly, commits an offence within the
Statute. This it might be argued opens up the widest issues,
and there is obviously need for a prompt reform of these
vague Statutes. In any case impostors trading on general
credulity by feigning to read the future would be punishable
at Common Law, independently of any Statute.

It is plain that the repeal of the Act of the first year of
James I had very little effect upon what has been well termed
‘“‘ the religious belief in witches.’’ Not infrequently do we
find shocking cases of peasants and country-folk having taken
the law into their own hands, and having swum some old trot
suspected of sorcery and harming her neighbours.

In 17512°! there were living at Tring, in Hertfordshire, an
old man, named Osborne, and his wife, Ruth, a palsied, doting
couple, miserably poor, who had long been held in very bad
repute as witches. Some six years previously, during Prince
Charlie’s ’45, old Mother Osborne had begged a portion of
buttermilk off a farmer named Butterfield, who dwelt at
Gubblecot, and having been roughly refused, turned away
muttering a curse upon the calves and hogs. Soon after the
whole stock became ill, and affairs deteriorated so rapidly
that Butterfield gave up his farm and opened an inn, where
he hoped for better luck. He made no secret of the fact that
he deemed sorcery had worked the mischief. In 1750 he
himself was seized with a strange sickness, and he promptly
summoned a wise man from Northamptonshire, who soon


168 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


diagnosed the case as witchcraft. Shortly news flew round
that certain witches would be ducked at Longmarston on
22 April. A disorderly mob assembled in the vein for any
brutality. The parish officers had taken the Osbornes into
the workhouse for safety, but the gates were broken open,
the doors wrenched off their hinges, and straw piled against
the building to burn it to the ground with all the inmates
unless the witches were produced. The master in desperation
pointed to their hiding-place and with horrid curses the
ruffians dragged forth the old man and his wife half-dead
with fear. They were stripped stark naked, tied up in the
traditional manner, and hurried to a small pond or river some
two miles off, where with oaths and kicks they were flung
into the water. Mother Osborne did not sink, and so one of
the ringleaders, a chimney-sweep, named Colley, waded into
the water and thrust at her with a long pole. She was drawn
out and beaten until she expired. Her husband died also,
although not on the spot. The men who had been the leading
spirits in this assault went among the crowd collecting money
in return for the amusement. But Government took the
matter up, and when a coroner’s inquest was held a verdict
of wilful murder was returned against Colley, who was
hanged in chains, many of his friends being punished with
only less severity. It will be seen that when matters were
left to the mob they had hardly improved since the days
of witch-finder Hopkins, and there was always danger of
similar riots. Had the law been at first modified rather than
repealed a better condition of things might have been
obtained. 262

When London was all agog in the year 1762 discussing the
mystery of the Cock Lane ghost Hogarth produced his
Credulity, Superstition, and Fanaticism, a confused and,
indeed, hopelessly involved satire, a little disgusting and
coarsely violent, one of the least satisfactory of his works.
It has, however, a certain historical interest, since ‘ To
ridicule certain extraordinary occurrences that savoured
of the marvellous, was the design of the print now under
consideration.”’?63 The thermometer, which is placed upon
two volumes, Wesley’s Sermons and Glanvill’s Sadducismus
Triumphatus,*** is fixed in a human heart and decorated
above with a representation of “Scratching Fanny” knocking


ENGLAND 169


upon the wainscot of young Miss Parsons’ bedchamber,
being crowned by the Drummer of Tedworth. The harlequin
preacher, vociferating from the pulpit—a grotesque figure—
in one hand extends a puppet representing a devil holding a
gridiron, in the other the figure of a witch on a broomstick,
who is being sucked by her familiar as a weasel. The three
panels of the pulpit represent the spectre of Sir George
Villiers, who is said to have appeared three times at Windsor
Castle to an officer of the King’s wardrobe and foretold the
Duke of Buckingham’s danger from Felton ;265 the vision
of Julius Ceesar seen by Brutus at Philippi; and the appari-
tion of Mrs. Veal to Mrs. Bargrave. Upon the floor con-
vulsively swoons the celebrated Mary Tofts,26* the rabbit
breeder of Godalming in Surrey. She is represented as in all
the pangs of labour, whilst some friendly hand offers her a
glass of cordial, which she has broken in the violence of her
paroxysms. The rabbits are scampering away from beneath
her petticoats. Hard by a possessed shoe-black26”? vomits
forth huge nails and crooked pins. His basket, wherein
appears a volume of Whitfield’s Journals, is placed upon
King James’ Demonologie. I had not dwelt upon the details
of this unpleasing picture were it not that it well displays
the temper of the age, than which it would be, I suppose,
difficult to point to a more unspiritual and indifferent a
period.

John Wesley, as is well known, was a firm believer in
Witchcraft, and in 1768 he writes in his Journal: “‘ It is true,
likewise, that the English in general, and indeed most of the
men of learning in Europe, have given up all accounts of
witches and apparitions as mere old wives’ fables. I am
sorry for it, and I willingly take this opportunity of entering
my solemn protest against this violent compliment which so
many that believe the Bible pay to those who do not believe
it. I owe them no such service. I take knowledge that these
are at the bottom of the outcry which has been raised, and
with such insolence spread through the land, in direct
opposition, not only to the Bible, but to the suffrage of the
wisest and best of men in all ages and nations. They well
know (whether Christians know it or not) that the giving up
of witchcraft is in effect giving up the Bible.” And again :
‘‘ With my latest breath will I bear testimony against giving


170 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


up to infidels one great proof of the invisible world: I mean
that of witchcraft and apparitions, confirmed by the testimony
of all ages.”

In 1785 a poor woman named Sarah Bradshaw, of Mears
Ashby, who was accused of being a witch, in order to prove
her innocence, submitted to the ignominy of being dipped,
when she was immediately taken to the bottom of the pond,
which was deemed to be an incontestable proof that she was
no witch. ?®

Such a pamphlet (twenty-four pages, 8vo) as the following,
which was published at Bristol in 1788, shows that Witch-
craft and possession were still firmly believed, since the event
excited considerable interest in the West Country : A Narra-
tive of the Extraordinary Case of Geo. Lukins, of Yatton,
Somersetshire, who was possessed of evil spirits for 18 years ;
also an Account of his remarkable deliverance at Bristol.

An interesting passage occurs in The Memoirs of Susan
Sibbald (London, 1926), née Mein, the daughter of Dr. Thomas
Mein, R.N., born at Fowey in 1783. She paid a visit to
Haslar Hospital as a schoolgirl, and vividly recalls the
peculiarities of Captain Yeo, the governor.

‘“‘ He was a big, boisterous sort of man, dreadfully subject
to gout, and wheeled himself about from room to room, in a
chair, as fast as one could run almost. The gout had deformed
both his thumbs, which made both the upper joints project
forward. Now, he was a very passionate and superstitious
man, and would, before he left the breakfast-room, wheel
himself round the table and crush to atoms every egg shell on
it. I thought this very odd, so the next day I put my egg cup
back into the stand in the middle of the table. He wheeled
round and round the table and made a great fuss until he
got it and broke it up. I asked Mrs. Yeo in the drawing-room
why he did it. ‘ My dear,’ she said, ‘the Governor thinks
witches go to sea in egg shells and cause storms and ship-
wrecks.’ One morning after we had become well acquainted,
I took my egg shell off the table and said, ‘ I am determined
a witch shall take a cruise in this that I may see what will
happen.’ He wheeled his chair between me and the door and
came after me so quick that he got me in a corner, and
although I had thrown away the egg shell, he pinched my
arm with his thumb bones till he made the tears come into


ENGLAND 171


my eyes. I took care not to interfere with his preventive
service again.”

On Wednesday, 17 February, 1808, a girl named Alice
Brown, living at Great Paxton, Hunts, endeavoured to cross
the Ouse on very thin ice, which after she had gone a few
yards gave sharply, since it had been thawing for some hours,
and she was promptly immersed in the cold water, and only
able to make her way with great difficulty to the bank where
a frightened friend, Fanny Amey, awaited her. Alice Brown,
shivering and scared, hurried back to her father’s house near
the river, and as soon as she reached it exhausted nature
threw her into convulsions. Fanny Amey, who was subject
to epilepsy, was also alarmed to such a degree that she also
was seized with fits of the nature from which she suffered.
Both girls now became thoroughly ill, and fell victims to
acute hysteria. A credulous neighbour affirmed they were
bewitched, and told a long rambling story of a town in
Bedfordshire where he had recently been staying. There an
old crone was more than suspected of causing a man actually
to languish away by her evil spells. Accordingly he filled
a vessel with his urine, and heated it in a corked bottle. The
result was the old woman was seen to enter the room, she
hurried wildly to and fro as in pain and vanished with a
distracted air. After a few days the witch died, when her
victim was completely cured.

This tale had immense effect, and it was now commonly
bruited in Great Paxton that Alice Brown, Fanny Amey, and
Mary Fox were bewitched. The Rev. Isaac Nicholson,?®
curate of the parish, sternly rebuked his congregation for
spreading so idle and wicked a rumour, but to little effect, for
a woman, named Ann Izzard, some sixty years of age,
presently came in great trepidation to tell him she was being
openly accused. ‘‘I am not a witch,” she cried, “ and am
willing to prove it by being weighed against the church
Bible.” On Thursday, 5 May, Mrs. Izzard betook herself to
St. Neots’ market. Towards evening she was returning in a
cart driven by her son, a lad of sixteen, when they offered
a lift to a neighbour, who carelessly set her basket of grocery
upon a sack of corn, where it kept jolting in no very secure
manner. On going down the hill which leads to Paxton
village, one of the horses became restive and by his plunging


172 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


overturned the basket, ruining the contents. The irate dame
to whom the goods belonged at once accused Anne Izzard
of spoiling them by Witchcraft. Shortly the whole place was
in an uproar, since it was reported that the local witch had
overturned a loaded wagon and team “‘ with as much ease as
it had been a spinning-wheel.”’ At ten o’clock on Sunday
evening, 8 May, a disorderly crowd, taking with them the
young wenches supposed to be forespoken, collected outside
Wright Izzard’s cottage. They broke in, dragged his wife
from bed, pricked her with pins, beat her, pelted her with
stones, and flung her naked in the yard. At last the unfor-
tunate wretch was able to creep away to a neighbour’s, the
widow Russel, who took her in, tended her wounds, and put
her to bed. Upon the next evening, however, 9 May, Ann
Izzard was a second time assaulted, and plans were made to
swim her the following afternoon. But she escaped her
tormentors by flight, and took refuge in a village some miles
away. Alice Russel, however, was subjected to bitter
persecution, and so hideously was she threatened that on
Friday, 20 May, she died of an illness brought on owing to
her fears.

On 17 July following Mr. Nicholson delivered a discourse
which was afterwards published as : A Sermon against Witch-
craft, preached in the Parish Church of Great Paxton, in the
County of Huntingdon, July 17, 1808, with a brief account of the
circumstances which led to Two atrocious attacks on the Person
of Ann Izzard, as a reputed witch. By the Reverend Isaac
Nicholson, A.M., Curate. . . . London: Printed for J. Maw-
man, Poultry, 1808.?7°

There is a preface of ix pp. which commences :—


“A brief Account of the Attack on the Person of Ann Izzard,
and the Circumstances which led to it.


“In the year 1598, an indelible mark of infamy was stamped
upon the inhabitants of Warboys, in the County of Hunting-
don, for their folly and wickedness in carrying to trial, and
afterwards to execution, three of their unfortunate parish-
ioners, for the alleged offence of witchcraft . .. but the
following statement of facts, will convince them of their
mistake, and, allowing for the difference of science and
civilization, will shew that Great Paxton, in the same county,


ENGLAND 173


is more than upon a level with Warboys for ignorance,
credulity, and barbarity.”


A few special copies of this sermon have attached to them
“An abstract of The Proceedings had against Joseph Harper,
James Staughton, Thomas Braybrook, Mary Amey, Fanny
Amey, Alice Browne, Edward Briers, Mary Hook, and Mary
Fox, for assaulting Ann Izzard of Great Paxton in the County
of Huntingdon, on the 8th and 9th of May, 1808, under the
pretence of her being a Witch. By Isaac Nicholson, A.M.,
Curate. London: Printed for J. Mawman, Poultry. 1810.”

The prisoners were first tried at Huntingdon Assizes, and
afterwards at the Court of King’s Bench, at Westminster,
23 November, 1809. Mr. Justice Grose in passing sentence
animadverted most severely on their conduct, mentioning
that some held the husband, Wright Izzard, whilst others
assaulted the wife, piercing ‘“‘ her hands, arms, and other
parts of her person with pins and other sharp instruments,
and wounding her in a most painful manner, and causing a
great disturbance in the neighbourhood, and behaving in a
most outrageous manner.’’ Edward Briers, Mary Hook, and
Mary Fox were sent to the common jail at Huntingdon for
one month; James Staughton was imprisoned for two
months. All were ordered to find security for their good
behaviour or to be kept in durance until such security was
forthcoming. Even this did not effectually stop the malice
and gossip, for on 16 October, 1809, Ann Izzard appeared
before Henry Pointer Standley, Esq., J.P., of Little Paxton,
and lodged a complaint against a mother and daughter named
Day, for assault. In default of finding bail for their good
behaviour they were both sent to Huntingdon jail.

In 1829 at Monmouth several persons were tried for common
assault, the ducking of a supposed witch.

About 1830 there dwelt in the Rope-walk, Hastings, an
old beldame who was commonly reputed to be a witch and
assiduously cultivated that foul reputation. Hideous in
appearance with eyes gleaming malignantly beneath her
frosted brows, a mutch covering her few grizzled locks,
bearded, buckled and bent so that she was wont to use a
crutched stick for support, her mouth full of blasphemy and
curses, upon her walks abroad she donned a red cloak and
a beaver hat, whilst there were many who would gladly turn


174 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


a mile out of their way rather than meet her. It was fully
believed that she could assume the form of a cat, and when
the child of a woman who resided within two doors of her
fell lame, the mother constantly asserted that the hated crone
had bewitched her girl, a tale which was received with
universal credence and sympathy.?”}

In the same town there dwelt a fisherman, who was
declared to have sold himself to the Devil, and to have made
his daughter a witch so that he might obtain dark power
over all his fellows. He was shunned and dreaded, and it
was believed that no sharp instrument could pierce his skin.
It is said that the company in the alehouses he frequented
would often place long needles in the cushions of a chair he
was to occupy arranged in such a manner that he could not
fail to be hurt, but that the result of such experiments
invariably tended to confirm their faith in his supernatural
anesthesia, ?7?

In the third decade of the nineteenth century a witch-
doctor who lived at New S. Swithin’s, Lincoln, had a large
practice throughout the neighbouring counties. On one
occasion he informed a patient’s wife that her husband’s
disease, a painful abscess, was an infliction of the Devil, and
that he was bewitched by his next-door neighbours, who, he
stated, had made a waxen image of the sufferer and stuck
it full of black pins, repeating charms which included the
Paternoster said backward. To counteract this the witch-
doctor prescribed certain simples and gave a charm to wear
next the skin where the swelling lay. Psalms and prayers
must also be repeated. The fee for this advice was a guinea.
The patient actually recovered after several weeks, whilst his
neighbours in great alarm lest he should persuade the wise
man to punish them for their alleged Witchcraft feed another
cunning man at Nottingham, who furnished them with
counter-charms to protect them against any malicious
attack. ?78

In 1839 there died at Cwrt-y-Cadno (Fox’s Court), a hamlet
situated high up in the valley of the Cothi, one of the fairest
and most remote parts of Carmarthenshire, the famous John
Harries,*’4 a white witch or Wise Man (dyn hysbys) who was
consulted by persons from all over Southern Wales. Born in
1785 he had been sent by his father, a substantial yeoman,


ENGLAND _ 175


to London to study medicine, and on his return to his native
village he at once set up in practice. It was rumoured that
he had no ordinary gifts of soothing pain; and that persons
troubled in mind as well as in body had consulted him to
their lasting benefit. He himself openly professed to derive
his knowledge from astrology and from certain secrets
confided to him by attendant spirits. Once every year on
a particular day Harries and a chosen disciple repaired to a
lonely place far from all human habitation. There he drew
a large circle on the earth, and, after various ceremonies,
having placed the neophyte within its bounds he opened a
mysterious volume, chanting a long litany in loud, mono-
tonous tones. It was firmly believed that spirits manifested
themselves and imparted occult secrets of mighty power.
Many are the stories told of the wonders he wrought. He is
said to have cured lunatics, to have recovered stolen property,
to have conjured up visions in a magic mirror. Incessant
was the stream of clients at his door, and he was held not
only in honour, but in something like veneration, throughout
the whole district. From a careful study of his own horoscope
he was convinced he was marked to die a violent death.
Upon the day his planet became fulfilled he retired to bed
early in the afternoon so that no harm should befall him,
but he was aroused by a cry that the house was on fire. He
hurried down to assist in extinguishing the flames, but whilst
ascending a ladder to throw water on the roof, he slipped,
fell and was instantly killed. He is buried in Caio churchyard,
where the old headstone records ‘“‘ John Harries, Surgeon.”

His mantle fell upon his son Henry, who specialized in
astrology, and rumour had it was even a more profound adept
than his father. He died in 1849. The Harries are said to
have possessed a not inconsiderable occult library. There
was also a secret book of magic and a crystal. One account
explains that the book was really a box, always kept locked,
which contained MSS., recipes, charms, and astrological
caleulations. There is, no doubt, a substratum of truth
beneath all the legends and strange happenings. The Harries
were probably shrewd folk, whose nimble brains enabled them
to make many a lucky hit, but I think that unquestionably
they also had a very real gift of clairvoyance and perhaps
even mediumistic faculties.


176 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


In the year 1846, Commissioners were appointed by the
Council (now the Board) of Education to examine into the
educational condition of Wales. The Report of these Com-
missioners, however, extended to a general inquiry into the
civilization of the Principality. The following is extremely
significant : ‘‘ Superstition is said to be very common among
the poor of this neighbourhood. There was recently a woman
in the village who gained her living by conjuring ; and there
is now a conjurer at Wrexham to whom scores are said to
go annually ” (p. 531).

A famous white-witch named Okey or Oakley resided at
Tunbridge Wells in 1830. He was at that time fully eighty
years old, and had been practising his craft since the beginning
of the century. The seventh son of a seventh son, as he
asserted, his white locks, flowing beard, and patriarchal
appearance excited the utmost respect, nay, even something
of awe. He professed to be endowed with miraculous powers
for the healing of diseases, especially such as might have been
inflicted by sorcery and malign spells. He asked enormous
fees from the wealthy for his advice, for not only were the
poor among his patients, but ladies of the highest quality
would send their carriages from distances of sixty or seventy
miles to convey him to their seats. All his charges were
amply paid on these occasions, and he was often rewarded
with a handsome present into the bargain.?75

Writing in 1861 Mrs. Lynn Linton remarks: ‘‘ Even the
mere vulgar belief in witchcraft remains among the lower
classes ; as witness the old gentleman who died at Polstead
not so long ago, and who, when a boy, had seen a witch swum
in Polstead Ponds, ‘ and she went over the water like a cork’ ;
who had also watched another witch feeding her three imps
like blackbirds ; and who only wanted five pounds to have
seen all the witches in the parish dance on a knoll together.” 276

But a few years earlier an epidemic of Witchcraft swept
through various smaller Essex villages, and at East Thorpe
the vicar of the parish was actually compelled to mount
guard over the door of a miserable crone, who was violently
suspect, and whom the mob were endeavouring to capture
and submit to the old water-ordeal.

On Friday, 20 March, 1857,277 at Stafford Assizes, before
Mr. Justice Willes, the judge of the Oxford Circuit, James


ENGLAND 177


Tunnicliff, the keeper of a small beershop, was charged
with obtaining by false pretences a sum of money, about
thirty pounds, from Thomas Charlesworth, a local farmer.
Charlesworth, a young fellow some thirty years old, related
in detail a long story of strange happenings on his land. The
milk turned sour in the pail directly the cows had been
milked, the butter would not come in the churn, the dairy-
maid fell sick with twitchings and shooting pains in her
limbs, a murrain seemed to attack the cattle, there was
illness in the house; in fact, from first to last it was a pitiful
tale of maladies and misfortunes. Eventually he decided
Witchcraft was at work and referred the matter to James
Tunnicliff, who seems to have enjoyed some repute among
the rustics as a white-witch or wise-man. Tunnicliff asserted
that two persons, a man named Bull of Yeaverley and a
certain Cotton of Longton, by their evil spells had cast a
blight upon Charlesworth’s wife, children, and cattle. He
set about undoing the bewitchment, a somewhat costly and
lengthy process. Fee after fee was paid him. Now a book
of spells had to be procured from London ; now some charm
confected of rare ingredients. But in the course of time his
impostures became evident, and at last he found himself in
the dock. He was sentenced to twelve months’ hard labour.
The most striking feature in the whole case was the absolute
and implicit belief in Witchcraft which prevailed throughout
the countryside. The account might well be from a pamphlet
of Jacobean days rather than from The Times newspaper
seventy years ago.

It was in reference to the discussion caused by these
revelations that on Friday, 3 April, 1857, a magistrate wrote
to The Times?”’ to say that on 17 November, 1856, application
had been made to him by a farmer whose wife was bewitched.
The husband asked that the police might be instructed to
swim old Mrs. C. or at Jeast to search her for the Devil’s mark.
An ancient superstition had been resorted to; one evening
urine had been warmed in a hermetically sealed bottle, and
sure enough as it grew hot the witch, Mrs. C., tormented in
her bladder had come to their cottage window, grinning and
mowing at them through the casement. When the magistrate
remonstrated the man declared that not many years before
a witch named Pointer had been swum in the village pond,


178 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and it was found that she could not sink. It is certain that
all the villagers believed that this farmer’s wife was bewitched.
One woman told the magistrate of a witch whom she had
known when she was a girl, a hag named Betsy Norris,
who, it was never denied, had bewitched cows, pigs, geese,
and people. Old Mother Norris was swum but could not
sink.

On Tuesday, 22 September, 1865, at Castle Headingham,
before Mr. Bernardiston and a full Bench of Magistrates,
Emma Smith, aged 86, the wife of a beershop-keeper at
Ridgwell, and Samuel Stammers, aged 28, a master carpenter,
were charged with having assaulted an old Frenchman called
“Dummy ” on the 8 August, so that he died the following
day. Sixty or seventy persons were concerned, and “ the
whole disgraceful transaction arose out of a deep belief in
witchcraft which possesses to a lamentable extent the trades-
people and lower orders of the district.”” It appeared that
‘‘Dummy ” was a deaf and dumb Frenchman, between
eighty and ninety years old, who used to make energetic and
grotesque gestures which were taken for cabalistic and
diabolical signs. He lived in a miserable hovel and gained
his living by telling fortunes and pretended Witchcraft.
Those who consulted him wrote their question on a piece of
paper, to which he subscribed the answers. Hundreds of
these scraps were found on the floor of his hut. Such
inquiries were: ‘‘ What was the reason my Sun do not
right ? I mean that sodger?” ‘Shall I marry?” ‘‘ How |
many children shall I have?’ Emma Smith, who had been
anemic and ill for eight or nine months, continually asserted
she was bewitched by Dummy. On the night of 8 August
Dummy happened to be in the tap-room of the Swan Inn
at Sible Hedingham, where also Mrs. Smith chanced to enter.
On seeing the old man to whose sorceries she attributed her
failing health, half in fear and half in anger she accosted him
with violent words. The crowd of some thirty or forty
frequenters of the inn seemed to have egged her on, and to
have mocked Dummy by dancing round him and yelling
ribaldry, until in a fury Mrs. Smith seized him, thrust him
into the street, and began to belabour him with a stick,
shouting: “ You old Devil, you served me out and J’ll serve
you out.” The crowd, led by Stammers, became more and


ENGLAND 179


more unruly, and at last dragged their unfortunate victim
to a brook which ran down the side of Watermill Lane to the
river and was particularly deep at that spot. Voices from
the rabble cried ‘‘ Put him, or swim him, on the Millhead.”
Stammers seems to have thrown the poor wretch into the
water, which closed over him. When he was drawn out he
was covered with mud, and, said a witness, Henrietta Garrod,
a child of ten years, “‘ was green and much wet all over.”
Dummy, who had been immersed for a quarter of an hour,
died on the following day owing to shock and exposure. In
her defence Emma Smith kept reiterating that she was
bewitched. Stammers pleaded not guilty. Both prisoners
were committed to Chelmsford jail for trial at the assizes.279

In 1875 Ann Turner, a reputed witch, was murdered by a
man who was afterwards found to be insane. In 1879 at
East Deringham in Norfolk a farmer was heavily fined for
assaulting the daughter of an old woman who had charmed
him by “ a walking toad,” her familiar. 2°°

In 1886 there happened to be found hidden away in the
belfry of an English country church a long cord tied in
elaborate strands and interwoven with the feathers of a black
hen. Obviously it had been made for some definite purpose,
and presently an old woman in the village identified it as a
**witch’s ladder,”’ proof positive that some persons in the
neighbourhood knew something of the traditional occult lore
and were trying to effect a spell.?81

Writing to The Evening News, 12 December, 1924, a letter
which is headed ‘“‘ Black Magic,” Mr. Walter Britten relates
a significant survival of Witchcraft in Devonshire. He tells
how a friend of his who was making a stay at Sidmouth for
a few months had a bicycle sent down there from London.
In those days the modern cycle was still something of a
novelty, and the visitor, an enthusiastic devotee of the wheel,
was soon known as “ the flying devil.” On a certain evening
he was actually waylaid by the villagers at Sudbury; he
dismounted with no small misgiving, when to his surprise
the leader of the party ran a sharp pin into one of his legs,
chanting: ‘“‘ Prickee wi’ a pin, and draw his blood, an’ ee
can’t hurt ee!’? After which the rustics at once appeared
quite satisfied and friendly. This, of course, was nothing else
than the scratching of the witch, so continually spoken of


180 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


in the old trials and recognized by the demonologists as a
powerful counter-charm to malefic spells.

In our towns never was Witchcraft more openly and more
unblushingly practised than at the present time, for what is
Modern Spiritism with its mediums and materializations but
Old Witchcraft writ Large ? There is hardly a phenomenon
of these sabbat-séances to-day that cannot be exactly
paralleled in the witch-trials of the seventeenth century.
The whole land teems with superstition. We have the gross
obscurantism of the rationalists, the materialists, and the
modernists on the one hand ; on the other the dark fanaticism
of the spiritist, and his fellow-devotees of a thousand exotic
cults. The nightmare theosophy of the Gnostics is taught in
magazines and by lectures ; false prophets and theologasters
abound. Necromancy is openly practised ; familiar spirits
are consulted ; public resort is had unto wizards that peep
and that mutter. Spells and charms are sought for with a
perseverance and energy worthy of a better quest. It was
not many months since that a lady of wealth and education,
a non-Catholic, who unhappily loves one who cannot recip-
rocate her feelings, earnestly begged me to place a sealed and
folded paper, wherin she had written the name of the man
whose affection she seeks, upon the corporal under the
Chalice at Holy Mass, so that God’s Blood might be poured
forth, as it were, over her billet, and this she felt would
infallibly mean the attainment of her wish. She was amazed
when I pointed out the profanity and horrid sacrilege of such
a superstition, and rejoined with the hardly veiled offer of
a bribe. Shocked as I was by the incident, it seems extremely
pregnant.

A somewhat similar charm is mentioned by the late
Monsignor Benson in a letter dated 26 July, 1905. He says:
“Have you heard of the events in Paris and Venice this
year ? In each case the person put the full name of an enemy
into a drawer, purposely ; and the enemy died within six
months. It is rather terrible.”

That a firm belief in Witchcraft still obtains in many rural
districts of every part of England is very certain, and from
time to time this is brought to light in local police-courts or
at assizes.


In Somersetshire witches are yet believed to assume the


ENGLAND 181


shape of hares. It will be remembered that one of the chief
charges against old Julian Cox, who was tried in 1663 at
Taunton before Justice Archer and hanged for sorcery, was
the tale of a huntsman. He swore that he had started a hare
and chased it behind a bush. But when he came up to the
thicket he only found Mother Cox there, crouched down and
panting wildly all out of breath.

Round Glastonbury they have by no means lost all faith
in the power of certain hags to forespeak an enemy, to blight
the crops, and bring strange misfortune. As for the Abbey
ruins the whole countryside knows of the curse laid upon
them, nor will it ever be lifted until the Abbey, red with the
blood of the martyred Richard Whiting, be delivered unto
the Church again.

On Tuesday, 12 January, 1926, at Tipton, Staffordshire,
two men were brought up for threatening a woman who
lived in a caravan. This woman, Haddington by name, was
believed in her own part of Staffordshire to possess super-
natural powers, including the dreadful gift of the evil eye.
She was said to have cast a spell over the wife of one of the
accused men and over the sister of the other. In the case of
this latter, the unfortunate creature reputed to be forespoken
jumped through a window, and had been removed to a
lunatic asylum. Nor were these two men the only believers
in the woman Haddington’s diabolical incantations. Several
of the country people testified on their oath that they were
afraid to go near Haddington because of the spells she could
weave against them and the curses she could put upon
them. 282

Mr. G. Mitchel, the chairman of the magistrates, in binding
the defendants over for twelve months, remarked: ‘‘ There
seems to be in the Black Country a surprising and deplorable
amount of ignorant superstition.”

In Norfolk the same traditional beliefs prevail, and
if possible are even more strongly maintained by the
peasantry.28? Thus Merton, the village of the legend of the
Babes in the Wood, holds firmly that sorcery can still work
harm, that there are those who practise occult arts for
malison and bane. “I have lived here,” wrote the Rector
of Merton, the Rev. Charles Kent, “‘ for twenty years and so
I know my people intimately. I am the rector of four


182 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


parishes—Merton, Tottington, Sturston, and Thompson—and
if I were to take a census of opinion in all four villages I am
certain that I should find a majority seriously professing
belief in witchcraft, the policy of the ‘ evil eye,’ and the
efficacy of both good and evil spells.

‘ My own belief in witchery, as they term it about here, is
possibly not so crude as that of some of my older parishioners.
Not like, for instance, that of a labourer who not so long ago
parted with a hard-earned guinea to a local planet-reader for
a spell to cure his wife. I believe in the actual power of hate
so working on the power of faith that evil results. Witchery
is hate made manifest. Here, as elsewhere, persons against
whom the wicked charge of witchery is whispered are usually
old women of dominant personality.

‘‘ My first experience of the kind was connected with what
is known as ‘ The Curse of Sturston.’ This story dates back
to the time of Queen Elizabeth. An Elizabethan vicar of
Bray was then the rector. For the country folk he held a
Protestant service in the church on Sunday morning, and
then recited Mass in his parlour for the Popish gentry.

‘* An old Protestant lady, as she lay dying, solemnly cursed
this very accommodating parson-priest, his church, his
rectory, and the great folks’ hall. And the curse seemed to
come true !

‘““ When I came upon the scene I was asked to lay the
curse, for the old hall had become a farmhouse surrounded
by a few cottages and the people feared that the curse
might still be working itself out. I held a public service,
using an old altar tomb in the ruined churchyard as a lectern.
People flocked to the service from miles around. In the
sequel nothing further dreadful happened. I had laid the
curse.

‘* Soon afterwards I was asked to visit a woman who was
thought to be dying. I found the usual deathbed scene—the
whole family gathered to take farewell. I offered up the
ordinary Prayer Book prayers and the woman began at once
to revive and eventually recovered.

“When I told her some time later that she ought to be
thankful to the Almighty for sparing her life, she said ‘I
weren’t a-dying. I was bewitched, and your prayers laid
the witchery. It’s an old wummin wi’ a hook nose that


ENGLAND 183


bewitched me. When you made the prayer I left the
witchery, reglar lifting-up like, and I fared better and
betterer.’

“ Here, if you will, you have a clear case of white magic,
or faith healing. But the simple spirit of that old woman’s
belief is as much alive to-day as it was then.”

It is a sad fact that early in the troublous days of Elizabeth
some few country priests hoping for the restoration of the
Catholic faith did accommodate themselves to Protestantism
and used the Book of Common Prayer in public. As late as
1568 Pope S. Pius V sent the famous Laurence Vaux, who
was to die a martyr in the Clink, to England, where con-
siderable uncertainty prevailed among the faithful as to how
far it might be lawful to conform outwardly to the new State
religion. Father Laurence was delegated to make known the
papal decision that to frequent the Established service was
a mortal sin. The Bull of Excommunication, Regnans in
Excelsis, which the Vicar of Christ launched against Elizabeth
in 1570, finally left no loophole for doubt or indecision. In
spite of the schismatic tendencies of the Elizabethan Rector
of Merton, and we trust that his pliancy ended before 1568,
or at least did not continue after that date, I cannot, I fear,
accept the story of the curse breathed by the old Protestant
lady. It is far more likely that the curse fell when the
Catholic worship ceased.

Merton is about ten miles north of Thetford, and it was at
Merton Rectory that Edward Fitzgerald died, 14 June, 1888,
whilst the guest of a former rector. Fitzgerald had begun
his translation of Omar Khayyam there, and the Rev.
Charles Kent tells us ‘‘ In the ‘ Del’ in the garden he did
much of his writing in the summer. One Sunday after I had
preached a sermon on Fitzgerald our cook came to me and
said, ‘I have often seen Mr. Fitzgerald, sir.’ ‘ Pooh, non-
sense,’ I said. ‘ You were not born then.’

“¢“ No,” she replied, ‘I was not born then, but I was born
in church time hours, and so I have the gift of second sight.
I saw my grandfather long after he was dead. I was a child
going for the groceries, and I dropped the pennies I had in
my hand and ran home all of a tremble with fright. I never
saw granddad but once. But this Fitzgerald, I have often


seen him.’


184 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


‘<< Tel] me what he was like,’ I asked. ‘ He was rather fat,’
she said, ‘ and with his clothes shoved on anyhow ’ (Fitzgerald
was both stout and slovenly). ‘I have seen him upstairs in
the little bedroom and in the pantry, too. I know the look
of him as well as I know you.’ ”

That the spirit of the writer of a poem which, however
great the beauty of its quatrains, contains in those honeyed
words the most poisonous philosophy that ever crutched
knock-kneed pusillanimity, does not rest in his grave I can
very well believe.

In February, 1923, there were strange stories afloat con-
cerning the haunting of a house, New Barn Farm, Gorefield,
in Cambridgeshire. The farm was in possession of a Mr.
Joseph Scrimshaw, who resided there with his aged mother,
and his daughter Olive. For many weeks noises such as the
moving of heavy weights were heard in various rooms, which
upon examination proved to be empty. Furniture was then
flung about and broken into a thousand pieces. These mani-
festations caused the greatest trouble and discomfort.
Hundreds of investigators visited the place and the “‘ Fen
Fiend ” was talked of far and wide. It was a clear case of
poltergeist manifestations. 84

In February, 1926, the police without success strove to
trace the origin of similar happenings at a farm near Finch-
hampstead, Berkshire. Pictures fell clattering from the wall ;
furniture was overturned with a crash, and a perambulator
could not be made to stand within the house.?%5

Unhappily it cannot be denied that Satanism is practised
in England at the present day. The Black Mass is said in
London and in Brighton—and I doubt not in many other
towns too—under conditions of all but absolute secrecy.
The tabernacles of London churches, moreover, have been
robbed of Hosts in circumstances which admit of no other
explanation. I myself have been shown two ancient candle-
sticks of great value upon which in a secret place was
inscribed in Hebrew characters the Most Holy Name of God,
—but inverted. They had been used at the hideous celebra-
tion of a diabolic Eucharist. Now and again some gang of
devil-worshippers may be broken up and dispersed, but
perhaps there are few persons who realize how far-spread and
how cunningly organized are these societies of evil. To the


ENGLAND 185


ordinary man Satanism is incredible, or at any rate a myth
of the-remote Dark Ages. He does not realize, and he is
happy in his ignorance, the evil fires that burn but just a
very little way beneath the thin and crumbling crust of our
boasted modern civilization.


NOTES TO CHAPTER II


1 Circa 54 B.0. to A.D. 24. Geographia, IV, c, iv, 6.

2 Cf. Cicero, De Natura Deorum, Lib. I, xlii, 119: Omitto Eleusinem
sanctam illam et augustam ;

Ubi initiantur gentes orarum ultime.
Pretere Samothraciam, eaque que Lemni
Nocturno aditu occulta coluntur
Siluestribus sepibus densa.

3 He was consecrated by Pope Vitalian at Rome, 26 March, 668, but did not
reach his see until May, 669. He died at Oanterbury, 19 September, 690.

“ De Idolatria et Sacrilegio, et qui Angelos [7.e. malos] colunt et maleficos,
Hariolos, ueneficos, sortilegos, diuinos, et uota reddentes nisi ad Ecclesiam
Dei, et in Kalendis Ianuarii in ceruulo et in uitula uadit, et mathematicos, et
emissores tempestatum.

5 Si quis immolat demonibus in minimis 1 annum peenitentie qui in magnis
x annos. Si quis secundo uel 111° immolat demoniis 111 annos subiaceat
peenitentiz. Si quis sacrilegium fecerit, id est quod haruspices uocat qui augurio
colunt per aues aut quocunque auguriauerit malo ingenio 111 annos peeniteat,
1 ex his in pane et aqua. Non licet clericos uel laicos, magos aut incantatores
existere aut facere philacteria, que animarum suarum uincula comprobentur ;
eos autem qui his utuntur, ab ecclesia pelli precipimus. Si quis maleficio suo
aliquem perdiderit. . . . Si quis pro amore ueneficus sit, et neminem perdiderit ...
Si autem per hoc mulieris partum quis deceperit. . . . Si quis hariolos querit,
quos divinos uocant, vel aliquas diuinationes fecerit, quia et hoc demoniacum
est. . . . Si quis sortes habuerit, quas sanctorum contra rationem uocant, uel
aliquas sortes habuerit, uel qualicunque malo ingenio sortitus fuerit, uel
diuinauerit. . . . Si qua mulier diuinationes vel incantationes diabolicas
fecerit. . . . Si qua mulier filium suum uel filiam super tectum pro sanitate
posuerit, uel in fornace. . . . Qui grana arserit ubi mortuus est homo, pro
sanitate uiuentium et domus. . . . Si quis, pro sanitate filioli, per foramen
terre exierit, illudque spinis post se concludit. . . . Quidiuinationes expetunt,
et more gentilium subsequuntur; aut in domos suas hujusmodi homines
introducunt, exquirendi aliquid arte malefica, aut expiandi causa... . Si
quis ad orbores, uel ad fontes, uel ad lapides, siue ad cancellos, uel ubicunque,
excepto in ecclesia Dei, uotum uouerit, aut exsoluerit, TI, annos cum pane et
aqua peeniteat ; et hoc sacrilegium est, uel demoniacum. Qui uero ibidem
ederit, aut biberet, 1. annum peeniteat in pane et aqua. Si quis in kalendas
Januarii in ceruulo aut uetula uadit, id est, in ferarum habitus se commutant,
et uestiuntur pellibus pecudum, et assumunt capita bestiarum: qui uero
taliter in ferinas species se transformant 111 annos peniteant; quia hoc
demoniacum est. Si quis mathematicus est, id est, per inuocationem
dzmonum hominis menten conuerterit. . .. Si quis emissor tempestatis
fuerit, id est maleficus. . . . Si quis ligaturas fecerit, quod detestabile est.
Benjamin Thorpe, Monumenta Ecclesiastica, London, 1840, pp. 292-3.

6 Pacifico Massimo in his Hecatelegiwm uses “‘ligare ”’ in a cognate sense.

7 De sinu licium protulit uarii coloris filis intortum ceruicemque uinxit
meam.

8 In ueneficiis licia adhibebantur discoloria, non tantum illigandi incan-
tandique gratia, ut in Pharmaceutria sed etiam soluendi et expiandi, ut hic,


unde et ligatura dicuntur.


186 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


® Anicula autem hec uenefica fuit, que Polyzni [Enclopii] curam suscepit
cuius, ut ipse loquitur, inguinum uires funerate erant. Morbos enim uenefici
ligamentis sanabant. . . . Sed precipue morbos inguinum. ... Ticia hee
mediz etatis scriptores ligaturas uocabant.

10 Ecloga, VIII, 73-8.

11 Eece ueniunt dies ecce kalende ueniunt et tota demonum pompa-
procedit, idolorum tota producitur officina, et sacrilegio uetusto anni nouitas
consecratur. Figurant Saturnum, faciunt Iouem, formant Herculem, exponunt
cum uenantibus suis Dianam, circumducunt Uulcanum uerbis haletantem
turpitudines suas, et plura quorum, quia portenta sunt, nomina sunt tacenda ;
quorum deformitates quia natura non habet, creatura nescit, fingere ars
laborat. Preterea uestiuntur homines in pecudes, et infe minas uiros uertunt,
honestatem rident, uiolant iudicia, censuram publicam rident, inludunt
szeculo teste, et dicunt se facientes ista iocari. Non sunt ioca, sunt crimina.
In idola transfiguratur homo. Et, si ire ad idola crimen est, esse idolum quid
uidetur ? . . . Namque talium deorum facies ut pernigrari possint, carbo
deficit ; et ut eorum habitus pleno cumuletur horrore, palez, pelles, panni,
stercora, toto seculo perquiruntur, et quidquid est confusionis humane, in
eorum facie collocatur. The quotation is from Homilia de Pythonibus et
Maleficis. Mai, Spicilegium Romanum, X, 222. The locality and date of
Severian, to whom the Homily is assigned, are uncertain. Perhaps he is to be
identified with Severian, Bishop of Gabala in Syria, c. 400, who won fame as
an eloquent and prolific preacher.

12 “An non omnia,”’ he cries, ‘‘ que a ministris demonum illis aguntur
diebus falsa sunt et insana ? . . . Num quid non uniuersa ibi falsa sunt et
insana, cum se a Deo formati homines, aut in pecudes, aut in feras, aut in
portenta transformant ? . . . Auspicia etiam uanissimi colligere se dicunt, ac
statum uit sue inanibus indiciis estimantes, per incerta auium ferarumque
signa imminentis anni futura rimantur ?”’ Homilia X VI de Kalendis Ianuariis.
Migne, Patres Lat., LVII, 255.

13 Tmaginem Dei portare noluit, qui idoli uoluit portare personam; qui
iocari uoluerit cum diabolo, non poterit gaudere cum Christo. . . . Abstrahat
ergo pater filium, seruum dominus, parens parentem, ciuem ciuis, homo
hominem, Christianus omnes qui se bestiis compararunt, exeequarunt iumentis,
ee pecudibus, demonibus formauerunt. Sermo CLV, Patres Lat.,

IT, 609.

14 « Quis enim sapiens,” he asks with biting irony, “ poterit credere, inueniri
aliquos sanz mentis qui ceruulum facientes in ferarum se uelint habitum
commutare? Alii uestiuntur pellibus pecudum; alii assumunt capita
bestiarum, gaudentes et exsultantes, si taliter se in ferinas species trans-
formauerint, ut hominesnonesse uideantur.’’ Sermo Pseudo-Augustin. OXXIX,
de Kalendis Januariis. Patres Lat., XXXIX, 2001. The sermon has been
ascribed to S. Augustine, to Faustus of Raji, and to Maxentius. For a full
discussion of these points see C. P. Caspari, Hine Augustin falschlich beilegte
Homilia de Sacriligris, 1886.

15 Anulas, agniculam, anniculam, are also read.

a Sermo Pseud.-Augustin. CXX, Patres Lat., XX XIX, 2003. The author-
ship is generally held to be that of Sermo CX XIX, but a Fleury MS. attributes
it to Bishop Sedatus of Besiers, who died in 589.

17 Licet credam quod illa infelix consuetudo ... iam .. . fuerit sublata ;
tamen, si adhuc agnoscatis aliquos illam sordidissimam turpitudinem de
hinnicula uel ceruula exercere . . . castigate. Sermo Pseud.-Augustin. 265,
Putres Lat., XXXIX, 2239.

18 This decretal was included as part of the permanent canon law in the
Decretales of Gregory IX in 1234. It was strongly supported by the Paris
theologians, and the Councils of Basle, Soissons, Laon, Lille. Patres Lat.,
CCXYV, 1070.


18 Theodorus Balsamon, In Can. LXII Cone. in Trullo. :
CXXXVII. 727. onc, in Trullo., Patres Greci,


** Ducagne s.v. would read hinnuli. Archbishop Ussher thought this
passage referred to the Saxon god Irminsul.


1 Hpistola III in Eahfridum. Patres L., LXXXIX, 93.


“es


ENGLAND 187


22 Ancient Laws and Institutes of England, Thorpe, 1840, p. 18.

*3 Miss Murray (Witch-Cult in Western Europe, p. 22) ambiguously says
“first Archbishop of York.” But Ecgberht was appointed by King Ceolwulf
to succeed Wilfrid II. There was a bishop of York in very early days. At the
Council of Arles (314) ‘“‘ Eborus episcopus de ciuitate Eboracensis’ was
present. The bishops of York may have acted as diocesan prelates until
Ecgberht received the pallium from Gregory III in 735, but their jurisdiction
was at first hardly defined.

24 Si mulier artem magicam, et incantationes, et maleficia exerceat, XII
menses, uel tria legitima ieiunia, uel xl dies ieiunet: sciatur quantum sit
flagitium. Si maleficiis suis aliquem occiderit, vit annos ieiunet. 32. Si quis
demonibus exigui quid immolauerit annum 1 ieiunet; si magni quid
immolauerit x annos ieiunet. Apud Thorpe.

25 Tbid.

26 Yule and Christmas, Their Place in the Germanic Year, G. Tille, 1899.

27 See F. W. H. Wasserschleben, Bussordnungen der abendland Kirche;
H. J. Schmitz, Die Bussbiichen und die Bussdisciplin der Kirche. Also P. Schaff,
History of the Christian Church (1883-93, 2nd edition), Vol. VII, p. 321.

28 Some writers give the date as 573-603. Many laws were made during
that period and comprised under one authority. Concilia Hui Merouingici,
Recensiut F. Maassen, 1893. Also Mansi, Sacrorum conciliorum noua et
amplissima collectio, Venice, 1769 sqq., 31 vols., folio. Dr. Ch.-J. Hefele,
Conciliengeschichte, 2nd ed., 9 vols., 8vo., Fribourg-im-Brisgau, 1890 sqq.

29 Non licet kalendas Ianuarii uetolo uel ceruolo facere uel streneas
diabolicas obseruare, sed in ipsa die sic omnia beneficia tribuantur, sicut in
reliquis diebus. Originally twigs plucked from the grove of the goddess
Strenia, who was associated with Janus in the revels of the New Year. Later
the strena became an omen which possessed divine influence. The force of the
prohibition here lies in the adjective “ diabolicas.”’ Superstitions and evil
periapts were evidently distributed. The word strenas survives in the French
étrennes.

30 Hist. Eccl., ed. Plummer, Oxford, 1896, I, p. 116.

31 Witchcraft in England, p. 3.

32 Patres Latint, CX XXII, 352.

33 Liber I, xvii.

34 Cf. the Greek ‘‘ Eumenides ”’ for “‘ Erinyes.”’

35 Quid de sacerdotibus et religiosis, quibus uasa uel ornamenta ecclesiz
uel similia furtim subtracta sunt; uel etiam de laicis quibus res proprie
furto sublata sunt ; numquid poterunt per inspectionem astralabii uel similia
inuestigare ? Ad hoc dicas secundum omnes, quod si fit ibi inuocatio
dzmonum uel aliud superstitiosum, nullo modo licet, immo grauissime peccat
quicunque facit, extra e. extrarum. Ubi quidam, licet iuuenili simplicitate et
bono zelo fecisset, fuit tamen suspensus ab officio et beneficio. Si autem
talis inspectio fieret simpliciter per astronomiam, non inuocatis damonibus
nec alio superstitioso adiumento forte posset amicti x‘ a contrario assensu
preallegate dec. et di. xxxvij. si quis gramaticam, et ita dicunt quidam :
tamen in eodem dec. dicitur, quod licet quadruuiales artes in se contineant
mertatz, tamen quia non sunt pietatis, non est in eis studendum. Item,
quid de sacerdotibus qui causa doloris permoti, ut altare uestibus sacris
exuunt, aut qualibet alia lugubri ueste operiunt, aut consueta luminaria
subtrahunt, aut altare vel crucifixum spinis circumdant.

Quid etiam de illis qui pronius scienter cantant missam defunctorum, uel
sub nomine illorum quos odiunt feretrum cum exequiis mortuorum in medio
ecclesiz ponunt, uel alia similia faciunt, ut illi citius moriantur ? Ad hoe
dico, quod si aliquid predictorum fiat propter odium priuatum, grauissime
peceat qui facit, et nisi per legitimam pcenitentiam se purgauerit, debet
deponi. Si autem propter causam communem puta, quia metuit contamina-
tionem sacrorum ordinum uel subuersionem fidei, uel hostilitatem suffert, uel
obsidionem uel diuinorum iudiciorum sententiam metuit, et ideo tale quod
facit, non dicitur peccare, quia in tali facto plus humilitas qua Deus placatur,
quam materiam liuoris dolositas declaratur. Hoc etiam tenet consuetudo
ecclesiz, unde solet cantare, omnes uenerunt gentes, ef in signum tristitiz in


188 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


die Ueneris sancti altaria spoliare. Hoc tamen distinctio fallit in illis,
qui pronis scienter celebrant officium mortuorum. Nam tales, si fuerint
detecti, indistincte debent deponi, et agendam peenitentiam, tam ipse sacerdos,
quam qui eum ad hoc incitauit, debent exilii perpetui ergastulo, seu monasterio
religari : hoc totum habes expresse in c. Tolletano, xxvi. q. 1., quicunque.

Quid de quibusdam sceleratis mulieribus, que credunt se et profitentur
cum Diana dea paganorum nocturnis horis, uel cum Herodiade et innumera
multitudine mulierum, equitare super quasdam bestias, et multa terrarum
spatia intempeste noctis silentio pertransire, eiusque iussionibus obedire
uelut dominez, certis noctibus ad ejus seruitium euocari, asserunt etiam ab
illis aliquas creaturas posse in melius uel in deterius commutari, aut in
aliam speciem uel similitudinem transformari? De hiis dico, c. Acquiren.
quod non a diuino spiritu sed maligno talia fantasmata mentibus fidelium
irrogantur. Diabolus enim, cum anima alicuius per talem credulitatem sub-
jugauerit sibi, transfigurat se in angelum lucis et transformat se in diuer-
sarum personarum species atque similitudines, mentem quasi captiuam tenet,
multipliciter deludit, nec debet aliquis uel aliqua in tantam uenire stultitiam
ut credat hac omnia, que in sompniis et spiritu tantum fuerit, etiam, in
corpore accidere, cum etiam Paulus non audeat asserere quod fuerit raptus
in corpore. Quicumque ergo talia crediderit uel asseruerit, proculdubio
infidelis est et pagano deterior, xxvj. q. v. episcopi. Item, cum dictum sit
supra fidem non esse habendam in auguriis, sortibus, et ceteris ‘speciebus
diuinationis, quoniam ferquenter euenerint ea que predicunt, quoniam etiam
tales homines sepe liberant gros, et mittunt egritudines, Aug. mouet
hanc questionem et soluit, dicens, Hoc fieri permissu Dei, ut illi qui audiunt
et uident probentur in quali fide sunt erga Deum. Hoc probat auctoritate
Deutoronomii, Si surrexerit in medio tui propheta aut qui sompnum dicat
se uidisse, et predixerit signum atque portentum, et uenerit quod locutus
est, et dixerit tibi, eamus et sequamur deos alienos quos ignoras et seruiamus
eis, non audics uerba prophetz, aut sompniatoris, quia tentat nos Deus noster,
ut palam fiat, scilicet ipsis temptantur et aliis hominibus, non autem Deo,
quia ipse scit omnia antequam fiant, utrum diligatis cum an non, xxvj. q. u.
nec mirum circa.

86 A curious detail, possibly it has some connexion with the disguise as a
ceruulus.

87 One may compare the legend of S. Bruno. At the funeral of Raymond
Diocres, a learned professor of Paris and canon of Notre Dame, when the
priests are chanting ‘‘ Responde mihi quantas habes iniquitates,”’ the corpse
half-rising from the bier cried in a lamentable voice, ‘‘ By the justice of God,
Iam condemned.” This happened thrice, and so terrible an incident decided
8. Bruno to leave the world. Le Sueur has included this fearful resurrection
in the series he painted for the Chartreuse at Paris in 1649. This story is first
found in a Chronicle of the Carthusian Order written about 1250, and it again
occurs in the Chronicle compiled by John of Ypres in the thirteenth century.
It was inserted in the Roman Breviary, but omitted in the revision under
Urban VIII, approved 19 September, 1631, and issued in the following year.
But it is generally recognized to-day that this reform was incomplete and is
most unfortunate in many respects. Dom Innocent Masson, General of the
Carthusians, in his Annales Ordinis Carthusiani, 1687, gives the old legend,
which is defended against critics by the learned theologian Théophile Raynaud,
8.J. (1583-1663), the author of ninety-two separate treatises, and by another
scholarly Jesuit, Francesco Colombi, in his Dissertatio de Carthusianorum
Inittis. The tradition is rejected, on the other hand, by Jean de Launoy, the
ecclesiastical historian (1603-78), in his Dissertatio de Recessu Brunonis ; by
Mabillon, who is often unduly sceptical ; and by the French Oratorian Dubois
in his Histoire de Paris, Book XI, c. ii, n. 6 and 8. Dom Ambrose Mougel,
O. Cart., doubts the historicity of the event, and some modern writers ascribe
S. Bruno’s retirement from the world to his disgust at the misrule and
violence of Manasses de Gournai, Archbishop of Rheims, who was suspended
from office in 1077, and ejected in 1080.

*8 Attributed to an imaginary monk, Matthew of Westminster. The mis-
understanding is due to the blunder of a copyist.


ENGLAND 189


89 Published in Poems, Vol. II, 1799.

_“° a.v. 852. Circa dies istos, mulier quedam malefica, in uilla que Berkeleia
dicitur degens, gule amatrix ac petulantiz, flagitiis modum usque in senium
et auguriis non ponens, usque ad mortem impudica permansit. Hee die
quadam cum sederet ad prandium, cornicula quam pro delitiis pascebat,
nescio quid garrire ccepit ; quo audito, mulieris cultellus de manu excidit,
simul et facies pallesgere ccepit, et emisso rugitu, Hodie, inquit, accipiam
grande incommodum, hodieque ad sulcum ultimum meum peruenit aratrum.
Quo dicto, nuncius doloris intrauit ; muliere uero percunctata ad quid ueniret
Affero, inquit, tibi filii tui obitum et totius familie ejus ex subita ruina
interitum. Hoc quoque dolore mulier permota, lecto protinus decubuit
grauiter infirmata ; sentiensque morbum subrepere ad uitalia, liberos quos
habuit superstites, monachum uidelicet et monacham, per epistolam inuitavit ;
aduenientes autem uoce singultiente alloquitur. Ego, inquit, o pueri, meo
miserabili fato demoniacis semper artibus inseruiui; ego omnium uitiorum
sentina, ego illecebrarum omnium fui magistra. Erat tamen mihi inter hec
mala spes uestre religionis, que meam solidaret animam desperatam ; uos
expectabam propugnatores contra demones, tutores contra szuissimos hostes.
Nunc igitur quoniam ad finem uite perueni, rogo uos per materna ubera, ut
mea tentetis alleuiare tormenta. Insuite me defunctam in corio ceruino, ac
deinde in sarcophago lapideo supponite, operculumque ferro et plumbo con-
stringite, ac demum lapidem tribus cathenis ferreis et fortissimis circumdantes,
clericos quinquaginta psalmorum cantores, et tot per tres dies presbyteros
missarum celebratores applicate, qui feroces lenigent aduersariorum incursus.
Ita si tribus noctibus secura iacuero, quarta die me infodite humo.

Factumque est ut preceperat illis. Sed, proh dolor! nil preces, nil lacryme,
nil demum ualuere cathenze. Primis enim duabus noctibus, cum chori
psallentium corpori assistebant, aduenientes Demones ostium ecclesie con-
fregerunt ingenti obice clausum, extremasque cathenas negotio leui dirumpunt;
media autem que fortior erat, illibata manebat. Tertia autem nocte, circa
gallicinium, strepitu hostium aduentantium, omne monasterium uisum est a
fundamento moueri. Unus ergo demonum, et uultu ceteris terribilior et
statura eminentior, ianuas ecclesie impetu uiolento concussas in fragmenta
deiecit. Diuexerunt clerici cum laicis, metu steterunt omnium capilli,; et
psalmorum concentus defecit. Demon ergo gestu ut uidebatur arroganti ad
sepulchrum accedens, et nomen mulieris modicum ingeminans, surgere
imperauit. Qua respondente, quod nequiret pro uinculis, Iam malo tuo, inquit,
solueris ; et protinus cathenam que ceterorum ferocium demonum deluserat,
uelut stuppeum uinculum rumpebat. Operculum etiam sepulchri pede
depellens, mulierem palam omnibus ab ecclesia extraxit, ubi pre foribus niger
equus superbe hinniens uidebatur, uncis ferreis et clauis undique confixus, super
quem misera mulier proiecta, ab oculis assistentium euanuit. Audiebantur
tamen clamores per quatuor fere miliaria horribiles, auxilium postulantes.

Ista itaque que retuli incredibilia non erunt, si legatur beati Gregorii
dialogus, in quo refert, hominem in ecclesia sepultum, a demonibus foras
eiectum. Et apud Francos Carolus Martellus insignis uir fortitudinis, qui
Saracenos Galliam ingressos, Hispaniam redire compulit, exactis uite suze
diebus, in ecclesia beati Dionysii legitur fuisse sepultus. Sed quia patrimonia,
cum decimis omnium fere ecclesiarum Galliz, pro stipendio commilitonum
suorum mutilauerat, miserabiliter a malignis spiritibus de sepulchro corpo-
raliter auulsus, usque in hodiernum diem nusquam comparuit.

41 Abbreuiatio Placitorum, p. 62.

42 Vol. II, Div. ii, p. 269.

43 Robert le Mareschal de Leycestre ad reconuz devant Simond Croyser,
coronner del hostiel nostre seigneur le roi, le Mescredy en la veille de Touz
Seyntz, ’an du regne le roi Edward disoeytisme, q’il fust demorrant ove
Mestre Johan de Nottingham, que se fist nigromauncer et demorra en Coventré,
et vindrent Richard le Latoner, Geffrei Frebern, Robert le Palmere, Adam de
Wolreston, Henri de Hynton, Hugh de Tuwe, Johan de Siflet, William de
Gloucestre, Johan de Stonleye, Richard le Taillour hosier, Johan le Wallere
que sert Alice la Honte, Henri Pake, Robert de Stoue, Robert de Lichefeld,
Robert le Mercer que ad espusée la fille Adam de Lyndeseye, Piers Baroun,


199 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Phelipp le Hosier, Wautier Chubboc, Rogier le Brai, Johan Frebern, Reynauld
de Alesleye gurdeler, William le Wallere, Richard Grauntpé, Johan le filz
Hugh de Merington, apprentiz de court, William Russell, Richard de la Grene,
et Johan le Redeclerk, hosier de Coventré, et le Mescredy preschein devant
la feste Seint Nicholas, l’an disseptisme, & Coventré a les avantditz mestre
Johan de Notingham et Robert le Mareschal, et les demaunderent si il voleyent
leur counseil celer et il averoient un grant profist. Et mestre Johan les assura
par sa foi q’il ne les discovereit poynt ; et le dit Robert assura le dit mestre
Johan de celer le counseil. La seurtée faite parentre eux, les avantditz Richard
le Latoner et les autres disoient 4 les avantditz mestre Johan et Robert q il ne
purroient vivre pur la duresce que le priour de Coventré les avoit fait et fist
de jour en autre, et pur le meintenaunce que nostre selgneur le roi, mon-
sieur Hugh le Despenser counte de Wyncestre, et monsieur Hugh le
Despenser le filz, firent au dit priour, en destruccion de eux et de la ville
de Coventré, et demanderent au dit mestre Johan s’il voleit pur le leur
donant enprendre de tuer le roi, le counte de Wyncestre, monsieur Hugh
le Despenser, le priour de Coventré, et autres q’ils nomereint, par sa nigro-
mancie et ses artz. Et il dist ge oyl, et se assenti; et sur ceo la fesoient
covenant ove luy, q’il averoit xx. li. d’esterlings, et sa gareison en quelle
mesoun de religioun q’il voleit eslire en Engleterre, et au dit Robert xv. li.
d’esterlings, de estre eidaunt a les felonies avantdites, desqueux deners les
avantditz Richard et les autres paierent au dit mestre Johan a4 Coventré
unze mars, le Dimenge preschein aprés la feste Seint Nicholas l’an dissep-
tisme en partie de paye de xx. li. avantdites, et au dit Robert quatre lyvers
des xv. li. avantdites meismes le jour, lieu, et an, par les meyns Johan fitz
Hugh de Merington et Johan le Redeclerk, 4 la meson Richard le Latoner,
et sept lyvres de cire et deux aunes de canevace, de laquele cire les ditz
mestre Johan et Robert fesoient sept images, un aprés nostre seigneur le
roi coronné de cire, un autre aprés le counte de Wyncestre, le tierz aprés
monsieur Hugh, le quart aprés le priour de Coventré, le quint aprés le
celerer, le sisme aprés Nichol Crumpe, seneschal le priour, et le septisme
aprés un Richard de Sowe, par qui et l’ymage fait aprés luy, il voleient
prover les autres images s'il furent certeyns ou ne mye, par l’assent et
Vacord le dit Richard et les autres. Et le dit Robert ad reconuz, qe le dit
mestre Johan et lui comencerent de faire leur mestries en la fourme avant-
dite, le Lundy preschein aprés la feste Seint Nicholas, l’an xvii., par l’assent
les avantditz Richard le Latoner et les autres, en une vielle mesoun & une
demie luwe de la ville de Coventré, desouz le parke de Shorteleye, et ensuit
demorerent continuelment sur leur oevre, tancque le Samady preschein apres
l’Ascension preschein suivant en meisme l’an. Et & ceo ad reconuz qe anxi
come le dit mestre Johan et lui furent en la dite vielle meson entour leur
oevre, le Vendredi preschein avant la feste de la Seinte Croice l’an xvii.,
entour la my nuyt, le dit mestre Johan bailla au dit Robert une broche de
plum acu devant, et lui comanda q’il la botast la mountaunce de deux pouz
parfound en frount de lymage fait apres Richard de Sowe, par qui ils
voleient prover les altres ; et il issi le fist : et lendemeyn matyn le dit mestre
Johan manda le dit Robert & la meson le dit Richard de Sowe, pur veer
en quel estat il fust, et le dit Robert trova le dit Richard brayaunt et
criaunt ‘‘ harrou ! ”’ sanz avoir conissance de nul homme, et si perdi memoire,
et ensuit just le dit Richard languissant tancque le Dimenge en le journant
preschein avant la feste de l’Ascension preschein suivant, 4 quel houre
le dit mestre Johan treet hors la dite broche de plum hors du frount le
dit image fait aprés le dit Richard, et la bota tancque a quoer. Et ensi
demurra la dite broche au quoer del image, tancque le Mescredi preschien
suivant, quel jour le dit Richard morust. La proeve faite du dit Richard
en la fourme avantdite, par l’assent les avantditz Richard et les autres, et
eux sachauntz le fait.

“* He had been consecrated at Avignon in 1318, by Nicholas, Bishop of
Ostium, under a mandate from Pope John XXII. There were constant
quarrels between him and Arnold Poer, Seneschal of Kilkenny, whom he
accused of heresy. But the same charge was brought against himself by the
Archbishop of Dublin, Alexander Bicknor, and he was forced to flee and appeal


ENGLAND 191


to the Pope for protection. Edward III in 1329 seized his temporalities, but
these were soon restored. Bishop Ledrede returned from banishment in
1347-8, but it was not until 1354 that the storm blew over, and six years later
he died at a very advanced age, having sat about forty-two years in his see.
He is buried in his own cathedral on the Gospel side of the High Altar.

45 For a very complete and scholarly study of this case see Thomas Wright’s
Proceedings against Dame Alice Kyteler. Camden Society, 1843.

4° The name afterwards became Britten.

47 Also called Basilia in some accounts of the trial.

48 A sacramental, Panis benedictus, now known in France as pain bénit.
Generally the bread is presented with some solemnity at the Offertory of the
parochial Mass and the priest blesses it before the Oblation of Host and
Chalice. Different customs prevail in different dioceses, although such
variations are slight and unimportant. It is distributed to the faithful, who
generally partake of it in church.

49 So in Horace Canidia and Sagana at the Sabbat ;

scalpere terram
unguibus et pullam diuellere mordicus agnam cceperunt.
Sermonum, I, viii, 25-7.

50 Quidam dzmon incubus nomine Robyn Artysson concubuit cum ea.
Annales Hibernie. Probably a chronicle of the fifteenth century, printed by
Camden, Britannia, ed. 1607, p. 818.

51 Printed by Mrs. Chaworth Musters in A Cavalier Stronghold, 1890, p. 388,
and in a French translation by Mrs. H. G. M. Murray-Aynsley in the Rane des
Traditions populaires, IV, 605. In Cornish mummings we find a character
“Hub Bub,” and at Chiswick ‘‘ Lord Grubb,” in both cases obviously a
corruption of the originalname. A player with a blackened face is generally a
protagonist in folk-drama, and sometimes the very name is ‘‘ Little Devil
Doubt ” or “‘ Jack Devil Doubt,” descending from medizval or even earlier
days.

52 Prior of 8. John of Jerusalem, appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland in 1326,
and Lord Justice in 13144.

53 The day of the week kept in commemoration of the Saint, upon which
votive Masses were allowed.

54 Ut heretica inditata, probata, condemnata.

55 The Annales Hibernie say: ‘‘Ipsa ulterius non comparuit, sed de
consilio filii sui et aliorum ignotorum absconsa fuit in uilla quousque habuit
uentum uersus Angliam, et sic transiuit, et sic nescitur quo deuenit.”” And
again: “ Prefata Alicia . . . cum prefata Basilia fugit, et nunquam postea
fuit inuenta.”

56 John Clynn, in his Annales, speaks of the confederates. as being “‘ de
secta et doctrina predictee domine Alicie.”

57 A retro actis temporibus non est uisum uel auditum quod quispiam pro
heresi peenam mortis sustineret in Hiberniz anti ipsam . . . non dico hee
sit que in hoc facinore primo peccauit, sed que primo passa est mortis iustum
iudicium propter heresim. Clynn, Annales. ;

58 Miss Murray, giving a list of the Kilkenny coven (The Witch-Cult in
Western Europe, p. 285), has: ‘‘ 9. Robin, son of Artis (the Devil),” i.e. the
Grand Master or Chief of the witches in that district, and we are no further.

59 Carrigan, History of the Diocese of Ossory, III, p. 18.

60 Enrolment of Pleas, 6 James I, memb. 2 (Queen’s Bench).

61 Almost certainly Isabella of Angouléme, widow of King John.

62 Triumphalia Sanctee Crucis (Register of Father Malachy Hartry, Monk
of Holy Cross, 1640-9), tr. and ed. Murphy, Dublin, 1891. Holy Cross,
although not one of the largest, was the loveliest of Irish Cistercian houses.
It was founded in 1169 by Donald O’Brien, King of Thomond. The pillared
shrine of the Relic still stands. ;

63 He died in 1671. Oork Hist. and Arch. Journal, vol. VII (2nd series).

64 Kgmont MSS. (Hist. MSS. Comm.), I, 181. ng

65 Sinclar in his Satan’s Invisible World Discovered (later edition), where he
quotes a pamphlet published in 1669, The Bewittching of a Child in Ireland.
This, which was probably locally printed, does not seem to have been traced.


192 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


66 The ballad is printed in The Ulster Journal of Archeology for 1908. There
also exists a shorter version, which is very incorrect, and in which the wise-
woman is termed Butlers.

87 Notes and Queries, 4th series, Vol. VII.

68 Folklore, VI, 302.

89 Trish Times, 14 June, 1911; Independent, 1 July, 1911.

7 George Ives, A History of Penal Methods, 1914, p. 68.

71 §. John D. Seymour, Irish Witchcraft and Demonology, 1913, pp. 247-8.

72 De termino Trinitatis anno xlv. regni Edwardi tertii. Nota, Que un
home fust prise en Southwark ovesque un test et un visage d’un home mort, et
ovesque un livre de sorcery en son male, et amesné devant Sir J. Knivet
justice en bank le roy, més nul endictment sur luy, per que les clerks luy
fierent jurer que jammeés ne serroit sorcier, et fuit deliveré del prison, et
le teste et le livre arse & Touthil as costages le prison. Year Book, IV, p. 17.

738 Archbishop of Canterbury, 1375-81 ; Lord Chancellor, 1380-1.

74 Vol. IV, i, p. 93. See also the Calendar of the Patent Rolls, Henry IV,
Vol. III, p. 112. It may be remembered that Henry IV’s opponent Owen
Glendower, “‘ the great magician, damn’d Glendower,” was traditionally a
famous sorcerer skilled to “‘ call spirits from the vasty deep.”

75 Rex dilecto et fideli suo Johanni Colepeper, ac dilecto sibi Roberto
Passemer seruienti suo ad arma, salutem. Sciatis quod quibusdam certis de
causis coram nobis et concilio nostro propositis, assignauimus uos conjunctim
et diuisim ad Thomam Northfelde, sacre pagine professorem, ordinis
predicatorum, apud ciuitatem Wygornie commorantem, capiendum et
arestandum, necnon ad omnimodo libros suos, tractantes materiam sortilegze
prauitatis, seu quascumque alias materias suspectas, scrutandum, capiendum
seu arestandum, et ipsum Thomam, ac libros suos taliter suspectos, saluo
et secure coram concilio nostro, omni celeritate possibili, adducendum, ad
respondendum super hiis que sibi ex parte nostra obiicientur tunc ibidem,
et ad faciendum ulterius et recipiendum quod per nos et dictum consilium
nostrum consideratum fuerit in hac parte; et ideo uobis mandamus quod
circa premissa diligenter intendatis, ac ea faciatis et exequamini in forma
predicta: Damus autem uniuersis et singulis uicecomitibus, maioribus,
balliuis, constabulariis, ac aliis officiariis, ministris, ligeis et subditis nostris
quibuscumque, tam infra libertates quam extra, tenore presentium firmiter
in mandatis quod uobis, seu alteri uestrum in executione premissorum inten-
dentes sint, consulentes, et auxiliantes, quotiens et quando per uos, seu alterum
uestrum, ex parte nostra, fuerint rationabiliter premuniti. In cuius, &o.
Teste Rege apud Westmonasterium, septimo die Maii. Per concilium.

76 A Mendicant Order which, after having for some time existed in Italy,
appeared in England from the priory of S. Maria di Morella at Bologna in 1244
with official documents from Pope Innocent IV requesting leave to make
foundations here. Their rule was that of S. Augustine; their habit brown
or black, afterwards changed to blue by Pius II. The first of their English
houses was founded in 1245, and they settled in London in 1249. The Order,
having dwindled to very few monasteries, was suppressed in 1636 by
Alexander VII.

7 Sir Harris Nicolas, Proceedings and Ordinances of the Privy Council,
London, 1834-7, IV, p. 114.

78 Rot. Parl., 1 Ric. III, printed in the Rolls of Parliament, Vol. VI, p. 240.

7° It has been suggested by Mr. Archbold, the author of the article on
Cardinal Morton in the Dictionary of National Biography, that the Cardinal
pohene wrote the history in Latin, and Blessed Thomas More turned it into

nglish.

*° Actually, of course, Anne Boleyn was merely a concubine.

81 Letters and Papers, Foreign and Domestic, X, 199.

82 Letters and Papers, VI, 1112.

8 An earlier statute mentioned sorcery and witchcraft in connexion with
medicine, but it was directed against quacks and irregular practitioners.

84 Acts of Privy Council, n.s., VII, 6 and 22.

*> Calendar of State Papers, Domestic, 1547-80, 142.

** British Museum, Add. MSS., 32,091, fol. 176.


ENGLAND 198


8? Archeologia Cantiana, Visitations of Canterbury, XXVI, 31.

88 British Museum, Sloane MSS., 3,943, fol. 19.

*® Kitchen of Llandaff and Thomas Stanley of Sodor and Man were the
only two prelates found willing to change their religion. Of the expelled
Bishops many were strictly imprisoned, others were held prisoners at large,
three (Cuthbert Scott of Chester, Richard Tate of Worcester, Thomas Goldwell
of S. Asaph) went abroad. Zurich Letters, 1st series, n. 33 and 35.

°° He was also preacher to the malcontents at Basel.

*1 “Thave at last returned to London,” 2 November, 1559. Zurich Letters,
I, 44, Parker Society, Cambridge, 1842.

_°2 “ Tanti est semel gustasse de missa! Qui bibit inde furit : procul hinc
discedite, queis est mentis cura bone: qui bibit inde furit: uident erepto
illo palladio omnia ventura in periculum.” Zurich Letters, IX. Candidly it
was the Mass that mattered.

93 Zurich Letters, IV, 20 March, 1559.

°* Even Laurence Humphrey, his Puritan biographer, thought the terms of
J ats challenge regarding the Fathers unwise. Bristow, Motives, ed. 1599,
pp. 67-8.

*5 Decem Rationes, V, apud Simpson’s Edmund Campion, 1907, p. 23.

96 In A True and Just Recorde of the Information, Examination, and Confession
of all the Witches taken at St. Oses.... Written... by W. W. (1582) we have :
“ there is a man of great cunning and knowledge come over lately unto our
Queenes Maiestie, which hath advertised her what a companie and number of
witches be within Englande.”’ The reference is, no doubt, to Jewel.

%7 Strype, Annals of the Reformation, I, Pt. i, 11.

®8 Dekker, Old Fortunatus, 4to, 1600, the Prologue and Epilogue at Court.

99 Sub Nomine. Dic. Nat. Biography.

100 G. W. Prothero, Statutes and Constitutional Documents, 1558-1625, 3rd
edition, 1906, pp. 78-9.

101 Acts of the Privy Council, n.s., VII, 200-1.

102 Depositions ... from .. . Durham (Surtees Society), 99.

103 The only original copy that can be traced is in the Lambeth Palace
Library. It has been reprinted for the Philobiblion Society, London, 1864-5.

104 Wytches at Chensforde (reprint), p. 24.

105 Tbhid., pp. 20, 29.

106 Alice Chandler was probably also hanged at the same time.

107 A Detection of damnable driftes, practised by three Witches arraigned at
Chelmsforde in Essex at the last Assizes there holden, whiche were executed in
Aprill, 1579. Black-letter pamphlet, ‘“‘ London, for Edward White at the
little North-dore of Paules.”’ ;

108 W. P. M. Kennedy, Elizabethan Episcopal Administration, 3 vols.,
Alcuin Club Collections, 1925. -

109 The apprehension and confession of three notorious Witches arraigned and
by Justice condemmde in the Countye of Essex the 5 day Julye last past, 1589.

110 Reginald Scot, Discoverie of Witchcraft, p. 542.

111 Acts Privy Council, n. 3, XI, 292.

112 Thid., XII, 21-3.

113 Jbid., XII, 29, 34.

114 Calendar of State Papers, Domestic, 1581-90, 220.

115 Historical MSS. Comm. Reports, IV, app. 366b.

116 Cf. Hudibras, II, 3.

Did not the Dev’l appear to Martin

Luther in Germany for certain ?
Appear in divers Shapes to Kelly,

And speak i’ th’ Nun of Loudo’ns belly ?


Kelly did all his feats upon

The Devil’s Looking-glass, a stone ;
Where playing with him at bo-peep
He soly’d all problems ne’er so deep.


194 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


117 “« She should have been executed, but that her spirit killed her in prison,”
says the account.

118 Of this there are two copies—apparently the only exemplars known—
in Lambeth Palace Library. It is superfluous to remark that all these
pamphlets are of the last rarity, in some cases only one copy has been traced.

119 Also known as Tissey. Tissey and Jack were males and could inflict
death, being more powerful than Tyffin and Pygine, who were females, and
only destroyed goods and cattle or punished with lighter ailments. In 1646
a Huntingdon witch, Elizabeth Werd of Great Catworth, gave a sister witch,
Frances Moore, a white Cat, a familiar, named Tissy.

120 Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584, p. 543. ’

121 1593, 2nd edition 1603, reprinted from the Percy Society, 1842. ‘

122 Second wife of Sir Henry Cromwell, who was the grandfather of Oliver
Cromwell.

123 Mr. H. E. Norris has collected some thirty references to the Warboys
witches in an elaborate and valuable bibliography. Notes and Queries, XII
series, 1916, pp. 283 and 304. .

124 Edinburgh, 1597. Reprinted in London, 1603. In 1616 it appeared
again as part of the collection of the King’s Workes compiled by the Bishop of
Winchester.

125 «The Preface to the Reader.”

126 See Brinsley Nicholson’s edition of the Discoverie (reprint, 1886),
Introduction, xxxv.

127 Nicholson thinks that he was himself a Justice of the Peace.

128 There is a study by R. Binz; Bonn, 1885.

129 Mayhall, Annals of Yorkshire, London, 1878, I, 58. Also Edward
Fairfax, A Discourse of Witchcraft, 1622.

130 The Most Cruell and Bloody Murther committed by an Innkeepers Wife
called Annis Dell, and her Sonne George Dell, Foure Yeares since. . . . With the
severall Witch-crafts and most damnable practices of one Johane Harrison and
her Daughter, upon several persons men and women at Royston, who were all
executed at Hartford the 4 of August last past 1606.

131 Glover, History of Derby (ed. Thos. Noble, 1833), Part I, Vol. ii, p. 613 ;
also W. Andrews, Bygone Derbyshire, pp. 180-4.

132 Thomas Potts, Wonderfull Discoverie of Witches in the countie of
Lancaster, London, 1613. Alizon Device and Isabel Robey were actually
indicted for causing illness, as also were John and Jane Bulcock. But the whole
coven had conspired to murder.

1383 The Witches of Northamptonshire, 1612.

134 Condemned 27 July. Potts, Wonderfull Discoverie.

135 A Booke of the Wytches Lately condemned and executed at Bedford, 1612-13.
Arbor, Stationers’ Register, III, 234b.

186 Middlesex County Records, II, lii, 95, 110, 217-18. She had previously
been twice tried and acquitted.

137 [bid., II, 108, 218.

138 The three women were employed as cleaners in Belvoir Castle. Mother
Flower was ‘“‘ a monstrous malicious woman full of oathes, curses, and impre-
cations irreligious.”” The two daughters made ample confession. They were
said to have killed Henry, Lord Ross, son of the Earl of Rutland. Upon the
Earl’s monument in Bettesford Church, Leicestershire, it is recorded that he
had “two Sons, both which died in their infancy by wicked practices and
sorcery ” (Gentleman’s Magazine, LX XIV, Pt. 11, 909). There is a pamphlet
The Wonderful Discoverie of the Witchcrafts of Margaret and Phillip Flower,
daughters of Joan Flower neere Bevor Castle : executed at Lincolne, March 11,
1618. London, 1619.

139 The Wonderful Discoverie . . . London, 1619.
inatt The Wonderfull Discoverie of Elizabeth Sawyer ... by Henry Goodcole,
41 Hist. MSS. Comm. Reports, XIII, Pt. 4, 136-7, 139-40, 147-8. The
Lord Warden disputed the town’s jurisdiction.


142 Middlesex Oounty Records, II, 116, 219.


ENGLAND 195


143 Alexander Roberts, Treatise of Witchcraft, London, 1616; also,
Mackerell, History and Antiquities of King’s Lynn, p. 233; see also Calendar
State Papers, Dom., 1611-18, 398, and William Kelly, Royal Progresses in
Leicester, Leicester, 1855, Pt. II, 15.

144 Robert Heyrick’s letters from Leicester, 16 July and 15 October, 1616.
Annual Register, 1800, p. 403.
ae J ai Latimer. Annals of Bristol in the Seventeenth Century. Bristol,

Dole

146 British Museum. Sloane MSS., 1, 954, 41-2.

147 Middlesea County Records, 11, 72, 73. She was again acquitted in
1625. Ibid, III, 2.

148 Church History of Britain, V, 452 (chap. X, Sect. 4).

149 Miscellany, 4-9.

159 The authority is the famous narrative by Thomas Potts, The Wonderfull
Discoverie of Witches in the countie of Lancaster. With the Arraignment and
Triall of Nineteene notorious Witches, at the Assizes and generall Gaole deliverie
holden at the Castle of Lancaster, upon Munday, the seventeenth of August last,
1612. . . . By Thomas Potts, Hsq., London, 1613. Reprinted by the Chetham
Society, edited J. Crossley, 1845.

151 Notestein, for no reason at all, suspects this plain and straightforward
narrative which has the very impress of truth.

152 Anne Redfearne, the daughter of old Chattox, never confessed.

158 She had two familiars, Fancie and Tibbe. Three skulls with teeth
were found in her possession. They had, of course, been used for a
charm.

154 This celebration of Holy Communion on Maundy Thursday is worth
remarking.

155 Jennet Device, a girl of nine years, was brought forward against her
mother, ‘‘ this odious witch, who was branded with a preposterous marke in
Nature even from her birth, which was her left eye standing lower than the
other, the one looking down, the other looking up.”

156 Baddeley, in his pamphlet The Boy of Bilson . . . London, 1622, says
she was discharged after the inquiry; but Arthur Wilson asserts she was
found guilty and condemned to death.

157 Bishop of Chester, 1616; translated to Lichfield and Coventry, 1618 ;
to Durham, 1632.

158 The book had been written some four years earlier.

159 E. Baines, Lancaster, 1868-70, II, 12.

160 W. Boys, Collections for an History of Sandwich in Kent, Canterbury,
1792.

161 MS. letter of 1685-6, Gentleman’s Magazine, 1832, Pt. I, 405-10.

162 Meric Casaubon, Of Credulity and Incredulity, London, 1668, pp. 170-1.

168 John Aubrey, Remaines of Gentilisme and Judaisme, Folk-Lore Society,


6l.
164 4 Collection of Modern Relations, London, 1693, 48-9.


165 4to, 1634. :
166 Qverbury died 15 September, 1613. Sir Jervis Elwes, Franklin, and
Mrs. Turner, the poisoners, were tried and executed between 19 October and
4 December, 1615. The Somerset trials took place in the following May.


Dr. Forman had died. h.
167 Richard Baxter in his The Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits, fully


evinced, by unquestionable Histories of Apparitions and Witch-crafts, Operations,
Voices, etc.; . . . Written for the Conviction of Sadducees and Infidels, 8vo,
London, 1691 (Term Catalogues, Michaelmas-November), gives anecdotes of


Dr. Lamb’s sorceries. : ;
168 Dr. Lamb’s Darling, or Strange and Terrible News from Salisbury, by
James [Edmond ?] Bowen, Cleric, London, 1653; and Doctor Lamb Revised, or


Witchcraft condemn’d in Anne Bodenham . . . by Edmond Bowen, London,


1653.
168 The Royal Standard was raised at Nottingham, 22 August, 1642 ;


Edgehill, 23 October, 1642.


196 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


170 John Stearne, his colleague, was a bitter Calvinist. Hopkins also had a
special commission from the Presbyterian. Parliament, for there seems no
reason to doubt Butler’s definite statement :

Has not this present Parl’ament

A Ledger to the Devil sent

Fully impower’d to treat about, ane
Finding revolted Witches out ?—Hudibras, II, iii, 139-42.

171 The Discovery of Witches... by Matthew Hopkins, Witchfinder,
London, 1647. ;

1724 True Relation of the Arraignment of Eighteene Witches at St..Edmunds-
bury . . . London, 1645.

178 John Gaule’s Select Cases of Conscience Touching Witches, London, 1646.

174 Hopkins answers this accusation, which was doubtless true, in Query 9
of his Discovery.

175 It was thought that everything unholy was repelled by water and
refused to sink therein. Binsfeld, De Confessione Maleficarum. The Greeks
believed in the cleansing power of ‘“‘ Waters at their priest-like task,”’ and
"Adade wtiorac was the cry of the hierophant to those about to celebrate
Eleusinian rites. They plunged into the sea to attain ritual purity, for as
Euripides says: Oddacca kdifer ravta TavOphrwv kaxd. (Iphigenia in Tauris,
1, 1193.) One may compare the famous lines in Macbeth, Il:

Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand ? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine,

Making the green one red.


176 Demonologie, III, 6. Actually the water ordeal, swimming a witch,
was the Judgement of God, and applied for many crimes. It goes back to
very early days, about the sixth or seventh century. It is prescribed in the
code of S. Edward the Confessor, who ordained an oath with twelve compur-
gators, in cases of the relapsed thirty-six must be found a third time, ‘‘ et
si alias de latrocinio composuerit est ad iudicium aque.”

177 De la Demonomanie des Sorciers, IV, 4, Lyons, 1593, p. 417.

178 Whose A Confirmation and Discovery of Witch-craft, London, 1648, is all-
important for the Hopkins crusade.


179 A Mr. Rivet, ‘‘ who heard it from them that watched with him,” gave
Hutchinson this account.


sae abe Clarke, Lives of Sundry Eminent Persons . . . London, 1683,
p. :
181 Stearne, Confirmation and Discovery . . . London, 1648, p. 14.


182 A. G. Hollingsworth, History of Stowmarket, Ipswich, 1844, p. 170.

183 Printed by Gaule at the opening of Select Cases.

184 Confirmation and Discovery . . . London, 1648.

186 J. T. Varden, Hast Anglian Handbook for 1885, p. 89.

186 Hudibras, II, iii, ll. 139-64.

187 William Robins (or Robinson), who at the capture of Basing House in
1645 was thus murdered by ‘‘ Butcher’ Harrison. See J. Wright, Historia
Histrionica, 1699. Harrison, who signed the warrant for the execution of King
Charles I, paid the penalty of his crimes on 13 October, 1660, when at Charing
Cross he was “‘ hanged, drawn, and quartered . . . at which there was great
shouts of joy.’’ Pepys, 13 October, 1660.

188 P. Browne, History of Norwich, Norwich, 1814, p. 38.

18° The Divels Delusions, 1649. Palmer gave information about a “ whole
colledge of witches.”


nt Chee Widdrington’s letter to Whitelocke. Whitelocke’s Memorials,


191 R ] h ; 5) . .
ae 0 , Seyi! England’s Grievance Discovered, C. LIII, p. 108.
1#8 Laurence Eachard, History of England, folio, London, 1706, III, p- 181.


19¢ Hudibras . . . With Large Annotations . . . by Z
London, 1744, Vol. II, p. 11. : y Zachary Grey, LL.D.,


ENGLAND 197


ai Middlesex County Records, III, 284. The Weekly Intelligencer, 7 October,
] ae Middlesex County Records, III, 287. The Witch of Wapping, A Declara-
tion in Answer to several lying Pamphlets concerning the Witch of Wapping, a
oe eae! 4 oe vee ees French Intelligencer, 6-13 April, 1652. Mercurius
emocritus, T— ril, 1652. Weekly Intell‘gencer, 6-1 i : }
Scout, 9-16 April, 1652. “ : ee EO Sele

197 Rug was the name of the familiar of Joyce Boanes, an Essex witch, who
was examined by Starne in 1645. She confessed “‘ she had two impes which
came into the bed to her in the likeness of mouses, and that they sucked on
this examinants body.” T. B. Howell, State Trials, London, 1816, IV.

198 A Prodigious and Tragicall History of the Arraignment . . . of six Witches
at Maidstone . . . by ‘“H. F. Gent,” 1652.

199 Baxter, World of Spirits, London, 1691, pp. 44, 45. ‘‘ The now minister
of the place ” reported this trial.

200 Richardson, Table Book, I, 286.

201 Mercurius Politicus, 24 Nov.—2 Dec., 1653. R. and O. B. Peter, The
Histories of Launceston and Dunheved, Plymouth, 1885, p. 285.

202 Middlesex County Records, III, 217, 218, 289.

203 F. Hutchinson, Historical Essay concerning Witchcraft, 1718 (enlarged
edition, 1720).

204 Glanvill, Sadducismus Triumphatus, 1681, II, 120-2.

205 Notestein, Witchcraft in England (p. 219), absurdly says: ‘‘ By 1653 the
equilibrium of England had been restored. Cromwell’s government was
beginning to run smoothly.” Ubi solitudinem faciunt pacem appellant.

206 A MS. letter of 1685-6 printed in the Gentleman’s Magazine, 1832,
Part I, 405-10.

207 P, Brown, History of Norwich, p. 39. Also Francis Bloomfield’s An
Essay towards a Topographical History of the County of Norfolk, London,
1805-10, IIT, 401.’

208 Gentleman’s Magazine, 1856, Pt. I, 39, from a letter of J. Noake of
Worcester, who used the Townshend MSS.

209 Hertfordshire County Sessions Rolls, I, 137.

210 Joseph Hunter, Life of Heywood, London, 1842, pp. 167-8, note. Oliver
Heywood was a prominent Dissenter of the north of England.

211 W. Welfitt (‘‘ Ciuis”’), Minutes of Canterbury, Canterbury, 1801-2, X.

212 Tt is interesting to note that Shadwell’s The Lancashire Witches, which
had been produced during the previous autumn, was published this year. In
his preface T’o the Reader he remarks: “‘ I have presented you a great part of
the Doctrine of Witchcraft, believe it who will. For my Part, I am (as it is
said of Surly in the Alchymist) somewhat costive of Belief” (The Alchemist,
t1,.3):

Mammon. I but come,
To ha’ you cunfute this gentleman.
Surly. Who is,
Indeed, sir, somewhat caustive of beliefe
Toward your stone: would not be gull’d.


218 Notestein, Witchcraft in England, p. 261, says of the evidence at this
trial that it ‘‘ was perhaps the absurdest ever used against even a witch.” His
industry in collecting data is most commendable, but his use of facts is extra-
ordinarily uncritical. His mind has already been made up, and everything is
wrested to square with these preconceived ideas, no small blemish in a
historian.

214 Glanvill, Sadducismus Triumphatus, II, 191-8.

215 T. B. Howell, State Trials, London, 1810, VI, pp. 647—700. ‘

216 4 Full and True Relation of the Tryal, Condemnation, and Execution of
Ann Foster . . . at the place of Execution at Northampton. With the Manner
how she by her Malice and Witchcraft set all the Barns and Corn on Fire . . . and
bewitched a whole Flock of Sheep. London, 1674.

217 T, B. Howell, State Trials, London, 1816, VIII, 1022.


218 [bid., 1035.


198 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


219 Memoirs and Travels of Sir John Reresby, London, 1812, p. 329.

220 FB, A. Inderwick, Interregnum, London, 1891. ‘

221 Ff. Hutchinson, Historical Essay concerning Witchcraft.

222 W. Boys, Collections for an History of Sandwich, p. 718.

228 London. No date. Printed for I.W. (probably John Wyatt of the
Rose in §. Paul’s Churchyard). The edition of 1700 was printed for J.M.

erhaps John Marshall). ssh
Hs ok The Witch-Cult a Western Europe, p. 95; Bibliography, p. 285.

225 State Trials, IV, 828. ce ;

AX W. H. Bernard Saunders in his Legends and Traditions of Huntingdon-
shire, 1888, entirely rejects the Hicks’ case. He has an excellent summary of
the arguments against such a trial. Chap. XIX, pp. 155-64, Fabricated
Executions for Witchcraft at Huntingdon.” H. E. Norris has a valuable
bibliographical note: ‘‘ Witchcraft-Case of Mrs. Hicks.’ Notes and Queries,
XII, Series 53, 30 December, 1916.

227 Witchcraft in England, p. 382.

228 25 Henry VIII, c. 14.

229 Stephen, History of Criminal Law, p. 477.

230 Holinshed, Chronicles, pp. 1226, 1262.

331 Remarkable Trials, 1765, II, p. 100.

232 Lord Hallam’s Life of Tennyson, c. I.

288 Confession . . . of Mary Saunders [Monmouth], 1764.

234 Sussex Assize Records.

235 As printed by the Sussex Archeological Society, Vol. LIT, p. 79.

286 Hutchinson, Historical Essay on Witchcraft, pp. 44, 45.

237 This and the next two cases are from Inderwick, Interregnum.

238 Swectator, No. 117, 14 July, 1711. :

239 An Account of the Tryal, Examination, and Condemnation of Jane
Wonham. One page.

240 R,. Clutterbuck, History and Antiquities of the County of Hertford, London,
1815-27, II, p. 461, note. ‘

241 A MS. in the British Museum, Sloane MSS., 3,943, continues the public
discussion. :

242 Leicestershire and Rutland Notes and Queries, I, 247.

243 British Museum, Add. MSS., 35,838, fol. 404 (Hardwicke Collection).
Notestein has misread the MS. and gives an ‘‘Old woman, her son and
daughter ”’ as ‘‘ Old woman Norton and daughter,’’ which mistake occurs at
least three times in his references. (Witchcraft in England, pp. 330, 333, 419,)

244 Hdited by Brinsley Nicholson, London, 1886.

245 Second edition, 1603 ; reprinted for the Percy Society, 1842.

246 Second edition, with appendix, 1655.

247 Part I, Sec. 2, Mem. 1, Subs. 3.

248 Johann Weyer, 1516-88. Lerchemer, Aug., Bedenker von der Zauberen
4to, 1685. Biarmanus, Martin Biermann, De magicis actionibus . . . Bodini,
opposita disquisitio, 4to, 1590. Ewichius, J. Ewick, De sagorum .. . natura,
Hemingius, Nic. Hemmingius, Admonitio de superstitionibus uitandis, 8vo, 1575.
Danezus, Lambert Daneau, Breme, 8vo, 1584, De Sortiariis, French translation,
Les Sorciers, s.l. (Geneva ?), 12mo, 1574. Chytreus, David, Explicatio Apocalyp-
sis Ioannis, 8vo, 1564. Zanchius, Hier., De diuinatione.. . artificiosa, 8vo, 1610.
Aretius, Angelo Aretino, T'ractatus de Malejiciis, folio, 1521. Delrio, Martin,
S.J., 1551-1608. Sprenger, James, Malleus Maleficarum, c. 1495-9. Niderius,
John, O.P., 1380-1438, Formicarius. Guatius, F. M. Guazzo, Compendium
Maleficarum, 1608. Bartolus, a legal writer, ob. at Perugia, 1536. Bodin, Jean,
1520-96. Godelman, Johan Georg, Disputatio de Magis, 1584. Damhoderius,
Tosse de Damhoudére, La practijue et enchiridion des causes criminelles, Louvain,
4to, 1555. Paracelsus, 1493-1641. Erastus, Thomas, a doctor of Heidelberg,
De lamiis, Le povuoir des sorciéres, French translation (Geneva), 8vo, 1579.
Scribanius, Gulielmus Adolphus, De sagarum natura, 1583. Camerarius,
Philippe, a lawyer and councillor of Nuremberg, Les méditations historiques,
French translation, Paris, 8vo, 1608.

24° Term Catalogues (Mercurius Librarius), Hilary (February), 1669.

#80 Term Catalogues, Easter (May), 1681.


ENGLAND 199


eee Glanvill, by H. 8. Redgrove and I. M. L. Redgrove, 1921, an
y compact little monograph, may be consulted with profit. There isa
more elaborate study, Joseph Glanvill, by Ferris Greenslet, Columbia Uni-
beg Press, and New York, 1900.
ven Lecky admits: ‘‘ The Sadducismus Triumphatus . . . is pr
the ablest book ever published in defence of the saperspbions? i.e. Ae
Rationalism in Hurope, Vol. I, c. 1.
. d :

oS ieee Lriumphatus (3rd ed., London, 1700), Part I, pp. 7 and 8.

*55 Glanvill very rightly refuses to trifle time in combating such a writer as
Scot, whom he with reason dubs “ ridiculous,”
oe “In octavo, Price, bound, ls. 6d.” Term Catalogues, Hilary (February),

ate oe In Folio. Price, bound, 10s.” Term Catalogues, Trinity (5 July), 1677.

Boe Displaying of Supposed Witchcraft, p. 68. Notestein apparently approves
this ineptitude.

35° 'T. Charley’s News from the Invisible World, ‘‘ Impartially compiled from
the Works of Baxter, Wesley, Simpson, and other Writers of Indisputable
Veracity,” is interesting. The writings of Dr. F. G. Lee, which specifically
deal with the problems of Witchcraft, deserve honourable mention, especially
Glimpses of the Supernatural, 2 vols., 1875; More Glimpses of the World
Unseen, 1878 ; and Glimpses in the Twilight, 1885. Such works as The History
of Witches and Wizards . . . by W.P.[1700 ?], giving short uncritical accounts
of various trials, Julian Cox, Elizabeth Styles, the Bury St. Edmund’s cases
of 1682, the garbled narrative of the Boy of Bilson, and legends con-
cerning Cornelius Agrippa, Dr. Faustus, have no value, save what lies in their
great rarity and their amusingly crude woodcuts. Witchcraft Detected and
Prevented, ‘“‘ By a Member of the School of Black Art, Italy,” Peterhead and
London, 1826, is written “‘ more with a view to amuse than to be put in
practice.” The spells given range from: ‘‘ To allay tempests,”’ “‘ To know if a
wife encourage a gallant,”’ ‘‘ To know if water is mixed with wine,” ‘‘ How a
person may render himself invisible,’ to ‘‘ Infallible Negro remedy for
rheumatism,” ‘‘ Edinburgh eye-water,”’ the ‘‘ Russian remedy for a vertigo,”
‘* Excellent worm powder,” and other purely domestic remedies.

260 Tn Ireland the law lasted until 1821. George Ives, A History of Penal
Methods, p. 68.

261 T, Wright, Narratives of Sorcery and Magic, London, 1851, II, pp. 326-8.

462 The following letter ‘‘ From Mr. Manning, Dissenting Teacher at
Halstead, in Essex, to John Morley, Esq., Halstead,” presents a strange
circumstance, and may well be admitted in a foot-note here :

‘“ HALSTEAD, August 2, 1732.

“ Sir,—The narrative which I gave you in relation to witchcraft, and
which you are pleased to lay your commands upon me to repeat, is as follows :
There was one Master Collett, a smith by trade, of Haveningham, in the
county of Suffolk, who, as ’twas customary with him, assisting the maide to
churne, and not being able (as the phrase is) to make the butter come, threw
a hot iron into the churn, under the notion of witchcraft in the case, upon
which a poore labourer, then employed in carrying of dung in the yard, cried
out in a terrible manner, ‘ They have killed me, they have killed me;’ still
keeping his hand upon his back, intimating where the pain was, and died upon
the spot.

“ Mr. Collett, with the rest of the servants then present, took off the poor
man’s clothes, and found to their great surprise, the mark of the iron that was
heated and thrown into the churn, deeply impressed upon his back.
This account I had from Mr. Collett’s own mouth, who being a man of
unblemished character, I verily believe to be matter of fact.—I am, sir, your
obliged humble servant, Sam. Mannine.

263 The Works of William Hogarth . . . Elucidated by Descriptions, Critical,
Moral, and Historical, by Thomas Clerk, London, 1810, Vol. I, p. 192, Plate liii.

364 Which Clerk calls ‘‘ Glanville’s Book of Witches.”’

265 This story is from Clarendon’s History of the Rebellion. It was the subject


of a common enough chap-book.


200 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


266 This extraordinary impostor, in the year 1726, pretended that she bred
rabbits, and even deceived two physicians, whereupon the affair was much
debated. King George I sent down Sir William Manningham, one of the royal
doctors, to investigate the matter, which was soon found to be a clever
cheat.

267 Treland thinks this figure was intended for the Boy of Bilson. Hogarth
Illustrated, II, p. 196.

268 Notes and Queries, Vol. VI, November, 1853, p. 470. Quoting from the
Northampton Mercury of 1785.

269 Curate of Great Paxton, Little Paxton, and Toseland from about 1799
to 1825, and vicar, 1825. A M.I. in Great Paxton Church records that he
“ Died, Dec. 27, 1839, in the 59th year of his age.”” He wrote a large number
of books, and many of his sermons were published.

270 This sermon was reviewed in The Monthly Repository, Vol. III, No. xxxv,
November, 1808.

271 Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions, p. 187.

272 Thid., pp. 187-8.

273 Hertford Reformer, 23 June, 1838.

274 Arthur Mee, The Harrieses of Cwrt-y-Cadno, an interesting brochure.
Also Mary L. Lewes’ valuable study The Wizards of Cwrt-y-Cadno, Occult
Review, July, 1924, pp. 17-24.

275 Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions, II, p. 189.

276 Witch Stories, 2nd ed., 1883, p. 320.

277 The Times, Tuesday, 24 March, 1857.

278 The Times, Tuesday, 7 April, 1857. The letter is signed E. No names,
merely one or two initials, and no place indications are given in the narrative
which is of considerable length.

279 The Times, Thursday, 24 September, 1863.
< 280 a Davidson, Witchcraft, article in Chambers’s Encyclopedia, 1895,

Ds :

281 C. Leland, Htruscan Roman Remains, London, 1892, p. 353. An old
Italian woman, to whom an engraving from the Folk-Lore Journal of the
““witch’s ladder ”’ was shown, recognized it as la ghirlanda delle streghe.

282 Daily Mirror, Wednesday, 13 January, 1926.

283 Westminster Gazette, Wednesday, 20 January, 1926. Liverpool Post and
Mercury, 22 January, 1926. The Rev. Charles Kent, Rector of Merton, has
courteously obliged me with a very ample letter on the subject.

284 Daily Mirror, 22 February, 1923.

285 Daily Express, 12 February, 1926.


CHAPTER III
ScoTLAND


Iy no country did the witch-cult flourish more rankly, in no
country did the belief persist more lately, in no country did
the prosecution of sorcery rage fiercer and the fires blaze
brighter than in Scotland. The lonely hills and wild untrod
moors, the echoing glens and remote glades, seemed the very
places for the hauntings of mysterious powers, influences
which were, however, in popular lore always ranged on the
side of evil, harbingers of death and destruction and hell.
Even the realm of Ferrie, whose denizens were thought of
elsewhere as being bright spirits friendly to humankind,
lovely, gay, bounteous of goodly gifts, in Scotland becomes
the Court of Elfame, a fearful country ruled over by the
Devil, who is actually spoken of as a fairy-man, inhabited
by malignant fiends, where the revels of elves and pretty
pixies dancing their graceful rounds in the silvery moonlight,
are a foul Sabbat of demons, hideous carlines and their dark
familiars. It is, perhaps, no matter for surprise that under
that quintessence of verjuice and venom, John Knox, whose
loathsome slime fouled Caledonia from north to south and
ate like a putrid sore through to the very heart of her children,
an intenser gloom, a deeper despair, fell upon the unhappy
land. The supremacy of the Devil seems an essential feature
of Calvinistic teaching. How can anyone look for tranquillity
or comfort, or ensue sweet communion with God, when his
eyes are ever scorched and scarred by the red roar of the
furnace of Hell, his ears ever stunned with the ceaseless
howling of the damned who are eternally agonizing in the pit
of Tophet ? Christ came to give the world love and peace ;
Calvin and Knox strewed the cockle of hate and fear. And
so in its dour fanaticism the Kirk proved a sterner judge
and a more cruel executioner than even Boguet or De Lancre ;
than Philip-Adolph von Ehrenberg, the burning Bishop of
201


202 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Wiirzburg ; or Chancellor Carpzow, who sent no less than
twenty thousand witches to the stake.

Even in the most distant and shadowy times of Scottish
history the legend of Witchcraft has its part. When Corbreid
Gald, that Galgacus of whom Tacitus! tells us, fought his
gallant fight against Agricola upon the Grampian Hills
(Mons Graupius) and was utterly crushed and overcome,
‘an eagle was seene almost a whole day, fleeing up and
downe over the Scotish armie, even as though she had laboured
herself wearie ; also an armed man was seen flieing about the
armie, and suddenlie vanished away. There fell, in like
manner, out of a dark cloud in the fields, through the which
the armie should pass, divers kinds of birds that were spotted
with blood.”

Another early Celtic monarch, King Mogall, was suspected
to have known through Witchcraft of that conspiracy against
him to which he fell a victim in a.p. 169. In the reign of
Natholocus, a witch dwelt in Iona, so celebrated for her skill,
that the King, when compelled to withdraw from the attacks
of his rebellious subjects, sent one of his trusty followers to
inquire of her as to the issue of the war. “ The witch, con-
sulting with her spirits, declared in the end, how it should
come shortlie to pass that the king should be murdered, not
by his open enemies, but by the hands of one of his most
familiar friends, in whom he had reposed an especiall trust.
The messenger demanded by whose hands that should be ?
‘Even by thine,’ said she, ‘ as shall be well known within these
few dayes.’ The gentleman, hearing these words, railed against
her verie bitterlie, bidding her go like an old witch, for he
trusted to see her burnt before he should commit so villainous
a deed. And, departing from her, he went by and by to
signifie what answer he had received ; but before he came
where the king lay, his mind was altered, so that, what for
doubt on the one side, that if he should declare the truth as
it was told him, the king might, happlie, conceive some great
suspicion that it should follow by his meanes as she had
declared, and thereupon put him to death first; and for
feare, on the other side, that if he keepe it secret, it might
happen to be revealed by some other, and then he to run in
as much danger of life as before. He determined with himself
to work the surest way, and so coming to the king, he was


SCOTLAND 203


led aside by him into his privie chamber, when all other being
commanded to avoid, he declared how he had sped; and
then falling forthwith upon Natholocus with a dagger, he
slew him outright.”

There was no more uncompromising opponent of the foul
mysteries of Druidism than the great and glorious S. Patrick,
who was born at Kilpatrick, near Dumbarton, in a.p. 387.
An old yet purely unhistorical tradition, although interesting
as showing how long the memory of his struggle against these
pagan sorceries survived, relates that the whole body of
witches in Scotland assembled to endeavour to kill the
Saint. Once when he was sailing upon the sea they hurled
by their enchantments a huge rock at his vessel. It fell far
short and in after days became the fortress of Dumbarton,
whilst the Saint, whom they were powerless to harm, went
on his way unscathed.

Among the laws attributed to King Kenneth I (d. 860),
and which are doubtless very ancient, is one that ordains
all warlocks and necromancers and such as invoke spirits
*“‘ and use to seek upon them for helpe, let them be burnt to
death.”

The case of King Duffus, ‘‘ the seventy-eighth King of
Scotland ” (A.D. 968), is related by many historians.2_ Whilst
he ‘“‘ was about the setling of the Countrey, and punishing
the Troublers of the Peace, he began to be sore afflicted in his
Body with a new and unheard of Disease, no Causes of his
Sickness appearing in the least.”’” A rumour soon spread that
the King’s malady was due to Witchcraft. ‘* This suspicion
arose, from an unusual Sweating he was under, his Body
pining and withering away by little and little and his strength
failling day by day. And since all his Physicians had done
their utmost, and yet no appearance of recovery it was
supposed his case was extraordinary, therefore all men being
vehemently intent upon the Event, news came to Court that
Night-meetings were kept at Farres a Town in Murray, for
taking away the life of the King.” Donald, the Governor of
Forres Castle, arrested a young wench who had been over-
heard to threaten the King, and she confessed that her mother,
a notorious sorceress, and a whole coven of devil-worshippers
were slowly taking the life of Duffus, who would expire in a
few days. That night a company of hags was surprised


204 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


whilst roasting the King’s image made of wax upon a long
spit over a slow fire, reciting meanwhile certain mysterious
words, and basting the figure with a poisonous brew. The
whole gang was seized, and they declared that as the wax
melted the body of the King would decay, whilst the muttered
spells deprived him of the natural refreshment of sleep. The
figure was stamped to dust ; the witches burned at Forres ;
and King Duffus recovered both health and strength.

The encounter of Macbeth with the three witches, whom
Holinshed in his Chronicle describes as ‘‘iij. women in
straunge and ferly apparell, resembling creatures of an elder
worlde,” and again as “‘ the weird sisters, that is (as ye would
say) y° Goddesses of destinie, or els some Nimphes or Feiries,”’
hardly calls for comment or description here.

On the 15 April, 1285, during the nuptial festivities of
Alexander III and Joleteta, daughter of the Count de Dreux,
at Jedburgh, a ghost or some strange spectre danced at a
royal ball. The continuation of John Fordun’s Scotichronicon
by Abbot Walter Bower?’ says: “‘ Insecutus est unus, de quo
pene dubitari potuit utrum homo esset an phantasma; qui
ut umbra magis labi uidebatur, quam pedetentim transire.”’
And Boece’ has: ‘ Effigies hominis mortui, carne nudatis
eius ossibus, uisa est.’? Alexander died in less than a twelve-
month from this date.

Many a fantastic legend has gathered about the name of
Sir Michael Scott, who was born in the earlier part of the
thirteenth century, probably about 1214. He is said to have
lectured at Padua, celebrated for its occult schools, upon
judicial astrology, and he also spent several years at Toledo
and Salamanca, the former of which Universities was in
particular reputed to be the head-quarters of magicians from
all over Europe.’ This great scholar is believed to have died
in 1291, and was buried either at Holme-Cultram, in Cumber-
land, or in Melrose Abbey. All accounts agree that his books
of occult lore were secretly interred with him, and some add
that the undying lamp of the Rosicrucians for ever lights his
tomb with its immortal glow. Dante placed Michael Scott
in the fourth Bolgia of the Inferno, where sorcerers are
punished :


The next, who is so slender in the flanks,
Was Michael Scott, who of a verity
Of magical illusions knew the game.®


SCOTLAND 205


And Benvenuto da Imola (Rambaldi), a lecturer upon Dante at
the University of Bologna in the fourteenth century, glosses :
“Michael Scott the Magician practised divination at the
court of Frederick II, and dedicated to him a book on
natural history, which I have seen, and in which among other
things he treats of Astrology, then deemed infallible.”

A far more terrible figure is the Scotch Gilles de Rais,
William, Lord Soulis, who sold himself to the Devil and
seems to have trafficked in every abomination of black magic.
The legend ran that he could summon the Demon whenever
he chose to rap thrice on a certain iron chest, but he must
never look in the direction of the spirit. Once, however, he
forgot or ignored this proviso and saw a tall dark man
wearing a red cap, crimsoned with the blood of human
victims. His doom was sealed, but the compact was kept to
the letter. Lord Soulis was protected by an evil charm
against any injury from rope or steel ; cords could not bind
nor sword pierce him. And so when he was seized by his
enemies they rolled him up in sheets of lead and boiled him
to death at a place called the Nine-Stane Rig.


On a circle of stones they placed the pot,
On a circle of stones but barely nine ;
They heated it red and fiery hot,
And the burnished brass did glimmer and shine.
They rolled him up in a sheet of lead—
A sheet of lead for a funeral pall ;
They plunged him into the cauldron red,
And melted him body, lead, bones and all.


Hermitage Castle,” one of the most famous of the Border
keeps in the days of its splendour, was the scene of the
demoniac orgies of Lord Soulis, and it is said to have sunk
partially into the earth, unable to bear such an accumulation
of crime. Once every seven years, the old wives tell, the
tormented ghost of the wizard still keeps tryst with Red Cap
in the chambers where he wrought his devilries.®

A contemporary account of the murder of King James I
at Perth on the 20 February, 1436, gives some details of a
curious prediction of the monarch’s fate by an Irish prophetess
or witch. ‘“‘ The kyng, sodanly avised, made a solempne fest
of the Christynmes at Perth, which is clepid Sant John’s
Town, which is from Edenbourgh on that other side of the


206 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Scottish see, the which is vulgarly clepid the Water of Lethe.
Yn the myddis of the way, thare arose a woman of Yreland,
that clepid herselfe as a suthsayer. The which anone as she
saw the kyng, she cried with lowde voise, saying thus: ‘My
lord kyng, and ye pase this water, ye shall never turne agane
on lyve.’. The kyng heryng this, was astonyed of her wordis ;
for bot a litile to fore he had red in a prophesie, that yn the
selfe same yere the kyng of Scottes shuld be slayne; and
therwithall the kyng, as he rode, clepid to him one of his
knyghtis, and gave hym in commandment to torne agane to
speke with that woman, and ask of here what sheo wold, and
what thyng sheo ment with her lowd crying? And sheo
began, and told hym as ye hafe hard of the kynge of Scottes
yf he passed that water. As now the kynge askid her, how
sheo knew that ? And sheo said, that Huthart told her so.
‘ Sire,’ quod ho, ‘men may calant ye tak non hede of yond
woman’s wordes, for sheo nys bot a drunkine fule, and wot
not what sheo saith’ ; and so, with his folk, passid the water
clepid the Scottishe see, towards Saynt Johnnes Towne.”
The chronicler relates some dreams ominous of James’s
murder, and afterwards proceeds: ‘‘ Both afore soper, and
long aftir ynto quarter of the nyght, in the which the Erle
of Athetelles, and Robert Stward were aboute the kyng,
where thay wer occupied att the playng of the chesse, att the
tables, yn redying of romans, yn syngyng and pyping, yn
harping, and in other honest solaces of grete pleasance and
disport. Therwith came the said woman of Yreland, that
clepid herself a dyvenourese, and entered the kynge’s courte,
till that sheo came streght to the kynge’s chambur-dore,
where sheo stood, and abode bycause that hit was shitte.
And fast sheo knokyd, till at the last the usher opyned
the dure, marvelyng of that woman’s beyng there that tyme
of the nyght, and askyng here what sheo wold? ‘ Let me
yn, sire,’ quod sheo, ‘ for I haf sumwhat to say, and to tell
unto the kyng; for I am the same woman that noght long
agone desired to haf spokyn with hym at the Lith, whan he
should passe the Scottish see.’ The usher went yn and told
hym of this woman. ‘ Yea,’ quod the kyng, ‘let hir cume
to-morrow’ ; bycause that he was occupied with suche dis-
portes at that tyme, hym let not to entend her as thenne.
The usher came agane to the chamber-dore, to the said woman,


SCOTLAND 207


and there he told hir that the kyng was besye in playing, and
bid her cum soon agane upon the morrow. ‘ Well,’ said the
woman, * hit shall repent yow all that ye wil not let me speke
nowe with the kyng.’ Therat the usher lughe, and held her
bot a fule, chargyng her to go her way, and therwithall she
went thens.”” The Earl of Athole, one of the chief conspirators,
was afterwards, at his execution, crowned with a regal
diadem of red-hot iron, because, says Buchanan, certain
witches, for whom the county of Athole was always infamous,
had told him that he would be crowned a king in sight of all
the people. The historian adds,—‘‘Idque uaticinium ita uel
impletum uel elusum est: ac certe tales predictiones fre-
quenter huiusmodi sortiuntur euentus.”’

In Scotland as elsewhere political rancour was often mixed
with charges of witchcraft. In 1479 during the reign of
James III his brother the Earl of Mar was accused of practising
magic to shorten the King’s life. Buchanan, indeed, attri-
butes the hatred of James for his brother to a prophecy
uttered by certain witches, in whom that monarch greatly
trusted, or a prediction of Andrew, a Flemish astrologer high
in the royal favour, to the effect that in Scotland a lion should
be devoured by his whelps. Twelve mean women and several
wizards were burned at Edinburgh on a charge of having
employed diabolic arts in the service of Mar by roasting a
waxen effigy or puppet of the King.

About the same time many stories of incubi and succubi
seem to have circulated, and are referred to by the historians.
Thus Holinshed, drawing from Hector Boece, has the
following narrative: ‘‘ There was in the countrie of Mar a
young gentlewoman of excellent beautie, and daughter unto
a nobleman there, refusing sundrie wealthie mariages offered
to her by her father, and other friends. At length she prooved
with child, and being rigorouslie compelled by her parents
to tell who was the father, she confessed that a certain young
man used nightly to come unto her, and kept her companie,
and sometimes in the day also, but how or from whence he
came, or by what meanes he went awaie, she was not able
to declare. Her parents, not greatlie crediting her words,
laid diligent watch, to understand what he was that had
defiled their house ; and within three days after, upon signi-
fication given by one of their maidens, that the fornicator was


208 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


at that very instant with their daughter, incontinentlie
thereupon, making fast the doors, they enter the chamber
with a great manie of torches and lights, where they find in
their daughter’s armes a foul monstrous thing, verie horrible
to behold. Here a number coming hastilie in, to behold this
evil favoured sight, amongst others, there was a priest of
verie honest life, not ignorant (as was thought) in knowledge
of holie scripture. This priest (all other being afraid), and
some of them running their waies, began to recite the begin-
ning of St. John’s Gospell, and coming to these words, Uerbum
caro factum est, suddenlie the wicked spirit, making a very
sore and terrible roaring noise, flue his waies, taking the roofe
of the chamber away with him, the hangings and coverings
of the bed being also burnt therewith. The gentlewoman was
yet preserved, and within three or four daies after was
delivered of such a mishapen thing, as the like before had
not beene seene, which the midwives and women, such as
were present at her labour, to avoid the dishonour of her
house, immediately burnt in a great fire, made in the chamber
for the same intent.”

During the troublous reign of James V (1513-1542), a
daughter of a noble house, Janet Douglas, Lady Glamis,
was sent to the stake on a charge of having attempted the
King’s life by poison and evil charms. The fact that she was
sister of the Earl of Angus, widow of John Lyon Lord
Glamis, and wife of Archibald Campbell of Hepneith,
availed her no whit more than her courage and beauty. Found
guilty, she was hurried from the bar of the assize to Castle
Hill and burned alive as a traitress and a witch. The following
record is from an abridgement of the Scotch Criminal Trials :
“July 17, 1537.—Janeta Douglas, Domina de Glamis,
convicted by the assize, viz. Earl of Athole, Earl of Buchan,
Lord Maxwell, Master of Glencairne, Home of Coldinknows,
Kirkpatrick of Kirkmichael, Crichton of Ravennis, Ker of
Mersington, Earl of Cassillis, Lord Semple, Laird of Raith,
Tower of Inverleith, Barclay of Mathers, Edmonston of that
ilk, M‘Lennan, tutor of Bomby. Sententia Forisfacture. It
is fundin be the said assize, that Janet Douglas, Lady of
Glamis, hes committed art and part of the treasonable con-
speration and magination of the slaughter and destruction
of our sovereign Lord his most noble person by poyson, and


SCOTLAND 209


for art and part of the treasonable assistance, supply, inter-
communing, and fortifying of Archibald, sometime Earl of
Angus, and George Douglas his brother, rebells and traitors,
in a treasonable manner. For the whilk treasonable crimes
the said Janet, Lady of Glamis, be forfaulted to our sovereign
Lord, her life, lands, goods, moveable and immoveable, and
that she shall be had to the Castle-hill of Edinburgh, and
there burnt in ane fire to the dead as ane traitor; and that
I gif for doom.”

Amongst other dames of high degree who were popularly
charged with witchcraft, although never brought to trial,
were Lady Buccleuch, who was supposed to have gained the
consent of Queen Mary to Darnley’s murder by her spells ;®
Margaret, daughter of Malcolm, third Lord Fleming, Countess
of Athole ; and the Countess of Huntley, whom Knox roundly
accuses of being a patroness and encourager of sorcerers, and
relying greatly upon “ hir principall witch, called Jonet.”
It is not surprising that Knox himself was esteemed a
warlock, and the story went that he had attempted to raise
““some sanctis”’ in the churchyard of S. Andrews, where
Satan, cornuted like a triple cuckold, leaped out, at which
terrible sight the secretary of Knox went mad and presently
died. But the dour old fellow was made of sterner stuff; it
may be familiarity had bred contempt. Nicol Burne, a
secular priest, in his clever and conclusive Disputation con-
cerning the Controversit Headdis of Religion (1580) says that
Knox was vulgarly supposed to have employed philtres or
some cunning charm to secure the affections of Lord Ochil-
tree’s daughter, ‘‘ ane damosil of nobil blude, and he ane auld
decrepit creatur of maist bais degree of onie that could be
found in the countrey.”’

The ninth parliament of Queen Mary in 1568 passed an
Act which decreed the punishment of death against all
witches and consulters with witches. At once prosecutions
followed. In 1572 at S. Andrews a notorious witch was
burned, who, when a white cloth “like a collore craig with
stringes whairon was mony knottis ” (obviously la ghirlanda
delle strege) was taken from her, gave way to utter despair,
and cried: ‘“*‘ Now I have no holp of myself,” adding that she
“ cared not whether she went to heaven or hell.”

In May, 1569, at S. Andrews “a notabil sorceres callit


210 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Nicneven was condemnit to the death, and burnt.”” Nicneven
is the name usually given to the Queen of the Fairies or, as
it would be in Scotland, the Queen of Demons, and was
probably bestowed on this witch because of her multifold
crimes. About the same date ‘“‘a Frenchman callit Paris,
quha was ane of the designeris of the king’s death, was hangit
in St. Andro, and with him William Steward, lyoun king of
armes, for divers pointes of witchcraft and necromancie.”

On the 8 November, 1576, Bessie Dunlop of Lyne, in
Ayrshire, as she was ‘“‘ make and hevye sair dule with hirself”
since her husband and her bairn were ill and her cow had
died, met ‘“‘ ane honest, wele, elderlie man, gray bairdit, and
had ane gray coitt with Lumbart slevis of the auld fassoun ;
ane pair of gray brekis and quhyte schankis gartanit abone
the kne; ane blak bonet on his heid, cloise behind and plane
befoir, with silkin laissis drawin throw the lippis thairof ; and
ane quhyte wand in his hand.’’!° This was Thomas Reid,
who informed her he had been killed at the battle of Pinkie,
1547, and was now a dweller in Elfame, or Fairyland. He
saluted her with “‘ Gude day, Bessie.” “‘ God speid yow, gude
man,” says she. ‘Sancta Marie,” says he, ‘‘ Bessie, quhy
makis thow sa grit dule and sair greting for ony wardlie
thing ?”’ She told him her troubles and he comforted her.
They met several times, and in the third occasion he endeav-
oured to persuade her to deny her baptism. That is to say
this individual who gave himself out as Thomas Reid was
obviously the Chief Officer of the Witches of the district, and
was persuading her to join their company. Eventually she
did so, and was introduced to the coven, ‘‘ twelf persounes,
aucht wemene and four men: The men wer clad in gentil-
mennis clething, and the wemene had all plaidis about thame,
and wer verrie semelic lyke to se; and Thome was with
thame.” Bessie Dunlop owing to Thomas Reid’s directions
and advice—‘‘ Sche culd do nathing, quhill sche had first
spokin with Thom ”—soon acquired a great reputation
throughout the district as a “‘ wise woman” and a midwife
of extraordinary powers. This was enough to mark her out
as a witch; “ confessit and fylit” (found guilty) she was
“convict and brynt ” on Castle Hill, Edinburgh.

On the 28 May, 1588, Alison Pearson, in Byre-hills, Fife-
shire, was convicted of practising sorcery, and of invoking


SCOTLAND 211


the foul fiend ; she acknowledged that she had been intimate
with the Queen of Elfland for many years, and that she had
many friends of her own kin in the Court of Fairy, with whom
she had consorted some seven years. After being “ wirreit
(strangled) at ane staik”’ she was duly burned, “ conuicta
et combusta.”’

On the 22 June, 1590, Catharine Ross, Lady Foullis, was
endited at the instance of the King’s advocate, together with
Hector Munro of Foullis, her own son-in-law, for witchcraft.
The first article of accusation urged against her is ‘‘the making
of two clay pictures, one for the destruction of the young
Lady Balnagowan, and getting them enchanted, and shooting
of elf-arrow heads at the said persons; second, for making
a stoupfull of poisoned aill for performance of your devillish
malice, wherewith ye killed sundry ; third, sending a pigfull
of poyson to the house where young Foullis was, the carrier
whereof falling, and with the fall breaking the pig, and seeing
the liquor, tasted it, and dyed immediately ; and the grasse
which grows where it fell, no beast will eat of it ; fourth, for
saying that ye would use all means that may be had of God
in heaven, or the devill in hell, for destroying Marjory
Campbell, the Lady Balnagowan, that the laird might marry
the lady Foullis; also hindering a commission that was
granted for tryall of witches, and procuring a suspension
thereof, which, if thou had been ane honest woman, thou
would never have done.” Curiously enough for Scotland
both defendants were acquitted.

About a month later, Bessie Roy, nurreych (nurse) to the
Leslies of Balquhain was “ dilatit ” as a notorious witch and
‘*a common awa-taker of women’s milk.” Amongst other
remarkable performances “‘ once in the field, in the presence
of sundry other servants, [she] drew a compas, made a hole
in the midst of it; then, by her conjurations, came forth a
great worme, and crap over the circle ; then a small one, and
also crap over; then a great one, which sank again into the
hole; which enchantment she interpreted thus to them:
The first great worm is the goodman, that he shall live long ;
the second is a barne in the ladye’s womb, (whereas nobody
knew she was with barne,) and that the barne should live ;
the last great worme was the goodwyfe, that should die of
’ the birth ; all which came to pass as she said.”


212 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Notwithstanding all these circumstantial charges she was
pronounced innocent.

In 1590 occurred one of the most extraordinary and notorious
witch-trials in Scottish history, or indeed in the whole history
of Witchcraft. Nearly seventy persons were more or less
directly implicated.11 The trouble seems to have begun
with Geillis Duncan, the servant of Master David Seaton,
the deputy-bailiff of Tranent, a small town in Haddington-
shire, about ten miles from Edinburgh. Grave suspicion was
aroused because she ‘‘ vsed secretly to be absent and to lye
foorth of her Maisters house euery other night :1* this Gedllis
Duncane took in hand to help all such as were troubled or
greeued with any kinde of sicknes or infirmitie : and in short
space did perfourme manye matters most miraculous, which
thinges forasmuch as she began to doe them vpon a sodaine,
hauing neuer doon the like before, made her Maister and
others to be in great admiracion, and wondred thereat: by
meanes wherof the saide Dauid Seaton had his maide in some
great suspition, that she did not those things by naturall and
lawfull wayes, but rather supposed it to be doone by some
extraordinary and vnlawfull meanes.

‘““Whervpon, her Maister began to growe very inquisitiue,
and examined her which way and by what meanes she were
able to perfourme matters of so great importance: whereat
she gaue him no answere, neuerthelesse, her Maister to the
intent that he might the better trye and finde out the trueth
of the same, did with the helpe of others, torment her with
the torture of the Pilliwinckes vpon her fingers, which is a
greeuous torture, and binding or wrinching her head with a
corde or roape, which is a most cruell torment also, yet would
she not confesse any thing, whereupon they suspecting that
she had beene marked by the Diuell (as commonly witches are)
made dilligent search about her, and found the enemies marke
to be in her fore crag or foreparte of her throate : which being
found, she confessed that all her dooings was doone by the
wicked allurements and inticements of the Diuell, and that
she did them by witchcraft.

“After this her confession, she was committed to prison,
where she continued for a season, where immediately she
accused these persons following to be notorious witches, and
caused them foorthwith to be apprehended one after an other,


SCOTLAND 213


vidz. Agnis Sampson the eldest Witch of them al, dwelling in
Haddington, Agnes Tompson of Edenborough, Doctor Fian,
alias Iohn Cunningham, maister of the Schoole at Saltpans
in Lowthian, of whose life and strange actes you shall heare
more largely in the end of this discourse: these were by the
saide Geillis Duncane accused, as also George Motts wife,
dwelling in Saltpans, Robert Griersonn, skipper ; and Iennet
Bandilandis ; with the Porter’s wife of Seaton; the Smith
at the brigge Hallis ; with innumerable others in those parts,
and dwelling in those bounds aforesaide: of whom some are
alreadye executed ; the rest remaine in. prison, to receive
the doome of Iudgement at the King’s Maiesties will and
pleasure.

“ The said Geillis Duncane also caused Ewphame Meealrean
to bee apprehended, who conspired and perfourmed the death
of her Godfather, and who vsed her art vpon a gentleman
being one of the Lords and Iustices of the Session, for bearing
good will to her daughter : she also caused to be apprehended
one Barbara Naper, for bewitching to death Archibalde, the
last Earle of Angus, who languished to death by witchcraft,
and yet the same was not suspected, but that he died of so
straunge a disease as the Phisition knewe not how to cure or
remedy the same: but of all other the saide witches, these
two last before recited, were reputed for as ciuill honest
women as anie that dwelled within the Citie of Edenbrough,
before they were apprehended. Many other besides were
taken, dwelling in Lieth, who are detayned in prison, vntill
his Maiesties further will and pleasure be known: of whose
wicked dooings you shall particularly heare, which was as
followeth.

“‘This aforeaside Agnis Sampson which was the elder Witch,
was taken and brought to Haliciud house before the Kings
Maiestie and sundry other of the nobility of Scotland, where
she was straitly examined, but all the perswasions which the
Kings maiestie vsed to her with y® rest of his counsell, might
not prouoke or induce her to confesse any thing, but stood
stiffely in the deniall of all that was laide to her charge:
whervpon they caused her to be conueied awaye to prison,
there to receiue such torture as hath been lately prouided for
witches in that country : and forasmuch as by due examina-
tion of witchcraft and witches in Scotland, it hath latelye


214 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


beene found that the Deuill dooth generallye marke them
with a priuie marke, by reason the Witches haue confessed
themselues, that the Diuell dooth lick them with his tung in
some priuy part of their bodie, before hee dooth receiue them
to be his seruants, which marke commonly is giuen them
vnder the haire in some part of their bodye, wherby it may
not easily be found out or seene, although they be searched :
and generally so long as the marke is not seene to those which
search them, so long the parties that hath the marke will
neuer confesse any thing. Therfore by special commaunde-
ment this Agnis Sampson had all her haire shauen of, in each
parte of her bodie, and her head thrawen with a rope according
to the custome of that Countrye, beeing a paine most greeuous,
which she continued almost an hower, during which time she
would not confesse any thing vntill the Diuels marke1* was
found vpon her priuities, then she immediately confessed
whatsoeuer was demaunded of her, and iustifying those
persons aforesaid to be notorious witches.

‘Item, the saide Agnis Tompson [i.e. Sampson] was after
brought againe before the Kings Maiestie and his Counsell,
and being examined of the meetings and detestable dealings
of those witches, she confessed that vpon the night of
Allhollon Kuen last, she was accompanied aswell with the
persons aforesaide, as also with a great many other witches,
to the number of two hundreth: and that all they together
went by Sea each one in a Riddle or Ciue, and went in the
same very substantially with Flaggons of wine making merrie
and drinking by the waye in the same Riddles or Ciues, to
the Kerke of North Barrick in Lowthian, and that after they
had landed, tooke handes on the land and daunced this reill
or short daunce, singing all with one voice.


Commer, goe ye before, commer, goe ye,
Gif ye will not goe before, commer let me.


At which time shee confessed, that this Geilles Duncane did
goe before them, playing this reill or daunce vpon a small
Trump, called a Iewes Trump, vntill they entered into the
Kerk of north Barrick.

‘* These confessions made the King in a wonderful admira-
tion, and sent for y® saide Geillis Duncane, who, vpon the
like Trump, did play the saide daunce before the Kings


SCOTLAND 215


Maiestie, who, in respect of the strangenes of these matters,
tooke great delight to be present at their examinations,

“Item, the said Agnis Tompson confessed that the Diuell
being then at North Barrick Kerke, attending their comming,
in the habit or likenes of a man, and seeing that they tarried
ouer long, hee at their comming enjoyned them all to a
penance, which was, that they should kisse his Buttockes, in
sign of duetye to him, which being put ouer the Pulpit barre,
euerye one did as he had enjoyned them: and hauing made
his vngodly exhortations, wherein he did greatlye inveighe
against the King of Scotland, he receiued their oathes for
their good and true seruice towards him, and departed :
which doone, they returned to Sea, and so home againe.”’

It should be remarked that we have here well-nigh every
circumstance of Witchcraft and the Sabbat orgies. The
osculum infame as a token of service and submission is
frequently alluded to in the witch-trials of all nations. It is
specially mentioned by Guazzo in his Compendium Male-
ficarum,14 by de Lancre, Bodin, Lambert Daneau in his
Dialogue of Witches (1574; English translation, 1575), whence
it is quoted by Reginald Scot, and other authorities. That
a similar homage was paid to the Master was one of the
charges brought against the Templars. Guillaume Edeline,
who was tried in 1453, ‘“‘ confessa . . . de sa bonne et fraiche
voulenté, avoir fait hommage audit ennemy en l’espéce et
semblance d’ung monton, en le baisant par le fondement en
signe de révérence et d’hommage.”’!5 The witches of Poitiers
in 1574 ‘‘ dansoyent 4 lentour du bouc: puis vn chacun luy
baisoit le derriere.”’!® Jeanette d’Abadie in 1609 confessed
that this degrading rite was continually repeated, after a
renunciation of Christianity which “ il luy faisoit renouueller
toutes les fois qu’elle alloit au sabbat, puis elle l’alloit baiser
au derriere.”’17 It would be easy to give a very large number
of other instances. Perhaps there is no ceremony which so
frequently occurs.

Agnes Sampson, whose confession greatly interested King
James, since he himself examined her in person, declared that
the Devil hated the King, ‘‘by reason the King is the greatest
enemy he hath in the worlde,” a pretty piece of flattery and
compliment. However, she proceeded to detail “ sundrye
thinges which were so miraculous and strange, as that his


216 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Maiestie saide they were all extreame lyars.’”” Whereupon she
gave him a convincing token of her veracity, for “‘ taking his
Maiestie a little aside, she declared vnto him the verye
woordes which passed betweene the Kings Maiestie and his
Queene at Vpslo in Norway the first night of their marriage,
with their answere eache to other: whereat the Kinges
Maiestie wondered greatlye, and swore by the liuing God,
that he beleeued: that all the Diuels in hell could not haue
discouered the same: acknowledging her woords to be most
true, and therefore gaue the more credit to the rest which
is before declared.”

It is evident that an attempt was made upon the life of
the King, and although the gangs did their best to bewitch
him to death they were very ready to resort to poison, even
if they brewed their venom with all manner of superstitious
ceremonies. For Agnes Sampson further “ confessed that
she tooke a blacke Toade, and did hang the same vp by the
heeles, three daies, and collected and gathered the venome
as it dropped and fell from it in an Oister shell, and kept the
same venome close couered, vntill she should obtaine any
parte or peece of foule linnen cloth, that had appertained to
the Kings Maiestie, as shirt, handkercher, napkin or any
other thing which she practised to obtaine by meanes of one
Iohn Kers, who being attendant in his Maiesties Chamber,
desired him for olde acquaintance betweene them, to helpe
her to one or a peece of such a cloth as is aforesaide, which
thing the said Iohn Kers denyed to helpe her too, saying he
could not help her to it. . . . And the saide Agnis Tompson
[Sampson] by her depositions since her apprehension saith,
that if shee had obtained any one peece of linnen cloth which
the King had worne and fouled, she had bewitched him to
death, and put him to such extraordinary paines as if he had
beene lying vpon sharp thornes and endes of Needles.” The
witches also performed incantations to raise a storm that
might wreck Queen Anne’s ship on her voyage to Scotland.
Among other ceremonies they took a cat and christened it,
and bound various members of a corpse to the animal, which
was afterwards cast into the sea near Leith. Nor did they
forget to fashion a wax image of the King in order that as it
was melted he might languish away and pine.

Upon the 31 October, All Hallows’ Eye, the whole company


SCOTLAND 217


of witches assembled at the haunted church of North Berwick.
Here they danced ‘“ endlang”’ round the kirk-yard, “‘ and
Gelie Duncan playit on ane trump, Johnne Fiene missellit
[masked] led the ring; Agnes Sampsoun and hir dochteris
and all the rest following the said Barbara [Napier] to the
nowmer of sevin scoir of persounes.”” In the church the
Devil “ start vp in the pulpett, lyke ane mekill blak man,
haifand ane blak buik in his hand, callit on ewerie ane of
thame, desyring thame all to be guid serwandis to him, and
he sould be ane guid maister to thame.” Agnes Sampson
described the Devil as follows: ‘‘ His body was hard lyk
yrn, as they thoct that handled him ; his faice was terrible,
his noise lyk the bek of an egle, gret bournyng eyn : his handis
and legis were herry, with clawis vpon his handis and feit
lyk the griffon.”” The meeting had been convened to discuss
some way to harm and, if possible, kill the King.

The examination of John Fian, who was known as the
Devil’s Registrar or Secretary, is given in great detail in
Newes from Scotland, and is full of interest.

“As touching the aforesaide Doctor Fian, alias Iohn
Cunningham, the examination of his actes since his appre-
hension, declareth the great subtiltye of the diuell, and
therfore maketh thinges to appeere the more miraculous : for
being apprehended by the accusation of the saide Geillis
Duncane aforesaide, who confessed he was their Regester, and
that there was not one man suffered to come to the Diuels
readinges but onlye he: the saide Doctor was taken and
imprisoned, and vsed with the accustomed paine, prouided
for those offences, inflicted vpon the rest as is aforesaide.

“‘ First by thrawing of his head with a roape, wherat he
would confesse nothing.

‘“‘ Secondly, he was perswaded by faire means to confesse
his follies, but that would preuaile as little.

‘Lastly he was put to the most seuere and cruell paine
in the world, called the bootes, who after he had receiued
three strokes, being enquired if he would confesse his damn-
able acts and wicked life, his tung would not serue him to
speak, in respect wherof the rest of the witches willed to
search his tung, vnder which was found two pinnes thrust vp
into the head, whereupon the VVitches did laye, Now is the
Charme stinted, and shewed that those charmed Pinnes were


218 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the cause he could not confesse any thing: then was he
immediatly released of the bootes, brought before the King,
his confession was taken, and his owne hand willingly set
ther-vnto, which contained as followeth.

“ First, that at the generall meetinges of those witches, hee
was alwayes preasent: that he was Clarke to all those that
were in subiection to the Diuels seruice, bearing the name
of witches, that alwaye he did take their othes for their true
seruice to the Diuell, and that he wrot for them such matters
as the Diuell still pleased to commaund him.

“‘ Item, he confessed that by his witchcrafte he did bewitch
a Gentleman dwelling neere to the Saltpans, where the said
Doctor kept Schoole, onely for being enamoured of a Gentle-
woman whome he loued himselfe: by meanes of which his
Sorcerye, witchcraft and diuelish practises, he caused the
said Gentleman that once in xxiiij. howres he fell into a
lunacie and madnes, and so cotinued one whole hower to-
gether, and for the veritie of the same, he caused the Gentle-
man to be brought before the Kinges Maiestie, which was
vpon the xxiijj. day of December last, and being in Maiesties
Chamber, suddenly hee gaue a great scritch, and fell into a
madnes, sometime bending himselfe and sometime capring so
directly vp, that his heade did touch the seeling of the
Chamber, to the great admiration of his Maiestie, and others
then present : so that all the Gentlemen in the Chamber were
not able to hold him until they called in more helpe, who
together bound him hand and foot; and suffering the saide
gentleman to lye still untill his furye were past, he, within
an hower, came againe to himselfe, when being demaunded
of the King’s Maiestie, what he saw or did all that while
answered, that he had been in a sound sleepe.

“Item, The said Doctor did also confesse, that he had vsed
means sundry times to obtaine his purpose and wicked intent
of the same Gentlewoman, and seeing himselfe disappointed
of his intention, he determined, by all waies he might, to
obtaine the same, trusting by coniuring, witchcraft, and
Sorcery, to obtaine it in this manner.

“It happened this gentlewoman being unmarried, had a
brother who went to schoole with the said Doctor, and calling
his Scholler to him, demaunded if he did lye with his sister,
who answered he did, by meanes whereof he thought to


SCOTLAND 219


obtaine his purpose, and therefore secretlye promised to
teach him without stripes, so he would obtain for him three
haires of his sisters priuities at such time as he should spye
best occasion for it: which the youth promised faithfullye
to perfourme, and vowed speedily to put it in practise, taking
a peece of coniured paper of his maister to lappe them in
when he had gotten them: and therevpon the boye practised
nightlye to obtaine his maisters purpose, especially when his
sister was a sleepe.

‘**But God who knoweth the secrets of all harts, and
reuealeth all wicked and vngodlye practises, would not suffer
the intents of this diuilish Doctor to come to that purpose
which he supposed it would, and therefore to declare that
he was heauilye offended with his wicked entent, did so
woorke by the Gentlewomans owne meanes, that in the ende
the same was discouered and brought to light : for she being
one night a sleepe, and her brother in bed with her, suddenlye
cryed out to her mother, declaring that her Brother would
not suffer her to sleepe, wherevpon her mother hauing a quick
capacitie, did vehemently suspect Doctor Fians entention,
by reason she was a witche of her selfe, and therefore presently
arose, and was very inquisitiue of the boy to vnderstand his
intent, and the better to know y® same, did beat him with
sundry stripes, wherby he discouered the trueth vnto her.

‘‘ The Mother therefore being well practised in witchcrafte,
did thinke it most conuenient to meete with the Doctor in his
owne Arte, and therevpon tooke the paper from the boy,
wherein hee should haue put the same haires, and went to a
young Heyfer which neuer had borne Calfe nor gone to the
Bull, and with a paire of sheeres, clipped off three haires from
the vdder of the Cow, and wrapt them in the same paper,
which she againe deliuered to the boy, then willing him to
giue the same to his saide Maister, which he immediately did.

‘The Schoolemaister so soone as he had receiued them,
thinking them indeede to bee the Maides haires, went straight
and wrought his arte vpon them: But the Doctor had no
sooner doone his intent to them, but presentlye the Hayfer
or Cow whose haires they were indeed, came vnto the doore
of the Church wherein the Schoolemaister was, into the which
the Hayfer went, and made towards the Schoolemaister,
leaping and dauncing vpon him, and following him foorth


220 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of the church and to what place so euer he went, to the great
admiration of all the townes men of Saltpans, and many other
who did beholde the same.

“The reporte whereof made all men imagine that hee did
woorke it by the Diuell, without whom it could neuer have
beene so sufficientlye effected ; and thereupon the name of
the said Doctor Fian (who was but a very yong man) began
to growe so common among the people of Scotland, that he
was secretlye nominated for a notable Coniurer.

‘¢ All which although in the beginning he denied, and would
not confesse, yet having felt the pain of the bootes, (and the
charme stinted, as aforesayd), he confessed all the aforesaid
to be most true, without producing anie witnesses to justifie
the same, & thervpon, before the kings maiesty, he subscribed
the sayd confessions with his owne hande, which, for truth,
remaineth vpon record in Scotland.

“* After that the depositions and examinations of the sayd
doctor Fian, Alias Cuningham, was taken, as alreadie is
declared, with his own hand willingly set therevnto, hee was,
by the master of the prison, committed to ward, and appointed
to a chamber by himselfe, where, forsaking his wicked wayes,
acknowledging his most vngodly lyfe, shewing that he had
too much folowed the allurements and entisements of sathan,
and fondly practised his conclusions by coniuring, witchcraft,
inchantment, sorcerie, and such like, hee renounced the deuill
and all his wicked workes, vowed to leade the life of a
Christian, and seemed newly connected towards God.

“The morrow after, vpon conference had with him, he
granted that the deuill had appeared unto him in the night
before, appareled all in blacke, with a white wand in his
hande, and that the deuill demaunded of him if hee would
continue his faithfull seruice, according to his first oath and
promise made to that effect. Whome (as hee then sayd) he
vtterly renounced to his face, and sayde vnto him in this
manner, Awoide Satan, auoide, for I haue listned too much
vnto thee, and by the same thou hast vndone mee, in respect
whereof I vtterly forsake thee. To whome the deuill answered,
That once ere thow die thou shalt bee mine. And with that (as
he sayde) the deuill brake the white wande, and immediatly
vanished foorth of his sight.

“Thus all the daie this Doctor Fian continued yerie


SCOTLAND 221


solitarie, and seemed to haue care of his owne soule, and
would call yppon God, shewing himselfe penitent for his
wicked life, neuerthelesse the same night hee founde such
meanes, that hee stole the key of the prison doore and
chamber in the which he was, which in the night hee opened
and fled awaie to the Salt pans, where hee was alwayes
resident, and first apprehended. Of whose sodaine departure
when the Kings maiestie had intelligence, hee presently
commanded diligent inquirie to bee made for his apprehension,
and for the better effecting thereof, hee sent publike pro-
clamations into all partes of his lande to the same effect. By
meanes of whose hot and harde pursuite, he was agayn taken
and brought to prison, and then being called before the
kings highnes, hee was reexamined as well touching his
departure, as also touching all that had before happened.

*“ But this Doctor, notwithstanding that his owne con-
fession appeareth remaining in recorde vnder his owne hande-
writing, and the same therevnto fixed in the presence of the
Kings maiestie, and sundrie of his Councell, yet did hee
vtterly denie the same.

‘* Whereupon the kinges maiestie perceiving his stubbourne
wilfulnesse, conceiued and imagined that in the time of his
absence hee had entered into newe conference and league
with the deuill, his master, and that hee had beene agayne
newly marked, for the which he was narrowly searched, but
it coulde not in anie wise be founde, yet, for more tryall of
him to make him confesse, hee was commaunded to have a
most straunge torment, which was done in this manner
following.

‘“‘ His nailes vpon all his fingers were riuen and pulled off
with an instrument called in Scottish a Turkas, which in
England wee call a payre of pincers, and vnder euerie nayle
there was thrust in two needels ouer euen up to the heads.
At all which tormentes notwithstanding the Doctor neuer
shronke anie whit, neither woulde he then confesse it the
sooner for all the tortures inflicted vpon him.

‘Then was hee, with all conuenient speed, by commande-
ment, conuaied againe to the torment of the bootes, wherein
hee continued a long time, and did abide so many blowes in
them, that his legges were crushte and beaten togeather as
small as might bee, and the bones and flesh so brused, that


222 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the bloud and marrowe spouted forth in great abundance,
whereby they were made unseruiceable for euer. And not-
withstanding al these grieuous paines and cruell torments
hee would not confesse anie thing, so deepely had the deuill
entered into his heart, that hee vtterly denied all that which
he had before auouched, and woulde saie nothing therevnto
but this, that what hee had done and sayde before, was onely
done and sayde for feare of paynes which he had endured.

‘‘Upon great consideration therefore taken by the Kings
maiestie and his Councell, as well for the due execution of
iustice vppon such detestable malefactors, as also for example
sake, to remayne a terrour to all others heereafter, that shall
attempt to deale in the lyke wicked and vngodlye actions, as
witchcraft, sorcery, cuniuration, & such lyke, the sayde
Doctor Fian was soone after araigned, condemned, and
adiudged by the law to die, and then to bee burned according
to the lawe of that lande, prouided in that behalfe. Where-
vpon hee was put into a carte, and beeing first strangled, hee
was immediatly put into a great fire, being readie prouided
for that purpose, and there burned in the Castle hill of
Edenbrough on a saterdaie in the ende of Ianuarie last
past. 1591.”

Agnes Sampson was also executed. Of the many other
persons implicated Barbara Napier, a woman of good family,
was acquitted, but Euphemia McCalyan, the daughter of
Lord Cliftonhall, whose trial took place on the 9 June, 1591,
was burned alive on 25 June. The Justiciary Record has
the following : ‘“‘ Euphame Maccalzeane, (her father was ane
advocate) spouse to Patrick Maccalzeane, alias Moscropt, for
many treasonable conspiracies undertaken by witchcraft, to
have destroyed the king’s person by a pictur of wax, and
have bereft his majesty of his life. Item, for enterprysing to
kill her husband, that she might gett another goodman, and
for drowning a boat betwixt Leith and Kinghorne, wherein
were 60 persons lost; convict of thir, and many other
monstrous points, sentenced to be burnt quick to the death,
and all hir lands and goods forfaulted.”

I have dwelt upon this famous trial at length because it
is obvious that here there was a deep-laid and widespread
plot, and high treason is commingled with the sorcery. There
can be no doubt that the whole body of witches combined


SCOTLAND 228


to attempt the life of the King by any possible means they
could. And as Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe pointed out it is
certain that the brain which contrived and the hidden hand
which directed the conspiracy were those of Francis Stewart,
Earl of Bothwell, who was aiming at the throne. It was he,
probably, who played the réle of the Devil in North Berwick
kirk. His connexion with the sorcerers seems to have been
common knowledge at the time, and in her confession Agnes
Sampson explicitly avowed that she made a wax image,
saying: “ This is King James the sext, ordonit to be con-
sumed at the instance of a noble man Francis Erle Bodowell.”’
And from the pulpit the Devil anxiously demanded to know
what effect the melting of the figure had, whilst some present
expressed their surprise that he could not harm the King.
Even in after life, when he was poor and exiled, Bothwell’s
fame as an occulist persisted. Sandys, speaking of Calabria
in the year 1610, remarks: ‘‘ Here a certaine Calabrian
hearing that I was an English man, came to me, and would
needs persuade me that I had insight in magicke: for that
Earle Bothel was my countryman, who liues at Naples, and
is in these parts famous for suspected negromancie.’’!8
These trials, no doubt, gave King James the idea of writing
his Demonologie, in Forme of a Dialogue, Diuided into three
Bookes, Edinburgh, 1597. In “ The Preface to the Reader ”
the royal author without circumlocution or parade thus
explicitly states his purpose: The fearefull aboundinge at this
time in this countrie, of these detestable slaues of the Deuill, the
Witches or enchaunters, hath moved me (belowed reader) to
dispatch in post, this following treatise of mine, not in any wise
(as I protest) to serue for a shew of my learning & ingine, but
onely (mooued of conscience) to preasse thereby, so farre as
I can, to resolue the doubting harts of many ; both that such
assaultes of Sathan are most certainly practized, & that the
instrumentes thereof, merits most severly to be punished : against
the damnable opinions of two principally in our age, wherof the
one called SCOT?® an Englishman, is not ashamed in publike
print to deny, that ther can be such a thing as Witch-craft: and
so mainteines the old error of the Sadducees, in denying of
spirits. The other called VVIERVS,” a German Phisition,
sets out a publick apologie for al these craftes-folkes, whereby,
procuring for their impunitie, he plainely bewrayes himselfe to


224 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


haue bene one of that profession. And for to make this treatise
the more pleasaunt and facill, I haue put it in forme of a Dia-
logue, which I haue diuided into three bookes : The first speaking
of Magie in general, and Necromancie in special. The second
of Sorcerie and Witch-craft: and the thirde, conteines a dis-
course of all these kindes of spirits, & Spectres that appeares &
trobles persones : together with a conclusion of the whol work.
My intention in this labour, is only to proue two things, as
I haue alreadie said: the one, that such diuelish artes haue bene
and are. The other, what exact trial and seuere punishment
they merite.

‘“‘ Philomathes and Epistemon reason the matter,” and it
must be confessed there is something very naive in the
ingenuous efforts of the former to display the latter’s erudition
and piety. No doubt several of the arguments are simple
words enough and not by any means convincing, nor do they
lose one jot of their artlessness by being couched in the
King’s quaint speech, and again some of the talk is rank folly
and (quite unconsciously) profane to boot,?! but these
reservations granted, we have a quota of clever pages and
here and there a shrewd hit. In many passages King James
has borrowed from the Continental demonologists, whom he
read with more diligence than acumen. For all his zeal and
dextrous learning one feels that there is something just a
little superficial in his grasp of the more scholarly writers and
theologians. And yet there is certainly a freshness in his
approach, and a brisk assurance in his methods, which are
not without their value and attraction. Perhaps we might
sum up the matter by saying that the treatise is able rather
than profound. It is rather ‘“‘ the small clack of Pistolet ”
than “ the rummishing shot of a Cannon.” Upon his accession
to the throne of England the Demonologie at once became
authoritative, and there can be no doubt that the book had
a great influence and was used by officials as a text-book
on the subject.

It is curious to note that, in spite of himself, James I was
bound to confess the power of Catholic exorcisms, which he
attempts to explain away by some very lame evasion, and
with an uneasy shrug and a stammer that “ such things are
‘fashious and feckles to recite,’ ”’ he is glad to hasten on to
a description “‘ of Spirites called the Phairie.”


SCOTLAND 225


Under King James the prosecution of witches in Scotland
increased apace, and it is notable how many persons of high
degree were accused of consulting with hags and enchanters.
On 24 June, 1596, John Stewart, Master of Orkney, and
brother of the Earl, “‘ was dilatit of consulting with umquhile
Margaret Balfour, ane wich, for the destructionne of Patrik
Erll of Orkney, be poysoning.” In the dittay she is called
*“ Alysoun Balfour, ane knawin notorious wich.” After
having been severely tortured she confessed all they desired,
but when released she recanted, which availed her nothing.
“The tyme of hir first deposition sche was tortorit, and |
severall tymes in the caspieclaws, and sindrie tymes taken
out of them deid, and out of all remembrance either of guid
or evill; as lykewayes hir guidman being in the stokes, hir
son torturit in the buits, and hir daughter put in the pilnie-
winks, wherwith sche and they were swa kepit and tormentit,
that pairtlie to eschew ane grittar torment and pownischment ;
and upon promis of hir lyffe and guid deids be the said person,
falslie agains hir saul and consciens sche mayd the confession,
and na otherwayes; for the qlk she askit the Lord mercy
and forgivenes, and constantlie deitt yratt.”

So Alison Balfour was burned on the Castle Hill, 16
December, 1594, whilst the Master of Orkney seems to have
escaped all penalties.

In October, 1596, Alison Jollie was executed as a witch,
and in the following month Christian Stewart was “ strangled
and burned ”’ for casting a spell upon one Ruthven, whereof
he died.

At Aberdeen one man and twenty-three women were sent
to the stake within a few months on accumulated charges of
Witchcraft. The archives faithfully detail the expenses for
“* peattis, tar barrelis, fir, and coallis ” to which the town was
put on account of these executions.

To catalogue, however briefly, the condemnations and
executions year after year, month after month, would be a
task tedious in its repetitions, distressful in its details, and
superfluous in its result. A few typical cases, not one
hundredth part of those on record, must be taken to exemplify
the roll of death.

In March, 1607, Isobel Grierson was burnt and her ashes
scattered in the wind, after being convicted of going one


226 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


night into the house of Adam Clarke, in Prestonpans, in the
likeness of his own cat, accompanied with a mighty rabble
of cats, which, by their noise, dreadfully affrighted Adam, his
wife, and maid-servant, the last of whom, the Devil, in the
shape of a black man, dragged up and down by the hair of
the head.

On 27 May, 1608, Beigis Tod, who had long been a
frequenter of Sabbats, was burned at Lang Nydrie. In the
same year the Earl of Mar informed the Privy Council that a
number of women who had been arrested at Brechin and
accused of sorcery, being put to “ane assize and convict
albeit they persevered constant in their deniall to the end,
yet they wes burnet quick after sic ane crewell maner that
sum of thame deit in dispair, renunceand and blasphemand,
and vtheris, half brunt, brak out of the fyre and wes cassin
quick into it againe, quhill they war brunt to the deid.” A
goodly specimen of Calvinistic cruelty, and as horrible a tale,
I think, as any to be met with in the annals of Witchcraft.

In 1616 Jonka Dyneis of Shetland, Katherine Jones,
dochter of Shetland, Elspeth Reoch of Orkney, Agnes Scottie,
Marable Couper, Agnes Yullock, and a large number of other
women were sent to the stake in the north of Scotland.

In 1622 was executed Margaret Wallace of Glasgow, who
long laid under suspicion on account of her consorting with
Christian Grahame, a known and notorious witch. The chief
charge seems to have been that they removed an ailment
“* from Margaret Muir, a bairne; to which end they went about
12 at night to a yard, and there used their devilish charms,
whereby the disease was removed from the bairne.”’

Eight years later at Edinburgh there was executed on a
very similar charge a warlock named Alexander Drummond,
“ indweller in the Kirktown of Auchterarder, as curing thereby
of frenzies, the falling evil, persons mad, distracted, or possest
with fearfull apparitions, as St. Antonie’s fire, the sickness
noli-me-tangere, cancers, worms, glengores, with other uncouth
diseases, upon many persons; also for burieng a quick ox
for effectuating his sorcerie, and of pleuch-irons upon merches
betwixt two lairds’ lands, for curing of madness; also for
having a familiar spirit attending him neir this fifty yeiris.
He confesses that such and such cures he did, but denies any
incantation or charme therein. For verification of the dittay,


SCOTLAND 227


produced his own depositiones, then the depositiones of an
hundred of witnesses ; whereupon, convict and burnt.”

“In the same year, Catharine Oswald, spouse to Robert
Atchison, in Niddrie, was brought to triall for being habite
and repute a witch, and defamed as such by Elizabeth
Stevenson, alias Toppock, who was burnt for the crime,
‘hersell an intimate ally of the said Catharine.’ And so
Catharine Oswald was duly hanged, and her body burned.

In 1629 a notorious wizard, Alexander Hunter, or Hamilton,
alias Hatteraik (which last name was given him by the Devil,
it seems), was burned alive at Castle Hill. For many years
he had been the chief gossip and abettor of all the worst
witches in Scotland, and it is truly wonderful that he escaped
his fate so long. His tale is told in Relation X VII of Satan’s
Invisible World Discovered, and Sinclar’s account is so racy
it may well be given in his own words :

** Anent Hattaraik, an Old Warlock.

“ This mans name was Sandie Hunter, who called himself
Sandie Hamilton, and it seems was called Hattaraik by the
Devil, and so by others as a nick-name. He was first a Neat-herd
in East-Lothian, to a gentle-man there. He was much given to
Charming and cureing of Men and Beasts, by Words and Spels.
His Charms sometimes succeeded sometimes not. On a day,
herding his kine upon a Hill side in the summer time, the Devil
came to him in form of a Mediciner, and said, Sandie, you have
too long followed my trade, and never acknowledged me for
your Master. You must now take on with me, and I will
make you more perfect in your Calling. Whereupon the man
gave up himself to the Devil, and received his Mark with his new
name. After this he grew very famous throw the Countrey for
his Charming and cureing of diseases in Men and Beasts, and
turned a vagrant fellow, like a jockie [a Scottish wandering
beggar], gaining Meal, Flesh, and Money by his Charms, such
was the ignorance of many at that time. Whatever House he
came to, none durst refuse Hattaraik an alms, rather for his il,
than his good. One day he came to the Yait* of Samuelstoun,
when some Friends after Dinner were going to Horse. A young
Gentleman brother to the Lady seeing him, switcht him about the
ears, saying, ‘You Warlok Cairle, what have you to do here ?’
Whereupon the fellow goes away grumbling, and was overheard

* i.e. gate.


228 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


to say, you shall dear buy this ere it be long. This was Damnum
Minatum. The young Gentle-man conveyed his Friends a far
way off, and come home that way again, where he supt. After
supper taking his horse and crossing Tine-Water to go home ;
he rides throw a shadowy piece of a Haugh, commonly called the
Allers, and the evening being some-what dark, he met with some
persons there that begat a dreadful consternation in him, which
for the most part, he would never reveal. This was malum
secutum. When he came home, the Servants observed terror and
fear in his Countenance. The neat day he became distracted and
was bound for several days. His Sister, the Lady Samuelstown,
hearing of it, was heard say, surely that knave Hattaratk is
the cause of his trouble. Call for him in all haste. When he
had come to her, Sandie, says she, what is this you have done
to my Brother William? I told him, says he, I should make
him repent his striking of me at the yait lately. She giving
the Rogue fair words, and promising him his Pock full of Meal,
with Beaf, and Cheese, perswaded the Fellow to cure him again.
He undertook the business, but I must first (says he) have one
of his Sarks, which was soon gotten. What Pranks he plaid
with it cannot be known. But within a short while the Gentleman
recovered his Health. When Hattarraik came to receive his
wadges, he told the Lady, your Brother William shal quickly go
off the Countrey but shall never return. She knowing the
Fellows Prophesies to hold true, caused her Brother make a
Disposition to her of all his Patrimony, to the defrauding of his
younger brother George. After that this Warlock had abused
the Countrey for a long time, he was at last apprehended at
Dunbar, and brought into Edinburgh, and burnt upon the
Castle-hill.”” As pestilent a rogue, I doubt not, as any who
has robbed, threatened, blackmailed, and perhaps poisoned
his victims.

During the following decade trial follows trial, and in very
few cases were the accused acquitted. It is altogether
exceptional to find such a result as the verdict of ‘ Not
guilty’ which in 1684 was returned against Elizabeth
Bathgate, the wife of a maltster in Eimouth, whose dittay
contained eighteen damning articles. Sir George Horne of
Manderston made himself very conspicuous in the prosecution
of suspects, and upwards of twenty executions are attributed
to his private zeal. The prickers, too, men who hunted down


SCOTLAND 229


witches and searched them for the Devil’s mark, that callous
spot into which pins were thrust to test its sensibility, the
guilty feeling no touch at all, were now very much to the fore.
The expert offices of Mr. John Kincaid of Tranent were
greatly in request, and he had a serious rival in Mr. John
Balfour, of Corhouse, whose technical knowledge, however,
does not appear on every occasion to have been rated as highly
as his own valuation. Mr. John Dick was yet another pricker
who showed exemplary zest in the pursuit of his profession.

The year 1643, in particular, seems to have been marked
by a fiercer onslaught than ever before. Perhaps Puritanism
was thus celebrating its unchecked power.

** About this time many witches are taken in Anstruther,
Dysart, Culros, St. Andrews, and other parts on the coast side
of Fife. They made strange confessions, and were burnt to
the death.”’??, One John Brugh, “a notorious warlock in the
parachin of Fossoquhy, by the space of 86 years,’ was
wirriet at a stake and brunt, 1648. The same year, Janet
Barker, and Margaret Lauder, “‘ indwellers and servands in
Edinburgh, were convicted of witchcraft. They confessed
that one Janet Cranstone, a notorious witch, introduced
them to the devil, who promised, that they should be as
trimlie cled as the best servands in Edinburgh.”

Marion Cumlaquoy of Birsay was haled before the Orkney
courts for bewitching crops and corn. She had been seen to
turn herself three several times ‘‘ withershins ”’ in Robert
Carstairs’ house, and that year his barley was “blew and
rottin.”” And so she went to the fire.

Janet Brown confessed amongst other iniquities that she
had cast a spell upon James Hutton and Janet Scott, and her
doom was sealed. Marion Peebles, a hideous hag, “ a wicked,
devilish, fearful, and abominable curser,” had wrecked boats
and drowned sailors to whom she bare “ane deadlie and
veneficial malice.’’ She cast her blear eyes upon a cow, and
it ‘‘ crappit togidder till no lyfe was leukit for her.” Wretched
was the fate of those who came under her malison. Her
neighbours pined and languished, and were racked with
aches and agues in every limb. But at length they took her,
and justice sentenced her to be hanged, the body being
burned. ?8

At Edinburgh Agnes Fynnie, a beldame of the vilest repute


230 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


who dwelt at the Potterrow Port, was prosecuted for witch-
craft. Her dittay contained twenty heads, the last of which
in fact sums up all the rest: ‘“ The 20th article is a generall,
for beiring companie with the devill these 28 years bypast ;
for consulting with him for laying on and taking off diseases,
als weill on men as women and bestiall, which is nottourly
known. Item, it is confest by hirself, that she has been
commonlie called a rank witch these many years bygane, and
has been sua diffamed, repute, and halden.”’

Agnes Fynnie was “‘ brunt to the deid”’ and her ashes
scattered to the four winds. Year after year the witch fires
blazed redly upon Castle Hill, and the prosecution spread
even more widely over the northern counties of Scotland,
where the frightened justices abetted and spurred on by dour
and fanatical ministers saw Satan at every turn.

In August, 1658, four women, “ ane of them a maiden,”
were burnt on the Castle Hill ; and soon after five more from
Dunbar; and then again nine from Tranent, all confessing
to commerce with the Devil.

In 1661 occurred the celebrated case of the Forfar witches,
whose great Sabbats were held four times a year at Candlemas,
Holy Cross Day, Lammas, and All Saints. Other meetings
were more frequently held, particularly in Forfar churchyard
at midnight, where, as Helen Guthrie confessed, “‘ they
daunced togither, and the ground under them was all fyre
flauchter, and Andrew Watson hade his vsuale staff in his
hand, altho he be a blind man yet he daunced alse nimblie
as any of the companye, and made also great miriement by
singing his old ballads, and that Isobell Shyrrie did sing her
song called Tinkletum Tankletum ; and that the divill kist
every one of the women.”’ On another occasion they met at
the house of a witch named Mary Rynd, “ and sat doune
together at the table, the divell being present at the head
of it; and some of them went to Johne Benny’s house, he
being a brewer, and brought ale from hence . . . and others
of them went to Alexander Hieche’s and brought aqua vite
from thence, and thus made them selfes mirrie.”’ It would
seem that nearly thirty persons were implicated.

In 1662 we have the revelations of Issobell Gowdie, whose
four depositions concerning the Auldearne witches were taken
between the 13 April and the 27 May. Her whole confession,


SCOTLAND 231


which is very minute and circumstantial, was not forced
from her by any threats or torture but given voluntarily,
clearly, and with precision. There can be no doubt it is
substantially true, and we have the fullest details upon almost
every point of Witchcraft, the Sabbats, minor meetings,
adoration of the Devil, feastings, dances, sexual rites and
obscenities, the making of wax images, instruction in spells
and charms. It is unfortunate that it seems hardly possible
to identify the Grand Master, about whom these gangs of
witches had collected, but he was certainly an occultist who
had devoted much time and study to the black art, and who
insisted upon unswerving loyalty from his subjects.

One of the most astounding and terrible cases in the whole
annals of Scottish Witchcraft is that of Major Thomas Weir,
who was burned alive for his hideous crimes at the Gallowlie
between Edinburgh and Leith, on Monday, 11 April, 1670.24
The following account has been collected from various
authorities, of whom the most pertinent are contemporary,
and actually heard the confession of these monstrous doings,
whose horror dwelt as a long and lively tradition well within
the memory of the nineteenth century.

Thomas Weir, one of the most celebrated Wizards of
Scotland, was born near Lanark, in Clydesdale. Of his father,
or grandfather, mention is made in the Memoirs of the
Somerville Family, written by James, eleventh Lord Somerville
(edited, with illustrative notes, by Sir Walter Scott, and
published in 1815, 2 vols., 8vo), who, recording a proffer of
alliance tendered by Lockhart of Lee to Gilbert, ninth Lord
Somerville, whose daughter Lockhart wished to secure as a
wife to his eldest son, says, “‘ It was supposed that Thomas
Weir of Kirktoune, Lee’s own brother-in-law, was both the
traytor that betrayed, and the person that obstructed the
going on of this marriage.” The proofs of Weir’s treachery
respecting the marriage, and also the sale of Lord Somerville’s
estate to the Earl of Marr, may be found in the second volume
of the Memoirs, pp. 73-77. Weir, the wizard, was a lieutenant
in the Puritanical army sent by the Scottish Covenanting
Estates in 1641, to assist in suppressing the Irish papists.*°
He was also an eminent promoter of the ‘“‘ Western Remon-
strance,” in the year 1650, and it is recorded, ‘‘ To these
principles he stuck as close, as to the Devil himself ; insomuch


232 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


that when the government of the Church was restored, he
avowedly renounced the communion of it, and endeavoured
to widen the schism to the utmost of his power. He could
not so much as endure to look upon an Orthodox Minister ;
but when he met any of them in the street, he would pull his
hat over his eyes in a Pharisaical kind of indignation and
contempt.”

In the years 1649-50 he had the great trust of the “‘ Guards
of the City of Edinburgh ” committed unto him under the
quality of Major, and from that time to the day of his
infamous death, was always called by the name of Major
Weir. ‘‘ He behaved himself in this office with great cruelty
and insolence towards the Loyal party, being very active in
discovering and apprehending the Cavaliers, and bringing
them to be arraigned and tried for their lives. He used to
insult and triumph over them in their miseries, and persecute
them with all manner of sarcasms and reproaches, when they
were led out like victims to public execution. In particular,
the barbarous villain treated the Heroic Marquess of Montrose,
with all imaginable insolence and inhumanity, when he lay
in prison, making his very calamities an argument, that God,
as well as man, had forsaken him, and calling him Dog,
Atheist, Traytor, Apostate, Excommunicate Wretch, and many
more such intolerable names. This cruel manner after which
he used to outrage the poor Royalists, passed among the
people for extraordinary zeal; and made them consider him
as a singular worthy whom God had raised up to support the
Cause. He studied the art of dissimulation, and Hypocrisie,
always affecting a formal gravity and demureness in his looks
and deportment, and employing a vast and tenacious memory
which God had given him, in getting without Book such
words, and phrases of the Holy Scriptures, as might serve
best in all companies to make him pass for an Holy and
gifted man. He had acquired a particular gracefulness in
whining and sighing, above any of the sacred clan, and had
learned to deliver himself upon all serious occasions in a far
more ravishing accent than any of their Ministers could
attain unto. By these and other Hypocritical arts he had
got such a name for sanctity, and devotion, that happy was
the man with whom he would converse, and blessed was the
family in which he would vouchsafe to pray. For he pretended


SCOTLAND 288


to pray only in the families of such as were Saints of the
highest form; insomuch, that the Brethren and Sisters of
these precincts would strive who should have him to exercise
in their houses, and of those that lived at a greater distance,
some would come forty or fifty miles to have the happiness
to hear him pray. He had indeed a wonderful fluency in
extemporary Prayer, and what through Enthusiastical
phrases, and what through Extasies, and raptures, into which
-he would appear transported, he made the amazed people
presume he was acted by the spirit of God. Besides praying,
he used to exhort, and bless the families in which he prayed ;
but he never undertook to preach in them, for fear of invading
the Ministerial Providence; which certainly would have
offended the Kirk !”

This base hypocrite professed wonderful sanctity ; he was
known as one of the “‘ Bowhead Saints,’”’ and used to pray
in House-Conventicles ; though it appears, that he partially
accommodated himself to the Prelatic rulers. According to
a contemporary account, “ His garb was still a cloak, and
somewhat dark, and he never went without his staff. He
was a tall black man, and ordinarily looked down to the
ground ; a grim countenance, and a big nose. At length he
became so notoriously regarded among the Presbyterian
strict sect, that if four met together, be sure Major Weir was
one. He had got himself the privilege, under a pretence of
praying and exhortation, to go to their houses, and into their
bed-chambers when he pleased ; and it was his practice to
visit married women at such times especially as their husbands
were from home. At private meetings he prayed to admira-
tion, which made many of that stamp court his converse.
Many resorted to his house to join with him, and hear him
pray ; but it was observed that he could not officiate in any
holy duty without the black staff, or rod, in his hand, and
leaning upon it, which made those who heard him pray admire
his flood in prayer, his ready extemporary expression, his
heavenly gesture; so that he was thought more angel than
man, and was termed by some of the holy sisters ordinarily
Angelical Thomas !’’ He never married ; but for many years
he dwelt along with his sister, Jean Weir, in a house near
to the Bow Head of Edinburgh. After this manner, and in
this mighty reputation, he lived till the year 1670, which was


234 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the 70th year of his age. After a life characterized externally
by all the graces of devotion, but polluted in secret by crimes
of the most revolting nature, and which little needed the
addition of wizardry to excite the horror of living men, Major
Weir fell stricken, it would appear, with insanity, which
affected his mind so much, that he was no longer able to
endure the remorse of his awakened conscience ; but to ease
the inquietudes of his guilty mind was forced to accuse him-
self, which he first of all did among those of his own party,
and desired them to bring him to public justice to expiate for
his abominable crimes. But they, considering what a con-
founding scandal, and dishonour the hypocrisy of such an
eminent professor would reflect upon the whole sect, did with
all possible care and industry strive to conceal the Major’s
condition, which they did for several months, till one of their
own ministers, whom they esteemed more forward than wise,
revealed the secret to Sir Andrew Ramsay, Lord Abbotshall,
then Provost of Edinburgh, who judging human nature
uncapable of such horrid crimes, as the minister told him the
Major had confessed, concluded he was fallen into a phrenzy,
or high degree of melancholy, and therefore courteously sent
some physicians of his own perswasion and acquaintance to
visit him, and physic him for his distempered brain. But the
physicians returning to the Provost, assured him that the
Major was in good health, and that he was free of hypo-
chondriac distempers, and had as sound intellectuals as ever
he had had, and that they believed his distemper was only
an exulcerated conscience, which could not be eased till he
was brought to condign punishment, as with cryings and
roarings he desired to be. Afterwards, the Provost, for his
further satisfaction, sent some Conventicle-Ministers to
enquire into his condition, and make a report thereof ;
who, finding it impossible to disguise the matter, which was
now town-talk, told his Lordship that the Major was not
affected with melancholy ; but that the terrors of God which
were upon his soul, urged him to confess and accuse himself.
The Provost thereupon began to conclude, that he had good
grounds to take public notice of this affair; and therefore,
without further enquiry, sent the guards of the city to seize
upon the Major and his sister Jean, who was involved in his
confessions, and carry them both to the public gaol.


SCOTLAND 235


It is recorded— When they were seized, she desired the
guards to keep him from laying hold on a certain staff, which,
she said, if he chanced to get into his hands he would certainly
drive them all out of doors, notwithstanding all the resistance
they could make.” This magical staff was all of one piece,
with a crooked head of thornwood. She said he received it
of the Devil, and did many wonderful things with it, particu-
larly that he used to lean upon it in his hypocritical prayers ;
and after they were committed, she still desired it might be
kept from him ; because if he were once master of it again,
he would certainly grow obdurate, and retract the confession
which he had so publicly made. She also confessed in prison,
“that she and her brother had made a compact with the
Devil; and that on the 7th of September, 1648, they were
both transported from Edinburgh to Musselburgh, and back
again, in a coach and six horses, which seemed all of fire, and
that the Devil then told the Major of the defeat of our army
at Preston in England; which he confidently reported in
most of its circumstances several days before the news had
arrived here. This prediction did much increase the high
opinion the people began to have of him, and served him to
make them believe that, like Moses, he had been with God
in the Mount, and had a spirit of prophecy, as well as of
prayer. But as for herself, she said, she never received any
other benefit by her commerce with the Devil, than a constant
supply of an extraordinary quantity of yarn, which she was
sure (she said) to find ready for her upon the spindle, whatever
business she had been about.”

When in the gaol they were visited by persons of all sorts
and qualities, Clergymen, Laymen, Physicians, Lawyers,
Conforming and Non-Conforming Ministers, who all flocked
thither to see this monster, and discourse with him about
his horrible crimes.

While the wretched man lay in prison, he made no scruple
to disclose the particulars of his guilt, but refused to address
himself to the Almighty for pardon. He acknowledged his
hypocrisie, by which he had deluded men and mocked God,
declaring that in all his life he had never prayed to God in
private, nor had he any power to speak when he attempted
to do it; although he had such an extraordinary and charm-
ing utterance in his solemn conventicle-prayers. He also


236 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


confessed that he never bowed his knee to God at his own, or
other men’s prayers ; and none of his own party can remember
that at any devotion, even when he seemed most rapturous,
they ever saw him kneel. . . . All the while he was in prison
he lay under violent apprehension of the heavy wrath of God,
which put him into that which is properly called despair ;
a despair which made him hate God, and desist from duty to
Him, and with which the damned souls in hell are reasonably
supposed to be constantly affected. In this sense he was
desperate, and therefore would admit neither Church nor
Conventicle-Ministers to pray for him, or discourse with him
about the infinite mercy of God, and the possibility of the
forgiveness of his sins. Much less could he endure to be
exhorted to repent, or be brought to entertain any thought
of repentance, telling all the world, that he had sinned himself
beyond all possibility of repentance, and pardon; that he
was already damned, that he was sure his condemnation to
eternal burnings was already pronounced in heaven, and that
the united prayers of all the saints in heaven and earth would
be vain, and insignificant, if they were offered to God in his
behalf. So that when some charitable ministers of the city,
by name the present Bishop of Galloway, and present Dean
of Edinburgh, were resolved to pray before him for his
repentance, and pardon, against his consent, he was with
much difficulty withheld from interrupting of them in their
devotions, and the posture he put himself in when they began
to pray, was to lye upon his bed in a most stupid manner, with
his mouth wide open; and when prayers were ended, being
asked if he had heard them and attended to them, he told
them, ‘‘ They were very troublesome, and cruel to him, and
that he neither heard their devotions, nor cared for it, nor
could be the better for all the prayers that Men or Angels
could offer up to heaven upon his account.” It was his
interest to believe there was no God; and therefore to ease
the torments of his mind, he attempted now and then to
comfort, and flatter up himself into this absurd belief. For
he was sometimes observed to speak very doubtfully about
his existence ; in particularly to say, that if it were not for
the terrors which he found tormenting him within, he should
scarce believe there was a God.


Being with great tenderness and compassion besought by


SCOTLAND 237


one of the city ministers, that he would not so resolvedly
destroy himself, by dispairing of God’s mercy, which upon
repentance had been granted to Murtherers, Adulterers,
Sodomists, Bestialists, nay, to those that had denyed Christ ;
he replyed in anger, “‘ Trouble me no more with your beseech-
ing of me to repent, for I know my sentence of damnation is
already sealed in Heaven, and I feel myself so hardned within,
that if I might obtain pardon of God, and all the Glories of
Heaven for a single wish that I had not committed the sins,
with the sence whereof I am so tormented, yet I could not
prevail with myself to make that single wish. And were your
soul in my soul’s stead, you would find your exhortations
impertinent, and troublesome, for I find nothing within me
but blackness and darkness, Brimstone, and burning to the
bottom of Hell.”

They had not been long in prison before they were brought
to Trial, which was on the 9th April, 1670. They were tried
before the learned civilian Mr. William Murray, and Mr. John
Prestoune, Advocates, who were made Judges by commission
for that time. They were prosecuted by his Majesty’s
Advocate, Sir John Nisbett, and the Jury by whom they were
tried was Gideon Shaw, Stationer ; James Penderer, Vintner ;
James Thomson, Feltmaker; Robert Brown, Stationer ;
James Brown, Feltmaker ; Robert Johnston, Skinner; John
Clighorn, merchant ; with many more sufficient Citizens of
Edinburgh. The Court being set, the Libel or Indictment
against the Major was read. After setting forth his disgusting
crimes, under four different heads, it proceeds thus: ‘It is
no small aggravation, if anie can be, of so great wickedness
and impietie, that being guiltie and conscious to himself of
so great hyneous abominations, and being altogidder void of
religione and fear of God, he hade the confidence, or rather
impudence, to pretend to fear God in a singular and eminent
way, and did make professione of strickness, pietie, and puritie,
beyond others ; and did presume and tak upon you to pray
publickly in many companies, and in the houses of youre
friends, neighbours, and acquaintances ; and did affect, and
hade the reputation and character of a pious and devot man,
thereby endeavouring to conceale and palliate his villainies,
and to abuse and impose upon the world, and to mocke God
himself, as if his all-seeing eye could not see through the


238 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


slender veill of hypocrisie and formalitie, and could not dis-
cover and lay open to the view of the world so great and
flagitious lewdnes in its own colours, in which it does now
appear.”’ It is stated that, ‘“‘ All which crimes particulariz’d
in manner aforesaid, he acknowledg’d judicially at the Bar.’’*®
But ‘“ the Lord Advocate called for further probation.” The
proof led against him, as to many points, was drawn from
his own confessions. The witnesses were ‘“‘ John Oliphant,
William Johnston, and Archibald Hamilton, Bailies, 7.e.,
Alderman of Edinburgh; also Jean Weir, his sister, Anne
Simpson, Archibald Nisbett, Writer to the Signet, John
Alexander of Leith; and Maister John Sinclare, Minister at
Ormistoune, 2’ aged fiftie years or thereby, married, sworne,
depones, that yesterday Major Weir having sent for him, and
that the Major told him he was to speak his conscience to
him, and make a frie confessione, and that the Major did
accordinglie confess unto him that he was guilty of Adulterie,
Incest, &c., and desired the deponer to pray for him as a
persone guiltie of the said grievous crymes; and farder
declares, that after the Major was brought down out of the
Tolbuith, and the deponer being desired to retier with him
to the little roum before the Toune’s Councill hous, he did
confess again, &c., and the deponer having asked him if he
had seen the Deivell, he answered, that any fealling he ever
hade of him was in the dark; and this is treuth, &c.”? The
process being thus ended the jury did unanimously find the
Major guilty of Incest with his sister, and bestiality with a
Mare, and a Cow, and found him guilty of Adultery and
Fornication by a plurality of votes. Whereupon the deputed
Judges sentenced him to be strangled at a stake betwixt
Edinburgh and Leith, on Monday following, the 11th of April,
and his body to be burnt to ashes—a sentence executed at the
Galla-lee, where, however, it would seem, that this miserable
wretch was actually burned alive. This shameful circum-
stance is thus recorded, ‘‘ That the body of this unclean Beast
gave manifest tokens of its impurity, as soon as it began to
be heated by the flames. In the flames along with him was
consumed his conjuring staff, carved with heads like those of
Satyrs, without which he could not pray, nor work many of
his other diabolical feats. Whatever incantation was in it,


SCOTLAND 239


the persons present own that it gave rare turnings, and was
‘long a-burning, as also himself.’ 28

The sum of the Libel against Jean Weir, his sister, “is
reduceable to two heads. First, to the charge of incest, which
she committed with her brother, and, Secondly, to the charge
of Sorcery, and Witchcraft, but most especially of consulting
Witches, Necromancers, and Devils; and yet more parti-
cularly for keeping and conversing with a familiar spirit,
while she lived at Dalkeith, which used to spin extraordinary
quantities of yarn for her, in a shorter time than three or
four women could have done the same.” When the case
came to trial, the proof against her, as to Witchcraft was
chiefly her own confession ; for she declared, ‘“‘ That when
she keeped a school at Dalkeith, and teached childering, ane
tall woman came to the declarant’s hous when the childering
were there ; and that she had, as appeared to her, ane chyld
upon her back, and one or two at her foot ; and that the said
woman disyred that the declarant should imploy her to spick
for her to the Queen of Farie, and strik and battle in her
behalf with the said Queen, (which was her own words) ; and
that the next day ane little woman came to the declarant,
and did give her a piece of a tree, or the root of some herb or
tree, as she thought, and told her that als long as she had
the samen, she wold be able to doe what she should desyre ;
and then the said woman did lay ane cloth upon the floor
near the door, and caused the declarant set her foot upon the
samen, and her hand upon the crown of her own head, and
caused the declarant repeit these words thrice, viz., ‘ All my
cross and trubles goe to the door with the’; which accord-
inglie she did; and that she gave the woman all the silver
she hade, being some few turners, and some meall ; and that
after the said woman went away, the declarant did spin a
verie short tyme, and that she did find more yearne upon her
pirne, and good yearne, nor she thought could be spun in so
short a tyme; which did so affright the declarant, that she
did set bye her wheile, and did shut the door, and did stay
within her house for the space of twentie dayes or thereby,
and was exceedinglie trubled, and weeped becaus she thought
what she had done in manner forsaid was in effect the
renuncing of her baptisme; and being interrogate, If she
knowes anything if her brother had any correspondence with


940 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT |


the deivell? declares that she hes been of a long tyme
jealous of him that he hade, bot knows noe certaintie ; bot
sex or seven years since or thereby, she and her brother having
went to visit David Livingstone, wheill-wryht in Dalkeith, as
they were in use to doe diverse tymes of befor, and her brother
having desyred her to claw his back, she found upon his
shoulder, as she thinks the right shoulder, a mark lyk that
which they call the divell’s mark ; and that when she found
it she was affrighted.” As for probation against Jean Weir,
the Lord Advocate insisted on her own declaration, and all
the depositions, in which as a party she was involved. All of
which she judicially confessed in the face of the Court. The
jury unanimously brought her in guilty of Incest with her
brother. Whereupon the Judges condemned her to be hanged
on the Tuesday following in the Grassmarket of Edinburgh.
In Lamont’s Diary,?® it is recorded, ‘‘ 1670, Apr. 11. One
Major Weyer, who lived in Edb. who had some allowance
from the Towne, for waiting or otherways, being ane old man,
about 75 or 76 yeirs of age, was brunt att the Gallo-lay,
betwixt Leith and Ebd. for incest with his sister, beastialitie
in laying with beasts, etc. He confest he had lyen with his
sister, who was married to another, since she was 16 yeirs of
age, and had layin with beasts divers tymes, etc. He was
one that had a great profession, and keiped divers of the
Conventicals att Edb. He wold not suffer the ministers to
spake or pray for him (nether wold he seike God’s mercy ;
but when he was forced to doe it, he said, ‘and now what
better am I?’) And Apr. 12, being Twesday, his sister
[Jean] Weyer, being abowt or more then 60 yeirs of age, was
hanged att Edb. She confest Incest, Witchcraft, ete. On
the scafold she cast away hir mantell, hir gown tayle, and
was purposed, as was sayde, to cast of all hir cloaths
before all the multitude ; bot Baylie Oliphant, to whom the
businese was intrusted, stoped the same, and commanded the
execwtioner to doe his office. Bot whille he was abowt to
throw hir ovir the leather, she smote the execwtioner on the
cheike; and hir hands not being tyed when she was throwen
ovir, she labored to recover hir selfe, and put in hir head
betwixt two of the steps of the leather, and keiped that
powster for atyme, till she was put from itt. They dyed both
impenitent persons, as was supposed be the standers by.”


SCOTLAND 241


Another Account says, ‘“‘ As for Jane, this incarnate Devil’s
sister, she was very insensible of her great sins, and was so
far from remorse of conscience for them, and despairing of the
mercy of God, as he did, that she presumed too much upon
it; placing a great deal of confidence in her constant adher-
ence to the Covenant, which she called the cause and interest
of Christ. She confessed indeed as he did that her sins
deserved a worse death than she was condemned to die; but
she never shewed herself in the least concerned for what
might ensue after death. When she was upon the ladder she
bespoke the people concerning her sins, her brother, his
conjuring staff, and the Solemn League and Covenant, in the
following words, ‘I see a great croud of People come hither
- to day to behold a poor old miserable creatures death, but
I trow there be few among you, who are weeping and mourn-
ing for the broken Covenant’; and having so spoken, she
threw herself in greater hast off the ladder, than a person
should have done, who was no better prepared for another
world.”’?°

In Law’s Memorials,*! it is recorded, ‘‘Aprile 12, 1670, was
Thomas Weir, commonly called Major Weir, son of Thomas
Weir of Kirktoun, put to death at Edinburgh, and brunt for
incest with his sister, Jean Weir, laying in it about 40 yeirs ;
(he himself was of age 70), for incest with his step-daughter,
Margaret Burdoun; for frequent adulteries with severalls
and diverse persons, and other abominable things; and,
notwithstanding of all these flagittious and horrid sins, he
was a dreadful Hypocrite and deceiver of God’s People, in ©
pretending to the fear of God in a singular and eminent way ;
making profession of strickness in piety beyond others ; pre-
suming to take upon him to pray publickly in many com-
panies; and in the houses of his friends, neighbours, and
acquaintances affecting the reputation and character of a
pious and devout man. He died obduredly, without any sign
of repentance, and would not hear any minister pray to and
for him, telling, his condemnation was sealed, and that now
since he was to goe to the devil he would not anger him. The
said Jean Weir, his sister-German, was put to death at
Edinburgh, and brunt for the same incest and witchcraft ;
she also was under a profession of religion beyond others.
The way how he was brought to confession was by torture


242 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of conscience ; he confessed that he never prayed in privat,
but all his prayers were in public ; and, beside all his abomina-
tions foresaid, he added this to all, that he did ly with his
servant Woman, Bessie Weimis, in fornication for the space
of 22 years. Thus did the holy justice of God eminently
shyne furth in detecting such wreatched hypocrites.”

It is certain that no story of Witchcraft or Necromancy, so
many of which occurred near and in Edinburgh, made such
a lasting impression on the public mind as that of Major
Weir.

Robert Chambers, in his Traditions of Edinburgh, remarks,
‘* The conclusion to which the humanity of the present age
would come regarding Weir—that he was mad—is favoured
by some circumstances. What chiefly countenances the idea,
is the unequivocal lunacy of the sister. This miserable
woman confessed to witchcraft, and related in a serious
manner, many things which could not be true. The case of
Weir and his sister immediately became a fruitful theme for
the imaginations of the vulgar, and for upwards of a century
after Major Weir’s death, he continued to be the bugbear
of the Bow, and his house remained uninhabited. His
apparition was frequently seen at night, flitting, like a black
and silent shadow about the street. His house, though known
to be deserted by everything human, was sometimes observed
at midnight to be full of lights, and heard to emit strange
sounds as of dancing, howling, and, what is strangest of all,
spinning. Some people occasionally saw the Major issue from
the low close at midnight, mounted on a black horse without
a head, and gallop off in a whirlwind of flame. Nay, sometimes
the whole of the inhabitants of the Bow would be roused
from their sleep at an early hour in the morning by the sound
of a coach and six, first rattling up the Lawn-market, and then
turning down the Bow, stopping at the head of the terrible
close for a few minutes, and then rattling and thundering
back again—being neither more nor less than Satan come in
one of his best equipages to take home the Major and his
sister, after they had spent a night’s leave of absence in their
terrestrial dwelling”; and that “‘ Plebeian imaginations have
since fructified regarding the staff, and crones will still
seriously tell how it could run a message to a shop for any
article which its proprietor wanted ; how it could answer the


SCOTLAND 243


door when any one called upon its master; and that it used
to be often seen running before him, in the capacity of a
link-boy, as he walked down the Lawnmarket ! ”

“ About fifty years ago, when the shades of superstition
began universally to give way in Scotland, Major Weir’s
house came to be regarded with less terror by the neighbours,
and an attempt was made by the proprietor to find a person
who should be bold enough to inhabit it. Such a person was
procured in William Patullo, a poor man of dissipated habits,
who, having been at one time a soldier and a traveller, had
come to disregard in a great measur the superstitions of his
native country, and was now glad to possess a house upon
the low terms offered by the landlord at whatever risk. Upon
its being known that Major Weir’s house was about to be
reinhabited, a great deal of curiosity was felt by people of all
ranks as to the result of the experiment; for there was
scarcely a native of the city who had not felt since his boy-
hood, an intense interest in all that concerned that awful
fabric, and yet remembered the numerous terrible stories
which he had heard respecting it. Even before entering upon
his hazardous undertaking, William Patullo was looked upon
with a flattering sort of interest, similar to that which we
feel respecting a regiment on the march to active conflict.
It was the hope of many that he would be the means of
retrieving a valuable possession from the dominion of dark-
ness. But Satan soon let them know that he does not tamely
relinquish any of the outposts of his kingdom. On the very
first night after Patullo and his spouse had taken up their
abode in the house, as the worthy couple were lying awake
in their bed, not unconscious of a certain degree of fear—a
dim uncertain light proceeding from the gathered embers of
their fire, and all being silent around them—they suddenly
saw a form like that of a calf, which came forward to the bed,
and, setting its fore-feet upon the stock, looked steadfastly
at the unfortunate pair. When it had contemplated them
thus for a few minutes, to their great relief it at length took
itself away, and slowly retiring, gradually vanished from
their sight. As might be expected, they deserted the house
next morning ; and for another half century no other attempt
was made to embank this part of the world of light from the
aggressions of the world of darkness.”


244 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


In 1678 two old women of Prestonpans were burned, having
accused before they went to their death seventeen others, of
whom nine presently shared their fate.

During August of the same year “‘ the devill had a great
meeting of witches in Loudian, where, among others, was a
warlock who formerly had been admitted to the ministrie in
the presbyterian tymes, and when the bishops came in
conformed with them. But being found flagitious and wicked
was deposed by them, and now he turnes a preacher under
the devill of hellish doctrine; for the devill at this time
preaches to his witches really (if I may so term it) the doctrine
of the infernal pitt, viz. blasphemies against God and His Son
Christ. Among other things, he told them that they were
more happy in him than they could be in God; him they
saw, but God they could not see; and in mocking of Christ
and His holy ordinance of the sacrament of His supper, he
gives the sacrament to them, bidding them eat it and drink
it in remembrance of himself. This villan was assisting to
Sathan in this action, and in preaching.” ®? Another account
adds that when the Devil “ adventured to give them the
communion or holy sacrament, the bread was like wafers,
the drink was sometimes blood, sometimes black moss-
water.” °3 This travesty of a Protestant communion is
certainly most curious, and perhaps it would not be too
extravagant to suggest that it was introduced by somebody
who knew of the Paris orgies and the Satanist’s masses which
were being carried on just at the same time. Fourteen years
later we find the same thing in New England, so evidently
the dark tradition was taken over the seas. The warlock
parson was identified as Mr. Gideon Penman, a man of
notoriously dissolute life, minister of Crighton. He was
particularly active during the rites, ‘‘ was in the rear in all
their dances, and beat up all those that were slow.’’34 His
indignant denials and stout refutations of the charge seem to
have been accepted by the court.

On 19 December, 1679, a coven of witches was discovered
at Borrowstowness, of whom the chief was Annaple Thomson.
They confessed to various sorceries, to sexual connexion with
the Demon, to attendance at the Sabbat—‘ ye and ilk ane
of yow was at ane metting with the devill and other witches
at the croce of Murestaine, upon the thretten of October last,


SCOTLAND 245


where yow all danced, and the devill acted the pyiper, and
where yow indewored to have destroyed Andrew Mitchell,
sone to John Mitchell, elder in Dean of Kinneil ’’35—and
many other circumstances of witchcraft. Accordingly
Annaple Thomson; Margaret Pringle; Margaret Hamilton
(Mitchell) ; Margaret Hamilton, relict of James Pullwart ;
Bessie Vickar; and William Craw, ‘found guiltie be ane
assyse of the abominable cryme of Witchcraft,’’ were ordered
to be taken to the west end of Borrowstowness, “‘ the ordinar
place of execution,’”’ betwixt two and four in the afternoon,
and “there be wirried at a steack till they be dead, and
thereafter to have their bodies burnt to ashes.”

In 1697 occurred the trial and condemnation of the
Renfrewshire witches. Christian Shaw, a girl about eleven
years of age, the daughter of John Shaw of Bargarran, on the
17 August, 1696, saw the maidservant, Katherine Campbell,
take a drink of milk from the can, and promptly threatened
to tell her mother. The girl, vexed at being caught, turned
on her smartly with a curse “ that the devil might harle her
soul through hell.” A few days after, Agnes Naismith, a
crone of ill repute, accosted Christian and asked her age, only
to receive a pert reply. The next night the child was taken
with fits and paroxysms of pain, her body now shaking as
with palsy, now rigid and stiff in every joint. In her frenzies
she cried out against Katherine Campbell and Agnes Naismith,
and when she began to vomit strange substances such as
crooked pins, small fowl-bones, sticks of candle-fir, filthy hay,
gravel stones, lumps of candle-grease, and egg-shells—who
could doubt she was bewitched ? By degrees a large number
of persons were implicated, many of them of the lowest
extraction, such as Elizabeth Anderson, a beggar’s trull of
seventeen, her’ cousin James Lindsay, aged fourteen, and
gley’d Thomas his brother, not yet twelve, their grandmother
Jean Fulton, Alexander Anderson, until at length no less
than twenty were condemned, of whom five were burned on
the 10 June, 1697, quick on the Gallow Green at Paisley.*®
One warlock, John Reid, hanged himself in prison, or, as the
report went, had been strangled by the Devil lest he should
reveal too many secrets of the infernal society. No doubt
Christian Shaw was hysterical and epileptic, full of hallucina-
tions and morbidities, but none the less it seems evident that


246 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


there did actually exist at Bargarran a clandestine sect of
Satanists, whose dark cult was unexpectedly exposed through
the accident of this quarrel with Katherine Campbell, doubt-
less one of their number. Christian Shaw afterwards acquired
a remarkable dexterity in spinning yarn, which she manu-
factured into thread ; and it was from her experiments, aided
by a friend who had learned some technical secrets of the
process when in Holland, that the famous Renfrewshire
manufacture of thread originated. About the year 1718 she
became the wife of Mr. Miller, minister at Kilmaurs Parish.
He died in 1725, and was buried in Erskine Church, being
greatly lamented by his flock.

The case of the Pittenweem witches in the year 1704
excited considerable interest. Peter Morton, a smith at
Pittenweem, on 13 June, sent up a complaint to the Privy
Council delating a certain Beattie Laing for having cast a
spell upon him, whereby “ he was seized with such a weakness
in his limbs that he could hardly stand or walk.” The local
magistrates arrested the accused, who presently confessed
her crime and implicated Janet Carset,®’ Lillie Wallace, and
Nicolas Lawson, who “had framed a picture of wax,”
each one “ having put their pin in the picture for torture.”
Isobel Adams, also, a young lass, ‘‘ was in compact with the
devil.” The demon, or rather the Grand Master of the
Satanists of that district, “‘ appeared as a gentleman...
she promised her service to him ; and he committed unclean-
ness with her (which she said no other had done before), and
he put his mark in her flesh, which was very painful.” All
the witches were ‘‘ prosecute by her Majesty’s Advocate, 1704,
but all set at liberty save one, who died in prison, in Pitten-
weem. Beattie Lang died undesired, in her bed, in St.
Andrew’s; all the rest died miserable and violent deaths.’’
Janet Corset, however, met a shocking fate. She had
managed to escape from jail, but being caught and brought
back to Pittenweem, the mob assailed her, and nobody
attempting her rescue, she was hauled down to the beach,
pelted with rubbish, swung in a rope betwixt a ship and the
shore, and a heavy door being thrown upon her, over which
stones were heaped, she was finally pressed to death. 38

In the year 1705, we learn from the Parochial Register of
Spott, that many witches were burnt on the top of Spott


SCOTLAND 247


Loan, and at the close of the year, two Inverness men, George
and Lachlan Rattray, were executed, being found “ guilty
of the horrid crimes of mischievous charms, by witchcraft
and malefice, sorcery or necromancy.”’

On 24 March, 1719, the Deputy-Sheriff of Caithness, with
ample apology for his remissness, wrote from Thurso to lay
the following information, a technical precognition, before
the King’s Advocate, Robert Dundas of Arniston, the
celebrated lawyer, at Edinburgh : ‘“ In the month of Decem-
ber last, one William Montgomerie, mason, in Burnside of
Scrabster, gave in a petition to the sheriff, representing that
his house was severall times infested with cats to that degree,
that he nor his family were in safety to reside there any
longer, and particularly condescended, that upon the 28th of
November last, and also five days thereafter, he had encoun-
tered with the said cats in his house, and with his sword, and
some other weapons, had killed two of them, and, as he
apprehended, had wounded some more of them ; and because
ane woman in the neighbourhood contracted sickness im-
mediately after these encounters, craved ane warrand from
the sherrif to inspect the woman, but could not condescend
in his petition upon the person; and this representation
seeming all the time to be very incredulous and fabulous, the
sheriff had no manner of regard yrto. There was no farther
thought of this affair from December, that the representation
was not given in, intill the 12th of February last, that one
Margaret Nin-Gilbert, in Owst, living about ane mile and
ane half distant from Montgomery’s house, was seen by some
of her neighbours to drop at her own door one of her leggs
from the midle, and she being under bad fame before for
witchcraft, the legg, black and putrified, was brought to me ;
and immediately thereafter I ordered her to be apprehended
and incarcerated ; and she having been examined upon the
18th of February before me, and some ministers, and persons
of reputation in the place, confessed her being in compact
with the devil, and several others, as mentioned in her con-
fession ; and particularly, that the time condescended upon
by Montgomerie in his petition, she was bodily present in his
house, though she appeared to him in the likeness of a catt,
and that her leg was broke by a stroke received from him ;
and condescended upon severall women who were present


248 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


with her in Montgomerie’s house that night, who were seized
and continue imprisoned, except two, who dyed the night
of the encounter with the catts in Montgomerie’s house, or a
few days thereafter.”

When Mr. William Innes, minister of Thurso, had examined
Margaret Nin-Gilbert, ‘‘ In presence of Mr. John Munro,
Minister of Halikirk, David Forbes, Bailzie of Thurso, Andrew
Balfour, Merchand there, James Maky, William Munro, and
Andrew Munro, Merchands there,” the wretched crone freely
confessed her compact with the devil, and implicated
Margaret Olsone, Jannet Pyper, Helen Andrew, Margaret
Callum, and old Mother M‘Huistan as witches.

‘“* Nota, That upon a vulgar report of witches having the
devil’s marks in their bodies, Margaret Olsone being tryed
in the shoulders, where there were severall small spots, some
read, some blewish, after a needle was driven in with great
force almost to the eye, she felt it not. Mr. Inness, Mr.
Oswald, ministers, and several honest women, and Bailzie
Forbes, were witnesses to this. And further, that while the
needle was in her shoulder, as foresaid, she said.—* Am not
I ane honest woman now ?’”

In January, 1720, great excitement ran like wildfire through
the countryside owing to the alleged possession of Lord
Torphichen’s third son, who declared he had been forespoken
by certain old women and a warlock living at Calder, the
village near his father’s mansion. The minister of the parish,
and many others, quickly caught the infection; a fast was
proclaimed at Mid-Calder, and the sermon preached on that
occasion, by Mr. John Wilkie, minister of the gospel at
Uphall, was afterwards printed by desire of Lord Torphichen.
At this discourse were present two of the confessing witches ;
and Wilkie, in his Notice to the Reader, says that three more
subsequently acknowledged their guilt. The piece is entitled :
A Sermon preached at Mid-Calder, on Thursday, January 14th,
1720. Being a Congregational Fast in that Place. James iv.7;°9
by John Wilkie, Minister of the Gospel at Uphall. Edinburgh,
1720, 12mo. Amongst others that ridiculous fantast, William
Mitchell, the crazy Tincklarian Doctor,*° alias White Smith,
sallied forth from his shop in the West Bow of Edinburgh, in
order to exorcise the evil spirits at Calder. He met with a
cool enough reception from Lord Torphichen, who did not


SCOTLAND 249


relish his house becoming the rendezvous of every fool in
Scotland, but none the less he interrogated the supposed
witches, and wrote an account of his proceedings which he
published as folio broadside, A Strange and Wonderful Dis-
course concerning the Witches and Warlocks in West Calder.
Although several of the accused were lodged in prison, and
even confessed their guilt, the Crown Counsel refused to
proceed to trial, whereon they were quietly released. In the
course of a year or two the “ witch-boy of Calder ” was sent
to sea, and by his gallantry obtained the command of an
Kast Indiaman, from whose decks he had repulsed a party
of the pirate Angria’s buccaneers. He finally perished in a
storm.

The last execution of a Scottish witch took place in June,
1722,41 at Dornoch. Two poor Highland women, a mother
and daughter, belonging to the parish of Loth, were brought
before Captain David Ross of Littledean, Deputy-Sheriff of
Sutherland, charged with Witchcraft and consorting with the
Devil. The mother was accused of having used her daughter
as her “ horse and hattock,” causing her to be shod by the
Devil, so that she was ever after lame in both hands and feet,
a deformity which was, rumour avers, afterwards entailed
upon her son.42, Captain David Ross, “‘ in flagrant violation,”
comments Sir Walter Scott, ‘‘ of the then established rules
of jurisdiction ’* pronounced the sentence of death. Stake
and tar-barrel were provided at Dornoch in the early morning,
and, it is said, that after being brought out to execution, the
weather proving nippy and chill, the hag sat composedly
warming herself by the bonny bright fire prepared to consume
her, what time the other instruments of her horrid death were
making ready.

To give even a tithe of the many stories concerning magic
and witches which persisted in the eighteenth century and
linger to-day is impossible. Two typical examples may,
however, be pertinently cited. Captain Burt in his Letters
from the North of Scotland, 1780, tells the first which he had
from a minister. A certain laird, whose wine was disappearing
mysteriously—through Witchcraft, as he suspected—went
armed one night to the cellar, where he expected to find the
nefarious gang at work. Closing the door carefully behind
him, he found himself to his amaze surrounded by cats, but


250 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


laying about him with his broadsword he very soon cleared
the place. Some drops of blood upon the floor showed him
that his weapon had claimed a victim. Next day the house
of an old woman, locally notorious as a witch, was entered,
and she was found in bed with one of her legs completely
severed.

A similar story hails from the Lowlands. In 1752 Captain
Archibald Douglas, accompanied by a sergeant, was on
recruiting service in Jedburgh. This sergeant was intensely
dissatisfied with his billet, which, he averred, was haunted.
He had also learned that his landlord was gifted with second-
sight, while the landlady was locally reputed to be a witch.
Wearied by the man’s incessant complaints, the captain
resolved to spend the night with him and see if there was any
truth in his story. About midnight a huge black cat seemed
to fly into the room through the window. The officer
promptly fired at it with his pistol and shot off one of its
ears. With a scream it vanished. Next morning, on visiting
the kitchen, he found the landlady lying senseless in a pool
of blood which flowed from the side of her head. Removing
her mutch he found that one of her ears had been shot away.

It is well known, that in the year 1736, the statutes against
Witchcraft, Scottish as well as English, were repealed ; which
gave so much offence to the seceders from the Established
Church of Scotland, that in their annual Confession of
National and Personal Sins, printed in an Act of their
Associate Presbytery, at Edinburgh, 1748, are enumerated
- the Act of Queen Anne’s Parliament for tolerating the
Episcopal Religion in Scotland ; the Act for Adjourning the
Court of Session during the Christmas Holydays ; as also the
Penal Statutes against Witches having been repealed by
Parliament, contrary to the express Law of God.

When we consider the long record of Scottish witch-trials
and executions we may well bear in mind that although, no
doubt, there were many innocent victims, many who fell a
prey to hatred and revenge, on the other hand there were
many who belonged to that dark and anarchical company
which seeks to destroy all social order, to corrupt and to
pollute, to replace Christianity by the worship of the Devil.
Nor must we suppose that this is wholly a thing of the past.
Methods change ; the object remains the same.


SCOTLAND 251


The belief in sorcery is still strong in the Highlands to-day,
and many tales are yet whispered of the malefic powers of
those who have sold themselves to Satan. In more than one
remote hamlet is some canny shepherd or wrinkled beldame
shunned and feared who two hundred years ago would have
been fuel for the fire.


NOTES TO CHAPTER III


1 Agricola, XXIX to XXXVIII.

_? Buchanan, Rerum Scoticarum Historia. I have quoted from George
Sinclar’s Invisible World Discovered, Edinburgh, 1685, XIII.

8 Or Bowmaker (d. 1449), Abbot of the monastery of Austin Canons at
Inchcolm. Fordun (d. 1385 ?), a canon of Aberdeen Cathedral, carried his
Annals to the death of David [in 1153. Abbot Bowen continued the record to
the death of James I in 1437.

“ Hector Boece (c. 1465-1536), Principal of King’s College, Aberdeen,
pe pahed in 1527 his Scotorum historic a prima gentis origine in seventeen

ooks.

5 See Gabriel Naudé, Apologie pour les Grands Hommes soupgonnez de Magie,
Paris, 1625, pp. 81, 82. Also Buckle’s History of Civilization, Vol. I, p. 334,
note, and Simancas, De Catholicis Institutionibus, pp. 463-8.

& Inferno, XX, Longfellow’s translation. To quote The Lay of the Last
Minstrel would seem superfluous.

7 Hermitage Castle, Hermitage, Liddesdale, some few miles from Riccarton
Junction, Roxburgh.

Haunted Hermitage,
Where long by spells mysterious bound,
They pace their round with lifeless smile,
And shake with restless feet the guilty pile,
Till sink the mouldering towers beneath the burdened ground.


8 And still when seven years are o’er,
Is heard the jarring sound,
When hollow opes the charmed door,
Of chamber underground.


® It is hardly necessary to point out that all charges connecting Queen
Mary with Darnley’s murder and Bothwell are entirely false. And although
“‘ aduersus eam heretici debacchati sunt,’’ as Benedict XIV says, in her case
“nihil fortasse deerit que pro uero Martyrio sunt necessaria.”’ De Seruorum
Dei Beatificatione et Beatorum Canonizatione, III, xiii, 10, editio Secunda
Romana, 1789, Vol. V, pp. 161-2.

10 Robert Pitcairn, Criminal Trials, Edinburgh, 1833, I, ii, p. 51.

11 Pitcairn gives the trials. I have also used, and freely quote from, the
contemporary pamphlet, Newes from Scotland, Declaring the Damnable life
and death of Doctor Fian, a notable Sorcerer, who was burned at Edenbrough in
Ianuary last, 1591.

12 She may have been a witch, but she was certainly a whore.

13 Et quant aux marques, c’est bien chose certaine, & que les iuges voyent
ordinairement, si elles ne sont bien cachees: comme i’ay sgeu d’vn gentil-
homme de Valoys, qu’il y en a qui ont la marque entre les lebures, les autres
soubs la Paupiere, comme escrit Daneau, les autres au fondement, quand ils
craignent estre decouuers, & ordinairement sur l’espaule dextre & les femmes
sur la cuisse, ou bien sous l’esselle, ou bien aux parties honteuses. Bodin,
De la Demonomanie, II, 4.


252 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


14 Milan, 1608. ‘‘ Ad signum homagii eum [diabolum] podice osculantur.”’
And Ludwig Elich in his Demonomagia, 1607, Questio 10, has: ‘‘ Deinde
quod homagii est indicium (honor sit auribus) ab cis ingerenda sunt oscula
Damonis podici.”

15 Jean Chartier, Chronique de Charles VII.

16 Bodin, De la Demonomanie.

17 De Lancre, Tableau, p. 131.

18 George Sandys, Relation of a Journey, London, 1632. E

19 Reginald Scot of Scots-Hall, Kent, whose Discoverie of Witchcraft was
published in 1584. ‘ es.

20 Johann Weyer, 1516-88, body-physician to Wilhelm IV, Duke of Jiilich,
Cleves, and Berg, to whom he dedicated his famous De preestigiis et incanta-
tionibus et ueneficiis, Basel, 1563.

21 F.g. the conclusion of C.V. Book I.

42 Spalding’s History, Vol. II, p. 102.

283 Samuel Hibbert, Description of the Shetland Islands, Edinburgh, 1822.

24 This is the date given in Lamont’s contemporary diary, and is doubtless
correct. But Robert Law’s Memorialls say Tuesday, 12 April, and a note in
Sinclar has Thursday, 14 April.

25 Weir had been an officer on the popular side in the civil war. In the
Registers of the Estates, under March 3, 1647, reference is made to a supplica-
tion by Major Thomas Weir, in which he craved payment of 600 merks due
to him by an Act of the Committee of Estates of date the 17th of December,
1644, and also payment of what might be due to him “for his service as Major
in the Earl of Lanark’s regiment by the space of twell months, and his service
in Ireland as ane Captain-Lieutenant in Colonel Robert Home his regiment
by the space of nineteen months ”’; further asking ‘‘ that the Parliament wald
ordain John Acheson, Keeper of the Magazine, to re-deliver to the supplicant
the band given by him to the said John upon the receipt of ane thousand
weight of poulder, two thousand weight of match, and an thousand pound
weight of ball, sent with the supplicant to Dumfries for furnishing that part
of the country.” The matter was given over to a committee.

26 «fe confessed crimes that it was possible for him to have committed,
but he qualified his confession by answering ‘ that he thought himself guilty
of the foresaid crimes, and could not deny them,’ and I am convinced of the
prisoner having been delirious at the time of his trial.’”-—Hugo Arnot’s Criminal
Trials, 1536-1784. 4to, 1785.

27 Brother to Professor George Sinclar of Glasgow.

28 One of the female witnesses deponed as to what she saw him doing
near “‘ New-Mills,” in the West Country, and ‘‘ complained of him to Mr. John
Nave, the Minister of New-Mills ; at whose instance he was brought back to
the place by some soldiers, but was there dismissed for want of further pro-
bation ; and the woman that delated him for the fact near New Mills, was
by order of the magistrates of Lanark whipped through the town by the hand
of the common Hangman, as a slanderer of such an eminent H oly Man /”

29 «The Chronicle of Fife: Being the Diary of Mr. John Lamont of Newton
1649-1671. Edited by Archibald Constable, 1810. New Edition, Edited by
George Ritchie Kinloch, 1830.” 4to.

°° Ravillac Redivivus, by Dr. George Hickes. Sm. 4to, 1678.

*1 “Memorialls ; or, The Memorable things that fell out within this Island
of Brittain from 1638 to 1684, by the Rev. Mr. Robert Law, Minister of Kirk-
patrick. Edited from the MS., with a Prefatory Notice and Illustrative Notes,
by Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe, Edinburgh, 1818. 4to.”

32 Law’s Memorialls, p. 145.

# ee Fountainhall, Decisions, Edinburgh, 1759, I, 14.

85 Scots Magazine, 1814, p. 201.

°° One account says that a gibbet and a fire were prepared, that the
condemned persons were hanged for a few moments on the one and then cut
down and cast into the flames.

°7 Whom Kirkpatrick Sharpe and others call Janet Cornfoot. But I have
followed the Additional Relations appended to Sinclar.


SCOTLAND 253


38 The best account is in the Additional Relations (II) to Sinclar: Satan’s
Invisible World Discovered, reprint, 1875, pp. 257-60.

89 “ Be subject therefore to God; but resist the devil, and he will fly
from you.”

40 1672-1740. This silly body dubbed himself ‘‘ The Tinchlarian Doctor,
who cures Pans and old Lantrens.”

41 Burt, Letters from the North of Scotland, Vol. I, pp. 227-34, 271-7, speaks
of a woman who was burned as a witch in 1727, but it is generally supposed he
has misdated the Dornoch execution. Woodrow in his Analecta has some
vague mention of executions in 1726, but as no details are given there is
almost certainly some error.

42 “ And this son,” says Sir Walter Scott, in 1830, ‘‘ was living so lately as
to receive the charity of the present Marchioness of Stafford, Countess of
Sutherland in her own right.”

43 Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft, No. IX, 1830.


CHAPTER IV
New ENGLAND


In 1606 King James the First granted all the American
continent from 84 to 45 degrees, which he divided into two
colonies, viz. the Southern, or Virginia, to certain merchants
from London; the Northern, or New-England, to certain
merchants of Plymouth. By its charter from the same
monarch, 3 November, 1620, which was generously renewed
by King Charles I, 4 March, 1629, ‘‘ The Governor and Com-
pany of the Massachusetts Bay in New England ” possessed
the entire sovereignty over all the territory thereby assigned
to it. The principal undertakers were Puritans. Planters,
and ministers of the same persuasion, together with servants,
cattle, and all necessaries for beginning a colony, were soon
sent over, albeit at a very great expense, and many dis-
contented Genevans whose brabbles had made England too
hot to hold them were glad to join the convoy.

On 30 April, 1629, the Company appointed Captain John
Endicott, one of the original patentees, to be ‘‘ Governor of
the Plantation of the Massachusets Bay,” to hold office, it was
specified, for one year, but meanwhile it was resolved to
transfer charter and company bodily to New England, when
John Winthorp was elected Governor on 29 October, 1629,
and, arriving in Salem on 12 June, 1630, he held his first
court at Charlestown, 28 August.

From 1640 to 1660 the community became almost in every
particular an independent commonwealth, and departing
from their charter they made their own intolerant laws upon
the true “ Christian state’ model. Moreover, although they
had no power to judge and determine capital offences, they
did not hesitate to give such a power to the judicatories they
created, and as might have been expected, during the
usurpation of Cromwell in England, they received every
indulgence and encouragement.


254


NEW ENGLAND 255


Their meticulous meddlings, their interference with in-
dividual liberty, their peddling arrogance, and their penalties
truly recall old Calvin, the block whence they were hewn.
Thus we have recorded : ‘‘ Captain Lovel admonished to take
heed of light carriage. Daniel Clarke, found te be an
immoderate drinker, was fined forty shillings. John Wedge-
wood, for being in the company of drunkards to be set in the
stocks. Robert Shorthose, for swearing by the Blood of God,
was sentenced to have his tongue put into a cleft stick, and
to stand so for the space of half an hour.’’! It is not excep-
tional. Men who, although granted every laxity and given
every allowance and loophole for long years, during which
they were merely requested to conform to a few of the most
elementary decencies of ecclesiastical order, one might almost
say of the Christian religion, complained all the while of
persecution and hard usage, stirring up unrest and disorder
in every shire of England, utterly contemptuous of authority
and decorum, and then when they have gained the upper
hand, the supreme control in a lax colony of their own
seeking and making, they prove the most relentless of tyrants,
the harshest of taskmasters, grinding down their subjects
and vexing them by mean regulations such as the fabled
orgulousness of an imaginary Hildebrand or the legendary
suspicion of a theatrical Louis XI would have spurned and
disdained to impose. As one reads the earlier annals of
Massachusetts one realizes that those treacherous fires which
consumed the hapless Servetus, the smoke and stench of his
roasting flesh, are not far in the background.

Owing the influx of Puritan influence from the Continent
into England on the death of Queen Mary I a law had been
passed in the fifth year of Elizabeth’s reign by which Witch-
craft was made a felony, in accordance with the statute under
Henry VIII. The first Parliament of James I had been in
session but eight days when steps were taken by the House
of Lords with regard to strengthening the existing statute,
and upon 9 June, 1604, about two months and a half after
its introduction, the Bill passed its final reading in the Lords.?
There are recorded many trials for Witchcraft during the
latter years of Elizabeth, and after her death these showed
a tendency to increase. In 1603 Mary Pannel, a Yorkshire
witch, was executed ; and Lancashire, in particular, whence


256 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


many of the influential Puritan emigrants hailed, was com-
monly known to be a very hotbed of sorcery which later
exploded in two notable trials. There can be no doubt that
the settlers in New England were not only firm believers in
every kind of Witchcraft, but well primed in every malevolent
superstition that could commend itself to their verjuiced and
tortured minds. They looked for the Devil round every
corner, and saw Satan’s hand in every mishap, in every
accident. The Devil, in fact, played a larger part in their
theology than God. They were obsessed with hell and
damnation ; their sky was cloudy and overset ; their horizon
girded with predestination and the awful consciousness of sin.
It is almost impossible to conceive the effect a new land, a
strange mysterious bourne beyond the waves of the illimitable
Atlantic, must have had upon the muddied morbid minds
and tortured souls of these stern and stoic pioneers.

Cultivation had made but a slight encroachment on the
wilderness. Directly he passed from the clearing or the
village street, a man came to huge, dark, unexplored forests,
which spread far over the distant hills, hung frowning above
the lonely roads, and on every side seemed to encircle with
unknown dangers the new and scattered settlements. Nothing
could have been more impressive and more melancholy than
the sombre stillness of those primitive woods, a silence only
broken by the fluttering of unseen birds brushing through the
foliage, the heavy fall of some rotted branch decayed from
the parent tree, the sudden rustle of leaves at the stealthy
stalking of some wild animal about to leap upon its prey, or
the soft naked tread of savages who were fiercer still.

For the depths of the jungle were the abode of a mysterious
race, the red men, of inhuman demeanour and unascertained
origin. The aspect they wore, the horrid stories told of them,
their devilries and cruelties, their barbaric rites, and, indeed,
everything connected with them served to awaken fear, to
bewilder the imagination, and drive minds already trembling
and distraught to a very lunacy of terror and apprehension.
What wonder then that common belief, encouraged not by
their ministers alone, but sanctioned by the most learned
scholars of that and the preceding ages, held the American
Indians to be the bastards of demons and worshippers of the
Devil, and their powwows, foul wizards mighty and malign ?


NEW ENGLAND 257


The hatred and vindictive hostility which the colonists
bore to the name of Indian are scarcely a cause for wonder.
Hardly a village where the marks of ruthless violence and
bloody mischief could not be pointed out, hardly a settlement
that had not been ravaged and burned, hardly a community
that had not been plundered of cattle and goods, hardly a
family which had not lost a member owing to the treachery,
the malice, and swift sudden incursions of their tireless foe.

Thus in 1689, John Bishop and Nicholas Reed were killed
by Indians at Salem; and in 1690 Godfrey Sheldon. In
August, 1696, the marauders slew or captured fifteen persons
at Billerica, leaving many houses ablaze. In October of the
same year they descended on Newbury to carry off and
tomahawk nine persons. In 1698 they raided Haverhill and
wrought fearful destruction. On the night of the 3 July,
1706, a garrison at Dunstable was stormed, when Holyoke,
Putnam and three other soldiers fell. These few scattered
instances must serve for many. Some half a dozen cases may
stand instead of a long catalogue of murderous forays. The
menace was ever at the door.

Immediately upon the outbreak of the Civil War in
England a fearful epidemic of sorcery swept the country,
and this increased in virulence as Puritanism gradually got
the upper hand. During the last six months of 1645, for
example, the year of Naseby and Langport, nearly one
hundred and fifty witches were put to death. It was then
that Master Matthew Hopkins was in his full glory, slaughter-
ing almost indiscriminately, striking his swashing blows to
right and to left. Presbyterianism fanned the flame, and it
is impossible that this crusade should not have been known,
widely discussed and approved in the new American colony.
It is hardly a coincidence that here the first suspicion of
Witchcraft arose about the year 1645, at Springfield upon
Connecticut river. Several persons, including two of the
minister’s children, were said to be possessed, but the evidence
was not sufficient for a legal process, although great pains
were taken to fasten the guilt upon certain suspected persons
who were interrogated time after time but without result.

The first witch to be actually executed in New England
was Alse Young, who was hanged in Connecticut, 26 May,
1647. On 15 June, 1648, Margaret Jones, a woman of


258 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Charlestown, was put to death. ‘‘ She was suspected partly
because that after some angry words passing between her and
her Neighbours, some mischief befel such Neighbours in their
Creatures, or the like: partly because some things supposed
to be bewitched or have a Charm upon them, being burned,
she came to the fire and seemed concerned.” She stoutly
declared her innocence to the last. Shortly afterwards
‘‘H. Lake’s wife of Dorchester,” who had previously been
a servant in the house of Master John Phillips, was executed.
“And although Mr. Thompson, Minister at Braintree, took
pains with her to bring her to repentance, she utterly denied
her guilt of Witchcraft: yet justified God for bringing her
to that punishment, inasmuch as when a single woman she
had played the harlot, and being with child had used means
to destroy the fruit of her body to conceal her sin and shame,
and although she did not effect it, yet she was a murderer
in the sight of God for her endeavours, and showed great
penitency for that sin; but owned nothing of the crime laid
to her charge.” A little later, in 1650, Mary Oliver confessed
her guilt, and avowed herself a witch, as she had indeed been
long commonly reputed, but there is no record of her execu-
tion. Another woman suffered at Cambridge; and in 1651
Mary Parsons of Springfield was charged with having ‘‘ used
divers devilish practices by witchcraft to the hurt of the
persons of Martha and Rebecca Moxon.” The evidence did
not convict her, but she was indicted for having killed her
child, found guilty, and hanged.

It is evident that now men’s minds were disturbed, and
considerable alarm began to be generally felt, for on 18 May,
1651, the Court appointed a day of humiliation ‘“‘ throughout
our jurisdiction in all the churches ” to consider among other
matters the extent to which “‘ Satan prevails amongst us in
respect of witchcrafts.”’

On 12 May, 1652, Hugh Parsons of Springfield was tried
before the Court of Assistants, held at Boston, for Witchcraft,
and “a jury of trials” found him guilty, but when the case
came to the General Court that body decided ‘“‘ he was not
legally guilty of witchcraft, and so not to die by law.”

In September, 1652, John Bradstreet of Rowley was pre-
sented “for suspicion of having familiarity with the Devil.
He said he had read in a book of magic.”” The case came


NEW ENGLAND 259


before the Courts on 28 September, and they set “a fine of
20 shillings, or else to be whipped.”

An important case was that of Mrs. Anne Hibbins, who
was hanged on 19 June, 1656, “ presently after the lecture
at Boston . . . the marshal general taking with him a suffi-
cient guard.” This precaution was necessary, as she had
always been held to be a very devout person and was highly
respected. Many at the place of execution with tears openly
bewailed her end which, however, she herself met with perfect
calm. She is said to have been a sister of Richard Bellingham,
at that very time deputy-governor, but if this were so it is
difficult to understand why he did not interfere, especially as
popular feeling would certainly have supported him.

In 1662, Ann Cole of Hartford in Connecticut, about thirty
miles from Springfield, a young woman who lived next door
to a Dutch family, was said to be possessed. In her fits she
accused a woman named Greensmith of having forespoken her,
and being examined by the magistrates and ministers per-
sisted in her tale. Greensmith, who was already in prison on
suspicion of Witchcraft, when questioned acknowledged the
truth of what had been said. She avowed she had enter-
tained a familiar with whom she had sexual connexion, that
she had not as yet signed a contract with Satan, but that she
had promised to do so shortly, and that she was to have had
a high frolic at Christmas, which in Puritan eyes was probably
as vile a crime as any. Increase Mather in his Remarkable
Providences (Chap. V) has the following account of this case:

‘* Very remarkable was that Providence wherein Ann Cole
of Hartford in New-England was concerned. She was, and
is accounted, a person of real piety and integrity ; neverthe-
less, in the year 1662, then living in her father’s house (who
has likewise been esteemed a godly man), she was taken with
very strange fits, wherein her tongue was improved by a
demon to express things which she herself knew nothing of ;
sometimes the discourse would hold for a considerable time ;
the general purpose of which was, that such and such persons
(who were named in the discourse which passed from her)
were consulting how they might carry on mischievous designs
against her and several others, mentioning sundry wayes they
should take for that end, particularly that they would afflict
her body, spoil her name, &c. The general answer made


260 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


amongst the demons was, ‘She runs to the rock.’ This
having continued some hours, the demons said, * Let us con-
found her language, that she may tell no more tales.’ She
uttered matters unintelligible. And then the discourse passed
into a Dutch tone (a Dutch family then lived in the town),
and therein an account was given of some afflictions that had
befallen divers ; amongst others, what had befallen a woman
that lived next neighbour to the Dutch family, whose arms
had been strangely pinched in the night, declaring by whom
and for what cause that course had been taken with her.
The Reverend Mr. Stone (then teacher of the church in
Hartford) being by, when the discourse hapned, declared
that he thought it impossible for one not familiarly acquainted
with the Dutch (which Ann Cole had not in the least been)
should so exactly imitate the Dutch tone in the pronunciation
of English. Several worthy persons (viz. Mr. John Whiting,
Mr. Samuel Hooker, and Mr. Joseph Haines) wrote the in-
telligible sayings expressed by Ann Cole, whilest she was thus
amazingly handled. The event was, that one of the persons
(whose name was Greensmith, being a lewd and ignorant
woman, and then in prison on suspicion for witchcraft) men-
tioned in the discourse as active in the mischief done and
designed, was by the magistrate sent for; Mr. Whiting and
Mr. Haines read what they had written, and the woman being
astonished thereat, confessed those things to be true, and
that she and other persons named in this preternatural dis-
course, had had familiarity with the devil. Being asked
whether she had made an express covenant with him, she
answered, she had not, only as she promised to go with him
when he called, which accordingly she had sundry times done,
and that the devil told her that at Christmas they would have
a merry meeting, and then the covenant between them should
be subscribed. The next day she was more particularly en-
quired of concerning her guilt respecting the crime she was
accused with. She then acknowledged, that though when
Mr. Haines began to read what he had taken down in writing,
her rage was such that she could have torn him in pieces, and
was as resolved as might be to deny her guilt (as she had done
before), yet after he had read awhile, she was (to use her own
expression) as if her flesh had been pulled from her bones,
and so could not deny any longer : she likewise declared, that


NEW ENGLAND 261


the devil first appeared to her in the form of a deer or fawn,
skipping about her, wherewith she was not much affrighted,
and that by degrees he became very familiar, and at last
would talk with her ; moreover she said that the devil had
frequently the carnal knowledge of her body; and that the
witches had meetings at a place not far from her house; and
that some appeared in one shape, and others in another ; and
one came flying amongst them in the shape of a crow. Upon
this confession, with other concurrent evidence, the woman
was executed ; so likewise was her husband, though he did
not acknowledge himself guilty. Other persons accused in the
discourse made their escape. Thus doth the devil use to serve
his clients. After the suspected witches were either executed
or fled, Ann Cole was restored to health, and has continued
well for many years, approving herself a serious Christian.

““'There were some that had a mind to try whether the
stories of witches not being able to sink under water were
true ; and accordingly a man and woman, mentioned in Ann
Cole’s Dutch-toned discourse, had their hands and feet tyed,
and so were cast into the water, and they both apparently
swam after the manner of a buoy, part under, part above the
water. A by-stander, imagining that any person bound in
that posture would be so borne up, offered himself for trial ;
but being in the like matter gently laid on the water, he
immediately sunk right down. This was no legal evidence
against the suspected persons, nor were they proceeded
against on any such account; however, doubting that an
halter would choak them, though the waters would not, they
very fairly took their flight, not having been seen in that part
of the world since.”’

On 20 January, 1662, the woman Greensmith was hanged,
two other witches apparently being executed at the same
time.

In the autumn of 1671 a case of Witchcraft and possession
occurred at Groton, and the Reverend Samuel Willard, the
minister of the town, gave much attention and study to it.
He wrote a long letter on the subject to Cotton Mather, who
duly inserted it in his pedantic and inflated Magnalia Christi
Americana, or An Ecclesiastical History of New England, folio,
1702, Book VI, ec. vii, p. 67. The victim was one Elizabeth
Knapp, who was born at Watertown, 21 April, 1655. She


262 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


lived with her parents James and Elizabeth (Warren) Knapp,
on the west side of Main Street. On Monday, 30 October,
1671, whilst sitting by the fire she suddenly fetched a great
shriek and fell into convulsions, presently barking like a dog
and bleating like a calf. Such an unusual phenomenon soon
brought the pastor to examine her, and it was not long before
he summed up the whole matter, especially as she abused and
reviled him with the most scornful and opprobrious language.

She said that she saw a man’s head and shoulders with a
great white neckcloth look in through her window on the eve
of Thanksgiving Day, 19 October, and she recognized this
to be the Devil. She accused a neighbour of having bespoken
her, but as this woman was known to all as most devout,
Elizabeth Knapp changed her tactics and asserted that a
demon had deceived her in this respect. ‘“‘ She is (I question
not),” piously concludes Mr. Willard, concerning the sufferer,
‘* a subject of hope and therefore all meanes ought to be used
for her recoverye. Shee is a monum! of divine severitye &
the Lord grant y all y' see or heare may feare & tremble:
Amen.”

Increase Mather in his Remarkable Providences (Chap. V)
gives the following account of these notorious occurrences :

‘“* Another thing which caused a noise in the countrey, and
wherein Satan had undoubtedly a great influence, was that
which hapned at Groton. There was a maid in that town
(one Elizabeth Knap) who in the moneth of October, anno
1671, was taken after a very strange manner, sometimes weep-
ing, sometimes laughing, sometimes roaring hideously, with
violent motions and agitations of her body, crying out
‘Money, money,’ etc. In November following, her tongue
for many hours together was drawn like a semicircle up to the
roof of her mouth, not to be removed, though some tried with
their fingers to do it. Six men were scarce able to hold her
in some of her fits, but she would skip about the house yelling
and looking with a most frightful aspect. December 17: Her
tongue was drawn out of her mouth to an extraordinary
length ; and now a demon began manifestly to speak in her.
Many words were uttered wherein are labial letters, without
any motion of her lips, which was a clear demonstration that
the voice was not her own. Sometimes words were spoken
seeming to proceed out of her throat, when her mouth was


NEW ENGLAND 263


shut : sometimes with her mouth wide open, without the use
of any of the organs of speech. The things then uttered by
the devil were chiefly railings and revilings of Mr. Willard
(who was at that time a worthy and faithful pastor to the
church in Groton). Also the demon belched forth most
horrid and nefandous blasphemies, exalting himself above the
Most High. After this she was taken speechless for some
time. One thing more is worthy of remark concerning this
miserable creature. She cried out in some of her fits, that a
woman (one of her neighbours) appeared to her, and was the
cause of her affliction. The person thus accused was a very
sincere, holy woman, who did hereupon, with the advice of
friends, visit the poor wretch; and though she was in one
of her fits, having her eyes shut, when the innocent person
impeached by her came in, yet could she (so powerful were
Satans operations upon her) declare who was there, and could
tell the touch of that woman from any ones else. But the
gracious party, thus accused and abused by a malicious devil,
prayed earnestly with and for the possessed creature ; after
which she confessed that Satan had deluded her, making her
believe evil of her good neighbour without any cause. Nor
did she after that complain of any apparition or disturbance
from such an one. Yea, she said, that the devil had himself,
in the likeness and shape of divers, tormented her, and then
told her it was not he but they that did it.”

In 1673 Eunice Cole of Hampton was tried, but although
strongly suspected—it does not appear on what grounds—of
copulation with the Devil, she was found legally not guilty.

The following year, 1674, Christopher Browne at a Court
held at Salem, 24 November, acknowledged he had dis-
coursed with one whom he took to be the Devil, “‘ which
came like a gentleman.”’ But “ his discourse seeming incon-
sistent with truth, the Court, giving him good counsel and
caution, for the present dismiss him.”

The following occurrences were noted by Increase Mather
as particularly remarkable :

“As there have been several persons vexed with evil
spirits, so divers houses have been wofully haunted by them.
In the year 1679, the house of William Morse, in Newberry
in New-England, was strangely disquieted by a demon.
After those troubles began, he did, by the advice of friends,


264 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


write down the particulars of those unusual accidents. And
the account which he giveth thereof is as followeth :—

“On December 3, in the night time, he and his wife heard
a noise upon the roof of their house, as if sticks and stones
had been thrown against it with great violence ; whereupon
he rose out of his bed, but could see nothing. Locking the
doors fast, he returned to bed again. About midnight they
heard an hog making a great noise in the house, so that the
man rose again, and found a great hog in the house ; the door
being shut, but upon the opening of the door it ran out.

‘*On December 8, in the morning, there were five great
stones and bricks by an invisible hand thrown in at the west
end of the house while the mans wife was making the bed ;
the bedstead was lifted up from the floor, and the bedstaff
flung out of the window, and a cat was hurled at her; a long
staff danced up and down the chimney; a burnt brick, and
a piece of a weather-board, were thrown in at the window.
The man at his going to bed, put out his lamp, but in the
morning found that the saveall of it was taken away, and yet
it was unaccountably brought into its former place. On the
same day the long staff, but now spoken of, was hang’d up
by a line, and swung to and fro; the man’s wife laid it in
the fire, but she could not hold it there, inasmuch as it would
forcibly fly out; yet after much ado, with joynt strength
they made it to burn. A shingle flew from the window,
though no body near it; many sticks came in at the same
place, only one of these was so scragged that it could enter
the hole but a little way, whereupon the man pusht it out ;
a great rail likewise was thrust in at the window, so as to
break the glass.

‘* At another time an iron crook that was hanged on a nail,
violently flew up and down; also a chair flew about, and at
last lighted on the table where victuals stood ready for them
to eat, and was likely to spoil all, only by a nimble catching
they saved some of their meal with the loss of the rest and
the overturning of their table.

‘* People were sometimes barricado’d out of doors, when as
yet there was nobody to do it; and a chest was removed
from place to place, no hand touching it. Their keys being
tied together, one was taken from the rest, and the remaining
two would fly about making a loud noise by knocking against


NEW ENGLAND 265


each other. But the greatest part of this devils feats were
his mischievous ones, wherein indeed he was sometimes antick
enough too, and therein the chief sufferers were, the man and
his wife, and his grand-son. The man especially had his share
in these diabolical molestations. For one while they could
not eat their suppers quietly, but had the ashes on the hearth
before their eyes thrown into their victuals, yea, and upon
their heads and clothes, insomuch that they were forced up
into their chamber, and yet they had no rest there; for one
of the man’s shoes being left below, it was filled with ashes
and coals, and thrown up after them. Their light was beaten
out, and, they being laid in their bed with their little boy
between them, a great stone (from the floor of the loft) weigh-
ing above three pounds was thrown upon the man’s stomach,
and he turning it down upon the floor, it was once more
thrown upon him. A box and a board were likewise thrown
upon them all; and a bag of hops was taken out of their
chest, therewith they were beaten, till some of the hops were
scattered on the floor, where the bag was then laid and left.

“In another evening, when they sat by the fire, the ashes
were so whirled at them, that they could neither eat their
meat nor endure the house. A peel struck the man in the
face. An apron hanging by the fire was flung upon it, and
singed before they could snatch it off. The man being at
prayer with his family, a beesom gave him a blow on his
head behind, and fell down before his face.

‘**On another day, when they were winnowing of barley,
some hard dirt was thrown in, hitting the man on the head,
and both the man and his wife on the back ; and when they
had made themselves clean, they essayed to fill their half-
bushel ; but the foul corn was in spite of them often cast in
amongst the clean, and the man, being divers times thus
abused, was forced to give over what he was about.

‘“¢On January 23 (in particular), the man had an iron pin
twice thrown at him, and his inkhorn was taken away from
him while he was writing; and when by all his seeking it
he could not find it, at last he saw it drop out of the air,
down by the fire. A piece of leather was twice thrown at
him ; and a shoe was laid upon his shoulder, which he catch-
ing at, was suddenly rapt from him. An handful of ashes
was thrown at his face, and upon his clothes ; and the shoe


266 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


was then clapt upon his head, and upon it he clapt his hand,
holding it so fast, that somewhat unseen pulled him with it
backward on the floor.

‘On the next day at night, as they were going to bed, a
lost ladder was thrown against the door, and their light put
out ; and when the man was a bed, he was beaten with an
heavy pair of leather breeches, and pull’d by the hair of his
head and beard, pinched and scratched, and his bed-board
was taken away from him. Yet more: in the next night,
when the man was likewise a bed, his bed-board did rise out
of its place, notwithstanding his putting forth all his strength
to keep it in; one of his awls was brought out of the next
room into his bed, and did prick him; the clothes wherewith
he hoped to save his head from blows, were violently pluckt
from thence. Within a night or two after, the man and his
wife received both of them a blow upon their heads, but it
was so dark that they could not see the stone which gave it.
The man had his cap pulled off from his head while he sat
by the fire.

“« The night following they went to bed undressed, because
of their late disturbances, and the man, wife, boy, presently
felt themselves pricked, and upon search, found in the bed a
bodkin, a knitting-needle, and two sticks picked at both ends ;
he received also a great blow, as on his thigh, so on his face,
which fetched blood; and while he was writing, a candle-
stick was twice thrown at him; and a great piece of bark
fiercely smote him; and a pail of water turned up without
hands.

“On the 28th of the mentioned moneth, frozen clods of
cow-dung were divers times thrown at the man out of the
house in which they were. His wife went to milk the cow,
and received a blow on her head; and sitting down at her
milking work, had cow-dung divers times thrown into her
pail. The man tried to save the milk, by holding a piggin
side-wayes under the cowes belly ; but the dung would in
for all, and the milk was only made fit for hogs. On that
night, ashes were thrown into the porridge which they had
made ready for their supper, so as that they could not eat
it; ashes were likewise often thrown into the man’s eyes as
he sat by the fire; and an iron hammer flying at him, gave
him a great blow on his back. The man’s wife going into the


NEW ENGLAND 267


cellar for beer, a great iron peel flew and fell after her through
the trap-door of the cellar ; and going afterwards on the same
errand to the same place, the door shut down upon her, and
the table came and lay upon the door, and the man was
forced to remove it e’er his wife could be released from where
she was. On the following day, while he was writing, a dish
went out of its place, leapt into the pale, and cast water upon
the man, his paper, his table, and disappointed his procedure
in what he was about ; his cap jumpt off from his head, and
on again, and the pot-lid leapt off from the pot into the kettle
on the fire.

*“* February 2. While he and his boy were eating of cheese,
the pieces which he cut were wrested from them, but they
were afterwards found upon the table, under an apron and
a pair of breeches ; and also from the fire arose little sticks
and ashes, which flying upon the man and his boy, brought
them into an uncomfortable pickle. But as for the boy,
which the last passage spoke of, there remains much to be
said concerning him and a principal sufferer in these afflic-
tions: for on the 18th of December, he sitting by his grand-
father, was hurried into great motions, and the man thereupon
took him, and made him stand between his legs; but the
chair danced up and down, and had like to have cast both
man and boy into the fire; and the child was afterwards
flung about in such a manner, as that they feared that his
brains would have been beaten out; and in the evening he
was tossed as afore, and the man tried the project of holding
him, but ineffectually. The lad was soon put to bed, and
they presently heard an huge noise, and demanded what was
the matter ? and he answered, that his bedstead leaped up
and down ; and they (i.e. the man and his wife) went up, and
at first found all quiet, but before they had been there long,
they saw the board by his bed trembling by him, and the
bed-clothes flying off him; the latter they laid on imme-
diately, but they were no sooner on than off; so they took
him out of his bed for quietness.

‘“‘ December 29. The boy was violently thrown to and fro,
only they carried him to the house of a doctor in the town,
and there he was free from disturbances ; but returning home
at night, his former trouble began, and the man taking him
by the hand, they were both of them almost tript into the


268 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


fire. They put him to bed and he was attended with the
same iterated loss of his clothes, shaking off his bed-board,
and noises that he had in his last conflict ; they took him up,
designing to sit by the fire, but the doors clattered, and the
chair was thrown at him; wherefore they carried him to the
doctors house, and so for that night all was well. The next
morning he came home quiet ; but as they were doing some-
what, he cried out that he was prickt on the back; they
looked, and found a three-tin’d fork sticking strangely there ;
which being carried to the doctors house, not only the doctor
himself said that it was his, but also the doctors servant
affirmed it was seen at home after the boy was gone. The
boys vexations continuing, they left him at the doctors, where
he remained well till awhile after, and then he complained he
was pricked ; they looked and found an iron spindle sticking
below his back: he complained he was pricked still; they
looked, and found there a long iron, a bowl of a spoon, and
a piece of a pansheard. They lay down by him on the bed,
with the light burning, but he was twice thrown from them,
and the second time thrown quite under the bed. In the
morning the bed was tossed about, with such a creaking noise
as was heard to the neighbours. In the afternoon their knives
were, one after another, brought, and put into his back, but
pulled out by the spectators; only one knife, which was
missing, seemed to the standers by to come out of his mouth.
He was bidden to read ; his book was taken and thrown about
several times, at last hitting the boys grandmother on the
head. Another time he was thrust out of his chair, and
rolled up and down, with outcries that all things were on fire ;
yea, he was three times very dangerously thrown into the fire,
and preserved by his friends with much ado. The boy also
made, for a long time together, a noise like a dog, and like
an hen with her chickens, and could not speak rationally.

‘ Particularly, on December 26, he barked like a dog, and
clock’t like an hen ; and after long distraining to speak, said,
* There’s Powel, Iam pinched.’ His tongue likewise hung out
of his mouth, so that it could by no means be forced in till
his fit was over, and then he said ’twas forced out by Powel.
He and the house also after this had rest till the 9th of
January ; at which time the child, because of his intolerable
ravings, lying between the man and his wife, was pulled out


NEW ENGLAND 269


of bed, and knockt vehemently against the bedstead boards,
in a manner very perillous and amazing. In the day-time he
was carried away beyond all possibility of their finding him.
His grandmother at last saw him creeping on one side, and
drag’d him in, where he lay miserable lame ;_ but recovering
his speech, he said, that he was carried above the doctors
house, and that Powel carried him: and that the said Powel
had him into the barn, throwing him against the cart-wheel
there, and then thrusting him out at an hole; and accord-
ingly they found some of the remainders of the threshed
barley, which was on the barn-floor, hanging to his clothes.

‘ At another time he fell into a swoon; they forced some-
what refreshing into his mouth, and it was turned out as fast
as they put it in ; e’er long he came to himself, and expressed
some willingness to eat, but the meat would forcibly fly out
of his mouth ; and when he was able to speak, he said Powel
would not let him eat. Having found the boy to be best at
a neighbours house, the man carried him to his daughters,
three miles from his own. The boy was growing antick as he
was on the journey, but before the end of it he made a grievous
hollowing ; and when he lighted, he threw a great stone at
a maid in the house, and fell on eating of ashes. Being at
home afterwards, they had rest awhile: but on the 19th of
January, in the morning he swooned, and coming to himself,
he roared terribly, and did eat ashes, sticks, rug-yarn. The
morning following, there was such a racket with the boy that
the man and his wife took him to bed to them: a bed-staff®
was thereupon thrown at them, and a chamber-pot with its
contents was thrown upon them, and they were severely
pinched. The man being about to rise, his clothes were divers
times pulled from them, himself thrust out of his bed, and
his pillow thrown after him. The lad also would have his
clothes plucked off from him in these winter nights, and was
wofully dogg’d with such fruits of devilish spite, till it pleased
God to shorten the chain of the wicked demon.

‘“‘ All this while the devil did not use to appear in any
visible shape, only they would think they had hold of the
hand that sometimes scratched them ; but it would give them
the slip. And once the man was discernably beaten by a fist,
and an hand got hold of his wrist, which he saw but could
not catch; and the likeness of a blackmore child did appear


270 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


from under the rugg and blanket, where the man lay, and it
would rise up, fall down, nod, and slip under the clothes,
when they endeavoured to clasp it, never speaking anything.

‘‘ Neither were there many words spoken by Satan all this
time; only once, having put out their light, they heard a
scraping on the boards, and then a piping and drumming on
them, which was followed with a voice, singing, ‘ Revenge !
Revenge! Sweet is revenge!’ And they being well terrified
with it, called upon God: the issue of which was, that sud-
denly, with a mournful note, there were six times over uttered
such expressions as, ‘ Alas! me knock no more! me knock
no more!’ and now all ceased.

‘“The man does, moreover, affirm that a seaman (being a
mate of a ship) coming often to visit him told him, that they
wronged his wife who suspected her to be guilty of witchcraft ;
and that the boy (his grandchild) was the cause of this
trouble ; and that if he would let him have the boy one day,
he would warrant him his house should be no more troubled
as it had been. To which motion he consented. The mate
came the next day betimes, and the boy was with him until
night; since which time his house, he saith, has not been
molested with evil spirits.

“‘ Thus far is the relation concerning the demon at William
Morse his house in Newberry. The true reason of these
strange disturbances is as yet not certainly known: some (as
has been hinted) did suspect Morse’s wife to be guilty of
witchcraft.

“One of the neighbours took apples, which were brought
out of that house, and put them into the fire ; upon which,
they say, their houses were much disturbed. Another of the
neighbours caused an horse-shoe to be nailed before the doors ;
and as long as it remained so, they could not perswade the
suspected person to go into the house ; but when the horse-
shoe was gone, she presently visited them. I shall not here
inlarge upon the vanity and superstition of those experiments,
reserving that for another place ; all that I shall say at present
is, that the demons, whom the blind Gentiles of old wor-
shipped, told their servants, that such things as these would
very much affect them; yea, and that certain characters,
signs, and charms, would render their power ineffectual ; and
accordingly they would become subject, when their own


NEW ENGLAND 271


directions were obeyed. It is sport to the devils when they
see silly men thus deluded and made fools of by them. Others
were apt to think that a seaman, by some suspected to be a
conjurer, set the devil on work thus to disquiet Morse’s
family ; or, it may be, some other thing, as yet kept hid in
the secrets of Providence, might be the true original of all
this trouble.”

Increase Mather reminds his readers of the famous story
of the Drummer of Tedworth, with which happenings he
compares the troubling of the house at Newberry. Tedworth,
a small village in Wiltshire, was for awhile the most talked-of
spot in England, and a very Mecca for those interested in the
supernatural.4 Among the visitors came Joseph Glanvill, who
spent a night there, and although none of the more striking
occurrences took place during his stay he was able to observe
sufficient to satisfy his own mind. King Charles sent Lord
Falmouth and the Queen the Earl of Chesterfield to investi-
gate the matter, but they appear to have been somewhat
superficial in their examination, and as nothing marvellous
was exhibited for their benefit their report tended to discredit
the affair, a very shallow answer to the evidence of those
who had again and again witnessed the disturbances. The
phenomena which commenced in April, 1661, and appear to
have continued intermittently until April, 1663 (it is not
established that they then ceased), took the form mainly of
odd noises and the capricious movement of objects without
any apparent physical cause. The best account of this very
curious case is to be found in Glanvill, Saducismus Trium-
phatus,® of which Increase Mather gives the following con-
venient summary :

‘*Mr. Mompesson of Tedworth being in March, 1661, at
Ludgershall, and hearing a drum beat there, he demanded of
the bailiff of the town what it meant; who told him, they
had for some dayes been troubled with an idle drummer, pre-
tending authority and a pass under the hands of some gentle-
men. Mr. Mompesson reading his pass, and knowing the hands
of those gentlemen whose names were pretended to be sub-
scribed, discovered the cheat, and commanded the vagrant to
put off his drum, and ordered a constable to secure him ; but
not long after he got clear of the constable. In April following,
Mr. Mompesson’s house was much disturbed with knockings


272 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and with drummings ; for an hour together a demon would
beat Round-heads and Cuckolds, the tattoo and several other
points of war, as well as any drummer. On November 5, the
demon made a great noise in the house, and caused some
boards therein to move to and fro in the day time, when
there was an whole room full of people present. At his de-
parture, he left behind him a sulphurous smell, which was
very offensive. The next night, chairs walked up and down
the room; the childrens shoes were hurled over their heads,
The minister of the town being there, a bedstaff was thrown
at him, and hit him on the leg, but without the least hurt.
In the latter end of December, 1662, they heard a noise like
the jingling of money, the occasion of which was thought to
be, some words spoken the night before by one in the family,
who said that fairies used to leave money behind them, and
they wished it might be sonow. In January, lights were seen
in the house, which seemed blue and glimmering, and caused
a great stiffness in the eyes of them that saw them. One in
the room (by what authority I cannot tell) said ‘ Satan, if
the drummer set thee a work, give three knocks and no
more’; which was done accordingly. Once, when it was very
sharp severe weather, the room was suddenly filled with a
noisome smell, and was very hot, though without fire. This
demon would play some nasty and many ludicrous foolish
tricks. It would empty chamber-pots into the beds ; and fill
porringers with ashes. Sometimes it would not suffer any
light to be in the room, but would carry them away up the
chimney. Mr. Mompesson coming one morning into his
stable, found his horse on the ground, having one of his
hinder legs in his mouth, and so fastened there that it was
difficult for several men with a leaver to get it out. A smith,
lodging in the house, heard a noise in the room as if one had
been shoeing an horse, and somewhat come as it were with
a pincers snipping at the smith’s nose, most part of the night.
The drummer was under vehement suspicion for a conjuror.
He was condemned to transportation. All the time of his
restraint and absence, the house was quiet.”

The “‘ idle drummer,’’ whose name was William Drury, was,
towards the end of 1662, arrested for stealing, and sentenced
to deportation, but he managed to escape, in April, 1663,
from the barge in which he was being conveyed. Whilst in


NEW ENGLAND 273


gaol he was reported to have accused himself of being the
cause of the disturbances at Tedworth, which fact came to
the knowledge of Mr. Mompesson, who, learning that Drury
had returned to his native village (Uscut, Wilts), caused him,
a few days after his escape, to be apprehended for Witchcraft.
According to a letter from Mr. Mompesson, printed in Sadu-
cismus Triumphatus, we learn that, whilst the Grand Jury
found a true bill, the Petty Jury acquitted Drury; and his
actual connexion with the affair (apart from his supposed
confession) appears to have been very slight.

The psychic phenomena at Newberry and at Tedworth
belong to the type which are now generally known as polter-
geist hauntings. The whole question is one of peculiar
difficulty, as a number of material explanations, mice, rats,
water pipes, hollow panels, the cracking of furniture under
changed conditions of atmosphere, heat, cold, the pranks
played by children or mischievous persons, at once suggest
themselves and are suggested. But whilst all these may
account for many things it is quite impossible that they
should cover a tithe of the phenomena which have been
investigated. That boys or girls may often be naturally
clever at deception and tricks, I readily admit, but how can
they possibly be such practised prestidigitators, such accom-
plished artists in the craft of hoax, that their performances
have necessitated the close observation of trained investi-
gators, of philosophers, shrewd lawyers, ecclesiastics of the
highest rank, and not infrequently even of the lynx-eyed
officers of the law?

It may not be wholly impertinent very briefly to mention
a few of the more prominent instances of poltergeist haunting.
In 1695 the farm of Andrew Mackie, who lived at Ringcroft
of Stocking, Kirkcudbrightshire, was pestered in this peculiar
manner. The disturbances began one February evening,
when various objects began to fly about as if of their own
volition, and soon heavy showers of stones were thrown into
the house, but by whom or whence could not be ascertained.
A phantom was also seen, a lad about fourteen years old,
red-faced, with yellow hair, dressed in hodden grey with a
bonnet on his head. Ministers were then called in to watch
and pray, but all the while hideous noises were heard, and on
one occasion fire broke out simultaneously in the house in


274 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


seven places. It was not until 1 May that the tormented
family was left in peace. ;

Very famous are the Epworth phenomena, concerning
which we have a number of letters dated from January to
April, 1717, between young Samuel Wesley, who was then at
school at Westminster, and his father, mother, sisters at
home. We also possess an account written for his son Samuel
by the elder Wesley, and a brief diary. Further, Mrs. Wesley
and some others made a set of records, written August to
September, 1726, at Epworth for John Wesley. It is hardly
necessary to describe the Epworth phenomena in detail :
‘“* Loud mumblings followed above stairs and below ; a clatter
among a number of bottles as if they had all at once been
dashed to pieces ; footsteps as if of a man going up and down
stairs at all hours of the night ; sounds like that of dancing
in an empty room, the door of which was locked ; gobbling
like a turkey-cock ; and, most frequently of all a knocking
about the beds at night and in different parts of the house.”
It was noticed that the wind commonly rose after any of
these demonstrations, and increased with it, whistling loudly
round the house. The phenomena seem to have continued
more or less during a period of four or five months, but were
much more violent for the first month, gradually becoming
less and less troublesome after this.®

In the celebrated case of the haunting of Willington Mill,
which was at its height, 1835-47, the poltergeist disturbances
were accompanied by spectral apparitions, and so it may be
regarded as a complex haunting. Willington Mill stands
upon what is locally known as Willington Gut, a sluggish
stream that empties itself into the Tyne between Willington
Quay and Wallsend. The mill itself is built upon the site of
a cottage occupied more than two centuries ago by a notorious
witch. The phenomena commenced when a Quaker, Mr.
Unthank, was living at the mill. The noise of a mangle was
heard going swiftly all night, when it was quite certain that
there was no such machine on the premises. Mr. Unthank
was succeeded by Mr. Proctor, likewise a member of the
Society of Friends, and soon after he had settled a fearful
uproar began late one night and persevered till dawn. Nobody
in the house could sleep a wink. ‘‘ Sometimes the noise was
like a paviour at work with his rammer thumping on the floor


NEW ENGLAND 275


till the whole building rattled again; again it was like a
donkey galloping round the room overhead ; at another time
it was as if a shovelful of scrappy iron had been thrown upon
the fireplace and fender. Heavy footsteps were heard ; there
were continual rappings as if someone with a pencil was
tabering upon the doors; candlesticks were thrown about ;
and pieces of furniture oscillated as though somebody were
pushing them with a violent effort. These manifestations
continued, though with less vigour and sporadically, for
several decades, when it seemed as if the force were being
exhausted. In 1891 the house, outwardly a wreck, had
within been divided into cheap tenements. No disturbances
were recorded for many years past.’’?

M. Tinel, the curé of Cideville, in 1851, had lodging with
him in the presbytery two pupils, Gustave Lemonnier, aged
twelve, and Brunel, aged fourteen. In the presence of these
two lads loud rappings occurred, fire-irons left their places on
the hearth, coverlets flew from beds, heavy desks moved
briskly of their own accord across the room. At first the lads
were suspected of some trickery, but a number of careful
investigators bore witness that it was not possible for
Lemonnier and Brunel to have anything to do with these
phenomena. That was proved beyond all manner of doubt.
At times the din caused by rappings and the falling of heavy
bodies attracted the attention of persons in the street. The
curé accused a shepherd named Thorel of causing the dis-
turbances by Witchcraft, and the man summoned him for
libel in the local Courts, which could find no explanation for
these strange happenings. That the children were uncon-
sciously mediumistic and therefore afforded an opportunity
for the force to exhibit itself is not an improbable solution,
but this is a very different matter from supposing they were
conjurers of no ordinary ability and address, and indeed
something more than mere conjurers.

Another very extraordinary case was that which occurred
in the house of M. Joller, a lawyer of Lucerne from 1860-62.
Joller, who was a man of high standing and a member of the
Swiss House of Representatives, has told his own story in a
pamphlet of some twenty pages which is now excessively rare.
Manifestations commenced by rappings and knockings upon
the walls and tables. A sound of sobbing was heard, and


276 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


later the noise of spinning-wheels throughout the house,
whilst the furniture began to move in an unaccountable
fashion. M. Joller, who attributed the whole affair to rats,
now dismissed their servant, as they suspected her of some
trickery. The phenomena, however, continued until the
unfortunate inmates of the house had no peace night nor day.
A commission of inquiry, consisting of the President of the
Court of Justice, Judge Schollberger, with several councillors
and other persons of the highest integrity, came to visit the
house, and were amazed at the confusion. Doors flew open
and banged incessantly, sometimes being held fast when any
person attempted to open them and suddenly released, whilst
a perfect charivari of knocking and drumming sounded in
every direction. No explanation was forthcoming in spite of
the strictest search, and the place having become quite un-
tenable, Joller was compelled to leave in October, 1862, and
seek another home.

The Worksop phenomena occurred in a household of the
lower middle class in 1888. A doctor and a policeman were
called in, both of whom saw crockery fly from cupboards,
cups leap into the air and fall to be smashed on the floor, a
basin float through the air, turning over and over as it went,
and many similar marvels. It was suggested that all this
was the work of a servant, Eliza Rose, and she was dismissed,
but it was remembered that the occurrences had commenced
before she was in that employment. A number of persons
inquired into the matter, but no pronouncement was ever
definitely made.

In October, 1883, at Wood’s Farm, near Wem, Shropshire,
when the tenant, Mr. Hampson, his wife, two children, and
two female servants, were about to have tea at four o’clock
in the afternoon, a saucepan, as they declared, sprang off the
fire and at the same moment, nobody being within reach of
the table, the cloth was lifted and all the tea-things swept
off crashing to the floor. Later pieces of burning coal were
flung out of the fire, and the ornaments upon the mantel-
piece fell to the ground.

In terror they called in their neighbours, a local farmer
named Lea, who with the village constable, Bowen, witnessed
the breaking and throwing about of crockery, and the hurling
of platters and plates from dresser to ceiling. Everybody


NEW ENGLAND 277


then quitted the house, and as they stood upon the lawn
discussing the matter in deepest amazement a whole shower
of articles was thrown out of the windows. Every endeavour
was made to elucidate the mystery, but to no avail.8

During the year 1891 a small house in Mayor’s Walks,
Peterborough, was taken by a railway employe, named Rimes.
From the time the family entered it the most extraordinary
events were experienced, and the manifestations were such as
eventually ended in the tenants being driven from the place.
When the inmates were in bed the blankets and quilts were
lifted and thrown in a heap by the bedside. Doors were
shaken with the utmost violence ; on one occasion a door was
actually splintered, although this was the only damage done.
The most horrible noises were heard. One witness asserted
that it seemed as if ‘‘a portion of the house was falling in
with a crash” ; another described the din “ as though a cart-
load of bricks had been tipped up in the house.” Once it
seemed “as though a table laden with crockery had been
overturned,” and once “‘ as if a sack of coals was being thrown
down the stairs.”’ Several witnesses agreed that “ the noises
were almost always preceded by a low humming sound, as
if made by a rushing wind.” Neither the residents, the
neighbours, the police, nor a private detective could explain
these occurrences.®

Professor Lombroso, the celebrated Italian criminologist,
investigated some strange manifestations which took place
in Turin, at number 6 Via Bava, in 1900. The house was a
wine and spirit store, belonging to Signor Fumero. On the
morning of 16 November, Signora Fumero and her assistant
saw a bottle of wine which stood on the kitchen table slowly
and deliberately turn over of its own accord. Other vessels
proceeded to do the same, and the furniture, saucepans, and
other cooking utensils began to move rapidly. Signora
Fumero fainted with fright, and her husband who was absent
was summoned by telegram. The phenomena continued, and
it was particularly observed that when anyone entered the
cellar used for storing bottles these hurtled together and
broke. So great was the noise that the police intervened but
utterly failed to cope with the unseen activities. Such un-
pleasantness ensued that it was with difficulty Lombroso
obtained permission to go down into the cellar and investigate.


278 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


‘The cellar,” he observed in the narrative of his experi-
ences, ‘‘ was at first in complete darkness, and I heard the
noise of broken glasses and bottles rolling at my feet. The
bottles were arranged in six compartments one above another.
In the middle was a rough table on which I had six lighted
candles placed, supposing that the spirit phenomena would
cease in the bright light. But on the contrary I saw three
empty bottles standing on the ground roll as though pushed
by a finger, and break near the table. To obviate any possible
trick, I carefully examined all the full bottles which were on
the racks, and assured myself that there was no cord or string
which could explain their movements. After a few minutes,
first two, then four, then two other bottles on the second and
third racks detached themselves and fell to the ground—not
suddenly, but as though carried by someone. After their
descent six of them broke on the floor already soaked with
wine, while only two remained whole. Then at the moment
of leaving the cellar, just as I was going out, I heard another
bottle break.”

Eventually the manifestations ceased when a boy employed
in the shop was dismissed. It was conclusively proved that
he could not have manipulated the phenomena, which often
occurred when he was absent, but no doubt he possessed
unusual mediumistic faculties which gave the power an oppor-
tunity to concentrate itself and cause the disturbance.”

Most curious molestations befell an old woman of Calabria,
aged eighty, Signora Bruno, in December, 1904. She was
persecuted by fire and by water, that is to say on one occasion
a great quantity of water began to fall from the walls of her
room on to her bed, and even on to her person, following her
about all over the house. When this ceased, her dress began
to burn, although she felt no sensation of heat whatsoever.
Her bed and her clothes, though packed away in a trunk,
and a quantity of hay in a loft also caught fire.11

During the summer of 1906 the farm of Monsieur and
Madame Cointet at Neuville, Somme, was troubled by most
mysterious occurrences, which seemed traceable to the un-
conscious mediumship of their grandson, a child of ten. The
local gossips declared that he had been forespoken, and the
boy himself constantly alleged that he saw an angry black
dog which wanted to attack him. Once, when in company


NEW ENGLAND 279


with several other persons, the child cried: ‘“‘ The brute has
got hold of my clothes !”’ and at the same moment the lad’s
trousers were rent in several places as by the fangs of some
fierce animal. In the stables the cords by which the cattle
were tethered, however cunningly tied, were loosed in an
inexplicable manner. The kitchen utensils used to fly about
the room as though hurled by invisible hands, and there was
a general repetition of the phenomena already described as
taking place at Ringcroft, Cideville, Wood’s Farm, Peter-
borough, and other distressed localities.

Great prominence was given in the daily and weekly press
to the disturbances at the village of Cheriton, near Folke-
stone, in 1917. These apparently commenced by the starting
of work on an air-raid dug-out at Enbrock Manor, the resi-
dence of Mr. H. P. Jacques. Mr. Frederick Rolfe, a builder
at Cheriton, was employed in connexion with the work
required, and according to the Weekly Dispatch he gave the
following account of his experiences :

* About six weeks ago I started work on the dug-out for
Mr. Jacques, and during that time I have gone through ex-
periences which you would hardly credit. All my life I have
been dead against such things as spiritualism—dismissed
them as impossible and absurd. What I have seen, however,
through this remarkable period makes me realize that there
is a hidden force which I cannot account for.”

Mr. Rolfe said on one occasion a large stone from quite
another part of the dug-out hit him on the crown of the head
(the scar is still visible) ; on another occasion he received a
severe blow on the hand (the wounds inflicted are also visible).

‘“‘ The candles were repeatedly extinguished by air and a
jet of sand accompanied by a sharp whiz, such as might be
expected from a current of air blown through a peashooter.

“On several occasions pieces of rock, varying from 8 lb.
to 20 lb., were hurled by some unseen foe from one position
to another.”

A boy named Penfold, who assisted, declared that he saw
the stones lift themselves an inch and then drop again ; then
about three inches and drop once more. Soon after, they
would fly off by themselves to another position. There were
bricks on the floor. These, too, lifted of themselves and


shifted positions.


280 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


“ Subsequently,” Mr. Rolfe continued, “ things became
worse. Rocks and stones flew about, and so much so that
an iron stove and iron pipe were smashed to pieces. Then,
to crown all, a short hammer, such as bricklayers use, weigh-
ing about 4 1b., threw itself towards me. The boy Penfold
then shouted, ‘ Look out, perhaps the sledge-hammer will
come also.’ Hardly had the lad uttered the words than the
hammer, weighing with handle about 14 Ib., flung itself at me
from a considerable distance, as did also soon after a pickaxe.

‘There were three chairs in the place, and one of these
moved about in an alarming style. There were only myself
and the boy in the place.

‘“* There was a heap of stones in one corner of the place and,
incredible as it may appear, these shifted themselves from one
point to another.”

No explanation appears to have been forthcoming of the
cause of these phenomena, and it was found impossible to
trace them to any normal agency.

All these cases are vouched for on irrefragable evidence,
and it seems to me idle to question their substantial truth.
I am not prepared to say that any one explanation will cover
them ; in fact, I think it highly probable that results which
as manifested are apparently very similar may proceed from
entirely different causes.

More than one writer!” has attributed the weird and awe-
some experiences which troubled the presbytery of S. Jean
Baptiste Vianney!® to these poltergeist hauntings, whereas
they were in truth demoniac persecution. This commenced
one night about nine o’clock when the holy curé was just
about to retire to rest. He was already in his bedroom, and
suddenly three terrific blows were struck upon the door of
the house as if someone were battering it with an enormous
club. He opened the window and cried ‘‘ Who is there ? ”
but nobody was to be seen in the clear cold moonlight, not
a footstep marked the expanse of spotless snow. Presently
noises sounded on the staircase, and the Saint acknowledged
that at the beginning of the visitations he felt as if he should
die of terror in his bed, his teeth chattered, his blood froze,
and his hair started like reeds on his scalp. Fearing at first
that it might be some burglarious attempt to steal the church
ornaments, since the Vicomte d’Ars had just presented the


NEW ENGLAND 281


parish with new vestments, rich gilded candlesticks, jewelled
reliquaries, and a magnificent monstrance, S. Jean Baptiste
arranged for the village blacksmith to spend some nights in
an adjoining room. This man, a powerful Hercules, who had
armed himself with a gun and a flesher’s whittle, declared
that at midnight all the furniture flew about the room, and
from the hubbub of crashes and wailings he thought the old
presbytery was on the point of collapsing over his head. He
called for lights, but when they searched nothing could be
seen. Grappin, for this was the name the holy curé taunt-
ingly gave the demon who attacked him, would pull the chairs
to and fro screeching on the bare boards, disarrange all the
crockery in the kitchen, drum upon the table or chimney-
piece or water-jug, and at other times seem to be hammering
nails into the floor, planing boards, or sawing planks as if a
carpenter were busy in the house. At one time the curtains
of the Saint’s bed burst into flame when no candle or fire had
been near them. These things were widely discussed in spite
of the curé’s efforts to keep them unknown, and on one
occasion during a mission the clergy who had assembled began
to rally him on the hauntings. It was agreed by all that this
infernal mysticism was nothing in the world but mere hallu-
cination, dreaming, and delusion ; and the curé himself was
treated as a visionary and a hypochondriac. ‘‘ Your presby-
tery,” they laughed, “is nothing but an old barn without
order or arrangement. The doors slam, the boards creak, the
rats hold high carnival there, for they play their pranks night
and day and you think you are persecuted by the Devil.
Come, come, dear friend, behave like other people, eat more,
and all this Satanic phantasmagoria will stop soon enough.”
And so all retired to their respective chambers with the happy
indifference of philosophers, who if they believed in the Devil
at all certainly absolved him from any interference in the
affairs of the Curé d’Ars. But at midnight these hardy souls
were awakened by the most hideous uproar. Doors open
and shut with violence, windows rattle, shutters fly back, the
very walls seem to shake and heave, footsteps rush up and
down the staircase with terrific speed. The stranger priests
dress all hurriedly shaking with fear. Every moment they
expect the building to fall in ruin upon them. They hasten
from their rooms, but are met by their host, who reassures


282 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


them in calm, collected tones. One of the missioners, l’Abbé
Chevalon, an old soldier of the Empire, when relating this
adventure said: ‘ I made a promise to Our Lord never again
to jest about these stories of apparitions and nocturnal dis~
turbances. It was more terrible than one could have believed.
As for the Curé d’Ars, I take him to be a saint.”

S. Jean Baptiste Vianney endured this persecution for a
period of some thirty years. Towards the end of his life he
was left comparatively at rest, and during six months before
his death (4 August, 1859) there was a complete cessation of
the diabolic phenomena.?4

In the fifth chapter of his Remarkable Providences Increase
Mather has some further particulars of poltergeist hauntings
in New England which are so curious as to warrant quotation
in full He writes:

‘“‘T proceed to give an account of some other things lately
hapning in New-England, which were undoubtedly preter-
natural, and not without diabolical operation. The last year
did afford several instances, not unlike unto those which have
been mentioned. For then Nicholas Desborough, of Hartford
in New-England, was strangely molested by stones, pieces of
earth, cobs of Indian corn, &c., falling upon and about him,
which sometimes came in through the door, sometimes
through the window, sometimes down the chimney ; at other
times they seemed to fall from the floor of the chamber, which
yet was very close ; sometimes he met with them in his shop,
the yard, the barn, and in the field at work. In the house,
such things hapned frequently, not only in the night but in
the day time, if the man himself was at home, but never when
his wife was at home alone. There was no great violence in
the motion, though several persons of the family, and others
also, were struck with the things that were thrown by an
invisible hand, yet they were not hurt thereby. Only the
man himself had once his arm somewhat pained by a blow
given him; and at another time, blood was drawn from one
of his legs by a scratch given it. This molestation began soon
after a controversie arose between Desborough and another
person, about a chest of clothes which the other said that
Desborough did unrighteously retain: and so it continued
for some moneths (though with several intermissions), in the
latter end of the last year, when also the man’s barn was


NEW ENGLAND 283


burned with the corn in it; but by what means it came to
pass is not known. Not long after, some to whom the matter
was referred, ordered Desborough to restore the clothes to
the person who complained of wrong; since which he hath
not been troubled as before. Some of the stones hurled were
of considerable bigness ; one of them weighed four pounds,
but generally the stones were not great, but very small ones.
One time a piece of clay came down the chimney, falling on
the table which stood at some distance from the chimney.
The people of the house threw it on the hearth, where it lay
a considerable time : they went to their supper, the piece of
clay was lifted up by an invisible hand, and fell upon the
table; taking it up they found it hot, having lain so long
before the fire, as to cause it to be hot.

‘““ Another providence, no less remarkable than this last
mentioned, hapned at Portsmouth in New-England, about
the same time: concerning which I have received the follow-
ing account from a worthy hand.

“On June 11, 1682, being the Lords Day, at night showers
of stones were thrown both against the sides and roof of the
house of George Walton: some of the people went abroad,
found the gate at some distance from the house wrung off
the hinges, and stones came thick about them, sometimes
falling down by them, sometimes touching them without any
hurt done to them ; though they seemed to come with great
force, yet did no more but softly touch them ; stones flying
about the room, the doors being shut; the glass windows
shattered to pieces by stones that seemed to come not from
without but within, the lead of the glass casements, window-
bars, &c., being driven forcibly outwards, and so standing
bent. While the secretary was walking in the room, a great
hammer came brushing along against the chamber floor that
was over his head and fell down by him. A candlestick
beaten off the table. They took up nine of the stones and
marked them, and laid them on the table, some of them being
as hot as if they came out of the fire; but some of those
mark’t stones were found flying about again. In this manner,
about four hours space that night. The secretary then went
to bed, but a stone came and broke up his chamber-door ;
being put to (not lockt), a brick was sent upon the like errand.
The abovesaid stone the secretary lockt up in his chamber,


284 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


but it was fetched out, and carried with great noise into the
next chamber. The spit was carried up chimney, and came
down with the point forward, and stuck in the back-log, and
being removed by one of the company to one side of the
chimney, was by an unseen hand thrown out at window.
This trade was driven on the next day, and so from day to
day ; now and then there would be some intermission, and
then to it again. The stones were most frequent where the
master of the house was, whether in the field or barn, &c.
A black cat was seen once while the stones came, and was
shot at, but she was too nimble for them. Some of the
family say, that they once saw the appearance of an hand
put forth at the hall window, throwing stones towards the
entry, though there was no body in the hall the while : some-
times a dismal hollow whistling would be heard ; sometimes
the noise of the trotting of an horse, and snorting, but nothing
seen. The man went up the great bay in his boat to a farm
he had there, and while haling wood or timber to the boat,
he was disturbed by the stones as before at home. He carried
a stirrup-iron from the house down to the boat, and there
left it ; but while he was going up to the house, the iron came
jingling after him through the woods, and returned to the
house, and so again, and at last went away, and was heard
of no more. Their anchor leaped overboard several times as
they were going home, and stopt the boat. A cheese hath
been taken out of the press and crumbled all over the floor.
A piece of iron with which they weighed up the cheese-press,
stuck into the wall, and a kittle hung up thereon. Several
cocks of English hay, mowed near the house, were taken and
hung upon trees ; and some made into small whisps, and put
all up and down the kitchen, cwm multis aliis, &ce. After this
manner have they been treated ever since at times; it were
endless to particularize. Of late, they thought the bitterness
of death had been past, being quiet for sundry dayes and
nights: but last week were some returnings again ; and this
week (Aug. 2, 1682) as bad or worse than ever. The man is
sorely hurt with some of the stones that came on him, and
like to feel the effects of them for many dayes.’ Thus far
is that relation.

“I am moreover informed, that the demon was quiet all
the last winter, but in the spring he began to play some


NEW ENGLAND 285


ludicrous tricks, carrying away some axes that were locked
up safe. This last summer he has not made such disturbances
as formerly ; but of this no more at present.

“ There have been strange and true reports concerning a
woman now living near the Salmon Falls in Barwick (formerly
called Kittery), unto whom evil spirits have sometimes visibly
appeared ; and she has sometimes been sorely tormented by
invisible hands: concerning all which an intelligent person
has sent me the following narrative.


A brief Narrative of sundry Apparitions of Satan unto, and
Assaults at sundry times and places upon, the person of Mary,
the wife of Antonio Hortado, dwelling near the Salmon Falls.
Taken from her own mouth, Aug. 18, 1683.


“In June, 1682 (the day forgotten), at evening, the said
Mary heard a voice at the door of her dwelling, saying, ‘‘ What
do you here?” About an hour after, standing at the door
of her house, she had a blow on her eye that settled her head
near to the door-post ; and two or three dayes after, a stone,
as she judged about half a pound or a pound weight, was
thrown along the house within into the chimney, and going
to take it up it was gone; all the family was in the house,
and no hand appearing which might be instrumental in
throwing the stone. About two hours after, a frying-pan
then hanging in the chimney was heard to ring so loud, that
not only those in the house heard it, but others also that
lived on the other side of the river near an hundred rods
distant or more. Whereupon the said Mary and her husband
going in a cannoo over the river, they saw like the head of a
man new-shorn, and the tail of a white cat, about two or
three foot distance from each other, swimming over before
the cannoo, but no body appeared to joyn head and tail
together ; and they returning over the river in less than an
hours time, the said apparition followed their cannoo back
again, but disappeared at landing. A day or two after, the
said Mary was stricken on her head (as she judged) with a
stone, which caused a swelling and much soreness on her
head, being then in the yard by her house ; and she presently
entring into her house, was bitten on both arms black and
blue, and one of her breasts scratched ; the impressions of
the teeth being like mans teeth were plainly seen by many.


286 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Whereupon deserting their house to sojourn at a neighbours
on the other side of the river, there appeared to said Mary
in the house of her sojourning, a woman clothed with a green
safeguard, a short blue cloak, and a white cap, making a
profer to strike her with a fire-brand, but struck her not.
The day following, the same shape appeared to her, but now
arrayed with a grey gown, white apron, and white head-
clothes, in appearance laughing several times, but no voice
heard. Since when, said Mary has been freed from those
Satanical molestations.

‘“** But the said Antonio being returned in March last with
his family, to dwell again in his own house, and on his entrance
there, hearing the noise of a man walking in his chamber, and
seeing the boards buckle under his feet as he walked, though
no man to be seen in the chamber (for they went on purpose
to look), he returned with his family to dwell on the other
side of the river ; yet planting his ground, though he forsook
his house, he hath had five rods of good log-fence thrown down
at once; the feeting of neat cattle plainly to be seen almost
between every row of corn in the field, yet no cattle seen
there, nor any damage done to his corn, not so much as any
of the leaves of the corn cropt.’ Thus far is that narrative.

‘“*T am further informed, that some (who should have been
wiser) advised the poor woman to stick the house round with
bayes, as an effectual preservative against the power of evil
spirits. This counsel was followed ; and as long as the bayes
continued green, she had quiet; but when they began to
wither, they were all by an unseen hand carried away, and
the woman again tormented.

“It is observable, that at the same time three houses in
three several towns should be molested by demons, as has
now been related.”’


The two Mathers, Increase and Cotton, as well by their
writings, the Remarkable Providences Illustrative of the Earlier
Days of American Colonisation, 1684, and the Cases of Con-
science; Concerning Evil Spirits Personating Men ; Witch-
crafts Infallible Proofs of Guilt in such as are Accused of that
Crime, Boston, 1692, of the former, and The Wonders of the
Invisible World, published at Boston in October, 1692, ‘‘ Re-
printed at London, for John Dunton, at the Raven in the
Poultry,” 1693, of Cotton Mather, as by their preachings,


NEW ENGLAND 287


practice, and precepts perhaps did more than any others to
fan into flame and keep alive the witch prosecutions of Salem,
the most prominent episodes of the New England crusade,
against sorcery. Some particular account, indeed, of these
remarkable men is necessary. Increase Mather (1639-1723)
was the youngest son of Richard Mather (1596-1669), a con-
gregational divine of good, but impoverished, stock. Richard
Mather was educated at Winwich grammar school, and in
1612 became the first master of a newly established school
at Toxteth Park, Liverpool. A chapel was also built there,
and when he had preached his first sermon on 80 November,
1619, he was ordained by Thomas Morton,!*> Bishop of
Chester, a stout Protestant. For fifteen years he seems to
have pursued his ministry with much zeal. In August, 1638,
he was suspended by even the casual and weak-kneed Bishop
Bridgeman,'* Morton’s successor, on the proven charge of
having illegally disused the Church of England ceremonies,
but some three months later at the intercession of powerful
friends he was reinstated. Things continued, maugre this
warning, in a very unsatisfactory state at Toxteth, and it
was very clear that Mather held other than episcopalian
views. In 1634 he was again suspended, as it transpired he
had never worn a surplice, and the visitors of Dr. Richard
Neile,!” Archbishop of York, discovered other glaring irregu-
larities and general lawlessness. In the following year Mather
resolved to emigrate to New England, and upon receiving
warm letters of encouragement from the Boston ministers
John Cotton and Thomas Hooker, he left the port of Bristol
with his family on 4 June, 1635, reached Boston harbour on
Sunday, 16 August, and landed next day. After residing
here for a few months he accepted a call from the congrega-
tion of Dorchester, Massachusetts, and became “‘ teacher ”
of their community on 28 August, 1636. In this charge he
remained till his death. He was soonto bean influential leader
in the councils of New England congregationalism, and it was
actually after presiding at one of these meetings, at Boston,
13-16 April, 1669, that he was seized with a violent attack
of an old disorder, returning to Dorchester but to die there
on 22 April following.

It will be seen that Increase Mather came of stern Puritan
forbears. He was born at Dorchester, 1639, graduated M.A.


288 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


at Harvard in 1656, thereupon being immediately elected a
fellow of the College. In 1657 he visited England, and from
Lancashire proceeded to Dublin, where he entered Trinity
College, and was admitted M.A. in 1658. He seems to have
officiated at Great Torrington, Devonshire, until May, 1659,
when he was invited to Guernsey by Colonel Bingham, the
governor, who delighted in his long sermons. On the appoint-
ment of Sir Hugh Pollard, however, he left the island, and
rather than conform returned to New England, where he was
installed as minister of the New North Church, Boston, com-
mencing his functions on 27 May, 1664. His career was
certainly of great local importance, and he busied himself
very prominently in all civic and ecclesiastical affairs. Having
been rector of Harvard for some years, he was elected
President in 1684, which dignity he resigned in 1701 owing
to the requirement of residence. He remained in his Boston
charge until he had passed his eightieth year, and upon his
death, 23 August, 1723, he was honoured with a public
funeral.

His eldest son Cotton Mather, was born at Boston on
12 February, 1663, entered Harvard when but twelve years
old, and from May, 1684, as a minister at Boston and a busy
pragmatist he kept himself even more in the public eye than
his father. He died at Boston, 18 February, 1728.

The Salem troubles originated in the house of a very re-
markable person, the Rev. Samuel Parris, the minister of
Salem Village, now the town of Danvers, adjoining the
present city of Salem. Samuel Parris, the son of Thomas
Parris, was born in London, 1658, but his father soon
emigrating to New England, he received his education at
Harvard, although he did not complete his scholastic course.
He left the University to engage in commerce, and was for
many years a merchant in the West Indies, his place of
residence being settled at Barbadoes. He is reported to have
shown the most grasping and avaricious spirit in all his
mercantile dealings and was notorious as an unduly sharp,
not to say an actually dishonest, hand at a shrewd bargain.
Later he came to Salem, where he engaged in the study of
divinity, making himself particular even among the fanatics
by his austere manners and excess of arid sanctimoniousness:
So high was he presently in favour with the bigots that on


NEW ENGLAND 289


29 April, 1689, he accepted “ a call to the ministry,” and was
congregationally ordained on Monday, 19 November, of that
year, succeeding after some interim Deodat Lawson.

The roll of the ministers of Salem at this period runs thus :
First, James Bayley, who was followed in 1680 by George
Burroughs. In 1688 Burroughs, being involved in various
parochial quarrels, retired from his post, and the next year
Deodat Lawson, consenting to some form of Congregational
election, began his public ministry. Lawson is first heard of
in New England in 1671. He seems to have been a man of
talents and some learning, and his eloquence in the pulpit
was universally admired. Whilst at Salem he lost both his
wife and a daughter. In 1690 he married Deborah Allen,
soon after accepting an appointment as “‘ minister of the
gospel’ over the Second Society in Scituate, where he was
living in August, 1693. In 1696 he went over to England,
as his people believed for a short visit, but they found ere
long that he had no intention of returning. Doubtless he was
alive and in London when in 1704 his famous Salem Village
Sermon was printed there. Samuel Parris followed Lawson,
and exercised his ministerial functions for a term of seven
years, being succeeded by the Rev. Joseph Green, whose
tenure of office lasted no less than eighteen years, terminating
on 26 November, 1715.

Almost immediately upon his induction in November, 1689,
there was a sharp dispute between Samuel Parris and the
authorities over a question of the arrangements pertaining to
his salary. Matters, however, were composed, and the new
minister forthwith began to exercise his disciplinary powers
with a high hand. In the Parris household were several West
Indian slaves brought by him from Barbadoes, of whom two,
*¢ John Indian ” and “ Tituba,”’ were man and wife. These
came from the Spanish settlements and were ignorant to a
degree, being secretly addicted to savage practices, and well-
versed in the voodoo lore of darkest superstition. During
the long winter months of 1691 and 1692 a number of persons
assembled evening after evening at Mr. Parris’ house. Chief
among these were Elizabeth Parris, a child of nine, the
minister’s daughter ; Abigail Williams, his niece, aged eleven,
whose vanity bordered upon megalomania ; Anne Putnam,
aged twelve, daughter of Sergeant Thomas Putnam, the


290 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


parish clerk, a dour old infralapsarian; Mary Walcot, an
acutely hysterical subject of eighteen, who had lived for some
time in the family of the Rev. George Burroughs, the daughter
of Captain Walcot, deacon of the parish; Mercy Lewis ;
Elizabeth Hubbard, a neurotic green-sick wench of seven-
teen; Elizabeth Booth and Susannah Sheldon, who were
both a year older; Mary Warren, a domestic servant of
seventeen employed by John Proctor; and Sarah Churchill,
a maid in the house of George Jacobs. Three married women,
Mrs. Anne Putnam, the wife of Serjeant Thomas Putnam ;
Mrs. Pope; and Mrs. Bibber, who lived at Wenham; not
unseldom put in an appearance, whilst a Mistress Goodell is
spoken of as having attended only once or twice.

To while away the long dark nights when dusk had fallen
and all was snow and bitter cold outside in the blackness,
this young coterie used to invite Tituba into the room, and
huddled round the blazing logs they would listen hour after
hour to her grim tales of Indian wizardry, barbaric rites, and
human sacrifice in the heart of the pathless forest where the
hideous drone of the drums drowned the despairing cries of
victims tortured and mangled before the monstrous bulk of
some grinning shark-fanged god. She spoke of the ju-ju
sorceries, of warlocks who by means of dancing, chants, and
invocations were able to cast withering spells upon their
enemies, who met evil spirits in secret communion and
learned foul secrets of necromancy, who could blast with a
look and send fever or consuming disease by a word. She
told them of the powerful ones who could read the future in
the palm of the hand, and picture what was to come in the
smooth mirror of some unruffled loch or mountain mere. As
they listened huddling in terror, fascinated by her mysterious
gestures and flashing eyes what time she whispered in awe-
some accents the story of the Indian sabbat, little was wanting
to persuade them that she, too, had her share in these evil
orgies, that she knew the secrets of the spirits and the dark
destroying angels. Sometimes even she would take their
hands in her dusky fingers and effect to scan the future
written in their palms. But more often she would dwell on
the fate of those whom the witchmonger had cursed, those
who drooped, and pined, and fell into an early grave, sicken-
ing with a sickness no herb could cure, no medicine allay.


NEW ENGLAND 291


It is hardly to be surprised at that the children well-nigh
scared out of their wits began to imagine that some enemy
had cast a malevolent charm upon them. All these morbid
histories were their one topic of conversation by day, and
haunted their dreams at night. Children are naturally
imitative, and acting is ever their chiefest joy. Soon it was
noticed that Elizabeth Parris, Abigail Williams, and Ann
Putnam were looking peaked and ill. ‘‘ They would put
themselves in odd postures, make antic gestures, and utter
loud outcries and ridiculous, incoherent and unintelligible
expressions.” A physician, Dr. Griggs, who was called in,
gravely shook his head and scented witchcraft. Forthwith
Mr. Parris and the Putnams tried to mend the matter by
prayer and fasting. Whole bevies of ministers were soon on
the spot, and the whole township was ablaze. The Genevan
divines uttered long orations and prayed lustily by the hour,
exciting the three lasses to a perfect frenzy of rage, which was
taken to be ample demonstration that the “‘ afflicted children ”’
—as henceforth the supposed victims were called—must
indeed be under the influence of the Devil. They were
vehemently exhorted to reveal the names of those who had
injured them, whereupon falling into violent paroxysms they
yelled “‘ Good,” “‘ Osburn,” “‘ Tituba.”’

Accordingly on the 29 February, 1692, warrants were duly
issued against Sarah Good, Sarah Osburn, and the Indian
woman, Tituba. The complainants in these cases were Joseph
Hutchinson, Edward Putnam, Thomas Putnam, and Thomas
Preston, all men of influence and unblemished character.
Sarah Good and Sarah Osburn were two miserable hags who
had been reduced to want and almost to beggary. Upon
1 March their examination took place before the principal
magistrates of the district, John Hathorne and Jonathan
Corwin, who sat in great state at the meeting-house, with a
full complement of ministers. A vast crowd had assembled
only a few of whom could be admitted, the rest thronging the
courtyard and adjacent village street.

Sarah Good was first produced, and the proceedings com-
menced with the abrupt question: Sarah Good, what evil
spirit have you familiarity with ? To which she answered :


None.
Have you made no contracts with the Devil ?—No.


292 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Why do you hurt these children ?—I do not hurt them,
I scorn it.

Who do you employ then to do it ?—I employ nobody.

What creature do you employ then ?—No creature ; but
I am falsely accused.

Why do you go away muttering from Mr. Parris his house ?
—I did not mutter, but I thanked him for what he gave my
child.

Have you made no contract with the Devil ?—No.

Hathorne desired the children, all of them to look upon
her, and see if this were the person that hurt them; and so
they all did look upon her, and said this was one of the
persons that did torment them. Presently they were all
tormented.

Sarah Good, do you not see now what you have done?
Why do you not tell us the truth ? Why do you thus tor-
ment these poor children ?—I do not torment them.

Who do you employ then ?—I employ nobody. I scorn it.

How came they thus tormented ?—What doI know? You
bring others here, and now you charge me with it.

Why, who was it ?—I do not know, but it was some you
brought into the meeting-house with you.

We brought you into the meeting-house.—But you brought
in two more.

Who was it then that tormented the children ?—It was
Osburn.

What was it you say when you go muttering away from
persons’ houses ?—If I must tell, I will tell.

Do tell us, then.—If I must tell, I will tell; it is the Com-
mandments. I may say my Commandments, I hope.

What commandment is it ?—If I must tell you I will tell ;
it is a Psalm.

What Psalm ?

(After a long time she muttered over some part of a Psalm.)

Who do you serve ?—I serve God.

What God do you serve ?—The God that made heaven
and earth (though she was not willing to mention the word
‘“God’’). Her answers were in a very wicked, spiteful
manner, reflecting against the authority with base and
abusive words; and many lies she was taken in. It was
here said that her husband had said that he was afraid that


NEW ENGLAND 293


She either was a witch or would be one very quickly. The
worshipful Mr. Hathorne asked him his reason why he had
said so of her, whether he had ever seen anything by her.
He answered, ‘‘ No, not in this nature,”’ but it was her bad
carriage to him ; and indeed, said he, ‘“‘ I may say with tears,
that she is an enemy to all good.”

Sarah Osburn was next brought in, the examination being
conducted upon much the same lines. She continually
protested her innocence, and when informed that Sarah Good
declared it was she who had hurt the children, her only reply
was: “I do not know that the Devil goes about in my like-
ness to do any hurt.”

It is noticeable that Increase Mather has actually discussed
this very problem at some length in his treatise Cases of
Conscience Concerning Evil Spirits Personating Men, origin-
ally printed at Boston, and reprinted at London “ for John
Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey,” 1693. Mather opens
his tract with the question: ‘‘ Whether it is not Possible for
the Devil to impose on the imagination of Persons Bewitched,
and to cause them to Believe that an Innocent, Yea that a Pious
person does torment them, when the Devil himself doth it; or
whether Satan may not appear in the Shape of an Innocent
and Pious, as well as of a Nocent and Wicked Person, to Afflict
such as suffer by Diabolical Molestations ?

“The Answer to the Question must be Affirmative.” He
then proceeds to argue: ‘“‘ We find that the Devil by the
Instigation of the Witch at Endor appeared in the Likeness of the
Prophet Samuel.” A singularly unsafe statement since—to
name but a few—Josephus, S. Justin, Origen, S. Ambrose,
S. Augustine, Alonso Tostado, Suarez, Tommaso de Vio
Gaetani, all hold the reality of the vision, that Samuel did
indeed appear to Saul, and this certainly seems to be the
correct interpretation of the passage.1®

Sarah Osburn was committed to prison and _ heavily
chained. From 7 March to 10 May she miserably languished
in Boston jail, where she expired in durance, and so escaped
the gallows tree.

Tituba the Indian played her réle far more dextrously, and
showed an appreciable amount of native cunning and craft.
Clever enough clearly to see that mere denial of guilt and
asseverations of innocence carried no weight at all she posed


294 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


as a penitent, one who had been entangled for a while in the
snares of sorcery, but had now shaken herself free, and was
being persecuted and tormented by her former associates,
the witches, to return to the Devil’s allegiance. Her seeming
struggles to persevere in the right path doubtless won her
considerable favour in the eyes of the ministers and magis-
trates who cross-questioned her closely enough. So they
ask :

Tituba, what evil spirit have you familiarity with ?—None.

Why do you hurt these children ?—I do not hurt them.

Who was it then ?—The Devil, for aught I know.

Did you never see the Devil ?—The Devil came to me and
bid me serve him.

Who have you seen ?—Four women sometime hurt the
children.

Who were they ?—Goody Osburn and Sarah Good, and I
do not know who the others were. Sarah Good and Osburn
would have me hurt the children, but I would not.

(She further said there was a tall man of Boston that she
did see.)

When did you see them ?—Last night at Boston.

What did they say to you?—They said, ‘‘ Hurt the
children.”

And did you hurt them ?—No, there is four women and one
man, they hurt the children and then they lay it all upon me ;
and they tell me, if I will not hurt the children, they will
hurt me.

But did you not hurt them ?—Yes, but I will hurt them
no more.

Are you sorry that you did hurt them ?—Yes.

And why, then, do you hurt them ?—They say, ‘‘ Hurt
children, or we will do worse to you.”

What have you seen?—A man come to me and say,
“* Serve me.”

What service ?—Hurt the children; and last night there
was an appearance that said, ‘“ Kill the children,” and if I
would not go on hurting the children they would do worse
to me.

What is this appearance you see ?—Sometimes it is like a
hog, and sometimes like a great dog.

(This appearance she saith she did see four times.)


NEW ENGLAND 295


What did it say to you ?—The black dog said, ‘“‘ Serve me,”
but I said, “‘ I am afraid.” He said if I do not he would do
worse to me.

What did you say to it 2—“I will serve you no longer.”
Then he said he would hurt me; and then he looks like a man,
and threatens to hurt me. (She said that this man had a
yellow bird that kept with him.) And he told me he had
more pretty things that he would give me if I would serve him.

What were these pretty things ?—He did not show me
them.

What else have you seen ?—Two cats; a red cat and a
black cat.

What did they say to you ?—They said, ‘“‘ Serve me.”

When did you see them ?—Last night, and they said,
“* Serve me,” and I said I would not.

What service ?—She said,‘ Hurt the children.”

Did you pinch Elizabeth Hubbard this morning ?—The
man brought her to me and made me pinch her.

Why did you go to Thomas Putnam’s last night and hurt
his child ?—They pull and haul me, and make me go.

And what would they have you do ?—Kill her with a
knife.

(Lieutenant Fuller and others said that at this time when
the child saw these persons, and was tormented by them,
that she did complain of a knife, and that they would have
cut her head off with a knife.)

How did you go ?—We ride upon sticks and are there
presently.

Do you go through the trees or over them ?—We see
nothing, but are there presently.

Why did you not tell your master ?—I was afraid; they
said that they would cut off my head if I told.

Would you not have hurt others if you could ?—They said
they would hurt others, but they could not.

What attendants hath Sarah Good ?—A yellow-bird, and
she would have given me one.

What meat would she give it ?—It did suck her between
her fingers.

Did you not hurt Mr. Curran’s child ?—Goody Good and
Goody Osburn told that they did hurt Mr. Curran’s child, and
would have had me hurt him too; but I did not.


296 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


What hath Sarah Osburn ?—Yesterday, she had a thing
like a woman, with two legs and wings.

(Abigail Williams, that lives with her uncle, Mr. Parris,
said that she did see the same creature, and it turned into the
shape of Goodie Osburn.)

What else have you seen with Osburn ?—Another thing,
hairy, it goes upright like a man, it hath only two legs.

Did you not set Sarah Good upon Elizabeth Hubbard last
Saturday ?—I did see her set a wolf upon her to afflict her.

(The persons with this maid did say that she did complain
of a wolf. She further said that she saw a cat with Good at
another time.)

What clothes did the man go in ?—He goes in black
clothes ; a tall man with white hair, I think.

How doth the woman go ?—In a white hood and a black
hood with a top-knot.

Do you see who it is that torments these children now ?—
Yes, it is Goody Good, she hurts them in her own shape.

Who is it hurts them now ?—I am blind now; I cannot
see.

It appears that Tituba, as a penitent, was released without
punishment, although doubtless in the charge of the Rev.
Samuel Parris. The only further information we have
concerning her is from a work by Robert Calef, More Wonders
of the Invisible World, written in keen opposition to Cotton
Mather and those who were conducting the witch-trials.
Calef, a Boston merchant, was in no way personally interested
in the crusade. He was a man of sceptical and unbelieving
mind, whose incredulity went to the same extremes as the
fanaticism of the Salem ministers and magistrates. He may
perhaps be described as an American Reginald Scot, ready to
accept the most far-fetched explanations of events not easily
to be accounted for in an ordinary way. It is obvious that
when he interviewed Tituba the cunning hag told him just
what he wanted to hear, and he writes: ‘‘ The account she
since gives of it is, that her master did beat her, and other-
wise abuse her, to make her confess and accuse (such as he
called) her sister-witches ; and that whatsoever she said by
way of confessing or accusing others was the effect of such
usage.”

On 19 March the Rev. Deodat Lawson, who was then


NEW ENGLAND 297


officiating as ‘“‘ minister of the gospel” at Scituate, visited
Salem Village personally to investigate the extraordinary
happenings which were so wofully perturbing his old parish,
and he has left us so graphic an account of what he witnessed
and heard that it is well worth reprinting this excessively
rare tract in full.


A True Narrative of some Remarkable Passages relating
to sundry Persons afflicted by Witchcraft at Salem Village
in New-England, which happened from the 19th. of March
to the 5th. of April, 1692.


COLLECTED By DEopaT Lawson.


On the Nineteenth day of March last I went to Salem
Village, and lodged at Nathaniel Ingersol’s near to the
Minister Mr. P.’s House, and presently after I came into my
Lodging, Capt. Walcut’s Daughter Mary came to Lieut.
Ingersol’s and spake to me; but suddenly after, as she
stood by the Door, was bitten, so that she cried out of her
Wrist, and looking on it with a Candle, we saw apparently
the marks of Teeth, both upper and lower set, on each side
of her Wrist.

In the beginning of the Evening I went to give Mr. P. a
Visit. When I was there, his Kinswoman, Abigail Williams,
(about 12 Years of Age) had a grievous fit; she was at
first hurried with violence to and fro in the Room (though
Mrs. Ingersol endeavoured to hold her) sometimes making
as if she would fly, stretching up her Arms as high as she
could, and crying, Whish, Whish, Whish, several times ;
presently after she said, there was Goodw. N. and said,
Do you not see her? Why there she stands! And she said,
Goodw. N. offered her THE BOOK, but she was resolved
she would not take it. saying often, J wont, I wont, I wont
take it, I do not know what Book it is: I am sure it is none of
God’s Book, it is the Devil’s Book for ought I know. After that,
she ran to the Fire, and began to throw Fire-brands about
the House, and run against the Back, as if she would run up
Chimney, and, as they said, she had attempted to go into the
Fire in other Fits.

On Lords Day, the Twentieth of March, there were
sundry of the afflicted Persons at Meeting, as Mrs. Pope,


298 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and Goodwife Bibber, Abigail Williams, Mary Walcut,
Mary Lewes, and Doctor Grigg’s Maid. There was also
at Meeting, Goodwife C. (who was afterward Examined
on suspicion of being a Witch: They had several sore
Fits in the time of Publick Worship, which did something
interrupt me in my first Prayer, being so unusual. After
Psalm was sung, Abigail Williams said to me, Now stand
up, and name your Text! And after it was read, she said,
It is a long Text. In the beginning of the Sermon, Mrs.
Pope, a Woman afflicted, said to me, Now there is enough
of that. And in the Afternoon, Abigail Williams, upon my
referring to my Doctrine, said to me, I know no Doctrine you
had, If you did name one, I have forgot tt.

In Sermon time, when Goodwife C. was present in the
Meeting-House, Ab. W. called out, Look where Goodwife
C. sits on the Beam suckling her Yellow Bird betwixt her
fingers! Ann Putman, another Girle afflicted, said, There
was a Yellow Bird sat on my Hat as it hung on the Pin in
the Pulpit; but those that were by, restrained her from
speaking aloud about it.

On Monday the 21st. of March, the Magistrates of Salem
appointed to come to Examination of Goodwife C. And
about Twelve of the Clock they went into the Meeting-
House, which was thronged with Spectators. Mr. Noyes
began with a very pertinent and pathetical Prayer; and
Goodwife C. being called to answer to what was alledged
against her, she desired to go to Prayer, which was much
wondred at, in the presence of so many hundred People :
The Magistrates told her, they would not admit it; they
came not there to hear her Pray, but to Examine her,
in what was Alledged against her. The Worshipful Mr.
Hathorne asked her, Why she afflicted those Children? She
said, she did not afflict them. He asked her, who did
then? She said, I do not know; How should I know ?
The Number of the Afflicted Persons were about that time
Ten, viz. Four Married Women, Mrs. Pope, Mrs. Putman,
Goodwife Bibber, and an Ancient Woman named Goodall ;
three Maids, Mary Walcut, Mercy Lewes at Thomas Putman’s,
and a Maid at Dr. Griggs’s; there were three Girls from
9 to 12 Years of Age, each of them, or thereabouts, viz.
Elizabeth Parris, Abigail Williams, and Ann Putman;


NEW ENGLAND 299


these ‘were most of them at Goodwife C.’s Examination,
and did vehemently Accuse her in the Assembly of Afflicting
them, by Biting, Pinching, Strangling, &c. And that they
in their Fits see her Likeness coming to them, and bring-
ing a Book to them ; she said she had no Book ; they affirmed,
she had a Yellow Bird, that used to suck betwixt her Fingers,
and being asked about it, if she had any Familiar Spirit, that
attended her ? she said, She had no Familiarity with any such
thing. She was a Gospel Woman: Which Title she called her
self by ; and the Afflicted Persons told her, Ah! she was A
Gospel Witch. Ann Putman did there affirm, that one
day when Lieutenant Fuller was at Prayer at her Father’s
House, she saw the shape of Goodwife C. and she thought
Goodwife N. Praying at the same time to the Devil; she
was not sure it was Goodwife N., she thought it was; but
very sure she saw the shape of Goodwife C. The said C.
said, they were poor distracted Children, and no heed to
be given to what they said. Mr. Hathorne and Mr. Noyes
replyed, It was the Judgment of all that were present, they
were Bewitched, and only she the Accused Person said,
they were Distracted. It was observed several times, that
if she did but bite her under lip in time of Examination,
the Persons afflicted were bitten on their Arms and Wrists,
and produced the Marks before the Magistrates, Ministers,
and others. And being watched for that, if she did but
Pinch her Fingers, or Grasp one Hand hard in another,
they were Pinched, and produced the Marks before the
Magistrates, and Spectators. After that, it was observed,
that if she did but lean her Breast against the Seat in the
Meeting-House, (being the Bar at which she stood), they
were afflicted. Particularly Mrs. Pope complained of griev-
ous Torment in her Bowels, as if they were torn out. She
vehemently accused the said C. as the Instrument, and
first threw her Muff at her; but that flying not home, she
got off her shoe, and hit Goodwife C. on the Head with it.
After these Postures were watched, if the said C. did but
stir her Feet, they were afflicted in their Feet, and stamped
fearfully. The afflicted Persons asked her, why she did not
go to the Company of Witches which were before the
Meeting-House Mustering? Did she not hear the Drum
beat ? They accused her of having Familiarity with the


800 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Devil, in the time of Examination, in the shape of a Black
Man whispering in her Ear; they affirmed, that her Yellow
Bird sucked betwixt her Fingers in the Assembly; and
Order being given to see if there were any sign, the Girl
that saw it, said, it was too late now; she had removed a
Pin, and put it on her Head ; which was found there sticking
upright.

They told her, she had Covenanted with the Devil for
ten Years, six of them were gone, and four more to come.
She was required by the Magistrates to answer that Ques-
tion in the Catechism, How many persons be there in the
God-head? She answered it but oddly, yet was there no
great thing to be gathered from it; she denied all that was
charged upon her, and said, They could not prove a Witch ;
she was that Afternoon Committed to Salem Prison; and
after she was in Custody, she did not so appear to them,
and afflict them as before.

On Wednesday the 28d. of March, I went to Thomas
Putman’s, on purpose to see his Wife: I found her lying
on the Bed, having had a sore Fit a little before; she
spake to me, and said, she was glad to see me; her Hus-
band and she both desired me to Pray with her while she
was sensible; which I did, though the Apparition said, I
should not go to Prayer. At the first beginning she attended ;
but after a little time, was taken with a Fit; yet continued
silent, and seemed to be Asleep: When Prayer was done,
her Husband going to her, found her in a Fit; he took her
off the Bed, to set her on his Knees, but at first she was so stiff,
she could not be bended; but she afterwards sat down, but
quickly began to strive violently with her Arms and Leggs ;
she then began to Complain of, and as it were to Converse
Personally with, Goodwife N. saying, Goodwife N. Be gone !
Be gone! Be gone! are you not ashamed, a Woman of your
Profession, to afflict a poor Creature so? What hurt did I
ever do you in my life? You have but two Years to live,
and then the Devil will torment your Soul; for this your
Name is blotted out of God’s Book, and it shall never be
put in God’s Book again; be gone for shame, are you not
afraid of that which is coming upon you? I know, I know
what will make you afraid; the wrath of an Angry God, I
am sure that will make you afraid ; be gone, do not torment


NEW ENGLAND 301


me, I know what you would have (we judged she meant, her
Soul) but it is out of your reach ; it is cloathed with the white
Robes of Christ’s Righteousness. After this, she seemed to
dispute with the Apparition about a particular Teat of Scrip-
ture. The Apparition seemed to deny it ; (the Womans Eyes
being fast closed all this time) she said, She was sure there was
such a Text, and she would tell it ; and then the Shape would
be gone, for, said she, I am sure you cannot stand before that
Text ! Then she was sorely Afflicted, her Mouth drawn on one
side, and her Body strained for about a Minute, and then
said, I will tell, I will tell; it is, it is, it is, three or four
times, and then was afflicted to hinder her from telling, at
last she broke forth, and said, It is the third Chapter of
the Revelations. I did something scruple the reading it,
and did let my scruple appear, lest Satan should make any
Superstitiously to improve the Word of the Eternal God.
However, tho’ not versed in these things, I judged I might
do it this once for an Experiment. I began to read, and
before I had read near through the first Verse, she opened
her Eyes, and was well; this Fit continued near half an
hour. Her Husband and the Spectators told me, she had
often been so relieved by reading Texts that she named,
something pertinent to her Case; as Isa. 40. 1. Isa. 49. 1.
Isa. 50. 1. and several others.

On Thursday the Twenty-Fourth of March, (being in
course the Lecture-Day at the Village,) Goodwife N. was
brought before the Magistrates Mr. Hathorne and Mr.
Corwin, about Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, to be
Examined in the Meeting-House, the Reverend Mr. Hale
begun with Prayer, and the Warrant being read, she was
required to give Answer, Why she Afflicted those persons ?
She pleaded her own Innocency with earnestness. Thomas
Putman’s Wife, Abigail Williams, and Thomas Putman’s
Daughter, accused her that she appeared to them, and
afflicted them in their Fits; but some of the others said,
that they had seen her, but knew not that ever she had
hurt them; amongst which was Mary Walcut, who was
presently after she had so declared bitten, and cryed out of
her in the Meeting-House, producing the Marks of Teeth
on her wrist. It was so disposed, that I had not leisure to
attend the whole time of Examination, but both Magistrates


302 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and Ministers told me, that the things alledged by the afflicted,
and defences made by her, were much after the same manner
as the former was. And her motions did produce like effects,
as to Biting, Pinching, Brusing, Tormenting, at their Breasts,
by her Leaning, and when bended back, were as if their Backs
were broken. The afflicted Persons said, the Black Man
whispered to her in the Assembly, and therefore she could not
hear what the Magistrates said unto her. They said also, that
she did then ride by the Meeting-House, behind the Black Man
Thomas Putman’s Wife had a grievous Fit in the time of
Examination, to the very great imparing of her strength,
and wasting of her spirits, insomuch as she could hardly
move hand or foot when she was carried out. Others also
were there grievously afflicted, so that there was once such
a hideous scrietch and noise (which I heard as I walked
at a little distance from the Meeting-House) as did amaze
me, and some that were within, told me the whole Assembly
was struck with Consternation, and they were afraid, that
those that sate next to them were under the Influence
of Witchcraft. This Woman also was that day committed
to Salem Prison. The Magistrates and Ministers also did
inform me, that they apprehended a Child of Sarah G.
and examined it, being between 4 and 5 years of Age. And
as to matter of Fact, they did unanimously affirm, that
when this Child did but cast its Eye upon the afflicted
Persons, they were tormented; and they held her Head,
and yet so many as her Eye could fix upon were afflicted.
Which they did several times make careful Observation of :
The afflicted complained, they had often been Bitten by
this Child, and produced the marks of a small set of teeth
accordingly ; this was also committed to Salem Prison, the
Child looked hail, and well as other Children. I saw it
at Lieut. Ingersol’s. After the Commitment of Goodw. N.
Tho. Putman’s Wife was much better, and had no violent
Fits at all from that 24th. of March, to the 5th. of April.
Some others also said they had not seen her so frequently
appear to them, to hurt them.

On the 25th. of March (as Capt. Stephen Sewal, of Salem
did afterwards inform me) Eliz. Paris had sore Fits at
his House, which much troubled himself, and his Wife,
so as he told me they were almost discouraged. She related,


NEW ENGLAND 303


that the great Black Man came to her, and told her, if she
would be ruled by him, she should have whatsoever she
desired, and go to a Golden City. She relating this to Mrs.
Sewal, she told the Child, it was the Devil, and he was a Lyar
from the Beginning, and bid her tell him so, if he came again :
which she did accordingly, at the next coming to her, in
her Fits.

On the 26th. of March, Mr. Hathorn, Mr. Corwin, and Mr.
Higison, were at the Prison-Keeper’s House to Examine
the Child, and it told them there, it had a little Snake that
used to suck on the lowest Joynt of its Fore-Finger ; and
when they enquired where, pointing to other places, it told
them, not there, but there, pointing on the lowest Joint of the
Fore-Finger, where they observed a deep Red Spot, about
the bigness of a Flea-bite; they asked who gave it that
Snake? whether the great Black Man? It said no, its
Mother gave it.

The 31 of March there was a Publick Fast kept at Salem
on account of thesé Afflicted Persons. And Abigail Williams
said, that the Witches had a Sacrament that day at an
house in the Village, and that they had Red Bread and
Red Drink. The first of April, Mercy Lewis, Thomas
Putman’s Maid, in her Fit, said, they did eat Red Bread,
like Man’s Flesh, and would have had her eat some, but
she would not; but turned away her head, and spit at
them, and said, I will not Eat, I will not Drink, it is Blood,
&c., she said, That is not the Bread of Life; that is not the
Water of Life; Christ gives the Bread of Life; I will have
none of it! The first of April also Mercy Lewis aforesaid
saw in her Fit a White Man, and was with him in a glorious
Place, which had no Candles nor Sun, yet was full of Light
and Brightness; where was a great Multitude in White
glittering Robes, and they Sung the Song in the fifth of
Revelation, the 9th verse, and the 110 Psalm, and the 149
Psalm ; and said with her self, How long shall I stay here?
let me be along with you: She was loth to leave this place,
and grieved that she could tarry no longer. This white Man
hath appeared several times to some of them, and given them
notice how long it should be before they had another Fit,
which was sometimes a day, or day and half, or more or less,
it hath fallen out accordingly.


304 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


The 8d of April, the Lord’s-day, being Sacrament-day,
at the Village, Goodw. C. upon Mr. Parris’s naming his
Text, John 6, 70. One of them is a Devil, the said Goodw.
C. went immediately out of the Meeting-House, and flung
the Door after her violently, to the amazement of the
Congregation. She was afterwards seen by some in their
Fits, who said, O Goodw. C. I did not think to see you here !
(and being at their Red Bread and drink) said to her, Is
this a time to receive the Sacrament, you ran away on the
Lord’s-Day, and scorned to receive it in the Meeting-House,
and, Is this a time to receive it? I wonder at you! This is the
sum of what I either saw my self, or did receive Information
from persons of undoubted Reputation and Credit.


REMARKS OF THINGS MORE THAN ORDINARY ABOUT THE
AFFLICTED PERSONS.


1. They are in their Fits tempted to be Witches, are
shewed the List of the Names of others, and are tortured
because they will not yeild to Subscribe, or meddle with, or
touch the Boox, and are promised to have present Relief
if they would do it.

2. They did in the Assembly mutually Cure each other,
even with a Touch of their Hand, when Strangled, and
otherwise Tortured ; and would endeavour to get to their
Afflicted, to relieve them.

8. They did also foretel when anothers Fit was a-coming,
and would say, Look to her! she will have a Fit presently,
which fell out accordingly, as many can bear witness, that
heard and saw it.

4. That at the same time, when the Accused Person
was present, the Afflicted Persons saw her Likeness in other
places of the Meeting-House, sucking her Familiar, some-
times in one place and posture, and sometimes in another.

5. That their Motions in their Fits are Preternatural,
both as to the manner, which is so strange as a well person
could not Screw their Body into; and as to the violence
also it is preternatural, being much beyond the Ordinary
force of the same person when they are in their right mind.

6. The eyes of some of them in their fits are exceeding
fast closed, and if you ask a question they can give no
answer, and I do believe they cannot hear at that time, yet


NEW ENGLAND 305


do they plainely converse with the Appearances, as if they
did discourse with real persons.

7. They are utterly pressed against any persons Pray-
ing with them, and told by the Appearances, they shall
not go to Prayer, so Tho. Putman’s wife was told, I should
not Pray; but she said, I should: and after I had done,
reasoned with the Appearance, Did not I say he should go
to Prayer ?

8. The forementioned Mary W. being a little better at
ease, the Afflicted persons said, she had signed the Book;
and that was the reason she was better. Told me by Edward
Putman.


REMARKS CONCERNING THE ACCUSED.


1. For introduction to the discovery of those that afflicted
them, It is reported Mr. Parris’s Indian Man, and Woman,
made a Cake of Rye Meal, and the Childrens water, baked
it in the Ashes, and gave it to a Dog, sirice which they have
discovered, and seen particular persons hurting of them.

2. In Time of Examination, they seemed little affected,
though all the Spectators were much grieved to see it.

8. Natural Actions in them produced Preternatural actions
in the Afflicted, so that they are their own Image without
any Poppits of Wax or otherwise.

4, That they are accused to have a Company about 23
or 24 and they did Muster in Armes, as it seemed to the
Afflicted Persons.

5. Since they were confined, the Persons have not been
so much Afflicted with their appearing to them, Biteing, or
Pinching of them, &c.

6. They are reported by the Afflicted Persons to keep
dayes of Fast and dayes of Thanksgiving, and Sacraments ;
Satan endeavours to Transforme himself to an Angel of
Light, and to make his Kingdom and Administrations to
resemble those of our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. Satan Rages Principally amongst the Visible Subjects
of Christ’s Kindgom and makes use (at least in appearance)
of some of them to Afflict others; that Christ’s Kingdom
may be divided against it self, and so be weakened.

8. Several things used in England at Tryal of Witches,
to the Number of 14 or 15 which are wont to pass instead


306 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of, or in Concurrence with Witnesses, at least 6 or 7 of them
are found in these accused : see Keebles Statutes.

9. Some of the most solid Afflicted Persons do affirme
the same things concerning seeing the accused out of their
Fitts as well as in them.

10. The Witches had a Fast, and told one of the Afflicted
Girles, she must not Eat, because it was Fast Day, she said,
she would : they told her they would Choake her then ; which
when she did eat, was endeavoured.


In May, 1692, the whole countryside was swept by a panic
of frenzied fear. The “‘ afflicted children ”’ were almost hourly
convulsed, sometimes falling into an extreme sweat and
agony, and “‘ crying out” upon those who tormented them.
All were aghast ; nobody knew who might not next be named
as a witch, an accusation which meant haling to prison, and a
trial concluding with almost certain condemnation. It seemed,
as Hutchinson has put it, that the only “‘ way to prevent
accusation was to become an accuser.” ‘‘ The number of the
afflicted increased every day and the number of the accused in
proportion.” None were so untiring in the persuit of witches
as the Rev. Samuel Parris. He felt it his duty to labour
night and day in the cause, and he never relaxed his efforts.
With all his faults of character he was in this respect
obviously a thoroughly sincere man, and he found an able
and active second in the Rey. Nicholas Noyes of the First
Church, Salem. The Rev. John Higginson and the Rev.
Samuel Willard of the Old South Church, Boston, proved far
more moderate in their judgements. In fact, Mr. Willard
presumed to rebuke some of those who alleged that they had
been bewitched, whereupon one of the “ afflicted children ”
‘eried out” upon him, but he was so universally beloved
and respected that they promptly removed the girl from
court, “‘ and it was told about that she was mistaken in the
person.”

The Rev. John Hale of Beverly, too, although a firm
believer, was by no means so zealous as many of his colleagues
in the prosecutions, but Cotton Mather showed himself
sufficient boutefeu to atone for the slackness of an hundred
chicken-hearts and sceptics.

Although by no means the first person to be accused, the


NEW ENGLAND 307


first to be executed was Bridget Bishop. She had been thrice
married, and was the mother of one child by her second
husband, Thomas Oliver. The mistress of a hostelry, which
stood on the high-road between Salem and Beverly, she was
wont to deck her buxom person in “a black cap and a black
hat, and a red paragon bodice, bordered and looped with
different colours,” which gave great offence to the Genevan
housewives, who were clad in cinder-grey or subfuse brown
and the ‘“‘ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.” Moreover, in
her house there was actually a shovel-board for the entertain-
ment of passing guests. Bridget Bishop was a woman of
sharp tongue and heavy hand, both of which she very liberally
employed against those who offended her, as many an idle
ostler and slattern servant knew. Indeed, she had made
enemies, and some five years before the panic began had
actually been bruited as being a witch, although the charge
came to nothing. Now, however, things had vastly changed,
and when Deliverance Hobbs, who had once been a witch but
was now penitent, cried out upon her, she was promptly
arrested and brought to trial on 2 June, 1692. The following
detailed account is given by Cotton Mather :—


THE TRYAL OF BRIDGET BISHOP, ALIAS


OLIVER, AT THE COURT OF OYER AND FERMINER,
HELD AT SALEM, JUNE 2. 1692.


I.


SHE was indicted for Bewitching of several Persons in
the Neighbourhood, the Indictment being drawn up, accord-
ing to the Form in such Cases usual. And pleading, Not
Guilty, there were brought in several persons, who had
long undergone many kinds of Miseries, which were preter-
naturally inflicted, and generally ascribed unto an horrible
Witchcraft. There was little occasion to prove the Wwtch-
craft, it being evident and notorious to all beholders. Now
to fix the Witchcraft on the Prisoner at the Bar, the first thing
used, was the Testimony of the Bewitched ; whereof several
testifi’d, That the Shape of the Prisoner did oftentimes very
grievously Pinch them, Choak them, Bite them, and Afflict
them ; urging them to write their Names in a Book, which the
said Spectre called, Ours. One of them did further testifie,


308 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


that it was the Shape of this Prisoner, with another, which one
day took her from her Wheel, and carrying her to the River-
side, threatened there to Drown her, if she did not Sign to
the Book mentioned: which yet she refused. Others of
them did also testifie, that the said Shape did in her Threats
brag to them that she had been the Death of sundry Persons,
then by her named ; that she had Ridden a Man then likewise
named. Another testifi’d, the Apparition of Ghosts unto the
Spectre of Bishop, crying out, You Murdered us! About the
Truth whereof, there was in the Matter of Fact but too much
suspicion.

II. It was testifi’d, That at the Examination of the
Prisoner before the Magistrates, the Bewitched were ex-
treamly tortured. If she did but cast her Eyes on them,
they were presently struck down ; and this in such a manner
as there could be no Collusion in the Business. But upon
the Touch of her Hand upon them, when they lay in their
Swoons, they would immediately Revive; and not upon
the Touch of any ones else. Moreover, Upon some Special
Actions of her Body, as the shaking of her Head, or the
turning of her Eyes, they presently and painfully fell into
the like postures. And many of the like Accidents now
fell out, while she was at the Bar. One at the same time
testifying, That she said, She could not be troubled to see the
afflicted thus tormented.

III. There was Testimony likewise brought in, that a
Man striking once at the place, where a bewitched person
said, the Shape of this Bishop stood, the bewitched cried
out, That he had tore her Coat, in the place then particularly
specifi’d ; and the Woman’s Coat was found to be Torn in
that very place.

IV. One Deliverance Hobbs, who had confessed her being
a Witch, was now tormented by the Spectres, for her
Confession. And she now testifi’d, That-this Bishop tempted
her to sign the Book again, and to deny what she had con-
fess’d. She affirm’d, That it was the Shape of this Prisoner,
which whipped her with Iron Rods, to compel her thereunto.
And she affirmed, that this Bishop was at a General Meeting
of the Witches, in a Field at Salem-Village, and there partook


of a Diabolical Sacrament in Bread and Wine then ad-
ministred.


NEW ENGLAND 309


V. To render it further unquestionable, that the Prisoner
at the Bar, was the Person truly charged in Tu1s Witch-
craft, there were produced many Evidences of orHER Witch-
crafis by her perpetrated. For Instance, John Cook testifi’d,
That about five or six Years ago, one Morning, about Sun-
Rise, he was in his Chamber assaulted by the Shape of this
Prisoner: which look’d on him, grinn’d at him, and very
much hurt him with a Blow on the side of the Head: and
that on the same day, about Noon, the same Shape walked
in the Room where he was, and an Apple strangely flew out
of his Hand, into the Lap of his Mother, six or eight Foot
from him.

VI. Samuel Gray testifi’'d, That about fourteen Years
ago, he wak’d on a Night, and saw the Room where he
lay full of Light; and that he then saw plainly a Woman
between the Cradle and the Bed-side, which look’d upon
him. He rose, and it vanished; tho’ he found the Doors
all fast. Looking out at the entry-door he saw the same
Woman, in the same Garb again; and said, In God’s Name,
what do you come for? He went to Bed, and had the same
Woman again assaulting him. The Child in the Cradle
gave a great Screech, and the Woman disappeared. It
was long before the Child could be quieted; and tho’ it
were a very likely thriving Child, yet from this time it
pined away, and, after divers Months, died in a sad Con-
dition. He knew not Bishop, nor her Name; but when
he saw her after this, he knew by her Countenance, and
Apparel, and all Circumstances, that it was the Apparition
of this Bishop, which had thus troubled him.

VII. John Bly and his Wife testifi'd, That he bought
a Sow of Edward Bishop, the Husband of the Prisoner ;
and was to pay the Price agreed, unto another person.
This Prisoner being angry that she was thus hindred from
fingring the Mony, quarrell’d with Bly. Soon after which,
the Sow was taken with strange Fits; Jumping, Leaping,
and Knocking her Head against the Fence; she seem’d
Blind and Deaf, and would neither Eat nor be Suck’d.
Whereupon a Neighbour said, she believed the Creature
was Over-looked ; and sundry other Circumstances concurred,
which made the Deponents believe that Bishop had _ be-


witched it.


310 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


VIII. Richard Coman testifi’d, That eight Years ago,
as he lay awake in his Bed, with a Light burning in the
Room, he was annoy’d with the Apparition of this Bishop,
and of two more that were strangers to him, who came and
oppressed him so, that he could neither stir himself, nor
wake any one else, and that he was the night after, molested
again in the like manner; the said Bishop taking him by
the Throat, and pulling him almost out of the Bed. His
Kinsman offered for this cause to lodge with him; and
that Night, as they were awake, discoursing together, this
Coman was once more visited by the Guests which had
formerly been so troublesom; his Kinsman being at the
same time struck speechless, and unable to move Hand or
Foot. He had laid his Sword by him, which these unhappy
Spectres did strive much to wrest from him; only he held
too fast for them. He then grew able to call the People
of his House; but altho’ they heard him, yet they had not
power to speak or stir; until at last, one of the People
crying out, What’s the matter? The Spectres all vanished.

IX. Samuel Shattock testify’d, That in the Year, 1680,
this Bridget Bishop often came to his House upon such
frivolous and foolish Errands, that they suspected she
came indeed with a purpose of mischief. Presently, where-
upon, his eldest Child, which was of as promising Health
and Sense, as any Child of its Age, began to droop exceed-
ingly ; and the oftner that Bishop came to the House,
the worse grew the Child. As the Child would be stand-
ing at the Door, he would be thrown and bruised against
the Stones, by an invisible Hand, and in like sort knock
his Face against the sides of the House, and bruise it after
a miserable manner. Afterwards this Bishop would bring
him things to Dye, whereof he could not imagin any use ;
and when she paid him a piece of Mony, the Purse and
Mony were unaccountably conveyed out of a lock’d Box,
and never seen any more. The Child was immediately,
hereupon taken with terrible Fits, whereof his Friends
thought he would have dyed: Indeed he did almost nothing
but Cry and Sleep for several Months together; and at
length his Understanding was utterly taken away. Among
other Symptoms of an Inchantment upon him, one was
That there was a Board in the Garden, whereupon he would


NEW ENGLAND 311


walk; and all the Invitations in the World could never
fetch him off. About 17 or 18 years after, there came a
Stranger to Shattock’s House, who seeing the Child, said,
This poor Child is Bewitched; and you have a Neighbour
living not for off, who is a Witch. He added, Your Neigh-
bour has had a falling out with your Wife; and she said,
in her heart, your Wife is a proud Woman, and she would
bring down her Pride in this Child. He then remembred,
that Bishop had parted from his Wife in muttering and
menacing Terms, a little before the Child was taken ill.
The abovesaid Stranger would needs carry the bewitched
Boy with him, to Bishop’s House, on pretence of buying a
pot of Cyder. The woman entertained him in furious manner ;
and flew also upon the Boy, scratching his Face till the Blood
came; and saying, Thou Rogue, what dost thou bring this
Fellow here to plague me? Now it seems the Man had said,
before he went, That he would fetch Blood of her. Ever after
the Boy was follow’d with grievous Fits, which the Doctors
themselves generally ascribed unto Witchcraft ; and wherein
he would be thrown still into the Fire or the Water, if he were
not constantly look’d after ; and it was verily believed that
Bishop was the cause of it.

X. John Louder testify’d, That upon some little Con-
troversy with Bishop about her Fowls, going well to Bed,
he did awake in the Night by Moonlight, and did see clearly
the likeness of this Woman grievously oppressing him ;
in which miserable condition she held him, unable to help
himself, till near Day. He told Bishop of this; but she
deny’d it, and threatned him very much. Quickly after
this, being at home on a Lords day, with the doors shut
about him, he saw a black Pig approach him; at which,
he going to kick, it vanished away. Immediately after,
sitting down, he saw a black Thing jump in at the window,
and come and stand before him. The Body was like that
of a Monkey, the Feet like a Cocks, but the Face much
like a Mans. He being so extreamly affrighted, that he
could not speak; this Monster spoke to him, and said,
I am a Messenger sent unto you, for I understand that you
are in some Trouble of Mind, and if you will be ruled by
me, you shall want for nothing in this world. Whereupon
he endeavoured to clap his hands upon it; but he could


312 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


feel no substance ; and it jumped out of the Window again ;
but immediately came in by the Porch, tho’ the Doors
were shut, and said, You had better take my Counsel! He
then struck at it with a stick, but struck only the Ground-sel,
and broke the Stick: The Arm with which he struck was
presently Disenabled, and it vanished away. He presently
went out at the Back-door, and spied this Bishop, in her
Orchard, going toward her House; but he had not power to
set one foot forward unto her. Whereupon, returning into
the House, he was immediately accosted by the Monster he
had seen before ; which Goblin was now going to fly at him ;
whereat he cry’d out, The whole armour of God be between me
and you! So it sprang back, and flew over the Apple-tree ;
shaking many Apples off the Tree, in its flying over. At its
leap, it flung Dirt with its feet against the Stomack of the
Man; whereon he was then struck Dumb, and so continued
for three days together. Upon the producing of this Testi-
mony, Bishop deny’d that she knew this Deponent: Yet
their two Orchards joined; and they had often had their
little Quarrels for some years together.

XI. William Stacy testify’d, That receiving Mony of
this Bishop, for work done by him; he was gone but a
matter of three Rods from her, and looking for his Mony,
found it unaccountably gone from him. Some time after,
Bishop asked him, whether his Father would grind her
Grist for her? He demanded why? She reply’d, Because
Folks count me a Witch. He answered, No question but
he will grind it for you. Being then gone about six Rods
‘rom her, with a small Load in his Cart, suddenly the Off-
wheel stump’d, and sunk down into an hole, upon plain
Ground ; so that the Deponent was forced to get help for
the recovering of the Wheel: But stepping back to look
for the hole, which might give him this Disaster, there
was none at all to be found. Some time after, he waked
in the Night; but it seem’d as light as day; and
he perfectly saw the shape of this Bishop in the Room
troubling of him; but upon her going out, all was dark
again. He charg’d Bishop afterwards with it, and she
deny’d it not; but was very angry. Quickly after, this
Deponent having been threatned by Bishop, as he was in
a dark Night going to the Barn, he was very suddenly


NEW ENGLAND 318


taken or lifted from the Ground, and thrown against a
Stone-wall: After that, he was again Hoisted up and thrown
down a Bank, at the end of his House. After this again,
passing by this Bishop, his Horse with a small Load, striving
to draw, all his Gears flew to pieces, and the Cart fell down ;
and this Deponent going then to lift a Bag of Corn, of about
two Bushels, could not budge it with all his Might.

Many other Pranks of this Bishop’s this Deponent was
ready to testify. He also testify’d, That he verily believ’d
the said Bishop was the Instrument of his Daughter
Priscilla’s Death; of which suspicion, pregnant Reasons
were assigned.

XII. To crown all, John Bly and William Bly testify’d,
That being employ’d by Bridget Bishop, to help to take
down the Cellar-wall of the old house wherein she formerly
lived, they did in holes of the said old Wall, find several
Poppets, made up of Rags and Hogs-bristles, with head-
less Pins in them, the Points being outward ; whereof she
could give no account unto the Court, that was reasonable
or tolerable.

XIII. One thing that made against the Prisoner was,
her being evidently convicted of gross Lying in the Court,
several times, while she was making her plea; but besides
this, a Jury of Women found a preternatural Teat upon her
Body: But upon a second search, within 3 or 4 hours,
there was no such thing to be seen. There was also an
Account of other People whom this Woman had Afflicted ;
and there might have been many more, if they had been
enquired for ; but there was no need of them.

XIV. There was one very strange thing more, with which
the Court was newly entertained. As this Woman was under
a Guard, passing by the great and spacious Meeting-house of
Salem, she gave a look towards the House: And immediately
a Demon invisibly entring the Meeting-house, tore down a
part of it ; so that tho’ there was no Person to be seen there,
yet the People, at the noise, running in, found a Board, which
was strongly fastned with several Nails, transported unto
another quarter of the House.


Bridget Bishop was hanged on 10 June.
On 29 June was tried Susanna Martin of Amesbury, a


314 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


widow, whom the “ afflicted children ” had continually seen
tormenting and pinching them.


THE TRYAL OF SUSANNA MARTIN AT THE


COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER, HELD BY ADJOURN-
MENT AT SALEM. JUNE 29. 1692.


1.


Susanna Marrin, pleading Not Guilty to the Indictment
of Witchcraft, brought in against her, there were produced
the Evidences of many Persons very sensibly and grievously
Bewitched ; who all complained of the Prisoner at the
Bar, as the Person whom they believed the cause of their
Miseries. And now, as well as in the other Trials, there
was an extraordinary Endeavour by Witchcrafts, with
Cruel and frequent Fits, to hinder the poor Sufferers from
giving in their Complaints, which the Court was forced with
much Patience to obtain, by much waiting and watching
for it.

II. There was now also an account given of what passed
at her first Examination before the Magistrates. The Cast
of her Eye, then striking the afflicted People to the Ground,
whether they saw that Cast or no; there were these among
other Passages between the Magistrates and the Examinate.

Magistrate. Pray, what ails these People ?

Martin. I don’t know.

Magistrate. But what do you think ails them ?

Martin. I don’t desire to spend my Judgment upon it.

Magistrate. Don’t you think they are bewitch’d ?

Martin. No, I do not think they are.

Magistrate. Tell us your Thoughts about them then.

Martin. No, my thoughts are my own, when they are in,
but when they are out they are anothers. Their Master.

Magistrate. Their Master? who do you think is their
Master ?

Martin. If they be dealing in the Black Art, you may
know as well as I.

Magistrate. Well, what have you done towards this ?

Martin. Nothing at all.

Magistrate. Why, ’tis you or your Appearance.

Martin. I cannot help it.


NEW ENGLAND 315


Magistrate. Is it not your Master? How comes your
Appearance to hurt these ?

Martin. How do I know? He that appeared in the
Shape of Samuel, a glorified Saint, may appear in any ones
Shape.

It was then also noted in her as in others like her, that
if the Afflicted went to approach her, they were flung down
to the Ground. And, when she was asked the reason of
it, she said, I cannot tell ; it may be, the Devil bears me more
Malice than another.

III. The Court accounted themselves alarum’d by these
Things, to enquire further into the Conversation of the
Prisoner ; and see what there might occur, to render these
Accusations further credible. Whereupon, John Allen of
Salisbury, testify’d, That he refusing, because of the weak-
ness of his Oxen, to Cart some Staves at the request of this
Martin, she was displeased at it; and said, It had been as
good that he had; for his Oxen should never do him much
more Service. Whereupon, this Deponent said, Dost thou
threaten me, thou old Witch? I'l throw thee into the Brook:
Which to avoid, she flew over the Bridge, and escaped. But,
as he was going home, one of his Oxen tired, so that he was
forced to Unyoke him, that he might get him home. He
then put his Oxen, with many more, upon Salisbury Beach,
where Cattle did use to get Flesh. In a few days, all the Oxen
upon the Beach were found by their Tracks, to have run unto
the Mouth of Merrimack-River, and not returned; but the
next day they were found come ashore upon Plum-Island.
They that sought them, used all imaginable gentleness, but
they would still run away with a violence, that seemed wholly
Diabolical, till they came near the mouth of Merrimack-
River ; when they ran right into the Sea, swimming as far as
they could be seen. One of them then swam back again, with
a swiftness, amazing to the Beholders, who stood ready to
receive him, and help up his tired Carcass: But the Beast
ran furiously up into the Island, and from thence, thorough
the Marshes, up into Newbury Town, and so up into the
Woods; and there after a while found near Amesbury.
So that, of fourteen good Oxen, there was only this saved :
The rest were all cast up, some in one place, and some in
another, Drowned.


316 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


IV. John Atkinson testifi’d, That he exchanged a Cow
with a Son of Susanna Martin’s, whereat she muttered,
and was unwilling he should have it. Going to receive
this Cow, tho he Hamstring’d her, and Halter’d her, she,
of a Tame Creature, grew so mad, that they could scarce
get her along. She broke all the Ropes that were fastned
unto her, and though she were ty’d fast unto a Tree, yet
she made her escape, and gave them such further trouble,
as they could ascribe to no cause but Witchcraft.

V. Bernard Peache testifi’d, That being in Bed, on the
Lord’s-day Night, he heard a scrabbling at the Window,
whereat he then saw Susanna Martin come in, and jump
down upon the Floor. She took hold of this Deponent’s
Feet, and drawing his Body up into an Heap, she lay upon
him near Two Hours; in all which time he could neither
speak nor stir. At length, when he could begin to move,
he laid hold on her Hand, and pulling it up to his Mouth,
he bit three of her Fingers, as he judged, unto the Bone.
Whereupon she went from the Chamber, down the Stairs,
out at the Door. This Deponent thereupon called unto
the People of the House, to advise them of what passed ;
and he himself did follow her. The People saw her not;
but there being a Bucket at the Left-hand of the Door,
ther was a drop of Blood found upon it; and several
more drops of Blood upon the Snow newly fallen abroad :
There was likewise the print of her 2 Feet just without
the Threshold ; but no more sign of any Footing further
off.

At another time this Deponent was desired by the Prisoner,
to come unto an Husking of Corn, at her House; and she
said, If he did not come, it were better that he did! He went not ;
but the Night following, Susanna Martin, as he judged, and
another came towards him. One of them said, Here he is !
but he having a Quarter-staff, made a Blow at them. The
Roof of the Barn, broke his Blow ; but following them to the
Window, he made another Blow at them, and struck them
down; yet they got up, and got out, and he saw no more
of them. i

About this time, there was a Rumour about the Town,
that Martin had a Broken Head; but the Deponent could
say nothing to that.


NEW ENGLAND 317


The said Peache also testifi’d the Bewitching the Cattle
to Death, upon Martin’s Discontents.

VI. Robert Downer testified, That this Prisoner being
“some Years ago prosecuted at Court for a Witch, he then
said unto her, He believed she was a Witch. Whereat she
being dissatisfied, said, That some She-Devil would shortly
fetch him away! Which word were heard by others, as
well as himself. The Night following, as he lay in his Bed,
there came in at the Window, the likeness of a Cat, which
flew upon him, took fast hold of his Throat, lay on him a
considerable while, and almost killed him. At length he
remembred what Susanna Martin had threatned the Day
before ; and with much striving he cried out, Avoid, thou
She-Devil! In the Name of God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, Avoid! Whereupon it left him, leap’d on the
Floor, and flew out at the Window.

And there also came in several Testimonies, that before
ever Downer spoke a word of this Accident, Susanna Martin
and her Family had related, How this Downer had been
handled !

VII. John Kembal testified, that Susanna Martin, upon
a Causeless Disgust, had threatned him, about a certain
Cow of his, That she should never do him any more Good:
and it came to pass accordingly. For soon after the Cow
was found stark dead on the dry Ground, without any
Distemper to be discerned upon her. Upon which he was
followed with a strange Death upon more of his Cattle,
whereof he lost in one Spring to the value of Thirty Pounds.
But the said John Kembal had a further Testimony to give
in against the Prisoner which was truly admirable.

Being desirous to furnish himself with a Dog, he applied
himself to buy one of this Martin, who had a Bitch with
Whelps in her House. But she not letting him have his
choice, he said, he would supply himself then at one Blezdels.
Having mark’d a Puppy, which he lik’d at Blezdels, he
met George Martin, the Husband of the Prisoner, going by,
who asked him, Whether he would not have one of his Wife's
Puppies? and he answered, No. The same Day, one
Edmond Elliot, being at Martin’s House, heard George
Martin relate, where this Kembal had been, and what he
had said. Whereupon Susanna Martin replied, If I live,


318 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


I'll give him Puppies enough! Within a few days after,
this Kembal, coming out of the Woods, there arose a little
Black Cloud in the N.W. and Kembal immediately felt a
force upon him, which made him not able to avoid running
upon the stumps of Trees, that were before him, albeit he
had a broad plain Cart-way, before him; but tho’ he had
his Ax also on his Shoulder to endanger him in his Falls,
he could not forbear going out of his way to tumble over
them. When he came below the Meeting House, there
appeared unto him, a little thing like a Puppy, of a Darkish
Colour; and it shot backwards and forwards between his
Legs. He had the Courage to use all possible Endeavours
of Cutting it with his Ax; but he could not Hit it: the
Puppy gave a jump from him, and went, as to him it seem’d,
into the Ground. Going a little further, there appeared
unto him a Black Puppy, somewhat bigger than the first,
but as Black as a Cole. Its Motions were quicker than
those of his Ax; it flew at his Belly and away; then at
his Throat; so, over his Shoulder one way, and then over
his Shoulder another way. His Heart now began to fail
him, and he thought the Dog would have tore his Throat
out. But he recovered himself, and called upon God in
his distress; and naming the Name of JEsus Curist, it
vanished away at once. The Deponent spoke not one
Word of these Accidents, for fear of affrighting his Wife.
But the next Morning, Edmond Eliot, going into Martin’s
House, this Woman asked him where Kembal was? He
replied, At home, a Bed, for ought he knew. She returned,
They say, he was frighted last Night. Eliot asked, With
what? She answered, With Puppies. Eliot asked, Where
she heard of it, for he had heard nothing of it? She rejoined,
About the Town. Altho’ Kembal had mentioned the Matter
to no Creature living.

VIII. William Brown testifi’d, That Heaven having
blessed him with a most Pious and Prudent Wife, this
Wife of his, one day met with Susanna Martin ; but when
she approach’d just unto her, Martin vanished out of sight,
and left her extreamly affrighted. After which time, the
said Martin often appear’d unto her, giving her no little
trouble ; and when she did come, she was visited with Birds,
that sorely peck’d and prick’d her; and sometimes a


NEW ENGLAND 319


Bunch, like a Pullet’s Egg, would rise in her Throat, ready
to choak her, till she cry’d out, Witch, you shan’t choak
me! While this good Woman was in this extremity, the
Church appointed a Day of Prayer, on her behalf; where-
upon her Trouble ceas’d; she saw not Martin as formerly ;
and the Church, instead of their Fast, gave Thanks for her
Deliverance. But a considerable while after, she being
Summoned to give in some Evidence at the Court, against
this Martin, quickly thereupon, this Martin came behind
her, while she was milking her Cow, and said unto her,
For thy defaming her at Court, I'll make thee the miserablest
Creature in the World. Soon after which, she fell into a
strange kind of distemper, and became horribly frantick,
and uncapable of any reasonable Action; the Physicians
declaring, that her Distemper was preternatural, and that
some Devil had certainly bewitched her ; and in that condition
she now remained.

IX. Sarah Atkinson testify’d, That Susanna Martin came
from Amesbury to their House at Newbury, in an extraordinary
Season, when it was not fit for any to Travel. She came (as
she said, unto Atkinson) all that long way on Foot. She
brag’d and shew’d how dry she was; nor could it be per-
ceived that so much as the Soles of her Shoes were wet.
Atkinson was amazed at it; and professed, that she should
herself have been wet up to the knees, if she had then came
so far; but Martin reply’d, She scorn’d to be Drabbled! It
was noted, that this Testmony upon her Trial, cast her in a
very singular Confusion.

X. John Pressy testify’d, That being one Evening very
unaccountably Bewildred, near a Field of Martins, and
several times, as one under an Enchantment, returning to
the place he had left, at length he saw a marvellous Light,
about the bigness of an Half-bushel, near two Rod, out of
the way. He went, and struck it at with a Stick, and laid
it on with all his might. He gave it near forty blows; and
felt it a palpable substance. But going from it, his Heels
were struck up, and he was laid with his Back on the
Ground, sliding, as he thought, into a Pit; from whence
he recover’d by taking hold on the Bush ; altho’ afterwards
he could find no such Pit in the place. Having, after his
Recovery, gone five or six Rod, he saw Susanna Martin


320 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


standing on his Left-hand, as the Light had done before ;
but they changed no words with one another. He could
scarce find his House in his Return; but at length he got
home extreamly affrighted. The next day, it was upon
Enquiry understood, that Martin was in a miserable con-
dition by pains and hurts that were upon her.

It was further testify’d by this Deponent, That after he
had given in some Evidence against Susanna Martin, many
years ago, she gave him foul words about it; and said,
He should never prosper more ; particularly, That he should
never have more than two Cows; that tho’ he was never so
likely to have more, yet he should never have them. And that
from that very day to this, namely for twenty years together,
he could never exceed that number ; but some strange thing
or other still prevented his having any more.

XI. Jervis Ring testify’d, That about seven years ago, he
was oftentimes and grievously oppressed in the Night, but
saw not who troubled him; until at last he Lying perfectly
Awake, plainly saw Susanna Martin approach him. She
came to him, and forcibly bit him by the Finger; so that
the Print of the bite is now, so long after, to be seen upon
him.

XII. But besides all of these Evidences, there was a
most wonderful Account of one Joseph Ring, produced on
this occasion.

This Man has been strangely carried about by Daemons,
from one Witch-meeting to another, for near two years
together; and for one quarter of this time, they have
made him, and keep him Dumb, tho’ he is now again able
to speak. There was one T.. H. who having, as ’tis judged,
a design of engaging this Joseph Ring in a snare of Devillism,
contrived a while, to bring this Ring two Shillings in Debt unto
him.

Afterwards, this poor Man would be visited with unknown
shapes, and this 7. H. sometimes among them; which
would force him away with them, unto unknown Places,
where he saw Meetings, Feastings, Dancings; and after
his return, wherein they hurried him along through the
Air, he gave Demonstrations to the Neighbours, that he
had indeed been so transported. When he was brought
until these hellish Meetings, one of the first Things they


NEW ENGLAND 821


still did unto him, was to give him a knock on the Back,
whereupon he was ever as if bound with Chains, uncapable
of stirring out of the place, till they should release him.
He related, that there often came to him a Man, who pre-
sented him a Book, whereto he would have him set his
Hand; promising to him, that he should then have even
what he would; and presenting him with all the delectable
Things, Persons, and Places, that he could imagin. But
he refusing to subscribe, the business would end with dreadful
Shapes, Noises and Screeches, which almost scared him out
of his Wits. Once with the Book, there was a Pen offered
him, and an Ink-horn with Liquor in it, that seemed like
Blood: But he never toucht it.

This Man did now affirm, That he saw the Prisoner at
several of those hellish Randezvouzes.

Note, this Woman was one of the most impudent, scurri-
lous, wicked Creatures in the World; and she did now
throughout her whole Tryal, discover her self to be such an
one. Yet when she was asked, what she had to say for her
self? Her chief Plea was, That she had lead a most virtuous
and holy Life.


Upon the following day, 80 June, Elizabeth How of
Topfield, who had been arrested on 28 May, was brought
before the Court.


THE TRYAL OF ELIZABETH HOW, AT THE


COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER, HELD BY AD-
JOURNMENT AT SALEM, JUNE 380. 1692.


18


Exizasetu How pleading Not Guilty to the Indictment of
Witchcrafts, then charged upon her; the Court, according
to the usual Proceedings of the Courts in England, in such
Cases, began with hearing the Depositions of several afflicted
People, who were grievously tortured by sensible and evident
Witcherafts, and all complained of the Prisoner, as the cause
of their Trouble. It was also found that the Sufferers were not
able to bear her Look, as likewise, that in their greatest
Swoons, they distinguished her Touch from other Peoples,
being thereby raised out of them.


322 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


And there was other Testimony of People to whom the
shape of this How, gave trouble nine or ten years ago.

II. It has been a most usual thing for the bewitched
Persons, at the same time that the Spectres representing
the Witches, troubled them, to be visited with Apparitions
of Ghosts, pretending to have been Murdered by the Witches
then represented. And sometimes the Confessions of the
Witches afterwards acknowledged those very Murders, which
these Apparitions charged upon them ; altho’ they had never
heard what Informations had been given by the Sufferers.

There were such Apparitions of Ghosts testified by some
of the present Sufferers ; and the Ghosts affirmed, that this
How had murdered them: Which things were fear’d, but
not prov’d.

III. This How had made some Attempts of joyning to
the Church at Ipswich, several years ago; but she was
denyed an admission into that Holy Society, partly through
a suspicion of Witchcraft, then urged against her. And
there now came in Testimony, of preternatural Mischiefs,
presently befalling some that had been Instrumental to
debar her from the Communion whereupon she was intruding.

IV. There was a particular Deposition of Joseph Stafford,
That his Wife had conceived an extream Aversion to this
How, on the Reports of her Witchcrafts: But How one
day, taking her by the Hand, and saying, I believe you
are not ignorant of the great Scandal that I lye under, by
an evil Report raised upon me. She immediately, unreason-
ably and unperswadeably, even like one Enchanted, began
to take this Woman’s part. How being soon after pro-
pounded, as desiring an Admission to the Table of the
Lord, some of the pious Brethren were unsatisfy’d about
her. The Elders appointed a Meeting to hear Matters
objected against her; and no Arguments in the World
could hinder this Goodwife Stafford from going to the
Lecture. She did indeed promise, with much ado, that
she would not go to the Church-meeting, yet she could not
refrain going thither also. How’s Affairs there were so
canvased, that she came off rather Guilty than Cleared ;
nevertheless Goodwife Stafford could not forbear taking
her by the Hand, and saying, Tho’ you are Condemned
before Men, you are Justify’d before God. She was quickly


NEW ENGLAND 823


taken in a very strange manner, Ranting, Raving, Raging,
and crying out, Goody How must come into the Church ;
she is a precious Saint; and tho’ she be condemned before
Men, she is Justify’d before God. So she continued for the
space of two or three Hours; and then fell into a Trance.
But coming to her self, she cry’d out, Ha! I was mistaken;
and afterwards again repeated, Ha! I was mistaken!
Being asked by a stander by, Wherein? she replyed, I
thought Goody How had been a precious Saint of God, but
now I see she is a Witch: She has bewitched me, and my
Child, and we shall never be well, till there be a Testimony
for her, that she may be taken into the Church. And How
said afterwards, that she was very sorry to see Stafford at
the Church-meeting mentioned. Stafford, after this, declared
herself to be afflicted by the Shape of How ; and from that
Shape she endured many Miseries.

V. John How, Brother to the Husband of the Prisoner,
testified, that he refusing to accompany the Prisoner unto
her Examination, as was by her desired, immediately some
of his Cattle were Bewitched to Death, leaping three or
four foot high, turning about, speaking, falling, and dying
at once; and going to cut off an Ear, for an use, that might
as well perhaps have been omitted, the Hand wherein he held
his Knife was taken very numb, and so it remained, and full
of pain, for several Days, being not well at this very Time.
And he suspected the Prisoner for the Author of it.

VI. Nehemiah Abbot testify’d, that unusual and mis-
chievous Accidents would befal his Cattle, whenever he had
any Difference with this Prisoner. Once, particularly, she
wished his Ox choaked; and within a little while that Ox
was choaked with a Turnep in his Throat. At another
Time, refusing to lend his Horse, at the Request of her
Daughter, the Horse was in a preternatural manner abused.
And several other odd things of that kind were testified.

VII. There came in Testimony, that one Good-wife
Sherwin, upon some Difference with How, was bewitched ;
and that she dyed, charging this How with having an Hand
in her Death. And that other People had their Barrels of
Drink unaccountably mischieved, spoil’d and spilt, upon
their displeasing of her.

The things in themselves were trivial, but their being


824 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


such a Course of them, it made them the more considered.
Among others, Martha Wood, gave her Testimony, That
a little after her Father had been employed in gathering
an account of How’s Conversation, they once and again
lost great quantities of Drink out of their Vessels, in such
a manner, as they could ascribe to nothing but Witchcraft.
As also, That How giving her some Apples, when she had
eaten of them she was taken with a very strange kind of
Amaze, insomuch that she knew not what she said or did.

VIII. There was likewise a Cluster of Depositions, That
one Isaac Cummings refusing to lend his Mare unto the hus-
band of this How, the Mare was within a day or two taken in
a strange condition: The Beast seemed much abused, being
bruised as if she had been running over the Rocks, and
marked where the Bridle went, as if burnt with a red hot
Bridle. Moreover, one using a Pipe of Tobacco for the
Cure of the Beast, a blue Flame issued out of her, took
hold of her Hair, and not only spread and burnt on her,
but it also flew upwards towards the Roof of the Barn, and
had like to have set the Barn on Fire: And the Mare dyed
very suddenly.

IX. Timothy Pearley and his Wife, testify’d, Not only
unaccountable Mischiefs befel their Cattle, upon their
having of Differences with this Prisoner: but also that they
had a Daughter destroyed by Witchcrafts ; which Daughter
still charged How as the Cause of her Affliction. And it
was noted, that she would be struck down whenever How
were spoken of. She was often endeavoured to be thrown
into the Fire, and into the Water, in her strange Fits:
Tho’ her Father had corrected her for charging How with
bewitching her, yet (as was testified by others also) she
said, She was sure of it, and must dye standing to it. Accord-
ingly she charged How to the very Death; and said, Tho’
How could afflict and torment her Body, yet she could not
hurt her Soul: And, That the Truth of this matter would
appear, when she would be dead and gone.

X. Francis Lane testified, That being hired by the
Husband of this How to get him a parcel of Posts and
Rails, this Lane hired John Pearly to assist him. This
Prisoner then told Lane, That she believed the Posts and
Rails would not do, because John Pearly helped him; but


NEW ENGLAND 325


that if he had got them alone, without John Pearly’s help,
they might have done well enough. When James How
came to receive his Posts and Rails of Lane, How taking
them up by the Ends, they, tho’ good and sound, yet un-
accountably broke off, so that Lane was forced to get thirty
or forty more. And this Prisoner being informed of it,
she said, She told him so before, because Pearly helped
about them.

XI. Afterwards there came in the Confessions of several
other (penitent) Witches, which affirmed this How to be
one of those, who with them had been baptized by the Devil
in the River, at Newbury-Falls : before which he made them
there kneel down by the Brink of the River and worshiped
him.


Accordingly on 19 July, five women, Sarah Good, who
was one of the first to be accused with Sarah Osburn and the
Indian Tituba, Sarah Wildes, of whom practically nothing is
recorded, Susanna Martin, Elizabeth How, and Rebecca
Nurse, were executed for witchcraft.

Rebecca Nurse was an aged matron of over seventy years
of age, in failing health, and of blameless character. In fact,
her reputation for piety was so great, and for so many years
had she been highly esteemed in the community, that the
jury brought in a verdict of “‘ Not Guilty,” upon which the
mob broke out into the wildest clamour, yelling with horrid
threats that they would pull the house about the judges’ ears
and tear the jurors to pieces. Benches were smashed, and
missiles began to be thrown, when the acquittal was hurriedly
withdrawn and sentence of death speedily pronounced.
Moreover, as Hutchinson tells us, ‘‘ Mr. Noyes, the Minister
of Salem, a zealous prosecutor, excommunicated the poor old
woman, and delivered her to Satan, to whom he supposed she
had given herself formally many years before; but her life
and conversation had been such, that the remembrance
thereof, in a short time after, wiped off all the reproach
occasioned by the civil or ecclesiastical sentence against her.”

The bodies of executed witches were not allowed to
receive Christian burial, and were huddled with contumely
into holes among the rocks of Gallows Hill where they
suffered. But there always existed among her descendants


826 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


a family tradition that the body of Rebecca Nurse was
recovered by her devoted husband and sons, and tenderly
buried near her old home. A pine grove covers the spot, and
hard by has been erected a granite monument to record
her end.

The most remarkable of all the Salem witch trials was
undoubtedly that of the Rev. George Burroughs. He was a
graduate of Harvard in the class of 1670, and after having
preached in Maine for several years he became, in 1680,
Pastor at Salem Village. Here his wife died, and seeing that
his stipend had not been punctually paid him he was forced
to run into debt for her funeral expenses, which caused such
scandal in the community that he chose to retire in 1683 to
Casco Bay. In 1692 he was a pastor at Wells, Maine. He
was “cried out upon” by Abigail Hobbs, Abigail Williams,
and particularly by Ann Putnam who told an extraordinary
tale.

‘“‘ The Deposition of Ann Putnam, who testifieth and saith,
that, on the 8th day of May, at evening, I saw the apparition
of Mr. George Burroughs, who grievously tortured me, and
urged me to write in his book, which I refused. He then told
me that his two first wives would appear to me presently,
and tell me a great many lies, but I should not believe them.

“There immediately appeared to me the forms of two
women in winding-sheets, and napkins about their heads, at
which I was greatly affrighted ; and they turned their faces
fowards Mr. Burroughs, and looked very red and angry, and
told him that he had been a cruel man to them, and that their
blood did cry for vengance against him; and also told him
that they should be clothed with white robes in Heaven,
when he should be cast into hell; and immediately he
vanished away. And, as soon as he was gone, the two women
turned their heads toward me, and looked as pale as a white
wall; and told me that they were Mr. Burroughs’ two first
wives, and that he had murdered them. And one of them
told me that she was his first wife, and he stabbed her under
the left arm and put a piece of sealing-wax on the wound. And
she pulled aside the winding-sheet, and showed me the place ;
and also told me that she was in the house where Mr. Parris
now lives, when it was done.

‘And the other told me that Mr. Burroughs and that wife


NEW ENGLAND 327


which he hath now, killed her in the vessel, as she was
coming to see her friends, because they would have one
another. And they both charged me that I should tell these
things to the magistrates before Mr. Burroughs’ face; and,
if he did not own them, they did not know but they should
appear there. This morning also, Mrs. Lawson and her
daughter Ann appeared to me, whom I knew, and told me
Mr. Burroughs murdered them. This morning also appeared
to me another woman in a winding-sheet and told me that
she was Goodman Fuller’s first wife, and Mr. Burroughs
killed her because there was some difference between her
husband and him.”

On 30 April a warrant had been procured from Boston for
the arrest of George Burroughs, ‘“‘he being suspected of a
confederacy with the Devil.” Being found at the supper-
table with his family when the marshal entered the house to
execute the mandate, he was at once brought back in custody
to Salem, whither they returned on 4 May. On 9 May a
special session of magistrates was convened, William
Stoughton coming from Dorchester and Captain Samuel
Sewall from Boston to sit with Hathorne and Curwin that the
proceedings might be carried out with fullest solemnity,
Stoughton, indeed, being the temporary deputy-governor of
the colony.

Burroughs was committed to jail, and on 5 August he was
brought before a special court, appointed to investigate the
crime of Witchcraft. Cotton Mather in his The Wonders of
the Invisible World gives the following account of the
proceedings :—


THE TRYAL OF G. B. AT A COURT OF
OYER AND TERMINER,


HELD IN SALEM, 1692.


Giap should I have been, if I had never known the Name
of this Man: or never had this occasion to mention so much
as the first Letters of his Name. But the Government requir-
ing some Account of his Trial to be inserted in this Book, it
becomes me with all Obedience to submit unto the Order.
I. This G. B. Was Indicted for Witch-craft, and in the
prosecution of the Charge against him, he was Accused by


328 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


five or six of the Bewitched, as the Author of their Miseries ;
he was Accused by Eight of the Confessing Witches, as
being an head Actor at some of their Hellish Randezvouzes,
and one who had the promise of being a King in Satan’s
Kingdom, now going to be Erected: He was accused by
Nine Persons for extraordinary Lifting, and such feats of
Strength as could not be done without a Diabolical Assistance.
And for other such things he was Accused, until about
thirty Testimonies were brought in against him; nor were
these judg’d the half of what might have been considered for
his Conviction: However they were enough to fix the
Character of a Witch upon him according to the Rules of
Reasoning, by the Judicious Gaule, in that Case directed.
II. The Court being sensible, that the Testimonies of
the Parties Bewitched, use to have a Room among the
Suspicions or Presumptions, brought in against one In-
dicted for Witch-craft; there were now heard the Testi-
monies of several Persons, who were most notoriously
Bewitched, and every day Tortured by Invisible Hands,
and these now all charged the Spectres of G. B. to have
a share in their Torments. At the Examination of this
G. B. the Bewitched People were grievously harrassed
with Preternatural Mischiefs, which could not possibly be
Dissembled ; and they still ascribe it unto the endeavours
of G. B. to Kill them. And now upon the Tryal of one
of the Bewitched Persons, testified, that in her Agonies, a
little black Hair’d Man came to her, saying his Name
was B. and bidding her set her hand to a Book which he
shewed unto her; and bragging that he was a Conjuror,
above the ordinary Rank of Witches ; That he often Perse-
cuted her with the offer of that Book, saying, She should
be well, and need fear nobody, if she would but Sign it; But
he inflicted cruel Pains and Hurts upon her, because of
her denying so to do. The Testimonies of the other Sufferers
concurred with these; and it was remarkable, that whereas
Biting was one of the ways which the Witches used for the
vexing of the Sufferers; when they cry’d out of G. B.
Biting them, the print of the Teeth would be seen on the
Flesh of the Complainers, and just such a Set of Teeth as
G. B.’s would then appear upon them, which could be
distinguished from those of some other Mens. Others


NEW ENGLAND 329


of them testified, That in their Torments, G. B. tempted
them to go unto a Sacrament, unto which they perceived
him with a Sound of Trumpet, Summoning of other Witches,
who quickly after the Sound, would come from all Quarters
unto the Rendezvous. One of them falling into a kind of
Trance, affirmed, that G. B. had carried her away into a very
high Mountain, where he shewed her mighty and glorious
Kingdoms, and said, He would give them all to her if she would
write in his Book ; But she told him, They were none of his to
give ; and refused the Motions; enduring of much Misery
for that refusal.

It cost the Court a wonderful deal of Trouble, to hear
the Testimonies of the Sufferers ; for when they were going
to give in their Depositions, they would for a long time be
taken with Fits, that made them uncapable of saying any
thing. The chief Judg asked the Prisoner, who he thought
hindered these Witnesses from giving their Testimonies ?
And he answered, He supposed it was the Devil. That
Honourable Person replied, How comes the Devil then to be
so loath to have any Testimony borne against you? Which
cast him into very great Confusion.

III. It has been a frequent thing for the Bewitched
People to be entertained with Apparitions of Ghosts of
Murdered People, at the same time that the Spectres of
the Witches trouble them. These Ghosts do always affright
the Beholders more than all the other spectral Repre-
sentations; and when they exhibit themselves, they cry
out, of being Murthered by the Witch-crafts or other
Violences of the Persons who are then in Spectre present.
It is further considered, that once or twice, these Appari-
tions have been seen by others, at the very same time they
have shewn themselves to the Bewitched ; and seldom have
there been these Apparitions, but when something unusual
or suspected, have attended the Death of the Party thus
Appearing. Some that have been accused by these Appari-
tions accosting of the Bewitched People, who had never
heard a word of any such Persons ever being in the World,
have upon a fair Examination, freely and fully confessed
the Murthers of those very Persons, altho’ these also did
not know how the Apparitions had complained of them.
Accordingly several of the Bewitched, had given in their


330 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Testimony, that they had been troubled with the Appari-
tions of two Women, who said, that they were G. B.’s two
Wives, and that he had been the Death of them; and that
the Magistrates must be told of it, before whom if B. upon
his Tryal denied it, they did not know but that they should
appear again in Court. Now, G. B. had been Infamous for the
Barbarous usage of his two late Wives, all the Country over.
Moreover, it was testified, the Spectre of G. B. threatening
of the Sufferers, told them, he had Killed (besides others)
Mrs. Lawson and her Daughter Ann. And it was noted,
that these were the Vertuous Wife and Daughter of one at
whom this G. B. might have a prejudice for his being service-
able at Salem Village, from whence himself had in ill Terms
removed some Years before: And that when they dy’d,
which was long since, there were some odd Circumstances
about them, which made some of the Attendants there
suspect something of Witch-craft, tho none Imagined from
what Quarter it should come.

Well, G. B. being now upon his Tryal, one of the Bewitched
Persons was cast into Horror at the Ghost of B.’s two
Deceased Wives then appearing before him, and crying
for Vengeance against him. MHereupon several of the Be-
witched Persons were successively called in, who all not
knowing what the former had seen and said, concurred in
their Horror of the Apparition, which they affirmed that
he had before him. But he, tho much appalled, utterly
deny’d that he discerned any thing of it; nor was it any
part of his Conviction.

IV. Judicious Writers have assigned it a great place in
the Conviction of Witches, when Persons are Impeached
by other notorious Witches, to be as ill as themselves ; especially,
if the Persons have been much noted for neglecting the Worship
of God. Now, as there might have been Testimonies enough
of G. B.’s Antipathy to Prayer, and the other Ordinances
of God, tho by his Profession, singularly Obliged thereunto ;
so, there now came in against the Prisoner, the Testimonies
of several Persons, who confessed their own having been
horrible Witches, and ever since their Confessions, have been
themselves terribly Tortured by the Devils and other Witches,
even like the other Sufferers; and therein undergone the
Pains of many Deaths for their Confessions.


NEW ENGLAND 331


These now testified, that G. B. had been at Witch-meetings
with them; and that he was the Person who had Sedue’d,
and Compell’d them into the snares of Witch-craft: That
he promised them Fine Cloaths for doing it ; that he brought
Poppets to them, and Thorns to stick into those Poppets, for
the Afflicting of other People; and that he exhorted them
with the rest of the Crew, to Bewitch all Salem Village, but
be sure to do it Gradually, if they would prevail in what
they did.

When the Lancashire Witches were Condemn’d, I don’t
remember that there was any considerable further Evidence,
than that of the Bewitched, and than that of some that
confessed. We see so much already against G. B. But
this being indeed not enough, there were other things to
render what had been already produced credible.

V. A famous Divine recites this among the Convictions
of a Witch; The Testimony of the party Bewitched, whether
Pining or Dying ; together with the joint Oaths of sufficient
Persons that have seen certain Prodigious Pranks or Feats
wrought by the Party Accused. Now, God had been pleased
so to leave this G. B. that he had ensnared himself by several
Instances, which he had formerly given of a Preternatural
Strength, and which were now produced against him. He was
a very Puny Man, yet he had often done things beyond the
strength of a Giant. A Gun of about seven foot Barrel, and so
heavy that strong Men could not steadily hold it out with
both hands; there were several Testimonies, given in by
Persons of Credit and Honor that he made nothing of taking
up such a Gun behind the Lock, with but one hand, and
holding it out like a Pistol, at Arms-end. G. B. in his
Vindication, was so foolish as to say, That an Indian was
there, and held it out at the same time: Whereas none of
the Spectators ever saw any such Indian; but they sup-
posed, the Black Man (as the Witches called the Devil; and
they generally say he resembles an Indian) might give
him that Assistance. There was Evidence likewise brought
in, that he made nothing of taking up whole Barrels fill’d
with Molasses or Cider, in very disadvantageous Postures,
and Carrying of them through the difficultest Places out of
a Canoo to the Shore.

Yea, there were two Testimonies, that G. B. with only


382 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


putting the Fore Finger of his Right Hand into the Muzzle
of an heavy Gun, a Fowling-piece of about six or seven
foot Barrel, did lift up the Gun, and hold it out at Arms-
end; a Gun which the Deponents thought strong Men
could not with both hands lift up, and hold out at the But-
end, as is usual. Indeed, one of these Witnesses was over-
perswaded by some Persons, to be out of the way upon
G. B.’s Tryal; but he came afterwards with Sorrow for his
withdraw, and gave in his Testimony: Nor were either of
these Witnesses made use of as Evidences in the Trial.

VI. There came in several Testimonies relating to the
Domestick Affairs of G. B. which had a very hard Aspect
upon him; and not only prov’d him a very ill Man; but
also confirmed the belief of the Character, which had been
already fastned on him.

"Twas testified, that keeping his two Successive Wives
in a strange kind of Slavery, he would when he came home
from abroad, pretend to tell the Talk which any had with
them; That he has brought them to the point of Death,
by his harsh Dealings with his Wives, and then made the
People about him, to promise that in case Death should
happen, they would say nothing of it; That he used all
means to make his Wives Write, Sign, Seal, and Swear a
Covenant, never to reveal any of his Secrets; That his
Wives had privately complained unto the Neighbours about
frightful Apparitions of Evil Spirits, with which their House
was sometimes infested ; and that many such things have
been whispered among the Neighbourhood. There were
also some other Testimonies relating to the Death of People
whereby the Consciences of an Impartial Jury were convinced
that G. B. had Bewitched the Persons mentioned in the
Complaints. But I am forced to omit several passages, in
this, as well as in all the succeeding Tryals, because the
Scribes who took notice of them, have not supplyed me.

VII. One Mr. Ruck, Brother-in-Law to this G. B. testified,
that G. B. and himself, and his Sister, who was G. B.’s
Wife, going out for two or three Miles to gather Straw-
berries, Ruck with his Sister, the Wife of G. B. Rode home
very Softly, with G. B. on Foot in their Company, G. B.
stept aside a little into the Bushes ; whereupon they halted
and Halloo’d for him. He not answering, they went away


NEW ENGLAND 888


homewards, with a quickened pace, without expectation of
seeing him in a considerable while ; and yet when they were
got near home, to their Astonishment, they found him on
foot with them, having a Basket of Straw-berries. G. B.
immediately then fell to Chiding his Wife, on the account of
what she had been speaking to her Brother, of him, on the
Road: which when they wondred at, he said, He knew their
thoughts. Ruck being startled at that, made some reply,
intimating, that the Devil himself did not know so far; but
G. B. answered, My God makes known your Thoughts unto me.
The Prisoner now at the Bar had nothing to answer, unto
what was thus witnessed against him, that was worth consider-
ing. Only he said, Ruck and his Wife left a Man with him
when they left him. Which Ruck now affirm’d to be false ;
and when the Court asked G. B. What the Man’s Name
was? his Countenance was much altered; nor could he
say, who ’twas. But the Court began to think, that he
then step’d aside, only that by the assistance of the Black
Man, he might put on his Invisibility, and in that Fasci-
nating Mist, gratifie his own Jealous Humour, to hear
what they said of him. Which trick of rendering them-
selves Invisible, our Witches do in their Confessions pretend,
that they sometimes are Masters of; and it is the more
credible, because there is Demonstration, that they often
render many other things utterly Invisible.

VIII. Faltring, faulty, unconstant, and contrary Answers
upon judicial and deliberate Examination, are counted some
unlucky Symptons of Guilt, in all Crimes, especially in Witch-
crafts. Now there never was a Prisoner more eminent for
them, than G. B. both at his Examination and on his Trial.
His Tergiversations, Contradictions, and Falshoods were very
sensible: he had little to say, but that he had heard some
things that he could not prove, Reflecting upon the Reputa-
tion of some of the Witnesses. Only he gave in a Paper to the
Jury ; wherein, altho’ he had many times before, granted, not
only that there are Witches, but also, that the present Suffer-
ings of the Country are the effects of horrible Witchcrafts, yet
he now goes to evince it, That there neither are nor ever were
Witches, that having made a Compact with the Devil, can send a
Devil to Torment other people at a distance. This Paper
was Transcribed out of Ady; which the Court presently


334 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


knew, as soon as they heard it. But he said, he had taken
none of it out of any Book; for which, his Evasion after-
wards, was, That a Gentleman gave him the Discourse in
a Manuscript, from whence he Transcribed it.

IX. The Jury brought him fn Guilty: But when he came
to Die, he utterly deni’d the Fact, whereof he had been thus
convicted.


Hutchinson, who had access to the same records, which
have now perished, gives identical evidence with reference to
the rites: ‘‘ Richard Carrier affirmed to the jury that he saw
Mr. George Burroughs at the witch meeting at the village
and saw him administer the sacrament. Mary Lacy, senr. and
her daughter Mary affirmed that Mr. George Burroughs was
at the witch meetings with witch sacraments, and that she
knows Mr. Burroughs to be of the company of witches.’’!®
John Hale also states: ‘‘ This D. H. [Deliverance Hobbs]
confessed she was at a Witch Meeting at Salem Village... .
And the said G. B. preached to them, and such a Woman
was their Deacon, and there they had a Sacrament.’’*°
Certainly all this was quite clear enough amply to justify
Cotton Mather in his statement that the witches were wont
to meet ‘‘in Hellish Randezvouzes, wherein the Confessors
[penitent witches] do say, they have had their Diabolical
Sacraments, imitating the Baptism and the Supper of our
Lorde?

On 19 August George Burroughs was executed at Witch-
hill, and with him suffered four more, John Procter, George
Jacobs, John Willard, and Martha Carrier.

John Procter was a native of Ipswich, and both he and his
wife, Elizabeth, had lain in prison for some three months.
Two weeks after he was put to death a child was born to
Elizabeth Procter who was yet in hold. The fact of her
pregnancy saved her life.

George Jacobs was a stout old patriarch who vigorously
resisted the accusations, and roundly told the magistrates :
“You tax me for a wizard; you may as well tax me for a
buzzard. I have done no harm,” a speech which was
probably not altogether to his advantage. He had been
arrested on 10 May, and was much cried out upon by Mary
Walcot.


NEW ENGLAND 335


Of John Willard little is known save that the afflicted
children accused him of murder and sorcery. Brattle gives
the following account of his demeanour at the gibbet:
“Procter and Willard, whose whole management of them-
selves from the jail to the gallows, was very affecting, and
melting to the hearts of some considerable spectators whom
I could mention to you; but they are executed, and so I
leave them.”

The trial of Martha Carrier is reported in detail by Cotton
Mather, and presents some very extraordinary circum-
stances.


THE TRIAL OF MARTHA CARRIER, AT THE


COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER, HELD BY AD-
JOURNMENT AT SALEM, AUGUST 2. 1692.


I


Marrua Carrier was Indicted for the bewitching certain
Persons, according to the Form usual in such Cases, pleading
Not Guilty, to her Indictment; there were first brought in a
considerable number of the bewitched Persons ; who not only
made the Court sensible of an horrid Witchcraft committed
upon them, but also deposed, That it was Martha Carrier, or
her Shape, that grievously tormented them, by Biting, Prick-
ing, Pinching and Choaking of them. It was further deposed,
That while this Carrier was on her Examination, before the
Magistrates, the Poor People were so tortured that every one
expected their Death upon the very spot, but that upon the
binding of Carrier they were eased. Moreover the Look
of Carrier then laid the Afflicted People for dead; and
her Touch, if her Eye at the same time were off them,
raised them again: Which Things were also now seen
upon her Tryal. And it was testified, That upon the mention
of some having their Necks twisted almost round, by the
Shape of this Carrier, she replyed, Its no matter though their
necks had been twisted quite off.

II. Before the Tryal of this Prisoner, several of her own
children had frankly and fully confessed, not only that they
were Witches themselves, but that this their Mother had
made them so. This Confession they made with great Shews
of Repentance, and with much Demonstration of Truth.


336 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


They related Place, Time, Occasion; they gave an account
of Journeys, Meetings and Mischiefs by them performed,
and were very credible in what they said. Nevertheless,
this evidence was not produced against the Prisoner at the
Bar, inasmuch as there was other Evidence enough to
proceed upon.

III. Benjamin Abbot gave his Testimony, That last
March was a twelvemonth, this Carrier was very angry
with him, upon laying out some Land, near her Husband’s :
Her Expressions in this Anger, were, That she would stick
as close to Abbot as the Bark stuck to the Tree; and that
he should repent of it afore seven years came to an End, so
as Doctor Prescot should never cure him. These Words
were heard by others besides Abbot himself; who also
heard her say, She would hold his Nose as close to the Grind-
stone as ever it was held since his Name was Abbot. Presently
after this, he was taken with a Swelling in his Foot, and
then with a Pain in his Side, and exceedingly tormented.
It bred into a Sore, which was lanced by Doctor Prescot, and
several Gallons of Corruption ran out of it. For six Weeks it
continued very bad, and then another Sore bred in the Groin,
which was also launced by Doctor Prescot. Another Sore then
bred in his Groin, which was likewise cut, and put him to very
great Misery: He was brought unto Death’s Door, and so
remained until Carrier was taken, and carried away by the
Constable, from which very day he began to mend, and so
grew better every Day, and is well ever since.

Sarah Abbot also, his Wife, testified, That her Husband
was not only all this while Afflicted in his Body, but also
that strange extraordinary and unaccountable Calamities
befel his Cattel ; their Death being such as they could guess
at no Natural Reason for.

IV. Allin Toothaker testify’d, That Richard, the son of
Martha Carrier, having some difference with him, pull’d
him down by the Hair of the Head. When he Rose again,
he was going to strike at Richard Carrier; but fell down
flat on his Back to the ground, and had not power to stir
hand or foot, until he told Carrier he yielded ; and then
he saw the shape of Martha Carrier, go off his breast.

This Toothaker, had Received a wound in the Wars ;
and he now testify’d, that Martha Carrier told him, He


NEW ENGLAND 337


should never be Cured. Just afore the Apprehending of
Carrier, he could thrust a knitting Needle into his wound,
four inches deep; but presently after her being siezed, he
was throughly healed.

He further testify’d, that when Carrier and he some
times were at variance, she would clap her hands at him,
and say, He should get nothing by it ; whereupon he several
times lost his Cattle, by strange Deaths, whereof no natural
causes could be given.

V. John Rogger also testifyed, That upon the threatning
words of this malicious Carrier, his Cattle would be strangely
bewitched ; as was more particularly then described.

VI. Samuel Preston testify’d, that about two years ago,
having some difference with Martha Carrier, he lost a Cow
in a strange Preternatural unusual manner; and about a
month after this, the said Carrier, having again some
difference with him, she told him; He had lately lost a
Cow, and it should not be long before he lost another ; which
accordingly came to pass ; for he had a thriving and well-kept
Cow, which without any known cause quickly fell down and
dy’d.

VII. Phebe Chandler testify’d, that about a Fortnight
before the apprehension of Martha Carrier, on a Lords-
day, while the Psalm was singing in the Church, this Carrier
then took her by the shoulder and shaking her, asked her,
where she lived: she made her no Answer, although as
Carrier, who lived next door to her Fathers House, could

‘not in reason but know who she was. Quickly after this,
-as she was at several times crossing the Fields, she heard a
voice, that she took to be Martha Carriers, and it seem’d
as if it was over her head. The voice told her, she should
within two or three days be poisoned. Accordingly, within such
a little time, one half of her right hand, became greatly swollen,
and very painful ; as also part of her Face: whereof she can
give no account how it came. It continued very bad for some
dayes ; and several times since, she has had a great pain in her
breast ; and been so seized on her leggs, that she has hardly
been able to go. She added, that lately, going well to the
House of God, Richard, the son of Martha Carrier, look’d very
earnestly upon her, and immediately her hand, which had
formerly been poisoned, as is abovesaid, began to pain her


338 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


greatly, and she had a strange Burning at her stomach ;
but was then struck deaf, so that he could not hear any
of the prayer, or singing, till the two or three last words of
the Psalm.

VIII. One Foster, who confessed her own share in the
Witchcraft for which the Prisoner stood indicted, affirm’d,
that she had seen the prisoner at some of their Witch-
meetings, and that it was this Carrier, who perswaded her
to be a Witch. She confessed, that the Devil carry’d them
on a pole, to a Witch-meeting; but the pole broke, and
she hanging about Carriers neck, they both fell down, and
she then received an hurt by the Fall, whereof she was not
at this very time recovered.

IX. One Lacy, who likewise confessed her share in this
Witchcraft, now testify’d, that she and the prisoner were
once Bodily present at a Witch-meeting in Salem Village ;
and that she knew the prisoner to be a Witch, and to have
been at a Diabolical sacrament, and that the prisoner was
the undoing of her, and her Children, by enticing them into
the snare of the Devil.

X. Another Lacy, who also confessed her share in this
Witchcraft, now testify’d, that the prisoner was at the
Witch-meeting, in Salem Village, where they had Bread and
Wine Administered unto them.

XI. In the time of this prisoners Trial, one Susanna
Sheldon, in open Court had her hands Unaccountably ty’d
together with a wheel-band, so fast that without cutting,
it could not be loosed: It was done by a Spectre; and the
Sufferer affirm’d, it was the Prisoners.


Memorandum. This rampant Hag, Martha Carrier, was
the person, of whom the Confessions of the Witches, and of
her own children among the rest, agreed, That the Devil had
promised her, she should be Queen of Hell.


On 9 September the Court condemned six persons, and
eight days later nine more were sentenced to death.

As early as 19 March Martha Corey had been arrested
under grave suspicion of Witchcraft. She was a woman
constant in attendance at the meeting-house, and remarkable
for her piety, facts which sadly militated against her when


NEW ENGLAND 339


she was accused, since her devout profession was at once
considered to be no more than a hypocritical mask of Chris-
tianity to hide her evil commerce with Satan and his agents.
Her examination, in the handwriting of Mr. Parris, is of
considerable length, and we find that she repeatedly asseverates
that she is a “‘ gospel woman,” as when asked by the magis-
trates: “ Tell us what you know of this matter,” she replied :
** Why, I am a gospel woman, and do you think I can have to
do with witchcraft too ?’’ Whereupon the afflicted children
broke in: “There is a man whispering in her ear,’ and
Hathorne promptly queried: ‘‘ What did he say to you?”
** We must not believe all that these distracted children say,”
was herreply. “ Cannot you tell what that man whispered ? ”
they urged. “I saw nobody.” ‘‘ But did you hear ? ” they
pressed. ‘‘ No,” she answered curtly enough. ‘‘ Here was
extreme agony of the afflicted.”’ She was further accused of
covenanting with a familiar, a bird that was visible to the
children, and the Rev. Nicholas Noyes roundly declared :
“I believe it is apparent she practiseth witchcraft in the
congregation ; there is no need of images.”

Martha Corey had more than once flatly declared her dis-
belief in Witchcraft, but her husband, Giles Corey, a passionate
robust old man of fourscore, who followed the proceedings
with the most intense zeal, bordering upon fanaticism, was
so enraged at his wife’s attitude that he let drop some angry
expressions, which were carefully noted and remembered to
her hurt. Even when called upon to give evidence he made
several entirely damaging statements, and then perhaps
‘realizing the folly of his vehemence, that he was in effect
sending his wife to the gallows, he ceased abruptly and
refused to utter another word. Whereupon he was arrested
for contumacy, upon which charge sorcery was quickly
clapped. On 19 April his examination took place, and from
the scanty papers which can be traced he seems to have been
labouring under the greatest distress of mind. The only
papers relating to him, on file as having been sworn to before
the Grand Jury, are a few brief depositions. If he had
actually been put on trial, no doubt we should have ample
documents. Besides his own vindictive course towards his
wife, two of his four sons-in-law had turned against her.
One (Crosby) had testified to her undoing, and another


340 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT |


(Parker) had allowed his name to be used as an adverse
witness. Giles Corey, then, made a will, or more properly a
deed, by which he gave all his property to his “‘ beloved sons-
in-law William Cleeves of Beverly and John Moulton of
Salem”; a clearly writ document, duly signed and witnessed.
He knew now that if brought to trial his death was certain,
and he realized that conviction and execution, owing to the
concomitant attainder, might invalidate all attempts of his
to convey his excellent property. Whereas if he should not be
brought to trial and condemnation his deed must legally
stand and nothing could break or defeat its effect. Accord-
ingly he made up his mind not to be tried. When called
into Court to answer to the indictment found by the Grand
Jury, he did not plead ‘“‘ Guilty” or “‘ Not Guilty,” but
vouchsafed no reply. This rendered it technically impossible
to bring him to trial, and the authorities did not hesitate to
apply to the prisoner who refused to plead the horrid penalties
prescribed by law. Having been called upon thrice, if he yet
remained mute of malice, the accused was sent to a low dark
cell, where he was stretched almost naked upon the stone
floor, and loaded with a mass of heavy iron, daily increasing
in weight, until such time as, if he persisted in his obstinacy,
his life was slowly crushed from his body. A few crumbs of
black bread and a sip of bracken water on alternate days were
all the sustenance that justice allowed. This was the peine
forte et dure. Giles Corey’s pressing to death was on 19
September, and tradition tells that it took place in the open
field near the jail, somewhere between Howard-street burial
ground and Brown Street. In order that the spiritual
weapons should not rust the Rev. Nathaniel Noyes, as soon
as it was known that the prisoner refused to plead, solemnly
declared him excommunicate, whilst on 11 September, the
Assembly voted the excommunication of Martha Corey for
Witchcraft, clear and proven, sentence being pronounced by
the Rev. Samuel Parris on 14 September.

A well-known antiquarian who was living at Salem as
recently as 1891, heard from his grandmother (who died in
1862, aged ninety-two) the anecdote told by her grand-
mother, whose mother was an eye-witness of the scene she
described ; she was living at the time in Essex Street, where
the Perley block now stands, and related, that as the tumbril


NEW ENGLAND 341


bearing the dead body of Giles Corey passed her door, she
saw a man push back with his cane the blackened tongue
of the unfortunate wretch, which had been forced from his
mouth by the agonizing pressure of his doom.

On 22 September Martha Corey was executed at Gallows
Hill, together with Mary Easty, Alice Parker, Ann Pudeator,
Margaret Scott, Wilmot Reed, Samuel Wardwell, and Mary
Parker. As they were launched from the gibbet Mr. Noyes,
who stood by, pointed to their bodies and exclaimed in
stentorian tones: ‘‘ Alas! What a sad sight it is to see eight
firebrands of hell hanging there ! ”’

Mary Easty, the sister?? of Rebecca Nurse, was aged fifty-
eight years, and the mother of seven children. She had first
been accused and examined in April, but was released from
prison on 18 May. Immediately, however, Mercy Lewis fell
into the wildest fits and convulsions to the horror and alarm
of all the neighbours, whilst the afflicted children kept crying
out that it was Goodwife Easty tormenting her. This
continued until Mistress Easty was arrested and once more
laid in bonds.

Of Alice Parker little is recorded save that she was the wife
of a sailor with whom she had incessant quarrels as he loved
to frequent the tavern. Her husband was wont to call her
hard names in his cups, and on one occasion she followed him
scolding lustily as far as Westgate’s ale-house, where she
heartily abused him before all the company. When the host
remonstrated with her he also got a smart lick with the rough
side of her tongue, and at the trial he recited this volley of
_ abuse, adding that a few nights later whilst on his way home
in the dark he encountered a number of shadowy animals
with gleaming eyes who sprang upon and cowered in his path
so that he had many a sorry tumble and only reached his door
half-dead with terror and mightily bruised. Mr. Noyes, also,
who visited Alice Parker when she was sick, affirmed that
“‘ discoursing with her about witchcraft, whether she were
not guilty, she answered, ‘If she were as free from other sins
as from witchcraft, she would not ask of the Lord mercy.’ ”’
This reply, which is in truth somewhat impious, was held by
the ministers to be damning to the last degree.

The story of the rest runs upon much the same lines. They
were suddenly cried out upon by the children, suspicion was


342 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


aroused which soon in the magistrates’ minds grew into
certainty, arrest and judgement inevitably followed. Some
few persons managed to escape. Philip English and his wife **
were figures of no small prominence. They owned houses,
land, a wharf, and a whole fleet of sailing-vessels. Mary
English was first arrested,?* and a few days after her husband
was sent to join her in Boston prison. Owing probably to
large bribes they were enabled secretly to escape from
Massachusetts, whither they did not return for some years,
when the prosecutions were over and done.

After Dudley Bradstreet, the magistrate of Andover, had
committed some forty persons to jail he refused to order any
more arrests. The consequence was that he and his wife were
accused of sorcery and had to fly for their lives.

The last executions which took place were those on 22
September, 1692. None the less the jails throughout the
whole district were crowded with suspects. The prisons of
Salem, Boston, Cambridge, and Ipswich were full to excess,
and it became almost impossible to receive any more accused.
When the prosecutions seemed at their zenith, by an extra-
ordinary circumstance the crusade came suddenly to an end
with startling abruptness. The first check was the accusation
in October of Mrs. Hale, the wife of the Rev. John Hale,
minister of the First Church in Beverly. But the acknow-
ledged and distinguished virtues of this lady, her solid piety
and a thousand charities, had made her so beloved by the
people and had so idolized her in their hearts, that not at all
the crying out of the afflicted children could sully or shake
their confidence. From that moment the power of the
accusers was destroyed. The whole community rose in
defence of Mrs. Hale and roundly declared that the children
were perjurers and liars.

Just at this juncture Sir William Phips, the Governor of the
Colony, stepped in and forbade the Special Courts of Oyer and
Terminer to try any more cases of Witchcraft. He further
ordered that no spectral testimony was henceforth to be
received as evidence. Obviously it was now impossible to
obtain another conviction. Mr. Samuel Parris, Judge
Stoughton, Cotton Mather, and Mr. Noyes were aghast. The
afflicted children promptly cried out upon the Governor’s lady
and declared she was a leader among the witches, but some very


NEW ENGLAND 343


drastic measures effectually closed their mouths once and for
all. The ministers were reduced to silence, and the magistrates
shook in their shoes, for they had received something more
than a hint that they might be called to a strict account of
their proceedings. In May, 1693, Sir William Phips discharged
all prisoners, and nearly two hundred persons were set at
liberty.

Judge Stoughton in sore displeasure had already retired
from public life. “In January, 1692-8, word was brought in
that a reprieve was sent to Salem, and had prevented the
execution of seven of those that were condemned, which so
moved the chief judge that he said to this effect : ‘ We were
in a way to have cleared the land of them; who it is that
obstructs the cause of justice I know not; the Lord be
merciful to the County!’ and so went off the bench, and
came no more into that Court.”

Judge Sewall, on the other hand, feeling that many
innocent persons had suffered, observed annually for the rest
of his life a day of fasting and prayer in private, and in
public on the “‘ day of the general fast ’’ stood up before the
whole congregation of the chapel where he worshipped, and
made a general acknowledgement of his errors, requesting
all present to join with him in earnest supplication for the
forgiveness of their sins, particularly their misguidance in
this matter.

The efforts of Mr. Parris to stem the tide which had so
suddenly and irresistibly turned against him aroused bitter
/ feelings among his parishioners. It was remembered that
from his house flew the sparks which were kindled into a
fatal flame, and month after month the controversies into
which he plunged with vigour if not even recklessness grew
more and more acute. On 14 July, 1696, his wife died, and
he was pressed by many influential persons to retire from his
charge. This he obstinately refused to do until the authori-
ties urged him in a way that allowed no option, whereupon
in sore vexation he removed to Newton, and next to Concord.
In November, 1697, he began to preach at Stow, his stipend
being forty pounds a year, half in money and half in kind.
Later he officiated at Dunstable, and finally at Sudbury,
where he died 27 February, 1720.

In 1710 his daughter Elizabeth had married Benjamin


844 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Barnes of Concord. Two other daughters married in Sudbury.
His elder son Noyes, who graduated at Harvard in 1721,
became deranged and was supported by the town. Samuel,
the younger, was for many years deacon of the church at
Sudbury, where he died on 22 November, 1792, aged
ninety-one.

Samuel Parris was succeeded at Salem by the Rev. Joseph
Green, under whom the excommunication of Martha Corey
for Witchcraft, voted on 11 September, 1692, and pronounce,
by Parris on 14 September, was rescinded. In March, 1712,
the similar sentences against Rebecca Nurse and Giles Corey
were annulled.

The parents of Ann Putnam, Serjeant Thomas Putnam and
Mrs. Ann Putnam, who had played a prominent part in the
prosecutions, died in 1699, when she was nineteen years old,
leaving to her charge several younger brothers and sisters.
Her health, however, soon began to fail her. She was
obviously morbid and hysterical from the first, and on 26
August, 1706, when she had lain sick and ill for many months,
there was read out in her presence before the whole congrega-
tion at the meeting-house a public confession, attested by
the Rev. Joseph Green, which she had herself for the greater
ease of her conscience carefully written out and signed. This
ran as follows :—


The Confession of Anne Putnam, when she was received to
Communion in 1706.


““I desire to be humbled before God for that sad and
humbling providence that befell my father’s family in the
year about ’92; that I being then in my childhood, should,
by such providence of God be made an instrument for the
accusing of several persons of a grievous crime, whereby their
lives were taken away from them, whom now I have just
grounds and good reason to believe they were innocent
persons; and that it was a great delusion of Satan that
deceived me in that sad time, whereby I justly fear I have
been instrumental, with others, though ignorantly and
unwittingly, to bring upon myself and this land the guilt of
innocent blood ; though what was said or done by me against
any person I can truly and uprightly say, before God and
man, I did it not out of any anger, malice or ill-will to any


NEW ENGLAND 345


person, for I had no such thing against one of them; but
what I did was ignorantly, being deluded by Satan. And
particularly, as I was a chief instrument of accusing of
Goodwife Nurse and her two sisters, I desire to lie in the
dust, and to be humbled for it, in that I was a cause, with
others, of so sad a calamity to them and their families ; for
which cause I desire to lie in the dust, and earnestly beg
forgiveness of God, and from all those unto whom I have
given just cause of sorrow and offence, whose relations were
taken away or accused.”


Anne Putnam died some ten years later, in 1716, at the age
of thirty-six. Her will is dated 20 May, 1716, and was
presented in probate on the following 29 June.

So sudden and complete a cessation of the witch crusade in
Salem is certainly remarkable, but the events which abruptly
checked the prosecutions and changed public opinion are
manifest and entirely logical and clear in their effect.

It is worth remark that superstitions yet covertly lingered
among the community, for on the 5 and 7 September, 1746,
the Rev. Peter Clark, solemnly warned and rebuked the
people of Salem for clandestinely resorting to a ‘“ reputed
witch or fortune-teller.”

There can be no doubt that the diseased imaginings of the
neurotic children and young girls, who used to meet at the
Parris’ house, set aflame by the wild tales of the Indian
Tituba, fancies and fantasies which quickly ripened into
acute hysteria and neurosis accompanied by grave functional
disorders, were the origin of the terrible panic that gave rise
to such wholesale accusations and condemnations. The
community was already predisposed to black superstitious
terrors by the stern rigours and _ hell-fire teaching of its
Genevan gospel, and consequently that it should be swept
by crowd-fear, a well-known and generally recognized
psychic phenomenon, seemed inevitable. It is plain that
terrible sufferings resulted, and much innocent blood was
shed.

We have the official acknowledgement of Judge Sewall ;
the public confession of Anne Putnam. It seems certain that
Rebecca Nurse, Mary Easty, old George Jacobs, suffered
wrongfully. The few historians of Salem Witchcraft—


846 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Charles Wentworth Upham in his monumental History of
Salem Witchcraft; Caroline Upham in her Salem Witchcraft
in Outline, Salem, 1891; as again Longfellow in poetry
and Lowell in prose—have poured forth pity and sentiment,
upon those who fell victims. All this is very proper, and
very just, no doubt. We also have the contemporary
sceptic Robert Calef, who, determined neither to see nor hear
anything save what he was already resolved to see and hear,
explains and rationalizes apace in the bad old materialistic
way at the expense of truth and accuracy.

The question remains to be asked whether there did not
secretly exist in New England a coven of witches, who were
partially, at least, discovered by the accident of the general
prosecution wherein so many guiltless became involved. And
the answer, I think, must be in the affirmative. It is most
certain from the testimony of Deliverance Hobbs that she
had belonged to such a coven, of which the evidence against
the Rev. George Burroughs, Bridget Bishop, and Martha
Carrier, proves them to have been members. There is a
considerable amount of exaggeration, as we should expect,
but when every allowance has been made a few salient facts
with regard to this Devil’s Society are clear.

Their place of meeting was “ upon a plain grassy place, by
which was a Cart path and sandy ground in the path, in
which were the tracks of Horses feet.”?> Initiation was by
a form of baptism. Mary Osgood, wife of Captain Osgood,
went ‘‘to five mile pond, where she was baptized by the
devil, who dipped her face in the water, and made her
renounce her former baptism, and told her she must be his,
soul and body for ever, and that she must serve him, which
she promised to do. She says, the renouncing her first
baptism was after her dipping.”®® The same Mary Osgood
met the Devil as a black man who presented a book; and
Mary Lacy of the Salem coven described him as a black man
in a high-crowned hat. It seems probable that this office of
the “‘ Devil” was filled by the Rev. George Burroughs, for he
was “head Actor at some of their Hellish Randezvouzes ” 27;
and also ‘‘ He was the person who had Seduc’d and Compell’d
them into the snares of Witchcraft.”?8 That a minister, and
one who was actually the pastor of Salem, should have
secretly been a high official among the witches is no matter


NEW ENGLAND 347


for surprise. The case, indeed, can be repeatedly paralleled.
Mr. Gideon Penman (1678), who had once been minister at
Crighton in Scotland, used to frequent the Sabbats, where
the Devil spoke of him as, ‘‘ Mr. Gideon, my chaplain.’ 29
He was most notorious, for “the devil had a great meeting of
witches in Loudian [Lothian], where, among others, was a
warlock [Penman] who formerly had been admitted to the
ministrie in the presbyterian tymes, and when the bishops
came in, conformed withthem. But being found flagitious and
wicked, was deposed by them, and now he turnes a preacher
under the devill of hellish doctrine; for the devill at this
tyme preaches to his witches really (if I may so term it) the
doctrine of the infernall pitt, viz., blasphemies against God
and His Son Christ. Among other things, he told them that
they were more happy in him than they could be in God ;
him they saw, but God they could not see; and in mockrie
of Christ and His holy ordinance of the Sacrament of His
Supper, he gives the sacrament to them, bidding them eat it,
and to drink it in remembrance of himself. This villan
was assisting to Sathan in this action, and in preaching.’’°
Lord Fountainhall describing the same assembly of witches
relates that the Devil ‘“‘ adventured to give them the com-
munion or holy sacrament, the bread was like wafers, the
drink was sometimes blood, sometimes black moss-water.
He preached and most blasphemously mocked them, if they
offered to trust in God who left them miserable in the world,
and neither He nor His Son Jesus Christ ever appeared to
them when they called upon Him, as he had, who would not
cheat them.’’31

It will be remembered that Deliverance Hobbs, who
acknowledged she had been a witch, confessed that ‘“ she
was at a Witch Meeting at Salem Village. . .. And the
said G. B. preached to them, and such a Woman was their
Deacon, and there they had a Sacrament.” Abigail Williams
also related how “‘ the Witches had a Sacrament that day at
an house in the Village, and that they had Red Bread and Red
Drink.” According to Madeleine Bavent, the Host at the
mass of blasphemies was red—L’hostie ressemblait aux
ndtres ; cependant elle me paraissait toujours rougeatre et
sans image®?—and there are many references to the red wine
of the chalice. The Abbé Guibourg even mixed fresh blood


848 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


in the chalice. There can be no doubt that at Salem the
traditional rites of the hideous black worship were precisely
observed, allowing, of course, that it was a Protestant Com-
munion and not Holy Mass which was the model of their
hellish liturgy. These practices must have been carefully
handed down and taught to the New England representatives
of the witch society.

It is impossible that the several witnesses should have so
exactly invented the details of these old occult ceremonies
and the ancient cryptic rites from their own imaginations.
They had obviously been present more than once at the witch
sacrament, and assisted at the Sabbat orgy. That a coven
of witches did indeed exist in Salem is proved beyond all
question, and it is, I think, equally certain that George
Burroughs was the grand-master, Bridget Bishop and Martha
Carrier, high officials. Whether any other of those whom
justice seized and hanged upon the accusation of the afflicted
children were members of the coven seems wholly uncertain.
We have not sufficient evidence to decide. On the other hand,
it is plain that the majority at least of those who were
executed died upon a false charge, and that they had no
knowledge at all of the sorceries which were so secretly
practised in their midst. The existence of this coven at
Salem has not, I believe, been before recognized. It throws
fresh light upon many of the proceedings, whilst in no way
absolving the magistrates and ministers from the guilt of
having shed much innocent blood.

The story of Witchcraft in America is, so to speak, singularly
concise and compact. That there should be indiscriminate
prosecution was inevitable. The Genevan ministers had
neither the spiritual nor the practical knowledge necessary
to deal with so dark and difficult a task. Naturally they
blundered woefully and abundantly. As in England, their
mistakes have provided the sceptic and the materialist with
many a text for trite moralizing and meditation upon the
ignorance of our forefathers.

At the beginning of the eighteenth century Witchcraft was
little in evidence in the New World. The venom, however,
only lay perdu, and waited its time, as is shown by the fact
that in 1848 it burst forth with new vigour and force under
the guise of Spiritism in the Fox family at Hydesville,


NEW ENGLAND 349


Catherine and Margaretta Fox are universally regarded as
the originators of the modern manifestations of Spiritism,
and it is not without significance that in November, 1850,
whilst Margaretta Fox was staying at West Troy in the house
of a Mr. Bouton, an angry and outraged crowd surrounded
the place uttering threats and imprecations against the
“unholy witch-woman within.’’*? Deplorable indeed as is
the violence of such demonstrations, and altogether to be
condemned, these people had exactly hit upon and were
vociferating the truth.


NOTES TO CHAPTER IV


1 T. Hutchinson, History of Massachusetts, 2 vols., 1764-7, Boston, I, p. 436.

2 Calendar Stale Papers, Domestic, 1603-10, 117.

3 A staff or stick used in some way about a bed. Dr. Johnson has: ‘A
wooden pin stuck anciently on sides of the bed-stead to hold the cloaths from
slipping on either side.” It may also be explained as a staff used to smooth
down the sheets and bedclothes. Or; the stout sticks or staves laid (loose)
across the bed-stocks in old wooden bedsteads to support the bedding (pre-
cursors of the modern laths). In Scotland these were called bed-rungs, in
some parts of England bed-sticks. The bed-staff often served as an improvised
weapon. There are innumerable allusions. E.g. Brome, The City Wit, 8vo,
1653, IV, 3, where Crasy says to Josina: “‘ Bastinado him soundly,” and she
replies: ‘‘ If I do not make him an example . . . say there is no virtue in
Cudgels and Bedstaves.”’ In Shadwell’s comedy, The Virtuoso, 4to, 1676, the
coxcomb Sir Samuel Harty uses the phrase (I, 1) “in the twinkling of a Bed-
staff,’’ and explains the words as ‘‘ a witty way I have of expressing my self.”

4 Pepys, Monday, 15 June, 1663, writes: ‘‘ Both at and after dinner we
had great discourses of the nature and power of spirits, and whether they can
animate dead bodies ; in all which my Lord Sandwich is very scepticall. He
says the greatest warrants that ever he had to believe any, is the present
appearing of the Devil in Wiltshire, much of late talked of, and, they say, very
true; but my Lord observes, that though he do answer to any tune that
you will play to him upon another drum, yet one tune he tried to play and
could not; which makes him suspect the whole; and I think it is a good
argument.”’ Surely rather superficial on the other hand. In Shadwell’s
comedy The Humourists, produced in the winter of 1670, 4to, 1671, Act IV,
Drybob says: ‘‘ If this be the Devil that touch’d me, I don’t like his sly Tricks
to fright a Man thus; ’would he would be as civil as the Wiltshire Devil was ;
and beat a Drum, to give a Man notice where he is, that I might avoid him.”

5 Two or three details concerning the matter which are omitted by Glanvill
will be found in the report of the case published in Mercurius Publicus. Com-
prising the Sum of all Affairs now in agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. . . . From Thursday, April 16th, to Thursday, April 23rd, 1663 ;
and The Kingdoms Intelligencer of The Affairs now in Agitation in England,
Scotland, and Ireland... . . From Monday, April 20th, to Monday, April 27th,
1663. It may be remembered that Addison’s comedy, The Drummer, or, The
Haunted House, produced at Drury Lane in March, 1715-6, which I have seen
acted with good applause and have enjoyed more on the boards than in the
reading, was largely founded upon the story of Tedworth. The play was
published anonymously in 1716, and later reissued with a long preface by
Steele in 1722. Although at first not wholly successful it won its way into
popular favour. During the eighteenth century it was frequently translated


350 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


into foreign languages, by Destouches as Le Tambour Nocturne in Nouveau
Recueil Choisi, 1733, Vol. V, not acted until 1762 ; by Descazeaux Desgranges
as La Prétendue Veuve ou l’Epoux Magicien, 1736; J. C. Gottsched as Das
Gespenst mit der Trummel in Die deutsche Schaubiihne, 1742, Vol. II; and by
L. A. V. Gottsched under the same title, Hin Lutspiel des Herrn Addisons nach
dem Franzésischen des Herrn Destouches iibersetzt, in Neue Sammlung von
Schauspielen, 1764, Vol. V. i 4 (

6 The Epworth Phenomena, to which are appended certain psychic experi-
ences recorded by John Wesley in the pages of his Journal. Collected by
Dudley Wright, London, 1917. ’

7 W. T. Stead, Real Ghost Stories, 1897. Reprinted from the Christmas and
New Year’s numbers of The Review of Reviews, 1891-2, Part II, c. 11,
“Willington Mill.”

8 Daily Telegraph, 5 November, 1883.

® The Peterborough Advertiser for January, 1892, and the Echo, January,
1892, have independent accounts. ;

10 The journal Annales des Sciences Psychiques quotes from a Turin paper
of November, 1900.

11 La Tribuna, 5 and 21 March, 1905.

12 Eg. Ralph Shirley, Editor of The Occult Review, in his Notes for the Month,
January, 1918, The Poltergeist, a thoughtful study of a difficult and baffling
subject.

13 Canonized, Whit Sunday, 31 May, 1925.

14 Le Curé d’ Ars, par V Abbé Alfred Monnin, 2 vols., Paris, 1861; 19th ed.
Paris, 1907 ; translated London, 1862. Also The Life of the Blessed Curéd’ Ars,
From the French of the Abbé Alfred Monnin, with a Preface by Henry Edward
Manning, Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster, N.D. (c. 1890). Le Bienhereux
Jean Vianney, par Joseph Vianney, English translation, 1906. Béatification
du Bienhereux Jean Vianney, Belley, 1907. Le Curéd’Ars, Mello, in Le Siécle,
Paris, 1905. There is a recent translation (1924) of the Abbé Monnin’s great
work, with a supplementary chapter upon the Beatification and Canonization
of 8. Jean Baptiste Vianney, by Father B. Wolferstan, s.J.

15 Thomas Morton, 1564-1659, Bishop successively of Chester, Lichfield
and of Durham. Amongst his many works, some of which are bitterly
polemical such as the futile Hncounter against M. Parsons, London, 4to, 1610 ;
an ungracious Causa Regia... aduersus R. Bellarminum, 1620; the
scurrilous Antidotum aduersus Ecclesie Romane de merito proprie dicto ex
condigno uenenum, Cambridge, 4to, 1637; is A Defence of the Innocence of the
Three Ceremonies of the Church of England, viz., the Surplice, Crosse after
Baptisme, and Kneeling at the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament, London,
4to, 1609.

16 John Bridgeman, 1577-1652, appointed Bishop of Chester 15 March,
1619, and instituted on 9 May. His scandalous leniency in dealing with
Nonconformists and Puritans brought a sharp and well-deserved rebuke from
his Metropolitan of Canterbury, after which he seems to have awakened to his
duty for a while. In 1620 he suspended Thomas Paget, a few years later John
Angier, and in 1631 Samuel Eaton of Wirral, all notorious and stubborn
dissentients.

17 Richard Neile, 1562-1640, Archbishop of York, having previously held
in succession the sees of Rochester, Lichfield and Coventry, Durham, and
Winchester. He was a close ally of Archbishop Laud, but no bigot, although
a strict disciplinarian owing to the anarchical state in which he found the
Northern Province. He was an organizer rather than a scholar.

18 Heclesiasticus, xlvi. 23, is convincing on the point. However, it is only
fair to say that S. Basil (In Isaiam, VIII, 218) and S. Gregory of Nyssa
(De pythonissa ad Theodos. episc. Epistola) hold that it was the Devil who in
the phantom guise of Samuel deceived Saul.

1° History of Massachusetts Bay, 1828, II, p. 55.

20 G. L. Burr, Narratives of the Witchcraft Cases, 1914, p. 417.


21 The Wonders of the Invisible World, “ An Hortatory and Necessary
Address.”’


NEW ENGLAND 351


22 Another sister, Sarah Cloyse, was accused and committed for trial.

33 She was the daughter of Richard Hollingsworth, and inherited his wealth.

24 The Rev. William Bentley, D.p., in his Description of Salem, gives full
details of this incident, and has a considerable account of the English family.

25 G. L. Burr, Narratives of the Witchcraft Cases, p. 418.
scope T. B. Howell, VI, p. 660. J. Hutchinson, History of Massachusetts Bay,

Deol.

27 Cotton Mather, Wonders of the Invisible World, ‘‘ The Tryad of G. B. I.”

28 J. Hutchinson, zbid., II, pp. 37 sqgq.

29 Lord Fountainhall, Decisions, Edinburgh, 1759, I, p. 14.

30 Robert Law, Memorialls (ed. Sharpe), Edinburgh, 1818, p. 145.

31 Fountainhall, Decisions, I, p. 14.

32 Gérres, La Mystique Divine; French translation by Charles Sainte-Foi,
Deuxiéme ed., Paris, 1862, V, p. 230.

33 History of Modern Spiritualism, 4th Edition, New York, 1870, p. 88.


CHAPTER V
FRANCE


Tue Gauls were from very early times notorious in the
ancient world for their sorceries and superstitions. Justin
tells us that when Brennus was invading Macedonia and
Greece in 280 B.c., and during the following year had even
penetrated to Delphi, his expedition was made under the
conduct of the sacred birds, that is to say, no important step
was taken unless the omens had first been consulted and
found favourable, for—adds the historian—the Gauls are
more skilled than all other nations in the arts of augury and
divination.1 Cesar, also, remarks upon the native super-
stitions and the human sacrifices which were offered by the
Druids, without whom it was not lawful to perform these
horrid rites.2~ Pomponius Mela, again, the geographer,
writing a century later, speaks of the Gauls as proud and
superstitious, a people upon whose altars formerly bled
human victims, whose wise men, the Druids, instruct their
disciples in astrology, the will of the Heavens, and teach
them occult lore in secret caves or in the very heart of some
thick forest where is their sanctuary.

A certain class of Druids, known as the Ovates or magicians,
made prophecy, oneirocriticism, and the reading of omen their
special province, and it was their duty to foretell the future
by the inspection of the entrails at a solemn sacrifice, or by
the winged flight of birds across the sky. Upon the Isle of
Sein (in the department of Finisterre) was a famous oracle,
whose responses were interpreted by nine Druidesses, vestals,
called Gallicene, who were believed to have the power of
raising storms and quelling tempests, of changing themselves
into the shape of any animal, of healing all manners of disease,
of predicting man’s destiny.

It was at the commencement of the fifth century that
the Franks began to occupy Gaul, and the most ancient

352


FRANCE 8538


document of Frankish legislation, the Salic Law (Lex salica),*®
was reduced to a written form, revised and finally sanctioned,
under Clovis (born 466 a.p.), who succeeded his father,
Childeric, as King of the Salic Franks in 481, was baptized by
S. Remigius of Reims on Christmas-day, 496, and died at Paris,
27 November, 511. As was the custom, the Salic Law inflicts
various fines for Witchcraft of which all had a most whole-
some dread.6 Seventy-two sous and half a golden coin for
launching a mortal curse or fashioning the witch’s-knot ; the
same for defaming a man as a wizard or accusing anyone of
having assisted at the Sabbat; one hundred and eighty-
seven sous for branding a woman as a witch, unless proof were
forthcoming ; two hundred sous for any witch convicted of
having feasted upon human flesh.

The Ripuarian laws ordained that the magician should be
mulcted in wehrgeld, that is to say he must give ample
pecuniary compensation for any harm to limb or to property
which he had done. In doubtful cases he might clear himself
by a solemn oath with six compurgators, men of substance.’

The code of the Visigoths, which was to some extent
founded on Roman law, punished the wizard who had killed
any person by spell or incantation with death ; Witchcraft,
not proven to have taken life, was rewarded with scourging
or slavery. The formularies show us the belief of the
Visigoths in the sixth and seventh when they were still
masters of the southern provinces of Gaul: ‘‘ Workers of
evil and those who raise tempests, those who are said to
destroy the vines or harvest by their incantations, those
who by the invocation of devils trouble their neighbours or
who sacrifice at night to the Demon whom in their wickedness
they call upon with impious prayers; any such person
being found guilty by the judge shall receive two hundred
lashes in public ; his head shall be ignominously shaven and
he shall be paraded through ten villages near the place where
he dwells that his disgrace may serve as a meet example and
a deterrent to others.’’®

Ecclesiastical sentence was also launched against the
witch. The offender, if a person of quality, was to be publicly
excommunicated and thrust out from the Church. If of
humbler rank or a slave he was to be beaten, that haply by
blows he might learn wisdom.?®


354 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


The Council of Elusa (Eauze) in 555, the fortieth year of
the reign of King Childebert I and Clotaire, prescribed
scourging for serfs who bewitched drinking-horns. The
Council of Narbonne, thirty-four years later, spoke of
sorcerers as carages, augurs, and complained that the South
was overrun by these diviners, who privily introduced them-
selves into houses and by their skill and address were gaining
a foothold on all sides. The Bishops ordered that they shall
be denounced, when, after meet punishment they will be sold
as slaves.

In 578 Queen Fredegonde lost one of her sons, who died of
dysentery, upon which the courtiers promptly accused the
general Mummol, whom she hated, of having killed the
Prince by witchcraft. It was reported that he consulted
secretly with several beldames of ill repute. These were at
once arrested and under torture confessed that they had
long been witches, that the Prince had been killed to preserve
Mummol’s own life as it was written one of the two must
perish. Some were burned at the stake, others drowned,
others broken on the wheel. Mummol was arrested, and
put to the question. Even in the midst of the most exquisite
agonies he uttered no incriminating word. They tore his
nails from hands and feet with hot pincers and lacerated the
tenderest parts of the human frame, but he endured all in
silence. At last, when his head was about to be severed from
his body, the Queen with cruel mercy granted him life.
Accordingly he was placed in a rude cart to be conveyed to
Bordeaux, but on the way he expired, either owing to his
sufferings, or perhaps swiftly assassinated at the royal
command.

The sudden loss of two other children of Chilperic and
Fredegonde at once gave ground for new accusations of
sorcery, in which were implicated Clovis, the son of the King
by a former wife, this Prince’s mistress, and her mother, who
when placed on the rack avowed her complicity with Clovis,
that their Witchcraft had caused the deaths, and indeed
everything she was asked. The infamous Fredegonde
promptly obtained her husband’s consent to the execution
of Clovis, who was poignarded, it being given out that he
had taken his own life. His paramour was secretly put away,
and her mother, who when released from the torture had


FRANCE 355


immediately denied all that was wrung from her by pain,
was burned alive, precautions being taken that she should be
rendered incapable of uttering a word. This series of crimes,
although alleged to be justice done to murderers and
magicians, had in fact a deep political motive. For Frede-
gonde, for all her pretended zeal against sorcerers, was
always surrounded by a pack of witches, in whose powers
she trusted for supernatural protection. And so, a few years
before, when King Sigebert defeated Chilperic, and gaining
possession of Paris was on his way to invest his foe at
Tournai whither the vanquished monarch fled from the
capital, Fredegonde had sent two of her servants, armed with
charmed knives named scramasax whose venomed blades
were consecrated to the Demon, and these fellows, on
some pretext gaining audience of Sigebert at Vitri, stabbed
him there in 575.1°

Among the black calumnies which have stained the memory
of Fredegonde’s rival, Brunehaut (Brunehilde), who was
horribly executed in 613, are charges of Witchcraft, especially
that of eunuchizing by a malefic spell her grandson Thierry II,
so that he was unable to consummate his marriage with
Ermenberge. This sterile charm, nouer l’aiguillette, was
always regarded with a particular abhorrence, and the
accusation of its employment occurs again and again in the
witch-trials.14

It will be seen that the first dynasty of French kings was
continually legislating against witches, and Childeric III in
742 appeals to the Bishops to help him suppress all kinds of
divination, sacrifices to demons, human sacrifices, which were
still covertly offered, impious worship of the dead, any
communication with spirits, the brewing of love-philtres and
any other devilish charms and ritual.1”

Briefly to summarize it may be said that during the
Merovingian period the law punished the practice of magic
by heavy fines, such as were usual in the case of other grave
offences; the Church strongly opposed her authority and
influence to sorcery or indeed any similar superstitions ; from
time to time accusations of Witchcraft were brought by and
against persons in high places, and the death-penalty with
torture was then almost invariably inflicted, but it is strongly
to be suspected that such prosecutions were largely political.


356 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


A Council of Soissons in 744, whilst Pepin le Bref was still
Mayor of the Palace and had not yet assumed the royal title, **
strictly charges the Bishops to be on the watch against any
creeping in of sorcery mingled with pagan rites, such observ-
ances as might yet prevail in country districts and open the
door to an influx of evil. Under Charlemagne a law was
passed forbidding any consultation of wizards, any interpreta-
tion of dreams or taking of omens; enchanters, diviners,
mediums, those who brew philtres, evokers of storm or hail,
those who tie the witches’ knot, are to be shunned. Let them
amend their ways or they will be cast into a close prison.
Fairy trees, pagan monoliths, haunted wells, the rendezvous
of witches, are to be destroyed and demolished utterly.14

In view of later ages the code of Charlemagne, imprison-
ment and a season for repentance, seems exceptionally mild,
but this attitude towards magic was very short-lived.
Evidently at first under the Carlovingians the full horror
and blasphemy of Witchcraft were not realized. But in the
days of Louis le Debonnaire (le Pieux), son of Charlemagne
and Hildegarde, who succeeded his father in 814, very serious
consideration was devoted to the alarming spread of sorcery.
King Louis himself, being eminent for his holiness of life,
regarded these matters more deeply perhaps than the men of
action and conquest whose thoughts were, perhaps, elsewhere.
A Council of Paris in 829 addressed a very solemn appeal to
this sovereign to assist by the secular arm the Church in the
crusade against Witchcraft. As it has been well said1* that
to some extent the provisions of all future French ordinances
are contained in this canon it is undoubtedly worth detailed
examination. The Fathers formally rehearse various Biblical
ordinances dealing with the necromancer and the witch, and
continue to say that there yet exist certain offscourings of
heathendom, magicians, diviners, sorcerers, poisoners, false
seers, enchanters, and interpreters of dreams, whom the
Divine Law ordains shall be punished with the last severity.
For it is written: ‘‘ A man, or woman, in whom there is a
pythonical or divining spirit, dying let them die” (Lev. xx.
27), and again, “‘ Wizards thou shalt not suffer to live”
(Exodus, xxii. 18). It is certain, and indeed common know-
ledge, that by enchantments and demoniacal charms the
brains of many men have been so disordered by love-philtres,


FRANCE 357


medicined food, amulets, that they have run mad, ignorant
of their own shame. Witches can raise tempests with their
incantations, send the hail-storm, foretell future events,
carry off fruit and milk from one to give it to another, and
accomplish the strangest prodigies. Wherefore the guilty,
when found, be they men or women, must be sharply and
cogently punished by the Prince of the land, seeing that they
have arrived at such a point of wickedness as to transfer their
allegiance to Satan.16

The civil power once invoked was not slow to act, and
recognizing, as the Statute says, that it was the duty of
Kings to slay the wicked, Regis ministerium est impios de
terra perdere, death was adjudged the punishment of the
sorcerer and witch, and not merely of the prime agents alone
but, by a far-sweeping enactment, of all who consulted or
visited them. So ordains a Capitulary of Charles the Bald,
promulgated at Kiersy-sur-Oise in 878. ‘‘ We have learned,”
he says, “‘ that warlocks and witches have established them-
selves in divers places within this our realm, that their evil
charms have devoted many to sickness and even to death,
and since, as the Saints have written, it is the duty of Kings
to slay the wicked, not to suffer wizards and poisoners to
live, we enjoin therefore that all and any such shall be sought
out and taken. If they be found guilty, whether men or
whether women, let them die the death as law and justice
demand. And not only the principals in this abomination,
but also those who consort with or consult them, shall pay
the penalty in order that the very memory of so heinous a
crime may be utterly abolished and uprooted from our land.’’!”
In cases where the accused avowed innocence, and the
evidence was not conclusive, resort was had to the Judgement
of God, an ordeal already in practice and by Charles the Bald
to be applied in witch-trials as a test. There were very many
methods of the Judgement of God, but in the case of Witch-
craft the ordeal by water was most popular and considered
the most convincing. It was, of course, granted for any
crime, but ere long this particular test became specialized,
so to speak. Before the immersion of the accused the water,
whether an artificial reservoir, a pool, a running stream, was
solemnly blessed by a priest.1®

The usual ordeals were also allowed, for example that of the


358 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


hot iron, when the accused picked up and even held for a few
moments a bar of red-hot metal. His hand was then swathed
in bandages which were sealed, and if on the third day there
was no trace of burning he was innocent. Much the same
kind of proof was required in the ordeal of boiling water,
when the arm had to be plunged in a steaming caldron
suspended over a fire, and a ring or some other object
recovered from the bottom of the vessel. If the arm was
whole in three days’ time and showed no scalding then had
the suspect proved that he was free from guilt. There were
several Judgements of God of the same nature, such as the
solemn oaths upon Holy Relics, the walking barefoot with the
eyes blindfolded among red-hot ploughshares set at uneven
distances,!® the going through the heart of blazing pyres of
wood whereby the Vallombrosian S. Peter Igneus won his
triumph,?° and, most long-lived of all, the single combat
or duel.??

The chronicles of the tenth century are full of the accounts
of miraculous happenings, and an epidemic terror seemed to
seize Christendom since numbers of fanatical preachers
appeared in France and Italy loudly proclaiming that the
thousand years prophesied in the Apocalypse of S. John as
the term of the world’s duration were about to expire, that
Antichrist was at hand and the Son of Man would shortly
appear in the clouds to judge the ungodly and the righteous.

The Church strove to stem these superstitions, which none
the less spread rapidly among the deluded people. The scene
of the last judgement was expected to be at Jerusalem and
as the year 1000 drew nigh the number of pilgrims proceeding
eastward to await the coming of the Lord in that city was so
great as to be compared to a desolating invasion. Most of the
wayfarers had sold all their possessions before leaving Europe,
and were supporting themselves on the proceeds. Buildings
were allowed to fall into decay. It was thought idle to repair
these when the end of time was so near. Many even deliber-
ately pulled down their houses, as shelters for which they had
no further use. Persons of all ranks of life and every calling,
forsaking the one his castle, the other his plough, leaving arms,
counting-house, merchandise, tillage, vineyards, made their
way in mighty companies to the Holy City, singing psalms as
they went, their eyes fixed in ecstasy upon the heavens,


FRANCE 359


which every moment they expected to see open revealing the
Son of God in all His glory.

During the thousandth year the pilgrims increased, and for
the most part they were stricken with abject terror as with
a plague. A thunderstorm fiung them all on their knees in
mid-March. They shuddered as they heard the crash and roll
of the elements, looking with blanched faces to see the graves
yawn and the dead arise. At Jerusalem itself the scenes of
confusion baffled all description. However slight an alarm,
and the whole Christian population rushed into the streets, to
weep and lament, to intone penitential hymns and canticles,
and pray with increasing fervour. Enthusiasts kept up the
flame of frenzy. It was firmly believed that the powers of
evil were having full fling before their final subjection, and the
legends of demons abound. In many countries the legislation
against witches became more and more severe,—thus as early
as the reign of Ramiro I, King of Aragon (842-50), several
Jewish astrologers were burned alive, and, in Westphalia in
914 a whole coven of witches was sent to the stake,22—so
although documentary evidence as to trials for sorcery under
the later Carlovingians is singularly scanty, this is perhaps
because the people, frantic with superstitious fears, may
often have taken the law into their own hands.

That the forces of evil should particularly trouble the
strongholds, the monasteries, was only to be expected, and
when we have liberally discounted such exaggerations as
there may be, enough remains to prove very extraordinary
and very hideous manifestations endeavouring to destroy
the peace of the cloister. Blessed Peter the Venerable (1092-
1156) has several accounts of diabolic invasions of Cluny,
when cases of actual possessior. occurred among the monks.
He also speaks of a certain Count of Macon who acquired most
evil notoriety as a magician, and who, the peasants believed,
was eventually carried off by the Demon. S. Bernard, the
glory of Clairvaux (1090-1153), was famous for the power
of his exorcisms, and healed many who were afflicted.

In 1022, during the reign of Robert the Good, a band of
Manichees was discovered at Orleans and sent to the stake
for their sorceries. They used to meet on certain nights in a
lonely and deserted house, whither they repaired each with a
lantern in his hand. There after certain loathsome ceremonies


360 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


they chanted a litany invoking Satan and other devils under
obscene and abominable names, extinguishing meanwhile
the lights they carried, and giving themselves over to the most
revolting debaucheries. Sometimes they sacrificed a child,
making a paste of the blood and portions of the flesh, which
they moulded into wafers to serve in their blasphemous
parodies of Holy Mass. It was in vain that learned priests
and doctors strove to convert them as they lay in prison.
Unhappily certain clerics were of the number of these
wretches, and among them, it is said, one Stephen who had
formerly been the confessor of Queen Constance.??

On Holy Saturday, 1066, Evrard, Archbishop of Treves,
expired suddenly at the very Font of his Cathedral, as clad in
full pontificals he was solemnly baptizing the catechumens
according to the rite of that day. It was whispered that a
number of witches had fashioned a wax figure of the prelate,
which they had bribed an apostate priest to baptize by the
Bishop’s name, and having stuck it full of pins melted it at
a slow fire, so that he died as the last drops ran away.
Bernard, Duke of Gascony, was supposed to have been slain
by a similar spell in 1013, and in 1178 Stephen, Archbishop
of Bourges, was alleged to have fallen a victim to the same
sorcery.?°

It is hardly surprising to find that Berengarius of Tours
(circa 999-1088), who seems to have held very many erroneous
beliefs concerning such matters as the spiritual power,
marriage, the baptism of children,?* although his most
notorious heresy attacked the Holy Eucharist, was reputed
to be a sorcerer,””? and strange stories were told of his necro-
mantic powers, traditional stories indeed, some of which we
recognize when repeated in connexion with Cornelius Agrippa.
So early was heresy regarded as involving Witchcraft.

In 1030 we hear the whisper of a scandal concerning a great
prelate, Poppo (1016-47), son of Margrave Leopold of
Austria and Archbishop of Treves. He is said to have become
madly enamoured of a religious, but when a pair of buskins
she had worked for him were worn by another ecclesiastic he
also was devoured with passion for the same nun. Suspicion
being aroused it was found that a potent charm was sewn in
the silk lining of her gift. This was burned, and the offending
sister expelled from her convent, which shortly afterwards


FRANCE 361


was given over to a congregation of monks. In 1074 the
citizens of Cologne hurled from their city walls a witch, who
was found guilty of having driven certain persons lunatic by
her spells and drugs.

In France itself during the twelfth and thirteen centuries
the witch-trials are very few, and in truth they are far from
numerous in other countries, which is largely to be attributed
to the unsettled state of Europe, the quarrels of kings, cam-
paigns, the Crusades. During the reign of Alexander III
(1159-81) a priest of the Venetian diocese of Aquileia in
Grado (Venice) was accused of having consulted an astrologer
and with him invoked a demon to declare where was hidden
some precious vessel which had been stolen from his church.
The Patriarch of Aquileia deprived the offender of all exercise
of sacerdotal power in perpetuum, but the Supreme Pontiff,
although denouncing the sortilege and evocation as a heinous
sin, changed the sentence to suspension for a period of two
years. 78

It was commonly bruited that witches had ensorcelled
Ingeburga, sister of Canute VI, King of Denmark, a lady
whom Philip Augustus of France married in 1198, but only
almost immediately to repudiate, a measure approved by an
assembly of complaisant Bishops and barons, and sternly
forbidden by Innocent III, who therefor in 1198 placed
‘France under an interdict.

Frederick II in his Constitution of 1224 lays down that
heretics convicted by an ecclesiastical court shall, on imperial
authority, be put to death by fire, auctoritate nostra ignis
iudicio concremandos, and in 1280, his son, Henry, afterwards
Henry VI, decreed that all sorcerers must likewise suffer
death. Heresy and sorcery were looked upon as one and the
same crime so far as prohibition and punishment extended.

Gregory IX by his Bulls of 18, 20, and 22 April, 1233,%°
solemnly and officially established the Order of Preachers as
the Pontifical Inquisitors for all dioceses of France to check
the anarchy and ravages of the heretics. The office of
Inquisitor was not, however, by any means confined to the
one Order, for we often meet with Franciscan delegates,
Cistercians, Canons Regular, as also secular priests.*1

The Inquisitors at once began to take cognizance of Witch-
craft, and indeed it was impossible that they should not have


362 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


done so seeing that sorcery and heresy were essentially inter-
mingled. Thus a hag of the sect of the Cathari, who belonged
to Mont-Aimé in the Champagne district, was arrested with
a whole gang of her co-religionists by Robert le Bougre, a.
Bulgarian (Catharist) convert to Christianity, and subse-
quently a Dominican. The accused were charged with
having employed the aid of demons as well as with their
particular heresy, and this crone seems to have been the
officer of the coven. On 29 May, 1239, about one hundred and
eighty persons whose trial had begun and concluded within a
week were consigned to the flames at Montwimer. Complaints,
however, were lodged protesting against so summary a
process; Robert was recalled to Rome, deposed from his
office, and confined within a monastery for life.**

At Toulouse, the hot-bed of Catharan evil, in 1275 an
Inquisitor, Hugues de Baniols, gave judicial sentence of death
by fire on Angéle de la Barthe, a beldame of some sixty years,
who confessed to having had intercourse with an evil spirit
from which conjunction she brought forth a monster whom
she nourished with the flesh of infants, slain by her or dug up
from their graves in remote churchyards.**

It must be remembered that all the great contemporary
Schoolmen, Blessed Albertus Magnus, S. Thomas Aquinas,
S. Bonaventura, the Venerable Duns Scotus, and many names
of lesser, but yet no inglorious, fame, admitted the possibility
of carnal intercourse between demons and human beings.
This is also accepted by Suarez ; the Salamanca theologians ;
S. Alphonsus de Liguori, Charles-René Billuart, o.p.; Dom
Dominic Schram, 0.s.B.; Benedict XIV, and by such later
writers as Gorres, Bizouard (Rapports de Vhomme avec le
dimon), Gougenot de Mousseaux (Les hauts phénoménes de
la magie).

It was at the beginning of the fourteenth century that all
Christendom, from Great Britain to Cyprus, was convulsed
by the tragic catastrophe of the Knights Templars, than
which, it has been said, history knows no more formidable
trial, nor has the final verdict been given even to-day.

Immediately after the deliverance of Jerusalem, the
Crusaders, considering their vows fulfilled, returned in a body
to their homes. But the defence of this precarious conquest,
surrounded as it was by Mohammedan neighbours, remained.


FRANCE 363


Accordingly in 1118 two French Knights, Hugues de Payens
and Geoffroy de St. Omer founded a monastic-military Order
to defend the Christian kingdom and to protect poor pilgrims
visiting the Holy Land. Nine companions bound themselves
by perpetual vows in the presence of the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, and Baldwin II accepting their services, assigned
them a portion of his palace adjoining the Temple, whence
their title, ‘‘ Pauvres Chevaliers du Temple.” Hugues de
Payens shortly afterwards travelled to Europe to obtain
recruits, and before long an immense number of novices
responded to his enthusiasm. At the Council of Troyes (1128)
the Knights Templars adopted the Rule of S. Benedict, as
recently reformed with great vigour by the Cistercians. They
undertook not only the three solemn vows, besides the
crusader’s vow, but also the austere regulations concerning
the chapel, the refectory, and the dormitory. They further
adopted the white Cistercian habit adding thereto a red cross.
The newly formed Order comprised four ranks of brethren :
the Knights, equipped like the heavy cavalry of the Middle
Ages; the Serjeants, who formed the light cavalry; the
Farmers, entrusted with the administration of temporals ;
and the Chaplains, who alone were priests ministering to the
spiritual needs of the brethren. The Order, combining the
two absorbing passions of the Middle Ages, religious fervour
and chivalry, rapidly grew in popularity. Ecclesiastical and
lay authorities heaped favours upon the Templars ; the Popes
took them under their immediate protection, exempting them
from all other jurisdiction, episcopal or secular ; their estates
were free from all taxation, assimilated to church land ; their
monasteries, chapels, and cemeteries could not be placed
under an interdict. Before long the Templars had com-
manderies in every State. In France they formed no less
than eleven bailiwicks, subdivided into more than forty-two
commanderies. The Order, in spite of the articles of the
original rule requiring a probationary period, began to make
immediate use of recruits. All that was demanded from a
new member was blind obedience, he had to declare himself
for ever ‘“serf et esclave de la maison.” To prove his
sincerity he was subjected to a secret test, the nature of which
was never officially declared. The Knights were largely
drawn from the ranks of the higher nobility many of whom


364 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


brought vast possessions to the general coffers, and before
many years had passed the Order, which began in simplest
poverty, was wealthy almost beyond imagination. To it
belonged at one time more than nine thousand estates, the
accumulated revenues of which in common with hoards of
other treasure were laid up in the Temples at London and
Paris. Princes, also, and private individuals deposited their
personal property, owing to the solid credit of such bankers.
In Paris the royal treasure was kept in the Temple. It is
hardly to be wondered at that as time went on the Order,
having no superior save the distant authority of the Pope
and enjoying financial power equal to that of any temporal
sovereign, began to make its influence felt throughout Europe
and assumed the direction of the Kingdom of Jerusalem,
at best an unstable monarchy and insecure, which after many
chances and changes finally came to an end in 1291. Excessive
pride is an accusation so continually and so generally brought
against the Templars that the truth of the charges can hardly
be doubted, whilst popular proverbs of the day such as “‘to
drink like a Templar” and ‘‘ Avoid the Templar’s kiss,”
although perhaps no evidence in themselves, show that the
Order was at least acquiring the common repute of intemper-
ance and luxury. After the Christian power had been
expelled from Palestine, the Grand Master of the Temple,
Jacques de Molay (1244-1314) fixed his residence at Cyprus
where he kept almost imperial state, and it seemed as though
the Order would form a kind of independent and international
aristocratic republic.

It is now necessary briefly to inquire into the peculiar
doctrines and cult of the Templars, who were asserted by their
opponents to be secretly Mohammedans, if not devil-
worshippers, and addicted to the darkest vices. It is, I
think, idle to deny that the charges made against the Order
were in the main well founded, but it must also be acknow-
ledged that the degree of culpability varied in different
branches, and the majority of members of certain preceptories
may have been to some extent ignorant of these transgressions
against faith and morals, the secret and genuine doctrine of
the Templars not having been communicated to them in its
entirety. Certain preceptories were, in fact, possibly only
novice-houses (although not known as such save to the higher


FRANCE 365


officials), the sojourn of neophytes and those members whom
it was not thought fit to initiate further into the ultimate
mysteries.

It must be borne in mind that the Christians in Palestine at
the time of the Crusades were often affected by their contact
and intercourse with the religious systems of the East,
notably with Gnostic bodies professing a distorted form of
Christianity, as also by their constant intermingling with
their Mohammedan neighbours. Nor in the case of these
quasi-Christian sects was there any such antagonism between
themselves and the Mohammedans as is usually supposed ;
in fact, they often borrowed ideas from the Saracens and
the Turk.

The Templars had been formed in this atmosphere, and the
intimacy of their associations with the Assassins and with
other sects which carried on a form of the ancient Gnostic
tradition under the veneer of Mohammedanism is fully
established. The Templars, in fact, were Gnostic heretics,
dualists, whose beliefs had developed on the lines of the
Luciferians. They worshipped not only a Supreme Deity,
the Creator of Spirit and all good, yet who was, however,
supposed to be unapproachable by man and inaccessible to
human understanding, but they also acknowledged another
Deity, the author of Matter and all evil, and him they adored
with mystic and peculiar ceremonies.

This lower God was the eldest son of the higher God.
Being at variance with his Father he, the First Born, is
driven from Heaven and creates for himself the world and
man. But the Templars followed the Luciferian doctrine
even to the extreme of blasphemy, and looked upon the
earthly and visible Christ, who was born at Bethlehem and
died on Mount Calvary, as an evil-doer and an impostor, and
in accordance with this notion, at the full initiation of new
members into the Order, Christ was denounced as a false
prophet, and the candidate was called upon to demonstrate
his belief that Christ suffered not for the salvation of man but
on account of His own wickedness.

The Templars took as their Patrons S. John Baptist and
S. John the Evangelist, and although the S. John from which
they originally derived their title was undoubtedly S. John
the Almoner, 4 the assumption of the two Patrons throws a


366 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


flood of light upon their secrets. For it is known that the
Templars were very closely connected with the sect of the
Nabatheans, Nasoreans, Mandzans, Sabians, or Johannites
as they were indifferently called, and there is even a
tradition that the Patriarch Theocletes, the sixty-seventh
successor of the Apostle S. John, transmitted in 1118 his
powers as Grand Pontiff to Hugues de Payens, whom he
appointed to follow him.*>

The Mandeans inhabited, and still inhabit, the district
round Bassorah. They hold or held that there are Three
Primeval AZons, one of which, Mana Rabba, the Great
Spirit of Glory, called into existence Hayyé Kadmayé, or
Primal Life, the God whom they adore. S. John Baptist,
the true prophet, was an incarnation of Hibil (Abel), who was
himself an incarnation of Manda d’ Hayye (yva@ors ris Cwis),
who was an emanation from Hayyé Kadmayé. Yishu
M’Shiha, the Jesus of the Christians, was the false Messiah,
and an impostor: His Crucifixion was brought about by the
true Messiah, Anish ’Uthra, the younger brother of Hibil.

Here then we have a very clear and sufficient reason for
the adoption of S. John Baptist as one of the Patrons of the
Templars.

The Order was also very intimately associated with the
Assassins and the Ishmaelites, whose successors the Druzes
still inhabit the Lebanon, the Hauran, and other districts
near Damascus. Their present name is derived as a plural
from Dorazy, who was a Persian at the court of El Hakim
in Egypt, about 1015, but the real founder of the sect was
another Persian, Hamzeh Ibn Ahmed El Hady, who preached
that the mad Fatimite caliph, El Hakim, was an incarnation
of God. After this monarch had been murdered Hamzeh
wrote a treatise to prove that he had only disappeared for a
while to test the faith of his followers, and the ultimate return
of El Hakim is a fundamental of the modern Druze creed.
The prophet of El Hakim, the Deity, is Hamzah-ben-Ali,
who is identical with S. John Baptist. The Druzes recognize
three Apostles of Truth, “the Feet of Wisdom,” S. John the
Evangelist, S. Mark, S. Matthew. They are also spoken of as
heavenly powers, and have passed through many incarnations.
The Gospel of S. John is regarded as the gospel of the “ true
Messiah,” and held in high esteem. It is, of course, wrested


FRANCE 367


and perverted to square with their nightmare Gnosticism,
for the Druzes hold that there was a distinction between
Jesus, the Son of Joseph, and Christ. Christ instructed
Jesus, but Jesus disobeyed Christ and was in consequence
crucified. It would be impertinent to follow them through
all the wild mazes of their fantasies, but the prominence given
to S. John the Evangelist must have particularly brought
this Saint under the notice of the Templars, and there can be
no doubt, I think, that here we have the explanation why
S. John the Evangelist was recognized as Co-Patron of the
Order with S. John Baptist.3¢ In view of the scanty material
at our disposal it would be futile to attempt to demonstrate
the full and direct connexion in belief between the Templars,
the Mandeans, and the Assassins (Druzes), and obviously a
large quantity of evidence has been deliberately destroyed,
but we can at least say that everything points to such a
reciprocality, and it is this corrivation which explains as
nothing else the whole history of the Order, its rise, its
grandeur, and its fall.

These two bodies, the Assassins, or followers of the Sheikh
or Old Man of the Mountains, and the Mandzans or Chris-
tians of S. John, with whom the Templars were in close
connexion, were not Mohammedans but Gnostic sects. The
Assassins actually paid tribute to the Templars, and it is
notorious that the Order murdered the emissaries sent in
1172 by Hassin to Amaury I, King of Jerusalem (1162-74).
These envoys had been commissioned to open negotiations
for Hassin and all his followers to embrace Christianity, with
the proviso that thereby they were released from the tribute
which they paid to the Templars. That the Templars,
presumably doughty champions of the Faith, should so
strongly have objected to the conversion of the Assassins is
extremely significant. It is not impossible that the Assassins
were in some way subordinate to the Mandezans, and the
tradition that the Patriarch Theocletes had invested the
Grand Master of the Templars with his rights and powers,
would seem to be borne out by the fact that the Assassins
were thus paying tribute to the Supreme Head. E

Philip IV of France, surnamed Le Bel, the son of Philip II
and Isabel of Aragon, was born at Fontainebleau in 1268, and
died there 29 November, 1314. He became King 5 October,


368 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


1285, and was consecrated at Reims on the feast of the
Epiphany, 6 January, 1286. He has been accused of being a
free-thinker, which he most certainly was not; for he was
religious, and even made pilgrimages. Yet his attitude
towards ecclesiastical authority was often very reprehensible,
and as King he deemed himself above all justice, human or
divine. He was, in fine, an absolutist in the fullest and most
unfortunate sense of the word. In his proceedings against
the Templars his motives have been pronounced as avarice
and hypocrisy, but this judgement seems altogether too
sweeping. The fact is men do not act from single, but from
mixed motives, and such was the case with Philip Le Bel.
He regarded with suspicion, no doubt, the fortresses and
strongholds which the Templars had scattered here and there
up and down his realm, castles which were very able to give
shelter to malcontent nobles and which might be found
impregnable in war; he looked with a wishful, perhaps a
greedy, eye upon the vast riches of the Order, wealth whose
influence might make many a throne tremble and fall. There
is no doubt he was afraid of the Order, and fear is a bloody
counsellor of kings. None the less, it would seem that he was
profoundly shocked and horrified at the revelations concern-
ing their dark mysteries, which secretly filtered through to
him. Towards the end of the year 1304 or very early in
1305, Philip’s minister, the legist Guillaume de Nogaret, an
unscrupulous politician, which is the worst that can be said
of any man, arrested several Templars, who were conveyed
to Corbeil and strictly questioned, perhaps with torture when
they made the most incriminating confessions. Accordingly,
when King Philip attended the coronation of Clement V
(Bertrand de Got) at Lyons, 14 November, 1805, he hinted
to the Pontiff something of the disorders he had learned.
At first Clement could not believe the charges, as is shown by
his kindly reception of Jacques de Molay, who had been
summoned to a conference at Poitiers in order to consider a
union between the Templars and the Hospitallers, a plan
which the former rejected with scorn and contemptuous pride.
On 14 May, 1307, Philip Le Bel visited the Pope, who was
now suffering from the painful languor which accompanies
chronic ill-health and was continually in the hands of his
physicians. With eager insistence the impetuous monarch


FRANCE 369


pressed Clement to investigate the accusations brought
against the Templars, and when the Grand-Master himself,
becoming aware of the scandals that were being bruited
abroad, loudly demanded an inquiry, the sick Pontiff, beyond
measure weary and distracted by their importunities, reluc-
tant to believe the possibility of such depths of evil, ordered
that the requisite steps should be taken by a Bull of 24
August, 1307.

Guillaume Imbert, the Grand Inquisitor for France, a man
of iron strength and will, next began to move in the matter.
The Templars were suspected of heresy and sorcery and these
crimes fell within the cognizance of the Holy Office, but Frére
Imbert demanded the assistance of the civil power. Letters
were ready on the 14 September, and on 22 September, 1307,
at Maubuisson Philip made Nogaret Keeper of the Seal, and
the same day the Royal Council issued a warrant for the
arrest ofthe Templars. But everything must be wholly secure
for making a decisive move, and accordingly it was not until
the morning of Friday, 13 October, that Jacques de Molay
and his assistant knights were arrested, whilst at the same
time the Templars in Paris were taken and flung into prison.
The chroniclers tell us that at the same hour on the same day
all the Templars in France were seized, and although there is
some exaggeration here there can be no doubt that the blow
fell with instantaneous severity far and wide, so that on
Monday, 16 October, King Philip was able to dispatch letters
to all the sovereigns of Europe, detailing the crimes of the
Order and inciting them to follow his example.’

The exact source whence the immediate denunciation of
the Templars came is uncertain.** Rumour spoke of a
Templar who lay at Toulouse under sentence of death
and who, unloading his bosom of no ordinary guilt, con-
fessed in bitter despair the foul orgies and hideous cere-
monies to a fellow-prisoner named Squin de Florian, or
Esquins de Floriac. This man demanded to be led to the
King, to whom he told the whole story, whereupon Philip
privately incarcerated and questioned other of the religious,
obtaining ample proof of their crimes. Another tradition
runs to the effect that the Prior of Montfaucon in the diocese
of Toulouse revealed the abominations of the brotherhood.
A third account relates that Jean de Banbellant, a Farmer


870 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


belonging to the diocese of Soissons, abandoned the Order in
1305, and informed the Inquisitor of Poissy of the heresies
and sorceries in which he had once participated.*® On the
other hand, from the letters of Kind Edward II dated 30
October and 20 November, 1807, to the Seneschal of Agen it
would appear that the earliest revelations were made in
that town.
The charges may be grouped under five heads :—


1. The trampling upon, spitting at, and defiling the
Crucifix by the new initiate ; with which is coupled
the obscene kiss.

2. The adoration of an Idol having the form of a human
head.

8. The omission of the words of Consecration at Holy Mass.

4. The granting of absolution by laymen.

5. The practice of sodomy.


It is true that some writers brush aside the accusations
with a disgustful contempt and aver that they were completely
disproved during the trials. Any such view it is in face of
the overwhelming evidence impossible to maintain, and
unprejudiced scholars have no doubt that the charges were
substantially established. It may be that many members
were not admitted into the foul mysteries of the advanced
initiates, who formed the backbone of the Order and were
both in act and creed Gnostics devoted to the utmost
licentiousness and blasphemy.

The first accusation has been variously explained. One
priest declared that it was a trial of the candidate’s firmness
to see if he would renounce Christianity if captured by the
Saracens. This is ridiculous, for we have no record of any
novice who rejected the test, and refused to trample the
Cross of his Saviour. Almost equally futile is the argument
that by this act of contempt the novice evinced his detestation
for the Cross as the instrument of Christ’s sufferings. The
true explanation is that the Templars held the Mandean
heresy, regarding Our Lord as an impostor, and thus the
maltreatment of the Cross showed their abhorrence of Him
Who had suffered thereon, an act of Satanism which can be
paralleled in the profanities of the Black Mass. This is borne
out by the fact that upon each Good Friday in an excess of


FRANCE 371


foul sacrilege they were wont to urinate upon the Rood.
This is borne out by the evidence of Galcerand de Teus in
the Sicilian trial at Santa Maria, and of Etienne Trobati before
Clement V and a commission of Cardinals.

Moreover, at his initiation the candidate stripped himself
stark naked,“ gave to and received from his Preceptor the
osculum obscenum and submitted to the most infamous
complaisances. Unnatural vice is an accusation which it is
easy to bring and wellnigh impossible to disprove. It was,
moreover, in the medieval mind closely connected with
heresy. Already had the heretic Bulgarians given the
English and French languages a word that it is shameful to
pronounce and most odious to hear. The evidence, however,
with regard to the Templars hardly admits of doubt.‘

There have been many descriptions of the idol which the
Templars worshipped. In the original trials it is simply
stated to be a Head: ‘“‘ Quod erat de metallo et habebat
faciem quasi humanam, capillos nigros et crispos et non
recordatur quod habuerat barbam.’’*2 The Chronicle of
St. Denis describes it as a stuffed human Head: “ Un viel
pel d’omme embasmée et de toile polie.” There were, of
course, many of these Heads. England alone possessed four
specimens ; one concealed in the sacristy of the London
Temple; one at Bytelesham; one at Bruer, near Lincoln ;
and one beyond the Humber. The knight Bernard von
Parma, when tried in Tuscany, confessed that the general
belief was this Head was powerful to save and to enrich, and
it was the source of all the wealth and prosperity of the
Order. To this Head, which seems to have been beardless,
the name Baphomet was given. The nomenclature Nicolai‘’
well suggests is composed of the words Bag¢y piri (or
pyrios),44 which may be Englished as “ Absorption into
Wisdom,” and hence the Head represented the Deity. Now
the Cabbalists represented God in abstracto by a Head without
a beard, and there can be no doubt that the Head worshipped
by the Templars to them represented Deity.*®

The omission of the words of Consecration at Holy Mass
may be due to the use by the Templars not of the Western
Rite but of an Eastern Liturgy. In all Eastern Liturgies
occurs the prayer in which, after the words of Consecration,
the celebrant prays that God may send down His Holy


372 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Spirit to change this bread and wine into the Body and Blood
of His Son. This is known as the Epiklesis, éx«Ayous,
inuocatio. All Orthodox theologians now believe that the
Epiklesis, and not the words of Institution, is the essential
form (or at least the essential complement) of the Sacrament.
Some even go so far as to say that the Epiklesis alone conse-
crates,4® so presumably the words of Institution might be
omitted without affecting the validity of the Sacrament,
although the greater number require the words of Institution
as well. A few minor Liturgies indeed do not recite the words
of Institution, and therefore they have been held invalid.
All of these are forms which were used by heretical sects, and
it seems certain that the form employed by the Templars
belonged to this family. The explanation that the Templars
omitted the words of Institution because in common with
many Gnostics they entirely rejected the idea of there being
any virtue in the Sacraments is very improbable.

It is undoubted that lay members of the Order gave
absolution after confession, and this is by no means merely
to be understood of the monastic culpa, or public acknow-
ledgement of faults against rule. Herr Dr. Prutz, in view of
the formula of absolution quoted in more than one of the
trials, concludes that this practice links the Templars very
closely with the Katharists, and with those bodies which
specifically denied the Divinity of Christ.

There was also a book of secret doctrines and instructions,
apart from the Statutes of the Order, which was only
delivered to certain of the brethren.‘7 In every case of
examination it appears either from the personal knowledge
of the examinee, or from statements which he had received at
first hand from other initiates, that such a volume with
occult rules and regulations actually existed. The nature
and scope of these mysterious writings will probably never
be known, for it is almost certain that all copies were
destroyed.*® It has been acutely suggested that some
concealed reference to these documents may be found in the
various compositions which form the cycle of the legends of
the Holy Grail.*®

Various extravagant stories which were popularly spread
in connexion with the Templars, that a monstrous black cat
presided at their Chapters and was worshipped, that demons


FRANCE 373


accompanied them as familiars, that every year the Devil
took toll of the Order and carried off a Templar of high degree,
we may, of course, discount and disregard, although they
show the general repute in which the Brethren were held.

At first the various monarchs to whom King Philip had
addressed his letters were slow to move, they awaited the
lead of the Holy See. The Duke of Brabant and the King of
Sicily, it is true, did not hesitate, and possibly they had some
individual information which strengthened their hands.
At Paris one hundred and seventy-four Templars were
interrogated, and Clement V, thinking that things were
moving too fast, by a Bull of suspension ®® temporally deprived
Bishops and Inquisitors of their power to try these cases.
None the less the prisons were full. And in a short while the
Pope, having gathered further details, issued a second Bull,
22 November, 1307, Pastoralis preeminentie, in which he
bade all sovereigns follow the example of the French King.
He had himself interrogated high dignitaries of the Order
who confessed unspeakable sorceries and heresies, especially
the trampling upon and defilement of the Cross.

The Pontiff reserved the final decision to the Apostolic
Chair, and on 29 and 80 June, 1 and 2 July, 1308, seventy-two
Templars were interrogated by a committee of six cardinals,
presided over by the Pope in person, when the accused frankly
and freely admitted their guilt in every particular. Horrified
as he was, Clement did not move quickly. He deliberated,
sifted the evidence, conducted fresh inquiries, the result of
which merely confirmed the truth of what had been avowed,
but it was not until the 30 December that he launched a Bull
declaring the Templars apostates and impure, forbidding any
to comfort, harbour, succour, or protect them.

The trials of the Templars in various countries of Europe,
in the cities and provinces of France, extended over a period
of more than five years, and those writers who mistakenly
seek to establish the innocence of the Order emphasize the
unfortunate and cruel fact that the accused were subjected to
torture, as though indeed this were something novel and
unaccustomed in similar proceedings at that date. It is not
to be denied that torture was repeatedly and rigorously
employed in the case of the Templars, and many of their
confessions were wrung from them by this i.eans. On the


374 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


other hand, many acknowledged their guilt without being
put to the question, although perhaps through fear of it.
Yet the mysteries which were revealed in France, in Italy,
in England, and elsewhere, by the Brethren are all so con-
sistent in their details, so correspondingly exact, and so
circumstantial, that it is impossible any false tales or feigned
accounts or fictions should thus precisely agree on all points
and in all particulars. There were, of course, those of the
Orders who knew nothing of the sorcery and occult obscen-
ities, and naturally they could not tell that of which they
were ignorant. But the initiates who were examined all
agreed in the story of their culpability, and the five charges
we have enumerated cannot but be looked upon as fully
established.

The ancient Roman code was accustomed from the earliest
times to employ torture not as a punishment, but simply as
a regular means of extracting the truth from the accused.
The appeal to the Judgement of God, Ordeals, ‘‘ dropped out
of practical usage during the thirteenth century...
unhappily to be succeeded by a dreadful revival of torture
all over Europe, where it was in full blast in the fourteenth
century . .. the custom spread to the lay courts towards
the end of the thirteenth century.’®! In 1252 Innocent IV
(1243-54), a stern Pontiff who was dealing with treachery,
anarchy, rebellion, and problems of overwhelming difficulty,
allowed torture to be introduced into the trials of heretics.
It is clear that the employment of torture in the prosecutions
of the Templars was no more than following the wont and
custom of the day.

To summarize, however briefly, the many interrogations
during the long and complicated trials would be impertinent,
but it is necessary to point out that two phases must be
carefully and continuously distinguished; the royal com-
mission and the papal commission. The latter, which
followed in the process, was extended to all the Christian
countries of Europe, and even to the Orient. Canonical
penances were imposed upon the guilty, and only those who
repeatedly lapsed were handed over to the secular arm.
Thus on 12 May, 1810, fifty-four Templars who had confessed
to Satanism and recanted, persisting in the face of all evidence
in their denials and refusing to be reconciled were condemned


FRANCE 375


to the flames and executed the same day. Eight days later
four more Knights were sent to the stake, and the dead body
of a high officer, Jean de Thuro, some time Treasurer of the
Temple, was cast upon the pyre.

On 22 March, 1312, by his Bull Uow in excelso Clement V
officially notified Christendom that the Order of the Knights-
Templars was found to be so corrupt and so rotten with
heresy, the whole question having been debated at the
Council of Vienne (Dauphiné), it must be dissolved and was
thereby declared suppressed. The members who were found
guiltless were allowed to join another Order, or return to the
secular state if they would, in which case an ample pension
for life was assigned each individual. The possessions of the
Order were for the most part granted to the Hospitallers,
and these were to be applied to their original use, the defence
of the Holy Places in Palestine. The Pope reserved to his
own judgement the cases of the Grand-Master, Jacques de
Molay, and three Preceptors of the highest rank. These had
already confessed their guilt, and the Holy Father delegated
a special tribunal composed of three cardinals, the Arch-
bishop of Sens, and other prelates to reconcile them to the
Church, after which they were to be removed to lifelong
imprisonment. On 19 March, 1314, before an immense crowd
which had gathered in the square facing Notre-Dame at
Paris, the four religious were set upon a platform, their
former declarations read aloud, and a formal public abjuration
of their heresies demanded. When this had been made,
absolution was given. But Jacques de Molay suddenly calling
for silence delivered a long harangue in which he theatrically
declared that he, his companions, and the whole Order were
innocent of all the charges made against them. Geoffrey
de Charnay, Preceptor of Normandy, loudly seconded his
words. Their judges amazed at this recantation ordered
them back to custody that the new situation might be
debated calmly and at leisure. But when the news was
brought to the King, Philip, furious with rage, gave instant
orders that Molay and Charnay should die that very day.
Without the knowledge, much less with the consent, of the
ecclesiastical commission, the two Templars protesting their
innocence to the last, were burned at the stake before the
gates of the royal palace. It is said that their brave


376 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


demeanour greatly impressed those who had assembled to
witness their punishment, and it is no doubt this constancy
which has led many writers to defend the Order in spite of
the crushing evidence of their Satanism and_ esoteric
debaucheries.52 Many men have died well in a bad cause.

The reign of Philip le Bel was marked by many other trials
for sorcery. In 1808 Guichard, Bishop of Troyes, was
arrested, chiefly at the secret instigation of Nogaret, upon a
charge of having poisoned Queen Joanna of Navarre and the
proceedings were unduly protracted until 1313, for when no
traces of poison could be found the Bishop was accused of
having bewitched the Queen to death. A hermit of St.-Flairt
de Villemaur came forward with an extraordinary tale. The
Prelate had fashioned, it was alleged, a wax figure to obtain
the love of the royal lady and when this had no effect he threw
it into the fire so that she languished and died. He had
brewed venom from asps and adders, from toads and spiders ;
he held continual consultations with a demon who appeared
robed as a Black Monk but with horns upon his forehead.
Margueronne de Bellevillette, herself in evil repute as a
witch, had caught sight of a dark shadowy winged figure of
awe conversing with the Bishop. Detail was heaped upon
detail, murder, the seduction of nuns, necromancy, false-
coining, and every crime human wit could invent. One
Noffodés, who was afterwards hanged for a felony and at the
foot of the gallows attested the Bishop’s innocence, showed
himself particularly active and fertile in invention. In 1313
the Prelate was transferred to Avignon, examined by Pope
Clement V himself, honourably acquitted, and dispatched on
an apostolic mission to Bosnia.®*

After the death of Philip IV the enemies of his minister,
Enguerrand de Marigny, who had taken no insignificant part
against the Templars, openly accused the favourite of
sorcery, and caused him to be thrown into prison. His wife,
Alips de Mons, and his sister, la dame de Canteleu, were tried
as accomplices. The usual story of the fabrication of waxen
puppets was related, and a magician, Jacques Dulot, who.
had modelled these was seized. Mad with terror this poor
wretch took his life in jail, and on 80 April, 1815, Enguerrand


de Marigny was hanged upon the highest gibbet at Mont-
faucon.


FRANCE 377


In 1821 a panic spread throughout France owing to the
reported discovery of a vast and hideous conspiracy among
the lepers to poison and contaminate all the wells and pure
water in France. A lazar confessed that certain sorcerers
had. distributed a distillation of human blood and urine
commixed with three unknown herbs, made up into a paste
with which was mingled the Blessed Sacrament stolen from
churches. This was all ground to powder to fill large
numbers of little bags and purses one of which thrown into
water would pollute the whole stream.

A woman, scarred with the fearful disease, was found to
have secreted among her garments a little packet sewn in
linen, which when cut open was seen to contain the head of
a snake, the legs of a toad, and strands of human hair,
cemented together with a black and noisome gum. From
border to border France thrilled with horror and alarm, and
King Philip V at once commanded that all the guilty should
be burned alive on the charges of murder and sacrilege.
A number of Jews, who were said to have instigated these
abominations, perished at the stake; in Languedoc, where
the alarm chiefly prevailed, no less than six hundred lepers
were in one day thrown into the flames, and at Paris almost
as many more.

Upon the accession of Pope John XXII (Jacques d’Euse),
who was enthroned 5 September, 1315, a Bull deposed
Hugues Géraud, Bishop of Cahors, who was sentenced to
perpetual imprisonment and the confiscation of all his
possessions for crimes which are not specified in the official
documents. Two men had been arrested at the gates of
Avignon, and in their luggage was found poisons, noxious
herbs, arsenic, quicksilver, dried toads, lizards, the tails of
rats, spiders, the hair of a hanged malefactor, vervain,
marjoram, mint, and many other compounds for philtres, and
above all wax figures of the Pope, cunningly hidden among
the crumb of large loaves. Their confession involved many
ecclesiastical dignitaries, including the Bishop of Cahors ;
Gaillard de Pressac, Bishop of Toulouse ; and Bernard Gasce,
Bishop in partibus of Ganos, three bitter opponents of the
reigning Pontiff. There can be no doubt from the evidence
that a widespread conspiracy was on foot to destroy Pope
John, and had wizardy failed the knife or a medicated dram


378 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


would have been employed. During the trials, the papal
nephew, Jacques de Via, Cardinal-Vicar of Avignon, suddenly
died, and the prisoners were lost. Hugues Géraud in par-
ticular was degraded, and delivered over to the secular arm
to be burned alive for sorcery, which sentence was carried
out in 1317.54

Of the Bulls of Pope John XXII directed against witches
a detailed account will be given later. The French
trials began to multiply apace, and it must suffice merely
to indicate one or two of the most important of these. In
1329 the Carmelite Pierre Ricordi, after investigations which
had lasted several years, was condemned to perpetual
imprisonment by Henri de Chimay, Inquisitor of Carcassone.
In order to obtain the love of certain women the friar had
fashioned under the invocation of demons figures of wax
moulded with his own blood and saliva, and the blood of
toads. The puppet, consecrate to the Devil by magic rites,
was then buried under the threshold of the house where the
woman, of whom he was amorous, lived, and unless she
yielded to his desires she was tormented in evil dreams and
uncouth happenings, spectres and voices. He avowed that
thus he had corrupted: three honest housewives. When he
had attained his ends, he sacrificed in thanksgiving to Satan.
To shield the honour of the Order sentence was privately
passed upon the offender by a special court which sat in the
episcopal palace at Pamiers.*®

In 1830 eleven witches were at Carcassone delivered to the
secular arm for punishment of death. Three shepherds, Jean,
Pierre, and Barthélemy Andrius, were convicted of killing
cattle and flocks by evil spells ; eight women had forespoken
children, composed philtres, fashioned amulets, and openly
practised divination; of these one confessed to frequent
attendance at the Sabbat.5¢

During the whole reign, indeed, of Philip VI (de Valois),
1328-58, the Inquisition dealt with a very large number of
witchcraft trials, many of the accused being first delated for
heresy, and upon examination found to be versed in necro-
mancy and the black art. Thus in 1835 at Toulotse a
solemn auto-da-fé of no less than sixty-three persons was
held. Two witches, Anne-Marie de Georgel and Catherine
Delort, had made ample acknowledgement of their diabolic


FRANCE 379


pacts and commerce. They confessed that they habitually
attended the Sabbat which was held, especially on a Friday
night, sometimes in the vicinity of Pech-David, sometimes
in the forest of Bouconne, or again in the low-level country
stretching between Toulouse and Montauban. There they
adored the Demon who was present under the form of a huge
black goat, they had had sexual connexion with him in this
shape as well as having been enjoyed by the foul warlocks
who frequented these assemblies ; they offered infants, stolen
from the cradle, to the Master of these orgies; they ate too
of the Devil’s banquets whereat no salt was served. Catherine
Delort had taken the lives of her two aunts, whose property
she was to inherit, by melting from time to time wax images
slowly before a fire; so that these women sickened and
languished as the wax flowed away. Both Anne-Marie de
Georgel and Catherine Delort held that the Devil was equal
in power to God; that their Master reigned on earth, God
only in Heaven; that over the earth and all that therein is
the Devil is lord. This shows that they were Gnostic heretics,
Manichees, and they belonged, no doubt, to a secret society
of these witches at whose nocturnal meetings the abomina-
tions they described took place. And indeed they were
not far wrong in deeming such assemblies the Devil’s
Sabbat.°7

At Carcassone in 1835 the Inquisitor Jean Duprat was
inquiring into the cases of Paul Vignier, Armande Robert,
Matheline Faure, Pierrille Roland, and others who had
boasted of their assistance at a Sabbat held on Mont Alaric.

André Cicéron, a shepherd, in order to confect a charm
had parodied the Sacrifice of Holy Mass. He celebrated the
Mass in a complete state of nudity, asserting that Adam had
thus offered the Eucharist. Two other rustics, Catala and
Paul Rodier, were found guilty of having poisoned various
wells, as also of sacrificing a black cock one midnight where
three ways met in order to bring another war upon the
district. All three were burned alive.°®

In 1840 a priest, Lucas de Lafond, of Grenade in the
diocese of Toulouse, was condemned to perpetual imprison-
ment. An ignorant girl, whom he had seduced, bore witness
that he had celebrated Mass in honour of Satan, and was in
the habit of employing holy water, Paschal wax, incense,


880 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and even the Blessed Sacrament Itself as the ingredients of
his charms.

In the space of thirty years, 1820-50, the Inquisition at
Carcassene heard no fewer than four hundred cases and at
least two hundred witches were burned, whilst the Holy Office
at Toulouse during the same period presided over some six
hundred cases and sent four hundred witches to the stake.°®

In 1352 eight warlocks were burned at Carcassone ; in 1857
no less than thirty-one; whilst from 1887-1400 the Inquisitors
of that town, Durand Salranch and Bouit Liestel, delivered
over sixty-seven persons, convicted of Witchcraft and
of various forms of Gnostic heresy, to the secular arm to be
punished according to the law.

Similar proceedings were taking place all over France, in
Switzerland, Germany, and many other countries. The pro-
blems of Witchcraft were soon to exercise the pens of the legists,
and during the fifteenth century no inconsiderable number
of technical and highly specialized treatises began to appear.
The De Superstitionibus, written in 1405, of Nicolas de Jauer,
Master in Theology of Prague, has never been printed, but
the very many manuscript copies which exist prove that the
work had a large circulation and was widely consulted. The
Most Christian Doctor, Jean le Charlier de Gerson (1863-
1429); Henry of Gorcum, O.P., a famous commentator on
S. Thomas; Alonso Tostado (circa 1400-55) the Biblical
exegete; Juan de Torquemada (Turrecremata), O.P. (ob.
1468), Cardinal-Bishop of Sabina and Master of the Sacred
Palace ; John of Mechlin, Professor of Theology at Cologne ;
Ambrose of Vignate, an acute jurisconsult ; and very many
other scholars of immense learning and equal piety wrote at
length upon the vexed subject of sorcery.

Especially remarkable is the Formicarius,® a treatise on
the philosophical, theological, and social questions of the
day, composed at the Council of Basle during the years 1435-
37, by John Nider, Prior of the Convent of Strict Observ-
ance at Basle, and attending the Council in the capacity of
theologian and legate. Born in Swabia, 1880, Nider took
the Dominican habit at Colmar, and soon won a great
reputation as a preacher throughout Germany. Elected
Prior of the Nuremberg house in 1427 he made himself felt as
a just but not harsh reformer, and such were his tact and


FRANCE 381


persuasive moderation that at the instance of Cardinal Julian
he made several embassies to the Hussites. After the
dissolution of the Council of Basle by Pope Eugenius IV in
1436 Nider resumed his theological lectures at Vienna, and
was twice elected Dean of the University before his death at
Colmar, 13 August, 1488. The Formicarius is valuable
because the author frequently quotes actual trials for Witch-
craft and the evidence submitted to him by his colleagues,
the Inquisitors at Berne or at Autun. Accordingly we have
recorded a number of facts concerning the prosecution of
witches in the Swiss districts and Rhineland during the first
quarter of the fifteenth century. Nider allows that in many
cases the demoniacal experiences were subjective, and he
gives it as his opinion that the voyage to the Sabbat was
sometimes a trance or hallucination.

The Sabbat largely occupies the pen of the Savoyard
demonologist who composed circa 1450 the famous Tractatus
in Errores Gazariorum. The writer was doubtless an official
who had taken part in trials, since he cites the very words
of the accused. He very justly makes no great distinction
between the Gazariens, the Cathari, the Vaudois, and
sorcerers. There may be subtle technicalities wherein they
slightly varied, but all were tarred with the same brush, and
broadly their Gnosticism was the same, Satanism. Here we
have the Sabbat described in full detail from the confessions
of those who had assisted, the orgies, the unspeakable
profanities, the bestial turpitudes, the rank obscenity, which
go to make up that pandemonium.

About 1450 also Jean Vinet, O.P., Inquisitor at Carcassone,
composed his T'ractatus contra inuocatores demonum, which
yet may only be found in manuscript. Herein the possibility
of carnal connexion with the Devil or some evil entity is
discussed, and the writer concludes that the confessions of
those who had declared themselves guilty of this abomination
must not lightly be disregarded.

The Flagellum Demonum Fascinariorum (1458) of Nicolas
Jacquier. O.P. (ob. 1472) holds a very important place in the -
library of the demonologists, and whilst many of Jacquier’s
pages have been elaborated and illustrated by numbers of new
and carefully observed examples, only the most erudite have
actually added to his exposition any details which are


882 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


substantially unrecorded there. He speaks with knowledge,
for example, of the blasphemy of the Black Mass, of the
Devil’s Mark, of the adoration of Satan, the aerial voyage
to the Sabbat, the dreams and subjective illusions of wizards.
Moreover, he recognizes the essential link between heresy and
Witchcraft, so intermingled and unified that to separate them
is impossible, for is not Witchcraft the worship of the Devil,
the heresy of heresies ?§1

Of lesser note is the Flagellum Maleficorum (circa 1462),
which was several times reprinted, of Pierre Mamor, a native
of Limousin, Canon of Saintes and Rector of the University
of Poitiers (circa 1460). A Liber contra artem magicam (circa
1475) of Jean Vincent, Prior of Moustiers-en-Lay, La Vendée,
remains in manuscript. He is inclined to explain the Sabbat
as, though sometimes a real experience, frequently dreamed
in a trance, induced and prolonged by evil charms. It is
interesting to find some mention of lycanthropy in this
treatise.

But perhaps the most celebrated of all works upon Witch-
craft is the Malleus Malleficarum of James Sprenger and
Henry Kramer, the Dominican Inquisitors who were
appointed by Innocent VIII to cleanse Bavaria and Saxony
from sorcerers. This great treatise, which may not unfittingly
be described as a Manual for the use of judges at witch-trials,
was based upon their own personal notes and actual experi-
ences, although perhaps suggested by the Directorium
inquisitorum of Nicolas Eymeric, O.P.,®* Inquisitor-General
of Aragon, which had been compiled as early as 1876, and
seems to be the only one of all Eymeric’s voluminous writings
that is printed.®* The first edition of the Malleus appeared
at Frankfort without a date, but it was issued not earlier than
1485%4 and not later than 1489.65 Giving, as it does, a most
full and detailed account of the methods of procedure, the
infliction of torture, the examination of witnesses, the sifting
of evidence, the Malleus Maleficarum is a most valuable
historical document. ®¢

To attempt any complete list of the witch-trials in France
during the fifteenth century is a task which, however inter-
esting, space will not here allow. In Languedoc the activities
of the Inquisition extended over a wide area. The records of
Hugues de Verdun, Grand Inquisitor of Toulouse, are largely


FRANCE 383


missing, but with Raymond de Tilhol (1430), his successor,
they become more regular. In the year 1432 we find that,
although one hundred and twelve persons were found guilty
of heresy and magic, only sixteen were executed. In 1433
there were eight sentences of death. Nor does the toll appear
to have been greater towards the end of the century, for in
1484 Antoine de Cléde, an Inquisitor, passed sentence on
eleven sorcerers, but only two—and those aggravated cases—
a shepherd and a woman, went to the stake.

At Carcassonne in 1410 Géraud Gassendi was accused of
debauching married women and young maidens by the aid
of evil charms and the help of the Devil. He had stolen
certain threads of gold from the festal cloak of Our Lady in
the Church of the Martyrs S. Nazarius and S. Celsus to weave
into his shirt, and he had evoked seven demons in the wood
of Bogoyran. The result of the trial is unknown. In 1412
several young men of Carcassonne were found guilty of
sorcery and sodomy and handed over by the Inquisitor Pierre
de Morelegio to the secular magistrates by whom they were
burned. In 1423 several warlocks were condemned to the
flames, and in 1435 great scandal was caused by the prosecu-
tion of Etienne de Vals, a canon of Montréal, on multiplied
charges of divination and necromancy.

In 1458 during an epidemic at Marmande, at the height of
the mortality a hag named Jeanne Canay, long reputed a
witch, was seized, and in a few days some dozen of her
accomplices were likewise thrown into prison. Torture was
freely employed; the rack extorted detailed confessions ;
and five wretched creatures who avowed they had spread the
infection were burned. Two expired during the question.
The members of the local tribunal, which seems to have
grossly exceeded its powers, being called to a sharp account
by Charles VIII, who took cognizance of the affair, escaped
with no light fines and reprimand.

In the Bibliothéque Nationale of Paris may be found a
manuscript (Mst. Latin, 3446, f. 58-62), a confession made
before the Inquisition of Lyons, possibly the actual screed
taken down in court. Throughout that district wizards
were known as “‘ Vaudois,”’ so deeply rooted is the traditional
connexion between heresy and sorcery, and their Sabbat
was the ‘“‘ Synagogue.” The various details comprise the


384 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


appearance of the Devil in the form of a man; the riding
upon a besom or stick; anointing the body with hellish
unguents; the obscene ritual of the Sabbat ; the horrible
desecration of the Blessed Sacrament, defiled and given to
toads; urination into a stolen chalice which had recently
been used at Holy Mass; magic powders distributed, by
sprinkling which on men and cattle diseases would be spread ;
blasphemies and obscenities beyond imagination. Here also
we have a rare and interesting detail, the visits by witches to
wine-cellars and the broaching of mighty tuns for Satan’s
bacchanalia. ®’

During the visitations of Frére Ponce Feugeyron, a
Franciscan, who was commissioned by Alexander V in 1409,
a number of sorcerers were interrogated and discovered
hideous abominations. During their assemblies they had
adored the Master of the Sabbat, who appeared as a tall
dark man, with the most disgusting ceremonies; they
trampled under foot the Crucifix and defiled the Sacred Host
with nameless profanities and vileness; periodically they
bound themselves by horrid oaths never to reveal the
mysteries of darkness.

In 1488 Pierre Vallin of Tour du Pin was executed for
having delivered his daughter to the embraces of one of the
Masters of the Sabbat from the results of whose lust and
violence she expired; in 1462 at Chamonix, seven women
and several men were condemned to the stake by the secular
arm. Of these one, Jean Greland, who had on many occasions
stolen the Blessed Sacrament, thrown It into the gutter and
stamped It in the mud, was compelled to kiss three times a
cross painted on the earth in the very spot he had dared his
sacrilege, his right foot was struck off by the executioner, and
he was flung into the blazing pyre.

In the archives of l’Isére there exists a contemporary
record of about one hundred and ten women and fifty-seven
men who were executed for sorcery, some being burned,
others drowned, between the years 1428 and 1447.

At Cambrai in 1460 a sorcerer named Jennin was haled
before the Bishop’s tribunal. Upon his arrest he endeavoured
to stab himself with a knife, but was prevented, and when
interrogated confessed to having entertained a familiar for
many years, by whose help he pretended to foretell, or fore-


FRANCE 385


told, future events. He had also abandoned himself to every
impurity, and had achieved no small reputation as a
confectioner of love-philtres and evil amulets. He was
condemned to make public confession of his heresy and
sorceries, to renounce the demon, and to perform some just
and exemplary penance. But, as on his return from the scene
of the public awto-da-fé, he not only tore his sackcloth robe
but broke and dashed to the ground the crucifix he was
carrying, he was considered to have merited the doom of a
relapsed heretic, was brought to trial, and two days after
burned at the stake.®§

Among the most resounding trials of the fifteenth century
must be accounted those of the Vaudois at Arras in 1459.
These wretches whose heresies and sorceries were the scandal
of the province had long been grievously suspected of robbing
the tabernacles and using the Hosts to mingle with their hell-
broths and devilish unguents.

It happened that in 1459 whilst Jean Jouffrey, the Bishop
of Arras, was absent in Rome, the Dominican Inquisitor,
Pierre le Broussart, arrested at Douai a woman of evil life
named Deniselle Greniere, upon the denouncement of an old
warlock, who had been burned at Langres. When she was
examined by the Vicar of the episcopal court and the doyen
of the Chapter, Jacques du Boys, she implicated four hags
and an old villain named Jean Lavite. So abominable were
the charges, so hideous their confessions that all five were
executed, being brought to the pyre their heads adorned
with paper mitres, on which were painted the devils they had
worshipped and served. Next the Inquisitor laid his hands
upon a large number of persons of every degree who had been
delated as seen at the local Sabbat, whereupon many more
fled, some to the court of the Duke of Burgundy, some
actually to Rome. Panic reigned throughout the country-
side, and the Duke, Philippe le Bon, ordered a Council to be
held at Brussels to consider the whole question. The ecclesi-
astical dignitaries of Arras, the Inquisitors, and many doctors
of Louvain, were convened to discuss every aspect of the
outbreak of “‘ vaulderie ” as the commixture of heresy and
witchcraft was called. But now the Parliament of Paris
interfered and ordered the release of the accused ; the Arch-
bishop of Reims and the bishops of Amiens and Paris refused


886 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


to hear charges of sorcery and dismissed all cases brought
before them; the chapter of Arras was in a sad plight, nor
was their dismay lightened when their bishop returned from
Rome to undo all their proceedings, to declare the whole
process illegal and worse, to set free all who had been
imprisoned upon suspicion of Witchcraft.®

There occurred in 1491 a case of possession in a convent, a
singularly rare happening at so early a date, although
unhappily far more common some hundred and thirty years
later. Among the Augustinian nuns of the Reform at
Quesnoy-le-Comte, near Cambrai, was a young, ardent, and
emotional sister, named Jeanne Potier. Although always of
most exemplary character and strictest observance she was
suddenly seized with a burning passion for the confessor, who
upon understanding the situation at once withdrew from the
place, his duties being undertaken by a venerable religious
of extraordinary sanctity and wisdom. But the nympho-
maniac burst out into the wildest ravings; she shrieked
blasphemies and obscenities ; sang bawdy songs such as it
was humanly impossible she should ever have heard ;
displayed the utmost lubricity in gesture and imagination ;
evinced an almost supernatural strength when it was
attempted to restrain her; and, what was worse, in some
mysterious way communicated her malady to other religious,
until the peaceful cloister became a very bedlam of riot and
impurity. Monks and friars came from all parts to exorcize
the demons who were thus afflicting the house, and who gave
their names as Tahu, Gron, and Gorgias. At length the
Bishop of Cambrai, Monsignor Henry de Bughes, visited the
convent with much state and ceremony. On the Second
Sunday after Easter he assisted at High Mass, and solemnly
blessed the whole cloister. He then proceeded to exorcize the
possessed nuns, and having expelled the diabolic influences
ordered Sister Jeanne Potier to be kept in strictest seclusion
until she had shown unmistakable signs of recovery. Order
was thus restored to those walls where pandemonium had
reigned for no less than seven months.7°

So immense a literature has gathered round the name of
S. Joan of Arc that it is impossible here even to touch upon
her long and intricate trial in any useful or satisfactory
detail. I will merely content myself with drawing attention


FRANCE 387


to Father Herbert Thurston’s ample and complete refutation?
of the ignoble fatuities, so seriously yet so idly, put forward
by Miss M. A. Murray in her The Witch-Cult in Western
Europe (pp. 270-6). It will hardly be believed that, obsessed
with her figment of an ancient religion which she terms the
“ Dianic cult,”” Miss Murray not merely declares S. Joan to
have been a member of this “ Dianic cult” but “ actually
the Incarnate God.” The monstrous extravagance of such
imaginings. which it is superfluous to add have not a very
shadow of foundation in fact, almost renders it impossible to
treat them as worthy of any consideration. They fall owing
to their own nightmare impossibility. Even the two Saints
who appeared from Heaven to S. Joan, S. Katherine of
Alexandria and S. Margaret of Antioch, are witches. Natur-
ally in the ages of faith, when nomenclature was limited,
the names of these two popular Virgin Martyrs occur again
and again, even as their pictures or statues were found in
every church however poor and humble. Through the
centuries of witch-trials we find that many of the accused
bore one of these two names—even aS there were many who
were called Mary at the font in honour of Our Blessed Lady—
and this is enough for Miss Murray to write of the two Saints
in the most fantastic strain. The fact that as S. Joan lay in
prison S. Katherine appeared to her gives occasion for the
wild suggestion that some female impersonated S. Katherine
and obtained access to the dungeon by a secret passage.
The whole thing is more than incredible, it is irrational. Yet
it is instructive, as showing the lengths to which writers will
go who wish to avoid the natural and true explanation.”*
There is no part of France more conservative and more
devout than Brittany. Here happily linger yet the old
traditions, the old courtesies, and the old homely Saints,
elsewhere wellnigh forgotten. And so at the little gothic
Chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Haut, near Moncontour, they still
pray to S. Mamert, who cures gastric disorders; to Saint
Livertin, who with S. Urlou, heals migraine; to S.
Houarniaule, who makes cowards brave; and S. Meen, who
chases away rheumatism and sciatica. S. Cornelius, S.
Nicodemus, S. Herbot, and S. Thégonnec, watch over flocks
and cattle; S. Eloi protects the horses; until recently
S. Hervé was invoked to guard the wayfarer from wolves, of


888 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


which one who attacked a peasant was killed not longer than
some forty years ago. The village maidens still stick pins
into the statue of S. Guirec at Ploumanac’h to remind him
to bring them a husband soon; S. Trémeur carries his head
in his hand; mothers hang tiny shirts and caps before the
shrine of S. Languy at Plougastel-Daoulas if their children
are languishing from any ailment or slow of wit ; in the little
village church of Guimilau their patron, the murdered prince,
S. Guimilau has his altar, rich with carven figures and fruit
and foliage, all dight with colour and gold, albeit the legend
grow faint with years.

Brittany has her wonderful faith, most precious of all her
possessions. And, as may be supposed, a land so ancient,
so alive to the sense of the supernatural, has also its occult
lore and whispered tales of sorcery. Menhirs and dolmens,
great monolithic circles like Carnac and Kergouen, recall the
memories of the Druids. Heloise, who loved Abelard, is still
spoken of in Brittany as a “ druidess,’’ and there exists a
strange ballad which extols her magic powers. Folk-lore says
that the fairies built the Druid monuments.

Well within the last century certain villages and hamlets
were tainted with an evil reputation for sorcery as the
dwelling-places of necromancers and enchanters. Breton
proverb speaks of the witches of Fougéres, of Tréves, of
Concoret, of Lézat.

The demonology of Brittany is unique, and finds in cottage
and in lonely farm more than a half-credence yet. At the
dead of night a harshly creaking wain may be heard on the
silent road. It halts before some door. A soul quits the
doomed house and the cart passes on its way. It is the Ankou,
the spirit of death, who travels in the darkness, calling to
those who are about to die, summoning them to take their
place beside her. It is said that in some churches a figure of
the Ankou may be seen, a grisly skeleton.

The Mourioche is a demon of hideous malignity, who
appears in the shape of some four-footed beast, most often a
year-old colt. Woe to the wight who mounts him deeming
that he is some ordinary steed! That ride will end in the
pit of hell. Around Morlaix the peasants fear the Teurst.
He is black and shadowy, but terrible, like the Highland
Ourisk, who haunts moors and glens. The Teursta Poulict is


FRANCE 389


invariably seen in the form of a pig or cat, or some domestic
animal.

Among the ancient dolmens, relics of a vanished race, lurks
the Nain. He is dark as an Ethiop, with dishevelled locks, a
cruel countenance wherein his eyes gleam red as carbuncles
with the fire of the damned ; his voice is harsh and horrible, he
has the legs and hoofs of the goat. In the pale starlight he
treads an uncouth measure around the ancient stones to the
screech and drone of some mysterious cornemuse. The Nains
are the inventors of a cabalistic alphabet, the characters of
which are engraved on several of the megalithic monuments
of Morbihan, and particularly those of Gavr’inis. He who can
decipher the magic screed will be able to tell where hidden
treasure is to be found in any part of the country.

Inferior demons, the Crions, Courils, and Gorics, haunt the
cellars of ancient castles and chateaux. Here gold is hidden
away, a vast store. Thus the Gorics watch the secret hoards,
whose resting-place no man knows, in the depths of the
Castle of Morlaix.

The Korrigan is a succubus of infernal beauty. Her golden
tresses, red lips, and sparkling eyes, the beauty of hell, can
entrap the heart of the most constant swain, and her
embrace will draw him for love of her to vow his soul to
Satan.

Brittany teems with legends of witches and their foul deeds,
some exaggerated, some wholly imaginary, no doubt, but
some fearfully true. And of these latter there is no more
hideous tale than the history of Gilles de Rais.

Gilles de Rais was born about 1404 in the chateau of
Machecoul, which lies on the borders of Brittany and Anjou.
His father, Guy de Laval II, died towards the end of October,
1415; and his mother, Marie de Craon, marrying the Sieur
d’Estouville, handed him and his brother Réné de Rais to
the lax guardianship of his grandfather, Jean de Craon, lord
of Champtocé and La Suze ‘“‘ homme viel et ancien et de
moult grand Age.” On the 80 of November, 1420, when he
was at the most seventeen years of age, Gilles de Rais married
Catherine de Thouars, by which union he became one of the
wealthiest, perhaps the wealthiest, noble in Europe.

At this time the state of France seemed desperate. The
English were swarming over a country already decimated by


890 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


massacres and ravaged by plague. As far as Orleans had the
invaders penetrated, leaving burning villages, blood, famine,
disease, and destruction on every side. Charles VII, the
Dauphin, disowned by his parents, his father mad, his mother
a whore, derided as a bastard, his authority mocked, his
courage failing, held some kind of court at Chinon, where
in profligacy and debauch he endeavoured to forget. But
from time to time he roused himself to issue a piteous appeal
and it was in 1425 that Gilles de Rais came to the help of this
puppet king, lending him huge sums of money, raising an
army, “bon et hardy capitaine,” the old chronicler says.
It was then that S. Joan appeared upon the scene to save
France, and the King entrusted her to Gilles de Rais, who
was ever at her side,?? her comrade, her protector, fighting in
all her battles, remaining with her all day under the very
walls of Paris when she was wounded. The abbé Bossard has
proved that in his wardship he was absolutely loyal and true
to S. Joan. He was already saturated with the most exalted
mysticism, and there is no doubt that he believed firmly in
the divine mission of the Saint in whose cause he fought so
gallantly and so royally. He saw her fulfil all that she
promised to accomplish, and when King Charles was crowned
at Reims Gilles de Rais was created a Marshal of France,
enjoying the honour of bearing the King’s arms on his
escutcheon.

In 1426, however, weary of both court and camps, he has
retired to his castle of Tiffauges, where we find that he kept a
truly imperial state. The details of luxury and magnificence
outvie the chronicles of Sultan and Cesar. He retained a
bodyguard of more than two hundred men, no mere common
soldiers, but knights, captains, squires, pages of high degree,
each one of whom wore brocade or velvet and had his own
retinue. The pomp of his chapel, which resembled a collegiate
church, where High Mass was sung every day and the Office
recited with full ceremonial and ritual observance, seemed
that of a metropolitan basilica. At Tiffauges resided a
prelatical establishment, the doyen, vicars, treasurers, canons,
priests, and deacons, clerks, scholars, singers, a regular
choir-school of sweetest voices. The rochets, amices, albs,
corporals, lavabos, and altar cloths were of finest linen.
The vestments glittered with gold and jewels; we hear of


FRANCE 391


tunicles of emerald-green silk woven with threads of gold ;
of heavy copes, crimson and violet, sewn with seed pearls ;
of great canopies of yellow damask and white; of dalmatics
of amber-coloured silk and blue and silver; of chasubles
figured with the Nativity and the Passion of Christ, the
Annunciation and the Assumption of the Mother of God;
of scarlet cloth to hang the chapel on festal days; of dossal
tapestries woven with the Legends of the Saints that decked
the chancel upon Easter, Pentecost, Christtide, Lady Day in
harvest, Hallowmas, and the Patrons of the place. Upon the
altar stood huge candlesticks of massy gold; gold were the
patens, the chalices, ciboria, the basons and lavers, the pax
and the reliquaries, of which the chiefest, that of Saint
Honoré, blazed with gems, treasure of incalculable value,
wrought by a cunning craftsman who lived and fashioned
these things in the castle itself.

Moreover Gilles de Rais kept open house; day and night
his board groaned beneath the weight of baked meats and
roast, huge baskets of white bread, pasties, mortreux,
manchets and collops, to feed not only his officers but those
travellers who should pass that way. He himself loved rare
spiced food and rich wines of Cyprus or from the East wherein
a gout of amber had been dissolved.

He was a bibliophile to boot, and stored in mighty chests
his precious manuscripts, which were painted for him by a
famous illuminator named Thomas, who clothed them in
velvets and gay Oriental stuffs from Cairo and Damascus.
He was especially fond of the works of Ovid, of Valerius
Maximus, and above all the Histories of Suetonius, his copy
of which was bound in red leather with a golden lock and
clasp.

it is obvious that even the revenues of a kingdom could not
sustain such a superfluity of extravagance, and gradually
manors and meadows and parks and forests began to be sold,
until in 1436 his family, alarmed for their inheritance,
petitioned King Charles who “ str du mauvais gouvernement
du sire de Rais” by an order in Council forbad him to
dispose of any property whatsoever. :

For a long while Gilles de Rais had experimented in
alchemy and sought the philosopher’s stone, and now he
began the quest in real earnest under the guidance of a


392 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


famous occultist of the day, Gilles de Sillé, a priest of St. Malo.
Vast sums were expended ; gold and silver melted in crucible
and retort; but without result. One of the Marshal’s
chaplains, Eustache Blanchet, set out for Italy to discover
some master of the craft, but in the meantime Gilles de Rais
seems to have determined to have resource to demoniac
powers to assist him. He applied to Jean de la Riviére, a
sorcerer who had just come from Poitiers, but spells and
incantations proved unavailing. A second warlock, named
Du Mesnil, persuaded Gilles to sign with his blood a parch-
ment swearing to give the Devil all he demanded “ hormis sa
vie et son Ame,” and in order to strengthen the evocation the
Office of the Damned was chanted in the chapel at midnight
upon the Feast of All Saints.

Shortly afterwards Blanchet returned from Italy bringing
with him Francesco Prelati, a Florentine priest. Prelati,
who was a scholar and a man of extraordinary charm, soon
gained complete ascendancy over Gilles de Rais, and then
began that hideous series of murders, blasphemies, and
abominations, which seem to have exhausted the foulest
depths of black magic. Satan, declared the wizard, must be
propitiated by blood, the blood of children. He would thus
show himself favourable and heap riches upon his devoted
servants. The name of the first victim of Gilles de Rais is
unknown. It appears to have been a young boy, who was
enticed one evening to the castle, and when in a secret
chamber the erotomaniac had satiated his lust upon this
unhappy child, they suddenly strangled their outraged prey,
and cutting the heart from the warm body offered the young
limbs that yet quivered and writhed with agony to the Demon
whom they invoked with the most horrible oaths and adjura-
tions. .Presently Prelati wrapped the corpse in linen, and
under cover of darkness buried it in consecrated ground, a
cemetry hard by a chapel of S. Vincent of Saragossa. The
blood was preserved in phials and with it on virgin vellum
were written a grimoire and the liturgy of Satan.

It is useless to reiterate these hideous scenes of Sadism and
sacrilege ; to describe the Black Masses which were celebrated
in the castles ; to enumerate the rapes, tortures, and murders.
From 1482 to 1440 the orgy continued, and children dis-
appeared from all directions into the monster’s den. Endless


FRANCE 393


lists of boys and girls were read out at the trial: Lost, at
Rochebernart, the son of the widow Peronne, a boy who was
going to school “ et apprenait moult bien”; Lost, at Saint-
Ktienne de Montluc, the son of Guillaume Brice, a poor man ;
Lost, at Machecoul, the son of Georget le Barbier ; Lost, at
Thouaye, the son of Mathelin Thouars, “ était ledit enfant de
Page d’environ douze ans’’; and so the records continue,
until it is believed that more than eight hundred victims
perished. Their bodies were burned, or thrown into the vaults
and latrines of the castle. Night after night de Rais gloated
fondly over anguish and death, for as he himself said: “‘ J’étais
plus content de jouir des tortures, des larmes, de l’effroi et du
sang que de tout autre plaiser.”” But his sleep was troubled
with fearful dreams. He built a college at Machecoul, and
dedicated it to the Holy Innocents. He spoke often of
retiring to a cloister; of walking barefoot to Jerusalem,
begging his bread as he went.

All the while it seemed as though John V, Duke of
Brittany, who was buying the Marshal’s lands and houses
cheaply enough, refrained from interfering whilst he could
replenish his coffers and swell his possessions. The sad
murmurs of the peasantry hardly reached his indifferent ears.
But there was one power which, upon complaint, could and
did move with relentless force. Jean de Malestroit, Bishop
of Nantes, a prelate of the highest probity and sincerest
piety, at length heard rumours of these foul businesses.
A month sufficed to make inquiry; a band of armed men

“marched against Tiffauges, whilst a second expedition
invested Machecoul whither Gilles de Rais had fled in deadly
fear. Resistance was useless ; escape impossible ; on the 14
September the wretched murderer, Prelati, and those of his
followers who had not abandoned him at the first sign of
danger were arrested, loaded with chains, and cast into
prison. The ecclesiastical proceedings lasted a month and
eight days; the civil proceedings forty-eight hours. Bishop
Jean de Malestroit himself presided over the court, with the
Bishops of Mans, Saint-Brieuc, and Saint-Lé as his assessors.
Pierre de l’Hospital, Chancellor of Brittany, watched the case
on behalf of the lay authorities. But perhaps the most
pregnant figure was he who sat by the side of the president ;
a simple friar in the black and white habit of S. Dominic,


394 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Jean Blouyn, delegate of the Holy Inquisition for the city
and diocese of Nantes.

The Promoter, Guillaume Chapeiron, a learned jurist,
rector of S. Nicolas at Nantes, read an appalling list of crimes.
Gilles de Rais was accused of the violation and murder of
children, of witchcraft and Satanism which involved blackest
heresy, and the prosecution demanded his instant excom-
munication as an evoker of demons, a sodomite, and apostate,
a heretic relapsed. The prisoner replied to these charges with
blasphemy and foul railings. He refused to offer any defence.
Then the Bishop of Nantes and the Inquisitor declared him
contumacious, and solemnly cast him out of the bosom
mercy of Mother Church.

On the third day the scene was changed. Gilles was now
entirely broken in spirit; he hardly seemed the same man
as the haughty noble who with sullen port had hurled defiance
at the judges ; bent, bowed, wrinkled, trembling and tearful,
his fevered eyes blazing in his ashen face, he had veritably
aged twenty years. When adjured to make full and ample
confession, a recital which was not to be ‘“ dubia, uaga,
generalis, illatiua, iocosa,’ but plain and pertinent, with
downcast glances and clasped hands that shook as with palsy,
in the midst of that crowded court he began the horrid
chronicle of his deeds. And as the dark tale poured forth in
his dull monotonous voice, emotionless and dead, the hush
grew more and more intense, whilst cheeks blanched with
terror, and even the billsmen, sturdy soldiers steeped in rapine
and war, would fain have stopped their ears to shut out the
chronicle of hell. Without faltering, without pause, he told
the details of his murders, his rapes of tender youth who
sobbed and struggled mad with fear and shame, he gloated
upon the ease with which the sharp knife sank into their
white throats, his orgasm as the red stream gushed out warm
and slab. He shook his long lean fingers as if scattering the
drops in some. horrible asperges of crime. He spared no
horror of his sadism, unmasquing his bestial appetites which
reverenced not even the dead. The bishops signed them-
selves with unsteady hands, and Jean de Malestroit, arising,
took a veil and for modesty sake covered the face of the
Crucifix that hung above his throne. At length the raucous
accents died away and with a piercing shriek the baron cried :


FRANCE 395


““O my God, my Redeemer, mercy, mercy, and forgiveness !
And do you the fathers and mothers of those so piteously
slain, pray for me!” A vast sound of weeping shook the
hall; great tears rolled silently down the cheeks of even the
Bishops who sat in judgement and doom. But Jean Blouyn,
who had heard all motionless with unwinking eyes and
unchanged look, made a solemn gesture. The Promoter
arose. The crimes were manifest, clear, and amply confessed,
he said, the next step was to pronounce sentence. The
Tribunal appointed the morrow. The first sentence was
passed by the Bishop of Nantes conjointly with the Inquisitor.
By them Gilles de Rais was declared guilty of Witchcraft,
Satanism, heresy, and apostacy, and handed over to the Civil
Arm to receive the punishment due to such deeds. The
second sentence, pronounced by the Bishop alone, declared
the prisoner convicted of sodomy, sacrilege, and violation of
ecclesiastical rights. Then upon the frantic prayers and
abasement of the unhappy wretch the ban of excommunica-
tion was lifted, but he was handed over to the secular court,
who sentenced him to death, on multiplied charges of murder,
as well as for the aforesaid crimes. Until his execution, which
took place on 26 October, 1440, he spent the hours in trans-
ports of prayer and aspiration ; the murderer, the sadist, the
demoniac, had disappeared; the mystic, the devotee, the
erstwhile companion of S. Joan alone remained. At eleven
o’clock on the fatal day he was led with his two companions,
Henri Griart and Etienne Corrillaut, from prison in funereal
procession to the Place de la Biesse, where had been piled
huge stacks of brushwood and tar over which towered high
gibbets. ‘‘ We have sinned, all three of us,”’ were his last
words to his comrades, ‘‘ but as soon as our souls have left our
bodies we shall all see God in His Glory in Paradise.” The
prisoners, at the express desire of the Marshal, were simul-
taneously executed. They were launched from the gibbets,
and in a few moments the red flames blazed beneath. But
when the heat had severed the rope by which Gilles was sus-
pended, certain noble ladies caused the body to be drawn from
the fire. The remaining bodies were wholly consumed, the
ashes being scattered to the winds. The corpse of the
Marshal, however, was honourably interred in the Carmelite
church hard by the scene of execution. Thus perished one of


396 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the most extraordinary figures in the whole history of
witchcraft.?*

Throughout the sixteenth century the prosecution of
witches increased steadily in zest and bitterness on every
hand in France, and this vigour is especially noticeable
from the time when the Inquisition began to delegate its
jurisdiction in these matters to the civil courts, who dealt
with delinquents and suspects with a severity that almost
amounted to cruelty. It must be remembered, however, that
authority and order were faced with a terrible problem and
menace, a band of malefactors, devoted to Satan and versed
in every phase of wickedness, adepts at poisoning and secret
murder, whose one aim was to spread anarchy, ruin, and
death, the kingdom of their master.

In 1519 a very horrible case was heard before Louis Bruni
(or Brun), a Franciscan, Vicar of the Grand Inquisitor for
Dauphiné. Catherine Peyretonne was tried on multiplied
charges of sorcery. She confessed to constant attendance
at the Sabbat, where she had indulged in every possible
sexual excess with the demon. She had stolen and killed
infants from the cradle to satisfy a hideous cannibalism, and
sacrificed them to her familiar, Barrabam. She had adored
the Devil with most filthy ceremonies, and vowed herself to
evil. It is curious to note that she speaks of the blue flames
at the nocturnal meetings of witches, a fact that points to the
burning of sulphur, and also of the black candles which were
distributed to those present. As a criminal of no ordinary
guilt she was sent quick to the stake, and executed at
Montpezat on the 9 October.7® ‘

At Besancon in 1521 some curious cases of lycanthropy
were investigated by the Inquisitor. Two shepherds, Michel
Verdung and Pierre Burgot, made a detailed acknowledge-
ment of their crimes. Even if they had not assumed the
shape they had been filled with all the desires of wolves,
even to coupling with females of that kind. Burgot confessed
that he had on several occasions met a tall dark man, who
declared himself to be a servant of the lord of hell, evidently
the official for the witches throughout the district. Before
this man he knelt and renounced God, Our Blessed Lady,
the Saints, his baptism ; swearing, moreover, never again to
recite the Credo. He then kissed the stranger’s left hand,


FRANCE 397


which was black and cold as that of a corpse. It may indeed
have actually been a dead hand held from beneath a disguise
cloak. In company with Verdung, who seems to have
initiated him into these abominations, Burgot attended the
local Sabbat, where he was assigned a familiar named Moyset.
A long tale of murders followed. Both Verdung and Burgot
swore that they had killed and devoured five persons, includ-
ing a little girl of four years old and a child aged nine.7°
They were burned alive at Poligny, and about the same time
a third were-wolf, Philibert Montét, was executed.

During the reign of Francis I (1515-47) a great sensation
was caused by an outbreak of demoniac possession at the
convent of St.-Pierre at Lyons. The cloister was solemnly
exorcised by a Bishop assisted by three priests. Before finally
leaving the building, the demon who had especially haunted
the dormitory, took refuge by the obsession of a nun, Sister
Alexis de Thesieux, to the great terror of the religious.
Owing, however, to the powerful prayers of the exorcists she
was presently delivered.??

The witches who were sent to the stake for the most part
were accused of the Gnostic heresy as well as sorcery. Thus
a warlock, who ate meat on a Friday without a dispensation,
was burned in 1539. A woman, who had committed
bestiality with a dog, her familiar, was executed in 1540
at Toulouse. In the same year the Norman Parliament
burned in the old Market-Place at Rouen two shepherds of
Tosny, a hamlet near Gisors, by name Delarue and Morin,
who had confessed their Satanism and witchcrafts to the
hurt of man and beast.

In the days of Henri II (1547-59) the punishment of
witches began to be more drastically and more systematic-
ally prosecuted by the civil arm. Seven sorcerers were
burned at Nantes in 1549, one of the chief articles against
them being that they had composed a grimoire, which they
intended to take to the witches of Norcia for evil consecra-
tion.78 They seem to have had the power of throwing them-
selves at will into mediumistic trances during which they
supposed they had attended the Sabbat, the revolting details
of which they described with extraordinary exactitude. In
1549, also, the Vicar of St. Jean at Lyons 7? was condemned
to the stake as a sorcerer.


398 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


In 1556 a witch was put to death at Biévres, a village some
two leagues from Laon. She confessed that she had had
carnal connexion with a demon who served her for many
years. She was condemned to be strangled and burned, but
by the bungling of the executioner she was consumed
alive.

Under Charles IX (1560-74) the trials begin to be even
more frequent, and fuller details are forthcoming. In 1564 at
Poitiers three warlocks and a witch confessed that they had
worshipped a monstrous goat, whom they obscenely kissed
offering each a candle in sign of homage. They had danced,
back to back, at the Sabbat, around the throne of Satan who
played upon a flute or pipe of shrill and hideous note. All
were summarily put to death. Apres auoir esté accusés, &
coueincus de plusiers malefices, ils furent tous bruslez.®°

At Laon, Nicole Aubry, the wife of a tailor of Vervins,
declared herself possessed. She declared that she was
surrounded by the shadowy forms of demons who threatened
her, and at last she fell into a cataleptic state, and when
roused spoke in a harsh rough voice entirely unlike her own.
The Bishop of Laon himself interviewed and afterwards
exorcised her ; she answered in a trance-like state questions
put to her in Hebrew and Greek in the tongues they were
asked ; she resolved theological difficulties, and above all
acknowledged the truth of Christ’s Body in the Most Holy
Sacrament ; she had intimate knowledge of affairs passing
at a distance as was several times proved by the event.

The Prince de Condé, who had just apostatized to Protes-
tantism, was so confounded and enraged that he flung her
into prison, but Charles IX promptly released her from so
unjust a durance, and compensated her husband with a
handsome bounty.®!

In 1571 or 1574 was executed on the Place de Gréve at
Paris, a sorcerer named Trois-Echelles. The extraordinary
feats he accomplished had long excited suspicion, and when
interrogated he confessed before the King, the Marshals de
Montmorency, De Retz, and the Sieur du Mazille, the royal
physician, that he had sold himself to the Devil by whose aid
he- performed these sorceries. He described at great length
the saturnalia of the fiends, the sacrifices which they offered
up, the debaucheries they committed with the young and


FRANCE 399


handsome witches, and the various modes of preparing the
infernal unguent for blighting cattle. He said he had upwards
of twelve hundred accomplices in the crime of Witchcraft in
various parts of France, whom he named to the King, and
many of whom were afterwards arrested and suffered
execution. ®?

At Déle, in 1573, Gilles Garnier, a native of Lyons, was

indicted for being a lowp-garou, or man-wolf, and for prowling in
that shape about the country at night to devour little children.
The indictment against him, as read by Henri Camus, doctor
of laws and counsellor of the King, was to the effect that he,
Gilles Garnier, had seized upon a little girl, twelve years of
age, whom he drew into a vineyard and there killed, partly
with his teeth and partly with his hands, seeming like wolf’s
paws ; that from thence he trailed her bleeding body along
the ground with his teeth into the wood of La Serre, where he
ate the greatest portion of her at one meal, and carried the
remainder home to his wife; that upon another occasion,
eight days before the festival of All Saints, he was seen to
seize another child in his teeth, and would have devoured her
had she not been rescued by the country people, and that the
said child died a few days afterwards of the injuries he had
inflicted ; that fifteen days after the same festival of All
Saints, being again in the shape of a wolf, he devoured a boy
thirteen years of age, having previously torn off his leg and
thigh with his teeth, and hid them away for his breakfast on
the morrow. He was furthermore indicted for giving way to
the same diabolical and unnatural propensities even in his
shape of a man; and that he had strangled a boy in a wood
with the intention of eating him, which crime he would have
effected—‘‘ nonobstant qu’il fust iour de uendredy ”—
if he had not been seen by the neighbours and prevented.
- Gilles Garnier was put to the rack after fifty witnesses had
deposed against him. He confessed everything that was laid
to his charge. He was thereupon brought back into the
presence of his judges, when Dr. Camus, in the name of the
parliament of Déle, pronounced the following sentence :—

“Seeing that Gilles Garnier has, by the testimony of
credible witnesses, and by his own spontaneous confession,
been proven guilty of the abominable crimes of lycanthropy
and witchcraft, this court condemns him, the said Gilles, to be


400 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


this day taken in a cart from this spot to the place of execution,
accompanied by the executioner (maitre exécuteur de la haute
justice), where he, by the said executioner, shall be tied to a
stake and burned alive, and that his ashes be then scattered
to the winds. The court further condemns him, the said
Gilles, to the costs of this prosecution.

‘“‘ Given at Déle, this 18th day of January, 1573.”

In 1574 was hanged at Paris a sorcerer who denounced
more than one hundred and fifty persons, of whom several
were executed being found guilty of having committed
horrible profanations upon the Host. ‘*‘ Mais ceux qui furent
pendus furent conuaincus d’auoir plusiers fois vsé de lhostie
consacree en leurs sorcelleries.’’8? In the same year was also
executed a gentleman who was discovered to have a waxen
image the heart of which was pierced by a long bodkin
stained with blood.

The same long record of trials continues under Henry III
(1574-89), most decadent of monarchs, who spent his days
between the caresses of his curled minions and penitential
processions of bleeding flagellants to avert the wrath of
Heaven. It were tedious and useless to recapitulate condemna-
tion after condemnation. In 1576 Marguerite Pajot was
executed at Tonnerre. She had for years attended the Sabbat,
caused men to languish and cattle to die, and even slain an
accomplice, a wizard who refused for some reason to lend
her a Relic of the Wood of the True Cross to employ in her
sorceries. In the following year the court of Coeuvres burned
Catherine Dorée, who had sacrificed her baby to the Devil
who appeared to her as a tall dark man magnificently attired.
In 1574 at Valéry-en-Savoie eighty witches perished in one
bonfire. One of these wretches confessed that she had been an
eryge, a heretic practising magic, for upwards of thirty years.

In 1578, Jeanne Harvilliers of Verberie, near Compiégne,
was convicted of causing deaths and misfortunes by enchant-
ment. She confessed that she was witch-born, and that her
mother had offered her to Satan from the womb. From the
time she was twelve years old a stranger, whom she under-
stood to be the Devil, had debauched her. ‘‘ Et qu’au mesme
instant elle eut copulation charnellement auec le Diable, con-
tinuant depuis l’aage de douze ans, lusques a cinquante ou
enuiron, qu’elle fut prise.”’84 It came out in the process of


FRANCE 401


the trial that her mother had been burned as a witch, and the
daughter soon met the same fate.

The trial of this woman has an especial interest as it
suggested to Jean Bodin his erudite and comprehensive work
De la Demonomanie des Sorciers, which, first published at
Paris, 4to, 1580, ran into several editions: 4to, Paris, 1581
and 1582; 8vo, Anvers, 1586; ‘‘ Reueu, corrigé et aug-
menté,”’ 4to, Paris, 1587; ‘‘ De noueau reueu,” 8vo, Anvers,
1593; 8vo, Lyon, 1593; 16mo, Paris, 1598; 12mo, Paris,
1598; ‘ Quatriesme édition,” 8vo, Lyon, 1598; ‘ Edition
derniére,”’ 12mo, Rouen, 1604.

Jean Bodin, born at Angers in 1520, died at Laon in 1596.
He studied law at Toulouse, and yet unknown at forty years
of age visited Paris. Here he soon attracted attention by his
legal writings, many of which, however, are very unsound in
principle and dangerous. In 1576 he was chosen a deputy of
the Third Estate (tiers état) to the States-General of Blois, and
fourteen years later (1590) he is Attorney-General at Laon.
He was a man of shifty and ever-shifting ideas, and his
political writings betray an anti-Catholic temper, although
he ever clung to the Catholic religion, and was actually
buried in the Franciscan Church at Laon. Brunetiere assigns
Bodin a place in French literature beside Henri Estienne
and Amyot.

Throughout France execution now followed execution. In
1583 a were-wolf was burned alive at Orleans; and in the
same year a woman, named Jeanne Bonnet, suffered at
Boissy-en-Ferez for having given herself to the embrace of a
familiar. Three years later, Marie Martin of Neuf-ville-le-Roi
was discovered to be marked with the devil’s claw. She
confessed she entertained a demon, Cerberus, who escorted
her to the Sabbat, but could not save her from the gallows.
At Paris a priest, named Séchelle, was burned on the Place
de Gréve for sorcery; and a few months after one Dominic
Mirot and his mother-in-law, Marguerite, met the same fate.

It is now fairly well established that the assassination of
Henry III on 1 August, 1589, was largely the outcome of
constant reports which were assiduously circulating through-
out the north of France accusing him of Satanism. The
murder of the Cardinal of Lorraine on 28 December, 1588,
and the subsequent denunciation of the King from Parisian


402 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


pulpits as a heretic, deposed, excommunicate, had inflamed
popular feeling from rebellion to the highest pitch of civil
war, but the charges of devil-worship seem to have determined
his death. How far such rumours were well founded it is
impossible to say. A contemporary pamphlet of fifteen
pages, octavo, Les sorceleries de Henry de Valois, et les
oblations qu'il faisoit au diable dans le bois de Vincennes.
Auec la figure des démons, d’argent doré ausquels il faisoit
offrandes ; et lesquels se voyent encores en ceste ville, published
at Paris by Didier Millot in 1589,8° accuses him of having
practised Satanism almost openly with D’Epernon and other
favourites, and arraigns his homosexuality and sorceries in
sternest condemnation. It is said that in a grove of the forest
of Vincennes two silver statues of satyrs, each about four feet
high, were discovered. Opposite them stood a golden cross
in the midst of which was set a splinter of wood, presumed
to be a Relic of the True Cross. The tanned skin of a child
inscribed with magical characters lay beside the images.
Another pamphlet, Remonstrances a Henry de Valois sur les
choses horribles envoyées par un enfant de Paris, 1589, gives
fantastic stories of schools for magic being held at the Louvre,
and accuses the King of maintaining a familiar, named
Terragon, to whose embraces he compelled a public prostitute
to submit herself. Whether Henry III dabbled in occult arts
or no, and the evidence is, it must be remembered, violently
prejudiced, inimical, and partizan, it was well known at the
time that prominent Leaguers attempted the King’s death
by fashioning his image in wax, and piercing it with long pins
to the heart. But the knife of Jacques Clément proved more
efficacious than their bodkins and needles.

During the reign of Henry IV (1589-1610) there are the
same lengthy and detailed records, year after year, of witch-
trials and executions. In 1597 a certain Chamouillard was
hanged and burned for having by his charms rendered a young
demoiselle de la Barriére sterile and unable to perform the
marriage act ;8° and in the same year Jean Belon, the rector
of St.-Pierre des Lampes, in the diocese of Bourges, was put
to death for using evil enchantments. At Riom Vidal de la
Porte was condemned as a neur de l’aiguillette,8? by whose
spells not only youths, but even dogs, cats, and other animals
were rendered impotent. At Angers a were-wolf, Jacques


FRANCE 403


Roulet, who had been discovered devouring the flesh of a
child he had just strangled, was burned alive. He accused
his brother and his cousin of also being addicted lycanthropy.

Pierre Aupetit, Vicar of Pageas, a village near Chalu in the
province of Limousin, who was sent to the stake at Bordeaux
in 1598, made a long and detailed confession. He acknow-
ledged that he had attended Sabbats for twenty years past,
generally in the landes of Mathegoutte or at Puy-de-Déme.
He had frequently celebrated the black mass in honour of
Satan, who taught him to pronounce in a mocking tone the
words “ Beelzebub! Beelzebub!” after the consecration.
He confected and used a certain poison, a black powder, by
means of which he had killed several persons, notably one
Jean Maume and a man named Pichin. He also administered
aphrodisiacs to young girls, of whom he had bebauched a
large number.

Bordeaux and Rouen seem to have been two great centres
of witch executions during this period and the archives of
both cities teem with accounts of condemnations to the stake.

In 1598 a great sensation was caused at Paris by a girl
some twenty years old, Marthe Brossier, the daughter of a
weaver, who declared herself possessed. The Bishop of
Orleans who had examined her declared the case a fraud.
When she was sprinkled with ordinary water she fell into
convulsions thinking it to be holy water, and on one occasion
an adroit priest read a passage from Petronius which by her
screams and frantic gestures she obviously believed to be the
Ritual. When the family, however, appeared in the capital
these facts were, of course, carefully kept concealed, and
Henri de Gondi, Bishop of Paris, appointed five physicians
to examine the girl, who was also exorcised at Ste-Genevieve
by the Capuchins. The whole case seemed exceedingly
doubtful, and the patient began to show even more extra-
ordinary signs of possession. It may well be that although
she began with imposture her state predisposed her to actual
demoniac obsession, of which unmistakable symptoms
showed themselves. The affair made a great noise; the
Parliament interfered and directed that the girl and her
father should be sent to Romartin and kept under surveil-
lance. However, Alexander de la Rochefoucauld, abbé of
St.-Martin, apparently convinced of their sincerity, protected


404 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


them, until by his championship he came in collision with the
King, and considerable trouble ensued. It would seem that,
as I have suggested above, we have in the case of Marthe
Brossier, an admixture of conscious fraud, hysteria, no doubt,
and something which goes deeper.*®

The title of the following pamphlet, 12mo, no date but 1610,
tells its own tale: Discours prodigieux et espowuantable du
Thresorier & Baquier du Diable & son fils; qui ont esté
brusles a Vesouz en la Frache Comté le 18 Janwier 1610. Apres
auoir confessé une infinité de malefices et sorcelleries par eux
comises. Ensemble le moyen comme ils furent descowuers.
Auec la copie de l’ Arrest du Parlement de Dole. Lyon. Iean
Doret. Mansfredo Dorlady, and Fernando, his son, were
denounced by Georges Roulet as holding the unique position
of bankers to the Devil. He swore that he had been presented
with a draft for money by a tall dark man who, as he after-
wards discovered, was none other than Satan, and that it was
immediately honoured by the house of Dorlady. He was
closely interrogated, and persisted in his tale, adding a
quantity of extraordinary details concerning a toad, which
was believed to be a familiar. Dorlady and his son were
arrested, confessed under torture, and were burned at Vesoul,
18 January, 1610.

It may be well briefly to consider here three figures of
prime importance in the history of French Witchcraft, Nicolas
Remy, Henri Boguet, and Pierre de Lancre.

Born at Charmes in 1530 Nicolas Remy,®® after having
filled various legal positions of importance, in 1575 was
appointed secretary to Duke Charles III of Lorraine, and in
the following year a member of the supreme judicial court of
Nancy. His business was not only concerned with trials in
the bailiwick of Nancy itself, but it was also his duty to
examine into, confirm or dismiss, any appeals which were
made from the other courts throughout Lorraine, and it was
owing to his activities in this function that he gained the
reputation of the scourge of witches. During the fifteen
years (1576-91) he held this office he pronounced or ratified
about nine hundred capital sentences against sorcerers,
that is to say some sixty a year, an average of more than
one a week. In 1591 he became procurator-general, and as
such was armed with almost unlimited powers of control


FRANCE 405


over all the courts of justice in the whole duchy. Not only
did he encourage the magistrates to exercise the utmost
vigilance in the pursuit, and the most unrelenting severity in
their condemnation, of witches, but he himself journeyed up
and down the province examining suspects, searching out
even the most remote villages and hamlets, and inquiring
into all cases of witchcraft with tireless energy. Remy died in
1612. He was a man of considerable learning, and among
his compositions are several historical works of value,
especially a History of Lorraine. But the most famous of his
productions is his Demonolatry, a vast collection of trials and
examinations of witches, with amplest details upon the
Sabbat, their enchantments, magic practices, spells and
harms, culled from hundreds of confessions. It is, indeed,
a terrible, and in some sense an awe-inspiring, volume.
Nicolai Remigti, Sereniss. ducis Lotharingie a consiliis
interioribus et in eius ditione lotharingica cognitoris publici
DZMONOLATRI& libri tres, ex iudiciis capitalibus nongentorum
plus minus hominum, qui sortilegit crimen intra annos
quindecim in Lotharingia capite luerunt.®°

At the same time as Remy was prosecuting his crusade
in Lorraine, Henri Boguet, president of the tribunal of Saint-
Claude, in the province of Burgundy, was displaying an
equal activity and no less severity in his pursuit of witches
throughout the district of the Jura. It has been calculated
that he ordered at least six hundred executions, many of
these being upon charges of lycanthropy.

By 1590 Boguet had published his famous Discours des
Sorciers avec six advis en faiet de Sorcelerie et une instruction
pour un Juge en semblable matiére,*1 a book which ran into
at least eleven editions. In spite of this it is, however, very
rare owing to the fact that Boguet’s family and heirs bought
up every copy they could find to destroy them. The
Instruction is dedicated to ‘“‘M. Romanet, juge a Salins,”
and consists of ninety-one articles. The merest suspicion of
sorcery is enough to insure the arrest of the accused, who
must be most carefully watched by the magistrate. Should
the prisoner not shed a tear, should he fix his eyes on the
ground, should he mutter to himself, above all should he
utter any oath or blasphemy, there is a strong presumption
of guilt. It is well for a clerk to be concealed behind a curtain,


406 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


who may take down an exact record of the interrogations.
Wise physicians should search the prisoner to discover the
Devil’s mark. Boguet does not approve of the custom of some
judges who promise release after a full confession and then
do not hesitate to break their word. Any witness may be
admitted, even a child. The fitting punishment is the stake.
Witches may be strangled and their dead bodies consumed to
ashes, but it is fitting that were-wolves, as specially heinous
offenders, be burned alive. No doubt the learned Daniel
Romanet was vastly edified by this treatise, the provisions
of which he probably put into practice. Boguet died in 1619.

In 1608 a certain Seigneur de Saint-Pé complained to the
Parliament of Bordeaux of the fearful increase of witches,
who even held their Sabbat not far from his manor, where-
upon orders were given that two judges should form a com-
mission extraordinary to visit the whole district of Bayonne
and Labourd, a locality which was terribly infected. The
two councillors who went out on this special circuit were
Jean d’Espagnet and Pierre de Lancre. The writings of the
latter not only give us a full account of the trials and examina-
tions, but the amplest possible details upon the Sabbat and
every abomination of Witchcraft. It must be remembered
that De Lancre was a scholar, a patron and follower of the
fine arts, a writer of no inconsiderable power and precision,
a clear-headed shrewd observer of men and manners. The
works of De Lancre are as follows: Tableau de ’inconstance
et instabilité de toutes choses, ow il est monstré, qu’en Diew seul
gist la vraye Constance a laquelle Vhomme sage doit viser. . . .
Seconde édition. Paris. La vefue Abel L’ Angelier. 4to, 1610
and 1611, a treatise afterwards revised and expanded as
Tableav de Vinconstance des mavvais anges et démons, ov il est
amplement traicté des sorciers et de la sorcelerie. Livre trés
vtile et nécessaire, non seulement aux Iuges, mais a tous ceux
qui viuent soubs les loix chrestiennes. Avec vn discours
contenant la procedure faicte par les Inquisiteurs d’ Espagne
et de Nauarre a 58 magiciens, apostats, Iuifs, et sorciers, en la
ville de Logrogne en Castille, le 9 nouembre, 1610. En laquelle
on voit combien Vewercice de la iustice en France est plus
iuridiquement traicté et auec de plus belles formes qu’en tous
austres empires, royaumes, républiques et estats. Paris,
Barjon, 4to, 1612.98 Ten years later De Lancre published


FRANCE 407


L’incredvlité et mescréance dv sortilege plainement convaincve.
Ov il est amplement et corievsement traicté de la verité ow illusion
du sortilege, de la fascination, de l’attouchement, du scopelisme,
de la diwination, de la ligature ou liaison magique, des appari-
tions, et d'une infinité d’ autres rares et nouueaux subjects. Paris,
Nic. Bvon., 4to. A very rare and little-known, but most
important work of De Lancre is his Du Sortilége, ow il est
traicté sil est plus expédient de supprimer et tenir soubs
silence les abominations et maléfices des sorciers que les
publier et manifester, 1627, 4to. These writings are of the
greatest value, and I have largely relied upon them in my
account of the Sabbat and other evil practices of the witches
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. De Lancre sent
to the stake a large number of sorcerers,®? and his drastic
measures went far to stamp out the evil. He found St. Jean
de Luz a centre for the witchcrafts of a wide district and here
the execution fires blazed brightly. Actually the last person
burned for sorcery in this town seems to have been a
Portuguese woman of rank, who was discovered to have
secreted the Host for magical purposes. While her case was
being investigated before the Bishop of Bayonne in the crypt
of the church, a mob of terrified fishermen, on the eve of
starting for Newfoundland, burst in, tore her out of the
church, and dragged her to the market-place where they
flung her into a huge pyre which had been previously kindled.
They averred they dare not set sail if so foul a blasphemy
were not summarily expiated. The Bishop’s procés-verbal
of the happenings is still extant in the archives of the Mairie.%*

The tale of those executed by De Lancre is uncertain,
but during the years 1609-10 so many witches were sent to
Bordeaux for punishment that the prisons were found
insufficient to contain the multitude of guilty. De Lancre died
at Paris about the year 1680.

The seventeenth century in France is especially remark-
able for the number of cases in which convents became the
scenes of Witchcraft and demoniac possession. It seemed as
though the forces of evil were launching their whole strength
against the houses of prayer and contemplation, boldly
storming the very citadels of God. As early as 1551 the
religious of the convent of Uvertet in the province of Hoorn
in Holland were seized with a mysterious malady which was


408 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


shrewdly suspected to have no natural origin. In a house
of Bridgettines near Xante the sisters imagined themselves
transformed into various animals and with loud shrieks
imitated the bleating of sheep, the squealing of pigs, the
lowing of cows, and other strange bestial sounds. The
cloisters of Hessimont near Nieumeghe were haunted by a
low sweet music which stirred the heart to passionate longings
and an agony of sensual desire. About 1560 the nuns of a
convent of Nazareth at Cologne were suspected by the
episcopal visitor to be obsessed. Upon examination they
avowed that the convent was the resort of incubi with whom
they indulged in the most unbridled licentiousness. It was,
in fact, proved that many of them had been deflowered, but
their paramours were never traced. The ecclesiastical
authorities, sore grieved and alarmed, treated the guilty with
the utmost severity. At Hensberg, in the duchy of Cleves, the
sisters complained of having seen men, who glided along the
corridors noiselessly and vanished like shadows, in the actual
clausura where no man could possibly be.

The Order of Ursulines, founded under episcopal approba-
tion by S. Angela de Merici in 1535, for the purpose of
educating young girls, spread through Italy, Germany, and
France with extraordinary rapidity. Already in 1544, when
approved by Paul III, several centres of great importance
were established, and two large and influential Congregations,
the Congregation of Paris and the Congregation of Bordeaux,
had been organized in France alone. In 1574, moreover,
Frangoise de Bermond had opened a house at Avignon, and
some twenty years later a convent was instituted at Aix,
which became famous as the school attended by all maidens
of good birth throughout the district, many of whom were
attracted to the religious life and after their own period of
tutelage, taking the vows required by the Order,®> remained
on to instruct and train new-comers. Among these was
Madeleine de Mandol, youngest daughter of Antoine
Demandols de la Palud and Francoise Glandevés-Gréoulx,
his lady, who had sent their child at a tender age to the
Ursulines of Marseilles, whence later she had been trans-
ferred to the house at Aix. The director of this convent, a
priest of an intensely mystical turn of mind, was a converted
Huguenot, Father Romillon. During the year 1609 he took


FRANCE 409


note that Sister Madeleine, and another nun, Louise Capel,
who seems to have been one of the few inmates not of aristo-
cratic birth, were attacked by a strange disorder, which did
not yield to any natural remedies. So hideous were their
convulsions, so extravagant their gestures, that the good
priest determined to exorcise them, which he accordingly did
in the sacristy of the chapel, so that no scandal might be
given. The two patients fell into the most terrible paroxysms
as the words of the ritual were pronounced ; their cries and
screams filled the assistants with horror; now they yelled
in piercing tones, now howled with a deep gruff clamour that
could hardly be believed to issue from the throats of two frail
women. Madeleine at length fell into a comatose trance and
averred that she was possessed by Beelzebub, Leviathan,
Verrine, and many other devils, to whom she had succumbed
owing to the incantations of a priest of Marseilles, Louis
Gaufridi.°® She further alleged that he had debauched
when she was but a child of nine years, and that she had
been compelled by him to nameless infamy and debauch.

Louis Gaufridi was born at Beauvezer, a village of Colmars,
situate on the right bank of the river Verdon, in 1572. He
was educated by his uncle, Christophe Gaufridi, a priest of
Pouvriéres, from whose care he passed to Marseilles, where
he distinguished himself by his eagerness for study and a
memory unusually retentive and adroit. It would seem that
these qualities, to which must be added a handsome face and
elegant manners, recommended to the notice of M. de
Demandols, who possessed estates which were bordered by the
Verdon. Soon after his ordination he was appointed vicar of
Accoules (Marseilles), and here he had opportunity for
constant intercourse with Madeleine de la Palud, who was his
penitent, and whom he sacrilegiously violated whilst she was
yet a child.

When after some eighteen months Father Romillon found
himself unable to free the two nuns, he appealed to the
saintly Sebastian Michaelis,®? a Dominician of great learning
and authority, who was then at St.-Maximin. By his advice
the sisters were brought to the sacred grotto, La Sainte-
Baume, hallowed by the tears and penances of S. Mary
Magdalen, and there exorcised by Father Francis Domptius,
O.P., who was reputed to be well skilled in these matters.


410 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Again and again the possessed launched the same accusations
against Gaufridi; there were the same scenes of hideously
unnatural agitation and violence, twisted limbs, staring eyes,
blanched faces, champing mouths that dripped with foam
and poured forth fetid blasphemies and obscenities beyond
all human imagining.

To relate the horrible story in all its details were super-
fluous. On the 5 February, 1611, Father Michaelis, who came
to Aix to preach a Lenten course in the Cathedral, submitted
his depositions to the civil authorities and demanded the
arrest of Gaufridi as a sorcerer, an apostate, a heretic soiled
with nameless crimes. This relegated the affair to Guillaume
Du Vair (ob. 1621), who although a priest, had been appointed
by Henry IV as Intendant-General of Marseilles, and a little
later had established himself at Aix with the powers and
pomp of a viceroy. A man of bitter and acrid temper his
justice became cruelty, his government a tyranny. Even his
apologist Sapey is bound to acknowledge that his despotic
rule caused him to be hated, and many memoirs of the time
speak of him with loathing and contempt. Proud in his
bearing, little in his ideas, rough in his speech, unhappy in his
temper, he met with a tart rebuff from Richelieu, who publicly
accosted him with: ‘‘ Sir, no man has ever entered upon the
office you hold with fairer opportunities; no man _ has
acquitted himself therein with greater discredit.”

On the 19 February, 1611, a commission was issued to one
de Séguiran, a councillor, to arrest Louis Gaufridi, accused
of rape, seduction, magic, sorcery, blasphemy, and other
heinous and abominable offences.

Madeleine de la Palud was interrogated during three days,
21, 22, 23 February, by President Thoron when she made the
amplest confession concerning witchcrafts of every kind,
especially the Sabbat at which she had frequently assisted.
There she had worshipped the Prince of the Synagogue (for
so the coven was called), a man, Lucifer’s lieutenant, in effect
Gaufridi himself. All present renounced the Holy Trinity,
their baptism, and the Catholic Faith. A banquet was spread
at several tables, some of which were piled with goodly viands
and wine ; upon others was served the roast flesh of newly
slain infants. Lewd dances were performed, and bawdy songs
sung. Each day of the week had its own sexual observances,


FRANCE All


proceeding to the most infamous conjunctions. The black
mass in honour of Satan was celebrated, sometimes by
Gaufridi, sometimes by some other wretch, the Host being
often thrown to a dog, and the Sacred Blood being scattered
over the vile crew who shouted : “ Sanguis eius super nos et
super filios nostros.”” Upon one occasion a dog who had been
led in to devour the consecrated Species, stretched out his
paws in adoration before God’s Body and bowed his head,
nor could kicks and blows compel him to stir. Several broke
in floods of tears and began to bewail their sins, after which
it was decreed that in future the Host should be defiled and
trodden under foot, but that no dogs should be admitted.
There seems no reason to doubt that this confession is
substantially true, and that these foul rites had been for
several years practised by a gang of infamous wretches under
conditions of all but inviolable secrecy.

Gaufridi, who was thrown into prison on the 20 February,
made a complete avowal of his iniquities, his sorceries and
seductions of religious. It is true that he was tortured
according to the usage of the day, but none the less his story
seems to be proven in every particular, and not merely wrung
from him by the torments of the question. It was published
under fifty-three articles in a rare pamphlet, Confession faicte
par messire Loys Gaufridi, prestre en Véglise des Accoules de
Marseille, prince des magiciens depuis Constantinople jusqu’a
Paris, & deux péres capuchins du couvent d’ Aix, la veille de
Pdques, le onziéme avril mil six cent onze. A Aix, par Jean
Tholozan, imprimeur du roi et de la dicte Ville. MVCXI.

On 80 April, Gaufridi was publicly degraded from all
ecclesiastical order by Monsignor Turicella, a Florentine,
erstwhile confessor to Maria de’ Medici, now Bishop of
Marseilles, and delivered over to secular justice. About five
o’clock in the afternoon he was burned at the stake before an
immense concourse of people.

Madeleine de la Palud and Louise Capel were both expelled
from the convent by the Ursulines. Of the latter nothing
more is known, but the principal actress in these scandals was
reduced to penury and was seen to beg her bread in the
streets. In after years she apparently inherited her father’s
estates, for she bestowed de la Palud upon the discalced
Trinitarians as a suitable site for a church and monastery.


412 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


In 1653 she was accused of having cast an evil spell upon
Madeleine Houdol, but she managed to clear herself, although
according to one account she was condemned to perpetual
imprisonment. This would appear to have been an easy
relegation to a convent or some institution, and there is a
tradition that she was alive as late as 1669.°§

There was an extraordinary sequel to the scandals and
sorceries of Aix when some two years after three Bridgittines of
the convent of S. Bridget of Sweden at Lille, Sisters Francoise
Bolonnais, Catherine Fournier, and Imbert, declared them-
selves to be possessed. They fell into violent paroxysms,
vomited strange substances, spoke in divers tongues normally
unknown to them, Hebrew, Greek, English, Spanish, and in
short gave every sign of Satanic disease. In their con-
vulsions they accused a nun, Marie de Sains, who until then
had been accounted a saint far advanced on the mystic way,
of having cast an evil spell upon them. When interrogated
she denied any such complicity with demons, but none the
less she was put under cloistral restraint and carefully
watched. Presently Father Sebastian Michaelis and Father
Domptius, the two Dominican exorcists, arrived at Lille, and
proceeded to examine closely into the affair. Marie de Sains
was closely questioned by these experts, and before long she
made the most astounding confessions. She swore that she
had dedicated herself body and soul, her will, every wish and
movement to the powers of hell. She had confected charms
to cause sickness and delirium, and these she had secretly
fastened to the habits of the nuns, in the straw of their pallets,
in some corner of their cells. It was these which caused the
possession of the three Sisters, as well as the diabolic attacks
on Sister Vandermotte, Sister Launoy, and Sister Peronne,
who were now on the verge of madness. The formula for
these amulets of evil power had been invented by none other
than Louis Gaufridi, who had taught her how to fashion them
at the Sabbat. They were composed of the Sacred Host and
the Precious Blood, commingled into a paste with a powder
made from human and animal bones, the skulls of infants,
hair, nails, flesh, the liver, brain, and spleen of an executed
murderer, and the semen of a sorcerer. She further avowed
that she had slain a number of young children, many of whom
she had cut open alive to offer their agonized and writhing


FRANCE 413


limbs as a sacrifice to the Devil. Some she had suffocated :
others she had put to death in exquisite torments. Several
she had crucified in mockery of the Cross of Calvary. She
added the most obscene details concerning the debaucheries
of the Sabbat, where she had abandoned herself to every
species of lewdness, defiling her body with the demons, with
goats and dogs. What is even more surprising she uttered
long dissertations upon the coming of Anti-Christ and
expounded the more obscure prophecies of the Apocalypse.
The Man of Sin was the offspring of a witch and a demon,
he was baptized by Gaufridi, and ere long would be manifested
upon earth. In hideous mimicry of the mission of S. John
Baptist, he also would be distinguished by a precursor, the son
of Gaufridi and Madeleine de la Palud. The wretched woman
was discovered to be pregnant, and she acknowledged she had
already given birth to two children, the father of the first
being a warlock who had deflowered her during the orgies of
the Sabbat, the father of the second Gaufridi. Another
sister, named Didyme, and a novice, Simonne Dourlet, were
intimately concerned in these abominations. Frantic and
extravagant as much of the confession of Marie de Sains was ;
in some details, humanly speaking, impossible; it was
established beyond all doubt that a very substantial amount
of fact underlay her ravings. She had for many years
managed to creep out of the convent secretly at night,
helped by her accomplices and sometimes accompanied by
them. She was wont to resort to a den of Satanists, where
the lubric scenes she rehearsed in such detail were actually
transacted. Her brain was obviously unsettled by her
debaucheries, but even at this distance of time it is possible
to disentangle to some extent the false from the true in her
story. We know that the witches had a very ample know-
ledge of toxicants and drugs, and a subtly administered
potion would account for the sickness and distractions of the
sisters, whom she probably feared and hated as having some
suspicion or even knowledge of her clandestine excursions.
The Bishop of Mechlin, who caused the case to be examined
by a conclave of divines, physicians, and lawyers, declared
that such blasphemies and depravity were incredible indeed,
but yet he was convinced that much of her confession was
only too terribly true. Marie de Sains was condemned by the


414 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


ecclesiastical court to perpetual imprisonment in the dungeons
of Tournai.*?

The case of the possessions at Loudun has often been told,
and famous as it is hardly offers any new details which call
for a lengthy investigation. In 1617 Urbain Grandier, a
young and gallant priest, good-looking, witty, elegant and
eloquent in the pulpit, was appointed vicar of Saint-Pierre
du Marché at Loudun. His fascinating exterior, gracious
manners, and silvery tongue found him many friends, whilst
an overweening pride and intellectual contemptuousness of
his colleagues made him not a few enemies. He was vulner-
able too ; stories of his amours began soon to circulate. His
intrigue with Philippe Trincant, daughter of the procureur
of the King at Loudun, resulted in the birth of a child. His
relations with several of his penitents were extremely
improper, and a young girl Madeleine de Brou, whom he had
seduced, was so openly his mistress that considerable scandal
ensued to the great chagrin of certain holy Carmelites and
Capuchins, belonging to the houses of those orders at Loudun.
With fatal imprudence in 1617 Grandier also gave offence to
Richelieu, Bishop of Lucon, and at that time in retirement at
the priory of Coussay owing to his disfavour with Louis XIII.
One account tells us that Grandier refused to allow the Bishop
due precedence in a solemn procession ; another story has it
that somewhat later he published a satire, La cordonniére de
Loudun, attacking the mighty minister ; however that may
be, upon his return to power Richelieu neither forgot nor
forgave. In 1630 the opponents of Grandier laid a complaint
before Louis de la Rocheposay, Bishop of Poitiers, accusing
him of immorality, and after an inquiry a penance was
imposed, and the guilty priest was inhibited a rebus diwinis
for five years in the diocese and in Loudun itself in perpetuum.
The following year, however, Henri de Soublis, Archbishop
of Bordeaux, quashed the whole proceedings.

Reports were now current that several of the Sisters of the
Ursuline convent at Loudun were possessed. The superior,
Sister Jeanne des Anges (in the world Madame de Beleiel),
had been seized with a succession of alarming fits which
shortly communicated themselves to other religious. It was
whispered that phantoms had been seen in the cloister, and
strangely hollow voices heard to mutter and gibber during the


FRANCE A15


still night watches. The director of the nuns, Mignon, called
in several Carmelite Fathers to help him in exorcising the
afflicted, and presently they had resource to the vicar of
Saint-Jacques at Chinon, Pierre Barré, a priest of austere
and severely simple life. After long preparation the superior
and a lay sister Jeanne Dumagnoux were exorcised according
to the ritual. The superior at the first words fell into fearful
paroxysms, her face seemed to alter to that of a grinning
fiend, a circumstance which filled the bystanders with no
ordinary fear; her tongue, black and swollen, was thrust
from her parched and cracking lips; her skin dripped with
sweat; her limbs which seemed endued with an unnatural
elasticity writhed and twisted in all directions; her body
balloonered to an immense size; whilst a harsh mocking
voice growled out that two devils, Asmodeus and Zabulon,
possessed her. Again and again were the exorcisms renewed,
and the patients began loudly to accuse Grandier of having
bewitched them. After a while two magistrates, Messire
Guillaume Cerisay de la Gueriniére, seneschal of the district,
and Messire Louis Chauvet, lieutenant civil, attended to take
the depositions of the possessed. The proceedings now
dragged on for several months and made a great noise.
Grandier was warned of his peril, but seemed to despise the
danger. Several new exorcists were summoned, notably
Father Lactance, a well-known Franciscan of spotless
integrity, and Father Tranquille of Saint-Rémi, a Capuchin.
The possessed nuns were exorcised in the church, which was
crowded with people, and reiterated their charges against
Grandier, who had, they asserted, entered into a close
compact with the lords of hell. It so happened that the
all-powerful Jean de Laubardemont was at Loudun to
superintend the destruction of the castle of that town. He
issued orders for the arrest of Grandier, who was accordingly
thrown into prison on the 80 November, 1683. The evidence
of the exorcists, the Carmelites and Capuchins, was carefully
taken; the court examined the sisters again and again ;
divines and physicians attended the exorcisms and watched
the possessed Ursulines night and day; Grandier, at whose
house a heretical document of the most incriminating nature
was discovered, was interrogated with unwearied patience.
The surgeon Mannouri was charged to search the prisoner


416 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


for the Devil’s mark, and reported that he had found two
places on his body insensible to any probe, although a needle
had been inserted some inches into the flesh. At length, on
the 18 August, 1634, the tribunal condemned Grandier to
the stake. The unfortunate wretch was declared to have
been “duly tried and convicted of the crime of magic, of
injuries and possessions practised upon the persons of several
Ursuline nuns of this town of Loudun, as well as upon other
seculars,’”” whereupon after having made public confession
of his faults ‘‘ before the principal door of the church of Saint-
Pierre du Marché, and before that of Sainte-Ursule of this
town” he was to be taken “‘ to the public place of Sainte-
Croix, and fastened to a stake upon a scaffold, which shall be
erected upon the said place, and there to be burnt alive,
together with all the compacts and magical characters used
by him, as well as the manuscript book composed by him
against the celibacy of priests; and his ashes scattered to
the wind.”

Before this sentence was carried out Grandier was put to
the question, ordinary and extraordinary. He was then
conveyed to the various churches, where the public acts of
reparation were to be performed in a low cart, and thence to
the place of execution. All this was done on the same day,
the sentence having been pronounced as early as five o’clock,
and the burning being accomplished about four in the after-
noon. It is noteworthy that the possession of the nuns did
not cease at Grandier’s death, but that they were tormented
for several years more. The famous Jesuit, Jean-Joseph
Surin (1600-65), celebrated as a mystical director, a true
saint—* consumed with spirituality,’ is Bossuet’s phrase—
was sent to Loudun to exorcise the harassed Ursulines. He
was so horrified at the terrible sacrileges intended for three
desecrated Hosts that a physical breakdown of health and a
long-continued psychic obsession resulted, but with heroic
charity he persevered in his task and after three years, in
1637, the unhappy victims were freed. From that time
sister Jeanne des Anges, who had been so grievously tor-
mented, was rewarded with heavenly consolations and died
a holy death in 1665.19

Throughout the whole history of Witchcraft there is no
history so infamous as that of Madeleine Bavent, Mathurin


FRANCE 417


Picard, and Thomas Boullé. Nowhere have I read so hideous
a confession. The details are so utterly abominable that even
the soul of a priest steeped in the fires of the confessional,
whom no human aberration can shock or surprise, shudders
and sickens at the dark mass of turpitudes which are as the
stench and vomit of the pit of hell.

In 1616 at Louviers, a busy little old-world town of
Normandy situate on the river Eure, some seven-and-twenty
miles from Rouen, was founded the convent of S. Louis IX
and S. Elizabeth of Hungary, for a community of Regular
Tertiaries of the Third Franciscan Order. Their first director
was an old priest named David, shortly to be succeeded by
Mathurin Picard, the vicar of Mesnil-Jourdain, whose curate,
Thomas Boullé, assisted him, and upon his death in 1642
was installed with full responsibility in his room. By some
unhappy fate—it was more than mere chance without
design—all three were adherents of the Manichees, concealing
their Satanism under a guise of orthodox sanctity. From the
commencement they set to work to corrupt the hapless
religious whose faithful pastors and guardians they should
have been, and instead of lifting their souls to heaven they
dragged them down to the nethermost inferno. As early as
1684 there were indications that something was seriously
amiss. Two or three Sisters were seized with fits of an
abnormal nature, now standing rigid in some paralytic trance,
now foaming on the ground in an epilepsy and writhing as
some boneless contortionist of the circus arena. Matters,
however, seem to have been hushed up for a while, although
the infamous Picard ran some danger of being exposed.
He was, in truth, the Chief Officer and Grand-Master of all
the witches and devil-worshippers throughout the district.
Having seduced and entirely subjected to his will an unfortu-
nate nun, Madeleine Bavent, he used her as his instrument,
his associate, and intermediary. There can be no doubt, I
think, that Picard must have possessed extraordinary
hypnotic powers, and Madeleine Bavent is probably not to be
accounted morally responsible for the orgy of crime into
which she was plunged. The details are known from the
confession which she wrote in prison at the instance of the
Abbé de Marets, an Oratorian, who helped and counselled her
in those hours of penitence and remorse. Several nights a


418 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


week she was awakened just before Matins, that is to say
about midnight, by one of the nuns, and conducted. to the
Sabbat. It is clear that Picard had provided himself with
false keys so that he could gain admission to any part of the
cloister at any hour. She declared that she never used any
ointment or recited any spell, but that she was conveyed
to the Sabbat by the power of Picard without knowing how
she arrived there, obviously in a state of trance. The exact
place where the Sabbat took place she could not identify,
but it was presumably in some house not far from the convent.
It was a long and narrow room, lighted by flares and the
candles upon the Devil’s altar which had been erected there.
This certainly suggests a cellar. A number of persons dressed
as priests were present, and some in grotesque masking habits,
half-animal, half-human. She never assisted at any adoration
of the demon in the form of a he-goat, and the rites were
seldom followed by a banquet. The Black Mass of Satan
was continually said at the altar. The host appeared to be
of a red colour, and communion was given to the worshippers.
The liturgy was read from a book of blasphemies, which was
also carried in procession. It contained the most hideous
maledictions against all things sacred and divine, and seems
to have been a manuscript rather than a printed book. There
was also a register or roll of the Satanists in which her name
had been inscribed by David. This was kept with the utmost
care and Madeleine was never told the names of any who were
present. She recognized four religious from her own house,
Catherine of the Cross, Catherine of S. Genevieve, Elizabeth
of the Nativity, and Anne Barré, also Thomas Boullé and
several other priests whom she knew only by sight, probably
as having served the convent chapel. Prominent among the
assistants were an elderly man with iron-grey hair, who was
generally richly dressed in a purple velvet suit, and a matron,
said to be Mother Frances of the Cross (in the world Simonne
Gangain), a co-foundress of the Louviers convent, who
ordinarily resided at Paris. It is impossible to relate certain
abominations and unnatural defilements of the Blessed
Sacrament which these evil priests practised. The details
are frankly too monstrous for reproduction.1°! The wretched
woman further related: ‘‘ On the Good Friday night of one
year Picard and Boullé brought with them four Hosts ; two


FRANCE 419


of these they put in their own mouths, and the other two into
Mother Simonne’s mouth and mine; then they exchanged
theirs for ours in order to cement for ever the union and
connexion between us. One night, after the book of blas-
phemies had been carried in procession, a little crucifix was
brought in and large Hosts were nailed to the hands and feet
of the figure of Christ, and each one present stabbed the Hosts
with a sharp knife. There fell two or three drops of blood,
which were gathered up carefully and preserved with the
Hosts to confect a charm.” ‘I cannot but believe,’’ she
cried in tones of utter despair, ‘‘ that this is a renewal of the
Crucifixion of Our Lord.” On one occasion a priest brought
a Host to burn it; and another time a priest brought a
chalice half-filled with the Precious Blood, which they poured
out over the floor. One Holy Saturday a woman handed over
to these men-devils her newly born child. The babe was
crucified on a rough cross, its little hands and feet being
fastened to the wood with nails which pierced large Hosts.
Two men, who had ventured to the Sabbat out of curiosity,
filled with horror at the spectacle refused to take part in the
orgies of lust and murder. They were not allowed to leave
the house alive. Picard used to delight to subject the
miserable Madeleine to the most infamous sexual connexions,
to prostitute her publicly before the fiendish assembly. In
fine, the pages of de Sade contain nothing fouler than the
confessions of this wretched woman; the most cruel and
obscene episodes of Justine or Juliette pale before the sworn
statement of this demoniac nun.

Mathurin Picard died in 1642, and was buried in the chapel
of the Franciscans, near the choir grille. No doubt Boullé,
who succeeded him, could not maintain the same magnetic
influence over the Sisters as their late director, and the master-
mind removed conscience began to make itself heard. Several
religious sickened of a strange malady, and were driven
almost to madness by their guilt and the pangs of remorse.
They uttered piercing cries, accusing themselves of hideous
crimes. Fear fell upon them, and before long some twenty
inmates of the house were in the last stages of nervous
disorder, broken in spirit and body. The thing could not be
hid, and early in 1648 the Bishop of Evreux, Monsignor
Francois Péricard, determined to begin a thorough investiga-


420 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


tion. He was assisted by several Capuchin fathers of great
tact and experience. The nuns soon made the most alarming
confessions, mortally implicating Madeleine Bavent, who
they seem to have regarded as the chief instrument of their
undoing, the dead Picard, the living Boullé. The good
Bishop did not delay to promulgate his sentence. Madeleine
Bavent was to be degraded from religion and imprisoned for
life; the body of Picard was no longer to be suffered to
remain in consecrated earth, but to be disinterred and flung
with contumely into a ditch, le Puits Cronier, which lay
outside the boundaries of the town; Boullé was pronounced
worthy of death. This judgement was delivered on 12 March,
1648, and before a few months were out Monsignor Péricard,
heart-broken at the insults offered to the Most Holy Sacra-
ment, had sunk into an untimely grave. Secular justice
stepped in, and the accused were transferred to Rouen.
Delay followed delay, and procrastination procrastination,
until after four years a final condemnation was issued by the
supreme courts. On 21 August, 1647, Thomas Boullé, after
having humbly begged pardon of God and the King before
the principal door of Rouen Cathedral, was degraded from all
ecclesiastical order, and burned alive in the market-square.
The corpse of Picard was flung into the same fire. Madeleine
Bavent remained in close confinement, and ended her days
forgotten in a dungeon. At first she revolted against her
doom, and attempted suicide, wounding her throat with a
knife she had concealed and thrusting it into her side. She
also swallowed glass, and would have starved herself to death.
In time a deep resignation succeeded, but there is no further
record of her fate. 12

The reign of Louis XIII, 1610-43, is signalized by no
decrease in the number of witch-trials, and executions were
numerous. In 1610 the Parliament of Bordeaux sent to the
flames four Spanish witches, old gipsies, three men and one
woman, who were accused of commerce with evil spirits, of
having ridden through the air on magic besoms, of destroying
persons, cattle, and the fruits of the earth by their malefic
craft. They were denounced by a priest upon whom they had
endeavoured to cast a spell.198 In 1615-16 took place an
important series of trials at Orleans when a gang of no less
than twenty-one devil-worshippers was discovered. The


FRANCE 421


whole facts are related at length by De Lancre. Three
managed to fly, but the rest were first strangled and then
burned. For many years they had secretly attended Sabbats,
at which the Black Mass with all its abominations, followed
by an unspeakable riot of lust and blasphemy, was continually
celebrated. An old villain of seventy-seven, named Silvain
Névillon, confessed that on one occasion no less than two
hundred persons, many of whom were masqued, had
assembled for these orgies. In 1618 the Provost of Londi-
niéres hanged eight wretches who were found guilty of attend-
ing the Sabbat and adoring Satan there. In fact, the archives
of Rouen, Orleans, Bordeaux and other great cities contain an
almost innumerable list of trials and condemnation, whilst
in their proportion the smaller towns and even villages are
no whit behind in their holocausts and hangings.

When Concini, Maréchal d’Ancre, had been shot dead on
24 April, 1617, by the King’s gentlemen, and Louis XIII
declared himself of age to govern France without the help of
his mother, Marie de’ Medici, the Louvre was cleared of a
whole pack of parasites, sorcerers, astrologers, charlatans in
medicine and magic, and Leonora Galigai, the Maréchal’s
widow and the Queen’s favourite, was brought to trial on
accumulated charges of Witchcraft and Satanism. Three
grimoires and a large number of strange periapts and amulets
were discovered in her apartments, as well as several waxen
images stuck full of black pins. It was proved that she
habitually consulted diviners and empirics, especially relying
upon the prediction of the Florentine, Cosmo Ruggieri, who
more than forty years before had been vehemently suspected
of poisoning Charles IX. She was condemned to death, and
beheaded on Saturday, 8 July, 1617, at the Place de Gréve, the
body afterwards being consumed in a huge bonfire. Political
animus, no doubt, sealed her doom, but it seems quite plain
that she was guilty of the crimes laid to her charge.'°*

In 1620 at Nancy a doctor named Poiret was burned being
accused of having debauched and bewitched an honourable
gentlewoman Marie-Elisabeth de Ranfaing. His accomplice,
Anne Boulay, who had escaped to Paris, was captured there,
and brought back to Nancy where she suffered the same fate.
A special commission of four-and-twenty judges tried the


case. 195


422 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Eight years later Desbordes, an attendant upon Charles IV,
Duke of Lorraine, was arrested at the instance of his master
upon a suspicion of having hastened the death of the Princess
Christina, mother of the Duke, by a deftly mixed potion.
Desbordes was greatly feared on account of various marvel-
lous feats he is supposed to have performed, such as causing
the figures worked in the arras to leave their station and
dance in the midst of the room. It seems probable that he
was able to hypnotize the company who witnessed this
fantastic round, and other stories point to the fact that he
was a clever prestidigitator. In any case his juggleries cost
him dear, for being found guilty of sacrilege and magic, he
was sent to the stake.1°6

In 1681 at Nancy Melchior de la Vallée was burned as a
sorcerer. 107

About the year 1650, in the reign of Louis XIV, another
case of conventual possession occurred. A house of Ursulines
at Auxonne was afflicted with a demoniac malady, and two
old peasant women were accused of having bewitched the
Sisters and their chaplains. The charges were so ill-sustained
and the evidence so flimsy that it was impossible for the court
to condemn them. They were recommended, however, to
leave the district, a verdict which threw the populace into
such a state of fury that seizing the hapless prisoners they
beat one to death with clubs and stones, and cast the other
into the Saéne where she was drowned.

In 1669-70 two brothers Ernoul and Charles Barneville
lodged a complaint with the Parliament of Rouen concerning
the increase of witches in the district of Coutances, Carentan,
and Haye du Puits. At once a number of witnesses came
eagerly forward and no less than five hundred persons,
amongst whom appear the names of a hundred priests, were
involved. Two young girls, one seventeen and the other a
year older, swore that a boy os eight had taken them to the
Sabbat. When examined on the 16 May, 1669, he acknow-
ledged the truth of the accusation. Jeanne de Boulanger
made a solemn declaration that one evening she had seen
many persons in a remote place dancing naked and perform-
ing lewd rites. Another witness Michel Marais had caught
sight of several companies who were dancing in a state of
nudity. The same story was related by many others,


FRANCE 423


especially by Isaac Marais, who sleeping in a lonely hut in
the forest, was awakened by a strange music and peeping
through a chink saw a procession of naked persons of both
sexes, each one of whom held a black candle burning with a
sulphurous blue flame. Jean le Cousteur described the Black
Mass at the Sabbat, which was chanted by a priest named
Marin, the deacon being Jacques le Gastelois, and the sub-
deacon Semion, the base-born child of a trull named
Marguerite. Six months and more were spent in searching
inquiries, and at length twelve wretches were condemned to
immediate execution, and the capital sentence on four-and-
thirty was only deferred until after the first burnings. An
appeal, however, was made to the King, and Louis after hearing
the case commuted the sentences to perpetual banishment.
The Parliament, amazed and dumbfounded, protested vigor-
ously and addressed the following weighty remonstrance to
the monarch who had thus clipped their claws.


““ SrrE,—Emboldened by the authority which Your
Majesty has committed into our hands in the Province of
Normandy, to try and punish offences, and more particularly
those offences of the nature of witchcraft, which tend to the
destruction of religion and the ruin of nations, We, Your
Parliament, remonstrate humbly with Your Majesty upon
certain cases of this kind which have been lately brought
before us. We cannot permit the letter addressed by Your
Majesty’s command to the Attorney-General of this district,
for the reprieve of certain persons condemned to death for
witchcraft, and for the staying of proceedings in several other
cases, to remain unnoticed, and without remarking upon the
consequences which may ensue. There is also a letter from
Your Secretary of State, declaring Your Majesty’s intention
to commute the punishment of these criminals into one of
perpetual banishment, and to submit to the opinion of the
Procureur-General, and of the most learned members of the
Parliament of Paris, whether, in the matter of witchcraft, the
jurisprudence of the Parliament of Rouen is to be followed in
preference to that of the Parliament of Paris, and of the other
Parliaments of the kingdom which judge differently.

‘“‘ Although by the ordinances of the Kings your predeces-
sors, Parliaments have been forbidden to pay any attention


424 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


to lettres de cachet; We, nevertheless, from the knowledge
which We have, in common with the whole kingdom, of the
care bestowed by Your Majesty for the good of your subjects,
and from the submission and obedience to your command-
ments which We have always manifested, have stayed all
proceedings, in conformity to your orders ; hoping that Your
Majesty, considering the importance of the crime of witch-
craft, and the consequences likely to ensue from its impunity,
will be graciously pleased to grant us once more your
permission to continue the trials, and execute judgement
upon those found guilty. And as, since We received the letter
of your Secretary of State, we have also been made acquainted
with the determination of Your Majesty, not only to commute
the sentence of death passed upon these witches into one of
perpetual banishment from the province, but to re-establish
them in the possession of their goods and chattels, and of their
good fame and character, Your Parliament have thought it
their duty, on occasion of these crimes, the greatest which men
can commit, to make you acquainted with the general and
uniform feelings of the people of this Province with regard to
them ; it being, moreover, a question in which are concerned
the glory of God and the relief of your suffering subjects, who
groan under their fears from the threats and menaces of this
sort of persons, and who feel the effects of them every day in
the mortal and extraordinary maladies which attack them,
and the surprising damage and loss of their possessions.

“Your Majesty knows well that there is no crime so
opposed to the commands of God as witchcraft, which
destroys the very foundation of religion, and draws strange
abominations after it. It is for this reason, Sire, that the
Scriptures pronounce the punishment of death against
offenders, and that the Church and the holy Fathers have
fulminated their anathemas, and that canonical decisions
have one and all decreed the most severe punishments, to
deter from this crime: and that the Church of France,
animated by the piety of the Kings Your predecessors, has
expressed so great a horror at it, that, not judging the
punishment of perpetual imprisonment, the highest it has the
power to inflict, sufficiently severe, it has left such criminals
to be dealt with by the secular power.


“It has been the general feeling of all nations that such


FRANCE 425


criminals ought to be condemned to death, and all the ancients
were of the same opinion. The law of the ‘ Twelve Tables,’
which was the principal of the Roman laws, ordains the same
punishment. All jurisconsults agreed in it, as well as the
constitutions of the Emperors, and more especially those of
Constantine and Theodosius, who, enlightened by the
Gospel, not only renewed the same punishment, but also
deprived, expressly, all persons found guilty of witchcraft of
the right of appeal, and declared them to be unworthy of a
Prince’s mercy. And Charles VIII., Sire, inspired by the
same sentiments, passed that fine and severe ordinance (cette
belle et sévére ordonnance), which enjoined the Judges to
punish witches according to the exigencies of the case, under
a penalty of being themselves fined or imprisoned, or
dismissed from their office ; and decreed, at the same time,
that all persons who refused to denounce a witch, should be
punished as accomplices ; and that all, on the contrary, who
gave evidence against one should be rewarded.

‘* From these considerations, Sire, and in the execution of
so holy an ordinance, your Parliaments, by their decrees,
proportion their punishments to the guilt of the offenders ;
and your Parliament of Normandy has never, until the
present time, found that its practice was different from that
of other courts; for all the books which treat upon this
matter cite an infinite number of decrees condemning witches
to be burnt, or broken on the wheel, or to other punishments.
The following are examples :—In the time of Chilperic,1°°
as may be seen in Gregory of Tours, b. vi. c. 85 of his History
of France,'® all the decrees of the Parliament of Paris passed
according to, and in conformity with, this ancient juris-
prudence of the kingdom, cited by Imbert, in his Judicial
Practice ; all those cited by Monstrelet, in 1459, against the
witches of Artois; the decrees of the same parliament, of the
13 of October 1578, against Mary le Fief, native of Saumur ;
of the 21 of October 1596, against the Sieur de Beaumont,
who pleaded, in his defence, that he had only sought the aid
of the devil for the purpose of unbewitching the afflicted and
of curing diseases ; of the 4 of July 1606, against Francis du
Bose ; of the 20 of July 1582, against Abel de la Rue, native
of Coulommiers ; of the 2 of October 1593, against Rousseau
and his daughter; of 1608, against another Rousseau and


426 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


one Peley, for witchcraft and adoration of the Devil at the
Sabbat, under the figure of a he-goat, as confessed by them ;
the decree of 4 of February 1615, against Leclerc, who
appealed from the sentence of the Parliament of Orleans, and
who was condemned for having attended the Sabbat, and
confessed, as well as two of his accomplices, who died in
prison, that he had adored the Devil, renounced his baptism
and his faith in God, danced the witches’ dance, and offered
up unholy sacrifices; the decrees of the 6 of May 1616,
against a man named Leger, on a similar accusation; the
pardon granted by Charles [X. to Trois Echelles, upon
condition of revealing his accomplices, but afterwards
revoked for renewed sorcery on his part; the decree of the
Parliament of Paris, cited by Mornac in 1595; the judgements
passed in consequence of the commission given by Henry IV.
to the Sieur de |’Ancre, councillor of the Parliament of
Bourdeaux; of the 20 of March 1619, against Etienne
Audibert ; those passed by the chamber of Nerac, on the 26
of June 1620, against several witches ; those passed by the
Parliament of Toulouse in 1577, as cited by Gregory
Tolosanus,!!° against four hundred persons accused of this
crime, and who were all marked with the sign of the devil.
Besides all these, we might recal to your majesty’s recollec-
tion the various decrees of the Parliament of Provence,
especially in the case of Gaufredi in 1611 ; the decrees of the
Parliament of Dijon, and those of the Parliament of Rennes,
following the example of the condemnation of the Marshal de
Rais, who was burned in 1441, for the crime of witchcraft, in
presence of the Duke of Brittany ;—all these examples, Sire,
prove that the accusation of witchcraft has always been
punished with death by the parliaments of Your kingdom,
and justify the uniformity of their practice.

“These, Sire, are the motives upon which Your Parliament
of Normandy has acted in decreeing the punishment of death
against the persons lately brought before it for this crime.
If it has happened that, on any occasion, these Parliaments,
and the Parliament of Normandy among the rest, have
condemned the guilty to a less punishment than that of death,
it was for the reason that their guilt was not of the deepest
dye: Your Majesty, and the Kings Your predecessors,
having left full liberty to the various tribunals to whom they


FRANCE 427


delegated the administration of justice, to decree such
punishment as was warranted by the evidence brought
before them.

‘After so many authorities, and punishments ordained
by human and divine laws, We humbly supplicate Your
Majesty to reflect once more upon the extraordinary results
which proceed from the malevolence of this sort of people ;
on the deaths from unknown diseases, which are often the
consequence of their menaces, on the loss of the goods and
chattels of Your subjects, on the proofs of guilt continually
afforded by the insensibility of the marks upon the accused,
on the sudden transportation of bodies from one place to
another, on the sacrifices and nocturnal assemblies, and other
facts, corroborated by the testimony of ancient and modern
authors, and verified by so many eye-witnesses, composed
partly of accomplices, and partly of people who had no
interest in the trials beyond the love of truth, and confirmed,
moreover, by the confessions of the accused parties them-
selves; and that, Sire, with so much agreement and con-
formity between the different cases, that the most ignorant
persons convicted of this crime have spoken to the same
circumstances, and in nearly the same words, as the most
celebrated authors who have written about it, all of which
may be easily proved to Your Majesty’s satisfaction by the
records of various trials before Your Parliaments.

‘“‘ These, Sire, are truths so intimately bound up with the
principles of our religion, that, extraordinary although they
be, no person has been able to this time to call them in
question. If some have cited, in opposition to these truths,
the pretended canon of the Council of Ancyra, and a passage
from S. Augustine, in a treatise upon the Spirit and the
Soul, it has been without foundation ; and it would be easy
to convince Your Majesty that neither the one nor the other
ought to be accounted of any authority ; and besides that the
Canon, in this sense, would be contrary to the opinion of all
succeeding Councils of the Church, Cardinal Baronius and all
learned commentators agree that it is not to be found in any
old edition. In effect, in those editions wherein it is found,
it is in another language, and is in direct contradiction to the
twenty-third Canon of the same Council, which condemns
sorcery, according to all preceding constitutions. Even


428 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


supposing that this Canon was really promulgated by the
Council of Ancyra, we must observe that it was issued in the
second century, when the principal attention of the Church
was directed to the destruction of paganism. For this reason,
it condemns that class of women who said they could pass
through the air, and over immense regions, with Diana and
Herodias, and enjoins all preachers to teach the falsehood of
such an opinion, in order to deter people from the worship of
these false divinities ; but it does not question the power of
the Devil over the human body, which is, in fact, proved by
the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ Himself. And with regard,
Sire, to the pretended passage of S. Augustine, every body
knows that it was not written by him, because the writer,
whoever he was, cites Boethius, +11 who died more than eighty
years after the time of S. Augustine. Besides, there is still
more convincing proof in the fact, that the same Father
establishes the truth of witchcraft in all his writings, and
more particularly in his City of God ; and in his first volume,
question the 25th, wherein he states that sorcery is a com-
munion between man and the Devil, which all good Christians
ought to look upon with horror.

“Taking all these things into consideration, Sire, the
officers of Your Parliament hope, from the justice of Your
Majesty, that you will be graciously pleased to receive the
humble remonstrances they have taken the liberty to make.
They are compelled, for the acquittal of their own consciences
and in discharge of their duty, to make known to Your
Majesty, that the decrees they passed against the sorcerers
and witches brought before them were passed after a mature
deliberation on the part of all the judges present, and that
nothing has been done therein which is not conformable to
the universal jurisprudence of the kingdom, and for the
general welfare of Your Majesty’s subjects, of whom there is
not one who can say that he is secure from the malevolence
of such criminals. We therefore supplicate Your Majesty to
suffer us to carry into effect the sentences we passed, and to
proceed with the trial of the other persons accused of the same
crime; and that the piety of Your Majesty will not suffer
to be introduced during Your reign an opinion contrary to the
principles of that Holy Religion for which You have always
employed so gloriously both Your Cares and Your Arms.”


FRANCE 429


' The only response returned to this appeal was a stern
injunction that the prosecutions were immediately to be
suspended, and the Parliament dared not disobey. In 1682
Louis XIV published various directions with regard to the
witch-trials, which were not only extremely significant, but
of the utmost importance in practice. Magicians and fortune-
tellers are to be punished as rogues and charlatans; severe
penalties are incurred by those who endeavour to work spells
or operate enchantments by the abuse of prayers or litanies ;
death is the portion of those who to evil superstitions add
any sacrilege for the sake of necromancy or evocation of
spirits. In fine, the edict is directed against common cheats,
against blasphemers and Satanists,112 against poisoners and
murderers who cloak their villainies under a masque of magic.
Until the passing of this statute, and indeed for some years
later, the witch-fires still blazed brightly throughout France.
Thus in 1684 at Rouen several men and women were hanged
and then burned for making a pact with the Devil, and in the
following year a priest, accused of sorcery, was sent to the
stake and suffered in the Market Place. In 1699, however,
the Parliament of Rouen commuted the sentence of death
pronounced by the magistrates of Valognes upon a certain
Marie Bucaille, to perpetual banishment. This woman, who
had for a long while so duped the people of Valognes that
they venerated her as a Saint, had feigned to enjoy visions,
pretended she was marked with the stigmata, boasted that
she could work miracles, essayed to heal the sick by the
imposition of hands. She was, in fact, an associate of a band
of Satanists whose Sabbats at Cherbourg she frequently
attended.

By a warrant of 18 December, 1691, confirming the
sentence of the magistrates of Passy delivered on the previous
26 October, the Parliament of Paris sent three shepherds of
la Brie, Bras de Fer, Jardin, and Petit-Pierre, to the stake.
They were at first accused of killing flocks and herds by evil
spells, but it was soon discovered that they used a paste or
some arsenical extract compounded with other toxicants.
They even succeeded in poisoning an accomplice, Etienne
Hocque, whilst he lodged in jail.11°

In 1696 ten men and women, belonging to a village near
Auxerre, whose lives were made utterly miserable by accusa-


430 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


tions of sorcery and the fear and hatred of their neighbours,
demanded to be put to the water-ordeal. They were accord-
ingly swum in the River Senin, near the Abbey of Pontigny.
To their infinite confusion only two sank, the rest floating
upon the stream. A century before they would have been
burned without question or delay, but the local magistrates
did not dare proceed against them, and things continued as
before save that the terror they inspired was intensified a
hundredfold.114

Three years later at St. Florentin, in Burgundy, a poor
wretch who was popularly suspected of Witchcraft insisted
upon undergoing the same test. When lowered into a pond
he did not sink, which the onlookers took to be proof positive
of his guilt. However, the magistrates refused to punish him,
and the parish priest gave him an excellent character. All
this availed nothing, for nobody throughout the whole
province would give him even a day’s work, and he was
obliged to tramp to some other part of France.1*°

It will be seen that trials for sorcery were rapidly on the
wane; the people believed as firmly as their fathers, but in
face of the known attitude of the King magistrates were
reluctant to punish and refused to condemn.

It is, perhaps, not impertinent to note that the last culprit
burned at Paris for heresy suffered in 1663, when a certain
Simon Morin, a native of Aumale in Normandy, was sent to
the stake. Morin preached that he was Christ Incarnate,
that to him all power had been given by God, and that his
followers, those who possessed the true light, were incapable
of sinning. These Illuminati practised the most infamous
debaucheries under the pretext of religious assemblies, and
it was shown that Morin was insatiable in his lusts and
corruptions. A wealthy widow, named Malherbe, who had
joined the sect, confessed the usual catalogue of filth and
folly. She had had sexual connexion with the Devil, had
attended the Sabbat, banqueted with demons, entertained
imps and familiars. The Parliament of Paris ordered her to
be branded with the fleur-de-lys and banished from the city.

But all these trials and processes were as nothing in
comparison with the hideous scandals which were unveiled
before the Chambre Ardente in 1679-82. This court, which
was instituted in 1679 by the King with special powers to


FRANCE 431


deal with the cases of poisoning that seemed so terribly on the
increase, sat at the Arsenal in a hall whose windows were
curtained with black, and therefore necessitating the constant
use of lighted candles, whence it took its name. At the
earliest investigations, conducted by La Reynie, chief
lieutenant of police, a whole gang of poisoners and sorcerers
was discovered, and as the inquiry was pursued it soon
became evident that not only persons of low degree but
nobles of the highest rank and proudest families in France
were wofully implicated. Venomed philtres had been
brewed, black masses said, necromancy practised, plots laid
for the deaths of court favourite and political foe, the Devil
propitiated and adored, and all these abominations seemed
to centre round two figures of the blackest underworld of
Paris, the abbé Guibourg and la Voisin.

Catherine Deshayes, widow of Antoine Montvoisin, and
commonly known as la Voisin, had long been known to the
criminal and the curious as midwife, bawd, and witch.
In the secret chambers of her house in the rue Beauregard
she told fortunes by cards, by the grounds of coffee, by the
magic crystal, just as any Bond Street seer of to-day. But
for a heavier fee she would inspect the entrails of beasts, she
would evoke the dead, and for yet more gold you might be
admitted to the hideous mysteries of Satan’s eucharist. Gold
too would buy a flask of clear liquid, a few drops of which was
a sure dormitive for the jealous husband, the rival who had
lived too long. She was assisted in her profession by
numerous satellites ; her lovers, Romani, a handsome young
Italian boy; a lusty Norman named Lesage. A wanton
hermaphrodite, exotic and perverse, la Trianon, dwelt in the
house, to which also some curious old women, whose calling
no one rightly knew, la Caillet, la Lepére, la Desportes, la
Thomas, were daily visitors. The two executioners of Paris,
M. Guillaume and M. Lariviére contended for la Voisin’s
favours, bringing her gallant presents of the limbs and fat of
murderers on the gibbet or wheel, whence she made tall black
tapers for her secret ceremonies. It is no exaggeration to say
that all Paris from duchess to drab, from marshal to muck-
man, thronged to la Voisin’s doors. Thither came the
Duchess de Bouillon ; the Duchess de Lusignan ; the Duchess
de Vivonne to devote herself and the babe in her womb to


482 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Satan; the Duchess de Vitry; the Comtesse de Soissons
(Olympe Mancini) ; the Comtesse de Rouse and Madame de
Polignac, both burning to be raised to the royal bed and
seeking the death of Louise de la Valliére ; the Comtesse de
Rouse; the Comtesse de Montmorency-Boutteville; the
Princess de Tingry, seeking love-philtres and erotic charms ;
Madame de Baucé to buy a hand of glory and a toad;
Madame de Gand and Madame d’Argenton; Madame de
Chapelain; Madame Baron, seeking a draught to render
impotent a priest who was unfaithful to her charms ;
Madame de Dreux, wishing to procure abortion ; in brief all
the fair and utterly corrupt aristocracy of France, and above
all the greatest lady in the realm, greater than the Queen,
the imperial Athénais de Montespan. Nor were men lacking :
the Marquis de Feuquiéres ; the chevalier de Varnens; the
comte de Longueval; the Duke de Luxembourg, who asked
to have speech with the Devil ; a mysterious figure who was,
they whispered, the Duke of Buckingham ; and a whole troop
of Colbert’s enemies demanding spells to insure his speedy
death.

The abbé Guibourg, the illegitimate son of Henri de
Montmorency, was a man of some sixty years, who is
described as tall and heavy-limbed with a malign and sensual
face. It was he who celebrated innumerable Satanic masses
at the instance of Madame de Montespan in order to secure
her supreme power and eternal fidelity on the part of the
King. A long black velvet pall was spread over the altar, and
upon this the royal mistress laid herself in a state of perfect
nudity. Six black candles were lit, the celebrant robed
himself in a chasuble embroidered with esoteric characters
wrought in silver, the gold paten and chalice were placed
upon the naked belly of the living altar to whose warm flesh
the priest pressed his lips each time the missal directed him
to kiss the place of sacrifice, uel extra uel intra corporale.
All was silent save for the low monotonous murmur of the
blasphemous liturgy. The Host was consecrated, and then
the Precious Blood. An assistant crept forward bearing an
infant in her arms. The child was held over the altar, a
sharp gash across the neck, a stifled cry, and warm drops
fell into the chalice and streamed upon the white figure
beneath. The corpse was handed to la Voisin, who flung it


FRANCE 433


callously into an oven fashioned for that purpose which
glowed white-hot in its fierceness.11° It was proved that a
regular traffic had been carried on for years with beggar-
women and the lowest prostitutes, who sold their children
for this purpose. At her trial la Voisin confessed that no less
than two thousand five hundred babies had been disposed of
in this manner, for the black mass was continually being
celebrated, not only by Guibourg but by other priests. Many
ladies of the court had served as an altar, whilst not in-
frequently some bulker from the street was called in to fill
that function. Madame de Montespan was generally attended
on these occasions by her confidante, Madame de la Desoeillets.
Guibourg celebrated three masses in this way upon the naked
body of Madame de Montespan. At the first the following
conjuration was used: ‘‘ Astaroth, Asmodeus, princes of
friendship and love, I invoke you to accept the sacrifice, this
child that I offer you, for the things I ask of you. They are
that the friendship and love of the King and the Dauphin
may be assured to me, that I may be honoured by all the
princes and princesses of the Court, that the King deny me
nothing I ask whether it be for my relatives or for any of my
household.”’

On another occasion an erotic charm was confected in the
following manner: Guibourg “a fait chez la Voisin, revétu
d’aube, d’étole et de manipule, une conjuration en présence
de la Des Oeillets, qui prétendait faire un charme pour le
[Roi]!17 et qui était accompagnée d’un homme??* qui liu
donna la conjuration, et comme il était nécessaire d’avoir du
sperme des deux sexes, Des Oeillets ayant ses mois n’en put
donner mais versa dans le calice de ses menstrues et l’>homme
qui l’accompagnait, ayant passé dans la ruelle du lit avec liu
Guibourg, versa de son sperme dans le calice. Sur le tout, la
Des Oeillets et l’-homme mirent chacun d’une poudre de
sang de chauve-souris et de la farine pour donner un corps
plus ferme & toute la composition et a pris qu’il eut récité la
conjuration il tira le tout du calice qui fut mis dans un petit
vaisseau que la Des Oeillets ou I’homme emporta.’’1?”

Not the least sad circumstance that came to light during
the investigation of these orgies of Witchcraft was the large
number of priests implicated. Amongst others concerned
were: Abbé Brigallier, almoner to the Grand Mademoiselle ;


434 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Abbé Bouchot, director of the convent of La Saussaye ;
Abbé Dulong, a canon of Notre Dame ; Abbé Dulaurens,
assistant priest at Saint-Leu; Abbé Dubourquet ; Abbé
Seysson; Abbé Dussis; Abbé Lempérier ; Abbé Olivier,
who consecrated a stone altar in a brothel; Abbé Cotton,
who offered in sacrifice to the Devil a child baptized with
the Oleum Infirmorum (the oil used for the Sacrament of
Extreme Unction) and then strangled; Abbé Lepreux ;
Abbé Davot, assistant priest at Notre Dame de Bonne-
Nouvelle, whose custom it was to lay under the corporal a
piece of paper inscribed with the name of a person who
should be brought to love, or, if hated, damned to die, a
practice eagerly pursued to-day—if a priest may be found ;
Abbé Mariette, vicar of St.-Séverin; Abbé Rebours ; Abbé
Le Franc; Abbé Lemeignan, curate of St.-Eustache, who
offered infants stolen from the cradle to Satan; Abbé
Tournet ; Father Gérard, a Capuchin ; Father Gabriel ; and,
above all, Guibourg himself, any one of whose mistresses,
la Fleurette, la Chaufrein, and la Jeanneton, the hangman’s
niece, would always serve him as an altar for his foul rites.
A certain Jean Baptiste Sébault, of the diocese of Bourges,
who was lodging in Paris at the house of a doctor, named
Chamillon, seduced Marianne Chamillon, his host’s daughter,
a girl of twenty-two, and continually brought her to the
black mass. The Abbé Guignard celebrated a Satanic mass
in a cellar, and was served by Sébault in a state of complete
nudity. An aphrodisiac was brewed at this orgy.

It is curious to note that the witches frequented the church
of Ste.-Ursule de Montmarte, where a statue of S. Ursula was
greatly venerated, as well as a picture representing the
appearance of Our Lord after His Resurrection to S. Mary
Magdalene, which was honoured under the title Rabboni.12°
They also worshipped at the church of the Holy Ghost, Place
de Gréve, where three novenas of masses, the first said in
honour of God the Holy Ghost, the second in honour of
S. Antony of Padua, and the third in honour of the Augus-
tinian S. Nicolas of Tolentino, were considered to be an
infallible means to obtain any object desired, whatsoever it
might be.

The scandals when this whole terrible affair came to light
were terrific. More than two hundred and forty-six persons


FRANCE 435


were deeply implicated in these abominations, and many of
these who had taken part were among the noblest names of
France. It was necessary that certain reports and dossiers
should disappear, and the King very properly forbade the
Court to follow up various inquiries which he indicated,—the
names of Madame de Montespan and the Comtesse de
Soissons, for example, must be completely safeguarded.
It appears that the lives of Louis XIV, the Dauphin, Colbert,
Louise de la Valliére, the Duchess de Fontanges, had been in
imminent danger. La Voisin was condemned to death and
burned at the stake on the 22 February, 1680. Several
persons died in prison; others again committed suicide in
agonies of shame at the thought of a trial; thirty-six who
had been found guilty of murder, chiefly by poisoning, were
executed; five were sent to the galleys; twenty-three
perpetually banished ; one hundred and forty-seven sentenced
to long or shorter terms of imprisonment at various towns
throughout the kingdom.

The authority for the confessions and trials is Francois
Ravaisson’s amply detailed and great work, Archives de la
Bastille. Documents inédits.121 This is truly a mine of
documents of first-hand importance. I have briefly summar-
ized in the following conspectus the most striking of
these :

Volume IV. A shepherd, Grand-Etienne, essays to kill
Louis XVI by Witchcraft; Mme de Montespan employs
magical spell against Mlle de La Valliere; a priest of
St-Séverin is imprisoned as a magician.

Volume V. Mme Baron veut faire nouer laiguillette 4 un
abbé ; Mme de Baucé buys a toad and a hand of glory from
la Voisin; Bosse, alias Belamour, writes a billet in order to
go to the Sabbat; la duchesse de Bouillon, le marquis de
Feuquiéres, le duc de Luxembourg desire to converse with
the Devil; Coeuret, alias Dubuisson, alias Lesage, practise
magic with l’abbé Davot: Gérard, a Capuchin, le chevalier
de Berniéres, l’abbé Olivier, le chevalier de Varnens, perform
magical rites ; la Leroux, a witch, employs charms.

Volume VI. Mme Relout, a butcher’s wife, Filastre, alias
La Boissiére, Mme de Montespan, Pajot, l’abbé Guibourg
make pacts with Satan; l’abbé Cotton, l’abbé Davot, V’abbé
Dulaurens, le P. Gabriel, a religious of Picpus, l’abbé Gérard,


436 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Yabbé Rebours, l’abbé Tournet, l’abbé Lepreux celebrate
black masses, des messes sur le ventre ou consacrent des
couleuvres; Debray, Decennes, l’abbé Cotton, l’abbé Le
Franc, l’abbé Lemperier, l’abbé Mariette, employ charms,
conjure, and practise black magic ; l’abbé Cotton offers to
the Devil a child baptised with the oil of Extreme Unction
and then strangled ; another sacrifice of a child to the Devil ;
la Duchesse de Vivonne devotes herself and her child to the
Devil; l’abbé Lemaignan sacrifices children to the Devil ;
Monsignol desires to devote a child to Satan; Mme de
Montespan se fait dire des messes sur le ventre, ainsi que
Mme de Gand, Mme d’Argenton et d’autres dames de la cour ;
witchcraft and charms of la Bergeret, a fortune-teller, of the
Duchesse de Bouillon, of Lesage, of Mme Chapelain, of la
David, a witch, and of several priests, of the relations of
Fouquet, of la Petit, a fortune-teller, of the vicomtesse de
Polignac, of de Regnard, called ‘‘ le Grand-Auteur,” of the
Marquise de Roure, and of others to kill Louis XIV; Mme
de Montespan is present at the strangling of a child offered to
Satan: the porter of the hospice ‘‘ des Quinze-Vingts ’’ has
a black mass celebrated ; abbé Olivier set up a stone altar in a
bawdy-house ; candles made of the fat of a criminal who has
been hanged ; pacts against Colbert ; abortion by la Voisin ;
Marre, an Italian sorcerer ; Mabile celebrates the sacrifice of
the Death’s Head; the Duchesse de Lusignan performs
blasphemous rites in a wood; la Morand devotes herself
to the Devil.

Volume VII. Sacrifice of a child given to Satan ; Conjura-
tion by Perceval; le sousdiacre Sebaud fait dire des messes
sur le ventre de sa maitresse.

Volume VIII. Conjurations and magic rites practised by
the Comte de Longueval.

Volume X. La Berthemet, la Fenouillet, are eager to give
themselves to Satan who will have naught of them; Mme de
Grancey, Destouches, ask for money from the Devil; le
capitaine Bederode, Picault, Tirmont, Davou, wizards ;
la Créancier, la Ducatel, la Dumouty, la Loysel, la Manne-
ville, la Randon, la Siamoise, la Sivry, la Fleury, witches or
fortune-tellers ; M. de Feuquiéres wishes to make a compact
with Satan ; Protain, a schoolmaster, writes a pact.

Volume XI. Aulmont, Lavaute, Lebégue, Siriaque,


FRANCE 487


Saint-Vidal, wizards ; La Chesnau, la Delprade, la Devaux,
la Pigeon, la Rochefort, la Rousseau, witches.

Volume XII. La Dequien, la Doublet, la Duchesse, la
Rancine, witches.

Volume XIII. The baron de Cerlach, wizard, raises the
Devil ; Loroux, Morin, wizards ; la Fouconnier, la Feugére,
la Gallet, la Norcy, witches.

Volume XIV. Duprat writes out grimoires; Forcassy, a
warlock.

Volume XV. Prince Camille and Dubuisson evoke the
Devil on the plain of Montrouge; the Comtesse de Mont-
boissier asks fifteen millions and the Duc d’Ollone fourteen
millions from the Devil; d’Olonne pays 118 livres for a
magic goat skin.

Towards the end of the reign of Louis XIV persons accused
of sorcery no longer went to the stake but to the Salpétriére.
This was the punishment of a woman named d’Amour, a
celebrated fortune-teller, as also of three notorious pretenders
to occult arts, la Créancier, la Ducatel, la Loysel. One
Picault, who boasted that he was a magician of no mean
power, and a schoolmaster, named Protain, who had written
out in a fair hand a contract with the Devil, were dealt with
in the same way. A man and his wife named Barot who were
arrested on charges of sorcery were sent, the husband into the
army, the woman to la Salpétri¢re. The warlock Bourdeaux
was imprisoned at Bicétre. Many other such instances might
be given.1!??

The last execution in France seems to have been that of a
man who was condemned to death in 1718 by the Parliament
of Bordeaux upon a charge of having by his spells rendered
a citizen impotent in the marriage-bed, his bride barren, and
otherwise afflicting the whole household.

In 1702 much talk was caused by the case of a young girl,
who had been overlooked, and for eleven years, since 1691,
had been possessed of a devil that was dumb. It will be
remembered that this affliction was known of old in Palestine,
since on one occasion Our Lord ‘‘ was casting out a devil and
the same was dumb ; and when he had cast out the devil the
dumb spoke ”123 (Et erat eiiciens demonium, et illud erat
mutum. Et cum eiecisset demonium, locutus est mutus.
S. Luke xi. 14). She was taken on a pilgrimage to the tomb


488 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of King James II, who died at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, 16
September, 1701, a sanctuary where already miracles had
been worked. After fervent prayer and an invocation of the
holy exile the girl was cured and spoke, and as in the Gospels
“the multitudes were in admiration at it” (admirate sunt
turbe). King James, always profoundly religious, in his
later years advanced to true sanctity. Such was his sinless-
ness that his Confessor stated, after nine years of spiritual
service, that it was very rare to find, in the most virtuous souls
of Christendom, intentions more pure, a vigilance more close,
or a greater delicacy of conscience as to the smallest imperfec-
tions. In view of this saintly life and the stupendous sacrifice
that the King made for the Catholic Faith it is not surprising
that his Canonization should have occupied the attention of
the Holy See. It appears, indeed, that he would certainly
have been raised to the Altars of the Church towards the end.
of the eighteenth century had not the crushing catastrophe
of the French Revolution come wellnigh to obliterate from
men’s minds all reverence and all thought of sentiment for
the past.

In 1720 at Bully a number of young girls declared them-
selves possessed. When exorcised by the abbé d’Esquinne-
mare they shrieked out in their convulsions that a poor
worker, Laurent Gaudouét, was the magician who had
caused the mischief. The affair made a great noise, and
Gaudouét lodged a formal complaint of defamation of
character before the local magistrates. The Parliament of
Rouen, than which no tribunal had been more active in the
prosecution of witches, interfered. The sufferers were
brought to Rouen, and to their surprise imprisoned in the
Conciergerie. Here they were kept under a strict discipline
for several months, at the end of which time they were glad
to return home and remain unknown.!24

Four years later at Landes, in the diocese of Bayeux, a child
of ten, the daughter of a petty noble, Claudine Le Vaillant de
Léaupartie, on the eve of her First Communion, suddenly fell
into fierce paroxysms, insulted her parents, uttered the most
astounding obscenities, and when prayer was made on her
behalf blasphemed like a maniac. As she had hitherto been
distinguished by her meekness and piety, great alarm was
felt. Abbé Hurtin, the parish-priest, by permission of the


FRANCE 439


Bishop of Bayeux, exorcised her, and she was for a while
lodged with the nuns of the Bon-Sauveur convent at St.-Lé.
In a few months she seemed perfectly healed, and was able
to make her first communion, when she returned to her
father’s house.

Kight years after another of the family, a younger daughter,
was taken with a mysterious malady. In a day or two
Claudine showed even stronger symptoms of the same attack.
A third sister succumbed ; the disease manifested itself in a
servant-maid, two nuns at Bayeux, the housekeeper of the
parish-priest at Landes, and a simple village girl. All were
thrown into hideous convulsions ; they foamed at the mouth ;
struck and bit any who attempted to hold them ; fell writhing
to the ground; yelled and cursed all sacred things ;_blas-
phemed God, Our Lady, and the Blessed Sacrament with such
filthy opprobrium that all who heard were petrified with
horror and amaze. The abbé Hurtin after several exorcisms
petitioned for the help of some priest skilled in these matters.
The Bishop promptly sent several learned divines, amongst
whom was the saintly superior-general of the Eudists.125
Two friars even came from Paris, and a number of doctors
debated upon the disease in all its bearings. They decided
that no natural explanation could be given of the phenomena,
and in 1785 the Sorbonne, when consulted, after minutest
inquiry declared that it was a true instance of demoniac
possession. Eventually the unhappy victims were separately
confined in various convents of the stricter observances
throughout the kingdom, and it is said that most, if not all,
recovered in the course of years.1?°

Although the case is very famous, and caused at the time
almost unprecedented talk and scandal, it is not necessary
to do more than touch very briefly upon the affaire Cadiére-
Girard. Marie Catherine Cadiére was born at Toulon on the
12 November, 1709. Her father having died during her
infancy, she was brought up in the utmost seclusion by her
widowed mother. The whole family was deeply, not to say
fanatically, religious; of her three brothers the eldest had
married, the second, Etienne Thomas, became a Dominican,
the third, Francois, a secular priest. Unfortunately Catherine
was of a highly neuropathic disposition, and suffered from a
morbidly sensual complex, which was aggravated by the


440 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


circumstances of her education and home. In April, 1728,
Father Jean-Baptiste Girard, a learned and eloquent member
of the Society of Jesus, was appointed rector of the seminary
of Toulon. The fame of his preaching had preceded him, and,
when he occupied a pulpit the church was thronged by crowds
which hung upon his persuasive words. His confessional,
also, was besieged by penitents, and under his direction a
number of pious persons, of whom one was Catherine Cadiére,
formed themselves into a society or gild living under a rule
and aiming at a more perfect life. From time to time they
met in a chapel or some convenient place, when after certain
devotions Father Girard gave addresses upon the mystical
state. He seems to have thought at first that he had to do
with elect souls, who might become as S. Teresa or S. Catherine
of Siena and tread the paths of the ecstatic S. Maria Madda-
lena de’ Pazzi or that Visitation nun to whom Jesus revealed
the love of His Most Sacred Heart. In any case his only
faults were over-enthusiasm and a little lack of discretion.
But before long he rectified these errors and perceiving that
his devotees were unfitted for the higher things, he led them
along the well-worn simple ways of prayer and good works.
This was not to the taste of la Cadiére and she soon became
hysterical and unhappy. Acting upon Father Girard’s advice
she made a retreat at the convent of Ste-Claire d’Ollioules,
which so far from calming her but increased her pithiatism
and melancholy. She fell into ecstasies, professed to have
visions, conversed with the Saints, and above all was seen
to be marked with the stigmata. Louis, Bishop of Toulon,
himself visited the convent, bade her return to her home,
and requested an aged and experienced religious, Father
Nicolas of S. Joseph, prior of the discaleed Carmelites at
Toulon, to inquire into the matter. Catherine Cadiére now
told a most extraordinary tale. She averred that Father
Girard had bewitched her, that he had violated her chastity,
and when she feared she had conceived he compelled her to
drink a draught which would procure abortion. She accused
him of propagating the doctrines of Molinos,12? that who-
soever was filled with heavenly love rose above the trammels
of the body, which was a mere envelope, and could indulge
sinlessly in any fleshly lust or perversion without harm or
hurt to the soul. She gave the most disgusting details of her


FRANCE 441


intercourse with him, alleging that he was wont to compel
her to undress and then amid circumstances of the greatest
indecency to inflict a severe discipline upon her naked body,
and having wakened his desires by this amorous flagellation
to proceed to the commission of the sexual act. Father
Nicolas, who was entirely deceived by this story reported the
complaint to the Bishop, and meanwhile the relatives of
la Cadiére carried the matter to the civil courts of Toulon.
The most resounding scandals ensued, and it is hardly too
much to say that the South of France was thrown into a fever
of excitement and unrest. The case was discussed on every
hand, and in 1781 the Parliament of Aix, upon an express
order from the King, made a searching investigation into the
whole matter. There were long and vehement disagreements ;
endless discussions and debate. It was obvious from the
first that the girl’s story was utterly and entirely false. But
the enemies of the Jesuits had massed their forces to heap
discredit upon the Society, and by the most underhand means
and lying methods they were straining every nerve to bring
about the disgrace of Father Girard. Jansenists and anti-
clericals moved earth and hell to effect his ruin. This, how-
ever, was beyond their power, and in 1731 Father Girard,
after a long canonical investigation, was solemnly declared
innocent in every particular and much maligned. The
nymphomanic la Cadiére was sent to her home, and vanishes
into obscurity. 18

Thus gradually prosecutions for Witchcraft ceased in
France. The so-called Philosophers who deny the super-
natural inevitably mocked at the idea of any such power.
Diderot, indeed, hesitates to go too far,12® but Condillac1*°
and Voltaire1*! are wholly sceptical, whilst the Encyclo-
pedists under the word “‘ Sorcellerie ” sum up their ignorance
in the following phrase: ‘‘ Opération magique honteuse ou
ridicule, attribuée stupidement par la superstition a
Vinvocation et au pouvoir des démons.”

During the eighteenth century the practise of magic and
the black art was common throughout France, nor were these
dark superstitions found only amid the peasantry and in
remoter provinces. Barbier’s Journal,1*? for instance, relates
that the Duc de Richelieu was much suspected of studying
“sorcery and every kind of occult science.” A story was


442 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


noised to the effect that he had formed too close an intimacy
with an Austrian noble whose tastes lay in the same direction.
Two Capuchins were found to say Mass, at which the devotees
assisted, in the old deserted chapel of a lone country-house.
After this the Duke and his friend defiled the Hosts, in the
hope that thereupon Satan would appear to crown the
blasphemy.

Saint-Simon remarks that the Regent, Philippe d’Orléans,
was notoriously addicted to goety. D’Alméras in an im-
portant monograph writes: ‘‘ Necromancers, old wizards
who brewed philtres and confected charms, denoueurs
@ aiguilette, fortune-tellers by cards, diviners of every kind,
says a historian who has delved deeply into the secrets of the
eighteenth century, swarmed in certain obscure districts of
Paris, covens which the police could not track, but which
were soon found by those who required their aid. The
alchemists, of whom there were great numbers, were
ensconced in the faubourg St. Marceau.’’133

Extraordinary and fearful stories were bruited concerning
the mysterious occultists who from time to time loomed so
largely before the public: Albert Aluys, the Comte de Saint-
Germain, Cagliostro, Louis Claude de Saint Martin, Martinés
de Pasqually, Franz Anton Mesmer, and many of lesser note,
many who were mere charlatans and vulgar adventurers.
Cabalistic romances, Le Comte de Gabalis, Le Sylphe
Amoureux, Les Ondins, L’ Amant Salamandre, Laffichard’s
La Salamandre, Venice, 1744; Le diable amoureux, 1776, of
Cazotte, whose fantasies more than one reader took seriously,
deeming the author a skilled magician ; the abbé Bordelon’s
Histoire de M. Oufle, Paris, 1789. Such works as Saint-
André’s Lettres aw sujet de la magie, the Traité sur la Magie,
1732; of Antoine-Louis Daguis, Pierre Le Brun’s Histoire
critique des pratiques superstitieuses, 1732; Lenglet-
Dusfresnoy’s Philosophie-hermetique, 1744, La Clef du
Sanctuaire philosophique, 1781, of Madame Sabine Stuart de
Chevalier, were devoured with feverish eagerness by all
classes of society.134

The eighth volume of the Bibliothéque Ecclesiastique,
8 vols., Paris, 1771, of the Abbé Claude-Marie Guyon, is
nothing else than a veritable enchiridion of magic. Especially
addressed to priests, the author announces that his book is


FRANCE 443


“a compendium of all that it is fitting to know upon the
subject of judicial astrology, the power of demons, and such
communion as they may hold with man, upon various
branches of Magic, enchantments, medieval sorceries, omens,
the casting of lots, amulets and talismans, dreams, divination,
and all ways in which man has essayed to read the future.
It is a manual of these sciences, a work which is not misplaced
in, but rather indispensible to, a priest’s library.”135 Daguis
in his Traité de la magie (1782, p. 127) had indeed affirmed
that a belief in the possibility of Witchcraft is “‘ an article of
faith which cannot be denied without falling into heresy.”

There is, perhaps, scarcely any fact which more clearly
brings home to us the prevalence of the black art in the
eighteenth century than a consideration of the vast numbers
of grimoires and books of goetic theurgy which poured from
the press and were scattered in every direction. Les Secrets
du Petit Albert (Alberti Parui Lucii libellus de mirabilibus
Nature arcanis) which tells how to confect philtres, fashion
talismans, employ the hand of glory, discover treasure, and
many a foul spell, was edited in 1758; Les Secrets du Grand
Albert (which has nothing to do with the great Dominican
doctor), in 1729, to be reprinted 1791, 1793. An Albert
Moderne appeared in 1769. The grimoire miscalled Pope Leo’s
was printed in 1749; La Véritable magie noire in 1750. In
1727 Levassau translated the Occulta Philosophia of Cornelius
Agrippa, whose Giuvres magiques were published by the firm
of Beringo, whose bookshop at Lyons was famous throughout
France. Many of these works have the imprint Rome, which
is, of course, incorrect and a mere guise. The Clauicula
Salomonis was actually issued at the expense of M. de
Bachelay, a farmer-general, who died in 1766.

In France Satanism, although largely driven underground,
persisted throughout the eighteenth century. As might be
expected, there are revolting pictures of the black mass in
the lewd pages of de Sade. In Justine,‘°* such a mass
celebrated in a cloister is described in filthy detail. When
Juliette!” is initiated into the ‘“‘ Society of the Friends of
Crime ” the Host and Crucifix are desecrated. Again, a little
later, two Satanic orgies are exhibited, when the High altar
is the scene of every defilement.1*° By a stroke of unparal-
leled impudence and malice the very quintessence of


444 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


blasphemy is attained, when the holy and suffering Pius VI
is made to take part in these abominations.1*® In the
country districts, moreover, the belief in witches and their
malice had hardly waned. Jules Garinet in his Histoire
de la Magic en France, Paris, 8vo, 1818, cites more
than twenty cases of alleged sorcery which were brought
before the courts owing to the assault on the witch by
peasants or some such matter between 1805 and 1818. None
present any features of special interest, although in 1818 no
less than three tribunals were occupied with trials resulting
from this belief. Upon the night of the execution of King
Louis XVI, 21 January, 1793, a number of French Satanists
formed themselves into a definite society to prosecute their
ends and propagate their worship of evil. In this they were
very active, and the Abbé Fiard, who in his La France
trompée par les magiciens et démonoldtres du dix-huitéme siécle.
Fait demontré par des faits, Paris, 1803, gives a truly appalling
picture of their blasphemies and sacrilege, was so heart-
broken by the abominations practised on every side and
which seemed almost on the increase that he prophesied
the coming of Antichrist must be near at hand. As early as
1818 these Satanists had an active branch in the department
of Lot-et-Garonne, and in 1843 it was proved that during
some twenty-five years of their existence they had defiled
and mutilated no less than three thousand three hundred and
twenty Hosts. In 1855, in 1874, and again in 1878 it was
discovered that professional Host-stealers were at work in
Paris. In 1865 hideous scandals disturbed the dioceses of
Lens and Auxerre, the department of the Yonne, and in fact
all France. A nun, named Cantianille, of the convent of
Mont-Saint Sulpice at Auxerre had been corrupted in her
fifteenth year by an apostate priest who vowed her to the
Devil. This priest himself had been initiated into Satanism
by a cleric who had taken part in the founding of the evil
Society at Paris, 21 January, 17938. The scenes which took
place in the cloister recalls the demoniac frenzies and
obscenities of Madeleine de la Palud and Madeleine Bavent.
Cantianille was exorcised by the Abbé Thorey, and in her
convulsions confessed such defilements of the Host, such
blasphemies, and fetid lewdness that the Bishop incontinently
banished her from his diocese. Rome took cognizance of the


FRANCE 445


affair, but the Bishop, literally brokenhearted at the terrible
things he had heard and seen, resigned his see to withdraw
to Fontainebleau, where after two years of utter seclusion
and ceaseless prayer, he died slain by the wickedness of the
world.

Satanism yet has its votaries and is extensively practised.
It is a matter of notoriety that in 1924 two ciboria, containing
one hundred consecrated Hosts, were carried off by an old
woman from the cathedral of Notre Dame in circumstances
which clearly indicate that the holy vessels were not the
objects of the larceny. During recent years similar depreda-
tions have increased in an extraordinary manner, and have
occurred throughout all France. No less than thirteen
churches belonging to the one diocese of Orleans were
despoiled within a twelvemonth, whilst not long since the
Archbishop of Lyons, Cardinal Maurin, issued special in-
structions to his clergy with regard to the safe custody of the
tabernacles. The departments of Aude, Isére, Tarn, Gard,
Niévre, Loiret, Yonne, Haute-Garonne, Somme, Le Nord,
and the Dauphiny, have all been the scene of similar outrages.
In 1895 a particularly revolting instance of defilement of the
Host occurred in the Island of Mauritius. Rome, Salerno,
Naples, Florence, Lyons, London, Brussels, Bruges, and
many other towns have all suffered from the abominations.
Even as I write these words news comes from The Hague
concerning a sacrilege which undoubtedly points to Satanism.
The ciborium with the Sacred Host was stolen out of the
tabernacle of the church at Amsterdamsche Veld. The golden
ciborium was afterwards discovered thrown into a muddy
ditch on the moors hard by the town. In order to prevent
any possible repetition of this outrage orders of watchers have
enrolled themselves, who will remain all night before the
Blessed Sacrament,:and guard the altar at any time when
such profanation might be attempted.1*°

It is very well known that the terrible picture of the black
mass drawn by Huysmans in his sombre romance Lda-Bas
is true in every detail.141 A considerable amount of informa-
tion as to occult practices was given the writer by the Abbé
J.-A. Boullan, editor of a small review, Les Annales de la
Sainteté, who lived at Lyons, lodging with an architect,
M. Misme, in the rue de la Martiniere. Two mediums,


446 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Madame Laure and Madame Thibaut, resided in the same
house. Boullan did not hesitate to accuse his personal
enemies of black magic and sorcery. A lengthy correspond-
ence was exchanged between Boullan and Huysmans, from
6 February, 1890, to the 4 January, 1893. Huysmans,
however, burned nearly all these letters. Under the date
10 February, 1890, Boullan wrote from Lyons: “ Je puis
mettre a votre disposition les documents pour établir que le
satanisme est vivant de nos jours, et comment et sous quelle
forme. .. . Au sein du clergé, le satanisme contemporain
est plus cultivé, plus savant qu’au Moyen age ; il se pratique
a Rome et surtout A Paris, Lyon, Chalons, pour la France, et 4
Bruges, pour la Belgique.” The Abbé particularly detested
the Marquis Stanislas de Guaita, Joséphin Peladan, and
Oswald Wirth, whom he frequently stigmatized as adepts in
Witchcraft and baleful spells. Perhaps it should be men-
tioned in passing that the orthodoxy of Boullan was very
much suspect. There was some gossip of strange masses
performed in secret, the sacrifice of the New Carmel as it was
called, by which enchantments were dissolved, a mysterious
liturgy whose priest wore at the sacrifice a long robe of
vermilion silk girt about the loins with a blue and white cord.
Over this he donned a cloak of white samite, and on his
finger was the consecrated ring. The mass was not the
Oblation of Calvary but the Eucharist of Glory, in some
sense the Mass of Heaven, when the Paraclete reigns over
all. There is little wonder that his ecclesiastical superiors
looked askance at Abbé Boullan.

The Abbé died suddenly on the 3 January, 18938, and six
days later, in the Gil Blas, Jules Bois commented upon this
““mysterious decease,” which, he asserted, was brought
about by the spells of the Rosicrucians and in particular by
Stanislas de Guaita. On the following day in an interview
which appeared in the Figaro Huysmans confirmed these
statements, which Jules Bois reiterated on the 11 January
in the columns of the Gil Blas. Stanislas de Guaita, who was
then living in the Avenue Trudaine, protested against such
imputations in the Figaro of the 12 January. Jules Bois
replied on the following day in the Gil Blas openly averring
that de Guaita had caused Boullan’s death. On the 15
January de Guaita addressed a most indignant letter to the


FRANCE 447


Gil Blas in which he said that his seconds were calling upon
Huysmans and Jules Bois. No duel with the former took
place, but the latter met de Guaita on the 19 January. Two
shots were fired on either side, but both parties left the field
untouched.!42

Towards the end of February, 1922, a young farm-hand,
named Barbeau, was arrested at the hamlet of St.-Georges
de Pointindoux, in the heart of the Vendée country, and
charged with having murdered a farmer’s son, called Chaillot,
who when returning home late one night was shot dead on his
father’s doorstep. For some weeks the police vainly sought
a clue to the crime, but at last it appeared that a bitter
enmity existed between the Chaillot family and some neigh-
bours, Archambaud. Once they were close friends, but
recently Archambaud’s cattle had been thinned by disease,
and it was openly suggested that old Chaillot had cast a spell
upon them. Then Archambaud’s nephew, the prisoner
Barbeau, assaulted Chaillot’s son. Immediately after
Barbeau fell ill of mysterious internal pains. The doctor
attributed these to a kick from a horse, but his rustic friends
loath to be so prosaic at once scented Witchcraft. Barbeau
fired the shots that night to rid himself of the man, who he
believed could bewitch him to death, and several witnesses
assert that they frequently heard him say the deceased was
killing him inchmeal.1+4%

Cases such as these, though rare, are not unique, and they
form a very certain and real link with the old days of Trois
Echelles, and the shepherds of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries on the one hand, and on the other with the
Satanism of Gilles de Rais, Picard, the Abbé Guibourg, and
the infamous la Voisin.

Stories of the loup-garow are yet told in many parts of
France, and in more than one village there is hated and
feared some man, or old hag it may be, who is commonly
believed to prowl the neighbourhood forests on a winter’s
night in the shape of a great grey ravening wolf. It is also
believed that demons will adopt this form to scare the chance
traveller and drive children to maddening terror.

In the Sologne some years ago, Monsieur Abbé Grélot,
curé of Selles-sur-Cher, was carrying the Host to a dying
man in the late gloaming, when he found a wolf walking


448 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


beside him. He was both amazed and greatly alarmed since
wolves were unknown in the Sologne, but pursued his way,
aware of the power of the Blessed Saviour whose Body he
bore, though as darkness deepened the glare of red and green
lights in the animal’s eyes gleamed yet more ferociously.

In November, 1925, a curious case of supposed lycan-
throphy occurred in Alsace when the garde-champétre, or
village policeman, of Uttenheim, near Strasburg, was tried
for shooting dead a boy, who had mischievously worked upon
his belief that he was haunted by animals with human faces.
He knew that the boy was playing tricks upon him, but
declared his conviction that, by means of sorcery, the lad
had acquired the power of turning himself into the forms of
other animals—the were-wolf, in fact—and the whole village
believed him.

A few weeks later occult circles in Paris were greatly
excited by the case of a certain Madame Picquart, a medium,
who was convicted of having stolen various articles from a
house where she was employed as a daily dressmaker. After
vehemently denying that she took them, she then pretended
that she must have done so under the influence of a spell
cast upon her by some enemy, and many kindly spiritualists
believed the story, and appeared as witnesses in support of
the appeal which she made against her conviction, but which
resulted in merely confirming it.

This, however, was nothing in comparison with the extra-
ordinary scandals arising from the fierce fanaticism of a
strange sect, which had established itself at Bordeaux, under
the direction of an ignorant concierge ‘‘ Mother Marie
Mesmin.” In 1906 Madame Mesmin brought back from
Lourdes a life-sized plaster statue of Our Lady, which was
placed in the porter’s lodge she occupied. It was shortly
afterwards bruited that tears were observed to fall from the
eyes of the figure, and a miracle was promptly proclaimed.
According to M. Parentel, a bank-clerk, the figure ‘“ shed
tears in sufficient quantity for us to collect them in vases in
order to heal the sick.”” In some three years no less than
three hundred worshippers of the Weeping Virgin formed
themselves into a society under the patronage of “ Our
Lady of Tears,” and transferred the statue to an Oratory.
Rumours of these extravagances reached the ears of Cardinal


FRANCE 449


Andrieu, Archbishop of Bordeaux, and His Eminence, who
though seriously concerned was unwilling at first to use harsh
measures, dispatched two priests to convey the statue to a
Franciscan convent in order that by this removal the cult
might forthwith cease. The adorers however refused to
listen to authority and were enraged at being deprived of
their miracles. A large oil painting depicting the original
statue was promptly installed in their sanctuary, as also a
figure of the Infant Christ, which, it is claimed, gives forth
sweet perfumes when persons kneel before it in prayer. It
stands upon an altarino amid masses of artificial flowers, ever
fragrant (they declare) with the scent of lilies and roses. The
Cardinal forthwith condemned this cult in uncompromising
terms, and formally forbad any Catholic to visit the Oratory
or to communicate with members of the sect. None the less
two priests, Monsignor Sapounghi, a Syrian, Archimandrite
and Vicar-General of Sidon, and the Abbé Lebret, were found
willing to assist Madame Mesmin in the direction of her
new society.

In 1914 Monsignor Sapounghi was lodging in the house
of Madame Mesmin, who declared that not only had he made
immodest proposals to her but also endeavoured to obtain
possession of the fees she received from the votaries of her
miraculous statue and cult. Scandal ensued, and Monsignor
Sapounghi retired to Nantes. As soon as the priest had left
Bordeaux, Madame Mesmin asserted that she was the prey
of his ‘‘ satanic machinations.”” An invisible moth used to
bite her, leaving one of its invisible teeth in an invisible wound.
She was the continual victim of abnormal seizures and attacks
of uncontrolled nymphomania. She solemnly swore that
Monsignor Sapounghi ‘‘ was wont to celebrate black masses,
putting toad’s blood in the chalice which he consecrated
upon the breast of a life-sized doll, nude, and perfectly
modelled in every particular.”” Several persons gave entire
credit to this story. Four men, M. Cardon, Chief Inspector
of the Bordeaux Police, a stockbroker, the conductor of
an orchestra, and another, heard Mass very devoutly, prayed
“that our hands may not become criminal,” and took a
journey to Nantes, where Monsignor Sapounghi taught
mathematics in a school, when having armed themselves
with whips they stripped and handcuffed their victim to


450 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


thrash him with savage violence leaving him covered with
blood and half-dead. He was indeed obliged to keep his bed
fora month. At the very same moment Madame Mesmin in
Bordeaux was for ever relieved of her terrible sufferings and
temptations, and recreated with floods of heavenly peace
and joy.!44 The avengers of Madame Mesmin carried off
with them a skull, a book of curses, and a waxen statue. The
four assailants, on their return to Bordeaux, were prosecuted
and sentenced to three months’ imprisonment, with the benefit
of the First Offenders Act. The judgement contains the quaint
phrase: ‘‘ Whereas in the present state of science it is not
certain that Mme Mesmin has been the victim of spells.”
Throughout the Great War, Madame Mesmin distributed
sacred medals to soldiers, and her followers declared that
these rendered the wearers immune from enemy bullets,
bombs, and shells, but nothing much was heard of the
devotees of this strange cult until January, 1926, when a
sensational outrage filled the columns of the world’s news-
papers with the most startling headlines and special articles.
The Abbé Desnoyers, parish priest of Bombon, near Melun,
noticed on Sunday morning 3 January, the Feast of the Holy
Name of Jesus, the presence of twelve strangers, two men
and ten women, among his congregation. At the close of Mass
when he had retired to the sacristy and was unvesting the
two men advanced towards the door with such threatening
gestures that the priest’s old servant, a woman of seventy,
turned the key in the lock. The intruders, however, suddenly
seized her, took the key from her by force, and placed a gag
in her mouth so that she should not scream. They then
opened the door, and, after throwing a handful of pepper in
the cure’s face, bound and gagged him. He was thrown on
the floor, and his gown was pulled up over his head. Each of
the flagellants then inflicted twenty-five blows with a
discipline. In order to hit harder the men took off their
coats. After the first fifty strokes the priest’s under-garments
were all torn, and from his waist to his knees he was soon
covered with blood. At each blow the flagellants cried out :
“Take that, Satan, and that, and that.’? When the flagella-
tion had lasted for more than a quarter of an hour, they re-
leased the gag from his mouth, and asked if he would withdraw
the evil spells he had cast upon their “‘ sainted mother.” ‘I


FRANCE 451


withdraw them,” gasped the priest. “ Withdraw them in the
name of God,” came the command enforced by a stinging
blow. . ‘I withdraw them in the name of God,” cried the
priest, who was in a fainting condition. At this juncture the
gendarmerie arrived, led by the old servant woman, and
arrested all the participants, who, however, showed no com-
punction or regret for their behaviour. The astonished
gendarmes were amazed to hear the assailants all claim the
honour of responsibility: ‘“‘ We have performed a divine
mission, and are sent by God to drive the devil out of this
priest,” they said, and then, folding their arms, they chanted
the Magnificat.

The unfortunate victim was carried to his room, and a
doctor hastily summoned. As soon as he had sufficiently
recovered Abbé Desnoyers at once wrote an account of the
assault to the Bishop of Meaux, in which letter the following
Passage occurs :


“If the brigadier of gendarmerie had not intervened, I
should have been dead in five minutes. My body was cruelly
bound in four places. Like my patron Saint Paul I was
scourged—at least three hundred stripes were inflicted upon
me—and I was tightly gagged, one gag over my nostrils, one
over, or rather in, my mouth, the third around my neck, the
last being formed of handkerchiefs tied together, which could
be tightened like a tourniquet. My flagellation lasted twenty
minutes, and, half-choked, I ceased to offer any resistance.
I was attacked by three handfuls of pepper thrown into my
face by my aggressors, who took off my shoes, and had
brought with them everything in readiness to burn the soles
of my feet and cut out my tongue. I did not belong to the
group of Our Lady of Tears, but I have had correspondence
with some of its members, who displayed great piety. Mme
Marie Mesmin has frequently claimed that she saw visions of
the Blessed Virgin, and of M. Robert, a captain in Syria.
She saw the latter with a halo of light around his head. This
led me to conclude that I was dealing with mystics and


fanatics.”


On Saturday, 23 January, the assailants appeared before
the magistrates at Melun. The two men had been kept in
custody, but the women were released on bail. These


452 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


fanatics were Maurice Lourdin, 27; Albert Froger, 39, chief
accountant of an important navigation company; Mmes
Aline Senan, 58, and Heloise Berton, 75, of independent
means; Mme Robert, 49, widow of a French army officer,
and her daughter Anne Marie, 17; Mme Meline Charles, 70,
dressmaker ; Mme Culpain, 60, charwoman ; Mme Gilberte
Burr, 47, a supervising clerk; Mme Marie Betts, 51, pro-
prietress of a steam laundry ; Mme Marie Vigneau, 61, one of
her ironers; and Mme Berthe Lagardére, 50, in domestic
service. The report in The Times (25 Jan., 1926) (From
Our Own Correspondent, Paris, 24 January) may be quoted
at length :

‘“‘ The prisoners arrived at Melun yesterday, wearing as a
protection against photography black veils and spectacles,
which they were with difficulty persuaded to remove while
giving evidence. The younger of the men, a street sweeper,
aged 27, when confronted with the Abbé, had no hesita-
tion in identifying him as Satan himself. The Abbé had,
he said, sent diseases to Bordeaux from Bombon by means
of birds, which flew over Mme Mesmin’s gardens, and
their droppings gave rise to fungi of obscene shapes, which
emitted such appalling odours that those who breathed
them were smitten with horrible diseases. He himself had
contracted a disease in this unusual fashion. Mme Mesmin
had a boil and her eyes were bloodshot. He added, un-
officially, that the Abbé Desnoyers was one of the greatest
sorcerers of the age. He was even more powerful than the
Syrian Archimandrite who had persecuted Mme Mesmin six
years ago. He could cause the death of anyone he liked in
24 hours, with or without suffering. A priest sold to the
Devil was all-powerful. He had at his disposal dolls into
which one stuck pins in order to injure one’s enemies, and
his were the spells which were transmitted by means of birds.

“The other man said that he inferred that the Abbé had
put a spell upon him from the fact that he had lost “ phos-
phates.” He had thrown pepper in the Abbé’s eyes and had
flogged him with a scourge which he had used himself for 15
months. Neither of the men expressed regret for his offence.

““Mme Robert, a widow, said that since she and her
daughter had known the Abbé they had suffered from
giddiness at night. Her deceased husband had written that


FRANCE 4538


he was afraid that the Abbé would put a spell on them. She
regretted what he had done because it had brought the
Virgin Mary into the case.

“Mme Berton, aged 75, described how, when the statue
of the Virgin wept, they caught the tears in a glass. This
never overflowed—a fact which was to be regarded as
miraculous. [It will be remembered that an ecclesiastical
investigation showed the tears to be of ordinary water.] Mme
Mesmin had cried out between midnight and two in the
morning: ‘The Abbé Desnoyers is killing me; get rid of
him.’

“Mlle Culpain gave corroborative evidence, and added
that Mme Mesmin had found the Abbé’s fingers round her
throat and bore the marks of blows which he had sent her
from afar.

*““ At the request of counsel, the Magistrate said that he
would consider whether Mme Mesmin would be charged with
inciting to violence. There the matter remains for the
moment, except that the accused are also charged with
assaulting the Abbé’s servant and her niece.”

As might be expected the affair gave occasion for some
ribald songs and lewd ballads which were hawked for a few
pence about the streets. Sightseers flocked to Bordeaux, and
Mother Marie Mesmin, who is described as ‘‘ a stout, red-
faced woman of 50 with flashing black eyes and a big black
wig,’ exploited the situation to the full. She may consider
herself happy that she did not live in the days of Boguet and
De Lancre.

In the same issue of The Times we are told :

“Several other cases of sorcery have been reported
recently. The latest has occurred at Cieurac, in the Lot,
where the house of a couple aged respectively 91 and 88
has been bewitched by an old woman to whom, on July 14,
1924, they refused lodging. The furniture dashes about
the room, candles and lamps go out without apparent reason,
doors open of their own accord, buckets of water and heaps of
fodder place themselves before the cattle, and the other day
a cauldron of water in which a pig was to be scalded, when
placed over a big fire, showed no rise of temperature until
the pig-butcher swore terribly, at which it boiled immedi-
ately.”


454 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Such instances of belief in black magic and enchantment are
indeed remarkable. It is in vain that France tries to be
materialistic and sceptical, she will never lose her hold upon
the supernatural, and if tyranny try to wrest her from things
divine, in her yearning she will embrace the supernatural
run to seed.


NOTES TO CHAPTER V.


1 Historie, XXIV, 4. “.. . ducibus auibus (nam augurandi studio Galli
preter ceteros callent).”” The History of Marcus Junianus Justinus is an
epitome, executed in the age of the Antonines, of the History of the World
written in forty-four books by Pompeius Trogus who flourished under Augustus.

2 De Bello gallico, VI, 16. ‘‘ Natio est omnis Gallorum admodum dedita
religionibus, atque ob eam causam, qui sunt adfecti grauioribus morbis quique
in preeliis periculisque uersantur, aut pro uictimis homines immolant aut se
immolaturos uouent administrisque ad ea sacrificia druidibus utuntur, quod,
pro uita hominis nisi hominis uita reddatur, non posse deorum immortalium
numen placari arbitrantur, publiceque eiusdem generis habent instituta
sacrificia.””

8 De Situ Orbis, III, 2. ‘‘ Gentes superbe, superstitiose, aliquando etiam
immanes adeo, ut hominem optimam et gratissimam diis uictimam cederent.

. Habent tamen et facundiam suam, magistrosque sapientie druidas.
Hi terre mundique magnitudinem et formam, motus ceeli ac siderum, et, quid
dii uelint, scire profitentur. Docent multa nobilissimos gentis clam et diu
iucenis annis, aut in specu, aut in abditis saltibus.”

4 Ibid., III, 6. ‘‘ Sena in Britannico mari, Osismicis aduersa littoribus,
Gallici numinis oraculo insignis est; cuius antistites perpetua uirginitate
sancte, numero nouem esse traduntur ; Gallicenas uocant, putantque ingeniis
singularibus preditas, maria ac uentos conciliare carminibus, seque in que
uelint animalia uertere, sanare que apud alios insanabilia sunt, scire uentura
et predicare: sed non nisi deditas nauigantibus, et in id Cantum, ut se
consulerent profectis.”

5 Lex Salica, tit. 22,77. Recueil des historiens de la Gaule, IV, pp. 136, 1388.

8 S. Gregory of Tours, Historia Francorum, IV, 29; V, 14,40; VI, 35.

7 Lex Ripuariorum, tit. 83. Recueil . . . IV, p. 251.

8 Lex Wisigothorum, Lib. VI, tit. 2, 1. 3. It is curious to note that certain
judges in doubtful cases had resource to augury to decide the right. The law
places these practices on the same level as inquiries of a diviner concerning the
health of the Prince or any of the royal stock.

® C. J. Hefele, Conciliengeschichte, 2nd ed., 9 vols, 8vo, Fribourg-im-Brisgau,
1890, sqq., p. 9, Sec. 284. ‘‘ De incantatoribus uolens (?), qui instinctu diaboli
cornua precantare dicuntur, si superiores forte persone sint, a liminibus
excommunicatione pellantur ecclesiw, humiliores uero persone uel serui,
correpti ad iudicium fustigentur, ut si se timore Dei corrigi forte dissimulant,
uelut scriptum est uerberibus corrigantur.”’

10 §. Gregory of Tours, Historia Francorum, IV, 1. 11.

11 Beaumont and Fletcher in their fine drama The Tragedy of Thierry, King
of France, and his brother Theoderet, 4to, 1621, have for theatrical purposes
effectively made Brunehaut a monster of evil. This, of course, is absolutely
unhistorical. A play called Brunhowlte is mentioned by Henslowe in 1597, and
a Brunhowlle in 1598.
ae Philip Fabre, s.s., Sacrosancta concilia . . . 18 vols., folio, 1671, Vol, col.

18 He was proclaimed King at Soissons in 751.

_ 14 Capitulare incerti anni, XL. Recueil des historiens, V, p. 691: “Ut nemo
sit qui ariolos suscitetur, uel somnia obseruat, uel ad auguria intendat; nec


FRANCE 455


sunt malefici, nec incantatores, nec phitones, nec cauculatores, nec tempestarii,
uel obligatores. Et ubicumque sunt emendentur uel damnentur.”’ Ch. XLI.

Ut obseruationes, quos stulti faciunt ad arbores uel petras uel fontes,
ubicumque inueniuntur, tollantur et destinantur.’ The exact force of
damneniur, let them be cast into a close prison, is made clear by a Capitulare
of the year 805: “ Sed tali moderatione fiat eadem districtio ne uitam perdant,
sed ut saluentur in carcere afflicti, usque dum, Deo inspirante, spondeant
emendationem peccatorum.” Recueil des historiens, V, p. 674. The obligatores
make witches’ knots or witches’ ladders, la ghirlanda delle streghe; these are
woven to-day in England and Italy; they are also noweurs d’aiguillette.
There are also other Capitularies of Charlemagne which forbid superstitious
practices, each Bishop is admonished to investigate and extirpate any heathen
observances and to be zealous in cleansing his diocese of “ diuinosque et
sortilegos, aut auguria, phylacteria, incantationes, uel omnes spurcitias
gentilium.” Capitulare anno 769, ch. vii. Also Capitulare anno 789, ch. iv.
“ Ut nullus in psalterio uel in euangelio uel in aliis rebus sortire presumat nec
diuinationes aliquas obseruare.”” This allusion to the mode of divination by a
book (usually the Bible or Vergil, Uergiliane sortes), is extremely interesting.
The practice preserves even to-day. See further on these capitularies, Soldan,
Geschichte der Hexenprozesse . . . Stuttgard, 1880.

15 De Cauzons, La Magie et la Sorcellerie en France, Paris, II, p. 118.

16 “ Extant et alia perniciosissima mala que ex ritu gentilium remansisse
dubium non est, ut sunt magi, harioli, sortilegi, uenefici, diuini, incantatores,
somniatorum coniectores, quos diuina lex irretractabiliter puniri iubet.’’ The
scriptural texts are quoted. ‘‘ Dubium etenim non est, sicut multis est notum
quod aquibusdam prestigiis atque diabolicis illusionibus, ita mentes quorum-
dam inficiantur poculis amatoriis, cibi, phylacteriis, ut in insaniam versi a
plerisque iudicentur, dum proprias non sentiunt contumelias. Ferunt enim suis
maleficiis aera posse conturbare, et grandinem inmittere, futura’ predicere,
fructus et lac aufere, aliisque dare et innumera a talibus fieri dicuntur. Qui
ut fuerint huius modi comperti, uiri seu femine, in tantum disciplina et uigore
principis acrius corrigendi sunt, in quantum manifestius ausu nefando et
temerario seruire diabolo non metuunt.” Concil. Paristensis liber III, c. 2;
Labbe, Concilia, VII, col. 1658; Soldan, Geschichte der Hexenprozesse.. .

. 130.

Pra Et quia audiuimus quod malefici homines et sortiariz per plena loca in
nostro regno insurgunt quorum maleficiis iam multi homines infirmati et plures
mortui sunt ; quoniam, sicut sancti Dei homines scripserunt, Regis ministerium
est impios de terra perdere, maleficos et uenefices non sinere uiuere, expresse
precipimus . . . ut tales perquirantur et comprehendantur. Et si iam inde
comprobati masculi, uel comprobate feminz sunt, sicut lex et iustitia docet,
disperdantur. Et non solum tales istius mali auctores, sed et conscil ac
complices illorum, siue masculorum siue feminarum, disperdantur, ut una cum
eis scientia tanti mali de terra nostra pereat. Capitulaire de Hiersy-sur-Oise,
873 a.D., VIL; Recueil . . . Vol. VII, p. 686. Ficker, Die gestezliche Hinfi-
hrung der Todesstrafe fiir Hetzerei (Mittheitungen des Instituts fiir cesterreichische
Geschichtsforschung, 1880), p. 181, allows that death by burning was a punish-
ment for sorcerers common among the Franks and Saxons in very early times,
although in cases not considered capital other penalties were, of course,
inflicted.

18 Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsalterthum, 3rd ed., 1881, p. 923, Formulas of
adjuration : Marténe, De Antiquis Ecclesie ritibus, Ordo, III, VII, VIII, IX,
XVI: Recueil des historiens, Vol. VI, p. 448. Dom J. Mabillon, 0.s.B., Uetera
Analecta, Paris, 1675, sqq., 4 vols., Vol. I, p. 47. Conrad of Ursperg, Conradi
Urspergensis Chronicon, anno 1126, in Vol. II of the Collectio judiciorum ...
of Charles du Plessis d’Argentré, Bishop of Tulle, 3 vols., folio, Paris, 1728.
Goldast, Collectio constitutionum imperti, Frankfort, 2 vols., folio, 1613, Vol. II,
p. 48. C. J. Hefele, Conciliengeschichte, 2nd ed., 1890, etc., p. 56. Hingmar,
De diuortio Lotharit, Recueil . . . Vol. VII, p. 292. L. Tanon, Histoire des
justices . . . Paris, 1883, p. 310. Historia Vizeliacensis monasterit, lib. iv,
Recueil . . . Vol. XII, p. 343. In England the swimming ordeal is prescribed


456 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


in the ecclesiastical code of S. Edward the Confessor. In the seventeenth
century many persons thought that witches flung into the water would swim
because the demons with whom they had commerce and who possessed them
were by nature fiery. This ancient ordeal was soon appropriated to test the
witch only, and there are cases of it being put in practice as late as 1863 in
a rural district of Norfolk, and possibly it was essayed on occasion even later.

19 The holy Queen Emma, the mother of 8. Edward the Confessor, proved
her innocence of the charges of sacrilege and incontinence by walking unhurt
over nine red-hot plough-shares laid in 8. Swithun’s Church at Winchester.
So also S. Cunegunda, ob. 1040, feast 3 March, when calumniated appealed to
God’s judgement and walked without harm over burning plough-shares, as she
is seen in a print by Hans Burgmair.

20 Over the Florentine simoniacs. S. Peter Igneus is often termed Blessed,
but in the Vallombrosian Proper, Officia Propria Sanctorum Ordinis et Congre-
gationis Uallis Umbrose, Florence, 1892, we have: “‘ Die VIII Februarii. In
Festo S, Petri Ignei, Ord. N. Cardinalis Episcopi Albanensis, et Confessoris.
Dup. 2, Cl. cum Octaua (nisi in Quadragesima).” The antiphon to the
Magnificat at First Vespers is: ‘‘ Excussit Dominus flammam ignis, et fecit
medium eius quasi uentum roris flantem.’”’ The whole office contains many
beautiful allusions to the Ordeal.

21 Agobard, Archbishop of Lyons (0b. 840) wrote a Liber aduersus .. .
impia certamina, and the Council of Valence, 855, prohibited the combat,
reiterating the anathema of the Council of Worms twenty-six years before.
Stephen V (885-91) forbade the ordeal, and Alexander IT (1061-73) specifically
condemned the hot iron, the cold or boiling water. Celestine III (1191-98)
interdicted the duel, and Innocent III (1198-1216) would no longer suffer
ecclesiastical assistance at ordeals of any nature whatsoever.

22 Soldan, Geschichte der Hexenprozesse, Stuttgard, 1880.

23 Acts of the Council of Orleans in the Recueil des historiens de la France,
Vol. X, p. 538.

24 Gesta Pontificum Treuirensium ; Recueil des historiens, XI, p. 194.

25 Guillaume Godeau, a monk of 8. Martial, Chronicon (1193), in the Recueil
des historiens, XIII, p. 677.

26 Bernard of Constance, De Berengerti herisiarche damnatione multiplici.
Migne, Patres Latini, Vol. CXLVIII, 1456; and Guitmond, De Corporis et
Sanguinis Christi ueritate in Eucharistia, P.L., Vol. CXLIX, 1429, 1480.

27 Aubry or Alberie, a monk of Trois Fontaines, Chronicle (Recueil des
historiens de la France, XI, p. 354).

28 Decretales Gregorii IX, l.v, tit. 21, c. 2.

: eter De Gestis Philippi Augusti (Recueil des historiens . . . XVII,
p. 38).

%° “Nos considerantes quod dicti fratres predicatores tam contra profli-
gandas hereses quam contra pestes alias mortiferas extirpandas se dedicauerunt
euangelizationi uerbi Dei, et quod uos diuersis occupationum turbinibus
agitati uix ualetis inter mundantium sollicitudinem angustias respirare. . . .”
Bull of Gregory IX to the Archbishops, Bishops, and all Prelates of France,
13 April, 1233. John II Rumigney Prince Bishop of Lif ge, had introduced
the Dominicans in his diocese in 1229, reserving the old rights of the episcopal
courts ; Peter Amélius, Archbishop of Narbonne (1226-45) had called upon
Fra Ferrier, 0.P., to act as inquisitor throughout his province, so the Papal
edict to a large extent merely confirmed and sanctioned an existing state
of affairs,

*1 See the roll of Inquisitors given by C. Donais, Documents pour servir &
Vhistoire de I’ Inquisition dans le Languedoc, 2 vols., Paris, 1900, and by Dr.
Paul Fredericq at the beginning of Vols. I and III of his Corpus docwmentorum
Inquisitionis heretice prauitatis neerlandice, 5 vols, Gand, 1889, sqq.

Soete de Trois Fontaines, Recueil des historiens . . . Vol. XXI, pp. 618
an :

aoe Vaisette, Histoire du Languedoc, édition Privat, IX, p. 39. In connexion
with this extraordinary tale it may not be impertinent to record in brief the
title of an old chap-book (c. 1709): ‘‘ The Miracle of Miracles. Being a full and


FRANCE 457


true Account of Sarah Smith, Daughter of John Symons, a Farmer, who lately
was an Inhabitant of Darken Parish in Essex, that was brought to Bed of a
Strange Monster, the Body of it like a Fish with Scales thereon, it had no Legs
but a pair of great Claws. . . . Which eat and fed for some time which Monster
has surprised many Thousand people that came there to see it . . . it was by
Command of the Magistrates knock’d on the Head, and several Surgeons were
there to dissect it. Also you have a Funeral Sermon on the Woman who
brought it forth, a very Wicked Liver, and disobedient to her Parents, and
one that was Mightily given to Wishing, Cursing, and Swearing. . . . This
strange and unheard of Monster was brought into the World in May last, and
if any doubt the truth thereof, it will be certify’d by the Minister and Church-
Wardens of the said Parish of Darkins in Essex as aforesaid.”

84 Joannes Eleemosynarius, or Joannes Misericors, Patriarch of Alexandria
(606-616), born at Amathus in Cyprus, c. 550, and died in that island 616. His
body was brought to Constantinople, and thence to Ofen by King Matthias
Corvinus of Hungary. In 1530 it was translated to Toll, near Presburg, and
finally, in 1632, to Presburg Cathedral, where it is venerated to-day. He is
commemorated by the Catholic Church on 23 January, by the Greeks on 12
November. He was inexhaustible in his charities, continually practising the
profoundest humility.

85 Fabré Palaprat, Recherches Historiques sur les Templiers, Paris, 1835.
The existence of Theocletes is historically at least exceedingly doubtful.
That he was a successor of the Apostle S. John is, of course, absurd. But
none the less, Hugues de Payens certainly absorbed some occult teaching, and
perhaps some propagandist commission, from the Mandean priests.

88 The Druze catechism, a French translation of which is given by M. B.
De Bock in his Essai sur l Histoire du Sabéism, Paris, 1788, is illuminating, and
there seems no reason to suspect its authenticity.

37 Havemann, Geschichte des Ausgangs des Tempelherrenordens, Stuttgard,
1846, p. 211. Lettres de Thibaut de Bar, Bishop of Liége, and of John II of
Brabant. Fredericq, op. cit., II, n. 35, Letter to King Jayme II of Aragon.
Villanueva, Viage literario, V, p. 176. Schottmiiller, Der Untergang des
Templerorden, Vol. I, p. 369.

88 As early as the year 1238 Gregory IX had declared that he suspected the
Templars of heresy ; in 1265 Clement IV contemplated a searching examina-
tion of the Order, which in 1272 the Council of Salsburg impeached as sadly in
need of drastic reform.

39 Michelet, Procés des Templiers, I, p. 553.

40 Here we probably have some connexion with the Adamite heresy, whose
adherents condemned marriage as unknown in Eden and celebrated their
rites in a state of nudity. They date perhaps from the second century. They
were seemingly an offshoot of the Carpocratian Gnostics who professed a
sensual mysticism and complete emancipation from the moral law. In the
thirteenth century these excesses were revived in the Netherlands by the
Brethren and Sisters of the Free Spirit, and in an even grosser form in the
fourteenth by the Beghards in Germany, a sect practically exterminated in
1421. Owing to the edict of toleration by Joseph II these practices reappeared
in Bohemia after 1781, and the Adamites actually had to be suppressed by
force in 1849. In April, 1925, investigations were made into an extraordinary
religious cult at Oroville, California. (The Sunday Hxpress, 26 April, 1925 ;
from New York correspondent, 25 April.) Anna Rhodes, the high priestess of
the sect declared: ‘‘ I am Eve, my husband is Adam. We are reincarnated.
I was named a disciple of God to purge my brother and others by fire.” Nude
dances were performed, and the fire ceremony consisted of branding on the
naked flesh. It appeared that in consequence of this branding a devotee,
Herman Schalow, died, possibly from shock or exposure, and District Attorney
William Rothe ordered an inquiry. Anna Rhodes asserted that her home at
Biggs, thirteen miles from Oroville, was the original Garden of Eden, re-created
by divine dispensation. A naked orgy took place in the Rhodes farmyard
round a huge bonfire, and Frank Rhodes, Mrs. Rhodes son, related that the
blood of animals was used in wild sacrificial ceremonies of the most bestial


458 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


kind, on one occasion a live lamb being burned. It is clear that these cere-
monies recall the Adamite abominations.

41 Dr, Havelock Ellis writes: ‘‘ At the beginning of the fourteenth century,
sodomy was still regarded as very prevalent. At that time it was especially
associated with the Templars, who, it has been supposed, brought it from the
East. Such a supposition, however, is not required to agcount for the existence
of homosexuality in France.” Studies in the Psychology of Sex, Vol. II. Sexual
Inversion, 3rd ed., Philadelphia, 1915, p. 36.

42 Loiseleur, La doctrine secréte des Templiers, 1872, P- 192.

43 Beschuldigungen gegen den Tempelherrenorden, Berlin, 1782.

44 Bagy (Bdrrw), a dipping of red-hot iron into water, the temper produced
thereby. tiv Baph dgiaow Somep oldnpos, elpnvnv dyovres. Aristotle, Politics, VII,
14, Aischylus, Agamemnon, 239, xpdxov Badds, the saffron-dyed robe,

45 According to some accounts the Head of the Templars was bearded. The
Cabbalists represented the creative God by a bearded head. C. W. Heckethorn.
Secret Societies, London, 1897, Vol. I, p. 160. The suggestion that Baphomet
is a corruption of Mahomet is obvious, but almost certainly mistaken. See also
Joseph de Hamner, Memoires sur deux coffrets gnostiques du Moyen-Age du
cabinet de M. le duc de Blacas, Paris, Dondey-Dupré, 4to, 1832. The author
believed that in these boxes he had found the various Cabbalistic symbols of
the worship of Baphomet. J. Collin de Plancy says that one of the Heads,
gilded, which had been seized in a Templar’s fortress at the time of the
dissolution of the Order was long preserved at Marseilles. Dictionnaire Infernal
Paris, 1863, sixiéme dition, p. 656; article T éte de Bophomet.

48 Peter Mogilas; Kimmel, Monumenta fidei eccl. orient., Jena, 1850, I,

. 180.

47 * Quod habebat quendam librum paruulum, quem bene ostendebat, de
statutis ordinis, sed alium Secretiorem habebat, quem pro toto mundo non
ostendebat.’” Michelet, Procés des Templiers, I, p. 175.

48 The pretended discovery in 1877 of these secret statutes by Dr. Merzdorf,
head librarian of the Grand Duchy of Oldenburg, is entirely untrustworthy.

49 In the T%turel of Albrecht von Scharfenburg, the Graal Knights, and
distinctly spoken of as Templars. Many Troubadours and Minniesingers
spread Gnostic doctrines throughout Europe under the allegories of Graal
legends. It is significant that the Graal cycle never found any favour with
the Church.

50 It has not been preserved.

51 George Ives, A History of Penal Methods, Chap. I, p. 24, and n. 9.

52 A whole literature of research and debate has gathered round the
Templars. It must suffice to specify a few works: Pierre Messie (Pedro
Mexia), gentil-homme de Seuile, Les diverses legons de Pierre Messie, Paris,
12mo, 1556. Pierre Du Puy, Traité concernant Vhistoire de France, 4to, 1654
(La Condamnation des Templiers); Histoire de Vabolition de Vordre des
Templiers, Paris, 12 mo, 1779. K. Anton, Versuch einer Geschichte des Tempel-
herren Ordens, 1781. F.-J. M. Raynouard, Monuments historiques relatifs a la
condemnation des Chevaliers du Temple, 8vo, 1813. J oseph de Hamner,
Mémories sur deux coffrets gnostiques du Moyen-Age, Paris, 4to, 1832. Fabré
Palaprat, Recherches historiques sur les Templiers, 1835. C. H. Maillard de
Chambrere, Régle et statuts secrets des Templiers, Paris, 8vo, 1841. Havemann,
Geschichte des Ausgangs des Tempelherrenordens, 1846. Jules Loiseleur, La
doctrine secréte des Templiers, 8vo, 1872. Dr. Hans Prutz, Geheimlehre und
Geheimsstatuten des Tempelherren-Ordens, 1879. H. Gaidoz, Note sur une
statuette en bronze représentant un homme assis, les jambes croisées, Revue
Archéologique, Nouvelle série, 22.. année, Vol. XLI, p. 365. The statue is phallic,
and connected with the Templars’ secret cult. Schottmiiller, Der Untergang
des Templerordens, 1887. E. Rey, Etude sur les Templiers, 8vo, 1891. Gmelin,
Schuld oder Unschuld des Templerordens, 1893.

58 Guillaume de Nangis, Recueil des historiens, XX, p- 608. Chroniques de
St. Denis, Recueil, XX, p. 690. Girard de Frachet, Recueil, XXI, p. 31.
Jean de Saint-Victor, Recueil, XX XI, pp- 644, 652, 655. Rigault, Le procés
de Guichard, évéque de Troyes, Paris, 1896.


FRANCE 459


54 Bernard Gui, Recueil des historiens, XXI, p. 727. Abbé Albi, Autour de
Jean XXII, Hugues Géraud, évéque de Cahors, Cahors, 1904. Langlois,
Revue de Paris, 1 February, 1906, pp. 532, 533.

55 Doat, Bibliothéque Nationale MSS., X XVII, 150, Paris, 1829, III, p. 212.

56 Lamothe-Langon, Histoire de Inquisition en France.

57 Extracts from the archives of the Toulouse Inquisition. Lamothe-
Langon, III, p. 235.

58 Jbid., III, p. 226 sqq.

59 Jbid., III, p. 226.

80 T have used the edition, 5 vols., Douai, 1605.

61 It may be noted that Jacquier recommends extreme caution in accepting
denunciations for Witchcraft.

62 Born at Gerona, c. 1320, and died there 4 January, 1399. Eymeric,
“ predicator ueridicus, inquisitor intrepidus, doctor egregius,” attacked with
much vigour and pertinacity the philosophy of Blessed Ramon Lull, Doctor
Illuminatus, and the Lullists, on which account he was temporarily banished
by King John I of Aragon. Quétif and Echard, Scriptores Ordinis Predica-
torum (Paris, 1719), I, 709-19, give the titles of thirty-five of Eymeric’s works,
contained in eleven MSS. volumes.

88 Barcelona, 1503; and many subsequent editions of which the best is
that printed at Rome, 1578, with a copious commentary by Francesco Peifia,
the famous Spanish canonist.

64 The first Bull of Innocent VIII was issued 5 December, 1484.

85 T have, with constant reference to the editio princeps, generally used the
excellent reprint in four volumes, 1669, to which have been appended many
other authoritative treatises on Witchcraft.

86 Certain writers have made themselves very merry concerning Sprenger’s
etymologies, but this is impertinent matter.

_ Compare the brilliant description in The Ingoldsby Legends, The Witches’
rolic.

$8 “* Deux jours aprés fut condamné 4a étre ars et fut son corps ramené en
poudre.”” Memoires de Jacques du Clercq, edited by the Baron de Reiffenberg,
4 vols., Brussels, 1823, Vol. III, pp. 29, 30.

69 Tanon, Histoire des tribunaux d’ Inquisition en France, p. 125. Limborch,
Historia Inquisitionis, Lib. I, c. xxiii.

70 Chroniques de Jean Molinet, édition Buchon, Vol. IV, p. 147.

71 The Month, January, 1922.

72 It may not here be impertinent perhaps to record my admiration of the
chapel and altar of S. Joanin Rouen Cathedral. It is a sanctuary in which one
lingers with devotion, and which one leaves with regret.

78 With admirable ingenuity and inconsequence Miss Murray (Witch-Cult
in Western Europe, pp. 276-9) hails Gilles de Rais also as an “ Incarnate God—
or at any rate a candidate for that honour,” whatever this latter phrase may
mean. Both S. Joan and Gilles de Rais were “ Devils,” that is to say
““ Incarnate Gods,” presumably because each rode a black war-horse! Folk-
lore has run mad.

74 Boissard et Maulde, Gilles de Rais, dit Barbe bleue, Paris, 1886. De la
Borderie, Histoire de Bretagne, Vol. IV, p. 248 sgqg. Jean Chartier, Histoire de
Charles VII, anno 1440, Monstrelet, Chroniques, édition de Buchon, Paris,
1875, II, c. 248. Charles Duplessis d’Argentré, Collectio iudiciorum.. .
3 vols., folio, Paris, 1728, Vol. I, 2, c. 27. It is often said that the local
traditions of Gilles de Rais gave rise to the story of Blue Beard, Perrault’s
Barbe-Bleue, but it seems more probable that this story is founded on the
legend of an old Breton King, Cémor, who ruled in the sixth century, and the
remains of whose castle are yet shown. f

75 Baissac, Les Grands jours de la Sorcellerie, Paris, 1889, p. 339. ;

76 It is undoubted that some such epidemic mania did prevail at the time.
In recent months (May, 1925) there have been an extraordinary number of
cases of the violation and murder of children, e.g. George Jeffrey, a lad of
fifteen years and seven months, who killed Joan Annett, ten years old, on
24 April, 1925.


460 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


77 Adrien de Montalembert, Awmosnier du Roy Francois I. ‘‘ La merveil-
leuse histoire de lesprit qui depuis nagueres s’est apparu au monastére des.
religieuses de Saint Pierre de Lyon, laquelle est plaine de grant admiration.
Colophon: Nowuellement imprime a paris en la rue Saint Jaques a Venseigne
du chasteau rouge, pres les Mathurins (chez Guillaume de Bossozel). Acheue le
XVe iour doctobre lan mil cing cens xxviij. >¢

78 Norcia was infamous as a centre of Witchcraft. Cellini tells us of the
priest who was minded to consecrate a book of spells among the Norcian
mountains. Cf. Folengo, Maccaronea XXI: “ Qualiter ad stagnum Nursz
sacrare quadernos.”’ ay }

79 Always the hot-bed of strange heresies. Here (rue de La Martiniére) lived
the esoteric abbé J.-A. Boullan (ob. 3 January, 1893), whom Huysmans has
introduced into La-Bas as Dr. Johannés. ‘“‘ Lyon est aussi le refuge du
mysticisme, le havre des idées préternaturelles et des droits douteux . . . c’est
la que les envofitements sévissent, car a la Guillotiére, on fait maléficier, pour
un louis, les gens!” Lda-Bas, XX.

80 Bodin, De la Démonomanie des sorciers, II, v.

81 Tehan Boulese, prétre, professeur des Saintes Lettres Hébraiques, pauvre
perpétuel du Collage de Montaigut. Le manuel de Vadmirable victoire du corps
de Dieu sur l’esprit maling Beelzebub, obtenue a Leon, 1566, Paris, D. Du Val.,
1575, 16mo. Also the same author’s L’abbrégée histoire du grand miracle par
nostre Sauueur et Seigneur Iesvs-Christ en la Saincte Hostie du Sacrament de
VAutel, fait a Laon, 1588, Paris, Belot, 1573, 16mo. 16 leaves.

82 Bodin, De la Demonomanie, III, v. ‘‘ Confessa deuant le Roy .. . la
facon du transport des sorciers, des dances, des sacrifices faicts 4 Satan, des
paillardises auec les Diables en figure d’hommes & de femmes: & que chacun
prenoit des poudres pour faire mourir hommes, bestes, et fruits.”

83 Bodin, De la Demonomanie, IV, 1.

84 Baudrillat, Jean Bodin et son temps, Paris, 1853. Brunetiére, Trois
artisans de l'idéal classique in Revue des deux mondes, 1 March, 1907.

85 It has been reprinted in Cimber and Danjou, Archives curieuses de
UV Histoire de France, Vol. XII, as also in L’Estoile’s Journal de Henri III,
Vol. III (pp. 369 sqq.) of the edition of 1744. See also the Leber Catalogue, IT,
No. 4037; Brunet’s Manual, V, 457; and the Ouvaroff Catalogue, No. 1736.

86 Collin de Plancy, Dictionnaire Infernal, 6th ed., 1863, p. 154, sub. v.
Chamouillard.

87 Le Petit Albert. Le solide trésor des secrets merveilleux de la magie
naturelle et cabalistique, of which there are numberless editions, many being
mere chap-books, gives stupid formulas how to perform this charm and how
to dissolve it.

88 Discours veritable sur le fait de Marthe Brossier, de Romorantin,
prétendue démoniaque. [By a physician named Marescot.] Paris, Mamert
Patisson, 8vo, 1599 (Tallemant des Reaux wrongly attributes this book to
Mgr. Le Boutellier, Archbishop of Tours). This should be checked by the
work of the saintly Cardinal de Berulle, T'raité des énerguménes, suivi d’un
discours sur la possession de Marthe Brossier, contre les calomnies d’un médecin
de Paris, Troyes, 8vo, 1599. Written as by Léon d’Alexis, it was reprinted
under the real name of the author at Paris, 8vo, 1631, in which year there were
two several editions, Cottereau and Fiacre Dehors. All copies of the Discours
which I have been able to examine end abruptly at page 56.

8° Ch. Pfister, Nicolas Remy et la sorcellerie en Lorraine, Revue historique,
32 year, Vol. 93, March-April, 1907, p. 225 sqq.; May-June, 1907, p. 43.

°° I have used the quarto edition, Lyons, 1595, The Damonolatria was
reprinted at Hamburg as late as 1693.

*1 This date I owe to Yve-Plessis, who is scrupulously exact. He gives the
8vo 1590 edition of Lyons (Rigaud) as the third edition. The 8vo Lyons
edition (Iean Pillehotte), 1602, is quoted by most authorities, e.g. Collin de
Plassey, Theodore de Cauzons, as editio princeps. But James I in his
Demonologie, Edinburgh, 1597, quotes from and translates Boguet, to whom
he is greatly but silently indebted, as in the passage concerning legal witnesses :

But in my opinion, since in a mater of treason against the Prince, barnes or


FRANCE 461


wiues, or neuer so diffamed persons, may of our law serue for sufficient
witnesses and proofes. I thinke surely that by a far greater reason, such
witnesses may be sufficient in matters of high treason against God: For who
but Witches can be prooues, and so witnesses of the doings of Witches.”’ I have
failed to trace the exact date of the first edition of the Discours, and the whole
bibliography is exceedingly difficult. We have : “‘ Seconde édition augmentée,”’
Lyons, Pillehotte, 8vo, 1603 ; other editions, Paris, Binet, 8vo, 1603 ; Rouen,
Le Mesgissier, 12mo, 1603; Lyons, Pillehotte, 8vo, 1605 ; Rouen, Osmont,
12mo, 1606 ; Rouen, de Beauvais, 12mo, 1606; Lyons, Pillehotte, 8vo, 1607.
There is another “ Seconde ‘dition,”’ Lyons, Rigaud, 8vo, 1608; ‘‘ Troisiésme
édition,” Lyons, Rigaud, 8vo, 1610; Lyons, Pillehotte, 8vo, 1611.

®2 Other editions, Paris, Abel Langelier, 4to, 1612; Paris, Nic. Buon, 4to,
1612 ; Me Reueu corrigé et augmenté,’”’ Paris, Nic. Buon, 4to, 1613. Some
copies, which are very rare and much sought after by bibliophiles, contain an
illustration depicting the orgies of the Sabbat, engraved by the Polish artist
J. Ziarnko.

°° La chasse aux sorcieres dans le Labourd (1609), Etude historique, by
J. Bernou, Agen, Calvet et Célérie, 8vo, 1897, is wholly based on de Lancre.
An engraving from Goya is given as a frontispiece.

®4 Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends, 2nd ed., 1879, p. 65.

85 In some Ursuline communities solemn vows are taken, and papal
enclosure is in force. In some houses the vows, though perpetual, are simple.
To-day many large and important communities still retain their independent
organization.

®6 The name is variously spelled in documents and contemporary printed
accounts of the trial: Gaufridy, Gaufredi, Gofridi, Jaufredi, Gauffridi,
Godefroy, Jauffret, Jouffroy.

*7 Born at Saint-Zacharie, near Sainte-Baume, in 1543, he took the habit of
S. Dominic at an early age and filled many high and important positions
in the Order. He promoted various reforms in the province of Southern
France, and was in high favour with Pope 8. Pius V. He had the gift of
prophecy, and his cause having been introduced he is declared Venerable by
the Holy See.

88 A considerable literature has grown up round Madeleine de la Palud and
there are many valuable monographs and detached studies. The contemporary
Histoire admirable de la possession et conversion d’une pénitente sédurte par un
Magicien la faisant sorciére . . . by Father Sebastian Michaelis, 8vo, 1612,
which ran into some eight editions, Paris, Douai, Lyons, 1613, 1614, and
later, is, of course, of prime importance. Raoul Gineste, Les Grandes Victimes
de V Hystérie, Louis Gauffridi . . . et Magdeleine de la Palud, Paris (no date,
c. 1900), contains much valuable material but is ill-arranged, and must be
used with great caution. The work of Ven. Sebastian Michaelis was translated
into English, London, 1613, Admirable Historie of the Possession and Conversion
of a Penitent Woman.

99 Our chief authority is the contemporary work of J. Lenormant de
Chisemont, [I] Histoire veritable, mémorable de ce qui c’est passé sovs Vexorcisme
de trois filles possédées és pais de Flandre, en la descouuerte et confession de
Marie de Sains, soy disant Princesse de la Magie ; et Simone Dourlet complice,
et autres. Ou il est avssi traité de la police du Sabbat, et secrets de la Synagogue
des magiciens et magiciennes. Del Antichrist et de la fin du monde. [II] De la
vocation des magiciens et magiciennes par le ministére des démons: et par-
ticvliérement des chefs de la magi a scauoir de Magdeleine de la Palud, Marie
de Sains, Louys Gaufridy, Simone Dourlet, etc. . . . Item de la vocation accom-
plie par Ventremise de la seule authorité ecclesiastique a spauoir de Didyme,
Maberthe, Loyse, etc. Auec Trois petits tractez. Paris, De Varennes et Nicolas
Bvon, 1623, 3 parts in two volumes, 8vo. The second volume, unknown to
Brunet, and bearing (as above) a different title from Volume I is of the last
rarity. One may also consult Les confessions de Didyme, sorciére pénitenie,
avec les choses qu’elle a déposées touchant la synagague de Satan ; Plus les
instances que cette complice (qui depuis est rechitée) a faites pour rendre
nulles ses premiéres confessions: Veritable récit de tout ce que s’est passé en


462 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


cette affaire, Paris, 1623, 8vo. A valuable work is Historia de tribus energumenis
in partibus Belgii, scilicet Magdalene de Palud, Maric de Sains. Paris, 8vo,
1623.

100 Urbain Grandier and the Loudun possessions have been the subject of a
whole library of works. These range from contemporary records such as
Interrogatoire de maistre Urbain Grandier, prétre . . . Paris, 8vo, 1634, and
Arrest de condemnation de mort contre Maistre Vrbain Grandier, prestre .. .
Paris, 8vo, 1634, to Dr. G. Legué’s Urbain Grandier et les possédées de Loudun,
Paris, 8vo, 1880, and Seur Jeanne des Anges . . . Autobiographie d’une
hysterique possédée (with a preface by Charcot), Paris, 1886, and second edition,
1888. I have myself studied fifty-four separate monographs and studies,
which list does not include incidental essays and chapters in other works.
However graphic, such a narrative as that of Alexandre Dumas in Crimes
Célébres (1839-41) is utterly unreliable and has no more historical basis than
the Dumas and Maquet drama Urbain Grandier, Paris, 1850. Many of the
monographs deliberately suppress the facts that the possession did not cease
upon Grandier’s execution. In fact, most of these works must be used with
caution.

101 Gérres, La Mystique Divine, French translation by Charles Sainte-Foi,
2nd ed. 1862, Vol. V, p. 232.

103 It were wellnigh impossible to enumerate the vast number of books and
pamphlets, over forty of which I have consulted, that deal with the Louviers
scandals. Perhaps the most famous is that of the theologian Desmarets :
Histoire de Magdelaine Bavent, Religieuse du Monastére de Saint-Louis de
Louviers, auec sa confession generale & testamentaire, ou elle declare les
abominations, impietez & sacrileges qu’elle a pratiqué & veu pratiquer tant
dans ledit Monastére qu’au Sabbat & les personnes qu'elle y a remarquées.
Ensemble l Arrest donné contre Mathurin Picard, Thomas Boullé, & ladite
Bavent. tous conuaincus du crime de Magie. Dediée & Madame la Duchesse
d@’Orléans. Paris, Iacques le Gentil, 4to, 1652. Reprinted twice in the same
year, as also at Rouen, 1878. A certain physician named Yvelin, who showed
himself sceptical, published an Examen, Paris, 4to (18 pp.), 1643, but several
writers gave a complete and unanswerable reply to his objections. Gérres has
an excellent account of Madeleine Bavent.

103 Discours prodigicux et epowuentable de trois Espagnols & une Espagnole,
magiciens et sorciers qui se faisoient porter par les diables de ville en ville .. .
Ensemble Varrest prononcé contr’eux par la tour de parlement de Bordeauz, 1610.
Paris, 8vo (15 pp.), 1625.

104 T have examined some fifteen contemporary accounts. Naturally there
was a whole crop of satires, pamphlets, and pasquils on the occasion, and
ephemeral writings such as La Magicienne Estrangére, a tragedy, by “ un bon
Frangois,”” Rouen, 8vo, 1617.

105 Le Sieur Pichard, Admirable Vertu des saints exorcismes sur les princes
Patch Seeders réellement vertueuse Damselle Elisabeth de Ranfaing, Nancy,

mo, -

206 Collin de Plancy, Dictionnaire Infernal, 6me édition, Paris, 1863, p. 205.

107 Mémoires de la société d’archéologie lorraine, 3¢ série, Vol. X, Nancy,
1882, p. 257 sqq.

108 Son of Clotaire I, King of Soissons or Neustria, 562-83.

109 §. Gregory of Tours, 538-39 to 593-94. The fifth and sixth books of his
famous Historia Francorum treat of events which took place between
575-84, and were written in 585.

110 Pierre Grégoire, a famous lawyer, originally of Toulouse, and then of
Pont-a-Mousson. The citation is from his Syntagma iuris uniuersi atque
legum pene omnium gentium et rerum publicarum, 3° pars, l. xxxiv, c. 2.

111 §, Augustine, born 13 November, 354 ; died 28 August, 430. S. Severinus
Boethius, whose local cult at Pavia was confirmed by the Sacred Congregation
of Rites in 1883, born 480, died 524-25.

112 But Satanism and Witchcraft are essentially the seme thing.

113 E. Gilbert, Sorciers et magiciens, Moulins, 12mo, 1895. Dom Calmet,
Traité sur les Apparitions, Paris, 1751, Vol. I, pp. 72, 74 sqq.


FRANCE 468


114 Lebrun, Histoire des pratiques superstitieuses.

115 Idem.

116 “ Tl avait acheté un écu l’enfant qui fut sacrifié A cette messe qui lui fut
présenté par une grande fille et ayant tiré du sang de l’enfant qu’il piqua
a la gorge avec un canif, il en versa dans le calice, aprés quoi l’enfant fut
eave eS emporté dans un autre lieu, dont ensuite on lui rapporter le coeur et

en railles pour en faire une deuxieme [oblation].” Francois Ravaisson,
Archives de la Bastille.

EN Said to be Louis XIV or Charles II. But this purely conjectural, and
the assertion of Madame de la Desoeillet’s was probably quite untrue.

118 “ On a pensé que cet homme mystérieux devait étre lord Buckingham.
Il semblerait ici que la Desoeillet travaillant pour Louis XIV, auquel on avait
fait prendre aussi bien qu’a Charles II d’Angleterre ce mélange ignoble.”’
Docteurs Oaufyenon et Jaf, Les Messes Noires, Paris, 1905, p. 125. But surely
this is mere guess-work.

119 FH, Ravaisson, Archives . . . 1679-81, p. 336.

_ 1% Jesus saith to her: Mary. She, turning, saith to him: Rabboni (which
is to say, Master), S. John’s Gospel, xx. 16.

Nab Paris. A. Durand et Pedone Lauriel, 1866-84, 17 vols., 8vo. S. Caleb,
Les Véritables et les Fausses Messes Noires, c. xiv (Messes Noires sous Louis
XIV); Roland Brévannes, L’Orgie Satanique a travers les Siécles, Paris, 1904,
Troisiéme partie, c. 11 (La Messe Noire sous Louis XIV) and c. iii (Madame de
Moniespan chez la Voisin); and Docteurs Cauffeynon et Jaf, Les Messes
Noires, Paris, 1905, c. ix, give excellent summaries of the witch-cult under
Louis XIV.

122 Ravaisson, Archives de la Bastille, X.

123 Cf, S. Matthew ix. 32, and xii. 22.

124 A. Floquet, Histoire du Parlement de Normandie. Rouen, Edouard Frére,
1840-42, 7 vols., 8vo, Vol. V, p. 374.

125 The Eudists, or Society of Jesus and Mary, instituted at Caen, France,
25 March, 1643, by Saint Jean Eudes, is an ecclesiastical body for the
education of priests in seminaries and the giving of missions. The Eudists
direct many colleges in Belgium, Spain, South America, Canada, and the West
Indies. The majority of Fathers, however, is still resident in France.

126 Calmeil, De la Folie, II, p. 401. A somewhat prejudiced account.

127 Miguel de Molinos, 1640-96, the founder of Quietism, taught interior
annihilation and the complete disregard of bodily acts in attaining a perfect
purity of soul. Hence followed the most lascivious practices. Innocent XI,
in the Bull Celestis Pastor, 2 November, 1687, condemns as heretical, suspect,
erroneous, and scandalous, sixty-eight propositions which Molinos admitted
to be his, although not all are to be found in La Guida Spirituale, Rome, 1675.
September 3, 1687, Molinos was sentenced to perpetual imprisonment of a
greatly mitigated nature.

' 128 Even now ignorant and contemptible party-writers retail these incidents
and assert the truth of la Cadiére’s story in order to attack the Society of Jesus.
Books and pamphlets to which the scandals gave rise are very numerous.
I have examined some eighty of these. Many are violently partizan libels
such as: Factum pour Marie Catherine Cadiére contre le Pére J.-B. Girard,
jésuite, ou ce religieux est accusé de l’avoir portée par un abominable Quiétisme,
aux plus criminels eacés de Vimpudicité, et d’avoir, sous la voile de la plus haute
spiritualité, jetté dans les mémes excés six autres dévotes, qut, comme elle, s’ étovent
mises sous sa direction. La Haye, Scheurleer, 8vo, 1731. Of course not the
slightest credence must be given to the vomit of Jansenist venom and spite.
A good work is Pazerpy-Thorame’s Démonstration des impostures sacrileges
des accusateurs du P. Girard . . . et de Vinnocence de ce pére. Aix, s.d. [1731],
folio. As we might expect, we also find obscenities inspired by the anti-
clericals: La sainte d’Ollioules ou éclaircissements sur le rapport mystérieux
entre le P. Girard et la demoiselle Cadiére, Paris, 1738, editions of which con-
taining the lewd pictures are very rare. Les Amours en estampe du P. Girard
et de la Belle Marie Cadiére, 1740, consists of a series of thirty-two bawdy
engravings. Les Amours de Sainfroid, jéesuite, et d’Hulalie, fille dévote.


464 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Histoire véritable. Suivie de quelques nouvelles. A la Haye, 1729, is a con-
temporary piece of pornography. Above all we have the infamous Thérése
Philosophe, ou Memoires pour servir a V Histoire de D. Dirrag et de M ademoiselle
Eradice (anagrams of Girard and Cadiére), 2 vols. La Haye, about 1748, with
twenty-four indecent illustrations. The book has been frequently reprinted,
e.g. in 1783, 1785 (twice), 1796, 1797, 1869, 1882, ete. The author was De
Montigny, although the Marquis de Sade attributed it to the Marquis Jean-
Baptiste de Boyer d’Argens. A ballad-opera, The Wanton Jesuit ; or, Innocence
Seduced, performed at the little theatre in the Haymarket and published,
8vo, 1731, is worthless. In de Nouveau Tarquin, Comédie en trois Actes, 1730-1,
ascribed to J. J. Bel, Girard is also vilely traduced. This isa lewd little burletta
“assaissoné de salet.s & de boufonneries . . . des fades turlupinades & les
plus sales équivoques y tiennent lieu de sel.” ; .

129 Diderot, Huvres, 22 vols., 8vo, Paris, 1821, Vol. XV, Dictionnaire, under
Divination ; Vol. XVII, Ligature.

180 Condillac, Huvres, 16 vols., 8vo, Paris, 1822, Vol. II, Traité des systémes,
c. v, pp. 46, 53, 65.

131 Dictionnaire philosophique, under Démoniaque ; Magie.

132 Journal historique et anecdotique, E.-J.-F. Barbier, Paris, 1847.

133 Henri d’Alméras, Cagliostro, Paris, 1904, p. 113.

134 An excellent and detailed study is La Croyance a la Magie au XVIIIe
Siécle en France dans les Contes, Romans, et Traités, by Constantin Bila, Paris,
1925. See also V. Delaporte, Du merveilleux dans la littérature francaise, Paris,
1891.

135 Bibliothéque Ecclesiastique, VIII, p. 90.

136 Justine ou les Malheurs de la Vertu, 4 vols., 1797, Londres (Paris), II,
p- 239. The first edition of Justine is two volumes, 1791.

137 La Nouvelle Justine ou les Malheurs de la vertu, suivi de l Histoire de
Juliette sa seur, ou les Prospérités du vice, Hollande (Paris, Bertrandet or
Didot ?), 1797, 10 vols., 18mo, Volume III, p. 35. There are several reprints of
this edition which should have a frontispiece and one hundred and four
engravings. Generally only one hundred illustrations are found, or even a
lesser number. One of the latest impressions is Brussels, 1875. The first
edition of Juliette (as distinct from Justine) is in four volumes, 8vo, 1796 ;
there is also an edition of six volumes, 18mo, 1797.

138 [bid., III, 147.

189 Ibid., V, 1.

140 The Universe, 22 May, 1925.

141 [.4-Bas ran through the Echo de Paris, and was published in book form
by Tresse et Stock, 1891. It caused an enormous sensation. Dr. Johannes is
the Abbé Boullan ; Gevingey, Ledos; Docre, Rocca. Madame Chantelouve
is a real person. ‘“‘ Maman” Thibaut is sketched in Huysman’s later work as
Madame Bavoil. The Satanist, a fine novel by Mrs. Hugh Fraser and J. I.
Stahlmann, gives a sad picture of diabolism in Italy. Mrs. Hugh Fraser wrote
tome: ‘ The incidents of the story all have their foundation in fact, so far as
Satan-worship, its adherents and its victims are concerned. Would that it
were not so!”

142 Joanny Bricaud. André du Fresnois withdrew from circulation his
interesting study, Une étape de la conversion de J.-K. Huysmans, and a series
of articles by Henry Céard and Jean de Caldain, Huysmans intime, which were
being published in the Revue hebdomadaire in 1908, ceased most abruptly.

143 The Evening News, Thursday, 2 March, 1922.

144 Daily Sketch, Monday, 5 January, 1920.


CHAPTER VI
GERMANY


THE conversion of Germany to Christianity was very slow,
for here the Church had a most difficult problem to solve,
namely, to replace the primitive and seemingly natural
conception of life by an entirely different one which appeared
strange to the people, who for a long while regarded the new
ideas not only with mistrust, but also with a certain contempt
especially hard to eradicate and overcome. Their acceptance
of the Christian teaching and name was at first purely
mechanical, although when later it became a true and inner
conviction few nations during the Middle Ages contributed
more to the greatness of the Catholic Church.

In the actual conversion of this country much credit is due
to the Irish and Scotch missionaries, but the real founders of
Christianity in Germany are the Anglo-Saxons, and above
all the glorious Apostle S. Boniface (Winfrid, Wynfrith), the
pride and joy of the Benedictine family. S. Columbanus,
who laboured in Swabia, was the first to come to the Conti-
nent, about 583; S. Fridolin founded Sachingen ; Pirminius
established the monastery of Reichenau in 724; whilst
about 618 S. Gallus founded the Abbey of S. Gall, for many
centuries one of the chief monastic houses in Europe. The
cause of Christianity was spread in Bavaria by S. Rupert
of Worms, at the beginning of the seventh century ;1 by
S. Corbinian (d. 730) and S. Emmeram (d. 715). The chief
missionary of the faith to the Franks was the Scotchman
S. Kilian, at the end of the seventh century ; the Frisians
received Christianity through S. Willibrod, Bishop of Utrecht,
who died at Echternach in Luxemburg, 7 November, 789.

On 15 May, 719, Pope S. Gregory II gave S. Boniface a
solemn and official mandate “to go forth and preach the
truths of both Testaments” unto “the wild nations of
Germany,” that is to say the heathens in Germany to the


465


466 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


right of the Rhine. The holy missionary when travelling
through Bavaria found S. Rupert’s labours had brought
forth good fruit in a number of convents and sanctuaries,
whilst Alamannia was equally flourishing. Thuringia,
however, which at Rome was still assumed to be Christian had
fallen back into the grossest heathendom. Duke Gotzbert,
and his son Duke Hethan II, both converts of S. Kilian,
and zealous promoters of the Faith, had been murdered.
Their rebellious subjects forthwith lapsed into what was at
best a mixture of Christianity and their old paganism.
Moreover in 716 King Radbod, who had gained possession
of all Frisia, drove out S. Willibrod and destroyed most of
the churches, replacing them by temples and altars to the
idols. This persecution, waged with hideous cruelty, lasted
three years, for the tyrant perished miserably in 719, but its
effects endured for more than a century. After a while
S. Boniface was recalled to Rome when S. Gregory II on 30
November, 722 (723) consecrated him a regional Bishop,
sending letters to his diocesans in Thuringia and Hessia
enjoining canonical obedience to their new superior. When
S. Boniface revisited Upper Hessia he discovered that even
during his short absence a large number had drifted back
into paganism, a loss which seems to some extent to have
been the fault of the clergy, many of whom, ill-taught and
irregularly appointed, were equally ready to say Mass for the
Christians or offer sacrifices to the idols for the heathen.
Naturally this caused the holy Bishop intense anxiety and
suffering, as may be seen in his letters to England. In order
to show the heathen how utterly powerless were the gods in
whom they placed their trust, at Geismar, near Fritzlar,
S. Boniface with his own hands felled an ancient oak, sacred
to the Lord of Thunder, and as the strokes of the axe rang
loud upon the gnarled bark of the wizard tree the pagan
throng stood confounded and amazed when no bolt from the
sky, no swift red levin destroyed this bold defier of mighty
Thor. Many were converted upon the spot, and it has been
said without exaggeration that the fall of this old oak
marked the fall of heathenism in Germany. With the wood
S. Boniface built a chapel, dedicated to the first Pope, the
Prince of the Apostles. Not long after he passed on to
Eschwege where he overthrew and ground to powder the


GERMANY 467


demoniacal statue of Stuffo, a fearful idol. Naturally the
forces of evil were all the more enraged by the victories of
the Saint, and their malice blazed forth with murderous fury,
when after years of glorious labour he journeyed to the
Frisians and gained many converts to the East of the Zuider
Zee. On 5 June, 755, a vast concourse of catechumens had
gathered for the Sacrament of Confirmation at Dokkum on
the River Borne. Suddenly an armed host of heathens burst
upon them with hideous shouts and yells, and scattering the
unprotected candidates in all directions they massacred the
Saint and fifty-two of his companions. When the Christians
had rallied the body covered with wounds was conveyed to
Utrecht, whence it was soon brought to Mainz, and in after
years translated to the Abbey of Fulda.?

As late as the end of the tenth century primitive paganism
prevailed among the Prussian tribes, who inhabited the
territory about the Gulf of Danzig, for it was at this period
that they were visited by S. Adalbert, Bishop of Prague, who
had been driven from his see* at the command of King
Boleslas, the tyrant being unable longer to endure the holy
prelate’s stern reproach for the murder of his two brothers
through whose blood he mounted the throne. The heroic
Saint made his way athwart the untracked forests and
marshes where the cold Vistula flows to the very source of
the river, and by his preaching to the inhabitants of the
town of Dantzig vast numbers were converted, receiving
Holy Baptism at his hands. Baptizabantur hominum multe
caterue. Crowds upon crowds were baptized, says Pagi in
his valuable annotations to the Annales of the Venerable
Cesare Baronius. This almost miraculous conversion of the
whole country-side was the affair of a few weeks at most—
many authorities assign only ten days—and the wrath of the
heathen wizards and priests knew no bounds. They plotted
his destruction, and the Bishop was assassinated by some
temple servant who pierced him through with a mighty lance.
The feast of S. Adalbert is celebrated on 23 April, and he is
generally venerated as the Apostle of Prussia. Immediately
after his death, Bruno, a monk of the Aventine monastery at
Rome, who in the world had been the Count de Querfurt,
set out with a small band to continue the martyr’s good
work. In 1009, however, he fell into the hands of the savage


468 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


pagans, and was butchered together with eighteen of his
companions. For nearly two centuries the Prussians lapsed
into darkness‘ until they were evangelized by a number of
Cistercians, chief amongst whom were Abbot Godfrey of the
Polish province, Dom Christian, and Dom Philip, whose work
was blessed and encouraged by the great pontiff, Innocent III.

Very different from the gods of sunlit Greece, the nurse of
poetry and all arts, were the dark cruel gods of the northern
nations. Not least amongst these, worshipped at midnight
in the haunted glades of the cold snowy forests, adored with
foul mystic rites beneath the black shadows of immemorial
fir and pine, was Kurche the lord of the pathless woodland,
who symbolized in some sort the blind pitiless forces of nature.
The word Hewe, which in German signifies a witch, occurs in
old authors under a double form hagedisse or hagetisse in Low
German, and hagezisse or hagezussa in the purer dialects.
Now the Hagedisses were the nymphs of the forest, who may
be compared with the Greek Dryades and Hamadryades ;
the Alseides ;5 the Huleoroi,* watchers of the wood; the
Auloniades,’? dwellers in the glen; the Napaiz, who lurk
amid the brakes; not kindly maidens to whom simple
rustics pour libation of milk and oil, but those strange
visions which if mortal see he is bereft of his senses and
driven frantic, and becomes vuugdoAnrTos, nympholept ;
lymphatus or lymphaticus? in Latin phrase. ‘‘ Nym-
pholepsy,” writes Robert Chandler in his Travels in Greece
(1775), “is characterized as a phrensy, which arose from
having beheld them [the nymphs].”

The Hagedisses are near akin also to the Valkyries. The
Valkyries sped through the clouds on their courses swift as air
from whose flowing manes are scattered both dew and hail.
It was they who fertilized the wide champaign. So in legend
did the witch ride athwart the storm-evoking wind and
tempest. She could fill with plenty the garners of those who
propitiated her, albeit evil were her gifts. In some parts of
Germany to-day the peasants term sorcerers Valriderske,
which was one of the names of the Valkyries. Wiéinschelwip,
a word used in precisely similar fashion, has also been
preserved. The Valkyries took part in the banquets of Odin.
When the coven of witches assembled at the Blocksberg or
Brockula they shared in the devil’s carousals and adored


GERMANY 469


Satan as Wotan or Donar was worshipped of old. An ancient
tradition averred that young girls who had never lost their
maidenhead and were of an Amazon spirit could under
certain conditions join the band of Valkyries, being admitted
to swell the train of Frigg or Freya when as Holda,—euphe-
mistically called the Good Lady,*—or in more northern
climes as Huldra and Holla, she rode abroad o’ nights
charioted upon the whirlwind and the gale. Hence the
name Hollenfahrt, Holla’s ride, was popularly given to the
voyage of witches hastening to their Sabbat orgies.

It is clear that in Germany medieval Witchcraft absorbed
at least in the popular imagination a number of dark
traditions that had lingered on from pagan days. It must,
however, be most carefully emphasized that this is by no
means any continuance of or any sort of link with some
hypothetical old religion, such as that for which the writer of
a recent study in anthropology has evolved the title “‘ the
Dianic cult,” 1° postulating a secret organization which in fact
is merest fable and moonshine. Very often the lees of black
heathendom envenomed the true Faith. Many a heresy was
spawned in Germany, and where heresy flourishes witchcraft is
not far behind. Crescit cwm magia heresis et cum heresi
magia. Heresy grows alongside Witchcraft, and Witchcraft
alongside heresy, wrote the learned theologian Thomas
Stapleton, in a Louvain thesis?! of 1549. Germany (Mid-
Europe) seems to have been especially troubled with frantic
sects and painful schisms. Many of these were speedily
suppressed, but others did infinite mischief before they
could be completely crushed. In 1051 a number of Cathari
were hanged at Goslar by order of and in the presence of the
Emperor Henry III. Early in the twelfth century, S. Norbert,
Bishop of Magdeburg (d. 6 June, 1134), was combating the
foul heresies and anarchy which Tanchelin had shamelessly
propagated and practised ; in 1114 a number of heretics who
had been provisionally placed in prison by the Bishop of
Strasburg were, during that prelate’s absence, forcibly
seized upon by the crowd who feared clerical lenience,
dragged out of the town, and burned alive ;1? a similar event
happened at Cologne in 1148. In 1184, Lucius III and
Frederick Barbarossa held a conference at Verona, the result
of which was the publication on 4 November of the famous


470 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Bull Ad abolendam, anathematizing the Cathari, Paterini,
the Poor Men of Lyons, Arnaldists, and other wretches.
Rules were laid down for the examination of suspects, the
visitation of infected areas, and the ample co-operation of
civil authority. The Emperor, also, officially placed heretics
under the imperial ban.!* Ten years later, Henry, Bishop of
Worms, is proceeding against heretics with a necessary
severity, as directed by the Emperor Henry VI.14 Less than
half a century after Frederick II extended the penalty of
death at the stake for obstinate heresy into the Empire,
introducing this measure into the Sachenspiegel and Schwa-
benspiegel of Germany. On 20 November, 1220, a first
constitution was published for Lombardy ; in March, 1224,
this was reiterated and reinforced, capital punishment
being prescribed ; and the amended law was finally promul-
gated throughout the Empire in 1238.15 This constitution
has been ascribed to the influence of Albert, Archbishop of
Magdeburg, who was horrified by the spread of the most
abominable ideas and revolutionary theories, which seriously
threatened the peace and prosperity of his people. Some
writers have blamed Frederick for his sanction of the extreme
penalty. This is foolish and short-sighted to a degree. He
was merely giving legal recognition to an actual practice, and
the time for tolerance had passed.

This catena of repression and legislation clearly demon-
strates that the fires of revolt were simmering all the while.
In Bohemia the subversive anarchy of such boutfeus as
Conrad Waldhauser, John Militz Kremsier, and the rational-
istic Matthias of Janow, burst out into full flood with John
Hus and Jerome of Prague, culminating with the atrocious
wars of Ziska and Prokop, pointing the way to the heresiarch
Luther.

A clause of great importance occurs in the articles of peace
signed between the King of the Romans, Henry, son of
Frederick II, and the nobles of the Empire in 1280. It
prescribes that “heretics, sorcerers, and evildoers, when found
guilty of the crimes laid to their charge, shall receive the
punishment due to the offence as the judge may ordain.”1¢
Three years before, Gregory IX had delegated powers extra-
ordinary to that remarkable man Conrad of Marburg, who
was enjoined to uproot the tares of heresy. Conrad of


GERMANY 471


Marburg seems to have been a secular priest, at least he is so
described by the Thuringian court chaplain Berthold and by
Cesarius of Heisterbach, and therefore he was neither a
Dominican, as Hausrath states, nor a Franciscan, as is
asserted by Henke and others. Contemporary chroniclers
describe him as a man of great ability, deep theological
learning, burning eloquence, zealous in the defence of the
Faith, and a severe ascetic. In 1225 Conrad became the
spiritual director and confessor of the landgravine of
Thuringia, S. Elizabeth, whom he led in the highest paths of
perfection, so that she was canonized at Pentecost, 1235,
less than four years after her death, 17 November, 1281.

On 11 October, 1231, Pope Gregory directed a bull to
Conrad, who was thereby relieved of some more onerous duties
in order that he might devote his attention to the inroads of
the Luciferians,17 an abominable sect, whose covens, as it
was alleged, actually saw the Demon under a human form
and worshipped him with foul ceremonies at their midnight
assemblies. They were, in fact, Satanists who devoted them-
selves to the most monstrous profanations, and stopped at
nothing to spread their devilish doctrines. Small wonder
that Conrad proceeded against them with exemplary severity,
and delivered the guilty to legal punishment, the stake.
Plots, however, were incontinently laid against him and
snares multiplied, until on 30 July, 1233, both he and his
companion, a holy Franciscan named Gerhard Lutzelholb,
were assassinated as they returned to Marburg. He is
fittingly buried in the exquisite Gothic fane of S. Elizabeth,
not far from the shrine of his spiritual daughter “ die liebe
Frau,” where the old stone steps are worn hollow by the
knees of pilgrims.

The Satanists seldom failed to perform their bad work with
untiring energy, sowing evil and anarchy on every side, as
was only too clearly evident from the revolt of the Stedingers,
who had long been secretly corrupted by sorcerers and
heretics. The Stedingers (a word meaning those living about
the shore) were a tribe of Frisian peasants who in past years
proved wellnigh the despair of missionaries on account of
their bitter resistance to both Christianity and culture and
their obstinate perseverance in cruel pagan superstitions and
darkness. Even in the thirteenth century their profession of


472 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


faith seems to have been at best lukewarm, and we are
hardly surprised to learn that ignorance and rudeness made
them an easy prey to the emissaries of the pestilential sects
who now began to ravage and infest Europe. The Satanists
taught the Stedingers anarchy, and in 1204 they broke out
into open rebellion against the Archbishop of Bremen,
Hartwich II, an enlightened and generous prelate. His
successor Gerhard II (1219-57) was a man of sterner mould,
and unable to endure their insolence and violence he sent a
levy of troops against them. His army, however, was
defeated in 1229, whereupon the Stedingers elated with their
victory overran the whole country-side, burning and plunder-
ing on every side. In particular were churches and monas-
teries the objects of their attack; the flame and smoke of
reverend sanctuaries and hallowed houses of prayer mounted
to heaven in ceaseless clouds amid the roar of crashing roofs
and falling walls; neither age nor sex was spared; priest
and nun were put to the sword amid cruel scenes of fearful
blasphemy and the desecration of a thousand altars. A synod
held at Bremen, 17 March, 1280, in addition to these acts of
violence and outrage, accuses the rebels of the most hideous
profanities and the open practice of sorcery, wherefor they
were sternly excommunicated, a discipline which but served
to spur the Stedingers on to fresh atrocities, whilst Gregory IX
commissioned the Bishop of Liibeck aided by certain zealous
Dominicans to use his best endeavours to quell the revolt
by an appeal to reason and sanity. A little later, however,
the Pontiff learned the full extent of the evil, and the
remorselessness of the ruffians with whom authority had to
deal ere law and order might be restored. Frederick II
placed the Stedingers under the ban of the Empire. Anarchy
was growing apace. The strong castle of Slutterberg, near
Delmenhorst, had been razed to the ground by a fearful
horde of marauders, and Count Burckhardt of Oldenburg,
its lord, was slain whilst bravely fighting in defence of his
property. Vast multitudes of lubber kerns, ferocious
levellers, savage desperadoes and brigands, the vilest
rascality, swarmed like locusts over the land. With them
went a train of sorcerers and sibyls, who prophesied their
ultimate triumph throughout the world, and spurred them
on to every deed of violence and licentiousness,


GERMANY A73


The Archbishop of Bremen was greatly alarmed, and
applied to Pope Gregory for counsel and aid. The successor
of Peter, who had also learned the details of the catastrophe—
for it was little less—from other trustworthy sources, no
longer stayed his hand. A crusade against the Stedingers
was preached in all that part of Germany. The supreme
Pontiff wrote instantly to all the Bishops and leaders of the
faithful an exhortation to arm, to root out from the land
those abominable witches and wizards. ‘The Stedingers,”
said his Holiness, ‘‘ seduced by the Devil, have abjured all
the laws of God and man, slandered the Church, insulted the
holy Sacraments, consulted witches to raise evil spirits, shed
blood like water, taken the lives of priests, and concocted an
infernal scheme to propagate the worship of the Devil, whom
they adore under the name of Asmodi. The Devil appears to
them in different shapes,—sometimes as a goose or a duck,
and at others in the figure of a pale black-eyed youth, with
a melancholy aspect, whose embrace fills their hearts with
eternal hatred against the holy Church of Christ. This Devil
presides as their Sabbats, when they all kiss him and dance
around him. He then envelopes them in total darkness, and
they all, male and female, give themselves up to the grossest
and most disgusting debauchery.”

Bishop Otto II of Minster, a mighty temporal prince as
well as powerful prelate, Bishop Engelbert of Osnabriick,
Bishop Peter of Ratzeburg who was suzerain of Butin,
together with the Bishops of Lubeck and Minden, the Duke
of Brabant, the Counts of Holland, Cleves, of the Mark, of
Oldenburg, of Egmond, and of Diest, and many other nobles,
assembled an army of no less than forty thousand men, who
under the conduct of the Duke of Brabant, marched against
the Stedingers. The rebels, who had become a mere disorderly
rout, rallied their troops with the wild energy of madness and
despair. They were crushed, however, on 27 May, 1234, eight
thousand being left dead upon the field. The rest were
scattered, and when sharp justice was meted out to those
who still resisted, the revolt so strangely commingled with
heresy and Witchcraft was at an end. On 24 August, 1236,
Pope Gregory directed that they should be relieved from the
excommunication after due penance had been performed
and satisfaction given,


474 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Witchcraft was, indeed, so closely identified with heresy
that during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in
Germany this crime was tried by the Papal inquisitors, of
whom the zealous Conrad of Marburg is one of the earliest
and most renowned. At the same time a Dominican, Conrad
Dorso or Tors,!® with a colleague John, made a visitation
of several disturbed districts, and purged them of the more
notorious criminals. After the publication of the Clemen-
tines!® in 1812 new efforts were made to suppress various
anarchical and nihilistic bodies, bent on disrupting human
society, such as the Beghards and Bogomiles, but the good
work seems to have been organized and carried on by the
episcopal courts rather than by papal Inquisitors. The
secular arm dealt with the few cases of Witchcraft when
heresy was only a secondary or accidental charge, and fire
was the penalty which had been juridically appointed for
this offence by the secular codes known as the “ Sachsen-
spiegel ’’ (1225), and the ‘‘ Schwabenspiegel”’ (1275). It
was not in truth until 1867 that Blessed Urban V (Guillaume
de Grimoard) stabilized the Inquisition throughout Germany
by the appointment of two Dominican delegates. There was
certainly need of organized repression, for the scandals of the
Adamites had become very gross, a shameless communism
being openly taught and naked debauchery elevated to a cult
and a religion. It is curious to note that these practices still
survive, since in the Daily Express of Tuesday, 9 June, 1925,
under the headings ‘‘ The Society of Eden Fined,” ‘‘ Nude
Sect Seeks a New Paradise,’ the correspondent from Geneva
is quoted as follows :

‘““A queer sect, which calls itself the ‘Society of Eden,’
has been founded at Rapperswil, near Zurich. The members
believe in the simple life of Adam and Eve.

“ The sect consists of a score of persons of both sexes and
of various nationalities, among them being a countess and
a retired general. They declare that they are tired of the
conventions of modern life with its useless ceremonies. Their
only garment is a shirt, worn to the knees, but even this
garment is discarded during prayer-meetings, which take
place in a forest twice a week.

“The inhabitants, shocked to see nude men and women
walking and singing hymns among the trees near the road,


GERMANY A'S


informed the police, who arrested the band. They were made
to put on their shirts, and were taken to the police-station,
where their names and addresses—‘ The Earth ’—were
registered.

The simple lifers appeared before the tribunal on a charge
of outrage against public morals, and the Public Prosecutor
demanded imprisonment and a heavy fine. The magistrates,
however, took a more lenient view, and fined them £2 each,
warning them that if they ‘ continued to play at Adam and
Eve in public ’ they would be sent to prison.

The Society of Eden is now looking for another forest,
in another canton.”

In Germany, at Magdeburg, Erfurt, Mihlhausen, and other
cities, Kerlinger, to whom Blessed Urban-had committed
jurisdiction extraordinary, displayed unusual energy, driving
the Sectaries out of the northern and central provinces,
restoring peace, seemly order, and prosperity.

About the year 1400 numerous prosecutions for Witchcraft
were instituted at Berne in Switzerland by Peter de Gruyéres,
a secular judge. Several witches from Simmenthal were sent
to the stake. In 13899 a woman was exiled by the Bale courts
for five years upon an accusation of having cast a charm upon
her neighbours, whilst at Berlin during the same year the
Supreme Court with greater severity burned a witch for
sorceries, manifest and abominable.

In 1420 and during the following decade the Dominican
Inquisitor Ulrich de Torrente condemned at Neuchatel and
at Fribourg a number of hags and secret poisoners who were
charged with black magic; some years later, in 1439,
Hanchemand le Mazelier, a Satanist, and four other wretches,
his accomplices, were seized at Neuchatel. They confessed
to devil-worship, sorcery, and bestiality, crimes which sealed
their fate.2° In the records the name Vaudois is given to these
miserable creatures, since in France about this period
vauderie is a term often used to designate Witchcraft, whence
is derived the word voodoo, the use of and belief in sorcery
prevalent among West Indian and American creoles and
negroes. There was, undoubtedly, a close connexion between
the sorcerers and that secret body, the followers of Peter
Waldes. Throughout the whole district of Constance,
Lucerne, Bale, Zurich, Neuchatel, there are almost unbroken


476 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


records of executions for Witchcraft. Many such are
chronicled in detail for 1437, 1488, 1440, 1442, 1444, 1454,
1457, 1458, 1462, 1477, 1482, and 1493. In 1447 a whole
coven of witches was discovered at Heidelburg to the great
alarm of the townsfolk who insisted upon the law being
carried out without let or relaxation.

The archives of Metz and contemporary documents repeat
a long and monotonous tale of executions. In 1482 at
Monthureux and at Senones three men and one woman were
burned ; in 1488 a sorcerer died in prison at Metz; on the
17 June of that year three witches were executed at Mairange ;
on the 25 June two more ; the following day three at Chastel ;
on the first of July two were committed to the flames at Metz
together with the corpse of a crone who had expired in bonds ;
a witch was burned at Salney on 3 July; on the twelfth two
more at the same village ; on the nineteenth three notorious
sibyls ; and the same day a warlock was put to death at
Brieg. On 19 August two women were burned at Juxey ;
four days later at Thionville two men and three women were
executed for necromancy; on the 2 September a woman
shared their fate at Metz; on 15 September a crazy beldame
suffered at Vigey ; yet another at Juxey on the 22nd of that
month.?!_ The list might be indefinitely and tediously
prolonged. Metz, it must be borne in mind, was a fief of the
Empire, and throughout all the Rhine towns, Strasburg,
Cologne, Mainz, the same persecution raged, bonfires
blazed almost daily in their market-places and squares.

On 9 December, 1484, Pope Innocent VIII (Giovanni
Battista Cibo) issued in the first year of his pontificate the
famous Bull Summis desiderantes affectibus, in which he
details the fearful growth of Witchcraft, especially in the
archdioceses of Mainz (Archbishop Berthold of Henneberg) ;
Cologne (Archbishop Hermann IV of Hesse); Salzburg
(Archbishop Leonhard of Keutschach); Bremen (Arch-
bishop Meinrich von Schwarzburg); and Tréves (Arch-
bishop John II, Margrave of Baden). The Pontiff speaks of
incantations, charms, necromancy, black magic, communion
with devils, sexual commerce with incubi and succubi, and a
thousand other abominations. Fearful crimes were openly
committed, and to such a height had the mischief grown that
fresh powers were granted to the two Dominican Inquisitors,


GERMANY ATT


Henry Kramer?? and James Sprenger, bidding them not
shrink from the most drastic penalties if no gentler measures
could eradicate the evil thing. The Bull was published on
23 July, 1485, by George Gosler, Prince-Bishop of Brixen,
and on 14 October of the same year the campaign was
initiated in his diocese. In 1486, by a rescript dated from
Brussels on 6 November, the Emperor Maximilian I took
the Inquisitors under his very singular and especial protection,
bidding all and each of his subjects to lend them help, aid,
and assistance in the prosecution of their mission. In 1487
the Faculty of Theology at Cologne warmly approved and
humbly received the Bull.

The prosecutions in the German Tyrol were commenced by
Henry Kramer himself at the express desire of the Archduke
Sigismund, who upon his departure for Germany loaded him
with presents and the highest tokens of a prince’s esteem.
Kramer very shortly, indeed, rejoined his colleague James
Sprenger with whom he worked diligently at the Malleus
Maleficarum. In 1495 he occupied the Chair of Theology
at the University of Salzburg, and later he was sent by
Alexander VI into Bohemia and Moravia officially to visit
those provinces, and to report upon the progress of the
Faith. He is the author of several works, amongst which is an
important monograph attacking the Vaudois, Clypeus sancte
Romane Ecclesic defensionis.

The Malleus Maleficarum, the first edition of which was
published at Cologne in 1489, is an exhaustive treatise
detailing and regulating the procedure to be followed in witch-
trials. As introductory matter, we have the “ Apologia
Auctoris’”’ and the Apostolic Bull Summis desiderantes
affectibus. The treatise is divided into three parts, of which
the First contains eighteen chapters; the Second, sixteen,
with nine supplementary chapters discussing the precautions
(remedia) to be taken against Witchcraft ; the Third, sixteen
chapters, with a supplement of nineteen chapters.2? The
earlier chapters of Part I propose the Catholic doctrine as to
witches; Chapter I discussing whether it be orthodox to
maintain that there are witches, and whether the contrary
opinion be heretical. The question of incubi and succubi is
bruited, whether procreation by such connexion be possible.
In Chapter VI we find: ‘‘ Why are women more often given


478 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


to sorcery than men ?” which was also posed and answered
by James I. Chapter VII seeks to know whether witches can
for hire induce love or hate, and Chapter VIII takes up a point
in the Bull to the effect that witches may hinder human
generation and render impotent the sexual act. Chapter XII
has a rubric: ‘‘ What are we to think concerning men who
are sometimes devoured by wolves, and children who are
thus snatched from their cradles. May not this not unseldom
be wrought by black magic?” It is set forth that witches
can slay babes in the womb and procure abortion, their sin
is greater than that of the rebel angels or that of our first
parents who fell, therefore as the offscouring and scum of
humanity they deserve the heaviest punishments.

In Part II (Chapter IV) is argued how witches are carried
localiter from place to place ; how the incubus copulates with
the witch (Chapter V), an abomination which was continually
confessed in the trials, and we soon proceed to the cognate
subject, “‘ Of the way in which the Sacraments of the Church
are vilely abused by witches practising their vile art. And
of the way in which they let and hinder generation.”” Chapter
VII announces De modo quo mébra uirilia auferre solent ;
Chapter VIII, How witches may seem to metamorphose
men into beasts. Chapter XIII tells of the mischiefs which
midwives who are sorceresses may do, by slaying children,
or worser yet by offering them to Satan in horrid sacrifice.
The devilish raising of tempests with thunder, lightning, and
hail to destroy the earth’s produce is narrated, and we
proceed to the Remedies against Magic and the black art,
such as the Exorcisms of the Church, and in what manner
those afflicted by sorcery are to be exorcized (Capitulum VI,
Remediorum).

Part III concentrates upon the method of dealing with the
evil and the form of the legal punishment of witches in foro
ecclesiastico. In fullest detail is prescribed how the process
shall be commenced ; the numbers and respectability of the
witnesses ; how they are to be examined ; what questions
shall be put to them; the arrest and imprisonment of the
accused ; of the lawyers to be briefed ; of the interrogatory
of the accused and of the use of torture during the trial, when
the accused is to be adjured to confess ‘“‘ by the bitter Tears
which Our Lord Jesus Christ shed upon the Cross for the


GERMANY A'79


salvation of the world, and by the burning tears of the Most

Glorious Virgin, Saint Mary, His Mother, which when
evening was come She shed over His Most Precious Wounds.”

These pages have very full instructions with regard to the

many cases which may arise, how heretics who are penitent

but relapsed should be dealt with and judged; the punish-

ment of heretics who are impenitent and relapsed, vaunting

their crimes ; of those who flee from justice or contumaciously

refuse to appear; insuper etiam super maleficas obstetrices et

maleficos sagittarios.

Meagre and superficial as it is, yet from this baldest outline
it will be seen that the Malleus Maleficarum is a document
of the first importance, both from a historical and a social
point of view. There are, it may be, some obvious errors, but
it is a work of enormous erudition, and its influence was felt
far and wide throughout Europe. It is hardly too much to
say that nearly all succeeding demonologists owe a vast debt
to Kramer and Sprenger. Even those to whom in a later day
the pages of this encyclopedic manual seem most fantastic,
most unreal, will be bound to acknowledge the profundity
of the exposition, the tireless care and exactest pains with
which a subject wellnigh infinite is pursued and clearly
tracked in all its ramifications and subtlest intricacies. Some
may not grant the premises, some may not approve, but surely
no man can scorn or contemn so zealous an earnestness, so
serious and grave a labour.

Germany is the home of one of the most famous figures in
the annals of Witchcraft, for there are few, if any, modern
legends which have so impressed themselves upon the
popular imagination of Europe as deeply as the story of
Faust. The origin and development of the early traditions
seem fairly clear. Faust was an historical personage who
lived in Germany during the first half of the sixteenth
century, and explicit mention of whom by contemporaries
can be traced from 1507 until about 1540. He was born at
Knittlingen in Wiirtemberg, or, according to others, at Roda
near Weimar. His parents were poor, but the legacy of a
rich uncle enabled him to study medicine at Cracow, where
he began to dabble in magic. John Trithemius (1462-1516),
the famous scholar and Benedictine abbot of Spanheim, in a
letter dated 20 August, 1507, speaks of him as having been at


480 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Gelnhaussen in the previous year, and subsequently as having
visited Wiirtzburg and Kreuznach. He is called Georgius
Sabellicus, Faustus iunior. He is described as a vagabond,
boastful and insufferably braggart, travelling up and down
the country-side under pompous and exotic names, for ever
proclaiming his skill in necromancy, astrology, magic,
chiromancy, agromanecy, pyromancy, hydromancy, and all
goetic arts, blasphemously declaring that by his crafts he
could reproduce as often as he would the very miracles of
Christ. At Kreuznach Faust was employed by Franz von
Sickingen to lecture and teach, but he soon rendered himself
so odious by his debaucheries that he was compelled
incontinently to flee the town. In 1509 one Johann Faust,
who may not improbably be the same individual, took the
degree of Bachelor of Divinity at Heidelberg. The distin-
guished humanist, Konrad Mutianus Rufus (1471-1526),
canon of Gotha, in a letter of 1513 to Henri Urbain, speaks
with contempt of the charlatanry of one Georgius Faust at
Erfurt. This was, no doubt, the same vagabond scholar, and
in 1516 he was at Maulbronn ; in 1525 (according to tradition)
he dwelt in Leipzig ; in 1528 Dr. George Faust of Heidelberg
was expelled on a charge of suspected sorcery from Ingolstadt.
The famous physician, Philip Begardi of Worms, in his Index
Sanitatis (1539) speaks of Faust as a fellow who was for
several years notorious as an impudent quack and wandering
empiric, one who gave himself out as philosophus philoso-
phorum and was highly acclaimed by his dupes as a mighty
magician whose cures and marvels were certainly due to
supernatural powers. Begardi had not himself seen the
necromancer, but he had spoken with many whe had been
most egregiously swindled by this clever chouse. A some-
what ambiguous passage in the narrative is interpreted as
signifying that Faust was just dead; in any case we know
that he was no longer alive in 1544. The Protestant divine,
Johann Gast, in the second volume of his Conuiuialium
Sermonum Liber (1544) speaks of having supped with Faust
at Basel, when he was attended by a dog and a black horse
that were obviously demons, and there is a further account of
the sudden and violent end of the warlock, who was found
dead one morning with a twisted neck, his countenance black,
horribly distorted, and swollen. Although as often as five


GERMANY 481


times turned Christianly upwards, the corpse lay constantly
on its face on the bier.

In 1561 Conrad Gesner of Zurich mentions Faust as a
wandering scholar of no mean powers, long since dead.
Manlius, a pupil of Melanchthon, in his Locorum Communium
Collectanea, 1562, relates that his preceptor knew Faust,
who was a native of Kundling, and describes him “a most
filthy beast, the midden of numberless devils ” (turpissima
bestia, et cloaca multorum diabolorum). He continues to tell
of his magical studies at Cracow, his sorceries performed
throughout all Germany, and how at last Satan carried him
to eternal bale. The famous physician of Cleves, Johann
Weyer, in his De Prestigiis Demonum (1561) speaks of Faust
as a profligate and profane wretch; according to Widman
Luther discoursed of Faust and his familiars ; Count Froben
Christoph von Zimmern in his Chronik twice alludes to Faust
who was strangled one night at a hostelry by his demons.
In the Christliche Bedenken und Erinnerung von Zauberei
(1585) of the Protestant theologian Augustin Lereheimer of
Steinfelden details are given of Faust’s life; two of the
seventeen tracts in Theatrum de Ueneficis (1586), the Jesuit
scholar Martin Delrio in his Disquisitionum Magicarum
Libri Sex (1624), and Philip Camerarius in his Opera Horarum
Subcisiuarum (1658) all testify to the story. The man was
beyond all question a notorious and defamed foist, a lewd
boaster of his bad proficiency in malefic arts, a subtle diviner
and nigromant, so small wonder that when he came by his
death at a wayside house in mysterious circumstances rumour
at once bruited of a strange fierce storm one black night
wherein the Devil had borne him away amid thunder-claps
and levin, whence immediately arose the story of a dark
compact and conveyance with Satan.

The first literary version of the Faust legend was the
Volksbuch, published by Johann Spies at Frankfurt in 1587,
under the title Historia von Dr. Johann Fausten, dem
Weitbeschreiten Zauberer und Schwartzkiinstler, etc., the
preface to which is a treatise upon the damnable consequences
of magic and commerce with the Devil. The book is divided
into three parts of unequal length. All the incidents which
since have been so often used and related are to be found
here. We have the meeting of Faust with the fiend who


482 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


gives his name as Mephistophiles ; the signing of a contract
with blood; Faust’s voyages to Paris, Naples, Venice,
Rome, and other cities; the evocation of Alexander the
Great to satisfy the emperor’s request; the presenting of
fresh grapes and apples at a banquet in a snowy January ;
the raising of Helen of Troy, whom he uses as his succubus
and who bears him a son; the fearful end of the wizard,
whose limbs are scattered far and wide by howling demons,
whilst Helen and her child disappear, and the famulus Wagner
succeeds to his master’s estate.

It is unnecessary to detail the immense popularity of this
work, of which as many as four impressions were printed
before the end of 1588, a second and corrected edition being
issued by Spies himself in that year. A low German rendering
at once appeared, and before 1589 a close, if somewhat
abbreviated, English translation. Danish, Dutch, Flemish,
and French versions followed fast. Abridgements began to
swarm from the press as also enlarged editions and rewritings.
At Hamburg in 1599 was printed Widman’s version, a later
recension of which by the Nuremberg physician, Johann Nicol
Pitzer (1674),?4 is interesting as containing a shadowy hint
of Goethe’s Gretchen in the citizen’s fair daughter whom
Faust wishes to marry, but which the demon will not permit
him to do.

Not even the chap-books, however, spread the legend of
Faust so widely and so inspired the popular imagination as
the dramatic versions of the tale. One of the greatest, as one
of the earliest, of these is Marlowe’s mighty play The Tragical
History of D. Faustus. Written, it is generally believed, in
1588, it was received with unbounded applause, and wellnigh
a century later Phillips notes in 1675, ‘‘ Of all that Marlowe
hath written for the stage, his Doctor Faustus hath made the
greatest noise.”” Marlowe follows Spies’ narrative with some
exactness. In the forms which have come down to us,
however, there intermingle with scenes of impassioned
grandeur and awful doom episodes characterized by the
most witless lamblack buffoonery, as also offensive matter
even more out of place than mere clowning, the low and
farcical picture of the Pope and the friars, an unnecessary
and entirely displeasing indecorum reproducing only too
faithfully the atmosphere of the anti-Catholic Volksbuch.?5


GERMANY 483


The marvellous lines in which Faust hails Helen’s beauty are
well known, and Lamb justly remarked: ‘What has
Margaret to do with Faust? Marlowe, after the original
story, makes Faust possess Helen of Greece.” It is interesting
to note that William Prynne in his noisome Histriomastix
(1633) retails an idle story that on one occasion the Devil
himself “ appeared on the stage at the Belsavage Playhouse
in Queen Elizabeth’s days” while this tragedy was being
performed, ‘“‘the truth of which I have heard from many
now alive who well remember it,” says the rabid old
canter. ?®

English companies were playing Dr. Faustus at Gratz in
1608, at Dresden in 1626, and in many other continental
cities during the seventeenth century. These performances
may well have given rise to the numberless motions when
puppetry enacted the Faust drama throughout the length
and breadth of Germany.?’? ‘‘ The marionette fable of
Faust,” says Goethe, ‘“‘ murmured with many voices in my
soul.” His great masterpiece had been thought out as early
as 1774, but the first part was not published till 1808, the
second part in 1831.

It were impertinent and wellnigh impossible to attempt to
mention even merely by name the many dramas which have
the Faust legend as their theme. Indeed, the Faust literature
is so vast that Karl Engel’s Zusammenstellung der Faust-
schriften (Oldenburg, 1885) contains 2714 numbers.?* Lessing
had projected two versions of the story, one which followed
the original legend, the other eliminating any supernatural
element, but of these only a few fragments remain. Klinger
worked the subject into a romance, Fausts Leben, Thaten, und
Hollenfahrt (1791) ;2° a libretto was written for Spohr’s opera
in 1814 by Bernard; the following year Klingemann
published his unequal tragedy; Lenau’s epico-dramatic
Faust appeared in 1836 ; and Heine’s ballet Der Doctor Faust,
ein Tanzpoem in 1851.

The historical figure of Faust is extremely significant. To
some extent the literature which has thus magnificently grown
up about his name has obscured his individuality. We are
apt to think of the Faust of Marlowe or of Goethe rather
than of the vagabond warlock whose ill repute so deeply
impressed his contemporaries, who was, beyond all doubt,


484 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


a student of black magic, an adept in evil, possessed of
malefic and occult powers.

Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, who was born at
Cologne the city of the great Dominican doctor, Blessed
Albertus Magnus, on 14 November, 1486, was early reputed
to be a skilled magician, even whilst he was yet a mere youth
of two-and-twenty and serving the Emperor Maximilian as
his confidential secretary. It was shortly after his marriage
that he addressed himself to his grand design the writing of
the De Occulta Philosophia in three books, a work every
page of which is informed and influenced by the Cabalistic
mysteries. The third part, in particular, treats of divine
names and their influences, Angels and Devils, sacred
characters and figures, and the evocation of spirits. The last
chapters tell of rites, forms, incense, their use and purposes.
Although the three volumes were not published in their
entirety until after Agrippa’s death, manuscript copies had
been made of various sections and passed from hand to
hand. These naturally caused no small stir, and considerable
suspicion began to attach to the writer. In 1518, at the
age of thirty-two, he was named advocate and orator to the
free town of Metz, but so distasteful did the appointment
prove and so strenuously did the Dominican and Franciscan
fathers oppose him that he was compelled to abandon his
post and retire to his native Cologne. Dark tales began to
dog his footsteps, and although it is very certain that many
harmless incidents and ordinary accidents were magnified
into happenings supernatural and mysterious, more than
once he was openly proclaimed as ‘‘ heretic and magician,”’
and I suspect that the charge went little, if at all, beyond the
truth. He was hunted from city to city, from state to state,
and when he died in obscure and almost unknown circum-
stances, although it is clear that he was in full communion
with the Catholic Church at the end, the reputation of a
notorious wizard clung, and has clung, through the years to
his name.

With the secession of Martin Luther and Huldreich
Zwingli from Catholic unity, the cockering of human fraility
and men’s worst passions, the anarchy of belief and practice,
a terrible wave of fanaticism swept throughout Germany.
The Lutheran princes for their own political purposes


GERMANY 485


fostered the spread of the new doctrines, interpreting them
as they pleased, and presently conflicts between the adherents
of the various sects, which were almost daily breaking up
into fresh bodies and subtle subdivisions, began to increase
confusion tenfold. If men professed religion it was not from
love of God but for fear of the Devil, who had a finger in
every pie.

A horror of sorcery and Witchcraft filled every heart.
Unrest and disquietude scorched the land like a fierce flame ;
fear, vague ill-defined shadowy fear, drove the people to a
frenzy of cruel prosecution. It will be sufficiently instructive
to take one typical case. The little town of Waldsee on the
‘Steinach in Wurtemberg has some two thousand inhabitants,
and during the sixteenth century it probably held no greater
tale of souls. The following list of executions, which i€ by no
means complete, is terribly significant :*°


1518. Elsa Peffin and Elsa Khiinlin, found guilty of
sorcery, were condemned to be burned.

1518. The wife of Simon Thausser was condemned to the
stake on the same charge.

1528. Ursula Wachin of Waldsee burned for Witchcraft.

1581. Elsbet Miillerin of Waldsee condemned to be burned
as a witch.

1581. Three beggar women, Eva Schwarz, Anna Beuchel,
and Elsbeth Scharber, all of Waldsee, sentenced to be
burned as notorious witches.

1581. Appollonia Buckh, sentenced to be burned for the
same crime.

1581, 6 July. Madlen Isolin, Maria Rosch, Brigida Wunsil,
Catharina Einseler, and Anna Flieger, all of Waldsee,
were condemned to death and burned on multiplied
charges of sorcery.

Another document, relating to the same town, records :


Hans Deiner burned as a warlock. (The year is not
stated.)

Simon Thausser, whose wife had been executed in 1518,
burned at the stake as a sorcerer.

Joachim Hezensohn, who confessed to copulation with a
succubus, was beheaded on the Friday following Letare


(the fourth Sunday of Lent), 1557.


486 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Barbara Echtinger, found guilty of magical practices, on
the Friday after Bartlemas (24 August), 1545, was
condemned to perpetual imprisonment.

Maria Reich, Trauben Wirth, Waldburg Lachenmayer, and
Anna Treher, all four of Waldsee, were found guilty of
repeated acts of sorcery and condemned to be burned, 5
July, 1585.

Margaret Rohrfelder, Barbara Ulmer, and a fearful hag
Ursula Sailler, were sent to the stake 24 August, 1585.
Felicitas Schneider, Anna Erb, Ursula Schultheiss, all three
of Waldsee, were burned as obstinate witches, 9 March,

1586.

Anna Hoyd of Waldsee, a known witch, burned 24 Novem-
ber, 1586.

Catharina Rauffains, Ursula Isel, Ursula Stadelmann, all
three of Waldsee, were found guilty of diabolic sorcery
and sent to the stake, 7 November, 1586.

Agatha Weiss, Anna Dormar, Christina Mayer, all of
Waldsee, burned as witches, 9 October, 1586.

Anna Kleiss of Waldsee sent to the stake for sorcery, 30
October, 1586.

Ursula Fray and Catharina Kless of Waldsee, condemned
to be burned for known and proven sorceries, 12 June,
1587.

Barbara Huebmeyer, Appela Huebmeyer, and Anna
Schelling of Waldsee, were burned as witches, 11
September, 1589.

Margrett Fray and Agata Birenseng, both of Waldsee, were
condemned to be burned at the stake for demonolatry
and practising the black art, 25 June, 1594.


This brief catalogue, in which there are many lacune,
refers only to one small town. Similar prosecutions were
raging with ever fiercer intensity throughout the whole land.
The chronicler of Treves records: ‘In the year 1586 the
diocese of Treves was so scoured and purged of sorcerers and
witches that in two villages only two women were left alive.’?21
The commissary Claude de Musicl made the following entry in
his judicial register: “‘ From 18 January, 1587, to the 18
November, 1598, there were executed for witchcraft in the
diocese of Treves three hundred and sixty-eight persons of


GERMANY 487


both sexes; this does not include the number of sorcerers
who were burned at Treves itself, or in the vicinity of the
city.”82 The Archbishop John VII von Schénenberg
(1581-99) was a prelate of unblemished reputation and
admirable piety, but the ravages of Protestantism had little
inclined him to temper justice with mercy.

In 1589 at Quedlinburg in Saxony, a town of some 12,000
inhabitants, one hundred and thirty-three wretches, found
guilty of Satanism, were burned in one day.*?

At Bamberg, the Prince-Bishop, Gottfried von Aschhausen,
1609-22, horrified at the blasphemies with which the devil-
mongers almost openly vaunted their foul mystery, initiated
the prosecutions. This excellent prelate in 1612 invited the
Jesuit fathers to the diocese and put them in charge of
ecclesiastical seminary, appointing them also as cathedral
preachers. A widespread spiritual revival was the result.
His successor, Bishop John George II Fuchs von Dornheim,
1623-33, showed equal zeal. His saintly coadjutor, Freidrich
Foerner, Bishop in partibus of Hebron, to whose pen we owe
an important treatise, Panoplia armature Dei, Conciones
contra omnes superstitiones et prestigias diaboli, Ingolstad,
1626, ably seconded his efforts. To the horror of the Bishops
it was found that the diocese was permeated by bands of
devil-worshippers who had for years been spreading their
damnable doctrines in secret, corrupting whole families and
districts. A special court was convened to deal with the
situation. Six doctors utriusque iuris Vasold, Schwarzconz,
Einwag, Eppenauer, Harsen, and Neusesser, sat with several
minor colleagues under episcopal presidency. The sternest
measures were necessary. A gigantic conspiracy was on foot
and had been maturing for years. The chancellor of the
Bishop, Doctor George Haan, Ursula his wife, their daughter
Maria Ursula, and their son Doctor George Adam Haan,
were discovered to be deeply implicated, and sent ruthlessly
to the stake. Five rich burghers of Bamberg, John Junius, *4
George Neudecker, Daniel Bayer, Jacob Dittmayer, Albert
Ritcher; several senators; even a few priests, amongst
whom was Michael Kcetzner, chaplain of S. Martin’s, shared
the same fate.’ Frenzied with rage at the discovery of their
fell designs, some of these wretches had the audacity to
accuse Bishop Feerner himself of complicity in their abomina-


488 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


tions, an impudence which but recoiled on their own heads
as such malice filled the Prince-Bishop John George II with
almost ungovernable rage. The prosecutions concluded in
1631, and the following year Bamberg fell into the hands of
the Swedes. In 1633 the Prince-Bishop died in Carinthia
far away from his see, but Franz von Hatzfeld, his lawful
successor, was not able to take possession of the cathedral
until 1635. More than nine hundred executions for Witch-
craft are officially chronicled between 1627 and 1631. The
following contemporary record only gives one hundred and
fifty-six, but it is valuable as showing how deeply the virus
had infected the body of the state.


A list of witches who suffered death by the headman’s sword
and whose bodies were then burned at Wirzburg.*®


First execution, four persons :
The woman Liebler. Old widow Ancker. The woman
Gutbrod. The woman Hecker.


Second execution, four persons :
Old mother Beutler. Two women, strangers. Old
mother Schenck.


Third execution, five persons :
A man named Tungersleber, a fiddler. A woman named
Kuler. An old bawd named Stier. The woman Biirsten-
Binderin. The woman Goldschmidt.


Fourth execution, five persons :

The wife of a burgomaster, Siegmund Glaser. The
woman Brickmann. A midwife named Schickelte. (It
is said that she was responsible for much sorcery
throughout the district.) Old mother Rum. A stranger,
a& man.


Fifth execution, eight persons :

Lutz, a well-known merchant. A merchant named
Rutscher. The wife of the Intendant of the Provostry of
the Cathedral. Old mother Hof Seiler. A woman named
Steinbach. The wife of a Senator named Bannach. A
woman named Zuickel Babel. An old woman.


Siath execution, six persons :
The Intendant of the Council, by name Gering. Old


GERMANY 489


mother Canzler. A woman named Schneider. The cook
of M. Mengerdcerfer. A stranger. A stranger, a woman.


Seventh execution, seven persons :

A young girl, a stranger, aged twelve. A stranger.
A stranger, a woman. A stranger, a lawyer. Three
women, strangers. At the same time was executed in the
market-place a soldier who had allowed some prisoners to
escape.

_ Eight execution, seven persons :

The Senator Bannach. The Intendant of the Provostry
of the Cathedral. A stranger. A man named Schleipner.
A woman, a milliner who sold masks. Two women,
strangers.

Ninth execution, five persons :

A wheelwright named Wunth. A stranger. A woman

named Bentz. Her daughter. A woman named Eyering.
Tenth execution, three persons :

Steinacher, one of the wealthiest citizens. Two strangers,
a& man and a woman.

Eleventh execution, four persons :

A vicar of the Cathedral named Schwerdt. The wife of
the Intendant of Rensacker. A woman named Stiecher.
A man named Silberhans, a fiddler.

Twelfth execution, two persons :

Two women, strangers.

Thirteenth execution, four persons :

Old Hof-Schmidt. An old woman. A little girl of nine
or ten years old. Her younger sister.

Fourteenth execution, two persons :

The mother of these two girls. Lieber’s daughter, aged
twenty-four.

Fifteenth execution, two persons :

A boy of twelve years old in one of the lower forms of
the school. A woman who kept a pie shop.

Sixteenth execution, six persons :

A page of Ratzenstein was executed this morning at six
o’clock in the courtyard of the Town Hall, where his body
remained all day in a barrow. The next day it was burnt
with the following: A boy, ten years old; the two


490 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


daughters of the aforesaid Intendant and their maid; a
woman named Seiler.


Seventeenth execution, four persons :

The host of the Golden Orchard at Baumgarten. A boy
eleven years old. An apothecary’s wife, and her daughter
who lived at the Sign of The Stag. A woman named
Harfner hanged herself in the prison.


Eighteenth execution, six persons :
A tanner named Batsch. A boy of twelve years old.
Another boy of the same age. The daughter of D. Jung.
A girl of fifteen. A stranger, a woman.


Nineteenth execution, six persons :

A page of Rotenhan was executed at six o’clock in the
courtyard of the Town Hall, and his body burned on the
following day. The wife of Secretary Schellhar. Another
woman. A boy, ten years old. Another boy, twelve years
old. A baker’s wife named Biigler was burned alive.


Twentieth execution, six persons :

A girl named Gabel Babelin, said to be the loveliest lass
in Wirzburg. A young student, who was an excellent
musician, wocaliter et instrumentaliter. Two choir boys
belonging to the new Cathedral aged twelve. The daughter
of an upholsterer named Babel. The ferryman’s wife.


Twenty-first execution, six persons :
The Master of the hospital of Dietrich. A man named
Stoffel Holzmann. A boy fourteen years old. The young
son of Senator Stolzberger. Two seminarists.


Twenty-second execution, six persons :
A cooper named Stiirmer. A stranger, a boy. The wife
of Senator Stolzberger. His granddaughter. A washer-
woman. A stranger, a woman.


Twenty-third execution, nine persons :

The son of David Crots, a boy aged twelve. The two
young sons of the Prince’s cook, the eldest was fourteen,
the younger twelve years old. Melchior Hammelmann,
parish priest of Hach. Nicodemus Hirsch, canon of the
Cathedral. Christopher Berger, a vicar of the Cathedral.
A seminarist. An officer of the Court of Brennerbach and
a seminarist were burnt alive.


GERMANY 491


Twenty-fourth execution, seven persons :
Two boys belonging to the hospital. A rich cooper.
Laurence Stiiber, vicar of the Cathedral. Martha Rosslein.
[Two names are missing here. ]


Twenty-fifth execution, six persons :

Frederick Basser, a vicar of the Cathedral Chapter.
Stab, parish priest of Hach. Lambrecht, a canon of the
Cathedral. The wife of Gallus Haus. A boy, a stranger.
A woman named Schelmerey Kramerin.


Twenty-sixth execution, seven persons :

David Hans, canon of the Cathedral. The Senator
Weydenbusch. The wife of the host of the Golden Orchard
at Baumgarten. An old woman. The young daughter of
Valkenberger was executed privately and the body burnt
in its coffin. The young son of an Officer of the Council.
Wagner, a vicar of the Cathedral Chapter, was burnt alive.


Twenty-seventh execution, seven persons :

A butcher named Kilian Hans. The ferryman. A boy,
a stranger. A woman, a stranger. The son of a woman
named Hafner of Hach. Michael Wagner of Hach. Knor
of Hach.

Twenty-eighth execution, which took place after Candlemas,
1629, six persons :

A woman, who kept a pie shop, called Knertz. Babel
Schutz. A young blind girl. Schwartz, a canon of Hach.
Ehling. Bernard Mark, of the Cathedral Chapter, was
burnt alive.

Twenty-ninth execution, seven persons :

Viertel Beck. Klingen Wirth. The steward of Mergel-
sheim. A woman named Beck of Ochsenthor. A woman
of rank named Edelfrau. A doctor of theology, by name
Meyer, of Hach, and a canon were executed at five o’clock
in the morning ; their bodies were burnt. A gentleman of
rank, the Chevalier Fleischbaum. Paul Vaecker of Breit-
Hiit. Since then there have been two other executions,
16 February, 1629.


To this list is appended a memorandum: “ Since which
date there have also been very many other executions.” ;
Such a catalogue, it is true, at first glance seems horrible


492 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


to a degree, but it must be remembered that these frequent
executions only serve to show how deeply gangrened was
this unfortunate and unhappy district. The Satanists had
secretly pursued their evil crusade with an energy and
determination worthy of a better cause. They corrupted
old and young, rich and poor, vagabond minstrel, comfortable
burgers, princely aristocrat alike; nay, even priests were
drawn into the toils of hell. The poison of social anarchy and
demoniac revolution must be purged with drastic measures
if the whole body were not to become infect and not utterly,
to stink in the nostrils of God and man. It is sad, indeed, to
read of children who were thus early tainted by evil. Yet
such cases persist throughout the ages. In Chile the priests
sadly complain of the perversion of the school-children.
A Lazarist Father of Santiago relates that not many years
ago some of the Catholic Indians saw a young white boy,
not more than fifteen years old, nail a Host to a tree in the
suburbs of the town, and stab It again and again until they
realized what was happening and rushed forward to stop him.
The Satanists of South America get hold of boys and girls of
twelve and less and make them swear to blaspheme, never to
enter a church, to devote themselves to Satan.

All eminent historians speak of the Prince-Bishop John
George II as a “‘ humane and pious man ”’ (Doctor Leitschuh).
a prince who often interfered on the side of mercy and who
was mild in his judgements.** Perhaps the saddest and most
woeful of all the tragedies of Wiirzburg was the awful blow
which struck so nearly at this gracious Prelate himself, the
discovery that Satanism had perverted those of his own
household, his very kith and kin.

Of the princely pages the chief favourite with the Bishop
was young Ernest von Ehrenberg,’ who merited his cousin’s
favour not so much by reason of his comeliness, his courage,
his vigour, as by the eminent qualities of his mind, his talents,
and an unfeigned piety. It was noticed, however, that he
lapsed from his first fervour into indifference—a common
enough fault with youth—from indifference into a strange
contempt for holy things, seldom was he seen at Holy Mass,
never did he seek the confessional, he plunged into wildest
debauchery and sought the harlot and the sot as his boon-
companions. His speech was foul with obscenities and


GERMANY 493


studied blasphemy. The Jesuit Fathers were perplexed and
alarmed, this was no question of a young profligate given
to lewdness from his earliest years, but a youth whose
devotion had been admirable, his honour unblemished,
falling suddenly into foul courses and worse.

Certain of the witches under examination swore that
Ernest von Ehrenberg was a frequent assistant at the
Sabbat, that he was not the least conspicuous in their orgies.
The Prince-Bishop, broken-hearted, bade the good Fathers
watch the suspected lad carefully, and if convinced of the
truth of these accusations bring him back to the right path.
This they did, and when taxed with his crimes the boy broke
down and in tears confessed that he had been diabolically
seduced by an old lady of the court, a known and notorious
witch. He vowed amendment, and the Fathers joyfully
absolved him. His penitence, however, proved false. Again
and again he was caught slipping out of the palace at night
to join the demon’s orgies ; scapulars and medals he burned ;
the Host he unspeakably profaned ; his attendance at Mass
and the Offices of the Church was mere hypocrisy; ‘if he
spent his days with God, he passed his nights with the Devil.”
Some holy Capuchins, priests of the most eminent piety,
learned, deeply versed in scholastic and mystical theology,
were sought to turn the errant boy. He received their
ministrations and counsel with hideous profanities and foul
abuse. At length they admitted that they were unable to
influence him, and the Prince-Bishop delivered him to the
Council who pronounced a sentence of death. The Jesuit
Fathers endeavoured to prepare him for his doom. On the
day fixed for the execution he was led into a hall draped with
black in the centre of which upon a scaffold some six feet high,
hung with scarlet, was the block scattered with sawdust and
a linen shroud. As the masked headsman placed his hand
upon the unhappy youth the poor wretch swooned for fear.
The judges, who were present, instantly stopped the procedure
and sent to the Prince-Bishop begging him to sign a pardon.
The Jesuit Father, who accompanied the lad, exhorted him
to penitence, but suddenly he was met with a string of foulest
profanity. He recoiled in horror, and when the incident
was related to the Prelate, turning away with a bitter sob
he exclaimed in broken accents: “Alas! Alas! Justice


494 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


must then have its course.” The archers closed round the
raving youth who was led into a smaller chamber, and there
struggling, shouting, blaspheming, as he was, the executioner
took off his head with a sudden sweep of the sword. “ He
fell,’ writes the good Father who relates the terrible scene,
‘he fell without a sign or word of penitence, he fell calling
not upon God but the Devil. Christ grant that he has not
fallen into eternal bale ! ”

During the seventeenth century similar crusades against
witches and Satanism were prosecuted throughout Germany
with the utmost vigour. A few examples will save the
monotony of recounting all. In Mainz between 1626 and
1629, at Miltenberg, a town of 3000 souls, there were fifty-
six executions for sorcery; at Burgstadt, which numbers
some 2000, seventy-seven ; at the little village of Eichenbiihel,
nineteen; at the hamlets of Berndit, Buttan, Ebenheit,
Wenschdorf, Heinbach, seven apiece; at the even smaller
hamlets of Prozelten and Amorbach, four apiece. Throughout
the bailly of Miltenberg the number of burnings in three
years was one hundred and sixty-eight.

The Prince-Elector of Mainz, John Philip von Schoenborn,
who reigned from 1647-78, was one of the first to check the
prosecution of witches in Germany. He had been a Canon
of Wiirzburg, and as such had assisted at innumerable ~
executions. He was, however, chiefly guided in his policy
by the Jesuit Freidrich von Spee. Von Spee was born at
Kaiserswirth on the Rhine, 25 February, 1591, and died at
Treves 7 August, 1635. He distinguished himself by his vast
scholarship and occupied the professorial chair of theology
at many Universities. The work by which he is best remem-
bered is the Cautio Criminalis, written in admirable Latin,
and it is in effect an arraignment of the witch-trials. He
does not by any means, as has been erroneously stated,
ask for the complete suppression of such trials, but he does
advocate measures of reform, such as a new German imperial
law on the subject, and it was his bold pleading which
gradually brought about the abolition of witch trials upon
any save the gravest and most weighty evidence. The
treatise, which might perhaps be counted a little lax in some
respects, was printed at Rinteln in 1631 without Spee’s
name or permission, although he was doubtless generally


GERMANY 495


known as the author. The General of the Jesuits, Mutius
Vitelleschi, with some reason mildly rebuked Spee inasmuch
as he had not attempted to suppress the treatise, and the
Provincial of the Order on the Lower Rhine demanded certain
explanations. Yet no charge of heterodoxy can be brought
against the book, although it can hardly be commended
without a certain reserve. 8

In the diocese of Cologne the witch prosecutions were
numerous. One of the most famous cases was that of
Catherine de Henott, who was burned alive in 1627. She
was accused, amongst other abominations, of having
bewitched a convent of Poor Clares, renowned for their piety.
That she was a Satanist the Jesuit Fathers seem to have had
no doubt.*® One of the fiercest opponents of sorcery in this
district was Franz Buirmann, who brought a large number
of malefactors to the stake.

At Zuckmantel in 1551 it was found necessary to employ
no less than eight executioners. In 1654 at the same place
were burned one hundred and two Satanists, upon whom the
most hideous outrages had been proved.

It has been said that from 1590 to 1600 in the Duchy of
Brunswick an average of ten wretches were burned daily, so
that before the principal gate of the town there seemed to be a
veritable forest of charred stakes. ‘‘ All over Germany,” wrote
von Spee, “‘ pyres are blazing, the flames of execution are red.”

It were useless to give long catalogues of the Satanists who
perished thus throughout every province and dukedom of
Germany. At Neerdlingen, for example, a little town in
Swabia, from 1690 to 1694 thirty-five women and one man
were burned upon the charge of black magic. In Alsace the
witches were executed in batches of three, four, seven, and
eight. In one year, 1678, at Salzburg no less than ninety
were sent to the stake.

A very famous case which occupied the tribunal of Lienz
for a full year was that of Emerenziana Pichler of Defereggen,
who with two of her children, the one aged fourteen, the other
twelve, was condemned for manifold, manifest, and proven
acts of sorcery in September, 1680. The mother was executed
on the 25th of that month, the two boys a couple of days
later, on the feast of SS. Cosmas and Damian.

On 23 July, 1788, thirteen persons were burned alive at


496 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Szegedin in Hungary as vampires and warlocks. There were
seven women and six men. As late as 1746 a woman was
executed in the same town for Witchcraft,*° and the place of
her punishment is yet preserved in the district called
Boszorkany sziget, the Island of Enchanters.

In the village of Lindheim, Wetterau, in the Grand Duchy
of Hesse, there stands on the banks of the Nidder some
hundred paces from the parish church a round tower of great
antiquity, isolated and detached as were many of these
medieval fastnesses. A roof of slates which covered it in the
sixteenth century no longer exists. It is a huge heavy mass
of stone, windowless, with but one entrance, a door eighteen
feet from the ground reached only by an exterior flight of steps,
to-day crumbled, broken and insecure. The interior, says
Horst, is supremely horrible, and so deep is the gloom and
depression, which never lift, that it is impossible to gaze into
the shadows without a shudder. About five yards apart are
constructed in the actual thickness of the walls several
square niches three or four feet in size, which run straight
down to the very base of the building. When Horst first
examined the place early in the nineteenth century he saw
fifteen feet high, firmly mortared in the blackened walls of
these grim recesses, handcuffs and leg-irons attached there
by chains but a few inches in length such as would effectually
impede and prevent any movement. It is believed that the
unhappy wretches condemned to death for sorcery were thus
fastened in helpless agony suspended several feet from the
ground, until led forth to their doom. Local tradition even
asserts that warlocks and witches were actually burned or
rather calcined alive as they hung there. This is sup-
ported, if not actually proven, by the fact that there
may be traced at the foot of the tower on the north side a
door, now blocked up with more recent masonry than the
rest, the use of which can hardly otherwise be explained.
Moreover, at the bottom of the tower, amid the broken slates
of the roof and the weed-grown rubbish which had collected
there, was found a quantity of charred faggots and brush-
wood. At regular intervals, five feet from the ground, are a
series of machicolations or squints ‘‘ contrived to let smoke
escape and by the passage of air to fan the flames.”

To-day the Tower of Lindheim stands in a lovely park,


GERMANY 497


its old walls surrounded on all sides by parterres of gaily
coloured flowers. When the ground was dug in order that
the lawns might be turfed and the beds laid out there was
found buried at the foot of the stair a vast quantity of human
bones, amongst which were five or six skulls, and these as
well as other mortal fragments had unmistakably been
scorched and consumed by fire. ‘‘ I myself saw and examined
these bones,”’ says Horst. ‘‘ There can be no doubt that
they were the remains of persons who had been burned, if
not actually within the Tower itself, at least directly under
the walls.” It appears almost certain that those condemned
to die were fixed in the recesses and horribly consumed.
A more recent writer than Horst, Otto Glaubrecht, tells us
that the nicked chains are blackened with fire, and the
squints even now bear the traces of soot and smoke. The
Tower, which bears the name of The Witch-Tower, is to-day
almost exactly as George-Conrad Horst described it. Several
parts which seemed dangerous have been strengthened and
made secure, but otherwise it is unchanged. This building
and the pleasaunce around belonged to the famous novelist
Sacher-Masoch.

The earliest records of witch-trials at Lindheim have not
been exactly preserved. We know‘! that in 1630 three
women, one of whom, la Pombanne, was the wife of a Conrad
Lorsch, were beheaded and their bodies burned in 1681.
From 1650 to 1653 the whole country-side was panic-
stricken by a prosecution for sorcery which involved a large
number of individuals, and several, both men and women,
were imprisoned in the Tower and burned alive, doubtless
within the walls. Details of these processes are not now
extant, but we have the fullest documents relating to the
trials of 1662-68, when the district was groaning under the
cruelties of a certain George Ludwig Geiss, an old soldier who
had taken part in the Thirty Years War, and who even
during that period of bloody anarchy had distinguished
himself by his ferocity and savage deeds. Geiss was acting
with full powers of life and death as mayor and judge for the
Baron Herman Oynhausen, an absentee. Oynhausen himself
was answerable to the over-lord Johann Hartmann von
Rosenbach, doyen of the Wiirzburg canonical chapter. Geiss,
a most formidable ruffian, joined with himself four fellows of


498 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


low estate and brutal manners, a weaver and three peasants,
none of whom could write nor read. Andrew Krieger, the
weaver, soon became notorious for his rapacity, and the
rustic Conrad Euler, his colleague, was known to be com-
pletely ignorant, avaricious, revengeful, and cruel. On 17
August, 1662, Geiss wrote to Oynhausen that he had arrested
six persons, and that the land should have no rest until the
whole tribe of sorcerers was stamped out and destroyed.
A little lower in the same letter he relates the arrest of five
other miserable wretches, among them being the King of the
Sabbat (probably the local Devil), and the Queen of the
Witches. That Lindheim was polluted with Satanism admits
of no doubt, but it is also true that the whole prosecution was
carried on in a most illegal and improper manner by base
fellows whose motives were not above suspicion so eagerly
did they confiscate the goods of the accused, and who showed
themselves monsters of cruelty in the conduct of the assize.
The Queen of the Witches was justly condemned. She died
blaspheming and cursing God. Before long, however, it was
evident that Geiss was ordering the arrests of those whose
properties he coveted, persons who were demonstrably
innocent of the crimes laid to their charge. A general
revulsion of popular feeling ensued, particularly when Johan
Schiller, a wealthy miller of good report, and his wife were
seized and imprisoned in the Tower. After a few days
Schiller escaped from durance. Several of his friends banded
together to deliver him. An opening was made in the old
slate roof and a blacksmith descending by a rope-ladder
released the prisoner from his chains on the night of 18
February, 1663. His wife who was afraid to follow him they
were obliged to leave behind, but he himself succeeded in
making his way to Wiirzburg, where he interested Hartmann
von Rosenbach in his case. Geiss was furious at the escape
and revenged himself by the summary execution of the
unfortunate Madame Schiiler who was burned alive, perhaps
in one of the recesses of the Tower, on 23 February with
scarcely the empty formality of a trial. Hartmann von
Rosenbach meanwhile had directed a letter to Oynhausen
bidding him look well into the proceedings instituted by
Geiss, to whom Oynhausen wrote in hot haste. An even
weightier authority now slowly began to move. Schiiler,


GERMANY 499


whom the fearful death of his wife had plunged into bitterest
sorrow, swore by Heaven and Earth to avenge her fate. At
his instructions Dr. Maurice William von Gulchen, one of the
foremost lawyers of the day, addressed a cogent memorial to
the Supreme Imperial Court of Speyer, detailing the cruelties
and iniquities of Geiss and his satellites. At Lindheim the
disaffection made itself felt by something like a popular
rising. Twelve persons who had been imprisoned in the
Tower, amongst whom were two women condemned to death
on the following day, were hastily released during the first
week of March, and when Andrew Krieger ventured to arrest
a@ woman named Horn her husband Matthew Horn set upon
him and thrashed him so unmercifully in the market square
that the puisne judge fled howling with a broken arm.
A hostile crowd collected and chased him to his house where
he lay concealed behind shuttered windows and barricaded
door quaking with fear in instant terror of death. The
prisoners who had been set free made their way to Speyer,
and suddenly appeared before the Supreme Tribunal clamour-
ing for redress. When the judges saw this wretched band,
whose pale haggard faces, attenuated forms, crippled legs,
and feeble gait showed only too plainly the hardships they
had endured, an official mandate was conveyed to Geiss
prohibiting any further prosecutions. His rage was terrible
and in his frenzy he at first refused to obey, replying in the
most insolent terms by a justification of his cruelties.
Immediately, however, the Baron Oynhausen in order to
ingratiate himself with the higher authorities dismissed him
from his offices and deprived him of all his power. It was
just at this juncture that a violent death overtook him. It
is said that whilst he was riding hard in pursuit of a suspected
witch who had escaped his clutches his horse, which he had
spurred to leap a wide ditch, some half a league from Lind-
heim, threw him heavily breaking his neck. Thereafter the
spot was known as the Devil’s Ditch.

As has been remarked above, there can be little doubt that
Satanism had actually penetrated to Lindheim, but this
unhappily gave an opportunity for a knot of lawless and
brutal ruffians to terrorize the country-side with their
cupidity and blackmail amid circumstances of the most
hideous cruelty and lust.


500 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Two or three years before the Lindheim prosecutions a
famous case of Witchcraft had been widely talked of in
Germany. On 8 November, 1658, George Eve, a recent
member of the commune of Wehlitz (Wahlitz), a small village
on the river Ehle about three miles from Gommern, 4? lodged
with the magistrates an accusation of sorcery against
Elizabeth Brose, the wife of a neighbouring shepherd. When
she was summoned before the tribunal this woman unfolded
a curious tale. She said that a little against the harvest her
two daughters, the one eleven, the other a mere child of two
and a half years, were occupied in a remote spot on the banks
of the Ehle, not far from Eve’s cottage, the elder washing
linen and keeping a watchful eye on her sister’s baby games.
Eve’s wife, Anna, passed near, and when she spied them
assailed them with horrid curses, calling them “ toads of the
devil’s begetting,”’ and adding, ‘‘ May Satan twist your arms
and legs for you!”’ She then spat thrice upon the younger
girl. A little after the child fell sick, and in her bed were
continually found animals not unlike huge meat-flies the
presence of which could not be explained. But a few days
passed ere she expired in strange convulsions. When Anna
Eve was interrogated upon these strange happenings she
could only give most rambling and inconclusive answers. She
stammered that she had never recognized the children, that
one day in summer she had stretched out some linen to dry
on the bank of the stream, and that when she saw some boys
and girls playing at a distance she may have scolded them
as once they had muddied a newly washed kerchief and
smock which were bleaching in the sun. The tribunal was
ill content with her halting equivocations, and on 14 February,
1659, further inquiries were instituted. It is true that a
number of peasants came forward to testify in the favour
of Anna Eve, but there is ample warrant to suppose they were
influenced by fear. On the other hand, the local minister,
owing to his strong suspicion of black magic wrought by the
woman Eve, had felt obliged to refuse her Holy Communion,
probably lest she should not swallow the bread but convey
it away in order to desecrate it. Two women, also, by name
Richter and Volkholzen, averred that they had seen unearthly
sights when one dark evening out of curiosity they awesomely
peeped through the uncurtained lattice of Eve’s lone hut.


GERMANY 501


There can be no doubt that the village thought as their
pastor believed, although he may have hesitated plainly to
deliver his verdict. It was found, moreover, upon inquiry
that both Eve and his wife, who were resident at Wehlitz
not above a year, had continually changed their abode, gipsy-
fashion, sojourning now here, now there, leaving no very good
reputation in their tracks.

Viewing all the circumstances it is hardly surprising that
the judicial Court of Leipzig, to whom the plaint and the
matters which arose from it were referred, summoned Anna
Eve before a full bench of magistrates and submitted her to
a formal interrogatory. When asked if she thought that
Brose’s child had been bewitched she showed considerable
confusion and gave evasive quibbling answers. It was
declared upon oath by several witnesses that in a quarrel
she called Elizabeth Brose ‘‘ a devil’s whore,” and she had
been overheard saying to the frightened child who died,
“You young bastard, I have bewitched you and that devil’s
whore, your mother.’”’ Although known to be a foul-mouthed
wretch she indignantly denied having used such expressions.
Various other questions were put to which she replied in a
taunting manner, and, indeed, the deposition mentions that
all the while she smiled contemptuously at the bench, and it
would seem even jeered them, out of senseless bravado, one
supposes, or relying upon some dark power to deliver her
from their hands. Such a demeanour was little calculated to
ingratiate her with her judges, and when other accusers came
forward to give evidence of dark and secret practices, she
was according to the legal procedure of the day put to the
torture, albeit only in a lesser degree, in order to extract an
avowal of her guilt. To detail the trial were useless, suffice
she defied every effort to make her speak. Moreover, she did
not even utter a groan or shed a tear. This alone would have
been enough to convict her, for it was universally held that
witches were unable to weep. Boguet in his Discours des
Sorciers4? expressly states: ‘‘ Common experience shows us
that witches are unable to shed a tear. Sprenger, Grilland,
and Bodin all agree that if the accused does not weep there is
strong presumption she is a sorceress.” 44

So unprecedented was her behaviour that the sworn
tormentor drew up a special report which was read with


502 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


much astonishment. It was even shown that she had slept
whilst on the rack. The tribunal then decided to proceed to
the extraordinary question, and accordingly on 4 November,
at four o’clock in the morning, the Chief Justice Ernst
Friedrich Heinitz, Judge Moritz Arntz, and the two senior
Clerks of the Assize, Hans Polch and Ditmar Arnoldt, caused
the prisoner to be brought to the Hall of the Halbadiers in
the Castle of Gommern. Here she endured the question
ordinary and extraordinary, always mute and obstinate,
until just as the clock was striking eight the unfortunate
woman expired without shedding a tear or uttering a sigh.
It should be mentioned that her husband seemed obviously
relieved when her death was reported to him. A messenger
brought him into court at ten o’clock, just two hours after
the event. He acknowledged frankly that his marriage had
been unhappy, and that he often suspected his wife of some
evil craft into which he was afraid to inquire lest she should
kill him. When he was dismissed he went away, says the
official report, ‘‘ with a smiling face and lissom step.” The
corpse was buried in some unfrequented distant spot on the
moors before dawn, 11 November, 1660. It is difficult,
perhaps impossible, to unravel all the intricacies of such a
trial, such accusations and evidences, at the present date
of time. So far as we may securely judge it appears that
Anna Eve was indeed a Satanist, something more than a
dabbler in occult and forbidden things, and reading between
the lines it becomes plain that she was a poisoner to boot.
Many witches had studied deeply the qualities of nocent
plants and herbs ; old secrets of toxic lore were handed down
in that dark society from generation to generation. Some
tempting morsel, some cate or comfit wherein venom had
been deftly mingled, proffered to the little girl playing by the
water’s edge, quickly eaten as children will, and certain death
would follow, a mysterious sickness attended by such
symptoms as the documents describe. In poison we may
surely find full often a key to the doom of many a forespoken
wight, one who has been blasted by the witches’ eye or the
witches’ ban.

A passage in Lettres Historiques,*® published at The Hague
in 1698, tells as that on 26 March of that year eight youths,
not one of whom had passed the age of fifteen or sixteen,


GERMANY 503


and a girl of twelve who confessed to having fornicated eight
times with the Devil, all frequent assistants at the Sabbat,
were burned upon multiplied and proven charges of Satanism
at Burghausen in Bavaria. Here we have another terrible
instance of the cunning and vile craft of demonolaters who
are ever particularly anxious to corrupt and seduce the
young to swell their accursed society.

On 13 December, 1714, King Frederick William I ordered
that throughout the realm of Prussia a full report of any case
of sorcery which incurred the penalty of death must be
submitted in writing to himself and that no such execution
might take place unless the warrant bore the royal signature.
Seven years later a country woman who was accused of
sorcery at Nau was acquitted, and the King openly informed
the magistrates that no more charges of this kind were to be
heard. At Berlin there happened a much-talked-of case in
1728. A young girl swore that she had seen and made a close
compact with the demon. The court, under the King’s
direction, decided that she was a subject for the hospital,
and ordered her to be detained in the asylum at Spandau.

In Austria, however, Joseph I renewed in 1707 the old
laws having reference to Witchcraft, adding none the less
some important regulations which forbade the use of torture
save in the rarest instances. In the Trentino two executions
took place in 1716 and 1717. At Szegedin an especially
baneful gang of Satanists was discovered in 1728. Six
sorcerers and seven witches were burned alive. In 1730 an
official of the same town, who had secretly leagued with
them and was perpetuating their hideous craft, went to the
stake. Three warlocks suffered at Karpfen in 1744; two
years after three more at Mihlbach in Saxony ; and in 1752
an old midwife of most evil repute at Maros Vasarheli.

About 1782 a veritable epidemic of vampirism terrorized
Hungary, Moravia, Poland, and Serbia.*® It was reported
that in many villages shadowy figures haunted the church-
yards and even penetrated into houses sucking the blood of
their victims who were mysteriously thrown into an hypnotic
sleep. At Medreiga in Hungary the graves of a man named
Arnold Paul and a girl Stanoske were opened. The corpses
were discovered to be fat and well-nourished, of a ruddy hue
as though blooming with health. A sharp stake was driven


504 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


through the heart of each, the heads severed, and the coffins
burned with the bodies. As is well known, a belief in vam-
pirism is yet widely prevalent in Eastern Europe. At Sujos in
Serbia, as late as 1910, the body of an old woman was dug up,
pierced with a yard, and burned. She had been universally
regarded as a witch during her lifetime, and the peasants
feared she would return as a vampire to maraud the village. 4”

One of the most interesting of the witch-trials in Germany
is also one of the latest.

At the distance of a league from Wirzburg, down the
river Main, there may be seen an ancient and imposing pile
which in the good old days of the Prince-Bishops was a
convent of Premonstratensian nuns.*® This was known as
Unterzell ; whilst a little higher, a yet more extensive and
wealthier house, stood the Abbey of Oberzell, the home of the
Premonstratensian canons, to one of whom, Father Oswald
Loschert, who was an actual eye-witness of and intimately
concerned in the whole proceedings, we owe the most reliable
and fullest account of those dark and mysterious occurrences
which he so succinctly and impartially relates in his report .
addressed to the Empress Maria-Theresa. This great princess, —
who was deeply religious, expressed herself as keenly inter-
ested in the terrible series of events. The monograph bears
the following title : Die wahrhafte und umstdndliche Nachricht
von dem Zufalle, so das jung frduliche Kloster Unterzell néchst
Wiirzburg betroffen verfasset im Jahr 1749.4

The Order of Prémontré was founded by S. Norbert in 1120
at Prémontré near Laon, France. At first there was no fixed
rule, but after a while the Saint unfolded to his companions
the plan of a regular organization. It was then that
S. Augustine of Hippo appeared to him and in a vision
delivered the old canonical code, to which S. Norbert added
fastings, penances, and other mortifications together with
some pious customs and venerable practices peculiar to the
Benedictine family, whereby the new foundation (1121)
became, as it were, monastico-canonical.

The five particular ends of the Order are : Laus Dei in choro,
the singing of the Divine Office in choir; Zelus animarum,
zeal for the salvation of souls; Spiritus iugis penitentie,
the spirit of habitual mortification ; Cultus Eucharisticus,
a special devotion to the Blessed Sacrament; Cultus


GERMANY 505


Marianus, a special devotion to Our Lady, and in particular
to her Immaculate Conception.

The first Order is comprised of priests and clerics; the
second of nuns, who being strictly enclosed work for the
salvation of souls by their prayers and penances, rising for
Matins at midnight and spending much time in contemplation,
thus co-operating with the missionary efforts and active
administrations of the Fathers. The third Order consists of
lay folk, whose duties are in the world, but who wear a small
white scapular and have certain prayers to recite. After the
death of S. Norbert this institution was imitated by other
founders, notably by S. Francis, 8. Dominic, and the holy
Servites. The nuns wear a white habit, white scapular,
white shoes, as the canons, save that the white biretta is
replaced by the black veil.

Blessed Ricwera, widow of Raymond de Castro, was
S. Norbert’s first spiritual daughter. Her example was
followed by Ermengardis, Countess of Roussi; by Agnes,
Countess of Braim ; by Fredesindis, the foundress of Mount
S. Martin; by Guda, Countess of Bonneburg; by Beatrix,
Viscountess of Amiens ; by Anastasia, Duchess of Pomerania ;
by Hadnigis, Countess of Cleves, and her daughter Gertrude ;
by Adelia of Montmorency, daughter of Burchard, Constable
of France; and by very many more. Though the rule was
most austere it is said that in less than fifteen years there
were ten thousand cloistered virgins and widows in the
Norbertine convents of Europe. The especial glories of the
second Order are S. Gertrude, daughter of S. Elizabeth of
Hungary (feast 13 August); B. Bronislava (feast 30 August) ;
B. Petronilla (18 July), and B. Poncia (16 May), the wife and
daughter of S. Gilbert the Abbot.

Prior to the destruction of the monasteries under Henry
VIII there were in England two houses of Premonstratensian
nuns, at Irford, near Market Rasen, Lincolnshire, and at
Broadholme, near Tuxford, Notts. There are now convents
in Holland, France, Belgium, Spain, Poland, Switzerland,
and elsewhere.

During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the
Canonesses were far more numerous than in less fervent and
decadent days, when the evil of war and tyranny expelled so
many from their homes, burning to the ground spots hallowed


506 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


for centuries by prayer and penance, or else defiling them
to secular uses.

It was towards the end of the year 1746 that Sister Cecilia,
a professed nun of the Convent of Unterzell, was attacked
by a mysterious and unaccountable malady. At first an
obscure nervous complaint was suggested and appropriate
measures for the relief of the patient were commenced.
However, other symptoms soon appeared. The sufferer was
seized by painful cramps in every member, her body swelled
as if from dropsy, the muscles contracted and were again
suddenly relaxed so as to cause her intense agony, hallucina-
tions of the senses, sight, hearing, touch, succeeded and
developed into actual delirium. Although the senior nuns
took every precaution that the details of Sister Cecilia’s
illness should not be known, and although the infirmary was
isolated under even stricter regulations than usual, before
long strange stories began to be whispered among the
community. Shadowy figures had been seen at night in the
corridors; mocking laughter was heard which suddenly
died away in a awesome silence ;°° the cries of animals,
a porcine grunting, the deep baffing of huge hounds, the angry
miauling of cats, sounded in the refectory, but when the
doors were hastily opened the room was empty and still ;
and, as so often in poltergeist hauntings, articles of furniture
moved here and there, seemingly of their own volition, chairs
being overthrown without any visible agency, whilst a huge
oak chest no two men could shift was overturned with a
loud crash that rang through the vaulted cloisters. An
atmosphere of indefinable terror possessed the place. Other
and unseen inhabitants, not of this earth nor from heaven,
had occupied those hallowed walls.

Cecilia Pistorini, the sick religious, was originally from
Hamburg, the descendant of an Italian family which had
long been settled there. During her novitiate at Unterzell
she was distinguished by her fervour and piety, but, as is not
unusual in these cases, in order to test her constancy her
solemn profession had been deliberately deferred. Whilst
the question was under discussion by the Mothers it was
remarked that the Sub-Prioress Maria-Renata Senger
showed a most determined and even violent opposition to
the young novice, even voting for her dismissal from the


GERMANY 507


convent. In order that they should make no mistake, to
assure themselves that her zeal for the cloister was no mere
romantic enthusiasm, her superiors, says Father Loschert,
legitimately ‘‘ made her submit to hard, not to say harsh,
trials of her patience, which gave her ample opportunity of
practising the virtue of humility. It was noticed that
prominent among the Mothers who advocated this strict
probation was Renata who, when possession or some
demoniac malice came to be suspected in Sister Cecilia’s
illness, openly declared that there were neither witches nor
occultists, that possession was a fable—rationalistic argu-
ments many Satanists use as a wicked blind to compass their
ends—and that Sister Cecilia was an hysterical subject who
had brought about her own sickness, for which she deserved
to be punished rather than consoled.” As Gorres says :
““ Renata distinguished herself throughout the whole com-
munity by the hatred she displayed towards Sister Cecilia.’
So here we have a nun of high position in the convent who
not only expresses herself in scoffing and atheistical language
but shows herself full of malice and rancour which she is
ready to visit in every possible way upon a simple and pious
girl, a novice of the Order. It might seem that Renata had
some presentiment that through this humble Sister, who was
eventually admitted to take solemn vows in 1745, her own
evil life would be dragged to the light of day.

Suddenly as the religious were reciting their office in Choir
several of the nuns collapsed in their stalls uttering raucous
cries and even piercing yells. They shook from head to foot
as if with an ague, their bodies were convulsed, they rained
blows upon invisible enemies who assailed them, they foamed
at the mouth, wrestled, and struggled with a more than
human strength. It was wellnigh impossible to stifle the
scandals of some years’ continuance any longer. Yet
with praiseworthy anxiety for the good name of her house
and tenderest love for her little flock whom the wolf had
so foully ravaged, the Prioress, awful suspicions gnawing at
her heart, heroically endeavoured to bear the burthen
without complaint, without appeal. At length, however,
the whole business was inevitably and immediately exposed.
One of the elder sisters was stricken with a mortal disease.
Upon her death-bed she revealed to her confessor, a Canon


508 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of Oberzell, that the illness which had sapped her life was
the result of the secret machinations of the Sub-Prioress,
whom for a number of years she had recognized as a Satanist,
an adept in black magic, a worker of enchantments and
noxious spells. The dying woman attested that Renata by
the employment of certain herbs and drugs had contrived
to affect four choir nuns and a lay sister with lingering
complaints. There can be little doubt, in fact, that the
Sub-Prioress was a skilled poisoner, versed in the horrid
crafts of the Roman witch Hieronyma Spara, her companion
La Graziosa, and the infamous Toffania, whose acqua tofana
dispersed half over Europe under the name of “ Oil of
S. Nicolas of Bari” was regulated so that the victims would
die in a week, a month, a year, according to the strength
and doses. *®1

At first the confessor, appalled at these monstrous accusa-
tions, refused to give credit to the tale ; he remonstrated with
his penitent, reminded her that she lay on a bed of death, and
adjured her by that living God Whose judgement she was so
soon to endure to speak the truth, the just truth only con-
cerning these dark matters. The aged nun in most solemn
tones reiterated all she had revealed, nay more, she declared
that she must tell her story in the presence of witnesses so
that it should not be for ever lost under the seal of Sacra-
mental Confession. Accordingly when the Host was brought
into her chamber, then in the very presence of her Maker,
before the numerous persons who had assembled there, she
repeated every detail already whispered to the priest, openly
denouncing Renata as author of these hideous crimes, and
invoking God, Whom she was about to receive as Viaticum,
to attest her sincerity and faith. The scene must have been
intensely dramatic in its impressiveness and terror. The
failing woman is stretched upon her pallet in the humble
room, her wrinkled cheeks and trembling veined hands
almost as pale as the snowy counterpane over which they
feebly strayed or the spotless pillows which propped her high ;
strange broken accents fall hesitatingly and slow from her
parched gasping lips, words at which the sisters kneeling all
round blanch and quiver with fear what time the star-capped
tapers shake in their grasp; tempered by the fire of a
thousand confessions the grave priest in his white robe and


GERMANY 509


flowing surplice of goffered lawn down which hangs the
purple stole, a narrow splash of colour, stands silent by the
bed ; in the centre of all, upon a table covered with damask
and fair linen, ablaze with wax flambeaux is the golden
ciborium scintillating in the candlelight, the ciborium
whereon are fixed the dim-mantled eyes of the expiring nun.
‘ Even yet,” says Father Loschert, ‘‘ the community was
loth openly to accuse the Sub-Prioress to denounce her to the
authorities. They preferred to suffer in patience rather than
allow themselves to be persuaded that a religious, at any
rate a person wearing the religious habit, could be guilty of
such abominations. However, the demon declared by the
mouth of a possessed nun that he seized Renata even in her
mother’s womb, that she was his slave and a cursed thing.”
Maria Renata Senger von Mossau was born at Munich
about 1680, and she had commenced her postulancy with the
Premonstratensians of Unterzell at the age of nineteen. It
afterwards came to light that she had been devoted to Satan
when only seven years old, a ceremony repeated with binding
oaths two years later. An old woman had instructed her in
occult lore and magic, and no doubt in the art of poisoning
as well. At eleven she had lent herself to the foul desires of
a man of high estate, and at thirteen she was engaged in a
disgusting intrigue with two lewd officers. A little later she
was baptized with the Devil’s baptism by a woman of ill
life, one of her father’s household, a Satanist, who introduced
her to that horrid society. A woman of rank, whose name
was not revealed, became her mistress in the most intimate
arcana of goetic lore, and it was finally under this tutelage
that she became a skilled chemist, a very Locusta in her
knowledge of herbs and venomed drugs. She entered the
convent only to sow dissension and evil in the very strong-
holds of God’s kingdom, to debauch and torment souls
essaying the perfect life. She was, indeed, as Joannes Scherr
says, “no ordinary woman,” a virago as strong for evil as
some have been strong for good. For fifty years had she
hidden her abnormal wickedness under a cloak of cunningest
hypocrisy. None so regular as she at office, in chapter, at
refectory ; none so devout in choir; none so attentive, so
punctual, so reserved. She seemed the very model of a good
religious. It was this masquerade which had gained her the


510 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


position of Sub-Prioress. She would even have been elected
Prioress, had not an indefinable something, not a suspicion,
not a suggestion, but yet a vague shadow of mistrust hindered
the community from appointing her to that all-important
office.

This was providential, as I believe in the exactest sense of
the word. From the very first hour she had entered the
convent Renata had secretly been in touch with the Satanists
of Wiirzburg; sometimes before, sometimes after Matins
she had stolen out to their assemblies; they had supplied
her with poisonous roots and acqua tofana, with magical
screeds and amulets, of which not a few, including the
witches’ unguent, were found concealed in her room. Indeed,
the continual visits to the Convent of an old beldame who
sought to hold long conferences with Renata in private gave
rise to gossip. It seems certain that by their aid she had
procured duplicate keys to the doors, both exterior and
interior. Impressions could easily be obtained with a little
soft wax, and then the thing were done. Father Loschert
relates that in her youth Renata almost nightly frequented
the local Sabbat, that the Grand Master of the Satanists of
Wirzburg had welcomed her there, that in the presence of
all that accursed society she renounced Almighty God and
His Blessed Mother, that her name Maria whereat Satan
trembles and is afraid was changed to Ema, under which
nomenclature she was inscribed in the Black Book, that she
was marked on the back with the brand of hell. As I have
said elsewhere, although the réle of Devil at such Sabbats was
often undertaken by the chief officer, the leader of the
Satanists, in any particular locality, I have no doubt that
there was on occasion an actual manifestation of the
materialized evil power, who was adored by his worshippers
with filthy blasphemies and mysterious rites.

Immediately after the death-bed revelations of the aged
nun, who had denounced Renata, special prayers, novenas and
tredicinas, mortifications, rigid fasts, litanies, penetential
psalms, were ordered for the community. The Blessed
Sacrament was solemnly exposed and the Miserere sung
in choir to obtain grace and guidance during those dark and
troubled days. On Christmas Day the almoner of the
convent, a pious and discreet priest, determined to proceed


GERMANY 511


to the solemn exorcism of the afflicted nuns. For three days
he continued his efforts, and the morning of Holy Innocents,
certain of whose Relics were shown for the veneration of the
religious, a terrible scene took place. All were in chapel, the
almoner had begun the formula of exorcism when the
possessed women fell into frenzied convulsions. They rolled
on the ground howling and snapping like mad curs. Hideous
blasphemies mingled with their raucous yells. At length they
shrieked out: ‘“‘Our time is come! Our time is come!
We cannot longer lie hid!” As in the days of our Divine
Lord the demons were speaking through the mouths of their
miserable victims.

Diabolic possession was proven. ‘‘ Nobody,” says Father
Loschert, ‘‘ could from this moment doubt but that the six
nuns were possessed by the Devil; one could only in all
humility wonder that Heaven had permitted so terrible a
curse to fall upon a convent where day and night the occupa-
tion of all was the praise of God and prayer. This hour,
however, had been ordained by Providence to expose that
foul witch who hid her sorceries beneath the holy habit, to
expel her from that fair community to which in spirit and
in truth she had never belonged.”

Another solemn exorcism of the afflicted sisters took place
in full choir. The evil spirits when adjured revealed their
names in the kingdom of darkness—fantastic, hideously
grotesque labels—Datas Calvo, Dusacrus, Nataschurus,
Nabascurus, Aatalphus, Elephatan. Renata was present,
and it is said that in horror at her stony silence, the con-
temptuous smile that curled her lip, her flashing eyes, the
Prioress and the nuns, even the priest himself, shrank from
the blast of malice and hate that seemed to encompass her
and dart malevolently from such hellish fury.

As may be well supposed Renata concentrated her rage
upon the almoner, who had been so largely instrumental in
discovering the Satanist.

The Lord Abbot of Oberzell forthwith made a formal
visitation of the convent, in the course of which he ordered
Renata to be confined in a room apart, straitly charging that
she should be allowed no communication with the rest of
the community. This quick move filled her with appre-
hension, as well it might, and when she was immediately


512 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


put under restraint before she had the opportunity of return-
ing to her own room, she began to lose her stoic attitude and
to show signs of distress. She earnestly pleaded to be
allowed to furnish herself with certain books of devotion,
a mere subterfuge as shortly appeared. ‘‘ She asked that
she might go to her room,” reports Father Loschert, “in
order to get a few articles of pious use, but this was a flimsy
pretext, and it was soon evident that she was anxious to
destroy various unhallowed objects she had concealed there,
ingredients for her spells and sorceries. Leave was denied.”
On the other hand grave suspicions were aroused by her
pertinacity and manifest uneasiness. Several learned priests
made a thorough examination of the chamber, and there they
found not only noxious herbs and phials containing potions
and lotions, which when analysed by skilled chemists were
discovered to be swift poisons, but also a number of pots of
ill-savoured ointment, the witches’ unguent, and above all
a yellow robe curiously embroidered with cabalistic sigils
and signs, which, as she afterwards confessed, Renata wore
at the conclaves of Satanists she was wont secretly to
frequent. It will not be impertinent to note that Weyer has
preserved for us three formule of ‘‘ witch ’’ ointment :


1. Du persil, de Peau de l’Aconite, des feuilles de Peuple,
et de la suye.

(Parsley or rather hemlock, water of aconite, poplar
leaves, and soot.)

2. De la Berle, de lAcorum vulgaire, de la Quintefeuille,
du sang de chauvesouris, de la Morelle endormante,
et de Vhuyle.

(Water hemlock, sweet flag, cinquefoil, bat’s blood,
deadly nightshade, and oil.)

3. De graisse d’enfant, de sue d’Ache, d’Aconite, de
Quintefeuille, de Morelle, et de suye.

(Baby’s fat, juice of cowbane, aconite, cinquefoil,
deadly nightshade, and soot.)


“These prescriptions,” says Professor A. J. Clark, ‘‘ show
that the society of witches had a very considerable know-
ledge of the art of poisoning.” 52

As Renata continued to display such a violent animosity
toward the almoner of Unterzell it was resolved that a


GERMANY 513


confessor extraordinary should be applied for, whose ministra-
tions and ghostly counsel might prevail upon her to relieve
her guilty soul by a frank and free acknowledgement of her
crimes. This is strictly in accordance with the provision of
the Council of Trent: ‘‘ Prater ordinarium autem confes-
sorem alius extraordinarius ab Episcopo et aliis superioribus
bis aut ter in anno offeratur qui omnium confessiones audire
debeat.” Sessio XXV. cap. 10. (In addition to the ordinary
confessor, another priest, a confessor extraordinary may be
provided by the Bishop or other superiors twice or thrice a
year, and he shall then hear the confessions of the Com-
munity.) The Prince-Bishop of Wirzburg, when formal
application was made, at once authorized a confessor extra-
ordinary to visit the convent, and with the approbation of
his Abbot, Dom Maurus, a learned and experienced director,
a Benedictine of the Wiirzburg monastery, undertook the
task. There were many religious houses in the city, Augus-
tinians, Franciscans, Dominicans, Jesuits, and others, but
of them all the Benedictine family was reputed to be the
most scholarly, the most deeply versed in things mystical,
true monks, true contemplatives, not mingling with the world,
but wholly devoted to the interior life, walking in heavenly
places. Dom Maurus enjoyed the reputation of a Saint ;
his knowledge of the spiritual life, his gentleness, his charity,
had won him not only the love but also the reverence of the
whole district. At his first interview with the unhappy
Renata his holy admonitions so touched her heart, that she
unburdened her conscience of the load of guilt and poured
forth a tale of blackest infamy. This she related openly, not
under the sacramental seal, and later her long and terrible
confession was reduced to thirteen heads: (1) She acknow-
ledged that she was a Satanist; (2) that she had made
a covenant with the Demon, changing her name Maria,
as especially hateful to Satan, to Ema, under which title she
had been entered on the local roll of witches ; (8) that she
was marked on her body with the Devil’s character ; (4) that
at night she frequently rubbed her body with the witches’
ointment, and attended the Sabbat, wearing the yellow robe
which had been discovered in her room; (5) that at these
assemblies she had abjured God, Our Blessed Lady, the
Sacraments; (6) that she had had carnal intercourse with


514 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


a Demon and with Satanists at the Sabbat ; (7) that she had
enticed three persons outside the convent to join the hellish
society ; (8) that she was accompanied by a familiar, a rat ;
(9) that she attempted to cast spells upon the almoner of the
convent and the Lord Abbot of Oberzell, but in this instance
she had failed ; (10) that by her enchantments [and, doubt-
less, by her poisons] she had caused six persons in the house
and several persons not of the house to fall ill of wasting
diseases, that she had stricken several with paralysis and
other ailments ; (11) that she was responsible for the diabolic
- possession of six nuns; (12) that she had ensorceled Father
Gregory of the monastery of Ebrach and Father Nicolas
Venino of Ilmstadt; (18) that at her communions she was
wont not to swallow the Sacred Host but to keep It, and
then to throw It into the fish-ponds or on a midden, or again
down the latrines, or not unseldom to carry It to her secret
rendezvous when the company would stab and pierce It with
bodkins and needles in their insensate hatred of God. It was,
in truth, this last and most horrible confession which scaled
her doom.

The unhappy woman showed every sign of a sincere and
complete penitence, but the evil she had wrought could not
be so soon undone. The afflicted nuns were still tortured
and tormented by the devils, for as was divinely said in days
of old: ‘‘ Hoe genus in nullo potest exire, nisi in oratione
et ieiunio.” (This kind can go out by nothing, but by prayer
and fasting.) The Prince-Bishop, to whom a full report was
addressed, now ordered the transference of Renata to the
fortress of Marienberg where she was kept under strict ward.
Her religious habit was taken away and she was dressed in a
dark robe of secular fashion. Several pious priests visited
her and spent long hours in exhortation and prayer, and
‘although they knew she had been a hardened and infamous
malefactor, nevertheless they believed that she had truly
repented of her crimes, since she gave such unmistakable
signs of contrition and a change of heart.” The unclean
spirits, furious at their prey being thus snatched from them,
raved more madly and foully from the mouths of the
possessed, tearing and rending their poor victims in hideous
convulsions and paroxysms of frenzy.

An ecclesiastical tribunal sat to judge the case. The


GERMANY 515


assessors were two priests of tempered experience and probity,
of whom one was Father Loschert; two Jesuit fathers; Dom
Maurus and the almoner of the convent. After long delibera-
tions, which lasted several weeks, Renata was condemned
as guilty of sorcery, heresy, apostasy, and of having defiled
the Host in the Manichean manner. She was degraded from
religion and handed over to the secular courts. “After a
new inquiry, a report was submitted to His Highness the
Prince-Bishop [28 May, 1749] and the prisoner was condemned
to be burned for her crimes; this punishment, however,
Monsignor, in consideration of the extreme youth of the
accused when she was first seduced to the heinous sin of
Witchcraft mitigated to death by the headsman’s sword
within the precincts of the prison, and that her body should
afterwards be publicly burned upon a great pyre.’ Renata
heard her sentence calmly, accepting it without a murmur
as the just penalty of her crimes.

On 21 June, 1749, between the hours of eight o’clock and
nine, the prisoner was carried in a chair to the place of
execution, a bastion of the castle. She wore a long black
dress, a white apron, a white gorget, and a coif of black and
white. Two priests, Dom Maurus, her confessor, and the
almoner of the prison, Father Gaar, S.J., walked by her side,
to comfort and exhort her in this extremity. An eye-witness,
who was officially present as the representative of a civic
corporation, relates that she showed a truly perfect and
humble resignation at the last, and the executioner most
dextrously severed her neck with one swift sudden sweep
of his sword.

The body was then conveyed by two serjeants, “ night
watchmen,” to the other side of the Main, and there on a
hill locally dubbed ‘Sorcerers’ Square,” perpetuating the
fact that a century and a half before numbers of witches had
perished at the stake on that spot, it was consumed in an
immense fire of faggots, brushwood, and tar-barrels, which
had been built up the preceding day. A vast crowd had
assembled to witness the event, and Father Gaat, mounting
a movable pulpit, first addressed the throng in an eloquent
and admirably reasoned discourse. He impressed upon his
hearers that sorcery although a rare was none the less a
very real offence, that unclean spirits might yet possess and


516 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


torment persons even as in the days of Our Lord, that the
Devil even now “tamquam leo rugiens circuit, querens
quem deuoret,” ‘as a roaring lion, goeth about seeking
whom he may devour.”

The whole account of Maria Renata Senger is recorded
with the utmost clarity without passion, without partiality.
There are ample documents, and the train of events is
perfectly simple and logical. It is obvious that she was a
Satanist, who had early been introduced into that dark
society, that for years she was trained in all their evil secrets,
and that at last discovery came almost by an accident.

There can be no doubt that these hideous doctrines were
assiduously propagated. Two years after the Wirzburg
scandals Anna Bayerin was executed at Salzburg for unspeak-
able outrages upon the Host which she had retained at
Communion, and defiled according to the Satanist tradition.

From 1786 until 1779 the whole district of Limburg, parts
of Lorraine, and the province of Treves, were infested by a
vast secret society known as the “‘ Buxen.” Their organiza-
tion was singularly complete. Their custom was to meet
after nightfall in some lonely spot and to commence proceed-
ings by the celebration of Black Mass when Hosts, which
were stolen from the tabernacle, were grossly desecrated.
This was the time when recruits were initiated into the gang.
It is said that their foul ceremonies were generally conducted
in one of three ruined sanctuaries, that of S. Rose near
Sittardt, of S. Leonard near Roldyck, and a chapel at
Oermond on the Maas. Afterwards they sallied forth and
raided farms, country houses, and even villages. If they
passed a church on their way they invariably burst open the
doors, robbed the tabernacle, and gutted the whole building,
leaving it in flames. A state of anarchy and terrorization
prevailed. At length in the Roldyck district stern measures
were taken. Permanent gallows were set up in many places,
some hamlets had two gibbets apiece. Breaking on the
wheel and burning alive soon became the fate of any of the
gang who were captured, and the court records of Falkenburg
show that between 1772 and 1774 over one hundred Buxen
were thus executed. Leopold Leeuwerk, who was dubbed
their chaplain, a Satanist, was caught at last, and the most
infamous of their leaders, Abraham Nathan, a renegade


GERMANY 17


Jew, was put to death at Haeck, on the moor of Graed, 24
September, 1772.

The last official trial and execution for Witchcraft in
Germany was that of Anna Maria Schwaegel, the daughter
of an artisan at Lachen. Being in service with a well-to-do
family of the town she was seized with an inordinate passion
for a fellow-servant, the coachman, a smart young Lothario,
who deliberately set himself out to win her affections. He
gave himself out to be a Lutheran, and insisted as a pre-
liminary to their marriage that she should renounce the
Catholic Faith to join his sect. So besotted was she that the
unhappy girl obeyed her paramour’s behest only to discover
she was being trifled with and abused. The man had no
intention of making her his wife, in fact he wedded another.
In despair Anna Maria fled from the place, and half-distracted
by what had occurred she wandered blindly to and fro, a
beggar, until one day she was found by the wayside in the
last extremity of wretchedness, starving, clad in a few
miserable rags, and so taken to an asylum at Laneggen, be-
tween Kempten and Immensadt in Bavaria. It was noticed
that here she seemed always uneasy, always afraid. In
time she related her adventures to other inmates of the
home and one day she revealed her secret. She told them
how she had lapsed from the Church to become a Lutheran,
and she added that her lover beneath the pretext of this
form of belief was in reality a Satanist, that she attended
the Sabbat with him, and there committed unspeakable
abominations at his behest. ‘It was the Devil under the
form of this coachman, who betrayed me,”’ was her constant
ery. This exclamation makes the event amply clear. As I
read the story, the coachman was the Grand Master, the
Devil, that is to say, of the local Satanists.

The Superior of the home, Madame Anna Maria Kuhstaller,
a sincerely pious if somewhat rigid dévote, could not fail to
hear the tale, and in her first impulse of horror she informed
the magistrates of Kempten of what had happened. On
20 February Anna Maria Schwaegel was arrested and carried
to Kempten, where she was lodged in custody. When
interrogated she not only maintained her story, but added
many new and conclusive facts. She had twice made an
express compact with the Demon, she had assisted at the


518 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Sabbat many times, and defiled herself with foulest profana-
tions and blasphemies. On 11 April, 1775, three judges—
Treichlinger, Feiger, and Leiner—passed sentence of death,
which was forthwith submitted to the Prince-Bishop, who
after reading the culprit’s confession, wrote on the parch-
ment with his own hand Fiat iustitia, Honorius, Prince-
Bishop. There was some discussion amongst the lawyers
whether the punishment should be the stake, pana ignis, the
traditional method, or the ax, pena gladii, conformably to
article 109 of the penal code of Charles V. It was decided
that the headsman should be called upon to do his office.

The last regularly official trial and execution for Witchcraft
in Western Europe was that of Anna Goeldi who suffered at
Glaris, a Protestant district of Switzerland, 17 June, 1782.
This woman was accused by a doctor named Tschudi of
having cast evil spells upon his little son, who had fallen
into a decline. Possibly there was some suspicion of poison,
the witch’s readiest weapon to strike her foe. Anna Goeldi
was hanged.

Probably the last trial and judicial execution for Witchcraft
in Europe was that of two fearful hags, notorious and
rampant Satanists, who were burned at the stake in Poland
in 1793.58

That Satanism survived, and although driven underground
was strong in Germany during the nineteenth century, is
hardly to be doubted. In the twentieth century it has well-
nigh been flaunted by debauchs and decadents, more than
one sounding scandal being the result of their effrontery.
In December, 1919, the authorities broke up a gang of Devil
worshippers at Berlin. The police, who were more than a
hundred strong, surprised the demonists at their orgies in
the Café Kerkau. The whole assembly, which numbered
wellnigh five hundred persons, offered a brief resistance,
only to be coerced at the revolver’s point. Most of the
company were in a state of stark nudity, and there was
evidence that no founess of the Sabbat had been forgotten.
All were conveyed to durance in covered motor-lorries, and
it is said that several persons of high standing were gravely
implicated. 54

In November, 1925, a boy at Uttenheim near Strasburg
was shot by the village policeman as being a werewolf, and


GERMANY 519


the whole country-side who had gone in terror of the dead
lad firmly believed that he continually affected that trans-
formation to ravage their flocks and folds.

There are few European countries which so teem with
legend and superstition as Germany. The Rhine is the river
of the undine and the lorelei; along its banks are countless
haunted castles, in the romantic woods innumerable phantoms
and unearthly visitants. The Brocken was the rendezvous
of witches the whole world over; in the Hartz Mountains
you may meet the Black Huntsman ; and amid the glades of
the Black Forest the werewolf yet prowls for his prey. Old
beliefs, old customs linger still. On Walpurgis night in many
parts of Bavaria and among the Germans of Bohemia the
country folk will yet expel the witches, or, at least, such was
the invariable practice until some twenty or thirty years ago.
In the Béhmerwald Mountains, which divide Bavaria from
Bohemia, all the young fellows in the village assemble on
some height, especially at a crossroad, and lustily crack huge
whips with all their strength. Where the noise of the whip
is heard the witch can do no harm. In other places the
herdsmen wind their horns meanwhile, and the long loud
notes will effectually keep the hags at bay. In Voigtland,
a@ mountainous region of Central Germany bordering on the
Frankenwald range, the witch is still hated and feared.
For on certain days, Walpurgis night, S. Thomas’ Eve,
Midsummer, the sorceress will make her way into a neigh-
bour’s house and try to borrow some trifle or else filch it
unobserved. Misfortune will fall on that homestead when
they have succeeded in their quest. On these days, too, the
cattle are protected from their blasting spells by the sign of
the most Holy Cross chalked upon the byres, and bunches of
sweet herbs hung around, marjoram and gillyflowers, which
‘the foul crew loathe and warily shun.

In Bohemia the peasantry on Walpurgis night strew
brambles and thorns on the house lintels and around the
cowsheds and pens to keep far those who are riding aloft in the
darkness and gloom. Huge bonfires are lit and effigies of
witches consumed therein. At a certain hour all the horns
and musical instruments, in fact anything capable of making
a noise, are sounded and clanged throughout the village.
The witches are hurrying from the chimneys on their way to


520 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


the Sabbat and the din will drive them faster and further on
their course.

The Silesian rustics also dread Walpurgis night. The
housewife carefully removes her utensils from the fireplace
and hides her broom, the goodman locks up his pitchfork and
his rake, lest haply the witch should seize them and in an
instant be astride hey ! for the Sabbat, hey ! for the worship
of hell, the orgy of bane and bale.


NOTES TO CHAPTER VI


1 §. Rupert is by authorities said to have died on Easter Sunday, 27 March,
718. Other writers reject this date, and speak of the fifth and beginning of
the sixth centuries as the age of his missionary work. The latest research,
however, inclines to the seventh, or even as above, to the eighth century.

2 There are important relics at Louvain, Mechlin, Prague, Bruges, and
Erfurt. A considerable portion of an arm is at Eichfeld. On 11 June, 1874,
Pope Pius IX extended the feast of S. Boniface to the entire world.

% Baronius, 997.

« The inhabitants of Livonia twice fell back from Christianity to paganism.
In 1201 Albrecht founded the city of Riga, of which he became Bishop, and
reclaimed the people by a crusade. In 1202 he established the famous Order
of Knights of the Sword.

5 Grove-nymphs, Apollonius Rhodius, I, 1066.

6 Thid., I, 1227.

7 Orphica, 60.

§ Lympha = viudn.

® Cf. the Greek Humenides for Erinyes. Sophocles, @dipus at Colonus, 128.

10 Miss M. A. Murray, The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, pp. 11, 12, etc.

11 Cur magia pariter cum heeresi creuerit.

12 Havet, L’Hérésie et le Bras Séculier au Moyen Age, @uvres (Paris, 1896),
II, pp. 117-81.

13 See the provisions of the Bull Ad abolendam. Also Mansi, Sacrorum
conctliorum noua .. . collectio, Venice, 1769, Vol. XX, pp. 476 sgg. And
Frédéricq, Corpus documentorum Inquisitionis . . ., Ghent, 1889, sqq., I, 56.
And Havet, op. cit.

14 Lami, Lezioni d’antichita Toscana, Florence, 1766, II, pp. 484 and 523.

18 Monumenta Germanic historica, ed. G. A. Pertz, II, p. 252.

16 Monumenta Germanic historica, Leges, II, p. 268.

17 Michael, Geschichte des deutschen Volken, II, p. 266.

18 Some authors write that he was a lay-brother, but this does not seem
credible. In fact, there is a good deal of obscurity in the records. The com-
mission handed offenders over to the secular courts for punishment. The
chronicler of Worms notes that the proceedings were authoritatively approved
by Henry, King of the Romans, and by many other princes. Annales breu.
Worm. ; Monumenta German. Script., XVIII, pp. 38 sqq.

19 A number of canons issued in 1312 by the Council of Vienna under Pope
Clement V. The Bull Multorwm querela was incorporated in the decrees of this
ee P. Frédéricq, Corpus documentorum . . . (Ghent, 1889-1906), Vol. I,

0. ;


20 Charloz, Les sorciéres neuchateloises. J eanneret, Les sorciers dans le pays
de Neuchatel.

* Diary of Johan Aubrion, a solid burgess of Metz (1461-1512), cited by
Hansen, Geschichte des Hexenwahns.


GERMANY 521


*2 Who often appears as Henry Institor the Latinized version of his
surname.


*” ‘They were seldom printed, and usually largely extemporized, keeping at
the same time fairly closely to the original theme. See the Ulm piece and
others in Vol. V of Scheible’s Kloster (1847) ; also the puppet versions edited
by W. Hamm (1850); O. Schade (1856); K. Engel (1874); Bielschowsky
(1882); Kralih and Winter (1885).

38 Dr. Ernest Faligan’s Histoire de la Légende de Faust, 1888, has a valuable
“index bibliographique.”

2° Translated into English by George Barrow, 1826. G. W.M. Reynolds has
a lurid romance, Faust, with its sequel, Wagner, the Wehr-Wolf.

80 Carl Haas, Hexenprocesse, pp. 84 et sqq.

31 Gesta Treuirorum, 189. Hontheim, Diplomatische trierische Geschichte,
Vol. I, p. 877.

Mien ene Beitrag zur Geschichte des Hexenwesens im 16 Jahrhundert, Trier,
Denke

38 This seems correct, although a late account, Voigt, Berliner Monatschrift
von 1781 (April), says “‘ one year.”

34 His youngest daughter Anna Maria, a Sepulchrine nun, has left a few
fragments of a diary. Under the year 1627 she speaks of the condemnation
of the Satanists.

35 Hauber, Bibliotheca magica.

36 M. J. Diefenbach, Der Hexenwahn, p. 124, n.

37 Historia tragica adolescentis prenobilis Ernesti ab Ernberg.

38 For a good bibliography of von Spee see the Introduction to the Trusz-
nachtigall, a collection of some fifty to sixty sacred lyrics, by Weinrich, 1907.

39 See the Gazette de Cologne, 3 January, 1875.

409 Kohl, Reise in Ungarn, Dresden, 1842.

41 Otto Glaubrecht, Die Schreckensjahre von Lindheim, Stuttgart, 1886.

42 A small town of some 2000 souls about seven miles from Magdeburg.

43 Premier avis, No. LX.

44 Esquirol gives tearlessness as a symptom in some forms of insanity. See
E. K. Hunt’s translation of Mental Maladies, p. 245, Philadelphia, 1845.

45 May, 1698, pp. 535, 536, La Haye, 1698.

46 Traité sur les Apparitions des Esprits et sur les Vampires, ou les Revenans
de Hongrie, de Moraire, &c., Dom Augustin Calmet, 2 vols., Paris, 1751.
See especially Vol. II, c. 14.

47 Le Matin, 4 January, 1910.

48 Now desecrated and turned into a Palace of Industry.

49 Amongst other cognate matter we have: Christliche Anred ndchst dem
Scheiterhaufen, worauff der deichnam Mariae Renatae, einer durchs Schwert
hingerichteten Zauberin den 2lten Jun. A. 1749, ausser der Stadt Wiirzburg,
verbrennet worden, an ein zalreich versammeltes Volk gettan. . . . Von P.
Georgio Gaar, s.3., Aktenmaessiger Bericht von der zu Unterzell bet Wiirzburg
vorgefallenen erschrecklichen Begebenheit puncto Maleficiorum et Magic, in the
Zauber bibliothek of Horst, Vol. I, pp. 205 sqg. Der letzte Hexenprocess in
Deutschland, Pirna, 1849. Die letzte Reichshexe in Hammerschlage und
Historien, by J. Scherr, Vol. II. Gérres in his Die christliche Mystik has a
very reliable account of the Maria Renata case.

50 A detailed examination of these phenomena would repay study. They
may be closely paralleled by much of the thaumaturgy of modern spiritism,


522 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and by many supernormal happenings which are described in the writings of
authoritative investigators.

51 La Spara and La Graziosa were executed in Rome under Alexander VII,
1655-67. The hag Toffania at the age of ihreescore and ten was overtaken
by justice at Naples, and strangled in 1719. Hahnemann says that her
poison was compounded of arsenical neutral salts. Garelli, physician to
the Emperor of Austria, considered it to have been crystallized arsenic,
dissolved in a large quantity of water by decoction, with the addition (for
some unexplained purpose) of the herb cymbalaria.

52 See Appendix V, p. 279, to Miss M. A. Murray’s The Witch-Cult in
Western Hurope.

53 Tt is worth recording that the burning alive of five witches by the Alcade
Ignacio Castello of San Jacobo in Mexico on 20 August, 1877, ‘‘ with consent
of the whole population,” is merest fiction. See Stimmen aus Maria-Laach,
XXXII, 1887, p. 378.

54 Daily Express, 9 December, 1919.


CHAPTER VII
ITALY


ALTHOUGH, doubtless, the deadly poison had been in secret
filtering through from the East for many years, it was not
until early in the eleventh century that the Gnostic heresy
began to show itself openly in Italy. The various sects, all
of debased Manichean origin, Paulicians, Bogomiles, Kathari,
Paterini, Vaudois, Albigenses, Tartarins, Beghards, Pauvres
de Lyon, or what not, were clandestinely devoted to Satan-
ism, adepts in the most lewd and abominable rites glorifying
the principles of anarchy and evil, fanatics whose active
propaganda soon fanned to flame the dying embers of sorcery
and revivified every foul superstition which the Church had
wellnigh stamped out, but which yet lingered in remote
districts amongst the fearful and ignorant peasantry.

That profound scholar Mons. Aroux? suggests that this
invasion of the West was made by two routes, one of which
was by sea through the trading relations existing between
Provence and the East; France and Spain being reached in
this manner. The other route was through Bulgaria, the
sectaries overrunning Moldavia, Pannonia, Moravia, Bohemia,
and Dalmatia, thus entering Italy. Lombardy, where these
two streams would converge, naturally became the head-
quarters of the organization. Those corrupt Oriental
philosophies which, mingled with a distorted form of Chris-
tianity, were carried westward by the Crusaders, certain of
whom had become gravely infected, now began to corrode
whole sections of society and a further impetus was given to
the movement by the foundation in 1118 of the Order of the
Templars whose ranks were from the very beginning tainted
with Dualism, and who assiduously propagated a secret
doctrine closely akin to the arcana of the Gnostie bodies that
vermiculated Europe.

This work was carried on very secretly and with infinite

523


524 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


precautions, so that for many years at least the inroads made
by heresy and magic were hardly suspected.

In 1080 Pope S. Gregory VII writing to King Harold of
Denmark restrains that monarch’s zeal, and forbids him to
condemn witches to death without the clearest proofs of
their guilt, a mere accusation of having raised storms or
blighted standing corn and invoked pestilences must be at
once set aside. As yet then heresy is not overtly interlocked
with necromancy and malignant spells.

The most important and, of course, supremely authorita-
tive series of documents dealing with the conduct of witch-
trials in Italy and elsewhere are the Papal Bulls. In 1233
Pope Gregory IX (Ugolino, Count of Segni) addressed
a Bull to the famous Conrad of Marburg bidding him proceed
against the Luciferians, who addressed homage and prayers
to the Demon, but it may fairly be said the first Bull which
directly reviews the situation was issued 13 December, 1258,
by Pope Alexander IV (Rinaldo Conti). Addressing the
Franciscan inquisitors? this prudent and holy pontiff ruled
that they must carefully refrain from any intervention in
charges of sorcery unless there be some clear presumption
of heretical belief and practice, “‘manifeste hzresim saperent.”’
But it is obvious that the two things were now so inter-
mingled that one could hardly exist without the other. It
was, at any rate, at Toulouse, a hot-bed of Katharan infection,
that in 1274 the earliest example occurs of a witch being
burned after judicial sentence of an inquisitor ; a malignant
_ hag named Angéle de la Barthe was there condemned by the
learned and clement Hugues de Baniols. Amongst other
abominations she confessed to having murdered a number
of infants whose flesh she and her fellows devoured. This
wretch also boasted of having had commerce with the Demon,
and of being a constant attendant at the Sabbat.? On 10
January, 1260, Alexander IV directed a similar Bull to the
Dominicans.

At the opening of the fourteenth century occurred the
scandals connected with Walter Langton, Bishop of Lichfield
and treasurer of Edward I, who was accused of magical
practices upon the most circumstantial evidence—eye-
witnesses coming forward and swearing they had seen him
pay homage to Satan—but who succeeded in clearing


ITALY 525


himself with the compurgators. Boniface VIII (Benedetto
Gaetani), the greatest jurist and acutest diplomat of his age,
issued a weighty and considered Bull on the occasion, dated
8 June, 1308, which commences thus: ‘“‘ Dudum ad audi-
entiam nostram peruenit, quod uenerabilis frater noster W.
Couentrensis et Lichefeldensis episcopus erat in regno
Angliz et alibi publice defamatus quod diabolo homagium
fecerat et eum fuerat osculatus in tergo eique locutus
multotiens. .. .” It will be remarked that the details of
the charges are set forth clearly and in explicit terms.

The next Papal Bull is of prime importance. It is dated
27 February, 1318, and addressed from Avignon by John
XXII (Jacques d’Euse) to Bartholomew, Bishop of Fréjus,*
Prior Pierre Tisserand of the Monastery of S. Antoninus of
Pamiers, and Pierre de Champs, Archdeacon of the Cathedral
Church of Clermont. The Holy Father gives these three
prelates complete and ample inquisitorial powers to proceed
against nine persons, eight clerics (of whom one Giovanni di
Ansanto was a physician) and a certain Innocent, who
belonged to the household of no less a prelate than Peter
of Savoy, Archbishop of Lyons, and is described as
“‘barbitonsor,”’ barber, a position of considerable confidence
and trust. A barber in the service of so great a noble would
at least have had a fair knowledge of drugs and medicine,
and have been “ grounded in astronomye”’ and “ magik
naturel.”” The accused seem to have studied the black art
deeply in allits branches. They had collected a large number
of grimoires and books of spells; used enchantments to
afflict their enemies with diseases and death; consecrated
puppets, mirrors, and rings for purposes of divination ;
evoked the fiend after fencing themselves in pentacles and
magic circles which they traced ; inquired of the future from
demons and discarnate intelligences; nourished familiars® ;
paid divine honours to the powers of hell, from whom they
hoped for all temporal good, a distinctly Manichean belief.
These renegades seem to have been indiscreet enough
publicly to boast that by certain words and mystic runes
they had the power to cure a man of any sickness, nay,
actually to prolong life, and contrariwise to visit any who
molested them with sudden and immediate destruction,
a vaunt which for a long while successfully secured their


526 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


immunity from any active interference on the part of the
civil authorities. The evidence was overwhelming and the
scandal grew day by day until it reached the ears of the
Vicar of Christ who was not slow to deal with the matter.
The Bishop of Fréjus and his co-inquisitors are recom-
mended, nay commanded, to deal with the affair at once,
without favour and without advertisement, to hear all
witnesses indifferently, to find out all who are implicated in
these malpractices, summarily to punish the guilty. The Pope
remarks with no little acumen that they will undoubtedly
find heresy mingled with sorcery, “‘ preesertim cum labem
sapiant heretice prauitatis.”

The text of this important Bull is as follows :

[John XXII] to Our Venerable Brother Bartholomew,
Bishop of Fréjus, and to Our beloved son Pierre Tisserand,
Doctor of law, Prior of the Monastery of S. Antoninus of
Pamiers in the diocese of Rodez, and to Pierre de Champs,
Professor of civil law, Archdeacon of the church of Clermont,
Our chaplains. The Roman Pontiff, Whose particular duty
and care it is to watch over the safety of souls, must needs be
most instant in correcting His sons, when they are straying
from the Faith, for assuredly nothing is more certain than
that naught availeth to salvation, unless it be firmly rooted
in the Faith. Now there hath newly come to Our ears a
report which is worthy of all credence and which is bruited
abroad by common talk, namely that John de Lemorici ;
James said to be of Brabant; Giovanni di Ansanto, a
physician; Radulph Penchadau; Walter Laflamene ;
Guglielmo Marini; Conrad a German; to whom was
erstwhile joined one Thomas said to be a German likewise ;
all being clerics, as well as Innocent, the barber and leech of
Our Venerable Brother, Peter, Archbishop of Lyons, of whom
some are dwelling in Our own court, disdaining to follow
the precept of the Apostle and be wise unto salvation, but
rather being curious with inordinate desires and intoxicated
with the folly of overweening vanity, these, We say, have
entangled and enmeshed themselves in the dark toils of
nigromancy, geomancy, and other magic arts, possessing
writings and books that treat of these arts, which inasmuch
as they are the arts of devils born of a baleful and hated
correspondence between men and the evil angels, must be


ITALY 527


avoided by every Christian and reprobated from the heart
with every circumstance of contumely, yet these wretches
having consecrated certain mirrors and images according
to their accursed ceremonies not unseldom make use of such
objects and taking their place in circles they frequently
invoke evil spirits, that they may by this means do a mischief
to men’s health, either by slaying them owing to the blighting
curse of some spell or by shortening their days and wasting
them with disease. On occasion, moreover, they enclose in
mirrors, circles, or rings, devils, who may answer their
inquiries concerning the past and the future, secking from
these hellish communications to predict the future, which is
known to God alone, wherefore they eagerly practise divina-
tion and soothsaying, and in most evil wise do they defile
themselves by connexion with succubi. When they have
evoked these foul spirits they essay many a curious experi-
ment in every branch of diabolic lore. They further make
bold to declare that by no medicine, food, or draught, but
merely by the power of some formula they can shorten or
prolong a man’s days or at will slay him, and contrariwise if
such be their good pleasure they will heal him of any sickness.
This do they maintain they have not infrequently performed.
Wherefore abandoning their Creator and placing their trust in
this sort of devilish cantrips, and foully deeming that evil
spirits are worthy of service and of divine honours, they
presume and dare to worship them with all outward show
of reverence and adoration even as idolators and heathen use.
The aforesaid clerics, then, and the barber, each several one
and all of them, as also others who yet live at Our court, are
said to have committed these enormities again and again,
to the imminent peril of not only their own souls but of
many another soul to boot. So vile and pestilent a super-
stition, whose evil and reprobate adherents the common
consent of society holds as enemies to general order and,
indeed, the foes of humanity, We neither can nor will wink
at, especially since it is polluted with the taint of heretical
pravity, and accordingly in regard to all the aforesaid
matters owing to Our great zeal for the Faith, whose interests
must be everywhere diligently safeguarded, We direct that
the Inquisition proceed against the clerics, the barber, and
all whose names are herein rehearsed, nor shall it be any let


528 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


that the aforesaid Thomas is dead, for in a business of such
black and heinous crimes, the memory even of a man who is
dead must be assailed, since in some way his infamy, if clear
proven, may yet be lawfully punished. Wherefore to you,
to each one severally, and to all, in whose sound judgement
We place entire trust under Our Lord God, by the authority
of these presents we commit this weighty charge, solemnly
requiring you that whensoever ye may find the aforesaid
clerics and barber and others who reside at Our court, who
have been publicly defamed as reputed to be evilly and
criminally concerned in all these vile businesses or aught
cognate to them, ye by the aid of any fitting and proper
persons shall forthwith and presently without noise or
disturbance attach their persons, and no appeal being
allowed, according to course of justice, having the fear of
God alone before your eyes ye shall with exactest carefulness
proceed to inquire into the truth of the accusations, and
when the inquiry has been duly made ye shall deliver sentence
according to the course of law. By the tenor of these
presents unto you, to each one severally and to all, We grant
and give full and amplest powers, so that each one of you,
whatsoever be his rank and estate, may commence a process
when and wheresoever he will, and that another may con-
tinue and conclude the said process, and ye shall summon
whomsoever ye will as witnesses to places convenient to
yourselves, just as and so often as seemeth expedient to you,
and these shall be called upon, required to attend, and
personally cited to appear. And if there be any recalcitrant
or disobedient they shall be forcibly constrained and com-
pelled by ecclesiastical censures and Our Apostolic authority,
if it be expedient for the judging of the aforesaid crimes or
any questions relevant and pertinent. All this notwith-
standing the two decisions arrived at in the general council,
notwithstanding also any other constitutions delivered by
Our predecessors the Roman Pontiffs. Given at Avignon.
27 February [1318].®

On the 22 August, 1320, John XXII addressed a Bull from
Avignon upon the subject of Witchcraft? to the Dominican
Cardinal of S. Sabina, William de Laudun, Bishop of
Carcassone and Toulouse, to which was added in 1326 the
Constitution Super illius specula. Four years later, 4


ITALY 529


November, 1380, the same Pope issued a Bull Sano nouiter
tntellecto to Bernard de Farges, Archbishop of Narbonne, and
his suffragans. The whole of that district had been honey-
combed by the sect of the Albigenses of whom Innocent III
justly remarked: ‘They are worse than the Saracens.”
Strictly speaking, Albigensianism was not even a Christian
heresy, but an extra-Christian religion deeply involved with
Oriental magic and blasphemous parodies of Holy Mass;
in a word, Satanism. When the adherents of this cult had
gained sufficient power in a district they did not hesitate to
spread their doctrines by fire and sword. The holy Cistercian
S. Peter of Castelnau, whom they martyred in 1208, and
S. Camelia, put to death by the same ruffians, are both
honoured in the Proper of Carcassone. Other similar cases
might be cited. The dregs of the heresy were finally driven
underground, but they reappear in the form of Witchcraft
and the black art.

On the 12 April, 1331, John XXII addressed his Bull Uiros
maleficos humani generis to Bishop Hugh II of Paris. This
document is particularly directed against Hercaudus, a Bene-
dictine abbot of the diocese of Autun, who was reported to
have attempted by spells the life of Philip VI. The fearful
spread of sorcery throughout Europe greatly exercised the
third of the Avignon Popes, the Cisterican Benedict XII.° A
profound patristic scholar, a learned theologian, a subtle
disputant, he took a keen and active part in the settlement
of the problems of his day, than which none seemed more
formidable than the increase of Witchcraft and its kindred
abominations. The list of the Bulls dealing with demonism
which begins less than two years after his accession to the
throne, is both lengthy and important. On 13 April, 1336, the
Supreme Pontiff writes to Bishop William of Paris, concern-
ing William Altafex, an English warlock, “ nigromanticum
de Anglia”; and during that summer no less than three
papal letters followed to various chapters, 17 June, 9 August,
17 August. On 9 August various guilty persons were
mentioned individually : one Fra Peter Thomas, a sorcerer ;
Bertrand of Narbonne, a relapsed heretic ; Gerald, a cleric ;
Rostagno, accused of necromancy; a woman named
Decelma, and others. On 21 December, 1336, a brief was
dispatched to Gaston de Foix recommending renewed civil


580 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


vigilance throughout the territory of Narbonne, whilst
on the same date no less than four other briefs were indited,
one of which to the Bishop of Tarbes gives ample evidence
of the Pope’s solicitude and preoccupation with this business.
Scarcely a month later, 18 January, 1337, a bull is addressed
to William Lombard, a canon of Mirepoix, a famous scholar,
and we have Bulls of 12 June and 13 June, Dudum ad
audientiam nostram perducto, in the same year. On 29
October, 1837, appeared the Bull Ad ausus nefarios impro-
borum et malignantium reprimendos, directing more drastic
measures to stem the flood of anarchy and diabolism,
injunctions which were repeated on 7 April, Non absque
horrore detestando percepimus, in the following spring. On
8 December, 1339, a similar Bull was issued to the Cistercian
Durand,® Abbot of Bolbona (Mirepoix).

We have one Bull from Gregory XI (Pierre Roger de Beau-
fort), “the best of the Avignon popes,” says Héfler, dated
from Avignon 14 August, 13874, two years previously to his
departure for Rome; one Bull of the Franciscan Alexander
V (Petros Filargis), a man “of the highest knowledge,”
dated from Pisa, 80 August, 1409, two months after his
election to the throne of Peter ;1° one Bull of Martin V (Oddone
Colonna) from Constance, 3 February, 1818.11 Eugenius IV
(Gabriello Condulmaro), the great Venetian scholar and noble
patron of Humanism, published four Bulls with reference to
Witchcraft. The first, 24 February, 1434, is addressed from
Florence to a Franciscan inquisitor, Pontius Fougeyron ;
the second appeared in 1487: Ad nostrum non sine graui
mentis amaritudine peruenit auditum; the third 23 March,
1440, was issued from Florence ; and the last, 17 July, 1445,
from Rome. Nicholas V (Tommaso Parentucalli), ‘‘ a name
never to be mentioned without reverence by every lover of
letters,” indicted a Bull on 1 August, 1451, to the Inquisitor
Hugo Niger, O.P.; Callixtus III (Alfonso de Borja), “‘ a man
of lofty ideals, of boundless courage, energy, and _perse-
verance,” published a Bull, dated from Rome, 19 October,
1457; and Pius II (Enea Silvio de’ Piccolimini) a Bull from
Mantua on 17 December, 1459, fifteen months after his
election.

The vigilant and vigorous Sixtus IV (Francesco della
Rovere) soon took active measures to crush the Waldenses


ITALY 531


whose practices and doctrines menaced the stability of
society, and in his reign we have three Bulls directly attacking
sorcery, which he identifies with heresy, 17 June, 1478;
1 April, 1478 ; and 21 October, 1483.

Important, weighty, and supremely authoritative as it is,
the Bull Summis desiderantes affectibus of Pope Innocent VIII
has been dwelt on in the past by most writers with exagger-
ated emphasis, as though it were unique, the very fons et
origo indeed of the witch-trials throughout Europe, and it is,
moreover, even yet generally alluded to by modern historians
and by scholars of no mean standing too in terms which
show that they consider it an extraordinary and unparalleled
document, responsible for the outbreak of a campaign
against witches which soon grew to be a universal, terrific,
and almost indiscriminate persecution. Such views are
purely illusory, for in truth the Bull of Pope Innocent was, as
may be very clearly seen, merely one of many ordinances
dealing with a demoniac pestilence that wellnigh threatened
to overwhelm the world’s civilization.

Innocent VIII is so important a figure in the history of
Witchcraft that it will not, perhaps, be impertinent to give a
brief impartial account of this great Pontiff, than whom few
have been more ignorantly and more evilly maligned.

Giovanni Battista Cibé was born at Genoa in 1432. The
son of a Roman senator Aran Cibé and Teodorina a lady
of the house de’ Mari, his youth was devoted to the Humani-
ties, and early he gained great reputation as one of the most
elegant and correct Latinists of the day. Having taken
Holy Orders he entered the family of Cardinal Calandrini,
and in 1467 was created Bishop of Savona, which see he
exchanged for Molfetta in 1472, being raised to the Sacred
College in the following year. At the conclave of 1484 the
choice fell upon this distinguished and scholarly cardinal,
who in honour of his famous countryman Innocent IV
(Sinibaldo de’ Fieschi) ascended the throne of Peter as
Innocent VIII. The chief concern of the new Vicar of Christ,
whose kindliness of heart won golden opinions on every side,
was the promotion of peace amongst the princes of Europe.
Many difficulties and obstacles lay in the path of the Pontiff
who, in the true spirit of his Master, so pathetically en-
deavoured to unite Christendom, his charge, against their


532 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


common enemy, the Turk, the hater of the Cross. Secular
ambitions and royal jealousies intervened. But the Pope
had at least the compensation of witnessing the fall of Granada
in 1491, the crowning glory of the reconquest of Spain from
the Moors, whereby Ferdinand won the proud title of
‘Catholic Majesty.”” Innocent VIII was deeply spiritual.
He issued an appeal for a crusade against the abominable
Waldenses ; he strenuously opposed the pestilential Hussites
in Bohemia; and it was he who forbade under penalty of
excommunication (December, 1486) the reading of the nine
hundred theses, which Pico della Mirandola had publicly
posted in Rome. This was.an eminently proper precaution,
and shows the zeal of the Holy Father for purity in religion,
since several learned theologians had declared that at least
thirteen of these propositions were gravely heretical, and
great scandal ensued. As a matter of fact it is doubtful
whether they were worse than nonsensical, and the mere
unskilled posing of insoluble problems. Pico had printed his
theses, Conclusiones philosophice, cabalistice, et theologice
(Rome, 1486, folio), a strange farrago, but the book was
prohibited and the author condemned.!?_ The Pope canonized
Margrave Leopold of Austria (6 January, 1485), and on 31
May, 1492, he solemnly received at Rome the Holy Lance}
which Sultan Bajazet at last surrendered to Christendom. 4
Worn-out with anxiety, and proclaiming always his heart’s
desire for peace, the Vicar of Christ presently sank into a
swift decline, which terminated during the summer heat, on
25 July, 1492, when he passed away as if in sleep. His body
was set upon a magnificent catafalque in S. Peter’s, and they
buried him there, on the fifth of August, not inaptly writing
upon his tomb “ Ego autem in Innocentia mea ingressus
sum,” 15

Many historians have conspired to blacken the character
of this noble and admirable Pope. A narrative must be, if
not more interesting, at least more exciting when confected
from the lurid pages of Infessura and Burchard, than if
merely drawn from the less melodramatic true unvarnished
story. During his youth, before he had taken Holy Orders,
Giovanni Ballista Cibé became the father of two illegitimate
children, Franceschetto and Theodorina. Burchard overtly
describes Franceschetto as, ‘ Filius Pape, etiam bastardus,


ITALY 533


prout Domina Theodorina.” Both children, as was natural
and just, were provided for well; in 1487 his father married
Franceschetto, an amiable and pleasing youth, to Maddalena,
the daughter of Lorenzo de’ Medici, whilst Theodorina was
bestowed upon a Roman noble of good estate. Admitting
the fact that his earlier years were not stainless, after that
surely there is no very great harm in all this ; indeed it shows
the affection and kindly thought of the father. Yet we have
quoted the exaggerated statements of Egidio di Viterbo!%*—
to whom Leo X was to give the Red Hat—“ Primus
[Innocentius] pontificum filios filiasque palam ostentauit,
primus eorum apertas fecit nuptias, primus domesticos
hymenzos celebrauit.”” And the unworthy epigrams of
Michaele Marullo of Constantinople,!? no mean poet it must
be confessed, are dragged from their oblivion to complete
the tale. Our own King James II was in his youth con-
fessedly lax and the Duke of Berwick was acknowledged to
be his son. But King James died a saint at Saint Germains.
It is highly indecorous to retail these scandals concerning
the Supreme Pontiff, and it is something worse than in-
decorous to repeat obscure gossip which has no basis in fact.

Innocent VIII, in spite of his few faults, was a Pope of
fine intelligence and great heart. His mildness and quiet
sweet manners especially impressed his intimates. Roscoe,
perhaps, hardly does him justice,1® although the verdict of
that admirable historian may be read and pondered with
profit when the simian chatter of more recent writers is
happily forgotten.

A Bull proceeding from such a Pontiff bears no wonted
weight. The full text of the famous ordinance is as follows:


Innocent, Bishop, Servant of the servants of God, for an
eternal remembrance.

Desiring with the most heartfelt anxiety, even as Our
Apostleship requires, that the Catholic Faith should especially
in this Our day increase and flourish everywhere, and that all
heretical depravity should be driven far from the frontiers
and bournes of the Faithful, We very gladly proclaim and
even restate those particular means and methods whereby
Our pious desire may obtain its wished effect, since when all
errors are uprooted by Our diligent avocation as by the hoe


534 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of a provident husbandman, a zeal for, and the regular
observance of, Our holy Faith will be all the more strongly
impressed upon the hearts of the faithful.

It has indeed lately come to Our ears, not without afflict-
ing Us with bitter sorrow, that in some parts of Northern
Germany, as well as in the provinces, townships, territories,
districts, and dioceses of Mainz, Cologne, Treves, Salzburg,
and Bremen, many persons of both sexes unmindful of their
own salvation and straying from the Catholic Faith, have
abandoned themselves to devils, incubi and succubi, and
by their incantations, spells, conjurations, and other accursed
charms and crafts, enormities and horrid offences, have slain
infants yet in the mother’s womb as also the offspring of
cattle, have blasted the produce of the earth, the grapes of
the vine, the fruits of trees, nay, men and women, beasts of
burthen, herd-beasts, as well as animals of other kinds,
vineyards, orchards, meadows, pasture-land, corn, wheat,
and all other cereals ; these wretches furthermore afflict and
torment men and women, beasts of burthen, herd-beasts, as
well as animals of other kinds, with terrible and piteous pains
and sore diseases, both internal and external; they hinder
men from performing the sexual act and women from
conceiving, whence husbands cannot know their wives nor
wives receive their husbands; over and above this, they
blasphemously renounce that Faith which is theirs by the
Sacrament of Baptism, and at the instigation of the Enemy
of Mankind they do not shrink from committing and perpe-
trating the foulest abominations and filthiest excesses to the
deadly peril of their own souls, whereby they outrage the
Divine Majesty and are a cause of scandal and danger to
very many. And although Our dear sons Henry Kramer and
James Sprenger, Professors of theology, of the Order of Friars
Preachers, have been by Letters Apostolic delegated as
Inquisitors of these heretical pravities, and still are Inquisi-
tors, the first in the aforesaid parts of Northern Germany,
wherein are included those aforesaid townships, districts, dio-
ceses, and other specified localities, and the second in certain
territories which lie along the borders of the Rhine, neverthe-
less not a few clerics and lay folk of those countries, seeking
too curiously to know more than concerns them, since in the
aforesaid delegatory letters there is no express and specific


ITALY 535


mention by name of these provinces, townships, dioceses, and
districts, and further since the two delegates themselves and
the abominations they are to encounter are not designated
in detailed and particular fashion, these persons are not
ashamed to contend with the most unblushing effrontery
that these enormities are not practised in those provinces,
and consequently the aforesaid Inquisitors have no legal
right to exercise their powers of inquisition in the provinces,
townships, dioceses, districts, and territories, which have
been rehearsed, and that the Inquisitors may not proceed
to punish, imprison, and penalize criminals convicted of the
heinous offences and many wickednesses which have been set
forth. Accordingly in the aforesaid provinces, townships,
dioceses, and districts, the abominations and enormities in
question remained unpunished not without open danger to
the souls of many and peril of eternal damnation.

Wherefore We, as is Our duty, being wholly desirous of
removing all hindrances and obstacles by which the good
work of the Inquisitors may be let and tarded, as also of
applying potent remedies to prevent the disease of heresy
and other turpitudes diffusing their poison to the destruction
of many innocent souls since Our zeal for the Faith especially
incites us, lest that the provinces, townships, dioceses,
districts, and territories of Germany, which We have specified,
be deprived of the benefits of the Holy Office thereto assigned,
by the tenour of these presents in virtue of Our Apostolic
authority We decree and enjoin that the aforesaid Inquisitors
be empowered to proceed to the just correction, imprisonment,
and punishment of any persons, without let or hindrance, in
every way as if the provinces, townships, dioceses, districts,
territories, yea, even the persons and their crimes in this
kind were named and particularly designated in Our letters.
Moreover, for greater surety We extend these letters deputing
this authority to cover all the aforesaid provinces, townships,
dioceses, districts, and territories, persons, and crimes newly
rehearsed, and We grant permission to the aforesaid
Inquisitors, to one separately or to both, as also to Our dear
son John Gremper, priest of the diocese of Constance, Master
of Arts, their notary, or to any other public notary, who shall
be by them, or by one of them, temporarily delegated to those
provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, and aforesaid terri-


586 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


tories, to proceed, according to the regulations of the Inquisi-
tion, against any persons of whatsoever rank and high estate,
correcting, mulcting, imprisoning, punishing, as their crimes
merit, those whom they have found guilty, the penalty being
adapted to the offence. Moreover they shall enjoy a full and
perfect faculty of expounding and preaching the word of God
to the faithful, so often as opportunity may offer and it may
seem good to them, in each and every parish church of the
said provinces, and they shall freely and lawfully perform any
rites or execute any business which may appear advisable in
the aforesaid cases. By Our supreme authority We grant
them anew full and complete faculties.

At the same time by Letters Apostolic We require Our
venerable Brother, the Bishop of Strasburg [Albrecht von
Bayern, 1478-1506], that he himself shall announce, or by
some other or others cause to be announced the burthen of
Our Bull, which he shall solemnly publish when and so often
as he deems it necessary, or when he shall be requested so to do
by the Inquisitors or by one of them. Nor shall he suffer them
in disobedience to the tenor of these presents to be molested
or hindered by any authority whatsoever, but he shall threaten
all who endeavour to hinder or harass the Inquisitors, all
who oppose them, all rebels, of whatsoever rank, estate,
position, pre-eminence, dignity, or any condition they may
be, or whatsoever privilege of exemption they may claim,
with excommunication, suspension, interdict, and yet more
terrible penalties, censures, and punishment, as may seem
good to him, and that without any right of appeal, and if he
will he may by Our authority aggravate and renew these
penalties as often as he list, calling in, if so please him, the
help of the secular arm.

Non obstantibus . . . Let no man therefore . . . But if
any dare to do so, which God forbid, let him know that upon
him will fall the wrath of Almighty God, and of the Blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul.


Given at Rome, at S. Peter’s, on the 9 December of the
Year of the Incarnation of Our Lord one thousand four hun-
dred and eighty-four, in the first Year of Our Pontificate.19


On 18 June, 1485, Innocent VIII again recommended the
Inquisitors Henry Kramer and James Sprenger to Berthold,


ITALY 537


Archbishop of Mainz, in the Bull which commences Pro
causa fidei et summi dei honore cupientes negotium inquisi-
tionis heretice prauitatis, words of the deepest significance as
showing that in the judgement of the Pope, at any rate,
sorcery and heresy were one. On the same date a similar Bull
was sent to the Archduke Sigismund of Austria in which
Abbot John of Wingarten in the diocese of Constance is
warmly praised for his zeal. The Abbot himself was
addressed in a brief issued the same day. “It hath been
told Us with what zeal thou dost undertake the defence of
the Faith against heretics, and with what kindliness and
help thou dost aid the Inquisitors. Most highly do We
commend thy devotion, the piety and sincerity of thy heart.
Thou dost indeed perform the part of a good and orthodox
Prelate; 7°

On 30 September, 1486, Innocent VIII issued a Bull to
Paolo Zane, Bishop of Brescia, and Antonio di Brescia, O.P.,
the Inquisitor for Lombardy, and this again emphasizes the
heresy which is so inevitably commingled with sorcery ;
“contra nonnullos utriusque sexus hereticos, ut accepimus,
quos culpabiles ut hereticos impcenitentes repertos poena
debita iuris puniendos condemnauit,” a most striking
phrase (Certain heretics of both sexes, as we are informed,
whom as guilty and impenitent heretics the just laws rightly
condemned.)

Alexander VI (Roderigo Borja) on 381 January, 1500,
repeats almost the same phrases with even added stress:
‘“* multos nequissimi hostis uenenis infectos contra catholicam
ueritatem in uerba blasphemize prorumpere et in praua
hereticorum dogmata impudenter .. . insurgere” and
“ quamplurimi illarum regionum in damnatas Waldensium
hereses prolabuntur.”’ Nothing could be plainer. In 1501
the Pope sums up the evils of Witchcraft very concisely in a
brief?! to the Lombard Inquisitor Fra Angelo of Verona, O.P.,
when he writes: ‘‘ Inasmuch as We have been informed that
in the province of Lombardy various persons of both sexes use
and practise various magical arts and devilish abominations,
and by their poisons and other spells have committed many
heinous crimes, destroying both men and beasts and blasting
fruitful fields and spreading horrid heresies so that great
scandal is given, We are determined in accordance with the


588 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


solemn duty of executing Our Apostolic office bestowed upon
us from on high, to crush—With the help of Almighty God—
all such enormities, to put an end to these heresies and
scandals.’’22, A noble and truly magnificent exordium.

In a brief to Giorgio de’ Casali, O.P., Inquisitor at Cremona,
Julius II (Giuliano della Rovere) speaks of “ persone
utriusque sexus ... certam sectam facientes, fidem.. .
abnegantes, . . . ecclesiasticis et presertim eucharistie
sacramentis abutentes, diabolum in suum dominum et
patronum assumentes eique obedientiam et reuerentiam
exhibentes.”” In this there is more than a hint of the
abominations of the Black Mass, to which, perhaps, the
Pontiff was unwilling to refer more plainly. The date of this
document does not appear, but it may be approximated by
several references in the Dominican registers to Giorgio de’
Casali. ‘‘ 1502, April 25, Brescia. Ciuitas Placentina et
Cremonensis cum suis diocesebus separantur a ciuitate
Papiensi et diocesi quoad officium inquisitionis, et magister
Georgius de Casali instituitur inquisitor in ciuitate Placentina
et Cremonensi.” And in the Register of the Generals under
19 June, 1512, Rome, we have: ‘“‘M. Georgius de Casali
instituitur inquisitor super Bergomo, Cremona, Crema, et
Brixia cum eorum districtibus.”

The Mecenas of Renaissance Humanism, Leo X (Giovanni
de’ Medici), on 15 February, 1521, issued a long and weighty
Bull to the Bishops and Inquisitors of the Venetian republic,
of Bergamo and Brescia, in which the Pontiff with dignity
and restraint denounces ‘“‘quoddam hominum genus
perniciosissimum ac damnatissimum labe heretica, per quam
suscepto renunciabatur baptismatis sacramento, dominum
abnegabat et Satanz, cuius consilio seducebantur, corpora
et animas conferebant.” Of these ‘“‘ quot redire ad ecclesiz
unitatem uellent, clementer suscipiendi,” but those who
obstinately persist in their misdeeds must suffer the penalties
enacted ‘‘ contra maleficos et sortilegos ac a fide apostantes,
prout criminis postulauerit qualitas.”’

In the same strain sadly writes the holy and ascetic
Adrian VI (Adrian Dedel) addressing Modesto Vincentino,
the Dominican Inquisitor of Como. The Bull was issued on
20 July, 1528, and the long-considered sentences throb with
the anxiety and agony that were wellnigh breaking that


ITALY 539


fatherly heart. ‘‘ Presertim eucharistie sacramentis
abutentes,” what a ery of sorrow can be heard in those four
words! The full text of this ordinance, a document of great
importance in the history of Witchcraft, runs as follows :


To Our beloved Son Modesto Vincentino, of the Order of
Preachers.


Yet a little while ago, as thou didst so clearly make known
to Us, Our predecessor Pope Julius II of happy memory,
learned, to his bitter sorrow and sore grief, from George de’
Casali, Professor of the Order of Friars Preachers and
accredited Inquisitor in the diocese of Cremona to punish
heretical pravity, that in certain parts of Lombardy and
especially in those districts in which the said George was
accredited Inquisitor, there were found to be many persons
of both sexes, who forgetful of their own souls’ salvation and
straying far from the Catholic Faith, made a certain sect,
utterly denying the Faith which they received in Holy
Baptism, spurning beneath their feet the Holy Cross and
treating it with vilest contumely, above all abusing the
Divine Sacrament of the Altar, taking the Devil to be their
Lord and Master, promising him worship and obedience, and
with accursed incantations, charms, sortilege, and other foul
magic rites ever doing grave harm and hurt to men, animals,
and the fruit of the earth, ensuing and wreaking numberless
other abominations, enormities, and heinous crimes at the
instigation of the Devil as aforesaid, to the deadly peril of
their own souls, giving offence to the Divine Majesty of God,
affording also an ill example and grave scandal to many.
Yet when (as the aforesaid George declared) the Inquisitor,
George de’ Casali, in the course of his duties in the said
districts to which he was accredited, would have proceeded
against these wretches, some there were, clerics as well as lay
folk of these parts, who seeking to know more than was their
business most rashly and naughtily presumed to affirm that
such offences did not fall under the jurisdiction of the
Inquisitor George, attempting moreover to stir up hatred
against him among the populace and to hinder his efforts,
which indeed they did then hinder, wherefore the aforesaid
persons who practised blasphemies and impieties remained
unpunished and by their examples and precepts they kept


540 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


continually inducing others to use like abominations which
caused no small mischief and shame to the Faith, danger to
immortal souls, and scandal to very many. Our predecessor
accordingly being altogether loath that the execution of the
Inquisitor’s office should be hindered in any way at all and
thuswise the poisonous taint of vile heresy be more widely
spread, enjoined and commanded by a Brief addressed to the
said George, that as Inquisitor he should take full cognizance
of such infamies which fell within his jurisdiction and that he
should exercise and employ to their uttermost his inquisitorial
powers against all and sundry of whatsoever estate or rank
they might happen to be, and that it was his duty, full power
being assigned to him, to correct and punish the offences of
all whom he might find guilty of the aforesaid enormities, the
charges being heard by him and the Vicars of the local
Ordinary, whensoever they wished to sit as assessors, and the
judgements being delivered as is decreed in the case of other
heretics according to the canon and civil law. Any persons
who dared oppose this procedure were to be punished by
ecclesiastical censures and other legal remedies. But those,
who in regard to these matters lent him advice, help, or
favour, Our predecessor decreed should gain and enjoy the
same indulgences as those who bear the Cross against other
heretics then gained and enjoyed according to the Apostolic
indult conceded to them, as is more amply set forth in the
particular Brief. To this We append a further declaration,
that not only do impieties and crimes of this kind against the
Catholic Faith and the Christian Religion come under the
jurisdiction of the Inquisitor at Cremona, but in all other
districts and dioceses they now come under the jurisdiction
of the other Inquisitors of the Lombard congregation of the
said Order. For inasmuch as they are the same offences they
shall meet with the same treatment and punishment accord-
ing to the tenor of the same letters. Wherefore thou, who
art, as thou dost show Us, the accredited Inquisitor of these
crimes in the city of Como, hast, in thine own name as in the
names of all other Inquisitors of heresy of this Order and
Congregation wheresoever they be stationed or accredited,
humbly made supplication that We would vouchsafe to extend
unto you the aforesaid letter with certain additions and
other provisions now conveniently to be made. We there-


ITALY 541


fore lending a gracious ear to this thine prayer, by Our
Apostolic authority and by these presents extend the aforesaid
letter with all that is contained therein in every clause and
proviso to thee as also to the other Inquisitors of the Order
and Congregation, as well those who are now accredited as
those who shall be accredited at some future date to all
perpetuity, as if the letter were directed and delivered to thee
and to each several person of the aforesaid Inquisitors. This
letter, then, with all the benefits thereby conferred We
concede to thee and to them. Notwithstanding any hind-
rance, let, or bar, which Our predecessor Julius in the afore-
said letter was minded should not hinder, let, or bar, and
notwithstanding aught else whatsoever to the contrary. And
because it would be indeed a hard task to convey the present
letter to the several places, where perchance it might be
necessary that the provisions thereof should be recognized
and accepted, it is Our good pleasure and We decree by Our
Apostolic authority that when it has been transcribed by the
hand of any public notary and signed and sealed with the
seal of some member of the Curia or some Dignitary of the
Church as a token of surety, should such need arise, the same
respect is thereto to be shown as would be shown to these
presents were they published or posted.


Given at Rome, at S. Peter’s, under the Fisherman’s Ring,
20 July, 1523, in the first year of Our Pontificate.?°


With complete conviction is the heresy of Witchcraft
recognized in a brief of Clement VII (Giulio de’ Medici)
addressed on 19 January, 1524, to the Governor of Bologna,
Bishop Altobello Averoldo di Pola (1497-1581), which recom-
mends the Parmesan Inquisitor, Fra Jeronimo of Faenza, O.P.,
and in unmistakable phrase speaks ‘“‘ de heresi strigatus ”
being directed against ‘“‘ quosdam infectes predicta heresi.”
Upon this the learned Bartolomeo de Spina in his Questio
de strigibus comments: ‘ Assuredly Our Most Holy Lord
would not have indited this brief nor would he have issued
these injunctions, if such persons, witches to wit, who are
declared to be heretics, were not in very truth heretics, or if
these enormities that they use and practise, on account of
which they are judged to be heretics, were but empty
illusions of the Devil.”?4 We have also a later brief of


542 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Clement VII in 1526, where his injunctions are reiterated and
reinforced.

Many of the banditti who infested the Campagna during
the middle years of the sixteenth century were addicted to
black magic, and a document?> which describes the times
of Gregory XIII (Ugo Buoncompagni, elected Pope 13 May,
1572, died 1585) tells us how gangs of outlaws “ non semel
sacra supellectile e templis direpta, augustissimam et sacra-
tissimam eucharistiam in siluas et latibula asportarunt,
qua ad magica flagitia et execrementa abuterentur.” Two
centuries later, the Buxen, an immense secret society which
from 1736 until 1779 terrorized last districts of Germany
and Brabant by plunder and brigandage combined Satanism
with wholesale robbery and murder. They used to meet
after nightfall to attend a Black Mass, which was generally
celebrated at one of three ruined chapels, Saint Rose, near
Sittardt; another at Saint Leonart, near Roldyck;
another at Oermond, by the Maas. It is said these wretches
never passed a church without breaking in to desecrate and
defile the Tabernacle.

Among the most important of the Papal pronouncements
upon the subject of Witchcraft is the long and weighty
Constitution, Celi et Terre Creator Deus,** issuedon 5 January,
1586, by that great and extraordinarily able ruler Sixtus V
(Felice Peretti, O.F.M.), against those who practise the
Art of Judicial Astrology, and any other kind of divination,
as well as those who read and retain treatises dealing with
such matters. The Pontiff dwells at some length upon the
evils which arise from the credulous consultations of fortune-
tellers and astrologers, aptly quoting the divine words, ‘‘ Non
est uestrum scire tempora uel momenta, que Pater posuit in
sua potestate.” He points out that the future cannot be
foretold by man, and all such prognostications are ‘“ false
and vain, merely published and promulgated by the cunning
of wicked men and the deceits of devils, from whose work,
counsel, or aid, all divination is derived. . . . For, indeed,
what knowledge they possess is not from any. divination nor
from any true insight into the future, but ariseth from the
shrewder wisdom of their spiritual nature, and is acquired in
certain other ways not clear to man’s intelligence, which is
less perspicacious. Wherefore there can be no doubt at all


ITALY 543


that in the inquiry after and foretelling of future events and
happenings which may chance, the work of the Devil is most
deceitfully and intimately concerned, so that by his craft and
wiles he may turn wretched men away from the path of
salvation, and entangle them in the snares of perdition.”
Wherefore all professed occultists who cast nativities “ such
most especially are Astrologers, those who were once called
Mathematicians [Mathematici in its technical sense2’],
Genethliacs, Horoscopers, and Planetaries” are to be
utterly avoided and eschewed. Various methods of divination
are in some detail enumerated to be condemned: “ For
many, not without some secret correspondence with the
Demon, or at least by some tacit pact, use and practise
Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, Pyromancy, Ono-
mancy, Cheiromancy, Necromancy, and other spells and
magic arts, nay they do not hesitate to employ such unlawful
methods of divining as by small dice, by grains of wheat,
by beans which are thrown in a certain way, [i.e. by astragalo-
mancy, by krithomancy, by kuamomancy]. And some there
are also who enter into communion with the Dead and
compact themselves with Hell; who further busy them-
selves with accursed sciences that they may discover
treasures, or that they may ensue and commit other enor-
mities, even though they must needs then expressly bind
themselves by a bond to the Devil’s slavery at the dire
hazard of their souls, and these wretches will employ the
most abhorred charms of black magic, the properties of
sorcery, and poisons too; they draw circles and trace the
dark characters of the pit. They evoke and consult demons
from whom answers are sought and obtained; they offer
prayers to them and incense, or the smoke of noxious herbs, or
fumigations with impious sacrifices; they light candles in
their honour ; they most blasphemously abuse sacred things,
to wit the Sacraments, or Sacramentals ; they worship them
with latria, genuflections, and other ceremonies of profane
adoration ; they venerate and reverence them; they make
or cause to be made rings, or mirrors, or small phials, in order
that they may (as they suppose) enchain or enclose herein
evil spirits from whom they will demand and obtain answers
to their questionings.’? The Inquisitors are straitly charged
and directed to search out and deal with all offenders, ‘‘ even


544 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


although in many of the aforesaid cases they have hitherto
either not taken measures against the offenders, or were
unable to take measures’; whilst the ordinaries are to
assist especially by suppressing and destroying grimoires,
‘all books and every book, volume, and pamphlet of this
kind, treating of Judicial Astrology, Geomancy, Hydromancy,
Pyromancy, Onomancy, Cheiromancy, Necromancy, Goety,
or in which are described or contained fortune-telling,
poisons, augurisms, auspicies, abominable incantations, and
devilish superstitions.” 2* Care is to be taken that no works
of value dealing with medicine, navigation, the natural
sciences, and the like are mistakenly attacked under this rule.
Among the latest Papal ordinances directed against Witch-
craft is the famous Constitution Omnipotentis Det issued by
Gregory XV (Alessandro Ludovisi) on 20 March, 1623.
A changed point of view is clearly shown. It will be seen
that former punishments are lessened ; the death penalty is
decreed only for those who were proved to have entered into
a formal compact with the Devil, and to have committed
homicide by infernal assistance. Since the Great Schism of
the sixteenth-century sorcery, although a frequent con-
comitant of, was not at all necessarily coincident with heresy
as had been the position in earlier days. Had such continued
to be the case the Pontiff would not have hesitated to declare
it, for he was ready to take drastic measures against the
Huguenots, and in his own just phrase Geneva was “‘ non solo
come piena di uomini appestati ma come catedra di pesti-
lenza.”’*® With holy zeal he urged Louis XIII and the Duke
of Savoy ‘‘ di domare in ribellati heretici.”” From every point
of view, then, the Constitution is of exceptional interest.


The Constitution of our Most Holy Lord Gregory the
Fifteenth against those who practise the Black Art or
Witchcrafts.


Gregory Pope XV. Ad perpetuam rei memoriam.


We, who although all unworthy, fulfil here on earth the
office of Almighty God Our Saviour, Who, in order to free
man from the snares of the Devil, vouchsafed to suffer upon
the Cross, according to the duties incumbent upon Us and to
Us entrusted from above by Our Apostolic servage, are
instant with the utmost zeal and care to accomplish Our


ITALY 545


task, to wit the defence of the Lord’s flock redeemed with an
inestimable price against the malice and deceits of Satan, by
employing the divine resource of this same authority which
Heaven has bestowed, whensoever and whereas we deem it
may be necessary and healthful in the Lord. For of a truth
there are some who, wholly forgetful of their own estate,
and of the solemn promises of them made, when they were
enrolled in the flock of Christ by the Sacred lavacre of
spiritual regeneration, have not shrunk from wholly giving
themselves up to Satan, whose wiles, wickednesses, abomina-
tions, and evil works they renounced, nay, more, following
in the footsteps of their Master, who never ceases to lay
snares for men by that mortal hate with which he harrieth
mankind, they do not fear to hurt their neighbour in many a
way, and assuredly to damn their own souls. Wherefore,
in order that such heinous enormities may be abhorred of all
Christian folk, we decree that such flagrancy be punished
with sad and severe penalties. Accordingly by Our Own
proper Motion, and of certain knowledge, and mature con-
sideration, as also from the fulness of Our Apostolic Power,
by the tenor of these presents, We decree, We ordain and
command, that if it be proven that anyone has made a
compact with the Devil, and by apostasizing from the Faith,
either by the black art or by charms, hath so harmed any
single person or several persons, that owing to the black art
or to charms death ensued, even if it be the first offence, he
shall be delivered to the secular Courts to meet the just
punishment of his crimes ; And more, if anyone apostasizing
in similar manner, hath made a compact with the Devil, as
afore rehearsed, and hath practised any magic art or spell,
whereby, albeit death did not ensue, yet there did follow
sickness, divorcements, sexual impotehce, or some serious
harm to cattle, fruits, or crops of any kind, he shall be duly
incarcerated and strictly held in durance, or confined for life
in the prisons of the Inquisition wheresoever the Holy Office
is established. If anyone hath cognizance of any such
criminals he is bound to declare them to the Bishop or to the
Inquisitor. And these notwithstanding any constitutions, or
Apostolic ordinances, or other statutes, or anything of
whatever sort to the contrary. We also require that these
presents shall be transcribed, as also printed, and subscribed


546 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


by the hand of a Public Notary, and sealed with the seal of an
Ecclesiastical dignitary, and that they shall then have the
same weight everywhere as these presents carry if they are
exposed or published. These presents, after they have been
affixed to the doors of the Basilicas of S. John Lateran and
of the Prince of the Apostles in Vatican, as also upon the
Column in the Campo di Fiori, shall bind and law all and
single whom they may concern, and all persons shall be held
to have knowledge of and be acquainted with their contents.
Given at Rome at S. Peter’s under the Fisherman’s Ring, upon
the 20 March, MDCXXIII, in the Third Year of Our


Pontificate.
S. CARDINAL OF S. SUSANNA.?°


[Rome: From the Printing Offices of the Apostolic
Chamber, M.D.C.XXIII.]


It has sometimes been stated by scholars*? that this
Constitution, Omnipotentis Dei, of Gregory XV was the last
Papal enactment against Witchcraft, but this is incorrect,
for on 1 April, 1631, Urban VIII (Maffeo Barberini) issued
his Constitution Inscrutabilis iudiciorum Dei altitudo**
“Contra Astrologos Iudicianos, qui de statu Reipublice
Christianz, uel Sedis Apostolic, seu uita Romani Pontificis,
aut elus consanguineorum Iudicia facere, necnon eos qui illos
desuper consulere preesumpserint.”’ The Pontiff reiterates
the measures promulgated by Sixtus V, and adds that any
person of any rank whatsoever, even be he count or duke,
who consults fortune-tellers concerning affairs of state,
particularly the length of time Christ’s reigning Vicar may
live, is ipso facto excommunicate, and upon conviction will
be condemned to death with confiscation of all his goods. The
penalties are insisted upon with solemn emphasis and in some
detail.

As the German witches were supposed to hold high Sabbat
amid the Hartz Mountains, on the Brocken or Blocksberg,
whilst the Swedish covens assembled at their Blockula, the
French favoured Puy-de-Déme, and the English the Wrekin
or Malking Tower, so an old walnut tree of dense shade and
mighty girth near Benevento was reputed to be the general
rendezvous of all the witches in Italy, where they forgathered
for the treguenda. It is certain that from very early times


ITALY 547


dark beliefs became associated with walnut trees, which were
considered of ill-omen for a traveller to catch sight of unless
the spell was broken by pelting them with stones. And so
Ovid in his poem Nux commences


Nux ego iuncta uiz, quum sim sine crimine uite
A populo saxis pretereunte petor.


The Nu was, perhaps, suggested by an epigram, formerly
attributed to Plato, which may be found in the Greek
Anthology :%3
Kivodinv xaptnv pe tapepyopévors édtrevoav
Tlawrt, AGoBArjrov matyviov edoroyduys.


The last line is significant :
Avodaipwv ex’ eunv bBpw éxaproddpovv.


Pope Paschal II (Rainerius, O.S.B., 1099-1118) ordered a
large walnut tree which stood in the Piazza del Popolo to be
hewn down and burned owing to the gross superstitions to
which it had given rise. There is a pamphlet by Peter of
Piperno, De Nuce Maga Beneuentana, which gives in some
detail the history of and many legends connected with the
wizard walnut tree of Benevento. He mentions the curious
fact that the nuts were triangular in shape: ‘“‘ qua tragu-
laribus lineis emittebat.” The original, or at least a very
ancient, walnut tree was destroyed by S. Barbatus (663).
Here was worshipped with mysterious rites in Lombard times
a golden serpent. This the Saint melted in a crucible and of
the metal he made a sacred paten which was preserved up
till the time of the French invasion in 1799. The tree was
replanted in the eighth century, and during a local trial for
sorcery in 1519 a witch named Violanta confessed that in the
company of other Satanists she had performed certain
ceremonies under this tree. A witness, Alberto Alutario, who
passed the place late at night, testified that he had seen a
numerous assembly of persons there. They were all carrying


lanthorns or tapers.
Dom Piccini in his Ottava della Notte has the following


lines, thus translated by C. G. Leland :
In Benevento a nut-tree stands
And thither by night from many lands,
Over the waters and on the wind,
Came witches flying of every kind,


548 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


On goats, and boars, and bears, and cats,
Some upon broomsticks, some like bats,
Howling, hurtling, hurrying, all

Come to the tree at the master’s call.


A current Neapolitan proverb says :


Sott’ acqua e sotta viento
Sott’ e nuce ’e Veneviento.


The Papal Bulls and briefs of the fifteenth century are fre-
quently and repeatedly directed to the Inquisitors of the dio-
ceses of Como, Bergamo, and Brescia, since in Northern Italy
Witchcraft was chiefly localized among the Lombard valleys
of the Alps. This was notorious, and is often alluded to
by Italian writers. Thus Bandello (III, 52) speaks of:
‘‘'Val Camonica, ove si dice essere di molte streghe. It
was Lombardy where, as we have seen, the two floods of
Manichezan heresy from the East converged and commingled
as they swept into Europe, and for centuries the unfortunate
province became a pullulating nursery of Satanism and every
monstrous evil. The Italian strega was as loathsome as the
vilest of the foul Northern sisterhood, nay, she was, if possible,
even more dangerous, since she studied deeply the properties
of simples and poisonous plants, the chemistry of drugs and
abortives, and when sorcery and maledictions failed venom
was employed to complete the work. Heretics, poisoners,
quack-vendors, blackmailers, bawds, these hags and their
accomplices strove to make a hell upon earth, and small
wonder then that the tribunals, both ecclesiastical and
civil, strove to stamp out the pestilence with relentless
severity.

During the fifteenth century the prosecution of witches
throughout the North of Italy was pursued with unrelent-
ing severity. Agnes Arizonelli, of Val Leventina, St. Gothard,
confessed that she had invoked the Devil, worshipped him
under the form of a black goat, and used spells to devastate
fields by storm and hail (1482). In 1455 a witch was burned
at Locarno at the command of the Count of Locarno. In the
same year the Inquisitor at Brescia appealed to the Venetians
to help him in his campaign against the Satanists of Val
Camonica, who defiled the Blessed Sacrament and adored
the Demon as God, offering human sacrifices of infants. In


ITALY 549


the following thirty years we find continual witch-burnings
in Lombardy and Piedmont ; in 1472 three women were sent
to the stake at Forno-Rivara ; two at Levone in 1474 ; five
at Forno in 1475; whilst larger centres show an increasing
number of condemnations.

There is no grimmer portrayal of Italian Witchcraft to be
found than that depicted by the fantastical Girolamo Folengo
(Merlinus Cocaius), and the fact that his poems are composed
in Maccaronic verse makes the details only more ghastly and
more shameful. It is impossible to question their truth, the
sincerity and serious intention of the writer. ‘There is,”
says John Addington Symonds, “no mistaking the veri-
similitude of the picture he drew. All the uncleanliness of a
diseased imagination, all the extravagances of wanton desire,
all the consequences of domestic unchastity—incest, in-
fanticide, secret assassination, concealment of births—are
traced to this one cause and identified by him with witch-
craft.’ 34

Folengo, who was born in 1491 at Cipada, a village of the
Mantuan district, after some wild and reckless years of
undergraduate life at Bologna, entered in December, 1507, a
Benedictine monastery of the Cassinese Congregation, which
title had been adopted only three years before by the Congre-
gation of S. Justina of Padua. In 1509 Folengo was professed
at the abbey of S. Euphemia at Brescia, when he changed his
name Girolamo to Teofilo, and it is by this latter he is most
generally known. In 1515 he broke his vows, flying from the
cloister, and for the next eleven years he seems to have led a
wandering and, as might have been expected, an unhappy
life, 25 until in a spirit of deep penitence he resumed his habit,
to die at last in December, 1544, at the house of S. Croce di
Campere, near Padua.

The Maccaronea*® first appeared at Venice in 1519, and the
Orlandino,?? a burlesque of Boiardo and Ariosto, in 1526.
The first is a mock epic, written in an extraordinary jargon
where plebeian Italian and the Mantuan dialect to boot are
mingled with the classic and medieval Latin of sonorous
hexameters. It tells the adventures of Baldus, son of the
peerless Paladin Guido and of the Princess Baldovina,
daughter of the King of France. In Maccaronea XXI Baldus
makes his way to the court of Gulfora, Reine du Sabbat, the


550 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Scotch Queen of Elphin, or Elfhame, Scortum Luciferi. He has
already denounced her in trenchant terms :


Olim quarundam uetularum parua striarum
Turba dabat poenas meritis incensa casottis,

Sed modo non tantum confectz tempore uecchize
Gattas, Montones, Capras, Porcosque caualcant,
Uerum Magnates plures, Dominique togati,

Et qui dant populis in sacro iura senatu

Se sub Gulforea statuunt ditione regendos.
Obseruant zobias,** ungunt sua membra cirottis,
Quos ego spe cauas tueor transire per istas,
Namque suam properant ad cortezare*® Madonnam,
Gulfora que dicta est, reliquarum prima striarum,
Scortaque Luciferi, tot certe digna casottis, *°
Quot lapides terree, Maris unde, sidera cceli.41


It is very significant to find here more than a hint that
whilst wretched old beldames, malicious, doting, miserably
poor, were burned wholesale as witches, often the sorcerers
of high rank escaped untouched and undetected. It is only
fair to say that the authorities, both ecclesiastical and civil,
knew no distinctions when punishing this sorcery.

Baldus having a magic stone “ scondificam ” penetrates
unseen into the most secret chambers of the infernal palace
where Gulfora holds her Sabbat. Here he finds a crowd of
witches compounding foul philtres in hell’s laboratory :


Taxum, cambrossen, squillas, Aconita, cicutas.
Electuaris complentur bissola mille,
Compositis, heu heu, nigro de puluere mortis :
De spuma zatti*® de ladri carne picati,

De pulmone asini, uirda de pelle Ranocchi,
De lue matricis, de Infantis sanguine ceeci.
De Cadaueribus tumulorum, deque sagina
Uirginule, de felle bouis, de lacte sigorum,

De sudore patris proprii, de proh scelus! alba
Paschalis ceree candelis*’, deque sacrato
Chrismate, de Christi dono Baptismatis unda.


Folengo refuses to give further details :


Pingunt mixturas cum sacris mille profanas,

Quas uti componant, describere sorte ualerem,
Sed metuo, errores si quando reprehendere uellem,
Errorum fierem preceptor.


It is interesting to compare Jean Bodin’s sharp chiding of
John Weyer, whom he sternly reproves for having copied


ITALY 551


into the De Prestigiis Demonum a number of charms and
spells, the mischief of which might thus be propagated.

The loathsome ingredients, yew, privet, aconite, hemlock,
the venom of a toad, the flesh of a brigand’s parboiled limbs,
the skin of a green frog, the blood of an infant, dust from a
grave, and the rest, can be paralleled over and over again in
the confessions of the witches and from the pages of the
demonologists. The “slips of yew,” “root of hemlock,”
“ swelter’d venom.” “ lizard’s leg,”’ “ toe of frog,” “ finger of
birth-strangled babe” of the cauldron in Macbeth at once
leap to the memory.

Baldus finds books of spells and grimoires in Gulfora’s
bower :


Librazzos aperit, uel apertos lectitat omnes,

Nil nisi lethales considerat esse recettas.
Quomodo Garzones* faturentur, amare negantes,
Quomodo adulterium uxoris uir noscere possit.
Quomodo uirginez cogantur amare puelle.
Quomodo non tumeat mulier cornando Maritum.
Quomodo si tumuit, Fantinum mingit abortum.
Quomodo uix natos uitient sua fascina puttos.
Quomodo deficient odiati membra mariti.
Quomodo de birlo mentem, de corpore uitam
Eiusdem tollant, ualeant ut pascere Mcechos.
Feetentes ibi sunt, ranzz,*> uecchiseque striazze,
Que uadunt, redeunt portantes Bissola*® circum.


This catalogue of erotic enchantments is very striking,
more particularly when we remember that in Italy the witch
was continually resorted to for some charm or elixir to cause
love or hate, and that any mad overwhelming passion, any
sudden sexual obsession was immediately attributed to magic
and supernatural influences. Thus in the long confession of
her amours with Gianpaolo Osio Virginia Maria de Leyva, a
nun of the convent of S. Margherita at Monza, acknowledged
that she had first entertained his addresses in the year 1599
or 1600, and as soon as she admitted him into the cloister he
made her take a little jewel in her mouth. This was a white
load-stone, blessed by the confessor of the convent, Paolo
Arrigone, who was privy to the intrigue, and it was declared
to be a powerful love-charm. That Virginia believed she was
bewitched is obvious from her own words : “‘ Some diabolical
force compelled me to go to the window overlooking his


552 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


garden.” She endeavoured to struggle against the influence
of her seducer. ‘‘ But the sorceries with which I was sur-
rounded, prevailed. In my bed were found the bones of the
dead, hooks of iron, and many other things of which the nuns
were well informed.’’4? In 1582-83 when Vittoria Accoram-
boni was separated from the Duke of Bracciano and living in
enforced retirement at Gubbio, her brother Marcello clung
ever at his master’s side to keep alive the flame should it
seem to cool, and gossip freely chattered of a mysterious
Greek sibyl whom he had hired with much gold to brew those
potions and possets which foster desire.

In Galfora’s domain there was a school of Witchcraft where
Baldus saw hideous beldames instructing young damsels in
all the lore of hell.

Est locus alter ibi ter centum brachia longus,

Quo docet heu quantas ! uecchiarum turma puellas
Sunt ibi Dongellas scarcossze*’ mille docentes,
Suntque Pedantrices in despensare Triacas,

Et pedagogarum dant ritus more tenendos :
Qualiter obsequio*® Ueneris sua uota sequantur,
Qualiter Infantes tenerini membra®® smedullent,
Qualiter ungantur, moueantque tonitrua cceli.
Qualiter et segetes, et uites grandine tollant.
Qualiter in uarias formas sua corpora mutent.
Qualiter efficiant®! quod amantis forma diabli est.
Qualiter et Christum renegent, Christique batesmum.
Qualiter alliciant Pretos, sibi tradere sanctam
Eucharistiam, aut alicuius membra Beati.

Qualiter, ah facinus! Crucifixum stercore turpent.

Even to-day a dark superstition lingers in Romagna
Toscana that Witchcraft runs in families, and that the secrets
of sorcery are perpetuated by word of mouth, the young
being carefully instructed and drilled in this horrid business
by their older relatives. The fact that the newly made
witches learned spells and runes from those who had been long
initiated is alluded to in the trials of all countries. During
the investigation of the Lancastrian cases under James I
it was acknowledged by the accused that ‘‘ old Demdike.” con-
sistently brought up her children and grandchildren to be
witches, and had been their daily monitress in evil. Elizabeth
Device, her daughter; Alison, James, and Jennet Device, her
grandchildren; all testified against her. Nor was Elizabeth
Device slow to carry on the tradition, for Thomas Potts


ITALY 558


apostrophizes her in the following trenchant terms: “O
barbarous and inhumane monster beyond example ; so farre
from sensible understanding of thy owne miserie as to bring
thy owne naturall children into mischiefe and bondage, and
thyselfe to bea witnesse vpone the gallowes, to see thy owne
children, by thy deuillish instructions, hatcht vp in villanie
and witchcraft, to suffer with thee, euen in the beginning of
their time a shamefull and untimely death! ’’52 In some
instances it seems to have been the Chief Officer of the
district, whose business it was to prime new adherents in the
art and practice of sorcery. ‘‘ He delivers unto his Proselite,
and so to the rest, the Rules of his Art, instructing them in the
manner of hurting and helping, and acquainting them with
such medicines and poysons as are vsuall herevnto.’’53
Every detail of this vile poem which Folengo recites is to be
found again and again in the trials of every country and every
age. We might almost think his lines a paraphrase of the
Decretal Epistle of Pope Adrian VI who denounced the
witches “as a Sect deviating from the Catholic Faith, deny-
ing their Baptism, and showing Contempt of the Ecclesiastical
Sacraments, treading Crosses under their Feet, and, taking
the Devil for their Lord, destroying the Fruits of the Earth
by their Enchantments, Sorceries, and Superstitions.’ 4
The horrible profanation of the Host, of which Folengo
speaks, points to the blasphemies of the Black Mass, and the
defilement of the Crucifix is akin to the mysteries of the
Templars.
All the foulness and stench of the Sabbat froths and

foments before Galfora’s throne :

Turpia dico, iocis lasciuis, atque pruritu,

Turpia nequitiis blandis, luxaque petulco,

Turpia mollitie, Uenerisque libidine, scortis,

Pellicibus, tandem quicquid patet esse Lupanar.,
Obscene forms of Incubi and Succubas mingle with the
throng :


Leggiadros iuunenes, bellos, facieque uenustos,
Stringatos, agiles, quos iudicat esse Diablos,
Humanum piliasse caput, moresque decentes.
Conspicit innumeras circum scherzare puellas.


Their eyes glowing with bestial lust the witches adorn them-
selves for demoniac accouplements. They bathe their arms


554 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and necks with milk-white fucus, they trick their lashes with
kohl, they carmine their lips, and spread maquillage upon
their cheeks,


Incrispantque comas propter placuisse Diablis.


I have dwelt thus long and in such detail upon Folengo’s
poem and quoted thus freely his bizarre hexameters because
I feel that here we have a contemporary picture of a rank
social evil supplied with photographic exactitude by a closely
observant and uncompromising realist.5> It is, in fine, a
most valuable document, every detail of which can be
authenticated and paralleled with the evidence of a thousand
trials.

Although Witchcraft was extensively practised throughou
the length and breadth of Italy we have not the almost
excessive wealth of material for an intensive study of Witch-
craft such as we meet with in England during the century
1560-1660, in Scotland, and in France. This is not to say
that there are not very many records of exceptional interest
and importance, and it is scarcely hazardous to suppose that
many more must lie unexamined and unedited in the libraries
of noble houses and the archives of the great cities.

During the sixteenth century the Inquisition was very
busy throughout the northern provinces of Italy, a veritable
hotbed of Witchcraft. In 1510 Silvester Mazzolini (1460-
1523) (Prierias), the famous Dominican, burned sixty witches
on various charges of sorcery ; about the same time Bernard
of Como proved so zealous in his pursuit of these criminals,
that the ignorant rustics, living in the villages to the north of
Milan, who were too often in collusion with the accused,
threatened to rise in revolt.°6 In the diocese of Como,
Bartolomeo de Spina was assisted by ten colleagues, and he
records that in one year, 1523, no less than a hundred witches
were sent to the stake.®? The official records of Val Camonica
from 1518 to 1521 contain over a thousand names; of these
at least sixty-four were executed, whilst a crowd of fugitives
found an asylum in cities further south, where they spread
their evil practices and enchantments. In 1588 Cardinal
Valieri, Bishop of Verona, in a pastoral letter bewails the
prevalence of sorcerers ; whilst Bononio, Bishop of Como,
drew up a whole procedure for the examination of witches,


ITALY 555


whom he orders to be interrogated and punished by the
episcopal courts over which he himself presided.

It is now fully established that the Roman Academy
founded by Pomponius Letus contained an inner circle
whose initiates were Satanists meeting in the obscurity of the
Catacombs for devil worship and demonolatry. Giulio, the
natural son of a nobleman of the Sansevino house, was born
in Calabria in 1425. When very young he presented himself
in Rome, where he became a favourite pupil of the irreligious
Lorenzo Valla. Pomponius devoted his energies to the
enthusiastic study of antiquity, an excellent pursuit, but
unfortunately this led to sheer paganism and before long he
was a contemner of Christianity and an avowed enemy of
Christ. A number of kindred souls gathered round him; an
Accademia was formed, and meetings were regularly held.
Outwardly they seemed innocent enough. There was no harm
in celebrating the festival of the Pallia—the anniversary of
the foundation of Rome. There was actual good in perform-
ing the comedies of Plautus.5® But these were only a cloak
to blind. Paul II (Pietro Barbo), shrewdest of pontiffs, then
occupied the Chair of S. Peter (1464-71). He was a
Humanist, a Patron of Universities, a collector of works of
ancient art, an elegant and accomplished Latinist, deeply
interested in the new invention of printing. Yet he suppressed
the Accademia, and years after a prominent member thereof,
Bartolomeo Platina, completest of liars, wrote a calumnious
biography of the Pope. Pomponius, Platina, and their fellows
were imprisoned upon charges—only too well-founded—of
conspiring against the life of the Pontiff. The tales of torture
are mere nonsense. Sixtus IV, large-hearted, trustful, and
generous, upon his accession (1471) released the culprits from
S. Angelo. It would appear that in future they mainly held
aloof from politics, but that they studied magic and celebrated
Black Masses is undeniable. Until the last, Pomponius, who
died in 1498, desired to be buried in an ancient sarcophagus
on the Appian Way. His wishes were not agreed to, for he
was interred in Aracoeli. Sentimental writers—I will not say
historians—delight to draw a picture of the old man, lantern
in hand, descending from his modest house upon the
Esquiline®® to the lecture-room, where, however early the
hour, however inclement the weather, crowds of eager students


556 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


await him. And at night amid the gloom of the Catacombs
or in some dark cellar of his ill-omened villa the warlock
defiles the Host, or in hideous mockery offers the Sacrifice
of the Mass to the Powers of Darkness and Destruction.

However curious, it must be allowed that save for the
spirited narration the necromantic episode in Cellini’s
Memoirs is not very remarkable and offers no new features.
A Sicilian priest, a wizard ; Cellini; Vincenzio Romoli ; and
a man from Pistoia, who was versed in the black art, repair
to the Colosseum. Circles are drawn upon the ground, and
perfumes are burned, when after about an hour and a half
“several legions of devils”” seem to appear. Cellini asks
that he may be brought into the company of Angelica, a light
o’ love who had gone off to Sicily and left him in the lurch.
No answer is returned ; the spirits vanish; but the priest
declares that they may look for better success the next night,
when they must further bring with them a lad of spotless
purity, a virgin. On the following evening the same cere-
monies are repeated, Cellini having with him his apprentice
about twelve years old. The wizard furnishes a pentacle of
great virtue which is held over the boy’s head. Tremendous
invocations and conjurations in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
follow. Devils are seen, and in answer to Cellini’s demand
some vague prophecy is uttered. Thousands of ghosts appear
in every part of the Colosseum to the intense alarm of the
experimenters, who have to remain within their magic circle
until the church bells ring for prime. As dawn breaks they
set out for home all keeping very close together ; and even
then, so the boy avers, a couple of demons follow them at a
distance, leaping and skipping, and playing strange pranks.
The priest further endeavoured to persuade Cellini to assist
him in the consecration of a book of spells, whispering in his
ear that the best place to perform the operation would be
among the mountains of Norcia, where the peasants were not
ignorant of the black art and might even lend valuable aid
in the ceremony. It so happened, however, that in spite of
constant entreaties Cellini, who was not altogether unwilling
to essay the adventure, was prevented from taking part.
Norcia, be it noted, was one of the great centres of Italian
sorcery ; and among the remoter Apennines many a pagan
superstition lingered until late centuries. °°


ITALY 557


Throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries Italy
was overrun with dabblers in magic, who, like this Sicilian
priest, made almost open boast of their commerce with
spirits. They cast nativities; drew horoscopes ; practised
cheiromancy; fashioned talismans ; interpreted dreams ;
sought the philosopher’s stone; augured by stereomancy,
theriomancy, and the flight of birds; foretold days lucky
and unlucky ; played Pandarus ; brewed philtres ; confected
a ceruse; mixed a lotion; were half herbalist and half
physician, half astrologer and half witch. If now and again
one of the fraternity was unfortunate and found himself
lodged in the dungeons of the Holy Office, they were at
least generally tolerated, and often secured favour in the
highest places of the land. So Diego Hurtado de Mendoza,
the famous diplomat and _ politician, who represented
Charles V at the Council of Trent, writing to the Emperor
a description of Rome during the pontificate (1534-49) of
Paul III (Alessandro Farnese), says: ‘‘ Es venido la cosa a
que ay muy pocos cardenales, que concierten negocios, aunque
sea para comprar una carga de lefia, sino es o por medio de
algun astrologo o hechizero.”” As might have been expected
under such conditions there at once sprang into existence a
swarm of idle charlatans, pimps and quacks, of whom the
best were impostors, the worst poisoners, ready for any
infamous job that filled their pockets, often mere rogues who
traded on the folly of their employers, but sometimes fantasts
who believed to some extent at any rate in their own powers
and pretensions and were only a little less credulous than
their dupes. These are figures which continually appear in
contemporary literature, in the dramatists and novellieri ;
thus we have Ariosto’s Il Negromante, della Porta’s
L’ Astrologo, Grazzini’s La Strega, and the same author’s
novel of Zoroastro, La Seconda Cena, IV.*! But it sometimes
happened that these mountebanks overreached themselves.
There is a story related in an Italian diary of the seventeenth
century®? concerning a fellow who donned some strange
habit and arrived at Rome in a painted carriage drawn by
two large black dogs. Great curiosity was aroused, which he
further inflamed by having the incredible folly to report that
these were two familiars, who conducted him at lightning
speed whithersoever he wished to go. Just then an express


558 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


courier happened to arrive from Milan—perhaps a confederate
—and he asserted that he had left the conjurer in that city,
only to recognize him in the Piazza del Popolo and to learn
that he had been several days established in a lodging there.
The pleasant public interest gave way to an ugly fear. The
wizard was promptly arrested, and before many weeks
executed on a charge of sorcery. That such condemnations
were rare®3 is, I think, obvious from the fact that the incident
finds mention in a record of only fifty leaves which covers no
less than twelve reigns, a period of seventy-seven years.

In 1633 a far more resounding scandal amazed and horrified
Rome. A mysterious astrologer had some few years before
prophesied to Giacinto Centini, nephew of the Cardinal
d’ Ascoli, that his uncle would succeed Urban VIII in the
Chair of S. Peter. The impulsive and ambitious young man
soon tired of waiting, and rashly resolved to hasten the event.
He first applied to Fra Pietro da Palermo, an Augustinian
Eremite, than whom, it was whispered, there were few more
deeply skilled in the mysteries of the Holy Kabbalah and
necromantic lore. This sage declared that the Pope still had
many years to live, although the Cardinal d’ Ascoli would
certainly be elected at the next conclave. He hinted that it
was in his power to shorten Urban’s days, a suggestion
Giacinto Centini eagerly embraced. The aid of a certain Fra
Cherubino, a Friar Minor of Ancona, and a master of goetic
science, was called in, as well as that of yet another occult
adept, Fra Domenico da Fermo, O,.S.A. The four accomplices
at once set to work to destroy the Pope by their spells. They
caused a knife to be secretly forged after the model of the
Key of Solomon, and this was engraved with hermetic
characters. A clean virgin was employed to spin hemp into
a thread. They then repaired to a secret room in Giacinto’s
palace, where Fra Pietro solemnly celebrated the Black Mass.
A circle was next drawn with the mystic thread, a fire lighted
in the centre, and before the blaze a wax figure of Pope
Urban, stabbed through and through with the knife, was
slowly melted until utterly consumed. The friars had
informed Giacinto that a demon would infallibly appear and
announce the Pontiff’s sudden decease. All their ceremonies
and invocations, however, were vain, and at last Fra Pietro
explained the failure by asserting that some treacherous


ITALY 559


murder had been committed in the palace, and this prevented
the operation of their magic. A few days later they repeated
their rites, but this time in a remote vineyard, at midnight,
under the canopy of heaven. And yet no Satanic vision was
vouchsafed, no demon issued from the darkness. Now
Fra Pietro attributed their non-success to the score of foul
weather and angry elements. So far from being chagrined
at these disappointments Giacinto only urged him on with
greater eagerness, and when the wizard announced that he
knew a sure and deadly spell of awful power, which needed
the assistance of seven priests to confect the charm, and of
these one must be stabbed to the heart at the moment of
consummation so that the warm reeking drops of blood might
more swiftly wing the curse, without hesitation the head-
strong youth instructed his servants to search him out seven
priests who would lend themselves to these dark superstitions.
Such a quest could but attract attention and give rise to
inconvenient talk. Meanwhile Giacinto, who seems to have
been a hysterical neuropath, incapable of holding his tongue
on the subject of his obsession, kept throwing out hints, and
something more than hints, to his friends, promising he would
make them all cardinals, when he should in a little time
become the Papal nephew. Little wonder that the Holy
Office descended rous upon the persons implicated in the
conspiracy, and that when they were brought to trial the
most damning evidence of their guilt was speedily established.
The end of it all was that Giacinto lost his head upon the
scaffold, Fra Pietro and Fra Cherubino were burned alive for
sorcery and high treason, Fra Domenico went to the galleys
for life. Several other men who were more or less involved in
the process received punishments of considerable severity.
Incredible as the folly of Giacinto may seem, psychologically
it is not merely possible but not even rare. On the other
hand, the only explanation of the conduct of the friars,
the fact that at the peril of their lives they confided their
hideous secrets to a young man whom they must have known
to be a tattler and a braggart coxcomb, would appear to lie
in a firm conviction of the reality of their own occult powers,
a belief that they could save and shield themselves from any


harm, and defy human justice. ®4
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries fearful


560 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


pestilences devastated Savoy, Lombardy, and the North of
Italy. In 1524 the mortality in Milan and the country-side
was reckoned at 140,000; at Venice in 1575-77 no less than
50,000 perished; whilst in 1630-31 nearly 47,000 were
carried off within a space of sixteen months in the city, to
which if we add the number of those who died in the lagoons
a total of wellnigh 95,000 is reached. On these occasions
Venice celebrated her deliverance by the votive offerings of
the churches of Il Redentore, built by Palladio in 1577, and
of S. Maria della Salute, built by Baldassare Longhena in 16382.
At Milan in 1629-30 sixty thousand victims were swept away,
whilst many of the neighbouring villages literally lost all their
inhabitants. In 1598 whole districts of Piedmont were
scourged with the utmost virulence of the plague. In May,
1599, it was calculated that less than four thousand persons
could be found in Turin. The streets were piled with
unburied corpses, the palaces were strewn with rotting
bodies of the dead, whilst the survivors only thought of
debauchery and plunder, often to be struck down in the midst
of their riot and marauding. The history of these visitations
is ghastly in the extreme, and the details reported by cold and
exact chroniclers make reading of almost unexampled horror
and loathliness.

It was probably first at Milan during the sickness of 1598
the belief awoke in the popular mind that the disease had been
introduced and was being actively disseminated by sorcerers.
Two strangers of suspicious habit were arrested and presently
confessed that they had come from Geneva for this express
purpose. They were condemned to death, and a few weeks
later two other poisoners were burned. At Turin in 1600 four
men were executed on the same charge. They indicated a
wood where they said they had buried a purulent liquid
intended to be used for smearing doors and walls. The spot
was searched and some jars were discovered. Other wretches
avowed that they had at the Devil’s instigation collected the
pus from the sores of plague-stricken corpses, and kept it in
phials. The Demon secured their own safety, but any person
whom they touched, be it ever so lightly, with the foul
matter was infected and inevitably perished. Such vessels as
they described were found secreted in their houses.

The name given to these diabolical malefactors was Untori,


ITALY 561


the Smearers, and the plague of Milan in 1629-30 was known
as “ La Peste degli Untori.” It is singular to note that this
pestilence was foretold a year before it broke out, since a
large comet which appeared in 1628 was announced by the
astrologers to portend a terrible mortality. Other prophecies
were current, especially an ancient distich which said that in
1680 the Demon would endeavour to poison all Milan. It
was remarked one morning in April, when owing to the warm
dry weather the disease was raging, that many of the doors
and walls were stained with a curious daub, as if a sponge,
saturated with the thick matter from the pustules and sores
of the sick had been pressed against them. Frantic alarm
spread rapidly, and the pestilence fearfully increased. The
witches were supposed to go about the city smearing benches,
the handles of doors, furniture, chairs, confessionals, choir-
stalls, even fruit, flowers, and food with the deadly stuff.
They scattered magic powders in a circle on the pavement.
To set a foot in one of these meant certain destruction.
Hundreds of such untori were seized and condemned by the
magistrates. In particular one Mora, half-barber, half-
alchemist, who had long lain under the suspicion of necro-
mancy, was arrested on this charge. Various mysterious
ungents were found secreted in his house, and the physicians
upon analysis declared these to be rank poison. He was
racked, and at length confessed all his accusers desired. He
had smeared houses and every article of touch with venom
of the plague, he was in league with the Devil to infect all
Milan. He named several persons as his accomplices, and
these were instantly executed as the vilest of criminals.
About the same time a wild enthusiast, who came forward
at the height of the scourge, told a long and circumstantial
story to the effect that he had actually been tempted by the
Demon to smear all the houses and walls of Milan with a
pestiferous salve, and thousands at once believed his tale.
It was said that a band of warlocks had taken a house in the
city, and that there they concocted their drugs, and met in
midnight Sabbat to debate on the progress of the plague, and
make plans for its furtherance and increase. So convinced
were the citizens of the truth of this report, that repeated
search was officially made for the mysterous abode, but


all in vain. ®®


562 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


The evidence for the wntori is so overwhelming that it seems
certain there were at least some few moral maniacs who,
crazed by despair or by their brooding upon death and
corruption, yielded to a spell of fearful malignity and
endeavoured to spread the contagion. Certainly such
persons by influencing the overwrought and sickly imagina-
tions of their fellows could do incalculable harm, and
appreciably extend the sphere of the pestilence by frightening
others into the very disease. It is obvious, however, that
many innocent persons must have been not only falsely
accused but have perished miserably through accident or, it
may be, an enemy’s revengful design.

Throughout Piedmont and Lombardy, especially in the
Alpine valleys and the villages of the Tyrol, the witch
prosecutions were actively promoted and pursued during
the greater part of the seventeenth century. Even in these
districts, however, the records of trials are far less common
and less complete than those of France and England at a
corresponding period.

For the virus of heresy had infected deeply—and it was,
we may remind ourselves the degraded Manicheean heresy,
with whose dark doctrines and foul practice Satanism is
inextricably mingled. The Inquisitors, who had jurisdiction
in the northern cities, often went in fear of their lives. The
zealous Michele Ghislieri, afterwards Pope S. Pius V, an
untiring opponent of sorcerers and witches, upon entering
the city of Como was more than once received with volleys of
stones. To save his life he not infrequently had to escape in
disguise, and conceal himself in the remote cottage of some
faithful rustic. Nay more, at Bergamo a mob actually
stormed the monastery of S. Dominic and released a warlock
named Giorgio Mondaga, who had been incarcerated there.
“In Bergamo li fu levato per forza dalle prigioni del monas-
tero di San Domenico, dove allora si solevano mettere i rei,
un principale heretico, nominato Giorgio Mondaga, con gran
pericolo suo e de’ frati.’’*¢

It is known to have been a great grief to S. Carlo Borromeo
that his diocese was so corrupted by demonolatry. On one
occasion, it is said, that when he passed through certain
villages of the Val Camonica, highly suspect as being the
haunt of necromancers, the Saint in silent rebuke kept his


ITALY 563


eyes turned upon the ground, and did not move a hand to
bless the peasantry who had assembled to watch his progress.
On one occasion he received the submission and confessions
of no less than one hundred and thirty sorcerers of Mesolcina,
a valley of the Grisons. In 1583 several witches of this
district were burned, including a priest Domenico Quattrino,
of Rovereto, convicted by the testimony of eleven indepen-
dent witnesses of having attended the Sabbat dressed in
chasuble, stole, and maniple, of having carnal intercourse
with a notorious whore suspect of magic and poisoning, and
of having used the Holy Oils to confect a charm.

Cardinal Federico Borromeo, the cousin and successor of
S. Carlos, a prelate of great learning and rare intelligence
and Archbishop of Milan from 1595 to 1631, was well known
for his zeal against witches and did much to suppress magical
superstitions in his diocese.

It is comparatively seldom that we hear of trials for
sorcery in other provinces of Italy, and pamphlets which
were so common at that time both in France and England
are not often to be met. Such a one, however, is the follow-
ing: “* Histoire admirable et prodigieuse d’un Enchanteur
Italien lequel fut bruslé tous vif en la ville de Pezaro le 26
octobre dernier avec un asne duquel il se servoit en ses
sortileges ; ensemble les charmes, philtres et compositions
par lui faites sur la personne de la Signoré Alinda pour
V’émouvoir &4 son amour. Paris, Jean de Bordeaulx, 1614.”
8vo.

A typical case of Witchcraft, and one which owing to its
prominence and the meticulous investigations of the authori-
ties has luckily been reported in full, attracted considerable
attention in the winter of 1646 and the following spring.
It will, moreover, be found to present so many factors and
features, which occur again and again in the contemporary
trials of wellnigh every European country, that it may
profitably be dealt with in some detail.

A certain old woman of Castelnovo, Maria Salvatori,
nicknamed “la Mercuria,” who had long been suspected of
sorcery, was arrested on 26 October, 1646, and formally
examined. At first the two principal charges, sufficiently
damning in themselves, seem to have been that at her
communions she did not swallow the Sacred Host, but kept


564 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


It in her mouth to spit It out secretly and reserve It for some
abominable purpose, and also that by her ecbolic spells she
had caused the young Marchesa Bevilacqua to miscarry in
childbirth. She was again interrogated on 3 November and
put to the torture of the cord when she accused Domenica,
the widow of a certain Tomaso Camelli, and Domenica’s
daughter, Lucia, the wife of Antonio Caveden, both of whom
dwelt at the hamlet of Villa, of being rank witches. She also
avowed she had taken a Host from her mouth to give to
Lucia Caveden, who thereby confected a charm which caused
the abortion of the Marchioness. She added that she had
also bewitched Cristoforo Sparamani, the son of Cecilia
Sparamani, and that a certain Delaito Cavaleri was a necro-
mancer and a worshipper of Satan. A further interrogation
followed on 15 November, as a result of which the court,
consisting of Paride Madernino, delegate in all criminal and
civil cases in the districts of Castelnovo and Castellano, and
his assessor Giovanni Ropele, doctor utriusque iuris,
promptly gave orders to Giuseppe Coriziano, “‘ bargello di
questa turia,” to arrest Domenica and Lucia. This was
done, and on Saturday, 24 November, 1646, at Nogaredo,
the proceedings against the witches were formally opened.
‘““ Processus Criminalis pro destructione lamiarum.” On
27 November Domenica Camelli was questioned by the
judges, but they got little enough out of her. Two days
following Lucia Caveden was brought before the tribunal.
She vehemently declared that the charges were all malice ;
the hag Salvatori was her enemy ; and with many cries she
called Heaven to witness her innocence, repeatedly exclaim-
ing “‘ per grazia del Signor Iddio no son una stria!” But
the next day she proved less firm and implicated yet another
woman, Domenica Gratiadei, who was immediately thrown
into prison, a number of suspicious objects being found in her
house when it was closely searched by the officers. Certain
pots of a dark unguent and a mysterious powder being pro-
duced in court, Lucia Caveden confessed that these were for
the destruction of human life and cattle. Seeing that the game
was up Domenica Gratiadei, upon being put to the torture,
soon laid bare all the secrets of the infernal sisterhood. She
had ma@e this unguent with which she anointed herself to
attend the Sabbat “trasformata in gatto,” she had cast


ITALY 565


the evil eye on Cristofero Sparamani, she had renounced her
baptism, defiled the Blessed Sacrament, adored Satan with
divine honours. The judges were filled with horror, and
trembled at the hideous tale of diabolism these women
poured forth. Cecilia Sparamani, a plain honest woman,
was next summoned as a witness and told how her son fell
into fits of no ordinary kind. The doctors had acknowledged
their skill baffled, and in spite of the prayers of two Capuchin
fathers and the exorcisms of Monsignore the Bishop of
Brondolo, this preternatural sickness still persisted. She
informed the court that as soon as summer came and the
roads were passable she intended to take the boy to the shrine
of S. Antony at Padua, to whom she had a special devotion.

On 18 December, 1646, Benvenuta, the daughter of
Domenica Gratiadei, made a startling confession. She
declared that she had been taken by her mother “as if in a
dream ”’ to a place where there was dancing and singing,
where she had been welcomed by a large number of revellers,
and especially by a young man, who having kissed and
fondled her awhile afterwards had connexion with her.
This was, her mother averred, Satan himself. When closely
questioned as to these proceedings the girl could only reply :
‘* Tutto mi sembra, come ho detto, un sogno: e parevami
che sempre vi fosse il diavolo in forma di quel giovene.”” It
would seem from these very striking and significant words
that the girl was a hypnotic subject, entirely under her
mother’s control, and that on these occasions she passed into
a semi-trance state. The case dragged on throughout the
months of January and February, 1647. There were
interminable interrogations, and a large number of persons
were gradually implicated.

On 2 January 1647, Domenica Gratiadei gave a detailed
description of the Sabbats she had attended. She and an old
warlock named Santo Peterlino always led the coven.
“The rest followed in the shape of cats; but the Devil
went first of all.”” They enjoyed banquets, dances, plays,
music, songs, and afterwards all worshipped Satan, presenting
him with Hosts which they kept from their last communion.
Before attending the Sabbat she anointed herself with an
unguent made of “the Blessed Sacrament, the blood of
certain small animals, Holy Water, the fat of dead babies ”’


566 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


which was mixed with horrible imprecations and blasphemies
to confect the charm.

On 10 January, a strange figure, Maddalena Andrei, nick-
named “ La Filosofa,” first appears in the case. She confessed
that she had assisted in the making of the ointment and had
also adored the Devil who frequently appeared to her,
“brave, like a gallant captain, dressed all in red.” On
9 March, when Giuseppe Goriziano entered the cell of
La Filosofa to summon her to court he found her lying dead
upon the floor. The common people believed that she had
been carried off by Satan, especially as the Archpriest of
Villa, Don Giovanni Bragliardi, shrewdly suspecting that the
unhappy woman had committed suicide, refused her sepulture
in consecrated ground.

This long and complicated Witchcraft-trial at length came
to an end in April, 1647. The court was thronged with an
excited yet hushed crowd, when the judge Paride Madernino
and his assessors the Counts of Lodrone and Castel-Romano
delivered the sentences. Domenica Camelli, Lucia Caveden,
Domenica Gratiadei, Catterina Baroni, Zinevra Chemola,
Isabella and Polonia Gratiadei, and Valentina Andrei were
condemned to death. Maria Salvatori, ‘“‘la Mercuria,” and
Maddalena Andrei, ‘“‘la Filosofa”’ had expired in prison.
The condemned were beheaded and their bodies burned.
It would seem, however, that Isabella and Polonia
Gratiadei and Valentina Andrei managed to escape and
could not be traced. The execution of the rest took place on
14 April, 1647, when Leonard Oberrdorfer the common
hangman carried out the judicial sentence.

The chief witches here naturally fall into four groups each
constituted of one old and one young woman, Domenica
Camelli and Lucia her daughter; Domenica Gratiadei and
Benvenuta her daughter; Isabella Gratiadei and Polonia
her daughter; Maddalena Andrei and her daughter
Valentina. The chief of the coven was undoubtedly
Domenica Gratiadei, whose vile confessions, a mixture of
most horrid blasphemies and lewdest obscenity, convince her
of being a wretch wholly devoted to evil, and an active
propagandist of the Satanic cult. It was she who had
debauched her own daughter to “the Devil,” that young
man whose name and individuality do not appear, but who


ITALY 567


may be guessed to have been a noble of the district, using the
witches for his own ends and, presumably, supplying them
with money to carry out his dark designs. That the whole
gang frequently attended the Sabbat, at which he was not
unseldom present, there can, I think, be no question. The
horrid circumstance confessed by the beldame Salvatori,
that at her communions she did not consume the Sacred
Host, but impiously retained It in her mouth to eject It
secretly for use as some profane charm, occurs also during
the trial of Silvain Nevillon at Orleans in June, 1614. ‘“‘ Dit
aussi auoir veu des Sorciers & Sorcieres qui apportoient des
Hosties au Sabbat, lesquelles elles auoient gardi lors qu’on
leur auoit baillé & communier a l’Eglise, & que le Diable
faisoit des gestes comme en depitant sur icelles Hosties, des-
quelles ou faisoit de la poudre, & quelque fois ou les
mettoit dans l’eau, & que le Diable estoit fort ayse
quand ou luy apportoit lesdites Hosties.”®? In France
(1652) a witch was “interrogée sy le diable ne luy avoit
conseillé de cracher la Sainte Hostie hors de sa bouche,
ou bien ne la point recepvoir, dist que non, mais bien que
le diable Vat une fois battue fort parce qu’elle l’avoit
receu.”®® In an old Basque legend, The Witches at Akhelarre
(The Sabbat),®® a lady is very ill. A witch is overheard to
say that the sick woman ‘as she was going out of the
church, let the holy wafer fall on the ground, and a toad
had picked it up; and this toad is still near the door, under
a stone, with the bread in his mouth. And again, this same
witch saw that, until they took away this bread out of the
toad’s mouth, this lady will not be cured.”?° James
Device, who was one of the Lancashire witches executed
in 1618, confessed “that upon Sheare Thursday was two
yeares, his Grand-Mother Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Demb-
dike, did bid him this Examinate goe to the Church to re-
ceive the Communion (the next day after being Good Friday)
and then not to eate the Bread the Minister gaue him, but to
bring it and deliuer it to such a thing as should meet him on
his way homewards.” Some little distance from the church
‘Ca thing in the shape of a Hare.” crossed his path, and he
understood this to be the animal that awaited the bread,
which, however, he had already swallowed.74 A similar
practice is said to have prevailed in certain Welsh districts.


568 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


There is a story of two old women who about a hundred years
ago attended the morning service at Llanddewi Brefi Church,
and received Holy Communion. They kept the bread in their
mouths, and forthwith went out into the churchyard. They
then walked round the building nine times, and at the ninth
time the Demon came out of the old wall in the shape of a
frog, to whom they gave the bread from their mouths. Thus
they were supposed to be selling themselves to Satan, and
become witches. An old man in North Pembrokeshire used
to boast that he had obtained the power of bewitching by
making a pretence at eating the bread of his First Com-
munion, whilst in reality he pocketed it. When he left the
church there met him at the gate a dog to which he gave the
bread, thus selling his soul to the Evil One, and thenceforth
he possessed magic and malignant powers.7?

The Satanist of to-day will often attend Holy Mass and
receive Communion in order to retain the Sacred Host, which
he defiles at his abominable rites. It is almost impossible for
a priest to prevent this, as one may not refuse to give Holy
Communion save under the most exceptional conditions.
One morning, not many years ago, there was found in a
remote corner of a London church a Host, soft and moistened
as from lying upon a human tongue. Two or three Low
Masses had been said and Communion given to perhaps some
forty or more persons. The Host had evidently been removed
from the mouth with the intention of secreting It, and It must
have slipped to the pavement from the handkerchief or hand
in which It was being conveyed to the pocket. In 1855
there was discovered at Paris an association of Satanists
who communicated daily in order to gain possession of the
Host by quickly passing It from their mouths. They were
dispersed by the efforts of Monseigneur Sibour, the Arch-
bishop, who on 3 January, 1857, was assassinated by an ex-
communicate priest named Verger. It has been suggested
that this apostate may have been secretly connected with these
miscreants. In 1874 a similar abominable sacrilege came to
light, and Monseigneur Guibert, the Archbishop, found no
little difficulty in suppressing them, as the wretches involved
used to present themselves at the altar on different mornings
in distant churches of the city and the suburbs.

It is not unknown that the Tabernacle itself should be


ITALY 569


violated, and from time to time it would seem as though a
regular gang of Host-stealers systematically sets to work.
More than one London church has been robbed in this
manner, and there are instances of churches in the country
being profaned in precisely the same way. The particulars
make it certain that no ordinary theft was intended. The
gold ciborium, studded with jewels, was left overthrown upon
the altar, but the Contents had gone.

The pots of unguent found concealed in the house of
Domenica Gratiadei are none other than that “ flying oint-
ment ” with which sorcerers were frequently wont to besmear
themselves before they proceeded to the Sabbat. It makes a
constant figure in the trials, and Weyer gives us the exact
formule for its composition. The ingredients, according to
the hag Gratiadei, were: ‘“‘the Blessed Sacrament, the blood of
certain small animals, Holy Water, the fat of dead babies.”’
Weyer has three prescriptions: (1) Du pusil, de l’eau de
l’Aconite, des feuilles de Peuple, et de la suye ; (2) De la Berle
de VAcorum vulgaire, de la Quintefeuille, du sang du
chauvesouris, de la Morelle endormante, et de Vhuyle;
(3) De grasisse d’enfant, de sue d’Ache, d’Aconite, de Quinte-
feuille, de Morelle, et de suye. It will be noticed that in
numbers two and three the blood of bats and baby’s fat
severally occur.

The transformation into cats or the cat disguise is so
common as to be proverbial everywhere. At a witch-trial in
Guernsey in 1563 Martin Tulouff confessed that he had
assisted at a Sabbat ‘‘ 1a ou ly avoet ching ou vi chatz, d’ou
il y en avoet ung qui estoet noir, qui menoit la dance, . . . q
ledit Chat estoet le diable.’’ During the winter of 1718, one
William Montgomerie, of Barnside near Thurso, a mason,
complained to the acting-sheriff ‘“‘ that his house was severall
times infested with cats to that degree that he nor his family
were in safety to reside there.” On one dark November
evening armed with a dirk and an ax he had rushed out into
his yard and dispersed a gathering, as is seemed, of all the
grimalkins in Scotland. Two he had killed, of one he had
half sliced off the leg, and several others he had sorely
wounded. In the morning no bodies and no traces of blood
were to be found. Suspicion was aroused, and a crone named
Margaret Nin-Gilbert, who had long borne a very evil


570 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


reputation, was discovered in bed with her leg bleeding and
broken. The sheriff and local ministers at once made official
inquiry into the matter. “ Being interrogat, If she was in
the house of William Montgomerie, mason in the Burnside
of Scrabster, especially on that night, the day of ;
when that house was dreadfully infested with severall cats, to
that degree that W.M. foresaid was obliged to use sword,
durk, and ax in beating and fraying away those catts ?
Confessed, That she was bodily present yr, and that the said
M. had broke her legg either by the durk or ax, which legg has
fallen off from the other part of her body ; and that she was in
the likeness of a feltered catt, night forsaid, in the said house:
and that Margaret Olsone was there likeness of a catt also.”
This late Caithness trial is certainly one of the most curious
instances of the cat superstition.

The confessions of Benvenuta Gratiadei; her attendance
at the Sabbat, sometimes, no doubt, an experience on the
psychic plane, for she was undoubtedly a medium of unusual
powers, and sometimes in actual fact ; the dances, feasting,
music, songs, of the Sabbat; her copulation with “ the
Devil”; the worship of Satan; all these may be paralleled
by the details of the Sabbat given in my previous study, and
mere repetition were superfluous. In the Nogaredo trials
and confessions we certainly find some of the most valuable
and interesting witch material Italian archives afford.

In 1647 Fra Brognoli, a Franciscan of much experience,
was called in by Father Carlo de Velitri, Vicar of the Holy
Office at Treviso, to assist him in reclaiming a Manichean
Satanist, who in agonies of remorse had voluntarily placed
himself in the Inquisitor’s hands for reconciliation. Fra
Brognoli was so impressed by the revelations of the penitent
that he composed a treatise, Alewicacon, in which he discusses
with great acumen the exact boundaries between medicine
and theology in such cases. His work is of no little value,
since it is a record of first-hand evidence.

Perhaps even more important is the De Demonialitate of
Sinistrari, which was first published from the original manu-
script by the well-known bibliophile Isidore Liseux, Paris,
8vo, 1875. Ludivico Maria Sinistrari was born at Ameno,
a small town in the diocese of Novara, on 26 February, 1622.
In the year 1647 he entered the Franciscan Order, and for


ITALY 571


fifteen years he professed first Philosophy and then Theology
at the University of Pavia. He was a scholar of immense
erudition, omniwm scientiarum uir, and an eloquent preacher.
At Rome he was appointed Consultor to the Supreme
Tribunal of the Holy Office, and later he acted as Vicar-
General of the Archbishop of Avignon. For many years also
he was Theologian to the Cardinal-Archbishop of Milan.
Full of honours he died on 6 March, 1701, at the age of
seventy-nine. His works were published in three folio
volumes, Rome, Giannini, 1753-54.

Although there are a few passages which may, perhaps, be
accused of some slight extravagance the De Demonialitate
is of great value, especially as showing the belief in witches,
and the modification of that belief which persisted throughout
the seventeenth century. With regard to the penalties for
Witchcraft he writes as follows: ‘“‘ Quantum ad _ pcenas
Demonialitatis, nulla lex ciuilis, aut canonica, quam legerim,
reperitur, que poenam sanciat contra crimen huiusmodi.
Tamen, quia crimen hoc supponit pactum, ac societatem cum
Demone, ac apostasiam a fide, ultra ueneficia, atque alia
infinita propemodum damna, que a Maleficis inferuntur,
regulariter extra Italiam, suspendio et incendio punitur. In
Italia autem, rarissime traduntur huiusmodi Malefici ab
Inquisitoribus Curiz seeculari.”’

During the whole of the eighteenth century the belief in
Witchcraft was universal throughout Italy. Many cases were
tried by the Inquisition behind closed doors, but often mob
law prevailed, and doting beldames, whom the popular voice
declared to be witches, were stoned or beaten to death in the
streets by some frenzied rout. There also flourished sibyls
of superior wit, if not of superior rank, who traded upon
vulgar credulity, told fortunes, and supplied both “ love-
philtres ”’ and, it was whispered, more dangerous medica-
ments, for which they were handsomely fee’d. The lessons of
Hieronyma Spara, a notorious witch and poisoner, who was
hanged 5 July, 1659, under Alexander VII (Fabio Chigi, 1655—
67), and of her successor, La Toffania, the Neapolitan Locusta,
were not forgotten. The more innocent charlatans used to
display their wares and tell fortunes in the Piazza Navona.

There is a tale told of a certain Madame T.M. who some
sixty years ago went to one of these vagrant sorceresses for


572 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


a charm, by means of which she might extract admiration
and money from Cardinal Antonelli (died 6 November, 1876).
The witch declared that in order to confect an efficacious
charm she must have His Eminence’s red berretta. Servants
were heavily bribed, and the berretta was forthcoming.
Presently the lady presented herself before the Cardinal, but
the spell did not work and she met with a chilling reception.”°

In May, 1789, there arrived in Rome the notorious Joseph
Balsamo, who now dubbed himself Alexander, Count
Cagliostro, with his wife Lorenza. Expelled from half a
dozen countries, mixed up in half a hundred discreditable
transactions, more than suspected of fraud, forgery, pecula-
tion, sorcery, and half a score knaveries, he was none the less
received with kindness by several great nobles and even by
some prelates of no mean rank. Thus encouraged he took
a private house in the Piazza Farnese, and before long he had
the inconceivable folly to give an exhibition of his so-called
occult powers in the presence of a large audience whom he had
assembled there one evening in September. The Abate
Benedetti writes an account of this gathering. Among those
who assisted were the French ambassador, Cardinal Bernis ;
the Abate Ennio Visconti; the Princess Rezzonico; the
Princess Santacroce ; the Marchese Vivaldi and her secretary
Father Tanganelli; the Marchese Massimi attended by a
Capuchin, Fra Francesco da San Maurizio; and a large
number of the Roman nobility. At the end of the salon
had been erected a kind of altar, on which were placed skulls,
stuffed monkeys, serpents who writhed and coiled as in life,
owls, musty parchments, amulets, crucibles, and other strange
furniture. Incense was burning before the images of fantastic
Chinese and Egyptian idols. Cagliostro, wrapped in a Chal-
dean robe, appeared followed by his wife. He passed—or pre-
tended to pass—into trance, and gave a lively description of
the Marriage at Cana of Galilee. He then seized a glass beaker
of pure water and crying “‘ Ego sum qui sum”’ poured therein
two drops from a small vial he kept in his bosom, whereupon
the liquid seemed to be transformed into a sparkling wine,
cups of which were handed to the guests who pronounced it
delicious. Psychometry and crystal-gazing followed, and
anon Cagliostro addressed them on the subject of a mysterious
society, which the Capuchin most indiscreetly announced that


ITALY 573


he was willing to join. ‘ He certainly did many things which
greatly surprised me,” says the Abate Benedetti, ‘“ but in all
his actions there is much imposture. . . . Sooner or later I
believe that his true object will be discovered, and that he
will be denounced to the Governor or the Holy Office.”

The séances continued for a while, but on 27 December,
Cagliostro, his wife, and Fra Francesco were all arrested by
the Inquisition ; a sequel which was only to be expected.
When brought before the tribunal Cagliostro denied the
charges, but his wife confessed all. On 7 April, 1791, the
Holy Office promulgated sentence and adjudged him worthy
“ of all the pains and penalties inflicted by the Canons of the
Church, and the laws of the land, whether civil or municipal,
upon heretics, astrologers, and magicians,” that is to say,
death. But Pius VI commuted the punishment into per-
petual imprisonment in the fortress of S. Leo, after he had
made public abjuration of his errors in S. Maria sopra
Minerva. The Capuchin was assigned to his Order to be
visited with exemplary discipline, whilst Cagliostro’s wife
was relegated to the convent of Santa Appollonia in
Trastevere, where she languished forgotten and in obscurity.
Cagliostro himself died, impenitent, on 28 August, 1795.

He appears to have been in some way connected with
Satanism, but whether he participated in these abominations
from any serious motive, or whether his charlatanry saw
therein a way of getting money, by threats and blackmail,
must remain an open question. It is certain that bands of
Satanists, who, however, only dared to practise their rites in
circumstances of the utmost secrecy, existed in Italy all
through the eighteenth century and have, indeed, continued
to the present day. Monseigneur de Ségur definitely states
that in 1848 a Satanist chapel was discovered in Rome, where
an altar had been placed with six black candles. The mass
of the Devil was celebrated before a congregation of men
and women, each one of whom spat and defiled a crucifix, and
deposited in a ciborium a consecrated Host either stolen from
a church or purchased. The whole assembly stabbed the
Hosts with horrid imprecations, and an orgy followed
similar to ‘“‘ Pagan mysteries and Manichean reunions.”’
Even more recently, about some ten years ago, another
chapel arranged for diabolic worship was accidentally


574 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


discovered at Rome, great scandal ensued, and this haunt
of the infernal cult was speedily suppressed.

There is also a link, although far more innocent, and,
indeed, comparatively harmless, between many obsolescent
superstitions, that yet covertly linger in modern Italy, and
the Witchcraft of three centuries ago. Rhymed spells and
doggerel formulas such as were used by the sixteenth-century
streghe have been handed down for generations, but happily
they have for the most part lost their ill-omened names and
evil motives to take a more honest turn, and many such a
magic rune has become strangely identified or connected
with some Christian Saint.

Even to-day in Italy certain Saints are regarded as folletti,
goblin Saints. The chief of these is S. Antony, the first
hermit. Probably the fact that this Saint was so tormented
by demons and won such tremendous power over them gave
rise to this traditional superstition. ‘“‘ San Antonio and San
Simeone cannot be saints,” said a strega to Leland,’
‘* because we always perform incantations in a cellar to them
at night.”” For S. Antony the Great is often confounded with
S. Antony of Padua. So when you have lost anything you
say a double paternoster to S. Antony, thus :

Pater noster—Pater noster !

Qui es in ccelis—Qui es in ccelis !
But the Pater-noster a doppio is decidedly a matter of Witch-
craft, at least this is what every peasant believes. ‘‘ Ma dire
il paternoster cosi e della stregheria, e non della vera religione
Cattolica.” So said one who had received a liberal education
in magic. S. Antony the Great protects his votaries from
sorcery and spells. Therefore they say to him in Romagnola :

Sant’ Antogne, Sant’ Antogne

Sopre eame, liberez dai sase !


Edal streghi chliuvengu,
In camia a stregem.

In Italian :
Santo Anton sopra il cammino
Liberati ci dagli assassini !
Edalle Streghe che non vengano
In casa mia a stregare.


San Elia and San Eliseo are also Saints by whose invocation
charms may be rendered effective. Both, it may be remem-


ITALY 575


bered, are venerated by the Carmelites as founders of that
august Order, the feast of S. Elias the Prophet, “‘ Dux ac
Pater noster,” being observed on 20 July as a Double of the
First Class with an Octave, the feast of S. Eliseus, ‘‘ Propheta
Pater noster,” being celebrated on 14 June as a Double of the
Second Class. The statues of these two Saints may often be
seen in Carmelite churches,7* and in S. Peter’s S. Elias stands
amongst the Founders of Religious Orders. S. Eliseus is
especially appealed to by maidens whose lovers seem fickle.
The name of S. Elias occurs in connexion with a harmless
enough little rhyme used by those with weak eyes :

“To cure an affliction of the eyes, take three roots bound
with a red ribbon, three leaves of trefoil, and then say :

*Stacco queste trefoglie per Santo Elia,
Che il mal d’occhio mi mandi via.’ ”

Perhaps the most popular of these Saints is Il Vecchio
Simeone Santo. The Libretto di Stregonerie, a halfpenny
chapbook, has the following curious piece of old-world lore.


Il Buon Vecchio Simeone.

“‘ Procure a picture or statue in plaster of this great Saint,
who presided at the Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ
with the old Saint Joseph and our Immaculate Lady, both
being the dearly beloved progenitors of the Lord God the
Redeemer.

It makes no difference whether it be a picture of the Saint or
a plaster Statue if we repeat the marvellous Novena dedicated
to him, and if according to the instructions in it we recite the
customary prayer.

And it is certain that soon after the Novena, the good old
man will appear in some form, and grant the one praying his
request ; but what he principally bestows is lucky numbers
in the lottery.

There is no need to fear, for the Saint generally appears
in a dream while you sleep, and his look is so good and
benevolent that there is no danger of awaking in a fright.

The whole difficulty is to know how to decipher the exact
meaning of the words and signs which the Saint will give.
Many people mistake his meaning, such is the experience of
many, so difficult is it to decipher and unravel his gestures
and figurations.”


576 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


The novena is merely the following grayer: ‘‘O glorio-
sissimo S. Vecchio Simeone che meritaste ed aveste la bella
sorte di ricevere e portare nella vostre fortunate braccie il
Divin Pargoletto Gesi—E le annunziaste e profetiziaste e le
vostre Profezie furono sante verita. O Santo concedetomi
la grazia che vi addomando. Amen.”


An old woman (a witch) told Leland to repeat this prayer
three nights in succession at midnight. The Saint will then
appear. He may assume any figure. A priest clad all in
white, a friar with a long beard, an old man wrapped in a
mantle. He will inquire what it is you demand, and you must
answer promptly, asking three lucky numbers in the lottery,
where a certain treasure is hidden, just what you will. But
if you are not fearless, and do not reply immediately and
boldly, he will give you a sound cuff on the head, so that the
marks of his five fingers can be plainly seen in the morning.
Sometimes, indeed, they never disappear. Above all in
repeating the prayer you must not err in a single syllable.
If you are without fear, however, you will get what you want.

Holy Simeon may be considered to be commemorated on
2 February, Candlemas, but his particular Feast is on
21 October,7® when he was formerly honoured at Venice
with a special office and proper antiphons, the collect being:
‘““Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui Unigenitum tuum ulnis
Sancti Simeonis in templo sancto tuo suscipiendum pre-
sentasti, tuam supplices deprecamen clementiam ; ut, eo inter-
ueniente, in templo sancto glorize tue presentari mereamur.
Per eundem Dominum.” The Venetian Calendarium for
the current year (1925) omits Holy Simeon, so I presume his
Feast is now only kept in his own church, the green-domed
S. Simeone Grande, which to me, for its intimate associations
and its masses, will always be one of the dearest and loveliest
of Venice’s churches. Beside the high-altar is the recumbent
statue of S. Simeone, a masterpiece of the Roman artist,
Marco Romano, 1817. In Lent there is a Station at S. Simeone
on the Tuesday after the First Sunday. The Greeks honour
Holy Simeon and the aged Prophetess Anna on 3 February.

Even yet the idea among rustic folk in Italy that Witch-
craft runs in families is deep rooted. In J anuary, 1891, there
was a priest at Florence, an excellent and even holy man,


ITALY 577


who was none the less said to be a stregone since his mother
had always been reputed to be a strega.

Old women in the Tuscan Romagna will tell you still that
the witches meet for their Sabbat on Tuesdays and Fridays.
Unfortunately the darker superstitions yet lurk in dusty
corners, foul obscene things dreading the light. The Nea-
politan Sfruttata, whose lover has deserted her, will take a
lemon and with horrid imprecations stick it full of long black
pins that as the fruit withers and dies, so may he who has for-
saken her sicken and pine, so may her rival be burned with
fever and racked with aches till she drop into the grave.

There are modern charms which recall the horrors of the
sixteenth century, the love pastes of Guibourg, the elixirs of
Le Frane and Davot. For one enchantment ‘si deve
prendere del sangue menstruale chi viene alla donna,’’ rue
and cummin boiled in pure water, which are all fashioned into
comfits, a curse being declaimed during this strange cookery.
To rouse bitter strife between persons on their wedding-day,
and to cause impotency in a husband whilst inflaming the
wife’s desires, the witch takes an orange flower pounded with
salt, pepper, cummin, and the herb sconcordia (literally
variance), and this she scatters secretly over the bride’s dress,
muttering meanwhile: ‘“‘ Tu sia maladetta, Tu non possa
avere un giorno di pace, E quando vai, Inginnochiarti, Avanti
l’altare, Tu possa essere gia peniti, Del passa che tu fai.”
There are hideous stories of the mutilation of animals for
purposes of sorcery, too sickening to relate, too loathsome for
thought. There is also la ghirlanda delle streghe, a long cord
tied in elaborate knots with the feathers of a black hen
inserted in the strands. This is hidden away in some secret
place with appropriate maledictions, and the person at whom
the bane is launched will be consumed with a swift disease
no doctor can cure. Strangely enough one of these enchanted
ropes was in 1886 found in the belfry of an English country
church. All were puzzled, for it was evidently twined and
twisted for some specific purpose. An old woman in the
village identified it as a “ witch’s ladder,” but it was not
until an engraving had been published in The Folk Lore
Journal that full information was received and the purport
of the mysterious charm completely understood. This is a
most singular occurrence, and proves that less than forty


578 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


years ago there were some who held firmly enough to witch-
craft even in enlightened England.

It is true that even in Italy here and there Satanism still
lingers in obscure corners, and yet persist dark practices and
hidden deeds of shameless blasphemy. Speaking of the South
a modern writer with more force than truth says :

‘‘ Naples abounds in persons who profess to be inspired by
the Devil or by the Saints, and for a few halfpence will give
you aforehand the winning numbers at the lottery, and it is to
these prophets that the Neapolitans—who I dare not swear
believe in God, but most assuredly believe in the Saints and
in the Devil—are continually resorting. . . . There is one most
curious belief which still holds: If an unscrupulous and
accommodating priest can be found who is willing to recite the
Canon and celebrate Mass in honour of the Devil and give
Satan’s body in communion, the fiend—noblesse oblige—will
immediately reward the inquirer by gaining him a trey. This
Mass is known as the Black Mass, and those deboshed priests,
dirty and unkempt as the lazzaroni of the harbour, who can
easily be seen any day walking about the narrow and muddy
slums of old Naples, are continually being asked to do folk
the favour of celebrating this Mass. They, modern Talley-
rands that they are, seldom make much difficulty about
giving God the cold shoulder by saying the Black Mass. .. »
Auri sacra fames.’’??

The faults and vices of the Neapolitan are primitive and
flamboyant. None the less there are at this very day great
saints living in Naples, and these not only in the cloister.
The devotion of the crowded churches at Holy Mass is truly
wonderful ; their love for the Madonna beautiful as only a
true love romance can be. It is notorious that the colder
nations of the North do not understand such things.

In parts of Sicily strange barbaric beliefs may yet be found.
On 8 September, 1896, near Messina a young boy was lost,
and it was discovered upon official inquiry that certain
ignorant peasants, dreaming they were on the track of a
buried treasure, had stolen the child whom they actually
sacrificed alive, since they were assured that human blood
would infallibly secure for them what they sought. I can
well remember the thrill of horror that ran throughout all
Italy at the disclosure of this monstrous crime.


ITALY 579


Needless to say all superstitions are forbidden by the
Church, and evil or baneful practices, intending harm and
often combined with some filthy circumstance, would fall
beneath a particular ban. With regard to idle and empty
charms, in which to simple folk the events might often seem
to justify the performance, it may be said that the univer-
sality of such incongruous beliefs and observances, though not
always inducing inculpable ignorance, may possibly obscure
the knowledge and weaken the will to a degree incompatible
with mortal sin, nay, formal guilt may often be reduced to a
vanishing point by easy credulity.


NOTES TO CHAPTER VII


1 Mystéres de la Chevalerie et de amour platonique, 1858. The views
expressed in Dante Hérétique, 1854, do not commend themselves to my
judgement.

* Alexander IV showed great favour to the Greyfriars, and among his
earliest official acts was the canonization of S. Clare.

3 Vaissette, Histoire du Languedoc, IX, p. 39.

4 Of which see the Pontiff himself had formerly (1300-10) been bishop.

5 “ Diuinationibus et sortilegiis se immiscuerunt, perperam dianis non-
nunquam utentes.” It has been suggested that Dzani are succubi, but I
would rather understand ‘‘ familiars.’’ The familiar was often employed for
purposes of divination. In the confession of Silvain Nevillon, who was tried at |
Orleans in 1614 (De Lancre, L’Incredulité, pp. 801-3), we have: “‘ Qu’il y a des
Sorciers qui nourrissent des Marionettes, qui sont de petits Diableteaux en
forme de Crapaux. . . . Et quand ils veulent aller en marchandise on coiier, &
scauoir s'il y fera bon ils regardent si les-dites Marionettes sont ioyeuses, en
ce cas ils vont en marchandise, ou ioiier : mais si elles sont maussades & tristes,
ils ne bougent de la maison. Gentilon Gentié le Clere dit qu’il auoit plus
d’acquest en sa Marionette qu’en Dieu.”

6 [ Johannes, XXII.] Uenerabili fratri Bartholomeo episcopo Foroiuliens i
et dilecto filio magistro Petro Textoris doctori decretorum priori monasterii
Sancti Antonini diocesis Ruth[enensis] per priorem soliti gubernari ac Petro
de Pratis iuris ciuilis professori preposito ecclesie Claromontensis, capellanis
nostris.

Romanus pontifex, ad quem ex officii debito principaliter pertinet saluti
animarum intendere, eo uacare debet instantius circa corrigendos filios
exorbitantes a fide, quo cercius ad salutem aliquid ualere non posse dinoscitur,
si non in fidei radice fundatur. Ad nostrum siquidem assertio fide digna et
sonorum quoddam uulgaris fame preloquium nouiter perduxit auditum, quod
Iohannes de Lemouicis, Iacobus dictus Brabantinus, Iohannes de Amanto
medicus, Radulphus Penchaclau, Gualterus Loflamene, Guillelmus Marini,
Conradus Alamannus, et quondam Thomas dictus Alamannus, clerici et
Innocentius barbitonsor uenerabilis fratris nostri archiepiscopi
Lugdunensis diocesum et nonnulli alii in nostra curia residentes, nolentes
iuxta doctrinam apostoli sobrie sapere, sed nimie uanitatis ebrietate desipere
reprobis ausibus appetentes, se nigromancie, geomancic et aliarum magicarum
artium moliminibus implicarunt et implicant, scripta et libros habentes
huiusmodi artium, que quidem, cum sint artes demonum ex quadam pestifera
societate hominum et angelorum malorum exorte, uitande forent cuilibet


580 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


christiano et omni penitus execratione dampnande, speculis et ymaginibus
secundum oritum suum execrabilem consecratis usi fuere frequenter ac in
circulis se ponentes malignos spiritus sepius inuocarunt, ut per eos contra
salutem hominum molirentur aut eos interimendo uiolentia carminis aut
eorum abreuiando uitam uiolentia immissa langoris, demones in speculis,
circulis seu anulis interdum incluserunt, ut eos nedum de preteritis set et de
futuris inquirerent, futura ipsa, que prescire solius dei est, ex illorum con-
sultationibus predicturi, diuinationibus et sortilegiis se immiscuerunt,
perperam dianis nonnunquam utentes. Sed et experimenta quam plurima
quandoque fecerunt circe hee et alia per eos demonibus inuocatis. Nec
uerentur asserere, quod nedum potus uel cibi propinatione, quin etiam solius
uerbi prolatione hominum abreuiare seu prorogare uitam aut prorsus perimere
et ab omni possent infirmitate curare, talibus se usos fuisse firmiter affirmantes.
Relicto preterea creatore suo in huiusmodi demonum suffragiis confidentes
eosque dignos arbitrantes, quibus seruiant et quibus honores diuinos impen-
dant, illos ydolatrarum more adorare cum exhibitione cultus et reuerentie
presumpserunt. Hiis et aliis superstitionibus detestandis et aduersantibus
catholice fidei prefati clerici et barberius et eorum quilibet, necnon aliqui alii
residentes in curia non semel sed pluries institiss feruntur, nedum in suarum
sed in quamplurium aliarum periculum animarum. Quia igitur pestem
superstitionum huiusmodi, quarum reprobos sectatores ciuilis ratio comunis
salutis hostes reputat et humani generis inimicos, nec uolumus nec ualemus
conniuentibus oculis pertransire, presertim cum labem sapiant heretice
prauitatis, super predictis omnibus et singulis zelo fidei, cuius negotium est
ubique fauorabiliter prosequendum, ad inquisitionem contra clericos
barberium et alios memoratos censuimus procedendum, non obstante quod
predictus quondam Thomas in fata decesserit, cum de talibus agatur
criminibus, de-quibus etiam licet memoriam accusare defuncti, cuius post
mortem comprobata perfidia debite plecti debet. Quocirca uobis et uestrum
cuilibet in solidum, de quorum discretione plenam in domino fiduciam gerimus,
auctoritate presentium committimus et mandamus, quatinus super premissis
omnibus et singulis specificatis ac dependentibus ex eisdem nec non super
quibuslibet, de quibus predictos clericos, barberium et alios quoslibet in ipsa
curia existentes inueneritis publice diffamatos, cum ipsis et cum personis aliis,
quas ad id uideritis expedientes et utiles, summarie et de plano sine strepitu et
figura iudicii ac omni appellatione cessante solum deum habendo pre oculis
inquiratis exacta diligentia ueritatem et inquisicionem exinde factam, prout
iustum fuerit, fine debito terminetis. Nos enim uobis et uestrum cuilibet
in solidum, ita quod non sit melior condicio occupantis, sed quod unus uestrum,
quandocunque et quocienscunque incepit, alter resumere seu continuare
valeat et finire, premissa omnia et singula faciendi testes et personas alias ad
hoc oportunas, prout et quociens uobis expediens esse uidebitur, super hiis
admittendi, euocandi et ad partes personaliter citandi, contradictores et
rebelles per censuram ecclesiasticam auctoritate apostolica compellendi et alia
faciendi et exequendi, que pro predictis uel ea tangentibus expedientia fuerint,
tam de dualus dictis in concilio generali quam aliis quibuscunque contrariis
constitutionibus per predecessores nostros Romanos pontifices editis nequa-
quam obstantibus, plenam et liberam tenore presentium concedimus potes-
tatem. Dat. Auinione iii kl. Martii.

* To be distinguished from William Durandus the Younger (0b. 1328),
nephew of the famous ritualist and canonist with whom he is often con-
founded ; as also from the Dominician Durandus of Saint-Pourcgain, Doctor
Resolutissimus (0b. 1332).

® Pastor, History of the Popes (London, 1891), I, 190, and Hergenréther,
Kirchengeschichte, II, 1, 65, deny the legitimacy of this papacy. But the name
of Alexander V occurs in the Roman Gerarchia Cattolica, which prior to 1906
gave a chronological list of the popes, and in 1889 the tomb of Alexander V at
8. Francis in Bologna was magnificently restored by order of Leo XIII.

® He was elected 11 November, 1417, at Constance, which city he left for
Rome, 16 May, 1418.

0 It must be remembered that in medieval times the archdiocese of


ITALY 581


Narbonne was of the greatest importance. Bernard de Fargues founded the
Narbonne College at Paris.

-: Elected 20 December, 1334; died at Avignon 24 April, 1342.

Notwithstanding his defence, Apologia J. Pici Mirandolani Concordice
comitis, 1480.

13 Tt is now venerated in S. Peter’s.

14 The alleged permission granted by Innocent VIII to the Norwegians to
celebrate Mass without wine is a forgery. Bullarium Romanum, III, 111
(Rome, 1743), 190-225.

15 The idle stories about the Jewish doctor and the infusion of blood, culled
from the shameless liar Infessura, may be ignored. It is a pity that these and
other trattles should be graphically retailed in the pages of so brilliant a writer
as John Addington Symonds.

16 His own youth was loose enough, and his Caccia d’ Amore (Venice, 1526
and 1537) is not particularly puritan.

17 His works were published at Florence, 1497, Hymni et Epigrammata
Marulli. Poliziano, who loathed him, has some stinging epigrams which lash
him well. Incidentally Poliziano’s sapphics Innocentio Pontifici Maz. are
exceedingly fine.

18 Leo the Tenth, 4th ed., London, 1846, Vol. I, p. 81.

'1® Innocentius episcopus, seruus seruorum dei, ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
Summis desiderantes affectibus, prout pastoralis sollicitudinis cura requirit,
ut fides catholica nostris potissime temporibus ubique augeatur et floreat ac
omnis heretica prauitas de finibus fidelium procul pellatur, ea libenter declar-
amus ac etiam de nouo concedimus, per que huiusmodi pium desiderium
nostrum uotiuum sortiatur effectum, cunctisque propterea per nostre
operationis ministerium, quasi per prouidi operationis sarculum erroribus
extirpatis, eiusdem fidei zelus et obseruantia in ipsorum corda fidelium fortius
imprimatur.

Sane nuper ad nostrum non sine ingenti molestia peruenit auditum, quod in
nonnullis partibus Alemaniz superioris necnon in Maguntinensi, Coloniensi,
Treuirensi, Saltzburgensi et Bremensi prouinciis, ciuitatibus, terris, locis et
diocesibus quamplures utriusque sexus persone, propriz salutis immemores
et a fide catholica deuiantes, cum dzemonibus incubis et succubis abuti ac
suis incantationibus, carminibus et coniurationibus aliisque nefandis super-
stitiis et sortilegiis, excessibus, criminibus et delictis mulierum partus,
animalium foetus, terre fruges, uinearum uuas et arborum fructus necnon
homines, mulieres, iumenta, pecora, pecudes et alia diuersorum generum
animalia, uineas quoque, pomeria, prata, pascua, blada, frumeuter et alia
terre legumine perire, suffocari et extingui facere et procurare, ipsosque
homines, mulieres, iumenta, pecora, pecudes et animalia diris tam intrinsecis
quam extrinsecis doloribus et tormentis afficere et excruciare, ac eosdem
homines ne gignere, et mulieres ne concipere, uirosque ne uxoribus, et
mulieres ne uiris actus coniugiales reddere ualeant, impedire ; fidem preterea
ipsam, quam in sacri susceptione baptismi susceperunt, ore sacrilego abnegare,
aliaque quamplurima nefanda, excessus et crimina, instigante humani generis
inimico, committere et perpetrare non uerentur, in animarum suarum perl-
culum, diuine maiestatis offensam ac perniciosum exemplum ac scandalum
plurimorum. Quodque licet dilecti filii Henricus Institoris, in preedictis
partibus Alemaniz superioris, in quibus etiam prouinciz, ciuitates, terre,
diceceses et alia loca huiusmodi comprehensa fore censentur, necnon Jacobus
Sprenger, per certas partes linee Rheni, ordinis fratrum Preedicatorum et
theologie professores, heretice prauitatis inquisitores per literas apostolicas
deputati fuerint, prout adhuc existunt, tamen nonnulli clerici et laici illarum
partium, querentes plura sapere quam oporteat, pro 60 quod in literis deputa-
tionis huiusmodi prouincie, civitates, diceceses, terre et alia loca preedicta
illarum que persone ac excessus huiusmodi nominatim et specifice expressa
non fuerunt, illa sub eisdem partibus minime contineri et propterea prefatis
inquisitoribus in prouinciis, ciuitatibus, dicecesibus, terris et locis predictis
huiusmodi inquisitionis officium exequi non licero et ad personarum earundem
super excessibus et criminibus antedictis punitionem, incarcerationem et


582 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


_ correctionem admitti non debere, pertinaciter asseuere non erubescunt.
Propter quod in prouinciis, ciuitatibus, dicecesibus, terris et locis preedictis
excessus et crimina huiusmodi non sine animarum earundem euidenti iactura
et xterne salutis dispendio remanent impunita. : be P

Nos igitur impedimenta quzlibet, per que ipsorum inquisitorum officii
executio quomodo libet retardari posset, de medio submouere, et ne labes
heretice prauitatis aliorumque excessuum huiusmodi in perniciem aliorum
innocentium sua uenena, diffundat, opportunis remediis, prout nostro incumbit
officio, providere uolentes, fidei zelo ad hoc maxime nos impellente, ne
propterea continget prouincias, ciuitates, diceceses, terras et loca predicta sub
eisdem partibus Alemaniz superioris debito inquisitionis officio carere, eisdem
inquisitoribus in illis officium inquisitionis huiusmodi exequi licere et ad
personarum earundem super excessibus et criminibus pradictis correctionem,
incarcerationem et punitionem admitti debere, perinde in omnibus et per
omnia acsi in literis predictis prouincie, ciuitates, diceceses, terre et loca ac
persone et excessus huiusmodi nominatim et specifice expressa forent,
auctoritate apostolica tenore presentium statuimus. Proque potiori cautela
literas et deputationem predictas ad prouincias, ciuitates, diceceses,
terras et loca necnon personas et crimina huiusmodi extendentes, prefatis
inquisitoribus, quod ipsi et alter eorum, accersito secum dilecto fitio Ioanne
Cremper, clerico Constantiensis dicecesis, magistro in artibus, eorum
moderno seu quouis alio notario publico, per ipsos et quemlibet eorum pro
tempore deputando in prouinciis, ciuitatibus, dicecesibus, terris et locis
predictis contra quascumque personas, cuiuscumque conditionis et pre-
eminentiz fuerint, huiusmodi inquisitionis officium exequi ipsasque personas,
quas in premissis culpabiles repererint, iuxta eorum demerita corrigere,
incarcerare, punire et mulctare, necnon in singulis prouinciarum huiusmodi
parochialibus ecclesiis uerbum dei fideli populo quotiens expedierit ac eis
uisum fueirt, proponere et predicare, omniaque alia et singula in premissis
et circa ea necessaria et opportuna facere et similiter exequi libere et
licite ualeant, plenam ac liberam eadem auctoritate de nouo concedimus
facultatem.

Et nihilominus uenerabili fratri nostro episcopo Argentinensi per apostolica
scripta mandamus, quatenus ipse per se uel alium seu alios premissa, ubi,
quando et quotiens expedire cognouerit fueritque pro parte inquisitorum
huiusmodi seu alterius eorum legitime requisitus, solemniter publicans, non
permittat eos per quoscunque super hoc contra predictarum et presentium
literarum tenorem quauis auctoritate molestari seu alias quomodolibet
impediri ; molestatores et impedientes et contradictores quoslibet et rebelles,
cuiuscumque dignitatis, status, gradus, preeminentia, nobilitatis et excel-
lentis aut conditionis fuerint et quocunque exemptionis priuilegio sint
muniti, per excommunicationis, suspensionis et interdicti ac alias etiam
formidabiliores, de quibus sibi uidebitur, sententias, censuras et poenas, omni
appellatione postposita, compescendo, et etiam legitimis super his per eum
seruandis processibus, sententias ipsas, quotiens opus fuerit, aggrauare et
reaggrauare auctoritate nostra procuret, inuocato ad hoc, si opus fuerit,
auxilio brachii secularis.

Non obstantibus premissis ac constitutionibus et ordinationibus apostolicis
contrariis quibuscunque, etc.

Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat, etc. Si quis, etc.

Datum Rome apud S. Petrum, anno incarnationis dominice millesimo
quadringentesimo octuagesimo quarto, nonis Decembris, pontificatus nostri
anno primo,

*° Relatum est nobis, quod feruenter defensionem fidei suscipis aduersus
hereticos quantumque opere et fauoris inquisitoribus prestas. Commendamus
itaque deuotionem tuam et animi tui religionem ac probitatem, Fungeres enim
officio boni et catholici prelati.

#1 The month and day are not found.

22 Cum ‘acceperimus, in prouincia Lombardiz diuersas utriusque sexus
personas diuersis incantationibus et diabolicis superstiticionibus operam dare
suisque ueneficiis et uariis obseruationibus multa refanda scelera procurare,


ITALY 583


homines et iumenta ac campos destruere et diuersos errores inducere magnaque
inde scelere exoriri, decreuimus pro pastoralis officii nobis exalto commissi
ministerio scelere huiusmodi compescere ac scandalis et erroribus premissis,
quantum cum deo possumus, occurrere.

*8 Dilecto filio Modesto Uincentino ord. Pred. Dudum, uti nobis exponi
fecisti, per fel. rec. Iulium papam II predecessorem nostrum non sine magna
tune animi sui displicentia accepto, quod per quendam Georgium de Casali,
ordinis fratrum Predicatorum professorem et in ciuitate Cremonensi hxretice
prauitatis inquisitorem deputatum, in nonnullis Lombardix partibus et
presertim in locis, in quibus dictus Georgius inquisitor deputatus erat,
reperte fuerunt quamplures utriusque sexus persone, proprie salutis
immemores et. a fide catholica deuiantes, certam sectam facientes, fidem,
quam in sacri susceptione baptismatis susceperant, abnegantes, sanctam
crucem pedibus conculcantes et opprobria super eam perpetrantes, ecclesi-
asticis et presertim eucharistie sacramentis abutentes, diabolum in suum
dominum et patronum assumentes eique obedientiam et reuerentiam
exhibentes, et suis incantationibus, carminibus, sortilegiis, aliisque nefandis
superstitionibus homines, animalia et fructus terre multipliciter ledentes,
aliaque quamplurima nefanda, excessus et crimina eodem diabolo instigante
committentes et perpetrantes, in animarum suarum periculum, divine
maiestatis offensam, perniciosum quoque exemplum et scandalum plurimorum.
Contra quas, cum (ut predictus Georgius tunc asserebat) in dictis locis suze
inquisitioni deputatis, prout ipsius Georgii incumbebat officio, ipse processisset,
nonnulli autem tam clerici quam laici illarum partium, querentes plus sapere
quam oporteret, premissa delicta ad eiusdem Georgii inquisitionis officium
non pertinere temere asserere presumentes, in populo odiosum reddere et
dicti Georgii officium impedire conati fuerant, prout etiam tunc impediebant,
ita quod propter premissa persons predicts delicta huiusmodi perpetrantes
remanebant impunite et alie earum exemplo ad similia perpetranda
quotidie inducebantur, in non modicum fidei opprobrium, animarum
periculum et scandalum plurimorum. Dictus predecessor uolens, ne inquisi-
tionis officii executio quomodolibet retarderetur et labes heretice prauitatis
longius uenena diffunderet, prouidere, dicto Georgio per quasdam suas in forma
breuis literas commisit et mandauit, quatenus in locis eiusdem Georgii inquisi-
tioni deputatis de excessibus huiusmodi cognoscere, et contra quascunque
personas cuiuscunque conditionis et preeminentie fuerint inquisitionis
officium exercere et exequi, ipsasque personas, quas in premissis culpabiles
reperiret, una cum locurum ordinariorum uicariis, quatenus uoluissent
interesse, iuxta dictarum personarum demerita corrigere et punire deberet
et ualeret, secundum modum contra alios hereticos a iure et sacris
canonibus statutum, contradictores quoscunque per censuras ecclesiasticas
et alia iuris remedia compescendo. Eos uero, qui in premissis consilium,
auxilium vel fauorem prestarent, prefatus predecessor noster eisdem
indulgentiis ubi et gaudere decreuit, quibus crucesignati contra alios hxreticos,
ex indulto apostolico eis concesso, tune gaudebant et utebantur, prout in
dictis litteris plenius contineri dicitur. Et sicut eadem expositio subiungebat,
non solum delicta et crimina huiusmodi contra fidem catholicam et christianam
religionem sub iurisdictione inquisitoris Cremonensis committuntur et perpe-
trantur, sed in omnibus aliis locis et dicecesibus sub iurisdictione aliorum
inquisitorum dicti ordinis congregationis Lombardia in dies perpetrantur et
committuntur. Et cum eadem sint delicta, eadem profecto prouisione et
castigatione eis est iuxta earundem literarum tenorem prouidendum. Quare
tu, [qui] sicut asseris, in ciuitate Comensi dict prauitatis inquisitor deputatus
existis, tam tuo, quam aliorum omnium dictorum ordinis et congregationis
heretice prauitatis inquisitorum ubilibet consistentium et deputatorum
nominibus fecisti nobis similiter supplicari, ut literas predictas ad uos
extendere et ampliare aliasque desuper opportune prouidere dignaremur.
Nos igitur huiusmodi supplicationibus inclinati, literas preedictas cum omnibus
in eis contentis clausulis in omnibus et per omnia, prout in eisdem literis
continetur, ad te et alios ordinis et congregationis huiusmodi inquisitores,
tam in presentiarum deputatos quam in futuram perpetuis futuris temporibus


584 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


deputandos, ac si tibi et cuilibet dictorum inquisitorum dirigerentur et
direct fuissent, apostolica auctoritate tenore presentium extendimus ipsas
que literas tibi et illis, ut premittitur, eisdem auctoritate et tenore concedimus.
Non obstantibus omnibus illis, que idem Iulius predecessor in dictis literis
uoluit non obstare, czterisque contrariis quibuscunque. Et quia difficile foret,
presentes literas ad singula loca, in quibus de eis fides forsan fuerit facienda,
deferre, uolumus et apostolica auctoritate decernimus, quod ipsarum trans-
sumptis manu cuiuscunque notarii publici subscriptis et sigillo alicuius curie
ecclesiastics seu person@ in dignitate ecclesiastice constitute munitis in
iudicio et alibi, ubi opus fuerit, eadem prorsus fides adhibeatur, que adhiberetur
eisdem prasentibus, si forent exhibitz vel ostense. Datum Rome apud sanctum
Petrum sub annulo piscatoris die 20. Iulii, 1623, pontificatus nostri anno primo
rimo.

‘i 24 Hoc autem non narrasset neque talia iussisset sanctissimus dominus
noster, si tales persone sc. Striges, que indicantur heretic, non uero essent
heretic, uel si ea, que per ipsas fiunt, propter que iudicentur heretice,
solum essent illusiones diaboli.

25 MS. Sixtus V, Pontifex Maximus, Bibl. Altien., 80 pages.

28 T have used the original publication, ‘‘Anno a Natiuitate Domini,
Millesimo quingentesimo Octuagesimo sexto,” with signature ‘‘ H. Proilat.
Ioannes Baptista Canobius.” The Bullariwm Romanum, *‘ Taurinensis editio ”
(ed. Sebastian and Henry Dalmazza), 1863, gives this Constitution in Vol. VIII,
pp. 646 sqq.

27 Cotgrave (1611) has, Mathematicien: a Mathematician ... a caster
of nativities.

28 Contra Exercertes Iudiciarisa Astrologie Artem Et alia quecunque
diuinationum genera, librosque de eis legentes ac tenentes. Fallaces et uane,
improborum hominum astutia et demonum fraudibus introducte, ex quorum
operatione, consilio uel auxilio omnis diuinatio dimanat. . . . Que quidem
ipsis cognita sunt, non diuinitate aliqua nec uera futurarum rerum scientia
sed nature subtilioris acumine, et aliis quibusdam modis, quos hominum
obtusior intelligentia ignorat. Quambrem dubitandum non est, in huiusmodi
futurorum contingentium et fortuitorum euentuum inquisitione et pre-
cognitione, diaboli operationem se fallaciter immiscere, ut sua fraude ac dolis
miseros homines a@ uia salutis auertat, et laqueo damnationis inuoluat. .. .
tales in primis sunt Astrologi, olim Mathematici, Genethliaci, et Planetarij
uocati. . . . Alij enim Geomatis#, Hydromantie#, Aeromantiz, Pyromantiz,
Onomantia, Chiromantix, Necromantia, alijsq; sortilegijs & superstitionibus,
non sine Demon saltem occulta societate, aut tacita pactione, operam dare,
seu illis, ac sortibus illicitis taxillorum, granorum triticeorum, uel fabarum
iactu vti non uerentur. Alij item sunt, qui eG Morte fedus ineunt, & pactu
faciunt cu Inferno, qui similiter ad occultori diuinationem ad inueniendos
thesauros, uel ad alia facinora perpetranda, etia expressa cli Diabolo pactione
facta, in manifesta suart perniciem animari, nefarias magic artis incitationes,
instruméta, & ueneficia, adhibent circulos, & diabolicos characteres describunt
Demones inuocant aut consulunt, ab eis responsa petunt, aut accipiunt, eis
preces & thuris, aut aliarum rerum suffimenta, seu fumicationes, aliaue
sacrificia offerunt, candelas accendunt, aut rebus sacris, uel Sacramentis, aut
Sacramentalibus, sacrilegs abutuntur, adorationis, genuflexionis, aut queuis
alia impietatis obsequia prestant, cultum uenerationemue tribuunt, aut
anulum, uel speculum, aut! paruas phyalas sibi fabricant, aut fabricari curant
ad Demones in eis alligandos, seu includendos, vt putant, ad responsa ab
ipsis inde petenda, aut habenda . . . etiamsi in plerisque ex his casibus antea
non pracedebant aut procedere non ualebant . . . omnes & singulos libros,
opera, & tractatus huiusmodi iudiciaria Astrologie, Geomantie, Hydro-
mantiz, Pyromantiz, Onomantiz, Chiromantie, Necromantiz, Artis Magica,
aut in quibus sortilegia, ueneficia, atiguria, auspicia, execrabiles incantationes
ac superstitiones continentur.

39 Instruttione al padre Don Tobia Corona, de’ chierici regolart, mandato da


1S. and H. Dalmazzo, the editors of the Bullarium Romanum, VIII, Turin, 1863, omit “ aut
anulum, uel speculum, aut,”


ITALY 585


Papa Gregorio XV al re di Francia e prima al duca di Servoia per Vimpreso della
cittd dt Ginevra. MS. 26 leaves, 4to, Frankfort Library.

9° S.mi D. N. D. Gregorii, Papx XV. Constitutio Aduersus Maleficia, se
Sortilegia committentes, (Rome, ex Typographia Reuerenda Camere
Apostolic, MDOXXIII.] Gregorius Papa XV. Ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
Omnipotentis Dei Saluatoris Nostri, qui, ut hominem a laqueis Diaboli
liberaret, Crucem subire dignatus est, uices, quaamquam immeriti, gerentes in
terris, in id summo studio, iuxta creditum Nobis desuper Apostolic seruitutis
officium, incumbimus, ut gregem Dominicum, inzstimabili pretio redemptum,
aduersus Sathane fraudes defendamus, ciusdem officii partes desuper inter-
ponendo, prout conspicimus in Domino salubriter expedire. Sane nonnulli sue
conditionis obliti, et solemnis sponsionis ab iis facte, cum in Christi gregem
per Sacrum regenerationis lauacrum adsciti fuerunt, Sathane, cui renunciarunt,
artibus, maleficiis, superstitionibus, ac nefariis inventis operam dare non
uetentur, quinimo Magistrum imitantes, qui capitali odio, quo humanum
genus prosequitur, hominibus insidiari nunquam cessat, proximum uariis
modis ledere, animas uero suas perdere, non timent. Quapropter, ut tam
exitiosa scelera a Christifidelibus arceantur, grauioribus penis uindicanda
duximus. Motu itaque proprio, et ex certa scientia, ac matura deliberatione,
nostrea deque Apostolice potestatis plenitudine, tenore presentium
decernimus, precipimus, et mandamus, ut constito, quod aliquis pactum
cum Diabolo fecerit, et a fide apostatando, maleficiis, siue sortilegiis unam,
seu plures personas ita leserit, ut ex maleficio, uel sortilegio mors secuta sit,
etiam pro primo lapsu, Curie seculari tradatur, debitis poonis puniendus:
Qui uero, similiter apostatando pactum cum Diabolo, ut prefertur fecerit, et
maleficium, seu sortilegium commiserit, ex quo, licet mors secuta non sit,
infirmitas tamen, diuortia, impotentia generandi, sive animalibus, frugibus,
uel aliis fructibus damnum notabile prouenerit, muro claudi, sive perpetuis
carceribus in Sancto Inquisitionis officio, ubi illud existit, fabricandis,
mancipari debeat: Qui uero similium delinquentium notitiam habuerint, eos
Episcopo, sive Inquisitori denunciare teneantur. Non obstantibus consti-
tutionibus, et ordinationibus Apostolicis, ceterisque, contrariis quibuscunque.
Uolumus autem, quod presentium transumptis, etiam impressis, manu alicuius
Notarii publici subscriptis, et sigillo alicuius persone in dignitate Ecclesiastica,
constitute: munitis eadem prorsus, fides ubique adhibeatur, que eisdem
praesentibus adhiberetur, si forent exhibite, vel ostense ; quodque eedem
presentes, postquam in ualuis Basilicarum Sancti Ioannis Lateranensis, ac
Principis Apostolorum de Urbe, et Cancellariz Apostolice, necnon in acie
Campi Flore affixe fuerint, omnes, et singulos, ad quos spectat, arctent, et
efficiant, perinde acsi unicuique personaliter intimates fuissent. Dat. Roma
apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo piscatoris, die 20 Martii MDCOXXIII,
Pontificatus nostri Anno Tertio. S. Card. 8. Susanne

31 E.g. Dom Michael Ott, 0.8.B., Professor of the History of Philosophy,
S. John’s University Collegeville, Minnesota, Gregory XV.

32 Romz, MDCXXXI, Ex Typographia Reu. Cam. Apost. Et Uenetiis,
Apud Andream Baba, Si vende a S. Marco sotto li Portici delle Procuratie noue.
It has been reprinted in the Bullarium Romanum, Vol. XIV, 1868, under the
supervision of Cardinal Bilio, pp. 211-14.

88 J, 20. The lines have been translated into Latin by Alciat in his Hmblems.
It is curious that since the walnut tree had so unfortunate a name nuts were
scattered among the crowd at a wedding whilst the Fescennines were sung.
But so Pliny says, and calls “‘ nuces iuglandes . . . nuptialium Fescenninorum
comites.”? Historia Naturalis, XV, 86. One may compare the commentary of
Servius on Vergil’s Hclogue VIII, 29 and 30, where he explains that the nuts
were scattered to boys on these occasions “ ut significarent se puerilia cuncta
iam spernere.” In the exquisite Zpithalamium of Catullus we have :

Da nuces pueris iners
Concubine: satis diu
Lusisti nucibus : lubet
Iam seruire Thalassio.
Concubine, nucas da.


586 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


34 J, A. Symonds, Italian Literature, XIV. Fel =

35 “ Huc illuc uagari solitum fuisse uerosimile putamus... . Theophili
animus continuis fluctibus iactabatur.” De Theophili Folengi Rebus Gestis et
Scriptis, 3.

36 T have used the edition Amstelodami, 1769 and 1771, 2 vols., 4to.
Amsterdam is doubtless Mantua. My copy was that of the late John Addington’
Symonds, and his pencilled notes in the margins are very interesting and
valuable. ‘

37 Folengo jestingly relates that this poem owed its inspiration to a witch
of Val Camonica.

38 Dies Jouis, quibus unctze Sage, ad maleficia peragenda noctu per erem
ferri credunt nimiz credulitatis mulieres.

39 Obsequium coram exhibere.

40 Cum in maleficiis detegerentur Sage flammis tradebantur.

41 Macaronca XX. ’ :

42 De spuma quam Rubeta ab ore emittit. Zatto in the Mantuan dialect is
a toad, :

43 Detestabili sane sacrilegio, qui magicis se artibus addicunt, rebus sacris
ad maleficia peragenda abutuntur.

4 Arcana, que in magicis libris, reperiuntur.

45 Marcide.

Parua uasa fictilia.

47 Dandolo, La Signora di Monza, Milano, 1855.

Decrepitz, que terebratis nucibus, et uacuis comparantur.

49 Sagarum precepta.

50 Medullas extrahant.

51 Sensus est, quomodo efficiant, ut Diabolus formam induat Amasii.

52 The Wonderfull Discoverie of Witches ... by Thomas Potts, Esq.,
London, 1613, reprinted by the Chetham Society, J. Crossley, ed., 1845.

53 Thomas Cooper, Mystery of Witchcraft, London, 1617, pp. 90-2.

54 But the Decretal, for the full text of which see supra, p. 583, was issued
in 1523, four years after the first edition of Folengo’s poem.

55 T cannot agree with Symonds that ‘‘ under the allegory of witchcraft, in
which at the same time he seems to have believed firmly, Folengo meant to
satirise the secret corruption of Society.’’ In 1519 Italian society was notori-
ously not secretly corrupt. Folengo believed in witchcraft, and every detail
is authentic.

56 Cantu, Storia della citta e della diocesi di Como, 2 vols, Milan, 1829-31.

57 De Strigibus, c. xiii.

58 One of the most important and fullest MSS. (Vaticanus 3870) had been
brought to Rome, 1428-9.

5° Tn ancient days it was the custom to execute criminals here and bury
them on the spot. The Esquiline long bore an ugly reputation as witch-
haunted, a belief which persisted until the Middle Ages. One may compare
Horace, Sermonum, I, viii, the traditional rubric to which ran ‘‘ Conqueritur
Priapus Esquilinum montem ueneficarum incantationibus infestari.”

60 There is a pertinent allusion in Folengo, Macaronea XXI: Qualiter ad
stagnum Nurse sacrare quadernos.

$1 Novelle di Antonfrancesco Grazzini detto Il Lasca, in Londra, 1756,
pp. 200-34.

62 Compendio delli casi piu degni e memorandi occorsi nelli pontificati da
Gregorio XIII fino alla creatione di Clemente IX (1590-1667), MS., 50 leaves.
The record would seem to be by more than one hand. It is a collection of
notable events and happenings.

** A number of witches were burned at Bologna by order of Pope Paul IV
(Giovanni Pietro Caraffa), 1555-9.

64 Racconto delle cose piu considerabili che sono occorso nel governo di Roma
in tempo di Monsr Gio. Batt. Spada.

65 Ripamonte, De Peste Mediolani.

°° Relazione di Roma in Tempo di Pio IV e V, Paolo Tiepolo.

*” L’Incredulité et Mescreance du Sortilége, De Lancre, Paris, 1622.


i


ITALY 587


68 La Tradition, V, p. 215, Van Elven, 1891.

6° Akhelarre literally means “ goat pasture.”

70 Basque Legends, p. 66, Rev. Wentworth Webster, London, 1879, 2nd ed.

71 Discoverie of Witches, Thomas Potts,

72 Welsh Folklore, J. Ceredig Davies, Aberystwith, 1911, p. 231.

73 La Corte a la Societa Romana rei XVIII e XIX secoli, David Silvagni.

74 Htruscan Roman Remains, p. 238.

75 K.g. the Carmelite convent at San Remo. §. Elias is greatly honoured in
the Greek Church.

76 “Dies assign. ex 8 huius,”’ says the Officia Sanctorum Pro Ciuitate et Diocesi
Uenetiarum usque nunc Concessa, 1864.

77 Napoli 6 ricchissima di individui che dicendosi ispirati dal diavolo o
dai santi, danno per pochi soldi i numeri per giocare al lotto e il popolo
napoletano—il quale non giureremmo che creda in Dio, ma certamente crede
ai santi e al diavolo—ricorre sempre a costoro. . . . Una credenza originali-
sissima di questo popolo . . . 6 questa: se si trova un prete poco scrupoloso,
disposto a leggere il canone e dir la messa in onore del diavolo e a darir la
comunione del corpo di Satana, lo spirito maligno—noblesse oblige—vi ricom-
pensera subito dandovi un terno. Questa messa si chiama messa nera, e quei
preti affamati, sporchi come lazzoroni del porto, che facilmente voi vedrete in
giro per le strette e fangose vie della Napoli vecchia, sono continuamente
pregati di tal favori. Essi, Talleyrands in sessantaquattresimo, voltanto
senza, troppa difficolta le spalle al buon Dio per recitare la messa nera. . . .
Auri sacra fames. Alfredo Niceforo, L’Italia Barbara Contemporanea, Milano,
1898, pp. 81-3. An interesting but exaggerated book.


CHAPTER VIII
SPAIN


Tue origin of Spanish Christianity is apostolic, and there
exists a venerable tradition that not only S. James but also
S. Paul visited the Peninsula, which under Roman domina-
tion had attained a high estate of culture and civilization.
The Spanish calendar boasts a remarkable number of early
martyrs, and Prudentius tells us that very many fervent
souls witnessed their faith even to blood in every one of the
persecutions. During this period, too, important Councils
were held in Spain, and in 380 at the Council of Saragossa
Priscillianism was expressly condemned. This heresy was
derived from the Gnostic. Manichean doctrines taught by
Marcus, an Egyptian from Memphis, one of whose disciples,
the rhetorician Helpidius, contrived to seduce Priscillian,
““a man of noble birth and great riches, bold, restless,
eloquent.” In a short time the neophyte became the leader
of the party and an ardent propagator of strange and extrava-
gant errors. The foundation of the Priscillianist heresy was
the Dualism of Mani, a belief in a kingdom of Darkness which
rivalled and might overcome the kingdom of Light. It was
taught that the death of Our Lord was phantasmal, and there
was much obscure and involved angelology, in which allegory
became dogma, and fancy fact. Thus S. Gregory the Great
tells us that the Priscillianists imagined that every man was
born under the influence of a star, and that his lot was
mysteriously fixed by that star, since a new Star was seen
when Our Lord was born. ‘“‘ The Boy, however,” says the
Saint, “* was not guided by the star, but the star by the Boy.’’?
It is not necessary to pursue these exoteric and esoteric
tenets, which in practice led to repellent asceticism on the
one hand, such as fasting on Sundays and on Christmas Day,
and on the other hand to flagrant indecencies and unashamed
immorality of life.


588


SPAIN 589


In defiance of the Synod Priscillian was ordained to the
priesthood and consecrated Bishop of Avila. The Emperor
Gratian, however, issued a decree depriving the Priscillianists
of their churches, and the new-made prelate accompanied by
certain of his followers presently journeyed to Rome to plead
his cause with Pope S. Damasus I, only to find an audience
denied. At Milan S. Ambrose refused to receive them or to
use his influence on their behalf. They then resorted to
bribery and intrigue, and thus won over certain imperial
officials by whose offices they were reinstated in at least some
of the Spanish cities, whereupon Bishop Ithacius of Ossanova,
a strong opponent of the heretics, appealed to Gratian, who,
as it happened, was treacherously slain at Lyons 25 August,
883. Maximus, his successor, who had revolted against him,
was extremely anxious to gain a secure position, and deeming
that it was necessary to placate the orthodox party, gave
orders for a synod at Bordeaux in 384. Instantius, one of
the leaders of the Priscillianists, was condemned to deposition
by the assembly, whereupon Priscillian himself appealed to
the Emperor at Treves. The accusations brought against the
heretics were so many and so well founded that a sentence
of imprisonment was passed whilst future steps should be
considered. S. Martin of Tours, who was then at Treves,
intervened, and having justly expressed his disapproval of
bringing ecclesiastical cases before a civil court, obtained
from Maximus a promise that no blood should be shed. After
the Saint had left the town, the Emperor appointed the
Prefect Evodius, a severe and unyielding magistrate, to try
the cause. Ithacius seeing the inevitable sequel now declined
to press the charge, but Evodius after a long and careful
hearing found Priscillian guilty of lewd imposture, of
professing an obscene philosophy, and of black magic.* This
judgement was reported to the Emperor, who following the
rigour of the statute at once ordered Priscillian and some
other of his followers to be executed by the headsman on the
count of sorcery. In a little while S. Martin, hearing of what
had happened, protested energetically and upon his return
to Treves rebuked the Emperor face to face; S. Ambrose was
equally stern in his denunciation of the proceedings ; whilst
Pope S. Siricius (elected December, 884) gravely censured
both the Emperor and Ithacius, actually excommunicating


590 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Bishop Felix of Treves who pertinaciously defended their
proceedings. :

A period of some difficulty followed, for the Spanish
followers of the heretics increased in numbers and zeal.
There can be no doubt that the secret doctrines of the
Priscillianists comprised initiation into the lower forms of
magic ; Priscillian himself was known to have devoted himself
to the close study of occult arts from his earliest years. The
upheaval in the Peninsula consequent on the invasion of the
Vandals and the Suevi enormously helped the sect, which
was not wholly eradicated until the end of the sixth century.

After the sack of Rome by Alaric (410), the Visigoths, or
Western Goths, turned towards Spain, and before many
years began to extend their rule throughout the country,
almost entirely confining the Suevi to Galicia, the indepen-
dence of which territory was stoutly maintained, although
Kuric (466), who gave the earliest written laws to the
Visigoths, may be considered the first monarch of Spain.
The Visigoths were Arians, and in the following reigns the
Catholic kings of France appeared as protectors of the
Hispano-Roman Catholics. Religious unity was at last
obtained by Recared, the brother of S. Hermengild, who
had suffered martyrdom for rejecting communion with those
who denied the divinity of Christ. Recared accepted the
Catholic Faith in the Third Council of Toledo, 589.

One hundred years later saw the decay of the Gothic king-
dom. The fanatical hordes of Mahomet were already ad-
vancing through North Africa. The last Gothic King of
Spain, Roderic, son of Theodofridus, the thirty-third of that
line, reigned from 710 to 714. Legend has it that he violated
Florinda, La Cara, the beautiful daughter of Count Julian,
governor of Ceuta, who in revenge for this dishonour opened
to the Moslems the gates of the Peninsula.’ The battle of
Guadelete, when Roderic faced the foe, seems to have been
lost through the treachery of the partisans of Witiza, his
predecessor on the throne. The Arabs spread rapidly through
Andalusia, soon reaching Toledo, the Gothic capital, whilst
the Jews, who were numerous in the cities, facilitated their
advance. Musa, governor of Barbary, came to share the
triumph of the infidel, and in 714 he captured Saragossa,
and the period of the domination of the Crescent began.


SPAIN 591


The Mussulmen occupied Toledo for three hundred and
seventy-three years, and Saragossa for rather more than four
centuries.* Especially in these two cities did they establish
their schools of medicine and philosophy, which latter
included judicial astrology and other occult lore. Ere long
Toledo and Saragossa, as well as the University of Salamanca’?
(at a later date), became notorious throughout Europe as
nurseries of the black art. Blessed Gil of Santarem, a
Portuguese Dominican, in his youth excelled in scholarship.
Whilst on his way from Coimbra to the University of Paris
he fell into company with a courteous stranger who offered
to teach him magic at Toledo. As payment the stranger, a
Satanist, required that Gil should make over his soul to the
Devil, and sign the contract with his blood. After complying
with these conditions he devoted seven years to goetism and
hermetics at Toledo, whence he proceeded to Paris and
enjoyed a brilliant career. Repentance, however, came ;
he burned his grimoires, and returning to Portugal took the
habit of S. Dominic. After a long life of penitence and
prayer he died at Santarem, 14 May, 1295, and here his body
is still venerated. His cult was ratified by Benedict XIV,
9 March, 1748. His feast is observed 14 May.8

The old French romance? of the Christian enchanter Maugis
(the Malagigi of Ariosto) and his brother Vivian, the sons of
Beuves, count of Aigremont, contains some very singular
adventures. Maugis acquires the rudiments of magic with
supreme ease from the brother of a benevolent fairy, who
has rescued him when a babe stolen by a Moorish slave. His
first experiment is remarkable. Disguised as the Devil he
reaches the isle of Boucault, where he subdues and tames the
horse Bayardo, an exploit incidentally which Tasso assigns
to Rinaldo. This masquerade as a demon is interesting ;
it may hint at the dress and vizard assumed by the Grand
Master of a district when he was to preside over a Sabbat
in the person of Satan. After various other adventures
Maugis gains admittance to the necromantic societies of
Toledo, and here he completes his researches into wizardry,
ultimately obtaining the professor’s chair of sorcery in that
occult University.1°

This almost casual introduction of Toledo in a popular
romance as the headquarters of goetic lore and practice is


592 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


extremely significant. Luigi Pulci (1482-74) also has a
pointed reference in the Morgante Maggiore, where he writes :


The city of Toledo erst

Fostered the lore of necromancy,
Professors there, in magic versed,
From public chair taught pyromancy,
Or geomancy ; or rehearsed
Experiments in hydromancy.}?


In the Middle Ages the ignorance of the common folk
attached superstitious traditions to many of the greatest
names. Blessed Albert Magnus, O.P., ‘‘ Magnus in magia,
maior in philosophia, maximus in theologia ’’ was reported
to be an occultist advanced in goetic lore, and even S. Thomas
bore the reputation of a magician and a thaumaturge.??
Thus Blessed Ramén Lull,1? Doctor Illuminatus, the sweet
Catalan poet and profoundest mystic, was vulgarly bruited
to be an adept in hidden sciences, a master of secret arts, both
lawful and unlawful. No doubt his romantic life, his travels
to and fro, and many missionary adventures were utilized
to give some colour to the rumour, and so thickly had legend
and myth invested his name that even amongst the collected
editions of his works which appeared at Mainz from 1734
onwards in ten magnificent folios are included various
alchemical treatises. Between alchemy and sorcery popular
credulity drew a very thin line of distinction, and it has been
well said that “‘ the history of alchemy is, in the first place, a
history of fabulous ascriptions.”

Official proceedings against Witchcraft are comparatively
rare in Spanish history. This is, perhaps, because necro-
mancy and black magic were definitely associated with, if not
almost entirely merged in, heresy, and heresy fell under the
cognizance of the Holy Inquisition. Thus Nicolas Eymeric,
the famous theologian and inquisitor, who was born at
Gerona about 1820 and died there 4 January, 1399, in his
Directorium Inquisitorum, written as early as 1876 (published
Barcelona, 1503), particularly emphasizes that any fortune-
telling, the fashioning of love amulets, brewing of philtres,
or the like must be regarded as coming within the jurisdiction
of the Holy Office, more especially as Holy Water and other
Sacramentals, the Holy Oils, nay even the Blessed Sacrament
itself, are used to confect charms, and this constitutes


SPAIN 593


sacrilege in the highest degree. Sorcerers who give manifest
signs of repentance are to be treated leniently and reconciled,
but none the less they must always be regarded as suspect
of heresy.

It is noticeable that in Spain the regulations of the Papal
Bulls dealing with magic were adhered to very closely, and
prosecutions were conducted upon the prescribed lines. In
1507 the Inquisition of Calahorra was long busied with an
important case, at the conclusion of which thirty women were
burned as proven witches.’ Seemingly no details of the
trials are recorded, but in 1512 the assembly of the Cortes at
Monzon in Aragon memorialized Ferdinand V, asking him
to confine the authority of the Holy Office in charges of
sorcery to those issues enumerated in the Apostolic Constitu-
tion Super illius specula of John XXII (1826). Nor were
these representations ineffectual, for an important trial for
sorcery which took place in 1527 at Estella in Navarre was
relegated to a civil tribunal composed of members of the
Royal Council administering that province.

The facts are curious. Two little girls, the elder aged
eleven and the younger but nine, presented themselves of
their own accord at a sitting. of the Council and demanded
that their story should be heard. Such insistence seeming
unusual their depositions were taken. Both declared they
belonged to a sect to which they gave the name Jurginas.
They were stricken in conscience, and vowed that if their
lives were spared and mercy shown them they would deliver
over to justice a large number of persons belonging to this
secret society of sorcerers who were known to them. There
existed a certain occult sign!* whereby they could recognize
any witch who was a member of the coven. In this connexion
it is assuredly not impertinent to recall the fact that the
Manicheans had “signa oris, manus, et sinus,” and
Epiphanius gives us particulars of the Grip used by various
Gnostic bodies: ‘‘ On the arrival of any stranger belonging
to the same sect, they have a sign given by the man to the
woman and vice versa. In holding out the hand under the
pretence of saluting each other, they feel and tickle it in a
particular manner, underneath the palm, and by that means
discover whether the new-comer belongs to the same organiza-
tion.” The Albigenses and other dark brotherhoods had


594 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


words and signs by which they could recognize their fellows
without betraying themselves to the uninitiate.1° Ivan du
Narbonne, a convert from these horrid sects, in a letter to
Giraldus, Archbishop of Bordeaux, as cited by Matthew of
Paris, says that in every city where he travelled he was
always known by cryptic signs.*®

The Court, then, appointed a Commissary, who, with an
escort of fifty well-armed and mounted guardsmen, should
bear letters to the provosts and magistrates of the various
localities indicated by the two girls. They were to accompany
this band, and any persons whom they pointed out as suspect
must be forthwith examined by the authorities and questioned
as to their adherence to the infamous Jurginas. A number
of wretched hags were thus arrested and when interrogated
freely avowed their guilt. They confessed that they had
assisted at the Sabbat, that there they adored the Devil who
appeared to them as a monstrous buck-goat, black and
loathly. After having renounced Christ and His Immaculate
Mother, Holy Baptism and the Sacraments, they danced an
infernal saraband to the shrill skirl of a Zamora cornemuse.
The President of the Sabbat obliged them to salute him in an
obscene manner, the osculum infame, after which disgusting
ceremony food was provided. In Germany, France, and
England the banquet at these meetings seems to have been
plentiful and rich, the sorcerers gorging and cramming to
drunkenness and beastly repletion. At this repast, on the
contrary, only bread and cheese and wine were set before the
company. This homely fare has a parallel in the account
given by Goodwife Foster of Salem of the light collation
partaken with the Andover coven: ‘‘I enquired what she
did for Victuals ; She answered that she carried Bread and
Cheese in her pocket, and that she and the Andover Company
came to the Village before the Meeting began, and sat down
together under a tree, and eat their food, and thet she drank
water out of a Brook to quench her thirst.’’!?

The number of persons who acknowledged their guilt is
unknown, but there were more than one hundred and fifty
witches in the district of Estella alone. In some few cases
the accused confessed that they had destroyed their enemies
by secret poisoning, a very common method amongst the
members of these dark orders to ensure a complete and


SPAIN 595


speedy fulfilment of their threats and curses. For, as
Professor A. J. Clark points out, ‘the society of witches had
a very creditable knowledge of the art of poisoning.’’18

There can, I think, be no doubt in the face of the accumu-
lated evidence that Satanism was fairly extensively spread in
the North of Spain. There is no reason to question the truth
of these turpitudes, attendance at the Sabbat, renunciation
of the Christian Faith, self-devotion to the powers of evil.
That various extravagances were boasted and idle fictions
born of hysteria and egomania mingled with the tale of actual
happenings in no wise discredits the main tenor of the
revelations. The Holy Office certainly considered that the
crime of sorcery was amply proven, and this judgement seems
eminently proper and just. But the Commissary of the
Royal Council studiously refrained from exacting the penalty
of death. Fifty of the accused were punished with two
hundred stripes at the hands of the common hangman and
terms of imprisonment extending over several years.

In the same year, however, 1527, as these trials had taken
place Charles V, alarmed at the fearful increase of Witchcraft
in Biscay, addressed an urgent letter to the Bishop of
Calahorra with the Provincials of the Friars Minor and
Dominicians bidding them select eloquent and well-approved
preachers to travel the country-side from end to end in order
that the people might be warned, fortified, and, if need be,
converted.

In 1536 the Inquisition of Saragossa arrested and brought
to trial a large number of witches who were found to belong
to the Jurginas and to be assiduously propagating their
abominable tenets. Upon examination these wretches were
convicted of demonism and every impiety, whereupon by a
majority of votes the Tribunal condemned them to suffer at
the stake. A minority, however, were for penance and
perpetual imprisonment. According to the Constitutions of
the Holy Office, which comprise twenty-eight articles, drawn
up by the general assembly of Spanish Inquisitors under the
presidency of Tomds de Torquemada at Seville, 29 November,
1484, in a case where there is a difference of opinion of this
kind among the members of a local Tribunal the matter must
be referred to the Suprema. But in this instance after some
further discussion the minority agreed to the capital judge-


596 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


ment, and the gangs of Satanists were forthwith executed
according to law. None the less so exact was the Inquisition
in the observance of its statutes and codes that when a report
of the proceedings reached the Suprema, this, the highest
court, addressed a circular letter to all the local Tribunals
in Spain, sharply reproving the Tribunal of Saragossa, which
by not submitting the sentence and the divergement of a
minority to the Central Authority for a ruling and direction,
had autonomously preferred to settle the question, thus com-
mitting a very grave dereliction from duty and obedience.
The incident is illuminating, and serves to show that contrary
to vulgar opinion and legend a very strict adherence to the
Constitutions of the Holy Office was enforced throughout
Spain, and that any transgression, however minute or
technical, on the part of a local body would promptly meet
with animadversion and coercive censure from the Suprema.
The reproof administered to Saragossa was not without its
effect, since on 12 June the Tribunal of Toledo wrote to the
Suprema asking for detailed directions to be followed in the
cases of sorcery, and a reply was received which emphasized
the provision that if no formal pact with the Devil could be
clearly proved the accused was to be remitted to the civil
courts for examination and trial.

The parish priest of Bargota, near Viana, in the diocese of
Calahorra, who bore a great name for learning and wizardry at
the beginning of the sixteenth century, is a very shadowy
figure. Story says that he had the power of transporting
himself from place to place in the twink of an eye. Thus he
was invisibly present at many of the engagements of both
Ferdinand V and Charles V. He publicly announced in the
streets of Viana and Logrogno the victories gained by these
monarchs on the very days their triumphs had been won,
news which was afterwards confirmed by couriers from the
field. In fine, the Inquisition of Logrogno took cognizance
of these wonders, but he seems to have convinced the Tribunal
that his was only white magic, and to have gone scot-free.

A far more illustrious and important person was the Doctor
graduado Kugenio Torralba. Born of a good family!® at
Cuenca towards the end of the fifteenth century, at the age
of eleven he was sent to Rome where he entered the house-
hold of the Bishop of Volterra, Francesco Soderini, a noble


SPAIN 597


prelate who received his hat in May, 1503. Here Torralba
studied medicine under the famous physician Cipion and
other masters of their art, himself soon attaining no mean
skill. Amongst those who frequented the episcopal palace
was a certain Fra Pictro, a Dominican. Presently an
unusual intimacy based upon similar pursuits was formed
between the young doctor and the friar, who in close
confidence imparted to his friend that he was attended by
an angel or genius named Zequiel (Ezechiel). He was bound
by no pact or vow, however, to this spirit upon whom he
merely had to call for help to be relieved in any necessity and
advised as to his future undertakings. Fra Pietro promised
to present Torralba to Zequiel, and at a fitting opportunity
the form of a young man with fair hair and a mild countenance
stood before them. Addressing the doctor the spirit said :
““T will hold myself at your service so long as you live, and
I will follow you faithfully wheresoever you go.” There was
no other suggestion of any bond or agreement between the
two. Henceforward Zequiel appeared to the doctor at the
quarterly changes of the moon, and more often, whenever he
was summoned, ‘if there was need of him. Torralba expressly
stated that the spirit had never uttered a word contrary to
religion, never given him bad counsel, never inspired evil
thoughts, and not infrequently even accompanied him to
Holy Mass, so that he verily thought an angel was his monitor
and guide.

By the time that the Bishop of Volterra was raised to the
cardinalate Doctor Torralba already enjoyed a high reputa-
tion as a physician, and the new dignity of his patron yet
further increased his clientele, whose numbers swelled more
and more when it was found he secretly practised chiromancy
and could with no small cunning cast a horoscope.

In 1510 Torralba returned to Spain and for a while was
held in much esteem at the court of Ferdinand the Catholic.
One day Zequiel announced that the King would shortly
receive bad news, whereupon the doctor lost no time in
warning the first Minister of State and Primate, Cardinal
Ximénez de Cisneros, Archbishop of Toledo, as also the
famous general Gonzalvo Hernandez de Cordova. A few
hours later a post arrived in hot haste to announce the
crushing disaster which had overwhelmed the expedition


598 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


against the Moors and that Don Garcia of Toledo, son of
Fadrique de Toledo, Duke of Alva, had fallen at the head
of his troops. It would almost seem that Torralba made no
great secret of his communications with Zequiel. The story
goes that Cardinal Ximénez manifested a keen desire to see
Zequiel, and that Torralba endeavoured to persuade the
spirit to comply with this request, which was, however,
denied, the refusal being something mitigated by the prophecy
that one day Ximénez would be lord of all Spain, and this
proved true six years later, in 1516, when the Cardinal was
appointed Regent upon the death of Ferdinand, pending the
arrival of Charles V from Flanders. It is true that relying
on the authority of a document previously signed by Charles,
Adrian Dedel, 2° Dean of the Collegiate Church of S. Peter, at
Louvain, claimed the appointment, but the jurists were
unanimous in favour of Ximénez, and the Emperor, realizing
that he would be more acceptable of the two, confirmed him
in the regency whilst Adrian was gratified with the Bishopric
of Tortona and the honour of Grand Inquisitor of Aragon.
Whilst acting as regent Cardinal Ximénez not only greatly
improved the conditions of the army and navy, initiated a
new system of taxation and other reforms, but also forced
several rebellious cities and nobles to do him homage as the
representative of the Emperor. It is in the highest degree
unlikely that so pious and rigorous a man should have
countenanced any commerce with a spirit, or that he should
have expressed a wish to see this supernatural visitor. He
was acknowledged even by his opponents to be a prince of the
most unstained probity, in public fife he was sternly conscien-
tious, whilst in private he carried his austerities and mortifica-
tions so far as to endanger his health. The cause of his
canonization has been introduced, and indeed he has been
for many centuries honoured as a Saint in various districts
of the Peninsula. I have no hesitation in dismissing the story
that he would have discoursed with Zequiel as an idle and
baseless canard.

Many other events are said to have been revealed to
Torralba by Zequiel, such as the fearful conspiracy in 1517
of the Cardinal of Siena, Alfonso Petrucci, who had plotted
to take the life by poison of the Supreme Pontiff.24

The doctor, who had been residing in Rome for some three


SPAIN 599


years, returned to Spain during 1516, and was at once
consulted by Cardinal Bernardino Lopez de Carvajal,22 a
theologian of acknowledged eminence, concerning a dark and
mysterious business. A lady of wealth and position had
with great trepidation and alarm informed the Cardinal that
she was nightly disturbed by the phantom of a man, com-
pletely unknown to her, who declared that he had been
murdered and unavailingly sought rest. The Cardinal had
directed his body-physician Morales to watch with the lady
and to report what occurred. Moralcs for several nights had
remained in the chamber but could discern nothing, although
at a certain hour he felt a chill as if of the grave, accompanied
by a loathly smell of corruption which filled him with no
ordinary horror and fear, whilst the lady cried out that the
ghost had appeared. Cardinal Carvajal, knowing Torralba’s
deep studies in occultism, prayed him to join Morales at the
next opportunity, and accordingly the two doctors took their
station in the haunted room. About one o’clock they heard
an anguished cry, the air grew deathly cold and was foul with
the stench of human decay. Torralba saw by the bed the
figure of a man covered with wounds, the countenance
distorted and pale with pain. A little further there lurked
an even more terrifying apparition, the half-formed shadow
of an evil woman, her vile face leering horribly from the
darkness. ‘“‘ What would you?” demanded the scryer.
‘“‘ The treasure! the treasure !’’ moaned the vision. Upon
being questioned, Zequiel informed Torralba that in a cellar
long years before had been buried the body of a miser,
assassinated, all unshrive:. and unhouseled, for the vast sums
it was known he had concealed in the house. The woman,
whose spectre had been seen, was his servant who had
admitted the ruffians with whom she was in league, but after
the murder they could not find the hiding-place of the money-
bags, and so perforce remained unsatisfied. The crime had
never been discovered. Zequiel revealed the sliding panel
which gave access to the secret room where the wealth was
stored, and which actually opened out of the lady’s bed-
chamber. The money was thus recovered, a part was
devoted to masses for the dead man’s soul, the remainder to
other pious and charitable uses, and so the unhappy and
unquiet house found rest.


600 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


In 1517 Torralba returned to Rome, and here he formed
ties of closest intimacy with Don Diego de Zugniga, a near
relation of the Duke de Bejar, and brother of Don Antonio
de Zugniga, Grand Chancellor of the Order of Saint John in
Castile.22 Only two years had passed when the two friends
together returned to Spain. On their journey they halted
for some time at Barcelonnette, then a town of Savoy,
where they became acquainted with Azevedo, an officer of
some distinction, who had been adjutant-general of the
Spanish forces in Italy. One day whilst they were sitting
and talking of hermetic philosophy Zugniga and Azevedo
thought that they saw a shadow, as it were, swiftly pass into
the room and after a moment as swiftly disappear. Torralba
at the same instant informed them that Zequiel had just
conveyed to him certain news. From that moment Zugniga
continually pressed the doctor to allow him an interview with
the spirit, but his most earnest entreaties were withstood,
and at last as he became over-importunate smartly rebuffed,
a check which, although at the time he showed disappoint-
ment rather than displeasure, rankled sourly and was to have
its consequences. When Barcelona was reached Torralba
and Zugniga held many secret interviews with a canon of
the Cathedral, Don Juan Garcia, a mysterious personage,
in whose library were several books of necromancy, on the
margin of a leaf of one of which Torralba perceived a magic
formula enabling him who wore it about his person infallibly
to gain at cards, hazard, or any game of chance. This the
doctor transcribed and presented to Zugniga, bidding him
make a copy thereof in his own hand on a Wednesday
(miércoles), ?4 the day dedicated to Mercury, god of sharpers
and thieves,*® The story goes that Zugniga was in truth
supremely lucky at the tables and won large sums of money at
ombre, raffle, and other games, although some attributed his
fortune to high-running dice and sleight-o’-hand rather than
to mystic runes and sigils.

Upon one occasion, in 1527, Torralba announced to
Zugniga that he was about to pay a visit to Rome, and when
the latter inquired how long he purposed to be absent from
Valladolid, ?” where they were then residing, he answered but
a few hours as he had a means of aerial transport that would
convey him to and fro with supernatural speed, This journey,


SPAIN 601


which was asserted to have taken place on 4-5 May, enabled
the doctor actually to be present at the sack of Rome by the
Lutheran hordes under their bandit leaders, and as he made
no secret, but rather boasted, of the remarkable journey
it is not surprising that it was widely discussed on every side
and is perhaps the most notorious of his exploits. So curious
is the narrative that it is worth while giving Torralba’s own
account which he naively detailed when examined before the
Tribunal of the Holy Inquisition.2 ‘ Interrogated whether
the same spirit, ZEQuIEL, had ever corporally removed him
from one place to another, and in what manner, he made
answer in the affirmative ; that being in Valladolid, in the
month of May last (1527), the said Zequiel had told him that
Rome was sacked and entered the very hour that event
happened, and that he had repeated what Zequiel told him,
and the Emperor had heard of it; but he did not himself
believe it ; and that the following night, Zequiel perceiving
that he would not believe it, persuaded him to go with him,
and that he would carry himself to Rome, and bring him home
again the same evening. And it was so; for at four o’clock
they both went out of the gates of Valladolid, and being
without the city, the said spirit thus enjoined him: ‘ Have
no fear, no ill shall befall you; take this in your hand.’
(No haber paura; fidate de me; que yo te prometo que no
tiendras ningun displacer ; per tanto piglia aquesto in mano.)
And it appeared to him that the thing which was put into
his hand was a knotty stick; and the spirit said: ‘ Shut
your eyes, Torralba,’ (cerra occhi) and he did so; and when he
opened his eyes again, he saw the sea as if it were so near that
he could touch it with his hands ; and when he opened them
again he perceived a great obscurity, as if it had been a cloud,
and then again a great brightness, from which he was filled
with dread and alarm, and the spirit said to him: ‘ Fear not,
ignorant beast’ (Noli timere, bestia fiera), and he did so.
And they went on, and in about the space of half an hour he
found himself in Rome upon the streets ; and the spirit asked
him where he thought he was (dove pensate che state adesso ?)
and that he told him. That he stood on the Torre di Nona,*®
and heard the clock on the Castle of S. Angelo strike five ;_
and that they talked and walked together as far as the Torre
Sant Ginian, where he saw the Bishop Copis, a German ; and


602 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


that they saw many houses sacked and pillaged, and observed
everything that was passing in Rome,** and then came back
in the same manner to Valladolid (from which he thought
he might have been absent in all an hour and a half), and so
he betook himself to his own lodging, which is near the
monastery of San Benito.” Torralba immediately published
abroad all that he had done and seen to the universal
astonishment of the city.

It will be remembered that Cervantes alludes to this
celebrated voyage in Don Quiote (Part II, Chapter XLI)
where the Knight and Sancho, blindfold, are mounted on
Clavileno, the wooden horse, and apparently whisking
through the upper air. ‘‘ I remember,” says the don, “ the
strange, but true story, of Doctor Torralba, whom the devil
carried to Rome hoodwinked, and, bestriding a reed, in
twelve hours’ time setting him down in the tower of Nona,
in one of the streets of that city. There he saw the dreadful
tumult, assault, and death of the Constable of Bourbon ; and,
the next morning, he found himself at Madrid, where he
related the whole story. Among other things, he said, as he
went through the air, the devil bid him open his eyes, which
he did, and then he found himself so near the moon, that he
could touch him with his finger ; but durst not look towards
the earth, lest the distance should make his brains turn
round,’’5!

In 1528 Torralba was at Cuenca where also Don Diego
Zugniga happened to be sojourning. This latter, stricken in
conscience, and ashamed of his long life of trickery and flat
cheating at the gaming tables, began very seriously to
examine his estate. He realized that he had been the sport
of evil influences, and made full confession of his guilty
practices, denouncing the doctor to the Inquisition as a
sorcerer. The nets must have been drawing around Torralba
for some time, and an explicit accusation at once fast
tightened the cords. The doctor was arrested, thrown into
prison, and examined before the tribunal. The process lasted
many months. Torralba frankly acknowledged his inter-
course with Zequiel, who was, he maintained, a good spirit,
perhaps an angel. In May, 1525, however, the proceedings
suddenly ceased, and for some reason were held in abeyance
fora full year. After this fresh charges were brought, It was


SPAIN 603


deposed that the doctor whilst at Rome had expressed doubts
as to the divinity of Christ and the immortality of the soul.
The case took on a far more serious aspect, and was reported
by the Tribunal of Cuenca to the Suprema, at whose appoint-
ment Fray Agustin Barragan, Prior of the Dominican house
at Cuenca, and Don Diego Manriquez, a canon of the
Cathedral, with some two of three assessors sat to try the
prisoner. After a patient hearing, on 6 March, 1531, he was
condemned to make a formal and public abjuration of all
heresy and magic, to strict confinement, and to wear the
san-benito at the good pleasure of the Grand Inquisitor.
A clause was particularly inserted whereby he swore to hold
no further communication with the spirit Zequiel. At the
time of his arrest Torralba had newly been appointed body-
physician to the Admiral of Castile, Don Federico Enriquez,
and there can be no doubt that his patron intervened on his
behalf, since no long while after sentence we find that the
Grand Inquisitor, ‘‘in view of his sincere and sore repentance,”
allowed Torralba to be set at liberty and reinstated in the
Admiral’s household.

It is true that Pellicer, the famous editor of Cervantes, has
a note to the effect that Doctor Eugenio Torralba was
condemned to death as a sorcerer by the Holy Office, and
executed 6 May, 1531. This, however, is certainly erroneous.

It was this sounding scandal that caused Don Alfonso
Manriquez, the Grand Inquisitor, to publish certain articles
detailing crimes which every good Christian was bound to
denounce to the local tribunal. Don Alfonso had been
elected to his high office on 10 September, 15238, his
predecessor having been Adrian, Bishop of Tortosa, who as
Adrian VI ascended the papal throne on 9 January, 1522.
The offences which a man was in duty required to make
known were as follows :

1. If he knew or heard of any person who entertained and
rewarded familiars and flies,?2 who invoked spirits by
describing goetic circles and asked them questions, who had
made any agreement, tacit or explicit, with a demon; who
sought to use holy objects for purposes of divination, who ina
word gave the creature that honour due to the Creator alone.

2. If any person in order to discover either secrets or the
future employed geomancy, hydromancy, aeromancy, pyro-


604 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


mancy, anthropomancy, theriomancy, kleromancy, oneiro-
thancy, kapnomancy, knissomancy, koskinomancy, astragalo-
mancy, krithomancy, alphitomancy, tessaromancy, necro-
mancy, or any other magic craft,

3. If any person made use of circles, partagons, or any other
such sign and symbol for purposes of invoking demons ; if he
offered them incense or the fume of other burning substances ;
if he should sacrifice unto them; if he should abuse in their
honour the Sacraments ; if he should adore them, or pay them
any homage in any manner whatsoever.

4. If any person employed judicial astrology to discover
the future by those stars which had been in conjunction at the
conception or birth of any individual consulting him, or if he
should foretell good and evil from planetary influences.

5. If any person made or caused to be made mirrors, rings,
phials of glass or other vessels in order thereby to control or
therein to contain some spirit who should reply to his
inquiries and aid his projects; if he should invoke a spirit
even under the name of an Angel with prayer and fasting ;
if he should practise superstitious ceremonies with basins of
fair water and blessed tapers; if he should inspect the nails
or the palm of the hand after rubbing it with vinegar; if he
should reveal the future by phantom shows or images in a
mirror.

6. If any person should keep and read grimoires or books
of magic, or manuscripts of this kind, excepted always such
volumes as might appertain to medicine and surgery.

In the face of these injunctions we are not surprised to read
in Don Quizote, Part II, Chapter LXII, that when at Barce-
Iona Don Antonio Moreno shows the knight the Enchanted
Head, fashioned by a disciple of the famous wizard Michael
Scot, he exacts a vow of solemn secrecy. The Head, which
resembled the bust of a Roman Emperor, is supposed to
answer all questions which are put to it, and when interro-
gated by a small and select company it indeed replies in a
most surprising manner. The trick is, of course, that the
Head and the table whereupon it stands are hollow, and
through the cavities is conveyed a pipe, which piercing the
floor enters another room. Thence Don Antonio’s nephew,
a clever youth, who has been previously well coached, returns
the answers and is able to hit upon some smart and apt


SPAIN 605


sentences. The whole thing is a jest, “‘ but, at last, the noise
of Don Antonio’s having an Enchanted Head in his house
that gave answers to all questions began to fly about the city ;
and, as he feared this would reach the ears of the watchful
sentinels of our faith, he thought fit to give an account of the
whole matter to the reverend Inquisitors, who advised him
to break it to pieces, lest it should give occasion of
scandal among the ignorant vulgar.” This entertaining
episode in Cervantes’ immortal romance is interesting for
the accidental light it throws upon the caution it was neces-
sary to observe when one even feigned a magic feat for the
sake of a practical joke.

With reference to the belief that spirits could be imprisoned
in vessels of glass** it may be remembered that Don Cleofas,
the hero of El Diabolo Coxuelo by Luis Velez de Guevara
(first printed in 1641), having accidentally entered the abode
of an astrologer delivers from a bottle wherein he had been
confined by a potent charm el diabolo coxuelo who richly
rewards his liberator. Perhaps the situation is even better
known owing to Le Diable Boiteux and the release of Asmodée,
all of which Le Sage has amply borrowed from the Spanish
work. In Guevara’s romance we also have the sketch of the
hypocrite who is rubbing himself with grease ‘‘ in order to go
to a meeting of sorcerers this night between San Sebastian and
Fontarabia.”” The familiar adds: “I would carry you
thither this minute, to oblige you with so pleasant a diversion,
if I was not afraid of being known by the Devil, who personates
the goat there.” Such are the sorcerers who appear in
Goya’s pictures of the Sabbat, or that loathly bloated witch
whom he has drawn as she stands with uplifted finger,
menacing and horrible to see, by the bedside of the trembling
peasants in the dead of night.

As in France we find the possession of the Ursulines of Aix,
the Brigittines of Lille, the Ursulines of Loudun ; in Germany
the terrible story of the Nobertines of Unterzell; so in
Spain we have a record of diabolic attacks upon religious,
convents being the strongholds of the faith, against which
evil influences may assuredly concentrate their malice.
Magdalena de la Cruz was born in 1487 of poor parents at
Aguilar de la Frontera. From her earliest years her tender
devotion was admired by all, and when she was but a maid


606 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


of twelve she passed for a saint, a little later miracles even
were attributed to her prayers. In 1504, when scarce
seventeen, she took the Franciscan habit in the strict house
of S. Elizabeth at Cordova, and in 1533 she became Abbess
of the community. At two successive Councils in 1536 and
1539 she was re-elected, since for nearly forty years there was
no name so venerated throughout Cordova, and indeed all
Spain, as her own. Not only the poor and the citizens of the
town thronged to see her, but also professors, doctors, other
religious, lords and great nobles, bishops, archbishops, and
cardinals themselves. The Cardinal of Seville, Don Alfonso
Manriquez, Inquisitor-General, journeyed to Cordova
expressly to converse with her, and in letters saluted her
as dearest daughter in Christ, earnestly recommending him-
self to her prayers. The Inquisitors of Cordova showed her
high honour, and the holy Francisco de Quifiones, to be one
of the most famous members of the Sacred College, traversed
many miles solely to obtain a sight of the Abbess of
S. Elizabeth. Even the papal nuncio Giovanni da Reggio
came to Cordova in great pomp on the same errand, and the
Empress Isabel, proudest of queens, wrote to Magdalena,
addressing her as my dearest Mother, sending her portrait as a
gift to the community who had it hung in the parlour, and at
the birth of the Infante Philip (afterwards Philip IT) request-
ing the nun to bless her baby’s chrisom cloth and baptismal
robes of white.*4 Indeed, so many persons of high estate
and widest influence flocked to Cordova to consult the
Abbess that it was said her convent resembled an imperial
chancellery.*®

On every side nothing was heard but her praises. People
talked loudly of her rapts, her ecstasies, her gift of prophecy.
She foretold his approaching death to the Marquis de Vilena
when he was in robust health and seemed to have many more
years of life; she announced to the General of her Order,
Francisco de Quifiones, that he would one day receive the
scarlet hat, and years after, in September, 1528, he was
created Cardinal of S. Croce in Gerusalemme; she predicted
the captivity of Francis I and his marriage with Leonor,
Queen of Portugal, the sister of Charles V.

Magdalena had been re-elected Abbess of S. Elizabeth in
15389, but in 1542 at the triennial council it was seen that a


SPAIN 607


certain section of the community was opposed to her and
endeavoured not without success to deprive her of the
superiorship. It had been bruited and was piously believed
by many that the holy nun neither ate nor drank, living only
upon the Blessed Sacrament, a phenomenon which is not
altogether rare in the lives of the Saints. In the eighth century
S. Walburga, who had the reputation of only existing on the
Eucharistic species, was placed under supervision for many
days and nights and it was seen that the report was true.
In 1225 Hugh de Wells, Bishop of Lincoln (1209-35) and
Chancellor of England, having heard that a nun of Leicester
had been sustained seven years by Holy Communion alone,
refused to believe it and deputed not one, but fifteen ecclesi-
astics, to watch her for a fortnight without losing sight of her
for a moment. It was only after this severe trial that the
prelate declared himself amply convinced. S. Angela of
Foligno remained twelve years without any nourishment save
the Bread of Heaven; S. Catherine of Siena eight years ;
S. Lydwine of Scheidam twenty-eight ; Blessed Elizabeth
of Reute more than fifteen years; Blessed Catherine of
Racconigi ten years; Domenica of Paradise twenty; and in
recent times Rosa Andriani twenty-eight years ; Domenica
Lazzari and Louise Lateau fourteen years. During his
sojourn at Perugia Pope Innocent VIII caused a searching
judicial inquiry to be made into the case of Blessed Colomba
of Rieti, who had taken no nourishment save the Host for
more than twenty years. In 1659 the famous shepherdess of
Laus was taken to the Bishop’s house at Ernbrun and
guarded strictly for fifteen days every minute of the twenty-
four hours, her inedia was then adjudged supernatural.
In 1818 that wonderful mystic Anne Catherine Emmerich,
whose abstinence was no less remarkable, was watched closely
for ten days, and a report drawn up by the famous Dr.
Overbeg. In 1868 the abstinence of Sister Espérance of
Jesus was officially confirmed by the Bishop of Ottawa
assisted by two physicians, one, Dr. Baubien, a Catholic, the
other, Dr. Ellis, a Protestant. She was rigorously guarded for
six weeks by nurses who never left her. From 25 October to
” December, 1877, the abstinence of Josephine Reverdy was
examined in like manner. She was guarded by relays of five
trained matrons, and the authenticity of the fact recognized. **


608 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


Not only do these abstaining saints eat nothing secretly, but
often they can no longer receive food without throwing it up
again immediately. They are so advanced in the paths of
perfection that the Bread of Angels is the only nourishment
they desire or can sustain.°’

It was to this extraordinary gift that Magdalena de la
Cruz laid claim, and many hailed the phenomenon as a mark
of unusual sanctity. However, it was discovered in the
convent that she privily obtained bread and water and other
refreshments. As was inevitable, she was sharply rebuked and
penanced in chapter for venturing so audaciously to foster a
fraud. She retaliated by diverting the rich stream of alms
and bequests which was constantly flowing in upon her and
which she had employed upon the house to other and exterior
purposes. The new Abbess, a superior of singular acuteness
and perception, soon began to entertain shrewd suspicions
concerning the reputed saint, but she prudently hesitated
before she took action or gave any indication that she guessed
all was not fair and well. It was natural, too, that many
among the Sisters should be troubled at the flagrant decep-
tion in which Magdalena had been discovered, and where
peace had formerly reigned mistrust made its sinuous way.
Better the truth, however harsh and cruel, than a false
painted show, a mockery and a mumming.

During the year 1543 Magdalena was seized with an unusual
sickness, and before long it was clear that no ordinary guilt
laid heavy upon her soul. A letter, dated 80 January, 1544,
written by a Sister of the same community, gives us ample
details of the terrible story. The physicians who had been
called in to consult upon the invalid pronounced her state to
be desperate and bade her prepare for death. Thereupon
her confessor presented himself to shrive his penitent and
otherwise encourage her in good dispositions to receive the
last Sacraments. To the amazement and terror of those who
were kneeling by her bed convulsions suddenly seized the
unhappy woman. She writhed and twisted her limbs with
the most indecent acrobatism so that she could hardly be held
in her place, all the while she yelled and screeched the foulest
obscenities, blaspheming like a maniac, biting and snapping
at those who approached, her eyes blazing with fury, and
foam dripping from her swelled and champing lips. The


SPAIN 609


priest retired appalled at the sight. On the morrow and on
the third day when he entered the room the same fits were
renewed with increased violence. At length realizing that
here was soine diabolic disorder he exorcized the sick nun.
The contortions passed, to be succeeded by what seemed an
attack of chorea, when she presently made a long and awful
confession.

She had been debauched and given over to evil from her
earliest years ; when she was as yet but a child of five a strange
apparition, much like an Angel, visited her without awaking
any alarm, and by announcing that she was destined to
become a great saint fanned the smoky fires of the sin of
presumption. Two years later further apparitions encouraged
her in her folly and pride, and in spite of her secret mal-
practices she beheld the form of the Crucified, to whom she
was wedded, as it were, with spiritual espousals. The source
of these appearances was none other than the Demon.
It is the constant teaching and tradition of the Catholic
Church that the Devil has the power of transforming himself
into an Angel of light, and that he has dared to assume the
sensible exterior of Our Lord or the Saints. There are
numberless instances which testity to this: such are
especially remarkable in the life of S. Antony written by
S. Athanasius, that of S. Benedict by S. Gregory the Great,
and other Fathers. Among more recent occurrences of the
nineteenth century, it is enough to call to mind the appari-
tions and other diabolical delusions of Pierre-Michel Ventras
at Tilly (Calvados), and their condemnation by that saintly
Pontiff Gregory XVI in 1843. Fraudulent phenomena can,
however, always be detected by the person thus visited.
S. Teresa gives holy humility as a sure test of this, for she
teaches: ‘I look upon it as a most certain truth that the
Devil will never deceive, and that God will not suffer him to
deceive the soul which has no confidence whatsoever in itself

. seeking for further light on this side and on that.’’%
Benedict XIV also has many shrewd directions which will
infallibly distinguish a false vision from a true and divine
manifestation.2® If it be the former some mark of its evil
origin may assuredly be discerned by close observation, some
hideous trait will be shown beneath the mask of goodness


and beauty.


610 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


The appearances which visited Magdalena carefully coached
her in trickery and deception so that she was enabled to
perform seeming miracles, wonders which she herself knew
were mere cozenage and therefore must have had an origin
more than suspect. She became puffed up with pride and
rejoiced to hear herself everywhere saluted as a Saint. When
the sin of pride had wholly possessed her heart, lust soon
followed. The Demon showed himself to her as a handsome
youth and informed her that he was one of those angels who
had fallen from Heaven. The name by which he desired to
be known was Balban, and yet another spirit Pithon, his
comrade, also desired her. He promised her that if she
would consent to their solicitations he would ensure her the
reputation of a saint upon earth. The wretched girl
consented, and actually entered into an explicit contract with
the familiars, devoting her body to every excess of lechery
whereby they chose to defile and abuse her. After she had
taken the veil it was Balban who helped her to carry out her
infamous and profane mummery throughout the convent
years. He threw her into trances, such as modern mediums
use, and hypnotic slumbers which were taken to be ecstasies
and rapts. He informed her of events to come*® so that she
could ape the gift of prophecy. It was he who raised her
from the earth when it was believed she was levitated. He
further manifested himself so as to be seen by the entire
community, once even under the form of a baby in her arms,
when she declared she was fondling the Infant Jesus, and
occasionally as some good angel or Saint. In fine, her life
for many long years had been a tissue of blasphemies, licen-
tiousness, and imposture. She had not infrequently availed
herself of her position in the house to leave the enclosure
secretly at night in order to attend meetings of Satanists in
the town.

As has been stated the first suspicions were aroused when it
was discovered that her claim to live upon the Blessed
Sacrament alone was a mere pretence, and that she was well
supplied with food which she devoured in private at times she
deemed herself unseen. So vile an imposture wrecked her
opinion for sanctity. Upon hearing the hideous truth the
confessor enjoined her to make an open acknowledgement
before the community to whom such scandal had been given.


SPAIN 611


This she did, and shortly afterwards the Provincial of the
Franciscans with his socius and other reverend assessors
made a special journey to Cordova in order that they might
fully investigate these terrible businesses. Magdalena,
whose health after her confession had suddenly and surpris-
ingly impreved, now retracted all she had said, and denied
with horrid imprecations that she had ever consorted with
demons and Satanists. It seemed as if she had again fallen
under the thrall of the Evil One, but owing to the exhortations
and pious prayers of her confessor, who assured her that only
by an open discovery of her guilt and due penitence could she
hope for pardon, she at length reiterated on the 24 December,
1543, in the presence of the Provincial and his colleagues,
the representatives of the Holy Office, and other priests of
honour and learning, all she had admitted and avowed. She
was accordingly placed under formal arrest and lodged in the
prisons of the Inquisition. Her trial and examination were
conducted with extraordinary patience and care. On 138
May, 1546, she was obliged to walk in an auto-da-fé. Clad
in her religious habit but without the veil, a cord about her
neck, and a lighted candle in her hand, she was conducted to
the Cathedral of Cordova,*! and here she was placed upon a
high scaffold whilst the sentence was read aloud. This was
followed by a sermon denouncing her crimes, as was usual in
such circumstances. She was condemned to spend the rest
of her days in a cloister of the strictest Franciscans, situate
a few miles beyond the town. She was deprived of all rights
and privileges as a member of the community, she might not
wear the veil, and every Friday she fasted on bread and
water. She was not to speak to any save her confessor, or in
case of grave necessity the superiors. Holy Communion was
granted her but once in every three years, unless a serious
illness rendered advisable the Viaticum. When one considers
her blasphemies and Satanic impostures, her debaucheries
and ninefold guilt, the scandal given to all Spain and all the
faithful, the sentence cannot be pronounced severe.

No doubt in the case of Dr. Torralba, as in the case of
Magdalena la Cruz, there is much which may be explained
by hallucination, coincidence, hysteria. There is much
exaggeration, and a quota of legend. That Dr. Torralba
played—perhaps half-unconsciously—the réle of wise man


612 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


and even magician in order to impress the vulgar seems very
certain. With regard to the Abbess of S, Elizabeth I agree
with Simon Maiolo4? that there are many proven facts in this
history it seems impossible to account for unless one allow
that there was some connexion or communication with dark
influences and entities. If we read her confession in view of
the more secret, and I will add loathly, phenomena of modern
spiritism much may be understood and accepted which at
first sight might be pronounced incomprehensible and
impossible. We are hardly surprised to learn that even after
Magdalena had been imprisoned and when she was confined
according to her sentence in the remote convent, the cloisters
of S. Elizabeth were disturbed by uncanny sounds, and the
nuns scared by strange sights and shadowy figures lurking
in those haunted walls.

Throughout the records of the Holy Office some infrequent
cases of sorcery are to be found, but these are almost without
exception resolved into trials for heresy, and a condemnation
for Witchcraft alone is of the rarest.

At the present day, as in England, France, Italy, Germany,
and indeed all countries of the world, old beliefs and old
superstitions linger among the peasantry of Spain in the
smaller and more distant villages. Reputed witches may be
found everywhere the whole world over, and everywhere are
there those who lack not the will if they have not the power
to maim and kill by Witchcraft, for, as S. Augustine says, in
many more ways than one does man sacrifice to the evil
angels.


NOTES TO CHAPTER VIII


? Sulpicius Severus, Historia Sacra (Chronicorum Libri duo), II, 46. Migne,
Pat. Latini, XX.

* Priscillianiste heretici nasci unumquemque hominem sub constitutionibus
stellarum putant: et hoc in adiutorium sui erroris assumunt, quod noua
stella exiit cum Dominus in carne apparuit: . . . Non Puer ad stellam, sed
stella ad Puerum cucurrit. Homilia X in Euangelium secundum Mattheum.

8 step Bernays, Uber die Chronik des Sulpicius Severus, Berlin, 1861,
PP. 49-17.

“ “Tdem [Priscillianus] uanissimus et plus iusto inflatior prophanarum
rerum scientia : quin et magicas artes ab adolescentia eum exercuisse creditum
est.”” Sulpicius Severus, Hist. Sacra, II, 4'7.

5 This is the subject of William Rowley’s tragedy All’s Lost by Lust, 4to,
1633, but acted a decade or more earlier.

* Saragossa was reconquered by Alfonso I of Aragon, 18 December, 1118.

7 Founded in the twelfth century.


SPAIN 6138


§ Bollandists, 14 May. Touron, Histoire des hommes illustres de Vordre de
Saint Dominique, Paris, 1743.

® La,tres playsante hystorye de Maugist Daygremont et de Uiuian son frere,
en laquelle est contenu cément Maugist a layde de Orlande la Face samye alla en
lysle de Boucault ou il schabilla en diable. Et puis commét il enchanta le deable
Raouart, et occist le serpent qui gardoit la roche par laquelle chose il conguist le
cheual Bayard et aussi conquesta le grant Geant Sorgalant. A. Lotrain, Paris,
4to. Brunet gives no date, but considers that an impression of the romance
by T. Trepperel, Paris, which bibliographers have recorded, is even earlier.
There are numerous subsequent issues. ;

70 Maugis continues his enchantments in La cosqueste du trespuissant empire
de Tresbisonde et de la spacieuse Asie. He also plays a great part in Quatre fils
Aymon, whilst the concluding scenes of his life are told in the Histoire
singuliere & fort recreatiue Cétendt la reste des faits & Gestes des quatre fils
Aymon. . . . Ht de leur cousin Maugis, . . . a work usually known as the
History of Mabrian.

11 Questa citta di Tolletto solea,
Tenere studio di Negromanzia,
Quivi di magica arte si leggea
Publicamente, e di Piromanzia ;
E molti Geomanti sempre avea
E sperimenti assai di Hidromanzia.
Canto XXV.

12 See Gabriel Naudé, Apologie pour tovs les grands hommes . . . Paris,
1625, and William Godwin’s Lives of the Necromancers, 1835.

13 The feast of the Beato Ramén, Martyr, is celebrated by the Order of
S. Francis on 4 July, as a semiduplex.

14 This is said to have been a peculiar cast (known in France as pathe de
crapaud) in the left eye. But it was obviously some grip or motion with the
hand, no mere blemish or disfigurement. See Historia de la Vida y hechos del
emperador Carlos V, by Bishop Prudencio Sandoval.

15 Muratori, Antiquitates italice medit wut, V.

16 Gabriele Rossetti, Disquisitions, Vol. I, p. 27.

17 G. L. Burr, Narratives of the Witchcraft Cases, p. 418.

18 Apud Miss M. A. Murray’s The Witch-Cult in Western Europe, Appendix V,

. 279.
: 19 Zapata in his Carlos famoso calls him familiar del admirante, which would
seem to imply that he was in some way distantly connected with the Admiral
of Castille.

20 Who succeeded Pope Leo X and reigned from 9 January, 1522, to 14
September, 1523. Adrian VI (the last Pontefice barbaro, Guiccardini, XIV, v)
is the only Pope of modern times, except Marcellus II (1555), who retained his
baptismal name when crowned. Marcellus II was Marcello Cervini degli
Spannochi. ae

21 For details of these terrible happenings see Guiccardini, XIII; and Paolo
Giovio, Uita Leonis X. Roscoe, Leo the Tenth, chap. 14, gives a trustworthy
account of the proceedings.

22 Born at Plasencia, Estremadura, 1455; died at Rome, 16 December,
1523.

23 The Hospitallers of S. John of Jerusalem, a very ancient Order. Known
as Hospitallers of Jerusalem until 1309, the members were called Knights of
Rhodes from 1309-1522, and have been named Knights of Malta since 1630.
The Knights of Rhodes comprised eight chief nations, and one of the eight
supreme dignities was reserved to each several nation, to Italy admiral, to
England turcopolier, to Aragon standard-bearer, to Castile grand chancellor,


etc. . . oe
24 Dies Mercurii, or, dies Mercuris, Wednesday. Inscriptiones Muratorii,


402, 7. . ; :

25 Mercurius a mercibus est dictus. Hunc etenim negotiorum omnium
zstimabant esse deum. Apud the abstract from Sextus Pompeius Festus, the
grammarian, made by Paulus, Ed. K. O. Miller (1839), p. 124.


614 THE GEOGRAPHY OF WITCHCRAFT


26 Cf, Dryden’s Amphitryon ; Or, The Two Socia’s, produced 1 690, 4to 1690,
II. Mercury : Suppose I were Mercury, the God of Merchandise ? Phedra :
What, the God of small Wares, and Fripperies, of Pedlars and Pilferers ?
V.—Phedra: Begin, begin; Heads of Articles to be made, &c. betwixt
Mercury, God of Thieves—— ; ; Pcie,

27 Zapata says that Torralba was at Medina de Riosseo, but in his own
confession before the tribunal of the Holy Office the doctor said Valladolid.

28 In 1528. The record has been printed by Pellicer, whence this translation
is made.

29 One of the towers on the walls. It was fortified by Alexander VI, who
thus protected the Eternal City from naval attacks. Later the Torre di Nona
served as a strong prison. In 1567 the heretic Pietro Carneseechi—executed
in October of that year—was incarcerated here.

30 A vivid description of the unexampled horrors of the pillage of Rome may
be read in Valeriano’s dialogue De Literatorum Infelicitate. I have used the
Venice edition of 1620.

81 Translation by Motteux. I quote from Lockhart’s edition, 4 vols., 1885.

32 A flyisafamiliar. Cf. Jonson, The Alchemist, acted 1610, 4to 1612, 12:

Subtle : If I do give him a familiar,

Give you him all you play for; never set him :
For he will have it.

Face: Y’are mistaken, Doctor.

Why, he do’s aske one but for cups, and horses,
A rifling flye: none o’ your great familiars.

33 In the Uinculum Spirituum it is related that Solomon imprisoned three
millions of infernal spirits with seventy-two of their kings in a bottle of black
glass, which he cast into a deep well near Babylon. The Babylonians, how-
ever, hoping to find a treasure in the well, descended, and broke the bottle,
thus releasing these legions of darkness. The story of the Djin and the Fisher-
man in The Thousand and One Nights is familiar to all. As the idea of enclosing
demons in phials is Oriental it has been pertinently suggested that the Moors
introduced this fantasy into Spain.

34 The Empress was profoundly assured of the great destiny which awaited
her son. She deemed that any manifestation of pain or weakness during her
delivery might detract from the dignity of the occasion. One of her Portuguese
ladies, fearing that this effort of self-control on the part of the Empress would
add to her sufferings, begged her to give natural vent to her feelings as she
lay in the agonies of labour.—“ Silence ! ”’ said the mother, ‘‘ die I may, but
lament and make womanly moan I will not.”” She then ordered that her face
should be hidden from the light, that no involuntary sign of pain should be
seen.

35 Llorente, Histoire critique de l’ Inquisition d’ Espagne, II, p. 104.

36 Apparitions de Boullent, chap. v, where full details are given.

87 These fasts are clearly different from the feats performed by certain
fasting men who have attracted considerable notice from time to time in
European and American capitals, such performers as Tanner, Succi, Merlatti.
Succi constantly boasted that he had provided for his nourishment by means
of compressed foods. Merlatti abstained from solids, but he drank three litres
of water daily, and took other liquids. In any case these exhibitions are
wholly and entirely another thing from the supernatural inedia of the mystics.

38 Castle, 6th M., ch. iv.

39 De canonizatione sanctorum, Lib. ITI, c. iii.

‘© The demons have no knowledge of the future, but these spirits by their
nature enjoy great intellectual illumination, and as Maiolo explains, ‘In
shrewdness, knowledge, perspicuity, they far excel mankind, and they can
look much further into the future by logical deduction.”

‘1 The Mosque, begun by Ard-Er-Rahman I in 786, and completed in 1001,
which was converted into a Christian church.

42 Dicrum canicularium.


INDEX


Abelard, 32

Accoramboni, Vittoria, 552
Adalbert, S., 467

Addison, Joseph, 158

are Pope, 538-41, 553, 598,


Advertisement to the Jurymen, 162
Ady, Thomas, 162
A®nesidemus, 49
Agias of Troezen, 4
Agnes, wife of Odo, 80
Agrippa, Cornelius, 484
Alaric, 590
Albertus Magnus, o.P., B., 362, 592
Albigenses, 529, 593
Aldhelm, S., 71
Alexander III (of Scotland), 204
Alexander ITI, Pope, 361
Alexander IV, Pope, 524
Alexander V, Pope, 384, 530
Alexander VI, Pope, 477, 537-8
Alexander VII, Pope, 571
Alexander the Great, 16
Alphonsus Liguori, 8., 362
Altomari, 25
Amaury I of Jerusalem, 367
Ambrose, S., 293, 589
Amen-Ra (Hammon), 12, 14, 16
Ammonius Saccus, 49
Anderson, Sir Edmund, 129
Andriani, Rosa, 607
Angela de Merici, 8., 408
Angela of Foligno, S., 607
Animal forms of the gods, 3
Annacharius, S., 71
Annales Hibernic, 88, 89
Annals (Tacitus), 14
Antidote against Atheism, An, 162
Antinous, 39-40
Antonelli, Cardinal, 572
Antony of Padua, S., 565, 574
Antony the Great, S., 574, 609
Apollonius of Tyana, 30
Apologia (Apuleius), 30-1
Apuleius, 5, 9, 17, 27-31, 49
Aquinas, 8. Thomas, 362
Aran Islands, Witchcraft in, 99
Aristotle, considered to be a magician,
16


Arne, 3


Arras, Witchcraft at, 385-6
Artemis (Hecate), 6, 7

Arundel, Archbishop Thomas, 101
Askewe, Anne, 156

Assassins, 365-7


Asterie, 3
Astrampsychos, 15
Augustine, §., 5, 17, 19, 30, 31,


32, 67, 73, 77, 298, 427-8, 504,
612
Augustine, S., of Canterbury, 73
Augustus Cesar, 36
Aurelian, 47


Balfour, John, 229

Bamberg, Executions at, 487-94

Baniols, Hugues de, 362, 524

Barbatus, S., 547

Bargota, The Priest of, 596

Barthe, Angéle de la, 362, 524

Bavent, Madeleine, 347, 416-20, 444

Baxter, Richard, 165

Bayerin, Anna, 516

Beaumont, John, 165

Bede, The Venerable, 71-2

Bedford, Jaquet, Duchess of, 105—9

Benevento, Witchcraft at, 546-8

Bendis (Thracian Hecate), 7

Benedict XII, Pope, 529-30

Benedict XIV, 362, 591, 609

Benedict, S., 609

Berengarius, 360

Berkeley, The Witch of, 77-80

Bernard, Richard, 162

Bernard, 8., 359

Berosus, 14, 15

Bertrand, Sergeant, 24-5

Berwick coven, 11

Billuart, o.p., Charles-René, 362

Bilston, The Boy of (William Perry),
136-7


Bishop, Bridget, 307-13, 346, 348

Bocal, 88

Bodenham, Anne, 138-9, 147

Bodin, Jean, 4, 25, 142, 215, 401,
501, 550

Boethius, S., 2

Boguet, Henri, 27, 404, 405-6, 501

Bois, Jules, 446-7

Bolingbroke, Roger, 104


615


616


Bonaventura, S., 362

Boniface VIII, Pope, 80, 525

Boniface, S., 465-7

Book of Overthrowing Apep, The, 12

Borgia, Cesare, 42

Bothwell, Earl of, 84, 223

Boullan, Abbé, 445-6

Boullé, Thomas, 88, 417-20

Boulton, Richard, 165

Bowman, Christian, 156—7

Boy of Bilston, The, 136

Brennus, 352

Bridgettine convent at Lille, posses-
sion at, 412-14

Bronislava, B., 505

Brossier, Marthe, 403-4

Browne, Sir Thomas, 151

Brunehaut, Queen, 355

Bucaille, Marie, 429

Buckingham, Duke of (Edward Staf-
ford), 110-11

Buckingham, Duke ot (George Vil-
liers), 138

Bullen, Anne, 111

Bulls against Witchcraft, 524-46

Bully, Witchcraft at, 438

Burghausan, Satanism at, 502-3

Burne, Nicol, 209

Burning, punishment for high and
petty treason, 155-7; last case
of, in England (1789), 156-7

Burroughs, Rev. George, 289, 326-34,
346-8

Burton, Robert, 25, 162

Bury 8. Edmunds, Witch trials at,
149-51

Burying the Sheaf, 99-100

Butler, Eleanor (betrothed to Edward
IV), 105, 109

Butters, Mary, 98-9

Buxen, The, 516-17, 542


Cabiri, 7, 65

Cadiére, Catherine, 439-41

Cadoe, 8., 32-3

Caesarius, S., of Arles, 69

Cagliostro, 572-3

Cailleach, a, 99

Calder, Alleged Witchcraft at, 248-9

Calef, Robert, 296, 346

Calixtus IIT, Pope, 530

Campion, s.g3., Bl. Edmund, 115

Camus, Henri, 23

Candle in the Dark, A, 162

Canidia described by Horace, 22

Cantianille, 444-5

Caracalla, 41, 44

pr seedons Witchcraft at, 378-80,
83

Carlo Borromeo, S., 562-3

Carmoney Witch, The, 98-9

Carrier, Martha, 334-8, 346


INDEX


Carvajal, Cardinal Bernardino de, 599

Casali, o.p., George de’, 539-41

Casaubon, Meric, 164-5

Cases of Conscience . .
Mather), 286, 293

Catherine of Racconigi, B., 607

Catherine of Siena, S., 607

Cattle bewitched, 98-9

Cellini, Benvenuto, 556

Centini, Giacinto, 84, 558-9

Certainty of the World of Spirits, 165

Chaldzan (equivalent to magician),
14, 36, 37, 44

Charlemagne, 356

Charles I (of England), 138

Charles V, Emperor, 557, 559, 596,


. (Increase


598
Charles VIII of France, 425
Charles IX of France, 398, 421, 426
Charles Martel, 80
Charles the Bald, 357
Chattox (Whittle), Anne, 130, 133-6
Chelmsford, Witch trials at, 118-19
Childebert I, 354
Ohilderiec I, 353
Childeric IIT, 355
Chiron, 3
Chronos, 3
Church Hisipry of Britain (Fuller), 132
Cicero, 14, 17
Cieurac, Witchcraft at, 453
Cideville, 275
Circe, 3, 10
Clark, Jane, 160
Clement V, 368-76
Clement VII, Pope, 541-2
Clonmel tragedy (1895), 100
Clovis, 353
Cock Lane ghost, The, 168-9
Coeli et Terrce Creator Deus, 542—4
Coke, Sir Edward, 129
Colbert, 432
Colomba of Rieti, S., 607


| Columbanus, 8., 465


Colville, Dr. Alexander, 93-4

Commodus, 41, 44

Communion of Witches, 329, 334,
346-8, 360, 418-19

Compleat History of Magic, A, 165

Concini, Maréchal d’Ancre, 421

Confession faicte par . . . Loys Gauf-
fridi, 411

Confessional of Ecgberht, 71

Connecticut, Early cases of Witch-
craft in, 257-61

Conrad of Marburg, 470-1, 474, 524

Constantius, 54

Cooper, Thomas, 162

Corbinian, 8., 465

Corey, Giles, 339-41, 344

Corey, Martha, 338-41

Cornelius Agrippa, 15


INDEX


Corybantes, 7

Cotta, John, 161

Coventry, Witchcraft
Edward II, 81-5

Cox, Julian, 149, 150

Cromwell, Lady, of Warboys, 126-7

Cromwell, Oliver, 139, 145, 148-9

Cross-roads, haunted, 7, 8

Cruttenden, Anne, 156

Cullender, Ross, 150-1

Cybele, 7

Cyprian, S., of Antioch


at, temp.


Demonolatrice libri tres (Remy), 405
Demonologie (James I), 13, 128, 129,
132, 169, 223-4
cen and Theologie (Homes),
62


Damascius, 50

Damasus I, Pope S., 589

Daneau, Lambert, 215

De Consolatione Philosophice, 2

De Diuinatione, 14

De heretico comburendo, 101

De Lancre, Pierre, 4, 215, 404, 406-7,
421, 426

De preestigiis demonum, 129, 551

De Superstitionibus, 380

Dee, John, 120

Delacourt, John, 111

Demdike, Elizabeth, 130, 133-6, 552,
567

Demoniac hauntings, 280-2

Demonomanie des Sorciers, De la, 401

Deois, 3

Desmond, Gerard, Earl of, 92-3

Desnoyers, Abbé, 450-3

Despenser, Hugh le, 81, 83, 85

Device, Elizabeth, 130, 133-6, 552-3

Devil worshippers at Berlin (1919),
43


Diabolo Coxuelo, El, 605

Dialogue concerning Witches, A, 161

Diana, 74, 76

Dick, John, 229

Diocletian, 48

Diodorus, 3

Directorium inquisitorum, 382, 592

Discours des Sorciers (Boguet), 405—6

Discourse of the Damned Art, A, 161

Discourse of the Subtell Practises . . .,
A, 161

Discoverie of Witchcraft, 161

Dogs, sacred to Hecate, 7

Domenica of Paradise, 607

Domitian, 37

Domptius, 0.P., Francis, 409, 412

Don Quixote, 602, 604-5

Douglas, Janet, 208-9

Druidesses, 47, 352

Druids, 65, 203, 352

Drummond, Alexander, 226-7


617


Druzes, 366—7

Du Sortilége (De Lancre), 407
Duffus, King of Scotland, 12, 13, 203
Duncan, Geillis, 212-17

Dunlop, Bessie, 210

Duns, Scotus, Ven., 362

Duny, Amy, 150-1


Eachard, Laurence, 146

East Anglia, Activities of Hopkins
in, 139-145

Easty, Mary, 341, 345

Edeline, Guillaume, 215

Edward II of England, 31-3, 85, 87

Edward III of England, 101

Edward IV of England, 105-10

Edwards, Susanna, 151-3

Ehrenberg, Ernest von, 493-4

Elia, San, 574-5

Eliseo, San, 574-5

Elizabeth (Grey), Queen of King
Edward IV, 105-10

Elizabeth of Reute, B., 607

Elizabeth, Queen, 111, 112, 116, 117,
255

Emmeran, 8., 465

Emmerich, Anne Catherine, 607

Empusa, 8

Epimenides, 5

Epiphanius, 593

Epworth Phenomena, the, 274

Erichtho, described by Lucan, 21

Espérance of Jesus, 607

Eugenius IV, Pope, 530

Euric, 590

Europa, 3

Eusebius, 8

Eve, George, 500-1

Evodius, 589

Evrard of Treves, 360

Exeter, The last English execution
for Witchcraft at, 149, 151-2

Eymeric, 0.P., Nicolas, 382, 592

Ezzelino da Romano, 42


Fairfax, Edward, 137

Familiars, 135, 138, 139, 140-1, 147,
152, 159, 160

Farnese, Pier Luigi, 42

Fasti, 19

Faust, 479-84

Faustina, 44

Feast of Asses, 70

Feast of Fools, 70

Felix of Treves, 590

Ferdinand V (of Spain), 593, 596

Fian, Dr., 85, 213-22

Filmer, Sir Robert, 162

Fitzgerald, Edward, ghost of, 183-4

Flagellum Deemonum (Nicolas Jac-
quier), 381-2

Flagellum Maleficorum, 382


618


Flores Historiarum, 78

Fodera, 103

Folengo, Girolamo, 549-54

Folkestone, Hauntings at, 279-80

Forfar, Witches of, 230

Formicarius, 380-1

Fortescue, Sir Antony, 117

Foullis, Lady, 211

Fox, Catherine and Margaretta, 349

Fredegonde, Queen, 354-5

Frederick II, 361

Frederick William I, 503

Fridolin, S., 465

Full and Impartial Account...
(Jane Wenham), 159

Full Confutation of Witchcraft, A
(1712), 159-60

Fuller, Thomas, 132


Gaar, S.J., Father, 515

Gaetani, Tommaso de Vio, 293

Galiena, accused of sorcery, 80

Galigai, Leonora, 421

Garnier, Gilles (lycanthropist), 23-4,
399-400

Gaufridi, Louis, 409-11, 413, 426

Gaule, Rev. John, 143-4

Gaunt, Elizabeth, 156

Geiss, George Ludwig, 497-9

George ITI (of England), 166

Gertrude, S. (Nobertine), 505

Gervase of Tilbury, 25

Ghirlanda delle streghe, la 97, 179,
209, 353, 577

Gifford, George, 161

Gil of Santarem, o.P., B., 591

Gildas, S., 32-3

Girard, s.J., Jean-Baptiste, 440-1

Glanvill, Joseph, 163-4, 271

Glaubrecht, Otto, 497

Gloucester, Duchess of (Eleanor
Cobham), 104-5

Gnostic heresies, 365-7, 523-4, 588

Gobryas, 15

Goeldi, Anna, 518

Geetes, The, 4

** Good Parliament,’”’ The, 101, 102

Good, Sarah, 291-3, 294, 296

Gordian, the Elder, 46

Gorgo, 8

Goulart, Simon (Thrésor . . .), 26

Gérres, Johann Joseph, 362

Gowdie, Issobell, 230-1

Grandier, Urbain, 414-16

Gratian, 56, 57, 589

Great Paxton, Supposed Witchcraft
at, 171-3

Greatrakes, Valentine, 95

Gregory II, Pope S., 465-6

Gregory VII, Pope S., 524

Gregory IX, Pope, 361, 471-3, 524

Gregory XI, Pope, 530


INDEX


Gregory XIII, Pope, 542
Gregory XV, Pope, 544-6
Gregory XVI, Pope, 609
Gregory, S., of Nanzianus, 53
Gregory the Great, S., 588, 609
Gremper, John, 535

Grey, Dr. Zachary, 146
Grilland, Paul, 142, 501
Groton, Witchcraft at, 261-3
Guaita, Stanislas de, 446-7
Guazzo, Francesco Maria, 215
Guevara, Luis Velez de, 605
Guibourg, Abbé, 43, 84, 347, 430
Guichard of Troyes, 376


Haarmann, Fritz (‘“‘Hanover Vam-
pire ”’), 43

Habundia, 74

Hades, Odysseus visits, 5-6

Hadrian, 39-41

Hale, Sir Matthew, 150

Haltridge household bewitched, 96-8

Harries, Henry, 175

Harries, John, 174-5

Hastings, Witches at, 173—4

Hatteraik (Hunter), Alexander,
227-8

Hayes, Catherine, 156

Head, worshipped by Templars, 371

Hecate, 6-8, 19, 22, 65

Hecate Lampadephoros, 7

Herodias, 74-5, 76

Heliogabalus, 41

Henri II, of France, 397

Henri IV of France, 402, 410, 426

Henry III of France, 400-2

Henry IV of England, 102-3

Henry VI of England, 84, 104

Henry VI of Germany, 361

Henry VII of England, 110

Henry VIII of England, 110, 112, 116

Hermengild, Martyr, S., 590

Heroides, 12

Hertford, The Wenham case at,
158-160

Hicks, Mary, Spurious account of,


Hippolytus, 8., 8

Historical Essay on Witchcraft, 165

History of Richard III (Bl. Thomas
More), 110

Hobbs, Deliverance, 334, 346-7

Hogarth, William, 168

Holinshed, Raphael, 87, 88

Holland, Henry, 161 ;

Holt, Sir John, 157

Holy Cross Abbey, Thurles, 93

Homer, Nathaniel, 162

Honorius, 57

Hopkins, Dom Nicholas (Carthu-
sian), 111

Hopkins, Matthew, 29, 139-145, 257


INDEX


Horace, regarded as a magician, 35

Horn, Matthew, 499

Hosts, Thefts of, 444-5, 568-9

How, Elizabeth, 321-5

Hudibras, 145, 146

Human sacrifices in Africa, 45-6

Hume (Hun), Sir John, 104

Hungerford, Lord, 111-12

Huntingdon, alleged executions at
(1716), 153-4, 157

Huntingdon, Annual Witchcraft ser-
mon at, 127

Hutchinson, Bishop Francis,
165-6

Huysmans, J. K., 445-7


144,


Iamblichus, 50, 56

Iliad, 6

Imbert, Guillaume, 369

Impossibility of Witchcraft, The, 160

Incredulité . . . du sortilége, L’, (De
Lancre), 407

Incubus, 207-8, 553-4

Innocent III, 32, 70, 361

Innocent VIII, 476, 531-7

Innocent X, 43

Inquisition, Holy, and Witchcraft,
361-2

Instantius, 589

Ireland, Witchcraft in, 85-101

Island-Magee, Witchcraft at, 96-8

Ithacius of Ossanova, 589

Ivo, S., of Chartres, 74

Izzard, Ann, 171-3


James I of England, 84, 128, 129,
132, 133, 149, 166, 167, 215-17,
218, 221-5, 254

James I (of Scotland), 205-7

James IT (of Scotland), 437-8, 533

James III (of Scotland), 207

James V (of Scotland), 208

Jewel, Bishop John, 114-16

Joan, S., of Arc, 386—7, 390, 395

Johannes Gratian, 74

Johannites, 366—7

John XXII (Jacques d’Euse), 377-8,
525-9, 593

John, Baptist, S., 365-7

John, S., Evangelista, 365-7

John of Nottingham (wizard), 81-5

John of Salisbury, 74

John the Almoner, S., 365

Joller, M., 275-6

Joseph I of Austria, 503

Josephus, 293

Jourdemain, Margery, 104

Julian the Apostate, 42, 52, 53, 55

Julianus, M. Didius, 41

Julius II, Pope, 538, 539

Jurginas, 593-6

Justin (historicus), 352


619


Justin, 8., Martyr, 293
Justine, 443
Justinian, 50

Juvenal, 14, 37-8


Kalends of January (heathen cus-
toms), 65-7, 68-9

Kempe, Ursley (S. Osyth’s), 121-5

Kenneth I, King, 203

Kiersey-sur-Oise, Capitulary of, 357

Kincaid, John, 229

Knapp, Elizabeth, 261-3

Knox, John, 201, 209

Kramer, Henry, 382, 477-9, 534, 536

Krieger, Andrew, 498-9

Kyteler, Dame Alice, 85-91


Lactance, Pére, a Minorite, 415

Lactantius, 30, 31

Lamb, Dr., 138

Lancashire Witches, The (1612), 130,
133-6 (1633), 138

Langton, Bishop Walter, 80-1, 524-5

Lapland witches, 8

Lares, 17, 18, 50

Larve, 18

Last English trial for Witchcraft
(1717), 160

Last executions for Witchcraft in
Europe (1782, 1793), 518

Last Scottish execution for Witch-
craft (1722), 249

Late Lancashire Witches, The, 138

Lateau, Louise, 607

Laus, The shepherdess of, 607

Laws (Plato), 7

Laws, Saxon, against heathenism,
71-2

Lazzari, Domenica, 607

Leda, 3

Ledrede, Bishop Richard de, 0.F.M.,
85-91

Leicester Assizes, Last Witchcraft
trial at (1717), 160

Leicester, The nun of, 607

Lemures, 17, 18

Leo X, Pope, 533, 538

Leyva, Virginia Maria de, 551-2

Libanius, 54, 56

LIAber contra artem magicam, 382

Liber Penitentialis, 65-7, 68

Ligatura (a charm), 67

Lindheim, The Tower of, 496-9

Lindsey, Colonel, 148-9

Lisle, Alice, 156

Livy, 19

Lloyd, Temperance, 151-3

Lombroso, Cesare, 277-8

Loschert, c.B.P., Oswald, 504-15

Lothair IT, 67

Loudun, Witchcraft at, 414-16

Louis I (of France), 356


620


Louis XIII, 420-1, 544

Louis XIV, 84, 422-37

Louis XVI, 444

Louviers, The Convent at, 417-20

Lowes, John (minister of Brandeston),
142-3

Lucian, 7, 9, 38

Luciferians, 365, 524

Lucius III, 469

Lull, B. Ramén, 592

Lycaon, 23

Lydwine, 8., 607


Maccaronea, 549-54

Madeleine de la Palud, 408-12

Magdalena de la Cruz, 605-12

Mainz, Executions at, 494-5

Maiolo, Simon, 612

Malatesta, Sigismondo, 42

Malking Tower, Sabbat held at, 134-5

Malleus Malleficarum, 382, 477-9

Mamor, Pierre, 382

Mana (Manuana), 18, 19

Mandezans, 366—7, 370

Manfredi, Astorre, 42

Manichees, 57, 359-60, 523-4, 588,
593

Manriquez, Don Alfonso, 603, 606

Marcus of Memphis, 588

Marigny, Enguerrand de, 376

Mark, The Devil’s, 137, 140, 141,


146

Marshall, Robert, 81—5

Martianus Capella, 19

Martin V, Pope, 530

Martin of Tours, S., 589

Martin, Susanna, 313-21

Marinus, 50

Mass (Messa nera), vide Satanic Mass

Mass of St. Sécaire, 88

Massachussets, Seven laws of, 254-5

Mather, Cotton, 261, 286, 288, 296,
327

Mather, Increase, 262-3, 271, 282,
286-8

Matthew of Paris, 594

Matthew of Westminster, 78

Maurus, 0.8.B., of Wiirzburg, Dom,
613, 515

Maxentius, 42

Maximus (Emperor), 589

Maximus (Neo-Platonist), 49

Maximus, 8., of Turin, 69

Mazzolini, o.p., Silvester, 554

McCalyan, Euphemia, 213-22

Medea, 3, 10, 21

Medea (Euripides), 4

Medici, Marie de’, 421

Merlin, 15

Merton, Belief in Witchcraft persists
at, 181-4

Mesmin, Madame Marie, 448-53


INDEX


Metamorphoses (Apuleius), 27—30

Michaelis, Sebastian, Ven., 0.P., 27,
409-10, 412

Migalena, 88

Minucius Felix, 31

Mirandola, Pico della, 532

Mithraism, 51-3

Mogall, King, 202

Molay, Jacques de, 364, 368-9, 375-6

Mompesson of Tedworth, Mr., 271-3

Montespan, Madame de, 84, 432

More, Henry, 162

More Wonders of the Invisible World
(Calef), 296

Morgante Maggiore, 592

Morin, Simon, 430

Mormo, 8

Morse, William, 263-71

Morton, Bishop Thomas, 136-7

Moses, 35

Moslem conquest of Spain, 590-1

Mousseaux, Gougenot de, 362

Mummers’ Play, 89

Mummol, 354

Munnings, Mother, 157


Neapolitan charms, 577-8

Nebka (Neb-hau-Ra), 11

Nectanebus of Egypt, 15, 16

Neo-Platonism, 49, 51

Nero, 36-7, 38

Neuville (Somme), Haunted farm at,
278-9

Newberry (New England), Witchcraft
at, 263-71

Newes from Scotland, 11, 217-22

Newton, Florence, 94—5

Nicholas V, Pope, 530

Nicholson, Rev. Isaac, 171-3

Nicneven, 210

Nider, o.P., John, 380-1

Nobertines, 504—5

Nogaredo, The Witches of, 13, 563-6

Nogaret, Guillaume de, 368-9

Nonnus, 9

Norbert, S8., 469, 504-5

Norcia, Witches of, 397, 556

North Berwick, The Witches of, 212—
23


Northampton, Witch trial at (1705),
incorrect, 153, 157

Northamptonshire pamphlets, fic:
titious, 157

Northfield, Thomas, o.pP., 103

Nostoi (epic), 3

Nostrodamus, 15

Nowell, Roger, 134

Numa Pompilius, 5, 20

Numeninus, 49

Nuremburg Chronicle, 78

Nurse, Rebecca, 325, 344, 345

Nympholepts, 468


INDEX


Odoacer, 57

Odysseus, 3, 5, 6

Odyssey, 3, 5

Oenomaus, 4

Of Credulity and Incredulity, 164-5
Ointment, magic, 512, 569

Olaus Magnus, 78

Olympias, 16

Origen, 293

Orkney, Earl of, 225

Orlandino, 549

Oromazus, 5

Orpheus, 5, 6, 7, 9, 35

Osborne, Ruth, 167-8

Osgood, Mary, 346

Osthanes, 4, 5

Osyth’s, S. (S. Oses), Witch trials at,


121-5, 128
Otho, 37
Outlawe, William, 85-91
Ovid, 547
Oynhausen, Baron Herman von,


497-9
Paris, The la Voison scandals at,


Parris, Rev. Samuel, 288-91, 306,
340, 342-4

Paschal IT, Pope, 547

Paul II, Pope, 555

Paul III, Pope, 557

Pausanias, 4

Payens, Hugues de, 363, 366

Pazalas, 15

Pendle, The Witches of, 130, 133-6

Penman, Gideon, 244, 347

Pepin le Bref, 356

Perfect Platforme, A, .
Scot), 128

Perimede (a witch), 10

Perkins, William, 161

Perrers, Alice, 101-2

Persephone (Proserpine), 6, 7

Peter Chrysologus, S., 69

Peter Igneus, 8., 358

Peter of Piperno, 547

Peter the Venerable, B., 359

Peterborough, haunted house at, 277

Petersen, Joan, 146-7

Petit Albert, le, 15

Petronius, 22, 67

Peyretonne, Catherine, 396

Pharmaceutria (Theocritus), 9, 10

Philip II of Spain, 606

Philip IV of France, 367-376

Philip Augustus, 361

Phillips, Mary, 153

Philo, 49

Philopseudes, 7

Philosophumena, 8

Philyra, 3

Phips, Sir William, 342-3


. . (Reginald


621


Picard, Abbé, 88

Picard, Mathurin, 417-20
Pichler, Emerenziana, 495
Pittenween Witches, 246

Pius II, Pope, 530

Pius V, Pope S., 183, 562

Pius VI, Pope, 573

Plague in Italy, 559-62

Platina, Bartolomeo, 555

Plato, 7, 49, 547

Plautus, 555

Pleix, Scipion du, 27

Pliny, 2, 4, 5, 9, 14, 19, 23, 35-6
Plotinus, 49

Plummer of Gilston, Colonel, 159
Penitentiale Pseudo-Theodori, 71
Policraticus, 74

Poltergeist hauntings, 184-280, 282-6
Pomponius Leetus, 555-6
Pomponius, Mela, 352

Poppo of Treves, 360

Porphyry, 8, 49, 50

Poseidon, 3

Potier, Jeanne, 386

Potts, Thomas, 161, 552-3
Powell, Mr. Justice, 158-9
Premonstratensians, 504—5
Priapus, 7, 22

‘* Prickers ”’ of Witches, 145-6, 228-9
Priscillian, 588-90

Proclus, 50

Pulci, Luigi, 592

Pythagoras, 5, 35


Question of Witchcraft Debated, The,
165
Quifiones, Francisco de, 606


Rais, Gilles de, 42, 389-96, 426

Rameses IIT, 11

Ramiro I of Aragon, 359

Recared, 590

Regino of Prum, 73

Relic of the Rood, 93

Remarkable Providences . . . (Increase
Mather), 281, 286

Remy, Nicolas, 132, 404-5

Reverdy, Josephine, 607

Reynie, M. la, 431

Richard III of England, 110

Ripuarian laws, 353

Robert le Bougre, Inquisitor, 362

Robert the Good, 359

Roberts, Alexander, 161

Robin, Son of Art (familiar), 86-7,
90-1

Roderic the Goth, 590

Romulus Augustulus, 57

Rosenbach, Johann Hartmann von,
497-8

Rouen, Appeal by Parliament of,
423-9


622


Rupert, S., 465-6
Rymer, Thomas, 103


Sacrament, Blessed, used in spells,
88, 377, 384, 400, 411, 412, 416,
418-19, 539, 542, 552-3, 565,
567-9

Sade, Marquis de, 443-4

Saducismus Triumphatus, 163-4, 168,
271, 273

Senger, Maria Renata, 506-16

Sains, Marie de, 412-14

St. Omer, Geoffrey de, 363

Sampson, Agnes, 213-22

Samuel, Mother, of Warboys, 125-7

Satanic Communion, 244, 418-19, 578

Satanic mass, 411, 418-19, 421, 423,
432, 555, 573-4, 578

Sawyer, Elizabeth, 131

Schram, 0.s.B., Dom Dominic, 362

Schiler, Johan, 498-9

Schwaegel, Anna Maria, 517-18

Scot, Reginald, 13, 25, 128, 161, 215,
223, 296

Scott, Sir Michael, 204-5

Select Cases of Conscience .. . (Gaule),
144

Seneca, 4

Septimius Sevenes, 46

Sermon against Witchcraft, A (Isaac
Nicholson), 172-3

Severian, 68

Shaw, Elinor, 153

Shipton, Mother, 15

Shirley, James, 14

Shore, Jane, 110

Sible Hedingham, Case of Witchcraft
at, 178-9

Sibylline Books, 47

Simeone, San (Il buon vecchio), 557-6

Sinistrari d’Ameno, 570-1

Siricius, Pope S., 589

Sisters, The (comedy, 1652), 14

Sixtus IV, Pope, 530-1, 555

Sixtus V, 542, 646

Sobechan, Anastasia, 93

Sorceleries de Henry de Valois, Les
(pamphlet), 402

Sortes Uergiliane, 33

Soulis, Lord, 205

Southwell, Thomas (wizard), 104

Spectator, The, 158

Spee, s.J., Freidrich von, 494-5

Spina, Fra Bartolomeo, 132, 541, 554

Sprenger, James, 25, 382, 477-9, 501,
534, 536

Statius, 32

Statute against Witchcraft (James I),
129-30

Stearne, John, 142, 144

Stedingers, 471-3

Stuffo, an idol, 467


INDEX


Suarez, s.J., Francisco, 293, 362

Suetonius, 36

Summanus, 19

Summis desiderantes affectibus, 531,
533-6

Supounghi, Monsignor, 449-50

Surin, s.s., Jean-Joseph, 416

Swimming of Witches, The, 141-2,
160, 167-8, 170, 173, 176, 177,
178-9

Symonds, John Addington, 549


Tableau de Vinconstance (De Lancre),
406

Tacitus, 14, 202

Tages, 17

Tedworth, The Drummer of, 271-3

Templars, Knights, 215, 362—76, 523

Teresa, S., 609

Theoclites, 366, 367

Theocritus, 9

Theodore, S., of Canterbury, 65

Theodoret, 53

Theodosius the Great, 52, 57, 425

Theophane, 3

Theoris, 17

Thessala (a comedy), 9

Thessaly, the home of Witchcraft, 9

Thibaut, Madame, 446

Thietberga, 67

Thrasyllus, 14

Throckmorton family of Warboys,
125-7

Thurso, Witchcraft in, 247-8

Thurston, s.J., Herbert, 387

Tiberius Cesar, 14, 36

Tibullus, 21

Tipton, Belief in Witchcraft persists
at, 181

Tiresias, 5, 6

Tituba (an Indian witch), 289-91,
293-6

Titus (Vespasianus), 37

Tofts, Mary, 169

Toledo, notorious for magic, 591-2

Teen Dr. Eugenio, 596-603, 611-


sean Alonso, 293, 380

Tractatus contra inuocatores, 381

Tractatus in Errores Gazarionum, 381

Tranquille of Saint-Rémi, 0.8.F.0.,
415


Treatise against Witchcraft, A, 161

Treatise of Spirits, A, 165

Treatise of Witchcraft, A, 161

Trembles, Mary, 151-3

Yrial and Examination of Mrs. Mary
Hicks . . . (spurious pamphlet),
153-4

Triall of Witchcraft, The, 161

Tring, Witch swum at, 168

Trois-Echelles, 398-9, 426


INDEX


Tunbridge Wells, The wise-man of, 176
Turin, Haunted house at, 277-8
Turnebus (André Tournebeef), 67
Twelve Tables, Law of the, 20, 35, 425


Ulpian, 46

Ulrich de Torrente, 475
Unterzell, The Convent of, 504
Untori, Gli (of Milan), 560-2
Urban V, B., 474-5

Urban VIII, 84, 546, 558
Ursulines, 408


Vagrancy Act, 166-7

Vaillant Le, Claudine, 438-9
Valens, 55, 56

Valentinian I, 55

Valentinian II, 56

Valentinian III, 57

Valkyries, 468-9

Valla, Lorenzo, 555

Vampires, 503-4

Varro, 5, 20, 21

Vaux, Laurence, 183

Ventras, Pierre-Michel, 609
Vergil, 67

Vergil and Messianic prophecy, 31-3
Vergil, regarded as a wizard, 31-4
Vespasian, 37

Vaudois, 383-4, 385, 475
Vianney, 8. Jean Baptiste, 280-2
Visigoths, Laws of the, 353
Vitellius, 37

Voisin, La, 85, 430


Wagstafie, John, 165

Walburga, S., 607

Waldsee, Executions at, 485-7
Walkerne, The Wise Woman of, 158
Walpurgis night, 519-20

Wapping, The Witch of, 146—7
Warboys, Witchcraft at, 125-8


623


Warwick, Earl of (Robert Rich), 140

Water Ordeal, The, 141, 144, 160, 430

Wax figures used in Witchcraft, 10,
11, 81-4, 104

Webster, John (Displaying of Witch-
craft), 136, 165

Webster, John (dramatist), 25

Wehlitz, Witchcraft at, 500-2

Weir, Major Thomas, 231-43

Wenham, Jane, 158-160

Wenham pamphlets, The, 159-160

Wer-leopards, 26

Werwolves, 22-26, 396-7, 399-400,
401, 447-8

Wesley, John, 168, 169, 274

Wesley of Epworth, Samuel, 274

Weyer, Johann, 25, 128, 129, 223,
481, 550

Whale, Ann, 156

William of Malmesbury, 78

Willibrod, S., 465-6

Willington Mill, The haunting of,
274-5

Wilson, Arthur, 136

Witches, acquitted at later trials,
157-8

Witches, executed in the reign of
James I, 130

Witches unable to weep, 141-2

Witches watched for 24 hours, 140-1

Withraed, Laws of, 71

Wonderfull Discoverie of Witches, The,
(Potts), 161

Wonders of the Invisible World (Cot-
ton Mather), 287

Worksop, haunted house at, 276


Youghal, The Witch of, 94-5
Zequiel, a familiar, 597-603


Zeus, 3
Zoroaster, 4, 5, 35, 38


Library of the Mystic Arts


A LIBRARY OF ANCIENT AND MODERN CLASSICS


BARTON, R. F. Autobiographies of Three Pagans in the Philippines. intro. by Dr. Nancy Oestreich
Lurie. ill. index bibliog. 320 pp, 542” x 8%” 62-19195. $7.50 ANTHROP
“It is difficult to realize that the people in these autobiographies, two men and a
woman live on the same planet that we do. Head-hunting and spearing your
enemy are everyday occurrences. Anyone who knows your kin is an enemy, unless
he is your kin. It is the savage eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth of Biblical
times, even though coming of the Americans has discouraged some of the practices.
R. F. Barton was among the Ifugaos long enough to select three representatives
of the tribe. In the autobiographies he gives their life history before marriage,
including many of their ceremonies and customs. It is an interesting and inform-
ative anthropological study.” — WICHITA EAGLE & BEACON


BERNHEIM, H. Hypnosis and Suggestion in Psychotherapy: The Nature and Uses of Hypnotism.
intro, by Ernest R. Hilgard. index. 428 pp. 6%” x 944” 63-22664. $10.00 PSYCH
Hypnosis has had a checkered career over a period of centuries, going through
cycle after cycle of general approval and total eclipse. The fate of this book
indicates how fragile the reputation of hypnosis has been; written almost
eighty years ago, and translated into English a few years later, it has always
been acknowledged as a great classic. Yet it has been out of print for some
seventy years. It was not obsolete; nor was it suppressed. It has simply been
neglected —as has hypnotism itself. It was the Second World War that reintro-
duced hypnosis in psychotherapy, and the widespread contemporary interest
dates from that time. Today its potential is recognized by practically all medical
societies over the world, and courses in hypnotism are appearing in medical
school curricula and in training programs for psychiatric residents. Numerous
psychologists are also turning to hypnosis as a fertile field for research and
therapy.


BULLOUGH, Vern L. The History of Prostitution. index. 320 pp. 6%” x 914” 64-16619. $7.50 HIST
Prostitution, like the weather, has often been talked about, but very rarely has
any scholar bothered to do any research on the topic. Few serious studies on
prostitution have been undertaken by social scientists over the past fifty years.
Although an occasional sociologist, psychologist, psychiatrist, or anthropologist
has concerned himself, the historian has totally neglected the subject. As a result
this book is the first attempt at a serious history of prostitution in English in
this century.

The author, Dr. Vern L. Bullough, is a historian who has specialized in the
history of medicine and science. He has published numerous articles, primarily
on medical history, in various learned journals. He was assisted in his researches
by his wife, Bonnie L. Bullough.


COOMARASWAMY, Ananda Kentish. Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism. intro. by John C. Wilson.
ill. index. bibliog, glossary. 370 pp. 6%” x 9%” 64-16160. $10,00 REL
A classic introduction to Buddhism, Coomaraswamy’s book was originally pub-
lished in England in 1916. It was reprinted without change in 1927, and it is
now finally available in its original form in an American edition, The author
was revered both in the East and the West for his unique contributions to art


and philosophy as well as religion. An ardent Indian nationalist, his life work
became the preservation of India’s heritage and the monumental task of teach-
ing the West to respect and revere the great civilization of India.

When Coomaraswamy died, Aldous Huxley spoke of his “unique importance as
a mediator between East and West.”

The author was fond of calling himself a traditionalist and often emphasized the
virtues of orthodoxy. He was always suspicious of the Western fashionable
interest in Buddhism and frequently spoke with considerable irony of the
contemporary offbeat Zen enthusiasts. “The suspicious popularity of ‘Buddhism’
in Europe,” he wrote in 1938, “has rested upon a very thorough misunder-
standing of what Buddhism really means, The essential doctrines of Buddhism,
like those of all orthodox relgions, are in radical opposition to our modern
individualism.”

The book continues to be a solid exposition of Buddhistic thought and its reissue
should be timely in view of current rapprochment between the West and Eastern
religious systems. Some twenty plates add interest and value-—VIRGINIA KIRKUS
SERVICE.


FEILDING, Everard. Sittings with Eusapia Palladino and other Studies. intro. by E, J. Dingwall.
324 pp. 64%” x 914” 63-18682. $10.00 PARAPSYCH
“The author, well known as an objective observer of psychical phenomena,
presents primarily a detailed report of 13 seances with the noted Italian medium
of the 20th Century. There are included accounts of other mediums and of the
stigmata of a French abbe. Facts are given; conclusions are left for the reader.”
— JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION

“William James deplored the cheating and the vulgarity connected with the
mediumship of Eusapia Palladino, but he believed that there was a residuum of
phenomena in her performances which could not be explained. So did Everard
Feilding of the Society for Psychic Research. He put her through the most rigid
tests possible early in this century and concluded that she possessed some inex-


plicable power which caused tables to levitate, bells to ring, and lights to flash.
In this most interesting collection of Feilding’s writings we find that although
he was a serious researcher, he always retained a sense of humor and a healthy
skepticism. Eric Dingwall, who was his friend, has contributed a witty and
appreciative introduction which reinforces the impression one gets from these
papers that Feilding was a “most acute and well-balanced investigator” of ESP.
Recommended for all libraries interested in this field of research.” — LIBRARY
JOURNAL


GUIGNEBERT, Charles. Jesus fwd. by Joel Carmichael. index. bibliog. xv + 560 pp. 644” x 944”
56-7837. $10.00 REL
This historical study of the life of Jesus and the origins of Christianity has
received the highest possible praise from biblical scholars of the status of
Niebuhr, Barth and Pfeiffer. Its author, Charles Guignebert, is generally consid-
ered one of the finest examples of European scholarship. He spent a lifetime of
research into the genesis of all forms of religious belief; toward the end of his
life he held the chair of the History of Christianity at the Sorbonne.


REINHOLD NIEBUHR: “The virtue of Professor Guignebert’s venture lies in his
comprehensive analysis of the scholarship of the past decades in this field. The
specialists are acquainted with all the evidence which he analyzes. But there is no
book of recent years which will give the interested layman a more comprehensive
account of what has been written and said about the life of Jesus and a fairer
estimate of conflicting evidence. Naturally the author has a position of his own
to maintain, but the reader is permitted to see how he arrived at it, and with
what cogency and plausibility he defends it against contrasting views.”

ROBERT H. PFEIFFER: “Aside from Guignebert’s JESUS, only Goguel’s LIFE may
be regarded as a serious attempt to write a critical and objective historical work.


Guignebert furnishes an excellent introduction to the subject, a reliable guide to
beginners, and an informing manual for scholars. We need to be reminded again
by Guignebert of the strict and sober discipline required of the true historian.


JAFFE, Aniela. Apparitions and Precognitions: A study from the Point of View of C. G, Jung’s
Analytical Psychology. intro. by C. G. Jung. index. 224 pp. 646” x 94%”. 63-19744. $7.50 PSYCH
The author, well known for her valuable contributions to the literarure of
analytical psychology, was specifically selected by Dr. Jung to write this book.
The book represents a psychological evaluation of more than 1500 personal
accounts elicited in response to a series of articles by Dr. Jung, dealing with
prophetic dreams, coincidences, premonitions, apparitions. The articles appeared
in the popular Swiss magazine, Schweizerische Beobachter, and the astonishing
response to it came from all social classes — farmers, workmen, tradesmen, office
employees and various professions.

One of the notable things to come to light in Dr. Jaffe’s book is the fact that
among the Swiss, who are commonly regarded as stolid, unimaginative, ration-
alistic and materialistic, there are just as many ghost stories and strange tales
as is likely to be found in any other land; bewitching, sorcery, magic spells, as
practiced in the Middle Ages and remoter times have by no means died out, but
presently flourish among the Swiss as rampantly as they did centuries ago.

The author leaves aside the questioner of ultimate truth; instead she tries to
inquire into the psychological questions: Exactly who is it that sees a ghost?
Under what psychic conditions does he see it? What does a ghost signify when
examined for its content as a symbol?


KING, C. Daly. The States of Human Consciousness. fwd. by Roy Finch. index. v-xiii + 176 pp.
646” x 944” 63-10385. $7.50 PSYCH
The crucial thesis of this book is that in addition to the forms of consciousness
known to all human beings (Sleep and Waking) there exist two further forms
not yet widely known (Awakeness and Objective Consciousness).


What led such an extremely skeptical man as Dr. King to accept the unorthodox
idea that additional states of human consciousness are possible? There were four
main lines of evidence which convinced him: These were: 1) the neurological
and physiological teachings of the Guardjieff Institute; 2) his personal psycho-
logical experiments and experiences; 3) his historical studies of ancient civiliza-
tions; 4) his studies in behavioral patterns.


LEARY, Timothy; ALPERT, Richard; Metzner, Ralph. A Guide to Psychedelic Experience. 150 pp.
8” x 9” 64-19705. $5.00 PSYCH
During the past few years newspapers and magazines have poured out unre-
strained criticism on the subject of psychedelic drugs. Meanwhile certain tech-
nical journals have simultaneously dealt out unrestrained praise. Whom are we
to believe?

Perhaps the most objective evidence available on these important new drugs
comes from recent studies made by four scientific research groups, which admin-
istered LSD and psilocybin to 462 persons — among them physicians, lawyers,
writers, ministers, psychologists, artists, musicians, engineers and housewives.
The percentage of these persons reporting it was a pleasant experience was 73%;
the percentage reporting they wished to try it again was 82%; a total of 67%
reported the experience brought them greater regard for other human beings;
67% felt a sense of relaxation and freedom from anxiety and tension; 65% felt
it was of lasting benefit; 38% said it increased their interest in nature, art, music;
and 64% felt the experience had changed their lives.

Drs. Leary, Alpert and Metzner have for years been among the most prominent
names in the research of psychedelics. They were engaged in a program of
experiments with the drugs at Harvard University, until sensational national


publicity, unfairly concentrating on student interest in the drugs, led to the
suspension of the experiments. Since then, the authors have continued their work
without academic auspices.


Like other scientists involved with psychedelic research, the authors maintain
that the drug is only one component of the psychedelic session. Equally import-
ant is the mental and spiritual preparation, both before and in the course of
taking the drug. The authors find no need to invent new mental and spiritual
materials for this purpose. The great literature of meditation lends itself very
well to this use. This particular guide uses preparation material from THE TIBETAN
BOOK OF THE DEAD.


LEGMAN, G. The Horn Book; Studies in Erotic Folklore and Bibliography. index. bibliog. 565 pp.
6Y” x 94%” 63-19743. $12.50 REF
The author is probably the most learned and most controversial figure in the
field of American folklore. He is also the principal living specialist in erotic
folklore. A former bibliographer for the Kinsey Institute, he enjoys repute as
a lecturer and as the editor of Newrotica magazine. He is also the author of Love
and Death; A Study in Censorship, now in its second edition. In his present
work, the author's intention is to give the real facts about erotic literature and
folklore. Eloquently, he attacks the substitution of fakelore for folklore in the
mass communications media of America today. After establishing the value of
unfettered folk-art, Mr. Legman analyzes with penetrating psychological discern-
ment the displacement of sexual symbolism in our society and makes a strong
case for authentic, unexpurgated collections. He attacks the patently illogical
and insensible idea that sex must be expunged — while allowing the sadistic
programs, books and plays an uncriticized place in our society. Murder, torture,
cannibalism freely appear in our mass media, while the healthy normality of
sexual intercourse between man and woman is deprecated or silently omitted.
And the author points a serious warning: “The substitution of allowed sadism
for prohibited sexuality in folk literature and mass communications can only
result in the most sinister abnormalization of the whole psychic structure of
future generations.”

The book’s table of contents follows:


I. STUDIES IN EROTIC BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. The Bibliography of Prohibited Books: Pisanus Fraxi
2. The Horn Book, and Other Bibiliographical Problems
3. Great Collectors of Erotica
Il. THE REDISCOVERY OF BURNS’ MERRY MUSES OF CALEDONIA
4, The Cunningham Manuscript
5. The Merry Muses as Folklore
III. PROBLEMS OF EROTIC FOLKLORE
6. Folklore and Fakelore
7. Misconceptions in Erotic Folklore
8. The Bawdy Song...In Fact and In Print
9. The Limerick: A History and Critique
10. Toward a Motif-Index of Erotic Humor
11. Folksongs, Fakelore, Folkniks and Cash
12. Who Owns Folklore?


MARTIN, Eva. Reincarnation: The Ring of Return. index. bibliog. v-xi + 306 pp. 542” x 84%”
63-18492. $5.00 REL
The idea of reincarnation has always appealed powerfully to man’s innate sense
of justice, to his yearning for eternal progress. Yet, strangely enough, there are
not many books to be found in English on the subject. Nor are any of them
likely to be, as the present volume is, an anthology of the great writings on
reincarnation.

“This first American edition of what is regarded as a standard work in its field,
is comprehensive in that it covers the pre-Christian era, the early Christian era
and other writings of the first five centuries. Miscellaneous sources are drawn
upon and material from the first three decades of the Twentieth Century is also


included. Almost exclusively, the author in her quotations, turns to the poets.
Such a book as this, as the publisher remarks, ‘whatever its shortcomings 1s not
likely to become dull reading.’ — CHRISTIAN HERALD


PODMORE, Frank. From Mesmer to Christian Science: A Short History of Mental Healing; intro, By
E. J. Dingwall. index. xxi + 306 pp. 64” x 94” 63-21599. $10.00 f PSYCH
“This short history of mental healing covers broadly and impressively just about
everything from Mesmer to Christian Science. Certainly, spiritual healing has
become an important part of our everyday life. In medicine there are psycho-
analysts and an entire new school of therapy along with the use of hypnosis as
an anesthesia; and in religion, not only Christian Science and New Thought,
but many movements within the established churches and synagogues. More
and more it brings into sharp focus the miraculous therapy’ of Jesus. In these
pages one follows the steady march of mental healing from quackery and
chicanery to respectability, with something added.”— Dr. Daniel A. Poling,
CHRISTIAN HERALD


“Since the first appearance of this book in 1909, no publication has superseded
Podmore’s critical and detailed study. An outstanding member of the British
Society for Psychical Research, he traced the subject from the hectic days of pre-
Revolutionary Paris to the beginning of the 20th Century. Obsessed with the
idea of fraud, the medical profession obstinately rejected all evidence of the
validity of these investigations, abandoning the field to amateurs and fanatics.
Eventually the phenomena which Mesmer attributed solely to a material fluid
came to be explained as a purely spiritual process. The progeny of Mesmerism
therefore include not only hypnotism and aspects of experimental psychology,


but also Spiritualism, New Thought, and Mental Healing, of which Christian
Science is most prominent. Recommended for most psychology collections.” —
LIBRARY JOURNAL


PRINCE, Walter Franklin. The Case of Patience Worth. intro. by John C. Wilson. 509 pp. 6%” x 9%4”
63-23268. $10.00 PARAPSYCH
The author, a renowned psychologist and a pioneer in scientific psychic research,
regards the case of Patience Worth as one of the most fascinating and enigmatic
psychic manifestations of all time. In the conclusion of his book, Dr. Prince
states that he could offer no rational explanation to the riddle of Patience
Worth, despite years of impartial scientific investigation.

Patience Worth identified herself as a spirit from 17th Century England and
she communicated through a medium, Mrs. Pearl Curran, an unlettered Missouri
housewife. Over a period of five years, Patience created and communicated
through Mrs. Curran an enormous quantity of poetry and prose of astonishing
quality. Her literary creations displayed original genius, enormous erudition,
familiarity with classic literature and history, piercing wit and penetrating
wisdom; in brief, creations which could not conceivably have come from the
simple, unlettered Mrs. Curran, who had never been out of the Mid-West and
who had managed to complete a grammar school education only after consid-
erable difficulty.


ROSSMAN, Joseph. Industrial Creativity: The Psychology of the Inventor. intro. by Gardner Murphy.
index, bibliog. 288 pp. 646” x 9%” 64-16161. $7.50 PSYCH
In this scholarly and painstaking study of the mental processes of creativity, Dr.
Rossman, long associated with the U.S. Patent Office, presents many startling
conclusions developed after a long and careful analysis of source material
obtained from 700 active and important inventors. Dr. Rossman, a chemical
engineer, a member of the bar practicing before both the U.S. Supreme Court
and the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, a famous patent attorney, and


a doctor of psychology, is perhaps the only man who could have undertaken
such a study.


Popular fantasy pictures the inventor as a wild-eyed, impractical dreamer. But
the cumulative portrait that emerges in this book reveals an ability for keen
analysis, a mind strikingly original and observant, an astonishing perseverance
in the face of apparently insurmountable obstacles.

Dr. Rossman’s book was first published primarily to help inventors understand
all the implications of the inventive process. That was thirty years ago. Today
it is published anew, with new material by Dr. Rossman. This time he addresses
his book to all those interested in the nature of creativity, For those more
specifically interested in scientific invention, there is a considerable body of
original information.


SMITH, Susy. The Mediumship of Mrs. Leonard, photographs. bibliog. 256 pp. 6%” x 914” 64-17317.
$7.50 PARAPSYCH


This is the first comprehensive study taking in the entire life work of Mrs.
Leonard, the last of the great trance mediums of the golden age. She is now
well into her eighties. This important new work is destined to endure as a classic
in the search for psychic truth; it presents the strongest evidence ever obtained
of the survival of the human spirit —of earthly memories abiding beyond the
grave,

The scientific evidence in the case of Mrs. Leonard is the most documented in
_psychic history. No trance medium has ever been more thoroughly investigated
and researched. Most of her career was spent not as a private medium but under
the exclusive control of the Society of Psychical Research. The Society estab-
lished a framework of painstaking supervision and kept exact records of every-
thing said at Mrs. Leonard’s sittings.

This book continues the series from University Books dealing with the great
mediums. The two outstanding physical mediums, D. D. Home and Eusapia
Palladino, are already represented. Of the three great trance mediums, Mts. Piper
was introduced in William James On Psychic Research and Helene Smith in
Flournoy’s From India To The Planet Mars. The third trance medium is Gladys
Osborne Leonard.


APOCRYPHA. Introduction by Morton Enslin, Professor of Biblical Languages and Literature, St.
Lawrence University. Bound in white and gold, 3-color slipcase. xv + 239 pp. 744” x 11” ie
$15.00 R
“In 1924 the Nonesuch edition of the Apocrypha appeared, limited to 1325
copies. This new edition is an almost exact facsimile of that very beautiful work,
bound in a most attractive cover with stamped gilt design, and boxed. Most
marked of its changes from the original, and one that enhances the value of
the work considerably, is an Introduction by the editor of this Journal, Dr.
Morton S. Enslin, who in brief, concise paragraphs provides excellent prefaces
to the work as a whole and to each of the books individually. He places the
Apocrypha in its proper context in biblical literature, indicates the inappropri-
ateness of the name when applied to the books as a whole, and shows how it
was that Luther split off these writings and placed them ‘in the limbo between
the Old Testament and the New.’ The individual introductions serve to provide
the backgrounds, probable datings, and general contents of each of the fourteen
pieces. This is a valuable work for both the biblical scholar and the lover of
fine books.” — J. Calvin Keene, JOURNAL OF BIBLICAL LITERATURE


BIRREN, Faber. Color: A Survey in Words and Pictures: From Ancient Mysticism to Modern Science.
ill. index. 250 pp. 7%” x 1042” 62-18889. $15.00 PSYCH
“This book is a compilation of information concerning color, from the physi-
ology of the eye and theories of color vision to the ancients’ belief in magical
qualities of color, and even current theories of color and personality. The author
has written several books on color and color psychology, particularly relating
color to commercial purposes.” — LIBRARY JOURNAL ‘

“An introduction to the history of color, both ancient and modern, and to its


various uses. This book is highly recommended.” — PSYCHIATRIC QUARTERLY
“All in all, an absorbing book in an uncrowded field, and one which does credit
to the author's erudition and intuition.” — ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH


BIRREN, Faber. Color Psychology and Color Therapy: A Factual Study of the Influence of Color on
Human Life. intro by Felix Morrow. ill. photogs. index, biblio. xv + 302 pp. 6%” x 944” 61-14266.
$7.50 PSYCH
“Faber Birren is a consultant on the use of color in industrial and other applica-
tions, and perhaps without peer in this field. The book, however, goes much
farther than the mere applications and their psychology. There is fascinating
detail from historical, medical, occult, physiological sources as well — fascinating
and documented... Recommended.” — LIBRARY JOURNAL


THE BOOK OF THE DEAD: the Hieroglyphic Transcript of the Papyrus of ANI. tr. and intro. by
E. A. Wallis Budge. ill. index. appendixes. xiv + 704 pp. 64%” x 944” 60-12165. $12.50 REL
This is the collection of texts which the ancient Egyptian scribes composed for
the benefit of the dead. A book-length introduction by Sir Wallis Budge, late
Keeper of the Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in the British Museum, gives
us its history and theology. This is an exact reproduction of the famous Medici
Society edition of 1911 except that the original two volumes are here bound
as one.


BUCKE, Richard Maurice, M.D. Cosmic Consciousness; A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind.
bibliog. xvii + 326 pp. 7%4” x 934” 61-11100. $5.95 PSYCH
One of the great classics of mystical experience, this work was first published in
1901. The author saw-the emergence of a new faculty, the natural outgrowth of
our present level of consciousness to a level as far above it as it is above the
simple consciousness of animals. William James read the work when it appeared
and wrote to the author: “I believe that you have brought this kind of con-
sciousness ‘home’ to the attention of students of human nature in a way so
definite and inescapable that it will be impossible henceforward to overlook it
or ignore it... But my total reaction on your book, my dear Sir, is that it is an
addition to psychology of first rate importance, and that you are a benefactor of
us


BUDGE, E. A. Wallis. Amulets and Talismans. ill. b/w 22 plates, 300 ill. index. xxxix + 543 pp.
6%" x 9%” 61-7163. $10.00 REL/ ARCHEOL
“This encyclopedic volume represents years of research and an extensive knowl-
edge of ancient civilizations. The author, as teacher at Cambridge University
and curator of the British Museum, has accumulated a wealth of data dealing
with demonology, divination, astrology, numerology and the belief in the
prophylactic properties of the gems prevalent among the people of the ancient
civilizations of Sumer, Babylon, Persia, Egypt and others. The author throws
new light on many passages in early biblical writings which will give the student
of the Old Testament often a clearer meaning of the archaic sense of the text.
‘Amulets and Talismans’ is a reliable reference book of lasting value.” — THE
LUTHERAN


BUDGE, E. A. Wallis. Osiris; the Egyptian Religion of Resurrection; 2 vs. bound in one; intro. by
Jane Harrison. ill, 14 b/w plates, 212 line cuts. index. appendix. xliii + 440 pp. 64%” x 9%4”
61-10531. $15.00 REL
“In this full-length study, Dr. Wallis Budge, the late Keeper of the Egyptian
and Assyrian Antiquities in the British Museum, interprets Osiris as a year-god
who dies and lives again. In contradistinction to Frazer, he dwells on the native
African origins of this ancient Egyptian cult and avoids the obvious parallels
with the Mid-Eastern gods Attis and Adonis... His work will be read with profit
and enjoyment by all students of comparative religion.” — LIBRARY JOURNAL


T
ts
rey


Se
il
ate


asthe
sistgitt


3
i
os


f. ‘4
$f 35
+h


ba


sup


begs S513 } 3h
Tries tet
Titers aye


Rann
hy Pitsl:


HH
+7 tty


tet


t


4 on 3
! Bert grat
pare Heinentitey ys


tite


r


rt ahity


ass


abate se esetns


rDEsep yy


pis
aaa


i it
tf


i


1"
iti ana it
ht aieaaesetss
Ht Tea:
. t tik
arty
any


1 4 : : aieseisa:

sth f i i i } eas teste

3 Maat

vTelete ls +1. oat Tit

Rea : ta ane)
wyily Tiel Ty ett).


tchcraft.
4 $9559


133


>
a
<z
a
—
i
ie
o
Ww
4
_
°o
Vv
Ww
<J
<z
-
a
Ww
x=
z=
a
_
wo
_
4
=
Ss)


The geography of wi


3023516
