

BF1131


*0^


.*


t0^


7 ,.v^


,0  vT>  u *


.


J


/M.


B  0  0  K

PSYCHOLOGY.


1, Philosophical,
Practical.


by  la roy  Sunderland.

tote  Jf.ort| :

STEARNS & COMPANY,
25 ANN STREET


BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY

PATHETISM,

HISTORICAL,  PHILOSOPHICAL,  PRACTICAL;

GIVING THE RATIONALE OF EVERY POSSIBLE FORM OF

NERVOUS  OR  MENTAL  PHENOMENA

KNOWN" UNDER THE TECHNICS OF

Amulets,  Charms,  Enchantment,  Spells,  Fascination,  Incan-
tation, Magic,  Mesmerism,  Philters,  Talisman,  Relics,
Witchcraft,  Ecstacy,  Hallucination,  Spectres,
Trance,  Illusions,  Apparitions,  Clair-
voyance, Somnambulism,  Mira-
cles, Sympathy,  etc. :

SHOWING HOW THESE RESULTS MAY BE INDUCED, THE THEORY OP

MIND WHICH THEY DEMONSTRATE, AND THE BENEVOLENT

USES  TO  WHICH  THIS  KNOWLEDGE  SHOULD  BE  APPLIED.


I
BY  LAROY  SUNDERIAND,

AUTHOR  OF  "  PATHETISM" — "  NEW  THEORY  OF  MIND'' — "  THE MAONET"-
UBOOK OF HEALTH" — u  THE SPIRIT- WORLD," ETC. ETC.


NEW  YORK:
STEARNS & COMPANY,

2  5 ANN-STR  EET.
1853.


V


<2>


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1852,

BY  STEARNS  &  COMPANY.

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the

Southern  District  of  New  York.


■


CONTENTS  AND  INDEX.


Preface,


Page.
... 5


NOMENCLATURE.

2.  Apparition, 10

3.  Catalepsy 10

4.  Clairvoyance, 11

5.  Dreamine 12

6.  Double  Consciousness, 13

7.  Ecstacy, 14

8.  Ghosts, 15

9.  Hallucination 16

10.  Illusion 18

11.  Imagination, 18

12.  Miracle, 18

13.  Phantasy 20

14.  Phrenopatby 20

15.  Second  Sight 21

16.  Somnambulism, 21

17.  Sumnipathy 22

18.  Spectre,  . . '. 2-2

19.  Sympathy

20.  Trance

21.  Amulet 23

22.  Animal  Magnetism 25

23.  Bewitch, 26

24.  Charm 27

2.>.  Enchantment, 28

26.  Fascination, 29

27.  Incantation, 29

28.  MaCic 7. 29

29.  Mesmerism, 30

30.  Philters 31

31.  Belies, 31

32.  Spells 31

33.  Tali-man 32

34.  Marveloasness 34

35.  Spontaneous  Phenomena 351

36.  Suggestive, 35

37.  Volitional 35

38.  Electricity 36

39.  Pathetism, 39


23


Page.
HISTORICAL.

Religious  Phenomena, 42

Identity  of  Results 47

Professional  Experiments, 48

The  Object, 49

Facilities, 49

Details 50

The  *  Idea  "  of  Pathetism, ...  51

Key  to  Mesmerism, 51

14  Neuralogy," 53

"  Psychometry," 54

"  Hypnotism." 56

Method  of  Pathetism, 56

Reports  of  Lectures, 57

Original  Experiments, 61

Unity, 64

What  is  the  Reader's  Verdict  1  64

PHILOSOPHICAL.

Triune  of  all  Things, 67

Philosophy  of  Spheres, 67

Doctrine  of  Relations, 67

Spheres 68

Idiosyncrasy, 70

Riechen bach's  Experiments,  . .  72

"  Sensitives," 72

Individualities 72

Popular  Excitements, 73

Misnomer  ? 74

Physical  Bodies 75

Testimony  of  "  Sensitives,"  ••  76

Spheres  of  Mental  Bodies, 78

Sympathetic  Imitation 79

Mental  Contagion, 80

Sectarian  Mania

Diseases  from  Sj  m  pi  thy B8

( 'nm(\s  from  Sympathy,

Fanaticism B3

The  "Relation," 84

Illustration 85

Power  of  Habit 86

Bower  of  Faith 87


CONTENTS  AND INDEX.


PRACTICAL.


Page.


81.  Directions  for  Pathetising, . . ..

82.  Parental,

83.  Treatment  of  Disease,

84.  What  is  Comprehended  1

85.  Intelligence,

8G.  Self-Induction,

87.  Diversity  of  Means,

88.  An  Idea,

89.  Children,

90.  Antipathy,

91.  One  or  more  at  a  time,

92.  Position  of  the  Patient,

93.  Increase  of  Power,

94.  How  to  Form  the  Relation,. . .

95.  Hearing,

96.  Seeing,

97.  Feeling,

98.  The  Time,

99.  Power,

1 00.  The  Relation  Formed  1

101.  TheSittine

102.  To  be  Remembered

103.  The  Patient  is  controlled  by

Suggestions,

104.  No two Patients precisely

alike,

105.  Degrees, .

100.  External,

107.  Internal,

108.  Spiritual

109.  Knowledge  of  the  Patient, —

110.  He  has  Knowledge  of  the  In-

ternal World,

11 1.  Cautions,

112.  Benefits  of  Pathetism

113.  Nature  of  Diseases  Cured,

114.  Paralysis  and  Spasmodic  Hy-

steria, cured  by  Pathetism,..

115.  Fits and Insanity,  cured by

Pathetism,

116.  Tic  Douloureux,

.117.  Epilepsy  cured  by  Pathetism,.

118.  Cramp -Convulsions cured  by

Pathetism,

119.  Gout,  cured  by  Pathetism,

120.  Tobacco  Chewing  and  Smok-

ing, cured  by  Pathetism,


Page.

121.  Opium  Eating,  cured  by  Path-

etism, 104

122.  Insensibility  to Pain, during

Surgical  Operations,  produc-
ed by  Pathetism, 104

123.  Amaurosis, cured by  Pathe-

tism 104

124.  Stammering,  cured  by  Pathe-

tism,  104

125.  Tumor cured, and Surgical

Operation superceded, by
Pathetism 105

126.  Loss  of  Voice,  and Despair,

cured  by  Pathetism, 106

127.  Neuralgia, cured by Pathe-

tism, 106

128.  Scrofula,  cured  by  Pathetism,  107

129.  Want  of  Sleep,  cured  by  Path-

etism 107

130.  Dysmenorrhea  and  Sick-Head-

ache, cured  by  Pathetism,..  107

131.  Love  of Intoxication taken

away  by  Pathetism, 108

132.  Troy,  N.  Y 108

133.  New  York  City  Resolutions,..  108

134.  Surgical  Operation,  performed

by  Dr.  Paine,  while  in  a  state
ofTrance, 109

135.  Philadelphia, Pa.,  Resolutions,

Presentation  of  a  Silver  Cup,  110

136.  Boston,  Mass  ,  Presentation  of

a  Gold  Watch, 112

137.  Conclusion, 113

AXIOMATIC.

>J.  Manhood, 115

II.  Human  Destiny 115

III.  The  Problem  of  Evil........  115

IV.  Freedom, 117

V.  Authority 117

VI.  Individuality, 118

VII.  Justice 118

V1IL  Punishment, 119

IX.  Religion, 119

X.  Harmony 120


PREFACE.


In  the  author's  larger  work,  on  Pathetism,  will  be  found
what  is  believed  to  be  an  approach  towards  the  true  Philoso-
phy of  "  The  Mysteries,  Miseries  and  Felicities  of  Human
Nature."  The  present  book  is  designed  to  show  the  Practi-
cal Uses  to  which  that  Philosophy  may  be  applied.  And,  as
imperfect  as  this  little  work  must  be,  from  the  extreme  brev-
ity which  has  been  constantly  studied  in  its  composition,  yet,
I  believe  the  candid  reader  will  here  find  more  practical
information  on  the  subject  treated  upon,  than  in  any  or  all  the
books,  old  or  new,  that  have  ever  been  published.  The
author's  facilities  for  observation,  in  this  field  of  inquiry,  have
neither  been  few  nor  of  short  duration.  Twenty  years  a
clergyman, — most  of  this  time  actively  engaged  in  what  are
called  ';  revivals  of  religion  ;" — in  the  midst  of  those  popular,
sympathetic  excitements,  which  have,  for  centuries,  given
rise  to  many  of  the  most  strange,  diversified  and  wonderful
Psychological  Phenomena,  that  perhaps,  ever  did.  or  ever  can
take  place  ; — and,  for  ten  years  a  public,  experimental  lec-
turer on  Mental  Philosophy.  During  the  greater  portion  of
this  thirty  years,  my  investigations  have  been  carried  on,  not


VI  PREFACE.

for  the  purpose  of  confirming  any  preconceived  theory,  but  in
order  to  arrive  at  a  satisfactory  knowledge  of  the  method  of
mind.  The  object  in  my  experiments,  from  first  to  last,  has
been,  to  find,  if  possible,  what  the  truth  is.  For  this  purpose
I  have  entranced  many  thousands  of  persons,  six  hundred  or
more  of  whom  have  had  -  surgical  operations  performed  on
them,  without  the  consciousness  of  pain.  In  numerous  cases
I  have  thus  broken  up  the  habit  of  Stammering,  and  destroyed
the  appetite  for  Tobacco,  Tea,  Coffee,  Opium,  and  Intoxicating
Liquors ;  have  cured  difficulties  in  the  power  of  Speech,
have  restored  numbers  from  a  state  of  hopeless  despair,  and
insanity,  and  completely  annihilated  from  the  mund  a  tendency
to  crime,  not  excepting  that  of  suicide  !  All  the  phenomena
peculiar  to  a  state  of  Trance,  Extasis,  Clairvoyance,  &c,
whether  Idiopathic,  Suggestive,  or  Volitional,  and  in  a
variety  of  forms,  and  cases,  far  too  numerous  to  be  put  down
here  in  detail,  have,  for  this  series  of  years,  presented  them-
selves before  me  for  examination.  Nor  these  alone,  but  those
results  superinduced  upon  the  nervous  system,  by  the  "  impon-
derable fluids, "  by  the  "  spheres"  of  metals,,  by  minerals,  by
air,  food,  cold,  heat,  light,  darkness,  sound,  color,  odor,  bo-
dily and  mental  exercise,  associations,  and  in  a  word,  by  every
thing  in  nature,  real  or  imaginary,  which  may  be  brought  in
contact  with  the  body,  or  occupy  the  mind.

Such  have  been  the  author's  advantages  for  acquiring,  not
merely  a  knowledge  of  Human  Nature  in  general,  but  also  a
practical  acquaintance  with  that  peculiar  class  of  its  mysteries
of  which  some  explanation  is  attempted  in  the  following
pages.

While  it  is  certain,  that  this  subject  has  attracted  the  atten-
tion of  some  of  the  most  intelligent  minds  of  the  present  and
past  ages,  it  is  much  to  bo  regretted,  that,  perhaps,  from  their


PREFACE.  Vll

neglect,  it  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  few  who  have  so
sadly  mystified  and  misrepresented  its  practical  importance
under  the  semblance  of  certain  cabalistic  names,  and,  for
teaching  the  "  secret"  to  the  uninitiated,  enormous  prices
have  been  charged.  In  this  way,  multitudes  of  honest  people
have  "been  severely  taxed,  and  thus  compelled  to  pay  for  the
support  of  arrant  charlatanism,  they  have  been  prevented  from
giving  to  this  subject  that  attention  which  its  intrinsic  impor-
tance so  evidently  demands.  However,  such,  we  shall  find,
have  been  the  difficulties  with  which  the  higher  forms  of
science  have  always  had  to  contend,  such  have  always  been
the  unfounded  pretensions,  the  pedantic  empiricism,  and  the
rank  deception,  characteristic  of  "  Alchemy"  ancient  and  mod-
ern, under  whatever  guise  it  may  have  appeared.

But,  I  shall  be  told,  perhaps,  that  some  of  this  blame  falls
on  the  author  of  Pathetism,  for  having,  years  ago,  made  known
his  new  theory  in  respect  to  processes  for  controlling  the  ner-
vous system.  I  admit  it,  though  I  must  confess  I  did  not
once  anticipate,  in  1841,  what  uses  cupidity  might,  indeed,
make  of  the  information  which  I  published,  freely,  to  the
world.  Still,  I  cannot  abate  my  confidence  in  the  ultimate
intelligence  of  the  people,  which  is  the  only  safeguard,  (the
best  "  Talisman")  against  imposition  in  Theology,  Philosophy
or  Science.  To  increase  the  aggregate  of  this  knowledge,
is  the  object  in  the  re-publication  of  this  book.

How  much  importance  will  yet  be  attached  to  the  Idea  of
Pathetism  which  I  have  spent  some  thirty  years  of  my  life  in
maturing,  it  is,  of  course,  not  for  me  to  determine.  That  it  is
now  generally  believed  to  be  true*  is  manifest  from  the  radical
change  which  it  has  everywhere  wrought  in  the  manner  of
inducing  "mesmeric"  results,  not  in  this  country  merely,  but
also  in  Europe. Nor  is  it  unreasonable  to  hope,  that,  'in^er


Vlll  PREFACE.

whatever  names  (new  or  old)  this  idea  is  presented,  yet,  it
shall  be  applied  for  "  doing  good  to  the  souls  and  bodies  of
men,"  and  its  heat  and  light  practically  diffused  throughout
the  world.

23  Eliot-street,  Boston,  Ms.,
May  6,  1852.


BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY,


NOMENCLATIVE.

1.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that,  while  various  terms
have  come  into  use,  from  the  earliest  ages,  to  sig-
nify the  means,  or  the  processes,  by  which  certain
abnormal  changes  have  been  brought  about  in  the
nervous  system,  during  the  whole  of  this  time
there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  any  name  invented
to  signify  the  philosophy  of  their  induction.  On
arriving,  therefore,  at  what  I  supposed  to  be  the
rationale  of  all  artificial  impressions  made  upon  the
human  mind,  I  found  the  want  of  a  suitable  word
by  which  the  whole  subject  could  be  designated.
Before  explaining  that  term,  however,  let  us  briefly
examine  what  preceding  ages  had  done  towards
furnishing  us  with  ideas,  both  as  it  respects  certain
results  supposed  to  be  induced,  and  also  the  means
or  processes  by  which  they  were  brought  about.

1*


10  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.


Apparition,

2.  Although  this  word  simply  means,  something
seen,  perceived,  observed,  or  seeming  to  be  (from,
appear),  yet  it  has  by  use  been  applied  to  what
was  supposed  to  be  supernatural,  or  a  mental  hal-
lucination.

"  The  heavenly  bands,
Down  from  a  sky  of  lighted  jasper,  now,
In  Paradise,  and  on  a  hill  made  halt ;
A  glorious  apparition,  had  not  doubt,
And  carnal  fear,  that  day,  dimmed  Adam's  eye."

Milton,  Par.  Lost,  b.  ix.

The  human  mind  may  be  artificially  operated
upon  by  various  processes,  so  as  to  induce  percep-
tions that  might  be  designated  by  this  term.  (8.)

"  In  the  room  of  the  frightful  spectres,  there  now  en-
tered a  second  dance  of  apparitions,  very  agreeably
matched  together,  and  made  up  of  very  agreeable  phan-
toms."— Spectator,  No.  3.

Catalepsy.

3.  From  a  Greek  word,  which  signifies  seizing,  to
take,  invade.  A  sudden  seizure  of  the  nervous  sys-
tem, in  which  the  external  senses  are  suspended.
When  it  comes  on  spontaneously,  the  eyes  remain
open,  and  all  the  muscles  are  fixed  in  one  position,
while  the  mind  becomes  wholly  unconscious.  It
may  be  brought  on  by  artificial  means,  and  is,  per-
haps, as  good  a  term  as  any  now  in  use  to  specify
that  state  induced  by  Pathetism,  for  rendering  per-


CLAIBVOYANCE.  11

sons  insensible  to  pain  while  surgical  operations
are  performed  upon  them.  (122.)

Clairvoyance.

4.  A  French  word,  which  literally  signifies  clear-
sightedness, a  power  attributed  to  persons  (usually)
in  a  state  of  trance,  of  seeing  what  is  not  cogniza-
ble by  either  of  the  external  senses.  While  it
must  be  admitted  that,  hy  man}',  much  more  has
been  claimed  in  behalf  of  this  power  than  was  ever
sufficiently  proved  to  be  true,*  yet  the  power  itself
is  nevertheless  a  reality.  -  If  we  admit  the  fact  of
Intuition,  we  admit  all  that  is  necessary  in  regard
to  Clairvoyance.

The  results  which  have  been  developed  by  this
power,  may  be  divided  into  four  classes  r  (1.)  The
first  may  comprehend,  what  is  peculiar  to  certain
persons  in  their  normal  state.  By  Intuition,  they
describe  accurately  what  is  not  present  to  the  ex-
ternal senses.  Swedenborg  and  Zschokke  were  of
this  class.

(2.)  The  second  may  include  those  cases  where  it
has  been  developed  in  a  state  of  spotaneous  trance.
Dr.  Franklin  was  an  instance  of  this  kind.f  He
speaks  of  his  having  gone  into  the  water  to  swim,
where  he  remained  for  nearly  an  hour,  but  of  which

*  Dr.  Gregory's  Letters  on  Animal  Magnetism  (otherwise  a  most
interesting*  and  valuable  work),  contains  numerous  cases  of  this
class.

f  Numerous  similar  cases  are  described  in  the  author's  work  on
Pathetism,  New  York  edition  of  1843,  pp.  219-230.


12  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

he  knew  nothing  till  he  found  himself  in  the  act
of  putting  on  his  clothes.

(3.)  This  power  is  in  some  cases  developed  in  a
state  of  insanity*

(4.)  In  cases  of  the  induced  Trance,  by  Pathetism.
And  under  this  head,  Clairvoyance  may  be  sub-
divided thus  : — (1.)  Such  cases  as  result  from  sym-
pathy with  one  or  more  minds ;  describing  things
known,  to  minds  with  whom  the  patient  is  at  the
time  associated  by  Pathetism.  (2.)  Such  descrip-
tions as  persons  entranced  by  Pathetism,  give  of
things  wholly  unknown  to  the  mind  of  the  oper-
ator at  the  time.  This  is  sometimes  called  "  inde-
pendent clairvoyance."  And  (3.)  when  the  trance
is  self-induced;  as  many  persons,  especially  after
having  been  once  pathetized,  acquire  the  power  of
changing  their  states  from  the  normal  to  a  state  of
trance,  so  as  to  become  clairvoyant.  And  (4.)  in
cases  of  Dreaming.  Many  of  the  best  cases  of  clair-
voyance, of  which  I  ever  had  personal  knowledge,
have  been  developed  in  a  state  of  dreaming. \

I>r  earning,

5.  The  word  dream  is  said  to  come  from  dormire,
to  sleep,  because  it  has  been  used  to  signify  the
thoughts  which  occur  during  sleep.

"  The  vision  said  :  and  vanished  from  his  sight,
The  dreamer  wakened  in  a  mounful  fright,
Then  pulled  his  drowsy  neighbor  and  declared,
What  in  his  slumber  he  had  seen  and  heard"

— Dryden.

*  See  Pathetism,  Boston  edition  of  1847,  p.  117.
f  See  Spiritual  Philosopher,  No.  2.


DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS.  13

During  ordinary  sleep,  when  the  mental  organs
remain,  or  become  more  or  less  excited,  it  consti-
tutes dreaming,  and  the  character  of  the  dream  is
determined  by  the  organs  of  the  mind  which  par-
ticipate in  it.*  Very  many  of  the  descriptions
given  by  persons  in  a  state  of  Trance,  amount  to
nothing  more  nor  less  than  what  is  common  to
ordinary  cases  of  dreaming.  And,  when  the  Trance
is  artificially  induced,  the  patient  may  be  made  to
dream  in  his  normal  sleep,  by  simply  giving  him
directions  to  do  so.  (11-i.)

Double  Consciousness.

6.  This  term  has  been  used  to  signify  the  case
of  such  persons,  as  spontaneously,  or  from  exter-
nal influences,  live,  as  it  were,  in  two  distinct  Indi-
vidualities, so  distinct,  that  when  in  one  state  they
have  no  recollection  of  the  other.  It  is  common
in  cases  of  Somnambulism  and  Trance,  and  is  one
of  the  most  interesting  and  mysterious  things
involved  in  the  whole  subject.  It  is  manifestly
connected  with  the  philosophy  of  Memory,  and
which  must  be  better  understood  before  we  can
attempt  to  account  for  it.f

Sometimes  it  has  been  called  "  Divided  Con-
sciousness." If  it  is  to  be  accounted  for  by  sup-
posing that  the  two  brains  of  the  patient  (as  they

*  For  some  original  views  as  to  the  real nature of deep  and
dreaming,  see  Pathetism  (Boston,  1847,)  pages  32,  vT.
f  Some  new  views  of  Memory  will  be  found in  the  author's

larger  work,  "  Pathetism"  (184*7,)  page  57.


14  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

are  double)  are  in  two  different  states,  one  awake
and  the  other  asleep,  at  the  same  time,  this  will
give  an  idea  as  to  how  Consciousness  may  be  divi-
ded. But  the  truth  is,  we  have  cases  of  triple
Consciousness,  or  even  quadruple ;  that  is,  cases
where  certain  persons  pass  from  one  state  to  others,
and,  when  in  one  state,  they  have  no  memory  of
either.  This  fact  will  enable  us  to  account  for  the
way  in  which  clairvoyants  sometimes  get  know-
ledge of  books  and  things.  They  may  read  a  book
in  one  state,  and  in  another  state,  when  they  do
not  remember  to  have  done  so,  they  may  give  an
account  of  what  they  have  read,  without  being
aware  of  the  manner  in  which  their  information
was  obtained.

Ec§ta§y.

7.  Removed  from  its  normal  place.  Thus,  when
the  soul  is  exalted  in  a  state  of  Trance,  or  very  much
excited  with  emotion,  from  whatever  cause.  It  is
sometimes  written  extase  or  extasis,  ex  from,  and
istasthai  to  place ;  when  the  mind  is  unsettled,  and
removed  from  its  normal  condition.

And  whether  that  which  we  call extasy  be  not  dream-
ing with  the  eyes  open,  I  leave  to  be  examined.  *
Locke  on  Hum, Und.  b.  II".  c.  19.

"  This  is  the  very  coinage  of  your  brain
This  bodiless  creation  extasy  is  A'ery  cunning  in —
Ham.  Extasy  1  -

My  pnlse  as  yours  doth  temperately  keep  time,
And  makes  as  healthful  music." — Shakspeare.

Writers  upon  this  subject  have  generally,  agreed


GHOST.  15

in  using  this  term  to  designate  the  most  exalted
state  which  the  mind  can  reach,  while  in  the  body.
It  is  certain,  that  most  of  what  are  called  the
"  higher  phenomena,"  such  as  clairvoj^ance,  inter-
vision,  prevision  and  intuition,  occur  in  a  state  of
extase.  Having  myself  seen  very  many  cases,  of
what  were  supposed  to  be  the  highest,  I  do  not
hesitate  to  say,  that  they  present  some  of  the  most
interesting  phenomena,  that  ever  attracted  the  at-
tention of  human  beings.  To  describe  these  states
is  impossible.  They  must  be  witnessed  to  be  appre-
ciated. It  is  common  among  the  Eoman  Catholics
and  various  other  sects  of  Christians,  and  is  often
brought  on  by  religious  excitement.*  My  own
mind  was  first  impressed  with  a  desire  to  study
the  rationale  of  these  nrysterious  phenomena,  by
witnessing  the  Trance,  and  cases  of  ecstasy  which
occurred  in  "  revivals  of  religion,"  and  in  congre-
gations where  I  was  accustomed  to  preach,  some
thirty  years  ago.  (41.)

Ghost.

8.  A  word  that  maybe  said  to  signif}r  any  thing
seen :  a  vision,  a  spirit^  who  has  left  the  human
body.  It  is  nearly  synonymous  with  apparition,
though  more  generally  used  to  designate  a  spiritual
form  : —

*  See  "Letter  from the Earl  of  Shrew-!  ury,  D<  BCii]
estatica  of Caklara and Addolorata of  Capri  ana." New- York,
Coperly and  Sons,  1S43. A Review  of this  pamphlet  will  be
found  in  Pathetism,  ediiion  of  1843,  p.  1


16  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

"  The  ghosts  rejected  are  the  unhappy  crew;
Deprived  of  sepulchres  and  funeral  due,
The  boatman,  Charon,  those  the  buried  host
He  ferries  over  to  the  further  coast."

Dryden,  Virg.  JEn.  b.  VI.

Psychology  easily  accounts  for  many  appear-
ances to  which,  this  term  has  been  applied,  as  we
know,  that  when  the  mind  is  abnormally  excited,
it  may  see  ghosts,  or  any  thing  else,  which  comes
within  the  range  of  the  imagination.  (72.)

I  suppose  the  following  account  (published  at
the  time)  gives  a  description  of  the  first  experiment
of  this  kind  which  was  performed  in  a  promiscu-
ous public  assembly :

"  Mr.  Sunderland  informed  the  audience  that  he  would
induce  that  state  of  Mental  Hallucination  called  *  second
sight,'  on  a  person  in  the  waking  condition.  And  sure
enough,  the  lady,  with  her  eyes  wide  open,  arose,  and
stretched  out  her  hands  towards  what  she  took  to  be  her
deceased  father !  And  what  was  still  more  remarkable,  if
possible,  at  this  instant,  another  lady,  who  sat  near,  and
one  who  had  never  been  mesmerized  at  all,  gave  a  most
piercing  shriek,  declaring  that  she  also  saw  the  spirit  of
her  deceased  sister  ;  and  it  was  some  minutes  before  Mr.
Sunderland  succeeded  in  composing  her  mind/' — Provi-
dence Evening  Chronicle,  Oct.  21,  1843.

Hallucination.

9.  A  state  of  mind  in  which  one  errs,  blunders,
and  offends  against  the  light  of  reason.

"  Adorning  richly,  for  the  poet's  sake,
Some  poor  hallucinating  scribe's  mistake." — Byrom.

And,  is  it  a  desirable  condition  of  mind,  for  one
person  to  be  so  impressed,  or  controlled  by  another,


HALLUCINATION.  17

that  he  cannot  tell  the  difference  between  truth
and  falsehood,  between  a  walking-cane  and  a
snake  ?

Perhaps,  we  have  no  word  which  more  aptly
expresses  a  certain  class  of  "  experiments  n  on
persons  in  a  "  waking  state,"  of  which  so  much
has  been  made,  during  the  last  two  years,  than
this.  All  that  has  been  done,  under  the  new
terms  (which  the  reader  will  find  referred  to  in  the
following  pages)  is  included  in  the  term  hallucina-
tion, and,  not  unfrequently  has  it  happened,  that
the  "  lecturer,"  "Dr.,"  or  "Prof.,"  as  he  styled
himself,  has  been  as  much  hallucinated  as  any
one  upon  whom  his  influence  was  exerted.*

Such  is  the  power  of  association,  that,  for  a  time,
those  operated  upon  artificially,  become  really  hal-
lucinated or  insane.  Instances  have  come  under
my  notice,  where  persons  had  been  demented  and
remained  permanently  insane  by  the  process  of
u  Mesmerism."! Hallucination, whether  sponta-

*  ■  I  would  once  more  repeat  that  Animal  Magnetism  is  not  a  play
thing,  not  a  toy,  not  the  amusement  for  an  idle  hour,  not  the  moans
of  gratifying  a  morbid  craving  for  novelty  or  the  marvelous.  All
such  uses  of  it  I  abjure,  and  protest  against  as  abuses.  Neither  is
it  a  thing  to  be  exhibited  to  gaping  crowds  for  money  ;  to  crowds
who  stare  and  laugh,  and  go  away  thinking  it  very  strange  or  very
funny.  It  is  a  serious  subject,  well  worthy  of  the  most  earnest
and  devout  attention  we  can  give  it.  It  is  painful  to  see  it  abused
to  raise  a  laugh,  and,  so  strongly  do  I  feel  this,  that,  for  my  own
share,  I  object  to  all  exhibition  of  it,  public  or  private,  and  only
admit  an  exception  when  the  exhibitor  is  in  earnest  and  his  object  is
to  convince  those  who  feel  an  equally  sincere  desire  for  the  truth.
All  exhibitions  in  which  mere  amusement  is  the  object,  tend  to  de-
grade science,  and  to  retard  its  progress." — lh\  IT.  flrwyory,
ters  on  Ani)nal  Mogjictism,  p.  *252.

\  More  especially  by  processes  under  the  name  of  ■  Electrical
Psychology,"  "  Mental  Alchemy,"  6c.


18  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

neons  or  artificially  induced,  is  a  state  of  tempo-
rary insanity*

Illusion.

10.  This  term,  more  than  the  preceding,  refers
to  the  sense  of  sight,  the  other  includes  the  state
of  the  whole  mind,  not  one  of  its  faculties  merely*

Illusion,  from  illudere,  to  play  or  sport  upon.
To  cheat,  deceive,  beguile.  A  state  of  mind,  in
which  the  patient  is  wholly  or  partially  deceived
by  false  appearances.

"  The  wanton's  charms,  however  bright,
Are  like  the  false  illusive  light,
Whose  flattering  inauspicious  blaze
To  precipices  oft  betrays." — Thomson.

Such  are  the  impressions  made  upon  the  mind
by  artificial  experiments,  that  the  sense  of  sight  is
either  wholly  suspended,  or  so  perverted,  that  one
visible  object  is  taken  for  another.

imagination.

11.  That  power  of  the  human  mind,  by  which
it  forms  to  itself  such  conceptions,  fancies,  images,  or
representations,  as  are  falsely  taken  for  realities.
Hence,  we  put  it  in  the  category  of  influences  or
agencies  which  operate  upon  the  nervous  system,
and,  powerful,  indeed,  it  must  be,  when  we  know,

*  "  I  entirely  disapprove  of  causing  violent  passions  or  emotions  ;
as  1  do  also  of  all  those  in  which  strong  and  false  impressions,  espe-
cially of  a  disagreeable  nature,  are  made  on  the  mind.  Such  ex-
periments are  not  justifiable." — Dr.  W.  Gregory,  Letters  on  Ani-
mal Magnetism,  p. 106.


MIRACLE.  19

that  it  has  brought  on  every  imaginable  form  of

disease, of  fanaticism, and  insanity ; and, even

death  itself  has  been  produced  by  it : —

"  Lo,  what  a  great  thing-  is  affection,
Men  may  die  of  imagination,
So  deep  may  impressions  be  taken.''

— Id.  Miller's  Tale.

In  using  this  term  we  should  always  bear  in
mind  that,  while  the  fancy,  or  conception  of  the
mind  may  be  false,  and,  therefore,  merely  in  the
imagination,  the  change  which  that  conception  in-
duces in  the  nervous  system,  is  not  imaginary  but
real,  and  it  is  the  business  of  philosophy  to  explain
how  this  comes  to  pass.  (62.)

Miracle.

12.  Into  the  Theological  sense  in  which  this
term  is  used,  it  is  not  the  object  of  this  work  to
enter.  The  proper  signification  of  the  word  is,  to
wonder,  something  wonderful,  unusual,  and  beyond
the  power  of  the  spectators  to  comprehend.  Such
things  have  happened  in  all  ages  of  the  world,
nor  do  they  necessarily  imply  a  suspension  of  any
of  the  laws  of  nature.  That  which  is  done,  under
this  name,  must  come  to  pass  according  to  some
LAW,  though  we  may  not  see,  or  know  what  that
law  is.

In  some  religious  sects  besides  the  Papists  and
Mormons,  the  belief  prevails,  at  the  present  time,
in  miracles  wrought  by  supernatural  power,  or  by
power  which  interrupts  the  laws  of  nature.*

*  See  "  Discourse  on  Miracles  wrought  in  the  Roman  Catholic
Church,"  1676. And  "  The  Book  of  Mormon."


20  BOOK  OF PSYCHOLOGY.


Phantasy.

13.  From  a  Greek  word  which  signifies  to  shine,

to  appear.  That  which  merely  appears  to  the  mind,

not  external, but  an  idea  of  something,  which  is

not  real : —

"  All  the  interim  is
Like  a  phantom  or  a  hideous  dream. — Shakspeare.

It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  the  descriptions  which
Emanuel  Swedenborg  gives  of  phantasies  produced  .
by  spirits  acting  upon  one  another,  are  identical
with  the  results  produced  by  Pathetism,  or  so  much
like  them,  that  one  might  be  taken  for  the  other.
He  says :

"  There  are  spirits  who  induce  such  appearances  by
phantasies,  that  they  seem  as  if  they  were  not.  For  ex-
ample  :  if  anything  is  seen  in  the  shade,  or  by  moonlight,
or  even  in  open  day,  if  the  object  be  in  a  dark  place,  those
spirits  keep  the  mind  of  the  beholder,  fixedly  and  unceas-
ingly, in  the  thought  of  some  particular  thing,  either  of
an  animal  or  a  monster,  or  a  forest,  or  some  such  thing ;
and  so  long  as  the  mind  is  kept  in  this  thought  the  phan-
tasy is  increased,  and  that,  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  per-
son is  persuaded,  and  sees  just  as  if  the  things  were  really
there,  when,  nevertheless,  they  are  nothing  but  illusions.
Such  occurrences  take  place  with  those  who  indulge  much
in  phantasies,  and  are  in  infirmity  of  mind,  and  hence
are  rendered  credulous.  Such  are  visionaries." — A.  0%
1966.

Plirciiopatlty.

14.  This  term  was  first  used  in  the  author's  work
on  Pathetism, *  to  signify  those  experiments  per-

*  Edition  pf  1843,  p.  128.


SOMNAMBULISM.  21

formed  on  the  mind  by  placing  the  fingers  on  the
separate  organs  of  the  brains.  From phrenis,  mind,
and  pascho,  to  feel,  experience,  be  acted  upon.

Second  Sight.

15.  A  peculiar  sense  which  some  people  seem  to
possess  of  seeing  persons  and  things  that  are  not
present.  It  is  said  to  have  been  quite  common  in
certain  parts  of  Scotland,  in  Ireland,  and  many
other  parts  of  the  world.  We  may  admit,  that
much  that  has  passed  under  this  name  is  to  be
traced  to  the  excited  cerebral  system  of  the  patient,
while  perhaps  there  may  have  been  cases  where
spontaneous  clairvoyance  has  been  developed,  so
as  to  give  a  sight  of  persons  at  a  distance.  It  is  a
common  experiment  in  Pathetism,  to  so  control  the
patient's  mind  that  he  may  have  the  most  vivid
conceptions  of  persons  that  are  not  present  at  the
time.  (8.)

This  term  is  also  applied  to  prevision,  or  the
sight,  or  perception  of  events  before  they  come  to


pass.*


Somnambulism.


16.  This  term properly  signifies sleep-walking,

and  should  not  therefore  be  applied  to  anything
else.  It  has,  however,  been  improperly  used  to
designate  a  state  of  Trance,  where  there  was  no
muscular  action  at  all.


■  See  Pathetism  (1843,  p.  191),  and  edition  of  1S47,  p.  109.


22  BOOK OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

Somnipatliy.

17.  Sympathetic  sleep  ;  a  state  of  Trance,  super-
induced by  sympathy,  or  by  any  given  process
adopted  for  this  purpose.  So  Somnipathist  signi-
fies a  person  in  that  state.

Spectre.

18.  The  same  as  apparition ;  the  semblance  or
appearance  of  one  who  is  dead.

"  The  ghosts  of  traitors  from  the  bridge  descend,
With  bold  fantastic  spectres  to  rejoice." — Dryden.

^ysiBpatliy.

19.  As  this  idea  runs  through  the  theory  ex-
plained in  this  work,  it  will  be  well  for  the  reader
to  bear  it  constantly  in  mind.  It  is  applied  to
things  as  well  as  men;  to  causes  and  effects: —

(1.)  In  Natural  Science  it  is  used  to  signify  the
tendency  of  one  thing  to  act  upon  another.  Thus
we  say,  there  is  a  sympathy  between  the  iron  and
the  loadstone.

(2.)  In  Medicine  or  i  Pathology,  it  is  said  to  be
sympathy  when  there  is  a  "  consent  of  parts,"  or  a
correspondence  of  various  organs  in  similar  sensa-
tions or  conditions.

(3.)  An  agreement  in  the  affections,  which  makes
two  persons  agreed  with  each  other.

(4.)  Fellow-feeling  for  another  in  distress.


TRANCE— AMULET.  23


Trance,


20.  Supposed  to  come  from  a  Latin  word,  signi-
fying a  passing  over,  or  beyond.  A  state  in  which
the  spirit  seems  to  have  passed  beyond  all  influ-
ences, through  the  external  senses.  It  is  said  of
the  apostle  Peter,  that

"  He  fell  into  a  trance,  and  saw  heaven  opened." — Acts
10:  10.

This  is  a  much  better  term  by  which  to  signify
a  certain  state,  than  that  of  sleep,  which  has  often
been  used  in  its  stead.  The  term  sleep  cannot
apply  to  any  state  in  which  the  mind  is  perfectly
conscious,  and  carries  on  conversation  with  others,
as  persons  in  the  trance  are  known  to  do.

Thus  far  in  respect  to  results.  Now  let  us  exam-
ine the  terms  used  to  designate  the  means,  or  causes
of  their  induction :

Amulet.

21.  A  name  applied  to  stones,  metals,  plants  or
any  substance  worn  upon  the  neck  or  on  the  bod}^
for  guarding  and  preserving  the  wearer  against
disease,  witchcraft,  and  evils  of  .all  kinds.  (A,  from,
and  moles,  a  heap  or  mass.)  To  drive  away,  to
repel.  Ancientty,  in  the  days  of  ignorance,  they
were  common,  as  indeed  they  are  now,  among  the
Arabs,  the  American  Indians,  Africans,

The  phylacteries*  of  the  Jews  were worn  for  a

*  Ex.  13:  9,  1C.


24  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

similar  purpose,  as  they  are  to  the  present  day.
These  were  little  boxes  or  rolls  of  parchment,
whereon  were  written  certain  words  from  their
sacred  writings.

The  "  ear-rings"  and  "  gods"  which  the  patriarch
Jacob  is  said  to  have  buried  "  under  the  oak  by
Sachem,"*  would  seem  to  come  under  this  head.
Josephus,t  indeed,  informs  us  that  king  Solomon
employed  the  aid  of  a  "  charm"  or  "  spell"  for  the
purpose  of  assisting  the  virtues  of  a  plant  in  the
cure  of  epilepsy.

All  substances  worn  about  the  body  for  keeping
off  disease,  may  be  denominated  Amulets.  By  the
Jews  they  were  called  Kamea,  by  the  Greeks,  Phy-
lacteries, by  the  Romans,  Amuleta  or  Ligatura,  b}"
the  Papists,  Agnus  Dei,  and  by  the  nations  of
Guinea,  where  they  are  still  held  in  great  venera-
tion, they  are  called  Fetishes.  Their  use  may  be
traced  back  to  the  remotest  and  darkest  periods  of
antiquity.  And  yet  many  people  of  this  enlight-
ened age  do  not  seem  to  suspect  how  much  they
also  are  contributing  to  that  superstition  upon
which  the  use  of  the  Amulet  has  always  depended.
Many  such  people  will  rub  a  wart  with  a  white
bean,  and  then  "  throw  the  bean  away  over  the
right  shoulder;"  they  will  wear  a  red  cord  around
the  neck  to  prevent  the  nose  from  bleeding,  or
"  drink  magnetized  water,"  swallow  "  magnetized
medicines,"  "  wear  magnetic  bands,"  and  hold  in
their hands the "  magnetized coin." Such  are

*  Gen.  35:  4.  f  Lib-  8,cb.2,  5.


AKIMAL MAGNETISM.  25

some  of  the  new  forms  under  which,  the  use  of  the
u  Amulet"  now  obtains  among  those  who  do  not
profess  to  have  much  faith  in  the  old  notions  about
the  power  of  "  charms"  and  "  spells."  (93.)

Animal  Magnetism.

22.  This  term  was  brought  into  notice  by  Mes-
mer,  xand  his  pupil  De  Peysugur,  in  1760  ;  and  its
use,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  terms,  has  been
continued,  generally,  not  only  in  France,  but  also
in  Germany,  and  indeed  throughout  Europe.  It
was  first  introduced  in  this  country  in  1836,  by  Dr.
Charles  Poyen.  What  it  means,  may  be  seen  from
the  following  definition,  taken  from  Dr.  Poyen's
book  :*

"  A  state  which  is  ordinarily  produced  in  one  individual
by  the  will  of  another,  performing  certain  manual  evolu-
tions for  the  purpose  of  causing  it  to  take  place."f

It  should  be  constantly  borne  in  mind,  that  what-
ever may  be  the  term  used,  whether  u  Animal
Magnetism,"  or  "  Fascination,"  or  "Charm,"  the
thing  signified  is  one  and  the  same,  whether  it  be
used  to  designate  the  means  or  process  used,  or  the
susceptibilities  of  the  nervous  system  upon  which  the
influence  is  exerted.


*  "  Report  on  Magnetical  Experiments,"  Ac. Boston,  1836,  p.  6.
f  Med.  Die.  Sciences,  vol.  21.


26  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.


Bewitch.

23.  To  enchant,  to  charm,  to  overpower  by  allure-
ment. This  term  is  not  always  used  in  an  evil
sense,  though  the  term  witchcraft  is.

"  Come,  come  away,  frail,  silly,  fleshy  wight,
Nor  let  vain  words  bewitch  thy  manly  heart."

Spenser,  Fairy  Queen,  b.  i.,  c.  9.

"  As  for  the  term  witch  ov  wizard,  they  signify  no  more
than  a  wise  man  or  wise  woman.  In  the  word  wizard  it
is  plain  at  the  very  first  sight.  The  most  plain  deduction
of  the  name  witch  is  from  wit,  as  the  noun  wit  is  from
the  verb  weet,  which  is  to  know.  But  usage  has  now  ap-
propriated this  word  to  such  a  kind  of  skill  and  know-
ledge, as  is  out  of  the  common  road,  or  extraordinary.
Nor  did  this  peculiarity  imply  any  unlawfulness.  But
there  has  since  been  a  further  restriction,  and  in  which
alone  now-a-days  the  words  witch  and  wizard  are  used  ;
and  that  is  for  one  that  has  knowledge  or  skill,  by  virtue
of  either  an  express  or  implicit  sociation,  or  confederacy
with  some  evil  spirit.^*

However  much  of  that  which  has  passed  under
the  name  of  witchcraft  may  be  justly  attributed  to
ignorance,  faith,  fear,  and  superstition,  it  may  readily
be  admitted  that  evil  spirits,  out  of  the  body,  have
never  been  very  common  where  there  were  not
"  evil"  or  ignorant  spirits  in  the  body  to  believe,  fear,
and  act  for  them  ;  and  that,  as  people  become  good
and  intelligent,  the  disturbances  known  under  this
name  will  necessarily  disappear.!  (76.)

*  Dr.  More,  1678.

f  It  is  certain,  that  occurrences  have  taken  place  in  various  local-
ities throughout  this  country,  within  the  last  four  years  (previous  to


CHARM.  27


Charm


24.  Supposed  to  come  from  carmen,  a  verse  or
song,  as  it  anciently  signified  a  secret  power,  usually
exerted  by  singing  or  shouting.  It  is  also  applied
to  certain  substances,  believed  to  have  this  power.
Eeferred  to  in  the  Bible,  Jer.  8  :  17.

"  Mine  is  the  charm,  whose  mystic  sway,
The  spirits  of  past  delight  obey  ;
Let  but  the  tuneful  talisman  sound,
And  they  come,  like  genii,  hovering  round."

Moore.

Dr.  A.  Clark  says*  the  term  choher,  which  we
translate  charmer,  comes  from  a  word  that  signifies
to  join,  to  put  together,  i.e.  certain  unintelligible
words  which  formed  the  charm  or  spell.  And  he
adds  :

"  It  is  a  fact,  that  cannot  be  disputed  with  any  show
of  reason,  that,  in  ancient  times,  there  were  persons  that
charmed,  lulled  to  inactivity,  or  professed  to  charm,  ser-
pents, so  as  to  prevent  them  from  biting.''

1S52),  which  arc  abundantly  sufficient  to  confirm  some  of  the  old
notions  as  to  the  superhuman  agency,  in  many  developments,  to
which  the  term  witchcraft  has  been  applied.  I  nwself  have  wit-
nessed thousands  of  them — results  which  could  not  be  accounted
for  by  any  of  the  known  laws  which  appertain  to  this  world.  The
only  consistent  explanation  of  these  strange  things  which  I  have  yet
seen,  is  that  which  is  given  in  the  writings  of  Emanuel  Swedenborg,
especially  in  what  he  says  about  obsession.  (See  his  Apoc  /;>.,
1182  ;  Spin  Diary,  1902  ;  A.  C.  5985,  59S6.)  Whether  these  i\
be  precisely  what  they  purport  to  be  (spiritual),  or  not,  the  future
must  determine.

*  Com.  on  Ts.,  58  :  4.


28  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

See  Eccles.  10  :  11. The  prince  of  Eoman  poets

states  the  fact : —

"  In  the  meadows,  the  cold  snake  is  burst  by  incantation."
Virg.  JEcL  8  :  ver.  71.

The  same  author  (JEn.  7,  ver.  750)  gives  us  the

following  account  of  the  skill  of  Umbro,  a  priest

of  the  Marubians : —

"  Umbro,  the  brave  Marubian  priest,  was  there,
Sent  by  the  Marsian  monarch  to  the  war.
The  smiling  olive,  with  her  verdant  boughs,
Shades  his  bright  helmet  and  adorns  his  brows.
His  charms  in  peace  the  furious  serpent  keep,
And  lull  the  envenomed  viper's  race  to  sleep  :
His  healing  hand  allay'd  the  raging  pain,
And,  at  his  touch,  the  poison  fled  again." — Pitt,

Allusions  are  often  made  to  this  power  in  the

classics. It  is  not  improbable  but  that  Middleton

referred  to  it  in  the  following  passage,  two  hundred

years  ago : —

"  I'll  imitate  the  pities  of  old  surgeons
To  this  lost  limb,  who,  ere  they  show  their  art.
Cast  one  asleep, — then  cut  the  diseased  part."*

Indeed,  the  "charm"  is  retained  in  various  forms
to  the  present  day,  in  many  parts  of  Christendom,
and  used  for  curing  burns,  Jits,  &c.  I  knew  a
Methodist  clergymanf  who  acquired  a  high  cele-
brity by  his  skill  in  its  use.

Enchant,  Enchantment.

25.  Enchantment  (from  in  and  cantare),  to  sing
a  magic  song,  and  thus  to  enrapture,  to  overpower

*  Tragedy  of  *  Beware  of  Women,"  published  in  1657.
t  Rev.  B.  Hibbard.


FASCINATION — INCANTATION.  29

with  delight,  so  as  to  stun  the  faculties  of  the  mind,
and  deprive  them  of  their  power  of  action.

"  In  such  a  night,
Medea  gathered  the  enchanted  herbs,
Which  did  renew  old  iEson." — Shakspeare.

Fascination.

26.  To  charm,  enchant,  or  bewitch  by  the  eyes,
to  "  eye  bite."  From  Fascia,  a  band,  or  banded,
swathed.

"  The  Triballians  and  Illyrians,  who  with  their  very
eyesight  can  witch,  yea,  and  kill  those  whom  they  look
wistly  upon  any  long  time." — Holland,  Pliny  I.,  155.

Incantation.

27.  Magical  songs ;  in  and  canto,  to  sing ;  be-
cause this  power  was  exercised  usually  by  repeat-
ing or  singing  verses.

"  The  gothic  Runers,  to  gain  and  establish  the  credit
and  admiration  of  their  rhymes,  turned  the  use  of  them
very  much  to  incantations  and  charms." — Sir  W.  Tern-
pie,  of  Poetry.

Magic.

28.  This  term  originated  probably  among  the
Persians,  as  magi  was  used  to  signify  philosophers,
or  great  men,  priests,  or  those  learned  in  the  "Black
Art,"  or  the  science  of  producing  wonderful  effects
by  the  (pretended)  power  of  departed  spirits.  It
is  applied  to  various  things  used  as  instruments,  as
the  "Magic  wand,"  the  "Magic  square,"  "Magic
art,"  &c.


SO  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

Mesmerism.

29,  Generally  used  to  signify  precisely  the  same
thing  as  Animal  Magnetism,  though  not  always.

It  is  not  much  in  use  anywhere  except  in  Eng-
land ;  and,  in  this  country,  only  in  a  technical  sense,
to  distinguish  one  process  of  operating  from  an-
other. In  all  that  was  known  under  either  of  these
terms,  nothing  was  ever  done  without  the  " will"
and  "  motions  made  with  the  hands."  The  pro-
cesses of  "  Animal  Magnetism,"  or  "  Mesmerism,"*
are  as  follows :

Sit  down  in  front  of  your  patient.  Take  his
hands  in  yours,  or  seize  his  thumbs  so  as  to  bring
the  balls  of  both  your  thumbs  in  contact  with  his.
Fix  your  eyes  upon  his,  and  make  a  strong  effort  of
your  will  for  him  to  sink  into  a  state  of  trance.
After  you  have  continued  this  process  for  ten  or
fifteen  minutes,  raise  your  hands,  and  pass  them


*  "  Mesmer  (from  whom  the  above  term  had  its  origin),  although
educated  and  degreed  as  a  talented  physician  of  Switzerland,  was
too  fond  of  the  marvelous  to  conduct  himself  like  a  free  and  un-
mysterious  demonstrator  of  science.  He  no  sooner  discovered  his
ability  to  produce  many  physiological  effects  by  the  manipulations,
than  he  began  to  be  lugubrious  and  very  mysterious  in  his  deport-
ment. And  when,  in  1777,  he  introduced  himself  to  the  best  socie-
ty, both  literary  and  scientific,  which  lie  could  find  in  Paris,  he  still
carried  about  with  him  that  imposing  and  wizard-like  air  which  is
frequently  exhibited  in  the  so  called  evangelical  orders  of  moral
teachers.  He  made  a  great  secret  (like  some  of  our  modern  biolo-
gists and  psychologists)  of  the  magnetic  influence,  thus  exciting  a
love  of  the  marvelous  in  his  followers,  and  charging  them  each  one
hundred  louis  for  simply  informing  them  how  to  operate.  His
method  savored  strongly  of  imposition.  In  fact,  Mesmer  converted
much  of  a  sublime  discovery  into  mere  nonsense  and  quackery." —
A.  J.  Davis,  Great  Har.,  vol.  3,  p.  272.


PHILTERS — RELICS — SPELLS.  31

gently  down  each  side  of  his  head,  over  his  shoul-
ders, down  his  arms,  and  carry  them  off  at  the  ends
of  his  fingers.  '  Continue  these  passes  for  half  an
hour  or  more.

To  release  or  "  wake  up"  the  patient,  reverse  the
passes  up  his  arms,  and  over  his  head,  extending
your  hands  outwardly  each  time.  Continue  till  the
patient  is  completely  restored,  making  an  effort
with  your  will  at  the  same  time.

Philters.

30.  From  phileo,  to  love.  A  potion  supposed  to
have  the  power,  when  swallowed,  of  exciting  love.
To  impregnate  with  a  charm,  to  excite  love.

Relics.

31.  A  term  applied  to  the  remains  of  dead  bo-
dies, old  clothes,  bones,  &c.  &c.  Among  the  Ro-
man Catholics,  such  things  are  preserved  with
great  veneration,  and  often  believed  to  have  extra-
ordinary power  in  curing  diseases  and  working
miracles.  It  is  from  the  same  laws  of  association,
that  the  hair,  garments,  furniture,  finger-rings,  and
portraits  of  deceased  persons  are  preserved,  with
so  much  care.

Spells.

32.  From  the  Saxon,  spel,  a  story,  magic  charm
or  song ; and  hence  comes the  term  gospel^  from


32  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

God,  or  good,  and  spel,  a  history  or  narrative  ;*  a
good  narrative. The  term  is  used  by  Milton  : —

"  Begin,  begin,  the  mystic  spell,  prepare  ;r'

and  by  Shakspeare  : —

"  Start  not,  her  actions  shall  be  holy,
You  hear  my  spell  is  lawful."

Talisman.

S3.  We  are  told  that  the  Talisman  originated
among  the  Chaldeans,  as  indeed,  we  may  trace  the
rise  of  this  and  similar  terms  to  very  remote  pe-
riods of  antiquity, — among  the  Chaldeans  and  the
Persians.  The  word  is  from  teleo,  to  terminate,
and  has  a  similar  signification  to  Amulet,  though
the  thing  itself  would  seem  to  be  a  little  more  com-
plicated. The  talisman  was,  generally,  a  small
image,  cut  out  of  stone,  or  any  metalic  substance. f

*  See  Dr.  A.  Clark's  Commentary  on  Matthew,  p.  19,  and  Web-
ster's Dictionary  on  this  word.

f  Louis  Napoleon,  President  of  France,  is  said  to  have  in  his  pos-
session the  talisman  or  charm  which  was  constantly  worn  by
Charlemagne,  and  which  was  found  suspended  from  the  neck  of  the
Emperor  in  the  opening  of  the  sepulchre  in  1166.  It  was  presented
to  Napoleon  by  the  clergy  of  Aix  la  Chapelle,  and  on  his  death
passed  to  the  present  Napoleon.  The  talisman  is  one  of  fine  gold,
of  round  form,  set  with  gems,  and  in  the  centre  are  two  rough
sapphires,  a  portion  of  the  Holy  Cross,  besides  other  relics  brought
from  Palestine.  The  history  of  this  relic  is,  that  it  was  presented
to  Charlemagne  by  Haroun  al  Baschip,  in  the  year  797,  with  several
relics  of  kindred  value  ;  the  latter  are  shown  at  Aix  la  Chapelle  to
the  present  day ;  but  the  talisman  was  buried  with  Charlemagne,
by  whom  it  had  been  worn  till  his  death  in  714.

I  have  now  lying  before  me,  what  I  suppose  to  be  a  number  of


TALISMAN.  83

On  it  were  carved  numerous  mysterious  figures,
which  were  said  to  be  cut  under  a  certain  configu-
ration of  the  planets,  and  which  were  believed  to
be  powerfully  efficacious,  not  only  in  averting  dis-
eases and  various  evils,  but,  also,  in  making  known
what  appertained  to  the  future.  That  talismans,  or
something  of  the  kind  were  used  among  the  Jews
anciently,  is  manifest  from  their  sacred  writings.
Thus,  it  is  said,  that  Eachel  "  stole  the  images
(margin  reads,  teraphim)  that  were  her  father's.7'*
These  " images,"  Laban  calls  his  "gods."  Nor  is
it  improbable  but  that  the  "  TJrim  and  TJiummim,"
which  the  Jewish  High  Priest  was  directed  to  dis-
play upon  his  breast,  was  something  of  the  talis-
manic  kind.f  That  the  Urim  and  Thummim  was
consulted  for  similar  purposes  to  that  for  which
the  Chaldean  Talisman  was  used,  is  certain.^

Such,  then,  are  the  terms  which  have  from  im-
memorial time  come  into  use,  when  speaking  of
impressions  made  upon  the  mind,  or  upon  the  nerv-
ous system,  by  things  (real  or  imaginary)  applied
to  the  external  senses.  The  means,  being  diver-
sified, were  designated,  as  a  matter  of  course,  by
different  terms  ;  but  the  Philosophy  by  which  the
results  were  induced,  the  rationale  of  Nervous  In-

Egyptian  talismans,  far  more  interesting  to  the  antiquarian,  even
than  that  of  Charlemagne.  They  are  from  one  of  the  pyramids,
and  made  of  copper,  about  three  inches  long,  and  shaped  very  much
like  a  sarcophagus.  They  were  procured  in  Egypt,  and  presented
to  me  by  Mr.  John  C.  Hayden,  of  Stoneham,  Massachusetts.

*  Gen.  31  :  19.  \  Exod.  28  :  30.  \  See  "  Demonologia,"  London,
1831,  p.  101.


34:  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

duction,  not  being  understood,  no  appropriate  term
seems  to  have  been  suggested  for  designating  it.
The  ever  varying  susceptibilities  of  the  nervous
system  are  such,  that,  operated  upon  now  by  one
process,  (charm)  and  now  by  another,  (Mesmerism)
it  becomes  an  easy  matter  for  uninformed  persons
to  imagine,  that  they  have  made  a  new  discovery,
when,  in  fact,  they  have  merely  made  a  change  in
the  method  of  operating.

Marvelousness.

34.  There  is  in  Human  Nature  an  inherent  love
of  the  marvelous.  And  cupidity  may,  and  doubt-
less has,  often  tempted  to  the  adoption  of  new
names  for  old  ideas,  which  have  been  put  into  new
shapes,  for  the  purpose  of  exciting  curiosity,  which
people  will  always  be  willing  to  pay  more  or  less
for  having  gratified.*

*  Among  the  many  truthful  and  beautiful  things  written  by  Mr.
Andrew  J.  Davis,  "the  Poughkeepsie  Seer  and  Clairvoyant,"  is
that  classification  he  has  made  of  the  persons  who  attempt  to  inter-
est public  attention  as  "  Professors,"  "  Doctors,"  and  "  Lecturers,"
on  "  Electrical  Psychology  "  "  Electro-Biology"  "  Mental  Alchemy,"
"  Mesmerism,"  or  under  whatever  name,  new  or  old,  the  subject
may  be  presented. He  says : —

"  A  few  words  by  way  of  classifying  belie  vers  and  operators.  These
are  of  three  classes.  The  first  class  are  mercenary  practitioners,  who
commit  to  memory  a  few  fragmentary  facts  in  science,  who  claim
extraordinary  or  supernatural  powers  for  their  subjects, — who  give
public  and  vulgar  exhibitions, — who  employ  chicanery  and  ignoble
plans, — who  trifle  with,  and  play  fantastic  tricks  with  their  subjects,
— and  who  injure  the  truth,  by  producing  these  three  effects,  Super-
stition., Skepticism,  Disgust.

"  The  second  class,  are  doctrinal  practitioners,  who  pervert  and
misinterpret  principles  and  results, — who  labor  to  make  the  pheno-
mena subservient  to  and  illustrative  of  theological  dogmas,  who  re-


SPONTANEOUS — SUGGESTIVE, ETC.  35

Spontaneous,  Suggestive,  Volitional.

These  ferrns  are  sufficiently  comprehensive  to
include  all  the  Nervous  or  Mental  Phenomena
which  come  within  the  purview  of  our  present
undertaking.  They  will  include  all  described  in
the  preceding  pages,  if  not  all  (if  there  be  any
others)  that  could  be  designated  by  any  other
terms. Thus :

35. — 1.  Spontaneous.  Such  as  are  Idiopathic,
and  come  on  from  the  Idiosyncrasy  of  the  patient.
Indeed,  by  whatever  cause,  internal  or  external,
they  may  be  developed,  they  depend,  first  and  last,
upon  the  temperament  of  the  patient.

36. — 2.  Suggestive.  This  may  include  all  that  are
superinduced  through  either  of  the  external  senses,
Hearing,  Sight,  and  Feeling ;  whether  by  physical
substances  applied  to  the  patient's  body,  or  an  idea
addressed  to  his  mind.

37. — 3.  Volitional.  Effects  cannot  be  induced  by
the  mere  will  of  one  person,  acting  on  another,  till
a  relation  has  been  established  between  the  two  by
Suggestion.  Certain  changes  may  be  developed  by
one's  own  will,  or  by  the  will  of  another,  after  the


ceive,  modify,  or  reject,  as  sectarian  education  may  sanction  ; — who
conceal,  misstate,  and  magnify  disclosures;  and  w  ho  retard  the  pro-
gress of  truth  by  producing  these  three  eli'ects,  Credulity,  Distrust^
Enthusiasm.

The  third  class  are  free^  firm^  fearless  advocates  of  truth,  who  search
into,  and  look  facts  m  the  face  ;  who  investigate  deeply  and  declare
their  impartial  convictions  ;  who  are  swa\ed  by  DO  trivial  experiments,
who  collect  and  arrange  facts,  and  declare  a  consistent  and  harmoni-
ous system,  and  who  accelerate  the  progress  of  truth  by  producing
these  three  eilects,  JSeasot^  Respect  and  Inquiry? — ihii\rc<xium\
Vol.  1,  /'.  8.


36  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

.spheres  of  the  two  have  been  sufficently  assimilated.
But  observe,  that  the  Spontaneous  Phenomena  de-
pend upon  the  Idiosyncrasy  of  the  patient,  and  the
Suggestive  depend  "upon  his  Idiopathy,  and  the
Volitional  upon  the  Suggestive;  or  we  may  say,
that  this  is  the  order  in  which  these  classes  of
results  follow  one  another.*

Electricity.

38.  Valid  objections  have  often  been  urged  against
the  use  of  the  term  electricity,  when  speaking  of  the
Human  Mind,  or  Spirit.  The  three  kingdoms  of
the  Universe  are  discreet  and  so  distinct,  one  rising
above  the  other,  that  the  terms  which  designate
the  laws  of  one  below,  cannot  justly  be  applied  to
another  above.  The  term  "electrical"  belongs  to
the  Mineral  kingdom,  which  is  angular.  Mental
laws  are  far  above  the  earth ;  and  hence  to  apply
this  term  to  the  higher  faculties  of  man's  nature,
is  the  same  as  if  we  were  to  say  "  earthly  Psychol-
ogy," or  "  mineral  soul,"  "  earthly  life,"  &c.

Higher  authority,  perhaps,  could  not  be  quoted,
on  the  use  of  terms,  when  speaking  on  this  subject,
than  that  of  Dr.  William  Gregory,  Professor  of

*  It  seems  to  me  that  there  has  been  a  manifest  want  of  philoso-
phical accuracy  in  the  language  which  even  some  scientific  writers
have  used  when  speaking  on  this  subject.  Thus  Dr.  Gregory
(Letters  on  Animal  Magnetism,  page  67)  says:

"  All  the  facts  of  Animal  Magnetism  may  be  produced  by  the  silent
VjiU,  and  in  absence  or  at  a  distance."

No  results  whatever  can  be  induced  by  the  "  silent  will,*  without
first  addressing  the  external  senses.


ELECTRICITY.  37

Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh. He
says :

"  Ulcctro-hiohgy  and  electro-psychology,  both  are  used
on  the  assumption,  now  generally  regarded  as  fallacious,
that  that  which  we  call  life,  and  thought,  mind,  soul,  are
essentially  electrical,  or  depend  upon  electricity  as  one  of
their  conditions.  Now,  although  it  may  have  been  proved
that  electric  currents  do  take  place  in  the  body  during  mus-
cular action,  yet  there  are  many  points  which  electricity
cannot  clear  up  ;  the  analogies  are  partial  only,  and  the
presence  of  electrical  currents  does  not  prove  these  to  be
the  causes  of  muscular  action. They  may  be  its  effects.*

The  remark  has  often  been  made,  that  when
mortals  meet  with  phenomena  that  they  cannot
account  for,  they  must,  of  course,  attribute  them
to  "electricity,"  for  the  very  conclusive  reason  that
they  do  not  know  what  electricity  is.f

However,  if  we  may  rely  upon  the  researches  of
the  most  scientific  and  able  minds  that  have  ever
devoted  their  energies  to  the  investigation  of  this
subject,  then  we  may  conclude  with  Prof.  Harrison :

*  Letters  on  Animal  Magnetism,  p.  151.  And,  as  to  "  biologized,"
Dr.  Gregory  remarks,  "  It  is  a  most  barbarous  expression,  which  I
only  use  in  order  to  protest  against  it." — lb.  p.  160.

f  The  term  "  Mental  Alchemy"  is,  if  possible,  still  lower  and
more  objectionable  than  either  of  its  predecessors.  Strictly  speak-
ing, there  never  was  any  kind  of  "Alchemy"  but  "Mental,''  and
"  Alchemy"  is  but  another  word  for  mere  pretension,  for  that  which
is  deceptive  and  chimerical :

u  Alchemy.  The  pretended  art  of  the  transmutation  of  metals." —
Webster.

"  The  science,  if  it  deserves  to  be  distinguished  by  the  name  of
Alchemy,  lias  doubtless  been  an  imposition,  which,  striking  on  the
feeblest  part  of  the  human  miiul,  has  so frequently  been  successful
in  carrying  on  its  delusions" — Expose  of  Ancient  and  Modern  S
stition,  p.  73.


88  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

"  1.  That  the  existence  of  electrical  currents  in  the
nerves,  is  an  hypothesis  contradicted  by  experiment.

"2.  The  action  of  electric  currents  on  the  nerves  should
be  put  in  the  same  category  with  chemical  and  mechan-
ical stimuli.

"  3.  Metals  are  infinitely  better  conductors  of  electricity
than  the  nerves.

"  4.  The  nerves  are  not  better  conductors  than  the
muscles  :  their  powers  of  conduction  do  not  change  when
they  are  changed  by  mechanical  violence  (though  nar-
cotics, as  laudanum,  instantly  render  the  nerves  power-
less.)

"  5.  The  covering  of  the  nerves  is  incapable  of  iso-
lating the  most  feeble  electric  currents  which  man  pro-
duces in  galvanic  experiments,  so  that,  if  the  muscle
intervene,  the  current  will  pass  from  the  nerve  into  it."*

If  then,  neither  Science  nor  Philosophy  autho-
rize the  application  of  this  term  to  the  nervous
action,  how  much  more  inappropriate  must  be  its
use  for  designating  the  laws  of  the  human  mind.f
The  term  we  want  for  designating  the  whole  sub-
ject including  the  Idiopathic,  Suggestive,  and  Voli-
tional, or  artificial  nervous  phenomena,  is  not  one
that  belongs  to  any  one  person,  as  if  the  influence
we  speak  of  had  originated  with  Mesmer,  or  was
confined  to  one  man  ;  not  a  term  which  has  been
already  appropriated  to  other  departments  of  natu-
ral science,  but  one  which,  though  not  entirely
original,  yet  is  so  much  so  as  to  be  sufficiently  spe-
cific, and at the  same  time  partaking,  so  much

*  "  Essay  Towards  a  Correct  Theory  of  the  Nervous  System,''
p.  168.

\  And  the  addition  of  "  Animal,"  making  it  "  Animal  Magnet-
ism," is  more  objectionable  still ;  unless  we  wish  to  speak  of  man  as
a  mere  animal,  or  beast.


PATHETISM.  39

of  the  Human,  that  it  always  must  be  understood
as  carrying  in  its  meaning  that  which  appertains
to  the  nervous  systems  of  human  beings;  that
which  has  respect  to  intelligence,  to  mental  or  spir-
itual manifestations.

Patlictisiu.

39.  From  Ilao-^w,  pascho,  to  experience,  be  affected
with  any  thing,  good  or  bad;  to  suffer,  to  feel,  to
be  disposed  or  affected  in  a  particular  manner  towards
another,  or  by  any  event.  And  from  the  same  root,
YlaQoa,  joatkos,  passion,  affection,  that  which  is  suffered ;
love,  kindness,  a  disease,  a  mental  perturbation,  a
passive  state  of  the  mind  or  the  body ;  a  condition,
a  disposition  ;  and  from  which  we  have  apathy,  Idi-
opathy,  Sympathy,  pathetic,  Pathology,  Homcepathy,
Hydropathy,  and  Pathetism.

It  is  certainly  desirable,  when  speaking  of  new
ideas  or  things,  to  use  terms  the  most  expressive  of
their  real  nature  and  laws.  In  examining  Nervous
Phenomena,  whether  spontaneous  or  artificial,  three
questions  present  themselves  for  an  answer  :

1.  As  to  the  Idiosyncracy,  the  quality,  or  suscejiti-
hility  of  the  body  or  mind,  which  rendered  it  liable
to  the  change.

2.  As  to  the  Idiopathic  Motion,  which  was  the
immediate  cause  of  the  nervous  change  that  has
been  induced. And,

3.  As  to the Extrinsic  Motion,  Law,  L
Association, or  Suggestion,  which  was the  remote
cause  of  the  developed  Phenomena.


40  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

We  say  the  one  who  receives  an  impression  is
passive;  the  agent  or  thing  by  which,  or  the  person
by  whom  it  is  given,  is  active,  and  whatever  the
result  is,  in  all  cases  it  may  be  said  to  partake  of
the  nature  of  sympathy,  either  mental  or  physical,
inasmuch  as  a  sympathetic  result  is  one  produced
by  association.  One  person  is  affected  by  his  asso-
ciation with,  or  knowledge  or  belief  of,  another.
Hence,  I  use  a  similar  term,  Pathetism,  to  signify  ,
the  Philosophy  of  Influences,  in,  or  upon,  the
Human  Mind ;  not  merely  the  susceptibilities  of
one  who  is  influenced,  but  the  sphere  or  qualities
of  the  agent  from  whom  the  influence  is  received  ;
so  that  whatever  emotion,  volition  or  action  is  pro-
duced, this  term  signifies  the  rationale  of  its  induc-
tion. Pathetism,  therefore,  is  the  term  for  signifying
the  rationale  of  abnormal,  induced,  or  artificial
nervous  phenomena,  by  whatever  means  they  may
be  produced,  or  whatever  the  state,  (awake  or
asleep)  the  patient  may  be  in,  when  they  are
brought  about.  And  as  it  seems  to  be  more  ap-
propriate than  any  other,  and  has,  to  some  consid-
erable extent,  been  adopted  by  others,  and  is
generally  understood,'55'  it  may  not  be  improper  for
me  to  continue  its  use,  at  least,  till  a  better  one
shall  have  been  suggested.  The  phenomena  which
gave  rise  to  it,  and  the  philosophy  which  they
seem  to  illustrate,  will  each  be  duly  considered  in
their  appropriate  order.

*  See  the  American  Dictionary,  on  the  word,  and  its  derivations.


41


HISTOEICAL.

40.  Allusions  have  often  been  made,  in  my  pub-
lic Lectures  throughout  the  country,  and  also  in
the  accounts  that  have  been  published  of  them,  to
the  strange  results  which  took  place  under  my
Theological  discourses,  some  thirty  years  ago.*
And,  though  I  know  that  similar  phenomena  have,
in  past  ages,  accompanied  what  were  denominated
"Kevivals  of  Keligion,"  yet,  I  am  not  aware  that
any  one  connected  with  the  clerical  profession,
ever  before  attempted  to  account  for  these  things,
on  pure  pyschological  principles;  or  to  deduce
from  them  such  a  knowledge  of  the  Laws  of  Mind
as  promises  to  subserve  the  cause  which  all  good
people  have  at  heart.  Certainly,  no  clergyman
has  attempted  this,  who,  himself,  was  in  the  habit
of  inducing  these  results.

*  "June  9,  1823. — La  Roy  Sunderland  made  his  first  attempt  in
"Walpole,  Mass.  Before  the  close  of  his  address,  some  dozen  or
more  of  his  audience  were  under  the  influence  of  Fascination,  and
had  entirely  lost  their  self-control  and  strength.  Similar  mysterious
results  followed  in  other  places,  so  that  it  was  common  for  large
numbers  of  his  audience  to  become  entranced  while  he  was  address-
ing them,  of  which,  however,  after  their  recovery,  they  would  often
have  no  recollection  whatever  !  These  phenomena,  produced  thus
early  in  his  career  as  a  public  speaker,  seem  to  have  put  Mr.  Sun-
derland upon  that  course  of  investigation  into  the  Lavs  of  Mind
which  resulted  in  the  New  Theory  of  Human  Nature  he  has
since  published  to  the  world  under  the  name  of  PathetUm.  One
fact  must  be  admitted,  that  history  i^ives  us  no  account  of  the
man  who  has  equalled  La  Roy  Sunderland  in  the  power  of  Fas-
cination exercised  over  a  promiscuous  audience,  by  which  more
or  less  of  them  are  drawn  from  their  seats,  at  the  will  of  the
speaker." — Boston Weekly  Museum,  July  21,  1849.


42  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

A  few  of  them  may  now  be  classified,  to  enable
the  reader  to  judge,  accurately,  of  the  causes  by
which  they  may  have  been  brought  about.  It  must
be  borne  in  mind,  that  what  I  am  now  about  to
describe  could  not  have  been  caused  by  any  will
or  design  on  my  part,  because  I  had  no  will  in  the
premises.  My  object  or  "  will  "  was  to  give  infor-
mation on  the  subject  of  Eeligion,  and  what  I
said  was  usually  addressed  to  the  Faculties  of
Fear  or  Caution,  Conscientiousness  and  Hope.  The
effects  produced  by  my  public  addresses,  on  the
nervous  systems  of  my  auditors,  were  as  unex-
pected and  surprising  to  me,  as  they  could  have
been  to  any  one  else.

Religious  Phenomena.

41.  Without  attempting  the  details  of  particu-
lar cases,  the  following  classifications  of  the  pheno-
mena will,  perhaps,  be  sufficient : —

(1.)  Rigidity  of  the  muscles,  or  paralysis  of  the
limbs.  The  first  sermon  I  ever  delivered,  was  to
a  small  audience,  and  nearly  half  of  whom  were
affected  in  this  way.  Their  limbs  became  cold
and  rigid,  so  that  for  an  hour  or  so,  they  were
unable  to  leave  their  seats.  Very  many  curious
cases  of  this  kind  have  occurred  under  my  preach-
ing. In  meetings  I  held  in  Dennis,  Massachusetts,
in  the  Spring  of  1824,  I  had  more  than  twenty
strong,  able-bodied  men,  affected  in  this  way.  Two
young  men,  by  the  name  of  Crowell,  had  attended
a  meeting  I  held  in  the  afternoon,  in  which  they
neither  felt  nor  manifested  any  apparent  concern


RELIGIOUS PHENOMENA.  43

at  all.  From  the  place  of  meeting  they  went  to
their  shop  to  resume  their  work.  They  were
shoemakers.  On  seating  themselves,  they  were
both  struck  perfectly  stiff,  as  if  paralyzed  by  cata-
lepsy. I  was  immediately  summoned  to  the
shop  to  see  them.  I  found  them  with  their  work
in  their  laps,  their  tools  in  their  hands,  and  sitting
in  a  stooping  posture,  unable  to  stir.  Their  limbs
were  rigid,  and  they  grasped  their  tools,  which  they
held  in  their  hands,  with  such  force,  that  they
could  not  be  taken  from  them.  During  this  time,
another  man  came  into  the  shop  to  see  what  was
going  on,  (as  the  young  men.  made  a  great  outcry)
and  he  fell  against  the  side  of  the  shop,  with  con-
siderable force,  as  if  thrown  down  by  some  invisi-
ble power.

Out  of  the  whole  number  in  Dennis  affected  in
this  way,  there  was  but  one  woman.  She  became
so  excited,  that  one  Sunday  morning  she  went  and
stood  in  front  of  the  "  Orthodox  Church,"  and  with
great  zeal  addressed  the  people  (as  they  were  en-
tering the  church)  on  the  subject  of  religion.  She
was  a  modest,  unassuming  lady,  and  but  for  the
abnormal  excitement  which  she  sympathetically  took
from  the  scenes  she  had  witnessed  in  my  meetings,
she  could  not  have  been  induced  to  expose  herself
in  that  manner.

(2.)  Syncope, or "  loss  of  strength,"  as it  was
called. While  proceeding with my  discours
numbers  would  fall  from  their  seats,  perfectly  I
less. In  such  cases  they  were  said  to  "lose  their
strength." They  were  conscious,  and  in  this  state,


44  BOOK  OF PSYCHOLOGY.

while  excited  with  the  most  intense  emotions  of
hope  or  fear,  I  have  known  them  to  remain  for
hours.  A  Capt.  C,  in  Dennis,  Mass.  (March  17,
1824),  in  his  own  house,  where  I  was  invited  by
him  to  preach,  fell  upon  the  floor,  from  which  he
was  unable  to  rise  for  the  space  of  about  ten
hours.  I  have  seen  multitudes  of  people  affected
in  this  manner.

(3.)  Entranced.  Under  religious  excitement,  I
have  seen  large  numbers  of  people  entranced,  and
the  trance  carried  even  to  the  highest  degrees  of
ecstasy.  And  what  is  worthy  of  notice  here,  is,  I
have  invariably  found  that  those  who  were  the
most  liable  to  sink  into  this  state  under  what  is
called  "  religious"  influences,  are  the  most  suscep-
tible to  its  induction  from  Pathetism,  or  any  other
cause.

The  first  experiments  in  what  was  called  "Mes-
merism," that  I  ever  witnessed,  were  at  my  own
house  (131  Varick-street,  New  York),  in  the  year
1839,  and  they  were  performed  by  the  Eev.  Charles
S.  M'Eeading,  on  his  own  wife.  ISP*  And  this
very  lady,  Mrs.  M' Reading,  was  entranced  under  a
discourse  which  1  delivered  in  the  Methodist  Church,  in
JScituate,  Mass.,  in  the  year  1824.  At  that  time  her
limbs  became  rigid,  and  she  was  transfixed  to  her  seat,
so  that  she  could  not  leave  the  house ;  and  the
audience  retired  and  left  her  under  the  spell  that  I
had  fixed  upon  her.

I  have  the  unanimous  testimony  of  very  many
persons  whom  I  have  entranced  (who  had  fallen


RELIGIOUS  PHENOMENA.  45

into  that  state  from  religious  excitement),  that  it
is  the  same  state,  and  always  more  or  less  pleasant
when  the  persons,  or  associations  are  so,  by  which
it  is  brought  on.

(4.)  Visions.  The  history  of  all  "  powerful  revi-
vals" (so  called)  will  afford  more  or  less  cases
where  persons,  under  a  very  exciting  sermon,  have
been  known  to  fall  into  a  state  in  which  they  had
visions  of  "  heaven  and  hell,"  of  "  Christ  on  the
Cross,"  and  of  departed  spirits.

A  sailor,  in  South  Yarmouth,  Mass.  (1824),  who
had  attended  my  meeting,  took  me  the  next  day  to
the  place  where  he  had  actually  seen  the  devil,  and
showed  me  the  ground  that  had  been  torn  up,
where  he  had  engaged  in  a  combat  with  him.  An-
other man  (Mr.  Barstow),  in  Barnstable,  Mass.,
about  the  same  time,  after  attending  my  meeting,
went  home,  and  soon  the  devil  approached  his  bed-
side, with  a  mitre  upon  his  head.  At  other  times
recent  "converts"  have  been  transported  with
visions  of  the  blest  and  beautiful,  exceeding  the
power  of  language  to  describe.  Nay,  I  have  known
them  sometimes  to  become  clairvoyant,  and  to  give
an  accurate  description  of  the  character  of  persons
who  happened  to  approach  them.*  At  times  these
peculiar  states  lasted  twenty-four  hours,  and  even
for  a  number  of  days.

(5.)  Persons  were  effected  whom  I  never  saw,
even  before  they  had  seen  me.  At  the  time  I  was
preaching  in  Dennis,  Mass.,  above  referred  to,  there

*  See  Pathetism  (181o),p.  181.


46  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

were  two  men  out  on  a  hunting  excursion.  Hear-
ing that  I  was  to  preach  in  their  place  on  a  certain
evening  (March  15,  1824),  they  hastened  home,
threw  their  guns  upon  the  floor,  and  ere  they
reached  the  school-house,  in  which  the  meeting
was  held,  they  were  so  much  affected  that  they
cried  aloud.  They  came  into  the  house  where  I
was,  and  continued  during  the  whole  evening  under
the  most  violent  excitement.

(6.)  All  these  results  came  to  pass  without  any
will  or  design  on  my  part.  August  30,  1823,  I
preached  in  Chatham,  Mass.  Before  I  had  pro-
ceeded fifteen  minutes,  some  thirty  or  more  of  my
audience  had  "lost  their  strength,"  and  were  over-
whelmed with  excitement.  In  the  evening  of  the
same  day,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Eeuben  Eider,  sim-
ilar results  followed.  Indeed,  almost  as  soon  as  I
had  uttered  a  word,  a  number  were  "  struck  down"
upon  the  floor  (as  the  phrase  was),  and  lay  there
till  two  or  three  o'clock  the  next  morning.

Such  were  the  results  that  followed  my  public
labors  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  in  1825  ;  Saugus  and
Boston,  Mass.,  in  1826  ;  and  in  various  other  places
throughout  the  New  England  States  from  that  time
to  the  present ;  so  that  I  may  safely  say,  that  tens
of  thousands  of  persons  have,  from  first  to  last,
been  "fascinated"  "  impressed,"  or  entranced,  in  my
public  lectures  previous  to  1843  ;  during  all  that
time  I  was  (in  some  sense),  unconsciously  to  my-
self, yet  nevertheless  performing  what  were  really
li  experiments"  upon  the  nervous  systems  of  my


IDENTITY  OF  KESULTS.  47

auditors  ;  but,  like  the  multitudes  who  have  since
operated  under  the  name  of  "  Mesmerism,"  &c.,  I
did  not  fully  comprehend  how  the  strange  results
were  brought  about.  True,  they  were  often  with
me  a  subject  of  serious  investigation,  but  my  mind
was  more  or  less  unsettled  in  regard  to  them  till
the  year  1834,  when  I  read  an  "Essay  upon  the
Influence  of  Imagination  on  the  Nervous  System
contributing  to  a  False  Hope  in  Eeligion.  By  Eev.
Grant  Powers."*

Identity  of  Results.

42.  Witnessing  the  strange  phenomena  above
described,  in  every  variety  of  form,  for  the  space
of  twenty  years,  and  before  I  had  even  heard  of
the  term  "Mesmerism,"  or  "Animal  Magnetism,"
it  must  be  obvious  how  much  they  prepared  my
mind  to  perceive  their  identity  with  those  brought
about  by  the  processes  which  I  afterwards  learned
to  be  known  under  these  terms.  When,  therefore,
in  1841,  I  commenced  a  series  of  experiments,  for
the  purpose  of  ascertaining,  if  possible,  the  truth
in  respect  to  the  theories  known  under  these  terms,
I  soon  satisfied  myself  that  they  were  not  wholly
true,  and  hence  I  rejected  them,  together  with  the
processes  by  which  the  "  Mesmerizers,"  so  called,
had  induced  their  results.  I,  of  course,  felt  no
need  of  the  "passes"  and  "efforts"  by  the  "will,''
as  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  inducing  those  very
results  long  before  without  any  "  passes,"  or  any

*  Andovcr,  Mass.:  Flagg  &  Goukl. 1S2S.


48  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

specific  efforts  by  the  will.  And  hence  it  was  that
I  hit  upon  what  I  still  suppose  to  be  the  true  phi-
losophy of  the  phenomena  now  under  notice.

Professional  Experiments  in  1§41.

43.  I  have  already  stated  that  the  very  first  ex-
periment I  ever  saw,  by  the  peculiar  process  of
u  Mesmerism,"  (in  1839,)  happened  to  be  performed
on  a  lady  who  had  been  entranced  and  paralyzed
under  a  sermon  of  mine  in  1824.  In  1841,  I  com-
menced a  series  of  experiments,  in  connection  with
a  number  of  scientific  gentlemen,  in  the  "  New
York  Museum,"  then  under  the  charge  of  Mr.
Peale.  Wishing  for  assistance,  and  to  be  more
secluded  in  my  investigations,  I  invited  the  late
Dr.  Henry  H.  Sherwood,  and  Mr.  O.  S.  Fowler,
the  Phrenologist,  to  join  me  in  the  investigation.
The  experiments  were  witnessed  by  a  large  number
of  scientific  and  professional  gentlemen  in  New
York  and  vicinity,  during  the  summer  and  fall  of
that  year,  among  whom  were  Dr.  Griscom,  Dr.  A.
Ball,  Prof.  Charles  A.  Lee,  and  others.  The  fol-
lowing are  from  other  similar  testimonies,  pub-
lished of  those  experiments,  at  the  time  : —

"  The  subscribers  have  been  present  and  witnessed  nu-
merous cerebral  experiments  performed  by  La  Roy  Sun-
derland, by  which  various  phenomena  were  produced  in
the  mental  exercises  of  the  patient,  such  as  Sleepwaking,
Laughing,  Singing  ;  and  the  states  of  mind  resembling
Madness,  Monomania,  Insanity,  <fcc,  were  brought  on  and
removed  in  a  few  seconds  of  time.  In  our  opinion,  these
phenomena  were  brought  about  by  the  application  of  laws


THE OBJECT — FACILITIES.  49

to  the  human  system  which  have  not  been  well  understood

heretofore,  and  which  have  not  received  that  attention
which  the  importance  of  the  subject  would  seem  to  de-
mand. II.  II.  Sherwood,  M.D.,  Rev.  Isaac  Covert,  Rev.
J.  H.  Marty n,  O.  S.  Fowler,  Prof.  E.  Wright,  Daniel  L.
M.  Peixetto,  M.D.,  Ex-President  of  the  N.  Y.  Medical
Society. — New  York,  March  2,  1842."

"  The  new  discoveries  in  Psychology,  which  Mr.  Sun-  '
derland  proposes  to  unfold,  are  indeed  of  the  most  aston-
ishing character,  and,  substantiated,  will  place  Pathetism,
among  the  most  important  of  the  positive  sciences.  We
know  LaRoy  Sunderland ;  and  we  can  say,  with  the
utmost  confidence,  that  neither  his  integrity  nor  sagacity
will  be  questioned  by  any  who  enjoy  his  acquaintance." —
New  York  Tribune,  February  23,  1842.

Concerning  the  series  of  experiments  which  I
carried  on  for  some  two  years  even  before  I  com-
menced my  professional  labors  of  lecturing,  it  may
be  necessary  to  state  somewhat  more  distinctly.

The  Object.

-44:.  (1.)  That  they  were  commenced  and  con-
tinued at  considerable  expense,  for  the  sole  pur-
poses of  scientific  inquiry.  And,  indeed,  a  similar
remark  may  be  made  of  all  my  experiments  per-
formed during  the  last  twelve  years.  One,  all-per-
vading design,  through  the  whole,  has  been  to  find
out  the  Truth  in  respect  to  the  human  mind.

Facilities.

45.  (2.)  During  this  time  I  have  had  unusual  fa-
cilities lor  testing  the  influence  of  minerals  over  the


50  BOOK OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

nervous  system.*  Dr.  H.  H.  Sherwood,  of  New
York,  with  whom  I  was  associated  for  some  three
years  in  these  experiments,  was  himself,  it  may  be
said,  perhaps  almost,  if  not  quite,  at  the  head  of
the  profession  in  his  knowledge  of  what  Dr.  Fara-
day calls  Para-Magnetism  (Magnetism  of  Metals),
'and  Dia-Magnetism  (Magnetism  of  other  bodies),
Electro-Magnetism,  and  Electricity  in  its  various
forms.

Details  of  my  Experiments.

46.  (3.)  The  details  of  these  experiments  were
published  at  the  time  in  the  papers  of  the  day,  and
especially  in  the  one  of  which  I  was  then  proprie-
tor and  editor,!  and  also  in  other  works  which  I
have  since  published  on  the  subject,  so  that  it  is
not  necessary  that  an  account  of  them  should  be
repeated  here.:}:


*  "  The  subscribers  hereby  certify,  that  we  have  witnessed  numer-
ous magnetic  experiments  made  by  Rev.  LaRoy  Sunderland,  in
some  of  which  the  mental  faculties  were  excited  to  action  by  placing
the  fingers  over  the  location1  of  the  phrenological  organs  correspond-
ing to  these  faculties  ;  in  others,  the  power  of  a  steel  magnet  over
the  human  body  in  a  very  remarkable  degree,  was  shown  ; — that
we  have  carefully  examined  these  experiments,  and  firmly  believe,
both  from  the  mode  in  which  they  were  conducted,  and  from  the
candid  manner  in  which  they  were  shown  by  Mr.  Sunderland,  that
in  many  of  them  there  could  be  no  collusion ;  and  that  the  result  in
some  was  evidently  as  unexpected  by  the  operator  as  any  person
present— Flatbush,  JV.  Z,  Hay  14,  1842.  Rev.  Thomas  M.  Strong;
James  E.  Dubois,  M.D.,  T.  F.  King.  M.D.,  Rev.  Win.  Barlow,  John
B.  Zabriskie,  M.D."— The  Magnet,  Oct.,  1842.

f  New  York  Watchman,  from  Aug.  1841  to  July,  1842.

X  The  Magnet  :  Devoted  to  the  Investigation  of  Human  Physiol-
ogy. By  La  Roy  Sunderland.  New  York  :  Published  at  the  Magnet
Office,  138  Fulton-street.  1842-3.  Vols.  1  and  2.  8vo.  pp.280,
240.

Pathetjsm  ;  with  Practical  Instructions. Demonstrating  the  Falsity


THE IDEA OF PATHETISM.  51


The  Idea  of  Patlietsswa.

47.  The  distinguishing  Idea  of  Pathetism,  first
announced  to  the  public  in  1842,  as  the  "  Key-
stone" of  this  New  Theory-  of  Mind,  assumed,
taught,  and  demonstrated  this  important  principle,
viz: That  ichen  a  relation  is  once  established  beti

an  operator  (or  any  given  substance,  real  or  imagin-
ary, as  the  agent)  and  his  patient,  corresponding
changes  may  be  induced  in  the  nervous  system  of  the
latter  [awake  or  entranced)  by  mere  volition,  and  by
suggestions  addressed  to  either  of  the  external  senses.

The  "S£ey"  to  Mesmerism.

48.  (1.)  This  key,  it  is  believed,  does  much  to-

of  the  hitherto  prevalent  assumptions  in  regard  to  what  has  been
called  "Mesmerism"  and  "Neurology,"  and  Illustrating  those  Laws
which  induce  Somnambulism,  Second  Sight,  Sleep,  Dreaming,  Trance,
and  Clairvoyance  ;  with  numerous  Facts  tending  to  show  the  Pathol-
ogy of  Monomania,  Insanity,  Witchcraft,  and  various  other  Mental
or  Nervous  Phenomena.  By  La  Roy  Sunderland.  New  York  :  Pub-
lished for  the  Author  by  P.  P.  Good,  at  the  "Magnet"  Office,  138
Fulton-street,  and  by  the  Booksellers  generally  throughout  the  coun-
try. 1843. 12mo.  pp.  2-17.

"Confessions  of  a  Magnetized" Exposed:  Exhibiting  the  Folly
and  Falsehood  of  a  Pamphlet with  the  above  title.  -arks

showing  the  Falsity  of  the  Notions  hitherto  prevalent  in
what  has  been  denominated  "Mesmerism;"  and  giving  th
of  the  Author's New Theory  of Mind.
Boston  :  Published  by  Bedding  &  Co.,  No.  S  State-st]
pp.  50,

Pathkthm:  Man  considered  in  Respect  to  hi
tion.  Soul,  Mind,  Spirit;  giving  the  Rationale  of  tin


itfn
citeme'nts,  Apparitions, Spells, Charms,

>f  Sweden
Theory  of  Mind,  with  Din
By  La  Roy  Sunderlaud. B  >ston  : I'.


52  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

wards  solving  the  mysteries  of  the  "will"  force,,;
under  the  narfte  of  <£  Animal  Magnetism."

"It  must  be  remembered,  also,  that  the  effects  I  speak
of  in  this  chapter,  are  produced  on  subjects  both  in  the
ivaking  and  sleeping  state  ;  though,  in  an  infinite  variety
of  degrees,  in  different  persons,  and  also  by  processes  en-
tirely different  in  producing  the  same  effects." — JPathetism,
March,  1843,  p.  72.

"  Nor  is  this  power  confined  to  the  sleeping  state ;  as  I
have  found  it  equally  easy  to  exert  a  similar  influence
over  susceptible  subjects  when  awake.  The  only  differ-
ence between  them  is,  in  the  latter  case  it  is  not  so  easy
to  communicate  the  wishes  to  the  subject  without  some
visible  or  audible  sign  ;  but  when  he  is  by  any  means
made  to  understand  what  my  wishes  are,  they  are  obeyed  ;
and  I  have  as  much  control  over  the  limbs  and  muscles,
as  in  a  state  of  perfect  somnipathy." — lb.,  p.  88.

"  I  have  operated  on  hundreds,  and,  I  may  say,  thou-
sands of  cases,  where  I  know  that  the  subjects  were  no
more  under  the  influence  of  my  will  [Mesmerized]  than
any  other  person  whom  I  never  saw.  I  have  put  them
to  sleep  by  my  will,  as  it  is  called,  and  without  it.  I  have
examined  this  agency  in  every  imaginable  aspect,  and
tested  it  in  every  conceivable  manner  possible,  and  affirm
what  I  know,  when  I  say  that  I  have  induced  these  differ-
ent results  from  persons  who  were  not  asleep,  and  from
others  who  were,  and  yet  they  were  not  caused  or  modi-
fied by  my  will  in  the  least  conceivable  degree.  The
inference,  to  my  own  mind,  is  irresistible,  that  the  (Mes-
meric) notion  of  a  fluid  transmitted  from  the  operator
into  the  subject,  is  utterly  unfounded." — lb.  p.  114.*


*  Some  two  years  after  the  work  was  published  from  which  the
above  quotations  are  made,  a  book  was  issued  in  New  York  called
"  Etherology,"  in  which  a  claim  was  put  forth  of  priority  in  the
discovery  of  the  "Idea"  set  forth  in  the  above  extracts.  And  to
show  the  utter  futility  of  this  claim,  was  one  design  in  publishing


THE  "key"  to  neurology.  53

The  "Key"  to  "Weiiroldffy."

49, (2.) It  comprehends the  results  produced

"  Confessions  of  a  Magnetizer  Exposed,"  the  title  of  which  has  been
given. The  following  is  an  extract  from  my  pamphlet  : —

"The  drift  of  my  entire  work  [published  in  1843]  goes  to  show
that  I  accounted  for  the  results  produced  by  Dr.  Buchanan,  Mcsmer,
Baird,  and  others,  not  by  a  fluid,  but  by  the  operation  of  certain
relations  brought  to  bear  upon  the  patient's  mind,  through  his  exter-
nal senses,  or  Knowledge  of  the  operators  mind.

u  It  was  by  this  law  of  '  Credenciveness,'  (or  of  association,)  that  I
accounted  for  the  results  produced  by  Mesmer  (page  65),  also  the
results  which  follow  an  'assertion'  of  the  operator,  a  2  2,246,
284,  and  111.)  In  this  way  I  accounted  for  the  effects  produced  by
the  c  Tractors'  of  Perkins  (pages  106-108);  and  numerous  other  phe-
nomena, which  had  seemed  to  remain  shrouded  in  mystery,  or  attri-
buted to  supernatural  agency.  Indeed,  this  very  idea  may  be  found
repeated  upon  almost  every  page  of  my  book,  so  that  any  school-boy
who  reads  it,  as  Mr.  Grimes  says  he  has,  '  carefully,'  could  not  fail  of
perceiving  this  fact  recognized  as  " a  fundamental  principle  in  my
theory." — Page  44.

1.  Hence  the  Idea,  therefore,  which  was  claimed  in  "  Etherology,"
as  a  new  discovery,  was  discovered  and  published  under  the  name
of  Pathetism,  two  years  before  "  Etherology"  had  been  heard  of.

2.  Nor  is  it  true  that  I  ever  relied  upon  this  Influence  for  fixing
the  precise  locations  of  the  Phrenological  organs,  as  J.  S.  Grimes
represents  in  his  "  Etherology"  of  1845.  The  following  extracts
from  my  work  (of  1843)  will  prove  this  : —

" Pathetism  affords  new  and  extraordinary  facilities  for  brinein^
out  the  mental  functions,  both  in  the  sleeping  and  waking  state  :
it  cannot,  for  the  reasons  already  stated,  oe  depended  upm
the  precise  location  of  organs,  to the entire  exclusion  of the  old
method.'' — lb.,  page  146.

>,  in  exciting  the  organs,  [called  'Neurology.'] The  ft
are  placed  on  any  given  portion  or  the  head;  and  if  he  says  h<
a  certain  emotion,  he  may  be  easily  led  to  associate  that  feeling  with
that  place  in  his  head;  but  whether  it  be  the  nppr<
not,  must  be  determined  by  ether  things. I  have  seen  heads,
and  asleep,  turned  fc  topsy-turvy'  in  this  way." — lb.

3.  In  1850, Mr. Grimes  published  a  second  edition  of  bis  "Ether-
ology," in  which  he  makes  another  ,  re  he
says  thai  "  Mr.  Sunderland  abandoned  this  idea  in  1848."  M  Pathet-
ism," in  which  I  condemned  this  idea  (for  1  never  did  believe  it.  as
Mr.  Grimes  insinuate!  iblished  in  r  any
other  person  had  published  anything  on  thif at  adl.


54  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

through,  the  sense  of  feeling  or  touch  in  the  waking
or  normal  state.  The  hand  of  the  operator  is
placed  upon  any  part  of  the  patient's  body,  or  vice
versa ; — or  the  patient  is  directed  to  hold  any  sub-
stance in  his  hand,  or  place  the  same  in  contact
with  his  body,  and  certain  results  are  said  to  follow,
which  Dr.  J.  E.  Buchanan,  in  1841,  called  "the
experimental  part  of  Neurology."

P§ycIaome£ry.

50.  This  same  sense  is  appealed  to  by  what
has  been  improperly  called  the  "ulner  nerve  grip,"
holding  "coin"  in  ,  the  hand,  and  in  experiments
which  have  taken  the  name  of  Psychometry.  They
were  thus  described  in  the  Magnet  and  my  first
book  on  Pathetism : —

"  I  can  cause  persons  of  a  certain  temperament  to  obey
my  will,  awake  or  asleep  !  Nay,  I  have  known  some  in
whom  Lean  produce  what  is  called  the  clairvoyant  state,
while  they  are  perfectly  awake!  It  is  just  as  easy  to  bring-
out  results  from  persons  in  a  waking  state,  as  from  those
asleep;  and  this  I  have  fully  and  repeatedly  demon-
strated."— Magnet,  January,  1843.*

*  A  monthly  periodical,  commenced  in  New  York  in  June,  1842,
and  continued  about  three  years.  It  had  quite  an  extensive  circu-
lation, was  highly  popular  with  the  press  generally,  and  numbered
among  its  correspondents  many  intelligent  members  of  the  learned
professions  throughout  this  country,  and  some  in  England,  Ireland,
and  the  "West  Indies.  Probably  the  Magnet  did  more  towards
calling  public  attention  to  the  subject  on  which  it  treated,  than  any
or  all  other  'means  previously  used  for  this  purpose.  And  now,  it
is  gratifying  indeed  to  look  back  and  contemplate  the  progress  this
science  has  made  during  the  last  ten  wears,  much  of  which,  without


PSYCHOMETRY.  55

"  And  from  mere  contact  with  the  hand  of  some  of  a
peculiar  temperament,  when  wide  awake,  they  have  a
sense  of  different  substances,  and  are  able,  by  this  process
alone,  without  the  sense  of  sight  or  hearing,  to  tell  their
qualities,  and  the  feelings  which  others  seem  to  entertain
towards  them." — lb.,  p.  73.

"  At  other  times,  the  effects  are  very  much  increased
if  the  operator  sits  by  the  side  of  the  patient  during  this
process,  and  holds  one  of  his  hands ;  ot  if  he  gives  him
a  piece  of  steel,  or  any  substance  not  offensive,  which  the
patient  should  hold  in  his  hand." — lb.,  p.  122  ;  see  also
pp.  95  and  142.

"  The  same  mental  results  are  produced  in  different
cases,  by  touching  different  places  on  the  head  ;  and  in
some  cases,  all  or  most  of  the  mental  manifestations  are
brought  out  by  merely  touching  the  toes,  joints,  fingers,
and  different  portions  of  the  body,  without  any  contact
with  the  head.'7

"  But  for  these  different  and  ever-varying  results,  in
subjects  both  awake  and  asleep,  neither  the  magnetic  nor
the  neuraura  theories  render  any  satisfactory  account,  as
they  do  not,  indeed,  for  numberless  other  phenomena,
which  so  completely  annihilate  many  other  beautiful  cas-
tles which  have  been  so  ingeniously  constructed  upon  a
few  isolated  facts.  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  true
reason  for  these  different  results  is  to  be  found  in  the  dif-
ferent degrees  in  which  the  various  subjects  may  have
been  Pathetized.  And  I  might  think  so  too,  probably,
had  I  not  performed  a  vast  variety  of  experiments,  which
go  far,  very far,  as 1 believe, towards  demonstrating  the

any  doubt,  may  be  traced  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  circulation
of  that  work.

The  first  periodical  ever  attempted  in  this  country,  devoted  to
Psychological  subjects,  was  issued  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  Is
Dr.  S.  Underbill. It was  called  " The  Annals  of  Magnetism
continued  only  a  few  months. Dr. Underbill  was  himself
what  susceptible,  and  considerably  impressed  by  my  pro©
operating-  in  1841.


56  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

contrary.  Instance  the  following  :  Here  is  a  person  whoso
cerebral  organs  I  can  control  while  he  is  awake,  but  he
cannot  be  put  to  sleep.  Another  may  be  put  to  sleep,  and
his  cerebral  organs  cannot  be  excited  at  all.  Another  is
susceptible  of  the  excitement  of  any  portion  of  the  brain,
provided  he  understands  beforehand  what  impression  you
wish  to  produce." — lb,,  p.  94.*


*


Hypnotism.

51.  (3.)  This  principle  also  accounts  for  results
produced  through  the  sense  of  Sight,  as  when  the
patient  is  directed  to  gaze  at  the  operator,  or  at
something  held  in  his  hand,  or  indeed  at  any  object
which  secures  his  attention.  This  Dr.  Braid,  of
Manchester,  England,  in  1843,  called  "  Hypnotism,'7
or  rather,  a  Neurypnologj^."  Mr.  Braid's  process
differs  from  Mesmerism,  in  respect  to  the  use  of  the
"  will"  force,  principally.

Method  of  Patlietism.

52.  If  we  now  examine  the  results  which  may
be  claimed  as  peculiar  to  Pathetism,  it  will  enable
us  to  see  in  what  respects  it  exceeds  the  processes

*  And  nine  years  or  so  after  the  above  announcements,  as  to  the
possibility  of  operating  in  the  waking  state,  and  by  holding  substances
in  the  hand,  kc,  a  book  is  published  in  New  York,  in  which  this
Idea  is  claimed  as  a  "  new  discovery,"  and  for  teaching  which  enor-
mous prices  have  been  charged.  Nay,  the  "  secret"  lias  been
patented,  the  pupils  who  are  taught  it  are  solemnly  pledged  to
keep  it,  as  if  they  disclose  it  they  are  "  liable  to  prosecution  from
Fowlers  k  Wells,  for  trespassing  on  their  copyright"  1  !  [See  "  The
Philosophy  of  Electrical  Psychology,"  by  John  Bovee  Dods,  pub-
lished in  1850  by  Fowlers  k  Wells,  p.  11  ]


OF LEC  57

and  the  phenomena  produced  under  either  of  tho
theories  to  which  reference  has  here  been  made.
It  has  been  truly  observed,  that  the  first  question
in  any  branch  of  knowledge  must  be  in  respect  to
method.*  Without  method  there  can  be  no  standard
of  appeal,  no  process  of  proof,  ho  means  of  deter-
mining, otherwise  than  by  mere  opinion,  whether
a  proposition  be  true  or  false.  Here,  then,  are  the
reports  which  others  have  given  of  my  metJiod,
adopted  in  my  public  audiences,  on  the  commence-
ment of  my  professional  labors,  in  illustration  of
the  "Idea"  now  under  consideration.

"Reports"  of  Lectures.

53.  "  We  have  long  known  Mr.  Sunderland.  He  has
made  himself  respected  in  New  York  city  as  a  mental
philosopher.  He  will  fascinate  one  aj;  a  time,  or  one  hun-
dred, just  as  the  audience  may  choose,  and  all  without
touching  them  with  one  of  his  fingers? — Lowell  Wash-
ingtonian,  Sept.  8,  1S43.

"  All  the  phenomena  usually  produced  by  Mesmeriz<  rs
and  Neurologists,  by  manipulation,  Mr.  Sunderland  induces
without  contact,  or without the use  of  any  electrical  or
nervous  fluid,  in  persons  icicle  awake? — Lowell  Mot
Herald,  Sept.  23,  1843.

M  An  astonishing  instance  of  the  effects  of  nervous
ceptibility,  was  exhibited at Mr.  Sunderland's  lecture,  at
tho  City Hall, last Monday  evening. No  leas  than  live
persons  were  fascinated  while  lie was  speaking;  and he
declared  that  these  were  probably  the  first
ments  of  the  kind  ever  performed  (as  the  result  o
by  any  person  in  any  part  of  the  world." — Luwdl  Patriot,
Sept.  13,  1843.f

*  Theory  of  Human  Pi.  gression,  p.  2i.

\  It  may  perhaps  hereafter  iriosi-


58  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.


"  Mr.  Sunderland's  new  Psychological  experiments  were
of  a  most  wonderful  kind,  and  such  as  we  believe  no
other  person  in  the  world  ever  even  attempted  to  per-
form. l  Spells,'  'Charms,'  '  Ecstacy,'  and  all  these  things
: — done,  too,  in  strangers,  who  had  never  been  Mesmerized,
and  brought  on  without  contact,  is  almost  too  startling
for  belielfi" — Lowell  Patriot,  Sept.  20,  1843.

ties  of  Alchemistic  Literature,"  that  seven  years  after  the  above
reports  were  published,  announcements  were  made  in  a  book  issued
by  Messrs.  Fowlers  &  Wells,  New  York,  in  the  following  words : —

"  If  there  is  an  individual  in  existence  who  has  taken  persons  from
a  public  audience,  who  had  not  been  Mesmerized,  nor  operated  upon,
and  immediately  controlled  tTtem  in  their  muscular  motions  and  mental
impressions,  till  it  was  done  by  Dr.  B.  B.  Williams  and  myself,  I  am
ignorant  of  the  fact.  Such  experiments  I  have  never- seen  advertised
for  public  exhibition,  nor  have  I  ever  read  them  in  published  works."
— Electrical  Psychology,  by  John  B.  Bods,  p.  13. 1850.

"  Some  have  supposed,  and  even  published,  that  the  secret  could
be  told,  to  any  one  in  a  moment.  The  printer  and  vender  of  such  an
anonymous  publication  are  liable  to  a  prosecution  from  Fowlers  &
Wells,  for  trespassing  upon  their  copyright."  [  ! !  !] — lb.  p.  11.

And  now,  scarcely  two  years  after  the  above  appeared,  another
book  is  published  in  New  York,  from  which  the  following  para-
graphs are  extracted  :■ —

"  I  feel  it  my  special  duty  to  call  particular  attention  to  J.  B.  Dods,
that  the  public  may  not  be  led  astray,  especially  upon  this  point,
without  claiming  for  myself  originality  in  this  (Electrical  Psychol-
ogy) mysterious  department  of  human  existence." — Treatise  on  Men  -
tat  Alchemy,  by  B.  Brown  Williams,  M.D.,  page  55.  Published  in
New  York. 1852.

"I  first  discovered,  six  years  ago  (1846),  the  process  by  which  it
was  ascertained,  to  a  certainty,  that  the  nervous  system  of  many
persons  were  in  a  state  naturally,  so  that  impressions  properly  made
would  control  them  against  their  wills." — lb.  p.  33.

Such  are  the  rival  claims  as  to  the  "great  seer et"  of  " Mental
Alchemy  !"  And  if  the  reader  has  any  desire  to  see  how  much
danger  he  incurs  of  a  "prosecution  from  Fowlers  &  Wells,  for  tres-
passing on  their  copyright,"  I  refer  him  to  a  pamphlet,  bearing  the
following  title,  in  which  he  will  mid  some  further  information  on  the
subject  : —

"  Pathetism:  Statement  of  its  Philosophy,  and  its  Discovery  De-
fended,  against  the  assumptions  put  forth  recently  under  the  name
of  ;  Electrical  Psychology,'  '  Electro-Biology,'  <fec.  &c.  Steakns  &
Co.,  25  Ann-street,  New  York."


OF LECTURES.  59

"But  what  was  t|je  most  remarkable,  these  pnenomena
of  paralyzation  and  second  sight,  were  produced  in  per-
sons in  the  waking  state.  We  are  satisfied  that  Mr.  Sun-
derland has  shed  a  vast  amount  of  light  upon  this  hitherto
mysterious  subject,  and  that  he  will  finally  work  a  com-
plete revolution  of  opinion  in  relation  to  it.  He  has  made
it  his  study  for  a  number  of  years  ;  and  if  he  succeeds
in  his  attempts,  he  will  be  richly  entitled  to  the  gratitude
of  the  human  race." — Lowell  Herald,  Sept.  25,  1843.

"  Mr.  Sunderland  informed  the  audience  that  he  would
induce  that  state  of  mental  hallucination  called  4  second
sight/  on  a  person  in  the  waking  condition.  And  sure
enough,  the  lady,  with  her  eyes  ivide  open,  arose  and
stretched  out  her  hands  towards  what  she  took  to  be  her
deceased  father !  And  what  was  still  more  remarkable,  if
possible,  at  this  instant  another  lady,  who  sat  near,  and
one  who  had  never  been  Mesmerized  at  all,  gave  a  most
piercing  shriek,  declaring  that  she  also  saw  the  spirit  of
her  deceased  sister,  and  it  was  some  minutes  before  Mr.
Sunderland  succeeded  in  composing  her  mind." — Provi-
dence Evening  Chronicle,  Oct.  21,  1843.

u  Mr.  Sunderland  drew  persons  on  the  platform  wide
awake,  and,  as  they  said,  against  their  own  will  !  A  re-
sult was  produced  on  one  resembling  insanity!  The
madman  rushed  down  the  aisle,  and  lashed  himself  into
the  most  terrific  attitudes." — Providence  Chronicle,  Oct.
30,  1843.

"  The  views  he  presents  of  the  human  mind  are  quite
new,  and  his  Psychological  experiments  far  exceed  any-
thing we  ever  heard  of  in  the  annals  of  '  Mesmerism1  or
'Neurology.'  "—Boston  Bee,  Nov.  20,  1843.

"Mr,  Sunderland's  claim  to  originality,  as  stated  in  his
lectures,  and  his  published  works,  [The  Magnet,  1842, and
Pathetism,  1843,]  is  first,  in  respect  to  his  theory,  an
condly,  in  respect  to  his  peculiar  manner  of  operating.  1 1  is
fascinating  strangers,  in  a  promiscuous  assembly,  and
without  contact,  and  persons  who  had  ,
rized  previously,  and  this,  too,  while  in  the  delivery  o\'  his
lecture;  and  his  relief  of  pain,  and  cure  of  disease,  (and


60  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

other  phenomena,)  induced  in  persops  wide  awake,  and
without  any  previous  Mesmerizing — such  results  he  has
produced  in  the  Howard  Street  Tabernacle  and  Masonic
Temple,  and  suchas  were  never  induced  by  any  other  per-
son, here  or  elsewhere.'' — Boston  Post,  Dec.  4,  1843.

"  It  is  certainly  a  novel  sight  to  see  a  lecturer,  while
speaking  to  a  promiscuous  assembly,  exert  the  power  Mr.
Sunderland  does  over  his  auditors,  so  as  to  draw  them
from  their  seats  to  himself,  on  the  platform.' ' — Salem
Gazette,  Feb.  23,  1844.

"  Mr.  Sunderland's  mode  of  inducing  mental  phenomena
is  original,  singular  in  the  extreme,  and  entirely  different
from  anything  we  have  heretofore  seen.  While  lecturing,
and  as  he  rivets  attention  by  his  remarks,  you  will  see
some  dozen  or  twenty  persons,  whose  characters  are  irre-
proachable, in  subjection  to  his  power — spell-bound.  The
effects  produced  in  this  way  are  amusing,  indeed.'' — Salem
Gazette,  Feb.  28,  1844.

"  Mr.  Sunderland  is  the  discoverer  of  the  Psychological
truths  he  advances,  and  consequently  must  have  an  exten-
sive acquaintance  with  the  laws  which  govern  mind.  His
manner  of  operating  is  new  ;  for  while  delivering  his  lec-
tures ha  fascinates  numerous  persons  in  his  audience,  whom
he  causes  to  sing,  dance,  and  perform  on  musical  instru-
ments, indeed,  anything  that  may  suit  his  pleasure." — The
Oasis,  Nashua,  N.  II,  Hay  29,  1844.

"  Mr.  Sunderland's  Psychological  experiments  have  as-
tonished the  most  skeptical.  To  see  strong  and  able-bo-
died men  fascinated  so  as  to  be  unable  to  open  or  close  their
eyes,  or  to  move,  and  this,  too,  without  any  of  the  Mes-
merizing process,  and  while  the  lecturer  was  at  a  distance,
in  the  actual  delivery  of  his  lecture,  l^as  been,  indeed,  a
novel  sight.  The  results  produced  by  his  new  method,
are  strange,  and  some  of  them  quite  startling. — Portland
(Me.)  Bulletin,  Sept.  28,  1844.

"  Mr.  Sunderland  is  producing  a  tremendous  excitement
among  our  philosophical  circles  by  his  wonderful  illustra-
tions of  Pathetisra.  Last  evening  he  fascinated  a  dozen
or  more  ! We  cannot  look upon  the  wonderful results


ORIGINAL EXPERIMENTS.  61

produced  by  his  newly-discovered  philosophy,  without  a
shudder — that  such  marvelous,  superhuman  efforts  should
be  produced  by  such  simple,  natural  means!'' — Providence
(R.  I.)  Gazette,  Dec.  11,  1844.

Original  Experiments.

54.  Some  historical  account  of  tlie  manner  in
which  my  mind  was  put  upon  this  investigation,
and  also  some  account  of  the  phenomena  which
resulted  from  my  method  of  operating  in  public,
has  been  given.  But  as  this  question  of  method
must  be  kept  in  view  in  order  to  come  at  another,
still  higher,  in  respect  to  Use,  it  may  now  be  neces-
sary to  give  the  facts  somewhat  more  in  detail.
And  the  following  will  be  sufficient  to  show  in
what  respects  the  Idea  of  Pathetism  comprehends
all  of  Mesmerism,  and  exceeds  all  that  can  be  done
by  operating  through  one  of  the  external  senses
merely :

1.  Pathetism  operated  and  produced  all  the
results  of  Mesmerism,  without  the  labor  of  the
WILL,  or  its  peculiar  processes.  It  had  always
been  objected  to  "Animal  Magnetism/'  that  the
u  efforts"  of  the  "  will"  imposed  upon  the  operator
were  exhausting  to  his  system,  and  often  injurious.

2.  Pathetism  produces  the  same  and  more  re-
sults, without  the  labor  of  the  "  will,"  and  on  per-
sons u  wide  awake,"  while  they  are  perfectly  con-
scious of  external  relations  and  thin

3.  It  has  the  vast  advantage  of  producing  the
same  results  (not  on  one  individual),  but  on  one,
or  a  hundred,  at  the  same  time! In  one  of  my


62  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

public  Lectures  in  Philadelphia,  one  of  the  audi-
ence counted  and  announced  that  there  were  not
less  than  two  hundred  and  fifty  Fascinated  at  the
same  time !

4.  Pathetism  produces  all  the. phenomena  often,
without  requiring  any  conditions  of  the  patient;
and  it  is  the  only  theory  that  can  consistently
attempt  to  do  so.  In  "  Mesmerism"  you.  must  (at
first,  certainly)  gaze  at  the  patient,  and  take  hold
of  his  hands.  In  u  Neurology,"  you  must  touch
your  patient,  in  some  form.  So  in  "  Hypnotism,"
you  must  have  the  sense  of  sight,  and  the  patient
must  fix  his  eyes  upon  something.  But  not  so
(necessarily)  with  Pathetism ;  it  produces  results,
and  tells  how  they  are  produced,  when  no  condi-
tions whatever  are  required  of  the  patient !

5.  Pathetism  operates  without  (always)  requiring
any  conditions  from  the  attending  spectators  I  Thus
multitudes  have  been  affdtted  and  brought  com-
pletely under  my  control  while  there  has  been  any
amount  of  noise,  mirth  and  excitement  throughout
the  entire  audience.  In  thousands  of  instances  I
have  controlled  persons  "  immediately  in  their
muscular  emotions  and  mental  impressions,"  in  my
public  audiences,  when  they  (the  audience)  were
overwhelmed  with  emotion,  and  carried  almost  to
phrenzy  in  their  excitement.  In  those  cases  there
were,  there  could.be,  no  "mesmeric  passes,"  no
"  coin,"  no  "  zinc  and  copper,"  nor  any  other  object
to  gaze  at,  no  "profound  silence,"  no  "electro-re-
active conditions"  required.


ORIGINAL EXPERIMENTS.  63

6.  Pathetism  operates  on  the  entire  audience  at
one  and  the  same  time,  a  thing  never  attempted  or
done  by  any  other  theory,  old  or  new.

7.  It  operates  not  only  on  persons  in  the  a  nor-
mal" or  waking  state,  but  it  carries  them  into  the
higher  states  of  Trance  and  Ecstasy,  and  in  these
states  induces  phenomena  without  addressing  either
one  of  the  external  senses.

S.  It  dispenses  with  the  unfounded  notions  in
respect  to  the  pretended  M  electricity"  of  the
''Tractors'1  of  Perkins,  the  ''zinc' and  copper/'
"coin.''  And  when  results  are  produced  by  using
certain  substances,  as  "coin/1  or  a  piece  of  char-
coal, this  theory  shows  how  it  is  that  they  come
to  pass.

9.  The  method  of  Pathetism  compelled  persons
to  come  out  from  my  public  audiences,  and  place
themselves  on  my  platform  !  It  ma}'  be  an  i
thing  to  experiment  on  persons  after  they  have
left  the  audience,  and  seated  themselves  near  to  the
operator;  but  not  so  common  to- experiment  upon
them,  and  thus  cause  them  to  leave  their  seats,
even  before  they  had  any  suspicion  of  an  influx
exerted  over  them!

10.  And  more ! I  have,  by  Pathetism,  controlled
persons  not  only  "immediately,"  even  before  I
had taken  their  seats  in  my  public  lecture  room,
but  I  have  also Fascinated  them  at  a  distant

a  mile,  and  in  that  state have drawn  thei
hall  !

11.  Pathetism  is  original,  in  causing  one  somni-


64  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

pathist  to  perform  experiments  upon  another,  as
for  instance,  I  first  entrance  A,  then  A  entrances
B,  and  B  entrances  C,  and  so  on  from  one  to  fifty.
12.  Pathetism  is  original  in  causing  SURGEONS  to
operate  in  public,  while  both  the  surgeon  and  his  pa-
tient were  in  a  state  of"  Trance,  without  the  use  of
the  external  senses.  Dr.  H.  J.  Paine,  in  1845,  then
of  Troy,  N.  Y.  (now  at  San  Francisco),  also  Dr.
A.  L.  Hoyt,  in  Tremont  Temple,  Boston,  1846,
and  Dr.  J.  Thiers,  in  Coliseum  Hall,  New  York,
1847,  are  among  the  number  who  have  been  con-
trolled by  Pathetism  in  this  way.

Unity.

55.  In  the  theory  of  Pathetism,  then,  we  find  a
PKINCIPLE  which  runs  through  human  nature,  and
one  which  is  sufficient  to  account  for  one  and  all
of  the  phenomena  which  ever  were  or  ever  can  be
artificially  induced  in  the  nervous  system,  because
by  applying  this  same  principle  we  find  that  one
and  all  of  these  diversified  results  can  be  produced
by  addressing  the  mind  through  either  of  the  exter-
nal senses.*  After  the  relation  is  once  formed,  (79)
then  results  may  be  induced  by  the  will  force
merely.  (100*)

*  All  the  ultimate  tendencies  of  nature  are  to  unity.  A  hope
lias  been  expressed  by  the  celebrated  Faraday,  whose  researches
and  discoveries  have  raised  him  to  the  highest  rank  among  Euro-
pean philosphers,  that  he  will  yet  be  able  to  demonstrate  the  iden-
tify of  Heat,  Light,  Magnetism  and  Electricity,  or  that  these
imponderable  agencies  are  but  so  many  different  manifestations  of
one  and  the  same  force.


WHAT IS THE READER'S VERDICT?  65


What  is  tSie  Reader's  Verdict?

56.  Thus  far  in  respect  to  the  historical  aspects
of  this  subject.  The  reader  can  now  determine
for  himself,  not  merely  what  Pathetism  is,  but  in
what  respects  it  differs,  if  any,  from  preceding
methods,  and  also  whether  any  injustice  has  been
done  it  in  the  substitution  of  other  terms  signify-
ing precisely  the  same  thing.*""

*  At  a,  public  meeting  held  in  the  Tremont  Temple,  Boston,
February  6,  1850,  and  attended  by  editors,  physicians,  and  a  large
number  of  citizens,  Tyler  Parsons,  Esq.,  presided,  and  after  a  full
and  free  discussion,  the  following  resolutions  were  unanimously
adopted :

"  Whereas,  This  meeting  having  assembled  for  the  purpose  of
hearing  exposed  the  claims  of  what  has  recently  been  called  '  Elec-
trical Psychology,'  or  'Electro-Biology,'  and  which  has  been  Bet
forth  by  Rev.  Tbeopbilus  Fiske  as  a  '  newly  discovered  science,'
which,  if  is  said,  has.  been  brought  to  light  within  eighteen  months
past ;  and  whereas  the  disclosures  made  to  this  meeting  by  Mr.
George  P.  Kettell,  who  has  been  fully  instructed  in  the  so-called
1  new  science'  by  said  Mr.  Fiske,  together  with  the  documentary
evidence  laid  before  us,*  have  fully  satisfied  us  that  what  is  called
•  Electrical  Psychology,'  or  '  Electro-Biology;  is  not  a  new  science  ;
and  hence  the  demand  of  ten  dollars  for  teaching  it,  and  the
required  pledge  of  secrecy,  are  unjust,  and  an  imposition  upon  the
public.

"  Therefore  resolved,  as  the  sense  of  this  meeting,  That  what  is
called  'Electrical  Psychology,'  or  '  Electro- Biology,'  is  not  new,
either  in  theory  or  practice,  ihe  electrical  theory  of  life  having
years  ago  been  taught  by  lh:  Wilson  Phillip,  EL  H.  Sherwood,  and
others;  and  the  use  of  metals,  known  under  the  name  of  Perkins*
Tractors;  and  the  performance  of  Psychological  experiments,  with-
out what  is  called  the  '  mesmeric  process,'  on  a  nuinb*  .

*  Duuglison's  Physiology,  vol.  i.,  pp.  94  and  96 — Percira1
Medica  and Therapeutics,  vol.  3  1  authors  ther

— Harrison  on  the  Nervous  System,  p.159 — Sher  r  >wer
of  Ore  il  In-
structions, &c.,  -Pathetism,  an
Essay,  &c.,  1847. — ^i><  i


GQ  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.


PHILOSOPHICAL.

57.  In  all  systems  which!  come  under  the  gen-
eral head  of  Philosophy,  Science,  or  Theology,
it  will  be  observed,  there  is  some  one  leading  idea,
or  peculiar  characteristic  which  distinguishes  one
system  from  another.  So  in  all  treatises  upon  Men-
tal Philosophy,  each  of  which  has  had  its  receivers,
and  each  based  upon,  or  constituted  by  some  one
leading  principle  which  separates  it  from  all  others.

In  answer,  then,  to  the  question,  as  to  what  con-
stitutes the  Theory  of  Pathetism,  and  by  which  it


"while  they  were  awake,  having  been  done  in  this  city  more  than  six
years  ago  by  Mr.  LaRoy  Sunderland,  as  appears  from  the  Boston
Post  of  December  4th,  1843.

"  Resolved,  That  Mr.  George  P.  Kettell  having  been  deceived  by
the  assumptions  in  regard  to  the  'new  science,'  in  the  opinion  of  this
meeting  is  fully  absolved,  as  all  other  persons  in  similar  circum-
stances unquestionably  are,  from  all  obligations  of  '  honor'  to  keep
the  pledge  of  '  secrecy'  imposed  upon  him  in  regard  to  the  so-called
'  new  science.'

"  Resolved,  That  the  Rev.  Theophilus  Fiske,  the  teacher  of  the
so-called  'new  science,' having  failed  to  be  present  at  this  meeting,
when  respectfully  invited  to  appear  and  defend  himself;  and  as  he
also  refused  Mr.  Kettell  the  privilege  of  making  his  disclosures
before  one  of  Mr.  Fiske's  audiences  (as  Mr.  Kettell  requested  the
opportunity  of  doing),  it  is  to  us,  and  should  be  to  our  fellow-citi-
zens, sufficient  evidence  that  Mr.  Theophilus  Fiske  is  himself  con-
scious of  his  utter  inability  to  maintain  his  claims  in  regard  to  the
newness  of  the  so-called  science  of  'Electro-Biology,'  in  which
opinion  this  meeting  fully  concurs.

"Resolved,  That  this  preamble  and  these  resolutions  be  signed
by  the  Chairman,  and  offered  for  publication  in  all  our  city  papers,
With  the  request  that  they  be  copied  by  other  papers  throughout
the  country."


STATEMENT.  67

becomes  a  distinct  system  of  Mental  Philosophy,
the  following  statement  is  made  :

58.  (1.)  The  triune  of  all  things,  in  Essence,
Form  and  Use.

59.  (2.)  The  philosophy  of  Spheres,  Natural,
Human,  and  Divine.  The  qualities  of  things,  the
sources  whence  originate  all  Sympathies,  Antipa-
thies, Apathies,  Attractions,  (love)  and  Repulsions,
(hatred).

60.  (3.)  The  doctrine  of  RELATIONS,  Correspon-
dencies, Associations,  whence  originates  Power,
physical,  and  moral.*


*  Perhaps  the  leading  Idea  may  be  comprehended  in  Triune  or
Trinity.  The  theory  set  forth  in  the  works,  (the  titles  of  which  I
have  given  above,)  I  suppose  to  be  original,  only  in  a  partial  sense,
as  we  know,  that  nature's  laws  are  as  old  as  the  Universe  itself.
But,  in  nO  previous  publications,  it  is  believed,  will  they  be  found  so
distinctly  elaborated,  and  systematized,  as  in  those  I  have  named.
What  those  principles  involve  may  be  inferred  from  the  following
summary  quoted  from  Pathetism  (1S47)  p.  14.

1.  In  respect  to  the  ■peculiar  functions  of  the  nutritive  fluid.

2.  The  faculty  of  instinct,

3.  The  real  nature  of  steep.

4.  The  nature  of  pain.

5.  The  rationale  of.  pleasure  and  human  ftappii

6.  The  nature  and  causes  of  cerebral  excitements,  both  natural  and
abnormal.

7.  The  rationale  of  insensibility,  in  cases  of  induced  somnambulism.

8.  The  rationale  of  mental  and  spiritual  emotions,  volitions  and

i».  The  rationale  of  congenital  phena

10.  The  philosophy  of  m*

11.  The  true  nature  of  disease  and  health.

VI.  The  causes  of  mental  hallucinati  ^it}J>

18.  Wlui'  •  i<.

14.  The  difference  in  the
which  constitul  my.

15.  The  nature

1G.  The  causes  ihildren.

17.  The  i

IS.  The  philosophy  of  the  results  attributed  to  su2  r  mi-

raculous power.


68  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

And  thus  we  perceive  where  the  preceding  facts
center.  Man  has  three  senses,  Hearing,  Seeing,  and
Feeling  (Smell  and  Taste  are  included  in  Feeling) ;
so  the  same  results  may  be  induced,  (awake  or  en-
tranced) by  addressing  one,  or  all  of  these  senses.
And,  then,  after  the  Eelation  has  been  once  es-
tablished through  the  external  senses,  then,  and
not  till  then,  results  may  be  induced  merely  by  vo-
lition.

Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  with  a  little  more
minuteness,  the  rationale  of  their  induction.

Spheres.

61.  As  the  term  Sphere  has  an  important  and
comprehensive  signification  in  this  philosophy,  it
may  be  necessary  to  give  to  it  some  attention  here :

1.  It  signifies  not  merely  a  perfect  globe,  or  body,
which  is  in  every  part,  equally  distant  from  a  point
called  its  center,  but,  also,  the  extent,  or  circuit  of
motion,  peculiar  to  any  given  body.

2.  The  extent,  or  circuit  of  hnoivledge,  peculiar  to
individuals.

3.  Rank,  or  order  of  society,  by  which  the  rela-
tive position  of  one  to  another  is  determined.


19.  The  rationale  of  the  effects  attributed  to  talismans,  amulets,
charms,  &c.

20.  The  rationale  of  sympathy.

21.  Muscular  motion.

22.  The  connection  between  instinct,  the  nutr itive  fluid,  and  the
'Jin i a 1 1 lb  in hi<l.

23.  The  difference  in  the  instinctive,  ingestive,  retentive,  and  exclu-
sive emotions,  volitions,  and  actions  of  the  human  mind.

24.  Connection  between  memory  and  the  nutritive  fluid.

25.  The  rationale  of  the  "  Vis  medicatrix  naturce." —


SPHERES.  69

4.  The  extent,  or  circuit  of  that  which  proceeds
from  any  body  or  substance,  the  whole  of  the  in-
fluence exerted  from  or  by  any  one.  Bach  indivi-
dual, every  animal,  and  every  plant  in  the  vege-
table kingdom,  every  mineral  even,  has  a  sphere
of  its  own. Swedenborg  says  : —

;'  Sympathies  and  antipathies  are  nothing  else,  than
exhalations  of  affections,  from  minds  which  affect  one
another,  according  to  similitudes,  and  excite  aversion  ac-
cording to  dissimilitudes.  These,  although  they  are  innu-
merable, and  are  not  sensibly  perceived  by  any  sense  of
the  body,  are  yet  perceived  by  the  sense  of  the  soul,  as
one,  and,  according  to  them,  all  conjunctions  and  conso-
ciations in  the  spiritual  world  are  made." — T.  C.  R.  305.

"  Spiritual  spheres  encompass  all  spirits  and  societies  of
spirits  flowing  forth  from  the  life  of  the  affections,  and
of  the  thoughts  thence  derived.  Wherefore,  if  the  affec-
tions be  contrary,  collision  takes  place,  whence  comes  anx-
iety."—A  C.  10,  312.

"  A  sphere  diffuses  itself,  not  only  from  angels  and
spirits,  but  also,  from  all  and  each  of  the  things  which
appear  in  that  world,  as  from  the  trees  and  from  their
fruits  there,  from  shrubs,  and  from  their  flowers,  from
herbs  and  from  grapes,  yen,  from  earth,  and  from  every
thing  of  them  ; — this  is  universal,  as  well  in  things  living
as  dead,  that  everything  is  surrounded  by  something  simi-
lar to  that  which  is  within  it,  and  that  this  is  continually
exhaled  from  it  ; — a  continual  stream  of  effluvia,  flows
forth  from  a  man,  also  from  every  animal,  and  likewise
from  trees,  fruits,  shrubs,  flowers,  'yea,  from  metals  and
stones."— D.  L.  &  B.  W.  291-293.

"There flows  forth,  yea,  overflows  from every  man a
spiritual  sphere,  derived  from the  affections  of  his love,
which  encompasses  him,  and  infuses  itself  into  the  nat
sphere)  derived  from  the  body,  so  that  the  tw<
conjoined. That  a  natural sphere  i> continually  flowing
forth.,  not  only  from  man,  but  also  from  beasts,  yea,  from


70  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

trees,  fruits,  flowers,  and  also  from  metals,  is  a  thing  gene-
rally'known."—  C.  L.  171.

Every  spirit,  and  still  more  every  society  of  spirits  has
its  own  sphere  proceeding  from  the  principles  and  persua-
sions imbibed,  which  is  the  sphere  of  those  principles  and
persuasions.  The  sphere  of  principles  and  persuasions,  is
such,  that  when  it  acts  upon  another,  it  causes  truths  to
appear  like  falses,  and  calls  forth  all  sorts  of  confirmatory
arguments,  so  as  to  induce  the  belief  that,  things  false  are
true,  and  that  things  evil  are  good.  Hence  it  may  appear
how  easily  man  may  be  confirmed  in  falses  and  evils,  un-
less he  believe  the  truths  which  are  from  the  Lord. —
A.  C.  15,  10.

Idiosyncrasies.

62. The  following  testimony  is  from  Dr.  M.
Good :

"  We  occasionally  meet  among  mankind,  with  a  sort  of
sensation  altogether  wonderful  and  inexplicable.  There
are  some  persons  so  peculiarly  affected  by  the  presence  of
a  particular  object,  that  is  neither  seen,  tasted,  heard,
smelt  or  touched,  as  not  only  to  be  conscious  of  its  pres-
ence, but  to  be  in  agony  till  it  is  removed.  The  vicinity
of  a  cat  not  urifrequently  produces  such  an  effect,  and  I
have  been  a  witness  to  the  most  decisive  proofs  of  this  in
several  instances."

I  knew  a  person  who  was  so  much  affected  with
the  smell  of  onions,  as  to  be  unable  to  remain  in
the  house  where  they  were;  and  it  is  said,  Henry
the  Third,  of  France,  could  not  endure  the  pres-
ence of  a  cat.  Lord  Chancellor  Bacon  fell  down
in  a  fit  whenever  there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  moon,
the  philosopher  Boyle  could  not  endure  the  sound
of  water  drawn  from  a  cock.  Erasmus  trembled
at  the  smell  or  sight  of  fish ;  Marshall  D' Albert


IDIOSYNCRASIES.  71

fainted  at  the  sight  of  a  sucking  pig  ;  La  Molie  In
Voyer  could  not  endure  the  sound  of  music;  and
Shakspeare  speaks  of  some  person  in  his  day  who
could  not  endure  the  sound  of  the  bagpipe.  The
celebrated  astronomer  Brahe,  was  totally  paralyzed
in  his  limbs  at  the  sight  of  a  live  hare ;  and  we
have  known  intelligent  persons  who  could  not  en-
dure the  sight  of  a  rat.  Some  persons  are  pecu-
liarly affected  on  touching  certain  kinds  of  metals,
and  others  are  affected  in  the  same  way  if  they
touch  them  only  with  their  thoughts.  An  intelli-
gent lady  of  my  acquaintance  had  such  an  antipa-
thy to  spiders,  that  for  eight  years  she  retained  the
sense  of  disgust  and  horror,  which  it  gave  her,  on
finding  one  upon  her  person.

Now,  it  is  quite  certain,  that  these  states  of  feeling
do  not  depend  upon  the  judgment,  but  they  must
have  their  origin  in  the  peculiarity  of  the  physical
nature  of  each  person.  So  it  is  in  common  life.
There  is  a  sphere  surrounding  every  individual,  and
which  you  perceive  at  once,  when  you  approach
him.  On  the  first  sight  of  one  person,  you  feel  in-
stinctively repelled,  and  you  do  not  find  it  possible
to  feel  pleased  with  being  near  to  him,  or  to  delight
in  his  company.  But  with  another  person  you  are
delighted  at  once.  You  feel  an  attachment  to  him,
for  which  you  can  render  no  reason  at  all,  no  more
than  you  could  for  the  antipathy  you  felt  for  the
other.  All  our  feelings  of  love,  friendship,  and  dis-
like, are  founded  on  these  peculiarities  of  our  na-
ture.


72  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.


Reici&eiib£Lc'h'§  Experiments.

63.  Perhaps  no  author  since  Swedenborg  has
done  more  towards  demonstrating  this  doctrine  as  to
the  spheres  of  plry sical  bodies  than  Baron  Eeichen-
bach*

Bat,  then,  I  am  satisfied  that  his  work  is  liable
to  mislead,  and  therefore,  should  be  read  with  great
caution.  This  difficulty  consists  in  the  following
facts : —

geia§itives.

64.  (1.)  With  but  a  very  small  exception,  all  of
Keichenbach's  experiments  were  performed  through
the  nervous  systems  of  a  peculiar  class  of  people
v/hom  he  denominated  sensitives.

Individualities.

65.  (2.)  Hence,  though  there  may  be  some  appa-
rent uniformity  in  the  results  which  he  developed
from  his  "  sensitives, "  yet,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,
that  Reichenbach's  own  nervous  or  mental  sphere
entered  into  those  experiments,  and  necessarily
served  to  modify  them  in  some  form  or  other.  A
similar  remark  might  be  made  on  the  experiments
made  by  Dr.  Buchanan,  and  the  same  may  be  said
of  experiments  made  by  any  man  or  woman,  when
they  are  performed  through  the  nervous  systems
of  one  or  more  individuals.

*  Physico-Physiological  Researchf33  on  the  Dynamics  of  Magnet-
ism, Electricity,  <fcc.


POPULAR  EXCITEMENTS.  73

The  sphere  of  the  operator  may,  and  often  does,
direct,  modify  and  control  the  whole  ! !  In  cases,
therefore,  where  certain  results  are  expected  by  the
operator,  or  by  his  patients,  and,  which  depend
upon  the  nervous  susceptibilities  of  either  party,
we  must  bear  in  mind,  how  much  these  results  may
vary,  and  with  how  much  caution  we  should  de-
duce conclusions  from  such  experiments,  as  apply-
ing, always,  to  physical  bodies.

Popular  Excitements.

66.  (3.)  It  is  manifest,  from  this  law,  which  has
its  origin  in  the  Idiosyncrasy  or  sphere  of  different
"  preachers  of  the  gospel,"  that  what  have  been  call-
ed "  revivals  of  religion,"  have  always  had  certain
characteristics,  depending  on  the  views  of  the  leaders
by  whom  they  were  "  got  up."  Thus,  persons  who
were  "  converted"  under  the  preaching  of  John
Wesley,  generally  went  through  a  certain  routine
of  "feelings"  and  "exercises,"  as  all  have  done,
who  have  been  since  "  converted"  under  the  labors
of  Wesley's  followers.  But,  those  attracted  by  the
writings  of  Emanuel  Swedenborg  are  "  converted"
by  a  different  process  ;  and  a  similar  remark  might
be  made  of  "  revivals"  among  the  "  Baptists,"  "  Pres-
byterians," and  "  Mormons ;"  and,  indeed,  of  par-
ticular "  revivals"  or  "conversions"  under  different
preachers  ; — they  are,  always,  in  some  respect,  char*
acteristic,  both  of  the  men  by  whose  spheres  or  in-
fluences they  are  got  up,  and  the  sectarian  views  by
which  they  are  governed. Hence,  we may  see

4


74  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

John  Wesley  in  a  Methodist  "  revival."  We  see
George  Fox  in  the  Quaker  meeting  and  costume ;
Ann  Lee,  in  the  Shaker  habits,  and  the  preacher,
or  founder  of  the  sect,  always,  in  his  followers,  and
in  the  "  experience"  the  views  and  feelings  of  all
who  are  converted  by  their  labors.  In  the  nature
of  things,  it  must  be  so.  Each  one  has  his  pecu-
liar sphere,  within  which  he  will  bring  as  many  oth-
ers as  he  finds  congenial  with  himself,  and  the  in-
fluence he  exerts  over  them,  will  distinguish  him
and  them  from  all  others,  who  are  influenced  by
another  sphere,  essentially,  or  altogether  different.*

Misnomer  ?

67.  (4.)  While,  therefore,  it  is  admitted,  that
Eeichenbach's  experiments  do  much  towards  illus-
trating the  high  susceptibilities  of  certain  temperaments,
they  do  but  little  towards  demonstrating  any  thing
like  physical  force,  eliminated  from  physical  bodies.f

*  And  in  these  laws  we  find  the  reasons  for  that  caution  which
all  should  exercise  before  submitting  their  minds  to  the  influences  ex-
ercised by  another.  In  each,  there  are  certain  leading  traits  of  char-
acter, which  they  communicate.  In  one,  We  may  perceive  the  cles-
tructiveness  of  the  tiger ;  in  another,  the  cunning  of  the  fox ;  an-
other, the  secretiveness  of  tiie  cat ;  another,  {he  fidelity  of  the  dog  ;
another,  the  self-esteem  of  the  peacock ;  another,  the  stubbornness  of
the  donkey ;  and  so  of  the  swine,  the  goat,  the  lion,  the  horse,  &c.
We  should  be  attracted  by  those  who  are  above  us  in  goodness  and
truth.

\  Reichenbach,  (and  after  him  many  others)  speak3  of  what  he
calls  the  "  odic  force  /"  But,  why  call  that  which  is  merely  an  elim-
ination, a  force  f  If  that  which  is  eliminated,  can  produce  no
change  in  other  bodies,  why  call  it  a  "force  f '


SPHERES OF PHYSICAL  BODIES.  75

In  one  case  (p.  35)  he  details  an  experiment  which
seems  to  prove,  that  force  issued  from  a  magnet,
which  affected  an  iodized  silver  plate,  in  a  perfectly
dark  room,  during  the  space  of  sixty-four  hours ;
and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  he  did  not  perform
more  experiments  of  the  same  kind,  nor  that  he
does  not  tell  us,  precisely,  what  distance  the  mag-
net was  placed  from  the  plate.  The  magnetic  forces
affect  metals,  we  know ;  but  whether  it  was  light,
eliminated  from  that  magnet  which  affected  that
iodized  plate,  does  not  by  any  means  appear.

Spliere§  of  Physical  Bodies.

68.  (5.)  Giving  so  very  large  a  number  of  exper-
iments performed  entirely  on  nervous  or  "  sensitive"
persons,  by  the  spheres  of  magnets,  crystals,  &c.,
the  common  reader  would  be  led  to  infer,  that  all
physical  bodies  have  such  spheres,  as  to  give  off  phys-
ical FOECES,  which  can  produce  changes  in  other
physical  bodies.  But  this  inference  does  not  follow,
for  Eeichenbach,  himself,  says  (p.  226)  that  what
he  calls  the  od,  (or  what  Swedenborg  calls  the
sphere,)  which  is  given  off  from  all  physical  bodies,
affects  nothing  except  what  is  like  it. He  says  : —

a  All  odic  flame  may  be  made  to  flicker  by  currents  of
air,  be  diverted,  caused  to  move,  blow  about,  and  broken
up  by  blowing  on  it.  Meeting  with  solid  bodies,  it  bends
around  them,  follows  their  surface,  and  streams  forward
on  them,  like  flames  of  common  fire.  We  can  give  it
any  direction  we  please." — P.  226.


76  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

Testimony  of  "  SensitiTes.95

69.  But  even  this  testimony  does  not  amount  to
what  we  want,  inasmuch  as  all  that  is  here  stated,
is  taken  from  the  lips  of  the  "  Sensitives,"  whom
the  Baron  caused  to  see  what  he  describes  !  If  the
properties  of  physical  bodies  may  be  determined
from  the  testimony  of  a  certain  class  of  "  Sensi-
tives," whose  nervous  systems,  or  whose  minds  are
affected  by  them,  or  by  what  they  think  (76.)  about
them,  then,  from  similar  testimony,  we  can  prove
all  the  stories  that  have  been  told  of  ghosts,  appa-
ritions, and  communications  said  to  have  been  re-
ceived by  such  persons  from  the  spiritual  world.*

*  Reichenbach,  without  having  designed  anything  like  a  pun
upon  the  word  od,  or  odd,  which  is  the  term  he  applies  to  designate
the  spheres  of  different  substances,  has,  nevertheless,  shown  mani-
festly that  he  is  dependent  upon  the  testimony  of  an  odd  class  of
people  for  the  truth  of  what  he  affirms.  For  instance,  he  gives  the
following  account  of  them : —

"These  are  the  persons  who  are  generally  regarded  as  capricious
and  whimsical ;  who  cannot  bear  the  color  of  yellow,  while  more  than
others  they  love  the  color  of  blue  ;  who  hate  to  look  at  themselves  in
a  glass  ;  who  will  not  sit  on  the  middle  of  a  bench  with  others,  but
insist  on  having  the  corner  seat*  who  cannot  sleep  on  the  leftside  :
who  cannot  eat  with  a  spoon  or  fork  of  German  silver,  or  of  any  com-
position made  to  imitate  silver ;  who  cannot  eat  warm,  much  cooked,
fat  or  sweet  food,  but  have  a  passion  for  sour  dishes  ;  who  dislike  the
heat  of  an  iron  stove,  while  they  will  bear  an  even  greater  heat  from
one  of  clay  or  porcelain;  who,  in  an  omnibus  or  railroad  car,  insist
on  having  the  windows  open,  no  matter  what  the  weather  may  be,
and  no  matter  whether  their  fellow  travelers  fear  colds  and  rheuma-
tism or  not ;  who  cannot  bear  to  have  any  one  behind  their  chair,  and
do  not  like  to  shake  hands ;  who  are  subject  to  the  influence  of  the
moon,  and  shun  its  light  as  disagreeable,"  <fcc.  &c.

Now,  as  long  as  we  know,  that  from  this  class  of  people  you  may
bring  out  almost  any  kind  of  "  experiments "  you  please,  and  con-
firmatory of  any  theory,  we  cannot  allow  the  weight  to  Reichen-
bach's  assumptions  which  he,  himself,  seems  to  attach  to  them.


TESTIMONY OF "SENSITIVES."  77

(6.)  The  conclusion  we  come  to,  then,  is  this ;
that  physical  qualities  must  be  demonstrated  by
physical  results;  nervous  qualities  by  nervous  re-
sults, and  mental  qualities  or  spheres  by  mental
phenomena.  True,  we  may  be  able  to  form  just
conclusions,  in  respect  to  physical  bodies,  from  the
effects  they  produce  on  the  minds  or  nervous  sys-
tems of  "  Sensitives,"  but  the  process  must  be  very
slow,  as  it  is  attended  with  many  difficulties.  It  is
an  easy  matter  indeed  to  demonstrate  whether  a
person  is  what  Reichenbach  calls  a  "Sensitive,"  or
not ;  and  so  we  may  succeed  in  proving  far  more
as  to  the  ever-varying  susceptibilities  of  the  nervous
system,  than  we  can  as  to  the  inherent  properties  of
the  substances  which  may  be  made  to  operate  upon
them.  Reichenbach  commences  his  Treatise  with
the  following  remark  : —

"  If  a  strong  magnet,  capable  of  supporting  ten  pounds,
be  drawn  downwards  over  the  bodies  of  fifteen  or  twenty
persons,  without  actually  touching  them,  some  among
them  will  always  be  found  to  be  excited  by  it,  in  a  peculiar
manner."

Undoubtedly ;  and  similar  results  would  follow,
if  you  passed  a  piece  of  chalk  down  their  backs,
provided  they  believed  it  was  a  magnet.  Or,  still
better,  blindfold  the  "  fifteen  or  twenty  persons,"
and  do  nothing  to  them,  but  cause  them  to  believe
you  are  passing  a  powerful  magnet  down  their
backs,  and  you  will  find  the  results  generally  the
same.


BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.


Spheres  of  Mental  Bodies*

70.  (7.)  In  order  to  comprehend,  then,  how  it  is
that  one  mind  controls  another,  we  must  remem-
ber that  every  mind  has  its  sphere,  in  a  higher
sense,  than  can  be  said  of  physical  bodies.  And,
the  lower  the  organism,  the  lower  its  sphere.

Spheres  affect  spheres  according  to  their  chemical,
mental,  or  spiritual  affinities.  So  it  is  said  the  sphere
of  this  Earth  affects  other  globes,  or  is  affected  by
them.  The  sphere  of  the  sun  is  determined  by
the  extent  and  power  of  its  heat  and  light.  The
spheres  of  two  minds  assimilate  or  unite,  according
to  their  mental  affinities,  or  are  repelled  by  their
inherent  antipathies,  over  which  neither  of  them
may  have  much,  if  any,  control.

And  the  allusion  to  the  Earth  and  the  Heavenly
Bodies  may  suggest  an  idea  with  regard  to  space,
which  should  be  understood  in  order  to  compre-
hend how  it  is  that  one  mind  may  affect  another  at  a
distance.  The  spheres  of  all  bodies  determine  the
influence  they  have  upon  one  another,  whatever
the  distance  may  be,  or  rather  the  distance  is  de-
termined by  their  spheres.  As  the  mind,  there-
fore, ascends  in  the  scale  of  existence,  its  sphere
annihilates  (so  to  speak)  space  ;  and  hence  it  is,
that  qualities  or  states  cannot  be  measured  by  space.
What  does  Love,  Goodness,  Joy,  Hope,  know  of
space?  And  if  these  states  exist  without  any
reference  to  space,  so  may  intuition  and  the  know-
ing faculties  of  the  mind. Or,  if  we  can  under-


SYMPATHETIC IMITATION.  79

stand  the  subject  better,  we  may  contemplate  the
spheres  of  physical  bodies  as  the  media  through
which  they  are  perceived.  And  so  the  spheres  of
animal  bodies  may  be  the  medium  through  which
they  affect  one  another,  and  the  sphere  of  the
mind,  the  medium  through  which  its  knowledge
is  obtained.  And  this  leads  us  to  other  laws  of  the
nervous  system,  which  we  may  now  proceed  to
contemplate.

Sympathetic  Imitation.

71.  This  doctrine  of  the  spheres  or  the  qualities
of  things  explains  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  cer-
tain persons  may  be  compelled  to  imitate  whatever
they  see  done,  or  may  be  induced  to  feel,  or  see,  or
do  whatever  may  be  suggested  to  them,  or  they  may
have  any  conception  of.  And  this  very  susceptibility
to  sympathetic  imitation  in  certain  persons,  was
described  more  than  two  hundred  years  ago.

"  Men,  if  they  see  but  another  man  tremble,  giddy,  or
sick  of  some  fearful  disease,  their  apprehensions  and  fear
are  so  strong  in  this  kind,  that  they  will  have  such  a  dis-
ease. Or,  if  by  some  soothsayer,  wise  man,  fortune-teller,
or  physician,  [or  lecturer],  they  be  told  they  shall  have
such  a  disease,  they  will  so  seriously  apprehend  it  that
they  will  instantly  labor  of  it.  If  it  be  told  them  that
they  shall  be  sick  on  such  a  day,  when  that  day  comes
they  will  surely  be  sick,  and  will  be  so  terribly  afflicted
that  sometimes  they  will  die  upon  it*


*  Burton's  Anat.  MeL,  vol.  1,  p.  221.


80  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

Mental  Contagion.

72.  If  one  person  is  said  to  see  a  ghost,  it  not
unfrequently  happens  that  a  sensibility  is  awakened
in  the  minds  of  many  others,  till  the  infection  has
spread,  and  ghosts  are  multiplied  in  proportion  to
the  susceptibility  of  the  people  who  happen  to  hear
the  strange  details  of  the  departed  spirits.  So,  if
one  in  a  family,  or  neighborhood,  happens  to  have
a  singular  dream,  it  is  followed  with  others  of  the
same  kind.  In  a  word,  whatever  is  related  to  the
strange  or  marvelous,  whatever  is  calculated  to
excite  credulity  or  fear,  operates  by  sympathy,  and
in  this  way  we  may  easily  account  for  the  preva-
lence of  many  crimes,  and  the  various  forms  of
delusion,  which  have,  from  time  to  time,  so  much
disturbed  and  cursed  the  world.

There  is  a  kind  of  contagion,  purely  mental,  so
to  speak ;  there  is  a  peculiar  aptitude  in  minds,
and  society,  to  assume  a  peculiar  train  of  thought,
or  feeling,  grave  or  gay,  as  the  circumstances  may
dictate.  The  convulsions  among  the  children  in
the  Poor  House  at  Haarlem,  under  the  inspection
of  Boerhaave,  were  caused  and  cured  by  these
laws.

Mr.  Powers'*  details  the  particulars  of  a  family
in  Chelmsford,  Mass.,  where  one  of  the  children
was  affected  with  cholera,  and  five  others  exercised
themselves  in imitating  his odd gestures,  until

*  Influence  of  the  Imagination  on  the  Nervous  System.


SECTARIAN MANIA.  81

every  one  of  them  was  irresistibly  affected  in  the
same  way.  And  the  spell  was  not  broken  until
the  father,  one  day,  brought  in  a  block  and  axe,
and  sternly  threatened  to  take  off  the  head  of  the
first  child  who  should  exhibit  any  more  of  those
singular  gestures.

Dr.  Haygarth  gives  a  similar  account  of  the
effects  of  sympathy,  which  took  place  in  1796,
among  some  peasants  in  the  Island  of  Anglesey.
It  commenced  with  one  female,  and  in  a  short  time
extended  to  some  twenty  others.  And  a  similar
account  is  given  by  Eev.  Mr.  Archibald,  of  Unst.*
He  says,  at  first  the  affection  commenced  with  a
female ;  but  on  her  manifesting  the  affection  at
church,  it  was  immediately  communicated  to  others.
And  in  another  parish,  some  sixty  persons  were
seized  in  the  same  way  ;  and  being  carried  out  and
laid  in  the  yard,  they  would  struggle  and  roar  with
all  their  might,  for  five  or  ten  minutes,  and  then
rise  up  without  remembering  anything  that  had
happened  to  them.

Sectarian  Mania.

73.  Affections  of  the  same  kind  prevailed  among
the  Anabaptists  in  Germany,  and  the  French
Prophets  in  Dauphiny,  and  in  England  ;  and  after
them  the  Quakers,  and  also  among  the  Puritans  of
New  England,  in  1745,  and  more  recently  among
the  Methodists,  Baptists,  Presbyterians,  and  espe-
cially among  the  Mormons. Nor  are  these  affeo-


*  Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  vol.  iii,  p.  438.
4*


82  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

tions  confined  to  Protestant  sects  ;  they  have  been
equally  prevalent  among  the  Papists,  and,  indeed,
"among  those  who  are  not  religiously  disposed.  I
have  been  informed  of  similar  affections  among  the
Mahometans.  A  gentleman  who  has  been  among
them  during  seasons  of  prayer,  states,  that  for  some
time  he  had  seen  some  of  them  convulsed,  and
they  would  emit  a  kind  of  froth  at  the  mouth.
Those  less  favored,  would  take  this  foam  from  the
mouths  of  their  companions,  and  by  rubbing  it
upon  their  own  bodies,  would  thus  excite  a  similar
state  of  feeling  and  action  in  themselves.

Diseases  Caused  fry  Sympathy  •

74.  That  the  affections  above  described,  were
communicated  by  the  laws  of  sympathetic  imitation,
there  can  be  no  doubt.  And  it  would  be  equally
easy  to  show,  that  many  diseases  deemed  conta-
gious, have  been  communicated  in  the  same  way.
The  history  of  the  Asiatic  Cholera  would  as  plainly
demonstrate  the  truth  of  this  position,  as  it  would
prove  that  any  such  disease  ever  existed.  In  1821,
cholera  so  raged  in  Bankok  that  in  a  short  time
4000  persons  died.  The  king  appointed  his  nobles,
priests  and  astrologers,  to  ascertain  the  cause  of
this  scourge.  After  a  long  and  very  solemn  inves-
tigation, it  was  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the
council  that  it  was  produced  by  an  evil  spirit  that
visited  their  shore  in  the  shape  of  a  fish,  and  that
it  was  only  necessary  to  fire  their  guns  to  get  rid
of the monster. Accordingly the inhabitants


FANATICISM FROM SYMPATHY.  83

assembled  in  masses  on  the  beach  with  their  guns,
which  they  continued  firing  for  some  time,  but
without  effect,  as  of  those  who  were  collected  oil
the  beach,  700  died  there.

Crimes  from  Sympathy.

75.  And  the  same  might  be  said  of  other  diseases
and  affections,  both  mental  and  physical,  which  are
frequently  known  to  gain  upon  individuals,  fami-
lies, neighborhoods,  and  generally  whole  districts
of  country.  Sometimes  an  enormous  crime  will  be
committed ;  and  its  flagrancy  excites  a  kind  of  sus-
ceptibility in  the  mind  of  another,  until  it  has  been
followed  by  a  dozen  or  more  of  the  same  kind.*

Fanaticism  from  Sympathy.

76.  If  one  person  makes  a  profession  of  having
been  "  magnetized  by  spirits,"  the  idea  impresses
others  in  the  same  way,  and  thus  convulsions,  jerks,
fits,  and  the  like  have  been  known  to  spread  from  one
family  and  one  neighborhood  to  another,  till  innu-
merable multitudes  have  become  "obseped"  with

*  Some  of  the  above  language  is  from  my  larger  work,  a  fact
which,  perhaps,  I  ought  to  mention  here,  lest  it  might  be  supposed
it  had  found  its  way  into  these  pages,  from  the  writings  of  my
friend,  Mr.  A.  J.  Davis,  without  the  usual  signs  of  credit.  Compare
"The  Great  Hannonia,"  (1852),  vol.  iii,  pp.  92,  93,  90.  101,  102,  and
136,  with  Pathetfem,  (1847),  pp.  74,75, 105, 102, 101, and  111,  page
with  page,  in  the  order  here  set  down.  To  be  sure,  the  matter  is
of  no  consequence  at  all,  except  in  BO  far  as  it  may  render  me  liable
to  the  suspicion  of  having  quoted  from  Mr.  1>.,  without  credit,  when
I  am  merely  using  my  own  language,


84  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

the  same  impressions,  however  wild  and  absurd
those  impressions  may  prove  to  be.

Tlie  "Relation."

77.  To  understand  fully  the  laws  of  association,
or  the  source  whence  one  mind  acquires  power
over  another,  we  must  bear  in  mind  what  has  been
said  of  the  spheres  or  qualities  of  different  minds.
This  will  prepare  us  to  comprehend  what  is  meant
by  that  Kelation  upon  which  all  power  depends.
This  relation  must,  of  course,  take  its  character  and
extent  from  the  spheres  in  which  two  different  minds
are  developed,  and  from  the  sympathetic,  imitative
susceptibilities  of  one  of  the  parties.

If  the  brain  is  affected  by  the  stomach,  or  vice
versa,  it  is  because  they  sustain  a  peculiar  relation
to  each  other,  and  so  of  every  effect  which  comes
to  pass,  throughout  universal  nature.  Two  things
must  not  only  exist,  before  the  third  is  produced,
but  there  must  be  a  relation  brought  about  between
them ;  for,  without  this,  there  can  be  no  cause,  no
effect  of  any  kind.  Some  results  may  require  more
than  two  things  to  be  combined,  but  it  is  a  fact  so
well  known,  that  no  effect  of  any  kind  can  be  pro-
duced without  a  relation  first  established  between
an  agent  and  a  substance  to  be  acted  upon,  that
we  need  not  stop  here  to  argue  this  point.  It  is
one  of  those  self-evident  truths,  which  everywhere
first  meets  the  opening  senses  of  the  human  mind,
and  therefore  is  no  more  susceptible  of  proof  than
one's  own  consciousness  of  thinking,  speaking,  or


ILLUSTRATION.  85

acting.  It  will  be  sufficient,  therefore,  if  I  merely,
in  this  connection,  add  what  may  be  necessary  to
show  how  this  first  law  of  nature  applies  to  the
subject  now  under  consideration.

Illustration.

78.  If  you  take  two  pieces  of  soft,  smooth  iron,
and  apply  them  together,  you  will  discover  no  at-
traction between  them.  But  if  you  rub  one  upon
the  other,  lengthwise,  in  one  direction,  only  for  a  few
minutes,  you  will  perceive  a  mutual  attraction  be-
tween them.  Now,  we  say  this  attraction  depends
on  the  relation  established  between  those  two  pieces
of  iron,  by  bringing  them  in  contact  in  that  pecu-
liar manner.  For  if  you  merely  rub  one  upon  the
other,  as  in  the  process  of  filing,  no  effects  of  this
kind  are  produced.  So,  if  you  take  an  ordinary
iron  rod,  and  hold  it  horizontally,  on  applying  the
needle  it  will  not  show  any  signs  of  polarity ;  but
hold  the  rod,  for  a  time,  perpendicularly  to  the
earth,  and  it  acquires  polarity,  so  as  to  affect  the
needle.  The  reason  to  be  assigned  for  this,  is,  that
in  the  one  case,  the  rod  sustains  a  relation  to  the
earth,  from  which  its  polarity  is  derived,  which  it
does  not  sustain  in  the  other.  Zinc  and  copper
produce  no  galvanic  effect,  till  a  relation  is  estab-
lished between  them  by  a  suitable  fluid.

So  we  say  of  light  and  heat,  No  effects  are
produced  by  the  sun  until  his  influence  is  extended
to  the  earth,  and  a  certain  relation  must  be  brought
about  between  the  earth  and  the  sun,  before  the


86  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

process  of  vegetation  is  commenced  ;  and  not  then,
even,  unless  the  sun  is  brought  in  contact  with
earth  of  a  certain  quality.

All  chemical  results  come  to  pass,  from  relations
established  between  two  or  more  substances;  and
the  effects  depend  always  upon  the  spheres  or  quali-
ties of  the  bodies  which  are  brought  together.  This
law  is  universal.  True,  when  you  bring  two  poles
of  the  same  denomination  in  contact,  a  result  is
produced,  but  it  is  of  a  negative  character :  they
mutually  repel  or  destroy  each  other.  But,  to
bring  about  a  positive  result,  to  change  the  state
of  one  substance  or  body,  it  must  be  brought  into
relation  with  another  of  an  opposite  quality, — that
is,  one  must  be  positive  in  respect  to  the  other,
which  is  negative.  One  is  ACTIVE,  the  other  is  pas-
sive.-

Power  of  Habit.

79.  (2.)  This  relation  is  increased  by  habit,  and
sometimes  acquires  supreme  control  over  the  mind.
This  fact  explain?  how  it  is  that  some  persons  are
made  sick  by  the  mere  thought  of  an  emetic.  The
mind  having  become  accustomed  to  the  effects  pro-
duced by  the  drug,  the  mere  sight  or  thought  of  it
calls  up  this  relation,  and  the  sickness  follows.  So,
when  the  mind  becomes  habituated  to  the  effects
of  any  other  medicine,  or  any  peculiar  process  for
the  production  of  certain  results  ;  it  is  often  effected
by  this  relation  in  the  same  way.  (93.)

Instance  the  condition  of  one  confirmed  in  habits
of  intoxication. While  the  rum-bottle  is  out  of


POWER OF FAITH.  87

sight,  he  remains  quiet  and  sober ;  but  on  merely-
seeing  the  vessel  from  which  he  has  so  often
quaffed  the  bewitching  liquid,  his  susceptibility  is
awakened  at  once,  and  his  desire  for  it  again  be-
comes ungovernable,  till  he  is  carried  into  the  vor-
tex of  destruction.

What  is  called  the  "  association  of  ideas/'  is  at-
tributable to  this  same  power.  The  sight  of  one
object  calls  up  another,  with  which  it  had  become
associated.

The  first  note  of  a  well-known  tune,  brings  to
mind  the  entire  piece  of  music.  Cases  of  severe
tooth-ache  have  often  been  cured  by  the  mere  sight
of  the  forceps.  Persons  injured  by  fright,  in  cases
of  fire,  or  great  danger,  are  sometimes  alarmed  on
hearing  similar  sounds,  or  merely  seeing  any  place
or  object  which  brings  the  scene  again  before  the
mind.  Some  will  sink  into  "a  state  of  trance,  by
merely  sitting  in  the  chair  where  they  have  been
often  entranced  before ;  and  the  sight  of  any  place,
where  the  mind  has  been  peculiarly  impressed,  re-
vives the  same  feelings,  and  we  live  over  again  the
scenes  which,  otherwise,  had  remained  entirely  ob-
literated from  recollection.

Power  of  Faith.

80.  (3.)  This  relation,  in  some  cases,  seems  to  dep
wholly  upon  the  belief  as  to  its  nature,  and  the  mind
transfers  it  from  one  object  to  another, — That  the  mind
has this power, is  proved  by  innumerable  facts.
How  else  did  it  come  to  pass,  that  the  opiate  given


88  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

by  Dr.  Gregory,  operated  according  to  what  the
patient  thought  it  was,  and  not  according  to  its  real
nature  ?  How  else  did  it  come  to  pass,  that  Sir
W.  Ellis'  patient  was  salivated  with  bread  pills  ?
Indeed,  almost  every  practitioner  of  any  consider-
able experience,  will  be  found  able  to  refer  to  cases
of  the  same  kind,  when  the  effects  of  medicine
have  been  just  in  proportion  to  the  apprehensions
or  faith  of  the  patient,  and  not  according  to  their
well-known  medical  properties.*  It  was  this  law
of  the  human  mind  which  hilled  the  man  who
thought  himself  bleeding  to  death.  He  was  blind-
folded, and  told  that  a  vein  in  his  arm  had  been
opened  for  the  purpose  of  bleeding  him  to  death.
He  heard  a  stream  of  water  running  into  a  bowl,
which  he  took  to  be  the  blood  from  his  veins ;  and
in  a  short  time  he  fainted  and  died.  Such  is  the
FORCE  of  association,  and  the  power  of  this  law,
when  once  fastened  upon  the  human  mind.

*  Pathetism,  1843.


PAHENTAL.  89


PK  ACTIO  AL.

Directions  for  Pathetizing.

81.  From  the  information  already  given,  it  is
supposed  the  reader  must  now  either  have  some
idea  as  to  my  method,  or,  at  least  he  must  be  pre-
pared, somewhat,  to  appreciate  the  rules  which  fol-
low. It  is  not  so  easy  to  give  specific  directions  to
be  applied,  generally,  to  all  men.

Parental.

82.  If,  for  instance,  a  parent  should  inquire  how
he  might  best  control  the  mind  of  his  child,  I  should
wish  to  see  them  both  before  I  could  give  specific
directions  ;  because  I  must  know  not  only  the  tem-
perament and  constitutional  tendencies  of  the  child,
but  also  the  aptness,  tact,  and  knowledge  possessed
by  the  parent,  which  would  enable  him  to  adapt
what  he  did  to  the  best  possible  advantage  in  the
government  of  his  child. As  a  general rule, I
should  say  that  the  parent  who  secured  the  most
confidence  and  love,  would  be  the  most  able  (other
things  being  equal)  to  control  his  child. And  thus
with  every  other  person. Adults  are  children  in
miniature,  and  the  one  whose mind  is the  best
constituted  for  tliis  p)wpose,  who  has  an  aptness  for
controlling  another,  will,  on  the  whole,  succeed  the
best.


90  BOOK OF  PSYCHOLOGY.


Treatment  of I>isea§e.

Eemember : —

83.  (1.)  That  these  Rules  apply  to  the  Treat-
ment of  Disease,  the  breaking  up  of  bad  habits,
(such  as  the  use  of  tobacco,  or  opium,  &c.,)  or  to
the  production  of  any  and  every  imaginable  degree
or  form  of  Nervous  or  Mental  phenomena.

Wliat  is  Couipreliesided  in  these  Utiles.

84.  (2.)  That  these  Eules  include  all  and  singu-
lar, that  has  passed  under  the  names  of  "Animal
Magnetism,"  or  by  whatever  other  term  an  influ-
ence over  the  nervous  system  may  have  been  sig-
nified, whether  old  or  new.  Terms  have  been  used
for  concealing  this  fact !  Hence,  if  you  understand
the  theory  here  explained,  you  never  need  be  at  a
loss  to  account  for  any  experiment  that  you  see
performed  on  any  human  being.

Intelligence.

85.  (3.)  That,  in  many  cases,  it  is  not  necessary
that  the  operator  should  be  either  intelligent,  or
learned  in  Mental  Philosophy.*


*  Indeed,  the  more  ignorant  an  operator,  "  Dr.,"  "  Prof.,"  or  "  lec-
turer," often  happens  to  be,  the  more  he  will  assume  with  regard  to
himself,  and  his  powers  ;  and  the  more  that  is  assumed  (when  the
spectators  know  no  better  than  to  believe  all  he  says,)  why,  of
course,  the  greater  his  success  in  performing  experiments. And


SELF-INDUCTION.  91


Self-induction.

86.  (4.)  That  whatever  may  be  the  remote  cause
which  makes  an  impression  upon  the  sphere  or
nervous  system  of  the  patient,  (whether  by  sug-
gestion through  his  mind  or  otherwise,)  the  results
are,  in  all  cases,  secondarily  self-induced.  That  is,
they  are  brought  about  by  the  patient's  own  mind,
operating  on  the  Nutritive  Fluid  of  his  own  sys-
tem.


hence  it  is,  when  a  public  lecturer  happens  to  possess  the  happy
faculty  of  mystifying  the  subject,  and  makes  a  flourish  about  the
"  nervous  fluid,"  "  the  normal  and  abnormal  reactions  of  the  nervous
system,"  "  general  and  special  ^ore-significations,  <fec,  &c,  cfcc,  <fcc.,"  it
enhances  his  powers  very  much  indeed.  The  history  of  most  of  the
popular  excitements  which  have  ever  taken  place,  under  the  name
of  the  "  Crusades,"  "  Revivals,"  (fee,  will  show  how  very  little  it  is
necessary  for  certain  persons  to  know,  in  order  to  assume  great  or
supernatural  powers,  which  the  uninformed  have  always  been
ready  to  admit.  Indeed,  the  more  extravagant  the  assumption  in
behalf  of  "Alchemy  "  "  Witchcraft"  or  "Inspiration"  the  greater
the  faith  of  the  multitude !  Instance  the  case  of  the  ancient  "Ora-
cles" and  "Sybils,"  Mohammed,  the  Anabaptist  Leaders,  Matthias
and  John  of  Leyden,  the  French  Prophets,  Joanna  Southcote,  Pope
Joan,  the  Alchemists  of  the  Thirteenth  Century,  Peter  the  Hermit,
George  Fox,  Ann  Lee,  Joe  Smith,  and  id  genus  omne.

The  advantage  of  assuming  to  be  inspired,  for  instance,  by  de-
parted spirits,  consists  in  this  :  if  you  have  no  influence  or  authority
of  your  own,  by  professing  to  be  a  "1110(11111)1"  for  "St.  Paul,"
"  Swedenborg,"  or  "Tom  Paine,"  to  speak  through,  you  willatfrac
attention,  and  become  <>f  some  consequence  with  all  who  believe  in
spirits,  and  who  do  not  know  any  better  than  to  receive  what  cer-
tain "  mediums  "  say  about  them  !


92  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.


Diversity  of  Means.

87.  (5.)  That,  as  the  results  we  now  speak  of,
are  always,  in  some  sense  self-induced,  so  they  may
be  brought  on  by  as  many  different  ways  as  there
are  methods  and  objects  for  addressing  either  of
the  external  senses.

An  "Idea."

88.  (6.)  That,  after  an  idea  has  once  possessed
the  minds  of  certain  persons,  of  any  given  state,
that  same  idea  may  bring  on  that  state,  either  in
whole  or  in  part.  And  hence  it  is,  that  persons
often  sink  into  a  state  of  coma,  or  a  peculiar  ner-
vous condition,  without  any  visible  means.  And,
if  they  are  made  to  imagine  (11.)  that  that  state  is
brought  on  by  the  " spirits"  who  have  departed
this  life,  it  is  all  the  same !  This  law  of  the  human
mind  explains  how  it  is  that  results  are  often  pro-
duced by  talismans,  (33.)  or.  by  visible  substances
that  are  said  to  have  been  "  magnetized/'  The
mind  of  the  patient  must  first  be  directed  to  the
subject ;  he  must  have  some  previous  knowledge
that  a  result  of  the  kind  has  been  produced ;  or,
that  it  now,  may  be.  Thus  instructed,  the  mind
may  be  impressed  by  holding  different  substances
in  the  hand. (21.)

Children.

89.  (7.)  That  children  and  the  aged  are  not  apt
to  be  very  susceptible.


ANTIPATHY, ETC.  93

Antipathy.

90.  (8.)  That  there  should  be  no  antipathy,  nat-
ural or  incidental,  between  the  operator  and  his
patient.

One  or  More  at  a  Time.

91.  (9.)  That  you  may  operate  on  one  or  fifty  at
the  same  time.  All  that  is  necessary  is,  that  there
should  be  perfect  agreement  between  the  operator
and  the  patient,  in  relation  to  the  object  of  the  sit-
ting, the  time,  place,  and  attending  circumstances.

92.  The  patient  may  recline,  stand  up,  or  be
seated,  so  that  his  position  may  be  perfectly  easy.

Increase  of Power.

93.  (10.)  And  that  if  you  impress  one  person  in
a  company  where  there  are  others  to  witness  what
you  do,  this  increases  your  power,  as  others  will  be
likely  to  be  sympathetically  affected,  whether  you
desire  it  or  not.

How  to  form  the  Relation.

94.  All  that  has  been  said  enters  into,  or  may
enter  into,  that  influence  by  which  you  gain  control
over  the  mind  of  your  patient.  But  the  specific
directions  for  forming  the  relation  upon  which
all  your  power  depends,  have  respect  to  each  of  the
External  Senses,  which  are  the  avenues  through
which  you  gain  access  to  the  human  mind.  (47.)
You  may  address  yourself  to  either,  and  produce


94  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

results  when  the  relation  is  once  established. But
the  best  way  for  forming  it  is  to  begin  with :

Hearing.

95.  (1.)  The  sense  of  hearing.  You  peremptorily
ASSUME  THE  POWER  to  accomplish  the  result,  without
the  possibility  of  failure  !  You  are  ACTIVE,  positive,
and  simply  require  your  patient  to  be  passive,  neg-
ative. This  assumption  is  made,  by  addresses  to
the  sense  of  hearing.

Sight.

96.  (2.)  The  sense  of  sight  This  is  of  less  im-
portance, at  first,  than  hearing.  Yet,  if  you  secure
it,  so  much  the  better.  If  the  patient  fix  his  sight
by  your  direction,  then  you  have  secured  that  ave-
nue into  his  mind ;  also,

Feeling.

97.  (3.)  The  sense  of  feeling.  As  this  sense  is
located  especially  in  the  kands,  you  direct  the  pa-
tient to  put  his  hands  together ;  clasp  them,  and
let  them  remain  passive  in  his  lap.  The  mind  may
also  be  reached  through  the  sense  of  feeling,  by
placing  one  or  both  of  your  hands  upon  the  front
and  coronal  region  of  the  head,  or  if  you  pass  your
hands  gently  over  the  head,  the  face,  or  any  part
of  the  system  which  may  be  affected  with  disease.
If  you  operate  on  one  at  a  time,  stand  by  the  side,
place  your  left  hand  on  the  top  of  the  head,  and
make  the  passes,  over  the  sides  of  the  face,  with
the  other ;  or,  stand  behind  the  patient,  and,  with
both  hands,  make  the  passes  over  the  head,  shoul-
ders, and  down  the  arms.


TIME— POWER, ETC.  95

The  Time.

98.  If  the  patient  be  at  all  susceptible,  all  these
Rules  followed,  it  next  becomes  a  question  of  time ;
simply,  as  to  how  long  before  you  can  get  control
of  his  nervous  system.  From  one  to  twenty  min-
utes will  determine.

Power.

99.  You  should  remember  that  you  can  exert,
in  most  cases,  more  power  through  three  senses,  than
you  can  through  one.  Hence,  to  ascertain  whether
the  Relation  be  really  formed,  you  address  your
patient  and  say  to  him,  "Now  you  cannot  pull  your
hands  apart,' '  at  the  same  time  putting  your  hand
upon  his  (sense  of  feeling.)  The  patient  makes  an
effort  and  finds  himself  unable !  Or,  you  close  his
eyes,  and  then  say  to  him,  "Now,  you  cannot  open
your  eyes ! " He  tries  and  cannot !

Is  the  Relation  Established?

100.  This  process  continued  and  repeated  a  few
times,  the  Association,  or  Relation,  becomes  fully
established  between  you  and  your  patient,  and
this  done,  remember  that  DCr3  his  own  will  executes,
in  his  own  nervous  system,  the  DICTATES  of  your  Love,
so  that  ivhatever  you  WILL  or  command  him  to  feel,  or
will,  or  do,  (within  the  degree  of  his  developments,)
results  as  the  consequence.  That  is,  if  you  express
your  ivill  to  him  while  he  is  under  the  spell,  your
control  over  him  will  correspond  with  the  degree
in  which  your  mind  is  associated  with  his,  whether
in  the  Sensuous,  MENTAL,  or  SPIRITUAL  stat*


96  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

In  this  way  you  may  bring  on  the  trance  by  merely
speahing  to  him,  rouse  him  out  of  it,  relieve  him  of
pain,  cause  him  to  have  conceptions  or  perceptions  of
things,  real  or  imaginary,  past,  present,  or  absent —
Thus  you  may  cause  him  to  dream  ;  you  may  change
his  appetites,  disposition,  and  habits  of  life;  and  thus,
also,  he  may  control  and  govern  himself  by  his
own  determinations,  formed  in  his  own  mind,  while
under  the  spell,  provided  you  tell  him  to  do  so.

The  Sitting.

101.  The  sitting  should  not  be  continued  longer
than  is  agreea.ble  to  the  patient.  You  release  him
by  the  laws  of  association,  the  same  as  you  began.
That  is,  you  may  address  either  of  his  senses  for
this  purpose.  The  sense  of  hearing,  by  the  word,
"Done/"  The  sense  of  sight,  by  a  motion  of  the
hand ;  or  the  sense  of  feeling,  by  gently  patting
the  back  and  upper  portion  of  the  head.

To  lie  Remembered.

102.  The  patient  should  always  be  made  ac-
quainted with  your  design,  to  produce  any  result,
beforehand,  before  and  during  the  sitting.  He
should  become  passive,  and  settle  his  mind  upon  the
result  His  sight  and  hearing  should  be  fixed  or  sus-
pended) so  that  he  may  sink,  without  interruption,
or  resistance,  into  a  state  of  reverie.

103.  The  Eelation  once  formed,  the  patient  is
completely  controlled  by  your  suggestions,  as  you  sug-
gest, or  tell  him  what  he  can  do,  what  he  cannot  do,
what  he  shall  feel,  or  hear,  or  see  ;  and,  as  sure  as  your


DEGREES, ETC.  97

spheres  assimilate,  so  surely  will  you  see  him  doing

exactly  what  you  have  dictated  or  commanded  to

be  done.*

104.  Bear  in  mind,  that  no  two  patients  are  precisely

alike,  and  hence  the  difference  in  your  influence

over  different  persons. Some  you  may  carry  up

into  a  high  state  of  trance,  while  others  can  merely

be  impressed  through  their  senses  by  what  you  say

to  them.

Degrees.

105.  As  there  are  general  states  which  may  be
super-induced  by  Pathetism,  and,  as  the  good  you
may  be  able  to  do  your  patient  will  depend,  more
or  less,  upon  the  depth  or  height  of  the  state,  so
to  speak,  it  may  be  well  to  consider  each,  a  little
more  in  detail : —

External.

106.  1.  The  Sensuous  state  is  that  in  which  all

the  results  are  brought  about  by  addresses  made  to

the  external  senses. And  these  are  threefold,  and

have  respect  to  what  the  patieht  Hears,  Sees,  or

Feels.

Internal.

107.  2.  The  second  is  a  higher  state,  and  ex-
tends more  into  the  Sympathetic,  and  this,  also,  is
developed  in  three  ascending  degrees :

(1.)  In  the  first  degree,  the  patient's  external
senses  are  closed  up,  suspended.

*  To  fully  understand  the  philosophy  of  this  Relation,  the  reader
should  by  all  means  consult  the  author's  large  book  on  Pathetism,
published  by  Stearns  <fc  Co.,  New- York.


98  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

(2.)  In  the  second,  his  mind  is  at  oneness  with  the
mind  of  the  operator,  so  that  his  emotions,  volitions,
and  actions,  correspond  with  those  with  whom  he
is  in  communication.

(3.)  The  third  degree,  is  that  state  in  which  the
somnipathist  becomes  lucid,  and  has  an  acute  sym-
pathetic perception  of  whatever  is  forced  upon  his
attention  by  the  mere  will  of  the  operator.

Spiritual.

108.  3.  And  higher  still  is  the  next  degree,
which  is  Spiritual,  because,  in  this  state,  the  pa-
tient hears,  sees,  and  feels,  independently  of  his  own
external  senses,  and  independently  of  any  force
exerted  upon  him  from  the  operator,  or  from  the
external  world.  And  this,  also,  may  be  said  to  be
threefold,  comprehending  all  that  went  before :

109.  (1.)  The  patient  has  knowledge  (according  to
the  degree  in  which  his  wisdom  faculties  are  devel-
oped) of  the  external  world.

110.  (2.)  He  has  a  knowledge  of  the  internal  world.
"Whatever  is  comprehended  in  Physiology,  Phren-
ology, the  Physical,  Organic,  and  Moral  Laws  of
the  universe.

(3.)  And  also,  of  the  spiritual  world,  or  the
world  of  causes,  the  spheres  above,  the  Laws  of
Association,  Progression,  and  Development,  the
Final  Destiny  of  the  Eace.  In  each  of  these
states,  various  sliades  of  difference  may  be  observed,
all  depending  on  the  degree  in  which  the  patient's
capacities  are  developed. But  it  should  be  remern-


CAUTIONS.  99

bered,  that  one  will  succeed  the  other  in  the  pro-
cess of  time.  The  laws  of  progression  are  never
rapid.  Hence  the  necessity  of  patience  and  perseve-
rance in  the  use  of  the  means  before  described,
under  the  encouraging  assurance,  that  there  are
but  few,  if  any  cases,  where  they  can  be  conscien-
tiously used  in  vain.

Cautions.
111.  There  is,  really,  no  need  of  any  difficulty
with  your  patient,  at  any  time.  Nevertheless,  for
the  want  of  attention  to  some  of  the  preceding
Rules,  you  may,  possibly,  in  some  unlooked-for
emergency,  find  yourself  unable  to  determine  what
should  be  done,  and  you  will  remember  it,  perhaps,
if  put  down  here  under  the  head  of  caution.

1.  Never  become  yourself,  excited,  while  your
patient  is  under  your  influence  in  a  deep  state  of

•trance.

2.  If  your  patient  becomes  convulsed,  do  not
be  alarmed.  Relieve  him  in  the  manner  I  have
directed  (103.)

3.  If  you  find  it  impossible  to  rouse  your  pa-
tient from  a  deep  state  of  trance,  let  him  sleep  it
away  himself.

4.  Do  not  suffer  disagreeable  persons  to  approach
one  who  is  in  a  state  of  trance.

5.  If  your  patient  should  relapse  into  an  uncon-
scious state  after  having  been  once  intranced,  you
should  FORBID  it !  Do  something  to  prevent  it,
while  he  is  in  the  trance,  and  say  to  him,  "I  will
prevent  it ;  you  will  not,  cannot  fall  into  it  again."


100  BOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY.

6.  If  you  find  yourself  unable  to  control  your
patient,  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  him.  Above
all,  do  not  suffer  him  to  be  meddled  with  by  oth*
ers,  while  under  your  influence.

7.  On  no  account  should  any  liberties  be  taken
with  a  somnipathist,  (in  testing  insensibility  to  pain,)
which  he  would  not  consent  to  in  his  normal  state.

8.  Leave  no  false  impression  upon  the  mind.

9.  You  speak  and  act  for  the  patient.  Do  not
say  to  him,  "Be  relieved,"  &c,  but  UI  will  relieve
you,"  and  place  your  hand  upon  him,  or  do  some-
thing else  to  him  for  that  purpose.

10.  Do  not  overtax  the  powers  of  your  patient.
Evil  has  followed  earnest  efforts  to  induce  clairvoy-
ance.*

Use.

112.  This  is  the  great  question,  after  all.  To
what  use,  to  what  practical  benefit,  may  this  know-  .
ledge  be  applied  ?  What  good  can  be  done  by  it  ?
Answer,  any  good ;  any  good  that  is  within  the
possibility  of  accomplishment.  Is  not  the  preven-
tion of  crime,  a  positive  good  ? Is  not  the  relief


*  I  received  the  following  facts  in  1845,  from  an  excellent  lady,
(the  wife  of  Captain  West,  of  New-Bedford,  Mass.,)  who  soon  after
entered  the  spiritual  world.  She  was  Pathetized  during  the  period
of  utero  gestation,  for  her  health.  The  operator  was  exceedingly
anxious  to  develop  in  her  the  power  of  clairvoyance :  and  for  this
purpose  he  was  in  the  habit  of  putting  his  finger  upon  the  centre  of
her  forehead,  saying,  he  would  "  make  her  see,"  or  "  give  her  eyes
to  see  ! "  Her  child  was  still-born,  and  had  but  one  eye,  which  was
located  directly  in  the  centre  of  the  forehead!


USE OF PATHETISM.  101

of  pain,  the  healing  of  the  sick,  desirable  ?  And
this  I  suppose  to  be  the  legitimate  USE  which  ought
always  to  be  made  of  this  influence,  common  or
extraordinary.  To  encourage  those,  therefore,  into
whose  hands  this  little  book  may  fall,  to  try  to  do
good  in  the  same  way,  as  they  may  have  opportu-
nity, I  close  with  the  following  details.  Please  read
them  !  And  bear  in  mind  the  considerations  which
place  these  cases  far  above  those  certificates  of
cures  often  laid  before  the  public : —

113.  1.  These  are  some  of  the  very  worst  forms
of  Nervous  Diseases  ;  such  as  over  which  medical
drugs  exert  no  power.  And  yet  they  have  been  CURED
by  Pathetism  !

2.  2  hey  icere  not  recent  cases.  They  were  diseases
of  long  duration,  and  successfully  treated  by  Pathetism!
They  have  remained  permanently  cured!*

3.  Here  are  diseases  cured  by  Pathetism,  for  which
physicians  never  attempt  to  prescribe  ;  such  as  STAM-
MERING, and  the  use  of  Opium  and  Tobacco  !

4.  In  no  one  thing,  perhaps,  have  the  benefits  of
Pathetism  been  so  conspicuously  shown,  above
drugs,  and  especially  above  the  letheon  and  chloro-

*  I  do  not  mean  by  the  above  to  be  understood  as  affirming:  the
preposterous  notion  (taught  by  some  operators)  that  chronic  diseases
can  be  "  cured  in  five  minutes  of  time,"  by  the  mere  dictum  of  tlie
lecturer!  And  yet  by  a  word,  and  in  a  moment  of  time,  an  impres-
sion may,  certainly,  be  made,  often,  upon  the  nervous  system,  which,
if  followed  up  by  the  invalid,  (in  obedienct  to  the  laws  of  health,)
will,  in  time,  result  in  a  permanent  or  chronic  cure.  See  the  au-
thor's "Book  of  Health,"  published  by  Stearns  <fc  Co.,  25  Ann  street,
New- York.


102  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

form,  as  in  the  numerous  surgical  operations  which
have  been  performed  on  entranced  persons,  who
have  thus  been  rendered  utterly  unconscious  of  pain,
and  from  the  trance  there  are  no  unpleasant  effects
to  be  suffered  afterwards,  as  is  sometimes  the  case
from  inhaling  gas.

114.  Paralysis  and  spasmodic  Hysteria  cured  by  pathe-
tismf — About  five  months  since,  I  was  brought  down
with  paralysis  of  the  spine  and  lower  limbs  ;  since  which
time,  I  have  not  been  able  to  walk  at  all,  nor  even  to  bear
my  weight  upon  my  feet.  Besides  other  diseases,  I  have
been  affected  with  a  determination  of  blood  to*  the
head,  and  spasmodic  hysteria ;  so  that  frequently  my
entire  system  had  been  thrown  into  convulsions,  which
have  been  exceedingly  distressing.  When  Mr.  Sunder-
land commenced  Pathetizing  me,  I  did  not  anticipate
much,  if  any,  relief,  but  am,  with  my  friends,  astonished
at  the  effects  it  has  produced  on  my  system.  Besides  cur-
ing me  of  the  spasms,  my  limbs  have  become  straight,
and  I  am  now  so  far  recovered,  that  /  am  able  to  walk
across  my  room. — Caroline  A.  Wilkins,  72  Carmine-
street. New  York,  July  6,  1842.

115.  Fits,  Insanity,  and  other  Nervous  Difficulties,
cured  by  Pathetism  ! — For  more  than  twenty  years,  I  have
been  horribly  afflicted  with  cramp-convulsions,  and  occa-
sional insanity.  "When  four  years  old,  I  lay  in  one  fit  forty
hours.  On  being  entranced  in  Mr.  Sunderland's  lectures,
my  fits  and  insanity  ceased  entirely,  so  that  my  health  in
every  other  respect  was  entirely  restored  !  Since  that
time,  I  have  been  well  and  happy. — M.  J.  Mason.  Phil-
adelphia, Oct.  8,  1848.

116.  Tic  Douloureux  Believed  by  Pathetism! — For
eight  years  previous  to  my  attending  the  lectures  of  Mr.
Sunderland,  in  this  city,  in  1847,  I  was  severely  afflicted
with  Tic  Douloureux.  On  being  entranced  by  Mr.  S.-,  I
was  very  much  relieved  ;  so  much  so,  that  I  have  often
considered  myself  quite  well. — Mrs.  J.  Kedifer.  Phila-
delphia, October  15,  1848.


USE OF PATHETISM.  103

117.  Epilepsy  cured  by  Pathetism  ! — About  the  first
of  September,  1842,  I  was  seized  with  convulsions,  which
deprived  me  of  my  strength  and  reason.  I  was  com-
pletely prostrated,  and  for  three  weeks  was  attended  by
different  physicians,  who  pronounced  me  epileptic,  and
said  I  had  a  nervous  affection  of  the  heart  and  arteries,
and  they  treated  me  accordingly.  Finding  myself  daily
growing  worse,  and  fearing  for  my  life,  I  sent  for  Mr.  Sun-
derland. From  the  hour  he  commenced  pathetizing  me,
/  began  to  recover  ;  and  in  the  course  of  three  weeks  after,
I  considered  myself  completely  restored. — P.  0.  Horn,
41  Suffolk-street. New  York,  November  15,  1842.

118.  Cramp- Convulsions  cured  by  Pathetism! — For
about  six  years,  commencing  when  I  was  nineteen  years
old,  I  suffered  a  most  distressing  kind  of  fits,  which  my
physicians  called  cramp-convulsions. — They  came  on  once
in  three  weeks,  rendering  me  perfectly  insensible  for  two
or  three  hours  ;  and,  for  some  days  after,  I  remained  very
much  prostrated.  I  employed  the  best  medical  skill  the
country  afforded,  without  the  least  benefit,  and  some  of  my
physicians  assured  me  I  never  could  be  cured.  In  De-
cember, 1845,  I  attended  Mr.  Sunderland's  lectures  on
Pathetism,  where  I  became  entranced,  and  thus  experi-
enced the  first  relief  I  ever  found  from  my  distressing  mal-
ady. For  the  last  year  I  have  not  had  one  fit,  and  think
I  shall  never  have  any  more.  The  pleasure  I  experienced
under  the  treatment  of  Pathetism  I  shall  never  forget,  and
Mr.  Sunderland  will  always  have  my  heartfelt  gratitude  for
the  interest  he  manifested  in  my  welfare. — Caroline  S.
Allen. Chickopee,  Mass.,  October  8,  1848.

119.  Gout  cured  by  Pathetism  ! — Mr.  Sunderland  has
entirely  cured  me  of  Gout  in  my  head  and  shoulders,  from
which  I  have  been  a  sufferer  fur  years. —  II.  Major.  Phil-
adelphia, March  25,  1848.

120.  Tobacco  Chewing  and.  Smoking  cured  by  Pathe-
tism ! — I,  James  Cockrell,  jeweler,  of  the  city  of  Phila-
delphia, do  hereby  declare,  that  1  am  forty-three  years  of
age,  and  that  1  have,  for  the  last  twenty-Jive  years,  been
in  the  constant  and  excessive  habit  ot'  smoking  and  chew-


104  BOOK OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

ing  tobacco  ;  but  LaRoy  Sunderland  has  so  completely
destroyed  my  appetite  for  it,  that  I  now  feel  a  perfect  loath-
ing against  it,  in  all  its  forms. — James  Cockrell.  March
13,  1847.

121.  Opium  Eating  cured  by  Patketism  ! — T,  Mary
Hubbard,  of  Cabotville,  Mass.,  aged  29,  do  hereby  cer-
tify, that  for  seven  years  previous  to  December,  1845,  I
had  been  in  the  constant  habit  of  taking  laudanum,  till  my
dose  amounted  to  one  ounce  per  day,  when  I  became  en-
tranced in  the  lectures  of  LaRoy  Sunderland,  and  my  ap-
petite for  it  was  destroyed  in  a  few  days  ;  so  that,  for  the
last  eighteen  months,  it  has  never  once  returned. — Mary
Hubbard. May  28,  1847.

122.  Insensibility  to  Pain  during  Surgical  Operations
produced  by  Patketism,  ! — The  testimony  of  the  doctors
present  was,  that  the  tooth  had  been  drawn  from  the  en-
tranced lady  without  pain,  and  it  had  entirely  satisfied
them  that  Mr.  Sunderland  wielded  an  influence  over  the
nervous  system,  compared  to  which  the  strongest  opiates
were  powerless.  While  the  doctor  was^extracting  one  of
her  molar  teeth,  the  lady  was  as  stiff  and  as  unconscious
as  a  corpse. — Nantucket  Telegraph,  April  5,  1845.

123.  Amaurosis  Cured  by  Pathetism  ! — My  daughter,
Ann  Elizabeth,  when  a  babe,  had  weak  eyes,  and  from'
childhood  she  had  been  afflicted  with  amaurosis,  so  much
so  that  she  could  scarcely  read  ;  and,  on  account  of  this
and  other  nervous  difficulties,  she  was  unable  to  attend
school.  This  continued  till  she  was  sixteen  years  old,
when  she  was  entranced  in  the  lectures  of  LaRoy  Sunder-
land, in  this  city,  October,  1843.  In  a  few  weeks  after,
she  wholly  laid  aside  her  glasses,  and  has  never  used  them
since.  Her  sight  and  health  are  now  perfectly  good,  and
we  attribute  her  restoration  entirely  to  Pathetism  ! — Ben-
jamin Hall. Providence.  R.  I.,  Oct.  31,  1848.

124.  Stammering  Cured  by  Pathetism/ — T,  Celesta
E.  Seymour,  of  East  Granville,  Mass.,  (aged  23,)  do  here-
by affirm,  that  until  I  attended  Mr.  Sunderland's  lectures,
I  was  never  able  to  talk  plainly.  For  eighteen  years,  the
impediment  prevented  my  conversing,  so  that,  at  times,  I


USE OF PATHETISM.  105

was  unable  to  speak  at  all.  Twice  my  tongue  was  operat-
ed upon  surgically,  without  any  benefit.  My  sufferings
from  this  difficulty,  language  cannot  describe,  nor  can
words  express  my  gratitude  for  the  relief  I  have  received
from  Pathetism.  In  December,  1845,  I.  was  entranced  in
Mr.  Sunderland's  Lectures,  and  from  that  time  to  the  pres-
ent, my  speech  has  been  free,  and  without  any  impedi-
ment at  all.  The  gratitude  I  feel  and  the  thanks  I  owe  to
you,  I  cannot  express.  I  sometimes  think  I  am  the  hap-
piest person  in  the  world.  I  often  used  to  think,  when
talking,  I  would  give  all  the  world  if  I  had  not  attempted
to  say  anything,  and  would  then  resolve,  that  I  would  talk
as  little  as  possible  ;  but  now,  I  am  free  from  that.  A  for-
tune would  not  tempt  me  to  part  with  the  benefit  I  have
received  from  Pathetism. — C.  E.  Seymour,  Cabotville,
February  16,  1846.

125.  Tumor  cured,  and  Surgical  operation  superseded  by
Pathetism! — "While  Mr.  Sunderland  was  giving  lectures
last  February,  in  the  Tremont  Temple,  in  this  city,  he  was
applied  to  by  Captain  H.  H.  Watson  (Charlestown,  Mass.)
to  Pathetize  his  daughter,  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  her
insensible  while  a  tumor  should  be  cut  from  her  left  breast.
The  lady  was  about  twenty-three  years  of  age,  and  weigh-
ed about  180  pounds.  The  tumor  had  been  examined
some  eighteen  months  before,  by  a  number  of  our  first
physicians,  who  all  agreed  that  it  should  be  taken  out
with  the  knife.  One  of  them,  pronounced  it  fibrous,  and
another  cancerous.  It  caused  her  much  pain,  and  about
three  months  before  she  came  to  Mr.  S.,  her  attending  phy-
sician (the  late  Dr.  J.  B.  Walker)  put  a  plaster  upon  it,  but
took  it  off  again  in  twenty-four  hours,  as  he  said  it  uonly
made  it  worse."  In  about  seventeen  days,  Mr.  Sunderland
succeeded  in  securing  the  spell  upon  her  system  ;  so  that
she  was  utterly  unconscious.  Feb.  22,  at  10  A.  M.,  was  the
hour  fixed  upon  for  the  surgical  operation  to  be  performed.
The  night  previous  was  spent  almost  without  sleep  by
the  anxious  husband  and  parents.  The  patient  herself
had  not  been  made  acquainted  with  the  design,  and  at  the
appointed  moment  she  was  .spell-hound,  in  a  state  of  utter
unconsciousness,  with  her  left  arm  stretched  over  her  he^d


106  BOOK  OF PSYCHOLOGY.

in  a  state  of  rigidity  resembling  death.  The  operating
surgeon  came  precisely  at  10,  accompanied  by  three  other
surgeons ;  and,  after  arranging  his  instruments,  waxing
liis  thread,  &c.,  he,  with  the  attending  surgeons,  examined
the  breast  for  the  space  of  half  an  hour,  and  finally  decid-
ed that  there  was  no  tumor  there  !  During  the  time  she
had  been  Pathetized,  the  pain  and  the  tumor  had  disap-
peared  as  by  magic.  That  there  had  been  a  tumor  there,
bigger  than  a  hen's  egg,  all  were  agreed  ;  but  what  had
removed  it,  the  medical  gentlemen  did  not  pretend  to  say.
Since  that  time  there  have  been  no  symptoms  of  its  return.
She  believes,  as  does  her  husband,  father,  mother,  and
friends,  that  it  was  dissipated  by  Pathetism  alone  ;  and
her  ecstacy  in*  being  thus  able  to  escape  the  bloody  work
of  the  knife  was  excessive,  as  may  well  be  supposed. —
Boston  Chronotype,  June  5,  1846. •

126.  Aphony,  [Loss  of  Voice,)  and  Despair,  cured  by
Pathetism  ! — I  hereby  certify,  that  it  is  now  more  than
two  years  since,  from  a  severe  affection  in  the  throat,  I  lost
my  voice  entirely  ;  and  during  this  time,  I  have  been  quite
indisposed  as  to  my  general  health  ;  that  I  have  been
wholly  unable  to  speak  above  a  whisper,  until  last  Tuesday
evening,  the  26th  inst.,  when  LaRoy  Sunderland,  putting
his  hand  on  my  head,  enabled  me  to  speak  aloud.  And
I  further  declare,  that  for  about  one  year  previous  to  this
time,  I  had  been  in  a  state  of  mental  despair,  but  from
which  I  have  been  completely  restored  by  Mr.  Sunderland  ;
and  I  never  felt  more  perfectly  happy  in  my  life.  I  can
only  say,  it  seems  to  be  fhe  Lord's  doing,  and  marvelous
in  my  eyes. — Mary  Ann  Boom.  Albanv,  N.  Y.,  July  28,
1842.

127.  Neuralgia  cured  by  Pathetism  ! — My  wife  suffer-
ed horribly  from  neuralgia  for  eight  years.  The  doctor
tried  to  cure,  but  could  not.  Her  sufferings  were  aggra-
vated from  the  state  of  her  teeth  ;  but  one  physician  said
she  could  not  take  ether  or  chloroform  with  safety.  Thus
suffering,  and  when  about  given  up  to  despair,  in  Sept.,
1849,  we  applied  to  LaRoy  Sunderland,  for  relief  by  Pa-
thetism. Thanks  for  his  kindness,  he  took  out  seven  of


USE OF PATHETISM.  107

her  teeth  without  pain,  and  since  then,  he  has  so  much  re-
lieved her,  that  she  seems  to  have  risen  to  a  new  state  of
existence.  The  benefit  she  has  received  from  his  treat-
ment, it  is  not  in  words  to  describe  ;  but  we  can  do  no
less  than,  unsolicited,  give  this  testimony  of  our  gratitude.
John  A.  Spear. East  Boston,  Dec.  10,  1849.

128.  Scrofula  cured  by  Pathetism ! — Our  child,  a
daughter  of  fourteen,  had  been  feeble  and  sickly  from  in-
fancy, and  at  the  time  of  her  first  attending  the  lectures
of  Mr.  Sunderland,  (about  four  weeks  since,)  was  thought
to  be  by  eminent  physicians,  in  a  very  critical  state,  and
pronounced  past  help  by  them.  She  had  become  emaci-
ated to  a  mere  skeleton,  and  was  scarcely  able  from  weak-
ness and  debility  to  move  about.  She  began  to  improve
immediately  on  being  pathetized,  and  has  since  gained  at
least  fifteen  pounds  of  flesh,  and  from  being  a  peevish,  ir-
ritable, and  moping  child,  has  become  a  joyous,  laughing,
and  sprightly  girl.

It  was  in  view  of  such  facts  as  these,  that  Dr.  Grandin
was  led  to  exclaim — "  If  this  is  a  '  humbug,'  it  is  a  bug
that  hums  to  some  good  purpose."  J.  B.  Yerrinton.
Boston,  Dec.  21,  1849.

129.  Want  of  Sleep,  cured  by  Pathetism  ! — The  hap-
py effects  produced  by  Pathetism  upon  my  nervous  system
and  general  health  are  more  than  I  could  well  describe.
My  mind  is  entirely  relieved  of  despondency,  enabling  me
to  rest  better  than  I  ever  could  by  the  aid  of  medi-
cine. H.  M.  Winch. Boston,  Jan.  14,  1850.

i

130.  Dysmenorrhea  and  sick  Head-ache  cured  by  Pathe-
tism!— Let  me,  from  the  fulness  of  my  heart,  add  my  grate-
ful testimony  to  what  my  husband  has  written  respecting
the  relief  afforded  me  by  Pathetism.  The  anniversary  of  the
hour  in  which  you  blest  me  with  its  sacred  influence,  and
saved  me  from  those  unbearable  pains  which  I  had  always
been  heir  to,  should  ever  be  kept  by  me  with  joy  and
thankfulness,  more,  even,  than  the  day  of  my  birth.  S-
entire  freedom  from  acute  suffering  1  was  nei  with
before.  My  back  is  growing  stronger,  and  now,  t:
days  have  passed,  and  no  head-ache  ! My  lull  heart  sheds


108  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

tears  of  gratitude  and  joy. Mrs.  Dr.  H.  C.  Stone. Con-
cord, N.  H.,  April  1,  1846.

131.  Love  of  Intoxication  taken  away  by  Pathetism  ! —
My  dear  Mr.  Sunderland  : — Since  the  influence  exerted
over  me  in  your  lectures,  the  thought  of  any  stimulants
which  I  had  been  in  the  practice  of  using,  produces  nausea,
and  I  am  constrained  to  believe  that  I  could  not  swallow
one  of  them  any  more.  I  owe  you  a  world  of  gratitude,
and  I  can  but  hope  I  may  never  be  overtaken  by  that
mselstroom  again. New  York,  Dec.  22,  1846. Dr.  T.  T.

132.  Troy,  N.  Y. — What  Mr.  Sunderland  has  accom-
plished during  his  visit  to  this  city,  has  abundantly  con-
firmed the  newspaper  reports  we  have  seen  of  his  wonder-
ful performances  in  other  places,  which,  in  the  production
of  psychological  phenomena,  especially  those  peculiar  to
what  are  called  spells  and  charms,  place  him  far  before
all  other  men  of  whom  history  has  given  any  account. —
Troy  Budget,  Sept.  23,  1845.

133.  New  York*  City. — Preambles  and  resolutions
adopted  by  a  large  audience  in  attendance  on  Mr.  Sunder-
land's lectures  in  Mechanics'  Hall,  New  York,  on  Friday
evening,  Dec.  11,  1846,  offered  by  the  Rev.  Zenas  Covel  ;
John  F.  Driggs,  Esq.,  in  the  chair  :

"  Whereas  Mr.  LaRoy  Sunderland  lias  produced  results
in  his  EXPERIMENTAL  LECTURES  on  the  HUMAN
SOUL,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  this  audience,  fully  estab-
lish Pathetism  as  the  true  science  of  mind,  and  that  Mr.
Sunderland's  knowledge  of  his  subject  eminently  qualifies
him  for  imparting  to  others  the  philosophy  upon  which
this  science  is  founded  ;  and  in  view  of  the  great  good
which  a  more  general  knowledge  of  this  subject  would  be
the  means  of  doing  in  the  community  at  large,  in  the  fa-
cilities it  affords  for  rendering  persons  insensible  to  pain
while  surgical  operations  are  performed  upon  them,  as
we  have  repeatedly  seen  it  done  by  Mr.  Sunderland  before
his  public  audiences  in  this  city  ; therefore,

Resolved,  in  order  to  meet  the  wishes  of  many  who


USE OF PATHETISM.  109

have  not  been  able  to  witness  his  experiments,  Mr.  Sun-
derland be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  deliver  ano-
ther course  of  lectures  in  this  city,  as  soon  as  may  suit
his  convenience  ;  and  that  this  preamble  and  resolution
be  published  in  the  city  papers."

JAMES  ASHLEY,  M.  D.,  Secretary.
N.Y.  Mirror,  Bee.  13,  1845.

134.  Surgical  operation  performed  by  a  Somnambu-
list !  ! — Mr.  Sunderland's  tenth  and  last  lecture  on  the
Human  Soul,  was  delivered,  according  to  previous  no-
tice, in  Morris  Place,  to  a  crowded  and  highly  intelligent
audience,  on  Saturday  evening  last.  Long  before  the
appointed  hour,  the  house  was  filled  and  "  expectation
stood  tiptoe,"  to  witness  the  extraordinary  phenomena
promised  for  the  evening.  Among  those  taken  upon
the  platform  under  the  power  of  the  charm,  was  Dr.  H.
J.  Paine,  Mr.  Ketchum,  and  a  young  man  by  the  name
of  Althiser.  The  other  three  were  ladies.  After  caus-
ing Mr.  A.  to  dance,  and  a  few  other  results,  Mr.  S.  pro-
ceeded to  prepare  one  of  the  ladies  for  a  surgical  opera-
tion, and  invited  the  medical  faculty,  the  clergy,  and
gentlemen  of  the  press  present,  to  the  platform,  for  the
purpose  of  having  them  inspect  the  tooth  to  be  drawn,
and  notice  the  manner  in  which  it  was  done.  He  then
took  hold  of  Dr.  Paine,  (who  was  still  under  the  influence
of  the  spell,)  and  led  him  up  to  the  lady  seated  in  the
chair.  And  now  occurred  a  sight  upon  which,  probably,
mortal  eyes  never  gazed  before.  It  was  to  see  the  som-
nambulic doctor  in  the  process  of  extracting  that  tooth,
while  both  he  and  the  patient  were  in  a  state  of  trance,
and  neither  of  them  able  to  open  their  eyes  or  move  a
muscle,  without  the  consent  of  the  lecturer.  The  tooth
was  very  firmly  set,  and  it  required  an  extraordinary
outlay  of  strength  to  extract  it.  The  lady  sat  during  the
operation,  without  the  slightest  manifestation  of  con-
sciousness, though  she  is  well  known  to  be  one  of  the
most  fearful  and  timid  in  her  natural  state — so  much  so,
that  she  has  been  thrown  into  spasms,  it  is  said,  when
attempts  have  been  made  to  draw  her  teeth  while  she  was
awake. In  a few  minutes after,  the  Dr. himself  was


110  BOOK OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

seated  in  the  front  chair,  the  spell  still  upon  him, — and
another  physician  present,  (Dr.  Lyman,)  proceeded  to
perform  a  similar  operation  upon  him  !  This  experiment
was  intensely  interesting,  and  highly  satisfactory  to  the
audience,  as  we  suppose  it  is  the  first  and  only  one  of
the  kind  ever  performed,  since  old  Adam  was  put  into
the  "deep  sleep,"  for  the  purpose  of  having  the  rib
taken  from  his  side. —  Troy  Budget,  Sept.  23,  1845.

135.  Philadelphia,  Pa. — Quite  an  interesting  ceremony
took  place  at  Franklin  Hall,  on  Friday  evening  last,  during
Mr.  Sunderland's  lecture  at  that  place.  After  the  experi-
ments of  the  evening,  the  meeting  was  organized,  and  in-
formed that  a  piece  of  silver  plate  had  been  prepared  by
the  ladies  in  attendance  on  Mr.  Sunderland's  lectures,  and
which  they  had  desired  Dr.  Asay  to  present  to  Mr.  Sun-
derland in  their  behalf.  Dr.  A.  then  appeared  on  the
platform  with  a  most  beautiful  silver  cup,  which  he  pre-
sented to  the  distinguished  lecturer,  accompanied  with  a
few  pertinent  remarks.  The  cup  bore  the  following  in-
scription :

"  Presented  by  the  Ladies  of  Philadelphia  to  Mr.  La
Roy  Sunderland,  for  his  successful  and  satisfactory  exper-
iments in  Pathetism,  1847.

On  receiving  the  cup,  Mr.  Sunderland  made  a  most
happy  and  appropriate  allusion  to  the  "  character  of  Wo-
man,'' with  whom  nothing  was  impossible,  but  to  shrink
from  what  gratitude,  honor  or  religion  should  require,
whose  compassion  for  the  suffering  had  clothed  the  very
name  with  eternal  honor,  and  allied  her  to  the  angels  of
heaven.  The  lecturer  expressed  his  sense  of  gratitude  for
the  extreme  kindness  with  which  he  had  been  received,
during  his  sojourn  in  the  City  of  Brotherly  Love,  and  the
pleasure  it  afforded  him  in  believing,  from  the  largeness
of  the  audiences  which  had  been  in  constant  attendance
during  some  fifteen  nights  in  succession,  that  the  science
of  Pathetism  might  now  be  considered  as  established  in
Philadelphi,  and  his  determination  of  visiting  the  city
again,  agreeable  to  the  expressed  wishes  of  so  large  a
number  of  our  citizens. — Native  Eagle  and  American
Advocate,  Feb.  20,  1817.


USE OF PATHETISM.  Ill

At  the  close  of  LaRoy  Sunderland's  lectures,  on  Mon-
day evening,  March  8th,  1847,  in  Odd  Fellow's  Hall,  Phi-
ladelphia, the  audience  was  organized  by  the  appointment
of  a  Chairman  and  Secretary,  and  passed  the  following
resolutions  :

Resolved,  That  we,  citizens  of  Philadelphia,  have  been
highly  delighted,  amused,  and,  we  hope,  morally  and  in-
tellectually improved,  by  attending  Mr.  Sunderland's  lec-
tures on  the  science  of  Pathetism,  and  we  do  hereby  ex-
press our  gratitude  for  the  intellectual  entertainments  they
have  afforded  us.

Resolved,  that  in  parting  with  Mr.  Sunderland,  we  feel
the  loss  of  one  who  has  endeared  himself  to  us,  not  only
as  a  most  courteous  and  gentlemanly  lecturer,  but  as  one
having  the  most  profound  knowledge  of  the  human  mind,
of  any  or  all,  that  has  ever  appeared  amongst  us  ;  and
that  his  mode  of  operating  on  his  audiences  precludes  the
possibility  of  collusion,  and  that  the  subjects  being  our
relations,  friends  and  acquaintances,  is  to  us,  and  should
be  to  all,  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  the  truth  of  his  experi-
ments, and  the  most  wonderful  natural  phenomena  they
illustrate.

Resolved,  That  the  common  courtesy  due  to  a  stranger,
who  has  given  such  satisfactory  evidences  of  the  truth  of
Pathetism  at  his  numerous  lectures  to  the  dentists,  doc-
tors, editors,  and  other  scientific  gentlemen,  specially  in-
vited upon  the  platform  for  that  purpose,  demands  from
them  something  more  than  a  mere  silent  acquiescence  in
the  wonders  of  his  performances.

Resolved^  That,  Mr.  Sunderland,  in  leaving  us,  does  it
not  for  want  of  sufficient  interest  being  manifested  in  the
subject  by  Philadelphians,  who  nightly  crowded  his  exhi-
bitions, and  who  would  still  more  so  by  a  continuation  of
his  lectures,  until  no  hall  within  the  limits  of  our  city
would  hold  them.

Resolved,  That  Mr.  Sunderland will always  find  atten-
tive audiences,  open hands,  and warm hearts  to  welcome
him,  whenever  he  can  make  it  convenient  to  visit  us  again*
JOHN  EVANS.  Chairman,

Geo.  W.  Duncan,  Secretary.

[Philadelphia  Sun,  Jfarch  10,  1847.


112  BOOK  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

136.  Boston,  Mass. — Pathetism. — At  the  close  of  La
Roy  Sunderland's  Lecture  last  Friday  evening,  Nov.  17th,
1847,  the  following  resolutions,  presented  by  Rev.  Mr.
Morris,  and  seconded  by  Rev.  E.  T.  Taylor,  were  passed
by  a  large  and  intelligent  auditory —

Resolved,  as  the  sense  of  this  meeting,  that  we  have
not  only  been  highly  entertained  in  our  attendance  on  the
Lectures  of  Mr.  Sunderland,  by  the  newr,  amusing,  and
wonderful  experiments  he  has  performed  on  his  audience,
but,  as  we  hope,  morally  and  intellectually  benefited  by
the  information  he  has  afforded  us  on  the  nature  and  laws
of  the  human  mind.

Resolved,  That  Mr.  Sunderland's  gentlemanly  and  cour-
teous manners,  his  intelligence  as  a  philosopher,  his  aston-
ishing success  as  an  experimental  lecturer  upon  human
nature,  his  generous  attention  to  the  sick  in  his  gratuitous
lectures  to  ladies,  commend  him  to  the  confidence  and
patronage  of  our  citizens  ;  and  that  we  do  hereby  earn-
estly request  him  to  continue  his  lectures  in  our  city,  as
we  believe  they  afford  not  only  instruction,  but  that  kind
of  amusement  against  which  no  valid  objections  can  be
made. — Boston  Ck.  Freeman,  Nov,  26,  1847.

Pathetism. — Mr.  Sunderland  is  evidently  fast  awaken-
ing public  attention  to  this  subject,  and  demonstrating  its
truth  and  importance  as  a  science.  He  is  now  engaged
in  delivering  his  sixth  successive  course  of  evening  lectures
in  this  city  the  present  season,  and  his  audiences  have  been
the  whole  time  highly  respectable  both  in  numbers  and
character.  During  the  same  period  he  has  given  three
gratuitous  afternoon  lectures  each  week  to  ladies,  in  which
he  has  applied  the  principles  of  his  science  to  the  treat-
ment of  disease.  So  successful  have  been  his  experiments
in  this  regard,  that  those  benefited,  and  others  interested,
have  been  prompted  to  present  him  with  a  valuable  testi-
monial of  their  gratitude.  On  Saturday  evening  last —
after  some  astonishing  and  thrilling  performances  with  a
class  of  somnambulists — a  public  presentation  was  made
to  Mr.  S.  of  a  splendid  gold  watch,  by  Mrs.  Dr.  A.  C.  Taft,
in  behalf  of  the  ladies  attending  his  lectures — accompa-
nying the  gift  with  a  beautiful  and  appropriate  address,  to


CONCLUSION.  113

which  Mr.  Sunderland  made  a  very  feeling  and  pertinent
response.

The  watch  was  double  cased,  with  one  diamond,  and  a
complement  of  jewels,  and  cost  $228.  On  the  inner  case
the  following  inscription  was  beautifully  engraved  : —

"Pathetism  . — Presented  by  Ladies  of  Boston  to
LaRoy  Sunderland,  1847. "

We  believe  Mr.  Sunderland  has  received  several  similar
presents  in  other  cities — and  by  his  explanation  of  the
philosophy  of  mind  and  the  laws  of  life  and  health,  has
won  for  himself  a  commendable  fame. — Boston  Ckrono-
type,  Dec.  14,  1847.


CONCLUSION.

137.  Thus,  reader,  I  have  shown  you,  (as  far  as
was  in  my  power,)  how  you  may  do  good,  by  fur-
nishing j^ou  with  a  hey  for  unlocking  many,  if  not
all,  the  mysteries  of  human  nature.  While  that  na-
ture may  be  contemplated  as  a  unit,  and  uniform  in
the  elements  by  which  it  is  developed,  yet,  devel-
oped in  different  degrees,  both  as  to  qualities  and
powers,  we  can  see  why  it  is  that  an  INFLUENCE,
which  is  essentially  the  same  in  its  philosophy,  has
been  known  under  so  many  different  names.  In
curing  disease,  it  takes  the  name  of  "miracle;*1
(12,  and  114  to  131,)  when  low  and  discordant,  it
is  called  "evil ;"  in  another  form  it  is  called,  "the
power  of  God;"  in  another,  it  is  "Mesmerism;"
in  another,  it  is  Combativeness  and  "War:"  in
another,  it  is  Benevolence  and  Moral  Reform;  in
another,  it  bears  the  name  of  Religion  ;  and  here,


114


BOOK  OF PSYCHOLOGY.


too,  it  is  high  or  low,  as  the  sources  whence  it  ori-
ginates correspond  with


GOODNESS  AND  TRUTH  I

Celestial  Power  !  in  thy  divine  control

Is  all  that  brightens  and  exalts  the  soul !

Inspired  by  thee,  the  lofty  spirit  glows,

And  forms  its  plan  to  lighten  human  woes.

At  thy  decree  devotion  brighter  burns,

And  human  thought  each  selfish  motive  spurns.

The  wretched  seeks  a  shelter  in  thy  dome,

In  thy  abode  the  orphan  finds  a  home  ;

For  thee  the  missionary  roams  afar,

Thy  word  his  law,  thy  light  his  polar  star !

All  that  is  good  and  noble,  pure  and  free,

Sublime  and  godlike,  has  its  source  in  thee  ! Lewis.


AXIOMATIC.  115


AXIOMATIC.
I.

Manhood. — The  true  doctrine  of  manhood,  is
individual  sovereignty.  Every  human  being,  when
matured  by  age,  becomes  thereby,  so  far  indepen-
dent of  all  others,  as  to  possess  the  right  of  think-
ing and  acting ;  conditioned,  always,  that  each
one  shall,  in  his  proper  person,  bear  tjie  cost  of
his  own  conduct.  -

II.

HmiAX  Destiny. — The  destiny  of  the  race  is
eternal  progression.  Hence,  the  beginning  of  an
existence  which  is  progressive,  must  be  imperfect ;
and  that  imperfection  includes  whatever  there  is  of
evil  in  sickness,  pain,  sorrow  and  change,  or  death.

III.
The  Problem  of  Evil. — 1.  Absolute  goodness
and  absolute  evil,  are  two  absolute  contradictions,
and  therefore  both  cannot  be  true.  What  we  de-
nominate evil,  therefore,  is  comparative  good.  In-
fancy is  an  evil,  an  imperfection,  when  compared
with  Manhood  ;  at  the  same  time,  the  infant  may
be  perfect  as  an  infant,  but  its  state,  when  com-


116  BOOK OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

pared  with  the  ultimate  design  of  its  existence,  is
an  imperfect  one,  and  hence  it  must  grow,  and  pro-
gress out  of  it,  to  one  that  is  higher  and  better.

2.  If,  in  any  just  sense,  man's  ultimate  condition
may  be  said  to  be  evil,  or  more  of  an  evil  than  his
infancy,  then  of  such  an  one  may  it  truthfully  be
affirmed,  "It  would  have  been  good  for  that  man
if  he  had  never  been  born;"  because  his  birth  was
not  a  good  to  him  but  an  evil.  But  how  could  an
absolute  evil  be  "born,"  or  brought  into  being,  by
a  Parent  who  is,  was,  and  always  will  be,  Absolute
Goodness  itself!

3.  If  man  be  the  creature  of  God,  his  (man's)
existence  must  be,  on  the  whole,  a  positive  good,
unless  the  source  whence  he  originated  be  abso-
lutely imperfect.  Thus,  if  the  Love  of  God  was
sufficient  to  desire  man's  eternal  progression,  and
His  wisdom  was  equal  to  the  means,  it  must  follow,
unless  we  suppose  the  Deity  deficient  in  power,  and
thus  lacking  in  force  sufficient  to  accomplish  what
his  infinite  goodness  would  prompt  him  to  do,  if
he  could.  Hence,  if  man's  existence  be  not,  on  the
whole,  a  real,  positive,  eternal  good,  it  must  be,
because  the  Deity  either  did  not  desire  it,  or  if  he
desired  it,  he  did  not  know  how  to  accomplish  ;  or,
desiring  and  knowing  how  to  accomplish,  he  could
not  secure  for  the  want  of  power.  The  notion,
therefore,  of  absolute  evil,  cannot  be  admitted  ex-
cept with  its  correlative,  that  the  Deity  is  not  abso-
lutely perfect.


AXIOMATIC.  117


IV.


Freedom. — Though  man  be  a  sovereign  in  re-
spect to  his  individual  rights,  yet  his  existence
being  derived  and  dependent,  in  so  far  he  is  not
free.  The  laws,  the  nature  by  which  he  is  devel-
oped is  Fate  to  him,  which  is  the  good  of  which,
his  manhood  makes  him  conscious.  Were  his  des-
tiny absolutely  within  his  own  disposal,  he  being
imperfect  from  the  beginning,  in  knowledge,  in
power,  and  love,  absolute  failure,  might,  indeed,  be
the  result.

V.

Authority. — In  matters  of  Faith,  then,  there
can  be  no  sufficient  Authority  but  Superior
Wisdom,  as  developed  through  nature  and  reason.
The  objection  to  Tradition  is,  that  it  is  made  up  of
an  indefinite  number  of  disconnected  links,  and
even  if  the  chain  reach  back  to  antiquity,  it  carries
us  to  periods  when  the  Eace  was  more  ignorant
than  at  present,  and.  hence,  what  was  uttered  in  its
infancy,  cannot  be  of  so  much  authority,  even  if  we
know  precisely  what  was  said.  And  besides,  sup-
pose we  could  summon  Moses,  and  St.  Paul,  and
Pythagoras,  now  to  stand  before  us,  and  they  were
each  to  answer  the  following  questions  in  the  neg-
ative : —

Have  you  progressed  in  goodness  and  knowledge
from  the  first  till  now  ?  Have  you  advanced  any
from  the  views  you  entertained  when  in  this  world?
Do  you  receive  more  truth  now  than  you  did  then?


118  BOOK OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

And  how  much  authority  would  now  be  allowed
to  what  these  worthies  uttered  three  thousand
years  ago,  if  they  should  confess  that  they  had
lived  all  this  while  without  advancing  a  single  step
in  knowledge.  Or,  suppose  they  were  to  assure  us
they  had  progressed  in  goodness  and  truth.  Then,
why  should  we  be  required  to  go  hack,  and  confine
ourselves  to  the  views  of  things  they  entertained
thousands  of  years  ago,  and  when  they  had  no  bet-
ter facilities  for  obtaining  knowledge  than  we  have
now?

VI.

Individuality. — In  one  respect  only,  are  all  the
human  race  alike :  In  the  elements  of  their  being —
life,  motion,  and  thought  In  all  else,  they  must  dif-
fer, as  the  degrees  in  which  these  elements  are  de-
veloped in  each  individual,  differ  ad  infinitum. —
Hence,  there  can  be  no  two  absolutely  alike  in  all
respects ;  and,  of  course,  uniformity  of  opinion  in
the  race,  is  not  a  matter  of  abstract  possibility,
even.

VII.

Justice. — Justice,  or  Eeciprocity,  is  a  matter  of
necessity,  as  much  so  as  the  law  of  gravitation.
This  is  explained  by  the  true  Doctrine  of  Man-
hood. Each  must  bear  the  cost  of  his  own  con-
duct. Each  substance  thrown  into  the  air  is  at-
tracted back  to  the  earth,  with  a  force,  correspond-
ing mathematically,  with  its  size  and  density.  The
punishment  corresponds,  always,  with  the  capacity


AXIOMATIC. -  119

of  the  offender,  and  the  law  that  is  violated,
whether  it  be  Physical,  Organic,  or  Moral,  as  each
of  these  laws  operate  independently  of  the  other.

VIII.

Punishment. — The  notion  that  man  may  vio-
late any  Truth  or  Law  of  Nature,  and  yet  escape
punishment,  or  not  be  hindered  in  his  progression,
had  its  origin  in  the  infancy  of  the  race,  and,  is
gradually  outgrown  as  we  progress  to  manhood,
the  same  as  we  outgrow  other  notions  peculiar  to
a  juvenile,  imperfect  state  of  being.

IX.

Religion. — The  lower  first  and  then  the  higher.
The  highest  Faculties  have  respect  to  the  higher
Truths, — Science,  Philosophy,  Theology.  Hence
the  mental  organs  appropriate  to  Religion  are  the
highest.  And,  when  it  is  considered,  that  what
we  denominate  Religion,  embraces  two  elements,
Heat  and  Light,  or  Love  and  Knowledge,  it  is  easy  to
account  for  the  prevalent  forms  of  Fanaticism
which  have  hitherto  prevailed.  All  religious
books,  including  the  Bible,  Koran,  &c.,  show,  how
far  these  two  elements  were  developed  in  the  per-
sons who  wrote  them  ;  how  much  they  loved  the
Divine,  and  how  much  they  knew  about  him. —
And  precisely  the  same  inferences  are  to'be  drawn
from  the  methods  in  which  individuals  or  societies
undertake  to  worship  God.  The  earnestness  of
their  services,  and  the  pains  they  sutler,  show  how


120  BOOK  OF PSYCHOLOGY.

much  they  love,  the  Form  of  their  conduct  shows
exactly  how  much  they  know  of  the  Supreme  In-
telligence.

X.

Harmony. — As  God  is  Absolute  Goodness,  Ab-
solute Power,  Absolute  Intelligence,  itself,  so  these
elements  in  Him  are  Infinite  Harmony.  Hence,
Progression  is  advancement,  growth,  from  a  state  of
discord  to  one  of  comparative  harmony.  The  great-
est good  of  each  is  Individual,  Social,  National,
Universal,  Progressive  Harmony.


n


OR


eOMUPOSDITDOBfl  gQMiPILOlF'Ql®


AND


WHEREBY  THESE  ARTS  MAY  BE  ACQUIRED  IN  A  FEW  HOURS,

AVOIDING  THE  PEDANTIC  NONSENSE  OF  THE

GRAMMARIANS.


BY  PROFESSOR  T.  V.  PATERSON.


Grammar  treats  not  of  the  nature  of  things,  but  of  words— it  teaches  not
effective  or  elegant,  but  correct  speaking  and  writing.  When  we  talk  of  Gram-
mar teaching  us  things,  we  get  into  a  rigmarole— it  is,  nevertheless,  the  step-
ping stoni  to  such  knowledge.


NEW- YORK :
STEARNS  AND  C<


PRICE  TWENTY-FIVE  GENTS.


H


17


ri  1


u


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process.


? <^*  «  <^ Kf  s  oT* X> Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide

o* o^  rf* ±^U*r&%* ^  Treatment  Date:  Nov.  2004


PreservationTechnologies

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066
(724)779-2111


5  .  *>»*•,


^


r«*  ^


^w


\0<


N.  MANCHESTER, 1 ' *>|Cj|^<  »  S  ^

INniANA  4fiQfi?  I •  C^  *2>  dw
