The Sushruta Samhita, Vol. 3 (Uttara-Tantra) (Sushruta (Kaviraj Kunjalal Bhishagratna, trans.), 1916)
=====================================================================================================
The Sushruta Samhita, Vol. 3: the Uttara-Tantra. Completes the 3-volume Bhishagratna translation. Public domain. Internet Archive.

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION

01 '

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

Vo], Ilf.

uttara-tantra

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION

OF

THE SUSHRUTA SAMH1TA

WITH

A FULL AND COMPREHENSIVE INTRODUCTION, ADDITIONAL
TEXTS, DIFFERENT READINGS, NOTES, COMPARATIVE
VIEWS, INDEX, GLOSSARY AND PLATES

(IN THREE VOLUMES)

EDITED T?Y

KAVIRAJ KUNJA LAL MI1SHAGRATN A,

M. K. A. S. (Lond.)

Vol. HI.

TJTTARA-TANTRA

PUBLISHED BY

S. L. BHADURI, B. L.

IO, KASHI GHOSE’S LANE, CALCUTTA

1916

All Rights Reserved .

PRINTED AT THE BHARAT MIIIIR PRESS BY M. BHATTACHARYYA OF

Messrs. SANYAL & Co.,

25, ROY FAGAN STREET, CALCUTTA.

Kaviraj Kunja Lall Bhishagratna, M.R.R.S. (Lond.)

PKEFACE

It was some years ago that we took upon our-
selves the rather ambitious task of bringing out
the Sushruta Samhita in English. And we may
mention that the appreciation the first instal-
ment of our undertaking met with at the hands of
scholars at home and abroad considerably encour-
aged us in completing this huge undertaking.

We desire to record here our deepest feelings
of gratitude towards His Highness the Maharaja
Sir Sawai Jai Singh Bahadoor, K. C. S. I., of
Alwar (Rajputana), who has, by his princely
donation, enabled us to bring this highly import-
ant work to a completion. It is known through-
out India that the illustrious Ruler of Alwar is
a great patron of letters and a lover of Ayurvedic
Science, and many noble undertakings in our
country have depended largely upon his liberal
support. No words of mine can adequately ex-
press my admiration for the good he is doing to
our country.

Now that the whole work is before the public,
its worth and importance will be duly judged
Our translation does not claim to have fany liter-
ary excellence, as our sole aim has been to render
as faithfully as we could the original into one
of the European languages. The technical terms
occurring in the Sushruta Samhita cannot be

11

accurately translated into English, as there are
no corresponding words in that language which
would convey the exact meaning of the oftginal.
We have therefore retained the Sanskrit terms,
and have in some cases put within brackets such
English words as may approximately render the
meaning of the original.

No apology is needed for placing before
the learned world of the West a scientific treatise
of ancient India. We may only mention that
the Hindu system of medicine is not a thing
of mere antiquarian interest. It is a living sys-
tem, and even to-day millions of people in India
are being treated according to this system. A
system which has stood the test of centuries, and
which still holds its own against rival systems of
the day, cannot be lightly brushed aside as wholly
unscientific. It has been said that a system
which recognises prayer as one of the means
of curing human ailments, can lay no claim to
any scientific character. All that we need say
in answer to this criticism is that humanity has
not yet risen above prayer in any country in the
world, and faith in the efficacy of prayer in curing
diseases is, instead of dying out, gaining ground
in the modern scientific world. Whatever that
may be, in actual practice, Hindu medical men,
like their brethren of Europe, rely chiefly upon
medicine and surgery, but occasionally prescribe
prayer also as an efficient form of remedy. While
recognising the influence of mind on body, and the

Ill

efficacy of faith in certain forms of disease, they
treat it as a special method, falling more properly
within the province of priests.

A few words, however, seem necessary to
show what abiding interest there is for all time
in such a work as the Sushruta Samhitd. We do
not wish to enter into any historical criticism to
prove that the different systems of medicine in
other countries, new or old, have received more
than a mere stimulus from the Indian System,
and that many foreign discoveries may be traced
to the work we are now presenting to the world.
1'he opinions of some modern men of science, who
cannot be accused of having any bias in favour
of our system, will demonstrate its abiding value.

Surgeon General Sir Pardey Lukis, M. D.,
T. M. S., K. C. S. 1.. Director-General of Indian
Medical Service, was pleased to remark in the
course of his speech in the Imperial Legislative
Council : — “ Many of the so-called discoveries of
recent years are merely re-discoveries of the facts
known centuries ago to the ancients (Indians).”
In noticing the first volume of this very work, the
British Medical Journal observed in its issue of
November, 1912: — “It is certain that in this an-
cient medical book there are traces of knowledge
which is comparatively recent in the West."

We do not know what reception will be ac-
corded to this work by the public, but we may
fairly hope that now that the ancient Indian
Medical System and the Indigenous Drugs of

IV

this country arc being investigated by scientific
experts under the direction of the Government
of India, this ancient system of Medicine and
Surgery will attract the attention of those who
have hitherto neglected it as unworthy of notice.

The encouragement which we have received
from the Governments of Bengal and Nepal and
from the States of Baroda and Mysore, has helped
us a great deal and we take this opportunity
of expressing our gratitude towards them. The
active help extended to us in the preparation
of this work by Vaidyaratna Kaviraj Jogindra
Nath Sen, Vidyabhusan, M. A., Kaviraj Madhav
Chandra Tarkatirtha, Kaviraj J nanendranath Sen,
Kaviratna, B. A., Prof. Satyendranath Sen, Vidyti-
vigis'a, M. A., and Babu Sachindralal Bhaduri,
B. A., B. L., we also specially and thankfully
acknowledge. We offer our sincerest thanks also
to Dr. U. D. Banerjee, L. R. C. P., M. R. C. S.
Dr. Y. M. Bose, M. D. (Chicago\ and Kaviraj
Surendranath Goswami, Yidyavinode, B. A.,
L. M. S. who have never failed to give us their
valuable suggestions whenever we have sought
their advice.

IO, KASHI GHCSE’S I.ANE, I

Calcutta, j KUNJA LAL BHISHAORATNA,

May 25, 191b. J

CONTENTS

(Uttara-Tantra.)

CHAPTER I.

Diseases of the eyes, etc. Diseases of the eye and its append*
ages— Description of Drishti— Mandalas and Sandhis— Description of
Patalas — Premonitory symptoms — Causes of eye-diseases — Classification —
Prognosis of Vataja — Pittaja — Kaphaja — Raktaja and Tri-doshaja eye-
diseases — Seats of the eye-diseases. ... ... i— 8

CHAPTER II.

Pathology of the diseases of the eye joints ‘.—Their nomencla-
ture — Number — Symptoms. ... ... ... ... 9 — n

CHAPTER III.

Pathology Of the diseases Of the eye lids :— Causes and names
— Specific symptoms of Utsangini — Kumbhika — Pothaki — Ars'ovartma —
Anjana — Klishta-varlma — Vartma-bandhaka, etc. etc. ... 12 — 15

CHAPTER IV.

Pathology of the diseases of the sclerotic coat Names and
number — Symptoms of S'ukldrma — Lohitarma — S'uktikd — Arjuna — Pish-
taka— Sird-j dla — Balasa-grathila, etc. etc. ... ... 16—17

CHAPTER V. t

Pathology of the diseases of the black part of the eye:—

Number— Names — Symptoms — Prognosis — A-vrana-s'ukra J ata — Sa-vrana-
S'ukra— Akshi-p&kdtyaya— Ajak 4 . ... ... ... xS— 19

ii

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER VI.

Pathology of the diseases affecting the eyes as a whole

Names and Causes— Symptoms of Vdtaja— Pittaja— Kaphaja and Raktaja
Abhishyanda— Causes of Adhimantha— Symptoms of Vataja — Pittaja —
Kaphaja — and Raktaja Adhimantha — Prognosis — Symptoms of Sa-s'opha
and A-s'opha Akshi-pdka— Symptoms of Hatddhimantha — V£ta-pary£ya
— S'ushHkshi-pdka — Anyato-v&a — Anda-dhyushila — S'irot-pjita — Sird*
harsha. ... ... ... ... ... 20 — 24

CHAPTER VII.

Pathology of the diseases of the Pupil 2— Description of Drishti
— Symptoms — When first — second — third and fourth Patola attacked —
Blindness — Specific symptoms of Vataja— Pittaja — Kaphaja and Sanni-
patika Timira— Pariml 4 yi — Different colours of the pupil in cases of
Linga-nds'a — Specific traits of Vdtaja — Pittaja — Kaphaja — and Sdnnipsitika
Linga-nas'a — Traits of Vataja — Pittaja — and Kaphaja Vidagdha-Drishti—
Smoky sight — Hrasva-Jdtya— Nakuldndhya, — Gambhirika — Symptoms of
traumatic Linga-nds'a. ... ... ... ... 25—31

CHAPTER VIII.

Classification and treatment of ocular affections Classi-
fication — Names of Chhedya — Lekhya — Bhedya — Vyddhya eye-diseases
— Names of eye-diseases where operation not to be risked — Names of
curable and incurable eye-diseases. ... ... ... 32 — 33

CHAPTER IX.

Treatment of Vataja Ophthalmia Tarpana— Puta-paka—
F umigation —Snuff — Wash— Eye-drop— Collyri um — Treatment of Anyalo*
vata— Vata-paryaya — S'ushkiikshi-pjka. ... ... ... 34 — 37

CHAPTER X.

Treatment Of Pittaja Ophthalmia Tarpana measures — Wash
—Snuff— Anjana — Rasa-kriy 4 — AVchyotana— 1 Treatment of S'ukti-pdka
and Dhuma-dars'i. ... ... ... ... 38—40

CONTENTS.

lit

CHAPTER XI.

Treatment of theehmaja Ophthalmia Fomcntntion—Anjana
—Treatment of Baldsa-grathita— Pishtaka — Praklinna-vartma. ... 41—46

CHAPTER XII.

Treatment Of Raktaja Ophthalmia -Venesect ion— Inhalation
— Eye -drop — Snuffs — Plaster— Vartis — Treatment of S'irotpdta — Sird-
harsha — Arjuna. — Scarifying— Anjana — Treatment of S'ukra— Kshdra*
Anjana — Soothing applications— Treatment of Ajakd — Akshi-pdka— Puyd-
lasa— Praklinna-Vartma and Aklinna*Vartma. ... 47—53

CHAPTER XIII.

Treatment of Lekhya-roga Mode of treatment by Scarification
—Satisfactory — defective and excessive scarification— Names of diseases
amenable to scarification. ... ... ... ... 54—56

CHAPTER XIV.

Treatment of eye-diseases which require Incision :— 1 Treat-
ment of Visa-granthi— Lagana— Anjana — Krimi-granlhi and Upandha.—
Application of Sneha and Sveda. ... ... ... 57 — 58

CHAPTER XV.

Treatment of eye diseases which require Excision Treat-
ment of Armans— Preliminary actions — Mode of operation— Medicinal
treatment — Treatment of Sird-j^la — Sirdja-pidakd — Parvanikd.— Churna-
Anjana— Treatment of the inner part of the eye-lids. ... 59—63

CHAPTER XVI. f

Treatment of diseases pecnliar to eye-lashes and eye lids

Surgical treatment of Pakshma-kopa— Preliminary actions — Mode of
operation— Cauterisation and other measures. ... ... 64—65

iv

CONTENTS,

CHAPTER XVII.

Treatment of diseases of pnpil and crystalline lens General

treatment of Pitta and S'leshnia-Vidagdha-Drishti. — Pushpdnjana—
Dr&vdnjana — Gudikanjana — Treatment of Day-blindness — Nocturnal
blindness— Application of Vartis— Rasa-kriydnjana— Kshudrdnjana—
Treatment of a palliative type— Triphald-Ghrita—Navana-errhines— Puta-
pdka— Pratyanjana— Treatment of Pittaja — Vdtaja— Kaphaja and Tri-
doshaja Kacha — Fumigation — Treatment of ParimUyi— “Diet— Blood-
letting— Treatment of Timira— Prognosis— Surgical treatment of Kaphaja
Linga-ndsa — Its after-measures — Symptoms and treatment of the disorders
resulting from an injudicious operation— Causes of relapse— Symptoms
produced by the defects of the S'aldkd— Description of the S'aldkd —
Derangements due to defective operations— Their treatment— Eye-sight-
invigorating Anj anas and Vart is. ... ... ... 66 — 83

CHAPTER XVIII.

Preparations and medicinal measures for ocular affections
in general The Tarpana measures— Mode of application— Symptoms
of satisfactory — excessive and defective Tarpana — Treatment of excessive
and defective Tarpana — Cases of Tarpana— The Pula-pdka measures—
Emulsive — Scraping and Healing Puta-pdka— Preparations of Snehana —
Lekhana and Ropana Puta-pdka— Prohibition and Remedies for infringe-
ments— Symptoms of satisfactory— excessive— and defective applications of
Puta-pdka — Mode of preparing Puta-pdka— Mode of application— As'chyo-
tana and Seka — their classes— Maximum time for Seka — Time for appli-
cation— S'iro-vasti— Lekhana— Ropana and Prasddana Anjana — Forms of
Anjana— Their size and dose— Materials of vessels and rod for the use of
Anjana— How to apply Anjana— Forbidden cases for the application of
Anjana— Symptoms of satisfactory— excessive and deficient use of
Lekhana Anjana— Prasddana Anjana — Ropana Anjana— Recipe of several
principal Anjanas— Bhad rod ay a- Anj ana— Vartis— Pindanjana. ... 84—101

CHAPTER XIX.

Treatment Of hurt or injnry to the eye ’.—General Treatment-

Prognosis— Treatment of sunken eye— Symptoms and treatment of Kuku-
naka— Conclusion. ... ... ... 102— 10c

CONTENTS.

v

CHAPTER XX.

Causes and symptoms of Ear -disease Classifications— Symp.
toms of Kyna-s'ula— -Prandda— Vadhirya— -Kshveda — Kama -srdva— Kama-
kandu— Karna-gutha— Karna-pratindha — Krimikarna — Karna-vidradhi—
Karna-pdka — Puti-karna. ... ... ... ... 1 06—108

CHAPTER XXI.

Medical Treatment of Ear-disease General Treatment-
Treatment of Vdtaja ear -disease — Karna-s'ula — Prandda — and Vddhiryya.
— S'iro-vasti— Dipika-Taila— Different kinds of Ear-drop— General and
specific treatment of Pittaja car-ache and Kaphaja Karna-s'ula—
Treatment of Deafness — General and Special Treatment of Puti-karna —
Karna-srava Krimi-karna — Karna-kshveda — Vidradhi, etc. — Kama-
kandu — Karna-pdka. ... ... ... ... 109 — 117

CHAPTER XXII.

Causes and symptoms of diseases of the nose : -Nomenclature
and Classification — Symptoms of Apinasa — Puti-nasya — Nasd-pdka—
Rakta-pitta — Puya-rakta— Kshavathu — Bhrams'athu — Dipti — Pratinaha —
Parisrdva— Pari-b'osha — Ais'as— S'opha— ■ Arvuda— Pratis'yaya 118—120

CHAPTER XXIII.

Therapeutics of nasal diseases ‘.—Treatment of Puti-nasya—
Apinasa.— Diet— Errhines — Treatment of Ndsd-pdka— S'onita-pitta — Puya-
rakta— Kshavathu— Bhrams'athu— Dipti— Nasandha — Nasa-srava— Nasd-
s'osha etc. ... ... ... ... 121— 122

CHAPTER XXIV.

Symptoms and treatment of Catarrh ‘.—Causes— Premonitory
symptoms— Specific symptoms of Vdtaja— Pittaja— Kaphaja— Tri-doshaja
types— Raktaja-pratis'ydya— Prognosis— General treatment of Pratis'yaya—
Regimen of diet and conduct— Treatment of Vdtaja— Pittaja — Kaphaja—
and Tri-doshaja types. ... ... ... 124 — 130

vi

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XXV.

Symptoms Of diseases Of the head Classification— Symptoms
of Vataja— Pittaja— Kaphaja — Tri-doshaja— Kshayaja — Raktaja— Krimija
S'iro-roga — Symptoms of Suryilvarta — Ananta-vata— -Ardhava-bhedaka—
and S'amkhaka. ... ... ... ... * 3* — * 33

CHAPTER XXVI.

Treatment of diseases of the head -.—Treatment of Vdtaja—
Pittaja— Raktaja S'viroroga— -Food— Treatment of Kaphaja — Tri-doshaja
Ksbayaja — Krimija— Ardhava-bhedaka — Ananta-vata — and S'amkhaka.—
Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... 134— 140

Here ends the daClrikya-Tantra.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Specific features of nine malignant Grahas Different names

— General course ol attack — Symptom^ of attack by Skanda— Skandapa-
simira — S'akuni — Revati — Putana — Andha-putana— S'lta putana — Mukha-
mandika— Naigam rt sha —Prognosis — Rules to be observed. ... 141 — 144

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Therapeutics of au attack by Skanda Grata -.—General treat-
ment — Fumigation — Mantras ... ... ... 145 — 146

CHAPTER XXIX,

Therapeutics of an attack by SkandstpasmsCra:— General treat-

ment — sprinkling — Anointment — Utsadana— Fumigation— Religious pro-
piliation — Mantras. ... ... ... t<> 147 j.g

CHAPTER XXX.

Treatment of an attack by fifakuni graha : — Sprinkling — Anoint-
pient—Pracleha— Fumigation— Religious propitiation— Mantras. I49— IJO

CONTENTS.

v

CHAPTER XXXI.

Theraputics of an attack by Revati-graha ’.—Sprinkling— Anoint-
ment — Plaster — Religious propitiation— Mantras. ... ... 151 — *52

• ,

CHAPTER XXXII.

Treatment of an attack by Putana-graha Washing— Anoint-
ment — Fumigation — Religious propitiation — Mantras. ... 153 — 154

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Treatment of Andha-putana*graha Sprinkling— Plaster— Fumi-
gation — Religious propitiation — Mantras. ... ... 155 — 156

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Treatment of an attack by ^ita-putanai :— Sprinkling— Fumi-
gation — Anointment — Religious propitiation — Mantras. ... 157

CHAPTER XXXV.

Treatment of an attack by Mukha mandika -.—Sprinkling-
Anointment — Fumigation — Religious propitiation — Mantras ... 158

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Treatment of an attack by Naigamesha -.—Sprinkling— Anoint-
ment—' Utsadana — Fumigation— Religious propitiation— Mantras. 159—160

CHAPTER XXXVII.

Origin Of nine Grahas The nine presiding deities. ... 161 — 103

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Symptoms and Therapeutics of the diseases of the female
organ of generation ‘.—Causes.— Enumeration— Classification— Names
— Symptoms of Vdtaja — Pittaja — Kaphaja — and Tri-doshaja types —
Medical treatment. — Internal and External treatment. ... 164 — 168

Here ends the Kaumatra-bhritya-Tantra.

viii

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Symptoms and Treatment of Fever Description of Jwara—
Definition and classification — Pathology — Premonitory symptoms — Symp-
toms of Vataja — Pittaja— -Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja fever — Abhinyasa-
fever — Ilataujas — Sannyisa — Dwandaja fever — Vata-pitta*fever — V£ta-
S'leshma-fever — Pitta-S'leshma fever— Pralepaka— Tritiyaka (tertian) and
Chdturthaka (quartan) fever — Vishama-fever — Seat and duration of Vishama*
jwara — Satataka — Anyedyushka — Tritiyaka — Chdturthaka —Action — Influ-
ence of Vdyu on Vishama fever— Agantuka fever due to the effects of poison
— Hay-fever — Gambhira fever and its prognosis— General treatment — Fast-
ing — Prohibition of fasting — Effect of fasting — Satisfactory and excessive
fasting — Tepid water— Cold water — Peya — Yavdgu — Symptoms of Pakva
and Ama-jwara — Time for administering febrifuge — Preliminary treatment
— Application of Vasti and S'iro-virechana — Administration of Ghrita—
Diet — Ldja-larpana— Milk as a diet— Meat-diet— Prohibitions in fever—
Sams'amana decoctions for Vdtaja — Pittaja and Kaphaja fever — Treat-
ment of Kapha-Vata — Pitta-S'leshma — Vata-pitta fever and Tri-doshaja
fever— Treatment of Vishama-jwara — Ghrita in cases of Vishama fever —
Guduchyadi-ghrita — Kalasyadi-ghrita — Maha-kalyana-ghrita — Pancha*
gavya ghrita— Triphala-ghrita — Pancha-sara — Medicated Tailas — Fumiga-
tions and Anjanas — Treatment of shivering and burning sensation — General
and specific treatment of the complications— Application of Vastis — Symp-
toms of the remission of fever. ... ... ... 169 — 211

CHAPTER XL.

Symptoms and treatment of Diarrhoea, etc Causes— Patho-
logy — Premonitory symptoms — Symptoms of Vataja — Pittaja — Kaphaja
and Tri-doshaja types — Symptoms of S'okaja and Arnaja Atisara — Symp-
toms of Ama and Pakva Atisdra — Prognosis — General treatment — Twenty
different Recipes for Amatisara — Fasting — Six Yogas for Pittaja Atisdra —
Astringent remedies — Application of Ghrita — Pulapaka-prcparations —
Peya — Treatment of thirst — Use of milk — Asthapana and Anuvasana Vastis
— Pichchhd-Vasti— Diet— Causes and symptoms of Pakvalisara— Treatment
and Symptoms of Pravsftlikst — General Treatment — Application of Vastis
—Diet — Medical treatment — Yavdgu— General principle of treatment —
Indications of cure — Static or dynamic causes of diseases and treatment—
Chfahani— Premonitory symptoms of Grahani— Symptoms— Specific
symptoms of Vataja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja Grahani — Treat-
ment and diet. ... ... ... ... ... 212—236

CONTENTS.

ix

CHAPTER XLI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Phthisis Nomenclature— SWia

— Kshaya — Rija*yakshma — Etiology and general symptoms— Specific
symptoms of Vataja — Pittaja and Kaphaja types — Prognosis — Other causes
of S'osha and their symptoms — Premonitory symptoms — Prognosis — Treat-
ment — Diet — Meat, etc — Utsddana — Medicated Ghritas — Eladi-mantha —
Use of goat’s flesh, milk, etc. — Rules of conduct. ... 237 — 245

CHAPTER XLII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Gulma -.—Definition and Number-
Localisation and Nomenclature — Premonitory Symptoms — Specific Symp-
toms of Vataja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types — Symptoms of
Raktaja Gulma— General Treatment of Vataja — Pittaja — Kaphaja — Tri-
doshaja and Raktaja types — Uttara-Vasti — Anuvasana — Chitraka-
ghrita — Hingv&li-ghrita — Dadhika-ghrita — Rasona-ghrita. — Ghritas in
Pittaja — Raktaja and Kaphaja Gulma — Internal use of Kshara — Vris'chi-
rarishta— Blood-letting— Diet and Svcda. — Peya — Khada-yusha — Fomenta-
tion — Medicated plugs — Supervening symptoms — Prohibited articles —
Causes and Symptoms of Slula— Symptoms of Vataja— Pittaja— Kaphaja
and Sannipdtika S'ula. — General treatment — Treatment of Vataja —
Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja S'ula. — Symptoms and treatment of
P^rsVa-S'ula.— Symptoms and treatment of Kukshi-S'ula. — Symptoms
and treatment of Hrlch-chhula. —Symptoms of Vasti-S'ula — Mutra-S'ula
— Vit -S'ula and Annaja S'ula. — Theii treatment. ... 246 — 264

CHAPTER XLI 1 1.

Symptoms and Treatment of Heart-disease ‘.—Etiology and
Nomenclature — Numb*, r — Specific Symptoms of Vataja — Pittaja— Kaphaja
and Krimija types -Supervening Symptoms — Medical ticatment o(
Vataja— Pittaja— Kaphaja and Krimija types. ... ... 265 — 208

CHAPTER XLIV. f

Symptoms and Treatment of Jaundice, etc* Etiology and

Nomenclature — Premonitory Symptoms — Specific Symptoms of Vataja—
Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types — Symptoms of Kdrnala—
Kumbha-K^maM — L.igbaroha and llalimaka. — Supervening Symptoms—

CONTENTS.

X

General treatment —Treatment of — Kdmala — Kumbha-kamala — Lagha-
raka.- Articles of Diet— Treatment of Supervening Symptoms — Prog-
nosis. ... ... ... ... 269—276

CHAPTER XLV.

Symptoms and Treatment of Haemorrhage -.—Cause and Patho-
logy — Prognosis — Premonitory Symptoms — Supervening Symptoms — Symp-
toms of incurable types— General principles of treatment. — Emetic —
Purgative— Fasting — Articles of fare— Diet— Lambatives— The best six
Yogas — Asthdpana and Anuvdsana— Treatment of down-coursing type —
Uttara-vasti. ... ... ... ... ... 277—284

CHAPTER XLVI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Fainting fits Definition- Class!*
fication — Premonitory symptoms— Specific symptoms— General treatment
— Specific treatment.— Symptoms of Sannydsa — Treatment — Incurable
type— Diet. ... ... ... ... 285—288

CHAPTER XLVII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Alcoholism Properties and
action of wine — Evil effects of drinking — Three stages of Alcoholic intoxica-
tion— Cases where wine is prohibited.— Specific symptoms of Psfarftyaya
— symptoms of Vdtaja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types —
Symptoms of Para-mada — Pandjirna — and Pana-vibhrama — Prognosis —
Treatment of Vdtaja— Pittaja— Kaphaja— Tri-doshaja and Dvi-doshaja
types — Pdnaka — Treatment of Para-mada — Pandjirna — Pana-vibhrama and
Pdnatyaya — Treatment of Thirst— Remedies for Daha. — Symptoms and
treatment of Raktaja -D.lha. — Diiha due to thirst — Accumulation of
blood — Due to Kshaya— Due to hurt of Marma. — Their Treatment —
Mode of drinking wine. ... ... ... ... 289 — 301

CHAPTER XLVI 1 1.

Symptoms and Treatment of thirst ‘.—Etiology— Classification-
Premonitory symptoms— Symptoms of Vdtaja — Pittaja — and Kaphaja
types.— Symptoms of Kshataja— Kshayaja— Arnaja and Annaja thirst. —
Prognosis — General treatment — Specific treatment— Treatment of Kshataja
—Kshayaja and Amaja thirst.— General treatment. ... 302—308

CONTENTS.

XI

CHAPTER XL IX.

Symptoms 'and Treatment Of Vomiting Causes and Nomen-
clature— Premonitory symptoms — Specific symptoms of ViStaja — Pittaja —
Kaphaja — and Tri-doshaja types — Traumatic cases— Prognosis — General
treatment — Treatment of Vataj a — Kaphaja and Pittaja types. — Vomiting
due to pregnancy. — Treatment of traumatic and Krimija types. — General
treatment— Diet. ... ... ... ... 300—313

CHAPTER L.

Symptoms and Treatment of Hlc-cough Causes— Derivation
—Classification— Premonitory symptoms — Symptoms of Annaj£ — Yamala
— Kshudrika — Cambhira — and Mahd-hikk 4 . — Prognosis — Their treatment
— Four liquid compounds — Meat as diet. ... ... 314 — 318

CHAPTER LI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Asthma Etiology— Classification
— Premonitory symptoms — Specific symptoms of Kshudra — Tamaka —
Pra-tamaka — Chhinna — Maha— and Urdhva-S'vasa. — Prognosis — General
treatment. — Ilinsradi-ghrita — S'ringvddi-ghrita— Suvahadi-ghrita — Tali-
s'adi-ghrita — Meat as diet. — The five Lambatives — Utk&rikd — Articles
recommtnded — Application of Sneha and Dhuma — Purging and
Vomiting. ... ... ... ... ... 319—325

CHAPTER LII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Cough —Causes and Etiology-
Classification — Premonitory symptoms — Specific symptoms of Vtftaja —
Pittaja — Kshataja and Kshayaja types. — General Treatment — Inhalation
of Dhuma — Treatment of Vataja — Pittaja — Kaphaja— Kshayaja and
Kshataja Kasa. — Kalyana-guda — Agastya-lcha. ... ... 326—337

CHAPTER LI II.

Symptoms and Treatment of Hoarseness :— Etiq^ogy— Symptoms
Of Vitaja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types. — Symptoms of
Kshayaja and Medoja types — Prognosis— General Treatment — Treatment
of Vatsja Pittaja — Kaphaja — Tri-doshaja — Kshayaja and Medoja
types. ... ... ... ... ... 335—337

xii

CONTENTS.

CH AFTER LIV.

Symptoms and Treatment of Worms Causes— Classification —
Names and symptoms of Purishaja — Kaphaja — Raktaja worms? — Specific
causes— General symptoms — Prognosis— Their Treatment.— Treatment of
Rom&da and Dant£da worms— Diet. ... ... ... 338—343

CHAPTER LV.

Symptoms and Treatment of UdaCvartta Causes— Classifies -
tion — Symptoms of Yataja — Purishaja — Mutraja Ud a varta.— Repression of
Yawning — Tears — Sneezing — Eructation — Yomiting — Seminal discharge
— Hunger — Thirst — Breath and Sleep. — Piognosis— Their General Treat-
ment — Their Specific treatment. — Treatment of Adhm4na. — Uddvartta due
to errors of diet— Its treatment. ... ... ... 344—351

CHAPTER LVI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Visuchika Causes— Definition
— Symptoms— Alasaka— Vi lambika —Prognosis — General Treatment
— Ksh4r6gada — Kalyana-lavana— Diet. — Causes and Symptoms of iLnsiha
— Treatment. ... ... ... ... ... 352 — 356

CHAPTER LVII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Aroch&ka ‘.—Etiology— Classifica-
tion— Symptoms of V^taja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types.

— Their Treatment — Four specific Lambatives — Regimen of diet

Use of decoction — Arishta and Asava. — Treatment of M&nasa
Arochaka. ... ... ... ... ... 357—360

CHAPTER LVIII.

Symptoms and Treatment of suppression of Urine Ciassifica-

tion— Symptoms of Yata-kundalika— Vatasthild— Vata-vasli— Mutrdtita
— Mutra-jathara— Mutra-sanga— Mutra-kshaya — Mutra-granthi — Mulra-
sarkard— 1 Ushna-v&a an<l two kinds of Mutrauka-sada.— General treatment
—Application of Uttara-Yasti. ... ... 361— 36S

CONTENTS.

xiii

CHAPTER LIX.

Symptoms and Treatment of the defects of Urine Ciassi-

ficationr-Symptoms of V^taja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Sannipi 5 tika types
— Elector injury in the Urethra— Mutrd ghdta due to Stone or Gravel —
General Treatment — Treatmet of Vataja — Pittaja— Kaphaja and Tri«
doshaja types. — Treatment of Abhighdtaja and Furishaja types, 369—372

Here ends the Ka£yachikits&

CHAPTER LX.

Symptoms and Treatment of the diseases brought on through
Superhuman influences ’.—Action of Graha— Causes of influence by a
Graha — Indications of attack by Grahas— Deva-graha— Asura-graha — Gan-
dharva-graha— Yaksha-graha — Pitri-graha— Bhujanga-graha — Rakshasa*
graha and Pis'acha-graha.—Progonosis— Times of their Possession — Ex-
planation of Bhuta-vidya. — General and religious treatment — Their specific
religious treatment — Medical treatment — Special treatment. ... 373 — 3S0

CHAPTER LXI.

Symptoms and Treatment of Apasmrira Derivative signi-
ficance — Causes — Nomenclature — Premonitory Symptoms — Symptoms of
Vdtaja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Sannipataja types. — Discussion on its
causes. — General treatment — Specific treatment — Siddhartha-ghrita —
Pancha-gavya-ghrita — General treatment — Preparation of special wine —
Venesection. ... ... ... ... ... 381—386

CHAPTER LXII.

Symptoms and Treatment of Insanity ’.—Derivation— Classi-
fications of Vataja — Pittaja — Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types — Symptoms
of S'okaja and Vishaja types — General treatment — Treatment by frighten-
ing acts — Diet— Maha-Kalyana-ghrita — Kalyana-ghrita — Phala-ghrita —
Vartis — Venesection. ... ... ... ... 387 — 391

Here ends the Bhuta-VidyaC-Tantra-

XIV

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER LXIII.

Different Combinations of six different Rasas ‘.—Taken two at

a time— Three at a time— Four at a time — Five at a time — Six at a time—
One at a time. ••• Ml Ml Ml 39 *- 39 S

CHAPTER LXIV.

Rnl68 Of Health Indications of Health — Its importance— Regimen
of diet and conduct in the rainy season— Rules for autumn— Hemanta—
Winter— Spring — Summer and for Pr^vrit.— Different kinds of food—
When and how to be taken. — Ten proper times for administration of
Medicines— Their names — Definitions and Effects — Proper time for taking
food. ... ... ... ... ... 396—405

CHAPTER LXV.

The Technical terms used in the treatise :— Names of the

Technical terms — Necessity — Their definitions and examples. 406—413

CHAPTER LXV I.

The different Modifications of the different Doshas

Number of different diseases. — Number of drugs. — Different combinations
of the three Doshas — Their number. ... ... ... 414 — 416

End of the Contents of the Uttara-Tantra.

THE

SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

(SUPPLEMENTARY PART OF THE TREATISE).

CHAPTER I.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the diseases, viz., of the eye, etc. (Aupadra,Vl M

kam adhyayam). i.

Here commences that portion of the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which is known as the Uttara Tantra (the
supplementary part) to which references have been often
made in the preceding one hundred and twenty chapters,
as the fit place wherein to revert in detail to the topics
cursorily mentioned therein. This part comprises
within it the specific descriptions of a large and a varied
number of diseases, viz., those which form the subject
matter of the S&ls&ya-Tantra (Diseases of the eye,
ear, nose and throat) as narrated by the king of
Videha ; the aetiology and symptomatology, etc. of
diseases peculiar to infants and women ^(K&umrfra-
bhritya), the pathology, etc., of those diseases mentioned
in the six books of the Practice of Medicine par
excellence (Krfya-chikitsrf) compiled by the holy sages of
pld and diseases known as Upasarga (eg. Bhutopasarga

2

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. I.

—Demonology) as well as diseases of traumatic origin
are also included in this supplementary text*. Herein
are also mentioned the sixty-three combinations «of the
six different Rasas (tasccs) as well as the laws of health
and hygiene with their rationale (rules, interpretation
and reasonings) and the classifications of different
Doshas and organic principles of the body and various
accessories and remedial agents required for their
successful treatment and cure. 2.

I shall now begin with the description of the num-
bers, the pathology and the curability or incurability
of those specific ailments of the body which are peculiar
to the region of the head out of a myriad of other
distempers reserved for treatment in this portion of the
work (Uttara-tantra) which may be compared to the
unfathomable deep in respect of the vastness of its
depth and magnitude. 3.

Diseases of the eye and its append-
ages S — The eye-ball (Nayana-Budbuda) is two
fingers (about an inch) in transverse diameter, about the
breadth of one’s own thumb in depth (Sagittal diameter),
and two fingers and a half all round (in circumference).
The eye-ball is almost round in shape and resembles
the teat of a cow. It is made up of all the (five)
elements of which the universe is built up. The element
of the ‘soiid’ earth (Bhu) contributes to the formation
of its muscles, the element of ‘heat’ (Agni cr Tejas)
is in the blood (that courses in its veins and arteries),
*the gaseous element’ (V&yu) contributes to’ the formation
of the black part (Iris, etc.) in which the pupil is situated,
the fluid element (Jala) preponderates in the £Iucid

(1) The text has A'gantuka (traumatic ^diseases). Gayad&sa explains
it to wean Apasm^ra, Unmida, etc. (Hysteria, insanity, etc.).

Chap. I* ]

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

(white) part (Vitreous body) and the void (ethereal)
Space (Ak&s'a) is there to form lachrymal or the other
ducts or sacs (As'rum£rga) through which the secretions
are discharged. 4.

I shall now proceed to describe the Drishti (the cen-
tral part of Retina — ‘Macula Lutea’) as set forth by
expert ophthalmic physicians. The black portion of the
eye (Krishna-mandaia — Choroid) forms one third part
of its whole extent while the Drishti, according to them,
occupies only one-seventh part of the Krishna-mandaia.
The Mandalas or sub-divisions or circles of the eye-ball,
the Sandhis or J oints (parts where these sub-divisions
meet with one another) and the Patalas (layers or coats)
of the eye are respectively five, six and six in
number. 5-6.

Mandala and Sandhi The Mandalas of

the eye are the following, viz., (1) the Pakshma-mandala
(the circle of the cye-lashcs), (2) the Vartma-mandala (the
eye-lid) (3) the Sveta-mandala (the Sclerotic and Cornea),
the Krishna-mandaia (the choroid) and (4) the Drishti-
mandala (the pupil). These circles are so arranged that
the one preceding lies within the next in the list.* The
Sandhis (which serve as lines of demarcation of the
circles) already pointed out are six in number, the first
binding the eye-lashes (Paksha-mandala) with the eye-
lids (Vartma-mandala), the second the eye-lids and the
Sclerotic coat (Sveta-mandala), the third binding the
latter with the Krishna-mandaia (choroid), the fourth
situated between the latter and the Drishti-mandala,
the fifth lying in the interior comer (Kanin#kas) and the
last (sixth) in the exterior (posterior) corner (Apdngas)
of the eye. 7-8.

* Evidently some line or lines are missing here as the line cannot
give a complete sense by itself. Ed.

4

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

t Chap. I.

ThC Patalas 5 — Of the Patalas, two are in the
eye-lid (Vartma-mandala) and four in the eye proper,
wherein occurs the dreadful disease known *as the
Timira (loss of vision). Of these four the first or ante-
rior coat (Patala) supports the humour Jala and
light (Tejas), * the second coat or Patala (choroid) is
supported by muscles ; the third coat or Patala (Sceroim
and Cornea) consists of Medas (lit. fat) and there is the
fourth which is a fifth part of the whole and is known
as the Drishti. There are, however, divisions and sub-
divisions of these coats. 9.

The different parts of the eye-ball are held together
by the blood-vessels, the muscles, the Vitreous body
and the choroid.^ Beyond the choroid, the eye-ball
is held (in the orbit) by a mass of Sleshmd (viscid
substance — capsule of Tenon) supported by a number
of vessels. The deranged Doshas which pass upward to
the region of the eyes through the channels of the up-
coursing veins and nerves give rise to a good many
dreadful diseases in that region. 10.

Purva-rupa, etc. -.—Cloudiness of vision,
slight inflammation, lachrymation, mucous accumulation,
heaviness, burning sensation, sucking pain (D. Reaching
pain) and redness in the eyes are indistinctly manifest
(in the incubatory stage) in such cases. In cases of an in-
flammation of the Vartmas (eye-lids) the eye seems as if
studded with the bristles of worms (S>uka) and attended
with pain (as if pricked into with thorns) and a sensible
impairment of the faculty of the eyes in detecting

* By "Jala” is meant here the serum (Rasa) in the skin, and by
"Tejas” the blood in the veins (Sir£) carrying the (Tejas) known as the
A'lochaka.

t D. R. vessels, muscles and aqueous humour (Medas) are most
important for the maintenance of Krishna-mandala.

Chap. I’ 1 u 1 tara-TantaraM. $

colours and in closing and opening the eye-lids freely.
An intelligent physician will conclude from these symp-
toms tfeat the eyes have been affected by the (deranged)
Doshas, with a due consideration whereof the remedies
should be (carefully) administered, otherwise the eye-
diseases might become too serious. The simple maxim
or principle to be followed in the treatment of a disease
is simply to forego the primary pathological causes of
that disease. The special remedial measures that would
pacify the different Doshas, V&yu, etc. have been des-
cribed in detail. 12-13.

Causes of Eye-disease The local

Doshas deranged and aggravated by such causes as
diving in water immediately after an exposure to the
heat and the glare of the sun, (constant) gazing at dis-
tant objects, sleep in the day time and keeping up
late hours in the night, fixed and steady gaze, excessive
weeping or over-indulgence in grief, worry and fatigue,
a blow or a hurt, sexual excesses, the partaking (in inor-
dinate quantities) of Sukta, Aran&la (fermented rice-water),
acid gruel, M&sha pulse, and Kulattha pulse, voluntary
repression of any call of nature, exposure (of the eyes)
to smoke or dust, trickling down of the drops of sweat
(into the eyes), excessive or impeded vomiting, re-
pression of tears, constant contraction of the eyes to
adjust the sight to extremely small objects, etc., beget
disorders of the organs of vision. 14.

Classification of the Eye-diseases :

— Seventy-six different kinds of eye-diseases have been
come across in practice ; of these ten are of iginated by
the deranged Vfifyu, ten by Pitta and thirteen by
Kapha. Sixteen are produced by vitiated blood, and
twenty-five by the concerted action of the deranged
Doshas (Tri-Doshaja), and lastly, two are produced by

6

tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. I.

external causes i. e., they are traumatic in their
origin. 15.

Prognosis of the Vataja Type s— Of the

diseases of the eyes which are due to the action of the
deranged Viyu, those known as Hatddhimantha, Nimi-
sha, Gambhirika affecting the vision, and V&ta-hata-
vartma (Vdyu-afflicted Sclerotic coat) is said to be incur-
able. A temporary cure (Yipya) is all that can be effected
in a case of K&cha (cataract) due to the action of the
deranged bodily V&yu ; while the affection of the eyes
known as the Anyato-V&ta, Adhi-mantha (ophthalmia),
£>ushkctkshi-p£ka, Abhishyanda and Maruta-Paryaya
are curable. 16.

Prognosis of the Pittaja Type Of

the diseases due to the deranged action of the Pitta
known as Hrasva-j&dya and Jala-sr&va should be deemed
incurable ; and palliative measures are the only
remedies in cases of K&cha, Parimlayi and Nila, while
Abhishynda, Adhi-mantha Amlddhyushita, Suktik3,
Pitta-Vidagdha-Drishti, Pothaki and Lagana are cur-
able. 17.

Prognosis of Kaphaja Type.— Of the

diseases due to the aggravation of Kapha, the one known
as the Sr&va-roga is incurable and (Kaphaja) Kdcha
(cataract) admits of only palliative treatment, while a
cure may be be effected in the following cases, viz,,
Abhishyanda (conjunctivitis), Adhi-mantha, Bal6sa-
Grathita, £>leshma-Vidagdha-Drishti, Pothaki, Lagana,
Krimi-granthi, Pariklinna-Vartma, Sukldrma, Pishtaka,
Sleshmo-pandha. 1 8.

Prognosis of the Raktaja Type :-~0f

the diseases of the eyes due to the vitiated condition
of the blood, those known as RaktasrAva, Ajakdj&ta,
Avalambita (pendent), £>onitArsas and Siikra-roga should

a ftp- 10 UTTARA-TANTARAM. J

be regarded as incurable, and the type of *KAcha (cata-
ract) due to the same cause admits of only palliative
measures, while the diseases known as Adhi-mantha,
Abhishyanda, Klishta-vartma, SirA-harsha and SirotpAta,
Anjana, SirA-jAla, Parvani, Avrana (non-ulcerated), S>ukra-
roga, SonitArma and Arjuna may be included within
the group of curables. 19.

Prognosis of the Tridoshaja Type,
etc- 5 — Of the eye-diseases due to the concerted action
of the three aggravated Doshas, those known as Puya-
srAva, NakulAndhya, AkshipAkAtyaya and Alaji are
incurable and palliative measures are only possible in
cases of KAcha (cataract) or Pakshma-kopa ; while those
known as VartmAvabandha, SirAja-pidakA, PrastAr-
yarma, Adhi-mAnsArma, Snayvarma, Utsangini, PuyA-
lasa, Arvuda, SyAva-vartma, Kardama-vartma, Arso-
vartma, SukrArs'as, SarkarA-vartma, the two forms
of inflammation with or without local swelling known
as) Sasopha-pAka and As'opha-pAka, Bahala-vartma,
KumbhikA and Visa-vartma yeild to the curative
efficacy of appropriate remedial agents. Both the forms
of eyie-disease due to the external causes* should be
considered as incurable. 20 — 21.

Their Localities • — Thus we have finished
enumerating the seventy-six types of eye-diseases, of
which nine are confined to the Sandhis (binding
unions), twenty-one to the Vartma (eye-lids), eleven
to the ^nkla-bhs(ga (the Vitreous body), four to the
Krishna bhtfga (the region of the Choroid), seventeen
to the entire region (eye-ball) and twelve t <f the region
of the Drishti (pupil or the ’crystalline lens, etc.). The

•The one due to any external blow or hurt (Sa*nimitt&) and the other
originating from the sudden sight of any celestial being of extreme brilli-
ancy (A-nimitta)'

8

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX.

[Chap. I.

two cases due to the extraneous cause (are chiefly
located in the Driflhti though affecting the whole of
the eye-ball and) arc very painful and incurable* The
characteristic symptoms of all these will be hereafter
described in detail. 22 — 23.

Thus ends the first chapter of the Uttra-tantra in the Sus'ruta Sanihita
which deals with the diseases, viz. of the eye, etc.

CHAPTER II.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the pathology of diseases which are peculiar to the
joints or binding membranes of the eye (S$U1Clhl«
grata- Roga- VI J nan lya).

The names of those diseases Diseases

peculiar to the joining (Sandhi) of the eye are nine in
number and are named Puydlasa, Upandha, (the four
kinds of) Srdva (viz. Puya-srdva, S>leshma-srdva, Rakta-
srdva, Pitta-srdva), Parvani, Alaji and Krimi-granthi. 2.

Symptoms of PuysClasa and Upa-

nsCha : — A suppurated swelling occurring at any of
these joining and exuding a sort of fetid and dense *
pus is called Puyilasa. A painless cyst (Granthi) of
considerable size occurring at the union of the pupil (with
the Krishna-mandala) and attended with an itching sensa-
tion and a little suppuration is called Upangha. 3. A.

Symptoms Of Srdva. I — The ( deranged )
Doshas f of the locality passing through the lachrymal
ducts into the binding tissues of the four different
Sandhis (joinings) set up a painless J secretion (Srdva)
from the localities characterised by the specific symp-
toms of the different Doshas involved. These are known
as Sr&ras, which according to some, are also called

* According to Mddhava’s reading, the swelling should be painful
(OTfeO* There is no mention whether the pus should be dense or

otherwise.

t The term “Dosha” here means S'leshma, Pitta, Rakta (blood)
and the concerted action of the above three Doshas. It should be noted
that Viyu is excluded from the list as it does not produce any secretion,

% M&dhava does not mention this (painlessness) to be a symptom.

2

IO THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. C U *

Netra-nddi and are classified into four different groups,
the different symptoms of which will be described
presently. A suppuration (D. R. swelling) in any* of the
unions (Sandhi) of the eye marked by a discharge of pus
is called Puytf-sntva. This is due to the concerted action
of the Doshas (Kapha, Pitta and blood). The secretion of
slimy, white and thick muco-purulent discharges marked
by the absence of pain * is called &eshnu(-srrfva. The
flow of thin, warmf and blood-streaked copious discharge
due to a contaminated state of the local blood is called
Bakttf-srtfva. A warm, water-like and yellowish blue
(D. R. reddish yellow) discharge from the middle part
of the union (owing to the deranged condition of the
Pitta) is called Pittft-srdva. 3.

Symptoms of Parvanl, etc. : — A small,
round and copper-coloured swelling occurring at the join-
ing of the Krishna-mandala and Sukla-mandala, due to
the vitiated state of the local blood and attended with a
burning sensation and aching pain, is called Parvaui.
A swelling possessed of the preceding features and
occurring at the very same joining is called Alaji (Kera-
titis) A cyst or swelling (Granthl) characterised by an
itching sensation appearing on the joining of the eye-lids
and eye-lashes owing to the germination of parasites
(Krimi) in those localities, is called Krimi-granthi.
Parasites of different forms in such a case are found to
Infest the regions where the inner lining of the Vartma-

* According to Madhava’s reading, the absence of pain is not a
necessary concomitant in this case.

t According to Madhava’s reading thinness and warmness are not
essential.

t The difference between a case of Parranl and that of Alaji is
that the swelling in a case of Parvani is smaller, and that in the Alaji is
larger.

d»p. it ]

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

ir

mandala (eye-lid) is connected with the ^ukla-mandala
(Sclerotic coat) of the eye and to invade and vitiate the
substaace of the eye-ball. 4 — 5.

Thus ends the second chapter of the U ttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhita which deals with the pathology of the diseases peculiar to the
Sandhi (unions) of the eye.

CHAPTER III.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the pathology of diseases peculiar to the region of the
eye-lids (Vartmagata- Roga-Vijnaniyai i.
Causes and Names s— The Doshas of the

body jointly or severally expanding through the nerves
and veins, (Sirft) of the eye-lids (Vartma) bringing about
an augmentation of the quantity of the blood and
the growth of the flesh in the localities (determina-
tion of blood toward formation of fleshy growth in
the affected parts) give rise to a host of local diseases
which are known as Utsangini, KumbhikA, Pothaki,
Vartma-Sarkard. Arso-vartma, S>ushkdrrfas, Anjana,
Bahala-vartma, Vartm&vabandha, Klishta-vartma, Kar-
dama-vartma, Sydva-vartma, Praklinna-vartma, Pari-
klinna-vartma, V&tdhata-vartma, Arvuda, Nimisha, £>oni-
tarsas, Lagana, Visha-vartma and Pakshma-kopa.
These twenty-one diseases are restricted to the eye-lids
(Vartma). 2.

The Specific symptoms of the dis-
eases of the eye-HdS S — The names of these
have been enumerated ; now hear me describe their
specific symptoms. A (rolled up and indented) boil
or eruption (Pidakd) appearing along the lower eye-lid
on its exterior side with its mouth or head directed
inward is called Utsangini. A number of boils or
pustules (Pidakd) to the size of a Kumbhikd seed ap-
pearing on the joint of the eye-lids and the eye-lashes
and becoming inflamed after being burst is called
Kumbhikrf * 3—4.

* This disease (Kumbhiid) is due to the concerted action of the
three Doshas.

t Chap. HU

UTTARA-TAKTARAM.

13

A number of red and heavy (hard) boils or pustules
(PidakA) resembling red mustard seeds attended with
pain, itching and exudation is called Pothaki. A rough
and large pustule (Pidakd) surrounded by other very
small and thick erythematous pustules (covering the
entire length of the eye-lid) is called V artma-sarkartf.

S — 6.

Vegetations of small (D. R. soft) and rough papilse
(Pidak&s) on the eye-lid resembling Ervdruka seeds and
attended with very little pain are called Arso-vartma.
Long, rough, hard, and numbed papilse (Amkura) on the
eye-lid (2) are called {laghktfrrfas. 7 — 8.

A small, soft, copper-coloured pustule (PidakA)
appearing on the eye-lid and attended with burning,
pricking sensation and a slight pain is called an Anjana.
Vegetations of pustules (PidakA) of equal size (D. R. —
attended with hardness) occurring all along the eye-lid
and resembling it (or each other) in colour are called
Bahai a-vartma. 9-10.

Such swelling of the eye-lid attended with an itching
sensation and a slight pain as impedes or interferes with
its being evenly opened is called Vartma-bandha. A
mild and copper-coloured inflammatory swelling of both
the eye-lids simultaneously attended with a slight pain
and changing suddenly into redness (D. R. — suddenly
discharging blood therefrom) is called Klishta-
vartma. 11-12.

A case of Klishta-vartma in which the Pitta
has deranged and affected the blood antf much dirty
matter (mucus) is discharged as a consequence is called
a case of Vartraa-kardama. A dark brown colour of
the eye-lids both internally and externally marked by a

(2) According to M&dhava, the papilse in such cases occur in the
inner side of the eye-lid.

14 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. { Ch*p. III.

swelling (D. R. — pain) and attended with a discharge of
pus and with burning and itching sensations is called
tfydva-vartma. 13-14-

An external swelling of the eye-lid with a deposit of
mucous matter in its inner surface accompanied with a
little pain as well as a discharge, itching and pricking
sensation, is called a Praklinna-Vartma. A sticking to-
gether of the eye-lids even in the absence of any suppura-
tion and in spite of the eyes being constantly washed
(with water) * is called Pariklinna-vartma. 15 — 16.

The drooping down (lit. — inactivity) of the eye-lids,
whether attended with any pain or not, (so as to
obstruct the opening of the eye-lashes) where the eye-
lids seem to be out of joint is called V&rfhatarVartma.
A red and knotty swelling (Granthi) of an uneven size
or shape, growing hastily on the interior side of the
eye-lid and attended with a little pain is called an Arvuda
or tumour. 17 — 18.

Constant wrinklings of the eye-lids owing to the
incarceration of the (deranged) V&yu within the nerves
or veins (Sir&) controlling their wrinkings (closing and
opening) are known as Nimesha. Soft and fleshy
growths (Amkura) on the eye-lid which reappear even
after being removed with a knife, and are attended with
pain, itching and burning sensation are called fiiomt&sas
and should be ascribed to the vitiated condition of the
blood. 19-20.

A thick, slimy, hard and painless nodular swelling
(Granthi) on the eye-lid resembling a Sola fruit in size
and marked by an itching sensation and absence of sup-
puration is called Lagana t* An inflammatory swelling

* A different reading reads ‘whether washed or not.* This, however,
not a good reading,
t Certain editions read Nagaaa*

Chap. III. ] uttara-tantaram. i 5

of the eye-lid dotted with minute punctures like the pores
in the stem of a water-soaked lotus plant is called

Visa-vartma. 21-22.

An accumulation of the deranged Doshas about the
eye-lashes makes them rough and sharp-pointed, which
give pain to the eye and give relief when drawn off.
The disease is known as Pakshma-kopa in which the
eye cannot bear the least wind or heat or the glare
of fire. 23.

Thus ends the third chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in I he Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the pathology of the diseases of the eye-lids.

CHAPTER IV.

•

Now we shall discourse bn the chapter which deals
with the pathology of diseases of the Sclerotic coat
(white coat) of the eye (8taklagata-Roga«Vijndniya). i.

Names 5—' The eleven different forms of diseases
which are peculiar to the Sclerotic coat (white) of the
eye, are Prastftryarma, Suklftrma, Kshataj&rma (Rakt 4 -
rma), Adhim&ns£rma, Sndyvarma, Suktik&, Aijuna,
Pishtaka, Sir&-j<Ua, Sirii-pidak<i, and Bal&sa-grathita. 2.

Symptoms : — A thin and extended glandular
swelling (Granthi) coloured reddish blue and apearing
on the Sclerotic coat (Sukla) is called Pra&trfryarma.
A crop of soft and whitish growths slowdy extending
over the entire length of the Sclerotic coat is called
Siukl&ma. The fleshy growth on the white coat of the
eye resembling a (red) lotus flower in colour is called
Lohitrfrma. The soft, extended, thick and dark-
brown and liver-coloured growth of flesh on the white
coat is called Adhi-mtfnssfrma. The rough, yellowish
(D. R. white) growth of flesh on the white coat, and
gaining (slowly) in size, is called Sndyvarma. 3-7.

The appearance of dark brown specks resembling
flesh in colour or of those having the colour of an
oyster-shell on the white coat (Siukla) of the eye is
called Sluktikat The appearance of a single dot or
speck on the Sclerotic coat (£>ukla), coloured like a
(drop of the) hares blood, is called Arjuna. A raised
and circular dot or speck appearing on the white coat
and coloured white like pasted rice and (as transparent
as) water is called Pishtaka. Red and extensive
patches of hardened veins spreading over the white coat
and looking like a net-work is called Sirft-jrfla. The

Chap. IV. UTTARA-TANTARAM. 17

crop of white pustular growths (Pidak&) on the Sclerotic
coat (Smkla), near the limit of the black coat (Iris) and
covered over with shreds of veins are called the Sint-
PidaksC The disease in which a speck coloured like the
Indian bell-metal (Kdmsya) and covered over with a
vein (Sird) appears on the region of the Scleratic coat is
called the Balrfsa*. 8-13.

Thus ends the fourth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta Sam-
hit£ which treats of the pathology of the diseases of the Sceloretic region
of the eye.

* The reading in M&dhava’s Nidana is quite different here, and
Dallana seems to support that. It is defined as the disease in which a hard
speck appears like a drop of water on the white coat and looks like
bell-metal in colour.

3

CHAPTER V.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which* deals
with the pathology of the diseases of the black part of
the eye— Choroid including the Iris (Krishna-gata-
Roga-Vijniniya). r.

The diseases which are found to invade the region
of the Choroid including the Iris (Krishna-mandala)
have been briefly said to be four in number. Their
names are Sa-vrana-Sukra, A-vrana-Sukra, P&kdtyaya
and AjakA 2.

Symptoms : — A puncture-like dip in the region
of the (Krishna-mandala) with a sensation there as if
the part has been pricked with a needle and attended
with an excruciating pain and a hot exudation is called
Sa-vrana-^ukra. If the seat of this disease consider-
ably remote from the pupil — entire part of the Drishti
(Retina) be marked by the absence of pain and discharge
and be not deep-seated and if there be not double
spots, it offers very little chance of remedy. 3-4.

Symptoms and Prognosis of A-vra-
na-dukra : — A whitish film appearing on the
region of the Choroid including the Iris (Krishna) like
a speck of transparent cloud in the sky, and attended
with lachrymation and slight pain due to the eye-disease
known as Abhishyanda (Ophthalmia — lit. secretion) is
called the A-vrana-^ukra. This is easily curable. A
case of Avrana-S>ukra (non-ulcerated film) which is
thickened, deep-seated and long-standing, may be cured
only with the greatest difficulty, while an long-standing
case of this disease, if it is mobile, covered with shreds
of flesh, vein-ridden, stretching down to the second
layer of skin (in the eye) and obstructing the vision,

Chap. V.]

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

19

severed in the middle and marked with a reddish tint
in the extremities, should be deemed as incurable.
Several authorities aver that the appearance of Mudgfa
like specks or films on the region of the Iris, attended
with growths of pustules and hot lachrymations, should
be like-wise regarded as incurable. The fact of its (speck)
assuming the colour of the feather of a Tittira bird
is an additional indication of the incurable nature of
this disease. 5-

The appearance of a whitish milky film over the
black part of the eye slowly shrouding it entirly with its
mass and attended with acute pain is known as the
Akshi-Prfk&yaya. This is invariably found to result
from an attack of Akshi-kopa* and is due to the
concerted action of all the Doshas. A painful reddish
growth, like the head of a goat, found to shoot forth
from beneath the surface of the black part and attended
with reddish slimy secretion is called an Ajak& 6-7.

Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta Saiti^
hitS. which treats of the pathology of the diseases of the black part of the
eye.

* According to M&dhava’s reading in his Nidana, this disease need
not necessarily result from an attack of Akshi-kopa, and there need not
be an acute pain, and it would be incurable.

CHAPTER VI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) pathology of the diseases
affecting the eye as a whole (Sarva-gata-ROga-
Vljnaniya) i.

Names and causes The four types of
Abhishyandha (Ophthalmatis), the four types of Adhi-
mantha, the two forms of Akshi-pAka (suppuration of
the eye) attended with or without swelling, these ten,
as well as HatAdhimantha, Anila-ParjAya, £>uskAkshi-
pAka, Anyato-vAta, AmlAdhyushita, Drishti, Sirot-
pAta and SirA-Harsha are the names of the (seventeen
kinds of) diseases which affect the eye as a whole.
Nearly all these forms of eye-diseases may result from
the Abhishyanda (Ophthalmitis). Hence a wise physician
shall try speedily to remedy a case of Abhishyanda
(Ophthalmitis ) as soon as it is found out. 2.

Specific symptoms of Abhishya-

nda : — The symptoms which mark a case of Abhi-
shyanda due to the action of the deranged Vrfyu are
pricking pain (in the eyes), numbness, horripilation and
irritation in the eyes, roughness and parchedness of the
organ, cold lachrymations and headache. A case of
Pittaja-Abhishyanda exhibits the following features,
viz ., burning and inflammatory suppuration of the eyes,
longing for coldness (in the eyes), excessive hot lachry-
mations, cloudy vision and a yellowness of the eye. In
the Kaphaja type of the disease, the affected organ
longs for the contact of warm articles and is attended
with a heaviness, itching sensation, swelling, excessive
whiteness and a constant deposit and discharge of slimy
mucus. The special type of this disease which has

Chap. VI. J

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

21

its origin in the vitiated condition of the blood, i. e the
Baktaja type is marked by redness of the eyes, flow of
copper-coloured tears, as well as the symptoms of the
Pittaja type of the disease and the presence of deep red
stripes all along. 3-6.

Causes of Adhimantha s— All the (four)

forms of chronic Abhishyanda, if not properly attended
to and remedied at the outset, may run into as many
cases of Adhimantha which is attended (invariably)
with an excruciating pain in the eye, which seems as if
being torn out, the pain extending upward to and crush-
ing, as it were, the half the region of the head. The
characteristic symptoms of the Doshas involved in each
case are also seen to supervene. 7.

Symptoms of Vsitaja Adhimantha s—

In the Vrftaja type of Adhimantha the eye becomes
cloudy and seems as if being torn out and churned as
with an Arani (fire-producing wooden stick) attended
with an irritating, piercing and cutting pain, as well
as with a swelling of the local flesh, and a half of the
head (on the side of the affected eye) is afflicted with
a twisting and cracking sensation as well as with local
swelling, shivering and pain. 8.

Symptoms of Pittaja Adhimantha

The symptoms which mark the Pittaja type of Adhi-
mantha are the blood-streaked eye attended with secre-
tion and a sensation therein of being burnt with fire,
as well as swelling, perspiration and suppuration in the
affected organs, yellowish vision, fainting fits and a
burning sensation in the head. The eyes in this case
become liver-coloured and seem as if ulcerated or rubbed
with an alkali. 9.

Symptoms of Kaphaja Adhimantha s

--In the Kaphaja type of Adhimantha the eye is

22

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Chap. VI.

swollen with a slight congestion (inflammation). Dis-
charges with a sfensation of itching, coldness and heavi-
ness in the localities set in, and there is horripilation.
The eye becomes slimy with deposit of mucous matter.
The sight becomes cloudy, the nostrils are dilated, the
head aches and all objects seem to be full of dust. io.

Symptoms of Raktaja Adhimantha :

— A pricking pain in and a blood-streaked secretion
from the affected organ which looks (bright red) like a
Bandhujiva flower, are the symptoms which mark the
type of Raktaja Adhimantha (due to the vitiated blood).
The eye becomes painful and incapable of bearing the
least touch or contact, and the objects of vision seem as
if enveloped in flames. The extremities of the eye
become red and the whole origin of the cornea (black
coat of the eye) looks like an Aris/ita fruit submerged
in blood. II.

The prognosis : — A course of injudicious diet,
conduct or medical treatment may usher in the blindness
of vision in seven days from an attack of the Kaphaja
type of Adhimantha (Ophthalmia) and in five days from
that of the blood-origined (Raktaja) type, in six days
in a case of the V&taja Adhimantha and instantaneously
within three days of the attack) in- the Pittaja type of
(i. e ., Adhimantha. 12.

Symptoms of Sa-sopha and A-sopha
Akshi-p^ka : — A case of Sa-sopha-Netra-p&a

exhibits the following symptoms, viz,, itching sensation,
deposit of mucous matter (in the eye), lachrymation and
a redness of the eye like the colour of a ripe Udumbara
fruit. There is a burning sensation in the eye-ball which
becomes copper-coloured, heavy, and attended with a
pricking pain and horripilation. The eye becomes
swollen and constantly secretes either cold or hot slimy

Chap VI. ]

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

23

discharges, and ultimately suppurates. All these symp-
toms except swelling mark the (non-swollen) A-s'jpha-
Netra-prfka type of the disease. 13.

’ The ‘deranged Vdyu getting incarcerated in the optic
nerve (Sird) impairs the faculty of sight, and gives rise to
an incurable disease which is called Hatrfdhimantha
(blinding Ophthalmia). A shifting pain experienced
sometimes in the region of the eye-lashes* or of the
eye-brows and sometimes in the region of the eye,
owing to the coursing of the deranged and incarcerated
Vdyu in those localities, is called Vrfta-Paryiya. 14-15.

The disease in which the eye-lids become dry and
hard and remain always closed, the vision becomes
cloudy and hazy, and it becomes very painful to open
the eye-lids, is called the jtashkatkshi-prfka.t The
excessive pain in the eyes or in the eye-brows due to
the action of the deranged Vdyu incarcerated in the
region of the head, the cars, the cheek-bones, the back
of the neck (Avatu), the Manyd (a particular nerve
on either side of the neck), or in any other (adjacent)
place, is called the Anyato-vsfta. 16-17.

The swelling of the eye attended with a bluish red
tint all about, owing to the partakings of meals com-
posed of an unduly large proportion of acid articles, or
of such food as is followed by a digestionary acid re-
action, is called the Ambfdhyushita-Drishti. The
disease in which the veins all over the eye become
copper-coloured and are frequently discoloured, whether
attended with pain or not, is called the SirotjMtta. 18-19.

* M6dhava in the Nidana does not mention the eye-lashes,
t M^dhava in the Niddna reads which means that a highly

burning sensation is produced in the affected eye, in place of

a word which seems redundant.

24

THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITX.

[Chaps VI.

A case of Sirotpata, if not attended to and remedied
in time through ignorance, gives rise to transparent and
copper-coloured discharges in copious quantities from
the eyes and produce a complete blindness of vision.
This is known as the Sirrf-harsha. 20.

Thus ends the sixth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which treats of the diseases affecting the eye as a whole.

CHAPTER VII.

Now.we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the pathology of the diseases which are peculiar to
the Drishti (pupil) of the eye (Drishti-gata-
Roga-Vijnaniya). i.

Experts well-versed in the anatomy of the eye aver
that the Drishti (pupil) of the eye is the quintessence of
the five material elements with that of the eternal light
predominating therein— this principle of iight neither
increasing nor decreasing in this case. It is naturally
accustomed to cold from the very nature of its tempera-
ment and is covered by the outer coating (Patala) of the
organ proper. It looks like a hole and is equal in
dimension to that of a Mastira seed or pulse*. The
pupil of the eye resembles in its action the phosphores-
cent flash of a glow-worm or that of a minute particle
of fire (in not burning the things coming in contact with
it). Now we shall describe the pathology of the twelve
kinds of disease peculiar to the region of the Drishti
(pupil), as well as of the one which is known as Timira
(loss of vision) affecting the Patala (coating over the
pupil). 2.

All external objects appear dim and hazy to the
sight when the deranged Doshas of the locality passing
through the veins (Sir 4 ) of the eye, get into and are
incarcerated within the first Patala (innermost coat) of
the pupil (Drishti). 3.

Symptoms— when second f Patala

attacked False images of gnats, flies, hairs, nets or
cob-webs, rings (circular patches), flags, ear-rings appear

* According to Nimi, quoted in Mddhava’s commentary by S'rikantha,
the dimension of the Drishti is equal to only a half of that of a Masuru-
pulse.

26

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. t Cha P* VIL

to the sight, and the external objects seem to be enveloped
in mist or haze or as if laid under a sheet of water or as
viewed in rain and on cloudy days, and meteors Qf differ-
ent colours seem to be falling constantly in all directions
in the event of the deranged Doshas being similarly con-
fined in the second Patala (coat) of the Drishti. In
such cases the near appearance of an actually remote
object and the contrary {Miopia and Biopia) also should
be ascribed to some deficiency in the range of vision
(error of refraction in the crystalline lens) which in-
capacitates the patient from looking through the eye
and hence from threading a needle. 4.

Symptoms— when third Patala

attacked : — Objects situate high above are seen and
those placed below remain unobserved when the de-
ranged Dosha are infiltrated into the Third Patala (coat)
of the Drishti. The Doshas affecting the Drishti (crystal-
line lens), if highly enraged, impart their specific colours
to the objects of vision. Even large objects seem to be
covered with a piece of cloth. The images of objects and
persons with ears and eyes, etc., seem to be otherwise
i.e. y bereft of those organs. The deranged Doshas
situated at and obstructing the lower, upper and lateral
parts of the Drishti (crystalline lens) respectively shut
out the view of near, distant and laterally-situate objects.
A dim and confused view of the external world is all
that can be had when the deranged Doshas spread over
and affect the whole of the Drishti (crystalline lens). A
thing appears to the sight as if cutlinto two (bifurcated)
when the deranged Doshas affect the middle part of the
lens, and as triply divided and severed when the Doshas
are scattered in two parts ; while a multifarious image
of the same object is the result of the manifold distribu-
tions of movability of the Doshas over the Drishti. 5.

Chap. VII. ]

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

2 7

Symptoms— when fourth Patala
attacked S — Loss of vision (Timira) results from the
fact of the deranged bodily Doshas being confined within
the fourfh Patala (choroid) of the organ. When the vision
is completely obstructed by the aforesaid cause, it is
called a case of Linga-nsfsa (blindness). Only a faint per-
ception of the images of the sun, the moon and the stars,
the heaven, a flash of lightning or any other such highly
brilliant objects is possible in a case of superficial (not
deep-seated) Linga-n&s'a. The Linga-n&s'a (blindness) is
also called Nflikd and K&cha. 6.

Specific traits of Timira : — All external

objects are viewed as cloudy, moving, crooked and red-
coloured in the Viftaja type (of Timira), while in the
Pittaja type they appear to be invested with the different
colours of the spectrum or of the rain-bow, of the glow-
worm, of the flash of lightning, or of the feathers of the
pea-cock, or with a dark blue tint bordering on black ;
while in a case of Kaphaja Timira, a thick white coat
like that of a pack of white clouds or a deep white
chowri (Ch&mara) seems to intervene in everything which
look white and oily and dull and appear hazy and cloudy
in a fine day, or as if laid under a sheet of water. In a case
of the Raktaja type of Timira, all objects appear red or
envoloped in gloom, and they assume a greyish, blackish
or variegated colour. In a case of Safrmip&ika Timira,
the outer world looks vareigated and confused, appears
as doubled or trebled to the vision (of the patient), and
stars and planets, either defective or supplied with addi-
tional limbs, seem to float about in the vision.’ 7-1 1.

, Pari rn lay i : — The quarters of the heaven look
yellow and appear to the sight as if resplendent with
the light of the rising sun, and trees seem as if sparkling
with the tangles of fire-flies in a case of Parim&yi,

28

the: sushruta samhitX.

[ Chap. VII.

which should be ascribed to the action of the deranged
Pitta in concert with the vitiated blood. 12.

The different.colours of the pupil in
cases Of Linga-niisa S — Now we shalf describe
the colours of the pupil in the six different types of
Linga-nds'a. The pupil assumes a reddish ( Aruna) colour
in the V&aja type of the disease ; looks blue or bluish
yellow in the Pittaja, white in the Kaphaja and blood-
red in the blood-origined one, while it assumes a varie-
gated hue in the Sfitnnipdtika type of Linga-ndsa. A cir-
cular patch (Mandala) tinged with a shade of bluish or
bluish yellow colour and looking like fire or a piece of
thick grass, is formed on the pupil owing to the diseased
and aggravated condition of the blood (with pitta) in a
case of Parimlatyi. In this case the patient is sometimes
permitted to catch faint glimpses of the external objects
owing to the spontaneous and occasional filtering away
of the deranged Doshas obstructing the vision. 13-15*

Specific Traits of Linga-n^sa The

circular patch (over the pupil) in a case of Vsftaja Linga-
nds'a is red-coloured, and is moving and rough to the
touch, while that in a case of Pittaja Linga-nasa is bluish
or yellow or coloured like bell-metal. The circular patch
in a case of Kaphaj a Linga-nds'a is thick, oily and as
white as a conch-shell, a Kunda flower or the moon —
resembling a white drop of water on the moving lotus
leaf and moving away to and fro when the eye is rubbed.
The circular patch over the pupil in a case of Raktaja
(blood-origined) Linga-ndsa is red-coloured like a coral
or a (red) lotus-petal. A Sfifauipitika type of the
disease is marked by a variegated colour of the Drishti
(pupil) and by the specific symptoms of the different
Doshas. 16.

The total number of diseases peculiar to the Drishti

Chap. VII. ]

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

29

is twelve. The six types of Linga-nAsa (Drishti) have
been described above. The six other forms of the
disease, peculiar to the Drishti (pupil) are named
as Pilta-vidagdha-Drishti, Sleshma-vidagdha-Drishti,
Dhtima-darsin, Hrasva-J&tya, Nakul&ndhyatd and Gam-
bhirikd. 17.

The disease in which the region of the Drishti (pupil)
assumes a yellowish colour, and all external objects
appear yellow to the sight owing to the presence of the
vitaited (and augmented) Pitta in the region of the
Drishti is called Pitta-Vidagdha-Drishti. It is due to
an accumulation of the deranged Dosha (Pitta) in
the third Patala (coat) of the eye, and the patient
cannot see anything in the day, but can see only in the
night. 18.

The external objects appear white to the sight when
it is affected by the accumulation of the deranged Kapha.
The deranged Dosha (Kapha), in this case, is simulta-
neously divided over all the three Patalas (coats) of the
eye. In consequence of this the patient is attacked
with nocturnal blindness, being able to see only in
the daytime owing to the (melting and) decrease of the
deranged Kapha through the heat of the sun. This is
known as Sleshma-vidagdha-Drishti. 19.

The external objects appear dusky or smoke-coloured
when the sight is affected through grief, (high and pro-
tracted) fever, over-straining or excessive physical exer-
cise, or injury to the head, etc. The affection of vision
thus engendered is called Dhuma-Drishti (smoky
sight). 20.

The disease in which small things can be viewed
only with the greatest difficulty (even) in the daytime,
but can be viewed (easily and clearly) in the night owing
to the subsidence of the deranged pitta through the

3o

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX.

t Chap. Vll

coldness of the atmosphere (and a general cooling of the
Earth’s surface)* * * § is called Hrasva-jfifoyat. 21.

The form of occular affection in which the colour
of Drishti (pupil) of a man affected by the DoshaS resem-
bles (and is found to emit (luminous) flashes like) that
of a mungoose in consequence of which the external
objects appear multi-coloured in the day time, t is
called Nakulsfadhya. The form of occular affection
due to the action of the deranged Viyu, and in which the
Drishti (pupil) is contracted and deformed and sinks
into the socket, attended with an extreme pain in the
affected parts, is called Gambhiriktf. 22-23.

Besides the above, there are two more forms of
Linga-usfo'a of traumatic origin, via., Sa-nimitta (of ascer-
tainable origin) and A-nimitta (without any manifest or
ascertainable cause). Under the first group may be
arranged those which are produced by such causes as
an over-heated § condition of the head (brain, etc.), and
marked by the specific symptoms of (blood-origined)
Abhishyanda, while the second comprises those in
which the loss of one’s vision is due to causes, such as
the witnessing of divine halo or effulgence emanating
from the ethereal person of a god, or a Gandharva (demi-
god), a holy saint, a celestial serpent, or such other

* The latter part of the text here seems to be incongruous.
Madhava does not read the last line in his Niddna, nor does Dallana
include it in his commentary. Dallana, on the othei hand, says that some
read this line, but holds, on the authorityof Videha, that the reading is
incongruous, in as much as “Hrasva-j£tya” is said to cause one of the
four types of night-blindness.

t Some read Hrasva-jadya in place of Hrasva-jatya.

t This shows that a man affected with this form of disease cannot
see anything in the night.

§ The head is liable to be over-heated by the smelling of poison or
poisonous objects or any other strong-scented flower, etc.

Chap, VII ]

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

31

highly bright object. In this case the eye is not out-
wardly affected and the pupil (Drishti) looks as bright
and clear as a Vaidfirya gem, while in the former case
(of ascertainable origin) the eye is characterised by a
sunken or pierced or impaired aspect of the pupil. 24.

We have thus finished describing separately the
diagnostic traits of the seventy-six forms of disease
which affect the organ of vision. We shall hereafter
separately deal with the nature of the medical treatment
to be pursued in each case. 25.

Thus ends the seventh chapter of the U ttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhita which treats of the pathology of the diseases peculiar to the
pupil of the eye.

CHAPTER YIH.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the classification of occular affection according to
the different modes of treatment (Netra-Roga-
ChikitsA-Vibhaga-ViJnaniya). i.

Classification : — We have already described
the names and symptoms of the seventy-six kinds of
eye disease. We shall now briefly and severally deal
with the nature of treatment to be pursued in them.
Of these seventy-six kinds eleven should be treated
with incision operations (Chhedya), nine with scarifica-
tion (Lekhya), five with excision (Bhedya), fifteen with
venesection (Vysfdhya) ; twelve cases should not be
operated upon and seven admit only of palliative
measures (Yrfpya), while fifteen should be given up by
an experienced physician (Ophthalmic surgeon) as in-
curable. The two kinds of eye-disease of traumatic
origin should be likewise held as incurable or admitting
only of palliative measures at the best. 2.

Names of the Chhedya and Lekhya
eye-diseases : — Diseases which should be treated
with incision are Ars’o-vartma, Sushk areas, Arvuda, Sira-
Pidakci, Sir 4 .-jS.la, the five types of Arman*, and
Parvaniki (thus numbering eleven in all). Diseases in
which scarification should be resorted to (numbering
seven in all) are Utsangini, Bahala-vartma, Kardama-
vartma, Syiva-vartma, Vaddha-vartma, Klishta-vartma,
Pothaki, Kumbhikini, and Sarkari-vartma. 3-4.

Names of Bhedya and VysCdhya eye-
diseases S — Optical diseases in which the affected

* Sec Chapter IV, para 2, Utlara-Tantara.

Chap. VIII. ] UTTARA-TANTARAM. 33

localities should be treated with excisions, are Sleshmo-
pandha, Lagana, Visa-vartma, Krimi-granthi and
Anjana — thus numbering five in all. The two kinds of
eye-disease beginning with Sird viz., Sirotpdta and Sird*
harsha, the two kinds of Akshi-pdka attended or un-
attended with swelling, war., Sasoth&kshi-pdka and
Asothdkshi-pdka, and Anyatovdta, Puydlasa, Vdta-
viparyaya and the four types of Abhishyanda and the
four types of Adhimantha should be treated with
Veneseotion (Sird-vyadhana). 5-6.

Eye-diseases— not to be operated

Operations should not be resorted to in cases of Srnshkd-
kshi-pdka, Kapha-Vidagdha-Drishti, Pitta- Vidagdha-
Drishti, Amlddhyushita-Drishti, Sukra-roga, Arjuna,
Pishtaka, Aklinna-vartma, Dhuma-dars'in, Suktikd, Prak-
linna-vartma and Valdsa — thus making twelve in all.
In the traumatic forms also of eye-disease surgical
operations are not advised by experts. 7.

Names of curable and incurable eye-

disease : — Palliative or temporary relief is all
that can be offered in any of the six types of K&cha
described before, as well as in the affection known as
Pakshma-kopa, if the patient retains the faculty of
sight Four of the V&yu-origined, two of the Pittaja,
one of the Kaphaja, four of the blood-origined and four
of the types caused by the concerted action of the three
Doshas, as well as the two traumatic forms of optical
affections should be regarded as beyond all cure. 8-9.

Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the classification of eye-diseases according to
the different inodes of treatment.

5

CHAPTER IX.

Now we shall discourse on the remedial measures of
Abhishyanda (Ophthalmia) due to the action of the
deranged V&yu (V^tgfohishyanda-Pratlsh-

edha)* i.

The patient should be treated with old and matured
clarified butter, both in a case of (Vitaja) Abhishyanda
(Ophthalmia) and (V&taja) Adhimantha (Conjunctivites).
The diseased organ should be then duly* fomented
and local venesection resorted to. Then after having
effected full purging with the help of a Sneha-vasti
(oleaginous enema), such measures as Tarpana, Puta-
p&ka, fumigation, sprinklings (Aschyotana) f, snuffing
(Nasya), oily washings, Siro-vasti (errhines) or washing
the organ with K&njika ( Amla) or with any decoction
prepared with the drugs of the Vayu-subduing group
or with that of the flesh of any aquatic (Jalaja) animal,
or of one frequenting the marshy places (Anupa), should
be resorted to. A compound consisting of clarified
butter, curd, fat and marrow should be applied luke-
warm to the affected organ, which should also be

* It should be noted that the part of the forehead adjoining the eye
and not the eye itself— should be fomented, since fomentation should not
be applied directly over the eye.

f As'chyotana (Eye-drop) — Consists in dropping into the eye
with the two fingers, honey, A'sava, drug-decoction or any oleaginous sub-
stance. Its doses are eight drops for scarifying purposes, ten drops for
lubricating the part with any oleaginous substance (Snehana), twelve drops
for the healing of any local ulcer (Ropana). They should be dropped luke-
warm in winter and cold in summer into the eyes. In diseases of Vdtaja
origin they should be of a bitter taste ; oleaginous in diseases due to the
Pitta ; and bitter,— warm and parching in diseases due to Kapha.
— Vaidyaka Nighantu as quoted in the Vaidyaka-S'abda-Sindhu. Cf.
also Chapter XVIII, Uttara-Tantra.

Chap. IX.}

uttara-tantaram.

3 $

covered with a compress or linen soaked with the preced-
ing lardacious compound. Milk, Ves'avdra, J&lvana
Poultiee, Porridges (Pdyasa), etc., should be used by a
physician in poulticing the affected organ. A portion of
clarified butter cooked with the decoction of Triphali ,
or simply old and matured clarified butter, or milk duly
cooked with the drugs of the V&yu-subduing group, or
of the first group (viz., Viddri-Gandhddi Gana) should
be taken after the meal. 2. A.

The application of any lardacious substance other
than oil cooked with the admixture of the Vdyu-sub-
duing drugs will prove beneficial for Tarpana purposes
in such cases. The use of medicated Sneha in the shape
of Putapdka, Dhuma (fumigation) and Nasya (snuffs) is
likewise recommended. Oil (duly) cooked with Sthird ,
milk and the drugs of the Madhura group should be
employed as a snuff (in such cases). The milk of a
she-goat duly cooked with the admixture of the leaves,
roots or barks of Eranda plants, or with the roots of
Kantakdri , should be employed lukewarm in washing
(Sechana) the affected organ. A liquid compound con-
taining half milk and half water, and boiled together
with Saindhava , Vdld, Yashti-madhu and Pippali , should
be used in washing the eye as well as an Aschyotana
(eye-drop). A liquid compound consisting of the milk
of a she-goat diluted with the addition of water, boiled
with the admixture of Hriveta y Chakra (Tagara), Man -
jishthd , and Udumbara- barks is considered to be the
best eye-drop in cases of there being any £ain (£>ula) in
the eye. 2 . B.

A thin plaster compound of Yasthi-madhu , Rajani>
Pathyd and Devaddru , pasted together with the milk
of a she-goat should be used as an Anjana (collyrium) in
a case of acute Ophthalmia ( Abhishyanda), and it proves

36 THE SUSHRUfA SAMHUX. [Chtp.lt

very effective. Gairika-e arth, Saindkava , Ktishnd ,
(Pippali) and S'unthi— the quantity of each subsequent
one being double of that of the one preceding it * in the
order of enumeration, should be pasted together with
water, made into Gutiki (a large pill) and be likewise
applied (to the eye) in the manner of the application
of an Anjana. The use of Snaihika (lardacious) Anjana
(Collyrium) is beneficial in such cases. These will be
duly dealt with later on. 2.

Physicians should likewise adopt this method in
treating cases of Anyato-vafta and Vdta-paryaya.
Draughts of (medicated) clarified butter and of milk
before the meal, are highly efficacious. Clarified butter
duly cooked with (two parts of) Vnkshddani , Kapittha
and major Pancha-mula , (one part of) the expressed
juice (or decoction) of Karkata and (one part of) milk
should be taken in such cases*. In the alternative,
Ghrita duly cooked with (the decoction of) Pattura . ,
Agnika (Ajamodd) and Artagala and with milk, or
clarified butter duly cooked with milk and (the decoc-
tion of) Mesha-s* ringi, or of Viratara should be simi-
larly taken. 3.

Treatment of dushk£fkshi-p£(ka

Saindkava, Devaddru and S'untki and the expressed
juice of Mitulunga, water, breast-milk and clarified
butter mixed together and duly prepared (in the manner
of Rasa-kriyA) should be prescribed as an Anjana in
cases of i&ishkrfkshi-prfka- The taking of clarified

* According to Dallana and Gayadasa, this Ghrita should be pre-
pared without any Kalka. S'rikanta holds that the drugs Vrikshaddni ,
Kapittha and the Pancka-mula should be taken as Kalka and the Ghrita
* prepared with three parts of milk, S'ivaddsa also seems to support this
view.

Chap. IX.l

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

3 7

butter cooked with the drugs of the Jivaniya group and
the filling of the cavity of the eye with the same, as
well as snuffing with the Anu-taila* are also efficacious
in such cases. Washes composed of cold milk with the
admixture of Saindhava salt or of milk cooked with
Rajani and Deva-ddru and mixed with (a little quantity
of) Saindhava are efficacious. Mahaushadha (Sunthi)
rubbed over a stone-slab with clarified butter and breast-
milk is also recommended as an Anjana (eye-sal ve)f.
The Vasa (essence of the flesh) of aquatic animals or of
those which frequent swampy grounds, mixed with a
little quantity of powdered S’unthi and Sanidhava salt
(and rubbed on stone-slab) should be applied to the
eyes as an Anjana (collyrium) in a case of Sushk&kshi-
p&ka (Non-secreting type of conjunctivites). Let the
intelligent physician treat the sight-destroying VAtaja
affections of the eye of what-soever kind in accordance
with the principle herein inculcated. 4-5.

Thus ends the ninth Chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of Vdtaja Abhishyanda.

* According to Dallana, this Anu-taila is not the one described in
Chapter V of the Chikitsita Sthdna ; but the one described in the S'aldkya-
Tantra.

t This couplet may also be translated as follows Anjana (black-
antimony) rubbed over a stone-slab with clarified butter and breast-milk
is also recommended as a best remedy in such cases.

CHAPTER X.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment of
Abhishyanda (Ophthalmia) due to the action of deranged

Pitta (Pitt^-bhishyanda-Pratishedha). i.
General Treatment Blood-letting and

purgatives, eye-washes and plasters round the eyes,
medicinal snuffs and Anjana (collyrium), as well as the
remedial measures for Pittaja-Visarpa (Erysipelas)
should be employed in a case of Pittaja Abhishyanda
(Ophthalmia) and Pittaja Adhimantha (Conjunctivites). 2.

Clarified butter or goat’s milk duly cooked with
Gundrdy S'Ali (paddy), S’aivdla, S' aila-bheda, Ddru*
karidrdy Eld, Utpala , two parts of Lodhra , Abhra (Mus -
taka), Padma-leaLves , sugar, Durvd , Iksku , Tdla y Vetasa ,
Padmaka, Drdkshi, honey, (red) Chandana , Yashti-
madhUy breast-milk, Haridrd and Ananta-mula, should be
employed as a Tarpana measure* or as a wash or
snnff in the present case. As an alternative, all the
preceding drugs or as many of them as would be avail-
able should be daily used in the manner of any of the
four forms of Nasyaf. 3.

Anjanas : — All the Pitta-subduing measures,
may be employed in such cases. Application of medi-
cinal snuffs (as well as eye-drops, etc.) with Kshira -
Sarpih (clarified butter churned from milk) at the
interval of three days, as well as that of Anjana (colly-
rium) with the expressed juice of Palds'a or of S'allaki^
mixed with honey and sugar, should be likewise resorted

* See Chapter XVIII, ibid.

t The four forms of Nasya are (i) Pratimarsha. (2) Avapida (3) Nasya
(snuff) and (4) S'iro-virechana.

Chap. X. ]

UTTARA-TANTARAM.

39

to. The thick liquid extract (Rasa-Kriy£)* of Pdlindi
or Yashti-madhu mixed with honey and sugar, should
be likewise employed. As an alternative, a com-
pound consisting of Musta> Samudra-phena , Utpala,
Vidanga, Eld, Dhdtri and Vijaka and prepared in the
manner of Rasa-kriyi should be employed (as an
Anjana). 4.

Acompound of Tdlisa (D. R. — Kdrfisa), Eld , Gairika )
Udira and Samkha (conch-shell) pasted with breast-
milk should be applied to the affected organ in the
manner of an Anjana (eye-salve). As an alternative,
the powder or the Rasa-kriyA of Dhdtaki and Syandana
(D. R. — Chandana) mixed with breast-milk should be
used as an Anjana. Gold-leaf rubbed with breast-
milk, or the flowers of Kims'uka rubbed with honey,
or of a compound of Rodhra , Drdkshd , sugar, Utpala ,
Vacha and Yashti-madhu rubbed with breast-milk
should be used as an Anjana. Barks of Vamakaf pasted
in cows milk, or (red) Chandana wood, Udumbara and
Toya (V&ld) pasted in the same, or Samudraphena
rubbed either in honey or breast-milk should be like-
wise applied to the eyes in the manner of an Anjana. 5 .

Aschyotana : — Rodhra , Yashti-madhu , Drdkshd ,
sugar and Utpala should be soaked in breast-milk. It
should then be folded inside a piece of silk ( Kshauma )
and employed as an Aschyotana (eye-drop). A compound
of Yashti-madhu and Rodhra rubbed in clarified butter
should be similarly used. A compound of Kddmari
(G£mbh£ri) Dhdtri, Pathyd (Haritaki) and 7J>/tf{V&la),

* For preparation of Rasa-kriyi see Chapter XVIII, ibid,
t According to Dallana, ‘ Yamaha* Imeans ‘ Rockanika’. It may
also mean * Karnika'ro? which is not accepted either by Gay or by
Dallana. It may also mean * Chandana" which is most probably the
meaning here.

40

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITit tCh*P*X.

as well as that of Katphala and Ambu (VA 1 A) should
be similarly* prepared and applied* 6.

All the above remedial measures with the exception
of blood-letting should be resorted to in a case of Amld-
dhyushita-Drishti and Sukti-pAka. The medicated
Ghritas known as the Traiphala Ghrita or the Tilvaka
Ghritaf should be prescribed, or simply old and matured
clarified butter should be given in such cases. 7.

In a case of Sukti-pika an Anjana with cooling drugs
should be speedily employed in the event of the Doshas
being located in the lower part of the eye. Fine powder
ofVaidurya gem, Sphatika (crystal), Vidruma (coral)
and Muktd (pearl), Samkha (conch-shell), silver and gold
mixed with sugar and honey and used as an anjana
would prove a speedy remedy in a case of £>ukti-pAka. 8.

Clarified butter should be administered in a case of
Dhuma-d&rsin and the procedure and the remedial mea-
sures laid down in connection with Rakta-pitta and
Pitta-origined Visarpa (Erysipelas) as well as the Pitta-
sub-duing remedies J should be likewise employed there-
in. 9.

Thus ends the tenth chapter in the Uttra-Tantra of the Sus'ruta Samhitd
which deals with of the curative treatment of PitUbhishyanda.

* In the first two compounds, some take ‘Taya* and ( Ambu 9 for
water. But Dallana having explained 'Toy a? as ‘ Valaka? in a preceding
compound we adopt that meaning of the word here also.

t Traiphala-Ghrita is piepared by duly cooking clarified butter with
the Kalka and decoction of Triphal a'. For Tilvaka-Ghritaisee chapter III.
Chikistsita-Sth&na.

X By Pitta-subduing remedies Dallana means the remedial measures
laid down in connection with the treatment of Pitta-Vidagdha- Drishti.

CHAPTER XI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the curative treatment of Abhishyanda due to the
deranged action of Sjleshmi (£leshtn£bhlshya-
nda-Pratishedha). i.

General Treatment An attack of 3 iesh-
maja Abhishyanda or Adhimantha during the stage of
acute aggravation should be treated by opening a local
vein* or by the employment of fomentation, Avapida-
Nasya, Anjana, fumigation, washes, plasters, gargles or
non-fatty (Ruksha) eye-drops (Aschyotana) and Puta-
pAka. The patient should be made to fast on each
fourth day and to take a potion of Tikta-Ghrita*f in the
morning, and his diet should consist of such articles as
do not lead to the aggravation of the bodily Kapha. 2-3.

Tender twigs or leaves of Kutannata , Ashpotd ,
Phanijjhaka , Viha, Pattura , Pilu , Ark a and Kapittha\
should be employed in (mildly) fomenting the affected
eye. A thin plaster composed of Vdlaka , S* tint hi, Deva-
ddru and Kushtha , should be likewise applied to the
affected eye. 4.

Hingu , (Asafoetida), Trip hold, Yashti-madhu , Sain-
dhava , Prapaundaika , Anjana (black Antimony), Tuttha
(Sulphate of copper), and copper pasted together with

* The word ‘Atha’ (3TO) in the text means says D^Pana, that the
local vein should be opened as the best resource, when fomentation, etc.
would fail to effect a cure.

t See Chikitsila-sthdna, chapter IX.

% In place of " Kutannata?'* and “ Arid ’ both Vrinda and Chakrapani
read ** Suras a ’’ and “Arja”. S'rikantha the commentator of Vrinda how-
ever is of opinion that Arka should be better reading in place of that of
"Arjc?\ , ,

6

4a

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX.

[ Chap. XL

water and made4nto a stick (Varti) should be applied as
an Anjana to the affected eye. As an alternative, sticks
(Varfci) composed of Pathyd , Haridrd , Yashti-mhdhu and
Anjana should be similarly applied. Compounds made
of the equal parts of Pippali , Maricha , S'unthi, Haritaki,
Amilaki, Vibhitaka , Haridrd and Vidanga- seeds, or of
Vdlaka , Kushtha , Deva-ddru , (burnt) conch-shell, Pdthd
(Akanidhi), (Chitraka roots), Pippali \ Markka , ,

S'untki and Manak-s'ild (Realgar) and the flowers of
/4/Z, Karanja and 5 obhdnjana * pasted together with
water should be applied to the eye. The seedsf of
Prakiryd (Karanja), or of S'igru with the seeds and
flowers of the two kinds of Vrihati mixed with Rasdn -
jana, C hand ana, Saindhava- salt, Manak-s' ild, Haritaki,
and garlic taken in equal parts and pasted together
with water should be made into sticks (Varti) and used
as an Anjana in all forms of Kaphaja eye-diseases. 5 .

The following medicinal compounds should be pres-
cribed by experts as an Anjana (eye-salve) in a case of
Valrfsa-Grathita after the system of the patient had
been properly cleansed by means of blood-letting. A
quantity of blue barley with the horns should be soaked
(for a week or two) in milk and dried (after the manner
ofBhivand saturation). It should then be burnt into
ashes. These ashes should then be mixed with an
equal part of burnt ashes of Arjaka , Ashphotaka ,
Kapittha , Vilva, Nirgundi and Jdti flowers and an alka-

# Dallana quotes the reading of “ Panjika'kJra ” (another commen-
tator of Sus'ruta) according to whom Murva! and the flowers of Ja'/i only
should be taken instead of the flowers of Jatt, Karanja and Sobha'njana.
This reading seems to be the correct one inasmuch as this makes the
number of the drugs in the list twelve in all, as given by Dallana himself.

t According to some commentatois both the seeds and flowers of
Prakirjd and of S'igru should be taken.

U TTAKA-TAM T RAM.

43

Chap. XI. ]

line solution should be duly prepared therewith. Sain-
dhava> Tuttha (Sulphate of copper) and Rochand should
now be added to the above alkaline solution and duly
boiled. The compound thus prepared should 1 e applied
as an Anjana with an iron pipe (NAdi). This is pres-
cribed in a case of Va’ftsa-Grathita. Alkaline prepara-
tions may be similarly prepared with (the flowers, etc.
of) Phanijjhaka etc., and may be employed in a similar
manner. 6.

A (thin) plaster composed of S'nnthi , Pip fait , Musta ,
Saindhava and white Maricha* pasted with the
expressed juice of Mdtulunga and applied to the eye as
an Anjana, would bring about a speedy cure of the eye-
disease known as Pishtaka. 7.

Vrihati fruits should be gathered when ripe and a
paste compound of (the equal parts of) Pippali and
Srotdnjana should be kept inside those seedless fruits for
seven nights. The (preserved) paste should then be
taken out and applied to the eye as an Anjana. It
proves beneficial in a case of Pishtaka. Paste may
similarly be preserved inside a Vdrtdku (brinjal), S'igru,
Indra - Vdruni , Patola , Kirdta-tikta and Amalaki and used
for the same. 8.

Kcis'is'a (Sulphate of iron), Samudra f, Rasdnjana
and buds of Jdti-fi owers pasted together and rubbed in
honey, is advised to be prescribed as an Anjana in a
case of Praklinna-Vartma. 9.

A single application as an Anjana of the compound
composed of excellent Nddeya (Saindhaya) \ salt,

* Dallana explains white Marie ha as S’igru seeds,
t Samudra may either mean Samudra-phena or Samudra salt, i. e«
Karakacha salt. The commentators are silent on this point.

t Dallana explains Nddeya as meaning Saindhava, but it generally
eans Srotanjana (black antimony).

44 the sushkuta samhitX. t c^p-

white pippzt* and Nepdla-jdta (Realgar-lit., that which
is produced in Nep&la) taken in equal parts and pasted
together with the expressed juice of Mdtulanga , would
alleviate the itching sensation (Kandu) in the eyes.
Similarly a compound of S'ringaoera , Deva-ddru, Musta>
Saindhavd salt and buds of Jdti flowers pasted together
with wine and used as an A&ja&a would prove effica-
cious in a case of swelling (Sopha) and itching sensa-
tion of the eyes. The above eye-diseases should be
judiciously treated in accordance with the principles
laid down in the treatment of the cases of Abhi-shyanda
and Adhi-mantha. 10 .

Thus ends the eleventh chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
HamhiU which treats of the curative treatment of S'leshm&bhishyanda.

* Dallatta explains “S'veta-Maricha” as “S'igm -seeds”, but there is a
particular kind of Maricha which is white in colour and this is also
supported by some commentator.

CHAPTER XII.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment
of the type of Abhishyanda (Ophthalmia) which has
its origin in the vitiated condition of the blood

(Rakt^bhishyanda-Pratishedha). i.
General Treatment s— A wise physician

shall pursue the same course of medical treatment in
those four diseases known as Adhimantha, Abhishyanda,
Sirotp^ta and Sira-harsh a due to the vitiated condition
of the blood. Persons suffering from any of the afore-
said four complaints should be first anointed and lubri-
cated with old and matured clarified butter technically
known as Kaumbha Ghrita*, or with a copious quantity
of clarified butter. Venesection should then be resorted
to. The patient, having been made thus to bleed as much
as required, should be treated with clarified butter duly
cooked with Siro-virechana drugs and mixed with sugar,
as an errhine for cleansing the head. Piasters, washes,
snuffs (Nasya), inhalations (Dhuma)of medicated smokes,
eye-drops (Aschyotana), Abhyanjanaf, Tarpana (sooth-
ing measures), Sneha-karma (emulsive measures) and
Puta-paka should then be prescribed according to the
nature of the deranged Dosha involved in each
case. 2 5.

A plaster (Pralepa) composed of Nilotpala , Us'ira,
D&ru-haridrd , Kdliya, Yashti-madhu , Mnsta , Lodhra and
Padma-Kdshtha (taken in equal parts and) mixed with
Ghrita — duly washed, should be applied refund the region

* See Chapter XLV, Sutra-Sthana.

t Dallana explains “Abhyanjana” a* collyrium, but he also says that
some commentators take it in its usual sense of anointment with clarified
butter washed hundred times in water, or such other Sncha.

46

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[ Chap. Xil.

of the affected eye. Mild fomentations (Sveda), or
leeches should be applied to the region around the eye
in the event of there being intolerable pain (due to any
defect in bleeding) in the affected organ. Large draughts
of clarified butter tend to alleviate the pain. Remedial
measures and agents mentioned in connection with
ritt&bhishyanda, should be as well employed. 6-7.

Rain-water with powdered Kasetu and Yashti-maihu
added thereto may be squeezed with benefit through a
piece of linen into the affected organ* as an Afichyotana.
Flowers of PAtald , Arjuna , S'riparni > DhAtaki , Dhdtri ,
Vilva, the two kinds of Vrihati , and of Vimbi-lota and
ManjishthA taken in equal parts and pasted together
with honey or expressed juice of sugar-cane and applied
to the affected organ as an Anjana (Collyrium) is said
to be a curative in cases of Raktdbhishyanda. 8 9.

A similar compound consisting of C bandana,
Kumuda , Patra , S'ild-jatu , Kumkuma , powders of dead
iron and dead copper, Tuttha (Sulphate of copper), lead,
bell-metal, RasAnjana and the resinous exudation of a
Nimba tree taken in equal parts should be pasted with
honey and made into large Vartis (sticks). These arc
always recommended to be applied to the affected eye
as an Anjana. 10.

Treatment of ^irotpsfta A compound
consisting of honey and clarified butter and applied as
an Anjana should be regarded as a patent cure in cases
of Sirotprfta eye-disease. A compound composed of
Saindhava (salt), Kdsisa (Sulphate of iron) and pasted
together with breast-milk should be similarly used. The

* Both Dallana and S'ivad&sa say that pure transparent water may be
used in preparing the compound if rain-water is not available. Dallana
says further that the affected eye should also be washed with the liquid
compound thus prepared. S'ivadasa, however, supports this latter view.

Chap. XII ]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

4 7

application as an Anjana * of S'amkha ^ccnch-shell),
Manah-s'ild, Tuttha , Ddru-haridrd, and Saindhava pasted
with hdney, or of (white) Maricha pasted with the juice
of S'itisha flowers, honey and wine, or of Svarna-Garika
pasted with honey would be attended with beneficial
results in cases of Sirotprfta. 1 1.

^Ir^-harsha : —A compound consisting of
Phdnita{ treacle boiled down to a sticky consistency)
and honey should be applied to the affected organ as
an Anjana in a case of Sirat-harsha. Similar applications
of compounds composed of Rasdnjana (Antimony) pasted
with honey, or of Saindhava and Kds'is'a (Sulphate of
iron) pasted with honey, or of Vetrdmla * and Saindhaza
pasted with Phdnita and breast-milk would likewise
prove highly efficacious. 12.

Treatment of Arjuna A’l the measures
and remedies for PittAbhishyanda should be employed
in cases of Arjuna cye-discasc. The expressed juice of
sugar-cane, honey, sugar, breast-milk, Ddru-haridra ,
Yashti-madhu and Saindhava should be used in combi-
nation as a wash (Seka), or as an Anjana. Ami a
(KAnjika, &c.) should also be used as an iUchyotana (eye-
drop) in such cases. The following drugs, viz., sugar,
Yashti-madhu , Katvanga , Mastn , Am la, honey, Saindhava ,
Vija-puraka , Kola and Dddimba of acid taste and other
acid fruits cither singly or in combination of two or
three should be judiciously used (as an Aschyotana
with a due consideration of the vitiated Dosha in each
case). 13-14.

These two following compounds viz., of Sphatika

* Dallana explains “ Vet r Avila ” as “Amla vetasa”. Some, however,
divide it into two words vis “Vetra” and “Amla” meaning thereby
sprouts of Vetra (cane) an 1 Atnla-veiasa respectively.

48

THE SUSIIRUTA SAMIIItX.

[ Chap. XII.

(crystal), Vidruma (coral), » S'antkha (conch-shell), and
Yashti-madhu , pasted with honey, as well as of S'amfcha,
sugar, and Samudra-phena pasted with honey, if* used as
an Anjana would prove curative in a case of Arjuna eye-
disease. Saindhava and Kataka pasted with honey, or
Rasdnjana pasted with honey, or Kdsisa (Sulphate of
iron) pasted with honey, should constantly be applied
as an Anjana to the affected organ. 1 5.

Scarifying- An Jana s— All kinds of powder-
ed (dead) metals (Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, etc.) and
metallic substances (Manah-s' ild, Gairika , etc.), (the five
officinal kinds of) salt, all kinds of gems ( Vaidurya , coral
etc.), the teeth (of cows, horses, etc.), the horns (of cows,
etc.), the drugs of the sedative (Avas&dana) * group,
pulverised shells of hen’s eggs, Las'una (garlic), Trikatu ,
Karanja seeds and Eld (cardamom) mixed together and
used as an Anjana, should be regarded as Scarifying
(Lekhya) in their action. 16.

Treatment of Sukra : — In a case of non-
ulcerated (A-vrana) Siakra (milky film or white fleshy
growth in the eye) a skilful physician shall (first)
adopt all the preceding measures prescribed in the
treatment of (Blood-origined) Abhishyanda/f - beginning
with Rakta-visr&vana (Venesection) and ending with
Puta-p&ka (and these failing, the Lekhy&njana —
collyrium for scarifying) should be adopted. A case of
ulcerated (Sa-vrana) Sukra whether superficial or deep-
seated l or rough should be treated in the same
manner. 17-18.

* The group beginning with Kas'is'a— See Chapter XXXVI, Sutra-
Slhana, page 334, Vol. I.

t See paras 3 and 4 of this Chapter.

t “Superficial” (Utt&na) is here used in the sense of “seated In the
first layer” and “deep seated” (Avagddha) ‘seated in the second layer*.

Chap. xrr. ]

U TTARA-TANTR AM.

49

In a case of Sukra the affected part should be
rubbed (scarified) with a compound consisting of S'irisha -
seeds, Markka, Pippali and Saindhava pounded together,
or with Saindhava a 1 one. A compound composed of
powdered copper, Manah-s’ild , Markka and Saindhava
each preceding drug being taken in a quantity double
the one immediately succeeding it in the order of enu-
meration*, should be pounded together and made into a
thin paste. Applied as an Anjana to the seat of the
disease, it will cure a case of Sukra. As alternatives,
the two compounds composed of S , a?nkha , stones of
Kolas , K at aka, Drdkskd , Yashti-madhu , Mdkskika (honey),
or of teeth (of cows, etc.), Samudra-phena and S'irisha
flow r er and honey should be applied to the affected
locality inthe manner of applying an Anjana. The Kshtf-
rsfnjana (alkaline collyrium) mentioned in connection
with the medical treatment of Val dsa-gra th i ta ,“|* may
as well be profitably employed as an Anjana (eye-salve)
in the present disorder. Eve-salves made of fried husk-
less Mud>a pulse, (burnt) S’amkJia and sugar mixed with
honey, or of the pith of Madhuka pasted with honey,
or of the inner pulps of the stones of Vibhitaka pasted
with honey should be constantly used as an Anjana, in
cases of the eye-disease known as Sukra. A compound
consisting of conch-shell, oyster-shed, Drdkskd , Yashti-
madhu , Kataka and honey may be used and soothing
application (Tarpana) antidotal to the deranged bodily
V£yu, should be resorted to in cases of Sukra, if the
second layer (Patala) of the eye is attended with pain
(S>ula). 19-21.

* One part of Saindhava, two parts of Markka , four of Manahs’ild ,
eight of S'amkha and sixteen parts of copper should be taken in the pre-
paration of the compound.

f vSee Chapter XI, para 6, .

7

$0

THE SUSHRUTA SAM II CT A.

[ Chap. XII.

Young bamboo-sprouts, Arushkara , Tdla (palm) and
Ndnkela (cocoanut)* should be burnt to ashes and
alkaline water should be duly prepared therewith. The
burnt ashes of elephant’s bones should be soaked several
(seven) times with the above alkaline preparation in the
manner of Bh&vand saturation. The application of this
preparation in the manner of an Anjana tends to
remove the discolouring nature (whiteness) of a case
pf Sukra f. 22.

Treatment Of Ajak£L : —The thin watery
matter accumulated in the eye in a case of Ajakat
should be drained by making a puncture on either side
( of the cornea ) with a needle after which the incidental
ulcer should be filled with powdered beef mixed with
clarified butter. Scarification should be many times
made in the event of the ulcer becoming raised. 23.

Treatment of Akshi-paka Applica-
tions of Sncha and of Sveda (fomentation) to the affected
locality should be made in cases of the two kinds of eye-
disease known as Sa-sopha and A-sopha Akshi-pika
(inflammation of the eye-lid whether attended with any
local swelling or otherwise). Venesection should then be
resorted to. Eye-washes, eye-drops (Aschyotana), errhi-
nes (Nasya) and Puta-paka measures should also be
employed. 24.

After having cleansed the system of the patient both
internally and externally the following compounds
should be used as an Anjana (in cases of the two kinds

* The spathe (JatA) of the palm tree and the shell of the cocoanut
fruit should be taken in preparing the compound — S'ivad£sa.

+ The prepared powder of elephant’s b->ne should be mixed with
honey and rubbed over the affected part ( S'ukra) with the tip of the finger
or with a S'aldkd (rod). The eye should then be washed with the in-
fusion of Triphald — Pallana-

Chap. XII ]

UTTARA-TANTRAl^.

51

of Akshi-pa'ka). Saindhava and clarified butter pasted
together in a copper vessel with flesh or Maireya or curd
or with, curd-cream should be used as an Anjana.
As an alternative, the rust of bell-metal pasted with
clarified butter, or Saindhava pasted with breast-milk,
or equal parts of the pith of Madhuka tree and Gairika
pasted with honey, or Saindhava and copper pasted
with breast-milk and clarified butter should be used as
Anjanas. The compounds of DAdimba , Ataveta , As*
manta , JCola> and Saindhava pasted with any acid juice*
should be applied to the affected organ in the manner
of a Rasa-kriya£ measure for the cure of (the two kinds
of) Akshi-pika. 25-26.

Animal flesh and Saindhava salt soaked in clarified
butter and mixed with S'nnthi and breast-milk should
be applied to the affected organ in the manner of an
Aschyotana or as an Anjana. A compound consisting
of Jati flower, Saindhava , S'uuthi , Pippali and huskless
Vidanga pasted together with honey, may as well be
used as an Anjana with advantage in a case of
Akshi-pa'ka. 27-28.

Treatment of Puyalasa Blood-letting

(after the application of Sneha and Sveda) and poultic-
ing (Upanaha) of the affected locality arc efficacious
in the affection of the eye, known as Puysftasa. The
measures and remedies which prove curative in cases
of Akshi-pika should as well be employed with dis-
cretion in this case by a physician. An Anjana
(eye-salve) composed of Ardraka , Saindhava apd Kdsisa
(Sulphate of iron), or Kds'isa Saindhava , Ardraka , iron
and copper dust pasted together with honey, should be
applied to the affected eye in the manner of an Anjana
(in a case of Puydlasa). 29 -30.

* Some add honey in the lUt.

TIIE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XII.

Si

Treatment of Praklinna-vartma

The deranged Doshas of the system should be duly*
removed (corrected) and the patient should be duly
soothed in a case of Praklinna-vartma, after which
washes, eye-salves, eye-drops (Aschyotana), snuffs (Nasya)
and fumigation (Dhuma) should be resorted to according
to the Dosha involved in each case. A compound
composed of Musta , Haridrd , Yashti-niadhu , Priyangu ,
Siddhdrtha , Rodhra, Utpala-sdrivd f pasted together *
should be employed in the manner of an Aschyotana
measure. As an alternative, the compound consist-
ing of Rdsdnjana and honey should be used as an
Anjana. 3 r ~3 2 -

The decoction of the leaves and fruits of Anuxlaka
should be duly prepared (in the manner of Rasa-kriyi)
and used as an Aujana. Rasa-kriyaC preparations pre-
pared with (the expressed juice of) the roots of bamboo,
or VartlS prepared with the same by (condensing it by)
cooking it (again) in a copper vessel, should be used for
the above purpose. Rasa-kriya preparations prepared
with Triphald , flowers of Paldsa , or Khara-nuinjari ,
should be similarly applied to the affected organ. Eye-
salves made of powdered Kdmt ya-mala and cotton fibres
(Tantu) burnt together and pasted with the milk of a
she-goat and mixed with (white) Marich:i and powdered
copper should be used as a Pratyanjana to the eye
(already weakened by the use of Anjana.) 33 -34.

* Dallana says that the deranged Doshas of the system should be
cleansed with the application of Sneha, Venesection, purgative, errhincs
and A'sthapana.

t In place of some read ‘sfarfafrarfTfTfw:’, meaning,

in this case ‘Sy^ma-lata 1 by the term ‘Asita^sariv^’. Others again mean
‘Rasdnjana 1 by the term ‘Asita’. — Dallana.

t Dallana recommends ‘rain water 1 as the liquid for the preparation.

Chap. Xll. J UTTARA-TANTRAM. 5 j

An eye-salve or an Anjana made of Samudra-phena ,
Saindhava y conch-shell, Mudga and white Markka mixed
together (in the shape of a powder) should be prescribed
in a case of Aklinna-vartma as it would promptly
alleviate the local itching. The foregoing measures
and remedies should be likewise employed in a case
of Praklinna-vartma according to the nature of the
deranged Doshas involved therein. An Anjana pre-
pared with the admixture of Kajjala and Tuthhaka
(Sulphate of copper) rubbed in clarified butter on the
surface of a copper vessel, would be similarly used (in
such cases). 35-36.

Thus ends the twelfth chapter ol the Uttara-Tanlra in the Sus'rula
SamhiU which treats of the curative treatment of Raktabhishyanda.

CHAPTER XIII.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment of
eye-diseases in which Scarification should be resorted to

(Lekhya-Roga-Pratishedha). r.

The general course of treatment to be adopted in the
nine kinds of eye diseases which arc amenable to Scari-
fying (Lekhana) operations is as follows : — The patient
should be laid in a chamber not exposed to the sun
and the gales of wind, after having been treated with
proper emulsive measures (Sneha-karma)* and sub-
jected to a course of emetics and purgatives. The eye-
lid should be over-turned with the thumb and the index
finger and should be very carefully fomented with a
piece of linen soaked in lukewarm water and squeezed.
The eye-lid should be covered with a piece of linen and
over-turned with the thumb and the index finger at the
time to guard against its movement and enclosing. The
(part of the) eye-lid to be scraped, should be wiped
with a linen and marked with a surgical instrument and
the scraping should be effected therein with a scraping
knife or any (rough) leaf according to the exigencies of
the case. After the subsidence of the. bleeding, the
part should be fomented and then gently rubbed (Prati-
sArana) with a medicinal compound consisting of Manuk-
s' ild (Realgar), K&s'isa (Sulphate of iron), Trikatu , Atjana
(black antimony), Saindhava salt and MAkshika finely
pounded together. After this the part should be washed
with lukewarm water and lubricated with clarified
butter. The subsequent treatment thereof should be

* It should be noted that the patient should also be fomented (Svcda)
after being treated with the emulsive measures.

Chap. XIII. ]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

55

like that of an ulcer (Vrana).* Fomentations, Avapida,
etc., should also be employed after three days, Thus
I have described to you the general measures to be
observed in scraping an affected locality in the eye, 2.

Satisfactory and deficient scari*
fication : — Stoppage of bleeding, subsidence of the
swelling and itching, a smooth level aspect of the part
like the surface of a finger nail are the features, which
mark a proper and satisfactory scarification. Red-
ness of the eyes, swelling and discharge of blood
from the operated locality, occurrence of Timira (blind-
ness or darkness of vision), non-ameliorations of the
disease under treatment, brownness, heaviness, numb-
ness, itching, horripilation and coating (as if with foreign
matter) of the eye-lids and a consequent high inflamma-
tion of the eye if not attended to in time, are the symp-
toms which attend an incomplete and unsatisfactory
scarification, and this should be remedied by anointingf
and scarifying the affected part again. 3-4.

Excessive Scarification Excessive dis-
charge and pain in the locality together with an
upturning of the eye-lids and spontaneous uprooting of
the eye-lashes should be ascribed to excessive scraping.
Fomentation, application of Sneha and employment of
VAyu-subduing measures should be resorted to in such
cases. 5.

In the following diseases of the eye, viz., VartmA-
vabandha, Klishta-vartma, Bahala-vartma and Pothaki,
the affected part should first be gently scraped and then

* For the first seven days the treatment should be like that of an
incidental ulcer (Sadyo-vrana) after which period, the case should be
treated, if necessary, as a case of S'arira-Vrana.

+ Dallana says that some read (fomenting) in place of

( anointing).

TIIE SUSIIRUTA SAMIXITX. [ Chap. Kill.

5 6

scarified. In £>y&va-vartma and Kardama-vartma, the
intelligent physician will gently scarify the affected
part neither deeply nor superficially. In cases of Ut~
sangini, Sarkari and Kumbhikini, the seat of the disease
should be first cut (with a knife) and then carefully
scarified. An incision should be followed by a scarifica-
tion in the case of small, very hard, supperated, copper-
coloured, Pidakds (pustules) occurring on (the inner
membrane of) the eye-lid. Small and slightly swelling
Pidak^s (pustules) occurring on the exterior surface
of the eye-lid should be remedied with fomentations,
plasters and the general corrective remedies. 6.

Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which treats of the curative treatment of (eye-) diseases amenable
to scarification.

CHAPTER XIV.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment of
eye-diseases which require surgical incisions (Bhedya*

Roga-Pr&tishedha). i.

Treatment of Visa-granthi : — In a case
of suppurating Visa-grauthi, it should be first fomented,
and its puncture-like holes should be completely incised
(so as to remove any swelling in the affected part). It
should then be dusted with Saindhava , KAs’is'a , MAgadhi ,
Pushpdnjana, Manah-s'ild and Eld pounded together*.
Honey and clarified butter should then be applied (over
the dusted part), and it should be duly (loosely) bandaged
(for the complete union of the parts). 2.

Lagana : — An incision should be made into
the affected part in a case of Lagana, and any of the
following drugs, viz., RochanA, Yava-kshdra, Tuttha ,
Pippali and honey should be applied to the incised
part ; while in serious (lit. —big) cases cauterization
with alkali or with fire will be the remedy. 3.

An Jana In a case of Anjana, the affected part
should be duly fomented and if it spontaneously bursts
open, it should be well pressed and rubbed (Pratisarana)
with a plaster-compound of Manah-s'ild, Eld, T agar a-
pddukd and Saindhava, pasted together with honey.
If, however, the surgeon wants to open it, it should be
rubbed with honey and Rasdnjana mixed together and

* Both Vrinda and Chakradatta read only the first two lines of the
text and hold that the incision should be dusted with Saindhava only.
Their commentators, however, accept the reading there to be Sus'ruta's.
They supply the next two lines of Sus'ruta, and notice the consequent
alteration in the sen$e.

8

58

THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XIV.

then coated with a warm collyrium made with the
lamp-black collected from a burning lamp flame. 4.
Krlmi-granthi s— In a case of Krimi-granthi,

the affected part should be duly fomented after it has
been incised and it should then be treated with the
Rasa-kriyd solution prepared with (the decoction of)
Triphald (with the addition of) Tuttha'% Kd-sisa and
Saindhava. In a case of Upanalia (in the eye) due to
the action of the deranged Kapha, the affected part
should be opened and rubbed with powdered Pippali and
Saindhava mixed with honey. It should then be scraped
with a Mandaldgra instrument. The surrounding parts
should also be gently scratched all around. 5.

In the foregoing five cases of incisable eye-disease,
until the setting in of suppuration therein, the affected
eye should first be treated with Sneha and then with
light fomentation with (the help of) tender leaves (as
a cover over the eye). In all the remedies to be adopted
in the treatment of these (incisable eye) diseases, the
application of a Sneha should be first adopted. In
cases, however, where suppuration had already set in,
the remedies for the healing up of the ulcer, should be
carefully adopted. 6.

Thus ends the fourteenth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra of the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the curative treatment of (eye*) diseases requiring
incisions.

* Both Vrinda and Chakrapani read 'Mulra? (cow’s urine) in place of
* Tuttha'. Both of them also recommend the addition of Ras&njana in
the compound.

CHAPTER XV.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment of
cyc-diseases, which should be cured with excisions

(Chhedya-Roga-Pratishedha). i.

Treatment of Armas The patient should
be first treated with a Sneha-predominating food
before being surgically operated upon in a case of Arman
marked by the manifest vegetation or polypus (on the
affected eye). The patient should then be made care-
fully to sit at ease and the affected eye should then
be irritated by casting powdered Saindhava-s&lt into
its cavity after which the eye-ball, without any loss of
time, should be duly fomented and rubbed with the hand.
The intelligent physician will then ask the patient to
look at his Apdnga (the interior corner of his own affect-
ed eye) and the cyst or the polypus (thus turned up),
should be carefully secured with a hook (Vadisa) and
held with a Muchundi instrument or with a thread-
needle. It is dangerous to suddenly uplift the eye-lid
under the circumstances. The two eye-lids should be
firmly drawn asunder so as to guard against their being
anywise hurt during the operation. The polypus,
thus made flabby and pendent with the means of the
three aforesaid accessories, should be fully got rid of
by scraping it with a sharp Mandaldgra instrument.
The root of the polypus should be pushed asunder
from the Krishna-mandala (Sclerotic region) and the
fsukla-mandala (region of the cornea), to the extremity
of the Kaninaka (pupil) and then removed. The
Kaninaka (pupil) should be duly guarded so as not
to be hurt. A quarter layer of the flesh (of the polypus)
should be left back and then the operation would not
in any way hurt or injure the eye. An operation at

6o

THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A.

[ Chap. XV.

a point beyond the aforesaid limit of the Kaninaka
(might hurt the pupil and) would set up a hoemorrhage
and beget a sinus (as well as pain) in the locality.
The vegetation or polypus is sure to grow up again to
its former size if it is cut off insufficiently. 2.

' A shreddy or netted Arman in the form of a mem-
branous growth (Jdla) in the eye should be made pen-
dent by rubbing it (with Saindhava- salt) and then cut
with a bent Vadisa instrument at the junction of the
Sukla-mandala (cornea) and the Vartma-mandala (con-
junctiva or eye-lid). The affected part should then be
rubbed with a compound consisting of Y ava-ksh&ra ,
Trikatu and Saindhava- salt (pounded together) and
then (duly) fomented and bandaged up by the skilful
physician. Lardaceous or oily (Sneha) application
should thereafter be prescribed with due regard to the
nature of the place*, the season, the time (day or
night) and the strength of the patient, and the incidental
wound should be treated as an ulcer. The bandage
should be removed after three days and the affected part
should be (mildly) fomented with the application of
heated palms of the hands and treated with corrective
or purifying remedies. 3.

Milk duly cooked with Karanja seed, Amalaka and
Yashti-madhu and mixed with honey (when cold),
should be dropped twice a day (morning and evening)
into the affected eye in the event of there being any
pain in it. A cold plaster composed of Yashti-madhu ,
polens of lotus ( Utpala ) and Durvd-g rass pasted together
with milk and mixed with clarified butter is recom-
mended in such cases to be applied to the scalp. 4.

' In place of particular part and nature of the country,

aom 1 read the particular Dosha involved in each case.

Chap. XV. ] U TTARA-TAN T K AM. 6 1

Any residue of the Arman, left after the excision,
should be removed with the application of Lekhya*
(scraping) Anjana or eye-salve. An Arman (Cyst-like
papilla or protruberance) which is as white as curdled
milk (Dadhi), or which looks blood-red or blue or grey,
should be treated like a case of Sukrdrman (Opacity of
the cornea or a flimy and fleshy growth in the eye). An
Ar©an which is very thick and looks like a piece of skin
and covered over with fibres of flesh and nerves f, as
well as one occurring on the Krishna-mandala (region
of the iris) should be excisioned. The eye assu Ties its
former and natural colour and function, and becomes
free from pain and other complications by the proper
excision of an Arman. 5-8.

Treatment of Sira-J^Ia and Sira~

pidaka : — In a case of Sirsi-Jafla, the hardened veins
(Sird) should be hung down with a hook (Vadis'a) and
scraped with a Mandaldgra (round-topped) instrument.
Cysts or pimples (Pidakds) appearing on the diseased
veins in a case of the aforesaid Sird-Jdla and not prov-
ing amenable to the application of medicines, should
be excisioned as in a case of Arma with a Mandalagra
instrument. Pratisdrana (rubbing) as in a case of Arma
and Lekhana (scraping) with due regard to the nature
of the deranged Doshas involved in each case, arc also
recommendad in both the diseases (Sird-Jdla and
Sird-Pidakd) under discussion. 9.

Treatment of Parvanikaf s— in a case of
Parvanikst the place of junction \ (of the lachrymal

f

* For Lekhya Anjana see Chapter XII, para 16 of this Uttara Tantra.

+ Some here read (veins) in place j

t The ‘junction’ is the junction of the Krishna-mandala and the
S'ukla-mandala of the eye.— Dallana.

62 THE SUSllRUTA SAMIUTA. t Chap. XV.

sac and the cornea) should be duly fomented. A
quarter part only of the protuberance or growth should
be kept apart, while the remaining upper three quarters
should be secured with a hook and cut with a knife.
Half of the aforesaid quarter part should then be cut
away (very carefully), as lachrymal sinus (and conse-
quent lachrymation) w'ould otherwise set in. The seat
of operation should be subsequently rubbed (Prati-
sdrana) with a compound of honey and Saindhava- salt.
Scarifying (Lckhana) powders should then be applied
to the affected part for the complete recovery of the
disease (any complaint still remaining), io.

Churna-Anjana -Powders of S’amkha
(conch-shell), Samudra-phena , marine oyster-shell, crystal,
ruby, coral, As niantaka, Vaidurya (Lapis lazuli), pearl,
iron, copper and Srotonjana (antimony) taken in equal
parts and mixed together, should be stuffed in a ram’s
horn* and then let the intelligent one apply this Churna-
anjana (powder) to the affected locality, morning and
evening everyday, as such applications are extremely
efficacious in all types of Armans, Pidakds, Sird-jdla,
Arsds, Sushkdrs'as and Arvuda, etc., in the eye. n.

Treatment of inner part of the eye-
lids : — The mode of treatment in a case of any affec-
tion in the inner lining of the Vartma (eye-lid) is given
below. The affected part should be first fomented and
then the eye-lid should be over-turned (held at an angle),
and the diseased growth or swelling should be carefully
lifted up with a needle, when an experienced physician
should cut it at its root or base with the help of a sharp
Mandaldgra instrument. After that the affected part
should be rubbed with a pulverised compound consist-

Dallana explains K Ahik.i~$*ring<i as a kind of fnguJi tree.

Chap. XV. ]

UTTAR A-TANTRAM.

63

ing of Saindhava , Kdsisa (Sulphate of iron) and Pippali.
The affected eyedid should then be carefully cauterised
with a (red-hot) rod after a (complete) cessation of the
bleeding. The residue of its root or base, if any, should
be scarified with a scarifying alkaline (caustic) prepara-
tion. Decoctions of strong emetic and purgative drugs*
should be (internally) administered for the elimination
of the Doshas (from the Vrana — ulcer). The measures
and remedies mentioned in connection with Abhi-
shyanda (Ophthalmia) should also be prescribed with
regard to the nature of the bodily Doshas involved in
the case. The patient shall observe strict regimen ot
diet and conduct for a month after the surgical opera-
tion. 12.

Thus ends the fifteenth chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the Sus'ruta
Samhita which treats of the remedies of eye-diseases requiring excisions or
surgical operation.

* Some commentators say that emetics and purgatives should be inter-
nally administered, but Dallana and the Panjika k^ra oppose this view.

CHAPTER XVI.

Now we shall discourse on the curative measures for
the remedy of diseases occurring on the eye-lashes and

hence on the eye-lid (Pakshma-kopa Pratl*
shed ha), i.

Surgical Treatment s— in a case of
Pakshma-kopa which is an affection of the eye-lid and
which has been described before as admitting only of
palliative treatment, the patient should be first treated
with a Sneha and made to take his seat (in a proper
position). A cut in the shape and size of a barley corn
should be made in the eye-lid horizontally parallel to
(the part of the eye-ball lying between) the Kaninaka
(pupil) and the Ap&nga (exterior corner of the eye)
leaving two parts below the eye-brow and one part
above the cye-lashcs. The surgeon should then diligently
suture up the two edges of the incisions with (horse’s)
hair. After the application of honey and clarified butter
to the operated part, it should be treated in the manner
of an (incidental) ulcer. A piece of linen should be tied
round the forehead and the horse’s hair sewing up the
operated part should be attached thereto. The stitching
*hair should be carefully removed after the complete
adhesion* of the two edges of the incidental ulcer. 2.

Cauterisation In case of the failure of the
preceding measure, the eye-lid should be carefully exa-
mined and lifted up in an inverted posture and the
diseased cyst (Bali) should be very carefully cauterised
with fire or alkali. As an alternative, the Pakshma-

* According to Vagbhata, the stitching hair should be removed on the
fifth day.

Chap. XVI. ] * UTTARA-TANTRAM* 65

maid (eye-lashes) should be all removed and the affected
eye-lid having been carefully secured with three hooks*
(Vadis'a) should be rubbed with pasted Haritaki and
Tuvaraka (Lodhra). The four aforesaid measures* as
well as purgatives, eye-drops (As'chyotana), medicinal
snuffs, inhalations (fumigations), Plasters, Collyrium,
Sneha and Rasa-kriyd, should be likewise held as
beneficial-f* in cases of Pakshma-kopa. 3-5.

Thus ends the sixteenth chapter of the U ttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which treats of the remedies of Pakshma-kopa.

* The four measures are (a) operation, {&) cauterisation with fire,
(c) cauterisation with alkali, and (</) application of medicinal drugs,

t It should be noted that this disease cannot be radically cured, but is
amenable only to palliative treatments (?j|T?r).

9

CHAPTER XVII.

Now we shall discourse on the curative treatment
of the diseases of the pupil and the Crystalline lens

(Drishti-gata-Roga-Pratishedha). i.

Of the diseases included within the present group,
three are curable, three arc incurable, while the remain-
ing six admit only of palliative treatment. The cura-
tive remedies of the disease known as Dhuma-darsi
(smoky or dusky vision) has been already described
(in connection with the medical treatment of Pittaja
Ophthalmia) * All the remedies applicable in cases
of deranged Pitta and Kapha as well as application of
Nasya (snuff), Seka (sprinkling), Anjana (Collyrium),
A'lepa (plaster), Puta-p&ka and Tarpana (soothing)
remedies with the exception of surgical operation should
be respectively administered in cases of Pitta-affected
(Pitta-vidagdha) and Kapha-affected (Slcshma-vidagdha)
vision. Traiphala-Ghrita should be prescribed in a case
of Pitta-vidagdha-Drishti and Traivrita-Ghrita in a
case of Sleshma-vidagdha-Drishti. Potions of old and
matured clarified butter as well as of Tailvaka-Ghrita
are equally efficacious in both cases +. Collyriums
(Anjanas) should be prepared with Gonrika , Saindhava ,
Pippali, and the charred remains (Masi) of cow’s teeth,
or with beef, Maricha , S'irisha - seeds and Manak-s’ild ,
or with the stalk of a Kapitthi fruit together with
honey, or with Atmaguptd pasted with honey ; these four

* See Chapter X, 9, Uttara-Tantra.

t Traiphala-Ghrita, Traivrita-Ghrita and Tailvaka-Ghritd should
be prepared with both the decoction and Kalka of Triphald, Trivrila and
of Tilvaka respectively.

Chap. XVII. j UTTARA-T ANTRAM. 67

Anjanas may be used with advantage in both the types
under discussion. 2-3.

Pushpa'njana S — Powders of the flowers of
Kubjaka , As oka, S dla , Atnra , Priyangu , Nalini and of
Utpala , as well as powdered Renuki , Pippali, Haritaki
and Amlaki mixed with honey and clarified butter,
should be kept inside a hollow bamboo and applied
to the eye in the manner of a collyrium (Anjana) in
cases of Pitta-vidagdha and Sleshmd-vidagdha eye-
diseases. 4.

Dravanjana and Cudiksfnjana As

an alternative, Renukd pasted with the expressed juice
of the flowers of Amra (mangoc) and Jambu (black-berry)
and mixed with honey and clarified butter, should be
used in both the above cases as an Anjana. Pollens of
Nalini (red lotus) and of Utpala (blue lotus) as well as
Gairika * pasted together with the Rasa (watery secre-
tions) of cow-dung f and made into large pills (Gudikd)
may be profitably applied to the eye as an Anjana alike
in cases of day-blindness and night-blindness. This
Anjana is called the Gudikdnjana. 5.

Treatment of Day-blindness \-Ra$dn-

jana , Rasa (Juice) j, honey, Tdlis a-patra and Svarna -
gairika should be pasted together with the Rasa of
cow-dung and applied (in the manner of an Anjana) ir*
cases of Pitta-affected vision i)e. day-blindness. S'ita

* Chakradatta does not read ‘Gairika’ in the list,
t In place of som2 read Ae liver of a

which may mean a cow or any animal, such as goat, sheep, etc.

t According to Dallana, Rasa (lit : — Juice) means the juice of
A'mahka . According to others, however, it means the juice of the leaves
of Jdti flower. Chakradatta, however, reads “gfl” (clarified butter) in
place of

68

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. XVll.

(Rasdnjana, or according to some Camphor), and
Sauvira should be soaked in Rasa (meat-juice) * and
then pasted together. It should then be soaked again
in the bile of a tortoise or of a Rohita fish and dried
and reduced to powder. The present compound is called
the Churn a-anjana (powdered Collyrium) and may be
used beneficially for the pacification of Pitta (in cases of
Pitta-vidagdha-Drishti). Kds'mari flowers, Yashti-madhu ,
Ddrviy Rodhra and Rasdnjana, should be pounded
together and mixed with honey. Used as an Anjana it is
always efficacious in the affections of the eye. 6-8.

Treatment of nocturnal blindness :

— The application of a medicinal Varti (stick) composed
of Sauvirdnjana , Saindhava , Pippali and Renukd pasted
together with the urine of a she-goat would prove
highly beneficial in cases of nocturnal blindness. Simi-
larly the application of a medicinal Varti (stick) com-
posed of Kaldnu-Sdrivd, Pippali , S'unthi \ Yashti-madhu ,
T&Hs'a-patra, the two kinds of Haridrd , and Musta ,
pasted with the Rasa of cow-dung f and dried
in the shade, proves beneficial in such cases. Manah -
sild, Haritaki , Trikatu , Bald , Kdl&nu-sarivd and (S'amu-
dra-) Phena pasted together with the milk of a shc-goat
and similarly prepared in the shape of a Varti is also
recommended. 9-1 1.

Rasa-Kriya'njana S— The urine, bile and
dung of a cow J together with wine, should be boiled
(in the manner of Rasa-kriydnjana preparation) in the

* Rasa may also, from the context, mean the watery secretions of
cow*dung.

t Dallana’s reading is evidently which he explains as

meaning the juice or serum of the liver of a goat, See*

t The text has I The term which literally means

a cow, hete stands for any female quadruped, such as a she-goat, etc.

Chap. XVII. ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. 69

expressed juice of Dhdtri , or in the Rasa (serum) of the
liver of an animal (e.g. a goat), or in the decoction of
Tripkald . It is called the Kshudrafnjana, and should
be applied to the affected organ in the manner of an
Anjana (collyrium). An Anjana consisting of cow’s
urine, clarified butter, Samudra-phena , Pippali^ Katphala ,
Saindhava and honey mixed together should be first
kept inside a hollow bamboo and subsequently applied
(in night-blindness) as a collyrium. The Medas (fat)
and liver of a goat, together with a quantity of clarified
butter skimmed out of the milk of a she-goat, mixed
with Pippali and Saindhava should be boiled and cook-
ed with the (expressed) juice of Amalaka (in the
manner of Rasa-kriy 4 preparations). It should then be
mixed with honey and kept in a closed vessel made
of Khadira (Catechu) wood. The use of this (com-
pound), known as the Kshudr&njana, as an Anjana
(collyrium) would be attended with good results.
Harenu , Pippali-szzfe (without pericarps), Eld and the
liver (of a goat, etc.) should be pasted with the Rasa of
cow-dung. Used as an Anjana, it would prove efficacious
in a case of Kapha-affected vision (Slcshma-Vidagdha-
Drishti). 12-14.

The liver of a Godha(a kind of wild lizard) should be
partially opened and stuffed with Pippali and roasted
in fire (having been coated with clay ). The use of the
compound * for only once f as an Anjana (with honey)

* According to Dallana the Pippali bo roasted should be used with
honey as an Anjana.

t Both Vrinda and Chakradatta read in place of and the

commentators of both of them say that the sentence means — the liver
should be taken internally and the Pippali should be used as an
Anjana. The commentator of Vrinda further says that the practice is to
use both of them together as an Anjana.

;o THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. XVII.

would be found to be higlily beneficial in cases of
night-blindness. Similarly a single application of an
Anjana made of a goat’s liver stuffed with Pippali *
and roasted in fire as in the preceding case would
speedily and certainly cure an attack of night-blindness.
As an alternative, both the spleen and the liver (of a
goat or of a lizard) would be cut into pieces, mixed with
oil and clarified butter, and roasted on a spit. Used
internally or used as an Anjana with mustard oil, it
would speedily cure an attack of night-blindness. 15-17.

An Anjana or a pill composed of Nadija (Saindhava),
S'inibi (D. R. — Samkha — conch-shell), Kataka , Anjana
(Ras&njana), Manah-sild , the two kinds of Nisd , pasted
together with the juice of the liver f (of a cow) and
mixed with red-sandal paste is recommended in a
case of day-blindness. 18.

Treatment of palliative types

Bleeding by opening the (local) veins should be resorted
to in the six kinds of ocular affections in which the
palliative treatment is all that is open to us. The
patient should be as well kept constantly purged with
draughts of matured clarified butter duly cooked with
the admixture of suitable purgative drugs. In a V£taja

* Both Vagbhata and Dallana plainly say that the roasted Pippali
only should be used with honey as an Anjana in cases of night-blindness.

t There is a confusion in the reading of this couplet. In place
of i*e. pasted with the juice of the liver (of a cow or any

other animal), Chakradatta reads “jpjt 33^’* i.c. to say— the liver of
a cow (and of no other animal) should be taken. Vrinda, however,
reads and his commentator accepts the reading (the liver

of an animal other than a cow) ; but this reading is objectionable on the
ground of a faulty construction. * h e * pasted in the watery

secretions of cow-dung, is yet another variant noticed by both the
commentators of Vrinda and of Chakradatta.

Chap. XVII ]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

71

type (of any of these six affections) purging should be
induced with castor oil taken through the vehicle of
milk. Administration of Traiphala-Ghrita is also
re:ommended for purgative purposes, especially in
the Pittaja blood-origined types. Purging with (clari-
fied butter duly cooked with) Trivrit should be induced
in types having their origin in the deranged Kapha,
while oil duly cooked with Trivrit should be adminis-
tered (for the purpose) in cases of affections having their
origin in the concerted action of all the three deranged
Doshas. The use in any shape of old and matured
clarified butter, kept in an iron vessel, proves beneficial
in cases of Timira of any type. Clarified butter cooked
with (the Kalka and decoction) of Triphald or Mesha -
s'ringi always proves efficacious in Timira of any type.
The patient should be made to lick a compound of
powdered Triphald with a copious quantity of clarified
butter in cases of Pittaja blindness, with oil in the Vataja
type, and with a copious quantity of honey in the
Kaphaja type, of this disease (Timira — loss or darkness
of vision). 19-21.

The use as a Navana (errhine) of a medicated oil
cooked and prepared with the decoction of cow-dung
would be attended with beneficial results in all types
of Timira. Clarified butter* alone is beneficial in
the Pittaja type ; similarly clarified butter prepared
by churning the milk of a ewe or a she-goat and
cooked with the admixture of the drugs of the Madhura
(Kdkolyddi) group would prove beneficial in the
Pittaja type of Timira. Oil cooked with the drugs
of the Sthirddi (Viddri-gandhddi) or the Madhura

* Sqme say that this clarified butter is to be prepared from the milk
pf a ewe or she-gjoa^t

72 ' THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XVII.

group * as well as the Anu-taila (see Chapter V,
Chikitsita Sthdna), might be prescribed with the greatest
advantage in the types of the disease due respectively to
the action of the deranged Vdyu and vitiated blood of the
system. A medicated oil duly cooked with an admixture
of Sahdy Asva-gandhdy Ati-vald, S'atdvari \ Trivrit and
the three fatty substances, Ghrita, lard and marrow,
mentioned before (in connection with the treatment of
Mahd-Vdta-Vyddhi, Chapter VI, Chikitsita Sthdna)
might be advantageously employed as an errhine in
cases of Vdtaja Timira. Butter churned out of the
milk duly cooked with the flesh of any aquatic or
marsh-frequenting fowl or beast should be employed
as an errhine ; it would prove curative in cases of
Vdtaja Timira (loss of vision). 22-23.

The flesh of a vulture and of a deer of the Ena
species, Saindhava salt, honey and clarified butter should
be prepared and applied (to the affected eye) in the
manner of Puta-ptfka (see next Chapter). The lard of
vultures, snakes and cocks and Yashti-madhu should be
pasted together (with honey) and applied (to the affected
organ) in the manner of an Anjana (eye-salve)f. 24.

Antidotes l — Srotonjana should be successively
soaked in meat-juice, J milk and clarified butter in

* The part of the text within the two *s from ‘Similarly’ in the
last page to ‘group’ in this page is not to be found in either Vrinda or
Chakradatta. The commentator of Chakradatta, moreover, does clearly
say that this part is an interpolation and cannot be found in some of the
Mss. of Sus'ruta Samhita.

f According to Dallana the lards of vultures, snakes and cocks
may be jointly or separately used — taken either one, two or all the three
at a time. But in all cases they should be mixed with honey and Yashti-
madhu . It should be noted that the lard of a Krishna-Sarpa (venomous
serpent) should be used.

t Flesh of those animals which give strength to the sight should be
used in the preparation of meat-juice.

Chap. XVII. ]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

73

the manner of Bhavand saturation and used as a Praty-
anjana * (in cases of Vdtaja Timira unattended with
redness). In cases of Vdtaja Timira attended with red-
ness of the eye, however, the Srotonjana should be placed
inside the blades of Kus'a grass and preserved for a
month inside the mouth of a (dead) black cobra. Then
it should be taken out and mixed with Saindhava salt
and the burnt ashes of Malati (Jdti) flowers. It should
then be applied as an Anjana to the affected organ.
As an alternative, Srotonjana should be soaked in milk
for three successive days and applied to the seat of the
disease in a case of (V&taja) Kfiteha (cataract) which
is said by experts to be remediable by this Anjana. 25.
Treatment of Pittaja- K^cha :-Clari-

fied butter skimmed from milk (and not from curd)
and duly cooked with the drugs of the Madhura (K&ko-
ly&di) group i* should be employed as a snuff .(Nasya),
or as a Tarpana in the Pittaja type of this disease.
The flesh of Jangala animals (deer, etc.) and the drugs
of the Kdkolyddi group should be used in the manner
of Pata-ptfka in the Pittaja type of K&cha. A Kshudr&n-
jana composed of Rasdnjana , sugar, honey Manah-s'ild ,
and Yashti-madhu may likewise be applied. The use
of an Anjana composed of Rasdnjana and Tutthaka
taken in equal parts and finely pounded, is also recom-
mended by experts { in such cases. Powdered Tutthaka
soaked in the decoction of Bhillota and the drugs of

* Pratyanjana (secondary eye-salve) is an antidote for the over-use
of an Anjana.

t According to some commentators the milk should be first
cooked with the drugs of the Madhura group, and butter should then be
churned out of that milk.

t A benumbed condition of the eye through the abuse of eye-
salves calls for the use of this Anjana as an antidote.

10

74 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. XVIL

the Elddi-gana would be used as a Pratyanjana, and
would be found beneficial in such cases. The use (as an
Anjana) of Mesha-s* ringi and Stotonjana taken in equal
parts and two parts of conch-shell pounded together is
efficacious in the Pittaja type of this disease (K&cha).

The juice of P aids’ a, Rohita and Madhuka (flower)
mixed with honey and the surface layer of wine (taken
in equal parts) should be prepared (in the manner of Rasa-
kriyd and applied as an eye-salve in this type). 26-27.

Treatment of Kaphaja Type The

drugs known as Us'ira , Rodhra , Triphald and Priyangu
duly cooked together (with Tila oil) should be
employed for the purposes of snuffing (Nasya) in
the Kaphaja Type. Fumigation (Dhumana) with the
vapours of Vidanga, Pdthd, Kinihi and Ingudi- bark
would also prove beneficial in the Kaphaja type
of cataract (Timira). The affected part should be
likewise lubricated with the medicated Ghrita duly
cooked with the decoction of Vanaspati (the milk-
exuding trees, e. g., those of the species of Indian
holy fig) with pasted Haridrd and U s' ira (as Kalka).
The essence of the meat of J&ngala (forest) animals,
mixed with Pippali and profusely saturated with
Saindhava and honey, should be prepared in the
manner of Puta-pdka (and applied to the affected part).
Manah-s’ila» Trikatu , Saindhava , Mdkshika (honey),
S*amkha y Kdsisa and Rasdnjana should be combinedly
used for the purposes of Rasa-kriyd (in the type under
discussion). Kdsisa , Rasdnjana , Guda (old and matur-
ed treacle) and Ndgara> may be likewise used with
benefit. 28.

Treatment of Trt-doshaja Ka'cha

Anjana (Antimony) many times heated and (subsequently)
soaked in the decoction of Triphald prepared with (the

Chap. XVII.]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

>5

aight kinds of) urine, should be put inside the hollow
(marrowless) bone of a nocturnal bird (such as the
vulture, etc.) and kept immersed for a month in
unruffled (currcntlcss) water. The Anjana thus prepared
may be used with advantage, in combination with
Madhuka (Yashti-madhu) and the flowers of Meshctr
s'ringi in the Tri-doshaja types of K&ha. As an alter-
native, all the measures and remedies (e. g., Tarpana,
Puta-pdka, etc.) * applicable in all the three Doshas
should be employed in such cases. 29.

Treatment of blood-origfned Pari-
n'! Idyl i — Measures and remedies mentioned in con-
nection with the Pittaja type of Timira should be em-
ployed in a case of blood-origincd ParimWyi. In the
alternative, the remedial agents prescribed for the
treatment of the different kinds of Ophthalmia (Abhi-
shyanda) should be as well prescribed according to the
nature of the deranged Doshas involved in the case.
In case the deranged Doshas arc not thereby subdued,
Nasyas of the proper drug, as well as the many other
Anjanas (collyrium) mentioned in the (next) Chapter on
Kriyi-kalpa should be employed. 30.

Diet s— A person carefully partaking of old and
matured clarified butter, Triphald , S'atdvari, Patola ,
Mudga , Amalaka , Yaia (barley) as diet enjoys immunity
from all attacks of the dreadful Timira. Simply the
Pdyasa f prepared with S'atdvari , or with Amalaka
or a meal of barley corns cooked with the decoction J

* According .to some, the measures and remedies to be applied
in such cases are the measures of Rasa*kriya applicable in cases of
Vdtaja, Pittaja and Kaphaja Timira.

t The Pstyasa of S'atdvari and A' malaki should be prepared by
duly cooking S'atdvari or A' malaki) as the case may be, with milk and
sugar. According to others, however, it means the gruel (Yavagu) prepared
with the expressed juice of S'atdvari or A' malaki.

;6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHUA. Chap. XVIL

of Triphald and a copious quantity of clarified butter
would remove (an attack of) Timira. The use of such
edibles as Jivanti^ Sunishannaka , Tandtiliyaka , Vdstuka )
Chilli , Mulaka as well as meat of birds (such as Lava,
etc.) and Jdngala animals (eg. deer, etc.) should be con-
sidered as invigorating to eye-sight. The use of the
leaves or fruit (as the case may be) of Patola , Karkotaka ,
Kdravella , Vdrtdku , Tarkdri , Kariui (tender bamboo
plants), S'igru or Artagala , cooked with clarified butter,
proves beneficial (invigoratiog) to the sight. 31.

Blood-letting (venesection) should never be resorted
to in a case of Timira, marked by the redness of the
affected eye in as much as it might bring about an
aggravation of the deranged Doshas ending in blindness
of the patient. 32.

Prognosis : — A case of Timira marked by the
absence of any redness of the eye and in which the
first Patala (coat) of the organ is the seat of the disease,
is curable (S^dhya). The case in which the eye assumes
a bright red hue and the second coat or Patala of the
organ is the seat of the disease, may be regarded as a
curable one though only with the greaterst difficulty
(Krichchhra-Srfdhya). The case in which the third coat
or Patala of the organ is the seat of the disease (charac-
terised by the redness of its outer coat) should be re-
garded as (an incurable affection) admitting only of
palliative treatment (Yfifpya). Proper palliative measures
and remedies mentioned before should be employed in
cases of Timira marked by a redness (of the affected
organ), and leeches may also be applied to the region
of the affection (to relieve it of its exuberance of the
Dosha in cases of emergency). 33.

Surgical treatment of Kaphaja
Linga-nasa 5— Now we shall describe the (surgi-

Chap. XVII.] UTTARA-TANTRAM.

cal) measures to be employed for curing a case of Linga-
n&'a (obstruction or choking up at the pupil with a
cataract) due to the action of the deranged Kapha. In
cases where the deranged Dosha in the organ, i.e, }
the affected part of the organ does not appear semi-
circular or thin in the middle, nor, fixed, (hard) nor
irregular (in shape), nor marked by a large number of
lines or a variety of tints, or where it docs not resemble
a pearl or a drop of water in shape, or if it does not
become painful and red coloured, the patient should
be first treated with Sneha and Sveda at a season
of the year which is neither too cold nor too hot
for the purpose. Then the hands, etc., of the patient
should be secured with proper fastenings and he should
be made to sit, looking simultaneously (with his two
eyes) at (the tip of) his nose. Then the intelligent
surgeon leaving off two portions of the white part of
the eye-ball from the end of the Apinga (the end of
the eye) and having fully and carefully drawn apart
the eye-lids with his thumb and the index and the
middle fingers, should insert the Yava-vaktra (needle)
instrument* through the sides of the natural apperture-
like point near the external angles of the eye,
neither above nor below, care being taken not to pierce
the veins. The left eye should be pierced with the
right hand, and the right with the left. The satisfactory
nature of the operation (perforation) should be pre-
sumed from the characteristic report or sound and the
emission of a drop of water f from the affected region,
following upon the perforation. 3^-35. v,

* Both S'rikantha Datta and S'ivadafia, the commentators respect-
ively of Vrinda and Chakradatta, read meaning that the

S'aldki (rod) should be made of copper.

t Blood would come out if the perforation be not satisfactorily done.

?8

TIIE EvMIRUTA SAMHITA.

[ <3hap. XVII.

Instantly with the perforation the affected organ
should be sprinkled over with breast-milk. The SalakA
should be retained in its place and the diseased growth
or appearance (cataract), whether fixed or mobile, should
be duly fomented from the outside with the help of the
tender leaves of VAyu-subduing efficacy, and the region
of the Drishti-mandala should be subsequently scraped
with the (pointed) end of a SalAkA. The mucus or
phlegm (Kapha) accumulated in the affected eye should
be removod by asking the patient to snuff it off by
closing the nostril on the other side of the operated eye-
ball. The part should be regarded as properly scraped
when it would assume the glossiness of a resplendent
cloudless sun and would be free from pain. Then the
SalAkA (rod) should be gently withdrawn as soon as it
would be able to perceive vision, and then the (affected)
eye should be sprinkled over with clarified butter and
bandaged with a piece of linen. During this period *
the patient should be laid on his back in a comfortable
chamber (free from dust and smoke), and be warned
against indulging in all those bodily functions such as
eructation, coughing, yawning, spitting, sneezing, etc.
The regimen of diet and conduct thereafter should be
the same as observed by one internally treated with a
Sneha (See Chapter XXXI, Chikitsita-stha'na). 36-A.

The bandage should be removed on every fourth day,
and the organ should be washed with the decoction of
the drugs of VAyu-subduing properties and bandaged
again with a fresh one. The eye should be (mildly)
fomented on every fourth day as before, so that the bodily
VAyu might not be aggravated. This rule should be

t The period during which these rules should be followed is
‘seven days* according to Vagbhata. But according to Dallana it is only
the period during which the operation lasts.

Chap. XVII.]

U TTARA-TANTR AM.

79

followed for ten days, as it would impart a fresh vigour
to the sight After-measures (such as snuffs, errhines,
Tarpanas, etc.) should then be employed and the Diet
should consist of light articles of food and be given
only in moderate quantities. 36.

Persons declared unfit for venesection (viz., infants,
old men, etc.) in the chapter on venesection * should
not be subjected to any surgical operation, in cases of
Nilikrf except at the place mentioned before (viz. the
natural aperture — Daiva-krita Chhidra). 37.

Symptoms and treatment of the
disorders resultingfrom an injudici-
ous operation : — If the incidental haemorrhage
(from a puncture in a wrong place) fill in the cavity of
the eye, in that case the eye should be beneficially
sprinkled over with clarified butter duly cooked with
Yashti-madJiu and breast-milk. An incision (puncture)
close to the exterior corner (Apdnga) of the eye would
usher in swelling, pain, lachrymation and redness of the
eye, which should be remedied by poulticing (UpanAha)
the part between the arches of the eye-brows, and
sprinkling (Sechana) the eye over with tepid clarified
butter. In the event of the organ being punctured
near the Krishna-mandala (region of the iris) and the
Krishna-mandala being affected thereby, the affected
part should be sprinkled over with clarified butter, pur-
gative should be administered and blood-letting (by
means of leeches) should be resorted to. A distressing
pain ensues from the puncture being made on the upper
part of the eye (Krishna-mandala) and this should be
cured by sprinkling drops of lukewarm clarified butter
on the scat of affection. Excessive lachrymation sets in

* S'irira-Sttidna, Chapter VII.

8o

THE SUSIIRUTA SAM HIT A. [ Chap. XVII.

with pain and redness of the eye in the event of the
puncture being made on the lower part of the eye
(Krishna-mandala) and such cases should be treated in
the preceding manner. Emulsive (Sneha) application
and fomentation (Sveda) of the parts as well as applica-
tions of Anuv&sana enema should be considered as
remedies in cases of redness, lachrymation, pain, numb-
ness and bristling (of the eye-lashes) in the eye, as the
result of an excessive and improper handling of the
instrument during the operation. 37-38.

If removed in its acute stage (in a case of Linga-
ndsa) the Dosha is liable to have an upward course
and produce relapse in the red-coloured specks or films
(opacity) in the Sukra (white part of the eye), and it
tends to give rise to an excruciating pain in the locality
and completely obstruct the vision. The remedy in
such a case consists in sprinkling the eye with clarified
butter duly cooked with the drugs of the Madhuragana ,
and in the application of the same in the manner of
$>iro-vasti (errhine). Meat diet should be prescribed for
the patient in such cases. As a full-bodied cloud
coming in contact with the wind meets its destruction,
so the fully aggravated Dosha meets its doom, if operated
upon with the surgeon’s Saldkd (rod). 39-40.

Causes Of Relapse A relapse of the de-
ranged Dosha is caused by a blow on the head, physi-
cal exercise, sexual excesses, vomiting, epileptic fits, or
by an act of piercing the Linga-nds'a (cataract) during
its partially developed (D. R. immature) stage. 41.

Symptoms produced by the defects

of the S alaka : — Care should be taken not to
remove the cataract with a roughly shaped Salt&fi (rod)
as it might usher in an acute and aching pain in the
affected organ. A rod with an unsmooth body might

f Chap. XVII.

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

8l

lead to an aggravation of the deranged Doshas. A thick-
topped rod would necessarily create an extensive ulcer,
whereas a sharp one begets the apprehension of hurting
the eye in many ways. An excessive lachrymation
sets in from using a rod with an unequal or irregu*
lar top or mouth, whereas its unsteadiness (in the course
of the operation) makes the operation an abortive one.
Hence a Salakd (rod) should be constructed and used
for the purpose in such a manner as to preclude the
possibility of the foregoing defects and injuries. 42,
Description of the :-The

Saldk& (rod) should be made to measure eight fingers in
length, its middle part being covered with strings of
thread and resembling the upper section of the thumb
in circumference and its ends terminating in the form
of a bud. The rod (Sal£k&) should be prepared of
copper, iron or gold. 43.

Derangements due to defective

Operation : — Redness of the eye, local swelling,
sucking pain, (appearance of) Arvuda or Vudvuda, hog-
like eye (Sukardkshitd) * and ophthalmia &c. are due
to the improper handling of the rod or to the use of
improper regimen of diet and conduct. These should be
remedied according to the nature of the deranged Dosha
involved in each case. 44.

Their treatment Now again hear me
discourse on the (specific) medicines to be employed
in cases of pain or redness in the eyes. A medicinal
plaster composed of Gairika, S’drivd , Durvd , and barley
pasted with milk f and clarified butter, should be

* Both Virinda and Chakradatta reads “Kekarlkshitd” *\ e. a
squinting look.

+ Vrinda and Chakradatta following V^gbhata do not read “ Payas ”
(milk) and they read the first line of this couplet in a different form.

II

82

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX, [Chap. XVJI.

applied lukewarm (about the eyes) for the subsidence
of pain and redness. A plaster (Lepa) prepared of
Siddhdrthaka (white mustard seeds) and slightly fried
sesamum seeds pasted with the expressed juice of
Mdtulunga , or one prepared of Payasyd (Kshira-kdkoli),
Sdrivd y Pair a, Manjishthd and Yashti-madhu pasted
together with the milk of a she-goat, if applied luke*
warm to the affected region, removes the pain and
redness of the eyes. A plaster composed of Ddru , Pad -
maka , and S'unthi , prepared and used in the same way
is likewise recommended for the purpose. A plaster
of Drdkshd , Yashti-madhu , Kushtha and Saindhava
should be likewise used. Cow’s milk cooked with Sain-
dhava should also be used for the alleviation of pain
and redness of the eye. Clarified butter duly cooked
with the admixture of S'atdvari , Prithak-parni \ Musta ,
Amalaka , Padntaka and the milk of a she-goat, should
be applied (cold) to the affected organ (eye) for the
alleviation of pain and burning sensation therein.
Clarified butter duly cooked with the Kalka of the
drugs of the Kdkolyddi group with a quantity of milk
four times the weight of the clarified butter, previously
cooked with the drugs of the VAyu-subduing ( Bhadra -
ddrvidi) group (in the manner of Kshira-p&ka) should be
considered as efficacious in any form (internally or
externally , in cases of ocular affections. The affected
organ should be treated with Sncha emulsive (applica-
tions) and (Sveda), fomentation and opening of the veins
(Sir£) or cauterisation (by honey, clarified butter, or
treacle) as described before, should be resorted to in
cases where the foregoing remedies would fail to pro-
duce any effect. 45-46.

Eye-sight-invigorating An Jana

Now hear me describe two beneficial recipes of Anjana

Chap. XVII. ]

UTTAR A-TANTRAM.

33

which would invigorate the eye-sight and impart a clear-
ness of vision. Flowers of Mesha-S'ringi , S'irisha , Dhava
and of Mdlati together with pearl and Vaidurya (ruby)
should be pounded and made into a paste with the
addition of the milk of a she-goat. The compound
thus prepared should be kept in a copper vessel for a
week and then made into Vartis (sticks) of convenient
lengths and applied to the eyes in the manner of an
Anjana. A Varti (stick) should be similarly prepared
with Srotonjana , coral, Samudra-phena , Manah-s* ild and
Markka and used similarly as an Anjana (eye-salve). It
imparts steadiness of vision. The many other Anjanas
to be described in the next Chapter (KriyA-kalpa) may
also be beneficially applied for the purpose. 47-48.

Thus ends the seventeenth chaptei in the Uttara-Tantra of the SusTuta-
vSamhita which treats of the curative measures of the diseases of the
Drishti (pupil).

CHAPTER XVIII.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which treats
of the preparations and uses of the medicinal measures
(external applications) to be adopted or employed in
treating ocular affections in general (KriygC-

kalpa). i.

Here follows a general exposition of the instructions
which the sainted lord of Benares, the holy Dhanvantari
of profound intellect imparted to his disciple the
son of Vis'vimitra (Susruta) regarding the different
medicinal measures (Kriy£) such as Tarpana (soothing),
Seka (sprinkling), A'schyotana (eye-drops), Puta-ptfkas
Anjanas (eye-salves), etc., mentioned before in different
places to be employed in diseases of the eye. 2-3.

The Tarpana Measure The measure
known as Tarpana should be employed in respect of an
affected eye either in the fore-noon or in the after-noon
under the auspices of propitious astral combinations,
after having purged the head and bowels of the patient
and subsequent to the digestion of any food previously
taken. The patient should be laid on his back in a
chamber not exposed to the rays of the sun, and the gust
of the wind, and where the atmosphere is not charged
with minute particles of floating dust. The region of his
eye (i. e. eye-lids) should be thickly coated with powdered
MAsha pulse, pasted (with water) in the form of a circular
wall which should be even, hard and compact. Then a
quantity of the transparent upper layer of clarified butter
should be stirred with the admixture of a quantity of
lukewarm water and poured (Purana) into the cavities of
the eye up to the eye-lashes and retained therein for as

Chap. XV III. ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. 85

long a period as one would take to count five hundred,
six hundred, eight hundred, and ten hundred syllabless
respectively in cases of healthy persons and persons
with Kapha-origined, Pitta-origined and Viyu-origined
diseases of the eye. According to certain authorities,
the periods of such retention (of clarified butter) should
vary with the seat of the affection (in the eye-ball). The
clarified butter mentioned above should, according to
them, be retained in the cavities of the eye for as long
a period as one would take to utter three hundred, five
hundred, seven hundred, one thousand, or eight hundred
syllables respectively in cases of the diseases confined
to the region of the Sandhi, Vartman, Sukla, Krishna,
the eye in general (Sarva-gata) and the Drishti of the
eye*. The clarified butter should then be secreted through
the interior corner of the affected organ which should be
purified by applying poultices of pasted barley. The
Kapha, deranged by the use of this Sneha-Purana should
be then conquered by making the patient inhale some
kind of Kapha-subduing Dhuma (smoke). This rule f
should be observed for one, three or five days in succes-
sion. 4.

Symptoms of satisfactory, excess-
ive and defective Tarpana Sleep at

the first call, unembarrassed waking, cessation of secre-
tion, clearness of vision, agreeable sensation, perceptible
amelioration of the disease, and lightness of the organ

* Accordtng to some, the ‘Parana’ should be retained in the eye for a
period required to count one thousand syllables in c&ses of Sarva-gata and
eighteen hundred words in cases of Drishti-gata eye-diseases.

t According to Gayadasa, this rule should be observed for one, three,
or five days in cases of the preponderance of Vayu, Pitta and Kapha res-
pectively, and according to Jejjata, in cases of mild, moderate and severe
attack respectively.

36 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITjC [ Chap. XVII I.

are the symptoms which result from a proper and
satisfactory Tarpana of the eye. Cloudiness of vision,
a sense of heaviness in the affected organ, excessive
glossiness (of the eye), lachrymation, itching, sliminess
and an aggravation of the Doshas are the features which
mark a case of severe and excessive Tarpana. A sense
of dryness in the affected organ, cloudiness of vision,
profuse lachrymation, sensitiveness to light and an
aggravation of the disease are the evils which follow an
act of defective Tarpana (of the eye). 5.

Treatment of excessive and defect-
ive Tarpana Z — Cases of defective and excessive
Tarpana should be remedied with the application of
medicinal snuffs, Anjanas, washes and inhalations of
smoke and by adopting dry or emulsive measures, (as
the cases may require). 6.

Cases for Tarpana Shrivelling and dc-

pilation of the eye-lashes, cloudiness and darkness of
vision, archedness of sight, absolute want of lachryma-
tion, parchedness of the eye, hardness of the eye-lid and
a severely diseased condition of the eye are amenable
to the application of the Tarpana measure as giving
tone to the eye. The Tarpana measure should not to
be applied in a cloudy day, nor in a day excessively hot
or cold. It should not be applied to the eye of a
person engrossed by anxiety or fear, nor before the
subsidence of the supervening symptoms (Upadrava) of
the eye-disease. 7-8.

The Puta-pa'ka The Puta-ptfka measure
should be applied in the aforesaid cases. The Puta-p£ka
is not applicable in cases where Nasya (errhines), Tarpana
and the internal application of Sncha (Sneha-pAna) are
forbidden. After a complete subsidence of the Dosha,
the Puta-pdka should be applied to the (affected) eye
*

Chap. XVIII.

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

87

in cases where the patient would be found capable of
being treated with it. The Puta-paka measure may be
divided into three classes, viz., Snehana (emulsive),
Lekhana (scraping) and Ropana (healing) Puta-p&ka. The
Snehana (emulsive) Puta-p&ka is recommended in cases
marked by the extreme parchedness of the affected
organ or locality, and Lskhana (scraping) ones are
efficacious in cases of excessive applications of the
Sneha to the eye ; while the eye-sight is invigorated
by the Ropana (healing) Puta-pdka, which restores the
Vdta, * the Pitta and the blood of the affected locality
to their natural conditions, and (consequently) heals the
ulcer. 9-10.

Preparation of Snehana, Lekhana,
and Ropana Puta-pa'kas s— The Snehana

(emulsive) Puta-pdka should be prepared with the flesh
(of animals frequenting marshy places) abounding in
Sneha f and with the Vasct (lard), Majjan (marrow),
and Medas (fat), and the drugs of the Madhura group and
it should be retained in the eye so long as one would
take to utter two hundred syllables. The scraping or
Lekhana Puta-p&ka should be prepared with the flesh
and the liver of an animal of the Jdngala species and
the drugs possessing the Lekhana or scraping properties,
as well as powders of black iron (steel), copper, conch-
shells, Vidruma (corals), Saindhva salt, Samudra-phena,
Kdsisa (sulphate of iron) and Srotonjana (pasted to-
gether) with the cream of curd. The affected locality
should be exposed to a Lekhana Puta-pjjjca as long as

* A different reading, mentioned by Dallana, does not read “Vita.”
t In place of meaning flesh abounding in Sneha, a

different reading tf- c * clarified butter and flesh) is quoted by

Dallana.

88

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. XVIII.

one would take to utter a hundred syllables at most. The
healing or Ropana Puta-p&ka should be prepared by
cooking the flesh of an animal of the J&ngala group with
breast-milk, honey*, clarified butter and the bitter
drugs, and should be retained in the affected eye for a
period three times as much as the Lekhana-Puta-pdka
should be retained i.e., for a period as long as one would
require to utter three hundred syllables. n-13.

The fumigating measures mentioned in connection
with the Tarpana of an affected eye, as well as theappli
cations of Sneha and Svcda, should be resorted to in the
cases of the application of the Puta-paka measures, except
in cases of the application of the Ropana Puta-p&ka.
Puta-pdka applications may be made on one day only
or may be continued for two or three days.f. A
strict regimen of diet and conduct should be observed
for a period twice as long as the preparatory period
(beginning with the time of administering the Sneha to
the patient for preparing him for the application of the
Puta-p&ka till the time of actually administering the
Putapdka itself). 14-15.

Prohibition and Remedies for in-
fringement S — After the application of Tarpana
and Puta-p&ka (to the affected eye)* the patient should
not catch glimpses of the light, fire, sky, looking-glass or
any other luminous object ; nor he should expose the eye

* In place of ‘ (honey and clarified butter) Dallana quotes

a variant — lit. sacred clarified butter i e., clarified butter pre-

pared from cow’s milk.

+ Dallana explains that the application of the Puta-paka measure
should be made for one day only in Kaphaja eye-diseases, or if the
Puta-pdka be a Lekhana one ; and it should be continued for two days
in Pittaja eye-diseases, or if it be a Snehana one ; and for three clays in
V£taja eye-diseases, or if it be a Ropana Puta-pdka*

Chap. XVIII.]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

89

to the blast of the wind. The unfavourable symptoms
incidental to and induced by an infringement of the
rules to be observed after the application of these two
(Tarpana and Futa-p&ka) measures should be remedied
with the applications of Anjana (collyrium), A's'chyotana
and Sveda (fomentation) to the deranged bodily Doshas,
underlying each particular case. 16-17.

Satisfactory, excessive and defect
tive application Of Puta-p£ka Fresh-
ness and clearness of the colour (of the cornea), capa*
bility of the organ (eye) to bear heat, light and wind,
refreshing sleep and an unembarrassed gladsome waken-
ing and a lightness of the organ are the benefits which
are derived from Satisfactory Puta-p&ka applications.
Darkness of vision, pain and swelling of the eye and
the appearance of eruptions (Pidakd) in the affected
organ, arc the evils which mark an excessive applica-
tion of the Puta-p&ka measure ; while suppuration and
lachrymations of the eye and a thrilling ^^isation
(Harsha) in the affected organ, as well as a further
aggravation of the Dosha (involved) are the characteris-
tic features of a deficient Puta-p&ka application. 18.

Mode of preparing Puta-paka s— Now
I shall describe the mode of preparing a Puta-pa£ka
remedy. Two Vilva (Pala) measures of cleansed and
pasted meat, one Pala measure of the medicinal drugs
pasted together and one Kudava (half a seer) measure
of liquid ingredients should be mixed together (and
made into a ball), well covered with the leaves of
Kadali ’, Kdsmari , Eranda , Kumuda or of Padnta plant.
Coated with clay, it should be duly scorched in the
burning charcoal (fire) of catechu wood or in that of
Kataka , As'mantaka , Eranda , Pdtald , Vdsaka , Vadara y
Ksfiira-zyi uding trees, or in the fire of the dried cakes
* 12

90

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XVIU.

of cow-dung. When well cooked the ball should be
taken out of the fire and broken and its contents with*
drawn and squeezed. The fluid extract should then be
collected and applied (to the affected organ) in the
manner of applying a Tarpana. 19,

The mode of application The patient
being laid on his back at the time, the fluid extract in
both the cases (Tarpana and Puta-pdka) should be
dropped cold into the KaninikA (Cornea) of the eye in
cases of derangement of the blood and the Pitta ; it
should be used lukewarm when the VAyu and the Kapha
would be found to have been aggravated. A burning
sensation in the affected eye as well as its consequential
inflammation would result from the use of too hot
(warm) or strong or keen-potencied (Tikshna) extract
for the purpose. A thrilling sensation (Harsha), pain and
numbness in the locality and lachrymation from the
affected organ originate from the use of a cold and
mild-pJB&cied Puta-pAka or Tarpana eye-drop. Red-
ness and contraction of the eye attended with a jerking
and throbbing sensation therein are the effects of an
excessive (over-dose) application of the Puta-pAka and
Tarpana, whereas a deficient (under-dose) use of them
produces an aggravation of the deranged bodily Doshas
in the locality. Properly applied, they alley the burning
and itching sensation, swelling, pain, lachrymation and
mucous secretion, as well as the (unnatural) coating and
redness in the affected eye. As every one is desirous
of avoiding the aggravation of Doshas, so the Puta-pAka
and Tarpana measures should be applied in such a way
as would give health and happiness (to the eye). The
evils resulted by a course of injudicious application of
Puta-pAka or Tarpana, are to be remedied with the
application of errhines (Nasya), Dhuma and Anjana

Chap. XVIII ]

U TTARA-TAN TR AM .

91

remedial to the specific deranged bodily Dosha or
Doshas involved in each case. 20.

The affected eye should be fomented before the use
of a Puta-pika or a Tarpana measure with a piece of
cloth soaked in hot water (and rinsed). Fumigation of
the affected organ in the end should be prescribed in a
case marked by an aggravation of the deranged Kapha
of the locality. 21.

As'Chyotana and Seka Properly pre-
pared and applied, the As'chyotana and Seka measures
would respectively subdue cases of slight and violent
attacks of the eye. Like the Puta-paka measure these
two also are devided into three classes viz. t (Lekhana,
Snehana and Ropana). Seven or eight drops of the
medicinal fluid should be used in Lekhana-Aschyotana
(for the purpose of scraping the affected eye) ; ten drops
in the Snehana (for emulsive purposes) and twelve
drops in the Ropana Aschyotana ( for the purpose of
setting up a granulative process in a local sore or
wound). The maximum period for which an (affected)
eye should be subjected to the Seka measure is twice as
long as is enjoined in respect of a Puta-p^ka measure *
or until the disease is gradually and wholly removed/}"
Both the Aschyotana and the Seka applications should
be made in the morning or evening or at noon (in accord-

* The period for which an affected eye should be subjected to the
As'chyotana measure, is not given in the text, but jDallana says that It
should be the same as observed in cases of Puta»patk&< Some, however,
hold that in cases of both Seka and As'chyotana the period would be twice
as that for Puta-pika.

t This rule for subjecting the affected eye to the measure till the
disease is gradually and wholly removed is for Seka and As'chyotana only 3
but according to some it is a general rule which applies also to cases of
Tula-pika and Tarpana, elc.

gi THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVIlL

ancewith the aggravation of the deranged Doshas),*
or whenever there would be pain (in the affected eye), f
The symptoms of proper and improper (excessive and
deficient) applications of a Sneha (emulsive) Seka are
identical with those of Tarpana. 22-23.

£$irO-vaSti : — The serious diseases peculiar to
the head readily yeild to and are conquered by the
application of Siro-vasti, which also produces the
very good effects known as the Murdha-tailika ones
peculiar to the use of (emulsive) Siro-vasti. The patient
having been treated with purgatives and emetics (accord-
ing to requirements ) should be given a proper diet
according to the nature of the disease, and made to
sit erect in the evening, when an animal bladder (the
bladder of a goat being usually used for the purpose)
filled with the proper Sneha, should be placed on his
crown and firmly tied up with a bandage. The Sneha-
fiiled bladder should be so retained on the head ten
times as long as is necessary for Tarpana measure,
according to the nature of the disease. 24-25.

Anjana S — Proper Anjana for Lekhana (scraping),
Ropana (healing), or Prasadana (invigorating) purposes
should be applied after the cleansing ( purging, etc.)
of the system in cases where the deranged bodily
Doshas would manifest themselves in the region of the
eye only. 26.

A Lekhana-Anjana should be prepared with the

* The Lekbana-seka and As'chyotana should be applied in the
morning in the aggravation of Kapha* while the Snehana one should be
applied in the afternoon in the aggravation of Vdytl»— the Ropana ones
being applied at noon in the aggravation of Blood and Pitta*

t Dallana holds, that both the Seka and As'chyotana measures may
be applied when- ver there is pain in the affected eye, but others hold
that this rule applies only in ciases of Seka.

Chap* XVIII.]

TJTTARA-TANTRAM.

93

drugs of one or more tastes (Rasa) except the sweet
one and should be used in five different ways accord-
ing to the nature of the Dosha or Doshas involved in
each case.* The Dosha accumulated in the regions
of the eye and the eye-lids, in the ball, the passages,
and in the capillaries of the eye, as well as in the
gristle of the nose would be secreted through the
mouth, the nostrils and the corners of the eyes by
the application of a Lekhana Anjana. A Ropana-
Anjana should be prepared with the drugs of bitter
and astringent tastes ( Rasa ) mixed with ( a little
quantity of ) clarified butter and is good for healing
purposes. Owing to the presence of the Sneha, it is
cooling in its effect and consequently gives natural
colour and vigour to the eye. A Prasadana- Anjana, pre-
pared with the drugs of sweet taste and with (a profuse
quantity of) Sneha, imparts tone and vigour to the eye-
sight and should be used with advantage for all sooth-
ing purposes connected with the organ. The application
of the different kinds of Anjana should be made in the
morning, evening or in the night in accordance

* In cases ot the derangement of the local Vatyu, the Anjana should
bj prepared with the drugs of acid and saline tastes (Rasa) ; in the
derangement of the Pitta with those of astringent taste ; in Kapha with
those of astringent, bitter and pungent tastes In cases of the derange-
ment of the blood) the Anjana should be like that in the derangement
of Pitta, and in cases of the derangement of two or three Doshas simuh
taneously, the Anjana should be prepared with drugs of two or three of
the tastes required.

t The Anjana should be applied in the morning, in the evening
and in the night respectively in the cases of the derangement of the Kapha
Viyu and the Pitta. According to the others, the S'odhana, the Ropana
and the Snehana Anjanas should be respectively used in the morning, in
the evening and in the night. Others, however, are of opinion that these
different times should be judiciously selected in the different seasons of
the year according to requirement.

94

THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVIII.

with the nature of the deranged bodily Dosha or Doshas
involved in each case. 27-30.

Forms Of Anjana The forms in which
an Anjana may be, are those of pills, liquid (Rasa-kriyd)
and powder * each succeeding, one being more effica-
cious than the one preceding it, in the order of enu-
meration. 31.

Their sizes and doses The size (dose) of
a Lekhana, Prasadana and Ropana Varti (Pill) should be
equal to that of one and a half and twice as much as a
Kaldya pulse for ocular affections in general. As regards
the application of Rasa-kriya- Anjana in these disorders
the quantity to be used in a dose should be equal to
that of the Varti in the different cases respectively.
As regards the dose of the powders (to be used in eye-
diseases) it should be respectively twice, thrice and four
times as much as would be contained at the end of a
Sal&k& (rod). 32.

The materials of the vessel and rod
for the use of an Anjana The vessels
containing the different kinds of Anjana should be
according to the different kinds of Anjana themselves,
and these vessels as well as the Sal&ka (rod) for the
use should be made of gold, silver, horn, copper,
Vaidurya (a kind of precious stone), bell-metal and iron
respectively (in accordance with the different tastes of
the drugs the Anjanas arc made of), f The end of the

* Dallana says that Pill-Anjanas, Liquid-Anjanas and Powder-
Anjanas should be prescribed in cases of severe, intermediate and mild
attacks respectively.

t According to Dallana the Anjana of sweet taste should be placed
in a golden vessel, that of acid taste in a silver vessel, that of saline taste
in a vessel made of horn (of a sheep), that of astringent taste, in a vessel
either of copper or iron, that of pungent taste in a vessel made of Vaidurya,

Chap. XVIII.]

uttara-tantram.

95

rod should terminate in a bud-shaped ball with the girth
of that of a Kal&ya pulse, its entire length measuring
eight fingers only. It would be well polished, slender
at the middle and capable of being easily handled.
A rod prepared of copper, precious stones such as
Vaidurya , etc., and horns or bones, etc.,* will prove
beneficial. 33.

How to apply an Anjana The lids of
the affected eye (of the patient) should be slantingly
drawn apart with the left hand, and the Anjana
should be carefully applied by holding the rod with the
right hand and by constantly moving the rod from the
Kaninika to the Apanga and vice versa ( along the
inner side of the eye-lid ). This process should be
repeated ( twice or thrice ) according to requirements.
The Anjana should be applied with the finger when it
would be necessary to use it on the outer side of the
eye-lid. The Anjana in no case should be thickly paint-
ed in the corners of the eye (i.c., in the Kaninikd and
the ApAnga from fear of hurting them), nor the organ
should be washed till all the aggravations of the derang-
ed (bodily) Dosha in the locality are completely
removed thereform, in as much as it might bring on a
fresh aggravation and impair the strength of the eye-
sight. After the subsidence of the deranged local Dosha

and that of bitter taste should be placed in a vessel made of bell-metal.
The S'alikd (rod) for the use of the different kinds of Anjana should be
also accordingly prepared.

According to Nimi, however, as quoted by Dallana and S'rikantha
Datta, in their commentaries, the Ropana, Lekhana “and Prasddana
Anjanas should be placed in a vessel and used with a rod prepared respect-
ively of iron, copper and gold. The other materials may be, however,
used with discretion by an experienced physician.

* The word in the text shows that a rod of gold may also be

used with benefit— Pallana.

96

TIIE SUSHRUTA SAMlilTX.

[Chap. XVIII,

and of lachrymation, the eye should be first washed with
water, and Pratyanjana should then be used in accor-
dance with the nature of the specific deranged bodily
Dosha or Doshas underlying in each case, 34.

Forbidden Cases : — The application of
Anjanas is prohibited in cases of persons suffering from
fever, Uddvarta, and the diseases of the head and during
fits of anger, grief, fear, weeping and intoxication, as
well as in cases of the retention of stool and urine,
in as much as it might produce (in these cases) lachry-
mation, Smla (aching pain), redness, pain, blindness
(Timira), swelling in the locality, as well as giddi-
ness. An application of the Anjana in a case of
insomnia might be followed by the loss of the eye-
sight*. The application of an Anjana in a windy day
may impair the eye-sight. Application to the eyes
affected with dust or smoke, may bring on redness,
Adhimantha (Ophthalmia) and local secretion. Applied
after the use of an errhine (Nasya) it may usher in an
aching pain and swelling in the eyes. It leads to the
aggravation of the disease, if applied in any
disease of the head. The application of an Anjana
would be abortive, nay, it would rather aggravate the
Dosha, if applied before sun-rise, after a bath, or in a
very cold day, owing to the fixedness of the deranged
bodily Dosha. Similarly, the application of an Anjana
would fail to produce any effect in a case of indigestion,
owing to the sluggish condition of the internal passages
of the body (during the continuance of the disease).

* In some editions there is an additional text— “fijgpgra ^

which supplies a complete verb and makes the sense
complete. The line means — the application of an Anjana in a forbidden
case produces loss of sleep (insomnia) in addition (to redness, pain etc ,
mentioned in the preceding line).

hap. XVIII. ]

UTTARA-TANTKAM.

97

The application of an Anjana in an aggravated stage
of the deranged bodily Doshas, ushers in the distressing
symptoms peculiar to each of them. Hence, the applica-
tion of an Anjana should be carefully made in such a
manner as not to induce any of the aforesaid evils, and
these rules should be specially observed in connection
with a Lekhana-Anjana. These distressing symptoms
should be treated with washes (lotions), As'chyotana,
plasters, Dhuma (fumigation), Nasya and Kavala (gurgle)
with due regard to the specific nature of the deranged
bodily Dosha or Doshas involved in each case. 35-36.

Symptoms of satisfactory, excess-
ive and deficient use of a Lekhana-
Anjana : — Lightness, whiteness and pristine clear-
ness of the eye, marked by the improved power of
vision and absence of secretion and all other dis-
tressing symptoms, are the indications which point
to the fact that the eye has been satisfactorily purged
of the accumulated Doshas (by the proper application
of a Lekhana Anjana). An excessive purging of the
eye (by the excessive use of a Lekhana Anjana) begets
such local evils as the deep discolouration of the external
coat of the eye, its sense of looseness in the socket,
lachrymation, archedness of the organ and a sense of
constant dryness in its cavity. The medical treatment in
such instances consists in the employment of soothing
(Santarpana) and other Vdyu-subduing remedies. An
insufficient or deficient application of the Lekhan^
Anjana leads to the aggravation of the local deranged
bodily Dosha which should be fully secreted out
by employing medicinal errhines, Anjana and local
fumigation. 37-39.

Symptoms of satisfactory, excess-
ive and deficient use of Prasddana

*3

98

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHUX. [ Chap, XVIII.

(Snehana) and Ropana Anjanas s— The

action of the satisfactory application of a Prasidana
(Snehana) Anjana is to soothe the eye, to impart a
healthy tone to the organ of sight, to restore its
natural colour and gloss, and to make it strong and
unclouded and free from the aggravation of any Dosha.
Any 6 X 0688 in the application is followed by results
identical with those of excessive application of Tarpana
(soothing measures)* to the organ, and the remedy con*
sists in employing mild but parching remedies antidotal
to the deranged bodily Dosha (Kapha) involved in the
case. The symptoms which mark a satisfactory and
excessive application of a Ropana (healing) Anjana,
as well as the medical treatment to be applied in cases
of excess, are identical with those mentioned in connec-
tion with the satisfactory and excessive application
of the PrasAdana (soothing) Anjanas (respectively).
Deficient applications of both the Snehana (soothing)
and the Ropana (healing) Anjanas (in respect of ocular
affections) are sure to prove abortive in their effects.
Care should, therefore, be taken to apply it properly,
if it is hoped to get the wished-for result. 4043.

Thousands of remedial measures and remedies may
be devised and employed in the* manner of the
Puta-paka and other measures on the basis of the
fundamental principles herein inculcated. 44.

Now we shall describe the recipes and preparations
of several principal Anjanas fit for the use of kings and
crowned heads for the purpose of giving strength to the
eye-sight and for the amelioration of ocular affections
(KAcha, etc.) amenable only to the palliative measures.
Eight parts of Rasdnjana (Antimony) having the hue of

f

* See S'loka 5 of this Chapter,

Chap. XV III. ]

U TTARA-TANTRAM.

99

a (full-blown) blue lotus flower, as well as one part each
of (dead) copper, gold and silver should be taken together
and placed inside an earthen crucible. It should then
be burnt by being covered with the burning charcoal
of catechu or ,As'mantafca wood, or in the fire of dried
cakes of cow-dung and blown (with a blow-pipe till they
would glow with a blood-red effulgence) after which the
expressed juice (Rasa) of cow-dung, cows urine, milk-curd,
clarified butter, honey, oil, urine, lard, marrow, infusion of
the drugs of the Sarva-gandhd group, grape-juice, sugar-
cane-juice, the expressed juice of Triphald and the com-
pletely cooled decoctions of the drugs of the Sdrivddi
and the Utpalddi groups, should be separately sprinkled
over it in succession alternately each time with the
heating thereof, (or to put it more explicitly, the crucible
should be taken down after being heated and then one
of these draughts should be sprinkled over its contents
and then again heated and again sprinkled over with
another draught, and so on). After that, the preparation
should be kept suspended in the air for a week, so as to
be fully washed by the rains. The compound should
then be dried, pounded and mixed together with propor-
tionate parts (quarter part) of powdered pearls, crystals,
corals and Kdlami-sdrivd. The compound thus prepared
is a very good Attjana and should be kept in a pure
vessel made of ivory, crystal, Vaidurya , S’amkha
(conch-shell), stone, gold or silver or of Asana wood. It
should then be purified (lit. worshipped) in the manner
of the purification of the Sahasra-P&ka-Taila described
before. It may then be prescribed even for a king.
Applied along the eye-lids as a collyrium, it enables a
king to become favourite with his subjects and to
continue invincible to the last day of his life free from
ocular affections. 45.

100 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. XVIIt.

Bhadrodaya-Anjana * The drugs known
as Kushtha> Chandatta , Eld , Patra, Yashti-madhu ,
Rasdnjana, flowers of Mesha-s'ringi, Chakra (Tagara),
the seven kinds of jewels*, the pollens of the flowers of
Utpala , Brihati , Kartakdri and of lotus, Ndga-kes'ara ,
Us’ira> Pippali \ the shells of hen’s eggs, Ddru-haridra ,
Haritaki , Gorochond , Maricha , marrow or kernel of
Vibhitaka - seeds and the flesh of lizards (which are found
to scale the walls of rooms), should be powdered together
in equal parts and should be preserved in a vessel and
purified (sanctified) in the preceding manner. This
Anjana is called the Bh adrodaya-Anjana and should
always be used by a king. 46.

Equal parts of Chakra (Tagara), Maricha, Jatd-mdmsi
and S'aileya with Manah-s ild equal to the combined
weight of the preceding drugs, four parts of Patra with
Rasdnjana (antimony) twice the combined weight of
all the preceding drugs and Yashti-madhu of equal*f“
weight with the last-named drug (Rasdnjana) should be
powdered together and used as an Anjana in the fore-
going manner. 47.

Manah-s’ild , Deva-ddru , the two kinds of Rajani \ Tri-
phald , Trikatu i Ldkshd , Las'una, Manjishthd , Saindhava ,
Eld , Mdkshika , Sdvaraka Rodhra i dead iron and copper,
Kdldnu-sdriva and the outer shells of hen’s eggs taken
in equal parts should be powdered together, resolved
into a paste with milk and made into pills of ade-
quate size. Diseases of the eye such as the itching
sensation in the eye, Timira/ Sukldrma and Raktariji
readily yield to the curative efficacy of this Anjana. 48.

* The seven kinds of gems are (1) Padmaraga, (2) Matakata, (3) Hila,
(4) Vaidurya, (5) Mukta (pearl) (6) Prav£la and (7) Hema (gold).

t According to some the weight of the Yashti-madhu to be used in
this Anjana should be equal to that of all the other drugs combined.

Chap. XViri. ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. 10 i

An Anjana should be prepared by collecting lamp-
black on a vessel made of Indian bell-metal, and mix*
ing it with one part each of Yashtimadhu , Saindhava ,
Tagara and roots of Eranda , as well as two parts of
BriAatz. This compound should be pasted together
with goats milk and thinly plastered on a copper plate.
This process should be continued for seven times in
succession and dried in the shed. It should then be
made into Vartis and (used as such) would relieve
pain in the eye. 49.

One part each of Haritaki Yaskti-madku with
sixteen parts of Maricha should be pounded and pasted
together with cold water. It should then be made into
Vartis and would be efficacious in all sorts of ocular
affections. An experienced physician may with care
and discretion prepare Pindafajanas with the drugs anti-
dotal to the specific Dosha or Doshas involved in
the case, in the manner of preparing the Rasa-kriy4
preparations. 50-51.

Thus ends the eighteenth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhita whieh deals with the preparations and uses of the medicinal
measures to be used in different ocular affections.

CHAPTER XIX.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment
to be adopted -in cases of hurt or injury to the eye

(Nayanatohighatta-Pratishedha). i.

A violent and intolerable pain in the eye accom-
panied by redness and swelling therein, resulting from
a blow or from any sort of hurt or injury to the organ,
should be remedied with the application of medicinal
Nasya (errhines), plasters, sprinkling and Tarpana
(soothing measures), and other measures mentioned
before, as well as the measures prescribed in cases of
Pittaja and Raktaja Abhishyanda — lit. remedial to the
pain (Sula) caused by the deranged blood and Pitta
in the locality. The affected eye (Drishti) should also
be soothed with the help of cool, sweet and fatty drugs.
This kind of treatment should also be followed in cases
where the eye would be hurt or oppressed by (excessive)
fomentation, smoke or glare-fite, or affected on account
pf fear, mental agony, pain or injury. These measures
should also be resorted to in the first stage (/. <?.,
during the first week) of the hurt or injury in the eye.
After this period the affected eye should be treated
as a case of an Abhishyanda with due regard to the
nature of the specific deranged bodily Dosha or Doshas
involved in the case. A slight hurt in the eye may
be instantaneously relieved by the application of warm
breath-fomentation . 2-4.

Prognosis 5 — Any ulceration restricted to one
Patala (coat) only of the eye may be easily cured ; an
ulcer invading two Patalas of the organ may be healed
only with the greatest difficulty, while the one affect-
ing three Patalas should be regarded as incurable.

Chap. XIX. ] U TT ARA-TAN TRAM. f 03

Palliative measures are all that are possible in cases of
looseness, dislocation, sunkenness and the thiashed
condition (Pichchita) of the eyes as well as in a case of
Hata-drishti (loss of eye-sight). Cases of wrong or
erroneous vision, marked by the dilation of the pupil,
absence of any considerable redness and those cases
where the eye (eye-ball) is in its proper place and is not
affected in its power of vision prove amenable to,
medical treatment. S~6.

A sunken eye may be uplifted either by holding the
breath (PrAna-v&yu) or by inducing vomiting or sneez-
ing, or by throttling or obstructing the wind-pipe. Where
the eyes would be found to be hanging down from the
sockets, the measures and remedies prescribed before*
should be resorted to, and the patient should be made
to take in long breaths of air (through the nostrils) and
cold water should be poured on his head. 7.

Symptoms and treatment of Kuku-

naka S — The seventy-six kinds of eye-diseases herein
mentioned before, occur to adults as well as to infants,
but a peculiar disease, due to the action of deranged
Vdyu, Pitta, Kapha and blood, sometimes manifests itself
in (the inner lining of) the eye-lids of an infant and this
is known as Kukunaka. Its exciting cause is the
vitiated condition of the breast-milk of the mother. In
this disease, there is excessive itching in the eyes, and the
child frequently rubs his eyes, nose and forehead with his
fist ; there is constant lachrymation and the child cannot
bear the least light of sun’s rays. The orgkn should, in
such cases, be speedily bled (by applying leeches) and be
scraped (with rough leaves). The organ should further
be rubbed with Tri-katu and honey pasted together.

* Sec Qiikit'ita-sthAna, Chapter II, Para 29.

104

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XI&

The mother (or the nurse) should also be treated in the
manner prescribed before (in cases of an affection of the
breast-milk). Compounds of Saindhava salt, honey
and powdered Khara-manjari (Apimdrga) seeds, as well
as those of powdered Pippali , Saindaava- salt and honey
with the vehicle of breast-milk should be given to the
child for emetic purposes, but this should be discontinued
as soon as vomiting would set in. 8-10.

To a child who takes both breast-milk and other
solid food, the emetic should be administered with the
admixture of Vachd , and to a much older child (/.*., one
who has given up taking breast-milk) the emetic should
be given with the admixture of Madana fruit, n.

Decoction of the tender leaves of Jambu , Antra
and Amalaki should be used for washing and sprinkling
purposes. Clarified butter duly cooked with Trfyhald
or with Guduchi should be dropped into the eye as an
Aschyotana measure. 12.

Anjanas composed of Manah-s'ld , Marietta , S'amkha
(conch-shell), Rasdnjarta and Saindhava pounded to-
gether and pasted with honey and treacle should be
applied to the affected organ. Compounds of Murvd y
honey and powdered copper should also be used as
Anjana. The compound prepared by burning black iron
(steel), clarified butter, milk and honey mixed together
should be similarly used as an Anjana. As an alterna-
tive, the Gutikrfnjana made up of Trikatu , Paldndu
(onion), Yashti-madhu , Saindhava , Ldkshd (lac) and
Gairika (earth) pasted together, should be used. The
Anjana made of NintbaA eaves, Yashti-madhu , Ddrvi , *

* “Bdrvi” generally means Ddru-haridrd ; but, here, on the authority
of Videha, Dallana takes it to mean the two kinds of ffaridrd, viz.,
Haridr£ and £>*'ru-haridrd.

Chap. XIX. ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. IO$

copper (powdered) and Lodhra taken in equal parts and

pounded together, is also efficatious. 1 3.

An Anjana prepared with Rasdnjana (Antimony),
S'amkha , curd and Saindkava kept together for a
period of half a fortnight, * should be applied to the
affected organ of the child in cases of Sttkra, and the
directions given under the head of Kaphaja-Abhishyanda
should also be followed by experienced physicians in
such cases of the eye-disease of children. 14.

Conclusion : — The Science of medicine is as
incomprehensible as the ocean. It cannot be fully
described even in hundreds and thousands of verses.
Dull people who are incapable of catching the real
import of the Science of reasoning would fail to acquire
a proper insight into the Science of medicine if dealt
with elaborately in thousands of verses. The occult
principles (of the Science of medicine), as explained in
these pages, would, therefore, sprout and grow and bear
good fruits only under the congenial heat of a (medical)
genius. A learned and experienced (medical) man
would therefore try to understand the occult principles
herein inculcated with due caution and with reference
to other Sciences. 1 5.

Thus ends the nineteenth chapter of the U ttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment to be adopted in cases
of hurt or injury to the eye.

* The method of preparing this Anjana, as explained by Dallana
on the authority of Videha, is as follows S'amkha (conch-shell) and
Saindkava should be first pasted together with curd (Dadhi) and then a
quantity of Ras&njana should be soaked with this preparation for seven
days and a half and Varti should then be prepared therewith and applied
to the eye as an Anjana.

H

CHAPTER XX.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which treats
of the causes and symptoms of the diseases peculiar to
the ear — the organ of hearing ( Kama "gat a -

Roga-Vijn^niya). i.

Classification : — Twenty-eight different forms
of ear-diseases arc noticed in practice, vis., Karna-Sula
(ear-ache), Pra-nada (ringing or noise in the ear),
V&dhirya (deafness), Kshvcda, Karna-Sr&va (discharge
of pus, etc., from the ear), Karna-Kandu (itching in the
car), Karna-gutha, Krimi-karna (vermin-infested ears),
Prati-ndha, the two kinds of Vidradhi (local abscess),
Kama-pdka (suppuration of ear), Puti-karna (fetor in
the ear), four kinds of Ars'as (Cysts or polypuses in the
ear), seven kinds of Arvuda (tumour) and four kinds of
Sopha (swelling). 2 .

Symptoms of Karna-^ula and Pra-
nada : — The violent aching pain in the region of the
ear and inside the tympanum caused by the deranged
local V£yu, aggravated and obstructed by the other
deranged Doshas in the locality is called the Karna-Sula
(ear-ache). Ringing and various other sounds in the ear
are heard when the deranged Vayu of the locality gets
into the wrong way and remains there stuffed in the
sound-carrying channels of the organ. This disease is
called the Pra-nrfda. 3-4.

Symptoms of Vsfclhirya and Kshve-
da S— Vidhirya (deafness) results from the conti-
nuance in the sound-carrying channels of the deranged
local Vdyu in combination with the deranged local
Kapha in those localites without anyway being remedied
or subdued. An attack of Karna-kshveda (expresing a

Chap. XX. ]

U TT AR A-T ANTRAMt.

10 ?

peculiar sound in the ear) may be attributed to such
causes, as to the use of any cold thing or exposure to
cold after being treated with a head-purging remedy
(errhines), or to the continuance of the deranged local
Vdyu in the sound-passage, aggravated by excessive
labour, by any wasting process in the system or by
taking articles of fare of astringent taste or of parching
(Ruksha) property.* 5 -6.

Symptoms of Karna-Sr^va and
Karna-kandU : — Any discharge or secretion of
pus from the ear caused by the deranged bodily Vdyu
stuffing the ear-cavity, owing to a blow on the head or
a long immersion in water or a spontaneous suppuration
(and bursting) of an abscess in the inner ear, is called
Xarna-srstva. The excessive itching sensation in the
ear due to the aggravation of the local Kapha is called
Karna-kandu. 7-8.

Symptoms of Karna-gutha and
Karna-Prati-nsfha S — Any mucous accumulation
in the ear dried and hardened by the heat of the local
Pitta is called Karna-gutha ; when the dried accumu-
lation of the ear in cases of Karna-gutha becomes
liquefied, (and comes out through) the cavity of the
nose f and produces head-disease J it is called Kama*
Prati-naha. 9-10.

* Tha difference in the “Karna-n&la” and “Kshveda” is that in the .
former the sound in the ear is produced by the deranged V£yu alone and
is of various kinds, whereas, in the latter it is of a special kind, viz., that
of a wind-pipe— the exciting cause being the derangedlocal Pitta, Kapha
and blood. — Videha.

t Some explain to mean ^e cavity of the nose and of the

mouth.

t In place of (producer of head-disease) M4dhava

in his Nidina reads producer of the head-

disease known as Ardha-vedhaka (see chapter XXV).

to8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. 50 1 .

Symptoms of Krimi-karna and

Earna-Vid rad h i : — Germination of vermins or of
other local parasites in the cavities of the ear com-
pletely impairs the faculty of hearing and is called
Krimi'k&rna from the existence of worms in the ear.
Any abscess caused by any local ulcer or by a blow,
as well as any idiopathic abscess in the cavity of the
ear is known as Karna-vidrathi. It is marked by a
choked and burning sensation, and piercing and suck-
ing pain, and it secretes red, yellow or reddish bloody
discharges. Ii~i2.

Symptoms of Karna-psika and Puti-

karna, etc. S — A process of suppuration setting in
(in any of these boils) in the ear through the aggravated
condition of the deranged Pitta is marked by a blocked
and putrid condition of the passage of the ear. The
disease is called Karna-pika£ (suppuration of the ear).
A discharge of condensed and fetid pus whether accom-
panied or not with pain is set up by the local mucous
accumulation in the passage of the ear having been
liquefied by the heat of the aggravated Pitta. This
disease is called Puti-karna (pus in the ear). The
symptoms of swelling (Sopha), tumours (Arvuda) and
polypoid growths (Arsas) * in general as have been
described before should be carefully understood by an
experinced physicain to be the symptoms of these
diseases in the region of the ear. 13-15.

Thus ends the twentieth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'rutft
Samhitd which deals with the causes and symptoms of the diseases
peculiar to the ear.

* See chapter VI, XVIII and XXIII, Chikitsita-Sthdna*

CHAPTER XXL

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which treats
of the medical treatment of the diseases peculiar to the

car (Karna-gata Roga-Pratishedha). i.

General treatment : — Potions of clarified
butter (after meal), use of Ras&yana-measures,* re-
nunciation of all sorts of physical exercise, baths
without immerging the head, absolute sexual abstinence
and abstinence from talkativeness are the general
remedies and rules to be prescribed in the affections of
the ear in general. 2.

Treatment of the VsCtaja Ear-di-
seases ' The course of medical treatment to be
pursued in the four forms of the ear-diseases (all due to
the action of V£yu) vis., Karna-sula, Prantfda, Va'dhirya
and Karna-kshveda is the same and is as follows,
Sneha should be first administered (both internally and
externally) and the patient purged with emulsive purga-
tives after which the affected locality should be fomented
with Vdyu-subduing drugs administered in the manner
of Nstdi-sveda or Pinda-sveda. 3.

A case of Karna-sula (ear-ache), due to the concerted
action of the deranged Vayu and Kapha of the locality
yield to the application of fomentation to the affected
part with (the fumes of) Vilva , Eranda- roots, Arka , Var -
shdbhu , Kapittha, Dhustura , S'igru , Ajagandhd , As'va -
gandhd, Jay anti, barley and bamboo, boiled in Arandla
(fermented rice-gruel) and administered in the manner
of Nddi-sveda (fomentation through a pipe). An attack
of Karna-s'ula (ear-ache) yieds to the application of

* In place of “Rasiyana” (use of tonic) some read “Raads'anam”
(use of meat -soup with meal).

no

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX.

[ Chap. XXt

Pinda-sveda made with pieces of boiled flesh of fish,
cock or L&va (jointly or severally), or with (balls of
condensed) milk. 4-5.

A bowl-shaped cup should be made of the leaves
of the As'vattha soaked in oil and Dadhi-mastu * and
it should be heated by means of charcoal-fire. The oil,
thus heated and made to drop into the affected organ,
gives instantaneous relief in a case of ear-ache. The
affected organ should be fumigated with the fumes of
burning pieces of Kshauma (linen cloth) as well as
with clarified butter, Aguru and Guggulu mixed together.
Draughts of clarified butter as well as the application
of Siro-vasti after meal arc also found beneficial. 6-7.

A rice diet should fcc foregone in the night, and
draughts of clarified butter followed by potions of milk
should be taken in its stead. The Sata-p&ka Vald-Tailaf
should also be prescribed as Siro-vasti, errhine, as well
as Mastikya-Sirovasti and sprinkling. It may also be
given internally. Goat’s milk first cooked with Kanta -
kdri (in the manner of Kshira-p&ka) and then with the
fat (Vasd) of a cock is extremely efficacious (in cases of
ear-ache) if used as an ear-drop. 8 -9. *

The four kinds of Sneha (oil, clarified-butter, lard
and animal marrow) duly cooked together with the
Kalka of Tanduliyaka , Amkota fruits, Ahimsrd , Kendrakd -
roots, Sarala , Deva-Ddru , Las'una (garlic), S'unthi and
the scrapings of bamboo-skin and with the liquids of acid]:

* “Mastu” (curd -cream) is mentioned neither by Vrinda nor by
Chakrap£ni. According to Videha’s recipe, clarified butter should be used
in place of oil in cases of the aggravation of the Pitta. )
t For “VaU-Taila” — See chapter XV, Chikitsita Sthdna.
t The liquid acids here are Dadhi , Takra, Surd , Chukra (a kind
of Kanjika) and the expressed juice of Mdtulunga*

Chap. XXI.]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

Ill

taste (instead of water) should be used as an ear-drop in
order to alleviate the aching pain therein, io.

The expressed juice of Las'una , S'igru y Ardraka,
Murangi , Mulaka and (branch of) Kadali jointly or
severally poured lukewarm into the cavity of the organ
acts as an excellent ear-drop (in case of acute ear-ache).
As an alternative, the expressed juice of S’ringaoera
mixed with honey, Samdhava, and oil should be used
lukewarm as an ear-drop to alleviate the pain therein.
Clarified butter* duly cooked with the scrapings of
bamboo-skin and the urine of a ewe and of a she-goatf
should also be used as an ear-drop in cases of ear-
ache. 11-13.

Dipika-Taila : — Pieces of the roots of the
major Pancha-mula measuring eighteen fingures in
length should be covered (extending only to three-
fourths of the whole) with a piece of linen and then
soaked in oil. The stick so formed, should then be
lighted and the oil pouring in drops therefrom should
be used lukewarm (as an ear-drop). It instantaneously
removes the pain, and is know n as the Dipiki-Taila.
Different kinds of DipikA-Taila may be likewise pre-
pared with pieces of Deva-ddru , Kushtha or Sarala wood,
and used in the same manner in cases of ear-ache. 14-15.

Tender sprouts of Arka plants pasted with Kdnjika
(Amla) should be mixed with oil and salt. The paste
thus prepared should be placed inside the hollow made
in a branch of Snuhi tree and wrapped up with the

* Both Vrinda and Chakrapani read “Taila” (oil) in place of
“Sarpih” (clarified butter). But we have the authority of Videha (as
quoted by S'rikantha Datta in his commentary on Vrinda) in favour of
clarified butter.

t Clarified butter should first be cooked with the urine of a ewe and
then with that of a she-goat,— pallana.

112 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. XXL

leaves of the same plant. It should then be scorched
in fire in the manner of Puta-p&ka. The juice should
then be squeezed out of it and used lukewarm as an
ear-drop to alleviate the pain in the ear. 1 6.

Different kinds of Ear-drops The

expressed juice of Kapittha , Mdtulunga and Ardraka
mixed together and made lukewarm, or the lukewarm
Chukra (a kind of K&njika) should be used as ear-drops
in a case of ear-ache. As an alternative, the affected ear
should be judiciously dusted with powdered Samudra-
phena in such a case. As an alternative, the eight kinds
of officinal urines made lukewarm and used as an ear-
drop may prove efficacious in removing an ear-ache.
Similarly, a case of an ear-ache yields to the curative
virtue of an car-drop, composed of the four officinal
kinds of Sneha duly cooked with the different kinds of
officinal urine and acids (wine, sour-grucl, etc.,) as well
as with the V&yu-subduing drugs. 17.

General and Specific treatment of
Pittaja Ear-ache : — The above-mentioned mode
of treatment (car-drops and fomentations, etc.) with the
Pitta-subduing drugs should be followed in Pittaja-
Karna-sula (ear-ache). The use of the medicated Ghrita
duly cooked with milk weighing ten times as much and
with the drugs of the Kdkolyddi group,* as well as the
Ghrita* duly cooked with the drugs of the Tikta
(bitter) group would be found beneficial in such cases.
Clarified butter duly cooked with the tender sprouts of
Kshira-vriksha (milk-exuding trees), as well as with
Yashti-madhu and Chandana wood, or that cooked with
the decoction of Vimbi with (the Kalka of) sugar, Yasthi -

* Daliana says that Jejjatdcharya holds these two recipes as
unauthoritative*

Chap. XXL ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. 1 1 3

madhu and the purgative drugs would also be found
beneficial. 18-20.

Treatment of the Kaphaja Kama*-
sula In cases of Kaphaja-Karna-sula mustard oil
or Ingudi oil will be found beneficial if used as an
ear-drop* Decoctions (Yusha) of the drugs of the bitter
group, fomentation (Sveda) with Kapha-subduing drugs,
as well as the oil cooked with the drugs of the Surasddi ,
or the major Pancha-mula group would be found bene-
ficial. The expressed juice of Mdtulunga , Las'una and
Ardraka , as well as S'ukta> or the oil cooked with any
of them should be used as ear-drops in such cases.
The use of strong head-purgatives (errhines), or of gurgles
is, likewise, recommended in such cases. 21-24.

The medical treatment in a case of ear-ache
due to the vitiated condition of the blood should be
just the same as that in the case of a Pittaja Kama-
s'ula. 25

Thus we have given a general outline of the course
of treatment and remedial measures to be adopted in
the four kinds of ear-affections, vis. y Karna-s'ula (ear-
ache), Pra-ndda, Vddhirya and Karna-kshveda. Now we
shall deal with the special recipes and preparations
of ear-drops to be employed in cases of deafness
(Vddhirya). 26.

Treatment of deafness s— The oil duly

cooked with water, milk and Vilva pasted with cow’s ,
urine (as Kalka) should be used as an ear-drop in cases
of deafness. Oil should be first cook^i with goat’s
milk or the decoction of Vimbi fruit with sugar and
Yashti- madhu and Vimbi fruit (as Kalka). When
cooled down (it should be churned with the hand
and) the Sneha (oily portion) should be separated.
This oily part, after being stirred in the decoction of

1 $

114 THE. SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXI.

Vilva* * * § should again be cooked with milk weighing ten
times and with (the Kalka of) sugar, Yashti-madhu and
(red) sandal wood. It should then be thickened and
used as an ear-drop in cases of deafness. Measures
and remedies, which will be mentioned in connection
with Pratis'yaya-f* (catarrh) or have been already des-
cribed in the chapter on VAta-Vyddhi J ChikitsA may
be as well employed with benefit in the present
instances. 27-30.

Treatment of Puti-karna, Kama-
srsCva and Krlmi-karna The general mode
of treatment to be employed in cases of Karna-srAva,
Puti-karna and Krimi-kama is the same as above. Now
here (me describe) the general mode of treatment to be
employed in them. Errhines, fumigating, filling up the
cavity of the ear (as with an ear-drop), cleansing and
washing should be employed according to the exigencies
of each case. The affected ear should be washed with
the decoction of the drugs of the Rdja-vrikshddi or the
Surasddi group and filled with the powders of those
drugs. In a case of Karna-Srsfva, the cavity of the
affected organ should be filled in with the powders (D. R!
decoction) of the Pancha-Kashdya § drugs mixed with
honey and the expressed juice of Kapittha , 31-32.

* In place of “Vilvdmbu-gddham” some read “Vimbi-gddham” t i.
mixed with an abundant quantity of powdered Vimbi fruit. — Dallana.

t Chap. XXIV, Uttara-Tantra.

Chapter V and VI, Chikilsita-Sthdna.

§ According to some, “Pancha-Kashdya” means the barks of
A'ragbadha , S'irisha , Jambu,* Sarja and of Asvamdra { Palds'a), but
Dallana, on the authority of the authors of the Tikd and the Panjikd,
(the two commentaries) refutes this and holds that “Pancha-kashdya”
means the barks of Tinduka, Abkayd, Lodhra, Samanga 9 and of A’malafo
enumerated below in this chapter.

Chap. XX I. ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. 1 1 $

The use of the powders of Sarja- bark mixed with
honey and expressed juice of the Kdrpdsi fruit is recom-
mended in cases of Kama-Sra(va* A compound con-
sisting of pulverised Ldkshd and Sarja-rasa (D. R.
Ras&njhna) should be used in filling up the cavity of the
affected organ in the said disease. The oil duly cooked
with the tender sprouts of S'aivdla , Mahd-vriksha, Jarnbu
and of Antra, as well as with Karkata-S* ringi honey
and Manduki is highly efficacious in these cases.
Powders of the barks of Tinduka , Abhayd , Rodhra ,
Santangd and of Atnalaka mixed with honey* and
the expressed juice of Kapittha should be similarly
used. 33-36.

The expressed juice of Antra , Kapittha , Madhuka
flower, Dhava and of S'dla, or an oil duly cooked with
these is likswise recommended as ear-drops in these
cases. The oil cooked with Priyangu , Yashti-madhu ,
Ambdlikd , Dhdtaki , S'ita-parni, Manjishthd , Lodhra ,
and Ldkshd (as Kalka), and with the expressed juice of
the sprouts of Kapittha as the liquid, if used as an
ear-drop, arrests the secretion in a case of Kama-
&rava. 37-38.

Treatment of Puti-karna i—Rasdnjana

rubbed and dissolved in the breast-milk and mixed with
honey proves highly efficacious even in chronic and long-
standing cases of Puti-karna attended with fetid dis-
charge. The use as ear-drops of the compound composed
of oil, the expressed juice of Nirgundi and honey mixed
together arrests an attack of Puti-karna. 39-40.

Treatment of Krimi-karna Vermi-
fuges should be employed for the treatment of a case

* S'rikantha Datta in his commentary on Vrinda quotes this couplet,
but does not read ‘honey’ there. He reads in place of j

it$ ' THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A. [ Chap. XXI.

»

Krimi-karna. Fumigation* of the affected parts
with the fumes of (dried) Vdrtdku , or (the pouring of)
mustard oil (into the cavity of the affected organ)
is also beneficial in such cases. Vidanga and Haritdla
(yellow orpiment) mixed with cow's urine (and used
as an ear-drop) as well as fumigating the affected
organ with the fumes of (burnt) Guggulu tends to destroy
the fetor in the ear due to local parasites. Administra-
tion of emetics, smoke-inhalation and gurgles are also
beneficial in such cases. 4 1 - 4 2 .

Treatment of Karna-Kshveda, Vi-

dradhi, etc- : — Use of mustard oil as an ear-drop
is efficacious in cases of Karna-kshveda-t An abscess
(Vidradhi) in the ear should be treated as an ordinary
abscess. The affected ear should be sufficiently fomented
after being filled in with oil so as to soften the filthy
deposit in the cavity of the ear, after which the filthy
matter should be extracted with a probe or a director
(S>al4kd). 43-45-

Treatment of Karna-kandu and
karna-pratSngfha Fumigation of the parts
with the help of a tube (Nidi-sveda), exhibitions of
emetics, smoke-inhalations, head-purging (errhines), as
well as all kinds of Kapha-subduing measures should be
resorted to in cases of Karna-kandu. Application of
Sneha and of Sveda and then of head-purgatives
(errhines) should be made in cases of Karna-pratinrfha,

* Dallana explains this to mean fumigation of the affected organ,
as Well as the use of the same in the manner of smoking.

+ The use of oil is also recqjmnended in cases of abscess in the ear.
la cases of acute and painful V&taja Vidradhi sesamum oil should be used,
whereas in cases of Kaphaja Vidradhi the use of mustard oil is
recommended.— Dallana.

Chap. XXI. ]

UTTARA-TANfRAM,

4 n*

and the treatment thereafter should conform to the
nature of the specific deranged Dosha of the body
involved In the case. 46-47.

Treatment of Karna-psCka, etc.

Remedies and remedial measures described in connection
with Pittaja Visarpa* should be used with equal
profit in a case of Karna-ps&a (inflammatory suppura-
tion of the ear). Any filth or vermin, etc., lodged in
the cavity of the ear should be removed with the help of
a probe, or (by cutting it) with a horn. Cures for the
remaining cases of affections in the ear have been
described before ( in the Chikitsita-sthdna, Chapters
XVIII, Viand XXIII). 48-50.

Thus ends the twenty-first chapter of the Ultara-Tanlra in the
Sus'ruta SamhiU which’ deals with the treatment of the diseases pecu-
liar to the ear.

* In place of ‘Pittaja-Visarpa’, both Vrinda and Chakradalta read
‘Kshataj a- Visarpa’.

CHAPTER XXII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the causes and symptoms of diseases of the nose

(N£s£-gata-roga-ViJns(ri lya). i.
Nomenclature and Classification

Diseases which are specifically found to affect the organ
of smell may be classified into Thirty-one different
groups, viz., — Apinasa, Puti-nasya, NdsA-pAka. Sonita-
Pitta,Puya-s'onita, Kshavathu, Bhramsathu, Dipta, N£s£-
nAha, Pari-srAva, NAsA-sosha, the four kinds of Ars'as
( polypoids), the four kinds of swelling, the seven types
of tumours and the five types of Prati-s'y£ya which
will be described hereafter with the specific treatment
of each. Thus the diseases of the nose arc said to be
thirty-one in all. 2.

Symptoms of Apinasa and Puti-na-
sya S — Chokedness and burning sensation in the
nostrils attended with dryness and deposit of filthy slimy
mucus in their passages, thereby deadening the faculty
of smell and taste for the time being; are the specific
indications of Apinasa, ( obstructions in the nostrils )
Which are identical with the symptoms (of the same
type) of Pratis'ydya (catarrh). It is due to the
concerted action of the deranged VAyu and Kapha.
The disease in which the fetid breath is emitted through
the mouth and the nostrils owing to the presence of the
deranged VAyu mixed up with the other Doshas ( Pitta,
Kapha and blood ) in the throat and about the root of
the palate is called Puti-nasya. 3-4.

Symptoms of Nsfsd-prfka, Rakta
Pitta and Puya- rakta A purulent inflam-
mation and the presence of pimples (Arush) in the

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

119

Chap. XXII. j

nostrils owing to the vitiated condition of the local Pitta
attended with sliminess and foetid odor is called
pika.. The four kinds of Rakta-Pitta (haemorrhages)
with the two different origins and two different courses
will be dealt with again later on.* The disease in which
bloody or blood-streaked pus is discharged through
the nostrils either as the effect of a blow on the region
of the fore-head or through the highly heated condition
of the local blood, Pitta and Kapha is called Puya-rakta
(bloody pus). 5-7.

Symptoms Of Kshavathu S— The disease
in which the Vdyu charged with Kapha repeatedly
gushes out of the nostrils accompained by loud reports
or sounds, owing to the fact of the nasal Marma being
anywise affected, is called Kshavathu (sneezing).f A
trickling sensation in the gristle of the nose owing to
the insertion of a thread, etc., into the nostrils, or to the
action of any strong (Tikshna) articles of fare, or of
any pungent smell, or of looking to the sun causes
sneezing. 8-9.

Symptoms of Bhramsathu and
Dipta S — The disease in which the deranged
undigested thickened and saline Kapha previously
accumulated in the region of the head is dissolved or
disintegrated and dislodged from its seat through the
heat of Pitta and is expelled (sneezed off) through the
nostrils is called Bhram athu. The affection in which

* The four kinds are due to vitiated V£yu, Pitta and Kapha as well
as their concerted action. The two origins are (<$ the spleen and the
liver, or (£) the Amks'aya (stomach) and the Pakvas'aya (intestines). The
two courses are (a) the upper and the lower orifice, or ( b ) the mouth and
the nostrils. (2)

t The sneezing is here said to be of two kinds (1) Doshaja and (2) trau-
matic. Here the former is Doshaja, while the latter is of traumatic origin.

1 20

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHItX. [ Chap. XXII.

the VAyu, in the shape of warm vapour-like breaths,
comes out of the nostrils accompanied by an excessive
burning sensation in the locality is called Dipta. io-n«

Symptoms of Nas^-Pratinsfha, Nasa
parisra'va and Nsfsef-Parisosha s— The

condition under , which the up-coarsing Uddna Vdyu
of the region of the head is deranged in its passage
by a surcharge of Kapha, seems to stuff the
passages of the nostrils, and is called Nrfstf-Pr&tiurfha*
The disease in which there is constant, transparent,
slightly discoloured water-like secretion (of Kapha)
through the nostrils, more particularly at night, is called
NsCs^Parisrrfva (fluent coryza). Difficulty of respira-
ting (inhaling and exhaling) caused by the drying up
and consequent thickening of the Kapha (mucus) accu-
mulating in the passages of the nostrils, through the
action of the deranged Vdyu and Pitta, is called Nsferf-
ParWosha (parchedness of the nostrils ). 12-14.

Local Arsas (polypoids) as well as local Slopha (four
each) are due to the action of the three deranged
Doshas of the locality jointly and separately. The differ-
ent kinds of Arvuda (nasal tumour) as mentioned in the
Sdldkya-Tantra, with the one of Sdnnipdtika origin are
seven in all. The five types of Pratirfyrfya (catarrh)
mentioned here will be dealt with in chapter XXIV.
Remarks made in the chapter on the causes and
symptoms of swellings in general (Sopha-Vijndna),
as well as those of Ars'as (haemorrhoid growths) in the
NidAna-sthdna should be understood to apply to those
diseases affecting the locality of the nose as well. 15-18.

Thus ends the twenty -second chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the causes and symptoms of the
diseases of the nose.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the therapeutics of nasal diseases (Ncfea-gtlta*"

Roga-Pratishedha). i.

Treatment of Apinasa and Putl-

nasya S— In cases of the first-mentioned disease (t.e.
Apinasa) and in those of Pati-nasya, applications
of Sneha and of Sveda to the affected part, and
application of emetics and purgatives should be made.
The diet should be light and moderate in quantity.
The water for drinking should be boiled before
use, and inhalation of smoke (Dhuma-pdna) should
be indulged in at the proper time. Hingu, Tri-
katu, Indra-Yava , S'ivdti*, Ldkshd , Katp/tala, Vacfia,
Kushtha, S' obhdnjana, Vidanga , and Karanja should
be used daily with benefit in the manner of Avapida-
Nasya. Mustard oil should be duly cooked with the
aforesaid drugs together with cow’s urine and be used as
an errhine (Nasya). 2-3.

Treatment of N^s^-pstka, etc. In

cases of N&Sb-pdka, all the Pitta-subduing measures both
for internal and external use should be duly employed.
Barks of the Kshiri (milk-exuding) trees mixed with
clarified butter should be duly employed as wash and
plaster after a local bleeding. The medical treatment
of ^Onita-pitta (Haemorrhaege) from the nose shall be
hereafterf described. A case of Pnya-Rakta ( dis-
charge of bloody pus from the nose ) sjiould be treated

* S'ivdti may mean either white Punarnavd or SUfhdlihd. Neither
Chakrapdni nor Vrinda reads it in the text,
t See ch. XLIV of the Uttara-Tantra.

*6

122 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXIII.

as a case of sinus (NAdi) * for all practical purposes,
and Avapida-nasya as well as inhalations of smoke
(Dhuma) of keen-potencied drugs and Nasya (snuff or
errhines) of drugs of correcting or purifying virtues
should be used after the satisfactory exhibition of
emetics. 4-5.

Treatment of Kshavatu and Bhram-

S'athu S — Powders of head-purgaing drugs in the
form of snuff should be administered into the nostrils
through a pipe in cases of Kshavathu and Bhram-
rf&thu. The head should be duly fomented with V&yu-
subduing drugs and inhalation of Sneha-Dhumaf as
well as similar other medicinal measures remedial to
the deranged bodily V&yu should be resorted to. All
the Pitta-subduing measures should be employed in
a case of Dipta, and all cooling remedies and the drugs
of sweet taste should also be prescribed. 6-7.

Treatment of NsCssC-nsCha, etc. The

internal use of Sneha (Sneha-p&na) forms the principal
remedy in a case of NissC-niha, in which fumigations
with lardacious drugs as well as head-purgings may be
likewise employed. The use of Bali-Taila or any other
V&yu-subduing remedy mentioned in the chapter on
the treatment of V£ta-vy&dhi (Ch. V. Chikitsita Sth£na)
may be similarly used with beneficial results. Pow-
dered snuff should be introduced into the nostrils
through a pipe or tube, and strong and keen Avapida-
Nasya should be used in cases of Nstsft-Srfifra. Strong
fumes of (burnt) Deva-ddru and Chitraka should be
applied to the affected part. Goat’s flesh is also
found beneficial in such cases. 8-9.

* See ch. XIV of the Chikitsita-Sthrfna.

t See ch. XVII of the Chikitsita-Sthdna*

Chap. XXIII.]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

**3

Treatment of NsCssC-^osha The -use of
clarified butter churned out of milk, as well as that
of the oil as an errhine prepared in the manner of
Anu-taila are pre-eminently the best cures in a case
of NAstf-iiosha. Potions of clarified butter, meals with
JAngala meat-soup, applications of Sneha and of Sveda,
and fumigating the affected part with lardacious drugs
may be similarly prescribed with best advantage. The
remaining nasal diseases should be duly treated accord-
ing to the specific treatment of each case as described
before, io-ii.

Thus ends the twenty-third chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhiti which deals with the treatment of the diseases of the nose.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of catarrh

(Pratisy^ya-Pratlshedha). i.

Causes: — Excessive indulgence in sexual inter-
course, heating of the head, entrance of the minute
particles of dust or smoke into the nostrils, excessive
application of cold or heat, voluntary retention of stool
and urine are the cauS33 which may instantly usher in
an attack of nasal catarrh (Pratis'y&ya). The fundamental
principles of Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha, jointly and
separately, as well as of blood becoming aggravated by
various aggravating causes, bring on an attack of nasal
catarrh in course of time . 2-3.

Premonitary Symptoms Heaviness of
the head, sneezing and aching in the limbs, appearance
of goose-flesh upon the body, as well as many other
different kinds of supervening symptoms are seen to
precede an attack of nasal catarrh (Pratis'yiya). 4.

Specific Symptoms:— Hoarseness of voice,
a sense of stuffedness and obstruction in the nostrils
accompanied by a thin mucous secretion, dryness of the
throat, of the palate and of the lips, a -pricking, and pierc-
ing pain in the region of the temples, as well as excessive
sneezing and a bad taste in the mouth are the character-
istics of Vsftaja type of catarrh (Pratis'y&ya). A hot
and yellowish secretion from the nose, heated skin, thirst,
emaciation and yellowness of the complexion, as well
as the secretion being sudden, hot and smoky — these
are the characteristics which mark the Pittaja type of
catarrh. Constant running at the nose, the secretion being
’ white and cold, paleness (of the skin) and swelling (D. R.

Chap. XXIV. ] UTTARA-TANTRAM. * li$

whiteness) of the eyes, heaviness of the head, flabbiness
of the face* and tickling and itching sensation in the
regions of the head, throat, lips and of the palate are
the features which mark the Kaphaja type of the
disease. 5-7.

The spontaneous disappearance, as well as re-
appearance of Pratisy&ya — be it acute or chronic — is
the characteristic symptom of Tri-doshaja Pratis'ydya,
wherein the specific symptoms of all (the three) kinds
of Apinasa are present. 8.

Symptoms of Raktaja PratisysCya
Discharge of blood (from the nose), redness of the eyes,
a bruised pain in the chest which seems as if struck with
a blow, fetid smell in the breath and the mouth, and loss
of the faculty of smelling are the characteristic symp-
toms of the Raktaja type of Pratis'ydya which has
its origin in the deranged condition of the blood. In
these cases f hosts of extremely small worms of whitish
or blackish \ hue are found to infest the affected loca-
lities (viz., the nostrils) which show symptoms identical
with those of the head-disease due to the germination
of parasites in that region. 9.

Prognosis : — The malignant nature of the
disease (Dushta-Pratisy&ya) should be inferred from the
constant alternate sliminess and dryness, as well as cons-
tant alternate contraction and expansion of the nostrils,

* In place of ’—some read

t. e . “the man (patient) gets heaviness of the head.” In this case the
flabbiness of the face is not seperately mentioned.

t According to some this is the characteristic symptom of another
kind of Pratis'yfya, and not one of the symptoms of the Raktaja type as
appears at the first sight.

$ MAdhaya Kar reads *. e t , glossy white in hue, in place

of gron;* /. e. whitish and blackish in hue.

126 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXIV.

fetour in the breath and loss of the faculty of smell.
Such a case of Pratisyaya should be regarded as extremely
hard to cure. Neglected and not properly remedied at
the outset of an attack, any type of catarrh (Pratisydya)
may bring on cases of malignant Pinasa, which in
time gives rise to a number of diseases and produces
in its train deafness, blindness, loss of smell, violent
ocular affections, cough, dulness of appetite, and *£>opha
(swelling). 10-11.

General Treatment of Pratisyaya

Potions of clarified butter, various sorts of emetics, and
fomentations (Sveda) may be prescribed in nasal catarrh
(Pratirfydya), except in fresh and acute cases. Errhines
(Nasya) of Avapida type may also be employed in
time, if required. Fomentation should be applied and
diet should be taken in a tepid state with articles of
acid taste, and draughts of milk should be administered
with green ginger* and with any modification of the
expressed juice of sugar-cane*f“ for the purpose of thick-
ening and maturing the secreted mucus, in cases where
that maturing process has not already spontaneously
set in. The mucus found matured, thick and pendent
should be made to secrete by applying head-purgatives
(Siro-vireka). Purgatives, Vasti of the Asthdpana kind,
smoke-inhalations and medicinal gurgles should also be
prescribed according to the exigencies of each case
under treatment and in consideration of the nature and
intensity of the deranged Dosha involved therein. 12-14.

* Some explain “A'rdraka” to mean the expressed juice of fresh ginger,
while others explain it to mean the powder of dried ginger.

t In place of ‘‘TjfaqffTOftih’’ — w ith any modification of the expressed
juice of sugar-cane, such as treacle, sugar, etc , some read
u with articles of pungent taste.

Chap. XXIVO UTTARA-TANTRAM. 1 27

Regimen of diet and conduct In a

case of PratirfyAya the patient should sit, lie, or move
about in closed and windless rooms and wear warm
and thick turban on his head. He should take VijayA
(Haritaki) and partake of meals consisting of Paldnna*
cooked without clarified butter. He should also be
subjected to a course of strong head-purging as well as
of smoke-inhalations. Use of new wine and cold drink,
cold baths, sexual intercourse, anxious cares, lamenta-
tions, voluntary retention of stools and urine, as well as
partaking of fares which are excessively dry (and beget
dryness in the system), should be foregone by a person
suffering from an attack of Pinasa. 15-16.

Fastings and employment of digestive (Ptahana) and
appetising (Dipaniya) remedies should be the medical
treatment in cases of Pinasa (nasal catarrh) accompanied
by such distressing symptoms as vomiting, aching,
heaviness in the limbs, feverishness, non-relish for food,
apathy, and Atisira (diarrhoea). In case of an adult
person suffering from an attack of Pinasa due to the
concerted action of V&yu and Kapha, the patient should
be made to vomit by taking in a large quantity of any
liquid substance. The complications (Upadrava) in^
volved therein should be remedied by appropriate diet
and remedial agents and after their subsidence, the
patient should be treated according to the instructions
given before. 17-18.

Treatment of VaCtaJa Type in cases of
yitaja-Pratisyiya clarified butter dply cooked with
the drugs of the Viddri-gandkddi group or with the
five officinal salts should be prescribed for internal

* Paldnna is generally prepared by cooking together rice, meat and
clarified butter as well as other spices, but in this case clarified butter
should not be used.

U8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXItf.

* use^accordiftg to the rules of taking Sneha (see chapter
XXXI., Chikitshita-Sth&na). The process of snuffing, f
etc., should also be resorted to, if necessary, as in a
case of Ardita (Facial paralysis). 19.

Treatment of Pittaja and Raktaja
types S — In the Pittaja and Raktaja types (of
Pratisydya) the patient should be given draughts*
of clarified butter duly cooked with the drugs of the
Kdkolyddi group. Coldf washes and plasters should
also be used. Sarjarasa (Resin), Pattanga (red-sandal),
Priyangu , honey, sugar, Drdkshd , Madhulikd (Guduchi),
Goji y S'ri-parni and Yashti-madhu should be pres-
cribed as gurgles, and purgings (errhines ?) should be
induced with the help of the drugs of sweet potency
(such as Drdkshd , Aragbadha , honey, sugar, etc.). Oil
duly cooked with (a paste composed of) Dkava-b&vky
Tri-phald, S'ydmd , Tilvaka , Yashti-madhu , S'ri-pamt,
Rajaniy and with milk weighing ten times as much as
oil, should be preserved for a time and used as an
errhine (Nasya) in either of these cases. 20.

Treatment of Kaphaja Type s— In a
case of the Kaphaja-Pratis'yiya, emulsive measures
(Sneha-karma) should be performed with clarified butter,
and the patient should be made to vomit by using
Yavtfgu (gruel) prepared with Misha- pulse and Tila,
(sesamum-seed), after which the general Kapha-subduing
measure should be employed. Oil duly cooked with
the two kinds of Bald, the two kinds of Brihati y

♦Some read in place of This word means that the

clarified butter for use in this case should be duly cooked with the ftpjR
(bitter) drugs, viz., the leaves of Patola y etc.

t Both the commentators of Vrinda and Chakradatta explain the
term (cold) to mean ‘prepared with the drugs of cold potency

such as the drugs of the Nyagrodh&di and Utpal&di groups.’

Chap. XXIV.]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

129

Vidanga , Tri-kantaka , S'vetd- roots, Sahd (Mudga-

parni), Bhadrd (GAmbhAri) and Varsh&bhu should be
employed as an errhine. Sarald , Kinihi \ Ddru , Nikumbha
(Danti) and Ingudi should be pasted together and duly
formed as Vartis. These Vartis should be duly used
for the purposes of smoking (Dhuma-pAna) 21-22.
Treatment of Tri-doshaja Type

Clarified butter duly prepared with the drugs of bitter
and pungent tastes, inhalation of the smoke of strong-
potencied drugs as well as the use of articles of pungent
taste and other appropriate medicinal preparations
would prove curative in a case of Tri-3oshaja Pratis'y^ya
(nasal catarrh) brought about by the aggravation of
all the three Doshas. An intelligent physician should
prescribe as an errhine the medicated oil duly cooked
and prepared with the admixture of Rasdnjana ,
Ati-vishd, Musta and Bhadra-ddru. Gargles prepared
with the decoction of Musta, Tejovati , Pdthd , Katphala ,
Katuka , Vachd , Sarshapa (mustard), Pippali-mula , Pippali ,
Saindhava , Agnika (AjamodA), Tuttha , Karanja- seeds.
Salt and Bhadra-ddru should be prescribed. Oil duly
cooked with the preceding drugs is recommended for
purging (£>iro-vireka) the head of the patient. 23-24.

Flesh of birds and beasts of the Jdngala group, aquatic
flowers and the VAyu-subduing drugs (Bhadra-dArvAdi)
should be duly cooked in milk mixed with water weigh-
ing half as much as the milk. * The liquid in this
case should be reduced to the original quantity of milk,
when it should be taken down and allowed to cool.
Clarified butter should then be prepared from this
milk and should be again duly cooked with the drugs
of the Sarvagandhd (EIAdi) group, sugar, Atlanta, Yashti -

* Some say that milk and water in equal parts should be taken.

I 7

130 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXIV.

madltu and (red) Chandana and with a quantity of milk
ten times its own weight. All types of nasal catarrh,
yield to the curative efficacy of this medicated Ghrita,
if used as an errhine (Nasya). Oils medicated with the
drugs remedial to the specific deranged Dosha involved
in each case under treatment should also be pres-
cribed. 25-26.

All the foregoing preparations should be surcharged
with the urine and bile of a cow and used in cases due
to the existence of local parasites , and vermifuges ( e . g.,
drugs of the Surasidi group) should be administered as
a palliative measure.* 27,

Thus ends the twenty-fourth chapter of the U ttara-Tantra in the
Sus'ruta Samhita which deals with the (symptoms and) medical treatment
of Pratis'ydya.

* In places of “gTq^TT^^ , Chakradatta reads * *•> as an

errhine. He also reads *•*•> pasted with the urine (of a cow),

and thus does not read the bile of a cow (fqff) in the text. Vrinda, however,
reads u ^^^PTTf?r ,, in place of which means that vermifuges should

be used for washing purposes.

CHAPTER XXV.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the symptoms of diseases peculiar to the region
of the head (^iro-roga-ViJnsCniya). x.

Classification ; — Diseases which are peculiar
to the region of the head number eleven in all, viz., the
four kinds respectively due to the action of the deranged
VAyu, Pitta, Kapha, and their combination, as well as
those which are respectively incidental to any bodily
waste (Kshayaja), or to the vitiated condition of the
blood (Raktaja), or to the existence of parasites (Krimija),
the remaining four being known as SuryAvarta, Ananta-
vAta, ArdhAvabhedaka and Samkhaka. 'The symp-
toms of these eleven kinds of head-diseases are given
below. 2.

Symptomsof Dosha-origined types :

‘—A fit of violent headache without any apparent cause
and which becomes worse in the night and is relieved
by pressure or by being bandaged or by an application
of fomentation round the head, should be ascribed to
the action of the deranged Vatyu, and is known as the
Vfittaja-Siroroga. A violent burning and aching pain
in the . head, in which the scalp seems to have been
strewn over with bits of live charcoal, accompanied by
a sense of scorching vapour being emitted from the
nostrils, and which ameliorates in the night or on the
application of cold, should be ascribed to the action of
the deranged Pitta, and is known as the Pittaja-
Siroroga. A fit of headache in which the head (palate)
and the throat* seem to be covered with a coat of sticky

* In, place of some reatl This reading is

adopted by Mldhava. There seems to be no difference in the meaning
s the word fSrc^(head) may include both the palate and the throat.

*32 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXV.

mucus, and feel cold and heavy, and cannot be turned
about, and the face and the eyes look swollen or flabby,
should be attributed to the action of the deranged
bodily Kapha, and is called the Kaphaja-Skroroga.
A case marked by the concerted action of all the three
preceding Doshas exhibits all the symptoms peculiar to
all of them, and is known as the Tr i-doshaja-Siro-
roga. 2-6.

Symptoms of Raktaja, Kshayaja
and Krimija types of $iro-roga : — A

case of headache due to the vitiated condition of the
local blood manifests all the symptoms of the Pittaja
type, and the head becomes incapable of (bearing) the
least touch. This is known as the Raktaja-Siroroga.
A case of headache incidental to the waste of the local
VasA (fat) or Kapha* is marked by an intolerable pain
(Abhi-tipa) in the head which is aggravated by the appli-
cation of fomentation, fumigation, errhine, emetic and
blood-letting. This is known as the Kshayaja-Siro-
roga. The disease of the head in which a pricking
and tingling pain is felt inside the head as if being stung,
(by some poisonous insect), and which is accompanied
by a watery discharge mixed with blood (D. R. pus) from
the nose, should be attributed to the existence of local
parasites. This disease is a dangerous one and is
known as the Krimija (Parasitic) Siro-roga. 7-9.

Symptoms of Suryavarta £iro-
roga : — The disease of the head in which a severe pain
is felt in the eye and the eyebrow just at sunrise, and

* Dallana here comments that the term ‘‘VaSsC” means all the
fatty substances in the body, e. the brain substance, Medas, semen,
Majjan, etc. There is a variant which is not recognised by Gayi. That
reading is (*• by the waste) of blood, Vasa

Kapha and Vrfyu. This, however, seems to be the better reading.

Chap. XXV. ]

UTTARA-lANTRAM.

which goes on growing worse with the progress of the
day and begins to abate only when that great luminary
begins to set in the western sky, is called Suryivarta.
It (generally) abates on the use of cold articles but some-
times on that of warm things as well. It is ascribed
to the concerted action of the three Doshas. io.

Symptoms of Ananta-vsfta Siro-

roga S — The disease of the head in which a violent
pain is felt at the Many£ and the Gh&ti (the two
nerves on the backside of the neck) which ultimately
affects the region of the eye, the eyebrow and the
temples and specially produces a throbbing of the cheek,
as well as paralysis of the jaw-bone and the eye. The
disease is known as Ananta-vrfta and is due to the
concerted action of the three Doshas. n.

Symptoms of Ardhsfvabhedaka and
£amkhaka: — The disease of the head in which
a violent and excruciating pain of a piercing or aching
nature is felt in one half of the cranium which
makes the patient feel giddy, and which either follows
no distinct periodicity or recurs at a regular interval
of ten days or of a fortnight, is called the Ardh&ra-
bhedaka and is due to the concerted action of the
three Doshas. A violent pain caused in the head
and more especially in the temples by the local VAyu in
combination with the deranged Kapha, Pitta and blood
is designated by the holy sages of Ayurveda as the
Samkhaka. It produces a very great pain, and is very
hard to cure even by the joint advice of thousands of
physicians and is as fierce as death itself. 12-13.

Thus ends the twenty -fifth chapter in the Uttara Tantra of the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the symptoms of the diseases of the head.

CHAPER XXV I.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the therapeutics of the diseases of the head (3iro-
roga-Pratishedha). i.

Treatment of Vataja-^iroroga ‘.—Re-
medial measures described in connection with the treat-
ment of Vdta-Vyidhi should be employed in their
entirety in the Vayu-origincd types of the diseases of
the head, and all medicinal compounds of oil or clarified
butter should be followed by a potion of milk. Mudga,
Kulattha, or Mdsha pulse, unmixed with any other
thing, as well as pungent and heat-making articles,
saturated with clarified butter and followed by potions
of tepid milk should be taken in the night. Sesamum
oil or the paste of sesamum may also be taken. Milk
duly boiled with the Vayu-subduing drugs should be
employed in a lukewarm state in washing the diseased
locality, and a plaster composed of the powders of the
same drugs boiled with milk should be applied luke-
warm to the scalp. In the alternative, the scalp may be
plastered over with the boiled flesh of fish or with
Kris'ard (preparation of rice and sesamum) saturated
with Saindhnva salt, or with (the paste of) Chandana ,
Utpala, Kushtha and Pippali, finely powdered together
(all in a lukewarm state). 2-3.

Oil duly prepared with Kulira (crabs) should be used
for Nasya (snuffing) purposes subsequent to the employ-
ment of the (above) fomentation. A quantity of milk
diluted with the addition of half as much of water
should be duly boiled with the paste of the drugs of the
Varunddi group and taken down from the fire when
the water has evaporated. Butter should be skimmed out

Chap. XXVI.]

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

135

of it when cool and clarified butter prepared therefrom
should be again duly cooked with the paste of the drugs
of the Madhura group. The use of this Ghrita as a
Nasya (snuff) is highly efficacious in the type under
discussion. Clarified butter duly cooked with the decoc-
tion of the preceding drugs (of the Varun&di group) and
with milk should be taken with sugar. Snaihika Dhuma
(Chikitsd, XL.) should be administered in time when
required, and Traivrita Ghrita and Bald Taila should
be prescribed as a draught and as an errhine, as
well as for the purposes of anointing, sprinkling and
Vasti-Karma. The food in the present type of the
disease should be taken with milk cooked with Vdyu-
subduing drugs and with meat-soup saturated with
Sneha ( clarified butter). 4.-5.

Treatment of Pittaja and Raktaja

£§irO~roga : — Cooling plasters saturated with clari-
fied butter should be applied to the scalp and cooling
head-washes should be prescribed in the Pittaja and
Raktaja types of Siro-roga. Milk, the expressed juice of
sugarcane, fermented rice-gruel (Dhdnydmla), curd-cream
(Mastu), honey and sugar mixed in w^ater — these should
be used for sprinkling purposes. Plaster for the head
should be prepared with Nala, Vetasa , Kahlara (red
lotus), Chandana , Utpala , S'amkha (conch-shell), S'aivdla ,
Yashti-madhu , Musta and lotus taken together and
mixed with clarified butter, and the plasters described in
connection with the treatment of Pittaja and Raktaja
Visarpa (Erysipelas) should also be u**ed. The drugs
of the Madhura group should be used in a tepid state
as plasters and the Sneha (oil or clarified butter) duly
cooked with the same drugs should be used as an errhine,
and appropriate medicines should be used as purgatives
as well as in As t ha pan a and Sncha-Vasti measures,

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. XXVI.

t$6

Clarified butter skimmed from milk, and fresh
Vasd (lard)* of Jdngala animals should be used as
errhines, and, cooked with the drugs of the Utpalddi
group, should be used in the manner of Asthdpana-vasti.
Pood should be taken with meat-soup of J&ngala ani-
mals, and clarified butter should be used in the manner
of an Anuvisana Vasti. Clarified butter skimmed from
milk and dffy cooked with the drugs of the Madhura
group and mixed with sugar should be used for emulsive
purposes (Snehana), and all measures and remedies
which are remedial to the deranged blood and
Pitta may be likewise employed with profit in these
cases. 6-7.

Treatment of Kaphaja ^iro-roga:—

In a case of Kaphaja-S'iroroga, the Kapha-subduing
measures, such as strong emetics, head-purgatives (S’iro-
vireka) and gargling should be resorted to. The trans-
parent upper part of clarified butter f should be given
to drink, and fomentation should then be frequently
applied to the head. Head-purgatives should then be
administered with the pith of Madhuka wood, or
with Mesha-s ringi and Ingudi bark. Vartis (sticks)
made of Mesha-s ringi and Ingudi barks should be used
in smoking. Snuffs of powdered Katphala should be
taken, and gargles with Kapha-subduing drugs should be
used. Plasters prepared with Sarald, Kushtha , S'drn-
gashtd , Deva-ddru , and Rohisha pasted together with
the alkaline water and mixed with Saindhava salt should
be applied lukewarm to the head. The diet should
consist of cooked barley or Shashtika rice, which should

* In place of ‘to’ 0 ard ) some reat * which means meat-soup.

+ 1 According to a variant matured clarified butter should be used
in this case.

CIt*p. XXVI. 3

UTTARA-TANTRAM.

137

be judiciously taken with Yava-kshdra and powdered
Trirkatn and with the soup of Mudga, Patola and
Kulattha pulse. S.

Treatment of Tri-doshaja and Kshay-
S'iroroga 3 — The Measures which are severally
remedial to the three deranged Doshas pf the b.ody
should be employed in a case of Siroroga marked by
the concerted action of the three Doshas (Tri-dgshaja')
and draughts of old and matured clarified butter are
said to be specially efficacious in such instances. Em-
ployment of nutritive (Vrimhana) measures and reme-
dies is recommended in cases of the diseases of the head
due to any waste or atrophy of the local fat, etc. (Kahay-
aja Siroroga). Clarified butter duly cooked with the
admixture of the drugs of the V &yu-subduing and the
Madhura groups* should be given as drinks and
errhines. Any medicated Ghrita which acts as a remedy
in cases of consumptive cough would be found most
efficacious in the present (Kshayaja) type. 9-10.

Treatment of Krimija Siroroga 3 —

In a case of head-disease (head-ache ?) due to the germi-
nation of parasites (Krimi) in the head, the patient should
be made to snuff in a quantity of animal blood. The
worms or parasites lured with the smell of the blood,
would greedily come down (into the passages of the
nostrils) when they should be carefully extracted (by
means of tongs, etc). Head-purgatives composed of the
pulverised seeds of Hraswa (small) S’igru mixed with
Kdnsya (dead brass) and Nili (indigo) pounded together
should then be used, if necessary, or any vermifuge drug
(Vidanga, etc.) pasted with the urine of a cow should be

* According to Videha the clarified butter in this case should be
cooked with the decoction of the Vdyu-subduing drugs and with the Kalka
oi the Madhura drups.

•l8

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap, XXVI.

138

stuffed into the nostrils in the manner of an Avapida
Nasya. Fumigations should be applied into the nostrils
with the fumes of burnt sordid fishes and vermifuge
foods and drinks of various kind should be given. 1 1.

Treatment of Suryavarta and Ardhd-

vabhedaka : — Errhines etc. (plaster, gargle, etc.)
should be prescribed in cases of the Suryavarta type of
Siroroga. The diet should principally consist of boiled
rice and milk with clarified butter and the essence
or extract of the meat of J&ngala animals. These and
similar other suitable remedial agents should be employ-
ed in cases of the Ardha£vabhedaka type of Siroroga.
S>irisha* and Mulaka seeds or bamboo-roots camphor,
or Vacha and Mdgadhi \ or Yashti-madhu and honey,
or Manah sild , pasted with honey, or (pasted)
Chandana should be stuffed into the nostrils in the
manner of an Avapida Nasya m a case of the Suryd-
varta type of Siroroga as well as in a case of Ardhava-
bhedaka headache. After the use of the above, the
patient should be made to snuff in the medicated clarified
butter cooked with the drugs of the Madhura (Kako-
ly&di) group, in both the above cases. Plasters com-
posed of Sdrivd , Utpala , Kushtha and Yashti-madhu past-
ed with Kdnjika(acid gruel) and surcharged with oil and
clarified butter are to be found efficacious in both the
cases, if applied to the affected region. This may be
employed with equal success in the cases of the Kaphaja
type { of Siroroga. 12-14.

* Sripati Datta, the commentator of Vrinda, prescribes the bark and
S'ivadasa Sen, the commentator of Chakrapdni, prescribes the seeds of
S'irisha.

t Some take to mean |

t In place of the Kaphaja type some read the Kshayaja type. But
it is not accepted by Jejjata. Others again read “Anildtmake” i.r., in
the Vdtaja type.

UTTAttA-TAfcTRAk

dhap. XXVI.

139

Treatment of Ananta-vaCta Cases of
Ananta-v&ta Snroroga should be treated like those of
Suryavarta. Moreover blood-letting should be effected
(by opening a local vein) and the diet should be such
as to subdue the Vdyu and the Pitta and should cossist
of Madhu-Mastaka, Sangydsa ;.nd Ghrita-pura (different
kinds of confectionery made of wheat, sugar, milk, clari-
fied butter, etc.). 15.

Treatment of Ssamkhaka Clarified

butter churned from milk should be given for a drink and
used as an errhine in a case of Samkhaka and the diet
should consist of (boiled rice mixed with) clarified butter
and the essence of the meat of jdngala animals. Plasters
composed of S'atdvari , black sesamum , Y ashti-madhu ,
Nilotpala , Durvd and Punarnavd pasted together, or of
Mahd-sugandhd (Utpla-asAriv£) or Pdlindi pasted with
Kdnjika should be applied to the affected locality.
Cooling washes and plasters as well as different Avapida
Nasyas prescribed in cases of Sury&varta should also
be prescribed for this disease (Samkhaka). 16.

Strong head-purgatives (errhines) composed of oil
and honey should be first administered in cases of Siro-
roga with the exception of the Krimija and the
Kshayaja types. Then the patient should be made to
snuff in drops of mustard oil. In cases where the preced-
ing remedies would fail to produce any relief, the
patient should be treated with Sneha and Sveda, and
bleeding should then be effected by opening a local
vein. 17-18.

The Conclusion \ — The causes, symptortis
and the therapeutics of the seventy-six kinds of ocular
affection, of the twenty-eight kinds of the disease of
the ear, of the thirty-one kinds of nasal disease, of the
eleven kinds of the disease of the head as well as

$40 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXVI

of the sixty-seven (sixty-five) kinds of the affection of
the mouth have been described in detail in other
treatises (e.g. those of Videha, etc. dealing with this special
subject — the diseases of the over-clavicular region). The
number, symptoms and therapeutics of these diseases
of the over-clavicular region are herein briefly described
in accordance therewith. 19.

Thus ends the twenty-sixth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'iuta
SamhiU which deals with the treatment of the diseases of the head.

Here ends the £dldkya Tantra (Surgery
Minor).

CHAPTEB XXVII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the specific features (of the nine diseases of infant
life, which are attributed to the influences) of the nine
malignant Grahas (Nava-Grahakrlti -Vijtlrf-

nam). i.

Different Names Attentively hear me des-
cribe, Susruta, the origin, cause and medical treatment
of the diseases of infancy which are due to the influences
of malignant stars (Graha) or demons as well as the
characteristic symptoms by which each can be accurate-
ly diagonosed. The diseases number nine in all and
are called Skanda-Graha, Skandapasm&ra, Sakuni,
Revati, PutanA, Andha-PutanA, Sita-PutanA, Mukha-
rnandika and Naigamesha or Pitri-Graha. 2-3.

General course of attack These malig-
nant stars (Graha) or demons affect the person of a
child in the cases where the directions laid down before
(in the SArira-sthAna) in respect of the conduct of the
mother or the nurse during the time the child is brought-
up on the breast are not followed, and consequently
where proper benedictory rites arc not performed and
the child is allowed to remain in an uncleanly state, or
where the child becoming anyhow uneasy gets fright-
ened, is rebuked, or begins to cry. They (demons) make
their appearance for the purpose of getting proper
respect and worship. They being omnipotent and
omnipresent arc not capable of being seen by man
when they enter the person of a child. I should, there-
fore, discourse on the symptoms of their presence, as
derived from the authority of the sages of yore, 4.

42 THE SUSI 1 RUTA SAM HIT A. [Chap. XXVII-

Symptoms of attack by Skanda-
graha and Skanda'pasm^ra-graha

Swelling of the eyes and distorted features of the face
and an aversion to the breast-milk arc the indications of
an attack by the Skanda-graha. The body of the chiid
emits a bloody smell and one of the eyelids becomes
fixed or motionless. The child looks frightened, closes
his fists (as in a fit of convulsion) and moans a little. The
eyes become highly rolling and the stool becomes hard
and constipated. Alternate fits of fainting and cons-
ciousness, convulsive jerks of legs and hands like those
in dancing, foaming (at the mouth), yawning and the
passing of stool and urine with the passage of w ind are
the characteristic features of an attack by the SkandsC-
pasms(ra-graba. 5-6.

S$akuni and Revati : — Looseness of limbs
which emit a peculiar bird-like* smell arc the indications
of an attack of the child by the Jjakuni Graha. The
child in such a case starts up in terror and its body is
covered with a large number of secreting ulcers (Vrana),
or of eruptions of vesicles attended with a burning
sensation subsequently suppurating and bursting of
themselves. The face assumes a blood-red hue, the stool
(as well as the urine) becomes green and the body of the
child looks as if of deep yellow or dark brown colour,
fever ensues with an infiamation of the mouth, a bruised
pain is felt all over the body and the child frequently
rubs its nose and ears — these arc the features which
mark a sure attack of Revati-Graha. 7-8.

Putand and Andha-putanst : — Loose-
ness of the limbs, disturbed sleep whether by day

* By the wotd (lit. a bird) in is here meant meat-

eating aquatic birds.

Chap. XXVII. ]

UTTRA-TANTRAM.

*43

or at nighc, loose stools, emission of a crow-like smell
from the body, vomiting, appearance of goose-flesh on
the skin and thirst are the specific symptoms of an
attack of the child by the Putanat-Graha. Dislike for
the breast-milk as well as an attack of dysentry,
(Atis&ra), cough, hic-cough, vomiting, fever, discolouring
of the complexion, and swelling in the skin as well as
an inclination to lie always on the fa:c are the symp-
toms which arc exhibited in a case of an attack by
the Audha-Putanat-Graha. 9 - 10 .

SSita-putana and Mukha mandika
Constant and frightened startling up, excessive shivering,
comatose sleep, constant diarrheic stools and bloody smell
of the limbs arc the symptoms which characterise a case
of an attack by S.ta-Putanai. The child in this case cries
almost unceasingly, and a rumbling sound is heard in the
intestines. Paleness (emaciation) of the body (trunk) and
a glossy line (swelling) of the face and the extremities
attended with frightfulncss, voracious appetite, appear-
ance of net-like veins on the abdomen and the emission
of urinc-likc smell frbm the body are the symptoms of an
attack of the child by Mukha-mandiki Graha. 11-12.

Naigamesha Graha : — Frothy vomits, bend-
ing of the middle of the trunk, anxious appearance, loud
crying, upward gaze of the eyes, constant emaciation
(fcvcr-D. R.), a fatty smell in the body and unconscious-
ness are the symptoms which mark a case of an attack
by the Naigamesha. 13.

Prognosis : — A stupified State of the child
attended with ana version to breast-milk and constant fits
of fainting as well as the full development of all the
specific symptoms show the imminent fatal termination
of the disease. Otherwise it may prove amenable to
medical treatment, if it be not a case of long standing. 14.

144

THE SUSHRUTA SAWHITX. [ Ch*p. X*VH.

Rules to be observed 3— The child should
be kept in a clean and purified chamber and its body
should be rubbed or anointed with old and matured
clarified butter. Mustard seeds should be strewn all
over the floor (by a person) in a clean state and a lamp of
mustard oil should be kept perpetually burning therein.
Libations of clarified butter with the drugs of the Sarva-
gandhd and Sarvoushadhi * groups and garlands of
flowers as well as sandal paste should, be cast into the fire
and kept continually burning by reciting the following
incantations, “Obeisance to thee, O fire-god, obeisance
to thee, O goddess KrittikS, obeisance to thee, O
Skanda, obeisance to thee, O lord of the Grahas (which
has cast this malignant influence). With head down
with deep humility, I supplicate thy favour. Dost thou
accept the offerings I have made to thee. May my
child get rid of the disease it has been suffering from.
Makest it hale and hearty again.” 15.

Thus ends the twenty-seventh chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the
Sus'ruta-Sainhitd which deals with the specific features of an attack by the
nine (malignant) Grahas.

* The drugs of the Eladi 'group are known as Sarva-gandha.
Sarvaaushadhi drugs here mean Yava t Dka’nya , Tila y etc.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the Therapeutics (and remedial measures) of an
attack by Skanda-Graha (Skanda-Graha- Pra-
tishedha). i.

Decoctions of the leaves of the trees (Vilv&di) possess-
ed of Vayu-subduing virtue should be used for sprink-
ling purposes and oil duly cooked and prepared with
the decoction of their roots and with the drugs of the
Sarvagandha, group and pvith Kaitaryya* and Surd-
manda as Kalka should be used in anointing the body
of the child laid up with an attack of Skanda-graha.
Draughts of clarified butter duly cooked with Deva-ddru ,
Rds?td> the drugs of the Madhura group and with milk,
should be internally administered. 2-3.

Fumigation : — Moreover the body of the child
should be fumigated with the fumes of the mustard
seeds, the cast-off skin of a snake, Vachd , Kdkddani,
clarified butter and the hairs of a camel, a goat, a sheep
or of a cow mixed together and burnt. 4.

The twigs of Soma-balli (Guduchi), lndra-balli (As-
mantaka) and S’ ami as well as the thorns of Vilva and
the roots of Mrigddanz) should be strung together (in
the shape of a garland) and tied (round its neck). 5.

The physician (or any other person acting on his
behalf) should bathe in the night and worship the god
Skanda for three successive nights in the inner quadrangle
of the house of the child or at the crossing of roads
with various offerings, viz., garlands of red flowers, red
flags, red perfumes such as Kumkuma y edibles of various

* ICaitaryya, according to Dallana, means Nimba or Guduchi.

19

14 6 THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXVIII.

kinds and newly harvested barley grains, 5 Alt rice.
A cock should be sacrificed on the occasion (to appease
his wrath) and bells should be rung (for his propitiation).
The water to be used for bath (in course of worship),
should be consecrated by reciting the G£yatri Mantra
and the sacrificial fire should be duly lit with (three,
seven or ten) libations (of clarified butter). 6 .

Mantras > — The body of the child should be
guarded by a careful physician against the influence of
the malignant Grahas by reciting every day a Mantra
which runs as follows : — “May Skanda, the eternal and
changeless deity who is the receptacle of all sorts of
energies produced by austerities, fame, valour, or organic
combination (vital energy), be propitious to thee. May
the almighty Guha protect thee from all evils — Guha
who is the commander-in-chief both of the army of the
gods and of the Grahas and is the destroyer of the
enemies of the army of the gods (in which rank he has
been installed, lit. wedded, with the suffrage of all the
gods). May he who is the begotten son of the supreme
deity — the god of the gods and who acknowledges
severally the exalted motherhood of Gangd, Umd and
the KrittikAs, give thee health and comfort. May the
beautiful god who pierced with a single shaft right
through the heart of the mountain Krouncha and who
is effulgent with the red rays of his own divine person
smeared with the paste of red sandal-wood and decked
with the garland of red flowers, protect thee from all
perils.” 7 .

Thus ends the twenty-eighth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the Therapeutics of Skanda-Graha.

CHAPTER XXIX.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the Therapeutics of an attack by Skanddpasm&ra

(Skandapasmara-Pratishedha). i.

A decoction of Vilva, S' iris ha, Golomi (. Durdlabhd ),
and the drugs of the Surasddi group should be employed
in sprinkling the body of the possessed child in a case
of the present disease. Medicated oil duly cooked
with the drugs of the Sawagandhd group should be
used in anointing its body. Clarified butter duly cooked
with milk and the decoction of the barks of the Kshiri
trees together with the drugs of the K&kolyddi group
as Kalka* should be prescribed for internal use. 2 A.

The body of the affected child should be rubbed
(Utsstdana) with the paste of Vachd and Hingu taken
together. The dungs of an owl and a vulture, human
hairs, the nails of an elephant, clarified butter, and the
hairs of a bull should be mixed together and used for
fumigating the child’s body. Anantd , Vimbi , Markati,
and Kukkuti should be strung together and fastened
(as a charm) to the body of the child. 213.

The physician (or the votary officiating for him)
should worship the presiding deity of the disease in a
ditch (dug out for the purpose) with the offerings of both
cooked and uncooked meat, fresh blood (of a goat),
milk, and edibles prepared with the Mdsha pulse for the
ghosts, and the possessed child should be bathed at
the crossing of roads by physician ' observing the

* Although Dallana prescribes the drug® of the K6koly£di group to be
used as Kalka, we are inclined to take the sentence to mean that the
decoction of those drugs should be used.

148

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [ Chap. XXIX.

necessary fast, etc. with the recital of the following
Mantra : — “O thou, the trusted and beloved friend of
the god Skanda, O Skanddpasmdra, O thou ugly-faced
one whom the world knows by the epithet of Vis&kha,
may good befall this child in distress.” 2.

Thus ends the twenty -ninth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the
Sus'ruta Samhiti which deals with the Therapeutics of an attack by
Skand^pasmdra*

CHAPTER XXX.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the medical treatment of an attack by Sakuni

(£akuni-Pratishedha). i.

A wise physician should sprinkle the body of the
child possessed by Sakuni with the decoction (duly
prepared) of Vetasa , Antra and Kapittha. Oils duly
cooked with the drugs of the sweet and astringent groups
should be used in anointing its body. Pradehas
(plasters) composed of Madkuka , Us’ira> Hrivera> Sdrivd ,
Utpala , Padmaka , Rod hr a, Priyangu , Manjishthd and
Gairika , should be applied. 2A.

Various kinds of medicinal powders and diet and
remedial measures in general described in connection
with the medical treatment of Ulcers * as well as the
fumigations (Ohupana) mentioned in the chapter on the
treatment of Skanda-graha (vide ch. XXVIII.) should
be prescribed for the disease under discussion. Drugs
such as S'atdvari , Mrigadani \ Ervdm , Ndgadanti,
Nidigdh ikd , Lakshmand , Sahadevd and Vrihati should
be fastened (as a charm) to the body of the child (in
the preceding manner). 2B.

The presiding deity of the disease (Sakuni Graha)
should be worshipped by a physician of self-control
inside a Karanja bower and be propitiated with
offerings of huskless sesamum, garlands of flowers,
Haritdla (yellow orpiment) and Manahs’ild (realgar)
and the child should be bathed duly inside the bow r er
(according to the rules laid down in the treatment of
Skanda Graha). The medicated Ghrita prescribed foi

See Chapter I, Chikitshita Sthdna.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXX.

the treatment of Skanda Graha may also be ad-
vantageously given in the present instance. 2C.

Various sorts of worship should be made with the
offerings of various species of auspicious flowers. The
Mantra to be recited on the occasion runs as folllows : —
“May the ever down-looking sharp-beaked goddess,
S>akuni, who (with her keen and far-seeing eyes) is
decked with all sorts of ornaments and who traverses
the ethereal sky in her flight, be propitious to thee.
May the brown-eyed, fierce-looking, huge-bodied, large-
bellied, and spike-eared Sakuni, who strikes terror
into the heart of man with her terrible voice, be pleased
with thee.” 2.

Thus ends the thirtieth chapter of the Uttara Tantra in the Sus'ruta
SamhiU which deals with the treatment of (an attack) by S'akuni.

CHAPTER XXXI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which treats
of the Therapeutics of an an attack by Revati (Revath

Pratishedha). i.

The duly prepared decoction of As*vagandhd y Sdrivd ,
Ajas'ringi , Punarnavi , the two kinds of Sahd and
Viddii should be employed in sprinkling (Sechana)
the body of the affected child (in a case of an attack
by Revati). Medicated oil duly cooked with Kushtha
and Sarjarasa (resin) * should be used in anointing
the child’s body. Medicated Ghrita duly cooked with
the decoction of Dhava* As' va-k&rna, Kakubha , Dhdtaki
and Tinduka and with the drugs of the Kdkolyddi
group (as Kalka) should be employed internally as a
draught. 2A.

Kulattha , (burnt and) powdered S'amkha (conch-shell)
and the drugs of the Sarvagandha group should be used
as Fradehas (plasters), and the body of the child should
be fumigated (D hup ana) morning and evening with the
smokes of barley, Yava-phala (bamboo), and the dungs
of vultures and owls mixed with clarified butter. Neck-
ornament should be made with (the wood or pith of)
Varuna , Arishta (Nimba), Ruchaka , Sinduka (Nirgundi),
and Putranjivaka and should be always worn on the
neck (as a charm) by the child. 2-3.

The presiding deity of the disease known as Revati
should be worshipped in a cow-shed by a self-controlling
physician with the offerings of white flowers, milk, parched

* There is an additional text in the Bhivaprakas'a which says that
Guggulu (Palamkashd), Nalada (Khus*khus) and Giri-kadamba should also
be used in the preparation of the medicated oil.

152

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXI.

paddy and boiled S'dlt rice and the nurse as well as
the child should be bathed in a junction of rivers.
The Mantra (to be recited in course of worship) runs
as follows “May the goddess, Revati, of dark com-
plexion who is clad in parti-coloured garments and
garlands of flowers of various colours and painted with
anointments of various kinds and with oscillating ear-
rings, be pleassd with thee. May the goddess, Revati,
who is tall, drooping and terrible-looking, and who is the
mother of many sons be always propitious to thee.” 2.

Thus ends the thirty-first chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Susfruta
SamhitA which deals with the Therapeutics of an attaclt by Revati.

CHAPTER XXXII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which treats
of the medical treatment of an attack by PutanA
(PutanA- Pratished ha). i.

A decoction of the barks of Kapota-bankd , Araluka
Varuna, Pdribhadraka and A 'sphotd should be used in
washing, and medicated oil duly cooked and prepared
with (the Kalka and decoction of) Vacha y Vayasthd ,
(BrAhmi), Golomi \ Haritala , Manah-s'ila , Kusktka and
Sarja-rasa (resin) should be used in anointing the
body of a child possessed by PutanA. 2-3.

Clarified butter duly cooked with the Tugd-kshiri \
Kusktka , Tali s' a, Kkadira and Ckandana , and the drugs
of the Madkura group would be found beneficial. 4.

Deva-ddru , Vachd, Kusktka , Hingu , Giri-kadamba ,
and Harem should be used in fumigating the
body of the child. Fumigation of Gandhandkuli \
Kumbhikd , marrow of Vadara-fruits , shells of crabs,
and mustard-seeds pounded together and mixed with
clarified butter may also be used. Kdkddani \ Ckitra-
phaldy Vimbi and Gunjd should be worn on the body
(as a charm) by the child. 5-6.

v Putana, the presiding deity of the disease, should
be worshipped in the interior of a lonely chamber with
oblations and with the offerings of boiled rice prepared
with the admixture of fish as well as those of Kris , ard i
and Pa/a/a (meat or puddings of sesamum) placed in a
saucer and covered with another, and the child should
be bathed with the water left behind after worship. 7 A.

The worshipping Mantra is as follows : — “May
the slovenly shag-haired goddess, Putani, who is
dressed in dirty clothes, and who loves to haunt lonely

20

154

THE SUSHRUTA SAMFUtX. [Chap. XXXII.

dwellings, .preserve the child. May the fierce-looking,
frightful goddess who is as black as a dark rain-cloud,
who loves to haunt lonely and dilapidated human
dwellings and whose body gives off filthy odours protect
the child from all evils.” 7.

Thus ends the thirty-second chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment (of an attack) by
Putand.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Now wc shall discourse on the chapter which deals
>vith the medical treatment of (an attack by) Andha-pu-

tana (Andha-putamt-Pratishedha). i.

The decoction of the leaves of the trees of the
Tiktaka gana (trees of bitter taste) should be used in
sprinkling (the body of the possessed child). Surd (wine),
Souviraka (a kind of acid gruel), Kushtha , Haittdla ,
Manah-sild and Sarjarasa (resin) should be used in
due proportion in medicating the oil (for the child) and
medicated Ghrita should be duly cooked with the
Kalka and decoction of Pippali , Pippali-mula , the drugs
of the Madhura group, S'dlaparni and the two kinds of
Vrihati with the addition of honey (as an after-throw). 2 A.

Plasters of the drugs of the S&rva-gandhd (KlAdi ;
group should be applied to the body of the child and
its eyes should be soothed with cold applications.
The feces of the the cock, its feather and skin*, the
cast-off skin of a snake and the ragged garment of a
(Buddhist) monkf should be used for fumigating the
child’s body. The child should be made to wear (the
roots of) Kukkuti , Markati , S'imbi and Anantd as
a charm. 2 B.

Offerings of meat, cooked or uncooked, and of blood
should be made (to Andhapulani) at the crossing of
roads or inside a house for the preservation of the

* Some explain (hair) and (thin) as those of man and

not of a cock.

| Bhavaprakas'a reads '• very old cloth. This

reading does not suggest that the cloth to be used should have been worn
by a Buddhist monk.

*56

f HE SUSUKUTA SAM1IITX [Chap. XXXlt t

child, which (with its nurse) should also be bathed with
the decoction of the holy drugs of the Sarva-gandha
group. The Mantra runs as follows : — “May the dread-
ful, brown-coloured, bald-headed, goddess Andha-putana,
wearing a red-coloured garment be pleased to save
this child.” 2.

Thus ends the thirty-third chapter in the Uttara«Tantra of the
Sui/ruta Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of (an attack)
by Andha-puland*

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of
(an attack by) Sita-putana (^Ita-putana-Prati-
shedha). x.

The decoction of Kapittha , Suvahd (RisnA), Vimbi,
Vilva, Prachivala (?), Nandi (Vata) and Bhalldtaki should
be used in sprinkling [the child’s body). The urine of
a cow and of a shc-goat, as well as Musta, Deva-daru ,
Kushtha and the drugs cf the Sarva-gandha (ElSdi)
group should be used in duly preparing a medicated
oil (for the purpose) and medicated Ghrita should be
duly cooked with (three parts of) the decoction of
Roll ini, Sarjarasa (resin \ Khadira , Paldsd and barks of
Arjuna and (one part of) milk. 2 A.

Dungs of an owl and a vulture, the cast-off skin
of a snake as well as Ajagandhd and Nimba leaves and
Yashthi-tnadhu should be used for fumigating purposes,
and Latnbd (Tiktalavu), Gunja and Kdkddani should be
be worn (as a charm) by the child. 2B.

The goddess S>itaputan& should be worshipped with
the offerings of the preparation of rice and Mudga
pulse (cooked together) as well as with Vdruni w T ine and
blood, and the child should be bathed near a river or a
tank. The Mantra is as follows : — “May the goddess
Sita-putanA, who is fond of the preparation of rice and
Mudga pulse, who delights in drinking wine and blood
and who resides by the side of a river or a tank, preserve
thee.” 2.

Thus ends the thirty-fourth chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the
Sus'ruta Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of (an attack
by) S'itaputanl

CHAPTER XXXV.

Now wc shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the medical treatment of (an attack by) Mukha-
mandik* ( M ukha- mandi ka~ Prat ished ha i

The decoction of Kapittha , Vilva, Tarkdri (Jayanti),
V ants a-lochana (D.R. Vds&), Gandkarva-hastaka (Eranda)
and Kuverdkshi (Pdtala) should be used in sprinkling
(the body of the possessed child). Oil and fat (in equal
parts) should be duly cooked* with the expressed juice
of the Bhringardja , Ajagandhd and IlarigandhA (As'wa-
gandhi) and be used in anointing the child’s body.
Medicated Ghrita should be duly cooked with Madhulikd
(Murva), Tugd-kshiri and the drugs of the Madhura and
the minor Pancha-mula groups and with milk. 2. A.

Fumigation with Vachd, Sarjarasa and Kushtha
mixed with clarified butter would be found beneficial
and the child should be made to wear the tongue of a
Chdsa bird, a Chiralli bird or a snake (as a charm). 2. It

Offerings of Varnaka (Kampillaka), Churnaka , gar-
lands of flowers, Rasdnjana , Pdrada (mercury), Manah-
S'ilA , Pdyasa (rice boiled in milk) and puddings should
be made (to the deity) inside a cow-shed and the child
should also be bathed therein with water consecrated
with Mantra. The Mantra runs as follows : — “May the
beautiful and blessed goddess, Mukhamandika, who is
decked with ornaments, who can assume different
forms at will and who resides in cow-sheds, preserve
thee”.

Thus ends the thirty-fifth Chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the
Sus'ruta Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of (an attack
by) Mukhamandika.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Now wc shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the medical treatment of (an attack by) Naigamc-

sha (Naigamesha-Pratishedha). r.

The decoction of Vilva , Agnimantha and Putikd
should be used in sprinkling (the body of the possessed
child) and sprinkling with Surd , Sauvira and Dhdny-
dmla (Kanjika) is also advisable in such cases. A
medicated oil should be duly cooked with Priyangu ,
S a raid, Anantd , S' ata-pu slip d and Kutannata and with
cow’s urine, the liquid of the milk-curd (Dadhi-mastu)
and Kdnjika Medicated Ghritas should be duly pre-
pared with the drugs of the Madhura group as Kalka,
with the decoction of the Dasani u la and with milk or
with the head of a date-palm tree 2. A.

The child should be made to wear Vachd , Vayasthd ,
Gofomi and Jatild as a charm and the utsidana measures
recommended in the treatment of Skand&pasmclra
should be used in this case also. Siddhdrthaka (white
mustard), Vachd , Ilingu , Kushtha , parched rice, Bhal Id-
taka and Ajamodd should be used in fumigating the
body of the child. In cases of attacks by Navagraha the
dungs of a monkey, an owl and a vulture should also
be used by persons wishing the good of the child for
a fumigating purpose and that at the dead of the night
when all persons arc asleep. 2. B.

Offerings of huskless sesamum, garlands of flowers
and various dishes should be made to the deity
Naigamcsha (the preserver of the child) at the foot
of a Vata tree on the sixth day of the fortnight and the
child should be bathed there at the foot of the tree.

l6o THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. [Chap. XXXVI.

The Mantra runs as follows : — “May the far-famed
god, Naigamcsha, the preserver of children, who has a
goat's face with moving brow and rolling eyes and who
can assume different forms at will, preserve the child." 2.

Thus ends the thirty-sixth chapter of the U ttara-Tantra in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of (an attack
by) Naigamesha.

CHAPTER XXXVIL

Now wc shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the origin of the (nine) Grahas (Grahot patti-

Adhyaya). r.

The nine presiding deities — v?rj.> Skanda and others —
of the nine diseases of infant life arc all possessed of
ethereal frames, divine effulgence and specific sex-
distinction of their own. They were created by the
gods Agni, Mah^deva and the goddesses Krittika and
Umd for guarding the person of the new-born Guha
though protecting himself with his own divine prowess
amidst the stems of S'ara grass. Of these Grahas
the females who arc possessed of various shapes as
described before arc considered as originally made of
the R£jasa essence of the goddesses Gangd, Uma and
Krittika. 2 A.

The Naigamesha Graha who is possessed of a sheep’s
face was created by the goddess P&rvati as the friend
and protector of the young god Guha and who was as
dear to him as his own self. Skanddpasmira, the
presiding deity of the disease named after him, was
created by Agni, the fire-god (Vulcan). He is as bright
as fire itself and is a constant companion of the god
Skanda and is also known by the name of Vis'akha.
The god Skanda, the tutelar divinity of the disease of
that denomination, was begotten by His Holiness, the
Almighty Destroyer of Tripura and is otherwise known
by the name of Kumara (lit. a child, vie., of Mahd-
deva). 2B.

It is impossible that the god springing from Rudra
and Agni, with his exalted parentage would find pleasure
jn such a dangerous disease even out of childish frolic-

21

162

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXVH.

somcness and it has also been asserted by eminent
authorities on the physical science that some unintelli-
gent persons have been misled into holding, through a
mistake due to the identity of the names, that the
author of the disease under discussion (Skanda) is no
other than the invincible Skanda. 2.

On the effulgent god Skanda’s being elevated to the
leadership of the armies of Heaven, the presiding deities
of those diseases waited upon him and with folded
palms asked him about the means of their subsis-
tence. The god Skanda' in his turn, referred them to
His Holiness the god Siva for the answer, whereupon
they went to the latter in a body and made the same
query. Mah&deva, the Destroyer of Bhaga’s eyes, replied
“Gods, men and other animals, O, ye Grahas, exist
on the principle of reciprocal benefit*. The gods minis-
ter to the wants of men and beasts, etc., by marshalling
different seasons of the year and by setting the air
in motion and sending down the rain, and men, in their
turn, propitiate the gods by duly and reverentially per-
forming the sacrificial rites, by saying their prayers with
blended palms, by bowing down in reverence, and by
repetition of prayers, religious vows and other religious
observances. All services and their emoluments in
consequence have been filled up and settled and there
remains nothing for you to fill. Your proper means of

subsistence will, therefore, be in the life of an infant

*

(though the emoluments you shall receive shall be
stained with the tears of many an anxious, watchful
and night-worn parent). 3 A.

* Exchange or reciprocity of services underlies the foundation of all
distinct and cognitive existences, whether beasts, men or gods. The
worlds are linked to one another by bonds of service. Give-and-take is
th$ law of the universe. Duty implies obligation.

Chap. XXXVII. ] UTTARA-TANTRA. t G$

Children of the families in which the gods, the Fitris
(departed fathers), the Brahmans, the pious, the precep-
tors and the seniors and the guests are not properly
worshipped and attended upon and wherein the rule* of
cleanliness and virtues arc not observed and the mem-
bers of which do not make daily offerings to the gods
and give alms to beggars and live on food prepared by
others and eat from broken bowls and plates of Indian
bell-metal would be the proper persons whom you might
strike with impunity, and by your malign influence
lay them up with diseases peculiar to infant life. (It
shall be your duty to see that iniquities of the parents
are visited on their children. Attack them without
least compunction of heart and ample means of
subsistence will be thereby secured to you). There the
parents of thore children will worship you in their
calamities and you shall get plenty to live upon.” 3B.

Thus the Grahas came into being and began to
attack the children (of iniquitious parents), and it is
therefore that a child attacked by a malignant Graha
becomes very hard to be cured. Death or permanent
disfigurement of any limb or organ is sure to ensue
from an attack of Skanda Graha, since he is the most
dreadful of all the Grahas. A case of full-developed
attack by any other Graha should be likewise held as
incurable. 3.

Thus ends the thirty-seventh chapter of the Uttara Tanlra in the
Sus'ruta Samhita which deals with the origin of the Grahas.

Chapter xxxviil

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with (the symptoms and) the therapeutics of the diseases
of the female* organ of generation (Yoni -vyfiCpftt -

Pratishedha). i.

Causes * — The bodily (as well as the local)
VAyu of a girl of tender years, weakly constitution or
build and dry organic temperament, is deranged and
aggravated in consequence of her excessive indulgence
with a man of abnormally developed reproductive
organ, and on getting into her organ of generation
(yoni) gives rise to different local vaginal diseases which
become manifest through the presence of the symptoms
of the aggravation of the three specific Doshas. 2.

In the chapter on the enumeration of diseases, the
diseases which affect the female organ of generation
(yoni) have been classified into twenty different kinds']*.
The injudicious conduct of life which is usually found in
females, menstrual disorders, the diseased or defective
nature of the seed (of the parents of the girl), or any
accidental cause may be fairly set down as causes
of these female diseases. Now hear* them discussed
separately. 3.

Enumeration and Classification

UdavartA (dysmenorrhcea), Bandhyd (sterility), Vipluta
(introversion of the uterus), Paripluta (retroversion or
retroflexion of the uterus) and Vatald are the five kinds

* The term << yoni ,> is here used in a very compichenj>ive sense and
means the whole female organ of generation, *. e Uterus, Vagina, etc.

+ These three lines correspond verbatim with three lines in the
Charaka Samhitd (vide Charaka Samhita, Chapter XXX, Chikitsita*
sill ana).

Chap. XXXVIII.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

165

of Vsitaja vaginal diseases. Rudhirakshara (menorrhoea),
V&mini, Sramsini, Puttraghni and Pittali are the
Pittaja ones. Atyanandd (nymphomania), Karnini, the
two kinds of CharanA and Slaishmiki find their origin
in Kapha, and Shandi, Phalini, Mahati, Suchivaktrd
and Sarvaja are said to be due to the aggravation of
the three Doshas. 4 .

Symptoms of the Vataja types s— An

Ud&varti yoni discharges painful and frothy menses
and a Baildhya yoni is marked by the absence or
suppression of the catamenial flow. A local pain is
always complained of in a ViplutaC yoni and in a
Pariplutat yoni an excessive local pain is experienced
at the time of sexual congress. A Vatalai yoni is marked
by an aching and piercing pain in the organ which
seems rough and numbed. The peculiar pain due to the
derangement of the Vdyu is also felt in the first four
types of the scries. 5.

Symptoms of the Pittaja types:—

Discharge of the menses with a burning sensation in
the passage is the characteristic symptom of Lohita-
ksharSL or Rudhira-kashra£ yoni. The yoni from which
the semen charged with the menstrual blood, is ejected
with Viyu (sound) is called Va'mini ; the coming out
(prolapsus) of the organ (uterus) when disturbed and a
difficult or painful parturition arc the symptoms of a
Prasramsini yor]i. The yoni in the case of repeated
abortions due to the excessive discharge of catamenial
blood during the period \>f gestation is called
Puttraghni. All extremely burning sensation and
suppuration in the organ attended with fever are the
symptoms which mark a Pittala£ yoni. The four
previous vaginal diseases arc also marked by the specific
symptoms of the aggravated Pitta. 6.

166

THE SUSHRUTA SAMlIITA. [Chap. XXXVIII.]

Symptoms of the Kaphaja types

An Atyrfnandrf yoni knows no satisfaction in matters
of sexual pleasures. Haemorrhoid growths or polypii
due to the aggravation of Kapha and vitiated blood
appear on the living membrane of the organ in a
Karnini yoni. In an Acharauat yoni a greater quantity
of ovum is secreted before the completion of sexual
act, and in the other i. in an Aticharani yoni the
semen is not retained in consequence of over-indulgence.
A SleshmalaJ yoni is very cold and slimy and has a
local itching sensation. The first four kinds of this
series of vaginal disease (lit. diseased vagina) arc also
characterised by the actions of the deranged and
aggravated Kapha in the locality. 7.

Symptoms of the Tri-doshaja

types S —The yoni of a woman marked by the non-
appearance of the menses, non-development of her
breasts and the roughness of the vagina (vaginal
canal) which is felt at the time of coition is called a
Shandlli. A woman of tender years, who has just passed
her girlhood, when ravished by a man with an abnor-
mally developed genital organ, offers the illustration
of a Phalini yoni. An extremely dilated vagina is
called Mahstyoni, while an extremely constricted one is
called a Suchivaktrai (lit. a vagina with a needle-eyed
vulva). The yoni marked with the symptoms of the
aggravation of all the three Doshas is said to be a
Sarvaja yoni. The four preceding kinds of vaginal
malformations or diseases 4rc also due to the concert-
ed action of the three deranged Doshas in the locality
and these last (five) kinds of Tridoshaja vaginal diseases
are incurable. 8.

Medical Treatment The medical treat-
ment of the curable types of vaginal diseases should

Chap. XXXVIII.] UTTARA-T ANTRA. 1 67

begin with the administration of a Sneha according to
the Dosha involved in each case and applications of
properly charged vaginal enemas (Uttara-vasti) should
be particularly resorted to. In cases where the yoni
(vagina) would feel cold, rough, numbed and be marked
by diminished sensibility of its mucous membrane
during sexual action it should be fomented, in the
manner of Kumbhi-sveda, with the flesh of aquatic and
A'nupa animals ; and drugs of the Madhura group
mixed with Ves'av&ra (all described before) should be
applied (in the form of poultice) to the part, and plugs
of oil-soaked cotton should be constantly retained in
the yoni (vagina). Proper vaginal lotions and washes
as well as the measures of Purana i r. medical injection
(prepared with the VYiyu-subduing drugs) should also
be employed ; cooling measures should be adopted in
the cases marked by dryness and sucking pain (Osha and
Chosa) in the affected locality. The vagina should be
filled up with the powders of the five officinal kinds
of drug ( Pancha-kashdya ) in a case, marked by fetour
and slimy mucous secretion, and the decoction of the
drugs of R&javriksh&di group should be used in wash-
ing. Pindas (balls) of disinfectant (Sodhona, lit. purify-
ing) drugs pasted with cow’s urine and saturated with
salt, should be inserted into the vagina marked by the
discharge of pus. 9 — T2.

A yoni (vagina) marked by an itch and impaired
sensibility should be fumigated with the vapour of
Vrihati and the two kinds of Havidrd #akcn together,
which should be as well inserted and retained in the
vagina (in the shape of a plugl A plug or stick com-
posed of a paste of disinfectant (or Sodhana) drugs should
be inserted into and retained in a Karnini yoni ; and a
prolapsing (Prasramsini) yoni should be fomented with

l68

TIIK SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIIL]

hot milk and rubbed with clarified butter. It should
then be restored to its proper place and, being pasted
with Ves'av&ra, should be duly bandaged. 13 — 14.

Diet. — SurfiC, Asava, Arishta, (wines of medicinal
drugs) should be prescribed according to the Dosha
involved in each case and the patient should be made
to take the expressed juice of garlic (Lashuna) every
morning and her diet should consist mainly of milk,
meat-soup, etc. 15.

We have already described the nature of the
medical treatment and the remedial agents to be
respectively pursued in and prescribed for diseases of
the semen, menstrual complaints, affections of the
mammae, impotcncy, cases of false presentation of
child and diseases during the period of pregnancy
and motherhood, and all those may be employed with
equal benefit in these diseases peculiar to the female
sex. Other diseases (such as fever etc.) which may
arise from immature delivery should be treated in the
manner described in the respective treatment of those
diseases in the Uttara Tantra. 16,

Thus ends the thirty-eighth chapter of the Uttara Tantra in the
Sus # iuta Samhitd which deals with the therapeutics of the female organ o
generation.

Here ends the Kaumdrabhritya
Tantra,

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Now we shall discourse on the (symptoms and)

medical treatment of Fever (Jwara-Pratlshe*
dha). i.

The Divine Dhanvantari, who in his first incarna-
tion arose out of the primordial Ocean with a pitcher
of ambrosia on his head, (when it was churned by the
gods and the demons) and who conferred immortality
on Indra and his brother celestials, was thus interro-
gated by his disciples, Susruta and others “You have
instructed us, O, you, the foremost of physicians, the
subject on all the concomitant distressing symptoms
(Upadrava) of Ulcer iVrana). Now let us have a general
outline and detailed description of the concomitant dis-
tressing symptoms, physiological and pathological condi-
tions e.g. fever, dysentery, cough, etc. showing in an ulcer-
patient. An ulcer attended with many a concomitant
symptom Upadrava) may be cured only with the
greatest difficulty and such concomitant symptoms
appearing in an emaciated and weak ulcer-patient,
take time to be subdued because of the loss of his
Doshas and Dh£tus. Hence illumine us fully, O sir,
on those diseases affecting the whole body (and not
localised in any particular limb or organ) observed by
the holy sages of yore, and instruct us the nature and
application of the therapeutic agents^ to be employed
in their cure”. 2.

Description Of Jwara To the query of
the disciples, the divine physician, Dhanvantari replied
as follows : — “First I shall discourse on the nature and
origin of fever for it is the king of all bodily distempers

IfO THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap-JOCm*

in as much it affects the whole orgainsm at a time.
It was begotten by the fire of wrath of Rudra, and afflict-
ed the whole animal world or organic kingdom. The
different names by which it is designated amongst the
different kinds of animals are well known. Its presence
is perhaps an indispensable condition under which a
creature can come into being or can depart from this
* life, and hence it is called the lord of ailments and none
but a god or man can bear the heat of fever. Men may
become gods by virtue of their good deeds (Karma) in
life and would again revert to humanity (mortality) at
the close of their blissful effects, and it is this divine or
godly element in man that enables him to bear this
abnormal heat of fever whereas the lower animals are
simply lost under its influence. 3.

Definition and Classification of
Fever : —The disease which is marked by the arrest
of the flow of perspiration, by increased heat (of the
skin), by pain all over the body and by a sense of
numbness in the limbs, is called Jwara (fever). Cases
of fever of which the causes are numerous, are divided
into eight types according as they are brought on
through the derangement of the three bodily Doshas
separately, or through that of any two of. them in combi-
nation or through their concerted action, or by * any ex-
traneous causes * 4-3.

When the Doshas of the body are deranged by their
respective aggravating causes and in the hours of their
specific dominance^ they bring on an attack of fever by

* There can be three cases of fever d\ie to the derangement of the three
Doshas separately, three cases from the derangement of two of them at a
time and one case only from the concerted action of the three Doshas
These are the seven cases while that due to an extraneous cause is the eighth.

t Kapha is aggravated in the morning, Pitta, at noon and V£yu, In
'the evening. Fever follows a distinct periodicity determined by the

Chap. XXXIX. ]

UTTARA-T ANTRA.

spreading through the whole organism. The deranged
bodily Doshas augmented or enraged by their specific
aggravating causes, enter into the Am&s'aya and soon
find lodgment in the Rasa (lymph-chyle) by virtue of
their inherent heat ( U*hman ). The Doshas thus
deranged and mixed with Rasa obstruct the Rasa-
carrying and sweat-carrying ducts, impair the digestive
fire and cxpelthe inherent heat (Ushman) out of its
seat in the Pakvdsaya, and spreading all over the body
during the period of their specific dominance, bring on
fever and causes its rise and exhibit. their specific colour
on the skin, etc. (of the patient). 6 — 7.

Pathology : — The improper and excessive
application of Sneha, etc., any kind of blow, the pre-
sence of any other affection in the organism, sup-
puration (of an existing boil or ulcer in the body),
over-fatigue, any process of physical waste, indigestion,
introduction of any extraneous poison or poisonous
matter into the system, infringement of any habitual
rule of diet and conduct, the sudden change or contrarie-
ty of seasons, the smelling of any kind of poisonous
herb or flower, grief, the malignant influences of inaus
picious stars or planets (at the time of birth), dynamics

time of aggravation of the deranged bodily Doshas ushering in the attack
An attack of fever due to the deranged Kapha comes on in the morning or
after dusk ; one due to the deranged Pitta comes on at noon or mid-
night, one due to the deranged Vfiyu comes on in the afternoon or during
the small hours of the night. In a case of Dvi-doshaja fever (due td the
combined action of the two deranged bodily Doshas) the heat is aggra-
vated during the specific hours of domination of ttjc stronger Dosha and
continues through those peculiar to each of them. All night attacks
should be regarded as connected with the action of the deranged Pitta. In
a Tri-doshaja case, the heat comes on with the specific hour of the
strongest one and is abated on the approach of the time peculiar to the
weakest. V£yu is aggravated in the Varshi (rainy) season, Pitta, in the
S'arat (autumn) and Kapha, in the Vasanta (spring),

t/2

f HE SUSHRtlTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXXIX,

of deadly incantations or charms, curses (from Br&h-
manas and superiors), any fancied dread or anxiety,
effects of miscarriage or untimely parturition, injudi-
cious conduct of life on the part of a woman after
delivery, and the first accumulation of the milk in the
breast (after delivery) are the causes which lead to
an attack of fever, the derangement and aggravation
of the fundamental vital principles, (Doshas) of the
body being the existing origins of the disease. The
stomachic heat is propelled by the extremely deranged
and aggravated Doshas of the body, and, coursing
through the wrong channels in the orgainsm, tends to
escape through the surface (the skin of the body) and, by
incarcerating the vitiated Rasa Dh&tu generally causes
a rise in the bodily temperature and puts a stop to
perspiration. 8 — 9.

Premonitory Symptoms : — A sense of

fatigue or physical languor, aversion to all sorts of
work, paleness of complexion, bad taste in the mouth,
tearfulness of the eyes, alternate liking and dislike
for heat, cold and air, constant yawning, aching
of the limbs, a sense of heaviness of the body,
horripilation, disrelish for food, darkness of vision,
depression and a feeling of creeping cold in the
body are the general premonitory symptoms which
usher in an attack of fever Constant yawning, burning
of the eyes and aversion to food are the special pre-
monitory symptoms of the derangement of Vdyu,
Pitta and Kapha respectively. The derangement of
all the three Doshas is marked by the presence of all
the symptoms, while, in the derangement of any two
of these, the % special symptoms of those two Doshas
appear* to.

Symptoms of Vataja fever s — Shivering,'

Chap. XXXIX.]

UTTARA-T ANTRA.

173

irregular fits of fever, dryness of the throat, lips and
of the mouth, loss of sleep, stoppage of sneezing, par-
chedness of the skin, pain in the head, chest and limbs,
distaste in the mouth, suppression (D. R. — hardness)
of stool and aching pain (in the abdomen) arc the
characteristics of a case of fever due to the action of
the deranged Vtfyu of the body. 11.

Symptoms* of Pittaja fever High

fever (hyperpyrexia), diarrhoea, scanty but disturbed
sleep, vomiting, inflamation in the throat, lips, mouth
and nostrils, perspiration, delirious talks, swoon or
fainting fits, burning sensation in the body, loss of
consciousness, pungent taste in the mouth, yellowness
of the stool, urine and of the eyes and vertigo
are the symptoms which mark the Pittaja type of
fever. 1 2.

Symptoms of the Kaphaja fever

Heaviness of the limbs, shivering, nausea, appearance
of goose-flesh, excessive sleep, obstruction of the internal
passages of the body, slight pain (in the limbs),
water-brash, sweet taste in the mouth, slight heat in
the body, vomiting, lassitude, mal-assimilation (Avi-
p&katd), whiteness (glossinss) of the eyes arc the indica-
tions which point to the Kaphaja origin of the
disease. 13.

Symptoms of the TrI -dosha ja
fever : — Insomnia, vertigo, laboured or difficult
breathing, drowsiness (somnolence), a sense of innertness
in the limbs, aversion to food, thirst, swoon, delirium,
numbness, burning sensation and shivering of the body,
pain about the region of the heart, delayed assimilation
of the deranged bodily Doshas, (temporary) insanity,
blackish yellow coat on the teeth, blackness and
roughness of the tongue, pain in the head, in the' joints

tf 4 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap- XXXIX.

and in the bone, dilation of the pupil and cloudiness
of the eyes, pain and ringing in the ears, delirious
talks, inflamation of the living membranes of the
channels (of the nose and of the mouth), indistinct
sound in the mouth, coma (loss of consciousness) as
well as perspiration, scanty emission of urine and faecal
matter at long intervals, are the symptoms which are
exhibited in a case of fever due to tl\p concerted action
of all the three deranged Doshas of the body ( Pri-do-
shaja or Sannipatoaja) 14.

Abhlnyasa fever : — Now hear from me about
the peculiar forms of this type of fever the symptoms
whereof are as follows : — Where a slight or imperceptible
rise of the bodily heat, or a slightly subnormal tempera-
ture attended with a subcomatose state, erroneous vision,
loss of voice, injured or cracked condition of the
tongue, dryness of the throat, suppression of stool,
perspiration and urine, tearful eyes, hardness of the
thorax *, aversion to food, dulness of complexion,
difficult breathing and delirious talks and other con-
comitant symptoms are the specific indications in a
patient always confined to his bed, it is known by the
name of Abhinyataa, while others call it a case of
Hataujasa fever. 15.

An attack of Sannipdtaja fever can be cured only
with the greatest difficulty, while others hold it to be
almost incurable. A case of Sannipdtaja fever atten-
ded with somnolence is called Abhiuyis*, it is called
Hataujasa when the vitality of the patient is greatly
diminished and it is called Sanny&a when there is
an innertness of the limbs. 16

* is * different reading in place of * f«f$-

\ The term fij&g is more appropriately applicable to tftpf
than to both grammatically and in sense.

Chap* XXXIX.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 175

When ^in a case of Sannip&taja fever), the Ojo-dhatu
(one of the fundamental principles) of the organism
being disturbed or agitated by the deranged and aggra-
vated Pitta and V&yu, gives rise to shivering and
numbness of limbs and makes the patient drop into
fits of unconsciousness whether asleep or awake,
and when there are somnolence delirious talks, hor-
ripilation, looseness* of the limbs and slight pain (in
the body)— this kind of fever is called Ojo-nirodhaja
fever (due to an obstruction or an overwhelmed condi-
tion of the Ojo-dhAtu) by the experts. 17.

The disease, (in such cases) finds aggravation on the
seventh, the tenth or on the twelfth day * when the case
takes either a favourable turn or ends in death. 18.

Symptoms of Dwandvaja fever

A case of fever which involves, and is due to the
combined action of any two deranged Doshas of the
body, is called Dwandvaja fever and such cases are
classified into three different types (e. g. V&ta-pitta-fever,
V&ta-sleshma-fever and Pitta-s'leshma-fever). Yawning,
distension of the abdomen, loss of consciousness, shiver-
ing pain in the joints, emaciation of the body, thirst,
delirium and heat or increased temperature of the skin,
are the characteristic symptoms of Vita-pitta fever (due
to the action of the deranged Pitta and Vayu). Aching
pain (S>ula), cough, the vomiting of Kapha, shivering,
coryza, cold, sense of heaviness of the limbs, aversion
to food, and a feeling of general numbness, are the

* The fever in which V£yu predominates gets aggravated on the 7th,
that in which Pitta predominates becomes aggravated on the 10th and
that in which Kapha predominates comes to be aggravated on the 12th
day. According to some authority, however, Abhinydsa, Hataujasa, and
Sannydsa types of fever are pacified on the 7th, 10th and 12th. day
respectively. —Dalfana,

I THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXXIX,

symptoms of a case of Vita-rileshma-fever (due to the
action of the deranged V&yu and Kapha). Sensation
of cold and heat, aversion to food, numbness, perspi-
ration, epileptic fits, unconsciousness, vertigo, cough,
lassitude and nausea are the symptoms which charac-
terise a case of Pitta-rfleshma-fever (due to the action
of the deranged Pitta and Kapha)* . 19—21,

Even a small residue of the deranged bodily Doshas
in a patient just cured of an attack of fever but still
sufferring from weakness and indulging in injudicious
regimen of diet and rule of conduct, is apt to be augment-
ed and aggravated by the deranged Vdyu of the body,
and thus begets five different types of fever lodged in
any of the five specific locations of Kapha f. These five
types are known as the Satata, Anyedyushka, Tritiyaka,
Chaturthaka and the Pralepaka The (residue of the)
deranged Dosha of the body, shifting from one location
of Kapha to the next in the course of the entire day

* Dallana in his commentary has quoted in eight lines with different
wordings the symptoms of these kinds of Dwandvaja fever and these
lines have been adopted by Madhava in his Nidana The lines when
transtated would be thus : — Thirst, unconsciousness, vertigo, burning sensa-
tion, somnolence, pain in the head, dryness of the mouth and of the throat,
vomiting, horripilation, disrelish for food, giddiness, pain in tbe joints, and
yawning are the symptoms of Vsbta-pitta-fever. * Sensation of moisture
( over k°dy, pain in the joints, excessive sleep, heaviness

of the limbs, pain in the head, catarrh, cough, scanty perspiration, slight
sensation of heat, and pulsation not too quick nor too slow, are the
symptoms of Vstta-sleslimafever' A bitter taste, a coating on the
mouth, somnolence, unconsciousness, cough, disrelish for food, thirst,
alternate and varying sensation of heat and cold are the symptoms of
iheshma-pitta-fever •

i The five locations of Kapha are the Amds'aya, chest, throat, head
and the joints.

t There is another kind of Vishama J warn named Santata (cf. S'loka
31 of this Chapter) and Dallana remarks that it is begotten when the
residue of the deranged Dosha is lodged in all the five seats of Kapha*

Chap. XXXIX.] UTTARA-T ANTRA. 177

and night, ultimately finds lodgment in the Am&fiaya ,
(stomach) and thus brings on the virulent attack of
(those) fevers. Of these the type known as the Praia-
paka appears in cases of Sosha (consumption) and though
its attak is a mild one, it puts almost insurmountable
difficulties in the way of its cure, brings about a loss or
waste of Dhdtus (the seven fundamental principles of
the organism) and thus ultimately ends in death. There
are cases of Vishama-jwara known as the Viparyyaya
type (reverse of the above type) which are the result
of the deranged bodily Doshas being simultaneously
located in two or four specific seats of the deranged
bodily Kapha and arc hard to cure. 22 — 23.

Several authorities hold Vishama Jvara to be sui -
generis in its origin. But whether spontaneously idio-
pathic or not, an extraneous fact (cither a passing
psychic condition such as fear, grief, etc. or the presence
of any foreign poisonous matter in the system) is
always involved in and intimately connected with a case
of Vishama fever. The pre-dominance of the deranged
and aggravated Vayti is marked in cases of Tritiyaka
(tertian) and Chaturthaka (quartan coming on every
fourth day) fevers. A case of fever due to the abuse
of any wine or ardent spirits as well as the one occuring
in a low land at the foot of a mountain, should be
supposed to involve a predominant action of the
deranged and aggravated Pitta. A case of Pralepaka
fever is due to' the concerted action of the deranged
and aggravated Vayu and Kapha, of which the action
of the latter should be regarded as more dominant.
Cases of Vishama fever ushered in by epileptic fits
should be regarded as the result of the concerted action
of any two deranged Doshas of the body. 24 — 25,

The deranged Kapha and Vsiyu of the body, if lo-

23

1^5 THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXXIX.

cated under the surface of the skin, produce cold (shiver-
ing) during the first istage of fever, while the deranged
Pitta brings on the characterstic burning sensation at its
latter stage after the subsidence of the deranged Kapha
and Viyu. In certain cases the burning sensation is
engendered by the deranged Pitta at the outset, cold
(shivering) being brought on by the deranged Kapha
and V&yu at the latter stage after the subsidence of the
deranged Pitta. Both these two types of fever are
brought on through the combined action of two deranged
Doshas of the body and of these two, the type which is
ushered in by a burning sensation in the body is extreme-
ly hard to cure. A case of continued fever resulting
from an abnormal psychic condition (such as anger,
grief, desire, etc.) or due to any blow or hurt is likewise
hard to cure. 26 — 28.

Fever of the Vishama type attacks a man in various
ways and follows a distinct periodicity, it being aggra-
vated during the six specific times of dominance of the
deranged bodily principles (Doshas) as mentioned
before * in the course of day and night. This Vishama
fever never finds complete remission, (but lurks in the
deeper organic principles of the body) and produces a
sen^ of physical langour and heaviness of the limbs
as well as the characteristic emaciation. It is called
Vishama-jwara because its abatement is always con-
founded with its cure and remission, and this confound-
ing is due to the fact that the disease (fever) lies
dormant in a very small degree in the deeper principles
of the vital organism to be patent only at the slightest
exciting cause, just as a feeble fire fed with an insufficient
supply of fuel, becomes patent at the slightest exciting-
cause. 29.

* See chapter XXI.^Sutra-sthdna-

Chap. XXXIX.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

m

Seat of Vishama Jwara Even a small
residue of the deranged bodily Dosha, lurking in the
system after the apparent cure of fever, is aggravated by
a course of injudicious conduct and indifference to strict
regimen of diet, and thus invites a fresh attack * which
is known as the Vishama Jwara. A case of Santata
(remittent or continuous) fever has its seat in the vitiated
Rasa (serum) and blood + of the organism ; while a
case of Anyedyuh finds location in the contaminated
flesh of the body. The type known as the Tri-tiyaka
(tertian-fever coming on every third day) affects the
principle of Meda (fat), while the one called Chstturthaka
(quartan-fever coming on every fourth day) affects and
is infiltrated into bones and marrow. The last named
type is very dangerous. It brings on a simultaneous
attack of several other diseases and often terminates
fatally. Several authorities include cases of fever due
to the malignant influence of evil spirits within the
category of Vishama Jwara. 30.

Duration of Vishama Jwara The type

of fever which continues for seven, ten or twelve days
without any break or remission, is called Santata. A
case of Satataka fever is characterised by two distinct
aggravations in the course of day and night. Fever
of the An^edyushka type comes on only once a*day
and one of the Tri-tiyaka type comes on every third
i. e . on every alternate day, while a case of Chs(turthaka
fever sets in every fourth day. 3T.

* A case of fever may lapse into a Vishama type even from the Very
commencement of the attack.

t Vijaya Rakshita, the commentator on Mddhava Nidana, says, on
the authority of Charak, that by the term Santata are meant here
both Santata and Satataka and that they have their origin in the vitiated
Rasa and blood respectively.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXXtX.

iflo

Influence of Vafyu on Vishama

Jwara > — Just as the ocean is overflown when its
water is swollen up by the gusts of wind (V£yu), so the
bodily Doshas are aggravated by the bodily Vdyu,
and give rise to different kinds of fever. Just as
the water of the occean floods the shore at flow-
tide and rolls back to its former place during
ebb-tide, so fever being augmented by the deranged
Doshas of the body, rushes out of its lurking place
in the organism and manifests itself (or comes to the
surface of the skin) during the hours of the specific
aggravation of the Doshas, only to be driven back
into the deeper tissues and vital principles of the body
during the period of their specific abatement, or to
be expelled from the organising at the completion of
their perfect assimilation in or elimination from the
system. 32.

Agantuka Jwara A case of fever due to
any extraneous blow or injury should be treated in the
light of its periodicity and aggravation or in other
words the nature of the deranged bodily Doshas under-
lying, or involved in such a case should be ascertained
from the periodicity of its aggravation. A case of fever
due to the effects of poison is marked \>y such symptoms,
as blackness of the face, burning sensation diarrhoea,
catching pain in the region of the heart, aversion to
food, thirst, piercing pain in the limbs, epileptic fits and
extreme weakness. A case of fever caused by smelling
the pollens of any kind of ( strong smelling ) herbs ( as
Hay fever ) is marked by faintitig fits, pain in the head
and sneezing. A case of fever incidental to an un-
gratified amorous longing of the heart, or due to any
such ardent passion is characterised by aberration or
a distracted state of the mind, drowsiness, languidness,

Chap. XXXIX.] UTTARA-TANTRA. iBl

aversion to food, pain at the cardiac region and a
speedy emaciation of the body. Delirium marks a case
of fever due to grief or terror and shivering charac-
terises one due to a fit of anger. Thirst and fainting
fits are the concomitants of a case of fever due to any
curse, or ushured in through the dynamics of deadly
incantations. Anxiety, laughter, shivering and weeping
mark a case due to the malignant influence of evil

genii. 33—34.

The bodily V&yu deranged and aggravated by
fatigue, physical waste or by a blow spreads through the
entire organism and begets (traumatic) fever. There
is another kind of fever which is due to any extraneous
cause or which results from the acute stage of any
other disease attendant on the body. It exhibits all the
symptoms characteristic of each of the deranged bodily
Doshas involved therein * 35 — 36.

Gambhira fever and its prognosis

A case of Gambhira fever is characterised by a feeling
of internal burning sensation in the body (which is not
complained of in the surface), thirst, suppression of the
stool, laboured or painful breathing and cough. Paleness
of the complexion, dulness of the sense-organs, emacia-
tion cf the body, depression of the mind f and presence
of supervening symptoms (e. g. hard breathing, cough,
etc.) in cases of both Gambhira (inward or latent) and

* “Abhich^r,’ means incantations or Atharvan rites by which disease,
death and any other injuries are brought about. „

“Abhis'^pa” means the curse pronounced by' Brahmins, preceptors,
seniors and alters possesed of puissance.

+ Dallana says in his commentary that some read a few additional
lines after this. He, however, does not comment on those lines and
further adds that Jejjata does not read them. So we, too, refrain from
translating those lines.

1&2 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX [Chap. XXXIX

Tikshna (high) fever are the indications which point to
the hopeless nature of the case. 37 — 38.

A slightly, middling or excessively aggravated condi-
tion of the deranged Doshas of the body forebodes the
continuace of fever for three, seven and twelve days
respectively, each succeeding one being more difficult to
cure than the one immediately preceding it in order of
enumeration. Thus wc have done with the description of
(the nature, causes and symptoms of) the different types
of fever. We shall now deal with the remedial measures
or therapeutic agents to be employed in these cases. 39.

Treatment : — Draughts of filtered (matured
but non-medicated) clarified butter should be given as
soon as the premonitory symptoms would make their
appearance and the patient would get relief thereby.
This is applicable only in a case of the Vaftaja type of
fever while purgatives should be administered in a case
of the Fittaja and mild emetics, in a case of the Kap-
haja type under similar conditions. In cases of Dwi-
doshaja and Tri-doshaja fevers, the foregoing measures
should be adopted according to the Doshas involved
in each case. In the cases in which emulsive measures
(Sneha-Karma) and exhibition of purgatives and emetics
are forbidden, such measures should be employed as
would tend to lighten the system such as fasting,
(Langhana) etc. 40.

Fasting S — The premonitory and the actual
stages of fever are of various forms like those of
fire and its fume. Fasting is pre-eminently the best
remedy as soon as the characteristic symptoms of the
disease make their appearance distinctly and vomit-
ing is most efficacious in a case marked by the
presence of the deranged bodily Dosha in the Amdsaya
(stomach) and attended with nausea, thirst, water-brash.

Chap. XXXIX.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 1 83

Fasting should be continued as long as the least quantity
of the deranged Dosha or Doshas would remain intact
in the organism, and light food should then be given
with discretion after the Doshas have been fully assimi-
lated in (to) the sysmtem. 41.

Prohibition of Fasting Fasting is pro-
hibited in a case of fever due to a wasting process in
the body or incidental to the action of the deranged
bodily Vdyu or appearing in consequence of any
serious state of the mind (c. g. lust, anger, grief, etc,)
as well as in cases in which fasting has been forbidden
as in the chapter on Divi-vrana (Chapter I, 25 — Chikitsi-
sth£na). 42.

Effect Of Fasting : — Fasting in the case
of a patient in whom the bodily Doshas have been
deranged and of whom the digestive fire has become
dull, lead to an assimilation of the deranged
Doshas and kindles the digestive fire, produces
remission of fever, lightness of the body and relish
for food. 43.

Satisfactory and excessive fast-
ing 8 — Easy and natural passing of V&yu and stool
and urine, intolerable keenness of thirst and appetite,
lightness of the body, sprightly, action of the mind
and the sense-organs and a weakness of the body are
the results which spring from Satifactory fasting ;
while such symptoms as loss of strength, thirst, dry*
ness (of the mouth), insomnia, vertigo, doziness,
fatigue and such other supervening symptoms (as diffi-
cult breathing, cough, fever, hic-cup) mark an excessive
fasting. 44—45-

Tepid water Tepid (boiled) water is appetis-
ing and it tends to disintegrate the accumulation
of Kapha and restores the deranged bodily Pitta and

184 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXXIX.

V&yu to their normal condition. The use of tepid
water which allays thirst is highly efficacious in cases
of fever due to the actions of the deranged bodily
Kapha and V&yu, as it tends to cleanse the internal
passages of the body and helps in the easy movement
of the deranged bodily Doshas in the organism. The
effect of cold water is just the reverse and its inherent
cold tends to aggravate fever. 46

Pcyfif 5 — A potion consisting of water boiled
with the admixture of the following bitter drugs viz.
Gdngeya (Musta\ N agar a, U sir a, Pdrpata , U dicky a
(Bdlaka) and red sandal-wood should be given, when
cooled, for drinking in a case of Pittaja fever, as well as in
one due to the effect of any liquor or poison *. A Peyfifc
prepared with digestive drugs should be given to the
patient when hungry in as much as it is digestive,
appetising, light and febrifugal. Tasteful decoctions of
digestive drugs, which alleviate thirst, remove bad
taste in the mouth, bring about a fresh relish for food
and prove remedial for fever, should be given after the
seventh day in a case of fever which, in consequence of
a plethora of deranged Dosha in the system, would not
abate even after the observance of fasting and the
subsequent use of Yavafgu and where the digestive
power of the patient has been impaired. 47 — 49,

A decoction of Pancha-mula assimilates the bodily
Dosha in a case of Vdtaja fever, while a decoction of
Musta> Katuka and Indra-yava mixed with honey (when
cold) proves curative in a case of Pittaja fever, and a
decoction of the component drugs of the Pippaly&di
group helps the assimilation of the deranged bodily
Dosha in a case of Kaphaja fever. Decoctions remc-

* According to different authori ies purely boiled water, when cooled;
may also be given in such cases.

Chap. XXXIX.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

I8 5

dial to each of the deranged bodily Doshaa should be
administered in combination in a case of fever due
to the concerted action of any two deranged Doshas
of the body. A decoction should not be given to
a patient immediately after eating, drinking or fasting,
nor to a patient afflicted with thirst, extreme weak-
ness, emaciation and indigestion. 50.

Symptoms of Pakva-Jwara Abate-
ment of the bodily heat, lightness of the body and
an easy passing of stool and urine are the indications
from which the assimilation of the deranged bodily
Doshas should be presumed, and it is then that febri-
fuges should be administered according to the nature
of the deranged bodily Doshas underlying the case
under treatment * Some, however, believe that the
assimilation of the deranged Doshas should be presumed
from the changes in the symptoms characteristic of the
Doshas. 51.

Symptoms of Ama-jwara : — A crushing

sensation in the region of the heart, drowsiness, sali-
vation, aversion to food, non-assimilation of the derang-
ed bodily Doshas, suppression of stool (and wind),
copious discharge of urine, laziness, sense of heaviness
in the abdomen, stoppage of perspiration, undigested
stool, dissatisfaction, somnolence, heaviness and numb-
ness of the limbs, dulness of appetite, bad taste in the
mouth, a sense of physical languor and increased
virulence and continuity of the attack of fever (abnor-
mal rise in the bodily temperature) are' the symptoms
by which a learned physician should ascertain the

* Some read these two lines in a different way, They would mean that
the non-assimilation (A'ma) of the deranged Doshas would be presumed
by the presence of high fever, heaviness of the body and stoppage of the
excreta (Mala), and the reverse is the sign of their assimilation (P£ka).

24

1 86 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXXIX.

undigested state of the deranged bodily Doshas ushering,
in an attack of fever. 52.

Time for administering Febrifuge:—

According to several authorities, medicines (febrifuges)
should be given in a case of fever after the seventh,
or according to others after the tenth day of the attack.
Febrifuges may be administered earlier in the cases of
Pittaja fever, or in the event of the deranged bodily
Doshas being digested earlier. An administration
of (febrifugal) medicine in an undigested stage of the
fever is sure to produce a recrudescence of the disease.
Corrective, purifying and soothing (Samaniya) remedies
(in a case of fever with undigested Dosha) helps
the lapse of the disease (fever) into a Vishama
type. S3 — 54-

The spontaneous motions of the bowels (Mala)
of a patient suffering from fever should not be stopped
unless they are excessive, vvhen the case should be
medically treated as one of Atisdra (Diarrhea). 55.

Preliminary Treatment:— A suitable
purgative should be administered even in a case of
acute fever if the digested Malas (fsecal matter
etc.) are accumulated in the internal passages of the
Koshtha (abdomen), in as much as their presence in
the organism in that undigested state may usher in
an attack of Vishama Jwara attended by distressing
symptoms, or may produce loss of strength. Hence
they should be eliminated from the system with the helf
of emetics, etc. Emetics, Asthdpana-enemas, purgatives,
S>iro-virechana and errhines should be successfully em-
ployed for the purpose. Emetics should be at the outset
exhibited in a case of Kaphaja fever where the patient
would be found to be a person of considerable physical
strength, and purgatives should be given in a case of

Chap. XXXlX.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 1 87

fever marked by the predominant action of the derang-
ed Pitta in the event of there being laxity of the
bowels (intestines). Nirudha-vasti should be applied
in a case of Vitaja fever attended with aching pain in
the limbs and with Ud^varta (obstinate constipation of
the bowels), whereas Anuvatsana-vasti should be pres-
cribed for a patient with a strong appetite, if there be
pain in the regions of the back and the waist. Siro*
virechana (head-purgative) should be adiministered in
cases marked by the accumulation of the deranged
Kapha in the head, as the pain in and heaviness of
the head would be relieved, and the sense-organs roused
up thereby to their normal functions. 56-A.

A plaster composed of Deva-ddru , Vacha , Kushtha ,
S'atdhvd , Hingu and Saindhava pasted together with
Kdnjika should be applied lukewarm to the abdomen
in a case of fever attended with painful tympanites if
the patient be weak, whereas a medicated plug (Varti)
prepared with the above drugs should be applied into
the anus in a case marked by the upward coursing of
the bodily V&yu attended with suppression of stool
and urine, and Yavatgu prepared with Pippali , roots of
Pippali, Yamani and Chavya should be given to the
patient as a potion, it being remedial for the deranged
bodily V&yu. 56.

Administration of Ghrita:— The residue
of the deranged bodily Dosha having lurked in the system
(of a patient) even after the exhibition of proper emetics
and purgatives, the fever should ^be remedied by
draughts of medicated clarified butter, if the system of
the patient be sufficiently dry (Ruksha). 57.

A weak patient with only a small quantity of the
deranged bodily Dosha should be treated with the help
of soothing (Samaniya) remedies. Fasting should be

1 88 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIX

the principal cure for all types of fever due to (Santar-
pana) over-eating etc., provided the patient be found to
possess sufficient strength. 58.

Diet 8 — Diluted barley gruel (Yavdgu) should be
given to a patient constantly feeling thirsty and with
impaired digestion. Powdered parched corn (paddy)
mixed with honey and water should be given
in copious quantity to a patient suffering from the
after-effect of liquor, and afflicted with vomiting, thirst,
burning or perspiration and it should be followed, when
duly digested, by meals of rice-soup and meat-soup.
A diet consisting of boiled rice mixed with meat-soup
should be given to a patient suffering from an attack
of fever marked by the preponderance of the bodily
Vdyu, as well as in a mild type * of fever due to
fasting or over-fatiguing physical labour. The diet
in a case of Kaphaja fever should consist of boiled
rice and of Mudga pulse. In a case of Pittaja fever
it should consist of boiled rice and a soup of Mudga
pulse and be taken, when cold, with the admixture of
sugar. In a case marked by the concerted action of the
deranged VAyu and Pitta, the diet should consist of
Mudga soup mixed with (the expressed juice of) Ama-
laka or Dddima . In a case of V&ta-sleshmA fever

the diet should be prescribed to be taken with the
soup of tender radish, while in one of Kapha-pitta
type it should consist of the soup of the leaves of Nimba
and Patola, 59 — 60.

Ltfja-t&rpana — powdered parched com (paddy) mixed
with a copious quantity of water and with honey (and
sugar) — should be given, instead of any other diet (e.g

* This passage is quoted by S'reekantha Datta in his commentary
Jon Chakra-datta wherein he does not read {mild type), and his read-
* fag appears to be the better one, it being supported by Charaka as well.

Chap. XXXIX.] UTTARA-T ANTRA. 189

boiled rice) to a patient suffering from fever marked
by burning sensation, vomiting, thirst and weakness.
Yavdgu is not beneficial in summer as a diet in
a case of Kapha-pittaja fever or in a case of Rakta-pitta
(Hemoptysis ?) or in the case of a habitual drunkard.
Such a case should be treated with the soup of any
pulse or of the meat of Jingala animal with or without
any acid juice. 61 — 62.

Prepared barley mixed with any old wine would
prove beneficial in cases of (fever accom pained by) a
dullness of appetite. Takra (butter-milk or whey)
mixed with the powdered Tri-katu should be given in
case of disrelish for food due to the action of the derang-
ed Kapha. 63-A.

Milk as a diet:— Milk may be given with
advantage in a case of chronic or lingering fever mark-
ed by the scanty presence of the deranged bodily Dosha
in the system, by emaciation of the frame and by mental
depression as well as in a case of V dta-pittaja fever
accompanied by dryness of the organism and non-
emission or otherwise of the deranged bodily Doshas as
well as in a case of fever marked by thirst or burning
sensation. But milk taken in a case of fever in its
acute stage is highly injurious. 63.

A spare and light diet for a weak person should be
observed in all cases of fever, when its intensity abates,
as, otherwise by a heavy diet, it is aggravated. A proper
and wholesome diet should be given in a case of fever
even if the patient would show a positive aversion to it
since the want of food at the proper time or when the
system craves for it, is sure to be followed by the waste
of the body, and may bring about death in the end. A
food which is heavy of digestion (Guru), or secreting
'Kapha-producing) in its effect should by no means

THE SUSHRUTA SAMH1TA. tChap. jCXXtX.

lijD

be taken nor should food be taken at an improper time,
since such a food which is not beneficial, is neither
conducive to longevity nor to happiness (in a case of
fever). 64 — 66.

A light diet (such as milk or essence of meat) may
be given in copious quantity and with advantage to a
patient emaciated through a long and protracted attack
of Satataka or Vishama fever. The soup of such pulses
as Mudga , Masura , Chanaka {gram), Kulattha and
Makushtaka , etc. may be given with benefit as diet
to the hungry patient suffering from fever. 67. A

Meat-diet S — The meat of Ldva , Kapinjala ,
Ena, Pnshata , Sarabha , Kdla-puchchha , Kuranga ,
Mriga-mdtrikd (different kinds of deer) or S'as'a
(hare) may be prescribed as diet for a fever-patient
accustomed to the use of animal food * * Several
authorities, however, f do not recommend the use
of the meat of Sdrasa , Krouncha , Mayuta (peacock),
Kukkuta (cock) and of Tittira in cases of fever, owing
to its heaviness (as regards digestion), as well as to its
heat-making potency. (We, too, subscribe to this opinion
with a certain limitation) The use of the flesh of
these animals may, however, be recommended in a
case of fever in moderate quantitiy. and at proper time
provided the fever is marked by a preponderance of
the deranged bodily V'ayu. 67.

Prohibitions in fever s— A fever-patient
should forego baths, washing ( Parisheka), plunge-bath
( AvagAha. D. R. Pradeha — plaster), anointments, emul-
sive potions, day-sleep, physical exercise, sexual inter-
course and any cold articles or any emetic or purgative

*

According to Charaka, the meat-soup, in cases of fever, may be given
or without the addition of an acid juice (e.g. Dddima, A'mlaki, etc )
Charaka also holds the same opinion as Sus'ruta.

Chap* XXXIX ]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

I9t

medicine <{for a time even after his recovery) till he is
restored to his wonted strength and vigour. * 68.

Any of the preceding prejudicial acts done in a
weak state of health, closely following a recovery from
fever may bring on a relapse which invariably con*
sumes the body just as fire does a dried and sapless
tree. These rules, therefore, should be strictly followed
after recovery from fever till the fundamental Principles
of the body have returned to their normal edndition
and the health and strength is fully regained. 69,

A very small amount of physical exertion, in cases
of fever, is likely to usher in an attack of fainting fit
and hence the patient in such cases should be support*
ed when he sits taking his food or passing urine or
stool. An emetic or purgative (Sodhana) remedy
should be resorted to even after the subsidence of
fever in the case where the continuance of a resi-
due of the deranged Doshas in the organism would
be apprehended from such symptoms as aversion to
food, weariness of the limbs, discoloration of the body,
its evacuations, etc. A fever-patient emaciated through
prolonged suffering should not be largely fed at a time
(D. R. should not have a bath) and in haste i.e. until the
patient recruits his strength in as much as it might lead
to a fresh attack of the disease. 70 — 72.

All cases of fever should be remedied with thera-
peutic agents antidotal to the exciting factors. The
principal pathogenic cause or causes should be first
removed and remedied in a case of fever* due to bodily

* Additional text A patient suffering from acute fever should
forego also the use of astringent, heavy and dry food as well as fatty
and secreting food. In short he should also discourage mental emotions of
anger, grief, etc. as well as the use of newly collected corns. This is
evidently Dallana’s reading.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. tChap. XXXfX.

f 92

exhaustion, waste or hurt. An attack of (peurperal)
fever incidental to miscarriage or to the spontaneous
accumulation off milk in the breast of the mother after
delivery, should be medically treated by an experienced
physician with Dosha-subduing iSams'amana) remedies
according to the deranged bodily Dosha involved
therein. Now we shall deal with the recipes of
Dosha-subduing (Sam^amana) decoctions which may
be advantageously employed in all types of fever.
73— 74-

Samsamana decoctions for V£ta-
J'wara: — A decoction duly prepared of Pippali \
Sdrivdy Drdksha , S' atapushpd and Harenu should be
given with the admixture of treacle in a case of Vdtaja
fever or a cold infusion { of Guduchi should be taken by
the patient. Similarly a decoction of Vald, Darbha and
S'wa-danshtrd boiled down to a quarter part of the
original quantity of water and mixed with sugar and cla-
rified butter ; or a decoction of 5 atapushpd , Vachd , Kush-
tha , Devaddru , Harenukd, Kustumburu Nalada and
Musta mixed with sugar and honey should be given to a
patient in a case of Vataja fever. A decoction of Drdk-
shd , Guduchi , Kds'marya, Trdyamdnd and Sdrivd mixed
with treacle should be prescribed in * a case of Vdtaja
fever. A potion of the expressed juice of Guduchi mixed
with an equal quantity of that of S'atdvari and
with treacle proves almost instantaneously efficacious
in a case of fever of the same type. Rubbing of the

X Accotding to Dallana the cold infusion of Guduchi should be
given in a case of Vdtaja fever involving the action of vitiated Pitta also ;
whereas the decoction duly prepared of Guduchi should be prescribed
if, in a case of Vdtaja-fever, the vitiated Kapha is also involved. Cold
infusion is prepared by keeping over-night a quantity of the drugs immer-
sed in hot water. The infusion thus prepared is used in the morning*

Chap, XXXIX.] UTTARA-T ANTRA. 1 93

body .with clarified butter as well as fomentation
(Sveda) and plaster should also be prescribed under
certain conditions in the present disease. 75 — Si.

Samsamana decoctions for Pittaja

Jwaras — A decoction of S'riparni y red sandal wood,
Us'ira y Parushaka and Madhuka (Moul) flowers duly
boiled and mixed with a proportionate quantity of
sugar (when cold), or a decoction of the drugs of the
Sdrivddi group duly mixed with sugar, or a decoction
of the drugs of the Utpalddi group and Yashti-madhu , *
or a cold infusion of the drugs of the same group
mixed with sugar would cure a case of Pittaja fever.
A similar preparation of Guduchi, Padmaka , Rodhra ,
Sdrivd and Ptpala taken, when cold, with sugar
would prove beneficial in cases of Pittaja fever. 82-84.

A decoction of Drdkskd and Aragvadha , or - of
Kds'marya , or of the drugs of sweet, bitter or
astringent groups mixed with sugar and used, when
cold, would alleviate thirst and the severe burning
sensation of the body (in a case of Pittaja fever). The
contents of the stomach should be vomited out by
large draughts of cold water saturated with honey
whereby thirst (in a case of Pittaja fever) would be
alleviated. Milk duly cooked with the decoction (of
barks or twigs) of the Kshiri- Vriksha (milk-exuding
trees), or with Chandana or with any other cool-
ing drugs should be used cold (both internally ahd
externally) as a relief for an internal sensation of
burning in a case of Pittaja fever. 8$ — 87.

Draughts of water with Padmaka, Y ashti-madhu y

* Yashti-madhu is comprised in the drugs of the Utpalddi group.
Hence in preparation of this deeoction, two parts of Yashti-madhu
should be taken.

25

*94 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXXXX.

Drdkshd , Paundarika (white lily), Utpala, parched
barley, Us'ira , Samangd and Kdsmari fruit steeped there-
in and stirred and kept overnight and then mixed and
taken with honey (in the morning) would give relief
from fever and burning sensation and a plaster of the
same drugs should be applied over the scalp in a case
of fever accompained by dryness of the tongue, the
palate, the throat and of the Kloma. Pastes of the
polens or filaments (Kes'ara) of Mdtulunga mixed with
honey and Saindhava salt, or of Dddima mixed with
sugar, Drdkshd and Kharjura (date) as well as
gargles prepared from these drugs should be retained
in the mouth with a view to removing its bad taste.
88—89.

Sams'amana decoctions for Kapha-
Ja Jwara : — A decoction of Saptachchhada , Gudu-
chi , Nimba and Sphurjaka mixed with honey, or of Tri-
katu y N dga-Kes ara, Haridrd , Katurohini and Indra -
yava } or of Chitraka , Harid?d y Nimba , , Us’ira , , Ativishd ,
Vacha ) Kushtha , Indra-yava , Murvd and Patola mixed
with honey and pulverised Maricha (black pepper) should
be given in a case of Kaphaja fever. A decoction of
Sdrivd , Ativishd , Kushtha , Puru (Guggulu), Durdlabhd
and Musta> or of Musta , Vrikshaka-seeds (Indra-yava),
Tri-phald, Katurohini and Parushaka will be found to
be equally efficacious in the case of Kaphaja fever.
90—94.

Treatment of Kapha- V^tajaJwaras—

A decoction of the component members of the Rdja *
vrikshidi group mixed with honey and taken in due
course, would readily prove curative in a case of fever
due to the concerted action of Vita and Kapha. The
exhibition of the decoction of Ndgara , Dhanydka , Bhdrgi,
Ab/tayd, Devaddru Vachd , Parpataka , Mu$ta x Bkufika ,

Chap. X&XIX*] UTfARA-TANTkA.

*95

and Katphala mixed with honey and Hingu (asafcetida)
would’ be attended by almost instantaneous benefit in
the present type of fever accompanied with bronchitis,
cough, asthma, constriction of the throat, hic-cough,
swelling in the throat and aching pain at the chest and
at the sides. 95 — 96.

Pftta-Sieshmaja Jwaras— A decoction
duly prepared with Eld, Patola , Tri-phald , Yashtydhva ,
and Vrisha (Vdsaka) and mixed with honey, or one
of Katuka , Vijayd , ( Haritaki ), Drdkshd , Musta and Par -
pataka, or of Bhdrgi , Vacha, Parpataka , Dhanydka ,
Hingu , Abhayd, Ghana, Ndgaia and Kdsmarya mixed
with honey would prove efficacious in a case of fever
due to the combined action of the deranged Pitta and
Sleshmrf. Similarly two Tola-measure of powdered
Katuka and sugar dissolved in warm water proves
curative equally in a case of the present type. 97 — 100.

A decoction of Bhu-nimba, Guduchi, Drdkshd , Ama-
laki and S'athi mixed with treacle, or of Rdsnd, Vrisha
(Visaka), Tn-phala and fruits of Rdja-vriksha proves
curative in a case of fever due to the combined action
of the deranged Vtfyu and Pitta 101— 102.

Drugs and therapeutic agents remedial to each
of the specific deranged Doshas involved in a case of
the Tri-doshaja type should be employed in combination
for cure according to the predominance of each
Dosha. A potion of milk duly boiled with VriscJtika
(white Punamavi), Varshdbhu (red PunarnavS), Vilva
and water, but from which the water hp entirely evapor-
ated would prove curative in Tri-doshaja fever. The pith
and marrow of a S'irisha tree duly mixed with milk
(Weighing eight times that of the drug) and with water
weighing three times that of the milk, should be boiled
down to the quantity of the milk which, if administered

10 TiiK SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIX,

as a drink would prove curative in Tri-doshaja fever. A
potion of the decoction* duly prepared with the roots of
Nala and of Vetasa (cane) and Murvd and Devaddm
would prove remedial to this form of fever. + Clari-
fied butter mixed with the decoction of Tri-phald should
be given to a patient suffering from an attack of Tri-
doshaja fever. J 103 — 106.

Two-Told-measure of powdered Anantd (Durdlabhd),
Vdlnka , Musta , S'unthi and Katnka should be given
with (one Pala of) tepid water with benefit to a patient-
before sun-rise in Tridoshaja fever. Moreover, it acts as a
good appetiser. Any one or two of the (groups of the)
drugs of the purgative or appetising properties can
be employed with benefit in a case of (chronic) fever.
A lambative composed of Abhajd pasted together with
honey and mixed with oil and clarified butter should be
licked by the patient in a case of Tri-doshaja feVer.
Trivrit with honey would pacify a case of high fever.
107— 109.

Medical treatment of Vishama-

Jwara : — Purgatives and emetics should be exhibited
in a case of Vishama Jwara and the medicated clarified
butter described under the treatment of Plihodara
(chapter XIV Chikitsd-sthdna), or pulverised Tri-phald §
with the -addition of treacle may be advantageously
used in the type under discussion. A decoction of

* The decoction should be prepared with water only or with milk
and water according to the rules of Kshira*p£ka, if the exigencies of the
case so require.— Dallana. „ .

t Additional text:— A potion of the decoction of Hdridrd ,
Bkadra*mmta i Tri-pkald , Katuka % Nimba , Patola , Dcvada'ru and Kanta -
ka'ri would cure a case of Tri-doshaja fever with indigestion, water-brash,
dropsy, cough and disrelish for food.

% Dallana includes this line also in the additional text.

A According to Dallnaa the decoction of Tri^phala! should be used.

Chap. XXXI*. ] UTTARA-TANTRA. 19?

Guduchi , Nirnba * ’and Dhdtri duly mixed with honey,
may be likewise prescribed (in a case of Chiturthaka
fever). The patient should be likewise made to take
Las'una (garlic) with clarified butter. The three decoc-
tions duly prepared with three, four or all of the
following drugs, viz : — Madhuka , Patola , Katuka , Mus-
taka (D. R. — Batsaka) and Haritaki f should be like-
wise administered. I io — 1 1 1.

A potion consisting of milk, clarified butter, sugar,
honey and Pippali should be administered according
to the strength of the patient. Similarly Pippali should
be taken with the decoction of Das'a-mala . Pippali-
Bardhamana (sec chapter V, Chikitsita-sth&na) should
be likewise used by a patient who should then be made
to take only milk or meat-soup. The use of good wine
with the meat of fowl is also recommended. 112

Use of medicated Ghrita in cases of
Vishama Jwara :~-Clarificd butter duly cooked
with the decoction of Kola, J Agnimantha and Tri-
phaldy with milk-curd (Dadhi), with Tilvaka as Kalka
would be found to be highly efficacious in a case of
Vishama Jwara A potion of clarified butter duly
cooked with the Kalka (and decoction — Dallana) of
Pippali , Ativishd , Drdks/id , Sdrivd , Vilva. CJiandana
(red), Katuka , Indra-yava , Usira , Simla , T&malaki , Musta ,
Trdyamdnd , Stliird (S&la-parni), A'mlaki , S'unthi and
Chitraka would be found highly beneficial to irregular
(Vishama) appetite and would cure cases of chronic

* Chakradatta reads “Musta” in place of “ NimbaK

f Dallana says that some commentators are inclined to use the
decoction of the 16 different combinations of the five drugs taken three,
four or five at a time.

(25) Kola is here used for Pancha-kola, viz ; — Pippali \ nppali-roots,
CAavya, Chitraka and tfa'gara.

I98 THE SUSHRtiTA SA]\*HItX. [Chap. XXXIX,

fever, headache, Gulma, Udara (atcites), Halimaka,
consumption, cough, burning sensation in the body
and pain at the sides. 1 1 3 — 1 14

Guduchyadi Ghrita The use of a medi-
cated clarified butter duly cooked with the decoction of
Guduchi) Triphald , Vdsd (D, R. Rdsnd ), Triyamdnd
and Durdlabhd together with the Kalka of Drdkshd ,
Mdgadhikd , (Pippali), Ambhoda (Musta), Ndg^ira , Utpala
and Chandana would be attended by good results in
cases of consumption, asthma, cough and Jirna-Jwara
(chronic fever). 115.

Kalasyadi Ghrita : — Cases of chronic fever,
headache, pain at the sides, cough, and of consumption
(lit. — any wasting disease of the body attended with
fever) would readily yield to the curative efficacy of a
medicated clarified butter duly cooked and prepared
Avith the decoction of Kalasi (Piisni-parni), Vrihati ,
Drdkshd , Tfydnti , Nimba , Gokshura , V aid, Parpataka ,
Musta , S'dla-parni and Yatdsaka and with the Kalka
of S'athi , Tdmalaki , Bhdrgi \ Medd> Kataka (D. R. —
Amalaka) and Pushkara-roots and with milk twice as
much as the clarified butter. 116.

Patoladi Ghrita: — Clarified butter duly

cooked with the Kalka of Patola , Parpata , Arishta
(Nimba), Guduchi , Trip hold, Btisha , Katuka , Anibuda
(Musta), Bhu-nimba , Yavdsa, Y ashti-madhu, Chandana ,
Ddrvi, Indra-yava , Us’ira, Trdyamdnd , ifawi and Utpala
and with the expressed juice of Dhdtri , Bhringa+rdja ,
Abhiru (Sativari) and Kdka-mdchi readily proves
curative in cases of Apachi (scrofula), Kushtha, fever,
{oukra and Arjuna (two optical diseases), ulcer and in
diseases of the mouth, ears, nose and the eyes. 1 17,
Kalyanaka Ghrita Clarified butter, duly
cocked with the Kalka of Vidanga , Trip ha Id, Musta ,

Chap. XXXtX ] UTTARA-TANtRA. 199

ManjishtM4 y Dddima , Utpala , Priyangu , Elavdluka ,

Chandana, Devaddru , Varhistha (Vdtaka), Kuskthd ,
Haridrd \ the two kinds of Parnni and of SarivA , Hare-
nuka, Trivrity Danti , Vacha , Tdlis'a , Kes'ara and MAlati
flowers with milk twice as much as clarified butter, is
called the Kalyafaaka Ghrita. The range of its thera-
peutic application incudes such diseases as Vishama
Jwara, asthma, Gulma, insanity and diseases due to
the effect of any poison. It is auspicious and it
removes affections due to the evil influences of
malignant spirits and demons, etc., dulness of appetite,
epileptic fits, senile decay, sterility and diseases
of the seminal cord. It invigorates the eye-sight and
imparts memory and longevity to the person who
uses it. 1 1 8.

Maha-Kalyanaka Ghrita A Prastha

measure of clarified butter made from the milk of a
cow of Kapila species and duly cooked with the Kalka
of the preceding drugs and the drugs known as Sarva-
gandhd (El&di-gana) and with (dead) gold and gems
should again be duly cooked with the Kalka of
Sumanah, Champ aka, As oka and S'irisha flowers and
with Nalada and Padma (red lotus) and the polens of
Dddima flowers with the milk of a cow of the same
species. It should be prepared under the auspicious of
favourable astral combinations and lunar planes of both
the physician and of the patient and then be duly coif
secrated by Brimhanas. It is called Mahst-Kalytf-
naka Ghrita aud may be prescribed *t for a king. It
proves curative in all forms of fever. Its very touch
and sight confers bliss and destroys disease. Its
use enables a man to live to three hundred years free
from disease and decay and to remain invincible against
the attacks of all created beings. 1 19.

200

THE STJSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIX.

Pancha-Gavya-Ghrita Fquai parts of

milk, curd, clarified butter and urine of a cow and the
expressed fluid of cow-dung duly cooked with the Kalka
of Tri-phald, Chitraka, Must a, the two kinds of Haridrd,
Ativishd , Vachd, Vi dang a, Tri-kata , Chavya and Sura-
ddru prove curative in Vishama Jwara. It is called Pau-
cha-Gavya-Ghrita. The same five substances obtained
from a cow (e.g., milk, curd, clarified butter, urine and
the expressed liquid of cow-dung) may be duly cooked
without the addition of any Kalka as also with the
above Kalkas and the expressed juice of Vdsaka or of
Vald, or of Guduchi . * All of these medicated Ghritas
are efficacious in cases of Jirna Jwara (chronic fever),
chlorosis and edema. The same five substances (e. g.
milk, curd, clarified butter, urine and the expressed
fluid of dung) of a she-shccp, a she-goat or a shc-
buffalo and the four substances ( c. g. milk curd, clari-
fied butter and urine) of a shc-camel may be prepared
(and used) in the same manner. 1 20—1 22.

Tri-phaladi Ghrita: — Clarified butter duly
cooked with the Kalkas f of Tri-phald , Us'ira , Sam-
pdka, Katuka , Ativishd , S'atdvari, Sapta-parna, Guduchi,
the two kinds of Rajani , Chitraka , Trivrita , Murvd,
Patola , Arishta , Vdlaka , Kirdta-tikta , Vachd , Vis'd/d,
Padmaka , Utpala , the two Kinds of Sdrivd , Yashti -
madhu , Chavikd , Rakta-chandana , Durdlabhd , Parpataka ,
Trdyamind , Atarnshaka (Vasaka), Rdsnd, Kumkumx
(saffron), Manjishthd , Mdgadhi and Ndgara with the

* Dallana says that the expressed juice of Vdsaka , or

Guduchi , should be separately used along with the ordinary Kalkas
(Tfi*phald, etc.) of the Pancha-gavya Ghrita. But we are inclined to take
the lines to mean that Vdsaka, VaU and Guduchi should be separately
used as Kalkas in place of the ordinary Kalkas.

* Some here add Ghana (Musta) with the other Kalkas.

Chap. XXX IX. ]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

201

expressed, juice of Dhdtri weighing twice as much as
clarified butter proves curative in Parisarpa (erysipelas),
fever, Asthma, Gulma, Kushtha, Chlorosis, enlargement
of the spleen and dulness of appetite. 123.

One Pala weight each of Patola , Katuka y Ddrvi>
Nimba , Vdsd, Tri-phald, Durdlabhd , Parpataka and
Trdyamdnd and a Prastha measure of Amalaka should
be boiled in one Drona measure of water down to its
quarter measure. A Prastha measure of Ghrita should
then be cooked with the above decoctions. * The
Ghrita thus prepared proves curative in cases of Rakta-
pitta, diseases due to Kapha, perspiration, muco-purulent
discharges, atrophy of the limbs, fever, chlorosis, erysi-
pelas and Ganda-m&la (scrofula). 124.

Pancha-S'ara : — Boiled milk, sugar, Pippall ,
honey and clarified butter should be taken by stirring
them together with hands. The compound is called
Pancha-sfi£ra and may be employed with advantage in
cases of Vishama-Jwara, Kshata-Kshina, consumption,
asthma and affections of the heart. 12$.

Medicated Tailas !— A medicated oil duly
prepared by cooking it with Ldkshd , Vt's'va, Nis'd ,
Murvd , Manjishthd , Sarjikd and Amaya (Kushtha) as
Kalka and with Takra weighing six times as much as oil
acts as a febrifuge. A medicated oil duly cooked and
prepared with Kshiri-V riksha, Asana, Arishta, Jambu,
Sapta-ckclihada , Arjuna , S* iris ha , Khadira , Asphotd ,
Amrita-valli \ Atarustiaka , Katuka y Parpata , Us’ira ,
Vacha , Tejovati and Ghana as Kalka m&y be employed

* Additional text I—Some recommend the use of Kuiaja, Bku •
nimba , Ghana (Musta), Yaskti-madhu, Chandana and Pippali as Kalka
in the preparation of this Ghrita and that it proves efficacious in the
diseases of the eye, nose, ear, mouth and of the white part of the eye and
of the eye-lid and in ulcer.

26

202

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap- XXXIX.]

in anointing the body of the patient in a case of Jiroa*
Jwara with benefit. 1 26—1 27.

The patient should be frightened with a non-veno*
mous snake, trained elephants "and bogus thieves (or
rebuked with a thievish act falsely supposed to have been
committed by him before) at the appointed date and
hour of the paroxysm and be kept in empty stomach for
the day. In the alternative, he should be fed with
heavy and extremely secreting articles (milk, milk-
curd, etc.) and be made to continually vomit out the con-
tents of his stomach afterwards, or he should be made
to drink any strong liquor, or febrifugal medicated
clarified butter or simply matured clarified butter in
copious quantity or be treated with drastic purgatives,
or withlfomentations followed by Nirudha-Vasti applica-
tion on the date of the expected attack. 128.

Fumigation and Anjana The body

of the patient should be fumigated with the fumes of
the skin and hairs of a goat and a sheep mixed with
Vachdy Kushtha \ Palankashd ( Guggulu ), Nimba leaves,
and honey and burnt together. The excreta cf a cat
should be similarly used in fumigating the body of
the patient in a case of fever marked by shivering.
Pippali i Saindhava and Naipdli (Manah*s'il£) should be
pasted together and mixed with oil and be applied
along the eye-lids as an Anjana. 129 — 130.

The medicated Ghritas mentioned in conection with
the treatment of Udara (ascites), as well as the Ajita
Ghrita mentioned in the Kalpa-sthdna (Chapter II.)
may be likewise employed with benefit in fever. 131.

A case of fever due to the malignant influence of the
spirits, etc. should be remedied with the help of magical
incantations (Avesana), binding and beating (D. R. —
adoration) mentioned in the treatment of Bhuta-vidyA

Chap. XXXIX.] tJTTARA-TANTRA.

203

(demonology — Chapters LX — LXII). A case of fever
due to any mental condition should be cured with
psychic (hypnotic) measures ; while the one due to over-
fatigue or exhaustion should be treated with diets of
Rasaudana * after anointing the body of the patient
with clarified butter. Fever due to any curse or to
deadly incantations (exorcism) may be cured by per-
forming Homa (offering oblations to the gods) and such
other ceremonies ; while the cases due to the malignant
influence of any hostile planet, or of any unearthly
sound may be cured by practising charity, hospitality and
peace-giving rites (Svastyayana). All heat-engendering
(Ushna) measures are prohibited in a case of traumatic
fever and sweet and astringent drugs charged with oil or
clarified butter should be prescribed. Other therapeutic
agents should also be employed according to the nature
of the specific derangement of Dosha involved in the
case. In a case of fever caused by the smell of any herb
or cereals or in one due to the effect of any sort of
poison, the treatment should consist in such measures as
would alleviate the poison and the aggravated Pitta in
the system. + Decoction of Sawa-gandhd (the drugs of
the ElAdi-gana) is also beneficial in these cases. A
decoction of Nimba and Deva-ddru or of Jdti flowers
may be prescribed as well. Clarified butter, wine and
preparations of barley grains are wholesome in a case
of Vishama-Jwara which may be got rid of as well

/

* Rasaudana is a kind of food prepared by boiling rice in meat soup
(instead of in water). The term may, however, mean rice simply mixed
with meat-soup.

t In place of some read and

that would mean that the measures and remedies prescribed in cases of
poisoning (sec Kalpa-sthdna) should be applied. This variant seems to bo
the better one.

204 THE StfSHRtfTA SAMHITX [Chap. XXXIX.

by worshipping Br&hmans, cows, the god Is'ina, and

Ambikd. 132 — 133.

The body of the patient overwhelmed with coldness
(shivering) in cases of fever due to the action of the
aggravated Kapha or Vdyu, should be plastered with
a paste of the drugs of the heat-making group *
and heating measures should then be resorted to. In
the alternative, a compound of Arandla , S'ukta,
cow’s urine and Mastu (curd-crcam) made lukewarm
should be sprinkled over the body. Plasters of the
leaves of Surasa , Arjaka and S'igru pasted together
with water would prove beneficial. The body may be
rubbed with Kshdra-taila (oil cooked with alkali) mixed
with S'ukta. A decoction of the drugs of the Aragva-
dhddi group proves highly efficacious particularly in
the present case, and decoction of Vdyu-subduing
drugs should be used tepid as a bath. The shivering
having been thus relieved with the foregoing measures
and by the sprinkling of tepid water over the body, the
languid body of the patient should be smeared with
pasted Kdldguru and wrapped up in a silk, woolen
or linnen cover and then the patient should be made to
lie in a bed. 1 34.- A.

Damsels young, beautiful and skilled in the sport
of love, with faces glowing like the full moon of
autumn and darting forth beams of love from their
languid blue-lotus-like eyes, with eye-brows moving in the
ardour of desire and with dreary foreheads throbbing with
the gentle pulsations of love, with girdles sliding down
from their slender waists, with their splendid buttocks
naturally making them lazy in their steps, with their
lips vying with the ripe Vimba fruit in their luscious

* Dallana explains the Ushna-varga (heat-making group) to mean
the Bhadra-darvddi, Surasddi and the Elddi groups*

Chap. XXXIX.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

205

redness, with their elevated thickest breasts, and smeared
with saffron and Aguru pastes and clad in thin trans-
parent garment, fumigated and scented with the vapours
of burnt Aguru , should be asked to take the patient
into a firm embrace like a forest-creeper entwining itself
around a sylvan tree, and the girls should be told to
keep off as soon as the patient would feel himself heated.
The patient thus cured of the disease (cold-fever) by
the fond embrace of these beautiful damsels should
be treated to such a wholesome repast as would be
welcome to him. 134.

Measures which alleviate the burning sensation
should be employed in a case of fever marked by sever
burning sensation of the body. Vomiting should be
induced in such cases with honey and treacle mixed
with the (cold) infusion of Nimba leaves. The body
of the patient should be anointed with Sata-dhauta *
Ghrita and then plastered with a paste formed by
mixing powders of barley, Kola and Amalaka with the
fermented boilings of S’uka paddy, or with the cold
paste of tender leaves of Phenild (soap-berry) mixed
with Kola and A'malaka and pasted with Amla
(Kanjika), or with the cold paste of the leaves of
Palis 9 a pasted with Amla (Kinjika', or with the froth
(produced by stirring in Kdnjikd the paste) of the leaves
of Vadara or Arishta i f whereby thirst, swoon and
burning sensation would be relieved and removed. 135.

A Prastha measure of oil duly prepared by cook-

* Clarified butter washed hundred times in water is known as

dhauta Ghrita.

f Ariskta according to Dallana and S'rikantha (the commentator of
Vrinda) may mean either Nimba or Phenila ' (soap-b rryl. But S'ivaddsa,
the commentator of Chakradatta, explains Arishta to mean (leaves of)
Nimba . The practice, however# is, to use the leaves of Nimba ,

Zq6 THE StfSHRtfTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXtX.

ing it with half a Kudava measure of Yava parley), half
a Pala weight of Manjishthd and a hundred Prastha
measure of Amla (KAnjika). The oil is called Prah-
lrfdana (refreshing) Taila and it relieves the burning
sensation of the body due to an attack of fever. 136.

In the alternative, the body of the patient should
be plastered with the pasted drugs of the Nydgrodhddi ,
Kdkolyddi or Utpalddi groups, or anointed with a Sneha
duly cooked with the decoction of the drugs of the
preceding groups and with Atnla , or the patient should
be given a bath (Avagiha) in the £>ita-kasiya * of these
drugs. On the alleviation of the burning sensation, the
patient should be raised out of the tub and then washed
with the spray of cold water and smeared with soothing
sandal pastes, etc. Young, gay, beautiful and lotus-faced
damsels with their youthful cooling breasts profusely
smeared with sandal pastes, wearing garlands of beauti-
ful lotus flowers as well as necklace of pearls, etc.,
and clad in fine silken clothes should be asked to hold
the depressed patient in their firm embrace and to kiss
him. These damsels should he removed as soon as
the patient would exhibit symptoms of exhilaration.
He should be given wholesome (Pitta-subduing) food
which would give him much relief. Purgative and
pacifying (soothing) medicines described in connection
with the Pittaja fever are likewise beneficial in the
present case. 1 37.

General treatment of the Compli-
cations 5 — The deranged Pitta should be crushed
and remedied first of all in a case of fever, involving
therewith the co-operation of any of the deranged
Doshas of the body, in as much as it is extremely hard

* “dita-kasiya” may here mean either the cold infusion of the
drugs 0 x only the cold decoction.

Chap. XXXIX.]

U TTARA-T ANTRA.

207

to subdue the deranged Pitta especially in a case of
fever. Such distressing symptoms as vomiting, epilep-
tic fits, thirst, etc. should be remedied with such thera-
peutic agents as are not hostile or aggravating to the
principal disease (fever) but are antidotal to the exciting
factors. 138.

Specific treatment of the complica-
tions : — Now hear me tell you other specific remedies
for the complications. A plaster composed of Yashti -
madhu , Rajani , Musta , Dddima t Amla-vetasa, Rasdnjana ,
Tintidika (tamarind), Nalada (Mdnsi), Patra > Utpala ,
Tvak (cinnamon), Vydghra-nakha , the expressed juice
of Mdtulunga , honey and Madhu-s'ukta , * if applied to
the head, would alleviate heat in the head, delirium,
vomiting, hic-cough, and shivering — concomitants in cases
of fever. Vomiting would yield to the use of a com-
pound consisting of Madhuka flower, H river a, Utpala
and Madhulikd mixed with honey and clarified butter
and used to be licked up with the tongue as a lambative.
It is equally efficacious in water-brash, hic-cough, Rakta-
pitta (hemoptisis) and asthma. Fits of cough and
asthma in cases of fever rtfadily yield to the use of the
electuary prepared with Tri-phald , Pippali and Mdk-
shika ■f and mixed with honey and clarified butter.
139— I4T.

A plaster of Viddri ) Dddima , Lodhra , Dadhittha and

* Madhu-s'ukta is prepared by preserving the expressed juice of
fambira-lemon, Pippali and honey in an earthen jfot formerly used in
keeping honey. It should be laid for a month under the heap of paddy
before use. (Dailana) For an alternative mode of preparation see SRIPTC)
Chapter X— ^

t Dailana takes “ Mdkshika ” in the sense of honey and comments
largely on the seperate use of honey (s^j) * n Ike compound. But we are
inclined to take “Mdkshika” as the mineral of the same name.

208

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XXXIX.

Vijapuraka pasted together may be applied with
advantage to the scalf of a fever-patient afflicted with
thirst and burning sensation. Pastes of Dddirna and
sugar, and of Drdkshd and Amalaka , if kept in the
mouth, or a gargle ^Gandusha) of milk, expressed juice *
of sugar-cane, Mddhvika , * clarified butter, oil and
warm water, according to the exigency of the case,
would remove the bad taste in the mouth in fever. An
empty feeling in the head in fever would be relieved
by using as an errhine (Nasya) the medicated clari-
fied butter prepared with the drugs of the Jivaniya
group. 142 — 144.

A pulverised compound consisting of Tri-phala\
S'ya'ma', Trivrit and Pippali mixed with honey and
sugar, can be given for purgative purposes with
benefit after the digestion of the derangsd Dosha in
a case of chronic Pitt^ja fever, in an up-coursing
Raktapitta and in shivering. The system of the
patient should be cleansed with similar purgatives and
lardaceous lubrications in cases of Kaphaja and V&taja
fever. Lambativc of honey, sugar and Abhaya! should
be given in a case marked - by vertigo (Bhrama) even
after the subsidence of the aggravated Dosha. 145.

Application Of Vastis Nirudha-vastis
charged with the decoctions of sweet (Kdkolyddi) or
Vdyu-subduing(Bhadra-ddrvddi) drugs, should be applied
in fever due to the derangement of the bodily Vdyu,
according to the nature and intensity of the specific
deranged Dosha in the case and to the strength of the
patient ; in the alternative, Anuvdsana Vasti should
also be similarly applied. The decoction of the drugs

. * Dallana seems to read “Ma'kshikaP and explains it as honey.
** MadKvik a” which generally means the wine made of honey* may
however, also mean honey.

Ch*p* XXXIX.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

209

, of the Ujpalddi group mixed with Chandana and Us’ira
and sweetened with the addition of sugar should be
similarly applied cold (as a Nirudha Vasti) in cases of
Pittaja fever. A Vasti (in the manner of Nirudha)
* charged with a compound consisting of Amra- barks,
etc., S'amkha (conch), Chandana , Utpala , Gainka ,

Ras&njana , Manjishthd , Mrina'Li and Padma-kdshtha
pasted together and dissolved in milk saturated with
sugar , and honey should be passed through a. piece
of linen and then applied cold in a case of (Pittaja)
fever marked by intolerable pain. The characteristic,
burning sensation due to fever may be relieved
by applying Vasti charged with a decoction of the
preceding drugs in the manner of an Anuvdsana-vastl.
A Nirudha Vasti charged with the decoction of the
drugs of the AragvadhAdi group mixed with (the pow-
ders of) the drugs of the Pippalddi group and with honey
should be applied in cases of Kaphaja fever and the
decoction of the Kapha-subduing (Aragvadhddi) drugs
should also be injected into the rectum in the manner
of an Anuvdsana Vasti. In cases of fever due to the
aggravation of two or three Doshas, the Vastis (Nirudha
and Anuv&sana) to be applied should be charged with
the decoction of the drugs respectively antidotal to the
deranged Doshas involved in each case. 146 — 150.

All the medicated lardacious substances with the
exception of oil, which have been prescribed as being
efficacious (in the use of Vastis) in diseases of the de-
ranged Vdyu, are equally applicable $n AnuvdsAna
Vastis) in a case of fever due to the same cause. But
all of them (including also oil) are equally applicable
to anointing, etc. Lubrication of the body with oil
at the close of the acute stage i.e., on the thirteenth
or fourteenth day of the attack would be attended with

210

THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A. tCh»p. XXXIX.

beneficial results in a case of Vdta-a'leshma fever, where

fomentations have utterly failed to relieve the distress-
ing symptoms of the deranged Viyu. Clarified butter
duly cooked with sweet and bitter drugs should be
used (for the purpose of annointing) in Pittaja fever ;
while in Kaphaja fever, the Ghrita should be cooked
with bitter and pungent drugs. In the cases of fever due
to the concerted action of two or three Doshas, the
Ghrita should be cooked with the drugs of two or
more of the above groups according to the nature of
the Doshas involved in each case. 151 — 152.

The presence of even a small residue of the deranged
Pitta in the organism maintains the heat of the skin
up to the fever-point, so the remedy consists in taking
the expressed juice of sugar-cane, or sweet cordials or
Sarvats (sugar dissolved in water), and the diet in such
a case should consist of cooked S>£li and Shashti rice
and milk. Fomentations and anointments should be
employed in cases of Kaphaja and V&taja fevers.
Draughts of clarified butter should be given in all forms
of fever at the close of twelve days, for by that time the
aggravated Doshas return to their respective As'ayas
(places in the system). The Dosha involved (in a case
of fever) becomes aggravated by affecting, at the time
of the remission of the fever, the other fundamental vital
principles (Dhdtus) of the body and thereby makes the
patient weak and dejected at this time. 153 — 1 55.
Symptoms of remission The features

or indications which mark a complete remission of
fever, are lightness of the head, flow of perspiration,
pale and yellowish colour of the face, sneezing and
desire for food. 1 56.

Fever originating from the wrath-fire of the god
£>ambhu, is a dangerous disease* It affects appetite and

Chap. XXXIX.] UTTARA-T ANTRA. 2tt

the strength as well as the complexion of the body and
is virtniLlly the sum-total of all the. other diseases. It
is, therefore, called ,the lord of all bodily diseases. It is
common to all created beings (men and animals), affects
the whole of the organism (including also the mind),
is extremely hard to cure and is present in all cases at
the time of the death of all creatures. Hence it is rightly
called the destroyer of created beings. 1 57.

Thus ends the thirty -ninth chapter of the Uttara Tantra in the Sus'rutra
Samhiti which deals with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of fever.

CHAPTER XL

Now we shall discourse on the (causes, symptoms
and) medical treatment of diarrhoea, etc. (Atls^ra-
pratlshcda). i.

Causes Of Atlsif ra : — The excessive use of
extremely heavy (hard to digest), oleaginous, dry, hot,
cold, fluid, thick, and incompatible articles of food,
eating irregularly and at improper time (or unaccus-
tomed articles of fare), indigestion, eating before the
digestion of the previous meal, excessive use or misuse
of any lardacious substances, etc., (Sneha, Sveda, etc.),
use of any poison, fright, grief, drinking impure water,
the excessive drinking cf liquor, change of season or
physical contrarieties, indulgence in aquatic sports,
voluntary repression of any natural urging (of the
body) or germination of parasites in the intestines
are the causes which bring on an attack of diarrhoea
(Atisrfra) the symptoms whereof will be dealt with
presently. 2.

Pathology : — The liquid part (Ap-dhdtu) of the
body, if aggravated and carried downward by the bodily
Vdyu, impair^ the fire in the stomach (fire of digestion)
and mixing with the fecal matter, is painfully and cons-
tantly emitted through the anus. This dangerous disease
is named Atisrfra from the constant oozing out (Ati
and Sarana) of the liquid fecal matter from the anus.
It is usually classified into six different types, viz., those
due to the predominance of the deranged bodily Doshas
severally involved therein, that due to the concerted
action of the three Doshas, one due to grief and
that due to the indigested mucous accumulations (Ama)

dhap. XL.}

UTTARA-TANTRA.

** 3

in the intestines. Some authorities hold that Atisira
is of metny kinds but the holy Dhanvantari, on the
contrary, holds that it is not so but that the physical
conditions of a diarrhoeic patient undergo changes and
become manifold. 3.

Premonitory Symptoms Piercing pain

in the regions of the heart, umbilicus, rectum, abdomen
and in the Kukshi (sides of the abdomen), a sense of
numbness in the limbs, stoppage or suppression of flatus
and of stool, distension of the abdomen, and indiges-
tion are the premonitory symptoms of the disease. 4.

Symptoms of Vsftaja, Pittaja, Ka-
phaja and Tri-doshaja Types s— The

Vtfyu-origined type of the disease is marked by £>ula
(colic), suppression of urine, rumbling sound in the
intestines, looseness (constant movement in the intes-
tines) of the abdominal (Ap£na) wind, a gone feeling
in the waist, in the thighs and in the legs, and
frequent emissions with flatus of a scanty, frothy,
dry (Ruksha) brown-coloured (yellowish black) stool.
The specific features of the Pitta-origined type are
that the stool is fetid, hot, yellow, blue or slightly
red-coloured, or resembles the washings of meat,
and is emitted with sharp or acute force and is accom-
panied by thirst, epileptic fits (fainting), burning sensa-
tion, perspiration, suppuration and inflamation (P&ka)
of the affected organs, and fever. In the Kapha-
origined type of the disease the stool becomes loose and
constant, gets mixed with the lump of mucus and looks
white. The stool comes out without an^ sound. A sense
of constant urging is complained of and each, motion
' only creates the apprehension of a fresh one in the
mind. The patient becomes drowsy or sleepy, and feels
a sense of heaviness in the limbs, nausea, disrelish for

it 4 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. tChap. XL.

food, horripalation and lassitude. The symptoms which
mark a case of Tri-doshaja type (due to the concerted
action of the three simultaneously deranged bodily
Doshas) are drowsiness, swoon, lassitude, dryness of
the mouth, thirst and a varied colour of the stools. A
case of Tri-doshaja type, if attended with all the
symptoms, is very hard to cure and* if occurring in an
infant, or an old person, is scarcely amenable to medical
treatment. 5-8.

Symptoms of dokaja and Amaja

AtlSfiCra 3 — The suppressed tears of a bereaved
person of sparing diet, on quenching the digestive fire,
reach down into the Koshtha (intestines)’and there freely
mix with, and vitiate the local blood which becomes
dark-red like Kdkananti (GunjA). It then passes through
the rectum, charged with a peculiar fetour impart-
ed to it by the fecal matter in case of its combi-
nation with the latter or without any fetid smell,
when passing out unmixed. Such an attack ushered
in by the grief of bereavement of a person is according-
ly considered very hard to cure. The local bodily
Doshas in the Koshtha (abdomen) are aggravated and
deranged when they come in contact with the Ama
(unassimilated chyle), and are brought down into the
Koshtha (bowels), where they are more agitated and
emitted in combination with the undigested fecal
matter in various ways, and are attended with pain and
characterised by a variety of colour. This is the sixth
type of AtisAra. 9 — 10

Symptoms of Ama and Pakva Atl-

Sdra * — A case of AtisAra (diarrhoea) would be said to
be in the Ama (acute) state, if the stool of the patient
suffering from any of the foregoing Doshas would be
found to sink in water and to emit a very fetid smell

Chap. XL.}

UTTARA-TANTRA.

215

and to pass in broken jets (D. R.— to be slimy). A
contrariety of the preceding symptoms and a sense of
lightness of the body and in the affected cavity would
indicate that the disease has passed the acute stage
and it is then called Pakva (chronic) Atisdra. 11.

Prognosis S — If the colour of the stool (in a
case of Atisdra) resembles that of clarified butter, fat, the
washings of Ves'avdra, oil, goat’s milk, honey, Manji$hth& y
brain-matter, or Rasdnjana , or if the stool is cold or hot
to the touch, or if it is charged with a fleshy or fetid
smell, or marked with lines or specks of variegated
colours, or if it looks like pus or clay, or if just the
opposite or reverse symptoms or other distressing symp-
toms would be exhibited, the case is likely to end fatally
in case the patient be weak. A patient suffering from an
attack of Atisdra would be given up (as incurable) if he
be weak, if the orifice of his anus become suppurated and
cannot be closed, if there be distension of the abdomen
(D. R. — if the patient be not self-restrained), if there be
distressing symptoms and if the patient be found
destitute of thermal heat. 12-13.

An attack of Atisdra ushered in by whatsoever
cause, is sure to be marked by the specific symptoms
of the deranged bodily Dosha or Doshas complicated
with it. All cases of Atisdra whether due to the indiges-
tion of any oleaginous food or drink (Ghrita, oil, etc.),
whether with (or without) the symptoms of Pravdhikd
and the accompanying colic, as well as those due to
Visuchikd or any 'other kind of indigestion as also
those due to the effect of any poison (affecting the
digestive system), hoemorrhoids (Ars'as), or worms in
the intestines, — all of them are marked by the symp-
toms of the specific Dosha involved therein. The treat-
ment of Atisdra varies according to its acute or matured

216

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XT*

stage, the characteristic symptoms of those therefore
are to be carefully observed . and noted in each case
under treatment 14-1 5.

The patient should be kept without food as soon as
the premonitory symptoms of Atisdra would appear,
and then the dietic gruels (Yavigu) prepared with
the admixture of digestive drugs should be given in
their proper order. In a case marked by colic and
flatulent distension of the abdomen, fasting should
be first advised. And then vomiting should be induced
with draughts of water mixed with powdered Pippali
and Saindhava salt. A light diet in the shape of
a Khada-yusha, Yavdgu, etc., prepared with the admix-
ture of the drugs of the Pippalyddi group, should then
be prescribed after the cessation of vomiting. A decoc-
tion of the drugs of the Haridrddi, or Vachadi group,
should be be taken in the morning where the preceding
remedies would fail to relieve mucous accumulations
in the intestines (Amtftisrfra). No astringent or costive
medicine in the acute or immature (Ama) stage of
the disease should be administered in as much as by
obstructing the passage of the Doshas it might
bring on an attack of enlarged spleen, chlorosis, disten-
sion of the abdomen with suppression of stool and
urine, Meha (urinary complaints), Kushtha (cutaneous
affections), ascites, fever, cedematous swellings of the
limbs, Gulma (abdominal gland, etc.,) diarrhoea, piles,
colic, Alasaka and catching pain at the heart. 16-17.

Purging should be induced with Haritaki in a case
marked by constant and scanty motions (of mucus and)
attended with griping and pain (f->ula) or by an incar-
ceration of the deranged bodily Doshas (in the intestiries).
Emetics should be first exhibited and followed by
fastings and digestive or assimilative (Pdchana) remedies

Chap. XL ]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

21;

in a case marked by watery and copious motions. Pow-
dered Haritaki and Pippali with tepid water should be
administered for purgative purposes in a case marked
by scanty emissions of stool at times attended with
pain and colic (Srnla). Fasting is the first remedy to be
prescribed in cases of Ama (acute) Atis&ra, or in the
alternative, digestive remedies should be prescribed.
The recipes of digestive medicinal compounds which
are curative in the disease under discussion (Amdtis&ra)
are described below. 18 — 19.

Twenty different Recipes for Amati-

Sara : — (i) Deva-ddru , Vacha , Musta , N cigar a, Ativishd
and Abhayd ; or of (2) Kalinga ( Indra-yava ), Ativishd ,
Hingu , Saiivarchala- salt, Vac/id and Abhayd , or of (3)
Abhayd (D. R.-Nagara), Dhanydka , Musta , Vdlaka and
Vilva ; or of (4) Musta , Parpataka , S'unthi, Vacha ,
Ativishd and Abhayd ; or of (5) Abhayd , Ativishd , Hingu,
Vacha , and Sauvarchala-saih ; or of (6) Chitraka , Pippali -
Vacha, Katuka-rohini, or of (7) Pdthd , Vatsaka -
seeds (Indra-yava), Haritaki and Mahaushadha (Sunthi),
or of (8) Murvd , Nirdahani \ (Chitraka), Pdthd, Tryushana
( Trirkatn ) and Gaja-pippali ; or of (9) Siddhdrthaka ,
Bhadra-ddru, S'atdhvd and Katu-rohini ; or of (id) Eld,
Sdvaraka (Lodhra), Kushtha, the two sorts of Haridrd,
Kutaja - seeds (Indra-yava); or of (11) Mesha-s’ringi, Tvak ,
Eld, Krimighna (Vidanga) and Vrikshaka (Indra-yava) ;
or of (12) Brikshddani, Virataru, the two kinds of
Vrihati and the two kinds of (Mudga-parni and.

M&sha-parni) ; or of (13) barks of Aranda, Tinduka,
Dddima, Kutaja and of S' ami \ or of (14) Pdthd, Tejcvati,
Musta, Pippali and Indra-yava ; or of (15) Patola,
Dipyaka (Yamdni), FY/z'#, the two kinds of Haridrd
and Deva-ddru ; or of (16) Vidanga , Abhayd , Pdthd,
Snngaveta , Ghana (Musta) and Vacha ; or of (17) Vacha,

38

2l8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XL.

Vatsaka - seeds (Indra-yava), Saindkava and Katu-rohini ;
or of (i8) Hingu , Vatsaka- seeds (Indra-yava), Vacka and
dried green Vilva; or of (19) Ndgara , Ativishd, Musii ,
the two kinds of Pippali and Fa^tf/fo-seeds (Indra-yava) ;
or of (20) Mahaushadha , Prati-vishd and Mustd , — these
are the Twenty different recipes of the remedies which
are digestive (of the mucous accumulations) in cases of
Ama-AtisAra and should be administered (in the shape of
powder) with Dhdnydmla (KAnjika), tepid water or wine,
or their decoctions in luke-warm state should be
used. This is a detailed list of the best remedies in
cases of Ama~Atiss(ra. 20.

A compound of Haritaki , - Ativishd , Hingu, Sau-
vatchala and Vachd should be taken with tepid water in
cases of Ama-AtisAras. Similarly a compound of Patola ,
Yamdni \ Vis'va , Vachd, Pippali, Ndgara , Musta , Vidanga ,
and Kushtha , or that of S'unthi and Guduchi should
be taken with tepid water. 21-23.

The five following compounds separately composed
(l) of all kinds of officinal salt, Pippali \ Vidanga and
Haritaki ; or of (2) C hit r aka, S'imsapd , Pdthd , S'dm-
gashtd , and all kinds of officinal salt ; or of (3) Hingu ,
Fri^A^^seeds (Indra-yava) and all kinds of officinal
salt taken in equal parts ; or (4) of Ndga-danti and
Pippali , weighing two TolAs ; or (5) of and

Gto^fAi-stems, would be found beneficial, if taken with
tepid water. Twenty Musta , should be boiled in a
quantity of milk and thrice as much water. The milk
which is left back after all the water is evaporated
by boiling, should be used for the relief of the griping
(Slula) due to the accumulation of mucus (Ama) in the
intestines. 24-25.

Clarified butter mixed with SaindhavasoXt and
Yava-kskdra should be given to a patient of weak

Chap. XL]

U TT AR A-'T AN TR A.

2tp

digestive power in a case in which the Viyu R&s not
been restored to its normal condition in "spite of the
subsidence of the intestinal Sula (griping) and which is
marked by scanty (but repeated) motions passed with
pain. The Ghrita duly cooked with Ndgara, Chdngeri
and Kola (Vadara) and with milk*, curd (Dadhi) and
Amla (Kdnjika), or simply the transparent part of clari-
fied butter should be taken as a relief for Atisdra
attended with Smia (pain). In the alternative, clarified
butter mixed with (an equal quantity of) oil and duly
cooked with curd, together with a paste of Tri-katu>
Jdti (flower) and Chitraka , or with that of Pippali-mula,
Vilva y Dddima-bark and Kushtha should be given. All
these are the remedies to be employed in a type of
Atisdra due to the action of Vata or of Sleshma ; and
all the foregoing remedies with the exception of those
of keen and heat-making potency, may be used in the
Pittaja type of the disease. 26 — 27.

Fasting as already advised should be first observed
and it should be broken with gruels (Yavdgu) duly
cooked with the two kinds Vald , or with Ams's-mati , ot
S'vadanishtrd and Vrihati , or S’atdvari made cold and
mixed with honey. The soup (Yusha) of Mudga duly
cooked with the drugs of appetising virtue, or with mild
add bitter drugs of appetising property would cure (the
Dosha in) the acute stage (Amd-dosha) of the stool.

Decoctions of Haridrd , Ativishd, Pdtha, Vatsa- seeds

!

(Indra-yava) and Rasdnjana ; or of Rasdnjam , the two
kinds of Haridrd and A^/VyVi-sceds (lndra-yava ; or of
Pdthd, Guduchi \ Bhu-nhnba and Ifcatu-rohim would

* We have lha recipe of this Ghrita in Charaka Samhitd also. But
there we find JCshdrd in place of Kshira and that appears to be the better
reading. See Chapter XIX,— under Chdngeri Ghrita, Charaka SarahiUL

220 THE StfSHRUTA SAMHITX, tChap.XL.

prove ^xtremly useful in correcting (PAchana) the
deranged Pitta. 28—29.

Six Yogas for Pittaja-Atlssfra s— Any

one of the six decoctions respectively prepared with
Mustd , Kutaja-sseds (Indra-yava.J, Bhu-nimba and
Rasdnjana ; or with Ddivi , Durdlabhd , Vilva and red
Chandana ; or with Chandana , Vdlaka , Mustd , Bhu-
nimba , DurAlavd ; or with Mrindla, Chandana , Rodhra ,
Ndgara and Nilotpala ; or with Pdthd , Musta , the two
kinds of Haridrd , Pippali and A^&ytf-seeds ; or with the
seeds and barks of Vats aka, S' ringavera and Vachd
mixed with clarified butter should be regarded as good
remedies for the Pittaja type of AtisAra. 30.

A case of Pittaja- AtisAra in its acute (Ama) stage
would yield to the use of a decoction of (unripe) Vilva,
Indra-yava , Ambit oda (Musta), Vdlaka and Ativishd . A
decoction of Yashti-madhu , Utpala , Vilva, Antra, Hrivera,
IJdira and Ndgara mixed with honey proves curative in
the case under discussion. 31 — 32.

Astringent or constipating (Samstambhana) reme-
dies should be employed in a case of the chronic (Pakva)
AtisAra marked by dullness of the Grahani, viz, the
digestive fire and by constant motions. Any of the
four following medicinal compounds, vis., Samangd,
D/tdtaki-fi ower, Manjisthd, Lodhra and Mustd ; or *of
S'dlmali-veshtaka, Rodhra and the bark of Vrikshaka
(Kutaja) and of Dadima ; or of the stone of Amra }
Lodhra, the inner pulp of (unripe) Vilva and Priyangu ;
or of Yashti-madhu, S'ringavera and the bark of
Dirgha-vrinta (S>yonAka) should be taken with honey
and the washings of rice in cases of chronic (Pakva)
AtisAra. 33 — 34,

The decoction of Musta alone should be taken with
honey in the case under discussion, or a decoction of

Chap. XL.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 22 1

any of the nine Ganas, m., the Lodhrddi , Amboshikddt]
or Priyuhgvddi groups, etc. (see Chapter XXXVIII,
Sutra-Sth&na) should be employed. Similarly, the
decoction of Padmd , Samangd , Y ashti-madhu and dried
Vilva and Jambu fruits should be taken with the washings
of rice mixed with honey. A paste of the root of
Kachchhurd weighing an Udumvara (two Toids) should
be similarly taken .with the same vehicles). A case of
Pakv&tisdra marked by bloody stool or by emission of
blood (from the intestines) would yield to the use of
the decoction of Payasyd , Chandana , Padmd (Bhdrgi),
Sitd (sugar), Mustd and the polens of lotus. 35 — 38.

Application Of Ghrita S— Clarified butter
with Yava-kshdra should be given to a patient with
due regard to the* state of his digestive power if, after
being treated with fasting, etc., he be still found
to be affected with Sula and dryness and if the stool
would be found to be free from mucus i.e., in a case of
Pakv&tisdra. The colic (in a case of Atisdra) is relieved
by taking (a potion of clarified butter duly cooked
with) Vald y Vrihati, Amsu-mati and Kachchhurd- roots
mixed with a little honey and Y ashti-madhu (as an
after-throw). Clarified butter duly cooked with Ddwi,
Vilva , Kand (Pippali), Drdkshdy Katuka and Indra-yava
would prove curative in a case of Atisard due to the
action of the V&ta, Pittd and Kaphd (jointly or separ-*
ately). A draught of milk, honey and clarified buttef
(in equal parts) mixed with sugar, Ajaniodd , Katvanga
and Y ashti-madhu (as an after-throw)^ would relieve
the griping (Sula) in the intestines (in a case of Atisara).
39 — 42.

PutapsCka Preparations s— A case of

long-standing (chronic) Atisdra marked by stools of
various colours and a keen digestion but unattended

ill * HE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XL.

with any sort of pain or complication should be reme-
died with medicines prepared in the maner of Pttta-
prfka preparation (described below). The barks of
Dirgha-vrinta ( S'yondkd ), and polens of lotus should
be pasted together and wrapped up in leaves of
Kds'mari or of Padma (lotus) with their ends tied
w|th string or thread (D. R.— Kusa). The cover should
be then coated with a plaster of clay and duly scorched
in the fire of (smokeless) charcoal (of Khadira). When
well cooked, it should be taken out and the juice, squeez-
ed out of its contents. This juice should be cooled and
administered in combination with honey in a case of
Atisira. Similar preparations of the drugs known as
Jivanti and Mesha-s'ringi , etc., may also be used in
the same way. The skin of a Tittira bird should
be peeled off and a paste of the drugs of the
Nyagrodhddi group should be stuffed into its belly
after it has been previously drawn. After this it should
be duly stitched up and cooked (scorched) in the
fire in the above manner. The juice should then be
squeezed out therefrom and administered, when cool,
with the admixture of honey and sugar in a case
of Atisira. The drugs known as Lodhra , Chandana,
Yashtumad/iUy Ddrvi, Pdthd, Sitd (sugar), Utpala and
the barks of Dirgha-vrinta pasted together with the
washings of rice should be duly scorched in the fire
in the above manner (of a Puta-pika). The juice
pressed out of its contents and taken with honey,
when cold, proves curative in cases of Atisira due
to the action of the deranged Pitta and Kapha.
Simitar preparations may be made of the aerial roots
of Vata> etc and may be advantageously prescribed
with the soup of the flesh of any J&ngaia bird (such
as Tittira, Kapinjala, etc ,). 43-47.

„Chap. XL.]

UTTARA-TANTRA,

223

The Kutaja-bbtk taken with treacle would cure per-
force the long-standing cases of Atisdra attended with
blood and marked by the diminished action of the
bodily Vdyu but a predominant action of the deranged
Kapha. The drugs of the Ambashtddi group as well
as those of the Pippalyddi group taken with honey
would be similarly beneficial. 48-49

A Peytf duly prepared with the admixture of Pris'ni -
parni, Bald , Vilva (D. R. Vis'va\ Bdlaka , Utpala,
Dhanydka and Ndgara , should be taken by a patient
suffering from Atisdra. A case of Pakvdtisdra would
yietd to the curative efficacy of a light medicinal gruel
( Yavdgu) duly prepared with the admixture of the paste
of S'yottd/ca-b&xky Priyangu , Y ashti-madhn , and tender
sprouts of Dddima pasted together with curd. A case
of Atisdra attended with blood and colic (Sula) would
te readily cured by the use of Rasdnjana , Ativishd ,
Dhdtakiy Ndgara and the bark and seeds of Kutaja
taken with honey and the washings of rice. 50 — 52.

Yashti-madhu , (dried) green Vilva-fruit mixed with
honey and sugar, or particles of S'dli and Shashtika
rice (administered with the same drugs) would prove
curative in a case of Atisdra. Badari-xoots pasted with
honey should be given to be licked with the same result
Barks of Badari y Arjuna ) Jambu , Antra , S 9 allaki and
Vetasa taken with honey and sugar would cure a case of
Atisdra. Gruels (Yavdgu), MandaS (thick gruel squeezed
through a piece of linen) and Yusha (soup) may also be
duly prepared with the admixture of ^hese drugs, and
in a case marked by excessive thirst, the water for
drinking should be prepared by duly boiling these drugs.
The cold infusion of * S'dlmali-stems kept in the open

powdeys of S'dlm&li stem should be kept immersed for whole

224 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITX. [Chap. XL.

space for a whole night, may be given good with good
results as a drink in combination with Yasthi-madhu
and honey. 53 — 54.

Use of Milk in Atlsrfra ■ — Milk should be
given in a case of Atis&ra marked by the suppression of
stool and Viyu and attended with griping (Sula),
constant scanty motions, symptoms of Rakta-pitta and
thirst Milk is ambrosia itself in such a case of Atisdra
(Dysentery), and in long-standing cases the milk to be
taken should be duly boiled with thrice as much water.
This would remove the remnant, if any, of the Dosha
involved and is, therefore, considered as the best remedy
in such cases. Oily purgatives and application of Pich-
chila-Vasti (slimy intestinal injections) as well as the
medicated Ghrita duly prepared with the expressed
juice of the barks of slimy trees, c. g., S'yond , S'dUnali,
etc., are beneficial under the circumstances (in chronic
or longstanding cases). 56.

Draughts of clarified butter duly prepared with the
tender sprouts of the Kshiri trees and mixed with honey
and sugar (as an after-throw) should be taken in a case
of Atisdra marked with a discharge of blood before
or after the passing of the stool and with a cutting
pain (in the region of the anus). Draughts of medi-
cated clarified butter duly prepared with the barks of
Devaddru, and with Pippali , S’unthi ’, Ldkslid , Indr a-
yava ) and Bhadra-rohini (Katukdj administered through
the medium of any kind of Peyd , would prove highly
efficacious in a case of Tri-doshaja Atisdra of severe
type. 57 - 58 .

night in an equal quantity of water. In the morning the water should
be passed through a piece of linen. Four-Pala-weight of this water
mixed with a Karsba weight of iYashti*madhu and honey should be
taken.

Chap. XL.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 22J

Exhibition of emetics or vomiting is an excellent
remedy in a case of Atisdra marked by heaviness,
(in the abdomen) and the predominance of the deranged
bodily Kapha. A case attended with fever, burning
sensation and suppression of stool and marked by an
aggravation of Vdyu should be treated as a case of
Rakta-pitta. Intestinal injections with urine-purifying
(Mutra-Sodhana) drugs should be speedily administered
in the manner of an Asthstpana or Anuvatsana Vasti, as
the occasion might arise, in a case marked by an excess
sive accumulation of the deranged bodily Doshas in
the affqcted locality as well as by the suppression (of
stool) during the mature stage of the disease. 59-60.

Intestinal injections consisting of oil or clarified
butter duly cooked and prepared with the drugs of
sweet and acid tastes should be applied in the manner of
an Anuv&ana Vasti in a case marked by the protrusion
of the bowel through violent and excessive straining
and by painful obstruction of urine (Mutrdghdta) and
pain in the waist. Pitta-subduing washes, and injec-
tions prepared with the Pitta-subduing drugs and appli-
ed in the manner of Anuvdsana Vasti, are the remedies
in a case marked by the suppuration of the anus due
to the aggravation of Pitta in an injudicious or intem-
perate patient. Anuv&ana Vasti charged with oil
duly cooked with wine, Vifaa and Dadhi-manda should
be applied in a case of Atisdra marked by the aggra-
vation of the deranged bodily Viyu, and milk duly
boiled and cooked with the admixture of Kachchurdj
roots should be given to drink. 61-63.

Pichchhat- Vasti should be applied (into the rectum)
in a case of Atisdra marked by painful and frequent
emission of blood, though in scanty quantities at a
time, and by an entire suppression of Vdyu (flatus). An

2 9

226 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XL.

atonic condition of the anus results from a long-
standing attack of Atisdra which should, therefore, be
remedied by rubbing the part with oil. 64-65.

Did ! — The diet of the patient suffering from
Atisdra should be prepared with the admixture of
Kapittha , S'dlntali , Phanji (a kind of Pdthd), Vana-
Kdrpdsi (D. R. Vata and Kdrpdsi), Dddima , Yuthikd ,
Kachchhurd , SV#, S' ana, Chuchchu , Dadhi (curd), S'dla-
parni y Pris'niparni, Vrihati , Kanta-kdrikd , S'm/-

amstrd, Vilva , Pdthd, Ndgara and Dhanydka and may
also consists of the pastes of sesamum and Mudga pulse
or of Mudga soup. 66.

Causes and Symptoms of Raktdti-
SfCra S — The bodily Pitta of a person already suffering
from an attack of Pittaja-Atisdra is further deranged
and aggravated, if Pitta-generating eatables are taken,
and ushers in the discharge of blood with stool accom-
panied by fever, burning sensation, thirst, gripings (Sula)
and excessive suppuration (inflamation) of the anus
(Guda). The above are the characteristics of the
Rakttfti-srfra. 67.

Treatment S— Draughts of milk duly boiled
and cooked with the leaves of Vata , etc, (those includ-
ed within the Nyagrodhddi group) should be given with
clarified butter, or with sugar and honey in a case
marked by a discharge of blood before or after motions ;
or the butter prepared by stirring the preceding prepara-
tion of milk should be taken ; and draught of the Takra
(thus prepared) should be taken as an after-potion. The
discharge of blood (in a case of Atis&ra) may be
stopped by a potion consisting of the barks of Piydla>
S*dlmaliy Plaksha> S'allaki, and of Tinis'a pasted to-
gether with milk and mixed with honey. The same
result is obtained by administering the milk of a she-

Chap. XL J OttARA-tANtRA.

goat with a paste of Yashti-madhu , sugar* Lodhra,
Payasyd (Arkapushpi) and Ddrvi and mixed with
honey, or with a paste (or powder) of Manjishthd,
S'arivdy Lodhra , Padntaka , Kumuda , Utpala and Padmd
(Bhdrgi. 68-71.

Sugar, Utpala , Lodhra , Samangd, Yashti-madhu and
7 Y/# ; or Tila y Mocha-rasa and Lodhra ; or Yashti-madhu
and Utpala ; or Kachchurd and Tila are the ingre-
dients of four recipes which, if taken with the she-goat’s
milk and honey, would remove the blood in the stool.
Pastes of unripe Vilva fruits, treacle and honey taken
before the meal would be a remedy in a case marked
by watery motions mixed with blood. A case of blood-
dysentry due to the deranged blood, and Pitta and
attended with Sula yields to the use of a compound con-
sisting of Kosakdra (a kind of sugar-cane) pulverised
parched paddy fried in clarified butter and mixed
with sugar and honey. A case of blood-dysentery due
to the action of the deranged blood, and Pitta may be
cured with a compound of the kernel of a ^unripe)
Vilva-ix\x\\. mixed with Yashti-madhu and taken with
the washings of rice, honey and sugar. The remedies
mentioned in connection with a case of Guda-p&ka
(suppuration of anus) should also be employed in these
cases. Application of Pichchhrf-Vasti is recommended
in the type where the pain begins to subside. A purga-
tive consisting of the decoction of Vidanga, Triphald
and Pippali should be given to a patient with good
appetite as soon as the stool woi^d . assume* the
colour of blood. In the alternative, a purgative con-
sisting only of milk cooked with Eranda- roots (castor
plant) should be employed and the patient should be

* D. R. — When the stool would harden J

tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XL.

given Yavdgu prepared with appetising and Vdyu-
subduing drugs. 72-78.

Treacle (Phdnita) mixed with powdered S'unthi ,
curd, oil, milk and clarified butter should be given in a
case marked by good appetite but by frothy motions
devoid of all fcecal matter. Badara - fruits boiled with
oil and treacle, or cakes prepared from them and dried
unripe Vilva - fruits should be prescribed. Cakes prepared
with boiled Mdsha-^vXst should be prescribed to be
taken with curd followed by a draught of S'vetd (cake-
made) wine in the case marked by the absence of fecal
matter in the stool. The blood-stained flesh of a hare
cooked with 5 amangd , curd and clarified butter should
be taken with well boiled rice. 79.

A decoction of Mdsha- pulse, Kola and barley duly
cooked in equal parts of the oil and clarified butter
and mixed with curd and the expressed juice of Dddima
should be prescribed as diet in the case. The absence
of any fecal matter in the stool (Furisha-Kshaya)
would yield to the use of Bit (black salt), dried unripe
Vilva fruit and S'unthi pasted with any acid juice and
mixed with curd-cream and cooked in equal parts
of oil and clarified butter. Clarified butter duly cooked
with as- tringent and appetising ‘drugs should be
given in a case of Atisdra attended with Sula where
the patient feels a good appetite after the loss of fecal
matter. 80 — 81.

Symptoms of PravXhfkX The Vdyu
in the organism of a person addicted to the use of
unwholesome food, is deranged and aggravated. It
carries down the accumulations of Valdsa (mucus) into
the lower part of the body, whence, mixed with stools,
they are constantly passed off with tenesmus. The
disease is called Pr&vtfhiktf (mucous diarrhoea). The

Chap. XL.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

229

motions are attended with Sula (pain) in the Vsftaja
type of the disease, with burning sensation in the
Pittaja one, with mucus in the Kaphaja one and with
blood (blood-streaked mucus) in the Baktaja (blood-
origined type). Excessive use of dry (Ruksha) or of
fatty articles of food may be regarded as the exciting
factor of these cases. The specific indications of
PravAhikA as well as its Ama or acute and Pakva or
mature stage are respectively identical with those of
the several types of AtisAra. 82-83.

Treatment In the event of fasting and
other digestive (PAchana) compounds (cf PravAhikA)
producing no beneficial effect in serious cases they
are found to readily yield to the use of boiled milk,
oil, Tila (sesamum) or Pichchhila Vasti. The green
stems of S'almali well covered with green AkyVblades,
should be scorched in the fire in the manner of Puta-pAka.
The juice should be squeezed out thereof and mixed
with boiled milk, oil, clarified butter and powdered
Yashti-madku , and should be carefully injected into the
rectum in the manner of Vasti application in cases
of PravAhikA marked with the retention of stool and
urine. Similar injections of a decoction of Das'a-mula
duly cooked in milk and mixed with honey and applied
in the manner of an Asthipana- Vasti as well as
the application of oil in the manner of an Anuv&ana
Vasti would prove highly efficacious in cases marked
with painful tenesmus, 84 — 86.

Diet • — Oil duly cooked with the drugs of the
VAyu-subduing (VidAri-gandhAdi) group and with (the
five officinal kinds of) salt should be used in (the
preparation ol) food and drink. A compound consist-
ing of Lodhra , Bit - salt and dried unripe Ff/m-fruit
pasted with oil and mixed with Tri-katu should be

2$0 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XL.

given to be licked*, The food (boiled rice) of a diar-
rhoetic patient should be taken with honey and curd
from which the cream has not been removed ; or with
milk warmed by a piece of red-hot metal f (other than
gold and silver) and mixed when cold with a profuse
quantity of honey. The use of milk duly boiled and
cooked with the admixture of Tri-katu and Viddri -
gandkd, with the food would prove curative in a case
attended with Sula. He should also be given soups
(Rasa) prepared with the drugs of appetising, astringent
(GrAhi) and Viyu-subduing virtues. Fish he may take
and his soup should be prepared with oil and clarified
butter with the admixture of Vayu-subduing drugs.
The diet in this disease should consist of venison, mutton
or goats flesh cooked with the tender sprouts of a Vata
tree or of blood of a fatty goat duly cooked with curd
(Dadhi), oil and clarified butter. He may take his
food with an unsalted soup (Yusha) of a peacock or
of a Liva bird, or with well prepared curd. He may
take (with benefit) well cooked Mdsha-pulsc mixed
with the transparent upper part of clarified butter
(Ghrita-manda) and with curd, while chewing at inter-
vals (with his teeth) the unpowdered Markka (black
pepper). 87 — 89.

A compound of milk, honey and clarified butter
mixed with the decoction of Yashti-madhu and Utpala
should be applied in the manner of Vasti-application
in (a case of Pravdhiki, marked by) excessive pain and
painful micturation (Mutra-Krichchhra). The applica-
tion of this Vasti would alleviate the burning sensation,

* According to some variants this compound should be taken thrice
daily.

t In place of — Kupya (any metal other than gold and silver)

some read — Kurpa which is explained to mean a kind of stone.

Chap. XL.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

2$l

allay the the accompanying fever and remove the blood
(in the stool). Injections of the decoction (of the drugs)
of Madhura group (such as Kdkoli, etc.) in the manner
of an Anuvdsana Vasti, should also be applied every
day — at daytime or in the night, if the patient be
feeling any pain. 90.

A Vasti applied with the admixture of oil would
pacify the aggravated bodily Vdyu and Pravdhikd,
would be removed with the pacification of the deranged
bodily Vdyu. The main treatment, therefore, in a case
of Pravahikd is to restore the deranged local Vdyu to
its normal condition, (which is identical with a cure). 91.

Medical Treatment s— The drugs known
as Pdthd, Ajamodd , Kutaja-seeds , S'untki and Mdga-
dhikd taken in equal parts, pasted together and dissolved
in tepid water or milk duly boiled with the testicles
of a goat and mixed with clarified butter would prove
efficacious in a case of Pravdhikd. Clarified butter
mixed with oil and duly cooked with S'unthi and
Kshavaka would give instantaneous relief, if licked.
Yavdgu duly prepared with the admixture of Vilva
and the expressed juice of Gajds'ana (Sallaki), Kum -
bhikd and Dddima and with curd, oil and clarified
butter would prove highly beneficial. The use of milk
just drawn, would similarly prove beneficial in the
case. 92.

A wise and experienced physician should employ
the foregoing medicinal compounds and decotions in
the complaints of the bowels and of the Stomach (Udard-
maya) as well as light, appetising and emulsive (Snigdha)
articles of fare and other articles of food prescribed
before as diet in the cases. 93.

Yavfifg'U Yavdgu (gruel) is always efficacious
in cases of fever and Atisdra in as much as it allays

232 THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A. [Chap. XL.

thirst, is light in digestion and appetising, and acts
as a cleanser of the bladder (diuretic). 94.

General Principle of Treatment

Drying (Ruksha) measures should be employed in a
case due to the excessive use of any oily or emulsive
food and emulsive (Snigdha) measures should be
adopted in a case brought on through an excessive use
of any dry (Ruksha) article. The cause of terror
should be first removed in a case due to fright, while
the mind should be calmed or consoled in the case due
to any grief or bereavement. The treatment in cases
(of Atisdra) due to piles or worms (in the intestines)
as well as in those due to the effect of poison (intro-
duced into the system) consits in employing therapeutic
agents which are simultaneously remedial both to the
disease and to its exciting factors. Complications or
distressing concomitants such as vomiting, thirst, faint-
ing fits, etc., should be removed with drugs which are
not incompatible with the main treatment of the disease,
and which do not aggravate the exciting factors. In a
case of fever or Atisdra marked by the simultaneous
aggravation of the deranged bodily Doshas, the deranged
Pitta should be first remedied, while in all other
affections, it is the deranged bodily Vsfyu which should
be first curbed down or corrected. 95 — 96. ,

Indications Of cure Non-emission of
stool at the time of urination and the free emission of
flatus (Viyu), as well as the rousing of the appetite,
and the lightness of the abdominal cavity (Koshtha)
are the indications of cure in a case of Udar&maya
(Diarrhoea, etc.).* 97.

* The printed edition of Dallana’s commentary says that these are
the symptoms of cases of aggravated Atisfai.

Chap. XL. ]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

2 33

Static or Dynamic causes of Dis-
eases and Treatment S — Some diseases are due
to the dynamics of Karmas (deeds done by a man in
the present or any prior existence), and some are due to
the effects of deranged bodily Doshas, while there may
be others which have their origin both in the dynamics
of Karma and the necessary physiological (Doshaja)
causes. Of these a Karma-origined disease may come
on without any apparent exciting factor and it dis-
appears with the extinction of its (Karma’s) result
effected by means of any remedial measure (e. g.
penance, etc.) other than medical treatment, whereas as
a Dosha-origined disease is conquered as soon as the
involved deranged Doshas of the body are restored to
their normal condition. Cases due to a slight derange-
ment of the bodily Doshas but attended with a good
deal of troubles as well as those due to the excessive
aggravation of the Doshas but attended with only slight
troubles should be attributed both to the physiological
causes and to the dynamics of Karma, and these are
cured only when both of these causes viz., Karma and
aggravated Doshas are removed. 98.

Grahani • — The Graham (lit. the uppermost
extremity or the receiving ducts of the intestines) is
affected by the causes which produce dulncss of
appetite. The digestive fire of a patient is again de-
ranged, even after * the subsidence of an attack of
Atis&ra, if, with the dulness of appetite, he be still in-
temperate and injudicious in matters of food and drink.
Hence the regimen of diet and conduct in a case of
Atisara should be as laid down in connection with the

* The use of ‘W in the text shows, say the commentators, that
Grahani is possible even without a previous attack of Ati$£ra.

30

234

THE SUSHRUTA SAMH1TA.

[Chap. XL.

sequel of any purgative course (Virechana), until the
deranged Doshas of the body would be completely res-
tored to their normal condition, bringing in the natural
health and strength in their train. The sixth KalA
which has been described as the Pitta-dhard Kal& (Pitta-
containing sheath) is situated between Pakv&saya
and Amis'aya (duodenum ?) is called Graham. The
strength of the organ of Grahani is dependent on the
digestive fire (Agni) and the latter is situate in the
former. Hence anything that impairs the digestive fire
(Agni) necessarily affects the Grahani. 99-102.

The aggravation of one or all the bodily Doshas
leads to the derangement of the Grahani into which
the food taken is passed off in the shape of undigested
fecal matter, or if it is digested, it sometimes produces
constipation of the bowels and sometimes liquid motions
accompained (in both cases) by pain and fetid smell.
The disease is called Grahani (chronic diarrhoea ?) by
experienced Physicians. 103.

Premonitory Symptoms s— incomplete
digestion, lassitude or a sense of physical langour,
laziness, thirst, a sense of exhaustion, weakness, aversion
to food, cough, ringing in the ears (Karna-Kheda) and
rumbling sound in the intestines are the symptoms which
mark the premonitory stage of the disease. 104.

Symptoms : — Swelling or oedema of the hands
and of the feet, emaciation, pain at the joints, greediness,
thirst, vomiting, fever, aversion to food, burning sensa-
tion, eructations of bitter, acid or fermented taste, or of
those smelling of blood or smoke, water-brash, bad taste
in the mouth and non-relish for food, as well an
attack of Tamaka-S>vAsa (variety of asthma) are the
indications of the developed stage of the disease
(Grahani), 105,

Chap. XL.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 2^

Specific Symptoms of Grahani A

case of the Vrftaja type is accompained by a severe
aching pain at the anus, thorax (Hridaya), sides,
abdomen and the head. A case of the Pittaja type is
marked by a burning sensation in the body, while the
one of Kaphaja origin is characterised by a sense of
heaviness in the limbs. A case of Tri-Doshaja Grahani
exhibits symptoms belonging to all the symptoms of
the three cases (V&taja, Pittaja and Kaphaja types).
The deranged bodily Dosha involved in a case imparts
its characteristic colour to the finger-nails, eyes, face
and excreta (stool and urine) of the patient. Thus it
furnishes a satisfactory clue to the diagnosis of the
disease, which, if neglected or unchecked at the outset,
may usher in an attack of Hrid-roga (disease of the
heart), Pdndu (chlorosis), Udara (ascites, etc.), Gulma,
piles and enlargement of spleen. 106.

Treatment and Diet -.—Appropriate emetics
and purgatives should be exhibted (for cleansing the
upper and lower parts of the body) in accordance
with the aggravation of the Dosha or Doshas involved,
and Pey&s (gruels) and other articles of diet duly pre-
pared with appetising drugs should then he prescribed
in their due order. Therapeutic agents possessed of
digestive, astringent and appetising virtue should then
be employed through the vehicles of Sura, Arishta
(wine), Sneha (oil or clarified butter), cow's urine, tepid
water, or Takra. The use of Takra in the morning
is in itself an excellent cure for the disease (Grahani).
Remedies mentioned in connection with the treatment
of worms in the intestines, Gulma, ascites or piles may
also be adopted with benefit in the disease uuder
ditecussion. The compound known as the Hingvddi •
chunta , or the medicated clarified butter described as

23 6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlfX. [Chap. XL.

remedial in a case of enlarged spleen, or the one
duly cooked with the expressed juice of Chdngeri and
with the drugs of the Mdgadhddi (Pippalyidi) group
as Kalka may be likewise prescribed with beneficial
results. Clarified butter duly cooked with four times
as much curd (Dadhi) may also be used with benefit
Whatever is appetising (medicines, drugs and diet, etc.)
would be beneficial in cases of Grahani. Complications
(Upadrava) such as fever, etc. should be subdued with
drugs not incomptible wdth the main treatment of nor
in any way aggravative of the main disease. 107

Thus ends the fortieth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
SamhiU which deals with the (symptoms) and medical treatment of
Atisdra*

CHAPTER XLI.

Now we shall discourse on the (symptoms and)
medical treatment of Phthisis (Siosha-Prati&hedha). I.

Nomenclature : — Wasting or a general ema-
ciation of the frame marks the sequel of and comes
in as a premonitory symptom of an organic disease.
Any cachectic condition of the body accompanied by
a low lingering fever is called Kshaya. A correct
diagnosis and a radical cure of the disease under dis-
cussion has baffled many a skilful physician. The
disease is nameds Sosha from the fact of its consuming
or drying up (Sosha — withering) the vital principles of
the body such as Rasa — serum, etc. It is called Kshaya
(wasting) since a wasting process is found to accompany
all the functional activities of the body during its
attack. Since the Moon-god, the king of the Br&hmanas,
was the first to fall a victim to its attack, it is
also called Rija-yakshmd (king’s disease) f by some
authorities. 2.

Some say that the disease is produced by the
separate action of the three fundamental Doshas of the
body. It being usually found to be attended with all

* The mythological origin of Sfosha (Phthisis) is : —

The Moon*god married 27 daughters of Daksha of whom he was
attached to Rohini in the extreme. Thereupon the personated wrath ofhlis
father-in-law, Daksha entered the Moon-god in the shape of Phthisis,
whereby the body of the Moon-god began to emaciate. The Moon-god
became penitent and the wrath of his father-in-law having been subdued
at the intervention of the other gods, he managed to send down the
personated Phthisis to earth to take possession of men indulging
in any kind of excess and more particularly— sexual 6XC0B6- The
moon-god was then medically treated and radically cured by tbe celestial
physicians, the twin As'wins.

^ Cf. Scrofula which is now known as the ‘‘King’s disease.”

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX [Chap. XLI*

the eleven distressing symptoms which are manifested
simultaneously with the ushering in of the disease, and
being the only instance in the science of therapeutics
in which the treatment does not vary according to
the variation of symptoms. This disease, Sosha, is
more properly said to originate in the simultaneous
aggravation of all the three Doshas, and it is the
symptoms of the most predominant Dosha only that
are manifested. 3.

/Etiology and general symptoms

The process of any wasting disease in the system, re-
pression of any physical urging or propulsion, over-fatigu-
ing physical exercise and irregular diet are the causes
which, by aggravating the bodily Doshas and propelling
them all over the organism, give rise to the disease.
The aggravated Doshas with Kapha as the most predo-
minant factor having obstructed the lymphatic channels,
or the semen of a person having been exhausted by
sexual excesses consequently produce a loss of the
other Doshas or the principal elements of the organism,
thereby producing a cachectic condition of the body,
and the following symptoms, viz, aversion to food, fever/
asthma, cough, emission of blood, loss of voice, number-
ing six in all are found in cases of Rija-yakshm&. 4 — 6.

Specific Symptoms:— The symptoms which
mark the action of the deranged bodily Vsfyu in the
disease are loss of voice (hoarseness), aching pain (in
the chest), contraction of the sides and stoop at the
shoulders (Amsa), while those which are exhibited
through the action of the deranged Pitta are fever,
burning sensation, Atisira and expectoration of blood,
and the features which indicate the action of the
deranged Kapha in the disease are a sense of fullness in
the head, aversion to food, cough and a sense of the

Chap. XLI*} UTTARA-TANTRA. 239

presence of a lump or plug in the throat (as if something
is rising up). 7'

Prognosis > — A physician having an eye to
his professional reputation or good name should not
take in hand the treatment of a case of Sosha (Phthisis)
whether marked by all the preceding eleven kinds of
symptoms or attended with six of them viz. cough,
Atis&ra, pain at the sides, loss of voice, aversion to
food and fever, or accompanied by only three symp-
toms, viz. fever, cough and blood-spitting. 8.

Other causes of £osha and their

Symptoms : — Sexual excess, grief, old age, over-
fatiguing physical exercise, toils of journey, fasting,
ulcers and ulceration of the U rah (lungs) arc included
by certain authorities within the exciting factors of
this disease, Sosha. A case of £>osha due to sexual
excess is attended with all the symptoms due to loss
of semen and is marked by palour or yellowness of
the complexion, the vital organic principles beginning
with semen being wasted up in succession in their inverse
order of enumeration. Constant brooding over the
departed person, looseness of the limbs and all the
symptoms of sexual excess other than the actual dis-
charge of semen mark a case due to grief. A general
cachectic condition of the body accompanied by imbeci-
lity of the mind, diminution of bodily strength, impaired
functions of the sense-organs, laboured or difficult breath-
ing (D. R. shivering of the limbs), aversion to food, a
gong-like voice, expectorations markecf by the absence
of mucus (A. R. heaviness of the limbs), a general apathy
to the concerns of life and (constant mucus) secretions
from the ears, nose, eyes and mouth are the symptoms
which indicate the origin of the disease iin the natural
and spontaneous waste of an extreme old age. 9-12.

240 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLL

A case due to the toils of journey or travel develops
such symptoms as looseness of the limbs, flabbiness of
the muscles, scorched or burntness of complexion, a
haggard and cadaverous look, a gone-feeling in the
limbs, the absence of natural gloss of the body and
dryness of the mouth, throat and of the Kloma. These
symptoms in addition to those of the ulcerated lungs
(Urah-Kshata) without actual ulceration, characterise the
type due to over-fatiguing physical exercise. 13-14

If a case of ulcer is attended by loss of blood, pain
and difficulty in eating, it is turned to a case of Sosha
and is pre-eminently the most uncurable type of the
desease. Rupture or ulceration in the lungs (Urah-
kshata) is caused by physical exercises, lifting up heavy
loads, excessive and loud reading, a hurt or a blow,
or excessive sexual congress and such other acts as
require the active co-operation and entail excessive
straining of the chest fUrah). They ultimately dis-
charge blood and pusy secretions. Yellowish, black or
purple coloured blood is expectorated or hawked out
by coughing. A burning sensation is felt inside the
region of the chest. A fetid smell is felt in the mouth
and in the breath. The complexion of the body and
the tone of the voice is changed and the patient
becomes senseless from the excessive pain he suffers
from. In certain cases the symptoms vary according
to the varied natures of their exciting factors, and all
the specific symptoms arc not fully exhibited. Never-
theless these diseases also go under the denomination
of Kshaya (consumption) owing to the fundamental
vital principles of the body being equally consumed
or withered up in them, and the specific mode of
their treatment has already been explained before
(Chapter XV, Sutra-Sthdna). 15-17.

Chap. XU]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

* 4 *

Premonitory Symptoms:— Laboured or
difficult breathing, a gone-feeling in the limbs and a
sense of physical lassitude, secrdtion of mucus, dryness
of the palate, vomiting, dulness of appetite, vertigo or
fainting fits, nasal catarrh, cough, somnolence, whiteness
of the eyes, desire for meat, and increased sexual propen*
sities are the symptoms which mark the advent of the
dreadful disease — Sosha. The patient dreams that he
has been borne on the wings of a crow or a parrot or a
vulture or a pea-cock or has been riding a porcupine or
a lizard or a monkey or sees in dreams river-beds dried
up and trees dried up or fanned by gales of wind or
surrounded by flames or fumes of fire. 18.

Prognosis : — A gradual wasting of the body
inspite of sufficient food, presence of AtisAra (diarrhoea)
and swelling of the abdomen and scrotum are the symp-
toms of a comsumptive patient who should be given
up. The treatment, however, of a patient temperate
in his habits and strictly conforming to the instructions
of the physician and possessed of a good digestive fire
and not much reduced in body may be taken in hand
provided the disease be an acute one. 15-20.

Treatment The patient should be made
first to use the medicated clarified butter prepared from
the milk of a ewe or a she-goat and duly cooked
with the drugs of the Sthirddi (VidAri-gandhAdi) group,
and then mild emetics and purgatives. Intestinal
injections after the manner of an As|jhApana Vasti
should follow the preceding medicinal measures and
head-purgative (Siro-vircka) should be applied. The
diet should then be given consisting of (cooked) wheat,
barley S'dli-rice together with meat-essence. Construc-
tive tonics or tissue-builders (Vrimhana) should be given
to a patient with a gqod digestion and relieved of

. 3 1

242

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX.

[Chap* XU*

ail distressing symptoms or concomitants* Complica-
tions peculiar to the action of the deranged bodily
Vdyu generally mark a case due to sexual excess,
wherein constructive tonics and remedial agents of
Vdyu-subduing virtue would be found to be extremely
efficacious. 21 — 22.

Diet— meat, etc. : — The flesh of a crow or an
owl or a mungoose or a cat or a Gandupada (earth-
worm) or a cormorant or a beast of prey (VyAla) or of
any animal of the Vilesaya or Jangala class mixed
with Saindhava salt and fried in mustard oil, should be
prescribed in various ways for a patient laid up with
Phthisis. The diet may also consist of Mudga-sou p or
of Adhaki - soup or of the flesh of an ass, camel, elephant,
mule or horse variously prepared and well cooked.
Meat in combination with any Arishta as well as wine
mixed with Mddhvika may also be given. 23.

Various articles of food made of barley-grains
previously soaked in the alkaline water duly prepared
with Arka and Amritd may likewise be prescribed.
Clarified butter skimmed off from the milk of a ewe
or a she-goat, may be given with gruel at the meal-time
to .an extremely emaciated patient. A compound con-
sisting of Tri-katU) Chavya and Vidanga made into a
paste with honey and clarified butter should be given to
be licked up by a patient suffering from Phthisis. The
use of a medicated clarified butter duly cooked with the
essence of the flesh of any carnivorous animal and
mixed with Pippali and honey as an after-throw proves
remedial in a case of Phthisis. A lambative consisting
of Dr&kshd , sugar and Mdgadhikd pasted together with
honey and oil proves efficacious as a cure for Phthisis.
A'.case of Phthisis would yield to the use of a lambative
consisting of 774 *, Mdsha - pulse and As'vgandhd ground

Chap. XtL]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

243

to a fine paste with the addition of honey and clarified
butter skimmed out of the milk of a she-goat, or of
sugar, As'vagandhd and Pippali pounded together and
made into a fine paste with the addition of honey and *
clarified butter. Milk duly cooked with the admixture of
As'vagandhd may be prescribed as a constructive tonic.
Butter skimmed out of the preceding preparation of
milk and mixed with copious quantity of sugar should
be taken, as an alternative, every morning and this
should be then followed by a draught of milk. 24.

As'vagandhd , Punarnavd and Yava should be used
in rubbing (Uts&dana) the body of the patient Clari-
fied butter duly cooked with (the decoction of) the
whole of a Vdsaka tree (viz., its roots, leaves, branches
and barks) and with its flower (as Kalka) and mixed
with an adequate quantity of honey* should be taken
by a consumptive patient strictly conforming to the
regimen of diet. Thus a virulent attack of Phthisis
accompanied with cough, asthma and chlorosis would
be speedily conquered. 25-26.

A wise physician should take equal parts of clarified
butter, milk, decoctions of Murvd , Haridrd and of
Khadira and the expressed liquid of the dungs of a cow,
a horse, an elephant, a she-goat and a ewe. Ten
equal parts of the above ten articles should be duly
boiled and cooked together with the Kalka of powdered
Tri-kiitu , Tri-phald , Devaddru and the drugs of the sweet
(Kdkoiy£di) group. This medicated clarified butter
would be found highly beneficial in the cure of Phthisis
(Yakshmd). 27.

Six P&tra measures of the duly prepared decoction of
Das a-mula x Vatuna , Karanja', K hall dt aka, Vilva , the' two

* This preparation is also found in the Charaka Samhitd though in
different language under the treatment of Rakta-pitta#

244 THJE SljstiRUTA SAMtilT^. tdiap. XLt

kinds of Punarnavd , Yava, Kulattha , Badara , Bhirgi ,
Pdthd, Chitraka and Mahi-Kadatnba should be cooked
with a Pitra measure of clarified butter and with (the
Kalka of) Vyosha (Tri-katu), the milk of Mahd-vriksha
(Snuhi), Abhayd, Chavya , Devaddru and Saindhava salt
(D. R. Pippali). The medicated clarified butter thus pre-
pared proves efficacious in cases of Phthisis, Ascites and
V&taja-Prameha. Clarified butter duly cooked with the
milk, blood, meat-essence and the expressed liquid of
the dungs of a cow, a mare, a ewe, a she-goat, a cow-
elephant, a hind, a she-ass and a she-camel and with
the Kalka of Drdkshd , Asvagandhi , Magadhd and sugar
proves extremely beneficial in cases of Phthisis. 28-29.

Eladi-mantha A Praslha measure of clari-
fied butter should be duly cooked with the decoction of
Eld> Ajamodd, Amalaka , Abhayd , Aksha , Gayatri, Arishta ,
As ana, S'dlasdra , Vidanga , Bkalldtaka, Chitraka , Ugrd *,
Tri-katu , Ambhoda and Surdshtraja-z&x\h. When duly
cooked it should be taken down from the oven and
thirty Pala weight of candied sugar, six-Pala-weight
of Tuga-kshira (Vamsa-Iochana) and two-Prastha-
measure of honey should be added to it and stirred
with a laddie. A Pala weight of this preparation
followed by a draught of milk should be given to be
licked every morning to a Phthisical patient. The
present elixir is possessed of ambrosial sanctity. The
extent of its therapeutic application embraces such
diseases of the body as Phthisis, chlorosis, fistula-in-
ano, asthma, loss of voice, cough, troubles of the
heart, enlarged spleen, Gulma and chronic diarrhea or
indigestion. It imparts longevity to a person using it,
leads to the expansion of his intellectual faculties and

*Chakrad*tfe does sot read Ugii is the list*

Chap. XLt.]

UTTARA-fANfRA.

24 §

tends to invigorate his eye-sight. It is the best of all
rejuvenating preparations cf our pharmacopea and no
strict regimen of diet and conduct is required to be
followed while it is used. 30.

The medicated clarified butter mentioned under the
treatment of Plihodara (dropsy of the abdomen owing
to the enlargement of spleen — Chapter XIII, Chikitsita-
sth&na) as well as the three others mentioned in that
connection may be also used with advantage in the
disease under discussion. The accompanying symptoms
or complications such as hoarseness of voice, etc. should
be remedied with appropriate medicines presented for
those diseases in the S> 4 stras. The patient should be
made to use regularly the milk, butter, urine, blood,
meat and the (expressed liquid of the) dung of a goat as
his bath or in any other way possible (e.g., in drinking)
and to live in a goat-shed (in the company of goats)
whereby he would be cured of his Phthisis in a month.
A Phthisical patient should likewise be made to take
Rasona (garlic) or Ndga-vald or Magadhikd or S'ild/atu
with milk, in the prescribed manner (laid down in
connection with the medical treatment of Mahd-vAta-
Vyadhi). 31-34*

Rules Of conduct S — He should not allow any
grief, anger or jealousy to disturb the equilibrium of
his mind, should lead a life of strict continence, deal
in the discussion of sublime subjects and conform to the*
injunctions of his medical advisers or physicians. He
should pay respects to the gods, superiors&nd BrAhmanas
and listen to the discussions of the spiritual truths from
the lips of Brdhmans. 35.

Thus ends the forty -first Chapter of the U tiara Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhit* which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of Phthisis.

CHAPTER XLII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the symptoms and) medical treatment of Gulma

(Gulma- Prat isheda). i.

Definition and number of Gulinas

The fundamental principles of the body, deranged and
aggravated by their respective or specific exciting
causes and factors tend to accumulate in the cavity of
the abdomen (Koshtha) and help the formations of ball-
like tumours or Gulmas (internal tumours inculsive of
those known as the phantom tumours) somewhere inside
the body lying between the extreme confine of the
regions of the heart and of the bladder (Vasti). The
Gulma is of five kinds and found to be round or
spheroid in shape and may be either fixed or mobile (lit.
shifting) in their character and subject to variations in
their mass and size. 2.

Localisation and nomenclature

They have five locations inside the abdominal cavity,
viz. the two sides, the region of the heart, the
bladder (Vasti) and the 'region of the umbilicus).
The Gulmas are so named because their root or base
cannot be exactly localised as well as their cause cannot
be exactly ascertained owing to the fact of their
having their origin in the aggravated condition of the
local bodily Vdyu, or because of their being but a
agglomeration of the deranged bodily Doshas in the
affected locality and the shrub-like large converse outline
of the surface (Gulma-shrub). Since a Gulma, like a
bubble of water, is a self-contained agglomeration of the
deranged bodily Doshas and freely moves about in the
cavity of its growth, it is not marked by the advent of

Chap. Kill) UTTARA-T ANTRA. 247

any suppurative process in its mass or body. The
Gulmas are the products of either the several or con*
certed actions of the three Doshas, while in females a
separate class of tumours (such as the ovarian or uterine
tumours) intimately connected with the deranged or
vitiated condition of the blood (catamenial fluid, etc) is
also recognised. 3 — 5.

Primonitory Symptoms s— A sense of

lassitude, dulness of appetite, pain and rumbling in the
intestines, suppression of stool, urine and flatus, in-
capacity to take food to the full, aversion to food,
and an upward coursing of the internal Vdyu are the
indications which may be set down as the premonitory
symptoms of Gulma. 6.

Specific Symptoms Pain (Sula) in the
region of the heart and the belly (Kukshi), dryness of
the throat and of the mouth, suppression of Vdyu (flatus),
irregularity of digestion and all other symptoms which
specifically indicate the deranged condition of the bodily
Vdyu are the characteristics of the V&aja~Gtalma.
Fever, perspiration, defective digestion, burning sensa-
tion, thirst, redness of the body (Anga-rdga), bitter taste
in the mouth and all other specific symptoms of the
deranged Pitta mark the Pittaja type of the disease.
A sensation of wetness all over the body, an aversion to
food, lassitude, vomiting, water-brash, sweet taste in the
mouth and all other specific indications of the deranged
Kapha are exhibited in the Kaphaja type of the disease.
The Tri-doshaja type exhibits the symptoms specifically
belonging to each of the preceding ones and should be
regarded as incurable. 7 — 9.

Symptoms of Raktaja-Gulma s— The

symptoms of Raktaja-Gulma are mentioned below. The
bodily Vdyu of a woman pewly delivered of a child as

248 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XLII.

well as that of a woman who has recently miscarried, or
of a woman in her courses is deranged by the use of!
unwholesome or injudicious food (and regimen of con-
duct), and by supressing the discharge of the blood
(lochia) it gives rise to Gulma attended with pain and
burning sensation. A Gulma of this type is easily
mistaken for a case of conception, which exhibits all
the symptoms of pregnancy as well as those which are
peculiar to the state of the Pittaja type, with the
exception that the abdomen does not enlarge and
there is no movement (in the womb).' The medical
treatment of a Gulma of the present type should be
taken in hand after the lapse of the natural term of
gestation and this is known as the Raktaja-Gulma *
by the experienced physician, io.

General Treatment a person suffering
from an attack of Vrftaja Gulma should be duly treated
with a Sneha, purged with any fatty purgative and
then treated in the proper time with Nirudha and
Anuvdsana Vastis. In a case of Pittaja type of the
disease, the patient should be treated (rubbed) with
clarified butter duly prepared and cooked with the
drugs of the Kdkolyddi group and then being properly
purged with the compounds of sweet drugs (of the
Aragvadhddi group) he should be treated with Nirudha
Vastis. In a case of the Kaphaja type, the patient
should be first anointed with a medicated Ghrita duly
cooked and prepared with the drugs of the Pippalyddi
group, then purged with a strong (Tikshna) purgative
and then treated with Nirudha Vastis of the same

* This Raktaja Gulma is peculiar to the females only. But some
authorities an of opinion that a kind of Raktaja (blood -origined) Gulma
doe to the vitiated blood of the organism may be possible both in the
nudes and females.

Chap. XLIL]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

249

character. In a Tri-doshaja type, measures held to be
remedial for each of the Dosha s should be adopted or
employed. Measures laid down in connection with the
Pittaja type of the disease should be as well employed
in cases of Raktaja (bloodorigincd) Gulma in female
patients. Now hear me describe the recipes of the medi-
cines which would particularly lead to the disintegration
of the blood (in cases of Raktaja Gulma). Clarified
butter duly cooked and prepared with the alkaline
preparation of Palds a wood (water charged with the
burnt ashas of Paldsa) should be internally adminis-
tered, and the medicated clarified butter known as the
PippalyAdi Ghrita should be employed after the manner
of an Uttara-vasti. In the alternative, the discharge
(of blood) should be induced with the help of the drugs
of heat-making (Ushna) potency (eg , Pippaly&di group)
and measures laid down in connection with menorr-
hagia (Asrigdara) should be adopted after the flow
has fairly set in. it.

Anuvasana : — The use of curd, clarified butter,
oil, lard (Vasa) and marrow of Anupa (such as boar
buffalo, etc.) and Audaka (aquatic) animals, boiled
together and applied after the manner of an Anuvafeana-
vasti, proves beneficial in a case of V^taja-Gulma.
The application of similar Vastis charged with a solu-
tion of clarified butter and the lard of animals of the
J&ngala and Eka-sapha groups proves efficacious in
the Pittaja type of the disease, while the application
of these containing solutions of oil and the marrow of
any Jangala animal will prove beneficial in a case of
the Kpahaja type*. 12-15.

* Dallana recommends ihe use of V^yu subduing, Pitta-subduing
and Kapha-subduing drugs as Kalka in the preparation of these three
Vastis respectively.

250

THE &USHRUTA SAMHIT&

[Chap. XLII.

In a case of the Vattaja type of Gulma, the patient
should be made to use the medicated Ghrita duly
cooked with the expressed juice of Amalaka and with
the Kalka of the six drugs * and with the admixture
of sugar and Saindhava (as an after-throw). 1 5.

Chitraka Ghrita : —Clarified butter duly
cooked with curd, fermented rice-boilings (Kinjika)
as well as with the decoction of Vadara and the ex-
pressed juice of Mulaka and with the Kalka of Chitraka ,
Tti-katu , Saindhava , Prithvikd, Chavya , D&dima,
Dipyaka , Granthika , Ajdji , Habushd and Dhanydka
taken in equal parts, proves curative in cases of Vtftaja
Gulma, S>ula (colic), distention of the abdomen and
dulness of appetite. 1 6.

Hingvstcli Ghrita S — Clarified butter duly cook-
ed with Hingu , Sauvarcliala-salt , Ajdji , Vit-salt , Dddima ,
Dipyaka , Pushkara , Vyosha , Dhanydka , Amla-vctasa,
Yava-kshdra , Chitraka , S' at hi, Vachd , Ajagandhd , , ZiVrf
and Surasa as Kalka and with the admixture of curd
(Dadhi) as liquid, proves efficacious in a case of Vdtaja
Gulma, colic-pain and suppression of stool and urine. 17.

D4dhlka Ghrita : — Clarified butter duly
cooked with Vit-salt , Dddima , Saindhava , Chitraka ,
Vyosha , Jiraka , Hingu , Sauvarcliala-salt , Yava-Kshdra ,
Rushtha , S'unthi, Vrikshdmla (turmerie) and Amla-
vetasa as Kalka and with the expressed juice of
Vija-pura and with curd weighing four times as much
as of Ghrita, proves curative in cases of Gulma, enlarge-
ment of spleen and Sula. The clarified butter thus
prepared is called Dstohika-Ghrita. 18.

Rasona Ghrita S — Clarified butter duly cooked
with the admixture of the expressed juice of Rasona

* The six drugs to be used as Kalka are Pippali, Pippali-raula,
Chavya, Chitraka, Nagara and Yava-kshdra taken one Pala of each.

Chap. XLIL]

UTTARA-TANTlU.

2$i

and with the decoction of (major) Pancha-mula as well
as with wine (Suri), Arandla (fermented rice-boilings),
curd, and the expressed juice of Mulaka , with the Kalka
of Vyosha , Dddima , Vrikshdtnla , Yamdni, Chavya , »SW#-
Hingu y Amla-vetasa, Ajdji and Dipyaka (Aja-
mod£) taken in equal parts, includes within the range
of its curative efficacy such diseases of the body as
Gulma, Graham (chronic diarrhoea), piles, asthma, in-
sanity, consumption, fever, cough, epilepsy (Apasm&ra',
dulness of appetite, enlargement of spleen, colic, and
the derangements of the bodily Vdyu. 19.

An Adhaka measure each of curd, Sauviraka (a
kind of Kanjika), clarified butter and the decoctions of
Mudga and Kulattha pulse should be cooked with the
admixture of two Pala weight of each of the following
drugs, viz., Sauvarchala , Sarjika , Devaddru and Sain*
dhava . The medicated Ghrita thus prepared proves
curative in cases of V&taja Gulma and acts as a good
appetiser. 20.

Chritas in Pittaja and Raktaja
Gulinas : — Clarified butter duly cooked with the
Kalka of the drugs or the Jivaniyi (K&kolyddi) group
and with the decoction of the component members of
the Trina-pancha-muldy or of the Nyagrodhddi or of the
Utpalddi group, would undoubtedly prove curative in
cases'of Pittaja and Raktaja Gulma. 21.

Ghritas in Kaphaja Gulma : — A Gulma
of the Kaphaja type would surely yieldf to* the use of
medicated Ghritas duly cocked with the drugs of the
Dipaniya (Pippaiyadi) group as Kalka with the admix*
ture (as liquid) of the decoction of the component mem-
bers of either the Aragvadhidi group, the alkaline
(Mushkakddi) group or the kragvadhddi Gana, or with
the officinal group of (animal) urines. 22.

2§2 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHIlX. [Chap, tilt

A Gulma of the Ssfamipsftika type (due to the
concerted action of all the three fundamental Doshas
of the body) should be treated according to the pre-
dominance of any specific deranged bodily Dosha
involved therein. The patient should be made to take
at the proper time (*>,as soon as the disease sets in)
the pulverised compound known as the Hingvadi-churna
or the medicated Ghrita known as Tilvaka-Sarpih or the
one (viz. Shatpalaka Ghrita) which has been described
as curative of the enlargement of the spleen, as these
would prove curative in a case of Gulma. 23 — 24.

Internal use Of KshsCra Alkaline pre-
paration should be duly made with the following drugs,
vis,, the ashes ol (dried stems of) Ti/a, Ikshuraka ,
Sarshapa and Yava and of (the barks of ) P aids' a and
of Mulaka with the urines (weighing four times as much)
of a cow , she-goat, ewe, shc-ass and shc-bufifalo. This
alkaline preparation should then be cooked in an iron
vessel and on a slow fire with one Pala weight of each
of the following pulverised drugs, viz , Kushtha , Sain-
dhava y Yashti-madhu , Ndgara , Vidanga and Ajamodd
and with ten Pala weight of Sdmudra-salt thereto added
and, should be taken in the form of a lambative with
one or the other of clarified butter, curd, wane, ferment-
ed rice-boilings (DhanyAmla), warm water or the soup
of Kidattha . The alkaline compound, thus prepared,
undoubtedly proves curative in cases of Gulma and in
the derangements of the bodily' VAyu. Compounds
consisting of Sarjikd-Kshdra , Kushtha and the ashes of
Ketaki taken with oil*, or of Sarjikd-Kshdra , Kushtha

* According to Dallana, Sarjikd-Kshdra, Kushtha and Yava-Kshdra
with oil would form the 1st compound and the Kelakd-Kshara with oil
would loan a separate compound,

Chap. XLII ] UTfARA-f ANTRA. 253

and Saidhava taken with tepid water, would subdue an
attack of the deranged bodily Vayu. 25-26.

VrischirsCrishta : — The drugs known as
Vrischira , Uruvuka , Varshdbhu , the two kinds of
Vrihati and Chitraka should be duly boiled together
with a Drona-mcasurc of water and taken down from
the oven after three-fourths of the wafer are evaporated
by boiling. It should then be poured into an earthen
pitcher of which the interior has been previously coated
with pastes of Mdgadhi ) Chitraka and honey. One Seer
of powdered Pathyd and four Seers of honey shonld be
subsequently added to its contents and the pitcher
should be then kept buried in a heap of husks for ten
days, after which it should be taken out and its contents
should be given to the patient aftei the digestion of his
daily food. The Arishta (fermented wine) thus pre-
pared proves curative in cases of Ciulma, indigestion
and aversion to food. 27.

Powders of Pathd , Nikumhha , Rajani , Tri-katu , Tri-
phald , Agnika ( Chitraka\ Saindhava-$d\t and Vriksha-
vija (Indra-yava) in equal parts should be taken with
matured treacle of their combin d weight ; or the
powders of the above drugs with pulverised Pathyd
(weighing a fourth part only of the other powders
taken together) should be cooked with cow’s urine
(weighing four times) to a thick consistency and made
into pills which should be taken in an empty stomach
(by the patient). These medicines# would radically
cure the cases of Gulma, enlarged spleen, indigestion,
heart-disease, chronic diarrhea and violent forms of
chlorosis. 28.

Blood-letting* : — Blood-letting by the applica-
tion of leeches or by venesection should be effected in a
case of elevated and immobile (unshifting) Gulma

254

THE SUSHRUTA SAMrtlTA. [Chap. XLtt,

characterised by £>ula, burning sensation, inflamation
and piercing pain. 29.

Diet and Sveda : — Drinks composed of the
meat-essence of an animal of the JAngala group, pro-
fusely salted with Saindhava and mixed with clarified
butter and Tvi-katu and taken lukewarm are good
for Gulma-patients. PeyAs prepared with the VAyu-
subduing drugs and the soup of Kulattha - pulse cooked
with a Sneha as well as the Khada-yusha prepared with
Pancha-mula also are likewise efficacious as Diet.
Draughts of milk with Ardraka should be prescribed in
a case of Gulma attended with the suppression of stool
and flatus. Fomentation (Sveda) after the manner of
Kumbhika, Pinda and Ishtaka (see Chapter XXXII)
Chikitsita Sthana) are also efficacious. 30 — 32.

Purgatives preceded by the application of fomenta-
tion should be exhibited to a Gulma-patient, since it is
extremely difficult to purge him. Vilepana (massage
of the Gulma), application of unguents and poultices,
Samdahana (cauterisation) as w ell as tepid fomentation
after the manner of £>Alvana-Sveda and the like arc
likewise applicable. Medicated Ghritas, powders and
Vartis mentioned in connection with the treatment of
Udara as well as medicated salt? mentioned under the
head Udar&maya* are likewise applicable in the present
disease. 33-34.

Medicated Plugs or Vartis made of Sdmudra f,

* Udardmaya may mean cither indigestion or ascites. Anilamaya
(Vata-vyjSdhi) is a variant addopted by Dallana and is undoubtedly pre-
ferable since there are several medicated salts «. Patra-Lavana,
Kanda-Lavana, in the treatment of Vata-Vyadhi. See Chap. IV, Chikit-
sita Sthina.

t According to some ‘Suraudra’ means Sdraudra*salt and others, it
means Semudra-Phena.

Chap. XLII.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 2$5

Ardraka, Sarshapa (mustard) and a profuse quantity of
Markka pasted together should be inserted into the
rectum in suppression of stool and flatus in a case of
Gulma. Arishtas made with Danti -roots, Chitraka- roots,
or with the Viyu-subduing drugs according to the
manner laid down in the Sutra-sth&na should be pres-
cribed, or the patient should be made to use the duly
fried tender sprouts of Putika and Nripa-Vriksha , A
Gulma patient with the upward coursing of his bodily
V&yu should not be treated with Nirudha-Vasti. 35 — 37.

Compounds of Trivit and S'unthi or of treacle and
powdered Haritaki* as well as of Guggulu , Trivit , Danti ,
Dravanti , Saindliava and Vacha should be adminis-
tered through milk, wine or the expressed juice of
grapes, according to the strength (of the disease and of
the patient). Pilu made into k a paste and salted jvith
the addition of Saindhava should also be similarly
taken. Wine surcharged with Pippali, Pippali-roots ,
CJiavya , C hit} aka and Saindhava and taken at an oppor-
tune moment (/. e ., when attended with tympanities, etc.)
would prove readily curative in a case of Gulma. A
Gulma-patient afflicted with a suppression of stool and
of flatus should take barley with milk or Kulmdsha
(M&sha-cakes) profusely saturated with salt and clarified
butter. 38-39.

Supervening Symptoms :~if s'uia which

is its supervening symptom anyhow appears whereupon
the patient suffers a kind of digging |nd piercing pain
resembling that arising from the piercing of a dart,
there will also appear the following distressing con-
comitants according to the Dosha or Doshas involved,

* According to some commentators the first two compounds should be
taken with water. %

2$6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLU

supression of stool and urine, difficult respiration,
and numbness or stiffness of the limbs (in cases cf
aggravated Vtfyu), thirst, burning sensation, vertigo, in-
digestion of food, and excess of the colic pain (in cases
of aggravated Pitta), and goose-flesh, aversion to food,
vomiting, increase of pain after the taking of food and
a sense of lassitude in the limbs (in cases of aggravated-
Kapha). The course of medical treatment in such
cases should be determined by the nature and number
of the deranged bodily Doshas specifically lying at the
root and should be as follows. 40.

The following three compounds, viz., (r) Pathyd ,
the three kinds of salt (Saindhava, Sauvarchala and Vit)
Yava-Kshdra , Hingu , Twnburu , Pushkara , Yanidni,
Harid'd , Vidanga and Anil a-v eta set ; (2) Viddri, Triphala ,
Satdvari , S'ringdta, Guda-s drkara (GAngeri-phala),
Kds'mari-phala , Yashthi-madhu , Paiushaka , Hima (san-
dal wood) and (3) Shad-granthd (Vacha), Ativishd , Dcva*
ddru , Pathyd , Maricha , Vrikshaka, Pippali-mula, Chavya ,
Ndgara , Kshdra (Yuva-kshara) and Chitraka should be
respectively given in the VAtaja, Pittaja and Kaphaja
types of the disease. The medium through which
these compounds should be given wouid be tepid Amla -
Kdnjika , luke-warm milk and tepid water respectively.
The preceding three compounds should be jointly
administered in sets of tw r o or three when two or three
Doshas are involved in any case. 41.

Sprinkling (of water), baths, plaster (Pradcha) un-
guents and dietetic treatment should be similarly applied
in V&taja cases. Contacts with vessels filled with cold
water should be applied in Pittaja cases, while the use
of emetics, rubbing, fomentation (Svcda), fasting and
other Kapha-subduing remedies should be recommended
in Kaphaja types. Applications of Sncha and su:h'like

Chap. XLIl J U TTARA-TAN TRA. 2$?

remedial measures are specifically recommended in
the disease, according to the Dosha or Doshas involved
in each case. 42. '

Prohibited articles S — A person suffering
from Gulma, should refrain from taking Vallura (dried
meat), Mulaka (radish), fish, dried pot-herbs, any prepara-
tion of pease, Aluka , (potato of any kind) and any kind
of sweet fruit 43.

Causes and symptoms of £ula s— Now

I shall deal with the causes, the characteristic symptoms
and the treatment of Sula occurring in any specific
locality of a Gulma even without its actual presence or
formation therein. A voluntary retention of flatus
(V&ta), stool or urine, over-eating, indigestion, eating
before the digestion of previous food, over-exertion, use
of articles of food which are incompatible in their com-
bination, drinking water when hungry, use of germinated
grains, dry food or cakes of dry meat, as well as the use
of other such-like articles of fare, derange and aggravate
the bodily V&yu, which produces a violent cutting and
spasmodic pain (£>ula) in the main cavity of the trunk
(Koshtha). The patient complains of as if being pierced
with a Samku (spear) in the inside and of a feeling of
suffocation under the influence of that excruciating pain,
which fact has determined the nomenclature of Smla
(lit. — a spear). 44 — 45.

Vataja Sula : — The patient experiences a
violent colic whenever in an empty stomach and he feels
a difficulty of respiration. The limbs seem to be numbed
or stuffed and the flatus, stool and urine arc evacuated
with the greatest difficulty — these are the symptoms
which mark the Vtftaja type of the disease. 46.

Plttaja Sula s — Thirst and a bifrning sensation
}n the body attended with an excruciating pain, giddi-

33

258

THE SU SI I RUT A SAMIIITA.

[Chap. XLIl.

n6ss, loss of consciousness, desire for cold things and

amelioration on application of cooling measures, are
the specific features of the Pittaja type. 47.

Kaphaja and Safnnipdtika £ulas s—

An agonising pain attended with nausea, excessive full-
ness of the stomach and a sense of heaviness in the
limbs are the indications which distinguish the Kaphaja
type of the disease. The type due to the concerted
action of the three simultaneously deranged Doshas of
the body (Sfifonipitika Siula) exhibits all the series of
symptoms which respectively mark the preceding types,
and hence it is said to be incurable. 48-49.

General treatment The symptoms have
been described. Now hear me describe the mode of medi-
cal treatment (to be generally pursued in curing a case
of Sula). Since the deranged bodily V&yu (which is the
principal and immediately exciting factor, is very active
in its operation, hence it should be speedily subdued.
Fomentations with Payasa , Kris ard or cooked meat
saturated with any Sneha (clarified butter, etc.) should
be resorted to. Fomentation naturally gives relief to a
patient suffering from Sula. The patient should take
cooked 7 Wvr/V-leavcs (as pot-herbs) with his meals
cooked with a Sneha (clarified butter) and served hot ;
or he should eat the tender sprouts of Chiravilva fried
with oil, or drink the meat-essence of the flesh of any
birds of the Jdngala group charged with a Sneha, or take
the meat of any animal of the Vilesaya group. 50.

Treatment of VcCtaJa Sula :—Swd, Sauvi-
raka (fermented rice boilings), S'ukta, the cream of curd
and £Jdas*vit (half-diluted Takra) saturated with Kdla-
salt *, should be taken in a case of Vsttaja £>ula. The

* Kdla La van a generally means ‘Vit-salt’, but here, according to
Palana, it means ‘Sauvarchala-salt’.

Chap. XLII. ]

UTTARA-TANtRA*

2$9

soup of Kuluttha with an adequate quantity of the acid
articles (e. g. pomegranate, etc.) and cooked with the
soup of Ldui bird salted with Saindhava and seasoned
with pepper, exercise a curative efficacy in a case of

the Vdyu-origined type. The compound of Vulmga,
S , igru ) Kampilla , Pathyd> S’y&ma , A mla-vctasa, Suras d,
Asva-karna and Sauvarchala should be taken with wine
in an attack of the Vayu-origined type of Sula. 51—52.

A pulverised compound consisting of Prithvikd ,
A jdji, Chavikd , Yavdni , Vyosha , Chitraka , Pippali \
Pippala-miila and Saindhava pounded together should be
taken with milk or Kdnibalika or Madhvdsava (wine of
honey) or Chukra or Surd (wine) or with Sauviraka
(fermented rice-boilings) as alternatives. The above
pulverised compound should be soaked in the ex-
pressed juice of Matulunga and with the decoction of
Badara several times after the manner of Bhavand
saturation, and the compound should be taken with a
profuse quantity of Hingu , and with sugar. A Varti
made of the same powders and pulverised (pith of)
Dddima w'oocl mixed together should be lteked with
treacle or honey or taken with wine in cases of Vataja
Sula as giving an instantaneous relief. 53.

In a case of Sula due to hunger, light and sparing
diet should be given with lukewarm milk, Yavdgu or
meat-soup charged with clarified butter. Emulsive
diet should be given in a case of Vataja Sula to a
patient of dry or parched organism, use of well seasoned
Ghrita-puras being specially recommended. The patient
should also take V&runi wine wherefrom he will get
relief. $4 — 55- *

Treatment of Pittaja £ula : — The treat-
ment of VAtaja Sula has been described above. Now
I shall narrate the therapeutic agents and remedies in

$6o TI1E fetJSHRtJTA SAMIilTX. [Chap. XLII.

respect of IHttaja-Sala. A person afflicted with an
attack of the present type of the disease, should be
made to vomit without any violent effort by drinking
(a stomachful of) cold water. He should have recourse
to cooling measures and avoid all heat-making ones.
Vessels of copper, silver, or precious stones and cooling
gems and filled up to the brim with water, should be
placed upoq the seat of affection (Sula) in his body.
Treacle, barley, S'a'li rice, milk, (draughts of, clarified
butter, purgatives, the flesh of any J&ngala animals—
these should be prescribed in cases ofTittaja Sula. All
Pitta-generating articles should be avoided and those
which soothe the Pitta should be used. The soup of the
meat of JAngala animals may be taken with sugar as an
alternative. Parushaka, grapes, dates and aquatic fruits
such as S'ringa'taka , etc., should also be taken with
sugar as they tend to relieve Pittaja Sfula. 56.

Treatment of Kaphaja S$ula s— a fit of
J>ula due to the action of the deranged Kapha is aggra-
vated just after eating. Vomiting should be induced
in such a case with draughts of the decoction of
Pippali * Dry fomentations and other heating measures *
should be likewise resorted to and the patient should be
made to take Pippali and S'unthi *(in any shapjp) in
cases of Kaphaja Sula. Pdthd , Vachd , Tri-katu % and
Katuka-rohini should be used with the decoction of
Chitraka y or the soup (of any S>ula-subduing article)
should be taken with an equal part of Arjaka. 57-58.

Seeds and roots of Etanda , Gokshura- roots, S'dla-
parni , Pri$'ni-pami y Brihati \ Kantakdri \ S' rigdla-vinnd (a
killd of Prisni-parni), Sahadevd, Mahdsahd (Mishapami),

* Some commentators, according to Dallana, take (I*ippali to mean
seeds of Madana-phala.

Chap. XLil.]

Uttara-tantrA.

261

Kshudra-sahA (Mudga-parni) and Ikshuraka-roots should
be duly boiled with a Drona measure (sixty-four seers)
of water and should be boiled till reduced to a quarter
part. This decoction should be used with the admix-
ture of Yava-kslidra *. By this compound attacks of
VAtaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types of Jsula
would be thrown off just as the floating clouds are
shattered and driven by the wind. Pippali> Yava ,
Chitraka , Us'ira and Sarjikd-kskdra should be burnt
together and reduced to ashes. Taken with tepid
water, this compound proves curative in an attack of
Kaphaja Sula. 59-60.

Symptoms of Pars'va-£>ula The de-

ranged Kapha in the regions of the PArsva (sides)
arrests the course of local V&yu which thus irritated
causes an immediate distention of the abdomen and a
rumbling in the intestines. A pricking pain is felt in
the affected part, which seems as if being pierced with
needles, and the patient complains of insomnia and has
nc relish for food and his respiration becomes painful
and difficult. The disease is named Ptfrwa-Sala (side-
colic) and is brought on by the action of the deranged
Vdyu and Kapha. 61.

Treatment of Peirs'va-^ula : — A pul-

verised compound of Pushkara- roots, Hingu , Sauvar -
chala , Vit-salt \ Saindhava , Tumburu and Pathyd should
be taken with a decoction of barley in a case of (colic)
pain at the sides, at the region of the heart and at the
region of the bladder. The medicated Ghrita mentioned
in connection with abdominal dropsy due to the en-

* The total weight of the drugs should be 8 seers, according to
Dallana. According to others, however, it should be 12 seers. The
preparation should be used in any shape both internally and externally
a. & a bath, washings, etc.

4 62 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHIlX tChap. XLtt.

larged spleen, or clarified butter mixed with Hingu

should be as well administered in such cases. Vija-
puraka-Sdra* duly cooked in milk as well as draughts
of castor oil mixed with wine, Mastu } milk or meat-soup
(whichever of these may be conducive to the health of
the patient) should be taken and the diet should be taken
with milk or with the meat-soup of J ingala animals. 62.

Symptoms of Kukshi-£ula The de-
ranged and Aggravated bodily Viyu, affecting the fire
of digestion and incarcerated in the region of the
Kukshi (loins) interferes with the digestion of the food
previously taken which remains stiff and undigested
in consequence. The patient breathes heavily owing to
the accumulation of undigested (fecal) matter and tosses
about in agony of pain, finding no relief in any posture
whatever, whether sitting or lying. The disease is called
Kuk&hi-Siula, and is due to indigestion incidental to the
action of the deranged bodily VAyu. 63.

Treatment of Kukshi-^u la:— Vomiting

should be induced and fasting should be prescribed in
the case according to the strength of the patient. Acid
and appetising drugs should be employed for the
alleviation of the Doshas (VAyu and Ama). A decoc-
tion of Ndgara y Dipyaka , Chavya , Hingu , Sauvarchala ,
Vit, i* and the seeds of Mdtulunga , S'ydmd , Uruvuka ,
Brihati and of Kantakdri , should be taken for the relief
of the pain (Sula). Vachd , Sauvarchala , Hingu , Kushtha
Ativishd, Abhayd and Kutaja-secds taken together would
instantaneously relieve Sula. Purgatives should be
administered, and Sneha-Vastis and Nirudha-Vastis
should be applied for the amelioration of the deranged

* Vijapuraka-sdra, according to Dallana, means the fruit of Vija-
puraka. Vijaka*sara (the pith of Vijaka) is, however, a variant.

+ llingu, Souvarchala and Vit-salt should be used as an after-throw.

Chap. XLII.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

263

Doshas according to their nature and intensity. Sneha-
Sveda and poultices should be applied and Dhdnydmla
(fermented paddy-boilings) should be employed as
washes. 64-66.

Symptoms and treatment of Hrich-
Chhula S — The deranged bodily Viyu aggravated
by the vitiated Rasa (chyle) and incarcerated in the
region of the heart through the action of the deranged
Pitta and Kapha, produces £>ula (pain) in the heart
and gives rise to difficulty of respiration. This disease
which is called Hrich-chhula (cardiac colic) is ushered in
through the action of the deranged V&yu and Rasa of
the body. Remedial measures mentioned in connection
with the treatment of the diseases of the heart should be
as well employed in the present malady. 67-68.

Symptoms of Vasti-S»ulaand Mutra-

gula S — The local Vayu aggravated by the suppres-
sion of stool and urine is incarcerated in the region of
the Vasti (bladder) and gives rise to a pain in the
bladder, in the groins and about the umbilicus causing
a further suppression of the stool, urine and flatus.
The disease is called Vasti-Slula (bladder colic) and is
due to the action of the deranged bodily Vafyu. A
cutting pain experienced in the genital, the intestines
and fche loins as well as at the sides and in the inguinal
regions and about the umbilicus and causing a complete
suppression of urine, is called Mutra*Siula. The disease
should be likewise attributed to the action of the
deranged bodily V&yu 69-70.

Symptoms Of Vlt-£ula !— The bodily

Vdyu deranged and aggravated by the use of dry food,
etc., affects or impairs the digestive fire and obstructs
the evacuation of feces accumulated in the bowels
and gives rise to an excruciating pain in the locality by

264 THE SUSIIRUTA SAM HIT A. _ fChap. XLII.

stuffing or choking the channels of the intestines. The

pain is first experienced in the region of the right or
left Kukshi (loin), but it soon extends over the whole
abdomen with rumbling sounds therein. Thirst becomes
unquenchable and vertigo and epileptic fits follow in its
train, and the patient finds no relief even after the
evacuation of the bladder and of the bowels. This
disease is called Vit-Sula and is a very violent one. 71.

Treatment An experienced physician should
instantly employ {in such cases) the medicinal remedies
which have the virtue of eliminating the deranged
Doshas from the system. Fomentations, emetics as well
as Sneha-Vastis and Nirudha-Vastis should be applied,
and the bowel-cleansing compounds dealt with before
should be administered. Medicinal measures mentioned
in connection with the treatment of Uddvarta should
be likewise employed with advantage. 77.

Symptoms of Annaja dula : — A vora-
cious eating in an impaired state of digestive fire,
aggravate the local VAyu which makes the food
taken remain stiffed in the Koshtha. The food thus
undigested in the Koshtha causes an intolerable colic,
which brings on a distension of the abdomen, epileptic
fits, eructation, nausea and an attack of Vilambik^.
The patient shivers, vomits, or passes stool, and even
loses consciousness. Anti-colic (pain-killing) pills, powders
and medicinal Kshdras are recommended in the case.
Ail the medical remedies applicable in cases of Gulma
should likewise be applied in cases of £>ula. 73 — 74.

Thus, ends the forty-second chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of Gulma*

CHAPTER XL III.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of the
disease of the heart (H rid TOga- Prat Ishe*"
dha). i.

Etiology and Nomenclature ' The de-
ranged Doshas of the body, aggravated by such causes
as voluntary repression of any natural urging (of stool,
urine, etc.), external blow or hurt, use of extremely dry
(Ruksha) and heat-making articles of fare in inordinate
quantities or of such articles as are indigestable or are
incompatible in combination or are uncongenial to the
system as well as taking food before digestion, con-
taminate the bodily Rasa (lymph chyle) and find
lodgement in the heart, producing the characteristic pain
in the organ, which is known as Hridroga (the disease
of the heart). The disease may be divided into five
distinct types, of which four are Dosha-origined, ( yiz.—~
V&taja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Sdnnip&tika) and the fifth
is due to the presence of worms (Krimi). The different
symptoms should be first described and then the medical
treatment thereof. 2-3.

Specific symptoms s— In the Vrftaja type,
a pain is felt in the region of the heart which seems as
if being drawn and crushed, pierced and cracked, pricked
and split. Thirst with a burning sensation, a gone-feel-
ing and a sucking pain in the hearty epileptic fit, pers-
piration, fumy eructation and dryness of the mouth,
are the symptoms which characterise the Pitt&ja type.
A sense of heaviness in the chest, secretion of mucus
(from the nose and the mouth), an aversion to food,
feeling of numness (in the body), dulness of appetite and

34

2 66

THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A.

[Chap. XLIII.

a sweet taste in the mouth are the features which mark
the Kaphaja type of the heart-disease. 4-6.

KrimIJa Hrldroga Nausea, salivation
(spitting), piercing and cutting pain (in the heart), dark
vision, an aversion to food, a dull yellow hue of the eyes,
as well as emaciation of the body (D. R. swelling) are
the indications which point to the presence of worms
(Krimija Hridroga) as the exciting factor of the
disease 7.

Supervening symptoms 5— Vertigo and
a sense of exhaustion attended with a feeling of
physical lassitude and emaciation of the body exhibit
themselves as the distressing concomitants in all the
cases, while the supervening symptoms of Kaphaja
worms exhibit thcmselvxs in case of Krimija Hridroga
also. 8.

Medical treatment of the Vaftaja

type : — In a case of the Vitaja type, the patient
should be first treated with a Sneha and then made to
vomit (out the contents of his stomach) with a draught
of the decoction of Dasd-mula mixed with salt and a
Sneha. After being purged he shouid be made to take
a pulverised compound consisting of Pippali , Eld ,
Vachdy Hingu , Yava-ksJtdra , Saindhavti- salt, Sauvarchala ,
S'uthin and Ajanwdd through the medium of the juice
of (acid) fruits, fermented rice-boilings, decoction of
Kulattha y curd, wine, Asava or with any kind of Sneha.
The patient should be made to have his meal of matured
S'dli rice, with the soup of any Jdngala meat cooked
with clarified butter. Oil duly cooked with the Vdyu-
subduing drugs should be applied as a Vasti in an
adequate quantity in the case. 9.

Treatment of Pittaja type s— in a case of
Pittaja-Hridroga, vomiting should be induced with the

Chap. Xtfll. ]

UTTARA-T ANTRA.

267

decoction of S'ri-pari- fruit, Y ashti-madhu and Utpala
(D. R. — treacle) mixed with honey and sugar. Clarified
butter duly cooked with the drugs of the Madhura
group, as well as the decoction efficacious in Pittaja-
fever, should be internally administered. The food of
the patient should be prescribed with the soup of the
flesh of the principal animals of the Jdngala group
cooked with clarified butter, and he should then be
treated with a Vasti, charged with honey and oil
duly cooked with Y ashti-madhu, 10.

Treatment of Kaphaja type In the

Kaphaja type of the disease, vomiting should be
induced with the decoction of Vachi or of Nhnba and
the pulverised medicinal compound prescribed for the
Vdtaja type, should be adminstcred. The patient
should also be advised to take clarified butter with his
food. A decoction of Tri-phald or of the drugs of the
Phalddi (Madana-phaladi — Sutra, Ch. XXXIX) or the
Mustddi (Sutra, Ch. XXXVIII) group, should be pres-
cribed for internal use, or the patient should be purged
with clarified butter mixed with powdered S'ydmd
(Vriddha-ddraka) and Trivrit . A physician skilled in
the art of applying Vasti should prescribe a Vasti
charged with Vaki-oil under the circumstances. 1 £.

Treatment of Krimija type:— in the
type (Krimija) characterised by the persence of
worms, the patient should be first treated with a Sneha.
A meat-diet with curd or (fried and) powdered sesamun
should then be given to the patient fqr three days in
succession after which he should be purged with the
compound of Ajdji and sugar mixed with the salt-
predominating* purgative preparation (see — Sutra,

* Some read “Su-pala-lair-jogaih” in place of *Salava'fiair«jogaih*. It
would mean that the compound should be mixed With fried and powdered
sesamum.

268

THE SlfSHRUTA SAMHlTX. [dhap. xdlt

XLIV.) and mixed with the scented drugs (mentioned
in the Sutra-sthdna, Ch. XLIV). - An adequate quantity
of fermented-ricc boilings (DhanyAmla) with a profuse
quantity of Vidanga should then be internally adminis-
tered, whereby the worms would be dislodged from
the hearts (and expelled through the lower orfices of
the body). A diet consisting of cooked barley grains
saturated with powdered Vidanga should then be given
to*tlie patient. 12.

Thus ends the forty-third chapter of the Uttara Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhiti which treats of the (symptoms and) treatment of Hridroga.

CHAPTER XL1V.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of Jaundice,

etc. (Pandu-roga Pratishedha). r. *
Etiology and Nomenclature The

deranged bodily Doshas of a person addicted to sexual
excesses* or to eating clay or salts or articles of keen
potency and of acid or saline taste or to strong liquors
in excessive quantities or to sleeping in the day, con-
taminate the blood and produce a yellowish (P&ndu)
colour of the skin. This is known as P&ndu-roga and
is divided into four distinct types f according as they
are severally originated through the action of the
deranged Vdta, Pitta, or Kapha, the fourth being the
one incidental to their concerted action. The disease
has got the name of Prfudtt-roga from the fact that a
deep yellow (P&ndu) colour is imparted to the skin of
the patient suffering therefrom. 2

Premonitory symptoms Cracking of
the skin, salivation (spitting) a sense of lassitude in
the limbs, (desire for) eating clay, swelling of the eye-
lids, yellow r colour of stool and urine, and indigestion
arc the premonitory symptoms which usher in an attack
of P&ndu-roga. The diseases known as Kdmald-P&laki-
Pindu (popularly called KAmalA), Kumbha-Kimald,

* Mddhava in his Niddna reads “Vyaydma” (physical exercise) in the
place of “Vyavdya” “sexual enjoyment.” Charaka, however, includes both
“Vyavdyd” and Vydydma” in the long list of the causes of Pdndu-rogo.

t A variant reads that Pdndu-roga is of eight kinds* In that case the
four different varieties of Pandu, separately mentioned below should be
added to the four kinds mentioned here. Charaka says that Pdndu-roga.
is of five different tvpps : — by separating and adding the one due to the
eating of day to the four kinds enumerated here. ,

2*]0 THE SUSHKUTA SAM HIT A. [Chap. XLlV.

Ldgharaka and Alasa (otherwise known as Halimaka)
are all included within Jaundice (PAmdu-roga), the
characteristic symptoms of which are fully enumerated
in succession below. 3-4.

Specific Symptoms 5— A black colour of
the eyes and of the skin marked by the prominent
appearance of black-coloured vein (on the surface), black
colour of the stool and of the urine, blackness of the face
an4 of the finger-nails as well as other symptoms
characteristic of the deranged bodily VAyu are mani-
fested in the Vrftaja type of Pandu. Yellowness of the
eyes and of the skin marked by the appearance of veins
(S*irA) of the same colour (on its surface), yellowness of the
stool and of the urine, yellowness of the face and finger-
nails and other specific symptoms of the deranged Pitta,
mark the Pittaja type of the disease. Whiteness of the
eyes and of the skin, marked by the appearance of veins
of the same colour (on its surface), whiteness of the stool
and urine, whiteness of the face and of the finger-nails
and other specific symptoms of the deranged Kapha
mark a case of the Kaphaja type of the disease. AH
the preceding symptoms are exhibited in a case of the
Sshmipstta type. Now I shall describe the symptoms
which mark the disease known as KAmalA. 5 -8.

The Pitta of a patient suffering from any disease
not radically cured gets deranged by the use of any v
acid, or unwholesome food or drink, and imparts a
(deep) yellow tint to his complexion and produces
physical weakness as well as all the specific symptoms
(of PAndu-roga) described above. This disease is
known as Kstm&lrf. When it is accompanied by a
general swelling (edema) of the body and a crushing
pain in the joints, is called Kumbha-K4ma&, which,
when it developes in its course such symptoms as fever,

Oi»p. XUV.] UTTARHANTRA. 271

aching* pain in the limbs, vertigo, physical langour,
drowsiness and emaciation comes to be known
Lagharaka. This, in its turn, when marked by an
excessive preponderance of the deranged V£yu and
Pitta is called Alasa, otherwise known as Halimaka,
by those who are conversant with its nature. 9-12.

Supervening Symptoms Aversion to
food, thirst, vomiting, fever, headache, dulncss of appetite,
swelling about the neck, weakness, epileptic fits, exhaus-
tion and a pain in the region of the heart arc included
their distressing concomitants. 1 3.

General Treatment : — Having ascertained
the curable nature of an attack of Pandu-roga, the
patient should be treated with clarified butter*. He
should then be purged and vomited with the compounds
containing powdered Haritaki mixed with a copious
quantity of honey and clarified butter. Clarified butter
duly cooked with turmeric or the one known as Trai-
phala-Ghriita + as well as the one known as Tailvaka-
Ghrita J may also be used for the purpose. Drugs
possessed of purgative properties should also be taken
in combination with clarified butter (or clarified butter
duly cooked with purgative drugs should be prescribed).
Half a Pala (four TolAs) of Nikumbha duly cooked in
an adequate quantity (eight Palas) of the urine of a
she-buffalo should be daily used. Similarly half a
Kudava measure of treacle mixed (D. R. duly cooked)

* Some say that the Sneha used should be the Kaly^naka-Ghrita
(Ch. LX II.). Others says that simply matured clarified butter should be
used.

t Traiphala-Ghrita may mean either the Ghrita duly cooked with
Tri-phald or the one known as Traiphala-Ghrita mentioned in. *

£ Similarly Tailvaka-Ghrita may mean the Ghrita of that name men-
tioned in Chap. V. Chikitsita-st^na or the one duly cooked with Tilvaka.

2J2

THE SUSUKUTA SAMHITA.

tChap. XUV,

with pulverised Haritaki should be taken by the
gatient. A decoction of the drugs of the Aragvadhddi
group, may be likewise prescribed for internal use.
Powdered (dead) iron mixed with pulverised Vyosha and
Vidanga , or powdered Haridrd* and Tri-phald should be
licked up with honey and clarified butter, f Any other
medicinal compound mentioned anywhere as remedial
to Gulma should also be administered. 14.

The aggravated Doshas should be gradually elimi-
nated from the system in as much as an quick and ex-
cessive elimination of the Doshas under the circum-
stances might produce swelling in the patient. Either
the expresed juice of Dhdtri or of sugar-cane, or a
Mantha J should be taken with honey by a patient and
he should take wholesome diet. 15-16.

Clarified butter duly cooked with the Kalka and
decoction of the two kinds of Vrihati , Rajani , S'ukdkhyd
(1 S'ukcbs'itnbi ), Kdkddani , Kdkamdchi , Addri-vimbi and
Kadamba-pushpi ( Bhumi-Kadambd ) should be taken as
a remedy for Ffitadtt-roga. Pippali - powder dissolved in
milk should also be taken according to the condition
of the appetite. The use of a decoction of Yashti-
tnadhUy or of powdered Yashtwnadhu mixed with
honey would likewise prove efficacious. Powdered

* Here we have followed Dallana in the text. Some take Haridri to
mean DAm-Haridri.

+ According to Charaka’s recipe, however, we find that the two
compounds here have been combined into one and there we find the
definite mention of D4rvi (Diru-haridrd). In our practice also we
follow Char aka in this case.

t Mantha is prepared by mixing powdered grains of barley with clari-
fied butter and a copious quantity of water. Some commentators, however,
on the authority of other medical works, are of opinion that in cases of
P4ndu (jaundice) the word “Mantha*’ is technically used for the prepara-
tion of the powdered grains of barley mixed with the expressed juice of
A'malaki and of sugar-cane and with honey.

Chap. XLIV.j

UTTARA-TANTRA,

273

leaves of Tri-phald and powdered (dead) iron should be
frequently taken as an electuary in combination with
cow's urine. A compound composed of powdered coral,
pearl, antimony and conch-shell, or powdered Giru
mrittikd (ferrugnious earth) should be similarly used
by the patient. 17-18.

A compound consisting of half a seer of powdered
goat’s dung together with a Pala weight of each of the
drugs known as Vit- salt, Haridrd and Saindhava-s alt,
should be licked with honey by a patient living on
wholesome diet. A compound of Mandure (iron-rust),
Agni (Chitraka), Vidanga, Pathyd , Tri-katu all taken in
equal parts with Tdpya (Svarna-m&kshika) equal to their
combined weight should be duly soaked in cow’s urine
and formed into a lambative with the addition of honey,
the same being prescribed for an immediate cure of a
serious type of Pdndu-roga. 19-20.

Vibhitaka , Mandura (iron-rust), Ndgara and Til a
should be pounded together and made into a paste with
the addition of a profuse quantity of treacle. Pills
prcpaied from this compound should be administered
through the medium of Takra whereby a violent attack
of jaundice would be defeated. Pills of the KalAya
weight of each of Sauvarckala , Hingu and Kirdta-tikta
pasted together, should be taken with tepid water. As
an alternative, a lambative compound of Murvd ,
Haridrd and Amalaka pounded together and alternately
dried and soaked in cow’s urine for a week, should be
given to be licked by the patient. 21-22.

A patient suffering from Pandu-roga should observe
a proper regimen of diet and take two-TolA-w eight of
the compound of the powders of Vald and Chitraka
(with cow’s urine or tepid water). The compound of
Soindfmva salt and powdered S'z^rw-seeds taken in equal

35

274

THE SUSIiKUTA SAMHIXX.

[Chap. XLIV.

parts should be taken with tepid water, followed by a
meal of cooked rice with milk. The decoction of the
drugs of the Nyagrodhddi group should be taken, when
cold, with honey and sugar followed by a proper regimen
of diet. Powders of the drugs included within the S'dla*
sdrddi group or of Amalaka should be formed into a
lambative with the addition of honey and given to be
licked by the patient. 23-26.

The pulverised compound of Vidanga , Musta , Tri-
phald , Ajamodd , Parushaka , Vyosha and Chitraka as
well as clarified butter, honey, sugar and treacle should
be dhly cooked in the decoction of the drugs of the
S^dla-sdrddi group till reduced to the consistency of a
lambative. It should then be taken down and preserved
inside a covered vessel prepared of Mokshaka (Mush-
kaka). This lambative proves curative in cases of
PAndu attended l with a general edema as well as in
cases of the violent types of KdmalA. 27.

Treatment of K&mala, etc \—Tiibhandi

(Trivrit) taken with sugar as well as Gavdkshi or S’unthi
taken with treacle, is beneficial to a patient suffering
from an attack of Kdmald. Clarified butter duly
cooked with Kdleya - wood and mixed with turmeric
as an after-throw is also efficacious. In the alternative
the patient should take Srotdnjana and S'ildjatu with
cow’s urine in a case of Kumbha-Ksfmalrf. Manduia
(rust of iron) kept immerged in cow’s urine should be
likewise taken with Saindhava - salt continually for a
month. Mandura should be burnt in the fire of Vibhitaka -
wood and cooled with cow’s urine. The process should
be repeated eight times in succession. The iron-rust
thus tempered should be subsequently reduced to
powders. Licked with honey it would act as a speedy
cure in cases of Kumbha-Kdmald. 28-30.

Chap. XLIV.]

tfTTARA-TAfttRA.

275

Stundhava - salt once made red-hot by heating (in the
fire of Vibhitaka- wood) should be cooled in cow’s urine.
Iron-rust (Mandura) should be successively heated in fire
and cooled with cow’s urine as directed above, the
process being repeated many times. The two substances
(Saindhava and iron-rust) thus prepared, (taken in equal
parts) and made into a paste with (five times of) cow’s
urine, should be cooked on an oven, care being taken to
guard against their ignition. When dried, the com-
pound should be reduced to powder and taken with
Udasvit (a kind of Takra). The medicine acts as a
good appetiser and proves curative in cases of PAndu.
The patient using it should ^take his diet with Takra
after the assimilation of the medicine. Clarified butter
duly cooked with the expressed juice of Drdkshd y
Guduchi and Amalaki proves curative in cases of
Ltfgharaka. 31.

Articles Of Diet : —Arishtas and Asavas

prepared with treacle or with honey or with sugar or
with cow’s urine or with Kshara (alkali) as well as the
essence of meat of any JAngala animal saturated with
clarified butter and mixed with the expressed juice of
Amalaka or of Kola should be prescribed and meals of
cooked barley grains or of S'dli rice and the prepara-
tions prescribed in cases of swelling (Sopha) should be
daily taken by a patient suffering from an attack of
PAndu-roga. 32.

Treatment of supervening Symp-
toms S — The supervening symptoms such as difficulty
of breathing, diarrhoea, aversion to food, cough, epileptic
fits, thirst, vomiting, colic pain, fever, swelling (Sopha),
burning sensation in the body, indigestion, hoarseness,
lassitude, etc. should be remedied on the principles laid
down in the S>Astras with due regard to the nature and

276 TIIE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XLIV.

intensity of the deranged bodily Doshas, severally lying
at their roots. 33.

Prognosis S — If a patient afflicted with Pandu
have an edematious swelling of the extremities with
an emaciation of the abdominal region and vice versa
or if he have a swelling of the scrotum or of the
genitals or about the anus or if he be suffering from
fever or diarrhea or be lying in a sub-comatose state, he
should be given up and should not be attended by a
physician caring anything for his fame. 34.

Thus emls the forty-fourth chapter of the Uttara-Tanlra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of
P&ulu-rogn* t

CHAPTER XLV.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which deals
with the symptoms and) medical treatment of Hemorrh-
age (Rakta- Pitta- Pratishcdha). i.

Cause and Pathology : — Excessive indul-
gence in grief, fright or anger, excessive physical labour,
exposure to the sun and fire, constant use of pungent,
acid, saline and alkaline food, or, of articles of fare which
arc keen or heat-making in potency, or incompatible
in their combination, or are followed by deficient gastric
or intestinal digestion arc the factors which tend to
aggravate the Rasa (chyle), which, in its turn, aggravates
the Pitta. The aggravated Pitta thus imperfectly assimi-
lated affects or invades in virtue of its own essence the
blood (lit, leads to its imperfect digestion) which finds
an outlet through the upper or the lower channels of the
body or through the both. The deranged blood accumu-
lated in the Amdsaya (stomach) finds out an upward
outlet, while it flows out through the lower orifices in
the event of its continuing in a similar state in the
Pakv&saya (intestines), and it escapes through both the
upward and downward orifices in the event of its being
deranged and accumulated in both the Am as ay a and the
Pakvasaya. According to several authorities, the ejected
blood in the disease comes from the spleen and the
liver, 2.

Prognosis S - A case of Rakta-pitta in which
the blood finds outlet through an upward channel of the
body is amenable, while palliation is all that is possible
in a case in which it flowes out through a downward
orifice of the body. A case marked by the emission of

THE StJSHROTA SAMHITX [Chap- XLV.

blood through both these outlets, upward and downward,
should be regarded as incurable. 3.

Premonitory Symptoms A sense of
lassitude in the limbs, desire for cooling things, a sense
as if fumes are rising in the throat, vomiting and fetor
of blood in the breath are the symtoms which usher
in an attack of Rakta-pitta. The number of the cases
of Rakta-pitta as well as the aggravation of the different
Doshas involved in each case should be ascertained
from the colour and nature of the ejected blood (as
described before in Chap. XlV-Sutra-sth&na). 4-5.
Supervening Symptoms s— Weakness,

laboured breathing, cough, fever, vomiting, mental
aberration (lit : a state like intoxication), yellowness
of complexion, burning sersation in the body, epileptic
fits, acidity of the stomach, restlessness, extreme pain in
the region of the heart, thirst, loss of voice (D. R.
loose stool), heat in the head, fetid expectoration, aver-
sion to food, indigestion and absence of sexual desire
(D. R. bending of the body after sexual act) are the
usual complications in a case of Rakta-pitta. 6.

Symptoms of Incurable Types:—

In a case of Rakta-pitta the emitted matter resembling
the washings of meat or drug-decoction, or turbid water
or fat or pus, or being liver-coloured or dark-black or
blood-red in colour or looking like a ripe Jambu-irmt or
blackish blue or variously coloured like a rain-bow or
having a very fetid smell as well as the presence of the
above mentioned supervening symptoms — these are the
indications which show that the case should be given up
as incurable . 7.

General Principles of Treatment :—

It is improper to arrest the emission of blood imme-
diately at the outset of the disease if the patient be a

Chap. XLV.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

279

sufficiently strong man, in as much as such a procedure
may bring on ah attack, of * Pdndu-roga, Grahani,
Kushtha (cutaneous diseases), Gulma, or fever or enlarge-
ment of the spleen. An attack in which the blood
makes a downward course should be arrested with
emetic medicines, while purgatives should be exhibited
in a case in which the blood finds an upward course.
But weak patient, under the circumstances, should be
treated in both cases with soothing remedies. Fasting
should be first enjoined in the case of an excessive emis-
sion t of blood in respect of a strong patient with an
unimpaired digestion and an unemaciated frame. A
Peyd prepared with a small quantity of rice should be
given to the patient after fasting Tarpana measures,
decoctions of digestive drugs, as well as a variety of
medicinal lambatives and Ghritas should be the proper
applications in the disease under discussion. Purgation
should be induced with the compound of Drdkshd ,
Yashti-madhu , Kds'marya and sugar, while vomiting
should be induced with an emetic compound consisting
of Yashti-madhu mixed with honey. 8 — ir.

Articles of Fare:— The use of milk, the
drugs of cold-producing potency (e g. the drugs of the
Utpal&di group), essence of the meat of an animal of the
Jdngala group, soup of Satina (ceriais), S'rfZnrice, Shash-
/^-grains, leaves of Patola , S'elu } Sunishanna , Yuthikd

* Both Chakrapini and Vrinda read etc,” t\e. t they say

that it may bring on an attack of heart-disease also, h

f Both Chakrapini’and Vrinda read i.e. in cases of

upward emission. There is also another variant i.e. in

cases of excessive upward emission or in cases where a good deal of the
vitiated Doshas takes an upward course. *

X Additional Text 1 — Meat*essence (Rasa) and soup(Vusha) seasoned
wUh clarified butter prepared from cow’s milk.

28 o

THE SUSHRUTA SAMIHXX.

[Chap. XLV.

and Sindhuvdra (Nirgundi) as well as the tender sprouts
of Vata and Atimuktd (Tinduka) as pot-herbs and cooked
with clarified butter are recommended as diets. Soup of
the meat of pigeons, S'amk/uz (conch) and tortoise as
well as the gruels mentioned before mixed with the
expressed juice of Dhdtri and pomegranate and with a
profuse quantity of clarified butter should be given to
the patient as diet. Milk should be duly cooked in
combination with the drugs of the Utpalddi group, and
the cream therefrom should be likewise prescribed with
a copious quantity of honey and sugar. Cold Pradehas,
honey, sugar, and clarified butter are said to be
beneficial in cases of Rakta-pitta. 1 2 — 1 3.

An experienced physician should prescribe any one
of the four lambativcs composed of the powders of
the flowers of Madhuka , S' obhdnj ana y Koviddra or of
Priyangu , mixed with honey to be licked up by a patient
suffering from Rakta-pitta. Similarly lambatives of
Dnrbd , or the tender leaves of Vata , or of white Karnika
pasted together with the honey should be given to be
licked up by the patient*. Dates and other friuts of
the same therapeutic virtue, taken with honey, would
prove efficacious in the disease. 14 — 15.

Medicinal compounds mentioned in connection with
the treatment of Raktitis&ra (blood-dysentery) may be as
well employed with advantage in the present instance.
A piece of sugar-cane devoid of its skin and crushed
should be kept immersed in cold water contained in a
new earthen pitcher. The picther with its lid off should
be kept in an open place for a night. Its contents
duly strained in the morning should be given with pow-
dered Utpala and honey to a patient suffering from

# Dallana takes only Durbd and Vata under one recipe. Some coiq-
pientators would prescribe all these together under one recipe ,

Chap. XLV.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

28l

Rakta-pitta. A cold infusion of Jdtnbu , Amra and
Arjuna should be taken with honey. As an alterna-
tive, the expressed juice of Udumbara fruit should be
taken (with honey). 16 — A.

The best six Yogas : — A paste (Kaika) of
Trapusi - roots in combination with honey and washings
of rice or two Tol&s of the pasted Yashti-madhu should
be taken (with the same vehicles). A compound con-
sisting of Chandana , Yashti-madhu , and Rodhra taken
in equal parts or Karanja - seeds made into a paste with
sugar and honey should be similarly used In a similar
way, the pith of Ingudi together with Yashti-madhu
should be taken. As an alternative, salt (Saindhava)
and Karanja - seeds turned into a paste with curd-cream
should be taken lukeworm for three days in succession
by a person suffering from an attack of Rakta-pitta.
The six preceding medicinal compounds act as excellent
cures for the disease under discussion. 16.

Pathyd should be employed as an errhine after the
manner of Avapida-Nasya in the event of the blood
passing through the nostrils. In case of excessive
haemorrhage (in the disease) the patient should drink
blood in combination with honey, or eat a goafs raw
liver with the bile. 17.

Clarified butter duly cooked with the admixture
of an adequate quantity of the expressed juice of (the
bark of) Palds § a trees should be taken, when cool, in
combination with honey, or clarified butter prepared
by churning the milk duly cooked with* /the expressed
juice of (the bark of) the Vanaspati-trees (Vata, etc.)
should be used with sugar. A Pala weight of each of
Drdkshdy Us* ira y Padmaka and sugar should be kept
immersed in cold water during the (whole) night This
cold infusion would cure a case of Rakta-pitta. A

36

282

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XLV.

draught of milk with an equal quantity of water is also
re:ommended for a patient comforming to a proper
regimen of diet and conduct. 18.

The watery secretion of the dung of a horse or a bull
should be taken with honey and sugar. In the alter-
native, powders of the seeds of Vdstuka or (of the
roots, of Tanduliyaka- plants should be licked with honey.
A lambative formed of L&ja (parched paddy) and
Anjana * mixed with honey, or powdered Tugd-kshiri
mixed with honey and sugar should be licked. A patient
suffering from an attack of Rakta-pitta should take a
compound of Drdkshd , Tikta-rohini , Yashti-madhu and
sugar with cold water, or lick a compound of pulverised
Pathyd , Ahinsrd and Rajani with clarified butter, ir.

The compound of (blue), Utpala Sourdshtra mrithikd
(red earth), Priyangu , Lodhara , polcns of lotus and
sugar mixed together and taken with honey and a
decoction of Vdsaka would speedily stop the emission in
a virulant type of Rakta-pitta. Similarly a compound
consisting of flowers of Khadira , Jambu , Arjuna , (red)
Koviddra , S' iris ha , Lodhra , A sana, S'dlmali and S'igru ,
pounded together and mixed with honey should be
licked by the patient in a case of Rakta-pitta. 20—21.

The alkaline water prepared with the ashes of
lndivara and taken with honey, powdered Karanja-seeds
taken with honey and clarified butter and the decoction
of Jambu , Arjuna and Amra— these three compounds
prove curative in cases of Rakta-pitta. A paste made of
the roots and flowers of Mdtulunga should also be taken
with the washings of rice. 22 — 23.

* Kildnjana is a variant, in place of L^ja and Anjana. For KdUnjana
Dallana reads Souvirdnjana. This should be the proper reading because
there is a word in the receipe which shows that there will be only one
thing and not two.

Chap. XLV.J

UTTARA-TANTRA.

283

A solution of milk or water saturated with sugar
should be applied into the nostrils in the event of
bleeding from the nose. The expressed juice of grapes,
clarified butter prepared by churning milk or the express-
ed juice of sugar-cane should be taken cold (through
the nostrils) in combination with sugar *. All cooling
measures and sweet-drugs should be employed in the
present disease 24 — 25.

Asthapana and Anuvdsna The ap-

plication of an Asthapana-Vasti charged with milk
duly cooked with the drugs of the Viddri-gandhddi
group and mixed with honey, clarified butter, sugar
and Drdkshd , proves extremely efficacious in the disease
under discussion. The application of an Anuv&sna-
Vasti charged with clarified butter * would be attend-
ded with equal benefit. The drugs known as Pri-
yangn, Lodhra , Souvirdnjana, Gairika , Utpala , Suvarna -
gairika , Kdliyaka , conch-shell, Chandana, sugar, Asva-
gandhd, Ambuda , Yashti-madhu , Mrindla and Sougan -
dhika , taken in equal parts, should be pounded together
and mixed with copious quantities of milk, honey and
clarified butter. This solution should be injected into the
rectum after the manner of Nirudha-Vasti. The patient
should be sprinkled with cold water and given his diet
with milk after which clarified butter duly cooked with
Yashti-madhu should be injected into the rectum of
the patient after the manner of AnuvSsana-Vasti. This
measure proves extremely beneficial in cases of
down-coursing Rakta-pitta and violent types of bloocf-
dysentery. In the case of an excessive discharge of

* S'rikantha Datla, the commentator of Vrinda, would mix sugar with
the juice of sugar-cane only and not with the other two. All these should
be applied into the nostrils.

i%4 the SUSHRl/TA SAMHITX [Chap, XLV.

blood, if the patient be strong enough, vomiting should be
induced after the cessation of the blood-discharge. 26-27.

Urethral-injections composed of the aforesaid drugs
should be applied (after the manner of Uttara-vasti) in
the event of bleeding from the bladder. Measures laid
down in connection with the treatment of Rakta-pitta
should be resorted to in cases of bleeding-piles. In cases
of menorrhagia as well as in cases of excessive bleeding
incidental to any surgical operation, the above measures
(of the medical treatment) should be adopted by an ex-
perienced physician. The subsequent treatment of the
cases should be determined by the nature and intensity
of the deranged bodily Doshas as well as of the blood
involved therein. 28- 29.

Thus ends the forty-fifth chapter of the Utlara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhild which deals wifh (the symptoms and) the medical treatment of
Rakta-pitta.

CHAPTER XLVI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with (the symptoms and) the medical treatment of faint-
ing fits (Murchchhsf-Pratishectha). i.

Defi nation S — The deranged and aggravated
Doshas of the body of a person who is emaciated or
accustomed to the use of incompatible articles of food
or who has become very weak on account of a sudden
suppression of his natural urgings or of any external
blows or injur>’ give rise to fainting fits. The deranged
bodily Vayu, etc. choking up the sense-carrying nerves
of the body, produces that giddy state in a patient in
which the world seems to vanish from the eyes of the
afflicted person and the perception of the pleasure or
pain is suspended for the time being. The patient, in
consequence of this suspension of the sense-perception
drops down insensible as a log of wood and this disease
is called Murchchha or Moha (fainting). It admits of
being divided into six kinds or types according as an
attack is due to the action of the deranged Doshas
separately or to that of blood, wine or poison, but a
predominance of the deranged Pitta may be detected in
all forms of the diseases due to any cause whatever. 2.

Premonitory Symptoms s— Pain or op-
pression of the heart, yawning, lassitude, loss of cons-
ciousness and of strength arc the symptoms which
usher in an attack of the disease (MurchchhA) according
to the nature of the deranged bodily Dosha lying at its
root. 3.

The natural elements, water (Ap) and earth (Kshiti)
abound with the attribute of Tamas (insensibility). A
smell of blood also contains the same attribute, Tamas.

286

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. tChap. XLVL

It is therefore that persons generally lose their conscious-
ness at the smell of blood. Several authorities hold that
the loss of consciousness in these instances happens in
virtue of the natural properties of the thing itself, viz.,
blood, wine and poison which also possess these pro-
perties in a greater degree and it is therefore that an use
of cither of these substances suspends animation and
produces Moha (fainting). 4-5.

Symptoms* — Acascof Murchchha (fit of uncon-
sciousness) due to the effects of (deranged) blood is charac-
terised by stiffened condition of the limbs and by the
fixedness of the eyes (Drishti) and by deep breathing.
Delirious talks, mental aberration and the state of the
patient convulsively lying flat on the earth until the wine
is perfectly assimilated into the system are the symptoms
of a case of Murchchhd due to the effects of wine ; while
shivering, drowsiness, thirst and numbness of the body)
attended with the specific symptoms of poisoning form
the general characterstics of the type due to the effect
of poison. 6.

General Treatment S— Constant sprinkling
of water over the body (water-spray) plunge-bath in cold
water, contact of cold gems and garlands of flowers, cold
plasters and compresses, (cold) breeze and fanning, cold
and perfumed drinks and cooling measures in general
are efficacious in all cases of the desease under
discussion. Cordials prepared with the expressed juice of
IkshUy Piydla and Drdkshd and with sugar or with the
expressed juice of Drdkshd and Madhuka ( Maula ) or
those prepared by boiling Kdsmarya and Khatjura or
clarified butter duly cooked with the drugs of the
Jivaniya group with the d**ugs of the Madhura group, or
the essence of J&ngala meat in combination with the
expressed juice of pomegranate should be taken in a

Chap. XLVI ]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

287

case of Murchchhl The diet should consist of cooked
red S'dli- rice or barley grains or Srt/2#tf-pulsc.* ^ — 8.

Specific Treatment:— A compound con-
sisting of NdgLi-kes’ara, Marietta , Us'ira , the kernal of
Kola as well as Visa (lotus stock) and Mrinila (lotus-
stem) taken in equal parts should be taken with the
decoction of Satina (D. R. — with cold water). Pippali
with honey or Pathyd w ith sugar should also be taken.
The mouth and the nostrils should be pressed close
during a fit and the breast-milk should be given to the
patient to be drunk. 9.

Strong medicinal errhinc should be administered and
strong emetics should be as well employed in cases of
repeated attacks of the fit. Clarified butter duly cooked
and prepared w ith the decoction of Haritaki or with
expressed juice of Amalaki should be prescribed. The
decoction remedial to Pitta ja-fever should be given in a
cold state, mixed wdth Drdksha , sugar, parched paddy,
Nilotpala and Padma and well perfumed with any
good-smelling scent. 10.

Sannyasa : — The case of a patient lying in a
comatous state and incapable of being roused up or
brought to under the circumstances owing to the aggrava-
ted nature of the delusion (unconsciousness) due to an
extensive preponderance of the deranged bodily Dosha
(involved therein) should be looked upon by an intelli-
gent physicion as extremely hard to cure. This is said
to be a case of Sannyrfsa (Epilepsy ?). Just as a lump of
clay, when throwm into water, should tfc instantaneously
taken up before it is being finally desolved therein, so a
patient lying unconscious under an attack of suspended

* Chakrapdni and Vrinda both -read Mudga also in the list of the
diet.

288

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XLVI.

animation ( Sannyisa ) should be speedily restored to
consciousness with the help of medecinal remedies before
the process of final dissolution ( lit. — death ) sets in his
body, il — 12.

Treatment : — The patient should be tried to
be roused up with the application of strong eye-salves
(Anjana), unguents and inhalation of smoke (Dhuma) or
by pricking needles into his finger-nails or by discoursing
sweet words and music in his hearing or by shaking his
limbs roughly or by rubbing his skin with the fruits of
Atmagupta creepers. An attack of the present disease
not amenable to the above remedies but attended with,
salivation, laboured breathing, retention of stool and
urine and distension of the abdomen should be given up
as irremediable. Strong emetics and purgatives should
be exhibited after the return of consciousness and
diet should consist of light articles of fare. S'ildjatu *
mixed with Tri-phald , Chitraka , S’unthi , etc. should be
employed in combination with sugar and continued for
a month. Matured clarified butter should be used in
particular. Medicinal compounds remedial to any case
of fever originated by the Dosha in the case may be as
well prescribed in any case of Murchchhd ; and a case
dtie to the action of poisom should be remedied with
the antitoxine remedies (mentioned in the Kalpa
Sthdna). 13—14.

Thus ends the forty-sixth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitfi which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of Murchchhtf.

* According to Dallana S'iUjatu should be prepared with the said
drugs after the manner of Bh4van4 saturation and then be applied with
sugar.

CHAPTER XL VII.

Now shall discourse on the (symptoms and) medical
treatment of alcoholism and its kindred maladies
(P£ns(tydya~Pratishedha). i.

Properties and actions of Wine

Wine is heat-making in its potency, keen or sharp in its
properties, subtile in its essence, acts as a soaker or
cleanser of moisture and albuminous matter (Vis'ada), is
dry, and instantaneous in its action (Asukara), stimula-
ting or exhilarating in its effect (Vyav&yi) and is -diffu-
sive (Vik&s'i). It destroy cold and shivering by virtue
of its heat-making potency. It suspends ail cognitive
process (lit.-intellectual motions) on account of its keen-
ness or sharpness, enters into every limb and member
of the body by reason of its subtlety ( Sukshmatva ),
destroys Kapha ( phlegm ) and semen in virtue of its
Vais'adya, enrages or aggravates the bodily V&yu on
account of its dryness ( Rukshmtva ), and is instantaneous
in its action by reason of its As'uk&ritva. It is exhila-
rating on account of its Vyavdyitva and diffusive
(coursing swiftly all through the body) for its Vikds'itva,
Wine is acid in its taste, is light and appetising, and
produces fresh relish for food. Others assume the pre-
sence of*all the tastes except the saline one in it. 3 — 4*
Wine taken in combination with cooked meat and
boiled rice, or any other articles of food profusely
saturated with a Sneha (clarified butter, etc.) adds to
the longevity, muscular strength and corpulency of a
person (using it in moderate quantities) and to the exhi-
larated state of mind accompanied with beauty, fortitude,
vigour and valour and these benefits one may derive
frpm the proper use of wipe. This fiery liquid in com-

37

290

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XLVII.

bination with the aggravated bodily fire ( Kdya-Agni )
produces the symptoms of intoxication and unconcious-
ness, etc. ( Mada ) in a foolish person taking it without
food or in an empty stomach and in an inordinate
quantity. 5..

Evil effects Of Drinking Excessive
drinking produces incidental nescience which gradually
creeps into and clouds the sense-perceptions, destroying
all power of self control (control over the sense-organs)
and giving publicity to the innermost thoughts (in the
mind) of the intoxicated person. 6.

Three stages of Alcoholic Intoxica-
tion ! — There arc three stages of intoxication — viz.,
the first, the second or intermidate and the third or last.
The first or preliminary stage ( of intoxication ) is
marked by an exhilarated state of mind with increased
valour, and conviviality as well as satisfaction and
talkativeness, etc. The second or intermediate stage is
indicated by incoherent speech, exhilaration and the
performance of proper and improper acts. In the third
or last stage the man lies down unconscious, bereft of
all powers of action, of memory and of judging the ethic
effects of his acts. 7.

A man who is in the habit of taking fatty food or in
whom 5 >leshm& predominates, or in whose constitution,
there is only a little of Pitta, is not so easily affected by
the action of wine, which, however, proves distressing in
a person of contrary nature. Wine, if taken daily without
food by a man in an empty stomach, gives rise to many
distressing and dangerous diseases in his organism and
leads to the ultimate dissolution of his body. 8-9.

Cases where wine Is prohibited

.Wine should not be taken by a person under the in-
fluence of anger, grief, fright, thirst or hunger. The use

Chap, XLVIL] UTTARA-TANTRA. 2 91

of \virt£ is prohibited immediately after a fatiguing
journey, physical exercise or an act of load-carrying,, dr
after the repressing of any physical urging, or after the
use of excessively acid food, (D. R. excessive water and
food) to the full, or before the proper digestion of food
or by a weak person, or by one suffering from the effects
of heat. In the above cases, wine undoubtedly proves
a source of a host of bodily derangements such as
PAnAtyaya, Paramada, PAnAjima and the violent PAna-
vibhrama the characterstic symptoms of which I shall
presently describe. 10.

Specific symptoms of P^n^tyaya : —

The Vtftaja type of Psfoa'tyaya is marked by such
symptoms as numbness and aching pain in the limbs,
palpitation, a catching and pricking pain in the region
of the heart and headache. Perspiration, delirium,
dryness of the mouth, burning sensation and fainting
fits (loss of consciousness) ;and yellowness of the face
and eyes are the features which distinguish the Pittaja
type (of PAnAtyaya). Vomiting, shivering and water-
brash are the indications which mark the Kaphaja type.
The symptoms of all the three preceeding types being
exhibited in the one due to the concerted action of the
three deranged bodily Doshas— Tri-Doshaja type of
PAnAtyaya. 1 1 .

Symptoms of Para-mada Heat and a

s.nse of heaviness in the body, bad taste in the mouth,
excessive accumulation of Sleshma in the body, an
aversion to food, supression of stool and urine, thirst,
headache and a crushing pain in the joints are the
symptoms which the learned physicion sets down to
Pararmada (reactionary effects of the abuse of wine). 12.

Pdiidjirna and Pdna-Vibhrama

Distension of the abdomen (tympanites), acid or sour

igi THE SUSIiKUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XLVII.

taste (in the mouth), vomiting, deficient gastric diges-
tion are the symptoms which are exhibited in a PrfnsC-
jirna type (alcoholic indigestion). Aggravation of the
deranged Pitta should be regarded by a physicion as
the exciting factor of the disease. The malady which
exhibits such symptoms as piercing pain in the heart
and limbs, vomiting, fever, a sensation of the rising of
fumes into the throat, salivation, epileptic fits, headache,
a burning sensation in the throat and an aversion to
all sorts of food and wine (in connection with an abuse
of wine) is called Prfna-Vibhrama. 13 -14.

Prognosis S — A patient suffering from the effects
of excessive drinking and exhibiting such symptoms
as protuded upper lip, excessive shivering or burning
sensation and clamminess of the face, black or blue
colour of the tongue, lips or teeth and yellowness or
blood-colour of the eyes should be givin up as incurable.
Hiccough, fever, vomiting, shivering, tremor, cramp of
the sides, cough and vertigo are the supervening symp-
toms ( Upadrava ) which are found in all forms of
PanAtyaya (alcoholism). 1 5.

Treatment of Vsftaja type s— Now hear
me describe the medicinal remedies, for all the above
said maladies. Wine saturated with the mixture of
pulverised Chukra , Marietta , Adraka > Dipya (YamAni),
Kushtha and Souvarchala should be given for the relief
of the Vtft&ja type of PAnAtyaya, or one mixed with
Pritkvikd , Dtpyaka , Matwushadhi and Hingu , or with
Souvarchala should be taken for comfort. ShAdavas or
cordials made of Amrdtaka , Amra-fruits> Ddditna and
Mdtulunga should be given for relief. In the alternative,
. thft cooked flesh of an animal of Anupa group id tor-
toise, etc. should be seasoned with the expressed juice of
above fruits and be taken. 16.

Chap. XLVII.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

293

Treatment of PIttaJa type:— in the

Pittaja-type of Pdndtyaya, wine mixed with the decoc-
tion of the drugs of the Madhura group and saturated
and flavoured with the admixture of sugar and scented
drugs should be taken, or wine profusely mixed with the
expressed juice of sugar-cane should be taken and fully
vomited out, a short while thereafter. Meat-juice (Rasa)
of Ldva , Ena and Tittira unmixed with any acid, or
Mudga soup should be taken with sugar and clarified
butter. 17.

Treatment of Kapha ja and Tri-
Doshaja type, etc. In the Kaphaja type of
Pdndtyaya, the mucus should be eliminated by taking
a potion of wine mixed with the expressed juice or
decoction of Vimibi and Vidula (Vetasa). Meat-juice
of any fatty Jdngala animal mixed with bitter and
and pungent articles as also the Mudga - soup made bitter
and pungent should be taken as beneficial to the patient.
The diet should consist of preparations of barley, flesh
of Jdngala animals and also the Kapha-subduing articles,
as well as those calculated as remedial to the present
type of Pdndtyaya. The above kinds of medicines and
diet should be combinedly applied in the one due to
the concerted action of the three Doshas of the body
(Tri-Doshaja type), while in the Dvi~Doshaja types, the
treatment should be according to the nature of the
predominant Doshas. 18 — 19.

Now I shall describe the medicinal compounds which
tend to relieve the delirious state of mind and may be
employed for the relief of all forms of Pdnityaya in
general. The fine powder of Ndga-puskpa , Mdgadkikd ,
Eld , Madhuka , Dhdnya , Ajdji and Mancha taken in
equal parts mixed copiously with the expressed juice of
Kapittha i water and Earns /taka should be duly taken

294 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XLVli.

in all forms of PAnAtyaya after the mixture is strain-
ed through a piece of cloth. The body of the patient
should be anointed with a paste of Haridrd } Padma ,
Paripelava , Karavira , Padmaka , drugs of the Sdnvddi
group and acquatic flower pasted togather, and clear
and cold water should be sprinkled over the body of the
patient in a case of MadAtyaya. 20—21.

Panaks : — A Ptfnak prepared with Tvak, Patra,
Chocha , Marietta , Eld ) Ndga-pushpa and flowers of
S'leshmdtaka ground together into a paste and mixed
with treacle and Drdkshd , should be filtered and per-
fumed and given to a person suffering from an attack of
PAnAtyaya. The patient would find relief by the frequent
use of a Panaka (draughts) composed of Yashti-madhu ,
Katurohini \ Drdkshd and Trapusha- roots, or of Kdrpdsa-
roots, Ndga-vald and Suvarckald (SurjAvarta) all taken
in equal parts. 22 — 23.

Treatment of Para-mada A Pafoaka

( cordial ) made of the fruits of Kdshmarya , Daru ,
Dddinia , Vit, Pippali, Drdkshd pasted together and
disolvcd in water and taken in combination with the
expressed juice of Vijapuraka , instantly gives relief in
discomforts due to an abuse of wine (Para-mada).
PAnakas made of sugar, Drdkshd , Madhuka , Jiraka,
Dhdnya, Krislind{ Pippali) and Trivrit, or of Souvarchala,
the meat-soup (Rasa) of any fatty JAugala animal and
Phaldmla should be taken. Cold infusion of Bhdrgi
would be found beneficial in sprinkling. 74 — 25.

Treatment of PsfasCjirna Vomiting
should be induced with an Anjali measure of milk
duly cooked with the admixture of Ikshvdku, Dhdmd !-
rgava, Brikshaka and two kinds of Udumvarikd after
which the patient should be advised to take wine in
the evening in a case of indigestion due to an abuse

Chap* XLVII.3 UTTARA-TANTRA. 295

of wine (Pfiinfitjirna). Phaldmla in combination with
Tvak, Pippali , Ndga-pushpa , Vid, Hingu , Marietta and
Eld, or a compouud consisting of Saindhava ,

Chabya , £ 7 #, Hingu, Pippali, Pippali-roots and S'unthi
pounded and desolved in warm water should be taken.
The food of the patient should be made palatable with
the admixture of Khada-jusha * in the present ins-
tance. 27.

Treatment of P^na-vibhrama A

Pdnaka composed of Drdkshd , Kapittha , Phala ( Mdtu-
lunga, etc.) and Dddima sweetened with profuse quantity
of sugar and hone)’, as well as the one made with the
expressed juice of Kola and Amrdtaka sweetened in the
same manner would prove curative in a case of Pafoa-
vibhrama. A compound consisting of Kharjura , Vetra,
Karira , Parushaka , Drdkshd and Trivrit pounded
together and disolved in cold water should be taken,
sweetened with sugar, or the same should be taken in
combination with S'ri-parni . In the alternative, the
tender sprouts of Kshiri-trees, Visa (Mrindla), Jiraka,
Ndgapuslipa , Patra , Elavdlu , Sita-sdrivd , Padmaka , ^4;#-
rdtaka, Bhavya., Karamarda, Kapittha, Kola, Vrikshdmla ,
Fitfra-fruits, Jiraka , Dddima , Yashti-madhu and Utpala,
all pounded together and mixed with the cold infusion
of such drugs as Marietta , Jiraka, Ndga-pushpa , Tvak,
Patra , Vis'va, Chavikd and £ 4 * filtered through a piece
of thin linen duly perfumed with the addition of scented
drugs would be found curative in the seven types of dis-
tempers which have their origin in drinking excesses. 28*

Objects which are pleasing to the five sense-organs
of man and gratifying to the mind and heart, as well as

* Dailana in his commentatory says that some read in place of

an( * others read in place of

296 THE SUSHRUTA SAM II IT A. [Chap. XLVII.

*

light wine should be always prescribed in a case of
Panrftayaya and the patient should be enlivened with the
embrace of handsome and youthful damsels exceedingly
attached to the gratification of the senses with splendid
hips and thighs with their slender waists drooping under
the weight of the exuberance of their breasts. 29.

Potions prepared with powders of Ndga-pushpa ,
Ajdji, Krishnd and Markka taken in equal parts mixed
with sugar, Madhuka and Tri-sugandhi and then
disol ved in the expressed juice of Kushmdnda fruits,
should be taken. The drugs known as Varshdbhu ,
Yashtydhva , Madhuka , Ldkshd , Tvak, tender sprouts of
Karvudara, Jiraka , Drdkshd , Krishnd and Kes'ara
should be given mixed with tepid milk. 30—31.

A person afflicted with diseases due to the excess
of SurA, Asava, etc. should be treated with the same
wines (Surd, Asava, etc.) duly administered otherwise
he will be ruined, in the same manner as a person who
has incurred the king’s displeasure, should be saved by
courting the royal favour. An inveterate drunkard
giving up his habit of drinking is afflicted with the
symptoms of P&ndtyaya if he suddenly revert to his
former pernicious habit. 32 — 33.

The Agneya and Vdyaviya virtues of wine tend to
produce a dryness in the water carrying channels of the
body, hence thirst is experienced by a drunkard person.
A cold infusion of Patola , flowers and bulbs oi'Utpala,
and Mudga-parni mixed with Mdgadhika 9 should be
taken under the circumstances (reactionary thirst), or
oil, clarifiied butter, Vas£ (lard) and marrow (D. R. —
milk) should be duly cooked with curd (four times), ex-
pressed juice of Bhringa-raja (four times), and the decoc-
tion of Vilva and Yava (four times) with the Kalkas
of the drugs known as the Sarva-gandhd should b$

Chap. XLVIL]

UTTARA-T ANTRA.

297

applied as an Abhyanga. The body should be sprinkled
(Seka) with the cold decoction*. Palatable foods and
cold, pleasing and scented cordials should be pres-
cribed according to the nature and intensity of the
deranged bodily Doshas underlying the disease, 34 -35,

The heat generated by drinking being aggravated
by bodily Pitta and blood of an intoxicated person,
escapes through the surface of the skin and causes a
feeling of intense burning (DaCha) which should be
remedied with measures and therapeutic agents pres-
cribed in connection with the aggravation of Pitta. 36.

Remedies for DsCha S— Now I shall describe
the cooling measures which should be employed for
alleviating the burning sensation (Diha) in the case of a
rich patient. The body of such a patient under the
circumstances should be smeared at the outest with
Chandana v white sandal wood) pastes made cooler by the
contact of cold beams of the moon, pearl-necklaces and
the water produced from melted ice. Pie should be
laid down in a bed of full-blown lotus flowers sparkling
with dew drops or of lotus-leaves sprinkled with spray
of translucent water, and youthful damsels decked with
necklace and bangles of lotus-stems cooler even than
cold water, should be asked to touch him. Pic should
try to alleviate the burning feeling by strolling on the
banks of a tank in a garden in the soft, cool and sweet
breeze bearing on its wings the soft perfume of
Kalhdra (red) lotus and water-moss dancing in the

f *

adjoining tank. Water cooled and changed with UJira ,
Vdlaka and (white) sandal paste should be sprinkled
over his body, or he should be made to sport in a
cleansed tank filled with freshly collected water em-

* Decoction of the drugs of Madhura-gana and of the drugs of cold
virtues.

38

£^8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XL VII.

balmcd with full-blown red and blue lotus-flowers and
scents (e. g, sandal pastes) after being smeared with
vandal paste and with the hairs of his body standing
on their roots with the magnetic touch of beloved female
hands. Here he should take his bath with young, gay
and beautiful damsels skilful in aquatic sports refreshing
him with the lotus-like touch of their cold hands, thighs
and mouth and hard (ie., full-grown) breasts and with
their sweet words. 37-A.

He should lie down, when tired, in a cool chamber
cooled with watery breeze, fitted with fountains and
made dusky with the misty jets (vapours, of water. The
floor of the chamber should be sprinkled over with
scented water and flowers and the walls thickly coated
with pastes of sandal wood, Teja-patra and Vdlaka .
The chamber should be scented and decorated with
Mdnsi , Tamdla , Musta ) Kumkuma , Padma-lz&vts, Jdti-
flower, Utpala (blue-lotus), Priyangu , Kes'ara (Bakula),
and Pundarika (red-lotus), Punndga , N&ga-Kesara , and
Karavira and there in the room with garlands of
flowers gently swinging in the sweet and lazy wind,
the patient should lie down and listen to the sweet
discourses about the Hemanta, the Vindhya, the Malaya
or the Himdlaya mountains as well as about cold water,
leaves of Kadali or of any other evergreen tree or plant
and about the receptacles of full-blown blue or red
lotus, as well as about topics of moon-rise, or any other
subject which may be calculated to be agreeable to his
mind under the circumstances. Young and beautiful
damsels with their full and thick-set breasts and thighs
anointed with sandal pastes, being clad in wet clothes
(adhering to and advantageously showing the splendid
contours of their limbs, etc.,) and with their necklaces
^and girdles loosely sliding down their bosoms . and

diap. XLVII.] UTTARA-TANfRA* 2p0

slender waists should lie there with him in their firm
embrace. These damsels should refresh him with their
secret charms in that lonely chamber and by means of
their bodily coolness would be able to alleviate the
burning sensation of aggravated Pitta due to over-
drinking. 37*

These are the measures in general which should be
employed also in the cases of burning sensation due
to the aggravated condition of blood, Pitta and thirst.
Now hear me discourse on the measures which are to be
specifically employed in the case of a burning sensation
in the body under different circumstances. 38 A.

Symptoms of Raktaja D^ha The

blood coursing through the whole body when aggravated
by any cause whatsoever becomes heated and imparts
a copper colour to the skin, complexion and the eye-
balls of the patient. It produces a bloody smell in the
mouth and the body, and the patient feels a burning and
contracting sensation as if he is surrounded by fire. 38.

Treatment S — Fasting should be prescribed
at the outset in such a case and then the diet should
be regulated conformably to the nature and intensity
of the deranged bodily Dosha involved therein. If such
burning sensation (in the body) be still unrelieved, the
patient should be treated with a diet largely composed
of the soup of Jdngala flesh and venesection in the ex-
tremeties should then be resorted to duly in conformity
with the rules (prescribed in Chapter VIII — J&rira
SthAna). Cases of burning sensation due to the aggrava-
tion of Pitta would produce the symptoms of Pittaja
fever and remedies for Pittaja fever should in such
cases be resorted to. 39.

Symptoms and treatment of Drfha

due to thirst S— The watery part is dried up ii^

300 THE StiSHRUTA SAMIIITX. [CUp. XLVtl.

the event of an unslaked thirst, thus generating a heat
in the organism. This produces an extreme dryness
of the lip, throat and palate and a burning sensation
(D4ha) both in the skin and inside the organism of the
patient followed by the coming out of the tongue and
the trembling of the whole body. The medical treat-
ment under such circumstances consists in alleviating the
heat and adding to the watery component of the body.
A large draught of cold water or cooled milk saturated
with a copious quantity of sugar, or of the expressed
juice of sugar-cane or of Mantha should be given to the
patient to his satiety under the circumstances. 40-41.

An intense burning sensation in the body is caused
by the presence of accumulated blood in the abdomen
(Koshtha), the symptoms and therapeutics of which are
those mentioned in the chapter on Sadyo-vrana (Chap.
II — Chikitsita-Sthdna) A burning sensation of the body
incidental to the waste (Kshaya) of any of its funda-
mental organic principles (Dhdtus) brings on thirst,
fainting fits, feebleness of voice, suspension of physical
and mental faculties or functions, weakness and lassitude
in its train which should be remedied with measures laid
down under Rakta-pitta. Emulsive and V&yu-subduing
remedies are likewise applicable therein. 42-43.

A severe internal burning sensation in the body may
also be produced by (the aggravation of) blood due to
(the breach of the rules of) diet and to grief of any kind.
The symptoms in such cases are thirst, fainting fits and
delirium. The remedy should consist in giving the
patient the wished-for objects, and the diet under the
circumstances should largely consist of milk and meat-
essence to be partaken of in company with friends in
the manner described before. A burning sensation in
|Kc body incidental to a hurt or to a blow on any of

Chap. XLVlI.]

tJTtARA-T ANTRA.

jot

its vulnerable or tender parts (Marma) is the seventh of
its kind and should be deemed as incurable. All kinds
of burning sensation in the body with a coolness of its
surface are incurable. Emetics and purgatives should
be exhibited according to the Dosha involved even after
the subsidence of the supervening symptoms of excess
in wine. 44-46.

Wine mixed with half its quantity of water and
scented with Jiraka , Sauvarchala y Ardraka and S'unthi
becomes palatable and immediately allays thirst. Wine,
taken with meal and with cooked meat by a person
besmeared with sandal paste and wearing wet clothes
and garlands of flowers, does not produce any of its bad
after-effects nor brings on intoxication which in its
turn would throw the mind and mental faculties off
their balance. 47-48.

Thus ends the forty-seventh chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'rilta
Samhita which deals with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of
alcoholism.

CHAPTER XLVIIL.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of thirst

(Trlshnsf-Pratlshedha AdhysCya). i.

He who is not satisfied even with the constant
drinking of water but craves for more and more water
should be regarded as afflicted with the disease known
as thirst (morbid desire for water). 2.

Etiology S — The Pitta and VAyu of the body
become extremely aggravated by such factors as
(excessive) exercise, grief (or any violent mental agita-
tion), fatigue, drinking, use of any extremely dry, acid,
hot or pungent fares, or of those which cause a
parched condition in the organism, or waste of any
vital organic principle (DhAtu) of the body, fasting or
exposure to the sun, and combinedly affect the water-
carrying channels of the body (diminish the liquid
portion of the bodily lymph-chyle). The water-carrying
channels thus affected give rise* to violent thirst. The
disease is divided into seven types. . 3.

Classification S — The first three are due to
the action of the deranged Doshas (VAyu, Pitta and
Kapha). The fourth and fifth! are respectively incidental
to any ulcer and to the waste of any of its fundamental
organic principles. The sixth is due to the presence of
undigested fecal matter in the intestines (lit. mucus) and
the seventh is due to errors in diet. Now hear me
describe their specific symptoms and the therapeutic
agents to be employed in curing them. 4.

Premonitory Symptoms i-An extreme
dryness of and a, burning sensation in the palate,

Chap. XLV1U.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

303

throat, lips and mouth, external heat, vertigo, loss of
consciousness* and delirium are the general premoni*
tory symtoms which usher in an attack of the disease.
The specific symptoms are given below. 5.

Symptoms of V£taja, Pittaja and

Kapha ja Thirst Dryness of the mouth with a
tingling sensation in the regions of the temples, and the
head (D. R. — throat), obstruction of the (water-carrying)
channels of the body and a bad taste in the mouth,
are the symptoms which specifically mark a case of the
Vsttaja type in which the drinking of cold water leads
to a distinct aggravation of the disease (thirst). Loss
of consciousness (epileptic fits), delirium, an aversion to
food, dryness of the mouth, yellowness of the eyes,
extreme burning sensation in the w’hole body, desire for
coldness, a bitter taste in the mouth and a fumid sensa-
tion (in the throat) are the features which specifically
mark the Pittaja type of the disease. The vapours
produced by the fire of digestion being enveloped and
obstructed in their course by the layer of accumulated
Kapha, the heat (pent up in the body tends to dry up
the moisture of its water-carrying channels and) produces
a kind of thirst which is characterised by somnolence,
a sense of heaviness in the limbs, a sweet taste in the
mouth, extreme emaciation, cold-fever, vomiting, an
aversion to food and suppuration in the skin are the
symptoms of Kaphaja type. And where such symptoms
are present, the patient has no exeppive desire for
drinking water. 6 — 8.

Kshataja and Kshayaja Thirsts s — A

case of thirst which is engendered in consequence of
pain in or discharge of blood from, any cut in the body
is the fourth type and Is known as. Kshataja thirst The
days of the patient in such a case pass with great un-

304

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHItX. [Chap. XLVIII.

easiness even if he drinks water. In the type due to the
waste of the fundamental organic fluid (Rasa) which is
known as Kshayaja thirst, the patient constantly drinks
water in large quantity both in the day and in the
night but still finds no relief. This type is attributed
by several authorities to the concerted action of the
three deranged Doshas and all the specifice symptoms
due to the waste of the vital organic principle (Rasa)
described before are expected there. 9 — 10.

Amaja and Annaja Thirsts— The symp-
toms of all the three (aggravated) Doshas in addition to
pain in the heart, spitting and a sense of lassitude in the
limbs are present in the type which is due to indigestion
(Xmaja). The case of thirst which is produced by using
extremely fatty and saline articles of fare, as well as
those which are hard to digest is due to errors in diet
(and is known as Annaja thirst). 1 1 — 12.

Prognosis : — A patient who has become ex-
tremely weak and deaf in consequence of thirst and
who suffers from a mental stupour and lies with his
tongue protruded and hung down should not be taken
charge of (by a physician) for treatment. 1 3.

General Treatment Vomiting should be
induced with a solution of powdered Pippali in a
case of thirst in which the stomach of the patient
becomes fully loaded (with water). A plaster composed
of Dddinta, Amrdtaka and Mdtulunga is also beneficial.
Drugs which are cooling in their virtue and potency
should be applied in the three cases of thirst (due to the
three Doshas). A gargle composed of a solution of
powdered Amalaka with any acid drug (Mdtulunga, etc.)
should be retained in the mouth for removing the bad
taste in the mouth under the circumstances. Water
made hot by immersing bits of heated gold, silver, etc ,

Chap. XLVIII.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 30 $

as well as pieces of heated stone or baked clay in it
and taken in a tepid state, or cold water charged with
sugar and honey, is possessed of the efficacy of allaying
thirst. 14 — 16.

Specific Treatment A patient suffering
from Vtttaja thirst would find relief by taking lukewarm
and in a little quantity at a time the water boiled with
the drugs of any of * the five Pancha-mula groups or
with the drugs of the first group (Vid&ri-gandh&di-
gana). A decoction of the drugs of the Pitta-subduing
groups subsequently cooled and taken with the
addition of honey and sugar, or milk duly boiled with
the admixture of the drugs of the Jivaniya group (K&ko-
Iyddi Gana) would allay a case of Pittajft thirst.
Water duly boiled with Vilva , Adhaki , the drugs
of the Kantaka-Pancha-mula \ and Darbha allays a
case of Kaphaja thirst. Vomiting induced with the help
of a draught of the infusion of tender Nimba- leaves
taken lukewarm would likewise prove curative in such
a case. 17 — 19.

The Pitta-subduing remedies and measures should, in
the alternative, be applied in all types of thirst which
cannot otherwise be allayed. The expressed juice or a
decoction of ripe Udumvara should be taken with

* The five Pancha-mula groups are (i) The major pancha-mula, (2) The
minor Paucha-mula, {3) The Valli Pancha-mula, (4) The Kantaka-Pancha-
mula, (5) The Trina-Pancha-mula. See Chap. XXXVIII, Sutra sthftna.

f The Pitta-subduing groups are Utpal&li, $ 4 rivadi and K£ko1y£di .
groups,

t In place of ‘‘qRjqfTWy#!, etc.'*, some read “qrCWmrfcT
etc., i.e. Kantaka (Gokshura) and the drugs included in the group known
as viz. Pippali, Pippali-mula, Chavya, Chitraka and Ndgara.

The commentator K£rtika Kundu supports this: — Dallana. For Kantaka—
Pancha-mula, see Chap. XXXVIII — Sutra-Sthdna.

39

30 6 THE SU.SE TRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. XLVIIL

sugar under the circumstances. A thirst-afflicted patient
should likewise drink the water duly boiled with the
drugs of the Sdrivddi group sufficiently cooled down
for the purpose. 20—21.

Water duly boiled with Kas'eru , S'ringdtaka , Padtna ,
Mocha (plantain-flower) and Vis'd is efficacious in allay-
ing thirst incidental to hurt (Kshataja). Water contain-
ing Nilotpala , Us'ira and red Chandana should be kept
in an open space during the night and a physician should
give this well-scented water mixed with sugar and honey
and with a large quantity of Drdkshd to the thirst-
afflicted patients on the following morning for their
benefit. Cold infusions of the drugs of any of the Trina-
pancha-mula , Utpalddi and Madhura (D. R. the first group
/.ft, VidcirigandhAdi) groups mixed with the drugs of the
Sdrivddi group as well as that of the drugs of the
Madhuka-pushpddi groups should be prepared in the
preceding manner and prescribed. The six kinds of
cordials (P£naka) separately prepared (in the preceding
manner) with the (four kinds of) Rdjadana , Kshiri or
Kapitana are also beneficial in such cases. Fruits of
Tundikeri (wild KdrpAsa) and of Kdrpdsa pasted to-
gether (and dissolved in water) and taken internally
would prove beneficial. A case of thirst incidental to
any ulcer (Kshataja) is allayed with the stoppage or
removal of the pain or by taking meat-soup or the
blood (of deer, goat, etc.). 22 — 26.

A case of thirst due to the waste (Kshrfyaja) of any
fundamental organic fluid (Rasa) is removed by
taking draughts of clarified butter churned from milk ,*

* In P lac * s of and some read

m i x ed with water), (soup of Mdsha pulse) and

(honey mixed with water) respectively.

Chap. XLVIII. ] UTTARA-TANTRA. 30 J

as well as those of meat-soup and infusion of Yashti-
madhu. Thirst which is incidental to the presence of
mucus and undigested fecal matter in the intestines
(Amaja) should be remedied with the decoction of
Vilva, Vachd and the drugs of the Dipaniya (Pippalyddi)
group or with the decoction of the drugs of the Dipaniya
group mixed with Amrdtaka , Bhalldtaka and Vald .
The type which has its origin in the use of heavy and
indigestible fares or due to errors in diet as well as
all other types of thirst with the exception of the one
which is incidental to the waste of any fundamental
organic principle should be cured by inducing vomit-
ing. 27 — 28.

Solution of common treacle or Mantha or meat-
soup is efficacious in allaying thirst which is due to
physical fatigue. Warm Yavdgus or cold Manthas *
would alleviate a thirst caused by the obstruction of
the participated meal. A man should drink warm
water in cases of thirst due to an excessive taking of any
fatty substance (Sncha). The thirst of a habitual drunk-
ard which is due to the reactionary effects of wine is
allayed by draughts of half-diluted wine. Thirst due to
heat, may be allayed with draughts of cold water
surcharged with sugar or with the expressed juice of
suger-cane. 29 — 33.

General Treatment Vomiting should be

induced in these cases with the decoction of such drugs
as are remedial to the deranged bodily Doshas involved
in each case and the digestive (Pdchana) remedies as
prescribed in cases of fever should also be prescribed
in these cases. Use of cooling plasters and of cold

* Warm Yav^gu should be prescribed in cases where Vdyu p re *
ponderates and cold Mantha in cases where Pitta preponderates.

J 08 tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XLVItt.

baths and spray, residence in cold chambers, exhibition
of emetics and purgatives, use of milk, meat-essence,
clarified butter and sweet and cooling lambatives would
be likewise prescribed in all cases of thirst. 34 — 35.

Thus ends the forty-eighth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Su&'ruta
Samhit£ which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of thirst.

CHAPTER XLIX.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of vomiting
(Chhardi-Pratishedha).

Causes and Nomenclature ' The bodi-
ly Doshas are deranged and aggravated per force by
the use of extremely liquid, emollient, unpalatable or
oversalted food or of one taken at an improper time
or in an inordinate quantity or which is incongcnial
to the physical temperament of its user, as well as
by over-fatiguing physical exercise, fear, mental agita-
tion, indigestion, presence of worms (in the intestines),
or quick eating or owing to pregnancy or any disgus-
ting or loathsome causes. Thus deranged, the Doshas
rush up to the mouth and after covering the whole
of it come out with great force and with an aching
pain in the limbs. This is. therefore, called Vomiting
(Chhardi). 2.

The vital Vayu known as the Udina-Vdyu coming
in combination with the one known as the Vydna-Vciyu
in a man addicted to incompatible food and drink leads
to the derangement of the bodily Doshas and rushes
up to the upper part of his body (which causes vomit-
•ng). 3-

Premonitory Symptoms !— Nausea, sup-
pression of eructations, thin and saline water-brash and
an aversion to food and drink are the premonitory symp-
toms of vomiting. 4.

Specific Symptoms Scanty ejections of
frothy matter of strong astringent taste accompanied
with a loud sound and cramps at the back and the aidfcs

3to

tHE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITX.

[Chap. XLlX.

produce a sense of exhaustion or fatigue and increase
after the digestion of a meal and this should be
ascribed to the action of the deranged bodily Vtfyu.
Vomiting of yellow, greenish or blood-streaked matter
with an excessively acid, pungent or bitter taste in the
mouth and attended with such complications as fever,
dryness of mouth, fainting fits and burning and sucking
(Chosha) sensations in the body, should be ascribed to
the action of the deranged Pitta. Excessively cold,
white, sweet, thick and mucous vomiting attended
with horripilation, an aversion to food, heaviness of the
limbs and lassitude should be ascribed to the Kaphaja
type of vomiting. The specific features of all the three
preceding types are present in the type due to the
concerted action of all the three Doshas. 5 — 8. 4

Traumatic Casas : — The five cases of vomit-
ing due to any disgusting or loathsome cause or to
pregnancy, indigestion, presence of worms (in the
bowels) or the taking of uncongenial food and drink,
should be duly classified according to the Dosha aggra-
vated in each case. The stomach is irritated in all
types of vomiting. Fasting should, therefore, be the
first remedy in these cases. Violent cramps and nausea
as well as the symptoms of Krimija -1 Iridroga arc the
special characteristics of a case of vomiting due to the
presence of worms in the bowels. 9 — 10.

Prognosis : — A skilful physician shall not
take in hand the medical treatment of a patient afflict-
ed with vomiting, where the patient is emaciated and
is. distressed with the supervening symptoms,* and in
which the ejected matter is mixed with pus and

* The supervening symptoms are : —Cough, asthma, fever, hic-
cough, thirst, mental dejection, heart-disease and Tamaka-S'v&sa.

C bap. XJJX.J

UTTARA-TANTRA.

3 ”

blood, and resembles the variegated colour of a peacock’s
plume and where vomiting is almost constant. II.

General Treatment in a case of vomit-
ing marked by an excessive preponderance of any Dosha
(or by the presence of all the three Doshas), emetics
or purgatives should be administered with a due regard
to the nature and intensity of the Dosha or Doshas
involved. In cases due to the concerted action of
any two of the deranged bodily Doshas the medical
treatment should be determined according to their
relative order of preponderance. Diet in these cases
should consist of dry and light articles and what the
patient is accustomed to. Febrifuge decoctions should
be administered according to the nature and intensity of
<he deranged bodily Doshas involved in each case. 1 2.

Treatment of Vsftaja Type Draught

of clarified butter churned from milk, * or the soup
of Mudga and Amalaka taken with clarified butter and
Saindhava-$a.\t, or gruels ( YavAgii ) prepared with the
drugs of Pancha'mida and taken with honey, would
prove curative in the Vsitaja type of vomiting. The
use of the essence of any bird of the Vishkira group
(e.g. chicken, etc.) taken with a little quantity of salt
and juice of acid-fruits would likewise prove efficacious.
^Lukewarm oily purgtives mixed with salt arc also
recommended in such cases 13.

Pittaja Type 5 — Cold drinks and decoctions of
Pitta-subduing virtue would relieve vomiting due to
the derangement of Pitta. Emetics or purgatives com-
posed of the drugs of the Madhura- drugs and mixed

* l* as ^en explained by some commentators as milk

mixed with clarified butter. Chakradatta reads milk and

water in place of

312 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIUTA. [Chap. XtlX.

^ % 4

with the expressed juice of Drdkshd may likewise be
employed in the present type. In violent* attacks of
vomiting the medicated clarified butter known as
Tailvaka-ghrita should also be prescribed. 14. v

Treatment of Kaphaja Type A de-
coction of the drugs of the A ragvadhdch -group or of
Das'a-mula should be given with honey in a case of
vomiting due to the aggravation of Kapha. A cold
infusion (Hima-Kash&ya) of Guduchi mixed with honey
would prove an excellent remedy in all the three
preceding types of vomiting. 15 — 16.

Vomiting due to ( the use or sight of ) any disgusting
or loathsome thing should be treated with agreeable
things, while that peculiar to pregnancy should be
relieved by giving to the enceinte the things she longs for.

* Traumatic Types : — Vomiting due to the
use of any unaccustomed or incongenial food should be
relieved with fasting, vomiting or with the administra-
tion of habituated or congenial food. Vomiting due to
the presence of worms in the bowels (Krimija) should
be treated with remedies applicable in a case of Krimija
Hrid-roga (heart-disease of parasitic origin). The measures
and remedies prescribed before should be employed with
a due regard to the nature and intensity of the deranged
bodily Dosha or Doshas involved in each case. 17.

General Treatment Vomiting is relieved
by frequently licking a lambative made of Pippali ‘ honey
and the expressed juice of KapitthaAvmt. Madhurasd *
with the washings of rice and with honey may be
likewise taken for the purpose. Tarpana (soothing)
measure with the admixture of honey would be bene-

* , “Madhurasd** may mean (1) Drak'shd (2) Gdmbhdri fruit (3) Murvd
pr (4) Yashti-madhu, The practice is to prescribe prdkshd.

g*ap< XLIX.J UTTARA-TANTRA, 313

ficial its all the three cases (due to the aggravation of the
Doshas).* A potion composed of powdered Atma-gupta -
seeds and Yashti-madhu mixed with a copious quantity
of rice-washing and with honey as well as gruels
prepared^ with the admixture of KaranjaA eaves should
be administered. Ktistumbu.ru pasted and mixed with
salt and acid would also be benificial. Kapittha should
also be taken with Tri-k tu and rice-washing. 18 — A.

The excreta of flies should be licked with sugar,
honey and sandal paste. A lizard should be immersed
in hot milk and this milk, when cooled, should be
given to the patient to drink. Powdered fried
paddy mixed with honey and clarified butter should
be given to drink or pulverised Pippali mixed with
honey, sugar and clarified butter should be licked.
Sandal-paste * with the expressed juice of Amalaka^ or
the decoction of the leaves of Mudga *(* as well as a
lambative composed of the marrow of Kola and
Amalaka spiced with the Tri-sugandhi drugs (viz., Eld,
Patra and Tvak) powdered together should be prescribed.
Gruels of fried S'dli paddy mixed with honey should
also be prescribed. The use of perfumes which are
agreeable both to the mind and to the organ of smell,
is also recomended. 18-B.

Diet S — The meat of any Jdngala animal and
palatable cordials and victuals of various plates should
be likewise taken with care in all cases. 18.

Thus ends the forty-ninth chapter of the U ttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of Vomiting.

* The practice is to take white Sandal in this case.

i V^gbhata’prescribes the decoction alone as a separate remedy.

CHAPTER L.

Now wc shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of hic-
cough (Hicca-Pratishedha). i.

Causes S — Hiccough, cough and asthma are the
result of using those articles of fare which are heavy, dry,
or secreting (Abhishyandi) or which are followed by an
acid reaction or which remain long in an undigested state
(in the stomach) as well as of cold drinks, residence in
cold places, exposure to cold or dust or smoke or fire or
wind, over-fatiguing physical exercises, physical exer-
tion, load-carrying, toils of journey, voluntary repres-
sion of (physical urgings), fasting (Apatarpana), accumu-
lation of Ama-dosha (mucus in the intestines), blow
or hurt, emaciation (weakness) due to sexual cxccssc,
concomitant distress or agony of any existing or con-
tinuing physical ailment, irregular diet, eating before
the digestion of a previous meal or of a wrong applica-
tion of Samsamana remedies. 2.

: Derivation The Vdyu (wind) constantly
belches out of the mouth with a report shaking, as
it were, the spleen, the liver and the intestines. The
physicians have bestowed the name HiccsC on the disease
owing to fact .of its speedily extinguishing the vital
spark in man (from Sanskrit root — Ilins to kill). 3.

Classification : — Hicc& is divided into five
kinds which are styled Annajd, Yamald, Kshudra
Gambling and Mahati, all of which are the effects of
the derangement of the bodily V 4 yu acting in unison
with the deranged Kapha. 4.

Premonitory Symptoms s — An astrigent

UTTARA-TANTRA.

Chap, tf]

3ti

taste in the mouth, an aversion to all sorts of pursuits,
heaviness about the throat and cardiac region and a
rumbling sound in the abdomen (Jathara) arc the pre-
monitory symptoms which usher in a fit of hic-
cough. 5.

Symptoms S — The bodily V&yu being suddenly
deranged by taking too much food and drink, is pushed
upward and belched out in gusts which are known as.
Annajd Hicctf. The hiccough which occurs in double
strokes and at long intervals shaking the head and the
neck is called Yamald. The hic-cough which rises
with a mild force and at long intervals from the root*
of the clavicles (Jatru) is called Kshudrikst. The violent
hiccough which rises from the region of the umbilicus
accompaincd by a deep sound and interfering with free
respiration, causing dryness of the lips, throat, tongue
and of the mouth and producing pain at the sides and
complicated with many other distressing symptoms, is
called Gambhiraf The hiccough which produces a
feeling of crushing pain as it were, at the vulnerable
parts (Marmans) and stretches out the body in full, shak-
ing all the limbs and which occurs frequently and with
a considerable force accompaincd by a report, and
produces a severe thirst is called Mahai-Hiccat. 6 — 10 .

Prognosis : — A hiccough-patient whose body
is stretched out in full during a fit, with his eyes turned
upward and fixed in a gaze as well as tjie one suffering
from weakness, frequent sneezing (D. R. — cough) or
an aversion to food as well as those suffering from the
last two cases of Hieca viz., Gambhird and Mahati
should be given up as incurable. 11

* By the word “Mula” (r. e , root) of the Jatru (clavicles) Gayadas'a
understands the regions of the heart, Klorna, throat, etc^Dallana.

[Chap. L.

316 THE SUSHRUTA SAMtilTX.

Treatment • — Practice of PrAnAyAma (control of
breath-wind), tickling, frightening and producing con-
fusion by pricking with needles may be effectively re-
sorted to in a case of (simple) hiccough. Yashti-madhu
mixed with honey, or Pippali mixed with sugar, or a
Inkewarm compound of milk, clarified butter and the
expressed juice of sugar-cane* should be employed after
the manner of an Avapida-Nasya. Vomiting and
purging may be induced in a patient not extremely
weak. Red sandal-wood made into a paste with the
breast-milk, or lukewarm clarified butter mixed with
Saindhava salt, or powdered Saindhava dissolved in
water is beneficial, if administered as a medicinal
snuff. 12.

Gummy exudation of S'dla trees, Manah-s'ild , or
cow’s horn, or cow’s hairs and skin, charged with clarified
butter, should be used in fumigation (Dhupana). As an
alternative, the seats of hiccough {viz., umbilical
region, etc.) should be duly fomented. The patient
should be advised to use a lambative composed of
Svarna-Gairika or the ashes of the bones of any domes-
tic animal pasted with honey. Hairs of SvAvidh
a sheep, a cow or of Sallaki should be burnt in a covered
pot and given to be licked with honey. Plumes of a
peacock or the fruit of Udimvara or (the bark of)
Lodhra should be similarly burnt and the ashes thus
prepared should be licked by the patient in combination
with honey and clarified butter. Sarjikd-kshdra licked
with the expressed juice of Vijapura and with honey

* Tepid milk, tepid clarified butter and expressed juice of sqgar-Cane
are also separately used as snuff.

t S'vdvidb and S'allaki are the two different kinds of porcupine*

UtTARA-TANTRA.

Chap. L]

3 1;

would* also give instataneous relief in a paraxysm of hic-
cough. 13.

Lukewarm gruels (Yavagu) saturated with clarified
butter as well as lukewarm Pdyasa prove curative in
a case of hiccough. The milk of a she-goat duly
cooked with S'unthi and water * (in the manner of
Kshira-p£ka) and mixed with sugar could be as well
taken with benefit. The urine of a she-goat and of a
ewe taken to satiety would readily cure a fit of hiccough.
Similarly the smell of Puti-keeta f duly soaked in the
infusion of radish, Vachd and Hingu J after the manner
of Bhivana saturation would have the same result. 14.

Ndgakes’ara mixed with sugar and honey should be
taken with a copious quantity of) the expressed juice
of sugar-cane and of Madhuka flowers. A Pala weight
of Saindkava salt should be used with two-Pala weight
of clarified butter. Haritaki should be first taken and
then a draught of tepid water. Clarified butter should
be taken with milk and honey. A Pichu (two Tol 4 s)
weight of the expressed juice of Kapittha should be
taken with honey and powdered Pippali for the relief
(of hiccough). A lambative prepared with Pippali \
A'nialiika y S’unthi , sugar and honey, or one prepared
with Anjana (Souvirdnjana), powdered fried paddy, and
the kernel (of the stone of) Vadara- fruit should be licked
as a remedy for an attack of Hfcca. 15.

The four different liquid compounds :i prepared

* Some render as the decoction of S'unthi.

t Puti-keeta is a kind of bad-smelling worm appearing generally
during the rainy season.

X Some read (Ilingu and lotus) in place of | In

both cases, however, means simply ‘mixed’.

{1 According to Vrinda and Chakrapini lambatives should be pre-
pared with these drugs. According to some, the decoction should be Used*

3t8 THE StJSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. L.

with the drugs mentioned in the four quarts of the
present verse, viz. y (i) The fruit and flower of Pdtald>( 2)
Gairika and Katu-rohini (3) the kernel (inner pulp) of
Kharjura and Pippali and (4^ Kdsisa (sulphate of iron)
and Kapittha (D. R. — Dadhi), should be mixed with
honey and administered by an experienced physician in
cases of HicdL 16.

Meat as diet. The soup prepared with the
meat of S'allaka (porcupine), S’vadamshird , Godhd ,
Vris ha-dams' a (wild cat), Rishya (D. R. Riksha — a bear)
and Mriga (different kinds of deer, as well as of
Kapota and Pdrdvata (different kinds of pigeon), Ldva
and other birds should be taken lukewarm with the ex-
pressed juice of acid fruits and with Saindhava and a
Sneha (clarified butter, etc.). 17.

Purgatives as well as potions of tepid clarified butter
mixed with Saindhma- salt and sugar should be regarded
as highly beneficial in an up-coursing of the bodily Vayu
in cases of Hicc£. Some authorities are of opinion that
the application of an Anuvdsana-vasti would be also
beneficial in such cases. 18.

Thus ends the fiftieth chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the Stis'rula
Samhitd which deals with the (symptoms and.) treatment of hiccough.

CHAPTER LI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of Asthma
(Savasa- Prat i shed ha), i.

/Etiology 5 — To the same group of exciting
factors which bring in an attack of hiccough should
be attributed the origin of that voilent disease which is
known as Sv&sa (asthma). The vital V&yu known as the
Piaaa-V 4 yu foregoing its normal function rises upward
in unison with the deranged Kapha of the body and
produces that gasping and laboured breathing which is
called Sva'sa (asthma). This dreadful disease though
virtually one in its nature and origin is divided into
five spicific types, virj., Kshudra-Svdsa, Tamaka-Svdsa,
Chhinna-Svdsa, Maha-SvAsa and Urddhva-Svasa. 2 4.

Premonitory Symptoms s— Pain in the

region of the heart and at the sides, aversion to food
as well as to all other pursuits, suppression of stool and
urine and a bad taste in the mouth, may be regarded
as the premonitory symptoms of the disease. 5.

Specific Symptoms S —The type in which
the least movement or exertion brings on an aggrava-
tion of the disease, and a distinct amelioration or relief
is restored in a sitting posture, is called Kshudra-Svatsa
The type which is accompanied by such symptoms
as thirst, perspiration, vomiting and a rattling sound
in the throat and finds aggravation specially in foul
weather is called Tamaka-Sivasa. In a case of Tamaka-
Svlsa the patient is weak and has a loud (wheezing)
sound in the throat, as also cough, the symptoms
of (bronchial) catarrh and an aversion to food. He is
oppressed with difficult breathing even in sleep which

320

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITiC.

[Chap. LI.

abates only when the cough subsides and is aggravated
when the patient sleeps. If a case of Tamaka-£>v£sa be
attended with fever and fainting fits, it is then called

Pratamaka. 6—9.

The case wherein the patient pants for breath and
has tympanites and a burning sensation in the bladder,
and wherein the breaths are painful, detached and
intermittent, is known as Chhinna-Slvstea. The case
wherein the patient breathes heavily lying unconscious
and with a loud rattling sound in his throat and with
cramps at his sides, the lips and the throat being parched
and the eyes riveted in a fixed gaze or stare, is known
as Mahrf-^rfsa. The case wherein a patient breathes
hurriedly, lies unconscious with choked voice and upturn-
ed eyes and with his Marmans stretching out fully with
each stroke of breath is called Urddhva-Slvatsa. 10— 1 2.

Prognosis S — Of these (five) types the one
known a Kshudra-Svdsa is easily curable, while the one
known as Tamaka-Sv&sa is hard to cure, and the three
remaining ones, as well as Tamaka, ocurring in a weak
or enfeebled patient arc regarded as incurable. 13.

General Treatment S— Several authorities
aver that mild emetics and purgatives (lit. upward and
downward cleansing— Sodhana— of the system) with the
exception of the application of Siieha-vasti would be the
chief remedies in cases of asthma, if the patient
possesses sufficient vitality. Old and matured clarified
butter duly cooked with Abhayd , F//-salt and Hingu or
with Souvarchala , Abhayd and Vilva would be bene-
ficial in cases of cough, asthma, hiccough and heart-
disease. Similarly old and matured clarified butter
duly cooked with the pulverised drugs of the Pippalyddi
group as Kalka and with (the decoction of) the drugs
of the first le. the Viddrigandhddi group and with the

Chap. LI.]

UTTARA TANTRA.

321

five officinal kinds of salt added to it by way of, an
after-throw, relieves both cough and asthma. 14 — 15.

Himsra'di Ghrlta : — Clarified butter should
be duly cooked with a Kola (D. R. Karsha) weight each
of * Himsrdy Vidanga , Put ilea , Trip hold , Vyosha and
Chitraka , and with milk twice as much and water four
times as much as clarified butter. A draught of this
mediated Ghrita relieves both cough and asthma and
proves curative in cases of piles, aversion to food, Gulma,
diarrhoea and consumption (Kshaya). 16.

A quantity of clarified butter, duly cooked with four
times as much of the decoction of all the parts (viz. —
leaves, branches, barks, flowers and roots) of Vdsaka
and with its roots and flowers as Kalka, should be used
with honey when cold (in cases of asthma). 17*

^rmgyfifdi-Ghrfta, — A Prastha measure of
clarified butter duly cooked with S'ringi , Madhurikd ,
Bhdrgi , S' unthi, Rasdnjana , sugar, Ambuda , Haridrd
and Yashti-madhu all taken in equal parts and as
Kalka and with four times of water, would cure cases of
cough, asthma and hiccough 1 8.

Suvahadi Ghrita : — A Prastha measure of
clarified butter should be duly cooked* with twice as
much of water and with a Kola (one TolA. D. R. — Karsha)
weight each of Suvahd, Kalikd , Bhdrgi , S' ukandsd, fruits
of Nichula , Kdkddani , S'ringavera , Varshdbliu and the
two kinds of Vrihati. Taken hot after being made
pungent (by the addition of some pungent drug & g. t
Pippali), it would cure all forms of asthma. 19.

Calrified butter duly cooked with the admixture of
Souvarchala , Yava-kshdta , Katuka , Vyosha , Chitraka ,
Vachdy Abliayd , and Vidanga , proves curative in a case

* Some prescribe the Kalkas to be taken in the ordinary way and say
that the dose would be one Kola weight.

4 r

322 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LI.

of asthma. Similarly clarified butter duly cooked with
the decoction of Gopa-valli (Sdrivd) weighing twice
as much as the clarified butter is also prescribed.
Physicians prescribe these five medicated Ghritas in
cases of asthma and cough* 20-21

Tsnisrfdl-Ghrlta S — Clarified butter mixed with
Hingu weighing a quarter part of its own weight and
duly cooked m combination with four times as much of
water and with Tdlis'a , Tdmalaki and Ugrd y Jivanti ,
Kushtha , Saindhava, Bilva , Pushkara , Pulika 9 Souvar -
chala, Kand { Pippali), Agni ( Chitraka ), Pathyd, (Hari-
taki) and Tejovati as Kalka proves curative in all forms
of asthma. The medicated Ghrita known as Vsterf-
Ghrita f and Shatpala-Ghrita * would likewise prove
beneficial. 22.

The proper. use of oil duly cooked in combination
with the expressed juice of Bhringa-rdja weighing ten
times as much, would relieve cough and asthma. 23.

Meat a8 Diet S — Essence of any bird of the
Vishkira species (e.g. chicken, Liva, etc.) charged with
the juice of any acid fruit (e g. pomegranate, Vijapura,
etc.) and with clarified butter and salted with a profuse
quantity of Saindhava , or the soup of Kulattha cereals,
properly cooked with the heads of Ena deer, etc., as well
as milk duly cooked with (Anti-asthmatic and Vdyu-
subduing) drugs (e.g. Pancha-mula) would destroy
cough and asthma. 24.

The five Lambatives A lambative com-

* Some editors add this sentence after the next (Tdlisddi) Ghrita.

t Vjtotf-GHurita is mentioned in the treatment 'of Rakta-pitta
(Qu XLV t 20, Uttara-Tantra). It should be prescribed in cases of
asthma when Pitta predominates.

t Shatpala-Ghrita is mentioned in the treatment of V&a-Vy&lhi.
At should be prescribed if Vstyu prevail.

UTTARA-TAiiTRA.

Chap. LI.]

■t,

3^3

posed of any of the following five groups of drugs men-
tioned in a hemistich each, viz , Tinis'a-seeds, Karkata •
S'ringi and S'uvarchikd ( Jatuka-creeper)> or DurdrlabhA ,
Pippali \ Katuka ixAHaritaki;, or porcupine’s hair, peo-
cock’s feather, Kola* (Chavya) Mdgadhikd , and Kana* *
or Bhdrgi , Tvak , (cardamom), S'tingavera> Sarkarci
(sugar) and SW/fl&r-bark, or the well-pounded seeds of
Tri-kantaka alone, should be licked with honey and
clarified butter by a patient suffering from cough and
asthma. 25.

Powders of sapta-chchhada-ftow e rs and Pippali should
be taken with curd-cream (Mastu) or powders of fried
barley grains (?) previously soaked for several times
in the expressed juice of tender ^^fo-twigs together
with honey should be taken. As an alternative, a
patient suffering from asthma wou'd drink the Tarpana
(cordial) prepared with the above-mentioned barley-
powder (by mixing it with a copious quantity of water
and) with honey. 26.

A potion prepared with the flowers of S'irisha ,
Kadali and of Kunda and with Mdgadhikd and dissolved
in the washings of rice would completely cure all forms
of asthma. The pith or inner pulp of AV#-stone, roots
of Tdla (palm) tree (D. R. — T&la-muli) and the burnt
skin f of a deer of the Rishya species, should be taken
with honey ; or Bhdrgi with honey and clarified butter,
or Kadamba- seeds and Nimba in combination with
honey and the washings of rice. 27 — 28.

Drdkshd , Haritaki \ Krishnd> K ar kata- d ring i and

* Magbadhiki and Kana are synonyms and mean Pippali. Some,
therefore, prescribe two parts of Pippali in the compound. Others
prescribe one part of Pippali, and one of Gaja-pippali.

t The skin of the deer should be burnt in a covered earthen pitcher
and the black contents should be used.

3 24 the SUSHRUTA SAMlIIxX. [Chap. Li.

•

Durdlabhd in combination with honey and clarified
butter, should be licked by a patient whereby he would
get rid even of a violent attack of asthma. A lambative
composed of the equal parts of Haridrd Markka ,
Drdkshd , treacle, Rdsnd, Kand and S'athi. should be
given to be licked with oil by an asthma-patient, con-
forming to the regimen of wholesome diet. 29 — 30.

The expressed liquid of cow-dung and horse-dung
should be licked by the patient with honey and powdered
Pippali in cases of cough and asthma. The medicinal
remedies or compounds mentioned in connection with
P&ndu-roga, and edema (Sotha) or cough, may be employ-
ed with efficacy both in cough and asthma. A compound
made of Bhdrgt\ Tvak , Tryuskam, oil, Haridrd , Katu -
rohini , Pippali ’, Markka , Chanda and the expressed
liquid of cow-dung should be given (to be licked).
Utktfrik i should be prepared with Tala-keeta-vija *
Taken internally, it instantaneously subdues even a
violent attack of asthma. 31 — 34.

Articles recommended S— Matured clari-
fied butter, Pippali \ soups of Kulattha , or of the flesh of
any J ingala animal, Suri, Souviraka (fermented rice-
boilings), Hingu , the expressed juice of Mdtuluuga, honey,
Drdkshdy Amalaki and Bilva are recommended (as diet)
in cases of asthma and hiccough. *35.

Application Of Sv.eda S — Oily fomentation
(Snigdha-Sveda) with the help of oil and salt should be
applied to the patient suffering from asthma and hic-
cough, whereby the hardened Kapha (accumulated in
the channels) would be liquefied and the deranged bodily
Viyu pacified. If the Vdyu and Kapha be not thereby

* We do not know what ‘Tala-kocla’ is. Some printed editions read
“Tttlpa-kceta” which would evidently mean a “bug”. Dallana is silent
on the point*

Chap. Li.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

325

pacified, the patient should be first treated with Sneha
and then with a diet consisting of boiled rice cooked
with meat-soup. Application of Dhuma-inhalation
should then be resorted to. 36A.

Application of Dhuma:— The stick (Varti)
to be used in the process should be duly made of Manah •
s'ild, Dcva-ddru , Haridrd , Potra , Guggulu , Ldkshd and
Eranda- roots made into a paste. Compounds made of
clarified butter, fresh wax and resin ; or of cow’s horn,
hairs, hoof, tendon and skin ; or of Turashka (S>ild-rasa),
S’allaki (Mocha-rasa), Guggulu and Padmaka , should be
pounded together (and made into sticks) with the addi-
tion of clarified butter. An intelligent physician should
use these (sticks) for the purpose of smoke-inhalation in
the disease. 36.

Purging and vomiting should be induced in a
patient overwhelmed with the action of the deranged
Kapha, while Tarpana measures with the administration
of a potion of the well -cooked soup of mutton or of the
flesh of any Jangala or Anupa animal, should be
prescribed in the case of a weak or enfeebled patient,
or in respect of' one suffering from an internal parched
condition of the body. 37.

A lambative should be prepared with Nidigdhikd
paste of the weight of an Amalaka % mixed with half as
much of powdered Hingu and with a copious quantity of
honey. Duly taken, it would per force conquer a
paroxysm of asthma within three days. 38.

Irresistible is an attack of asthma like that of a fire
fed with heaps of fuel (D. R. fauned by the wind) or like
that of the thunderbolt hurled by the wrathful Indra,
the king of the gods. 39.

Thus ends the iifty-iir^l chapter in the Ultara-Tantra of the Sus'rula-
Samhit& which cicala with the (symptoms and) treatment of asthma.

CHAPTER LIL

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of cough.

(Krfsa-Pratishedha). i.

Cause and Etiology Cough has its origin
in the same sets of causes, which excite or usher in
an attack of hiccough or asthma. The vital VAyu of
the body known as the Prana-VAyu combined with
other Doshas (Pitta and Kapha) is deranged by such
causes as the entrance of smcke or of particles of
dust (into the larynx and nostrils), over-fatiguing
physical exercise, inordinate use of any dry or parched
(Ruksha) food, any food going wrong way, voluntary
repression of sneezing or of any natural propulsion
of the body. Thus deranged, it is suddenly pressed
upward and emitted through the mouth in unison with
the deranged Udina-VAyu (situated in the trachea)
producing a peculiar sound resembling that of broken
Indian bell-metal. This is called Krfsa (cough) by the
learned. 2—3.

Classification : — This disease is divided into
five types according as it is originated through the
action of the deranged Viyu, or Pitta or Kapha of the
body, or is due to the presence of any ulcer (Kshata)
or to any wasting process (Kshayaja) in the organism.
These five types of cough are recognised by the physi-
cians (in practice), which, when fully developed, (i.e., if
neglected) would tend to produce phthisis (Yakshmd). 4.

Premonitory Symptoms {-Itching in
the throat, a sense of obstruction in eating (difficulty
of deglutition), a sticky feeling in the throat and in

Chap. LJI.] UTTARA-T ANTRA. 327

the palate, changed voice, aversion to food, and dulness
of the digestive fire are the symptoms which ushei; in
an attack of cough. 5.

Specific Symptoms--— A person affected
with a cough of the Vfiftaja type, complains of an aching
pain in the region of his heart, in his temples, head,
stomach and the sides and has dry and frequent coughs
(unattended with mucous expectorations), with a pale
face, a weak and hoarse voice and diminished strength
and vigour (Ojas). A burning feeling in the region of the
heart, fever, sense of dryness, and a bitter taste in the
mouth, thirst, yellow and pungent expectoration, paleness
of complexion and a burning sensation in the body, are
the indications of the Pittaja type of Kdsa. A sticky
sense in the mouth, a sense of physical lassitude, head-
ache, aversion to food, a sense of heaviness in the
body, itching, frequent fits of cough and thick mucous
expectorations are the features which distinguish the
Kaphaja type. 6—8.

Symptoms Of Kshataja K&sa S— Ulcer-
ation in the Vakshas (chest ?) caused by loud reading,
over-fatiguing physical exercise or carrying loads of
excessive weight, or incidental to any blow or hurt dealt
thereon, affects the locality and gives rise constant
fits of cough accompained by blood-spitting. The
disease is called Kshatja Kaisa or cough of ulcerated
chest. 9.

Sexual excess, carrying heavy loads, excessive toils
of journey, over-exertion in battle, forcible controlling
of horses and elephants and such other fatiguing feats
tend to produce parchedness of the system and ulcers in
the Uras (chest) whereby the bodily V&yu is deranged
and cough is produced. The patient is afflicted only
with a sort of dry cough at the outset but begins to

328 TIIE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. UI.

spit blood with the progress of the disease. The patient
feels an excessive pain in the throat and his Uras (chest)
seems to be broken and pricked into with sharp needles,
and cannot bear the least touch on account of the
pressure of an intolerable aching pain (Sula) in the
locality. Breaking pain in the joints, fever, asthma,
thirst, and loss of voice arc the symptoms which mark
the Kshataja type of the disease and the patient lies
moaning like a pigeon, io.

Kshayaya- K&Sa — The fire of digestion in a
person who is addicted to the habit of taking unwhole-
some and incongenial food or of taking it at improper
time and quantity or who is given to sexual
excesses or who indulges in grief or disgust or
abhorrence (of food) in his mind, or who voluntarily
represses any natural urging of his body, becomes
affected and diminished. It (thereby) aggravates all
the three DoShas of the body, which, in their turn, give
rise to a type of cough attended with a gradual
emaciation of the body. The disease is called
Kshayaja Kisa. Cramps in the limbs, fever, burning
sensation in the body, fainting fits (Moha), loss of
strength (Prdna) and of flesh, emaciation of the body,
spitting blood streaked with pus, and weakness
are the symptoms of this type of Kdsa known as
Kshayaja KAsa. It is said by medical experts to be
due to the concerted action of all the three Doshas and
to be included within the category of diseases which are
very hard to be cured. A case of cough (in an old man)
due to his declining years is only susceptible of pallia-
tion. II— 12.

General Treatment : — A compound con-
sisting of £> \nngi y Vachd, Kat-phala, Ka-trina y Musta,
PJtanyAka , AbhayA , Bhdrgi y Deva-ddm y Vis'wa and

Chap. LIl]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

329

Hingu taken in hot water would rapidly cure a case
of long-standing cough. A lambative composed of the
equal quantity of Tri-phald , Vj’osha, Vidanga , S'ringi,
Rdsna' > Vacha\ Padmaka and Deva'-ddru pounded
together and mixed with a copious quantity of honey,
sugar and clarified butter, would speedily conquer a
serious attack of cough. 13 -14.

A patient afflicted with cough should use a lamba-
tive composed of Pathyd , sugar, Amalaka , fried paddy,
Mdgadhiy and S'unthi pounded together and mixed with
honey and clarified butter, or take Krishnd and
Saindhava salt with warm water. He should use
Ndgara and Pippali in combination with treacle, or use
a lambative of the paste of Drdkshd mixed with honey
and clarified butter. A compound composed of the equal
parts of Drdkshd , sugar and M dgadhikd, or of S'ringa-
vera , Yashthnadhu , and Tugd (Vams'a-lochana) should
be licked with honey and clarified butter ; or a com-
pound consisting of S'itopala (sugar) and an equal quanti-
ty of Markka should be licked with honey and clarified
butter. A compound consisting of Dhdtri ’, Kand , Vis’va
and S'itopala (sugar) should be taken with curd-cream
(Dadhi-manda). A person suffering from an attack of
cough should use Harenukd and Mdgadhikd taken in
equal parts and pounded together through the medium
of curd. The two kinds of Haridrd , Deva-ddru, S'unthi
and the pith of a Gdyatri- tree pounded and mixed
in equal k parts, should be taken with the urine
of a goat, or a pulverised compound consisting
of Danti, Dravanti and Tilvaka should be taken.
Leaves of Vadara pasted with Saindhava salt and fried
in clarified butter should be taken ; or a Kola (two
tolas) weight of Hingu should be taken with fermented
rice-boilings (Souviraka) or with the juice of acid fruit.

42

330 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LII.

Powdered Maricha should be likewise licked with
honey. 15.

Inhalation of Dhuma The patient
should be made to inhale the smoke of a burning
Varti (medicinal stick) composed of Bhdrgi, Vachd and
Hingu, pounded together and mixed with clarified but-
ter, or of the scrapings of (green) bamboo,* Eld and
Lavana mixed with clarified butter. Similarly, a patient
suffering from an attack of cough due to Vita and
Kapha should inhale the smoke of a Varti prepared
with Musta, bark of Ingudi, Yashti-madhu , Mdtisi,
Manah-s’ild and Haritdla pasted together with goat’s
urine and then take a draught of milk. 16.

In the alternative, Sidhu (a kind of wine) should be
taken in combination with Maricha, whereby a fit of
cough would be instantaneously subdued. Milk duly
boiled and cooked with the admixture of Dr&kshd,
Ambu (Vdlaka), Manjishthd and Buraf should be taken
with honey. Well-boiled Mudga pulse should be taken
with powdered Kanta-Kdrikd , Nagara and pippali mixed
with honeyj. Utkardka (a kind of confection) prepared
with clarified butter, Mula §, Truti (Eld), leaves of
Vadara and a copious quantity of powdered Ndgara
should be used. A thin Peyd prepared with the preced-
ing drugs may be taken cold in' combination with
honey. 17 — 19.

Treatment of Vaftaja Kasa The medi-
cated clarified butter mentioned in connection with the

* Dalian* explains as (leaves of bamboo),

t Pura means S'allaki (gum) or Guggulu.-Dallana.
t Dallana reads WJrfariRl^ as a variant and explains that the
powders of Tri-katu should be added in a large quantity in place of honey.

|r By the term some mean (raddish*. while others take it
to mean the drugs of the Pancha-mula -group.

Chap, tit]

UfTTARA-fANfRA.

33 *

medical treatment of Plihodara (enlargement of spleen)
and known as Shadanga-Ghrita * proves equally cura-
tive in cases of Vitaja-Ktfsa. Clarified butter duly
cooked with the drugs of the Viddri-gandhddi group,
or with the expressed juice of Vdsaka , would also prove
beneficial. Applications of purgatives with any Sneha,
as well as those of AsthaJpana or Anuvrfsana-Vasti are
recommended. Inhalation of Snaihika (oleaginous)
Dhnma as well as potions of lukewarm clarified butter,
gruels duly cooked with meat-essence, milk and lamba-
tives saturated with clarified butter, may be taken with
advantage in such a case. 20.

Treatment of Kaphaja Ksfsa s— Cases of
Kaphaja-K&a readily yield to the use of emetics, purga-
tives, medicinal head-purgatives, medicinal gargles, hot
and pungent lambatives as well as the inhalation of smoke
(Dhuma). Any articles of food which are emaciating (/.*?,,
light, percifying and small in quantity and even fasting)
should more particularly be beneficial. A case of cough
due to the action of the deranged bodily Kapha is
relieved by the use of Tri-katu, f or of clarified butter
duly cooked with the expressed juice of Krimighna .]
(Vidanga) or with the expressed juice of the leaves of
Nirgundi . 2t.

A clarified butter duly cooked in combination with
twice as much juice of Nidigdhikd (Kantikdri) and with
the Kalka of Pdthd, Vit-salt , Vyos/ia , Vidanga , Sain*

* For Shadanga-ghrita, see chapter XIV, Para i 8. It is better known
as Shatpalaka-Ghrita.

t According to Vdgbhata the clarified butler should be duly cooked
with the Kalka of Tri-katu and with the decoction (Rasa) of Vidanga.

t Some take ‘Krimighna’ to mean Vidanga, others take it to mean
any antiparaaitic drug, viz., the drugs of the Sttrasidi-gana.— Dallaga.
The infusion or decoction of Vidanga .should be used if its expressed
’^ice be not available.— -/£/#

3$2 THE SUSIIRUTA SAM HIT A. [Chap. til.

dhava , Tri-kantaka (Gokshura), Rdsnd, Chitraka, Vald,
S'rittgi, Vachd , Mustd, Deva-ddm , Durdlabhd , Bhdrgi,
Abhayd and S*atki, proves curative in asthma, dulncss
of digestion, hoarseness, as well as the violent attacks
of the five different types of cough. 22,

Pittaja and Kshayaja Kasa s — A case of
cough of the Pittaja-type, as well as the one due to the
wasting (Kshaya) brought about by sexual excess,
yields to the use every morning of the clarified butter,
duly cooked with the decoction of the drugs of the
Viddri-gaadhddi , Utpalddi , SdrivAdi and the Madhura
(i.e. Kikoly&di) groups and with the expressed juice of
sugar-cane, water, milk and with the drugs of the
Kdkolyddi group as Kalka and with the addition of
sugar as an after-throw. The three cases vis., Pittaja,
Kshataja (ulccr-orignicd) and Kshayaja (due to any
wasting process in the system) of Kasa are relieved by
the use of the compound prepared with Kkarjura ,
Bhdrgi y Pippali , Piydla , Madhulikd . Eld and Amalaka
mixed in equal parts, and taken with a copious quantity
of clarified butter, honey and sugar. 23 — 24.

Cases of the Kshataja (ulcerated) or Kshayaja (con-
sumptive) Kisa, would become amenable to the use of a
compound consisting of the equal parts of Raktd
(Manjishthd), Haridra , Anjana (antimony), Chitraka )
Pdthd , Murvd and Pippali pounded together and taken
with honey, or of clarified butter duly cooked with the
expressed juice of sugar-cane. Amalaka powder duly
cooked with milk and taken in combination with clari-
fied butter would prove efficacious. Persons afflicted
with the three types of cough may take with (benefit
the fine powders of wheat, barley as well as of the
drugs of the Kdkolyddi group, with milk and clarified
butter. Treacle boiled with water should be taken,

Chap. Lll.] UTTARA-TAftTlU. 333

when cold, with honey and with Markka taken at
intervals by biting it. 25 — 28

Kalayana-Guda s— Three Prastha measures
of the expressed juice of Amalaka and half a Tula
measure (six seers and a half) of treacle should be duly
cooked with eight-Pala-wcight of powdered Trivrit
(lightly fried) with eight-Pala measures of oil. Powdered
Granthika (Pippali-roots), Chavya, Jiraka, Vyosha , Gaja-
pippali , Havas hd, A/amodd , Vidanga , Saindhava , Tri-
phald , Yamdni , Patha , Chitraka and Dhdnya > each
weighing a Pichu weight (two Tolds) should then be
added to it as an after-throw and the whole compound
should be scented with the three scented drugs (Tvak,
El a and Patra). The patient should take an Aksha (two
Tola) weight of this preparation. The medicine thus
prepared is called Kalyana'ka Guda and it proves cura-
tive in cases of Grahani, cough, asthma, hoarseness of
voice and phthisis. It serves to improve appetite, increase
the semen of males and remove sterility in females.
There is no special restriction about the regimen of diet
and conduct when it is used. 29.

Agastya- Leha : — Two Palas each of the drugs
known as Das'a-mula , Gaja-pippali , Atma-guptd , Bhdrgi,
S’athi , Pushkara- roots, S’unthi , Pdthd , Gulancha> Gran-
thika (Pippali-roots), S , amkha-pushpi ) Rdsnd , Chitraka ,
Apdmdrga , and Durdlabhd , and one Adhaka (half
a seer) of PVwtf together with one hundred large-sized
Haritaki should be boiled with one Drona measure of
water and taken down from the oven with its three-
quarter part evaporated in the process. It should then
be filtered through a piece of linen. A Tuld weight of
treacle should be dissolved in the above decoction and
duly cooked with the addition of a Kudava measure
each of oil and clarified butter. When the cooking is

334 the sushruta samhitX. [Chap. Lit

finished, powdered Pippali should be added as an after-
throw and honey should be mixed with it, when cooled.
One Karsha weight of this elixir Leha should be
licked every day in combination with two Abhayds.
It conquers cases of phthisis, Grahani edema, dulness
of appetite, hoarseness of voice, cough, Pdndu, asthma,
head-ache (Siroroga), Hrid-roga (diseases of the heart).,
hiccough and Vishama Jwara. A j-egular use of this
elixir improves strength and memory, imparts vigour of
mind and energy of action and removes disinclination
to work. It was first concocted by the holy sage,
Agastya. 30.

Clarified butter duly cooked with the decoction made
by boiling the drugs of the Madhura or any other suit-
able group with the essence of Kulira (crab), Sukti,
Chataka, Ena-deer and Ldva proves curative in the case
of cough due to the presence of any ulcer (in the lungs)
or to any wasting process in the system. The use of
clarified butter duly cooked with S'atdvari , Ndga-vald
and Vald proves beneficial to a person afflicted with
cough. 31—32.

Thus ends the fifty-second chapter of the Uttara Tantra in the Sus'ruta
SamhitX which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of cou^h

CHAPTER LIII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of hoarseness

of voice (Svara-bheda-Pratishedha). i.

Etiology : — The V&yu and the other Doshas
are deranged and aggravated by such causes as ex-
tremely loud speaking, taking poison, reading at the top
of the voice, external hurt or injury and exposure to
cold, etc., * and finding lodgment in the sound carry .-
ing channels, they affect the voice. The disease is
called Svara-bheda (hoarseness of voice) and is classified
into six different types. 2.

Specific Symptoms 8—' The Vitaja type im-
parts a black colour to the face, eyes, urine and stool
and the voice acquires the sound of the rough and
hoarse braying of an ass +. The face, eyes and the
stool and urine of the patient are tinged yellow in a
case of the Pittaja type and the voice sounds sunken
as if proceeding from the throat with an internal burn-
ing sensation. In the Kaphaja type the patient cons-
tantly feels a sense of constriction in his throat with
mucus and is only enabled to speak slowly and softly
and that specially in the day. Symptoms specifically
belonging to the three preceding Dosha-originated
types, are simultaneously present in the type due to
the concerted action of the three Doshas (Tri-Dhoshaja)
together with indistinctness of speech and incapability

#

* Here Pitta- aggravating and Vayu -aggravating causes also are
intended by the word i-e. t etc. in I

t pallana’s reading evidently is indistinct).

336 THE SUSI1RUTA SAM11ITA. [Chap. LIIL

of articulation. This type should be deemed as in-
curable. 3 — 6.

Symptoms of Kjshayaja and Me-
doja types S— In the Kshayaja type the voice
emits vapour and, becoming lower and lower, it ulti-
mately disappears. This stage of Svara-bheda (loss
of voice) should be given up as incurable. In an attack
of the Hedoja type the patient speaks very indistinctly,
the voice remaining, as it were, inside his throat. And
his throat, lips and palate become sticky. 7-8.

Prognosis : — Svara-bheda in cases of weak, old,
emaciated, or fatty patient, as well as a long-standing,
congenital or Tri-Doshaja one should be regarded as
incurable. 9.

General Treatment The body of the

patier.t should be first rubbed wiih a Sneha (clarified
butter, lit. — treated with emulsive measures) and the
deranged bodily Dosha underlying the root of the
attack should be curbed with the help of emetics, pur-
gatives, Vasti, errhines, Avapida-Nasya, lambativcs,
smoke-inhalations or gargles. Measures and remedies
previously mentioned in connection with the treatment
of cough and asthma should be as well employed
in their entirety in the present disease. Now hear me
describe the medicinal remedies which arc specifically
beneficial to a patient afflicted with an attack of Svara-
bheda. 10.

Treatment of V^taja Type : -in the

Vsftaja type of the disease, the patient should take,
after a full meal, clarified butter mixed with the ex-
pressed jiyce of Kdsa-marda y Vdrtdku and Mdrkava with
Artagala (Arjua). In the alternative, Ghrita prepared
from goat’s milk and duly cooked with Yava-Kshdra
and Aiantoda or with Chitraka and Amahika , or with

Chap, till.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

337

Deva-ddru and Agni (Chitraka) should be taken with
honey. The diet of the patient in such a case should
consist of boiled rice taken with treacle and clarified
butter, followed by draughts of tepid water. 1 1.

Pittaja and Kaphaja types s— Clarified
butter should be constantly used with milk in the
Pittaja type of the disease. Piyasa * duly prepared
with the admixture of Yashtt-madhu and clarified
butter, should also be taken. Lambatives composed of
the powdered drugs of the Madkura (K&kolyddi) group
saturated with honey and clarified butter, or of powders
of S'atdvari or of V aid should be similarly taken. Pow-
ders of pungent drugs should be taken with a copious
quantity of cow’s urine or licked with oil and honey
in a case of the Kaphaja type of Svara-bheda. 12 — 13.

Medoja, Kshayaja, etc., Types The

medical treatment in the case of the Medoja type of
Svarabheda should be the same as in the Kaphaja type.
The medical treatment of the Tri-Doshaja and Kshayaja
types of the disease should be taken in hand without
holding out any hope of recovery. Milk f duly cooked
with the drugs of the Madhura group should be taken
in combination with sugar and honey in a case due to
the effects of loud speaking. 14— 1 5.

Thus ends the fifty-third chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the {symptoms and) treatment of hoarseness*

* Pstyasa is a Special preparation of rice boiled with milk and
sugar.

f Milk of a cow or of a sbe-buflalo, etc*, may be used ^ere*— Dallana.

43

CHAPTER LIY.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symtoms and) medical treatment of worms

(Kr I m 1 - Roga - Prat ished ha) i.

Causes The Pitta and Kapha of the body are
aggravated by such causes as eating before the digestion
of a previous meal, excessive use of any indigestible,
uncongenial, incompatible or filthy articles of fare, seden-
tary habits, partaking of cold, heavy or fatty meals,
sleeping in the day-time, excessive use of Mdsha, cikes,
Vidala (cereals), Visa (lotus stems), S'dluka (bulbous
root of the lotus), Kas'eruka, pot-herbs, Surd (wine)
S'ukta (a kind of fermented rice-gruel), curd, milk,
treacle, sugar-cane, Palala (dried plants of corn), flesh
of Anupa animals, Pinydka (oil cakes), Prithuka (Chipi-
taka), and such other articles of fare as well as by the use
of sweet, acid and liquid articles. They help the germin-
ation of parasites of various shapes in the different parts
of the body, Amdsaya (stomach) and Pakvds'aya (intes-
tines) being their principal seats or location. 2.

Classification : — The worms or parasites
(which are found to germinate and grow in a living
human organism) are divided into twenty different
species, and have their origin either in feces, Kapha or
blood *. Now I shall enumerate their names and
characteristic features. 2 — 3.

Names and Symptoms of Purishaja

Worms S — The seven kinds of worms which are

* Charaka speaks of another kind viz. Malajft (produced from the
external filth of the body), over and above that kind of worms which are
present in every organism from the very birth (Sahara)*

Chap. LIV.] UTTARA-TANTkA, 339

known as Ajava, Vijava, Kipya, Tripya, Gandu-pada,
Chum and Dvi-mukha, originate from feces (Purishaja).
They are white and extremely attenuated in their
size. They frequent the passage of the rectum and
produce a pricking pain (therein). Several of them
are thicker and have tails. Cramps (Sula), dulness
of appetite, yellowness of complexion, distension of
the abdomen, loss of strength, water-brash, aversion
to food, heart-disease (Hrid-roga) and looseness of
stool, are the symptoms which mark the presence of
worms (in the intestines), which originate in the feces.
Of these Gandu-pada worms are red and long in their
shape producing such symptoms as cutting pain (J>ula),
rumbling sound in the intestines, looseness of stool, and
indigestion and they come out of the anus with an
itching sensation. 4 — 5.

Names and Symptoms of Kaphaja

Krimi: — Those known as Darbha-pushpa, Mahd-
pushpa, Praluna, Chipita, Pipilikd and Ddruna,have their
origin in the deranged Kapha. They are either hairy
or have hairs only on their heads, or are marked with
brown spots on their sides or are provided with tails.
They are white and small-sized like fresh paddy-sprouts.
They eat away the marrow and bore into the eye-balls,
the palate and the ears and produce head-ache, cardiac
troubles (Hrid-roga), vomiting and catarrh. 6 — 7.

Names and Symptoms of Raktaja

Krimi The names of the worms originating from
the vitiated blood are Kes&da, Romdda, Nakh&da,
Dantida, Kikkisa, Kushthaja and Parisarpa * They
are either black or blood-coloured, glossy and thick and

* The names of these worms have been derived from the nature
of their actions on the different parts of the organism.

340 THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT*. [Chap- LIV.

generally produce diseases which are peculiar to the
vitiated state of the blood * in the body. 8.

Specific Causes : — Worms which have their
origin in the feces (accumulated in the bowels) are the
results of the (excessive) use of such articles of fare as
Misha- pulse, cakes, salt, treacle and pot-herbs. The
Kaphaja worms germinate in the system in consequence
of eating flesh, Masha - pulse (D. R. fish), treacle, milk,
curd and Ssukta (a kind of fermented rice-gruel). Worms
which originate from the contaminated blood of the
body, are intimately connected with the use of pot-herbs
and other indigestible and incompatible articles
of fare. 9.

General Symptoms Fever, paleness of
complexion, Sula, cardiac troubles (Hrid-roga), lassitude,
vertigo, aversion to food and diarrhoea (Atisdra) are
the complaints which mark the presence of worms 4 n
the system. 10.

Prognosis : — Of these the first thirteen kinds
of worms may be seen with the naked eyes, while those
beginning with Kes’dda {vis., the Raktaja worms) are
not so visible and (of these latter ) the first two (viz.,
Kes'dda and Romdda) kinds should be given up (as
incurable), it.

A physician should first ascertain the nature of the
worms and, with a view to destroy their colony in
the body, should treat the patient with a Sneha (clari-
fied butter or oil) and then administer an emetic with
clarified butter duly cooked with -the drugs of the
Surasddi group. He should then purge the patient
with any strong purgative and treat him with an
Asthdpana-vasti prepared with the decoction of Yava t
Kola, Kulattha- pulse, and the drugs of the Surasddt

* See Chapter xxiv.,— Sutra Sthdoa.

Chap. LIV, ] UTTARA-T ANTRA, 341

group, charged with salt and with a Sneha (clarified
butter dr oil) duly cooked with Vidanga. Just after
the flowing put of the injected solution (through his
anus) the patient should be bathed with lukewarm
water and a meal prepared with vermifugal articles
should be given to him. Anuvdsana-vasti should then
be applied with the preceding Sneha (prepared with
Vidanga). He should take a potion composed of the
expressed juice of S'irisha and Kinihi (Apdm&rga)
mixed together aud sweetened with honey. The ex-
pressed juice of Kevuka may be similarly (mixed with
and) administered with a meal prepared with the articles
of strong (Tikshna) property. 12.

A paste (or powder) of Palas’a- seeds or the expres-
sed juice thereof should be taken with the washings
of rice. The expressed juice of Pdribhadra- leaves
should be taken with honey. The juice extracted from
Pattura * or the drugs of the Surasddi group should
(similarly) be taken, or the powders of dried horse-
dung or of Vidanga should be licked with honey.
Pupulikd-cakes prepared with (pasted Yava and) the
pasted leaves of Mushika-parni (a kind of Danti) should
be taken by the patient followed by draughts of Dhdnyd-
mla (fermented paddy-gruels). 13 — 14.

Oil duly cooked with (the paste and decoction of)
the drugs of the Surasddi group should be given to be
drunk. Different kinds of cakes should be prepared
for him with (Yava mixed with) powdered Vidanga .
Sesamum-seeds should* be duly soaked in the decoction
of Vidanga (after the manner of Bhdvand saturation)
and oil should be then pressed out thereform (for his
use). IS A.

* Dallana explains ‘‘Pattura” as S'ephdlik^, but S'ivad&'a takes
it to be S'&incha.

342 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. UV.

Powdered excreta of a Sv&vidh (porcupine) similar-
ly soaked seven times in ( each of ) the decoctions
of Tri-phald and of Vidanga should be licked with
honey, followed by draughts of the expressed juice of
Amalaka , Haritaki , and Aksha (Vibhitaka). Powders of
any (dead) metal (Ayas) * may also be prepared and
taken in the preceding manner. In the alternative, the
expressed juice of Putika should be taken with honey,
or Pippali - roots should be administered through the
vehicle of the urine of a she-goat. Trapu (killed lead)
should be rubbed in the upper liquid part of curd
(Mastu) and should be taken for a week. Worms
which have their origin in the accumulated feces or
aggravated Kapha in the body should be destroyed
with the help of the aforesaid medicinal remedies. 13.

Medicinal Anjanas, Nasyas and Avapidas should
be particularly employed in destroying the different
classes of vermins which infest the regions of head,
heart and mouth and the nostrils. The liquid expressed
out of horse-dung should be dried and then successive-
ly soaked several times in the decoction of Vidanga .
The preperation should be blown into the nostrils
(Pradhamana). Powders of killed metal (Ayas, etc.+)
may also be applied in the same manner. Oil duly
cooked with the drugs of the Surasddi Gana should be
used in snuffing with the blue part \ of Indian bell-
metal. 17 A.

Measures and remedies mentioned in connection

* Ayas— Ht. iron, is also used for all the metals generally.

t Ayas— as in para 15 may mean any metal.

t Oil duly cooked with the drugs of the Surasddi Gana should be
placed. in a pot of Indian bell-metal. When the inner surface of the pot
would become blue by being oxidised, the oil should be well stirred
and mixed with that blue part and used as an errhine.

Chap. LIV.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

343

with the treatment of alopecia (Indra-lupta) should be em-
ployed in cases of RomsCda worms {vis. where the worms
would be found to have invaded the hairs of the body).
Medicines enumerated in connection with the treatment
of the diseases of the mouth should be prescribed in
cases of Danttfda worms {vis. where the vermins would
be found to have taken lodgment in the teeth). Cases
where the worms would be found to have their origin
in the vitiated condition of the blood should be treated
as cases of Kushtha to all intents and purposes. The
drugs of the Surasddi Gana, however, may be used in
any shape * in any case (of Krimi). 17.

Diet S — Meals composed of the articles of bitter
and pungent tastes as well as draughts of milk mixed
with the soup of Kulattha - pulse are recommended. A
person suffering from any complaint due to the presence
of worms (Krimi of whatever kind) and seeking their
destruction, should refrain from using milk, cooked
meat, clarified butter, curd, pot-herb (edible leaves),
things of acid or sweet tastes as well as cold things in
general. 18.

Thus ends the fifty-fourth chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of Krimi-Roga.

* Both internally and externally e. g. as a drink or bath.

CHAPTER LV.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of the
disease due to the retention of any natural physical
urging (UdsCvarta-Pratlshedha). i.

Causes S— A wise man valuing his life shall
never repress any natural urging of his body, whether
upward or downward, e. g. that of V&yu, etc. Udivarta
is 90 called from its origin from the repression of any
natural urging such as Vdta (flatus), evacuation of bowels,
micturition, yawning, lacrimation, sneezing, eructation,
vomiting and discharge of semen when it makes its
appearance (Udita) and urges a person to answer its
call. Udivarta is also brought on by the repression
of hunger, thirst, respiration and sleep. I shall now
fully describe its symptoms and the mode of medical
treatment to be pursued therein. It is of thirteen
different types and are brought about through the
aforesaid causes, over and above the one incidental
to the habitual use of unwholesome food and drink
(Apathyaja). 2-4.

Symptoms of Vdtaja Udrfvarta

The vital ApAna-Vdyu (at the anus) anyhow obstructed
in its passage gives rise to distension and cramps
in the abdomen, oppression and a constricted feeling
at the heart, headache, laboured breathing, hiccough,
cough, catarrh, catching pain at the throat which makes
speaking and Deglutition difficult (Gala-graha), violent
movement of deranged Pitta and Kapha all through
the body and suppression of stools or emission of fecal
matter through the mouth. 5.

Chap. LV.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

345

PurfShaJa Udavarta S— A repressed urging

for stool is followed by the exhibition of such symptoms,
as rumbling in the intestines, severe pain (in the abdo-
men), cutting pain in the anus, upward coursing of the
flatus, suppression of stool or even emission of feces
through the mouth. 6.

Mutraja Udavarta S— A repression of the
desire of making water is followed by scanty emission of
urine which is often given out by painful drops produc-
ing distension of the bladder and an excruciating pain in
the urethra, anus, scrotum and the inguinal regions and
about the umbilicus, and sometimes even in the head, ac-
companied with distortion of features in consequence. 7.

A repression of yawning leads to wry-ncck (numb-
ness of the Manyd and of the neck) as well as troubles
of the head due to the incarcerated local Vdyu and
violent diseases affecting the eyes, nose, ears and the
mouth. Tears born of any mental condition of grief or
joy and voluntarily repressed without being given free
vent to, give rise to severe distempers of the eyes,
heaviness of the head and catarrh (Pinasa). 8-9.

A repression of sneezing is followed by acute
diseases of the head, eyes, nose and ears. A sense of
fulness in the throat as well as the suppression and
croaking of the incarcerated V6yu (wind) are also exhi-
bited in this case.* The voluntary repression of any
natural urging towards eructation gives rise to diseases
peculiar to the derangement of the bodily Viyu. 10-11.

A repression of vomiting is followed by cutaneous

* The symptoms mentioned in this sentence (which comprises a line
in the verse) is taken by MAdhava with the following line which enu-
merates the symptoms of Uddvarta due to the voluntary repression of
eructation.

44

34 ' the SUSHRUTA SAMIIITX. [Chap. LV.

affections (Kushtha) due to the bodily Doshas which,
being vitiated, had interfered with the gastric digestion
with reactionary acidity and produced the vomiting..
Painful swelling of the bladder and of the scrotum, and
about the anus as well as suppression of urine, formation
of gravels in the bladder and involuntary emission of
semen are the symptoms which manifest themselves in
a case of repressed seminal discharge. 12-13.

Ungratified hunger brings on drowsiness, aching
pain in the limbs, disrelish for food, sense of exhaustion,
and weakness of eye-sight. An ungratified thirst brings
on dryness of the throat and mouth, dulness of hearing
and pain at the heart. A suppression of breath in an
exhausted person brings on cardiac troubles, fainting fits
and an attack of Gulma. An unindulged sleep produces
yawning, aching pain in the limbs, and a sense of heavi-
ness in the limbs as well as in the head and the eyes.
It may also bring on drowsiness. 14-17.

Prognosis • — An Ud&varta-patient afflicted with
thirst and cramps (Sula), vomiting fecal matter and
suffering from weakness and a distressing exhaustion
should be given up by a wise physician. 18.

General Treatment in ail forms ofUdA-
varta the preliminary treatment generally consists in
restoring the deranged and incarcerated bodily Vrfyu to
its normal course and direction. Now hear me again
describe the specific medicinal remedies to be separately
employed in each case. 19.

Specific Treatment s— in a case of Vtftaja
Ud&varta the patient should be first treated with a Sneha
and Sveda (fomentation) after which medicinal injections
should be made into the rectum after the manner of an
Asthdpana-vasti. In a case due to the incarceration
of feces in the intestines ( Purishaja ), the remedial

Chap. LV.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 347

measures and medicines laid down in connection with
the treatment of Andha should be employed. 2&-2T.

Wine charged with a large quantity of Souvarchala -
salt should be administered in a case due to the reten-
tion of urine* Milk or Eld should also be taken in
combination with wine. The expressed juice of Dhdtri
diluted with water should be taken for three successive
days ; or the expressed liquid of the dung of a horse
or of an ass should be taken ; or wine made from treacle
(Goudika) should be taken with honey and cooked meat
should beltaken by biting at intervals. One Told weight
of the compound consisting of Bhadra-ddru , Musta,
Murvd , Haridrd and Yashti-madhu shonld be dissolved
in an adequate quantity of rain-water and then be taken.
The expressed juice of Duspars’d (Durd-labhd) or an
infusion of Kum-kuma (D. R. — decoction of Kakubha
i e . Arjuna' should be taken, or Ervdruka- seeds mixed
with a little salt should also be taken with water. Milk
duly cooked with Pa ticha-mula* or the expressed juice
of Drdksha should be prescribed. The medicinal reme-
dies previously described h s possessed of the efficacy
of disintegrating gravels, (Asmari)f should be adminis-
tered. Similarly, all the measures to be mentioned
hereafter in connection with the medical treatment of
Mutra-krichchhra { (strangury) and of Mutrdghdta §
(obstruction of urine) which I shall have occasion to
deal with later on should also be adopted in this
case. 22.

A case of Uddvarta due to the suppression of

* Both D&llana and S'ivadasa recommend the use of minor Pancha-
mula, but S'rikantha recommeds the Trina-Puncha-mula.

t For As'mari— See Chiktisita-sthana, Chapter VII.

% For Mutra-Krichchhra— See ch. LIX., Uttara-Tantra.

| For Mutr4ghat6— See ch. LVIII., Uttara-Tantra

3^8 THE SUSHRUTA SAM HIT A [Chap. LV.

yawning should be conquered with the applications
of Sneha and of Sveda (fomentation). The patient
should be treated with Sneha and then fomented and
lachrymation should then be induced (with appro-
priate remedies)* in a case where the flow of tears has
been suddenly checked. Sneezing should be induced
with the help of strong Anjanas and Avapidas, or by
the application of Vartis, or by holding any strong
smell at his nose or by blowing any strong medicinal
powder into the nose (Pradhamna) or by making the
patient look towards the sun (or such like luminous
body) in a case of Uddvarta due to the suppression
of sneezing. 23—24.

In a case of Ud&varta due to suppressed eructation,
the patient should be made to inhale the fumes of oily
or lardaceous articles in due orderf or to take draught
of wine surcharged with Souvarchala - salt and the ex-
pressed juice of Vija-pura . A case of Udavarta due
to suppressed \romiting should be duly conquered with
emulsive measures (treating with a Sneha), etc., according
to the nature of the deranged bodily Dosha involved in
each case. In the alternative unguents with (Saindhava)
salt and (Yava-) Kshara should be applied. 25 — 26.

Milk should be duly cooked with the admixture
of four times as much water and- with the drugs of
bladder-cleansing virtues J and boiled until all the water
is evaporated. Draughts of this medicated milk should
be prescribed in copious quantities in a case of Udavarta
due to the retention of seminal fluid and the patient

* These are the applications of strong Anjanas and Avapida-Nasyas.

+ The order is (i) Dhuma-inhalation, ( 2 ) Nasya (errhine) and
(j) Kavala (gargle)

t These are the drugs of the Trina*pancha*mula as well as of the
Viratarvddi groups (Chapter XXXVIII, Sutra Slhana).

uttAka-ta&tra.

Ctiap.LV.]

349

should be advised to have sexual intercourse with lovely
women. 27.

Fatty (Snigdha) things should be taken lukewarm
and in small quantities in a case of UdAvarta due to
ungratified hunger. Cold Manthas or YavAgus should
be given to the patient in a case of UdAvarta due
to the suppression of thirst. Food with meat-soup
should be given to the patient after sufficient rest in
a case of UdAvarta originated from the suppression of
breath in a tired state of the body. Milk* should be
given in a case of Udavarta due to the suppression
of gleep and the patient should be made tq sleep with
the help of sweet discourses. 28.

Cases of Adhmfltaa (distension of the abodomcn),
etc., which are the supervening symptoms of Udavarta)
should be remedied with appropriate medicines and other
measures with an eye to the nature and intensity of the
deranged Dosha or Doshas involved in each case under-
lying at the root. 29.

Udavarta due to errors in diet:— The

abdominal (Koshthaja) VAyu deranged and aggravated
by such factors as eating dry, astringent, pungent or
bitter articles of fare (in inordinate quantities) causes
an immediate attack of UdAvarta in which the Vayu
(follows an upward course and) obstructs its own channels
as well as those of feces, urine, Kapha, fat and blood.
It dries up the fecal matter (in the body) causing pain
in the heart and bladder, a sense of heaviness in the
limbs (D. R — nausea), aversion to food (D. R. unwilling-
ness to do anything) and difficult and scanty emission
of stool, urine and flatus. Laboured breathing, cough,

* S'ivad£sa advises ihc use of buffalo’s milk in this case as being more
efficacious in bringing on sleep. Dut Dallana refutes this and re-
commends the use of cow’s milk.

350 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LV.

catarrh, burning sensation in the body, fits of uncons-
ciousness, vomiting, fever, thirst, hiccough troubles in
the head, defective functional activity of the Manas
(mind) and of the ear and such like symptoms, in conse-
quence, pre-eminently mark the deranged action of the
bodily V&yu. 30.

Treatment : — The patient’s body should be
made emulsive (Snigdha) by the application of unguents
composed of salt and oil. Fomentation should then be
applied under the circumstances, and intestinal injections
should be applied after the manner of a Nirudha Vasti.
Intestinal enemas (Vasti) of the AnuvAsana kind should
also be applied after meal, if the case be attended
with loose motions in virtue of the specific nature of
the deranged bodily Doshas involved therein. Fatty
purgtives should be exhibited after having fully foment-
ed the body of the patient, when the foregoing re-
medies would fail to give any relief from attacks of
Udavavta and he should be made to drink a potion
of any acid cordial together with the compound of Pilu,
Trivrit and Yavdni or with the compound consist-
ing of Iltngu , Kushtha , Vacha, Svarjika- ksh&ra and
Vidanga * each succeeding drug weighing double the one
immediately preceding it in the order of enumeration.
These two medicinal compounds may be employed
with advantage in relieving attacks of S>ula aud
UdAvarta. 31 — 32.

The drugs known as Deva-ddru , Chitraka , Kushtha,
Vacha (D. R — S>unthi), Haritaki , Palamkashd (Guggulu)
and Pushkara-x oots should be duly boiled with half an
Adhaka measure (thirty-two Palas) of water and taken
down from the oven with a quarter part of the original

* Cbakradatta reads ‘fafV (and Vit salt) in place of

Chap. LV.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 35 1

solution remaining. Draughts of the this decoction
would relieve an attack of Udavirta. 33.

A potion of clarified butter duly cooked with the
decoction of dried* Mulaka , Ardraka , Varshdbhn ,
Pancha-mula f and Arevata (Aragvadha) fruits would
cure any form of Uddvarta whatsoever, 34.

A compound consisting of Vachd, Ativishd , Kushtha,
Yava-Kshd ra, Haritaki, Pippali and Chitraka should also
be taken with tepid water, or a compound consisting of
Ikshdku-roots, Madam, Vis'alyd , Ativishd , Vacha , Kush ■
tka, Kinva (sediment of wine) and Agnika taken in
equal parts should also be taken in the aforesaid manner.
A compound of Deva-ddru , Agni , Tri-phald and Vrihati ,
should be taken with the urine of a cow. The decoction
of Kantakdri- fruits and barley weighing a Prastha
cooked in an Adhaka measure of water and boiled down
to half a Prastha only, should be taken in combination
with Hingu. 35 — 38.

A compound consisting of the pulverised seeds of
Madana and of Aldvu , Pippali and Nidigdhikd should be
blown into the rectum with a pipe. A Varti made of
Nikumbha (Danti), Kampilla , S'ydmd (Trivrit), Ikshdku 9
Agnika , (Ajamodd), Krita-V edhana (Kosdtaki), Mdgadhi
and salt pounded together, made into a paste with the
addition of cow’s urine, dried and cut into a propor-
tionate size, should be inserted into the rectum. The
last two ambrosial remedies give instantaneous relief in
a case of Udrfvarta. 39*

Thus ends the fifty-fifth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus v ruta
Samhita which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of Ud&varta.

* Dallana takes dried (S'ushka) with both ‘ Mulaka and Ardraka.

f Dallana recommends the major Pancha-mula \ but according to
Chakrapdni’s commentary, “Bhanumati,” it should be the minor Pancha-
inula.

CHAPTER LYI.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of Vishu-
chikd type of cholera, etc. (Visuchiksf-PratUhedha). i.

CaU 863 S —V isuchi, Alasaka and Vilambikd are
produced from the effects of the three kinds of indiges-
tion spoken of before (in Sutra, chapter XLVI), vis.,
Am&jirna (indigestion properly so-called), Vidagdhd-
jirna (indigestion with acidity) and Vishtabdhdjirna
(indigestion with undigested food stuffed into the
intestines in the form of undigested fecal matter). 2.

Definition l— The disease in which the derang-
ed and incarcerated bodily Vdyu produces, owing to
th% presence of indigestion, a pricking pain in the limbs
resembling that produced by the pricking of needles is
called Visuchikd by the physicians. Men well-versed
in the (dietetic) principles and temperate in their diet,
enjoy an almost absolute immunity from its attack,
whereas fools who arc greedy and intemperate and eat
like gluttons, fall an easy victim Jo it. 3.

Symptoms: — Fainting, diarrhoea (loose mo-
tions), vomiting, thirst, pain, cramps, vertigo, yawning,
burning sensation in the body, discolouring or paleness of
complexion, pain (cramps) at the heart and a breaking
pain in the head arc the symptoms of Visachikft 4.

Alasaka ■ — Excessive pain in and stuffedness of
the abdomen, rumbling noise (in the intestines),* and
the upward coursing of the Vdyu incarcerated in the
abdomen making a croaking rumbling sound in its way

* According to S'rikantha the commentator on Msidhava’s Niddna—
the patient himself makes an indistinct sound.

Chap. LVI.J

UTTARA-TANTRA.

355

upwards, absolute suppression of stool and flatus, hio
cough * and eructations — a patient suffering from these
symptoms is said have an attack of Alasaka. 5.

Vilambika S — The person in whom the deranged
and undigested food matter does not find any outlet
either through the upper or lower channels of the body
owing to the fact of its being obstructed in its course
by the action of the deranged Vdyu and Kapha, is said
to be suffering from an attack of Vil&mbiktf by
old medical experts and should be given up as in-
curable. In whatever part of the body the Ama
(undigested food matter) is present, it produces its’own
characteristic symptoms in that very part and the vitia-
tion of a particular Dosha in such cases should be
diagnosed by the presence of the characteristic symp-
toms (e. g. distension, etc.,) of Ama (indigestion)* 6 — 7,

Prognosis : — A patient exhibiting such sympr
toms as blackish blue (S>y&ma) colour of teeth, nails
and lips, diminished consciousness, vomiting, eyes sunk
in their sockets, feeble voice and looseness of all the
joints, should be regarded as not returning from his
journey (to the eternal home). 8.

General Treatment in the curable types,
cauterization of the regions of Pdrshni (heels), dry
fomentation, exhibition of strong emetics and such like
measures are recommended. Fasting should be observed
at (the time of) the digestion of the food. Digestive
(Pdchana) remedies as well as purgatives should also
be prescribed. The patient gets instantaneous relief
in cases of fainting, diarrhoea, etc., on the cleansing
of his body with the medicinal (emetic or purgative)
remedies. Intestinal injections after the manner of an
As'thdpana Vasti may be likewise applied in all cases

* M4dhava reads “thirst” in place of “hic-cougb.”

45

5$4. THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. (Chap. LVL

of the present disease. Now hear me describe the
recipes of other medicinal compounds which may be
employed in the aforesaid diseases in addition to those
already mentioned. 9—10.

A pulverised compound of Pathyd> V&chd, Hingu ,
Kalinga (Indra-yava), Grinja (a variety of garlic),
Souvarchala and Ativishd taken with tepid water
instantaneously relieves an attack of indigestion, colic,
VisuchikA and an aversion to food. The medicine
known as Kshtfrtf-gada (Kalpa — chapter VII) or
Vit- salt, or mustard-seeds and a profuse quantity of
treacle, should be taken (with tepid water). Sain •
dhava ) Hingu , Vija-pura , (D. R. seeds of £>Aka),
clarified butter and the two Tri-vargas (Tri-phalA and
Tri-katu) in combination with any fermented gruel
(KAnjika), or Tri-katu and Saindhava- salt mixed to-
gether with the milky exudation of Snuhi , should be
taken (with KAnjika). In the alternative, the medicated
salt known as Kalystna-Lavana described before under
the treatment of VAta-vyAdhi should be t*aken (with
KAnjika). Pippali t Yamdni and Apdmdrga , or Pippali
and Danti in equal parts should be similarly taken.
Pippali mixed with Danti should also be used with the
expressed juice of Koshdvati (GhoshA). Pippali and
S r unthi should also be taken with hot water. 1 1.

The drugs known as Vyosha ( Tri-katu ), Karanja-ixuits
(seeds), the two kinds of Haridrd* and the root of Mdtu-
lunga taken in equal parts should be pounded together,
made into GutikAs (or pills) and dried in the shade. The
application of these pills as an eye-salve (Anjana) along
the eye-lids proves curative in cases of VisuchikA.f 12.

* Chakrap&ni reads Haridrd in the singular number.

f Some here read the following two compounds as an additional text s—

Kushtha, Aguru, Patra, R&ni, S'igru, Vach £ end Tvak should be

Ciap. tVLJ tJTTARA-TANTRA. 3S5

Diet S— Digestive and appetising Pey 4 , etc, should
be given to the patient when he experiences a good
hunger after he had been fully treated with a course
of emetic or purgative or kept fasting for a proper
period. 13.

Causes and Symptoms of Anrfha:*-

The disease in which Ama (undigested food) or fecal
matter, gradually incarcerated (in the stomach) through
the action of the deranged and aggravated local VAyu
fails to find its natural outlet, or is not spontaneously
evacuated is called Anrfha (Enteritis ?).

A case of An&ha due to the accumulation of un-
digested food (in the stomach) exhibits such symptoms
as thirst, cattarrh, burning in the head, a sense of heavi-
ness and cramps in the stomach, nausea (D. R. — heavi-
ness of the heart) and suppression of eructations.
While a case of An&ha in the Pakvd^aya (intestines)
is marked by a sense of stuffedness in the back and
waist, suppression of stool and urine, eolic, epileptic
or fainting ^ts, vomiting of feces, laboured and difficult
respiration (D. R. — swelling), as well as the symptoms
mentioned under the head of Alasaka. 14.

Treatment : — In a case of Aniha due to the
presense of Ama, the patient should be treated with
emetics and then with digestive medicines and diet
according to the prescribed order. The Ama (undigest-
ed food) in a case not marked by any vomiting of
feces should be treated with fomentation and therapeutic

mixed together and pasted with KAnjika. This would be the best remedy,
for rubbing over the body of the patient, in a case of ViBttchik^

Oil should be duly cooked with Chitraka, Yuthi-flower, oiUcakes (of
sesamum), BhalUtaka, the two Kshiras, Saindhava and two parts of
Kushtha. This should be prescribed by an expert to be rubbed* or used
as a plaster over the body of the patient.

356 fHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap, LVl.

agents of digestive efficacy. Vartis (suppositories)
made by pasting the purgative drugs mentioned in
connection with the medical treatment of Visuchikd
together with the urine of a she-buffalo, or of a
she-goat or of a ewe or of a she-elephant, or of a
cow, should be used. The body of the patient should
be first fomented and then the powders of the drugs
used in preparing the afore-said Vartis should be blown
(into his intestines) through a pipe inserted into his rec-
tum. Decoction should be duly prepared by boiling the
drugs of emetic and purgative virtue in cow’s urine.
Nirudha Vasti* should soon be applied with the above
decoction mixed with half as much of cow’s urinef
and with honey and adding also the powders of Trivrit
and salt weighing a Prakuncha (Pala). The procedure
laid down in respect of the exhibition of purgatives
should be adopted here. Oil duly cooked and boiled
with the foregoing drugs should also be injected
into the rectum, if necessary, after the manner of an
Aunv&sana Vasti. 15 — 16.

Thus ends the fifty-sixth chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of Visuchikd.

* The application of this Nirudha Vasti ‘should be prescribed only
in the "<ro” stage of Andha and never in its stage.

f^Kdrtika Kundu does not include “urine” in this list. lie reads
w WITt3*hf* (added in half dose) in place of "iSJutspRH”.

CHAPTER LVII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of aversion
to food (Arochaka- Pratishedha). u

/Etiology : — The derangement of the Doshas
either several or combined or an apathetic state of
the mind (through grief, etc.) tends to block the food-
carrying channels vis., the esophagus, etc., as well as
the region of the heart causing aversion to all sorts of
food, which is designated Bhaktopaghaita (lit. aversion
to food — popularly known as Arochaka) by the physi-
cians and it is divided into five distinct types (according
to the different nature of its exciting factor). 2.

Specific Symptoms Pain and cramps
at the heart and a vapid taste in the mouth are the
symptoms which mark the Vdtaja type of Arochaka.
Excessive burning sensation (in the region) of the heart,
sucking pain (in the locality), a bitter taste in the mouth,
thirst and fainting fits are the features which mark the
Pittaja type of the disease. Itching sensation, heaviness
of the body, water-brash, lassitude, drowsiness and a
sweet taste in the mouth are the indications which
characterise the Kaphaja type. The Tri-doshaja type
is characterised by a good many symptoms which
severally mark the three Doshas. Indulgence in sensual
pleasure, as well as in fear and grief, ^r the sight of any
repugnant article, or of anything that tends to disturb
the mental ' Mdnasa) equilibrium, may also usher in an
attack of Arochaka. 3-7.

Treatment In a case of the Vtftaja type, the
patient should be first made to vomit with the help of

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. EVIL

i$8

decoction of Vacha and then be given a pulverised com-
pound of Krishnd , Vidanga , Yava-Kshdra , Harem >
Bhdrgi % Rdsnd , 2 s 4 f*, Hingu t Saindhava and Ndgara
through the medium of any Sneha or wine or hot water.
Vomiting should be induced with emetics sweetened f
with the solution of treacle in the Fittaja type of the
disease. The*use of a lambative prepared with Sain -
dhava, Sitd (sugar), honey and clarified butter would also
be efficacious. In the Kaphaja type, vomiting should be
induced with the decoction of Nimba and the powders of
Yamdni should then (after the taking of the meal) be
administered with the decoction of Aragvadha mixed
with honey. The pulverised compound mentioned in
connection with the treatment of the VAtaja type may
also be administered (in this case). All the preceding
measures should be employed in the Tri-doshaja type of
Arochaka. 8-n.

Four Specific Lambatives (i )Drdkshd %
Patola , FzY-salt, Vetra, Karira (bamboo-sprouts), Nimba f
Murud y Abhayd, Aksha , Vadara , Amalaka , (barks of)
Kutaja and seeds of Karanja and of Aragvadha should
be (powdered and) duly cooked with the urine of a cow
in the form of a lambative. (2) A similar preparation
should be made of Mustd, V<zchd> Tri-katu> the two
kinds of Rajani } Bhdrgi , Kushtka and Nirdahani%
and cooked with the urine of a ewe. (3) Similarly

* EU— Dalian a says that some take EH. in the sense of Ela*v£luk£
(a part used for the whole). S'ivaddsa, however, refutes this and asserts,
on the authority of V£gbhata, that “Ela M should mean EH.

t According to some, the emetic used should be Madana fruit ; while,
according to others, it should be the drugs of the Madhura (K&koly&di)
group— the word ‘Madhura 5 indicating the same. Some, however, read
‘Madhuka* (Yashti-madhu) for ‘Madhura’.

t Kirdahani, according to some, means Chitraka, but, according to
others, it means Yamini. The former sense is the most general one.

Chap. LVII. ] U TTARA-T ANTRA. 359

Pdtkd } V amsd-lochana, Ativi$hd and Rajani should be
boiled together with the urine of a she-eiephant.
(4) Mandukiy Arka , Atnritd and Ldngald should be
similarly boiled by an experienced and practical,
physician with the urine of a she-buffalo. Whoever
licks up any * * * § of the four preceding lambatives gets
rid of Gulma, aversion to food, asthma* and diseases
affecting the heart and the larynx. 12,

Regimen Of Diet:— The patient should par-
take of fruits, edible roots, etc. which grow in his country
and take cordials, Shddavas f Rigas \ and other
palatable dishes which are congenial to his physical tem-
perament and which he is accustomed to. He should
also be made to take (articles of) different Rasas § in
different ways and his food should be at the same time
light, Ruksha and agreeable to his taste. 13.

The due applications of Asth&pana-Vasti, purgatives
and of light head-purgatives (errhines) are efficacious in
the disease under discussion. The drugs known as
Tryushana , Rajani (D. R. — the two kinds of Rajani) and
Tri-phald pounded together and mixed with powdered
Yava-kskdra and honey, should be used as a tooth-
powder in washing the mouth. Any other drugs of
bitter and pungent taste may be likewise prescribed
for the purpose. 14-15.

* According to Dallana the four lambatives should be used in cases
, of Vdtaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Tri-doshaja types of Arochaka
ri&pectively.

f “Shidava”— It is a preparation with a variety Of articles of sweet,
acid and saline tastes.

X “Riga”— It is a preparation of a cordial with sugar, Souvarchala-
salt, Saindhava, turmeric, Parushaka, black-berry and mustard, etc*

§ Dallana interprets “Rasa” by meat-soup but we are inclined to
take it in the sense of articles of different tastes (Rasa).

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LVII.

360

Use of Decoction, Arlshta and Asava :

— Decoctions of the drugs of the Mustddi and Aragva •
dhddi or Das'a-mula groups as well as the different
lambatives with honey, the different Asavas prepared
with any officinal urine and with treacle as well as the
different Arishtas and the different Asavas prepared
from any Kshdra and resembling in scent, the wine
prepared from honey, should be used in conquering an
attack of Arochaka. The aforesaid measures should
also be employed for the purpose of re-kindling the
digestive fire (appetite) impaired through the action of
deranged Vdyu and Kapha. 16.

Treatment of Msfnasa Arochaka
In a case of impaired digestion due to the effects of any
ungratified desire, fear, grief, etc., the lost longing for
food should be restored in the patient by holding out to
him the near prospect of its realisation and by consoling
him with the prospects of fresh joy and safety. In a case
due to the loss of a splendid fortune, the bitter apathy
and loathsomeness of the patient towards taking any
food should be removed by infusing fresh hopes into his
heart and by narrating to him the balmy stories of
the PurAnas. A case due to dejection or despondency
should be conquered by sincere- sympathy and cheering
up. In short any impairment of appetite due to any
disturbed or agitated state of the mind should be
remedied with discourses gratifying to the patient under
the circumstances. 17

Thus ends the fifty-seventh chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the
Sus'ruta Samhitk which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of
Arochaka.

CHAPTER LVIII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of the
suppression of urine (MutrsC-ghsCta Pratf*
shed ha), i.

The disease is of twelve* kinds, viz., V£ta-kunda*
lik£, Ashthild, V&ta-vasti Mutrdtita, (Mutra-) Jathara,
Mutrotsanga, (Mutra-)Kshaya, M utra-granthi, Mutra-
sukra, Ushna-v&ta and the two forms of (viz, Kaphaja
and Pittaja) Mutraukasdda. 2.

Symptoms of Vsfta-kundaliksC:— The

bodily V£yu deranged and aggravated through an
extremely parched condition or through the voluntary
repression of an urging towards micturition affects and
retains the urine in the bladder, causing it to revolve in
eddies within the cavity of that organ. It allows the
urine to pass in small quantity or (even) to dribble out
in drops with pain. This disease is known as
kandaliktf and is of a violent type. 3.

VatsfshthilsC : — The deranged and aggravated
bodily V&yu incarcerated or lodged in the region lying
between the bladder and the anus gives rise to a thick
lumpy tumour like a pebble (Ashthild), which is hard
and non-shifting in its character, producing suppression
of stool, urine and flatus, distension of the abdomen
and pain in the bladder. It is known as Vrftrf8htllik& 4.

V^ta-vasti : — The bodily VAyu in the locality,
aggravated by a voluntary repression of a propulsion
to urination enters into the bladder of the ignorant

* Midhava reads thirteen different kinds of this disease. He reads
only one kind of Mutra-sAda and adds Vid-vigh&ta and iVasti-kundala.

46

362 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. LVIII.

person doing the same and also obstructs the orifice of
that organ causing retention of .urine with an oppressive
pain in the bladder and loins. The disease is known as
VtftarTOBti and is extremely hard to cure. 5.

MutrsCtita : — The urine of a person voluntarily
suppressing it does not flow out at all or only dribbles
out in drops or in scanty jets with slight pain, when
he strains. The disease is called MutrAtita. 6.

Blutra-Jathara-.— The vital Apina VAyu is
deranged and aggravated by the Ud&varta produced by
a checked desire for urination and completely fills up
and distends, with an excruciating pain in the abdomen
below the umbilicus. The disease is called Mutra-
jathara and the lower orifices* {viz. the anus and the
urethra) are obstructed in this disease. 7.

Blutrotsanga:— The disease in which the
stream of urine gliding along the bladder and urethra is
gradually emitted in scanty jets or runs down the
exterior surface of the glan penis with blood, whether
with or without pain, is called Mutrotsanga (lit. gliding
urination) and is an outcome of the deranged and aggra-
vated action of the bodily V&yu. 8.

Mutra-kshaya and Mutra-granthf
The deranged and aggravated Pitta and Vdyu in the
bladder of an extremely fatigued person already suffer-
ing from an extreme parchedness of organism, finds
lodgement in the bladder producing, in concert, a sensa-
tion of local burning and pain attended with a scanty
accumulation of urine in the cavity of the organ (lit.
absence of micturition). The disease which can be
made to yeild only to the virtue of therapeutic agents

* Some reed the lower part vh., the neck of

the bladder is obstructed.

ChapmLVIII.J UTTARA-TANTRA. 363

with the greatest difficulty is called Mntra-kshaya- A
small round painful fixed Granthi suddenly occurring
on the interior side (of the orifice) of the bladder and
exhibiting by its characteristic pain, etc., all the symp-
toms of the presence of gravels (urinary calculii) in that
organ, and which stands completely obstructing its
orifice without letting out a single drop of urine, or
admits only of its being dribbled out in scanty jets, is
called Mutra-granthi. 5-10.

Mutra-Sukra and Ushna-vdta A

person visiting a woman in the presence of a strong
urging towards urination and by voluntarily repressing
the same is found to pass urine highly charged with
semen which is sometimes seen to precede or follow
the discharge of urine. The urine in this case resem-
bles the washing or solution of ashes in colour.
The disease is called Mutra-s'ukra (lit. semen-charged
urine). The disease in which the Pitta of a person
deranged by such factors as over-fatiguing physical
exercise, exposure to the sun, or arduous pedestrian
journey, gets into his bladder completely wrapped in the
deranged Vdyu of his body, and produces an intense
burning sensation in his bladder, penis and the anus,
setting up a painful flow of a dark yellow or blood*
streaked urine or of blood alone through the urethra in
its stead, is designated as Ushna-vrfta. n-12.

Two kinds of Mutraukasdda s— A non-

slimy and thick flow of yellow-coloured urine attended
with a burning sensation, and leaving a sediment
like powdered Rochand when dried, is called (Pittaja)
Mutraukastfda. The wise ascribe the origin of this
disease to the action of the deranged Pitta. The
type in which a pale sediment resembling the powders
of conch-shell is deposited when the urine is dried and

364 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chip. LVIH.

in which the flow is painful and the urine is si inly,
thick and white, should be attributed to the action of
the deranged Kapha. It is but another variety of the
disease described immediately before. 13.

General Treatment Medicinal decoctions,
Kalkas, (medicated) Ghritas, (various kinds of ) foods,
lambatives, preparations of milk, alkalis, honey, Asava9,
fomentation and Uttara-vasti should be employed
according to their indications in coping with an attack
of any of the aforesaid ailments. An intelligent physi-
cian shall resort, in these cases, to measures which are
efficacious in cases of As'mari, or shall employ in their
entirely the medicinal compounds which have been
described as curative under the treatment of urinary
Uddvarta. 14.

A case of Mutra-krichchhra would be relieved by the
Use of pasted Ervdru- seeds and Saindhava weighing an
Aksha and taken with the fermented paddy-boilings.
A person afflicted with Mutra-krichchhra should take
wine (prepared from Pishta or pasted rice) in combina-
tion with Souvarchala- salt, or he should take wine pre-
pared from honey by biting meat at intervals, or take
any wine made from treacle. In the alternative, a
Karsha measure of Kumkutna should be kept saturated
with honey and water during the night and this should
be taken in the morning, whereby the patient would be
relieved of the trouble (of Mutra-krichchhra). By taking
the principal wine (viz., that prepared from Pishta or
pasted rice) with salt, powdered Eld, Jiraka and Ndgara
and saturated with the acid juice of pomegranade one
would get rid of Mutra-krichchhra. 1 5 — 16.

Half a Prastha measure of water with four times as
much of milk together with the drugs of the Prithak-
PAmyddi (VidAri-gandhadi) group and Gokskura-xooXs

Chap. LVIII.] UTTARA-TANTRA. 36$

should be kept boiling till all the water is evaporated.
A person suffering from an attack of MutrA-ghAta due
to the concerted action of deranged VAyu and Pitta
should use this medicated milk, when cooled, with sugar
and honey. The dung of an ass or of a horse should
he squeezed through a piece of linen and a Kudava
measure of this expressed liquid should be taken for the
cure of an attack of painful urination. 17 — 18.

An Aksha measure of the compound made by
pasting Musta> Abkayd, Deva-ddru , Mutvd and Yashti-
madhUy should be taken with the decoction of Drdkshd .
Abkaydy Amalaka and Aksha (Vibhitaka) together
weighing a Vadara measure should be taken with salt
and water for getting relief in cases of painful uri-
nation. An Udumbara measure of Drdkshd should be
kept saturated in water for the whole night and this
cold infusion should be taken (in the morning) for
getting relief in cases of painful urination. A Kudava
measure of the expressed juice of Nidigdhikd or the
Kalka of the same should be taken with honey as a
relief from the urinary complaints. 19.

By taking a Kudava measure of the expressed juice
of Amalaka y a person suffering from uninary complaints
would get rid of his troubles. In the alternative, the
patient should drink a potion consisting of powdered
small Eldy dissolved in the expressed juice of Amalaka
(and mixed with honey), or he should take a paste
of the tender roots of Tdla (palm) with cold rice-
washing. The expressed juice of Trapnsha and white
Karkataka should also be prescribed to be taken with
milk in the morning. In the alternative a person should
take a potion consisting of milk duly boiled with the
drugs of the Madlmra group saturated with clarified
butter as the compound is possessed of excellent diuretic

366

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap LVIII.

properties and tends to remove the seminal troubles
{e. g. } Mutra-rfukra) as well. 20.

A compound consisting of Vald ) S'vadamshtrd , seeds
of lotus (Krouncha)*, Tandula (ie., seeds) of Koktldkshaf ,
roots of S'ata-parvan Devad&ru, Chitraka and stone
of Aksha , pasted together and dissolved in wine should
be taken by a person . under the circumstances inasmuch
as it removes the defects of urine and eliminates the
gravels from the bladder. 21.

The ashes of burnt Pdtald wood, which are effica-
cious in relieving ail sorts of urinary troubles, should be
strained seven times in succession (after the manner of
KshAra preparation) and taken with a small quantity
of oil. In a similar way a paste of Nala, Iksku, Darhha ,
As'ma-bheda and the seeds of Trapusha and Ervdruka ,
should be duly washed in milk and filtered and taken
in combination with clarified butter. Powders of Tvak,
Eld and Tri-katu should be taken by the intelligent one
in combination with the alkaline solution of the ashes
of Pdtald , Yava-kshdra , Pdribhadra and Tila. Lamba-
tives made of the powders of the above-mentioned drugs
should be separately licked with treacle. 22 — 24.

Now I shall describe the measures which are bene-
ficial in Mutra-dosha (urinary defects). Purgatives
should be administered to a patient after the due
application of Sneha and Sveda. Uttara-vastis should
be injected after he has been duly purged. 25.

Sexual intercourse should be refrained from by a
person afflicted with a discharge of blood from the

* Dall&na explains Krounchdsthi as bones of a Krouncha bird, but we
are not inclined to accept this explanation.

t Some explain “Kokil&shaka-tandula” as meaning Kokiliksha and
Tandnla (rice) which meaning may also be accepted.

% “S'ata-parvan” may mean Durb£-grass or bamboo#

Chap. LV 1 II. ] UTTARA-TANTRA. 367

urethra owing to sexual excesses, and he should be
treated with remedies which arc constructive tonics
(e. g., meat-soup, milk, clarified butter, * etc.), Uttara-
vastis should be applied into the urethra, under the
circumstances, with cock's lard and with oil, the process
of applying which has already been elaborately des-
cribed. (See ChikitsA, XXVII). 26-27.

Half a PAtra measure of honey, one PAtra measure
of clarified butter churned from milk (Kshira-sarpis) f
and equal parts of sugar, and powdered Drdkshd ,
Atmaguptd- seed, Ikshuraka and Pippali \ together weigh*
ing one half part ri.e., half of half a PAtra) should be
thoroughly mixed by stirring the compound with a
laddie. A PAni-tala (two TolAs) measure of this com*
pound should be. licked, followed by draughts of milk.
By using this Ghrita, a man is relieved of all injurious
principles of his body, and gets rid of distressing and
dreadful urinary troubles which cannot otherwise be
easily cured by any other remedy. It acts as an excellent
blood-purifier, and, by using it, even a barren woman
may get rid of her sterility and of all other vaginal and
uterine complaints which usually obstruct or retard con-
ception in females. 28.

* Dallana says that K&rtika does not read this, in as much as this
would increase the number originally mentioned, as also because this case
has already been mentioned in Prameha. But according to Jejjata, this
is mentioned here to make the case more clear.

t Dallana’s reading here evidently is ‘Kshira-shrpishah’, but according
to a variant the reading would be “Kshira-sarpish u” i.e., milk and
clarified butter (taken together)* The latter reading has the support
of Chakrapdni and Vrinda who, however, read these lines in a different
way and prescribe the drugs in somewhat different proportions. The
former reading ‘Kshira-sarpishah’ with the sixth case-ending is, however,
more grammatical*

368

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LVI«.

Equal parts of Vald, stones of XVfl-fruIts, Yashti-
madhu, Svadamsktrd (Gokshura), S'atdvati, Mrindla
(lotus-stem), Kas'eru, seeds of Ikshuraka, Sahasra-viryA
(Durbd), Ams'umati (Ssila-parni), Payasyd (Vidiri), K&ld,
S’rigdlavimd (Pris'nipami), Ati-vald and the drugs of the
Vrimhaniya (KAkolyddi) group should be duly boiled
with four times of water of their combined weight and a
Tute masure of treacle. When only a Drona measure
of water would remain, it should be taken down and
strained through a piece of linen. It should then be
duly cooked with an Adhaka measure of clarified butter.
The medicated Ghrita (thus prepared) with a Prastha
measure of honey added to it (when cooled) should be
kept in an earthen pitcher. By using this medicated
Ghrita, one would be cured of all urinary troubles.* 29.

Thus ends the fifty-eighth chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the Sus'ruta
Samhitf which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of the suppression
of urine (Mutrkghkta).

* Additional Toxt Powders of Tugd-kshiri and sugar should be
mixed together with honey and licked in an auspicious day according to
the digesting capacity of the patient and a draught of milk should then
be taken. By its use the patient would be able to conquer all seminal
troubles if he observes a perfect continence. One whose semen has been
wasted by sexual excesses would get instantaneous relief $ and a man
who is possessed of vigour (Ojas) and strength would be refreshed and
cheerful.

CHAPTER LIX.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of the defects

of urine (Mutra-dosha-Pratishedha).* i.

Classification S — The disease known as
Mutropaghfifta is divided into eight different types
according as an attack is induced by the deranged action
of the bodily V&yu, Pitta and Kapha separately, or is
due to the concerted action of all of them, or to the
effects of an external blow or hurt (on the locality),
or to the pressure of the feces incarcerated (in the
intestine), — i.e. to the constipation of the bowels— or to
the presence of any stone (Asmari in the bladder).
The eighth is the one due to the presence of gravels
(Sarkard in the bladder). This disease is one of the
most painful and distressing ailments which assail the
human body. 2.

Specific Symptoms:— A scanty flow of
urine coming out in drops and producing an oppressive
and bursting pain in the scrotum, penis and bladder,
is the specific feature of the Viitija type of the disease.
The Pittaja type is characterised by the emission of
bloody or high-coloured (lit. dark yellow) and (very) warm
urine which produces a burning sensation in the scrotum,
bladder and penis being burnt by fire, as it were. A

* Dallana’s reading evidently is Mutra-krlchchbra (Strangury), for
he says that the variant here in some Mss . is Mut^dosha. He says further
that some do not read this chapter at all on the ground that the matter
in this chapter is included in the chapters on As'mari, Mutraghita and
Udkvarta, etc. But, according to him, it must oe read here for treat-
ment’s sake as well as on the ground of its being separately treated in
other authoritative works. M&dhava, Chakra-pdni, Vrinda and other com-
pilers have read this as Mutra-krichchhra in a separate chapter as here.

47

370 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LIX.

sense of weight or heaviness in the scrotum, penis and
bladder, an appearance of goose-flesh (on the skin) and
the emission of cold, white and glossy (oily) urine, are
the features which mark the Kaphaja type. Burning
sensation (in the urethra, etc.), shivering (of the body),
frequent emission of urine of varied colours, painful
micturition and loss of consciousness are the indications
which point to the Srfnnipitika origin of the disease
which is very hard to cure. 3-6.

The presence of any ulcer in or an injury to the
urethra, by any external object gives rise to an extremely
distressing stricture in the case of which the characteristic
symptoms of V&ta-vasti manifest themselves. The sup-
pression of the feces leads to the aggravation of the
local Vdyu which, in its turn, produces a distension of
the abdomen and a suppression of urine accompanied
with cramps (in the bladder). 7-8.

Asmarija and €arkarc(ja Mutri-gMta
(obstructed urination) due to the presence of As'mari
(stone) has been already mentioned (in the Niddna
Sth&na). Stones and gravels are of similar origin and
exhibit similar symptoms. Now hear me describe the
symptoms which are the distinguishing traits of a case
ol Sarkara (gravel or urinary calculus in the bladder).
Flakes or particles of deranged and condensed Kapha
when baked (dried ?) by the action of the deranged and
aggravated Pitta and severed in pieces by the deranged
bodily V 4 yu, are called Sarkar4 (gravels) giving rise to
such symptoms as cardiac troubles (pain in the heart,
etc.), shivering, cramps in the loins, great diminution of
the digestive fire, fainting fits and painful and obstructed
urination. The pain, however, subsides with the subsi-
dence of the desire for micturition (full evacuation of
the bladder), the relief from the pain continuing until

Cta p. UX.]

UTTARA-fANTRA.

371

the orifice of the organ (urethra) is not again obstructed
by the presence of other calculii. These are the symp-
toms which characterise a case of Mutragh&tg. (obstructed
urination)due to the presence of gravels in the bladder. 9.

General Treatment s— Now 1 shall describe
the mode of medical treatment and active therapeutic
agents to be employed in the eight cases of Mutrd-
ghdta. Medical measures and remedies mentioned in
connection with the treatment of As'mari (stone) should
also* be employed in the present instance in due succes-
sion — commencing with the application of Sneha, etc.
— with proper regard to the Dosha or Dhosas involved
in each case. 10.

Treatment of Vataja Type s — Oil, clari-
fied butter and lard mixed together should be duly
cooked with S'va-damshtrd , As'mabheda, Kumbhi (a kind
of moss), Hapushd , Kantakari, Bald , S'atdvari, Rdsnd ,
Varuna , Giri-karnikd and the drugs of the Viddri-
gandhddi group. Oil or clarified butter alone may also
be similarly cooked and prepared with the above drugs.
The above preparations should be internally administered,
or injected into the intestines after the manner of an
AnuvAsana-vasti, or into the urethra as an Uttara-vasti for
giving relief in cases of Vitaja Mutra-krichchhra. 11-12.
Pittaja and Kaphaja Types s— The

internal use of the clarified butter duly cooked with the
drugs of the Trina-panchti-mula , Utpalddi , Kdkolyddi and
Nyagrodhddi groups, would give an instantaneous relief
in a case of Pittaja Mutra-Krichchhra. The use of
this Ghrita as an Uttara-vasti would also similarly give

* Dallana says that the presence of the particle “V (meaning also)
indicates that the mode of medical treatment prescribed in cases of
Mutr4gh£ta should aUo be applied in this case.

3/2 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX [Chap. LIX.

relief' in a case of the present type. Any Sneha duly
cooked with the preceding drugs should be similarly
used after the manner of any of the three Vasti-applica-
tions. Purging with milk and the expressed juice of Ikshu
and of Drdkshd is also beneficial. Oils and Yavdgus
duly cooked with the drugs of the Surasddi ) Ushakddi>
Mustddi and the Varunddi groups would prove curative
in a case of Kaphaja Mutra-krichchhra. 13 — 14.

Tri-dOShaja Type : —The foregoing measures
and remedies should be employed in the Tri-doshaja
type of Mutra-krichchhra according to the nature and
intensity of the predominance of the Doshas involved.
Pulverised compound of P/talgu (KAkodumbara), Vris'-
chika (white PunarnavA), Darbha and Asma-sdra (dead
iron) taken with water, potions of Surd (wine), the
expressed juice of Ikshu , and the decoction of Darbha
would relieve pain in a case of Mutra-krichchhra. 15.

Medicines and medicinal measures mentioned in
the chapter on the treatment of Sadyo-vrana should
be employed in a case of stricture due to any hurt
(Abhighsfta) to the urethra. VAyu-subduing remedies
should be constantly used, and baths, fomentations, un-
guents, applications of Vasti and powders should be
employed in a case of Purishaja Mutra-krichchhra.
The treatment of the last two kinds {viz. As # mari-ja and
£>arkarA-ja) has already been described. 16-17.

Thus ends the fifty-ninth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'rula
SamhiU which deals with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of Mutra-
dosha.

Here ends the Kstya-ChikitssC

CHAPTER LX.

Now we shall ‘discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of the
disease brought on through super-human* influences

(Amafousha-Pratishedha). i.

Now we dilate upon the dictum which has been
put forward in the first portion of the present work,
and which is to the effect that a patient suffering from
ulcers should always be protected from the evil in-
fluences cast by night-rangers (*. e . ghost, monsters,
and malignant spirits, etc.). Whoever produces super-
human character in a man by making him exhibit
uncommon fortitude and marked irrelevancy in his
dealings and the power to know the private and future
events is called a. Graha. 2-3.

Causes of influence by a Graha
Innumerable are the Grahas and their tutelary divinities
who roam about in the world in quest of offerings or out
of their innate tendency for mischief and cruelty and
choose their victims from among persons who are impure
in body, mind and acts — be they ulcerated or otherwise.
These Grahas though possessed of various shapes and
figures are mainly classified under eight groups or
families. The Devas (deities) and their enemies (vis, the
Asuras), Gandharvas, Yakshas, Pitris (manes), Bhujangas,
(Serpent-dieties), RAkshasas (monsters) and Pis'Achas
(filthy goblins) are the eight classes of Grahas. 4-3.

Indications of attack by Grahas:-

A person possessed by a Deva (divine) Graha is cleanly,

* Amrinusha— lit. non-m£nusha, t. e. other than human. It includes
the deities, demons, ghosts, monsters and the manes and even the serpent-
deities.

#4 f HE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. L&

contented, vigorous and with little sleep. He speaks in
good and pure Sanskrit, betrays a strong and decided
liking for flowers and perfumes, grants boons (after the
fashion of a divine being) to all and is devoted to
Br£hmanas, and stares with a fixed gaze (in his eyes).
A person labouring under the malignant influence of
an Asura Graha (devil) perspires copiously, speaks ill
of the gods, Brihmanas and preceptors, knits his
brow with arched eyes, has no fear, becomes satisfied
with all kinds of food or drink and exhibits vicious
propensities. A person under the influence of a
Gandharva Graha moves about happily along lovely
river-banks, or in lovely forest. Always cleanly in body
and acts, he shows fondness for songs, flowers and sweet
scents laughs merrily and croons sweet songs and
dances. Copper-coloured eyes, partiality for wearing
thin red garments, vigour and fortitude, repeated offers
for granting boons or gifts to persons, taciternity,
restiveness (D. R.— fastness in walking) and gravity
of the mind are the symptoms which are manifested in
a person coming under the influence of a Yaksha
Graha. 6-5.

A person similarly affected by a Pitri Graha be-
comes calm and quiet as well as reverent towards the
manes. He offers oblations on Kus'a - grass and libations
of water for their satisfaction, with the upper garment
worn in a fashion so as to fall under his left arm and
exhibits a liking for cooked meat as well as sesamum,
treacle and P&yasa. A person struck by the malignant
influence of a Bhujanga Graha, sometimes moves on his
breast along the ground like a serpent, always licks the
corners of his lips with the tip of his tongue, becomes
drowsy (D. R. irritable) and shows a marked predilection
for treacle, honey, milk and Piyasa. io-ii.

Chap. LX.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

37 S

A fondness for flesh, blood and various kinds of
ardent spirit, blank shamelessness, extreme cruelty,
courageousness, irritability, extraordinary strength,
stirring out in the night and an entire disregard of
cleanliness are the traits which mark a person attack-
ed by a Rakskasa Graha. Haughtiness, emaciation
of the Jframe, roughness of behaviour, garrulousness,
fetid smell from the body, extreme uncleanliness
and restiveness, voracious eating, fondness for cold
water and lonely places, stirring abroad in the night
(D. R. fondness for walking about the out-skirts of
forest) and roaming about weeping and engaged in
vicious pursuits (D. R. anxious looks) arc the features
which show that a person has been possessed by a
Pisafcha Graha. 12 -13.

Prognosis : —If a person possessed by a Graha,
has swollen eyes, quick pace, foam at the mouth which
he licks himself, drowsiness, staggering gait which
sometimes compels him to fall down on the ground or
if he is possessed by a Graha after his fall from a
hill, an elephant, a tree or such other high place, or
if he be old* he should be regarded as incurable. 14.

Times Of possession : —A Deva Graha
strikes i. e . possesses a man at full moon ; an Asura
Graha at the meeting of day and night i. e. in the
morning and evening twilights ; a Gandharva generally
on the eighth and a Yaksha on the first day of
the fortnights. A Pitri Graha possesses a man on
the new moon day ; and a Sarpa Graha (serpent-
devil) enters on the fifth day of the new or full moon.
A R&kshasa Graha possesses a man at night and a

* In place of “wTHfr sj*:” MsUhava reads u (it is also

incurable) when it has continued for thirteen years*

376 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LX.

Pisdcha Graha on the fourteenth day of the fortnights.
A Graha imperceptibly enters into the body of the
patient in the same way as an image imperceptibly
enters into (the surface of) a mirror, as heat or cold
penetrates into the body of an organic being and as
the rays of the sun are collected in the crystal lens
known as the Surja-kdnta gem and as soul enters the
body unseen. 15-16.

Austere penances and vows, self-control, truthfulness,
charities and religious practices as well as the eight
qualities* are either wholly or partially present in the
Grahas according to the degree of their respective power.
These spiritual bodies never come in contact with, nor
do they themselves strike human beings. Those who
hold contrary opinion, must be ignorant of the mys-
teries of demonology. It is the thousands and hundreds
of thousands and hundreds of millions of the followers
of the Grahas, who are fierce-looking and fond of flesh
and blood, and who stir abroad in the night and possess
the men on earth. 17.

Of these malignant spirits (Grahas) those who are
associated with the gods should be regarded as of
celestial essence in virtue of their partaking of a tinge of
divine virtues. Those who are known as Deva Grahas
and are cleanly should be worshipped and homaged
and prayed like the other gods of our Pantheon.
The Grahas should be credited with those powers,
virtues and characteristics which are the attributes of

* The eight qualities referred to are ; — (1) Amman or the superhuman
power of becoming as small as an atom at will. (2) Laghiman — power of
becoming excessively light at will. (3) Vy^pti— expansiveness. (4) Pr£-
kiunya—irrisestible will. (5) Mahiman— power of increasing the size at
will. (6) Is'itva— greatness. (7) Vas'itva— ^elf-control and (8) IWm$va«
skyitk— suppression of passion,

Chap. LX.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

377

their respective masters. They are the issues of Nairiti’s
daughters and their living has been fixed as such by
the various Ganas (or groups of gods and demi-gods)
as they are always adverse to truthfulness, t\ e . the true
performance of the dictates of the £&stra. Those that
roam about in quest of evil and mischief in spite of the
celestial nature of their own divine essence and tem-
perament have been termed Bhutas (spirits). Hence
that branch of medical science which treats of the
therapeutics of diseases which originate from the influ-
ences of Bhutas (or Grahas) is called the Bhuta-
Vidyi 18-20.

General Religious Treatment s— Japas

(mental repetition of a Mantra sacred to any deity),
Homas (offering of oblations to the gods) and other
religious rites in accordance with the proper rules should
be undertaken by a careful physician for their propitia-
tion. Offerings of garlands of red flowers with red
scents (such as red Sandal paste, Kumkuma, etc.), seeds
(such as mustard, barley, etc.\ honey, clarified butter
and all sorts of victuals are the articles required general-
ly for (propitiation of) all classes (of Grahas). 2r.

Specific Religious Treatment sm-
oothes, wine, blood, flesh or milk should be offered to
them according to their respective likings*. Offerings
to the respective Grahas should be made on the day
corresponding to that in which they generally strike
their victims. Homas in the fire with the offerings of
Kus'a, Svastika, cakes (Pupa), clarified butter, umbrella
and P&yasa (porridge) should be made to the Deva
(celestial) Grahas in divine temples. To the Asura
Grahas the offering should the made in the yard

* This S # loka corresponding to “cloth likings” is only a variant

according to Pallana* Be doe? not seem to read this S'loka.

48

378 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LX.

(Chatwara), etc. of a house at the proper time {viz. at
evening) ; offerings to the Gandharva Grahas should
be made with wine and the soup of J dngala animals in
the midst of a gathering ; while those to the Taksha
Grahas should be made inside a house with the cakes
of boiled Mdsha pulse (Kulm&sha), blood, wine, etc.
The Pitri Grahas should be propitiated with the offer-
ings made on Kus'a grass together with Mddhavi and
and Kunda flowers on the banks of a river ; offerings to
the Rrfkshasa? should be dedicated in dreadful lonely
forests or at the crossing of two roads, while to the
Pi&chas cooked or uncooked flesh should be offered in
a lonely chamber. 22.

Medical Treatment In case the preval-
ent Mantras enjoined to be recited on such occasions
(in works on Demonology) are found to be ineffective
the following medical measures, should be employed.
Skin and hairs of a goat, a bear, a Salyaka (porcupine),
or of an owl pasted togotherwith Hingu and goat’s urine
and made.into incense sticks, should be burnt before
the patient, who would be fumigated with the fumes
emitted therefrom. The attack even of a violent Graha
would readily yield to it. The drugs known as Gaja-
pippali, Pippali- roots, Tti-katu, Amalaka and Sarshapa ,
duly soaked in the biles of a lizard, mungoose, cat
and bear should be employed as unguents, snuffs and
wash by an experienced physician. Dungs of an a s s,
horse, mule, owl, camel*, dog, jackal, vulture, crow and
boar pasted together with the urine of a she-goat should
be duly cooked with an adequate quantity of oil. The
oil thus prepared would be beneficial if used (as snuff,
etc.) in the preceding manner. 23-25.

* The woid in the text is ‘Karabha’ which man; mean a camel ot an
elephant. Dallana explicitly explains the word as a camel.

Chap. IX]

UTTARA-TA&TRA.

3^9

S’irisha- seed, La$'una> S’untki \ Siddhdrthaka % Vacha ,
Manjishthd , Rajani and Krishna should be pasted
together with goat’s urine and dried in the shade.
Vartis (sticks) prepared with this should be applied with
the bile (of a cow) along the eye-lids as an Anjana.
Vartis prepared with Naktamdla- fruit, Tri-katu , roots
of S’yondka and of Vilva as well as the two kinds of
Haridrd should be used as an Anjana in a similar way.
Saindhava , Katuka , Hingu , Vayasthd (Guduchi) and
Vachd f pasted together with goat’s urine and with the
bile of a fish, should be similarly used as an Anjana
in cases of attacks by the Grahas which would not
otherwise yield. 26-28.

Matured clarified butter, Las’nna , Hingu , Siddhdr -
thaka, Vacha , Golomi , Ajalomi, B hu takes’ i (JatAmAmsi),
Jatd (Gandha-mAmsi), Kukkuti (a kind of bulb), Sarpa-
gandhd, Kdna , (Kshira-kAkoli), Vishdnikd (MadhurikA),
Risky aprokta, Vayasthd , S’ringi \ Mohana-Valli y (Vata-
patrikA), Arka- roots, Tri-katu , Zatfd (Priyangu), Anjana
(RasAnjana\ Srotonjana , Naipdli ’ Haritala and other
articles which have the efficacy of exorcising evil spirits,
as well as the dungs, hairs, skin, VasA, urine, blood, bile
nails, etc. of lions, tigers, bears, cats, elephants, horses
cows, dogs, Salyakas, lizards, camels, mongooses, etc,,
should be used in the preparation of oil and clarified
butter which should be used internally as well as in
snuffing and as unguents. Pills made of the above
drugs should be used in sprinkling (wash) and their
powdered compound in dusting (the body of the patient).
A paste prepared with the above drugs should be used
as plasters. The due and proper application of the oil,
Ghrita, etc. thus prepared would, in a very short time,
surely cures all sorts of mental disorders. 29.

Unholy and improper articles should not be em-

$80 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX [Chap. DC.

ployed in a case due to the influence of any Deva
Graha (divine spirit). No hostile measure should be
adopted in a case of possession by a Graha other than
that due to the influence of a Pis'dcha Graha in as much
as the mighty Grahas, if offended, might kill both the
patient and the physician for the act A physician,
treating such a case with discretion according to the
rules laid dawn in the chapter known as the Hitdhita
(Ch. XX, Sutra-Sthdna) may acquire both fame and
wealth. 30-31.

Thus ends the sixtieth chapter of the Uttara-T^ntra in the Sus'ruta-
Samhiti which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of the disease
brought on through super human influences.

CHAPTER LXL

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatment of Apa-
smdra (Apasmara-Pratishedha). r.

Derivative Significance s— The word
“Smriti” signifies the faculty of past sense-perceptions
and (the prefix) “Apa” denotes the privation (of any
object or attribute). Hence, this disease (in which an in-
dividual loses the faculty of past cognitions) is termed
Apasmrfra (Epilepsy) and it turns fatal. 2.

Causes : — Excessive, inadequate and improper
attention to the objects of the sense as well as to their
actions, partaking of filthy, impure, incompatible and
uncongenial articles of fare and regimen of conduct,
repression of any natural urging of the body or aggra-
vation of the Rajas and Tamas (nescience), or going in
unto a woman in her menses, or indulgence in amorous
fancies, fright, anxiety, anger, or grief, etc., leads to an
aggravation of the bodily Dosha s which in their turn
affect the mind (Chetas) very greatly and give rise to
ApasmsCra. 3.

The sense-carrying Srotas (channels) of the body
overwhelmed by the concerted action of the deranged
Doshas bring in a predominance of Rajas and Tamas
(Nescience) causing the patient unconscious and forgetful
of all past memories. He writhes in agony and throws
his hands and legs in convulsive jerlcs with contracted
eyes (D. R. tongue) and eye-brows. He gnashes his teeth,
with foams at the mouth, etc., and falls to the ground
with open eyes, the consciousness returning a short
while after. The disease is called Ap&smtfra which is

3$2 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX tCfaap. LXI.

classified into four distinct types— viz. } VAtaja, Pittaja,
Kaphaja and SannipAtaja. 4.

Premonitory Symptoms ' The throb*
bing of the heart, emptiness or lightness(of the chest i.e. a
sense as if the external world is vanishing away fastly),
perspiration, pensiveness, fainting, stupid appearance
and sleeplessness are the symptoms, which are usually
found to usher in an attack (of ApasmAra). 5.

Symptoms of VaCtaJa and Pittaja

types S-In the Vatoaja type of ApasmAra the patient
fancies that a dark supernatural being is coming after
him to seize his person and is frightened and faints in
consequence with shivering grinding of the teeth i. e .
lock-jaw, laboured breathing and foaming at the mouth.
Fainting is excited by a terror of being seized by a
yellow and fierce-looking being in the Pittaja type
which is further marked by thirst, increased heat of the
body, perspiration, fainting, mild tremor of the limbs
and restlessness. 6—7.

Kaphaja and Sannipataja Types:—

Where the patient is excited by a fancied dread as if a
supernatural being of white colour is coming to appre-
hend him, it is a case of the Kaphaja type which is
moreover characterised by the, exhibition of such
symptoms as shivering, nausea, sleepiness, falling
prostrate on the ground and vomiting of mucus. Pain
in the heart, thirst and nausea are the specific charac-
teristics of the three types respectively. But delirious
talk and the making of indistinct and moaning sounds
are present in all the types, The specific features of all
the three foregoing types manifest themselves in concert
in a case of Satonipitika type. 8—10.

Discussion on its cause The sudden
appearance of the disease without any apparent cause

Chap. LXI.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

383

and also its sudden and spontaneous disappearance
after a short while without any apparent treatment,
have induced several medical authorities to hold that
ApasmAra is not due to any (aggravation of the) Dosha.
Several authorities, on the contrary, have described,
on the authority of other works on the subject, the
gradual aggravation of the (suddenly) deranged Doshas
as well as the concomitant symptoms of the disease in
its various phases with the spontaneous and speedy nature
of its abatement (though only temporary). Hence it may
be presumed that as seeds sprout in autumn only, when
the rains make the ground ready to receive them, the
shortness of time being counted as no factor potent enough
to obstruct the process (of sprouting), so the deranged
Doshas of the body though gradually aggravated bring
on, as a matter of fact, an attack of Apasm&ra with all its
concomitant symptoms, only under conditions favour-
able to its appearance which may, however, be short and
transitory in its duration. Hence this dreadful ApasmAra
is certainly a disease of idiopathic origin, it.

General Treatment Medicinal agents and
remedies to be mentioned in connection with insanity
(Unmada) may be as well employed in the present
disease. The use of matured clarified butter both in-
ternally and as unguents is recommended. Medicinal
measures and compounds mentioned under the head
of possession by the Grahas are also specially beneficial
in the present disease. Oil duly cooked with S'igru $
KatViitiga , ^SyonAka), Kinna (sedimpnt of wine) and
with the expressed juice of Nintba - barks and with cow’s
urine weiging four times as much, should be employed as
unguents. Draughts and embrocations of oil duly cooked
(separately) with the biles of a lizard, a mongoose, an
elephant (or snake), a deer of the Prishata class, a bear

384 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX [Chap. LXI,

and a cow, are recommended. Strong medicinal errhines
(Siro-virechana) as .well as strong emetics and purgatives
should be administered. The divine # Rudra god and
the host of his followers should be regularly worshipped
and propitiated every day. 12 — 15.

Specific Treatment S— Clarified butter duly
cooked with goat's urine and with the decoction of
Kulattha, Yava , Kola i S’ ana* seeds, Palankashd (Guggulu\
Jatdmdmsi, Das'a-vtula and Pathyd may be given with
advantage in a case of the V&aja type (of ApasmAra).
Clarified butter duly cooked with the decoction of the
drugs of the first (i.e. VidAri-gandhAdi) group and with
the drugs of Kdkolyddi group (as Kalka) if adminis-
tered with milk, honey and sugar would be beneficial in
a case of the Pittaja type. The use of (the medicated)
Ghrita duly cooked with Ktishnd , Vachd and the drugs
of the Mustakddi group (as Kalka) and with the decoc-
tion of the drugs of the Aragvadhddi group* and with
the five officinal kinds of animal urine is recommended
in cases of the Kaphaja type of ApasmAra. 16 — 18.

Siddhatrthaka Ghrita ■ Clarified butter
duly cooked with (the Kalka of) Sura-druma , Vacha ,
Kushtha , Siddhdrtha , Vyosha , Hingu , Manjishtkd, the
two kinds of Rajani , Samangd; Tri-phald, Ambuda
(Musta), Karanja- seeds, S' Irish /-seeds, Giri-karnd (white
AparAjitA # and Hutds'ana (Chitraka) and with four times
as much of cow's urine is called Siddh&thaka Ghrita,
which proves curative in cases of poisoning, worms (in
the intestines), Kushtha, asthma, derangements of
Kapha, Vishama-Jvara, Bhuta-graha, insanity and
ApasmAra. 19.

* According to Dallana, the Ghrita should be cooked with the decoc-
tion of Krishnd and Vacha, while the drugs of the Aragvadhddi group
should be used as Kalka.

Chap. LXIJ

UTTARA-TANTRA.

3»S

Pancha-gavya Ghrita Clarified butter

duly cooked with the Kalka of Das’a-mula % barks of
Indrcwriksha * Murvd , Bhdrgi *f, Tri-phald> Sampdka ,
(Aragvadha), S'reyasi (Gaja-pippali), Sapta-parni \ Apd -
mdrga and Pilu, and with the decoction of Bhu~nitnba %
Putika (Karanja), Vyoska, Chitraka , Trivrit , Pdthd % the
two kinds of Haridrd, the two kinds of Sdrivd % Push -
£ara-roots Katuka , Madayanti (Mallikd), (Vachd),
NiHni and Vidanga , and with the milk, curd (Dadhi),
urine and the expressed liquid of dung of a cow is
called Paneha-gavya Ghrita. It proves curative in all
forms of ApasmAra, Bhuta-graha, Chdturthaka (quar-
tian) fever, Phthisis, Asthma and Insanity. 20.

General Treatment Vastis should be
applied in the Vdtaja, purgatives, in the Pittaja and
emetics, in the Kaphaja types of ApasmAra. 21 .

Milk should be duly cooked with Bhdrgi and P£yasa
(porridge) should be prepared by cooking grains of £>&li
rice with this milk. This preparation should be given
to a boar kept fasting for three days. When it is
assured that the food taken has acquired a sweet taste
(t.e. that the process of digestion has begun in the stomach
of the boar) and when the symptoms of poisoning come
to be exhibited in the boar, the contents should be taken
out (of the boar’s stomach) and (should be dried and)
powdered. Three parts of this powder and one part of
Kinva (the sediment of wine) should be mixed together
and made to ferment in a cleansed earthen pitcher with
the addition of the cooled decoction of Bhdrgi. The wine
(SurA) thus prepared should be given in proper doses to

* By the term ‘Indra-vriksha-twak* some mean (barks of) Kutaja and
Twak (cinnamon).

f Bhdrgi— Pallana explains it as Goshthodumbara— the wild fig.

49

386

THE SUSRUTA SAMHITA

[Chap. LXI.

the patient as soon as it would acquire its (particular)
taste and aroma. Venesection (in the forehead) as
recommended before (S>drira-sthdna, Chap. VIII, 25-26)
should be resorted to and prophylactic and auspicious
articles should be used (by the patient). 22-23.

Thus ends the sixty-first chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which dealt with the (symptoms and) treatment of Apasmdra.

CHAPTER LXIL

Now wc shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the (symptoms and) medical treatmentlof Insanity
( U n maCda-Prat ished ha), r.

Derivation S — In as much as (in this disease)
the deranged bodily Doshas traversing the upper part of
the body affect the up-coursing nerves and produce there-
by a distracting state of the mind, it is called Unmdda
(Insanity), and it is a disease of the Manas (mind) 2.

Classification This disease is divided into
five different types according to the nature of their
origin —viz., the three types due to the several actions
of the three deranged and aggravated Doshas, the one
due to their concerted actions and the one due to
grief, etc, (real or imaginary). There is a sixth kind
also, viz., that due to the effects of poison, which should
be treated according to the nature and intensity of the
deranged Dosha or Doshas lying at the root and
which in its early stage, if not abnormally aggravated,
goes by the name of M&da. 3.

Premonitory Symptoms s— Fits of un-
consciousness, agitated state of the mind, ringing of the
ears, emaciation of the body, excessive energy of
action aversion to food, eating filthy things in dreams,
perturbation te. palpitation (of the heart) due to Vdyu
and vertigo or giddiness are the symptoms in a patient
which forebode a speedy and impending attack of
insanity. 4.

Specific Symptoms of Vrftaja, Pittaja

and Kaphaja types Shaggy appearance, use of
harsh language, appearance of a number of Dhamanis

388

TI-IE SUSRUTA SAMHITA

[ Chap* LXII.

(nerves) over the body, laboured breathing (D. R. experi-
ence of excessive coldness), emaciation of the body and
throbbing of the joints of the limbs are the specific fea*
tures of a case of the Vitaja type (of Unm&da) and the
patient in such a case reads clapping his hands, or sings
while dancing, or shouts or wanders about. Excessive
thirst, perspiration, burning sensation, voracious eating,
insomnia, desire for shade, cold, wind and walks on the
banks (of rivers or tanks), fits of anger, fancying fire in
cold water and fancied sight of stars in the heavens in
the day are the symptoms which characterise a case of
the Pittaja type. Vomiting, dulness of appetite, lassi-
tude or gone-feeling in the limbs, aversion to food,
fondness for sexual propulsion and loveliness, stupidity,
somnolence, reservedness in speech, eating little, fondness
for warm things and aggravation of the disease in the
night mark a case of the Kaphaja type of insanity. 5-7.

Tri-doshaja Type A case of Ssfnmprftika
insanity exhibits all the symptoms belonging to the
three aforesaid types origined from the three Doshas,
vie., Vdta, Pitta and Kapha. A case in which the
specific symptoms of the disease are manifested in
full should be deemed as incurable. Several authorities,
however, hold the Sannipdtika type to be sometimes
curable. 8.

Sokaja and Vishaja types : — A person
frightened by a thief, a king’s officers or his own enemy
or any such person, or suffering from any distracted
state of the mind owing to a loss of wealth, or from any
grief (Sioka) or bereavement or from any disappoint-
ed love would likely have an attack of mental dis-
traction (insanity). In such cases he would uncon-
sciously talk incoherently about subjects uppermost in
his mind or would sing in a stupid fashion or laugh or

-UTTARA-TANTRA.

Chap* LXII.]

389

weep. (These are the symptoms of &>kaja insanity).
-Redhhss of the eyes, dulness of complexion and of the
perceptive faculties, diminution of bodi-y strength,
extreme dejection, blush on face and loss of conscious-
ness are the symptoms which mark a case of insanity
due to the effects of poisoning. 9-10.

General Treatment A patient suffering
from insanity should be first treated with Sneha and
Sveda and then subjected to a course of emetics, purga-
tives and head-purgatives (Siro-Virechana). Powders
of various sorts of (drugs used in) Avapida snuffing
should be mixed with mustard oil and employed for
the purpose fof snuffing). Fumigation with burnt putrid
beef or dogs flesh should be constantly employed.
Snuffing and unguents of mustard oil are also effica-
cious in all cases. The patient should be surprised
with wonderful sights and the news of the death of any
of his dear ones should be related to him. He should
be constantly frightened with sights of fierce-looking
men, well-trained elephants or non-venomous snakes.
The patient should be threatened with being fastened
with ropes or being flogged, or frightened with bundles
of blazing hay, after being fastened, while asleep. He
should also be pierced in his body with pointed instru-
ments, avoiding, however, the vulnerable parts*, or he
should be made to reside constantly in a dry well with a
cover over it. Barley gruel, powders of parched barley
mixed with water alone should be given to him on every
third day by an intelligent physician. The diet of the #
patient should consist also of palatable and appetising
articles. 11.

* Additional Text -The patient should likewise be threatened
with being forced into a burning hut. He should be also kept immersed
in water or threatened with the fall of a thunder bolt.

390 THE SUSRUTA SAMHITA [Chap. LXII.

Maha-Kaly^na Ghrita s— Clarified butter
duly cooked with twice as much of milk and with
Vtdanga , Truphatd , Musta , Manjishthd , Dddtma , Utpala,
S'ydmd , Ela^vdlukd, Eld $ (redi Chandana , Deva-ddru,
Barhishtha (Bdlaka), Haridrd, Kushtha , Pamini Sdla-
parni), Sdrivd , Harenukd , Trivrit , Danti , Vacha, Tdlisa-
patra, Ndga-kes' ara and Mdlati flowers as Kalka(is called
Italy a'na Ghrita* and) proves curative in cases of Gulma,
cough, fever, asthma, phthisis and insanity. Clarified
butter duly cooked with four times as much of milk
and with the aforesaid drugs as Kalka and with the
drugs of the Kdkolyddi group added to it by way of an
after-throw is called Mahi-kalyioa Ghrita. The range
of its therapeutic application includes (such ailments as)
Apasmira, (attack by) Graha, consumption, impotency,
emaciation and sterility as well as the diseases mention-
ed above. 12.

Fhala Ghrita Clarified butter duly cooked
with Bdlaka , Kushtha , Manjishthd , Katuka , Eld,
Haridrd, Tri-phald , Hingu , As 9 vagandhd , Deva-ddru,
Vacha, Yamdni , Kdkoli, Medd , Yashti-madhu and
Padmaki as Kalka) , and with four times as much of
milk and with sugar as an after-throw would be
beneficial. It should also be prescribed for infants
struck by malignant stars as well as for male adults of
evil propensities and short intellect. This is known as
Phala-Ghrita* and removes barrenness of women 13.

Brdhni (Manduka-parni), Ainlri \ Vidanga, Tri-katu ,
Hingu, Surd (Deva-ddru\ Jatd (Jatd-mdmsi), Vishaghni
(Haridrd), Las'un.i (garlic), Rdsnd , Vis'alyd (Guduchi),
Surasd , Vacha , Jyotishmati, Ndga-vinnd (a kind of

* According to Dallana the mentions of these two recipes (Kalydna
Ghrita and Phala Grita) are interpolations.

Chap. LXII.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

39 *

Indra-viruni), Anatitd, Abhayd and Sourdshtri taken
in equal parts should be pounded together and made
into a paste with the addition of elephant’s urine. It
should then be dried in the shade, and Vartis should
be prepared thereof. These should be used by ' an
intelligent person as an Anjana, unguent, snuff, fumi*
gation and Avapida. 14.

Blood-letting from the Uras (chest), Apdnga (outer
corner of the eye) and Lal£ta (forehead) should be
resorted to. Measures and drugs mentioned in connec-
tion with the treatment of Apasm&ra and Graha-roga
may be likewise employed in the present instance. Oily
purgatives (Sneha-vasti) should be administered after
the subsidence of the deranged Dosha. 1 5.

In a case of the fifth kind (vis. Siokaja) of insanity
the cause of grief should be first removed. In all forms
of insanity the restoration of the serenity of mind should
be first attempted. Mild and gentle forms of these
remedies should be resorted to in a case of Mada
(preliminary stage of insanity). Mild anti-venomous
(anti-toxin) measures should be resorted to in • a case
(of insanity due to the effects of poison. 17-18.

j

Thus ends the sixty-second chapter in the Uttara-Tantra of the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the (symptoms and) treatment of
Insanity*

Here ends the Bhuta-vidycC-Tantra.

CHAPTER LXIII.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the different combinations of the (six) different
Rasas (Rasa-bheda- vi kal paAdhykya) . i.

The fifteen different combinations of the Doshas
already spoken of (in Chapter XXI, Sutra-SthAna) are
meant only for the sixty-three different combinations of
the (six) Rasas (taken one, two, three, four, five or all at
a time). They (z>/£.the different Doshas) may be manifest
separately (Avidagdha) or combinedly (Vidagdha) with
one another and the number of their combinations should
be taken to be sixty-three pari passu with the sixty-
three different combinations of the (six) different Rasas.
In other words, the combinations of the Doshas with
one another already spoken of should be considered by
an intelligent person to be sixty-three in all (and not
fifteen only, as spoken of in Chapter XXI, Sutra-
Sth&na). 2 — 3.

Enumeration— Taken two at a time:—

The Madhura Rasa (sweet taste) coming first in the
order of enumeration has got five combinations (with
the other five Rasas) taken two at a time. Similarly
Amla Rasa (acid taste) has got four combinations and
Lavana Rasa (saline taste) has got three. Katuka
Rasa (pungent taste) has got two and Tikta Rasa (bitter
taste) has got only one with Kasdya Rasa (astringent
taste). The different combinations taken two at a time
are thus fifteen in all. They are as fallows : —

(1) Sweet and acid, (2) sweet and saline, (3) sweet
and pungent (4) sweet and bitter and (5) sweet and
^stringent — these are the five combinations of Madhijr^

Chap. LX1II.]

UTTRA-T ANTRA.

393

(sweet) Rasa, (i) Acid and saline, (2) Acid and pungent
(3) Acid and bitter, and (4) Acid and astringent —these
ai*e the four combinations of Amla (acid) Rasa.

(1) Saline and pungent, (2) Saline and bitter, and (3)
Saline and astringent — these are the three combinations
of Lavana (saline) Rasa. (1) Pungent and bitter, and

(2) Fungent and astringent — these are the two combina-
tions of Katuka (pungent) Rasa. Bitter and pungent is
the only combination of Tikta (bitter) Rasa. Thus the
fifteen different combinations (of the six Rases) taken
two at a time have been enumerated. Now we shall
speak of their combinations taken three at a time. 4.

Taken three at a time The Madhura
Rasa tsweet taste) coming first in the list has got ten
combinations (with the other Rasas taken three at a
time). Similarly Amla Rasa (acid taste) has got six ;
Lavana Rasa (saline taste) has got half that number
i. e. three ; and Katuka Rasa (pungent taste) has got only
one combination They are as follows (i) Sweet,
acid and saline, (2) Sweet, acid and pungent, (3) Sweet,
acid and bitter, (4) Sweet, acid and astringent, (5) Sweet,
saline and pungent, (6) Sweet, saline and bitter,
(7) Sweet, saline and astringent, (8) Sweet, pungent
and bitter, (9) Sweet, pungent and astringent, and
(10) Sweet, bitter and astringent — these are the ten
combinations of the Rasas taken three at a time and
beginning with Madhura (sweet) Rasa, (t) Acid, saline
and pungent, (2) Acid, satin 3 and bitter, (3) Acid, saline
and astringent, (4) Acid, pungent and bitter, (5) Acid,
pungent and astringent, and (6) Acid, bitter and
astringent— these arc the six combinations (taken
three at a time and) beginning with Amla (acid)
taste. (1) Saline, pungent and bitter, (2) Saline,
pungent and astringent, and (3) Saline, bitter, and

50

394

THE SUS1IRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LXIII.

astringent— these are the three combinations (taken
three at a time) beginning with Lavana (saline)
taste, (i) Pungent, bitter and astringent is the
only one combination (taken three at a time and) begin-
ning with Katuka (puugcnt) taste. Thus the twenty
different combinations (of the six Rasas) taken three at
a time have been explained. Now we shall speak of
their combinations taken four at a time. 5.

Taken four at a time s— The Madhura

(sweet) Rasa has got ten different combinations of four
at a time. Similarly Amla vacid) Rasa has got four,
and Lavana (saline/ Rasa only one. They are as
follows i (1) Sweet, acid, saline and pungent, ' 2 ) Sweet,
acid, saline and bitter, (3) Sweet, acid, saline and astrin-
gent, (4) Sweet, acid, pungent and bittci (5) Sweet, acid,
pungent and astringent, (6) Sweet, saline, pungent and
bitter, (7) Sweet, acid, bitter and asliingcnt, (8) Sweet,
saline, pungent and astringent, (9; Sweet, saline, pungent
and astringent, and (10) Sweet, pungent, bitter and
astringent — these are the ten combinations (taken four
at a time and) beginning with Madhuia (sweet) Rasa.
(1) Acid, saline, pungent and bitter, (2) Acid, saline,
bitter and astringent, (3) Acid, pungent, bitter and
astringent, and (4) Acid, saline, pungent and astringent—
these are the four combinations beginning with Amla
(acid) taste, (r) Saline, pungent, bitter and astringent —
this is the only one combination beginning with Lavana
(saline) taste. Thus the fifteen different combinations
(of the six Rasas) taken four at a time have been
enumerated. Now we shall speak of their combinations
taken five at a time. 6.

Taken five at a time : — Th:re would be
five combinations (of the six Rasas) taken five at a
time and beginning with the Madhura (sweet) Rasa,

Chap. LXIII.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

395

and only one with Amla (acid) Rasa. They are as
follows HO Sweet, acid, saline, pungent and bitter,
( 2 ) Sweet, acid, saline, pungent and astringent, (3)
Sweet, acid, saline, bitter and astringent, (4) Sweet,
acid, pungent, bitter and astringent, and 5) Sweet,
saline, pungent, bitter and astringent— these are the
five combinations (of the six Rasas) taken five at a time
beginning with Madhura (sweet) Rasa. (1) Acid, saline,
pungent, bitter and astringent is the only one com-
bination of the kind beginning with Amla (acid Rasa.
Thus the six combinations taken five at a time have
been enumerated. Now wc shall speak of their com-
bination with (all the' six at a time. 7.

The combination (of the six Rasas) taken (all the)
six at a time is only one. The only combination of
this kind is (t) Sweet, acid, saline, pungent, bitter and
astringent. 8.

Separately taken one at a time, the six Rasas will
be — (1) Madhura (sweet), (2' Amla acid', (3) Lavana
(saline', (4) Katuka (pungent', (5) Tikta (bitter , and (6)
Kashaya (astringent). 9.

Memorable Verse Sixty-three combina-
tions of the six different Rasas have been enumerated
by the experts on Rasa and these sixty-three combina-
tions should be prescribed by experienced physicians
with due regard to (the aggravation or diminution of
one or more of) the (three) different Doshas. 10.

Thus ends the sixty-third chapter of the Gttarf-Tantra in the Sus'ruta
wSamhita which deals with the different combinations of the (six) different
Rasas.

CHAPTER LXIV.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the Rules of Health (Svastha-Vritta-
adhyaya). i.

Health indicates a normal condition of the (three)
Doshas (fundamental principles), Agni (the digestive
fire), Mala (excrements vis, feces, urine, etc)*, and
the (seven) Dhatus or root- principles of the body
as well as a serene state of the body, mind and
the sense-organs. It has already been stated in the
Sutra-sth&na, that the primary object of medical
treatment is to maintain this healthy state (of the
body and of the mind) in its normal equilibrium. A
brief outline of the means to be applied and of the
rules to be observed for the realisation of that end, has
also been given before. Now we shall enter into a
lengthy and elaborate dissertation on the subject. 2-3.

Regimen of diet and conduct in the
Varsha (rainy) season Articles of parti-
cular tastes which are remedial to the specific deranged
bodily Dosha should be used or am ployed by experi-
enced persons in the particular season of the year in
which the Doshas are respectively aggravated. The
bodily V&yu, etc., of a person is generally aggravated
during the Varsha (rainy) season owing to a slimy
condition of the organism, producing an impairment
of the digestive fire as well as goose-flesh on the skin.
Articles of astringent, bitter and pungent tastes should
therefore be prescribed for a king and king-like
personages during those months of the year for

* Some explain ‘Kriya 5 separately as the organic functions e . g* sleep
and awakening, etc.— Dallantu

Chap. LX IV.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

397

correcting or remedying the altered slimy condition of
(things which obtain inside) the body, as well as for
mitigating the aggravation of the bodily Doshas. The
food should be non-liquid and made neither too emollient
(fatty or lardacious) nor too Ruksha (dry), and should •
be composed of articles which are appetising and heat-
making in their potency. Water for drinking should be
prescribed according to the rules laid down before
(in chapter XLV, Sutra-sthana), or water, heated and
subsequently cooled, should be taken in combination
with honey, if the sky is overcast with clouds and the
air is charged with humid vapours, making the water
consequently very cold. 4 5.

The herbs and vegetables being newly grown in this
(rainy) season, arc (over-juicy and) consequently not
very easy to digest ; a wise man should, therefore, avoid
the excessive use of physical exercise, water, dew^, sexual
intercourse and the sun's rays (which might lead to
indigestion). One should, in this season, lie upon some
higher place to avoid the cold damp due to the emission
of earthly vapours at this time. When feeling cold one
should protect oneself from it with warm clothes and
should lie inside a room free from blasts of wind and
with fire burning w ithin. Fine A guru should be used as
pastes, and elephants should be used as conveyance in
this season. Sleep at day-time and eating before the
previous meal is digested should be strictly avoided. 6 .

Rules for Autumn Articles of astringent,
sweet and bitter tastes, different preparations of
milk and of sugar-cane-juice as well as honey, S'd/i-rice,
Mudga- pulse, oil and the meat of Jangala animals should
be used in the Autumn (Sarat) season. All kinds of
water are recommended in this season as they are all
clear and pure at this time of the year. Swimming

39& tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. (Chap.,LXIV.

and (immersion) in ponds full of Karnala (lotus) and
Utyala (water lily), enjoying the moon’s rays at dusk
and the use of sandal-pastes are recommended. The
aggravation of Pitta in the (previous) rainy season
should, in this season, be duly remedied by the use of
Tikta-Ghrita (Chapter IX, Chikitsita sthdna), by means of
venesection or by the use of purgatives. Tikshna (sharp-
potencied or pungent), acid, hot and alkaline articles (of
food) as well as the sun’s rays, sexual excess and sleep
at day-time and keeping late hours should be avoided.
Sweet and cold water and purified wine as transparent as
crystals are also recommended. All kinds of water are
in this season washed, as it were, by the clear white rays
of the autumnal moon and being purified by the rising
of the Agastya star,* become very clear and transparent
and consequently beneficial. Clean and thin clothes
scented with sandal-pastes or with camphor as well as
garlands of autumnal flowers should be worn, and the
Sidhu class of wine should be judiciously taken In short,
all Pitta-subduing measures should be taken in this
season. 7.

Rules for Hemanta and winter

seasons • —The season of Hemanta is cold but
dry (Ruksha). The sun is weak and the atmosphere is
very airy. Hence, owing to the outside cold, the bodily
Viyu is also aggravated in this season, The abdominal
fire becomes dull owing to the internal cold and dries
up the bodily Rasa (liquid portion of the system). The
use of oleaginous things is, therefore, beneficial in this

* The waters in the rainy season are generally muddy and impure.
When, after the rains, the waters become purer, it is said in Hindu mytho-
logy that owing to the rise of Agastya (a star making its appearance in
the horfeon after the rains— ‘■generally in the beginning of September) the
waters become clear and transparent. *

Cbap. LXIV.]

UTTARA-T ANTRA.

399

season; 1 The use of saline, alkaline, bitter, acid and
pungent articles of diet (prepared) with the addition of
clarified butter or oil are beneficial. Food should not
be taken cold, and drinks prepared with tikshna (hot-
potencied) articles (such as strong wine should be taken,
after pasting the body all over with Aguru-pastes.
Baths should be taken in tepid water after rubbing in oil
all over the body. Large inner apartments completely
surrounded by rooms on all sides and containing fire-
pots (serving the purpose of chimneys) should be used
as bed-rooms, and the bed-sheets should be silken.
Sufficiently warm coverings for the body should be
used. Kings (and king-like personages) should lie within
the sweet embraces of maidens with big breasts and
thighs and scented with the fumes of Aguru , and they
can, in this season, enjoy the sexual pleasures to their
hearts content and should take proper soothing food.
Sweet, bitter, pungent, acid and saline articles of food
and drink, as well as Tila (sesamum-seeds), Mdsha- pulse,
pot-herbs, curd, different modifications of sugar-cane-juice,
scented and newly husked S'dli~ rice, flesh of Prasaha,
Anupa, KravyAda, Bilcsaya, Audaka (aquatic), Plava
and Padin classes* of animals, as well as clear trans-
parent wines and all other invigorating articles of diet
should be used to his content at the advent of cold by
a person wishing vigour (of the body and of the mind).
The rules for Hemanta enumerated above would hold
equally good for the Sisira (winter) season. 8-9.

Rules for Spring 5 -The bodily Kapha al-
ready stored in the organism owing to the coldness of
the bodjr during the Hemanta season is aggravated
during the spring by the (increasing) heat (of the sun

* For a list of the animals of the different classes mentioned here,
see Chapter XLVI, Sntra-stha^pages 480 &c., Vol. J.

400

THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITX

[Chap. LXIV.

and consequently of the organism) and gives rise to
many diseases. Acid, sweet, demulcent and saline
articles of food and drink as well as those that are
heavy (of digestion) should, therefore, be avoided, and
recourse should be had to vomiting, etc. Shashtika -
rice, barley, articles of cold potency, Mudga- pulse,
Nivdra rice, and Kodrava-rice, should be duly prescribed
after the cold /. c. in the spring with the soup of the
meat of the animals of the Vishkira class, such as L&va,
etc., as well as with the soup of Pa tola, Nimba- leaves,
bringals and other bitter vegetables. All sorts of
iLsava and especially the A'iava and Sidhu prepared
from honey should be freely used in the spring. Physical
exercise should be had recourse to, Anjana (collyrium)
should be applied (to the eyes), strong smokes should be
inhaled and strong gargles used in the spring. Everything
should be used with tepid water and a diet consisting
of Tikshna (strong-potencied), Ruksha (non-demulcent),
pungent, alkaline, astringent, tepid and non-liquid articles
and especially the preparations of barley, Mudga pulse
and honey would be beneficial in the spring. Physical
exercise in the shape of mock-fight, walk, or the throwing
of stones would be beneficial. Utsadana (massage) and
bath should be had, and groves should be resorted to.
Sexual pleasure may be enjoyed in this season.
The bodily Kapha stored in the body during the
llcmanta season should be eliminated by means of Siro-
Vireka (errhines), vomiting, Niruha-vasti and gargles,
etc. Day-sleep and sweet, demulcent aud liquid articles
of fare as well as those hard to digest should be strictly
avoided, io.

Rules for Summer S -Physical exercise,
toil, hot and excessively drying articles of fare (e.g. those
prepared with pulses), as well as those abounding in

[Chap. LXIV.

UTTARA-TANTRA.

401

heat-producing (e* g< pungent, acid and saline) tastes
should be avoided in summer. Large tanks, lakes and
rivers as well as charming gardens and cold rooms should
be resorted to, and the finest (refreshing) sandal-pastes and
garlands of flowers of lotuses and lilies, soft breeze from
palm-leaf-fans and necklaces (of precious stones and
pearls) as well as light clothes should be used in summer.
Sweet-scented and cooling Pdnakas and Manthas with
abundance of sugar should be used. Sweet, liquid and
cold food mixed with clarified butter, and boiled milk
sweetened with sugar, etc , taken at night-time would
be found (tasteful and) beneficial at that time. One
should at that time lie on a bed strewn over with full-
blown and fresh flowers in some palatial building with
his body besmeared with sandal-pastes and refreshed by
cooling breeze, n.

Rules for Prsfvr it (rainy) season*

Articles of the three (viz. sweet, acid and saline) heavy
Rasas as well as milk, tepid meat-soup, oil, clarified
butter, and everything which is Vrimhana (fat-making)
and Abhishyandi (secreting) in its nature are beneficial
after the end of the summer season i. e . in the rainy
season. The bodily Vdyu which is liable to be aggra-
vated and which actually begins to aggravate in the
summer should be pacified by wise men with V£yu-
subduing remedies. 12 A.

River-water, Ruksha (non-demulcent) and heat-
producing articles, Manthas prepared with abundance
of water, the sun's rays, physical exercise, day-sleep and
sexual intercourse should be avoided in this season. Old
barley, old Shastika-ncz, old S'dli- rice, and old wheat

* A period of four months has been ascribed to the rains. Of these the
first two months are ealled Prkvrit, and the last two Varshd— »both meaning
the rainy season. See chapter VI, Sutra-stMna.

SI

402

THE SUSUUTA SAMHITA

[ Chap. LX1V.

should be used as food, and the bed to lie upon should be
stretched inside a room where there is no blast of wind
and should be covered over with a soft bed-sheet. The
rain-water (in and after its descent on the earth) becomes
poisoned with the excretions, urine, salivation, sputum,
etc., of poisonous animals as well as with the poisonous
atmosphere peculiar to the rainy season ; its use should,
therefore, be strictly avoided in this season. The
naturally aggravated bodily VAyu(in this season) should
be duly pacified, or the rules for Varsh& (ie. the rainy
season) should be duly observed in this season*. 12.

Whoever observes these rules for the different seasons
of the year does not suffer from the evil consequences
due to the change of seasons. 13.

Different kinds of food : — Now we shall
deal with the twelve different kinds of food (and drink).
They are -Cold, hot, Snigdha (demulcent), Ruksha
(non-demulcent), liquid, dry, taken once a day, twice a
day, taken with medicine, taken in smaller quantity,
taken for the pacification of (any aggravated Dosha) and
taken for subsistence. 14.

Persons afflicted with thirst, heat, alcoholism, burn-
ing sensation, Rakta-pitta, poisoning and epileptic fits
as well as those suffering from the effects of sexual
excess should be treated with cold food (and drink) ;
while persons afflicted with the aggravation of bodily
Kapha and Vayu as well as those already treated with
purgatives or Sneha and those whose bodies are full of
Klcda (physical moisture) should be treated with warm
food (and drink). 15-16.

Persons suffering from the aggravation of bodily
VAyu and from a parched (Ruksha) condition of the

* The whole of this Para is an interpolation in as much as Jejjata
does not read this.— Pall ana.

Chap. LXIV.]

UTTARA-TANfRA.

403

body well as those suffering from the effects of
sexual excess and those accustomed to physical exercise
should be treated with Snigdha food (and drink) ; while
persons with an excess of bodily Medas and Kapha as
well as those suffering from Meha and those previously
treated with a Sneha should be treated with Ruksha
(or non-demulcent) food and drink. 17-18.

Weak, parched and thirsty persons should be given
Drava (liquid) food ; while those suffering from Meha
and ulcers as well as those whose bodies arc full of
Kleda (bodily moisture) should be given dry (non-
juicy) food. Persons with impaired digestion should
be given only one meal every day, so that the digestive
fire may have opportunities to) be rekindled ; while
persons with the proper amount of digestion should
be given two meals a day. 19-20.

Medicine should be given with food and drink to
a person averse to it, while food and drink in smaller
quantity would be beneficial to persons suffering
from impaired digestion or any other disease. Food
and drink administered with due regard to the bodily
Doshas is called Dosha-prasamana ; while any kind
of food and drink taken for the preservation of life by
a healthy person would be called Vrittayrtha food
and drink. These are the twelve different kinds of food
and drink. 21-22.

Propertimes forthe administration
Of Medicines > — We shall now speak of the ten
specific times (i. e . proper occasions) fdr the administra-
tion of medicines. They are — Nir-bhakta, Pnig-bhakta,
Adho-bhakta, Madhye-bhakta, Antar£-bhakta, Sa-bhakta,
S&mudga, Muhur-muhuh, Gr&sa and GrdsAntara. 23.

Of the above medicines what is applied alone
(with or without some vehicle but not with any food

404 the SUSRUTA SAMHITA [Chap. LXIV.

or drink) is called Nirbhakta medicine. A medicine
not applied with any food [but applied by itself with or
without any vehicle) would have greater effect and would
soon and certainly destroy the disease it is applied in ;
but a medicine should not be applied in this way to a
child, an old man, a young woman ,and persons of mild
temperament, for it is likely to produce lassitude and
weaken the patient (in such cases). 24.

A medicine taken (in an empty stomach) just before
a meal, is called Prrfgbhakta. A medicine taken in
such a manner, is easily digested, does not lead to any
diminution of strength and is not ejected out of the
mouth owing to its being covered over with the meal,
On the other hand, taken before the meal, it adds to the
bodily strength and proves the most convenient form in
which a medicine can be administered to old men,
infants, females and persons of timid disposition. A
medicine taken just after a meal is called Adhobhaktft.
It conquers diseases which affect the upper part of the
body and gives strength in many ways. 25-26.

A medicine taken in the course of a meal is called
Hadhyebhakta. A medicine taken in this manner
fails to be diffused all through . the organism and
hence proves beneficial only in those ailments which
are confined to the middle part of the body. A
medicine taken between the two meals (*'. e. after the
morning-meal but before the evening-meal) is called
Antarrfbhakta. It is invigorating to the mind, greatly
appetising and Hridya (agreeable) and is beneficial in
every respect. A medicine applied with* any food is
called Sabhakta. It is most convenient to administer

* “A medicine applied with food” may mean a medicine prepared
before and taken with the meal } or, it may mean that the meal is cooked
(while being prepared) with the medicines to be applied.

Chap. LXIV.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

4^5

a medidne with food in cases of female, old and
infant patients as well as in cases of those averse to
taking any medicine. 27-29.

A medicine taken at the beginning and again at the
close of a meal is called Stfmudga. This form of
administration is jpost beneficial in cases where the
deranged bodily Doshas take both the (upward and
downward) courses. A medicine taken at intervals,
either with or without food, is called Hnhumuhnli.
This mode is to be adopted in severe cases of asthma,
cough, hiccough and vomiting. A medicine taken with
every morsel (Gr£sa) of food is called Gr&a. In this
form the medicine in the shape of a powder is administered
for increasing the appetite in cases of weak patients.
V&jikara (aphrodisiac) medicines are also better ad-
ministered in this form. A medicine taken with each
alternate morsel of food is called Gr&4ntara Emetics
and Dhumas as well as the well-known and well-experi-
mented lambatives for cases of asthma should be
administered in this form. These are the ten proper
occasions for administering medicines. 30-33.

Proper time for taking food The
proper time for giving diet to a patient is when he
gets free stool, urine and eructations, and feels his body
and sense-organs light and free, when he gets free actions
of the heart as well as natural courses of his bqdiiy
(ApAna) Vdyu, when he feels hungry (D. R. feels easy)
and has got relish for food and when his Kukshi (belly)
becomes light (/. e. when his belly appears to be empty
on account of hunger). 34.

Thus ends the sixty-fourth chapter in the Uttara-tantra of the Sus'ruta-
Samhiti which deals with the Rules of Hygiene.

CHAPTER LXV.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which dea's
with the technical terms used in this treatise (Tantra-
Yukti-N^ma-Adhyaya) a A-I •

Names of the technical terms: —

There are thirty-two technical terms in this Treatise.
They are— (t) Adhikarana, (2) Yoga, (3) PadArtha,
(|) Hetvartha, (5) Uddesa, (6) Nirdes'a, (7) Upadesa,
(8) Apadesa, (9) Pradcsa. (10) Atidesa, (11) Apavarga,
(12) Vakya-sesha, (13; Arthapatti, (14) Viparyaya,
(15) Prasanga, (16) Ekdnta, (17) AnekAnta, (18) Purva-
paksha, (19) Nimaya, (20) Anumata, (21) VidhAna,
(22) AnAgatA-vekshana, ( 23 ) AtikrAntA-vekshana,
(24) Samsaya, (25) VyakhyAna, (26) Sva-samjna,
(27) Nirvachana, (28) Nidarsana, (29) Niyoga,
(30) Samuchchaya, (31) Vikalpa, and (32) Uhya. 2.

Necessity 5— What is the necessity of the use
of these technical terms (Tantra-Yukti) ? The answer
is— For connecting words together, i. e. y making up sen-
tences and giving a sense or meaning to them. 3.

Memorable verses By the use of technical
terms in a scientific treatise the points of argument of
the opposite party are frustrated and the points of ones
own argument are established. The meanings of the
words, whether clearly used or not, whether direct or
indirect, or partially used, if there is any such, in the
treatise are also made distinct (by the use of the techni-
cal terms). Just as the sun shows a cluster of lotus
and a lighted lamp (the inside of) a room at their best,
so the technical terms used in a treatise clearly show
u e. t explain the intended meaning. 4.

Chap. LXV.] UTTARA-TANTRA. * 407

Of these terms Adhikarana is the subject about
which something is spoken of. For example — on (the
subject of ) Rasa or on (the subject of) Dosha. 5.

The term “Yoga” is the union of words or sentences
together. For example — an oil duly cooked with
Amrita-valli \ Nimba , Himsrd , Abhayd , V rikshaka,
Pippali ) the two kinds of Bald and with Deva-ddru
should be prescribed for drinking as being efficacious in
all cases of Gala-ganda. Here the main idea is ‘Siddham
pivet* t. e. should be cooked and taken internally ; but
the word ‘Siddham’ is used in the first half of the second
hemistich, far away from the word ‘Pivot* in the sentence.
This combining together of the different words, however
distant in a sentence, is called a Yoga. 6.

The term ‘Tad&tha” is the meaning implied by
a word or an aphorism (i e. a sentence). Padarthas are
innumerable. For example — Sncha, Sveda, or Anjana,
when used in a sentence, would each imply two or three
meanings ; but only one meaning which tallies with the
use of the previous or subsequent word (in the text)
should be understood in each case. Thus, in the sen-
tence “Vedotpattim Vy&khyd sydmah” u e. we shall
discourse on the origin of the ‘Veda’, the use of the
word “Veda” would put the hearer at a loss to under-
stand which of the Vedas is going to be discoursed on,
for there are several Vedas, vis , Rigveda, elc. But when
we try to understand the expression in connection with
the previous or subsequent use of the expression - for
the root ‘vid’ may mean either ‘Vich&fana’ (discussion)
or ‘Vindati’ (to get)— we can afterwards come to the
conclusion that the subject to be discoursed upon is
the origin of Ayurveda. This is what is meant by the
term Pad&rtha. 7.

JletwartJia is the ntcaning indirectly implied bv a

408

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX.

[Chap< LXV.

word. For .example-— as earth is moistened by water,
so an ulcer is moistened (and consequently secretes) by
(the taking of) Mdsha- pulse, milk, etc. 8.

TJddeda is the statement in brief. For example —
Salya (ordinarily any foreign matter but secondarily
implying any obstructing matter in the body). 9.

Nirdeda is the statement in detail. For example —
“£>alya” is of two kinds “S> 4 rira” (idiopathic) and
“Agantu" (traumatic). 10.

Upadeda is an instruction for the doing of a thing
in a particular way. For example — one should not sit
up at night and one should give up sleep at the
day time. 1 1.

Apadesa is the statement of reason. For example —
it has been specified that S>leshma is increased by the
use of the articles of sweet taste. 12.

Pradesa is the determination of a present action
from past events. For example — Devadatta’s £>alya has
been extracted by this person, hence Yajnadatta’s Salya
will also be extracted by him. 1 3.

Atideda is the determination of some future event
from some present event. For example — one’s bodily
Vdyu courses upwards by such and such an action,
hence one may get (an attack of Vdtaja) Uddvarta by
such an action. 14.

Apavarga is the extraction — t. e. exception of (some-
thing) from something more comprehensive or extended,
that is to say, it is an exception to the general rule. For
example — fomentation should not be applied to persons
suffering from the effects of poisoning excepting those
suffering from insect-poison. 1 5,

V rfkya-sesha is the word the absence of the use
of *which does not make the sentence incomplete. For
example -when we say of the head, the hands, the legs,

Chap. LXV.J UTTARA-TANTRA. 40 p

the sides, the back, the abdomen (Udara) and the
chest” it becomes evident that these (parts) of a \ person ’
are intended. 1 6.

Arthipatti (presumption' is the term used when
the sense (of a sentence), though not specifically men-
tioned, can yet be indirectly presumed or deduced.
For example* — when one says to another ‘this rice
(solid food) can be taken,’ it becomes evident that he is
not willing to drink a (liquid) Yavdgu or gruel. 17.

Viparyaya (reverse) is the term used when the
words used (in a sentence) convey quite a different or
opposite sense. For example, - when it is said that ‘ema-
ciated, weak and frightened persons are very difficult
to be medically treated’, the opposite sense becomes
evident, viz that strong, and such-like persons are very
easy to be medically treated. 18.

Prasanga (connected reasoning) is the term used
when a different subject is introduced at the end. It
is also the term used when the same sense is repeated
in different words in different places (in the same topic).
For example — it is said in the chapter on Vedotpatti
(Chapter J, Sutra-Sthina) that “Purusha” (liv’ng
organism) is the sum-total of the “Mahi-bhutas’’ (or the
five primary elements—^/.?., earth, water, fire, air and
ether) and the Hariri (or the soul), that medical treat-
ment should be made of him (Purusha) and that he is
the subject matter of every action) ; and it has been
repeated in the chapter on Bhuta-vidyd (demonology)
that the Purusha has therefore been said to be the
combination of the five MaM-bhutas and the soul and

* The common example of an Arthdpalti (presumption) in Sanskrit
philosophy is *Pino Devadalto div4 na bhumkte,’ (*. Pat Dcvadatta
does not cat at day-time), from which it is evident that he certainly eats
at night, otherwise he could not have become fat.

52

4*6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, LXV*

that he is the subject-matter of all sorts of medical
treatment. 19.

Ekrfnta is the term used to denote a thing which is
certain In every case. For example — Trivrit causes
purgation, and Madana-huit produces vomiting. 20.

Anekrfnta is the term used to denote certainty in
some cases and uncertainty in some other cases. For
example — many authorities hold that ‘Dravya’ or the
thing itself is the principal factor, some hold the Rasa*
or taste (in a thing) to be* the principal factor, some
again hold the “Viryya” or potency to be the principal
factor and others hold “Vip£ka” or digestive reaction
to be the principal factor. 21.

Furva-paksha is (the putting of) a question with an
apparent objection. For example— (the question why
are the four kinds of Vdtaja-Prameha incurable. 22.

Kirn ay a is the reply to a Purva-paksha or question.
For example— -the (bodily) Vdyu affects i.e, spreads
over the (whole) body and then forces the urine through
(the passage with the (vitiated bodily Vasi (greasc\
Medas (fat,) and Majjan (marrow). The Vataja cases
(of Prameha) arc, therefore, incurable. As has been
said — the (bodily) VAyu affects i /. spreads over the
whole body and coming in contact w ith the (bodily;
Medas (fat), Majjan (marrow) and Vasd (grease) becomes
vitiated and courses downward. The V&taja cases (of
Prameha) are, therefore, incut able. 23.

Anum&ta is the term used when an opinion of
another is (quoted but) not refuted. For example— some
authorities hold that there are seven Rasas or tastes.
(Now, as this is not refuted it is said to be Anuiziata or
sanctioned by the author). 24.

idhtfna is the act of mentioning, at the beginning,
the fact to, be established. For example— the vulnerable

Chap. tXV.]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

4U

orvitil parts (Marmans) in the thigh are eleven in
number, and this has already been stated to be
established. 25.

Anrfgatrfvekshana is the term u<ed when something
in the future is referred to in such terms as ‘this will be
dealt with hereafter’. For example — it can be said in
the Sutra-sthAna ‘it will be dealt with in the Chikitsita-
sthdna*. 26.

Atiknfatsfvekshana is the term used when some*
thing in the past is referred to. For example — it can
be said in the Chikitsita-sthAna *it has already been
said in the Sutra-sth&na*. 27.

Samsaya is the term used when examples of two
opposite and dissimilar subjects are cited* For
example — hurt to the Tala-Hridaya (Marmans in the
hands and legs) is fatal ; amputation of the hand and of
the leg is not fatal. 28.

Vysfehysfaa is the description or explanation of
the details. For example — Purusha as the twenty-fifth
factor has been dealt with in this book. While only the
twenty-four factors constituting this body have been
dealt with in other works 29.

Sva-samjni denotes the specific terms specially used
in any work and not in common with any other work. For
example— the term ‘Mithuna’ (in medical works) means
the two things, viz., honey and clarified butter. 30.

Udrfharana* is the example of what is well-estab-
lished or well-known in the world. For example—

* Uddharana has been recognised here as a technical term. But it
should not have been recognised as such, since it has not been
included in the list (see para 2). Had it been so, the number would
have been 33 and not 32. Dallana prefers to regard the portion
irfNWTiJ, etc * as an interpolation and adding a m after the sentence
ta ^ es j* * n continuation of the example of

41-2 THE SUSHRUTA SAM JUT A. [Chap. LXV.

cooling measures should be had recourse to to guard
against warmth* \3t.

Nirvaohana is the derivation of a term. For ex-
ample — Ayus (life) is the subject-matter,, of this work,
and a man gets (the means of) Ayus (longevity) from
this work and hence it is called Ayufveda. 32.

Nidarsana is the term used when the meaning (of
a word or sentence) is supported by examples. For
example— just as the (digestive) fire in the Koshtha
(abdomen) increases in contact with (the local bodily)
Vdyu, so also an ulcer increases when assisted by the
(bodily) V&yu, Pitta and Kapha. 33.

Niyoga is the enjoining of something to be done as
a duty. For example— only what is beneficial (Pathya)
should be taken. 34.

Samuchchaya is the joining (of two or more con-
nected but independent ideas) as such and such.- For
example— in the group of flesh, (those of) Ena and
Harina (two kinds of deer), Ldva and Tittira (two kinds
of birds) and Saranga (spotted deer) are the principal
ones. 35.

Vikalpa is the term used when something is said
to be this or that, i. e., when alternatives are used. For
example— either meat-soup or Yavigu (gruel) cooked
with clarified butter (should be used in such and such
a case). 36.

Uhya is the term used when something more can
be understood by an intelligent man, though not defi-
nitely used. For example — it has been said in the
chapter on Anna-p&na-vidhi (Chapter XLVI, Sutra-
Sth&na) that Anna (food) is of four kinds, viz,, (1)

in the previous para. His meaning is that the word fifESf being not
found in the sense referred to in para. 30, the reader is asked to find out a
popular example,

Chap. LXV.J THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. 4I3

Bhakshy a (masticable) or the solid food that has to be
bitten with the teeth before eating, (2) Bhojya (edible) or
the solid food proper /. e., which has not to be bitten
with the teeth, (3) Lehya (lambative) or the semi-liquid
food that has to be licked like an electuary, and (4)
Peya (drink) or the liquid food proper that has to be
drunk ; but of these four kinds, two kinds only {vie.,
Anna and Piniya) have been mentioned (in naming
the chapter). Here it is (said that the other two kinds)
are) understood. For, when only two arc mentioned in
respect of food and drink, the inclusion of. all the four
therein is easily comprehended. And why? Because
the term ‘ Bhakshya ’ is included in the term * Anna ’ —
both being of the same kind, vis., solid food ; and the
term ' Lehya ’ is included in the term 1 Peya ’—both
being of the same kind, vis , liquid. And the articles of
food, though they are really of four kinds, are usually
spoken of in the common language as being of two
kinds only ( vis , solid and liquid). 37.

Here have been fully described by me the thirty-
two technical terms for the investigation into the
essence of this Tantra (work). The intelligent man who
is fully conversant with these technical terms— which
work like lights, as it were, — is to be regarded as the
greatest physician and to be held in great esteem. — This
is what the Sage Dhanvantari says. 38.

Thus ends the sixty-fifth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'nita*
Samhiti which deals with the technical terms used ih this work

CHAPTER LXVL

" Now we shall discourse on the chapter which (deals
with and) is called the different modifications (combi-
nations) of the different Doshas — Dosha- Bheda-
vlkalpa-ti^tn^dhy^ya.

Revered Susruta, the son of Vis'vAmitra, asks (the
following to) the high-minded DivodAsa, well-versed in
all the eight divisions of Ayurveda, with intellect sharp
and as deep as an ocean, as it were, and with all the
difficulties in the meanings of the S>Astras fully solved.
The question is*— It has been already said that there
are sixty-two* varieties of the Doshas, but how are they
divided when taken one, two or all the three at a
time’ ? 2—3.

On hearing his word the great sage and king
(DivodAsa) with all his difficulties solved was greatly
pleased and thus narrated the true conditions to
Sus'ruta. 4.

The three Doshas, the (seven) DhAtus, feces and
urine — these, in their normal state, hold together the
corporeal frame in conjunction with the (six Rasas
necessary (for the constitution). 5.

Puru^ha or human body has sixteen sub-strataf.
The PrAnas {viz, the organs of sense) are eleven in num-
ber while the number of diseases is one thousand
one hundred and twenty and that of elementary sub-

* The reference is to chapter LXIII, but there the number is
sixty-three and not sixty -two. The three Dhdtus V£yu, Pitta and Kapha,
in their normal state, cannot properly be called Doshas. The slate in
which all the three Dhitus are in their normal state, is said to be the
6yrd. combination (see also para. & below).

t The sixteen sub-strata are the five elementary principles, {viz — Earth,
Water, Fire, Air and Ether) and the eleven sense-organs.

Chap. LXVi ]

UTTARA-TANTRA.

4*5

stances (Dravya) is five hundred and seventy-three, -
these have already been explained in detail. The three
qualities {viz,, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) have also been
explained in connection with the (three) different Doshas
{viz., Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha) which arc generally said
to have sixty-tw> combinations. 6—8.

Different Comblnationsof Doshas
The three Doshas separately have three combina-
tions, viz,, where one of the Doshas is aggravated
and the other two are in their normal state. Taken
two at a time, both of them aggravated, whether equally
or unequally (with the third in its normal state), the
number of combinations would be nine ; while the
number of combinations would be thirteen if they are
taken three at a time— all of them aggravated, both
equally and unequally (thus making twenty-five in all
with the aggravated Doshas). With an equal number of
combinations in cases of the diminution of the Doshas
(taken one, two or three at a time) we have fifty combi-
nations. The number of combinations (taken one, two
and three at a time) with the aggravated and dimi-
nished Doshas mixed together would be twelve only. —
Thus making sixty-two in all. 9

The number of combinations, when mixed together,
would be innumerable. It, therefore, behoves a physi-
cian to treat a patient with the different combinations
of the (six different) Rasas after properly diagnosing
the disease with a due regard to the aggravation, of the
different Doshas and without going into any further
details. In ameliorating a disease, the physician is the
doer of that action the effect whereof is health and the
instruments with which the action is performed are
the Rasas while the Doshas are the causes. The oppo-
site hereof is want of health. 10.

4t$ THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITX. [Chap. LX Y I.

The Uttara-Tantra, enriched with the sixty-six
chapters wherein have been described and explained the
order of the words and their meanings, and wherein
have been explained very clearly the hidden meanings
of the terms for making them clear to persons of weak
intellect, has thus been duly explained to you in accor-
dance with your question, if.

Persons reading, according to the rules laid down,
this treatise together with the Uttara-Tantra coming
from (the mouth of) Brahmi himself, are not abondoned
by their wished for objects, that is to say, they are sure
to obtain them. This word of Brahmd is perfectly
true. 1 2,

Thus ends the sixty-sixth chapter of the Uttara-Tantra in the Sus'ruta*
SamhiU which (deals with and) is called the different combinations of the
different Doshas.

Here ends the Uttara-Tantra.

THE END