The Life of Blessed Henry Suso by Himself (Heinrich Suso, trans. T.F. Knox, 1865)
==========================================================
Knox's 1865 translation of Suso's autobiography — the German mystic's own account of his austerities and visions, a medieval spiritual classic. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

THE   LIFE


Uf


OF


BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO

fttmshtzb


THOMAS

PRIEST  OF


LONDON :

BURNS,   LAMBERT,   AND   OATES,

17  Portman  Street  and  63  Paternoster  Row.
1865.


LONDON :

ROBSON  AND  SON,  GREAT  NORTHERN  PRINTING  WORKS,
TANCRAS  ROAD,  N.W.


^MAE?


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.


The  Blessed  Henry  Suso  was  born  at  Ueberlingen,
near  Constance,  on  St.  Benedict's  -  day,  a.d.  1300.
He  was  of  ancient  and  noble  descent  both  on  his
father's  and  mother's  side.  Out  of  devotion  to  his
mother,  who  was  a  person  of -eminent  holiness,  he
called  himself  by  her  maiden  name  of  Seuss,  Latin-
ised into  Suso,  instead  of  taking  his  father's  sur-
name, Von  Berg.  His  baptismal  name  was  Henry ;
but  many  years  later,  when  he  had  attained  to  great
holiness,  God  changed  his  name  into  Amandus,  or
Beloved.  The  Blessed  Henry  did  not  make  this
known  to  any  one  so  long  as  he  lived,  but  a  record
of  it  was  discovered  among  his  papers  after  his  death.
At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  entered  the  novitiate  of  the
Dominican  Convent  at  Constance,  where  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  vows  of  religion,  and  after  some  years
was  sent  to  the  convent  of  his  Order  at  Cologne,  to
pursue  his  studies  at  that  University.  While  there
he  made  such  great  progress  in  learning  that  he  was
about  to  be  promoted  to  the  degree  of  doctor  in  theo-
logy. But  he  was  forbidden  to  accept  this  honour  by
a  voice  from  God  within  him  saying  : — Thou  know-


IV  PREFACE.

est  well  enough  already  how  to  give  thyself  to  God
and  to  draw  other  men  to  Him  by  thy  preaching.
From  that  time  forth  he  began  to  preach  with  great
zeal  and  fervour,  and  to  devote  himself  to  the  con-
version of  sinners  and  the  guidance  of  souls  along
the  highest  paths  of  mystical  perfection.  At  length,
after  many  years  of  unceasing  labours  and  sufferings,
he  died  at  Ulm,  on  the  feast  of  the  Conversion  of  St.
Paul,  a.d.  1365,  and  was  buried  in  the  cloister  of  the
Dominican  Convent  in  that  city.  Two  hundred  and
forty-eight  years  after  tins,  when  Ulm  had  become
Protestant,  the  B.  Henry's  body  was  accidentally
discovered,  a.d.  1613,  by  some  workmen  who  were
digging  the  foundations  for^a  new. building.  It  was
quite  incorrupt,  and  lay. there  closed  in  the  "habit  of
the  Order,  and  emitted  &  fragrant. odour.  -The  work-
men went  in  alarm  ;t<f  inform  |Ee  burgomaster,  who
bade  them  fill  up  th<r  grave  arid  say  nothing  about
it;  adding,  that  he  had  always  heard  that  the  dead
should  be  allowed  to  rest'  in  peace.  Meanwhile,
during  the  absence  of ( the.  workmen,  a  devout  person
went  down  into  the  grave:  and  cut  off  part  of  the
black  mantle  and  white  scapular— portions  of  which
were  afterwards  distributed  rfs' relics  among  different
Catholics.  One  of  these  relics  came  into  the  posses-
sion of  Henry  Murer,  who  has  given  an  account  of
the  discovery  of  the  body  in  his  Helvetia  Sancta,
published  at  Luzern  a.d.  1648.  At  a  later  period,
when  Ulm  was  occupied  by  the  French  during  one  of


PREFACE.  V

their  campaigns,  they  caused  excavations  to  be  made
in  the  hope  of  discovering  the  sacred  remains,  but
without  success.  The  Blessed  Henry  has  never  been
formally  beatified,  but  his  feast  is  kept  by  the  Domi-
nican Order  on  March  2d,  with  the  approbation  of
Gregory  XVI.,  granted  April  16,  1831.

Such  are  the  main  outlines  of  B.  Henry's  external
life  and  history.  The  details  of  the  picture  must  be
sought  for  in  the  brief  record  which  he  has  himself  left
us  of  his  experiences  in  the  ways  of  God.

The  following  translation  has  been  made  from
the  editionj&^ms^^Henry  Suso's  Life  and  Works,
edited  top  Caramal  J^pftobrock,  Prince  Bishop  of
Bresla^Bln  182^gThe^fl^f  the  Life  is  based  upon
a  maifiscript^of^e  encTJQ\Uie  fourteenth  century
from  itSloyajr.  Li^ry^t  $fkftch,  which  the  editor
carefulv  collate"^ w^^th&eaBSelfc  printed  copies  pub-
lished ft  Augsbu)g^£.  T48f"all  a.d.  1512.

SurMs,Vthe  Oar$jS|ian,  trarllated  the  Life  and
Works  ftan\  the^e^nian  ©4  Latin.  The  first
edition,  defeated  $3  SfeVeribifeble  Abbot  Blosius,
appeared  a^Gologne  At^l5«D.  The  rendering  is
singularly  grace^^andaccj«Ke,  so  far  as  the  differ-
ent genius  of  the  twoTSnguages  and  the  occasional
imperfections  of  the  German  text  used  by  Burins,
principally  in  the  last  nine  chapters,  would  permit.

A  French  translation  by  the  Carthusian  Le  Cerf
was  published  at  Paris  in  1586,  and  an  Italian  one
by  the  Dominican  Del  Nente  at  Rome  in  1651.     The
a2


VI  PREFACE.

latter  has  been  frequently  reprinted,  but  it  does  not
in  any  sense  merit  the  name  of  a  translation,  as  it
is  nothing  more  than  a  mere  epitome  or  condensed
abridgment  of  the  original.  Cartier  has  recently
translated  Del  Nente's  work  into  French,  under  the
title  of  GEuvres  du  B.  Henri  Suso.  The  second  edition
appeared  in  1856.

As  the  chief  object  of  the  present  translator  has
been  to  provide  a  book  of  spiritual  reading  for  the
devout,  he  hesitated  for  some  time  whether  or  not  to
omit  the  last  nine  chapters,  which  treat  for  the  most
part  of  deep  points  of  mystical  theology  in  language
which,  from  its  antiquated  character  and  excessive
conciseness,  is  sometimes  obscure,  and  is  always  difficult
to  translate  into  intelligible  English  without  indulging
in  paraphrase.  Surius  has  relegated  these  chapters
to  another  part  of  the  volume,  under  the  title  of
"  Appendix  of  certain  sublime  questions."  Still,  as
Cardinal  Diepenbrock  observes,  they  really  belong  to
the  Life,  and  form  part  of  it  in  the  earliest  manu-
script and  printed  editions.  On  the  whole,  it  seemed
better  to  include  these  chapters  in  the  present  trans-
lation. They  contain  several  passages  of  wonderful
beauty,  which  every  one  will  read  with  pleasure.  They
are,  moreover,  a  protest  against  the  errors  of  panthe-
ism and  quietism,  to  which  a  spirit  of  false  mysti-
cism naturally  tends,  and  against  which  the  B.  Henry
often  raised  his  voice  in  warning.  Lastly,  their  ab-
sence would  leave  one  side  of  the  B.  Henry's  life


PREFACE.  Vll

wholly  unrepresented.  For  they  serve  to  remind  us
that  if  his  personal  and  experimental  acquaintance
with  mystical  theology  was  great,  he  was  no  less
conversant  with  it  as  a  science,  and  could  treat  with
learning  and  accuracy  the  many  deep  and  subtle
questions  which  it  suggests.


The  Oratory,  London,

Feast  of  St.  Richard,  1865.


CONTENTS.


PAGE

Translator's  Preface iii

Prologue .1

CHAP.

I.  Introductory 5

II.  Of  the  preliminary  combats  of  a  beginner       .  7

III.  Of  a  supernatural  rapture  which  befell  him     .  11

IV.  How  he  spiritually  espoused  the  Eternal  Wis-

dom      13

V.  How  he  inscribed  upon  his  heart  the  gracious

Name  of  Jesus 20

VI.  Of  the  foretaste  of  divine  consolations,  with

which  God  sometimes  allures  beginners     .     23
VII.  How  one,  who  had  begun  well,  was  drawn  on-
wards in  his  search  after  divine  consolation    27

VIII.  Of  certain  visions 30

IX.  Of  the  way  in  which  he  went  to  table      .         .    33

X.  How  he  began  the  New  Year   .         .        .         .36

XI.  Of  the  words  Sursum  corda      .         .         .        .38

XII.  How  he  kept  the  feast  of  Candlemas        .        .    41

XIII.  How  he  spent  the  Carnival  time      .        .         .44

XIV.  How  he  began  the  month  of  May     .        .        .48
XV.  Of  the  sorrowful  way  of  the  Cross,  which  he

made  with  Christ  when  He  was  being  led

forth  to  death 50

XVI.  Of  the  useful  virtue  called  silence  .  .  .  5G
XVII.  Of  the  chastisement  of  his  body  .  .  .57
XVIII.  Of  the  sharp  cross  which  he  bore  upon  his  back    Gl


X  CONTENTS.

CHAP.  *  PAGR

XIX.  Of  his  bed 68

XX.  How  he  broke  himself  from  drink      .        .71
XXI.  How  he  was  directed  to  the  rational  school,
in  which  the  art  of  true  detachment  is

taught .81

XXII.  How  painful  it  is  to  die  interiorly      .         .     84

XXIII.  Of  interior  sufferings  .        .        .        .97

XXIV.  How  he  went  forth  to  succour  and  to  save

his  neighbour 10O

XXV.  Concerning  manifold  sufferings  .        .  103

XXVI.  Of  the  great  suffering  which  befell  him

through  his  sister Ill

XXVII.  Of  a  grievous  suffering  which  befell  him

through  a  companion     .         .         .         .118
XXVIII.  Of  a  murderer     .        .        .        .        .'        .125

XXIX.  Of  perils  by  water 130

XXX.  Of  a  short  interval  of  rest  which  God  once

granted  him 133

XXXI.  How  he  once  entered  into  a  loving  account

with  God 135

XXXII.  How  his  sufferings  once  brought  him  nigh

to  death 141

XXXIII.  How  a  man  should  offer  up  his  sufferings

to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God       .         .  14(5

XXXIV.  Of  the  joys  with  which  God  recompenses

in  this  present  life  those  who  suffer  for

Him 151

XXXV.  Of  the  Servitor's  spiritual  daughter   .        .  157
XXXVI.  Of  the  first  beginnings  of  a  beginner          .  162
XXXVII.  Of  the  first  lessons  and  examples  which
are  suitable  for  a  beginner,  and  how  he
should  regulate  his  exercises  with  dis-
cretion     168


CONTENTS.  XI

CHAP.  PAGE

XXXVIII.  Of  certain  devout  practices  of  a  young  be-
ginner in  his  early  years        .        .         .178
XXXIX.  How  he  drew  light-minded  persons  to  God,
and  comforted  those  who  were  in  suf-
fering      185

XL.  Of  a  grievous  suffering  which  befell  him

while  thus  occupied       .        .        .        .191
XLI.  Of  interior  sufferings  „  214

XLII.  What  sufferings  are  the  most  useful  to  men,

and  bring  most  glory  to  God?        .         .  217
XLIII.  How  he  drew  certain  hearts  from  earthly

love  to  the  love  of  God  .        .        .  222

XLIV.  How  God  multiplied  drink  for  His  friends    233
XLV.  Of  certain  sufferers,  who  were  attached  to
the  Servitor  by  special  ties  of  friend-
ship and  affection  ....  234
XL VI.  How  Christ  appeared  to  him  under  the
form  of  a  Seraph,  and  taught  him  how

to  suffer 239

XLVII.  How  steadfastly  he  must  fight  who  would

win  the  spiritual  prize  ....  245
XLVIII.  How  the  Servitor's  face  was  once  seen  to
shine  with  light  while  he  was  preach-
ing          249

XLIX.  Of  the  lovely  Name  of  Jesus      .        .        .  249
L.  A  good  distinction  between  a  true   and
false  use  of  reason  noticeable  in  certain

persons 252

LI.  How  to  distinguish  between  a  well-ordered
reason  and  one  which  is  all  flowers  and

glitter 257

LII.  A  good  distinction  between  true  and  false

detachment 260


Xll  CONTENTS.

CHAP.  PAGE

LIII.  Maxims,  conformable  to  right  reason,  for  the
guidance  of  an  exterior  man  into  his  in-
terior      266

LIV.  Of  the  high  questions  which  the  well-exercised

daughter  put  to  her  spiritual  father  .  .  280
LV.  An  explanation  where  and  how  God  is  .  -  .  288
LVI.  Of  the  very  highest  flight  of  a  soul  experienced

in  the  ways  of  God 301

LVII.  The  conclusion  of  the  contents  of  this  book  in

a  few  simple  words 312


PROLOGUE.*


The  following  book  speaks  throughout  in  an
instructive  manner  of  the  life  of  a  beginner,
and  contains,  for  those  who  look  beneath  the
surface,  information  respecting  the  proper  way
in  which  a  beginner  should  order  his  outer  and
inner  man  so  as  to  be  in  harmony  with  God's
all-lovely  will.  And  since  good  works  are  un-
doubtedly a  better  guide,  and  sometimes  shed
a  brighter  light  into  a  man's  heart  than  mere
words,  therefore  the  book  recounts,  as  examples,
many  different  holy  actions,  which  really  and
truly  took  place  just  as  they  are  related.  The
book  also  tells  of  a  man's  progress  in  holiness ;
that  is,  how,  by  avoiding  things,  by  sufferings,
and  by  exercises,  he  may  break  through  his  un-
mortified  animal  nature,  and  arrive  at  great  and
exalted  dignity.    Moreover,  since  there  are  some

*  The  following  passages  are  taken  from  the  Prologue
prefixed  by  the  B.  Henry  Suso  to  a  manuscript  copy  of  his
Life  and  Writings.  They  contain  all  in  it  that  relates  to  the
Life.  The  Prologue  is  to  be  found  in  the  ancient  printed
copies,  and  is  quoted  by  Diepenbrock  in  his  preface.
B


2  PROLOGUE.

men  who,  with  courageous  hearts,  strive  to  grasp
at  what  is  highest  and  best,  and  yet,  from  want
of  the  necessary  knowledge  to  discriminate,  go
astray  and  miss  the  road,  therefore  this  book
gives  instruction  how  to  distinguish  rightly  be-
tween a  true  and  false  use  of  reason  in  spiritual
things;  and  it  teaches  the  orderly  and  proper
course  by  which  a  man  may  attain  to  the  un-
alloyed truth  of  a  blessed  and  perfect  life.

It  should  be  also  mentioned,  that  the  pages
of  this  book  lay  for  many  years  locked  up  in
secret,  awaiting  the  Servitor's  death ;  for  he
was  in  very  truth  reluctant  to  disclose  himself
to  any  one  by  means  of  them,  so  long  as  he
lived.  At  length,  however,  his  reason  told  him
that,  in  these  days  of  the  decline  of  the  human
race,  it  would  be  better  and  safer  that  the  book,
by  God's  permission,  should  be  submitted  to
his  superiors  while  he  was  still  living,  and  could
answer  for  its  truth  in  all  points,  than  after  his
death.  And  this,  moreover,  even  though  it
should  fall  out  that  certain  ignorant  men,  whose
words  are  in  no  way  worthy  of  account,  should
pass  false  and  perverted  judgments  upon  it,
either  because  they  would  not  regard  the  Ser-
vitor's good  intention  in  the  matter,  or  because
they   were    unable,    from    want    of    spiritual


PROLOGUE.  3

refinement,  to  comprehend  any  thing  higher
than  what  they  had  experienced  in  themselves.
Besides  it  was  quite  possible  that  the  book
might,  after  his  death,  come  into  the  possession
of  lukewarm  and  un spiritual  men,  who  would
not  give  themselves  the  trouble  to  communicate
it  for  God's  glory  to  those  who  would  receive  it
eagerly ;  and  in  this  way  the  book  might  perish
without  fruit.  Or  again,  it  might  chance  to
fall  into  the  hands  of  men  intellectually  blind
or  morally  bad,  who  from  their  sinful  dislike
of  it  might  suppress  it,  as  has  often  happened
in  other  cases.  Therefore,  with  the  divine  as-
sistance, he  took  courage,  and  extracted  from
this  book  the  sublimest  thoughts  and  the  most
elevated  teaching  which  it  contains,  and  himself
gave  these  extracts  to  a  learned  doctor,  named
Master  Bartholomew,  to  read;  a  man  richly
endowed  by  God  with  virtues  and  graces,  and
of  approved  experience  in  spiritual  science,  and
furthermore  a  Prelate  with  supreme  jurisdiction
over  the  order  of  Friars  Preachers  throughout
Germany.  The  Servitor  humbly  gave  him  up
the  book,  and  he  read  it  through  with  great  satis-
faction of  heart,  and  pronounced  that  it  was,  all
of  it,  as  it  were,  a  kernel  of  hidden  truth  drawn
from  Holy  Writ  for  all  clear-sighted  men.


4  PROLOGUE.

Afterwards,  when  the  ordinary  teaching  had
been  added  to  it,  in  order  that  every  man  might
find  there  what  would  suit  him,  and  the  Ser-
vitor was  about  to  lay  this  part  also  before  the
Prelate,  the  good  God  withdrew  from  hence
this  noble  Master.  The  Servitor,  on  hearing
of  his  death,  was  exceedingly  afflicted,  for  he
knew  not  what  to  do.  He  therefore  betook
himself  with  great  earnestness  to  the  Eternal
Wisdom,  and  prayed  that  it  might  be  shown
him  what  was  the  best  thing  to  do  in  this  affair.
After  a  time  his  prayer  was  heard,  and  the
aforenamed  Master  appeared  to  him  in  a  bright
vision,  and  told  him  that  it  was  God's  good  will
that  the  book  should  be  henceforth  communi-
cated to  all  good-hearted  men,  who  with  a  right
intention  and  an  eager  longing  might  desire  to
have  it.

He  then  who  wishes  earnestly  to  become  a
good  and  blessed  man,  and  who  longs  after
special  intimacy  with  God,  or  who  has  received
a  token  of  God's  love  in  heavy  sufferings,  as
God's  way  is  with  His  peculiar  friends, — such  a
man  will  find  this  book  a  help  and  comfort.
It  will  also  serve  as  a  guide  for  good-hearted
men  to  divine  truth,  as  well  as  teach  men  of
reason  the  right  road  to  supreme  bliss.


THE


LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.


Chapter  L

Introductory.
There  was  a  Friar  Preacher  in  Germany,  by
birth  a  Swabian, — may  his  name  be  written  in
the  Book  of  the  Living ! — whose  desire  was  to
become  and  to  be  called  a  Servitor  of  the  Eter-
nal Wisdom.  Now  it  happened  that  he  became
acquainted  with  a  holy  and  illuminated  person,
who  was  in  poverty  and  suffering  as  regards
this  world.  This  poor  sufferer  was  a  woman ;
and  she  used  to  beseech  the  Servitor  to  tell  her
something  about  suffering  from  his  own  expe-
rience, that  her  suffering  heart  might  gather
strength  from  it.  And  she  acted  thus  towards
him  for  a  long  time.  When  he  came  to  see
her,  she  drew  from  him  by  confidential  ques-
tionings the  manner  of  his  beginning  and  pro-


6  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

gress  in  the  interior  life,  as  well  as  certain  ex-
ercises and  sufferings  which  he  had  passed
through  :  all  which  he  told  her  in  spiritual  con-
fidence. As  she  found  comfort  and  direction
in  these  things,  she  wrote  them  down,  to  be  a
help  for  herself  and  others ;  and  she  did  this
by  stealth,  so  that  he  knew  not  of  it.  Later
on,  when  he  found  out  this  ghostly  theft,  he  re-
proved her  for  it,  and,  forcing  her  to  give  up  to
him  the  writing,  he  burnt  all  of  it  that  was
there.  When,  however,  the  rest  of  it  was  given
to  him,  and  he  was  going  to  treat  it  in  like  man-
ner, he  was  stopped  by  a  heavenly  message
from  God  forbidding  it.  Thus  what  follows  re-
mained unburnt,  for  the  most  part  just  as  she
had  written  it  with  her  own  hand.  Many  good
instructions  were  also  added  to  it  by  him,  after
her  death,  in  her  name.

The  first  beginning  of  the  Servitor's  perfect
conversion  to  God  took  place  when  he  was  in
his  eighteenth  year.  And  though  he  had  worn
the  religious  habit  for  the  five  previous  years,
his  soul  was  still  dissipated  within  him ;  and  it
seemed  to  him,  that  if  God  only  preserved  him
from  weightier  sins,  which  might  tarnish  his
good  name,  there  was  no  need  to  be  over-careful
about  ordinary  faults.     Nevertheless,  he  was  so


COMBATS  OF  A  BEGINNER.  7

kept  by  God  the  while,  that  he  had  always  an
unsatisfied  feeling  within  him,  whenever  he
turned  himself  to  the  objects  of  his  desires,  and
it  seemed  to  him  that  it  must  be  something  quite
different  which  could  bring  peace  to  his  wild
heart,  and  he  was  ill  at  ease  amid  his  restless
ways.  He  felt  at  all  times  a  gnawing  reproach
within,  and  yet  he  could  not  help  himself,
until  the  kind  God  set  him  free  from  it,  by
turning  him.  His  companions  marvelled  at  the
speedy  change,  wondering  how  it  had  come  over
him ;  and  one  said  this,  and  another  that,  but
as  to  how  it  was,  no  one  either  guessed  or  came
near  to  guessing  it;  for  it  was  a  secret  illu-
mination and  drawing  sent  by  God,  and  it
wrought  in  him  with  speed  a  turning  away  from
creatures.


Chapter  II.

Of  the  preliminary  combats  of  a  beginner.
Soon  after  this  impression  had  been  made
upon  his  soul  by  God,  there  began  within  him
certain  preliminary  combats,  in  which  the  enemy
sought  to  lead  him  astray  from  his  salvation.
The  inward  impulse,  which   he  had  received


8  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

from  God,  urged  him  to  turn  away  entirely
from  every  thing  which  might  be  a  hindrance
to  him.  The  tempter  met  this  with  the  sug-
gestion : — Bethink  thee  better.  It  is  easy  to
begin,  but  it  is  hard  to  bring  to  completion.
The  voice  within  put  forward  God's  might  and
aid.  The  opposing  voice  replied,  that  God's
power  was  beyond  doubt,  but  that  His  willing-
ness was  doubtful.  This,  however,  was  clearly
proved  to  him ;  for  the  kind  God  has  vouched
for  it  in  the  good  promise,  which  He  uttered
with  His  divine  mouth,  that  He  would  verily
and  indeed  help  all  those  who  should  begin  this
work  in  His  name.

When  grace  had  gained  the  victory  in  him
in  this  combat,  there  came  a  hostile  thought  in
friendly  form,  counselling  him  thus  : — It  may
be  all  right,  that  thou  shouldst  amend  thy  life ;
but  do  not  set  about  it  so  impetuously.  Begin
with  such  moderation,  that  thou  mayest  be  able
to  bring  it  to  completion.  Thou  shouldst  eat
and  drink  heartily,  and  treat  thyself  well ;  and
at  the  same  time  be  on  thy  guard  against  sins.
Be  as  good  as  thou  pleasest  within  thyself,  and
yet  with  such  moderation  that  the  world  with-
out may  not  take  fright  at  thee,  as  the  saying
is.     Is  the  heart  good,  all  is  good.     Surely  thou


COMBATS  OF  A  BEGINNER.  9

mayest  be  merry  with  people,  and  still  be  a
good  man.  Others  too  wish  to  go  to  heaven,
and  yet  do  not  lead  a  life  of  exercises  such  as
thine.  These  and  the  like  temptations  pressed
him  hard.  But  the  Eternal  Wisdom  overthrew
for  him  these  deceitful  counsels  thus  : — The
man  who  tries  to  hold  by  the  tail  that  slippery
fish,  the  eel,  and  to  begin  a  holy  life  lukewarmly,
will  be  deceived  in  both  cases ;  for  when  he
thinks  he  has  them,  they  will  have  slipped
from  him.  He  too,  who  seeks  with  tender
treatment  to  get  the  better  of  a  pampered  and
refractory  body,  wants  common  sense.  He  who
would  possess  this  world,  and  yet  serve  God
perfectly,  tries  for  what  is  impossible,  and  seeks
to  falsify  God's  own  teaching.  Wherefore,  if
thou  art  minded  to  forsake  all,  do  so  to  good
purpose.  He  tarried  somewhat  long  in  these
thoughts ;  but  at  last  taking  courage,  he  turned
himself  away  from  every  thing  with  all  his
might.

His  untamed  spirit  had  in  the  beginning  to
die  many  deaths  in  breaking  away  from  frivo-
lous companions.  Sometimes  nature  overcame
him,  and  he  would  go  to  them  to  cheer  himself;
but  it  commonly  fell  out,  that  he  went  to  them
merry,  and  left  them  sad;  for  their  talk  and


10  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

sports  were  no  pleasure  to  him,  and  his  were
unendurable  to  them.  At  times,  when  he  came
to  them,  they  would  try  his  patience  with  such
words  as  these.  One  would  say : — What  strange
ways  thou  hast  taken  up !  Another  would  an-
swer : — An  ordinary  life  is  the  safest.  While
a  third  would  add: — It  will  never  come  to  a
good  end.  Thus  they  passed  him  on  from  one
to  another.  But  he  kept  silence,  as* one  dumb,
and  he  thought  within  himself: — Ah,  gentle
God!  there  is  nothing  better  to  be  done  than
to  flee  from  them.  If  thou  hadst  not  heard
these  cruel  words,  they  could  have  done  thee
no  hurt.

One  thing  was  a  sore  suffering  to  him.  He
had  no  one  to  whom  he  could  pour  out  his
grief,  and  who  pursued  the  same  end  in  the
same  way,  that  he  had  been  called  to  pursue  it.
Therefore  he  went  on  his  way  in  wretchedness,
pining  for  love;  and  with  mighty  efforts  he
withdrew  himself  from  creatures, — a  practice
which  afterwards  became  very  sweet  to  him.


SUPERNATURAL  KAPTURE.  11

Chapter  III.

Of  a  supernatural  rapture  which  befell  him.

It  happened  once  in  the  time  of  his  begin-
nings, that  he  came  into  the  choir  on  St.  Agnes'
day,  after  the  midday  meal  of  the  convent  was
ended.  He  was  there  alone,  and  he  stood  at
the  lower  stalls,  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the
choir.  It  was,  moreover,  a  time  at  which  he
was  more  than  usually  crushed  down  by  a  heavy
weight  of  sorrow.  Now  it  came  to  pass,  that  as
he  stood  there  all  desolate,  and  with  none  to
help  or  shield  him,  his  soul  was  caught  up  in
ecstasy,  whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body,
and  he  saw  and  heard  what  no  tongue  can  tell.
It  was  without  form  or  mode,  and  yet  it  con-
tained within  itself  the  entrancing  delightful-
ness  of  all  forms  and  modes.  His  heart  was
athirst,  and  yet  satisfied;  his  mind  was  joyous
and  blooming ;  wishes  were  stilled  in  him,  and
desires  had  departed.  He  did  but  gaze  fixedly
on  the  dazzling  effulgence,  in  which  he  found
oblivion  of  himself  and  all  things.  Was  it  day
or  night,  he  knew  not.  It  was  a  breaking  forth
of  the  sweetness  of  eternal  life,  felt  as  present
in   the    stillness   of   unvarying   contemplation.


12  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

He  said  afterwards : — If  this  be  not  heaven,  I
know  not  what  heaven  is ;  for  not  all  the  suffer-
ings, which  a  man  could  suffer  here  below,  could
ever  merit  for  him  in  justice  to  possess  a  joy
like  this  throughout  eternity.  This  overpower-
ing rapture  lasted  about  an  hour  and  a  half;
but  whether  his  soul  stayed  in  his  body,  or  was
parted  from  it,  he  knew  not.  When  he  came
to  himself  again,  he  was  altogether  like  a  man
who  has  come  from  another  world.  His  body
was  in  such  anguish  from  the  brief  moment,
that  he  had  never  deemed  it  possible  to  suffer
so  much  in  so  short  a  time,  even  at  death.  He
came  to  himself  with  a  deep  groan,  and  his
body  sank  to  the  ground,  in  spite  of  him,  as  if
he  were  in  a  faint.  He  cried  aloud  piteously,
and,  deeply  groaning,  exclaimed : — Woe  is  me,
my  God !  Where  was  I  ?  Where  am  I  now  ?
Adding : — Ah,  Thou,  who  art  my  heart's  good !
never  can  this  hour  pass  from  my  heart !  He
went  on  his  way  in  body,  and  no  one  saw,  or
took  note  of  any  thing  in  him  outwardly ;  but
his  soul  and  mind  were  full  within  of  heavenly
marvels.  The  heavenly  glances  came  again
and  again  in  his  innermost  interior,  and  it
seemed  to  him  as  if  he  were  floating  in  the
air.     The  powers  of  his  soul  were  filled  full


SPIRITUAL  ESPOUSALS.  13

of  the  sweet  taste  of  heaven ;  just  as,  when  a
choice  electuary  has  been  poured  out  of  a  box,
the  box  still  keeps  the  good  flavour  of  it.  This
heavenly  taste  remained  with  him  for  a  long
time  afterwards,  and  gave  him  a  heavenly
yearning  and  longing  after  God.


Chapter  IV.

How  he  spiritually  espoused  the  Eternal  Wisdom.

The  course  of  life,  which  he  pursued  for  a
long  time  after  this,  in  regard  to  interior  exer-
cises, was  a  ceaseless  striving  after  actual  re-
collection in  interior  union  with  the  Eternal
Wisdom.  How  he  first  began  this,  may  be
learned  from  his  Little  Book  of  the  Eternal
Wisdom,  in  German  and  Latin,  which  God
moved  him  to  compose.

He  had  from  youth  up  a  loving  heart.  Now
the  Eternal  Wisdom  is  represented  in  Holy
Scripture  under  a  lovely  guise,  as  a  gracious
loving  mistress,  who  displays  her  charms  with
the  intent  to  please  every  one ;  discoursing  the
while  tenderly,  in  female  form,  of  the  desire
she  has  to  win  all  hearts  to  herself,  and  saying


14  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENKY  SUSO.

how  deceitful  all  other  mistresses  are,  and  how
truly  loving  and  constant  she  is.  This  drew  his
young  soul  to  her;  and  it  fared  with  him  as
with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  forest  whom  the
panther  attracts  to  itself  with  the  sweet  smell
that  it  sends  forth.  In  this  winning  way  she  full
often  wooed  him  to  her  spiritual  love,  especially
in  the  books  called  the  books  of  Wisdom.  When
these  were  read  at  table,  and  he  listened  to  the
endearing  words  as  they  were  read  out,  his  heart
was  right  glad  within  him,  and  he  began  to  feel
a  yearning  in  his  loving  soul,  and  thoughts
would  come  to  him  like  these: — Truly  thou
shouldst  make  trial  of  thy  fortune,  whether  per-
chance this  high  mistress,  of  whom  thou  hast
heard  tell  such  marvels,  will  become  thy  love ;
for  in  truth  thy  wild  young  heart  cannot  long
remain  without  a  love.

In  these  things  he  observed  her  closely,  and
she  pleased  him  well  in  heart  and  soul.

It  happened,  as  he  sat  at  table  another  morn-
ing, that  she  cried  aloud  in  the  person  of  Solo-
mon, saying : — "Audi,  fili  mi  I"  &c.  Hearken,
my  child,  to  the  high  counsel  of  thy  father.
Wilt  thou  pursue  exalted  love,  then  take  thee
for  thy  most  sweet  love  the  Eternal  Wisdom ;
for  she  gives  to  all  her  lovers  youth  and  virtue,


SPIRITUAL  ESPOUSALS.  15

nobility  and  riches,  honour  and  profit,  mighty-
power  and  an  everlasting  name.  She  makes
him  who  loves  her  gracious  to  all;  she  teaches
him  courteous  bearing,  and  secures  him  praise
before  the  world,  and  fame  among  the  multi-
tudes. She  makes  him  dear  and  of  high  esteem
to  God  and  men.  By  her  the  earth  was  created,
the  heavens  were  made  fast,  and  the  foundations
of  the  abyss  were  laid.  He  who  possesses  her
walks  securely,  sleeps  quietly,  and  lives  in  safety
(Prov.  i.-iv.).

When  he  heard  this  beautiful  discourse
read  out,  straightway  the  thought  came  to  his
longing  heart : — Ah  me !  what  a  love  is  this !
Could  she  but  become  mine,  I  were  indeed  well
off.  These  thoughts  were  met  by  contrary  sug-
gestions such  as  these: — Shall  I  love  what  I
have  never  seen,  nor  even  know  what  it  is  ?  A
handful  in  possession  is  better  than  a  houseful
in  prospect.  They  who  raise  lofty  buildings
and  love  venturesomely,  have  but  a  hungry
time  of  it.  Truly  this  loving  dame  were  a  good
mistress,  did  she  let  her  servant  treat  his  body
well  and  tenderly.  But  far  from  this,  she
says: — He  who  seeks  good  food,  strong  wine,
and  long  sleep,  can  never  win  Wisdom's  love
(Prov.  xxi.  17).     Was  there  ever  a  siutor  sub-


16  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

jected  to  such  hard  terms  as  these?  A  thought
from  God  answered: — By  ancient  right,  love
and  suffering  go  together.  There  is  no  wooer
but  he  is  a  sufferer  ;  no  lover  but  he  is  a
martyr.  Therefore  it  is  not  unjust  that  he  who
aims  so  high  in  love  should  meet  with  some
things  repugnant  to  him.  Eemember  all  the
mishaps  and  the  vexations  which  earthly  lovers
suffer,  whether  with  their  will  or  against  it.
He  was  greatly  strengthened  to  persevere  by
good  inspirations  of  this  sort.  And  the  like
of  this  often  happened  to  him.  Sometimes  he
had  a  good  will,  while  at  other  times  he  would
let  his  heart  go  after  perishable  love.  Never-
theless, to  whatever  side  he  turned,  he  always
found  a  something  in  every  object  which  would
not  let  him  give  his  heart  to  it  without  reserve,
and  which  drove  him  back  from  it.

One  day,  the  reading  at  table  was  about
Wisdom,  and  his  heart  was  stirred  and  set  on
fire  by  it.  Wisdom  spoke  thus: — As  the  lovely
rose-tree  is  full  of  bloom,  and  the  lofty  uncut
Libanus  yields  its  fragrance,  and  the  pure  bal-
sam sends  forth  its  odours  (Ecclus.  xxiv.),  even
so  I  am  a  blooming,  fragrant,  and  pure  love,
without  anger  and  bitterness,  a  very  abyss  of
loving  sweetness.     All   other   mistresses  have


SPIRITUAL  ESPOUSALS.  17

sweet  words,  but  a  bitter  recompense.  Their
hearts  are  deadly  nets,  their  hands  are  manacles,
their  discourse  honied  poison,  and  their  pastime
infamy  (Eccles.  vii.  27).  He  thought: — How
true  is  this !  And  then  he  said  to  himself  joy-
fully : — Yes,  it  must  be  so.  She  must  indeed
be  my  love,  and  I  will  be  her  servant.  And  the
thought  came  to  him : — Ah  God,  if  I  might  but
once  see  my  love  !  if  I  might  but  once  converse
with  her!  Ah!  what  is  the  form  of  my  be-
loved, in  whom  so  many  delightful  things  lie
hid?  Is  she  God  or  of  human  kind?  woman
or  man?  art  or  cunning?  or  what  can  she  be?
While  he  thus  strove  to  see  her,  so  far  as  she
could  be  seen  with  the  soul's  eyes  in  what  Holy
Scripture  has  made  known  concerning  her,  she
showed  herself  to  him  in  this  wise.  She  floated
high  above  him  in  a  choir  of  clouds ;  she  shone
like  the  morning  star,  and  her  radiance  was
dazzling  as  the  rising  sun ;  her  crown  was  eter-
nity ;  her  vesture  bliss ;  her  words  sweetness ;
her  embrace  the  fulness  of  every  delight;  she
was  far,  yet  near;  high,  yet  lowly;  she  was
present,  yet  hidden ;  she  forbade  not  to  con-
verse with  her,  yet  no  one  can  comprehend
her.  She  reaches  above  the  summit  of  the
heavens,  and  touches'  the  depths  of  the  abyss;
c


18  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

she  spreads  herself  from  end  to  end  mightily,
and  disposes  all  things  sweetly.  When  at  one
moment  he  thought  he  saw  in  her  a  beautiful
maiden,  forthwith  she  appeared  to  him  as  a
noble  youth.  Sometimes  she  showed  herself  as
one  rich  in  wisdom ;  at  other  times  as  overflow-
ing with  love.  She  drew  nigh  to  him  lovingly,
and  greeted  him  full  smilingly,  and  sweetly  said
to  him:  —  "Prsebe,  fili  mi,  cor  tuum  mihi!
Give  me  thy  heart,  my  child!"  (Prov.  xxiii.
26.)  Thereupon  he  bowed  himself  to  her  feet,
and  thanked  her  from  his  inmost  heart  out  of
the  depths  of  his  lowliness.  This  was  what
was  then  granted  to  him,  and  no  more  than
this  could  he  obtain.

Afterwards,  when  he  dwelt  in  thought  upon
the  all-lovely  one,  he  used  commonly  to  put  this
question  to  himself,  and  ask  his  love-sick  heart :
— Ah,  my  heart !  from  what  source  do  all  love
and  graciousness  flow  f  Whence  come  all  ten-
derness, beauty,  joyousness,  and  loveableness  ?
Comes  it  not  all  from  the  outbursting  fountain-
head  of  the  pure  Godhead  !  Up  then,  my  heart,
my  senses,  my  mind ;  up,  then,  and  cast  your-
selves into  the  fathomless  abyss  of  all  lovely
things.  Who  shall  keep  me  from  Thee  now?
Ah !  I  embrace  Thee  still  to-day  with  the  long-


SPIRITUAL  ESPOUSALS.  19

ings  of  my  burning  heart.  And  then  there
pressed  itself  as  it  were,  into  his  soul,  the
primal  outflow  of  all  good,  and  in  it  he  found
in  spiritual  fashion  all  that  is  beautiful,  lovely,
and  desirable,  for  all  was  there  in  a  way  in-
effable.

Thus  it  grew  into  a  habit  with  him,  when-
ever he  heard  songs  of  praise,  or  the  sweet
music  of  stringed  instruments,  or  lays,  or  dis-
course about  earthly  love,  immediately  to  turn
his  heart  and  mind  inwards,  and  gaze  abstract-
edly upon  his  loveliest  love,  whence  all  love
flows.  It  were  impossible  to  tell  how  often
with  weeping  eyes,  from  out  the  unfathomable
depths  of  his  outspread  heart,  he  embraced  this
lovely  form,  and  pressed  it  tenderly  to  his  heart.
And  thus  it  fared  with  him  as  with  a  sucking
child,  which  lies  encircled  by  its  mother's  arms
upon  her  breast.  As  the  child  with  its  head  and
the  movement  of  its  body  lifts  itself  up  against
its  tender  mother,  and  by  these  loving  gestures
testifies  its  heart's  delight,  even  so  his  heart
many  a  time  leapt  up  within  his  body  towards
the  delightful  presence  of  the  Eternal  Wisdom,
and  melted  away  in  sensible  affections.  At  such
moments  the  thought  would  come  to  him : — Ah,
Lord !  were  only  a  queen  my  spouse,  it  would


20  LITE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

make  my  heart  rejoice.  Ah  me  !  and  Thou  art
now  my  heart's  empress,  Thou,  the  giver  of
every  grace !  In  Thee  I  have  wealth  enough,
and  all  the  power  I  want.  As  for  what  earth
contains,  I  wish  for  it  no  longer.  Amid  these
contemplations  his  countenance  became  all  joy-
ous, his  eyes  godlike,  and  his  hea*rt  full  of
jubilee,  while  all  his  interior  senses  sang  "  Super
salutem,"  &c.  (Wisd.  vii.  10).  Above  all  good
fortune,  and  above  all  beauty  art  Thou,  O  my
heart's  good  fortune  and  beauty ;  for  good  for-
tune has  followed  me  with  Thee,  and  I  possess
with  Thee  and  in  Thee  every  good.


Chapter  V.

How  he  inscribed  upon  his  heart  the  gracious  Name  of
Jesus.

At  this  season  there  came  down  into  his
soul  a  flame  of  intense  fire,  which  made  his
heart  all  burning  with  divine  love.  Now  one
day  that  this  feeling  was  strong  within  him,  and
he  was  suffering  exceedingly  from  the  torments
of  divine  love,  he  went  into  his  cell  to  his  place
of  retirement,  and,  rapt  in  loving  contemplation,


NAME  OF  JESUS.  21

spoke  thus : — Ah,  sweet  Lord !  would  that  I
could  devise  some  love-token,  which  might  be
an  everlasting  sign  of  love  between  me  and
Thee,  as  a  memorial  that  I  am  Thy  beloved,  and
Thou  art  my  heart's  only  beloved ;  a  sign  which
no  oblivion  might  be  ever  able  to  efface.  In
this  fervour  of  devotion,  he  threw  back  his  sca-
pular, and,  baring  his  breast,  took  in  his  hand  a
style ;  then,  looking  at  his  heart,  he  said : — Ah,
mighty  God !  give  me  to-day  strength  and  power
to  accomplish  my  desire;  for  Thou  must  be
burnt  to-day  into  my  very  inmost  heart.  There-
upon he  set  to  work,  and  thrust  the  style  into
the  flesh  above  his  heart,  drawing  it  backwards
and  forwards,  up  and  down,  until  he  had  in-
scribed the  Name  of  Jesus  upon  his  heart.  The
blood  flowed  plenteously  out  of  his  flesh  from
the  sharp  stabs,  and  ran  down  over  his  body  into
his  bosom ;  but  this  was  so  ravishing  a  sight  to
him  through  the  ardour  of  his  love,  that  he
cared  little  for  the  pain.  When  he  had  finished,
he  went  thus  torn  and  bleeding  from  his  cell  to
the  pulpit  under  the  crucifix,  and  kneeling  down
said : — Ah,  Lord !  my  heart  and  soul's  only  love !
look  now  upon  my  heart's  intense  desire.  Lord,
I  cannot  imprint  Thee  any  deeper  in  myself;
but  do  Thou,  O  Lord,  I  beseech  Thee,  complete


22  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

the  work,  and  imprint  Thyself  deep  down  into
my  very  inmost  heart,  and  so  inscribe  Thy  holy
Name  in  me,  that  Thou  mayest  never  more  de-
part from  my  heart.

Thus  he  bore  upon  him  for  a  long  time  love's
wound,  until  at  length  it  healed  up;  but  the
Name  of  Jesus  remained  upon  his  heart,  as  he
had  wished,  and  the  letters  were  about  the
breadth  of  a  smooth  stalk  of  corn,  and  the  length
of  a  joint  of  the  little  finger.  In  this  way  he
bore  the  Name  upon  his  heart  until  his  death,
and  at  every  beat  of  his  heart  the  Name  moved
with  it.  When  newly  made,  it  was  very  visible.
He  bore  it  secretly,  so  that  no  one  ever  saw  it,
except  a  companion  of  his,  to  whom  he  showed
it  in  spiritual  confidence.  Thenceforth,  when
any  trouble  befell  him,  he  used  to  look  at  the
love-token,  and  his  trouble  became  lighter.  It
was  his  wont  also  at  times  to  say  within  himself
fond  words  like  these : — See,  Lord,  earthly  lovers
write  their  beloved's  name  upon  their  garments  ;
but  I  have  written  Thee  upon  the  fresh  blood  of
my  heart.

Once  upon  a  time,  after  matins,  when  he
had  finished  praying,  he  went  into  his  cell,  and
sitting  down  upon  his  chair,  he  placed  the  book
of  the  lives  of  the  ancient  Fathers  under  his


CONSOLATIONS  OF  BEGINNERS.      23

head  for  a  pillow.  Thereupon  he  was  rapt
in  ecstasy,  and  it  seemed  to  him  that  a  light
streamed  forth  from  his  heart ;  and  as  he  looked,
there  appeared  upon  his  heart  a  cross  of  gold,
and  there  were  worked  into  it  in  noble  fashion
many  precious  stones,  which  gave  forth  in  bril-
liant light  the  Name  of  Jesus.

Then  the  Servitor  took  his  mantle,  and  drew
it  over  his  heart,  intending,  if  he  could,  to  cover
up  the  bright  light  which  streamed  from  it,  so
that  no  one  might  behold  it.  But  the  fiery
radiance  shone  forth  so  ravishingly  that  all  his
attempts  to  hide  it  were  of  no  avail  against  the
power  of  its  loveliness.


Chapter  VI.

Of  the  foretaste  of  divine  consolations,  with  which  God
sometimes  allures  beginners.

It  was  his  custom  to  go  into  his  chapel  after
matins,  and  sitting  down  upon  his  chair  to  take
a  little  rest.  He  sat  there  but  a  short  time,
until  the  watchman  announced  the  break  of
day ;  when,  opening  his  eyes,  he  used  to  fall  at
once  on  his  knees,  and  salute  the  rising  morn-
ing star,  heaven's  gentle  queen,  with  this  in  ten-


24  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

tion  that,  as  the  little  birds  in  summer  greet  the
daylight,  and  receive  it  joyously,  even  so  did
he  mean  to  greet  with  joyful  longings  her,  who
brings  the  light  of  the  everlasting  day ;  and  he
did  not  merely  say  these  words,  but  he  accom-
panied them  with  a  sweet  still  melody  in  his
soul.

Once  at  this  time,  while  he  sat  thus  at  rest,
he  heard  within  him  something  which  rang  so
tenderly,  that  his  whole  heart  was  stirred  by  it.
The  voice  sang  in  tones  sweet  and  loud,  as  the
morning  star  uprose,  these  words: — "Stella
maris  Maria  hodie  processit  ad  ortum :  Mary  the
morning  star  has  risen  to-day."  This  strain  re-
sounded in  him  with  such  unearthly  sweetness,
that  it  filled  his  whole  soul  with  gladness,
and  he  sang  with  it  joyously.  After  they
had  thus  sung  together,  he  was  embraced  in  a
way  ineffable,  and  it  was  said  to  him  at  the
time : — The  more  lovingly  thou  embracest  me,
and  the  more  spiritually  thou  kissest  me,  so
much  the  more  ravishingly  and  lovingly  shalt
thou  be  embraced  by  my  glory.  Upon  this  he
opened  his  eyes,  and,  the  tears  rolling  down
his  cheeks,  he  saluted  the  rising  morning  star
according  to  his  custom.  When  this  first
salutation  was   ended,  he  next   saluted  with  a


CONSOLATIONS  OF  BEGINNEES.      25

venia*  the  gentle  Eternal  Wisdom  in  the  words
of  the  prayer,  beginning  u  Anima  mea  desidera-
vit  te,  "&c.  This  was  followed  by  a  third  saluta-
tion, with  another  venia,  which  he  addressed  to
the  highest  and  most  fervent  of  the  Seraphim,
even  to  the  one  who  flames  upwards  in  hottest
and  fieriest  love  towards  the  Eternal  Wisdom,
and  this  he  did  with  the  intention  that  the  spirit
should  so  inflame  his  heart  with  divine  love,
that  he  might  both  be  on  fire  himself  and  en-
kindle the  hearts  of  all  men  with  his  loving
words  and  teaching.  These  were  the  saluta-
tions which  he  made  every  morning.

One  night  in  the  carnival  time,  when  he
had  prolonged  his  prayer  until  the  watchman's
horn  announced  the  daybreak,  the  thought  came
to  him : — Sit  a  little  longer,  before  thou  greet-
est  the  bright  morning  star.  Thereupon,  his
senses  being  thus  for  a  short  time  lulled  to  rest,
it  seemed  to  him  that  the  heavenly  spirits  began
with  loud  voice  to  intone  the  beautiful  respon-
sory,  "  Surge  et  illuminare,  Jerusalem  (Isaias
lx.  1) :  Arise  and  be  illuminated,  Jerusalem ;"
and  it  rang  with  exceeding  sweetness  in  his
soul.     They  had  scarcely  sung  a  little,  when

*  A  monastic  term,  which  means  to  kneel  down  and
kiss  the  ground.


26  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

his  soul  became  so  full  of  the  heavenly  strain,
that  his  frail  body  could  bear  no  more,  and,
opening  his  eyes,  his  heart  overflowed,  and  the
burning  tears  streamed  down  his  cheeks.

Once  at  this  time,  as  he  was  sitting  thus,  it
seemed  to  him  in  a  vision  that  he  was  carried
into  another  land,  and  that  his  angel  stood  there
before  him  full  tenderly  at  his  right  hand.
The  Servitor  sprang  up  at  once,  and,  embracing
his  dear  angel,  clung  round  him,  and  pressed
him  to  his  soul  as  lovingly  as  he  could,  so  that
there  was  naught  between  them,  as  it  appeared
to  him.  Then  in  sorrowful  accents  and  with
weeping  eyes  he  exclaimed  out  of  the  fulness  of
his  heart : — O  my  angel,  whom  the  faithful
God  has  given  me  for  my  consolation  and  guard,
I  pray  thee,  by  the  love  thou  hast  for  God,  not
to  leave  me.  The  angel  answered  him  and  said:
— Canst  thou  not  trust  God  !  Behold,  God  has
so  lovingly  embraced  thee  in  His  eternity,  that
He  will  never  leave  thee.

It  came  to  pass  once,  after  the  time  of  his
sufferings  was  over,  that  early  one  morning  he
was  surrounded  in  a  vision  by  the  heavenly
spirits.  Whereupon  he  besought  one  of  the
bright  princes  of  heaven  to  show  him  the  man-
ner of  God's  secret  dwelling  in  his  soul.     The


DIVINE  CONSOLATIONS.  27

angel  answered  thus :  —  Cast,  then,  a  joyous
glance  into  thyself,  and  see  how  God  plays  His
play  of  love  with  thy  loving  soul.  He  looked  im-
mediately, and  saw  that  his  body  over  his  heart
was  clear  as  crystal,  and  that  in  the  centre  of
his  heart  was  sitting  tranquilly,  in  lovely  form,
the  Eternal  Wisdom;  beside  whom  there  sat,
full  of  heavenly  longing,  the  Servitor's  soul,
which,  leaning  lovingly  towards  God's  side,  and
encircled  by  God's  arms,  and  pressed  close  to  His
divine  heart,  lay  thus  entranced  and  drowned
in  love  in  the  arms  of  the  beloved  God.


Chapter  VII.

How  one,  who  had  begun  well,  was  drawn  onward  in  his
search  after  divine  consolation.

He  had  made  anew  for  himself  certain
bands,  with  which  he  was  accustomed  to  chastise
his  body.  Now,  on  the  night  before  the  feast
of  All  Angels,  it  seemed  to  him  in  a  vision  that
he  heard  angelic  strains  and  sweet  heavenly
melody  ;  and  this  filled  him  with  such  gladness
that  he  forgot  all  his  sufferings.  Then  one  of
the  angels  said  to  him : — Behold,  with  what  joy
thou  dost  hear  us  sing  the  song  of  eternity ;  even


28  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

so,  with  like  joy,  do  we  hear  thee  sing  the  song
of  the  venerable  Eternal  Wisdom.  He  added
further: — This  is  a  portion  of  the  song  which
the  dear  elect  saints  will  sing  joyously  at  the
last  day,  when  they  shall  see  themselves  con-
firmed in  the  everlasting  bliss  of  eternity.  At
another  time,  on  the  same  festival,  after  he  had
spent  many  hours  in  contemplating  the  joys  of
the  angels,  and  daybreak  was  at  hand,  there
came  to  him  a  youth,  who  bore  himself  as  though
he  were  a  heavenly  musician  sent  to  him  by
God;  and  with  the  youth  there  came  many
other  noble  youths,  in  manner  and  bearing  like
the  first,  save  only  that  he  seemed  to  have  some
preeminence  above  the  rest,  as  if  he  were  a
prince-angel.  Now  this  same  angel  came  up  to
the  Servitor  right  blithely,  and  said  that  God
had  sent  them  down  to  him,  to  bring  him  hea-
venly joys  amid  his  sufferings ;  adding  that  he
must  cast  off  all  his  sorrows  from  his  mind  and
bear  them  company,  and  that  he  must  also
dance  with  them  in  heavenly  fashion.  Then
they  drew  the  Servitor  by  the  hand  into  the
dance,  and  the  youth  began  a  joyous  ditty  about
the  infant  Jesus,  which  runs  thus :  "  In  dulci
jubilo,"  &c.  When  the  Servitor  heard  the  dear
Name  of  Jesus  sounding  thus  sweetly,  he  be-


DIVINE  CONSOLATIONS.  29

came  so  blithesome  in  heart  and  feeling,  that
the  very  memory  of  his  sufferings  vanished.  It
was  a  joy  to  him  to  see  how  exceeding  loftily
and  freely  they  bounded  in  the  dance.  The
leader  of  the  song  knew  right  well  how  to  guide
them,  and  he  sang  first,  and  they  sang  after
him  in  the  jubilee  of  their  hearts.  Thrice  the
leader  repeated  the  burden  of  the  song,  "  Ergo
merito,"  &c.  This  dance  was  not  of  a  kind
like  those  which  are  danced  in  this  world;
but  it  was  a  heavenly  movement,  swelling  up
and  falling  back  again  into  the  wild  abyss  of
God's  hiddenness.  These  and  the  like  heavenly
consolations  were  granted  to  him  innumerable
times  during  these  years,  but  especially  at  the
times  when  he  was  encompassed  with  great
sufferings,  and  they  made  it  all  the  easier  for
him  to  bear  them.

Once  upon  a  time  it  was  shown  in  a
vision  to  a  certain  holy  person,  when  the  Ser-
vitor had  gone  to  the  altar  to  say  Mass,  how
that  he  was  gloriously  arrayed  with  a  vestment
of  resplendent  love,  and  that  divine  grace  kept
dropping  upon  his  soul  like  dew,  and  that  he
was  one  with  God.  Behind  him  there  were
seen  standing  at  the  altar  a  multitude  of  kindly-
looking  children  with  burning  candles,  one  be-


30  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

hind  the  other.  The  children  stretched  ont
their  arms,  each  one  severally,  and  embraced
him  as  lovingly  as  they  could,  and  pressed  him
to  their  hearts.  The  person  in  amazement  asked
who  they  were,  and  what  they  meant.  They
answered : — We  are  your  brethren,  and  we
praise  God  with  joy  in  eternal  bliss,  and  are
beside  you  and  take  care  of  you  at  all  times.
The  holy  person  said  to  them  in  the  vision : —
Dear  angels,  what  mean  you  by  embracing  this
man  so  lovingly !  They  answered  : — He  is  so
very  dear  to  us,  that  we  have  much  to  do  with
him;  and  know  this;  God  works  unspeakable
marvels  in  his  soul,  and  whatever  he  asks  of
God  earnestly,  God  will  never  deny  him.


Chapter  VIII.

Of  certain  visions.

He  had  at  this  time  very  many  visions  of
future  and  hidden  things,  and  God  gave  him
an  experimental  knowledge,  so  far  as  was
possible,  of  how  things  were  in  heaven,  hell,
and  purgatory.  It  happened  to  him  com-
monly, that  many  souls  appeared  to  him  upon


VISIONS.  31

their  leaving  this  world,  and  told  him  how  it
had  fared  with  them,  what  sins  were  the  cause
of  their  purgatory,  how  they  could  be  helped,
or  what  wasw  their  reward  from  God.  Among
others  there  appeared  to  him  the  blessed  Master
Eckart,  and  the  holy  brother  John  der  Fucrer
of  Strasburg.  The  Master  signified  to  him,
that  he  was  in  exceeding  glory,  into  which  his
soul  was  quite  transformed,  and  made  godlike
in  God.  Upon,  this  the  Servitor  besought  him
to  tell  him  two  things.  The  first  was,  the
manner  in  which  those  persons  dwell  in  God,
who  with  real  and  genuine  detachment  have
sought  to  rest  in  the  supreme  Truth  alone?
To  this  he  answered,  that  no  words  can  tell  the
way  in  which  these  persons  are  taken  up  into
the  modeless  abyss  of  the  divine  essence.  The
second  thing  was ;  what  exercise  is  most  calcu-
lated to  help  forward  him,  whose  earnest  desire
is  to  arrive  at  this  state  ?  The  Master  replied,
that  he  must  die  to  himself  by  deep  detach-
ment, receive  every  thing  as  from  God  and  not
from  creatures,  and  establish  himself  in  un-
ruffled patience  towards  all  men,  however  wolf-
ish they  may  be.

The  other  brother,  John,  also  showed  him
in   a  vision   the   ravishing   beauty  with  which


32  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SITSO.

his  soul  was  glorified,  and  of  him  too  he  asked
the  explanation  of  another  point.  The  ques-
tion was:  which  among  all  spiritual  exercises
is  the  most  painful,  and  at  the  same  time  the
most  profitable?  The  brother  answered,  that
there  is  nothing  more  painful,  and  yet  more
profitable  for  a  man,  than,  when  forsaken  by
God,  to  go  out  of  himself  by  patience,  and  thus
to  leave  God  for  God.

The  Servitor's  own  father,  who  had  led  a
very  worldly  life,  appeared  to  him  after  death,
and  with  a  woful  aspect  showed  him  his  agon-
ising purgatory,  and  the  chief  sins  for  which
he  had  incurred  it,  and  explained  to  him  dis-
tinctly how  he  was  to  help  him.  The  Servitor
did  this ;  and  afterwards  his  father  appeared  to
him,  and  told  him  that  he  had  been  set  free.
His  holy  mother  also,  in  whose  heart  and  body
God  worked  many  marvels  in  her  lifetime,  ap-
peared to  him  in  a  vision,  and  made  known  to
him  the  great  reward  which  she  had  received
from  God.  The  like  happened  to  him  in  the
case  of  numberless  other  souls;  and  it  was  a
source  of  pleasure  to  him,  and  during  a  long
time  it  gave  him  instruction  and  support  in  the
course  which  he  was  then  pursuing.


HIS  BEHAVIOUR  AT  TABLE.  33

Chapter  IX.

Of  the  way  in  which  he  went  to  table.

When  the  time  came  for  him  to  go  to  table,
he  used  to  kneel  down  in  loving  contemplation
before  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  and  beseech  Him
very  earnestly  to  go  with  him  to  table  and  eat
with  him,  saying: — Most  sweet  Jesus  Christ,
I  invite  Thee  with  the  longing  desire  of  my
heart,  and  I  pray  Thee,  even  as  Thou  dost
bountifully  feed  me,  to  grant  me  also  to-day
Thy  gentle  presence.  Then,  on  sitting  down
to  table,  he  would  place  opposite  to  him,  as  his
table-companion,  the  dear  guest  of  pure  souls,
and  he  would  look  at  Him  very  tenderly,  and
often  bow  himself  towards  Him  on  the  side  of
His  heart.  At  each  course  that  was  set  before
him,  he  used  to  lift  up  the  plate  towards  his
Divine  host,  that  He  might  give  His  holy  bless-
ing to  it,  and  he  would  often  say  to  Him,  with
a  loving  familiarity : — O  my  Lord,  bless  what
is  before  us,  and  eat  with  Thy  servant.  Such
were  the  words  of  tenderness  with  which  he;
would  address  Him.  Again,  before  he  drank
he  would  lift  up  the  goblet  and  ask  Him  to
drink  first  of  it.  At  table  he  used  to  drink  five
draughts,  and  he  drank  them  out  of  the  five
D


34  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

wounds  of  his  dear  Lord;  and  because  water
and  blood  flowed  from  the  Divine  side,  he  drank
the  last  draught  in  two.  He  ate  the  first  and
the  last  mouthful  in  union  with  the  love  of  the
most  loving  heart  which  earth  could  possibly
produce,  and  with  the  hottest  love  of  the  high-
est of  the  seraphim,  desiring  the  while  that  his
heart  might  have  a  full  share  in  this  love.  He
used  to  dip  the  food  which  he  disliked  into  the
wounded  heart  of  his  beloved,  in  firm  trust  that
it  could  then  no  longer  hurt  him.

He  had  a  fondness  for  fruit,  but  God  would
not  let  him  indulge  it.  He  had  once  a  vision,  in
which  it  seemed  to  him  that  some  one  offered
him  an  apple,  saying: — Take  this;  it  is  what
thou  art  so  fond  of.  He  answered : — Nay !  all
my  fondness  is  for  the  lovely  Eternal  Wisdom.
The  other  replied  to  him  that  this  was  not  true,
seeing  that  he  took  too  much  delight  in  fruit.
This  made  him  feel  ashamed  of  himself,  and
for  two  years  he  ate  no  more  fruit,  much  though
he  longed  for  it  all  the  time.  When  the  two
years  were  ended,  and  the  next  year  the  fruit
crop  had  failed,  so  that  the  convent  was  with-
out any,  the  Servitor,  having  now  after  many
combats  gained  the  mastery  over  himself,  and
wishing  to  be  no  longer  singular  at  table  about


HIS  BEHAVIOUR  AT  TABLE.  35

fruit,  besought  Almighty  God,  if  it  was  His  will
that  he  should  eat  fruit,  to  supply  the  whole  con-
vent with  it.  And  it  came  to  pass  accordingly ;
for  when  it  was  morning,  an  unknown  person
arrived  with  a  large  quantity  of  new  pennies
for  the  convent,  and  desired  that  fresh  apples
might  be  bought  up  every  where  with  them.
This  was  done,  and  thus  the  convent  had  fruit
enough  for  a  long  time,  and  the  Servitor  began
again  to  eat  fruit  with  thankfulness.

He  used  to  divide  the  large  fruit  into  four
parts ;  three  of  which  he  ate  in  the  Name  of  the
Holy  Trinity,  and  the  fourth  in  union  with  the
love  with  which  the  heavenly  Mother  gave  her
gentle  child  Jesus  a  little  apple  to  eat.  This
last  part  he  ate  without  cutting  it,  because  little
children  usually  eat  it  in  this  way,  uncut.  From
Christmas  Day,  for  many  days  following,  he  did
not  eat  the  fourth  part,  but  he  offered  it  in  con-
templation to  the  gentle  Mother,  praying  her  to
give  it  to  her  dear  little  Son,  for  whose  sake  he
would  meanwhile  go  without  it.

If  sometimes  he  began  eating  or  drinking
too  eagerly,  the  presence  of  his  venerable  com-
panion would  make  him  ashamed  of  himself,
and  he  would  give  himself  a  penance  for  it.

Once  there  came  to  him  from  another  city


36  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

a  good  person,  who  told  him  that  God  had  said
these  words  to  him  in  a  vision  : — If  thou  would-
est  learn  how  to  conduct  thyself  at  table  as  is
meet,  go  to  my  Servitor  and  bid  him  tell  thee  all
his  ways.


Chapter  X.

How  he  began  the  New  Year.
It  is  the  custom  in  certain  parts  of  Swabia,
his  native  country,  for  the  young  men  to  go  out
in  their  folly  on  New- Year's  Night,  and  beg  for
May  wreaths :  that  is  to  say,  they  sing  ditties
and  recite  pretty  verses,  and  do  all  they  can,
with  such  like  courtesies,  to  make  their  sweet-
hearts give  them  garlands.  Now,  when  he  heard
of  this,  the  thought  came  at  once  to  his  young
and  loving  heart,  that  he  too  would  go  on  that
same  night  to  his  Eternal  Love,  and  beg  a  May
wreath.  Accordingly,  before  break  of  day  he
went  to  the  image  of  the  most  pure  Mother,
which  represents  her  holding  in  her  arms,  and
pressing  to  her  heart,  her  gentle  Child,  the
beautiful  Eternal  Wisdom ;  and,  kneeling  down
before  it,  he  began  with  the  sweet  voiceless
melody  of  his  soul  to  sing  a  sequence  to  the
Mother,  praying  her  leave  to  beg  a  garland  from


new-year's  night.  37

her  Child,  and,  should  he  fail  to  obtain  this,
that  she  would  help  him  in  his  suit.  And  so
earnest  was  his  prayer,  and  so  little  could  he  re-
strain himself  from  weeping,  that  the  hot  tears
kept  rolling  down  his  cheeks.  When  his  song
was  ended,  he  turned  him  to  his  heart's  love,  the
Eternal  Wisdom,  and  bowing  down  at  His  feet,
greeted  Him  from  the  very  bottom  of  his  heart,
and  praised  and  celebrated  Him  as  one  who  far
surpasses  all  this  world's  fairest  maidens  in  come-
liness, nobility,  virtue,  gentleness,  and  freedom,
united  with  everlasting  majesty.  And  this  he
did  with  songs  and  words,  with  thoughts  and
longings,  as  best  he  could ;  and  much  he  wished
that  he  could  be,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  the  fore-
runner of  all  lovers  and  loving  hearts,  and  the
inventor  of  all  tender  thoughts,  words,  and  sen-
timents, that  the  most  worthy  One  might  be
lauded  with  due  love  by  His  unworthy  Servitor.
Then  at  length  he  broke  forth  into  words  like
these : — Ah,  my  beloved !  Thou  art  indeed  an
Easter  Day  of  joy  to  me.  Thou  art  the  bliss
of  summer  to  my  heart,  and  the  hour  of  my  de-
light. Thou  art  the  loved  One,  whom  alone  my
young  heart  loves  and  thinks  upon,  and  for
whom  it  has  scorned  all  earthly  love.  Let  this
avail  me  now,  my  heart's  beloved,  and  let  me


38  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

obtain  a  garland  from  Thee  to-day.  Ah,  gentle
heart !  do  this  for  Thy  divine  virtue's  sake,  and
for  Thy  innate  goodness,  and  let  me  not  depart
from  Thee  with  empty  hands  this  New  Year's
Day.  Ah  !  how  well  this  will  beseem  Thee,  O
sweet  sweetness !  Eemember  that  one  of  Thy
dear  servants  has  told  us  of  Thee,  that  in  Thee
there  is  not  nay  and  yea,  but  only  yea  and  yea
(2  Cor.  i.  19).  Therefore,  my  heart's  beloved,
say  to  me  to-day  a  loving  yea  in  regard  to  Thy
heavenly  gift,  and  as  foolish  lovers  obtain  a  gar-
land from  their  loves,  so  let  my  soul  receive
to-day,  as  a  New  Year's  gift,  some  special  grace,
or  some  new  light  from  Thy  fair  hand,  my  own
sweet  love,  O  Divine  Wisdom.  These  and  the
like  prayers  he  used  to  offer  up  there,  and  he
never  went  away  thence  with  his  prayer  un-
granted.


Chapter  XI.

Of  the  words  "  Sursum  corda."
He  was  once  asked  what  was  the  subject  of
his  contemplation  when  he  sang  mass  and  in-
toned the  words  "  Sursum  corda,"  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  preface  before  the  Canon.  Now
these  words  mean  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  "Lift


SUESUM  CORDA.  39

up  all  hearts  on  high  to  God ;"  and  they  came
forth  from  his  mouth  with  such  an  expression
of  ardent  desire,  that  it  may  well  have  moved  to
peculiar  devotion  those  who  heard  them.  He
answered  this  question  with  a  deep  sigh,  say-
ing : — When  I  sing  these  adorable  words  in  the
holy  mass,  it  usually  happens  that  my  heart  and
soul  are  melted  with  a  yearning  and  longing
after  God  which  carry  away  my  heart  out  of
itself  at  that  moment ;  for  three  different  inten-
tions commonly  present  themselves  to  me  then,
and  lift  me  up  on  high — sometimes  one  alone,
sometimes  two,  and  sometimes  all  three  together
— and  they  bear  me  upwards  into  God,  and  with
me  all  creatures.

The  first  intention,  that  darts  like  a  ray  of
light  into  my  mind,  is  this  : — I  place  before  my
inward  eyes  myself  with  all  that  I  am — my  body,
soul,  and  all  my  powers — and  I  gather  round
me  all  the  creatures  which  God  ever  created  in
heaven,  on  earth,  and  in  all  the  elements,  each
one  severally  with  its  name,  whether  birds  of  the
air,  beasts  of  the  forest,  fishes  of  the  water,
leaves  and  grass  of  the  earth,  or  the  innumer-
able sand  of  the  sea,  and  to  these  I  add  all  the
little  specks  of  dust  which  glance  in  the  sun-
beams, with  all  the  little  drops  of  water  which


40  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

ever  fell  or  are  falling  from  dew,  snow,  or  rain,
and  I  wish  that  each  of  these  had  a  sweetly-
sounding  stringed  instrument,  fashioned  from
my  heart's  inmost  blood,  striking  on  which  they
might  each  send  up  to  our  dear  and  gentle  God  a
new  and  lofty  strain  of  praise  for  ever  and  ever.
And  then  the  loving  arms  of  my  soul  stretch  out
and  extend  themselves  towards  the  innumerable
multitude  of  all  creatures,  and  my  intention  is,
just  as  a  free  and  blithesome  leader  of  a  choir
stirs  up  the  singers  of  his  company,  even  so  to
turn  them  all  to  good  account  by  inciting  them
to  sing  joyously,  and  to  offer  up  their  hearts  to
God.     "  Sursum  corda."

His  second  intention,  he  said,  was  this  : — I
put  before  myself  in  thought  my  own  heart  and
the  hearts  of  all  men,  and  I  consider  on  the  one
hand  what  joy  and  pleasure,  what  love  and
peace  they  enjoy  who  give  their  hearts  to  God
alone;  and,  on  the  other,  what  hurt  and  suf-
fering, what  sorrow  and  unrest  perishable  love
brings  to  those  over  whom  it  rules ;  and  then
I  cry  out  with  earnest  desire  to  my  own  heart,
and  the  hearts  of  all  men,  wheresoever  they
be,  from  one  end  of  this  world  to  the  other : —
Come  forth,  ye  captive  hearts,  from  the  strait
bonds  of  perishable  love!    Come  forth,  ye  sleep-


CANDLEMAS.  41

ing  hearts,  from  the  death  of  sin !  Come  forth,
ye  frivolous  hearts,  from  the  lukewarmness  of
your  slothful  and  careless  lives !  Lift  yourselves
up  by  turning  wholly  and  unreservedly  to  the
living  God.     "  Sursum  corda."

His  third  intention  was  a  friendly  call  to
all  well-disposed  but  undetached  men,  who  go
astray  in  their  interior  life,  and  cling  closely
neither  to  God  nor  to  creatures,  because  their
hearts  are  distracted  and  drawn  to  one  side  or
the  other  at  every  moment.  These  men,  and
myself  among  their  number,  I  then  invite  to
make  a  bold  venture  of  ourselves,  by  turning
away  entirely  from  ourselves  and  every  crea-
ture unto  God.  Such  was  the  subject  of  his
contemplation  in  the  words  "  Sursum  corda."


Chapter  XII.

How  he  kept  the  feast  of  Candlemas.

For  three  days  before  our  Lady's  feast  of
Candlemas,  he  used  to  get  ready  with  prayer  a
candle  for  the  heavenly  Mother ;  and  he  formed
the  candle  of  three  twisted  tapers  in  this  man-
ner : — The  first  taper  was  in  token  of  her  stain-

\


42  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

less  and  virginal  purity;  the  second,  of  her
unfathomable  humility;  and  the  third,  of  her
maternal  dignity ; — three  prerogatives  which  are
hers  alone  above  all  creatures.  And  he  made
ready  this  spiritual  candle  every  day  with  three
magnificats.  Now  when  the  day  of  the  blessing
of  the  candles  was  come,  he  went  early  in  the
morning,  before  any  one  had  gone  into  the
church,  to  the  high  altar,  and  waited  there  in
contemplation  the  coming  of  the  august  Mother
with  her  heavenly  treasure.  When  she  drew
nigh  the  outer  gate  of  the  city,  he  ran  to  meet
her  with  the  multitude  of  all  souls  that  love
God,  and  he  outran  them  all  with  the  longings
of  his  heart.  Then  running  in  front  of  her  in
the  street,  he  prayed  her  to  tarry  a  while  with
her  attendants  until  he  had  sung  something  in
her  honour.  Thereupon,  with  a  spiritual  voice-
less melody,  so  that  his  lips  moved,  but  no  one
heard  him,  he  began  to  sing  as  lovingly  as  he
could  the  prose,  "Inviolata,"  &c.  (O  spotless
one,  &c),  and  he  bowed  himself  down  before
her  as  he  sang,  "  O  benigna,  O  benigna !"  (O
gracious  one !  O  gracious  one !)  and  he  prayed
her  to  show  forth  her  gracious  kindliness  to-
wards a  poor  sinner.  Then  rising  up,  he  fol-
lowed her  with  his  spiritual  candle  in  the  desire


CANDLEMAS.  43

that  she  would  never  permit  the  burning  flame
of  divine  light  to  be  extinguished  in  him.  After
this,  on  coming  up  to  the  multitude  of  all-loving
souls,  he  began  to  sing  "  Adorna  thalamum,"  &c.
(Make  ready  the  bridal  bed,  &c),  and  he  called
upon  them  to  receive  the  Saviour  with  love,  and
f ervently  to  embrace  His  Mother ;  and  thus  he
led  them  with  songs  of  praise  as  far  as  the
temple.  Then  drawing  near  to  the  Mother  be-
fore she  entered  in  and  gave  the  Saviour  to
Simeon,  he  knelt  down  in  front  of  her,  and  with
uplifted  hands  and  eyes  prayed  her  to  show  him
the  Child,  and  to  suffer  him  also  to  kiss  It.
When  she  kindly  offered  It  to  him,  he  spread
out  his  arms  to  the  boundless  quarters  of  the
wide  world,  and  received  and  embraced  the  Be-
loved One  a  thousand  times  in  one  hour.  He
contemplated  Its  beautiful  little  eyes ;  he  looked
upon  Its  little  hands ;  he  kissed  Its  tender  little
mouth ;  and  he  gazed  again  and  again  at  all  the
infant  members  of  the  heavenly  treasure.  Then
lifting  up  his  eyes,  he  uttered  a  cry  of  amaze-
ment in  his  heart  that  He  who  bears  up  the
heavens  is  so  great  and  yet  so  small,  so  beauti-
ful in  heaven  and  so  childlike  upon  earth ;  and
as  the  Divine  Infant  moved  him  so  did  he  act
towards  It, — now  singing,  now  weeping,  with


44  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

other  spiritual  exercises,  until  at  last  he  gave  It
back  to  Its  Mother,  and,  going  in  with  her  into
the  temple,  remained  there  till  all  was  fully
accomplished.


Chapter  XIII.

How  he  spent  the  Carnival  time.

When  the  Carnival  was  close  at  hand,  on
the  evening  that  the  Alleluias  are  left  off,*  and
the  foolish  people  of  this  world  begin  to  abandon
themselves  to  merriment,  he  set  about  keeping
in  his  heart  a  heavenly  carnival,  in  this  wise : —
In  the  first  place  he  considered  how  short-lived
and  hurtful  the  pleasure  of  this  earthly  carnival
is,  and  how  some  persons  with  a  momentary  joy
purchase  for  themselves  long  suffering;  and  then
he  said  a  "Miserere"  to  the  adorable  God  for
all  the  sins  and  the  dishonour  which  would  be
offered  to  Him  at  this  time  of  dissipation.  This
carnival  he  called  the  peasants'  carnival,  as  be-
fitting those  who  knew  nothing  better.  His
other  carnival  consisted  in  a  contemplation  of

*  The  eve  of  Septuagesima  Sunday,  when  the  Alleluias
are  left  off  in  the  divine  office.  They  are  not  resumed  until
Easter.


THE  CARNIVAL  TIME.  45

that  which  is  the  prelude  of  eternity;  namely,
how  God  makes  merry  with  His  chosen  friends,
while  still  clothed  in  this  mortal  body,  through
the  heavenly  consolations  which  He  gives  them ;
and  he  recounted  with  praises  and  thanksgiving
those  which  he  had  himself  received,  and  he  was
full  of  joy  in  the  Almighty  God.

At  this  same  season  of  his  beginnings,  God
once  gave  him  a  spiritual  carnival,  and  it  was  in
this  wise.  It  was  the  carnival  time,  and  he  had
gone  before  compline  into  a  warm  little  room  to
warm  himself,  for  he  was  miserably  cold  and
hungry,  and  yet  this  did  not  cause  him  so  much
pain  as  the  thirst  from  which  he  suffered.  Now
when  he  saw  them  eating  meat  there  and  drink-
ing good  wine,  while  he  was  hungry  and  thirsty,
he  was  so  affected  by  it  interiorly  that  he  soon
went  out  again  and  began  to  lament  himself,
and  to  sigh  from  the  very  bottom  of  his  heart.
That  same  night  it  seemed  to  him  in  a  vision
that  he  was  in  an  infirmary,  and  that  outside
the  room  he  heard  some  one  singing  a  heavenly
song,  and  the  tones  rang  so  sweetly  that  no
earthly  harp  ever  sent  forth  the  like ;  and  it  was
as  if  a  little  schoolboy  of  twelve  years  old  was
singing  there  alone.  The  Servitor  forgot  all
about  the  body's  food  as  he  listened  to  the  sweet


46  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENKY  SUSO.

melody,  and  he  exclaimed  with  longing  heart :
— Ah  me !  what  is  it  that  is  singing  there  ?
Never  on  earth  heard  I  tones  so  sweet.  A
noble-looking  youth,  who  stood  by,  answered
him  and  said : — Thou  shouldst  know  that  this
Boy  who  sings  so  well  is  singing  for  thee,  and
that  thou  art  the  object  of  His  song.  The  Ser-
vitor replied : — Alas !  God  help  me !  Ah,  hea-
venly youth,  bid  Him  sing  more.  The  Boy  sang
again,  so  that  it  resounded  high  in  the  air,  and
lie  sang  about  three  heavenly  canticles  from  the
beginning  to  the  end.  When  the  song  was
«nded  it  seemed  as  though  the  same  Boy  who
sang  so  sweetly  came  through  the  air  to  the
little  window  of  the  room,  and  presented  the
youth  with  a  pretty  basket  filled  with  red  fruit,
like  ripe  red  strawberries,  and  they  were  large
in  size.  The  youth  took  the  basket  from  the
Boy,  and  offered  it  joyfully  to  the  brother,  say-
ing:— Look,  comrade  and  brother!  this  red
fruit  is  sent  thee  by  thy  friend  and  heavenly
Lord,  the  delightful  Boy,  the  Son  of  the  hea-
venly Father,  who  has  been  singing  to  thee.
Ah,  how  very  dear  thou  art  to  Him !  At  this
the  brother's  face  became  all  on  fire  and  red
with  joy,  and  he  received  the  basket  longingly,
saying : — Ah,  it  is  well  with  me.    This  is  indeed


THE  CARNIVAL  TIME.  47

a  lovely  gift  for  me  from  the  delightful  heavenly
Boy.  My  heart  and  soul  shall  ever  rejoice  in
this.  Then  he  said  to  the  youth  and  the  other
heavenly  beings  who  were  there: — Ah,  dear
friends,  is  it  not  meet  that  I  should  be  enamoured
of  this  heavenly  Boy,  who  is  so  full  of  graces  ?
Yes,  verily,  it  is  meet  that  I  should  be  enamoured
of  Him,  and  whatever  I  shall  know  to  be  His
dearest  will  that  I  will  always  do.  Then  turning
to  the  aforenamed  youth,  he  said: — Tell  me,
dear  youth,  am  I  not  right !  The  youth  smiled
sweetly,  and  said : — Yes,  thou  art  right.  It  is
meet  for  thee  to  be  enamoured  of  Him ;  for  He
has  regarded  and  honoured  thee  more  than
many  other  men.  Therefore  love  Him  very
dearly;  and  I  tell  thee  thou  must  also  suffer
more  than  many  other  men.  Wherefore  make
thyself  ready  for  it.  The  Servitor  answered : —
Ah,  this  I  will  do  right  gladly ;  but,  I  pray  thee,
help  me  to  see  Him  and  to  thank  Him  for  His
beautiful  gift.  The  youth  replied: — Go  then
to  the  little  window  and  look  out.  The  Servitor
opened  the  window,  and  there  he  saw  standing
before  the  window  the  tenderest  and  loveliest
little  boy  that  eye  has  ever  seen ;  and  when  he
tried  to  force  himself  through  the  window  to
get  at  Him,  the  boy  turned  lovingly  towards


48  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

him,  and  inclining  Himself  sweetly  to  him,  with
a  friendly  blessing,  vanished  from  his  sight.
Thus  the  vision  departed,  and  when  the  Servi-
tor came  to  himself  again,  he  thanked  God  for
the  good  carnival  which  He  had  bestowed  upon
him.


Chapter  XIV.

How  he  began  the  month  of  May.

It  was  his  custom  on  May-day  Eve  to  set
up  a  spiritual  May-bough,  and  to  do  it  honour
every  day  for  a  long  space  of  time.  Among  all
the  beautiful  branches  that  ever  grew  he  could
find  none  more  like  to  a  lovely  May-bough  than
the  delightful  bough  of  the  Holy  Cross,  which
is  more  blooming  with  graces,  virtues,  and  orna-
ments of  every  kind  than  any  May-bough  that
ever  was.  Under  this  May-bough  he  made  six
prostrations  (venias),  and  at  each  prostration
he  desired  in  his  contemplation  to  adorn  the
spiritual  May-bough  with  some  one  of  the  love-
liest things  which  the  summer  might  bring
forth;  and  he  sang  before  it  interiorly  the
hymn,  u  Salve  crux  sancta,"  &c,  in  this  wise ;
Hail,  heavenly  May-bough  of  the  Eternal  Wis-


MAY-DAT.  49

dom,  on  which  has  grown  the  fruit  of  everlasting
bliss !  First,  I  offer  thee  to-day  as  an  eternal
adornment,  in  place  of  all  red  roses,  a  heartfelt
love;  secondly,  for  every  little  violet,  a  lowly
inclination ;  thirdly,  for  all  tender  lilies,  a  pure
embrace ;  fourthly,  instead  of  all  the  beautifully-
coloured  and  brilliant  flowers,  which  heath  or
down,  forest  or  plain,  tree  or  meadow  has
brought  forth  this  lovely  May,  or  which  have
ever  been  or  will  be  brought  forth,  my  heart
offers  thee  a  spiritual  kiss ;  fifthly,  for  the  songs
of  all  the  blithesome  little  birds  which  ever  sang
merrily  on  any  a  May-day  flight,  my  soul  offers
thee  praises  without  end;  sixthly,  for  every
ornament  with  which  a  May-bough  has  ever
been  adorned  my  heart  magnifies  thee  to-day
with  a  spiritual  song ;  and  I  pray  thee,  blessed
May-bough,  to  help  me  so  to  praise  thee  in  this
short  time  of  life  that  I  may  feed  upon  thy
living  fruit  throughout  eternity.  Thus  it  was
that  he  began  the  month  of  May.


50  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.


Chapter  XV.

Of  the  sorrowful  way  of  the  Cross,  which  he  made  with
Christ  when  He  was  being  led  forth  to  death.

At  first  for  a  long  time  the  Servitor  was,
as  it  were,  spoiled  by  God  with  heavenly  con-
solations; and  he  was  so  eager  after  them,
that  all  subjects  of  contemplation  which  had
reference  to  the  Divine  nature  were  a  delight
to  him;  whereas,  when  he  should  have  medi-
tated upon  our  Lord's  sufferings,  and  sought
to  imitate  Him  in  them,  this  seemed  to  him  a
thing  hard  and  bitter.  He  was  once  severely
rebuked  by  God  for  this,  and  it  was  said  to
him: — Knowest  thou  not  that  I  am  the  door
through  which  all  true  friends  of  God  must
press  in,  if  they  would  attain  to  true  bliss?
Thou  must  break  thy  way  through  My  suffer-
ing Humanity,  if  thou  wouldst  verily  and  indeed
arrive  at  My  naked  Divinity.  The  Servitor
was  struck  with  consternation  at  this,  and  it
was  a  hard  saying  to  him ;  nevertheless  he  com-
menced meditating  upon  it,  much  though  it
went  against  him,  and  he  began  to  learn  what
till  then  he  knew  not,  and  he  gave  himself  up
to  practise  it  with  detachment.

He  now  began  every  night  after  matins  at


THE  WAY  OF  THE  CROSS.  51

his  usual  place,  which  was  the  chapter-room,  to
force  himself  into  a  Christlike  feeling  of  sym-
pathy with  all  that  Christ,  his  Lord  and  God,
had  suffered  for  him.  He  stood  up  and  moved
from  corner  to  corner,  in  order  that  all  sluggish-
ness might  leave  him,  and  that  he  might  have
throughout  a  lively  and  keen  sensitiveness  to
our  Lord's  sufferings.  He  commenced  this  ex-
ercise with  the  Last  Supper,  and  he  accompa-
nied Christ  from  place  to  place,  until  he  brought
Him  before  Pilate.  Then  he  received  Him
after  He  had  been  sentenced  at  the  tribunal,
and  he  followed  Him  along  the  sorrowful  way
of  the  cross  from  the  court-house  to  beneath
the  gallows.  The  following  was  the  manner  in
which  he  made  the  way  of  the  cross  : — On  com-
ing to  the  threshold  of  the  chapter-house,  he
kneeled  down  and  kissed  the  print  of  the  first
step  which  the  Lord  took,  when,  on  being  sen-
tenced, He  turned  Him  round  to  go  forth  to
death.  Then  he  began  the  psalm  which  de-
scribes our  Lord's  passion,  "  Deus,  Deus  meus,
respice,"  &c.  (Ps.  xxi.),  and  he  went  out  by  the
door  into  the  cloister,  repeating  it.  Now  there
were  four  streets  through  which  he  accompanied
Him.  He  went  with  Him  to  death  along  the
first  street,  with  the  earnest  desire  and  will  to


52  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

go  forth  from  his   friends   and  all  perishable
goods,  and  to  suffer,  for  Christ's  glory,  misery
without  consolation,  and  voluntary  poverty.    In
the  second  street  he  proposed  to  himself  to  cast
aside  all  perishable  honour  and  dignity,  and  vo-
luntarily to  despise  this  present  world,  consider-
ing how  the  Lord  had  become  "a  worm  and  the
outcast  of  the  people."    At  the  beginning  of  the
third  street  he  kneeled  down  again,  and,  kissing
the   ground,  willingly   renounced   all   needless
comfort,  and  all  tender  treatment  of  his  body,
in  honour  of  the  pains  of  Christ's  tender  body :
and  he  set  before  his  eyes,  what  is  written  in
the  psalm,  how  that  all   Christ's  strength  was
dried  up,  and  His  natural  vigour  brought  nigh
to  death,  as  they  drove  Him  onwards  thus  piti-
ably;   and  he  thought   how   fitting  it  is  that
every  eye  should  weep  and  every  heart  sigh  on
account  of  it.     When  he  came  to  the  fourth
street,  he  kneeled  down  in  the  middle  of  the
road,  as  if  he  were  kneeling  in  front  of  the
gate  through  which  the  Lord  must  pass  out;
and  then  falling  on  his  face  before  Him,  he
kissed  the  ground,  and  crying  out  to  Him,  prayed
Him  not  to  go  to  death  without  His  servant,
but  to  suffer  him  to  go  along  with  Him.     Then
he  pictured  to  himself  as  vividly  as  he  could


THE  WAY  OF  THE  CROSS.  53

that  the  Lord  was  obliged  to  pass  quite  close  to
him,  and  when  he  had  said  the  prayer,  "Ave,
rex  noster,  fili  David !"  (Hail,  our  King,  son  of
David !),  he  let  Him  move  onwards.  After  this
he  knelt  down  again,  still  turned  towards  the
gate,  and  greeted  the  cross  with  the  verse,  "  O
crux  ave,  spes  unica !"  (Hail,  O  cross,  our  only
hope!),  and  then  let  it  go  past.  This  done,
he  kneeled  down  once  more  before  the  tender
Mother  Mary,  heaven's  queen,  as  she  was  led
past  him  in  unfathomable  anguish  of  heart,  and
he  observed  how  mournfully  she  bore  herself,
and  noted  her  burning  tears,  sad  sighings,  and
sorrowful  demeanour ;  and  he  addressed  her
in  the  words  of  the  "  Salve  Regina"  (Hail,  O
Queen !),  and  kissed  her  footsteps.  Then  he
stood  up  and  hastened  after  his  Lord,  until  he
came  up  with  Him.  And  the  picture  was  some-
times so  vividly  present  to  his  mind,  that  it
seemed  to  him  as  if  he  were  in  body  walking  at
Christ's  side,  and  the  thought  would  come  to  him,
how  that  when  King  David  was  driven  from  his
kingdom  his  bravest  captains  walked  around  him
and  beside  him,  and  gave  him  loving  succour  (2
Kings  xv.).  At  this  point  he  gave  up  his  will
to  God's  will,  desiring  that  God  would  do  with
him  according  to  His  good  pleasure.     Last  of


54  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

all,  he  called  to  mind  the  epistle,  which  is  read
in  Holy  Week,  from  the  prophecy  of  Isaias,
beginning,  "Quis  credidit  auditui  nostro"  (Is.
liii.),  and  which  so  exactly  describes  how  the
Lord  was  led  forth  to  death,  and  meditating
upon  it,  he  went  in  by  the  door  of  the  choir,
and  so  up  the  steps  into  the  pulpit,  until  he
came  beneath  the  cross,  and  then  he  besought
the  Lord  that  neither  life  nor  death,  weal  nor
woe,  might  separate  his  servant  from  Him.

There  was  another  mournful  way  of  the
cross  that  he  used  to  make,  and  it  was  in  this
wise: — While  the  "Salve  Regina"  was  being
sung  at  compline,  he  contemplated  in  his  heart
the  pure  Mother  as  at  that  moment  still  stand-
ing beside  her  dear  Child's  grave,  with  all  a
mother's  grief  for  her  buried  child,  and  that  it
was  time  for  her  to  be  led  home  again,  and  that
he  was  to  lead  her  home.  Accordingly,  he  made
three  prostrations  (yenias)  in  his  heart,  and  with
them  he  led  her  home  again  in  his  contempla-
tion. The  first  was  at  the  sepulchre.  As  soon
as  the  u  Salve  Regina"  began,  he  bowed  down
his  soul  before  her,  and  supporting  her  in  spiri-
tual fashion  with  his  arms,  bewailed  her  tender
heart,  which  was  at  that  time  so  full  of  bitter-
ness, outrage,  and  deadly  sorrow,  and  he  sought


THE  WAY  OF  THE  CROSS.  55

to  comfort  her  by  reminding  her  that  on  account
of  all  this  she  was  now  a  queen  in  dignity,  our
hope  and  our  sweetness,  as  it  stands  in  the  hymn.
Then,  when  he  had  brought  her  under  the  gate-
way into  Jerusalem,  he  went  on  before  her  into
the  street,  and  looking  back  upon  her,  as  she
came  along  in  wretchedness,  all  blood-stained
with  the  hot  blood  which  had  dropped  upon  her,
as  it  streamed  forth  from  the  bursting  wounds
of  her  pierced  Son,  he  marked  how  forsaken  she
was  and  bereaved  of  all  her  consolation.  Then
he  received  her  again  with  a  second  interior
prostration,  at  the  words,  "Eia  ergo  advocata
nostra!"  (Hail  then,  our  advocate!),  meaning
by  them  that  she  should  be  of  good  cheer,  since
she  is  the  worthy  advocate  of  us  all ;  and  he
besought  her  with  that  love  which  shone  forth
amid  her  anguish  to  turn  to  him  her  merciful
eyes,  and  to  grant  him,  when  this  miserable  life
is  over,  lovingly  to  behold  her  august  Son,  ac-
cording to  the  wish  expressed  in  the  prayer.
He  made  the  third  interior  prostration  before
the  door  of  her  mother  St.  Anne's  house,  whi-
ther he  had  led  her  in  her  sorrows,  and,  as  he
did  this,  he  commended  himself  to  her  gentle-
ness and  loving  sweetness,  in  the  devout  words,
"O  clemens,  O  pia,  O  dulcis  Virgo  Maria!"


56  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

(O  gentle,  O  pious,  O  sweet  Virgin  Mary!),
and  he  prayed  her  to  receive  his  wretched  soul
at  its  last  passage,  and  to  be  its  guide  and  de-
fender from  its  evil  enemies,  through  the  gates
of  heaven  to  everlasting  bliss.


Chapter  XVI.

Of  the  useful  virtue  called  silence.
The  Servitor  had  an  interior  drawing  to
strive  after  true  peace  of  heart,  and  it  seemed
to  him  that  silence  would  be  of  service  towards
attaining  it.  He  therefore  kept  so  strict  a  guard
over  his  mouth,  that  for  thirty  years  he  never
broke  silence  at  table,  except  once,  when  he  was
returning  from  a  chapter  with  many  other  bro-
thers, and  they  ate  on  board  ship.  On  that  oc-
casion he  broke  it.  In  order  to  have  greater
mastery  over  his  tongue,  and  to  stop  himself
from  giving  way  too  readily  to  talk,  he  made
choice  in  his  mind  of  three  masters,  without
whose  special  leave  he  resolved  never  to  speak,
and  these  were  the  holy  patriarchs  St.  Dominic,
St.  Arsenius,  and  St.  Bernard.  Whenever  he
wished  to  speak  he  went  in  thought  from  one
to  the  other,  and  asked  leave,  saying,  "Jube,


BODILY  MORTIFICATIONS.  57

domne,  benedicere"  (Bid  me,  O  master,  speak) ;
and  if  it  was  the  right  time  and  place  to  speak,
he  received  permission  from  the  first  master;
and  if  there  was  no  external  reason  to  prevent
him  speaking,  he  had  leave  from  the  second ;
and  if  it  was  not  likely  to  do  him  an  injury  in-
teriorly, he  considered  that  he  had  leave  from
all  three;  and  after  that  he  spoke;  but  if  it
was  not  so,  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  ought  to
keep  silence.  Whenever  he  was  called  to  the
door  of  the  convent  he  applied  himself  to  these
four  things:  first,  to  receive  every  one  with
kindliness;  secondly,  to  despatch  the  matter
with  brevity ;  thirdly,  to  send  the  person  away
consoled ;  fourthly,  to  go  back  again  free  from
attachment.


Chapter  XVH.

Of  the  chastisement  of  his  body.
He  was  in  his  youth  of  a  temperament  full
of  fire  and  life ;  and  when  this  began  to  make
itself  felt,  and  he  perceived  what  a  heavy  burden
he  had  in  himself,  it  was  very  bitter  and  grievous
to  him ;  and  he  sought,  by  many  devices  and
great  penances,  how  he  might  bring  his  body


58  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

into  subjection  to  his  spirit.  He  wore  for  a
long  time  a  hair  shirt  and  an  iron  chain,  until
the  blood  ran  from  him ;  so  that  he  was  obliged
to  leave  them  off.  He  secretly  caused  an  under-
garment to  be  made  for  him  ;  and  in  the  under-
garment he  had  strips  of  leather  fixed,  into  which
a  hundred  and  fifty  brass  nails,  pointed  and
filed  sharp,  were  driven,  and  the  points  of  the
nails  were  always  turned  towards  the  flesh.  He
had  this  garment  made  very  tight,  and  so  ar-
ranged as  to  go  round  him  and  fasten  in  front,
in  order  that  it  might  fit  the  closer  to  his  body,
and  the  pointed  nails  might  be  driven  into  his
flesh ;  and  it  was  high  enough  to  reach  upwards
to  his  navel.  In  this  he  used  to  sleep  at  night.
Now  in  summer,  when  it  was  hot,  and  he  was
very  tired  and  ill  from  his  journeyings,  or  when
he  held  the  office  of  lecturer,  he  would  some-
times, as  he  lay  thus  in  bonds,  and  oppressed
with  toil,  and  tormented  also  by  noxious  insects,
cry  aloud,  and  give  way  to  fretfulness,  and  twist
round  and  round  in  agony,  as  a  worm  does
when  run  through  with  a  pointed  needle.  It
often  seemed  to  him  as  if  he  were  lying  upon
an  ant-hill  from  the  torture  caused  by  the  in-
sects ;  for  if  he  wished  to  sleep,  or  when  he  had
fallen  asleep,  they  vied  with  each  other  in  biting


BODILY  MORTIFICATIONS.  59

and  sucking  him.  Sometimes  he  would  cry  to
Almighty  God  out  of  the  fulness  of  his  heart : —
Alas !  gentle  God,  what  a  dying  is  this !  When
a  man  is  killed  by  murderers  or  strong  beasts
of  prey,  it  is  soon  over ;  but  I  lie  dying  here
under  the  cruel  insects,  and  yet  cannot  die.  The
nights  in  winter  were  never  so  long,  nor  was
the  summer  so  hot,  as  to  make  him  leave  off  this
exercise.  On  the  contrary,  in  order  that  he
might  get  still  less  rest  amid  these  torments,  he
devised  something  further.  He  bound  a  part
of  his  girdle  round  his  throat,  and  made  out  of
it  with  skill  two  leather  loops,  into  which  he  put
his  hands,  and  then  locked  his  arms  into  them
with  two  padlocks,  and  placed  the  keys  on  a
plank  beside  his  bed,  where  they  remained  until
he  rose  for  matins  and  unlocked  himself.  His
arms  were  thus  stretched  upwards,  and  fastened
one  on  each  side  his  throat,  and  he  made  the
fastenings  so  secure,  that  even  if  his  cell  had
been  on  fire  about  him  he  could  not  have  helped
himself.  This  practice  he  continued  until  his
hands  and  arms  had  become  almost  tremulous
with  the  strain,  and  then  he  devised  something
else.

He  had  two  leather  gloves  made  for  him,
such  as  labourers  usually  wear  when  they  gather


60  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

briers,  and  he  caused  a  brazier  to  fit  them  all
over  with  sharp-pointed  brass  tacks,  and  he  used
to  put  them  on  at  night.  This  he  did  in  order
that,  if  he  should  try  while  asleep  to  throw  off
the  hair  under-garment,  or  endeavour  in  any
other  way  to  relieve  himself  from  the  gnawings
of  the  vile  and  hateful  insects,  the  tacks  might
then  stick  into  his  body.  And  so  it  came  to
pass.  If  ever  he  sought  to  help  himself  with
his  hands  in  sleep,  he  drove  the  sharp  tacks  into
his  breast,  and  tore  himself,  making  horrible
rents,  as  if  a  bear  had  torn  him  with  its  sharp
claws,  so  that  his  flesh  festered  at  the  arms  and
about  the  heart.  When  after  many  weeks  the
wounds  had  healed,  he  tore  himself  again  and
made  fresh  wounds.  He  continued  this  tor-
menting exercise  for  about  sixteen  years.  At
the  end  of  this  time,  when  his  blood  was  now
chilled,  and  the  fire  of  his  temperament  de-
stroyed, there  appeared  to  him  in  a  vision  on
Whit -Sunday  a  messenger  from  heaven,  who
told  him  that  God  required  this  of  him  no  longer.
Whereupon  he  discontinued  it,  and  threw  all
these  things  away  into  a  running  stream.


THE  SHARP  CEOSS  UPON  HIS  BACK.  61


Chapter  XVIIL

Of  the  sharp  cross  which  he  bore  upon  his  back.

Above  all  his  other  exercises,  he  had  a  long-
ing desire  to  bear  upon  his  body  something
which  might  betoken  a  sensible  sympathy  with
the  painful  sufferings  of  his  crucified  Lord.  To
this  end  he  made  for  himself  a  wooden  cross,  in
length  about  a  man's  span,  and  of  corresponding
breadth,  and  he  drove  into  it  thirty  iron  nails,
intending  to  represent  by  them  all  his  Lord's
wounds  and  love-tokens.  He  placed  this  cross
upon  his  bare  back  between  his  shoulders  on
the  flesh,  and  he  bore  it  continually  day  and
night  in  honour  of  his  crucified  Lord.  After-
wards, in  the  last  year,  he  drove  into  it  besides
seven  needles,  so  that  their  points  passed  a  long
way  through  the  cross,  and  remained  sticking
in  it,  while  the  other  ends  were  broken  off  close
to  the  wood.  He  bore  the  wounds  made  by
these  pointed  needles  in  honour  of  the  piercing
anguish  of  God's  pure  Mother,  by  which  her
heart  and  soul  were  wounded  through  and
through  so  utterly  at  the  hour  of  her  Son's
agonising  death.  The  first  time  that  he  stretched
out  this  cross  upon  his  back  his  tender  frame


62  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HEKEtY  SUSO.

was  struck  with  terror  at  it,  and  he  blunted  the
sharp  nails  very  slightly  upon  a  stone.  But  very-
soon  repenting  of  this  unmanly  cowardice,  he
pointed  and  sharpened  them  all  again  with  a
file,  and  placed  the  cross  once  more  upon  him.
It  furrowed  his  back,  where  the  bones  are,  and
made  it  bloody  and  seared.  Whenever  he  sat
down  or  stood  up,  it  was  as  if  a  hedgehog-skin
lay  upon  him.  If  any  one  touched  him  un-
awares, or  pushed  against  his  clothes,  it  tore
him.  To  make  this  painful  cross  more  bear-
able, he  chiselled  on  the  back  of  it  the  saving
Name  of  Jesus.  For  a  long  time  he  took  two
disciplines  every  day  with  this  cross,  in  the  fol-
lowing manner.  He  struck  behind  him  with
his  fist  upon  the  cross,  and  thus  drove  the  nails
into  his  flesh,  and  made  them  stick  in  it,  so  that
he  had  to  take  off  his  clothes  to  get  them  out
again.  He  used  to  strike  these  blows  upon  the
cross  so  secretly  that  no  one  could  have  observed
it.  He  took  the  first  discipline  on  arriving  in
his  contemplation  at  the  pillar  where  our  beau-
tiful Lord  was  so  barbarously  scourged,  and  he
prayed  our  Lord  to  heal  His  servant's  wounds
with  His  own.  He  took  the  second  discipline
when  he  had  come  in  contemplation  beneath
the  cross,  and  the  Lord  had  been  nailed  to  it,


THE  SHARP  CROSS  UPON  HIS  BACK.  63

and  then  he  nailed  himself  to  his  Lord,  never
more  to  part  from  Him.  He  did  not  take  the
third  discipline  every  day,  but  only  when  he
had  been  too  indulgent  with  himself,  or  had
given  way  to  inordinate  pleasure  in  eating  and
drinking,  or  such  like.

Once  upon  a  time  he  had  been  so  much  off
his  guard  as  to  take  into  his  hands  the  hands  of
two  maidens,  who  were  sitting  beside  him  in  a
public  assembly,  though  without  any  bad  inten-
tion. He  soon  repented  of  this  unguardedness,
and  he  considered  that  this  inordinate  pleasure
must  be  atoned  for  by  penance.  As  soon  as  he
left  the  maidens,  and  had  come  into  his  chapel
to  his  place  of  privacy,  he  struck  himself  upon
the  cross  for  this  misdeed,  so  that  the  pointed
nails  stuck  into  his  back.  He  moreover  laid
himself  under  an  interdict  for  this  fault,  and
would  not  allow  himself  to  go  after  matins  into
the  chapter-room,  his  usual  place  of  prayer,  to
meet  the  heavenly  spirits,  who  were  wont  to
appear  to  him  there  during  his  contemplation.
At  length,  desiring  to  atone  completely  for  the
misdeed,  he  summoned  courage,  and  fell  at  the
Judge's  feet,  and  took  a  discipline  in  His  pre-
sence with  the  cross ;  and  then  going  round  and
round  on  every  side  before  the  saints,  he  took


64  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

thirty  disciplines,  till  the  blood  ran  down  his
back.  In  this  way  he  atoned  very  bitterly  for
the  inordinate  pleasure  which  he  had  allowed
himself.

After  matins  had  been  sung,  he  went  into
the  chapter-room,  to  his  place  of  privacy,  and
kissed  the  ground  a  hundred  times  prostrate
with  outstretched  arms,  and  a  hundred  times
kneeling;  each  time  with  a  special  object  of
contemplation.  This  caused  him  very  great
pain  on  account  of  the  cross.  For  as  it  was
fastened  tightly  upon  him,  and  driven  closer  to
his  body  than  a  hoop  is  to  a  cask — such  being
his  custom  at  this  period — each  time  that  he
flung  himself  on  the  ground  in  making  the
hundred  prostrations  the  nails  stuck  into  him
through  the  fall.  When  he  got  up  again  he
writhed  them  out  of  him.  But  at  the  next  fall
they  stuck  into  fresh  holes,  and  this  was  a  sore
pain  to  him.  If,  however,  they  stuck  into  the
same  holes  it  was  endurable.

There  was  another  penitential  exercise  which
he  had  previously  practised.  It  was  this :  He
made  for  himself  a  scourge  out  of  a  leather
thong,  and  had  it  fitted  with  pointed  brass  tacks
as  sharp  as  a  style,  in  such  a  way  that  the  ends
of  each  tack  stood  out  on  either  side  of  the  thong,


HIS  SCOURGE.  65

and  each  of  the  ends  had  a  triple  point,  which
caused  wounds  in  whatever  part  of  the  body
they  struck.  Such  was  the  kind  of  scourge
which  he  made  for  himself ;  and  he  used  to  get
up  before  matins,  and  go  into  the  choir  in  front
of  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  and  there  discipline
himself  with  it  severely.  He  practised  this
penance  for  a  long  time,  until  at  last  the  bro-
thers became  aware  of  it,  upon  which  he  dis-
continued it.

Once,  on  St.  Clement's  day,  at  the  beginning
of  winter,  he  made  a  general  confession,  and
that  same  evening,  when  it  became  dusk,  he
shut  himself  up  in  his  cell,  and  stripping  him-
self naked  to  his  horsehair  under-garment,  he
took  out  the  scourge  with  the  pointed  tacks,  and
struck  himself  with  it  over  the  body  and  about
the  arms,  till  the  blood  ran  down  just  as  when
one  is  cupped.  The  chief  cause  of  this  was  a
bent  tack  on  the  scourge,  in  shape  like  a  little
hook,  which  tore  away  all  the  flesh  on  which  it
caught.  He  struck  himself  so  hard,  that  the
scourge  broke  into  three  pieces,  and  while  one
little  piece  remained  in  his  hand,  the  rest  with
the  points  flew  against  the  walls.  As  he  stood
there  all  covered  with  blood,  and  looked  at  him-
self, the  spectacle  which  he  presented  was  a


66  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

most  miserable  one,  and  lie  resembled  in  some
degree  Christ,  our  Lord,  when  He  was  bar-
barously scourged.  Thereupon,  being  moved
to  pity  for  himself,  he  began  to  weep  from  liis
very  heart,  and  kneeling  down  all  naked  and
bleeding  in  the  frosty  cold,  he  besought  God  so
to  blot  out  all  his  sins  that  His  merciful  eyes
might  no  more  behold  them.

Another  time,  on  Quinquagesima  Sunday,  he
went,  as  he  had  done  before,  into  his  cell,  when
the  brothers  were  at  table;  and  after  having
stripped  himself  naked,  he  gave  himself  very
cruel  blows,  so  that  the  blood  streamed  down
his  body.  But  just  as  he  was  about  to  strike
himself  still  harder,  there  came  thither  a  bro-
ther, who  had  heard  the  noise,  so  that  he  was
obliged  to  leave  off.  Then  he  took  vinegar  and
salt,  and  rubbed  them  into  his  wounds,  that  "the
pain  might  be  rendered  greater.

On  St.  Benedict's  feast,  the  day  on  which
he  was  born  into  this  miserable  world,  he  went  at
breakfast-time  into  his  chapel,  and  making  fast
the  door,  stripped  himself  as  before,  and  taking
out  the  scourge,  began  to  strike  himself  with  it.
A  blow  fell  on  his  left  arm,  and  hit  the  vein
called  mediana,  or  another  vein  near  it.  And
as  the  stroke  was  a  very  severe  one,  the  blood


HIS  SCOURGE.  67

burst  forth,  and  ran  down  in  a  stream  upon  his
foot  between  the  toes,  and  lay  in  a  pool  upon
the  pavement.  His  arm  immediately  swelled
up  to  a  great  size,  and  turned  blue ;  and  this  so
frightened  him,  that  he  did  not  dare  to  go  on
striking.  Now  at  this  very  time,  and  at  the
selfsame  hour  in  which  he  thus  struck  himself,
there  was  at  another  place  in  a  certain  castle  a
holy  maiden,  named  Anna,  praying,  who  seemed
to  herself  to  be  carried  in  a  vision  to  the  spot
where  he  was  taking  the  discipline.  And  when
she  saw  the  hard  blows  which  he  was  giving
himself,  it  so  moved  her  to  compassion  that,
going  up  to  him  just  as  he  had  raised  his  arm,
and  was  on  the  point  of  striking,  she  intercepted
the  blow,  and  received  it  on  her  own  arm,  as  it
seemed  to  her  in  the  vision.  When  she  came
to  herself  again,  she  found  the  mark  of  the  blow
on  her  arm  in  black  wales,  as  if  she  had  been
hit  by  a  scourge.  These  marks  remained  visible
upon  her  for  a  long  time,  and  they  were  accom-
panied with  great  pain.


68  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

Chapter  XIX.

Of  his  bed.

At  this  same  period  the  Servitor  procured
an  old  castaway  door,  which  he  placed  upon  his
bedstead  in  his  cell,  and  he  used  to  lie  upon  it
at  night  without  any  bed-clothes  to  make  him
comfortable.  He  also  made  for  himself  a  very
thin  mat  of  rushes,  which  he  laid  upon  the  door,
and  which  reached  only  to  his  knees.  He  put
under  his  head  for  a  bolster  a  small  sack  filled
with  pea-stalks,  and  upon  it  a  very  small  pillow.
He  had  no  bed-covering  over  him,  and  he  lay  at
night  just  as  he  was  clothed  during  the  day;  ex-
cept only  that  he  took  off  his  shoes,  and  wrapped
a  thick  cloak  round  him.  He  thus  secured  for
himself  a  most  miserable  bed ;  for  the  hard  pea-
stalks  lay  in  lumps  under  his  head,  the  cross
with  the  sharp  nails  stuck  into  his  back,  his
arms  were  locked  fast  in  bonds,  the  horsehair
under-garment  was  round  his  loins,  and  the
cloak  too  was  very  heavy,  and  the  door  hard.
Thus  he  lay  in  wretchedness,  afraid  to  stir,  just
like  a  log.  Whenever  he  attempted  to  turn,
the  pain  it  caused  him  was  very  great ;  and  if
he  fell  back  at  all  heavily  upon  the  cross  when


HIS  BED.  69

asleep,  the  nails  ran  into  his  bones ;  and  he
would  then  send  up  many  a  sigh  to  God.

In  winter  he  suffered  very  much  from  the
frost,  for  if  he  stretched  out  his  feet  in  sleep,  as
people  do,  they  lay  quite  bare  upon  the  door,
and  froze  with  the  cold ;  and  if  he  drew  them
in  again,  and  kept  them  gathered  up,  the  blood
became  all  on  fire  in  his  legs,  and  this  was  great
pain  to  him.  His  feet  were  full  of  sores ;  his
legs  swelled,  as  if  they  were  growing  dropsical;
his  knees  were  bloody  and  seared ;  his  loins  were
covered  with  scars  from  the  horsehair  under-
garment ;  his  back  was  wounded  by  the  cross  ;
his  body  wasted  from  excessive  austerity;  his
mouth  parched  with  intense  thirst;  and  his
hands  tremulous  from  weakness.  Amid  these
torments  he  spent  his  days  and  nights ;  and  he
endured  them  all  out  of  the  greatness  of  the
love  which  he  bore  in  his  heart  to  the  Divine
and  Eternal  Wisdom,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
whose  agonising  sufferings  he  sought  to  imitate.

After  a  time  he  gave  up  this  penitential  ex-
ercise of  the  door,  and  instead  of  it  he  took  up
his  abode  in  a  very  small  cell,  and  used  the
bench,  which  was  intended  for  a  seat,  as  his  bed.
This  bench  was  so  narrow  and  short  that  he  could
not  stretch  himself  out  upon  it.     In  this  hole,


70  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

and  upon  the  above-mentioned  door,  he  lay  at
night,  in  his  usual  bonds,  for  about  eight  years.
It  was  also  his  custom  during  the  space  of  five-
and-twenty  years,  provided  he  was  staying  in
the  convent,  never  to  go  after  compline  in
winter  into  any  warm  room,  or  to  the  convent-
stove  to  warm  himself,  however  cold  it  might  be,
unless  he  was  obliged  to  do  so  for  other  reasons.
Throughout  all  these  years  he  never  took  a  bath,
either  a  water  or  a  sweating  bath ;  and  this  he
did  in  order  to  mortify  his  comfort -seeking
body.

For  a  long  time  he  only  ate  once  a  day,
both  in  summer  and  winter ;  and  he  not  only
fasted  from  meat,  but  also  from  fish  and  eggs.
He  practised  during  a  long  time  such  rigid  po-
verty that  he  would  neither  receive  nor  touch  a
penny  either  with  leave  or  without  it.  For  a
considerable  space  of  time  he  strove  to  attain  to
such  a  high  degree  of  purity  that  he  would
neither  scratch  nor  touch  any  part  of  his  body,
save  only  his  hands  and  feet.


HIS  ABSTINENCE  FROM  DRINK.  71

Chapter  XX.

How  he  broke  himself  from  drink.

Another  afflictive  exercise,  which  he  once
adopted,  was  to  limit  himself  to  an  exceedingly
small  measure  of  drink ;  and  that  he  might  not
transgress  this  measure  either  at  home  or  abroad,
he  caused  a  little  cup  to  be  made  of  the  exact
size,  and  carried  it  with  him  whenever  he  went
out.  In  times  of  great  thirst  it  was  no  more
than  enough  to  cool  his  parched  mouth,  just
like  what  is  given  to  refresh  a  sick  person  in  a
burning  fever.  For  a  long  time  he  drank  no
wine  at  all,  save  only  on  holy  Easter-day,  and
he  drank  it  then  in  honour  of  the  high  festival.
On  one  occasion,  after  he  had  long  endured
great  thirst,  and  from  a  spirit  of  mortification  was
resolved  not  to  quench  his  thirst  with  water  or
wine,  he  looked  upwards  to  God  in  the  excessive
anguish  of  his  soul,  upon  which  God  answered
him  interiorly  in  this  wise  : — Mark  and  see  how
thirsty  I  was  in  My  death-agony,  with  nothing
but  a  little  vinegar  and  gall  to  drink;  and  yet
all  the  cool  fountains  upon  this  earth  were
Mine,  for  I  have  created  them  all,  as  well  as
all  things  else,  and  ordained  them  all  for  man's
support.      Wherefore   thou   also   must   endure


72  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

patiently  privation  and  want,  if  thou  wouldst
imitate  Me.

It  happened  once  before  Christmas  that  the
Servitor  had  utterly  renounced  and  put  from
him  all  bodily  comforts,  and  moreover  had
taken  upon  himself  three  penitential  exercises
in  addition  to  the  ordinary  practices  which  he
had  long  pursued.  The  first  of  these  was,  that
he  remained  after  matins  until  daybreak  stand-
ing on  the  bare  stones  before  the  high  altar,
and  this  too  at  a  time  when  the  nights  were  at
the  longest,  and  the  bell  for  matins  rang  very
early.  The  second  practice  was,  that  he  avoided
going  to  any  warm  place,  either  by  day  or  night,
and  never  warmed  his  hands  over  the  chafing-
dish  at  the  altar  ;*  in  consequence  of  which  his
hands  became  horribly  swollen,  because  the
cold  at  that  time  was  exceeding  great.  When
compline  was  ended,  he  used  to  go,  all  cold  as
he  was,  to  sleep  upon  his  bench,  and  after
matins  he  stood  before  the  altar  on  the  bare
stones  till  daybreak.  The  third  practice  was
to  abstain  altogether  from  drinking  during  the
day,  however  great  his  thirst  might  be.     He

*  It  was  the  custom  to  place  a  chafing-dish  upon  the
altar  when  the  cold  was  very  great,  in  order  that  the  priest
might  warm  his  fingers  at  it.


HIS  ABSTINENCE  FROM  DRINK.  73

only  drank  in  the  morning  at  table,  and  at  that
time  he  was  not  thirsty.  When,  however,  it
drew  towards  evening,  his  thirst  became  so  ex-
cessive that  his  whole  frame  panted  for  drink ;
nevertheless  he  bore  it  all  perseveringly,  though
the  pain  of  it  was  bitter  and  intense.  His
mouth,  inside  and  out,  was  as  dry  as  that  of  a
sick  person  in  a  distemper,  and  his  tongue  was
so  cracked  that  for  more  than  a  year  afterwards
it  would  not  heal.  When  he  stood  in  choir  at
compline  thus  parched  with  thirst,  and  the  holy
water  was  sprinkled  around  according  to  cus-
tom, he  would  eagerly  open  his  parched  mouth,
and  gape  wide  towards  the  sprinkling-brush,  in
the  hope  that  a  little  drop  of  water  might  fall
upon  his  dried-up  tongue  and  cool  it  a  little.
Again,  when  he  used  to  push  away  the  wine
from  him  at  the  supper-table,  all  athirst  though
he  was,  he  would  sometimes  lift  up  his  eyes  and
say: — Ah,  heavenly  Father,  receive  this  cool
drink  as  an  offering  of  my  heart's  blood,  and
give  Thy  Child  to  drink  of  it  in  that  thirst
wherewith  He  thirsted  in  His  death-agony  upon
the  cross.  Sometimes  also,  when  he  was  very
thirsty,  he  would  go  opposite  the  fountain  and
gaze  at  the  tinkling  water  in  the  tinned  basin,
and  then  he  would  look  upwards  to  God  and


74  LIFE  QP  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

sigh  deeply.  At  other  times  he  was  so  utterly
overcome  by  his  sufferings  that  he  would  cry
out  from  the  depths  of  his  heart : — Alas,  O
everlasting  Good,  how  hidden  are  Thy  judg-
ments !  Ah  me !  that  the  broad  lake  of  Con-
stance is  so  nigh,  and  the  clear  Rhine  flows  all
around  me,*  and  yet  one  single  drink  of  water
is  too  dear  for  me  to  purchase !  This  is  indeed
a  misery.

This  state  of  things  continued  until  the
time  when  the  Gospel  was  read  at  Mass  about
how  our  Lord  God  changed  water  into  wine..
That  same  Sunday  night  he  sat  in  misery  at
table,  for  through  excess  of  thirst  he  had  no
desire  to  eat.  As  soon  as  grace  was  read  he
hurried  quickly  to  his  chapel,  for  he  was  so
overcome  with  agony  that  he  could  no  more
contain  himself,  and,  bursting  into  a  flood  of
bitter  tears,  he  exclaimed : — O  God,  Thou  alone
knowest  what  sorrow  and  anguish  of  heart  arc
Wherefore  was  I  born  into-  this  world  so  utterly
poor  and  destitute  that  in  the  midst  of  all  abun-
dance I  must  endure  such  grievous  need?  While

*  The  Dominican  Convent  in  which  Blessed  Henry  Suso>
lived  stood  on  a  small  island  at  the  point  where  the  Rhine
flows  out  of  the  lake  of  Constance.  It  is  now  a  manufac-
tory.


HIS  ABSTINENCE  FKOM  DKINK.  75

he  was  uttering  these  lamentations,  it  seemed  to
him  as  though  a  voice  spoke  within  his  soul,
saying : — Be  of  good  courage ;  God  will  soon
rejoice  and  comfort  thee.  Weep  not,  brave
knight ;  bear  thyself  well.  These  words  brought
fresh  life  to  his  heart,  so  that  he  stopped  lament-
ing, and  tried  to  leave  off  weeping  altogether.
But  the  pain  he  suffered  would  not  let  him  feel
quite  joyful,  and  his  tears  continued  falling,
though  something  inwardly  forced  him  to  smile,
as  though  at  some  pleasant  adventure  close  at
hand  which  God  would  ere  long  send  him.  In
this  state  he  went  to  compline.  His  mouth
sang  while  his  heart  trembled,  and  it  seemed  to
him  the  while  that  he  should  soon  be  recom-
pensed for  all  his  sufferings.  And  so  it  came
to  pass  not  long  afterwards,  and  even  that  very
night  he  received  part  payment  in  the  follow-
ing manner :  It  appeared  to  him  in  a  vision  as
though  our  dear  Lady,  God's  Mother,  came  to
him  with  the  little  Child  Jesus  in  the  form  He
wore  on  earth  when  seven  years  old.  The
Child  carried  in  His  hand  a  small  goblet  of
fresh  water.  The  goblet  was  glazed  all  over,
and  was  a  little  larger  than  one  of  the  convent-
mugs.  Then  our  dear  Lady  took  the  goblet  in
her  hand,  and  gave  it  to  the  Servitor  to  drink.


76  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

He  received  it  with  great  eagerness,  and
quenched  his  thirst  to  his  heart's  content.

One  day  as  he  was  walking  in  the  country,
he  happened  to  meet,  on  a  narrow  pathway,  a
poor,  respectable  woman ;  and  when  the  woman
drew  near  him,  he  gave  up  to  her  the  dry  path,
and  went  himself  into  the  wet  at  the  side,  in
order  to  let  her  go  by.  The  woman,  turning
round,  said  to  him : — Dear  master,  how  comes
it  that  you,  a  gentleman  and  a  priest,  give  way
so  humbly  to  me,  a  poor  woman,  who  ought
much  more  fittingly  to  have  given  way  to  you  ?
He  replied : — Ah,  dear  woman,  it  is  my  cus-
tom to  pay  willing  deference  and  honour  to  all
women  for  the  sake  of  the  gentle  Mother  of  God
in  heaven.  At  this  she  lifted  up  her  eyes  and
hands  to  heaven,  and  spoke  thus : — I  beseech
this  same  augnst  Lady  that  you  may  not  depart
this  world  until  you  have  received  some  special
grace  from  her  whom  you  honour  in  all  of  us
women.  He  answered  : — May  the  pure  Maiden
Mary  in  heaven  obtain  me  this.

It  happened  soon  afterwards  that,  though
there  was  abundance  of  every  kind  of  drink
before  him,  he  left  the  table,  according  to  Ins
custom,  with  a  thirsting  mouth.  That  same
night,  when  he  lay  down  to  rest,  there  came


OUR  LADY  GIVES  HIM  DRINK.  77

and  stood  before  him,  in  a  vision,  a  beautiful
heavenly  form,  which  thus  addressed  him : — It
is  I,  the  Mother,  who  gave  thee  to  drink  from
the  little  goblet  the  other  night ;  and,  since  thou
art  so  exceeding  thirsty,  I  will  in  pity  give  thee
once  more  to  drink.  To  this  the  Servitor  made
answer  very  wisely : — Ah,  purest  one !  but  thou
hast  nothing  in  thy  hand  out  of  which  to  give
me  drink.  She  replied: — I  will  give  thee  to
drink  of  that  healthful  drink  which  flows  from
my  heart.  He  was  so  terrified  at  this  that  he
could  not  answer  her,  for  he  knew  well  how  un-
worthy of  it  he  was.  Then  she  said  to  him,
with  great  kindliness  :  —  Inasmuch  as  Jesus,
the  treasure  of  heaven,  has  come  down  so  lov-
ingly into  thy  heart,  and  since  thy  parched
mouth  has  so  dearly  earned  this  grace,  I  will
bestow  it  on  thee  for  thy  special  consolation;
and  it  is  not  a  corporeal  drink  which  I  will  give
thee,  but  a  healthful,  spiritual,  and  excellent
drink  of  real  and  true  purity.  Then  he  let  it
be  as  she  had  said,  and  he  thought  within  him-
self : — Thou  shalt  now  drink  thy  full,  and  be
able  to  quench  thy  great  thirst.  When  he  had
well  drunk  of  this  heavenly  drink,  there  re-
mained something  in  his  mouth  like  a  little  soft
lump.      It  was   white,  and  of  the  nature  of


78  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

manna ;  and  lie  kept  it  in  his  mouth  for  a  long
time,  as  a  voucher  for  the  truth  of  what  had
taken  place.  Afterwards,  he  hegan  to  weep
from  his  very  heart,  and  he  thanked  God  and
His  dear  Mother  for  the  great  grace  that  they
had  vouchsafed  him.

That  same  night  our  dear  Lady  appeared  to
a  holy  person  in  another  town,  and  said : — Go
and  tell  my  Child's  Servitor  from  me  what  is
written  of  the  great  doctor,  John  Chrysostom
of  the  golden  mouth,  how  that  one  day,  when
he  was  still  a  scholar,  as  he  was  kneeling  be-
fore an  altar,  on  which  the  heavenly  Mother
was  represented  in  carved  wood  giving  the
Child  in  her  arms  to  drink,  as  mothers  do,  the
image  of  the  Mother  bade  her  Child  stop  awhile,
and  allowed  the  afore-named  scholar  likewise  to
drink  from  out  her  heart.  This  same  grace
the  Servitor  also  has  received  from  me  in  a
vision,  and  as  a  voucher  for  its  truth,  mark
this:  that  from  this  time  forth  the  teaching
which  will  proceed  from  his  holy  mouth  will  be
much  more  fervent  and  pleasanter  to  hear  than
it  has  ever  been  before.  When  the  Servitor
heard  this,  he  lifted  up  his  hands,  heart,  and
eyes,  saying : — Praised  be  the  vein  of  the  out-
flowing Godhead,  and  praised  beyond  praise  be


OUR  LADY  GIVES  HIM  DKINK.  79

the  sweet  Mother  of  all  graces  by  me,  poor
worthless  man,  for  this  heavenly  gift.

The  same  holy  person  made  answer,  saying:
— One  thing  more  I  have  to  tell  you.  Know,
then,  that  our  dear  Lady,  with  her  dear  Child,
appeared  to  me  last  night  in  a  vision,  and  our
Lady  had  in  her  hand  a  beautiful  drinking-vessel
of  water.  The  Child  and  the  Lady  spoke  loving
words  about  you,  and  then  she  held  the  vessel
of  water  to  the  Child,  and  prayed  Him  to  pro-
nounce His  blessing  over  it.  He  pronounced
His  holy  blessing  upon  the  water,  and  imme-
diately the  water  became  wine;  and  He  said: —
It  is  enough.  My  will  is  that  the  brother  should
no  longer  mortify  himself  by  abstaining  from
wine.  Let  him  henceforward  drink  wine  for
his  wasted  frame's  sake.  From  that  time  forth,
now  that  God  allowed  it  to  him,  the  Servitor
drank  wine  as  he  had  done  before.

At  this  same  period,  when  the  Servitor  had
become  very  ill,  owing  to  the  excessive  burden
of  the  afore-mentioned  exercises  which  he  had
so  long  practised,  our  dear  Lord  appeared  to  a
holy  friend  of  God,  holding  in  His  hand  a  box.
She  said  to  him: — Lord,  what  meanest  Thou  by
the  box  1  He  answered : — I  mean  to  cure  my
Servitor  with  it,  for  he  is  sick.     Then  our  Lord


80  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

went  to  the  Servitor  with  the  box,  and  opened
it,  and  in  the  box  there  was  fresh  blood.  He
took  out  some  of  the  blood,  and  spread  it  over
the  Servitor's  heart,  so  that  it  became  all  bloody,
and  after  that  He  spread  it  over  his  hands  and
feet  and  all  his  limbs.  Upon  this,  she  said  to
Him: — Ah,  Lord!  why  dost  Thou  mark  him
thus?  or  is  it  Thy  will  to  impress  upon  him  Thy
five  love-marks  I  He  answered : — Yes.  I  will
lovingly  mark  his  heart  and  all  his  frame  with
sufferings,  and  I  will  heal  him,  and  restore  him
to  health,  and  I  will  make  of  him  a  man  after
My  whole  heart.

At  length,  after  the  Servitor  had  led,  from
his  eighteenth  to  his  fortieth  year,  a  life  of  ex-
ercises, according  to  the  outer  man — such  as
have  been  in  part  described  above — and  when
his  whole  frame  was  now  so  worn  and  wasted
that  nothing  remained  for  him  except  to  die  or
leave  off  these  exercises,  he  left  them  off;  and
God  showed  him  that  all  this  austerity  and  all
these  practices  were  nothing  more  than  a  good
beginning,  and  a  breaking  through  his  un-
crushed  natural  man ;  and  he  saw  that  he  must
press  on  still  farther  in  quite  another  way,  if  he
wished  to  reach  perfection.


THE  SCHOOL  OF  TEUE  DETACHMENT.       81


Chapter  XXI.

How  he  was  directed  to  the  rational  school,  in  which
the  art  of  true  detachment  is  taught.

One  day  the  Servitor  was  sitting  on  his
bench  after  matins,  and  while  he  was  absorbed
in  meditation  his  bodily  senses  became  ab-
stracted, and  it  seemed  to  his  inward  vision  that
a  noble  youth  came  down  from  above,  and,
standing  before  him,  addressed  him  thus: —
Thou  hast  been  long  enough  in  the  lower
schools,  and  hast  exercised  thyself  sufficiently
in  them,  and  art  now  full-grown.  Up  then
with  me.  I  will  take  thee  to  the  highest  school
which  is  to  be  found  in  this  world;  and  thou
shalt  diligently  learn  there  the  highest  of  all
crafts,  which  shall  establish  thee  in  divine  peace,
and  bring  thy  holy  beginnings  to  a  blissful  end.
The  Servitor  was  rejoiced  at  this,  and  stood  up;
upon  which,  the  youth  took  him  by  the  hand
and  carried  him,  as  it  appeared  to  him,  into  a
land  above  the  ken  of  sense.  There  was  a
beautiful  house  there,  which  looked  as  if  it  were
the  abode  of  religious  men,  and  those  who  prao
tised  the  afore-named  craft  dwelt  in  it.  When
he  entered  the  house,  they  received  him  kindly

G


82  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

and  greeted  him  lovingly,  and  then  they  went
in  haste  to  the  Master  Superior,  and  told  him
that  one  had  come  who  also  wished  to  he  his
disciple,  and  to  learn  the  craft.  He  answered:
— I  will  look  at  him  and  see  how  he  pleases  me.
When  he  saw  the  Servitor,  he  smiled  upon  him
very  kindly,  and  said: — Be  assured  that  this
stranger  may  become  an  excellent  professor  of
this  high  craft,  if  he  will  patiently  submit  to  the
strait  stocks,  in  which  he  must  be  inwardly  con-
fined. But  the  Servitor  understood  not  these
obscure  words ;  so  he  turned  him  to  the  youth
who  had  brought  him  thither,  and  asked  him,
saying: — Tell  me,  dear  comrade,  what  is  the
highest  school,  and  what  is  the  craft  taught  there
of  which  thou  spokest  to  me  f  The  youth  an-
swered :  —  The  highest  school,  and  the  craft
which  is  taught  there,  consist  simply  in  an
entire  and  perfect  detachment  from  self;  that
is  to  say,  how  a  man  may  attain  to  such  an
abiding  spirit  of  self-renunciation,  that,  no  mat-
ter how  God  treats  him,  either  directly  by  Him-
self, or  indirectly  through  creatures,  or  how  he
feels,  whether  joyful  or  sad,  the  one  object  of
his  strivings  shall  ever  be  to  continue  always
the  same  by  a  perpetual  giving  up  of  self,  as  far
as  human  frailty  will  allow,  and  to  make  God's


THE  SCHOOL  OF  TRUE  DETACHMENT.       83

honour  and  glory  his  sole  aim,  just  in  the  way
that  the  dear  Christ  acted  towards  His  heavenly
Father.  When  the  Senator  heard  this,  he  was
well  pleased  at  it,  and  he  resolved  to  study  the
craft,  and  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  could  meet
with  no  difficulties  so  great  as  to  make  him  turn
aside  from  this  intention.  Moreover,  he  wished
to  build  a  house  there,  and  to  undertake  much
active  work.  The  youth  prevented  him  from
doing  this,  saying : — This  craft  requires  a  com-
plete cessation  from  activity.  The  less  a  man
does  here,  the  more  he  has  really  done.*

Immediately  after  this  discourse  the  Servitor
came  to  himself  again,  and  he  continued  to  sit
still  as  before.  Then  he  began  to  reflect  deeply
upon  this  discourse,  and  he  observed  that  it  was
the  same  pure  and  simple  truth  which  Christ
Himself  has  taught.  Thereupon  he  proceeded
to  hold  converse  with  himself  interiorly,  saying:
— Look  inwards,  friend,  and  thou  wilt  find  thy-
self still  really  there,  and  wilt  perceive  that,  not-
withstanding all  thy  outward  practices,  in  which
thou  didst  of  thy  own  choice  exercise  thyself,
thou  art  still  undetached  from  self  in  what  re-

*  He  alluded  in  this  to  that  mode  of  acting  in  which  a
man  is  a  hindrance  to  himself,  and  does  not  seek  God's
honour  purely.


84  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENEY  SUSO.

lates  to  contradictions  at  the  hands  of  others.
Thou  art  still  like  a  timid  hare,  which  lies  hid-
den in  a  thicket,  and  is  terrified  at  every  rust-
ling leaf.  Even  so  is  it  with  thee  too.  Thou
art  terrified  every  day  at  the  sufferings  which
come  upon  thee.  The  sight  of  thy  enemies
makes  thee  lose  colour.  When  thou  shouldst
let  thyself  be  humiliated,  thou  takest  to  flight.
When  thou  shouldst  expose  thyself  to  the  blow,
thou  hidest.  When  thou  art  praised,  thou  laugh-
est.  When  thou  art  blamed,  thou  mournest.
It  may  well  be  true  that  thou  needest  a  higher
school.  Then  sighing  inwardly,  he  looked  up
to  God,  and  said: — O  God,  how  nakedly  has
this  truth  been  shown  me !  Woe  is  me !  When
shall  I  ever  become  a  truly  detached  man  ?


Chapter  XXII.

How  painful  it  is  to  die  interiorly.
Now  that  the  Servitor  had  been  released  by
God  from  exterior  penances  of  the  kind  described
above,  by  which  his  life  had  been  imperilled,  his
worn-out  frame  was  so  rejoiced  at  this,  that  he
used  to  weep  for  joy  whenever  he  called  to  mind
his  penitential  bonds,  and  all  the  cruel  sufferings


INTERIOR  CROSSES.  85

and  combats  which  he  had  passed  through.
And  he  said  within  himself: — Henceforth,  dear
Lord,  I  will  lead  a  quiet  life  and  enjoy  myself.
I  will  quench  my  thirst  fully  with  wine  and
water,  and  I  will  sleep  unbound  on  my  straw
bed.  Oh !  how  often  and  how  earnestly  I  have
longed  that  this  comfort  might  be  mine  before
I  died!  I  have  been  long  enough  wearing  my-
self away.  Henceforth  the  time  is  come  for  me
to  rest.  Such  were  the  presumptuous  thoughts
and  fancies  which  then  floated  before  his  mind.
Alas !  he  knew  not  yet  what  God  had  decreed
concerning  him.

When  he  had  spent  several  weeks  very
pleasantly  in  these  agreeable  thoughts,  it  hap-
pened one  day  that,  as  he  was  sitting  ac-
cording to  custom  on  the  bench  which  was  his
bed,  he  began  to  contemplate  that  true  saying
of  the  suffering  Job,  "Militia  est  vita  hominis
super  terram"  (Job  vii.  1), — The  life  of  man
in  this  world  is  nothing  else  but  a  knight's  life
of  warfare.  As  he  meditated  on  these  words,
his  senses  became  abstracted,  and  it  seemed
to  him  that  there  came  in  a  comely  youth,  of
very  manly  form,  who  brought  him  a  pair  of
knight's  shoes,  of  excellent  quality,  with  other
clothing  such  as  knights  are  wont  to  wear.    The


86  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

youth  went  up  to  the  Servitor,  and  vested  him
in  the  knight's  attire,  saying: — Hearken,  Sir
Knight.  Hitherto  thou  hast  been  a  squire:
God  wills  thee  now  to  be  a  knight.  The  Ser-
vitor looked  at  himself  in  the  knight's  shoes,
and  marvelling  greatly  in  his  heart,  exclaimed :
— Wonderful,  O  God  !  What  has  happened  to
me?  What  have  I  become?  Must  I  be  a
knight  ?  I  had  much  rather  lead  a  comfortable
life  than  this.  Then  he  said  to  the  youth : —
Well,  since  God  wills  me  to  be  a  knight,  if  only
I  had  been  made  one  gloriously  in  a  battle,  I
should  have  preferred  it.  The  youth  turned
half  aside,  and,  with  a  laugh,  answered: — Be
not  anxious.  You  shall  have  fighting  enough.
He  who  resolves  to  bear  himself  undauntedly  as
God's  knight  in  this  spiritual  warfare  will  meet
with  much  harder  conflicts  than  ever  fell  to  the
lot  of  the  famed  heroes  of  olden  time,  whose
knightly  prowess  the  world  loves  to  recount  in
song  and  tale.  Thou  fanciest  that  God  has
taken  thy  yoke  oif  thee,  and  that  He  has  cast
away  thy  bonds,  so  that  thou  canst  now  attend
to  thy  comfort.  But  it  is  not  so,  as  yet.  It  is
not  God's  will  to  take  thy  bonds  from  off  thee.
He  will  only  change  them,  and  make  them  far
heavier  than  they  ever  were  before.     The  Ser-


INTEKIOR  CKOSSES.  87

vitor  was  struck  with  terror  at  this,  and  said : —
Alas,  my  God !  what  art  Thou  about  to  do  with
me?  I  fancied  that  all  was  at  an  end,  just  as
it  is  going  to  begin.  My  straits  are  only  now
commencing,  as  it  seems  to  me.  Ah,  Lord  of
Heaven!  what  mean  Thy  dealings  with  me?
Am  I  alone  a  sinner,  and  are  all  other  men
just,  that  Thou  dost  in  this  wise  use  Thy  rod
on  me,  poor  wretch,  and  sparest  many  others  ?
Thou  hast  acted  thus  with  me  since  my  child-
hood's days,  when  Thou  didst  crucify  my  youth-
ful frame  with  heavy  and  weary  sicknesses.  I
fancied  that  I  had  had  enough  by  this  time;
He  answered : — No !  it  is  not  yet  enough.  Thou
must  be  tried  and  proved  to  the  very  bottom  in
all  things,  if  it  is  to  go  well  with  thee.  The
Servitor  said : — Lord !  show  me  how  much  suf-
fering I  have  still  before  me.  He  answered:
— Look  upwards  at  the  heavens  above  thee,
and  if  thou  canst  count  the  countless  multitude
of  the  stars,  thou  canst  count  also  the  sufferings
which  still  await  thee;  and  as  the  stars  seem
small,  and  yet  are  great,  even  so  thy  sufferings
are  small  in  seeming  to  the  eyes  of  unexercised
men;  while,  judged  of  by  thy  own  feelings,  they
will  prove  great  for  thee  to  bear.  The  Servitor
said: — Ah,  Lord!   show  me  the  sufferings  be*


88  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

forehand,  that  I  may  know  them.  He  answered :
— No !  it  is  better  for  thee  not  to  know  them,
lest  thou  shouldst  lose  heart  beforehand.  Never-
theless, among  the  countless  sufferings  which
await  thee,  I  will  tell  thee  three.

The  first  is  this.  Hitherto  thou  hast  struck
thyself  with  thy  own  hands,  and  left  off  striking
when  thou  wouldst,  and  hast  had  pity  upon  thy-
self. But  now  I  will  myself  take  hold  of  thee,
and  give  thee  over  quite  defenceless  into  the
hands  of  strangers,  and  thou  shalt  suffer  pub-
licly the  loss  of  thy  good  name,  through  the
means  of  certain  blinded  men.  This  will  press
upon  thee  more  painfully  than  the  sharp  cross
on  thy  wounded  back  did;  for  in  thy  former
exercises  thou  wast  held  in  high  repute  among
men,  whereas  now  thou  shalt  be  beaten  down
and  brought  to  naught  in  the  sight  of  all.

The  second  suffering  is  this.  Many  as  have
been  the  bitter  deaths  which  thou  hast  inflicted
on  thyself,  nevertheless  this  has  always  remained
to  thee  by  God's  providence,  that  thy  disposition
is  an  affectionate  and  love-seeking  one.  Now
it  shall  befall  thee,  that  in  those  very  quarters
where  thou  shalt  look  for  special  love  and  faith-
fulness thou  shalt  meet  with  great  unfaithful-
ness, sufferings,  and  affliction.     And  this  shall


INTERIOR  CROSSES.  89

happen  in  such  manifold  ways,  that  those  who
shall  continue  more  than  ordinarily  true  to  thee
will  have  to  suffer  with  thee  from  compassion.

The  third  suffering  is  this.  Hitherto  thou
hast  been  like  an  unweaned  sucking  child,  and
thou  hast  floated  in  divine  sweetness,  as  a  fish
in  the  sea.  I  will  now  withdraw  this  from  thee,
and  let  thee  starve  and  wither ;  and  thou  shalt
be  forsaken  both  by  God  and  the  world,  and
be  openly  despised  by  friends  and  foes.  In  a
word:  whatever  thou  shalt  take  in  hand  in
order  to  delight  or  comfort  thee,  shall  come  to
naught.

The  Servitor  was  struck  with  such  conster-
nation at  these  words  that  his  whole  frame  trem-
bled; and  springing  up  impetuously,  he  fell  down
upon  the  ground  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  and
calling  upon  God  with  a  cry  of  agony  from  his
very  heart,  besought  Him  by  His  kind  fatherly
goodness  to  take  away  from  him,  if  it  were  pos-
sible, this  great  misery ;  or,  if  this  could  not  be,
to  let  the  heavenly  will  of  His  eternal  ordinance
be  accomplished  in  him.

After  he  had  lain  a  good  while  in  this  ex-
tremity of  anguish,  something  spoke  within  him
thus: — Be  of  good  cheer.  I  Myself  will  be
with  thee,  and  I  will   aid  thee   graciously  to


90  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

overcome  in  all  these  unusual  trials.  There-
upon he  arose,  and  gave  himself  up  entirely
into  God's  hands.  Now  when  it  became  morn-
ing,  and  he  was  sitting  sorrowfully  in  his  cell
after  Mass,  thinking  over  these  things,  and
frozen  with  cold,  for  it  was  winter,  he  heard  a
voice  within  him  saying : — Open  the  window  of
the  cell,  and  look  out  and  learn.  He  opened
the  window,  and  looked  out,  and  he  beheld  a
dog  running  about  in  the  middle  of  the  cloister
with  a  worn-out  foot-cloth  in  its  mouth.  The
dog  was  acting  very  strangely  with  the  foot-
cloth,  for  he  kept  tossing  it  up  and  down,  and
tearing  holes  in  it.  Thereupon  the  Servitor
looked  up  to  heaven,  sighing  deeply,  and  it  was
said  to  him: — Even  so  shalt  thou  be  in  thy
brethren's  mouths.  Then  the  thought  came  to
him : — Since  it  cannot  be  otherwise,  resign  thy*-
self  to  it ;  and,  as  the  foot-cloth  suffers  itself  to
be  maltreated  in  silence,  even  so  do  thou.  He
went  down  into  the  cloister,  and,  taking  up  the
foot-cloth,  preserved  it  for  many  years  as  a
jewel  most  dear  to  him ;  and  as  often  as  he  felt
inclined  to  break  out  into  impatience,  he  used  to
bring  it  forth,  that  he  might  recognise  himself
in  it  and  keep  silence  in  regard  to  all  men.  If
it  sometimes  happened  that  he  half  turned  away


INTERIOR  CROSSES.  91

his  face  in  anger  from  some  of  those  who  per-
secuted him,  he  was  inwardly  rebuked  for  it,
and  it  was  said  to  him : — Remember  that  I,  thy
Lord,  turned  not  away  My  beautiful  face  from
those  who  spat  upon  Me.  Then  he  would  bit-
terly repent  of  what  he  had  done,  and  turn
himself  to  them  again  very  lovingly.

In  the  beginning,  when  he  met  with  any
suffering,  the  thought  would  come  to  his  mind :
— O  God,  that  this  suffering  were  at  an  end,
that  I  might  have  done  with  it!  Thereupon
the  Child  Jesus  appeared  to  him  in  a  vision  on
our  Lady's  feast  of  Candlemas,  and  rebuked
him,  saying : — Thou  dost  not  yet  know  how  to
suffer ;  but  I  will  teach  thee :  Behold !  when
thou  art  in  any  suffering,  thou  shouldst  not
look  onwards  to  the  end  of  that  suffering,
fancying  that  thou  wilt  then  be  at  rest;  but
so  long  as  the  suffering  lasts,  thou  shouldst  be
getting  thyself  ready  to  accept  with  patience
another  suffering,  which  is  sure  to  follow  in
its  train.  Thou  shouldst  do  like  a  maiden
picking  roses.  When  she  has  picked  one
rose  from  the  rose-bush,  this  does  not  satisfy
her,  but  she  resolves  to  pick  many  more  from
it.  Even  so  do  thou.  Make  up  thy  mind
for  this   beforehand,  that,  when  one  suffering


92  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

comes  to  an  end,  another  will  forthwith  meet
thee.

Among  other  friends  of  God  who  foretold  to
him  the  new  sufferings  which  were  hanging
over  him,  there  came  to  him  a  person  of  emi-
nent sanctity,  who  said  that,  on  the  Angels'  fes-
tival, after  matins  she  had  prayed  to  God  for
him  with  exceeding  earnestness ;  and  that  it
seemed  to  her  in  a  vision  that  she  was  carried
to  the  place  where  he  then  was,  and  that  she
beheld  a  beautiful  rose-tree  grow  up  over  him,
and  spread  itself  on  all  sides  far  and  wide.  It
was  of  a  ravishing  form,  and  full  of  lovely  red
roses.  On  looking  up  to  heaven  it  seemed  to
her  that  the  sun  rose  all  beautiful,  without  a
cloud,  and  with  much  splendour.  Now  there
stood  in  the  sun's  radiance  a  lovely  Child  in  the
form  of  a  cross ;  and  she  saw  a  ray  come  forth
from  the  sun  to  the  Servitor's  heart,  and  it  was
so  mighty  that  it  set  on  fire  all  his  veins  and
limbs.  But  the  rose-tree  bowed  itself  between,
and  did  its  best  with  its  thick  boughs  to  shut  out
the  sunshine  from  his  heart.  Nevertheless  it
could  not  succeed  in  this,  for  the  outstreaming
rays  were  so  powerful,  that  they  pierced  through
all  the  boughs  and  shone  down  right  into  his
heart.     Then   she   saw  the  Child  come  forth


INTERIOR  CROSSES.  93

from  the  sun,  and  she  said  to  him: — Dear
Child,  whither  art  Thou  going  ?  He  answered :
— I  am  going  to  My  beloved  Servitor.  Upon
which  she  said : — Sweet  Child,  what  means  the
sun's  brightness  in  Thy  Servitor's  heart?  He
replied: — I  have  made  his  loving  heart  thus
bright  and  glorious,  that  the  reflection  of  its
radiance,  streaming  forth  from  out  his  heart,
may  draw  lovingly  the  hearts  of  all  men  to  Me.
The  thick  rose-tree,  which  represents  the  mani-
fold sufferings  that  await  him,  cannot  hinder
this,  but  right  nobly  it  shall  be  accomplished
in  him.

Inasmuch  as  seclusion  is  profitable  to  a  be-
ginner, the  Servitor  resolved  to  remain  for  more
than  ten  years  secluded  in  his  monastery  from
all  the  world.  When  he  went  from  table  he
used  to  shut  himself  up  in  his  chapel  and  re-
main there.  He  refused  to  hold  any  long  con-
versations at  the  convent -door  or  elsewhere
with  women,  or  even  with  men,  nor  would  he
look  at  them.  He  fixed  a  short  limit  for  his
eyes,  beyond  which  he  suffered  them  not  to
look ;  and  the  limit  was  five  feet.  He  remained
always  at  home,  and  would  never  go  out  either
into  the  town  or  the  country.  His  one  aim  was
to  practise  solitude.    All  this  watchfulness,  how-


94  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

ever,  served liim  nothing;  for  during  these  years
there  fell  upon  him  exceeding  grievous  suffer-
ings; and  they  crushed  him  down  so  heavily
that  he  became  an  object  of  pity  to  himself  and
others.

In  order  that  his  prison-house  might  be
more  agreeable  to  him  during  the  ten  years
which  he  had  resolved  to  spend  in  voluntary
confinement  in  his  chapel,  he  directed  a  painter
to  draw  for  him  the  holy  fathers  of  olden  time
with  their  sayings,  as  well  as  other  devout  pic-
tures, calculated  to  encourage  a  sufferer  to  pa-
tience under  afflictions.  But  God  would  not
let  this  be  according  to  his  wish ;  for  when  the
painter  had  sketched  out  the  ancient  fathers
writh  charcoal  on  the  chapel -walls,  his  eyes
became  so  bad  that  he  could  no  longer  see  to
draw.  He  therefore  begged  permission  to  de-
part, saying  that  the  work  must  wait  until  he
got  well  again.  The  Servitor  turned  to  the
painter,  and  inquired  how  long  it  would  take
him  to  get  well.  The  painter  answered: —
Twelve  weeks.  Upon  this  the  Servitor  told
him  to  set  up  again  the  ladder,  which  he  had
taken  down,  against  the  outlines  of  the  anciejut
fathers  on  the  wrall;  and  when  this  was  done,
he  mounted  the  ladder,  and,  after  rubbing  his


INTERIOR  CROSSES.  95

hands  upon  the  pictures,  stroked  the  painter's
suffering  eyes,  saying : — In  the  might  of  God,
and  through  the  holiness  of  these  ancient
fathers,  I  bid  you,  master,  come  back  here  to-
morrow morning  with  your  eyes  quite  cured.
Early  next  morning  the  painter  came  back  joy-
ous and  well,  and  he  thanked  God  and  the
Servitor  for  his  cure.  The  Servitor,  however,
did  not  ascribe  it  to  himself,  but  to  the  ancient
fathers,  on  whose  pictures  he  had  rubbed  his
hands.

During  this  same  period  it  seemed  as  if  God
had  given  leave  to  the  evil  spirits  and  to  all  men
to  torment  him.  Innumerable  were  the  suffer-
ings which  he  then  endured  from  the  evil  spirits,
who,  in  horrible  assumed  forms  and  with  savage
cruelty,  caused  him  so  much  pain  and  grief,  day
and  night,  awake  and  asleep,  that  his  sufferings
from  this  source  were  exceeding  great.

Once  upon  a  time  he  was  tempted  with  a
great  longing  to  eat  meat,  for  he  had  passed
many  years  without  touching  meat.  Now,  after
he  had  eaten  the  meat,  and  had  scarcely  finished
satisfying  his  longing,  there  came  and  stood
over  against  him,  in  a  vision,  a  monstrous  hellish
figure,  who,  after  repeating  the  verse,  a  Adhuc
escao  eorum  erant  in  ore  ipsorum,  et  ira  Dei  des-


96  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

cendit  super  eos"  (Ps.lxxvii.  30;  Numb.  xi.  33), —
As  yet  the  morsel  was  in  their  mouth,  and  the
wrath  of  God  came  down  upon  them, — cried  out
in  a  barking  voice  to  those  who  stood  by : — Tins
monk  is  guilty  of  death,  and  I  will  execute  the
sentence  on  him.  But  when  they  would  not  suf-
fer this,  he  drew  forth  a  horrible  auger,  saying :
— Since  I  may  not  do  any  thing  else  to  thee,  I
will  at  least  torture  thy  body  with  this  auger;
and  I  will  bore  it  into  thee  through  thy  mouth
in  such  a  manner,  that  the  anguish  which  thou
shalt  suffer  will  be  as  great  as  the  pleasure  thou
didst  take  in  eating  the  meat.  And  having  said
this,  he  drove  the  auger  in  cruel  fashion  against
the  Servitor's  mouth.  Whereupon  immediately
his  chin-bones  and  teeth  swelled  up,  and  his
mouth  became  so  swollen  that  he  could  not  open
it ;  and  for  three  days  he  could  not  eat  meat  or
any  thing  else,  except  only  what  he  could  suck
up  through  his  teeth.


INTERIOR  SUFFERINGS.  97

Chapter  XX  III.

Of  interior  sufferings.

Among  his  various  sufferings,  there  were
three  interior  ones  which  caused  him  great  tor-
ment. One  of  these  was  impious  imaginations
against  the  faith.  Thus,  there  would  come
into  his  mind  the  thought : — How  was  it  pos-
sible for  God  to  become  man,  with  many  other
thoughts  of  that  kind.  The  more  he  fought
against  them,  the  more  perplexed  he  became.
God  suffered  him  to  remain  under  these  temp-
tations about  nine  years,  during  which  he  ceased
not  with  wailing  heart  and  weeping  eyes  to
cry  to  God  and  all  the  Saints  for  help.  At  last,
when  God  deemed  that  the  time  was  come,  He
set  him  entirely  free  from  them,  and  bestowed
upon  him  great  steadfastness  and  clearness  of
faith.

The  second  interior  suffering  was  an  inordi-
nate sadness.  He  had  such  a  continual  heavi-
ness of  spirit,  that  it  was  as  if  a  mountain  lay
upon  his  heart.  A  partial  cause  of  this  was,
that  his  turning  away  from  creatures  to  God
had  been  carried  out  with  such  excessive  speed
and  severity,  that  his  bodily  frame  had  suffered
H


98  LITE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

greatly  from  it.      This  trial  lasted  for  eight
years.

The  third  interior  suffering  was  a  tempta-
tion which  assailed  him,  that  it  would  never  be
well  with  his  soul  hereafter,  but  that  he  must
be  damned  eternally,  no  matter  how  rightly  he
should  act,  or  how  many  spiritual  exercises  he
should  practise ;  for  all  this  would  be  of  no
avail  to  place  him  among  the  saved,  and  it  all
seemed  to  him  lost  labour  from  the  beginning.
His  mind  was  saddened  with  this  thought  day
and  night ;  and  when  he  had  to  go  into  choir,
or  to  do  any  other  good  work,  the  temptation
presented  itself: — What  does  it  profit  thee  to
serve  God?  Then  he  would  say  to  himself,
very  mournfully  : — Surely  there  is  nothing  but
a  curse  for  thee.  Never  will  it  be  well  with
thee.  Give  it  all  up,  then,  betimes.  Thou  art
lost,  do  what  thou  wilt.  Then  he  would  think
within  himself: — Alas,  utterly  wretched  that  I
am,  whither  shall  I  betake  myself?  If  I  quit
the  Order,  hell  will  be  my  lot ;  and  if  I  remain
in  it,  nothing  but  misery  awaits  me.  Alas,  Lord
God !  was  there  ever  a  man  worse  off  than  I
am?  Sometimes  he  would  stand  deep  sunk
into  himself,  and  groan  many  times  heavily,
while  the  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks.     Then  he


INTERIOR  SUFFERINGS.  99

would  beat  his  breast  and  say : — Alas,  O  God !
am  I  then  never  to  be  saved?  Oh!  what  a
mournful  thing  is  this !  Must  I  be  miserable
here  and  hereafter  ?  Woe  is  me,  that  I  ever
came  forth  from  my  mother's  womb.

This  temptation  fell  upon  him  through  an
inordinate  fear.  It  had  been  told  him  that  his
admission  into  the  Order  had  been  connected
with  the  bestowal  of  temporal  goods,  and  from
this  comes  the  sin  called  simony,  which  consists
in  the  purchase  of  something  spiritual  with
something  temporal.  What  he  heard  sunk
deep  into  his  heart,  until  at  length  he  was
quite  overpowered  by  the  anguish  that  it  caused
him.

After  this  terrible  suffering  had  lasted  about
ten  years,  all  which  time  he  never  looked  upon
himself  in  any  other  light  than  as  one  damned,
he  went  to  the  holy  Master  Eckart,  and  made
known  to  him  his  suffering.  The  holy  man
delivered  him  from  it,  and  thus  set  him  free
from  the  hell  in  which  he  had  so  long  dwelt.


100  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

Chapter  XXIV.

How  he  went  forth  to  succour  and  to  save  his  neighbour.

After  he  had  spent  many  years  in  attend-
ing to  his  interior  life,  God  urged  him,  by  mani-
fold revelations,  to  apply  himself  also  to  the  sal-
vation of  his  neighbour.  The  great  sufferings
which  befell  him  in  this  work  were  beyond  num-
ber and  measure.  But  how  many  souls  were  suc-
coured by  him  was  once  shown  by  God  to  one  of
His  chosen  friends  named  Anna,  who  was,  more-
over, a  spiritual  daughter  of  the  Servitor.  She
was  one  day  rapt  in  ecstasy  at  prayer,  and  she
saw  the  Servitor  saying  Mass  upon  a  lofty  moun-
tain. An  innumerable  multitude  of  children
were  hanging  in  and  on  him,  but  each  differ-
ently from  the  rest;  for  the  more  any  one  had  of
God,  the  more  firmly  he  rested  on  the  Servitor;
and  the  more  inwardly  he  was  drawn  into  the
Servitor,  the  more  perfectly  God  turned  Himself
to  him.  She  saw,  moreover,  that  the  Servitor
was  praying  earnestly  for  them  all  to  the  ever-
lasting God,  whom  he  held  in  his  priestly  hands.
Upon  this,  she  besought  God  to  make  known
to  her  what  the  vision  meant.  And  God  an-
swered her  in  this  wise : — The  innumerable  mul-


HIS  ZEAL  FOR  SOULS.  101

titude  of  children  who  hang  npon  him  are  all
those  who  are  his  penitents  or  disciples,  or  are
in  other  ways  bound  to  him  by  ties  of  special
love  and  faithfulness.  All  these  he  has  com-
mended to  Me  in  such  sort,  that  I  will  guide
their  life  to  a  good  end,  and  they  shall  never  be
parted  from  My  gladsome  countenance.  What-
ever heavy  sufferings  may  on  this  account  be-
fall him,  shall  be  all  fully  made  up  to  him  by
the  joys  which  I  will  give  him.

Before  the  above-named  noble  maiden  be-
came acquainted  with  the  Servitor  of  the  Eter-
nal Wisdom,  she  had  received  from  God  an
interior  drawing  and  desire  to  see  him.  Now
it  happened  once  that  she  was  rapt  in  ecstasy,
and  in  the  vision  a  voice  bade  her  go  to  the
place  where  the  Servitor  then  was,  and  see  him.
She  answered : — I  do  not  know  him  among  the
multitude  of  the  brothers.  The  voice  replied :
— It  is  easy  to  know  him  among  the  others.
He  has  around  his  head  a  green  ring,  entwined
round  and  round  with  red  and  white  roses,  like
a  garland  of  roses.  The  white  roses  signify  his
purity,  and  the  red  roses  his  patience  amid  the
manifold  sufferings  which  he  must  endure ;  and
just  as  the  ring  of  gold,  which  it  is  the  custom
to  paint  round  the  heads  of  Saints,  represents


102  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

the  everlasting  bliss  which  they  now  possess  in
God,  even  so  the  ring  of  roses  indicates  the  mul-
tiplicity of  sufferings  which  God's  dear  friends
must  bear  while  they  are  still  serving  Him
in  this  world  with  knightly  exercises.  Then
the  angel  led  her  in  the  vision  to  where  he  was,
and  she  soon  recognised  him  by  the  ring  of  roses
which  was  round  his  head.

During  this  same  period  of  suffering,  the
Servitor's  greatest  interior  support  came  from
the  continual  help  which  the  holy  angels  gave
him.

Once  upon  a  time,  when  his  outward  senses
were  absorbed  in  ecstasy,  it  seemed  to  him  in  a
vision  that  he  was  carried  to  a  place  in  which
there  was  a  very  great  number  of  the  angelic
host,  and  that  one  of  those  who  stood  nearest  to
him  said : — Put  forth  thy  hand  and  look.  He
put  forth  his  hand  and  looked ;  and  out  of  the
middle  of  his  hand  there  sprung  up  a  beautiful
red  rose,  with  lovely  green  leaves.  The  rose
was  so  large  that  it  covered  his  hand  to  his
fingers,  and  it  was  so  beautiful  and  resplendent
that  it  gave  great  pleasure  to  his  eyes.  He
turned  his  hand  round  outside  and  inside,  and
on  both  sides  it  was  ravishing  to  look  at.  Greatly
marvelling  in  his  heart  at  this,  he  said : — Dear


FALSE  ACCUSATIONS.  103

comrade,  what  means  this  vision  %  The  youth
answered: — It  means  sufferings  upon  suffer-
ings, and  over  again  sufferings  upon  sufferings,
which  God  intends  to  give  thee.  This  is  what
is  signified  by  the  four  roses  on  thy  two  hands
and  thy  two  feet.  The  Servitor,  with  a  deep
sigh,  said : — Alas,  gentle  Lord !  it  is  a  singular
ordinance  of  God  that  sufferings  should  cause
such  pain  to  men,  and  yet  be  so  beautiful  an
adornment  to  them  spiritually.


Chapter  XXV.

Concerning  manifold  sufferings.

Once  upon  a  time  he  came  to  a  small  town,
and  near  the  town  there  was  a  wooden  image,  a
crucifix,  which  stood  in  a  little  house,  as  the
custom  is ;  and  it  was  the  popular  belief  that
many  miracles  were  wrought  there,  on  which
account  people  used  to  bring  thither  wax  figures
and  much  wax  in  honour  of  God.  When  he
arrived  opposite  the  crucifix,  he  went  up  and
knelt  before  it;  and  then,  after  he  had  spent
some  time  in  prayer,  he  arose  and  proceeded
with  his  companion  to  the  inn.  This  kneeling
and  praying  of  his  before  the  crucifix  had  been


104  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

seen  by  a  little  girl,  a  child  of  seven  years  old.
Now,  the  night  following,  there  came  thieves  to
the  image,  and  they  broke  open  the  doors,  and
stole  all  the  wax  which  they  found  there.  As
soon  as  it  was  day,  the  news  came  into  the
town,  and  was  carried  to  the  citizen  who  had
the  charge  of  the  image.  He  inquired  into  the
matter,  in  order  to  discover  who  had  committed
this  great  robbery.  Upon  which,  the  above-
mentioned  child  said  that  she  knew  well  who
had  done  it.  And  when  she  was  pressed  to
make  it  known,  and  to  point  out  the  villain,  she
said : — No  one  is  guilty  of  the  crime  except  the
brother,  meaning  by  this  the  Servitor ;  for,  she
added : — I  saw  him  yesterday  kneel  before  the
image,  and  then  go  into  the  town.

The  citizen  took  these  words  of  the  child  as
truth,  and  repeated  them  on  all  sides,  so  that
the  calumny  concerning  the  brother  spread
through  the  town,  and  he  was  charged  with  the
crime  on  these  slight  grounds;  and  many  an
evil  judgment  was  passed  upon  him,  how  that
he  ought  to  be  killed,  and,  as  a  wicked  man,  to
be  put  out  of  the  world.

When  the  Servitor  heard  all  this,  he  was
filled  with  consternation,  though  he  well  knew
that  he  was  guiltless,  and,  with  a  deep  groan,  he


FALSE  ACCUSATIONS.  105

said  to  God : — Alas,  Lord !  since  it  is  my  lot  to
suffer,  and  I  must  needs  suffer,  if  Thou  wouldst
but  give  me  ordinary  sufferings,  such  as  would
not  bring  me  to  disgrace,  I  would  bear  them
joyfully;  but  by  destroying  my  good  name
Thou  dost  strike  me  to  the  heart  in  those  things
which  of  all  others  are  the  sorest  to  me.  He
remained  in  this  town  until  the  people  ceased
to  talk  about  it.

It  came  to  pass,  in  another  town,  that  there
arose  a  great  outcry  concerning  him,  so  that  the
whole  town  and  neighbourhood  was  full  of  it.
There  was  a  monastery  in  this  town,  in  which
there  was  a  stone  crucifix,  of  the  exact  size,  it
was  said,  of  Christ  Himself.  Now,  one  day  dur-
ing Lent,  fresh  blood  was  observed  on  the  cru-
cifix, just  beneath  the  wound  on  the  side.  The
Servitor  ran  thither  with  the  others  to  behold
the  wonder,  and  when  he  saw  the  blood,  he
went  up  and  received  it  on  his  finger,  in  the
sight  of  all  who  stood  around.  The  concourse
of  people  from  every  part  of  the  town  soon  be-
came very  great,  and  they  forced  him  to  stand
forward  before  them  all,  and  relate  what  he
had  seen  and  touched.  He  did  this,  adding
at  the  same  time  the  caution,  that  he  pronoun-
ced no  judgment   about  the  matter,  whether


106  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENEY  SUSO.

it  was  from  God  or  man,  but  that  lie  left  this  to
others.

This  story  resounded  far  and  wide  through
the  country,  and  each  person  added  to  it  what
he  pleased,  and  it  was  given  out  that  the  Servi-
tor had  pricked  himself  in  the  finger  and  rubbed
the  blood  upon  the  crucifix,  in  order  that  it  might
be  supposed  that  the  crucifix  had  bled  of  itself,
and  that  he  had  devised  this  through  covetous-
ness,  with  a  view  to  draw  a  crowd  of  people
thither,  that  he  might  plunder  them  of  their
property.  The  same  evil  report  was  spread
abroad  about  him  in  other  towns  also.

As  soon  as  the  citizens  of  the  town  heard
this  calumnious  tale,  there  was  nothing  left  for
him  but  to  escape  by  night  out  of  the  place,  and
they  pursued  him,  and  would  have  killed  him,
if  he  had  not  got  away.  They  even  offered  a
large  sum  of  money  to  whoever  would  bring
him  in  alive  or  dead.  Evil  rumours  of  this
kind  were  circulated  in  abundance  concerning
him;  and  wherever  these  tales  reached,  they
were  received  as  truth,  and  his  name  was  greeted
with  many  revilings  and  curses,  and  many  an
unjust  judgment  was  passed  upon  him.  Some
persons,  indeed,  who  knew  him,  were  more
reasonable ;  but,  if  they  ventured  to  assert  his


FALSE  ACCUSATIONS.  107

innocence,  they  were  so  savagely  put  down,  that
they  were  forced  to  hold  their  peace,  and  let  him
perish  in  the  world's  esteem.

An  honourable  lady,  a  citizen  of  the  town,
when  she  heard  all  the  marvellous  sufferings
which  the  poor  innocent  man  had  undergone,
came  to  him  out  of  compassion,  in  the  midst  of
his  distress,  and  advised  him  to  procure  from
the  town  a  sealed  testimonial  of  his  guiltless-
ness, that  he  might  take  it  with  him  wherever
he  went,  for  every  one  in  the  town  knew  well
that  he  was  innocent.  He  replied : — Ah,  dear
lady !  if  this  were  my  only  suffering,  and  if  it
were  God's  intention  to  lay  no  other  affliction
upon  me  but  this,  I  would  apply  for  the  testi-
monial ;  but  as  things  are,  so  much  suffering  of
this  kind  falls  to  my  lot  every  day,  that  I  must
leave  it  to  God  and  bear  it.

At  another  time  he  set  forth  on  a  journey  to
the  Netherlands,  to  be  present  at  a  chapter,  and
he  found  sufferings  ready  waiting  for  him  on
his  arrival,  for  there  came  thither  to  attack  him
two  persons  of  high  position  in  the  Order,  who
were  very  active  in  their  endeavours  to  bring
him  into  great  trouble.  With  quaking  heart,
he  was  put  upon  his  trial,  and  many  things  were
laid  to  his  charge,  among  which  was  the  follow-


108  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

ing : — They  said  that  he  had  written  books  con-
taining false  doctrine,  wliich  had  defiled  the
whole  country  with  heretical  filth.  In  conse-
quence, he  was  harshly  and  severely  repri-
manded, and  he  was  threatened  with  heavy
punishment,  though  God  and  the  world  knew
that  he  was  guiltless  in  the  matter.

These  crushing  trials  did  not  satisfy  God,  but
He  made  their  number  still  greater.  He  sent
the  Servitor  a  sickness  on  his  journey  home,  and
caused  him  to  be  attacked  by  a  violent  fever.
Besides  this,  a  dangerous  abscess  gathered  in-
wardly, close  to  his  heart;  so  that,  what  with
interior  anguish  and  outward  sufferings,  he  came
so  near  to  death  that  his  companion  often  looked
at  him  to  see  whether  the  moment  had  not  come
for  his  soul  to  take  its  departure.

As  he  lay  thus  utterly  wretched  in  a
strange  convent  in  bed,  and  could  not  sleep  at
night  from  the  straits  to  which  his  grievous
sickness  had  reduced  him,  he  began  to  enter
into  account  with  God  in  this  wise: — Woe  is
me,  O  just  God,  that  Thou  hast  so  exceedingly
overburthened  my  sick  frame  with  bitter  suffer-
ing, and  wounded  my  heart  through  and  through
with  the  great  dishonour  and  shame  that  has
been  done  me,  and  that  I  am  thus  encompassed


FALSE  ACCUSATIONS.  1091

with  bitter  anguish  from  without  and  from  with-
in !  When  wilt  Thou  cease  afflicting  me,  O
gentle  Father  !  When  wilt  thou  deem  it  enough  ?
Then  he  set  before  his  mind  the  death-agony
which  Christ  endured  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,,
and  while  contemplating  this,  he  crawled  from
his  bed  to  the  bench  which  stood  beside  it,  for
he  could  not  bear  to  lie  down,  owing  to  the
abscess.

While  he  sat  thus  in  miser)7-,  it  seemed  to-
him  in  a  vision  that  there  came  into  the  cham-
ber a  great  company  of  the  heavenly  host  to
comfort  him,  and  that  they  began  to  sing  one  of
the  songs  of  heaven,  which  rang  so  sweetly  in
his  ears  that  his  whole  being  was  transformed
by  it.  As  they  sang  thus  joyously,  and  the  sick
Servitor  sat  there  so  full  of  sorrow,  a  youth  came-
to  him,  and  said  very  lovingly: — Wherefore  art
thou  silent?  Why  singest  thou  not  with  us?
And  yet  thou  knowest  right  well  the  song  of
heaven.  The  Servitor,  with  a  sigh  from  his
sorrowful  heart,  made  answer,  saying : — Alas  !
seest  thou  not  how  full  of  woe  I  am !  When
ever  did  a  dying  man  rejoice?  Do  you  want
me  to  sing  ?  I  am  singing  now  the  wail  of  suf-
fering. If  I  have  ever  sung  joyously,  that  is  all
over  now,  for  I  am  waiting  only  for  the  hour  of


110  LITE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

my  death.  To  this  the  youth  replied  right  joy-
fully : — "  Viriliter  age."  Be  of  good  cheer.  Be
joyous.  Nothing  of  this  kind  shall  befall  thee.
Thou  shalt  yet  sing  in  thy  lifetime  such  a  song
that  God  in  His  eternity  shall  be  glorified,
and  many  a  sufferer  consoled  by  it.  Upon
this,  his  eyes  ran  over,  and  he  burst  into  tears,
and  at  the  same  instant  the  abscess  within  him
broke,  and  departed  from  him,  and  he  was  re-
stored to  health  upon  the  spot.

Afterwards,  when  he  reached  home,  there
came  to  him  a  blessed  friend  of  God,  saying : —
Dear  sir,  though  it  is  true  that  on  this  jour-
ney you  were  more  than  a  hundred  miles  away
from  me,  nevertheless,  what  you  suffered  during
it  was  quite  present  to  me.  I  saw  one  day  with
my  soul's  eyes  the  Divine  Judge  sitting  upon
His  throne,  and,  by  His  permission,  two  evil
spirits  were  let  loose,  who  persecuted  you  by
means  of  the  two  prelates  who  caused  your  suf-
ferings. Then  I  cried  to  God,  saying: — Alas,
gentle  God !  how  canst  Thou  bear  to  let  Thy
friend  be  in  such  great  and  bitter  suffering!
Upon  which  God  answered  me  in  this  wise : —
It  is  for  this  end  that  I  have  chosen  him  for
Myself,  that  by  means  of  these  sufferings  he
may  be  fashioned  after  the  image  of  My  only-


HIS  SISTER.  Ill

"begotten  Son.  Nevertheless,  My  justice  must
avenge  the  great  wrong  that  has  been  done  him,
by  the  speedy  death  of  the  two  who  have  tor-
mented him.  This  came  to  pass  in  very  truth
soon  afterwards,  and  in  such  a  way  that  many
persons  became  aware  of  it.


Chapter  XXVI.

Of  the  great  suffering  which  befell  him  through  his  sister.

The  Servitor  had  a  sister  who  was  under
the  obedience  of  the  religious  life.  Now,  it
happened  that,  while  the  brother  was  living
elsewhere,  she  began  to  throw  aside  restraint
and  attach  herself  to  evil  company.  On  one
occasion,  when  she  had  gone  out  with  these
companions,  she  went  astray  and  fell  into  sin,
and  then,  through  grief  and  wretchedness  at
what  had  befallen  her,  left  her  convent,  and
ran  away  he  knew  not  whither.

When  he  returned  home,  the  miserable  tale
was  being  whispered  about,  and  some  one  came
and  told  him  what  had  taken  place.  On  hearing
it,  he  became  like  a  stone  from  sorrow,  and  his
heart  died  within  him,  and  he  went  about  like
one  out  of  his  mind.     He  asked  where  she  was,


112  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

but  no  one  could  tell  him  where.  Then  the
thought  came  to  him : — A  new  suffering  is  quite
right,  but  that  it  should  be  here!  Well!  lose
not  heart.  See  whether  thou  mayst  not  be  able
to  bring  back  again  the  poor  ruined  soul,  and
offer  at  once  the  sacrifice  of  thy  worldly  honour
to  the  merciful  God.  Cast  aside  all  human
shame,  and  spring  into  the  deep  gulf  to  her  and
lift  her  up.

When  the  brothers  stood  in  the  choir  at
office,  and  he  had  to  pass  up  through  the  choir,
all  his  colour  left  him,  and  he  felt  as  if  his  hair
was  standing  on  end.  He  had  not  courage  to
go  up  to  any  one,  for  all  were  ashamed  of  him,
and  those  who  had  formerly  been  his  compa-
nions fled  from  him.  If  he  sought  counsel  of
his  friends,  they  turned  away  their  faces  -  from
him  contemptuously.  Then  he  called  to  mind
poor  Job,  and  said : — Weil !  the  compassionate
God  must  needs  comfort  me,  since  I  am  aban-
doned by  all  the  world.

He  inquired  on  all  sides  whither  he  should
go,  that  he  might  bring  speedy  help  to  the  for-
saken soul.  At  last  he  was  directed  to  a  certain
place,  and  he  set  out  for  it.  It  was  St.  Agnes's
Day,  and  the  weather  was  cold,  and  there  had
been  a  pouring  rain  throughout  the  night,  so


HIS  SISTEK.  113

that  the  brooks  were  much  swollen.  On  trying
to  jump  over  a  brook,  he  fell  into  it  from  weak-
ness. He  got  up  as  soon  as  he  could,  but  his
inward  distress  was  so  excessive  that  he  heeded
little  this  outward  mishap.  After  he  had  gone
some  distance  further,  his  sister  was  pointed  out
to  him  in  a  small  cottage.  He  went  up  to  it  in
anguish  of  soul,  and  going  in,  found  her  there.
As  soon  as  he  saw  her,  he  sank  down  upon  the
bench  on  which  she  was  sitting,  and  twice  his
senses  left  him.  When  he  came  to  himself
again,  he  began  to  cry  aloud  piteously,  and  to
lament  and  weep  and  beat  his  hands  toge-
ther above  his  head,  saying: — Alas,  my  God,
how  hast  Thou  forsaken  me !  Then  his  eyes
failed  him,  and  his  mouth  became  fixed,  and  his
hands  stiffened,  and  he  lay  thus  unconscious  for
a  while  in  a  faint.  But  as  soon  as  he  came  to
himself  again,  he  took  his  sister  into  his  arms,
and  said : — Alas,  my  child !  Alas,  my  sister  !
What  have  I  lived  to  see  in  thee  ?  Alas,  gentle
maiden,  Saint  Agnes,  how  bitter  has  thy  feast-
day  become  to  me !  And  then  he  sank  down
again,  and  his  senses  left  him.

Upon  this,  his  sick  sister  stood  up  and  fell  at
his  feet,  with  great  and  bitter  tears,  and  in  a
I


114  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENEY  SUSO.

voice  of  lamentation  addressed  him  thus : — Alas,
my  lord  and  father !  what  a  sad  day  was  that
which  brought  me  into  the  world,  since  I  have
lost  God  and  caused  you  such  great  suffering.
Alas,  true  brother  and  rescuer  of  my  lost  soul !
though  I  am  not  worthy  that  you  should  speak
to  me  or  answer  me,  still  take  me  to  your  true
heart,  and  call  to  mind  that  in  nothing  can  you
be  more  true  to  God  and  act  more  like  Him
than  in  what  you  do  for  a  cast-away  sinner  and
an  overburdened  heart.  Since  God  has  made
you  full  of  pity  for  all  pitiable  things,  how  will
you  refuse  to  pity  me,  a  poor  cast-away  sinner,
who  am  become  an  object  of  pity  to  God  and
all  the  world,  now  that  my  grievous  sin  has  so
speedily  and  thoughtlessly  made  me  vile  in  the
eyes  of  every  one?  What  all  reject  and  dis-
dain, you  seek  out.  When  all  are  justly  ashamed
of  me,  you  go  openly  to  the  cause  of  your  suf-
fering and  disgrace,  and  seek  me  out.  Oh!  I
beseech  you  with  an  anguish  of  heart  which
knows  no  rest,  prostrate  and  bowed  clown  be-
neath your  feet,  reverence  God  in  me,  poor
fallen  sinner,  and  forgive  me  altogether  this
crime  and  wrong  which  I  have  done  you,  to  the
hurt  of  my  poor  soul.    Call  to  mind,  I  pray  you,


HIS  SISTER.  115

that  if  in  this  world  I  have  lessened  your  honour
and  harmed  your  person  and  life,  you  will  receive
instead  singular  honour  and  consolation  in  eter-
nity ;  and  refuse  not  to  pity  me,  for  I  am  the
poor  maid  who  has  fallen  into  the  snare,  and  I
must  bear  this  loss  in  time  and  eternity  in  heart
and  soul  for  evermore,  and,  besides  all,  be  a
burden  to  myself  and  every  one.  Oh !  let  me
then  be  your  poor  needy  child  in  this  world  and
the  next.  Nothing  higher  does  my  heart  desire
than  that  I  may  have  no  longer  the  right  to  be,
or  to  be  called,  your  sister.  Only  let  me  in  pity
be  your  lost  sister,  and  by  right  your  found  and
well-earned  needy  one.  This  comes  so  truly
from  the  very  bottom  of  my  heart,  that  when  any
one  calls  me  your  sister,  or  points  me  out  as
such,  it  is  a  peculiar  bitterness  to  my  heart ;  and
I  pity  you  when  you  are  where  you  see  me  in
your  presence  and  must  needs  suffer  from  it,  for
I  know  that  you  cannot  help  suffering  all  the
shame  which  a  heart  naturally  feels  at  such
times.  Any  thing  further  in  common  between
us  there  neither  ought  to  be  henceforth,  nor  do
I  desire  it,  for  your  eyes  and  ears  must  be  filled
with  shame  and  horror  at  me.  All  these  pain-
ful things  I  will  endure,  and  offer  them  up  to
God  for  my  shameful  sin,  in  the  hope  that  you


116  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENEY  SUSO.

will  mercifully  pity  me,  poor  sinner,  and  faith-
fully satisfy  for  me,  and  help  my  poor  soul  to
find  grace  again  before  God.

When  the  brother  came  to  himself  again,  he
answered  her  sorrowful  lament  in  this  wise : —
Alas,  ye  hot  tears,  burst  forth  from  a  full  heart
which  can  no  longer  contain  itself  for  anguish !
Alas,  my  child !  thou,  my  heart  and  soul's  only
joy  from  my  childhood  up,  in  whom  I  had
dreamed  to  find  joy  and  comfort  throughout
life,  come  hither  and  let  me  press  thee  to  this
dead  heart  of  thy  wretched  brother.  Let  me
water  my  dear  sister's  face  with  the  bitter  tears
of  my  eyes.  Let  me  wail  and  weep  over  my
dead  child.  Oh,  a  thousand  deaths  of  the
body,  how  slight  a  woe !  Oh,  the  death  of  the
soul  and  of  honour,  how  great  a  woe  !  Oh,  sor-
row and  sufferings  of  my  wretched  heart !  O
God,  merciful  God,  what  have  I  lived  to  see!
O  my  child !  come  hither  to  me.  Since  I  have
found  my  child,  I  will  weep  and  lament  no  more ;
and  I  will  receive  thee  to-day  with  the  same
grace  and  pity  with  which  I  pray  the  merciful
God  to  receive  me,  a  sinful  creature,  at  my  de-
parture; and  I  will  gladly  forgive  thee  alto-
gether the  exceeding  pain  and  sorrow  which  I
have  suffered  through  thee,  and  must  go  on  suf-


HIS  SISTEE.  117

fering  to  my  life's  end ;  and  I  will  help  thee
with  all  my  might  to  expiate  and  correct  thy
sin  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  the  world.

All  those  who  saw  and  heard  these  lamenta-
tions of  the  two  were  so  moved  to  pity  thereby,
that  they  conld  none  of  them  restrain  them-
selves, but  were  forced  to  weep.  Thus,  by  his
sorrowful  bearing  and  his  loving  consolations,
he  so  softened  her,  that  she  became  willing  to
return  at  once  to  religious  obedience.

Later  on,  after  he  had  with  unspeakable
shame,  and  great  toil  and  labour,  brought  back
in  his  arms  to  the  merciful  God  this  lost  sheep,
God  so  ordered  it  that  she  was  received  into  a
far  more  satisfactory  place  than  where  she  was
before.  And  her  earnestness  in  God's  service
became  so  great,  and  her  holy  and  well-guarded
manner  of  life  showed  such  perseverance  in  all
virtues  until  her  death,  that  the  brother  was  well
repaid  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  the  world  for
all  the  pain  and  suffering  which  he  had  ever
had  on  her  account.

When  the  true-hearted  brother  saw  that  his
affliction  had  turned  out  so  exceeding  well,  it
gave  him  pleasure  and  joy,  and  he  called  to
mind  how  God  secretly  orders  all  things  so
that  they  turn  to  good  for  the  good ;  and  then


118  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

he  looked  up  to  God  with  great  thankfulness,
and  his  heart  melted  within  him  in  praise  of
God.


Chapter  XXVLL

Of  a  grievous  suffering  which  befell  him  through  a  com-
panion.

Once  upon  a  time,  when  he  was  about  to
set  forth  upon  a  journey,  there  was  assigned  to
him  for  his  companion  a  lay-brother  who  was  not
quite  right  in  his  head.  He  received  this  bro-
ther very  reluctantly,  for  he  had  continually
before  his  mind  the  sufferings  which  he  had
on  former  occasions  undergone  through  the  ill-
behaviour  of  his  companions.  Nevertheless,  he
submitted  himself,  and  took  the  brother  with
him.

Now,  it  so  happened  that  they  arrived  before
breakfast  at  a  village  in  which  an  annual  fair
was  being  held  on  that  day,  and  a  very  great
number  of  people  of  all  sorts  were  collected
together.  The  Servitor's  companion,  having
been  wet  with  the  rain,  went  into  a  house  to  a
fire,  and  declared  that  he  would  not  go  about
with  him  any  where,  adding  that  the  brother
must  do  whatever  he  had  to  do  without  him,


CHARGE  OF  POISONING.  119

and  that  lie  would  wait  for  him  there.  The
brother  had  scarcely  left  the  house  when  his
companion  rose  up,  and  seated  himself  at  table
with  a  set  of  rough  fellows  and  dealers  who  had
travelled  to  the  fair.  When  these  men  per-
ceived that  the  wine  had  got  well  into  his  head,
and  he  had  left  the  table,  and  was  standing
under  the  yard-door  gaping  about  him,  they
set  upon  him,  saying  that  he  had  stolen  a
cheese  from  them.  Now  at  that  very  moment,
when  these  wicked  people  were  treating  him  in
this  cruel  manner,  there  came  up  four  or  five
good-for-nothing  soldiers,  who  also  fell  upon
him,  exclaiming  that  the  scoundrel  monk  was
a  poisoner ;  for  it  was  just  then  that  there  was
the  outcry  about  poisoning.  Upon  this,  they
laid  hold  of  him,  and  made  a  great  uproar,  so
that  there  was  a  general  rush  to  the  place.

When  the  lay -brother  saw  what  course
things  had  taken,  and  that  he  was  a  prisoner,
he  wished  very  much  to  get  free,  and,  turning
round,  he  said  to  them:  —  Stop  a  moment.
Only  stand  still  and  let  me  speak,  and  I  will
confess  it  all  to  you,  and  tell  you  how  things  are.
They  stood  still,  and  every  body  listened ;  upon
which,  he  began  thus : — Look  at  me  now ;  you
cannot  help  seeing  that  I  am  a  fool  and  a  wit*


120  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

less  man,  and  no  one  makes  any  account  of  me ;
but  my  companion  is  a  man  of  consummate
wisdom,  and  the  Order  has  intrusted  him  with
little  bags  of  poison  to  throw  into  the  wells
between  this  place  and  Alsace,  whither  he  is
now  journeying ;  and  his  intention  is  to  defile
every  place  to  which  he  comes  with  vile  poison.
But  see  that  you  make  haste  and  seize  him,  or
he  will  have  done  a  murderous  deed  which  can
never  be  healed ;  for  he  has  just  now  taken  out
a  little  bag  of  poison  and  cast  it  into  the  village
well,  that  all  those  who  have  come  here  to  the
fair  and  shall  drink  of  the  well  may  die  without
fail.  This  is  why  I  stayed  behind,  and  would
not  go  out  with  him,  for  it  is  a  great  grief  to
me.  And  as  a  voucher  that  I  speak  the  truth,
you  must  know  that  he  has  a  great  bag  for
books,  full  of  little  bags  of  poison  and  a  quantity
of  florins,  which  he  and  the  Order  have  received
from  the  Jews  for  carrying  out  this  murderous
design.

When  the  wild  crew,  and  all  those  who  had
forced  their  way  into  the  house,  heard  these
words,  they  became  mad  with  rage,  and  with
loud  yells  they  shouted  out: — Quick  after  the
murderer,  that  he  escape  us  not!  And  one
seized  a  pike,  and  another  a  battle-axe,  each


CHARGE  OF  POISONING.  121

one  taking  what  he  could,  and  they  rushed
about  in  a  state  of  frenzy,  forcing  open  the
houses  and  the  closets,  where  they  fancied  they
might  find  him,  and  stabbing  with  their  naked
swords  through  the  beds  and  the  straw,  until
the  whole  fair  ran  together,  on  account  of  the
uproar.

Among  the  crowd  there  were  strangers
from  other  districts,  honourable  men,  who  knew
the  Servitor  well,  when  they  heard  his  name.
These  persons  came  forward  and  told  the  others
that  they  were  wronging  him,  for  that  he  was  a
very  pious  man,  who  would  be  very  sorry  to
commit  such  a  crime.  At  length,  as  they  could
not  find  him,  they  gave  over  the  search,  and
carried  his  companion  as  a  prisoner  to  the
village  magistrate,  who  ordered  him  to  be  shut
up  in  a  cell.

The  Servitor  knew  nothing  of  all  this
trouble;  but  when  he  thought  the  time  for
breakfast  had  come,  and  that  his  companion
had  quite  dried  himself  at  the  fire,  he  set  out
for  the  inn,  intending  to  breakfast  there.  When
he  reached  the  inn,  they  began  to  tell  him  the
sad  news,  and  related  to  him  all  that  had  hap-
pened. Upon  which,  he  ran  straightway  in
terror  to  the  house  where  the  magistrate  and


122  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

his  companion  were,  and  besought  the  magis-
trate to  release  him.  The  magistrate  replied
that  this  could  not  be,  for  that  he  intended  to
confine  him  in  a  tower  as  a  punishment  for  his
offence.  This  seemed  hard  and  unbearable  to
the  Servitor,  and  he  ran  hither  and  thither
seeking  help ;  but  he  could  find  no  one  to  aid
him  in  this  matter.  After  he  had  busied  him-
self in  this  way  for  a  long  time,  he  at  length,
with  much  shame  and  bitterness,  obtained  his
companion's  release,  though  at  great  cost  to
himself.

He  now  fancied  that  his  sufferings  were  at
an  end;  but  they  were  only  just  beginning.
For  he  had  no  sooner  got  free  from  the  authori-
ties with  trouble  and  loss,  than  his  life  was  ex-
posed to  imminent  danger.  When  he  left  the
magistrate,  about  vesper-time,  a  cry  was  raised
among  the  common  people  and  the  mob  that  a
poisoner  was  there ;  and  they  yelled  at  him  as
at  a  murderer,  so  that  he  dared  not  pass  along
in  front  of  the  village.  They  pointed  at  him,
saying: — That  is  the  poisoner.  He  shall  not
escape  us.  He  must  be  killed.  We  will  not
let  him  off  for  money,  like  the  magistrate.
When  he  tried  to  escape  by  slipping  away  into
the  village,  they  yelled  still  more  fiercely  after


CHARGE  OF  POISONING.  123

him.  Some  of  them  said: — We  ought  to
drown  him  in  the  Ehine;  which  ran  past  the
village.  The  others  answered: — No;  the  filthy
murderer  will  defile  all  the  water:  we  should
burn  him.  A  huge  peasant,  in  a  sooty  jerkin,
snatched  up  a  pike,  and,  forcing  his  way
through  to  the  front,  cried  out: — Hear  me,
my  masters,  all  of  you.  There  is  no  more
shameful  death  to  which  we  can  put  this  heretic
than  if  I  run  him  through  with  this  long  pike,
just  as  we  spit  a  poisonous  toad.  Even  so  in
like  manner  let  me  spit  this  poisoner  naked
on  this  pike,  and  then  lift  him  up  backwards,
and  drive  him  so  firmly  into  this  stout  fence
that  he  will  not  be  able  to  fall  off.  There  let
his  foul  carcass  be  dried  by  the  winds,  that  all
who  go  by  may  have  a  view  of  the  murderer,
and  curse  him  after  his  vile  death ;  that  so  his
misery  may  be  the  greater  in  this  world  and
the  next,  for  richly  has  this  utter  miscreant
deserved  this  fate.

The  Servitor  heard  these  words  with  such
terror  that  he  groaned  deeply,  and  the  great
tears  rolled  down  his  face  from  anguish.

All  those  who  stood  round  the  ring  and  saw
him  wept  bitterly ;  and  some  beat  their  breasts
through  pity,  and  struck  their  hands  together


124  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

above  their  heads ;  but  no  one  dared  to  say  any-
thing in  presence  of  the  infuriated  people,  for
they  were  afraid  of  being  attacked  themselves.

When  night  began  to  fall,  he  went  up  and
down  with  weeping  eyes  entreating  that  some
one,  for  God's  sake,  would  pity  him  and  give
him  shelter;  but  they  repulsed  him  cruelly.
Some  kind-hearted  women  would  have  gladly
taken  him  in,  but  they  dared  riot.  At  length,
when  the  wretched  sufferer  was  thus  in  the
straits  of  death,  and  all  help  from  man  had
failed  him,  and  they  were  only  waiting  for  the
moment  to  fall  upon  him  and  kill  him,  he
sunk  down  beside  a  fence  through  anguish  and
fear  of  death,  and,  lifting  up  his  miserable  and
swollen  eyes  to  the  heavenly  Father,  exclaimed:
— O  Father  of  all  pity,  when  wilt  Thou  bring
me  help  to-day  in  my  great  need?  O  kind
heart,  how  hast  Thou  forgotten  Thy  great
kindness  towards  me  ?  "  O  Father,  O  time,
kind  Father,  help  me,  poor  wretch,  in  these
great  straits !  I  cannot  resolve  in  my  heart,
which  is  already  dead,  whether  it  be  more  toler-
able for  me  to  be  drowned,  or  to  be  burned,  or
to  die  upon  a  pike,  for  one  of  these  deaths  must
now  be  mine.  I  commend  my  wretched  spirit
to  Thee  to-day,  and  I  pray  Thee  to  show  me


A  MURDERER.  125

pity  in  my  miserable  death,  for  they  are  nigh
unto  me  who  are  resolved  to  kill  me.

This  sorrowful  plaint  was  overheard  by  a
priest,  who,  running  thither,  snatched  him  by
force  out  of  their  hands,  and  brought  him  home
into  his  house ;  and,  after  keeping  him  during
the  night,  that  nothing  might  happen  to  him,
set  him  on  his  way  next  morning  early,  safe  out
of  all  his  troubles.


Chapter  XXVIII.

Of  a  murderer.

Once  upon  a  time,  when  the  Servitor  was
returning  from  the  Netherlands,  his  road  lay
up  the  Rhine.  He  had  with  him  a  companion
who  was  young,  and  a  good  walker.  Now,  it
happened  one  day  that  he  could  not  keep  up
with  his  swift  companion,  for  he  had  become
very  tired  and  ill,  and  in  consequence  the  com-
panion had  gone  ahead  of  him  about  half-a-
mile.*  The  Servitor  looked  back  to  see  if  any
one  was  following  in  whose  company  he  might

*  A  German  mile  is  about  four  English  miles  and  a
half.


126  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

go  through  the  forest,  at  the  skirts  of  which  he
had  arrived,  for  it  was  late  in  the  day.  The
forest,  moreover,  was  extensive,  and  of  ill  re-
pute, for  many  persons  had  been  murdered  in
it.  The  Servitor  therefore  stopped  at  the  out-
skirts of  the  forest,  and  waited  to  see  whether
any  one  was  coming.

At  length  two  persons  approached,  at  a  very
rapid  pace;  the  one  was  a  young  and  pretty
woman,  the  other  a  tall  ferocious-looking  man,
carrying  a  spear  and  a  long  knife,  and  he  had
on  a  black  jerkin.  The  Servitor  was  struck
with  dread  at  the  terrible  appearance  of  the
man,  and  he  looked  round  to  see  if  there  was
any  one  following;  but  he  saw  no  one.  He
thought  within  himself: — O  Lord!  what  land
of  people  are  these  ?  How  am  I  to  go  through
this  great  forest,  and  how  will  it  fare  with  me  1
Then  he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  his
heart  and  ventured  it.  When  they  were  al-
ready deep  in  the  forest,  the  woman  came  for-
ward to  him,  and  asked  him  who  he  was  and
what  was  his  name.  As  soon  as  he  had  told
her  his  name,  she  answered : — Dear  sir,  I  know
you  well  by  name.  I  pray  you  to  hear  my
confession.  Then  she  began  to  confess,  saying:
Alas,  worthy  sir !  it  is  with  sorrow  I  tell  you


A  MUEDEEEE.  127

my  sad  lot.  Do  you  see  the  man  who  follows
us  ?  He  is  by  trade  a  murderer,  and  he  mur-
ders people  here  in  this  wood  and  elsewhere,
and  takes  from  them  their  money  and  clothes.
He  never  spares  any  one.  He  has  deceived
me,  and  carried  me  off  from  my  friends,  who
are  persons  of  good  repute,  and  I  am  forced  to
be  his  wife.

The  Servitor  was  so  terrified  by  these  words
that  he  nearly  fainted,  and  he  cast  a  very  sorrow-
ful look  all  round  him,  if  haply  there  were  any
one  in  sight  or  hearing,  or  any  mode  of  escape.
But  there  was  no  one  to  be  seen  or  heard  in  the
dark  forest  coming  after  them,  except  the  mur-
derer. Then  he  thought  within  himself: — If,
weary  as  thou  art,  thou  triest  to  flee,  he  will
soon  overtake  and  kill  thee ;  and  if  thou  criest
out,  no  one  will  hear  thee  in  this  wilderness,
and  death  again  will  be  thy  lot.  He  looked
upwards  very  wofully,  and  said : — O  my  God,
what  is  to  become  of  me  to-day?  O  death,  how
nigh  thou  art  to  me !

When  the  woman  had  finished  confessing,
she  went  back  to  the  murderer,  and  besought
him  privily,  saying: — Come  now,  dear  friend,
go  forward,  and  make  thy  confession  also;  for
it  is  a  pious  belief  among  my  people  that  who-


128  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HESTRY  SUSO.

ever  confesses  to  him,  however  sinful  he  may  be,
will  never  be  abandoned  by  God.  Do  it,  then ;
that  God  may  help  thee,  for  His  sake,  at  thy
last  hour.

While  the  two  were  thus  whispering  to  each
other,  the  Servitor's  terror  knew  no  bounds,  and
the  thought  came  to  him : — Thou  art  betrayed !
The  murderer  was  silent,  and  went  forward.
Now,  when  the  poor  Servitor  saw  the  murderer
advancing  npon  him,  spear  in  hand,  his  whole
frame  quivered  with  dread,  and  he  thought  with-
in himself: — Alas,  now  thou  art  lost!  For  he
knew  not  what  they  had  been  talking  about.  At
this  point  it  happened  that  the  Rhine  ran  close
to  the  wood,  and  the  narrow  path  lay  along  the
bank.  Moreover,  the  murderer  so  contrived  it
that  the  brother  was  forced  to  walk  on  the  side
next  the  water,  while  he  walked  next  the  wood.
As  the  Servitor  went  along  in  this  manner  with
trembling  heart,  the  murderer  began  to  confess,
and  revealed  to  him  all  the  murders  and  crimes
which  he  had  ever  committed.  Especially  he
spoke  of  a  horrible  murder,  which  struck  terror
into  the  Servitor's  heart,  and  which  he  thus  de-
scribed:— I  came  once  into  this  wood  to  rob
and  murder,  as  I  have  done  to-day,  and  meet-
ing with  a  venerable  priest,  I  confessed  to  him,


A  MURDERER.  129

while  lie  was  walking  beside  me  at  this  very-
spot,  just  as  you  are  doing ;  and  when  the  con-
fession was  over,  I  drew  forth  this  knife  and  ran
him  through  with  it,  and  then  thrust  him  from
me  over  the  bank  into  the  Ehine.

These  words,  and  the  gestures  with  which
the  murderer  accompanied  them,  made  the  Ser-
vitor turn  pale,  and  terrified  him  so  exceedingly
that  the  cold  sweat  of  death  ran  down  his  face
upon  his  breast,  and  he  shook  with  fear,  and
became  speechless,  and  all  his  senses  failed  him,
and  he  kept  looking  every  moment  at  his  side,
expecting  that  the  same  knife  would  be  thrust
into  him,  and  that  he  would  then  be  pushed
over  into  the  river.  Now  just  as  he  was  on  the
point  of  falling  down  through  agony  of  mind
and  utter  inability  to  advance  a  step,  he  cast  an
exceeding  piteous  look  all  round  him,  like  a  per-
son longing  to  escape  death.  The  murderer's
damsel  caught  sight  of  his  woe-stricken  face,
and  running  up  received  him  in  her  arms,  as  he
was  falling,  and  holding  him  fast,  said : — Good
sir,  be  not  afraid.  He  will  not  kill  you.  The
murderer  added  : — Much  good  has  been  told  me
concerning  you,  and  you  shall  have  the  benefit
of  it  to-day,  for  I  will  let  you  live.    Beg  of  God

K


130  LITE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

to  help  and  favour  me,  a  poor  criminal,  at  my
last  hour,  for  your  sake.

In  the  mean  time  they  had  come  out  of  the
forest,  and  the  Servitor's  companion  was  sitting
there  under  a  tree  waiting  for  him.  The  mur-
derer and  his  partner  passed  on.  But  the  Ser-
vitor, crawling  to  his  companion,  sank  down  on
the  ground,  while  his  heart  and  his  whole  body
trembled,  as  in  an  attack  of  ague,  and  he  lay
thus  motionless  for  a  long  time.  At  length  on
recovering  himself,  he  rose  up  and  went  on  his
way ;  and  he  besought  God  earnestly  and  with
deep  inward  sighings  for  the  murderer,  that  He
would  let  him  have  the  benefit  of  the  pious  con-
fidence which  he  had  conceived  towards  the  Ser-
vitor, and  not  suffer  him  to  be  damned  at  his
last  hour.  God  gave  the  Servitor  such  an  in-
ward assurance  of  this,  that  it  was  impossible
for  him  to  doubt  that  the  murderer  would  be
saved.


Chapter  XXIX.

Of  perils  by  water.
On  one  occasion  when  he  had  travelled  to
Strasburg,  according  to  his  custom,  and  was  on


PERILS  BY  WATER.  131

his  return  home,  he  fell  into  a  great  stream  of
water,  caused  by  an  overflow  of  the  Rhine,  and
he  had  with  him  the  new  little  book  which  he
had  just  finished,  and  with  which  the  foul  fiend
was  very  wrath.  As  he  was  being  swept  help-
lessly along  by  the  current,  at  the  peril  of  his  life,
the  faithful  God  so  ordered  it,  that  at  that  very
moment  there  came  up  by  chance  from  Stras-
burg  a  young  newly-made  Prussian  knight,  who
venturing  into  the  turbid  and  raging  water  saved
the  Servitor  and  his  companion  from  a  miser-
able death.

Once  upon  a  time  he  set  forth  on  a  journey
under  obedience,  when  the  weather  was  cold;
and  after  travelling  on  a  carriage  the  whole  day
through  until  evening  without  food  in  the  cold
wind  and  frosty  weather,  he  arrived  at  a  troubled
piece  of  water,  which  was  deep  and  rapid,  owing
to  the  great  quantity  of  rain  which  had  fallen.
The  man  who  drove  him  went  too  near  the  bank
through  carelessness,  and  the  carriage  turning
over,  the  brother  was  shot  out  of  it  and  fell  into
the  water  on  his  back.  The  carriage  fell  over
on  him,  so  that  he  could  not  turn  himself  in  the
water  either  to  this  side  or  to  that,  nor  yet  help
himself  at  all ;  and  in  this  state  he  and  the  car-
riage floated  down  for  some  distance  towards  a


132  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

mill.  The  driver  and  others  ran  thither,  and
jumping  into  the  water  seized  hold  of  him,  and
tried  their  best  to  draw  him  out ;  but  the  heavy
carnage  lay  upon  him  and  pressed  him  down.
When  at  last  they,  succeeded  with  great  labour
in  lifting  the  carriage  off  him,  they  drew  him
out  to  land  dripping  wet,  and  he  had  not  been
long  out  of  the  water  before  his  clothes  froze
upon  him  from  the  excessive  cold.  He  began  to
tremble  with  cold,  so  that  his  teeth  chattered,  and
in  this  miserable  plight  he  stood  still  for  a  long
time,  and  then  looking  up  to  God  exclaimed:
— O  my  God,  what  am  I  to  do  !  what  course  am
I  to  adopt  1  It  is  late  and  night  is  at  hand,  and
if  there  is  no  town  or  village  near,  where  I  can
warm  and  refresh  myself,  I  must  die ;  and  what
a  wretched  kind  of  death  this  will  be !  He  looked
around  on  all  sides,  until  at  last  he  espied  far
away  upon  a  hill  a  very  small  hamlet.  He
crawled  thither,  all  wet  and  frozen  as  he  was,
and  by  the  time  he  reached  it  night  had  set  in.
He  went  up  and  down  begging  for  shelter  in
God's  name ;'  but  he  was  driven  away  from  the
houses,  and  no  one  would  take  pity  on  him.
Then  the  frost  and  fatigue  began  to  attack  Ins
heart,  and  put  him  in  fear  for  his  life;  upon
which  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  God: —


INTERVAL  OF  REST.  133

O  Lord !  O  Lord !  it  would  have  been  better
hadst  Thou  let  me  be  drowned,  for  then  there
would  have  been  an  end  of  it,  instead  of  my
being  frozen  to  death  in  this  street.

These  words  of  lamentation  were  overheard
by  a  peasant,  who  had  before  this  driven  him
away,  but  who  now  touched  with  compassion
took  him  in  his  arms  and  brought  him  into  his
house,  where  he  spent  a  miserable  night.


Chapter  XXX.

Of  a  short  interval  of  rest  which  God  once  granted  hiin.

God  had  accustomed  him  to  this,  that  as
soon  as  one  suffering  left  him  another  was
ready  at  hand  to  take  its  place;  and  in  this
way  God  played  with  him  unintermittingly.
Once  only  He  allowed  him  an  interval  of  rest ;
but  it  did  not  last  long.

During  this  season  of  inaction  he  came  to  a
nunnery,  and,  being  asked  by  his  spiritual  chil-
dren how  things  went  with  him,  he  replied : —
I  fear  they  are  going  very  ill  with  me  at  pre-
sent, and  for  this  reason.  It  is  now  four  weeks
since  any  one  has  attacked  me  in  my  person


134  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

or  my  good  name,  quite  unlike  what  used  to
happen  to  me ;  so  that  I  fear  lest  God  has  for-
gotten me.  Now  he  had  not  sat  long  with
them  at  the  grate  when  there  came  a  brother
of  the  Order,  who  called  him  out,  and  said : —
I  was  a  little  while  ago  at  a  castle,  and  the  lord
of  it  asked  after  you,  where  you  were,  and  he
did  this  very  savagely.  And  then  he  lifted
up  his  hands,  and  swore  before  every  one  that
wherever  he  found  you,  he  would  run  a  sword
through  you.  The  same  thing  was  also  done
by  several  fierce  soldiers,  his  kinsmen,  and  they
have  been  searching  for  you  in  different  monas-
teries round  about  in  order  to  execute  their  evil
designs  upon  you.  Be  warned,  therefore,  and
take  care  of  yourself,  as  you  love  your  life.

The  Servitor  was  struck  with  terror  at  these
words,  and  said  to  the  brother: — I  should  be
very  glad  to  hear  what  I  have  done  to  de-
serve the  penalty  of  death.  He  answered : —
The  lord  of  the  castle  has  been  told  that  you
have  misled  his  daughter,  as  well  as  many
other  persons,  into  a  particular  kind  of  life,  to
which  the  name  of  spirit  is  given,  and  that
those  who  follow  it  are  called  spirits;  and  he
has  been  assured  that  they  are  the  most  aban-
doned set  on  the  face  of  the  earth.     But  more


HIS  LOVING  COMPLAINT  TO  GOD.         135

than  this.  There  was  another  ferocious  man
there,  who  said  of  you : — He  has  robbed  me  of
a  dear  wife.  She  draws  her  veil  down  now,
and  will  no  longer  look  at  me.  She  will  only
look  inwards.  He  is  the  cause  of  this,  and  he
shall  pay  for  it.

When  the  Senator  heard  this  tale,  he  re-
plied:— Praised  be  God!  and  hastening  back
immediately  to  the  grate,  said  to  his  daughters :
— Be  of  good  cheer,  my  children.  God  has
been  mindful  of  me,  and  has  not  forgotten  me.
Then  he  told  them  the  cruel  tale,  how  that  men
were  seeking  to  return  him  evil  for  the  good
that  he  had  done.


Chapter  XXXI.

How  he  once  entered  into  a  loving  account  with  God.

During  this  season  of  the  Servitor's  suffer-
ings, and  in  the  places  where  he  then  lived,  if
he  sometimes  happened  to  go  into  the  infirmary
to  give  a  little  refreshment  to  his  sick  body,  or
if  he  sat  silent  at  table  according  to  his  cus-
tom, he  was  sorely  tried  by  mocking  discourse
and   unseemly   words  ;    and   this    at   first  was


136  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

a  great  suffering  to  him,  and  made  him  feel
such  pity  for  himself  that  the  hot  tears  would
often  run  down  his  cheeks,  and  force  their  way
with  what  he  ate  or  drank  into  his  mouth.  At
such  times  he  used  to  look  up  silently  to  God,
and,  groaning  inwardly,  exclaim:  —  Alas,  O
God!  art  not  Thou  content  with  the  misery
which  I  suffer  day  and  night  ?  Must  even  my
scanty  food  at  table  be  mingled  with  great  per-
secutions? This  happened  to  him  oftentimes
and  abundantly.

Once  on  leaving  table  he  could  restrain
himself  no  longer,  and,  going  into  his  place  of
privacy,  he  said  to  God : — Dear  God,  Lord  of
the  whole  world,  be  gentle  and  gracious  to  me,
poor  man,  for  I  must  enter  into  account  with
Thee  to-day.  I  cannot  help  doing  it;  and
though  in  truth  Thou  owest  no  man  aught,
and  art  bound  to  no  one  by  reason  of  Thy
high  sovereignty,  nevertheless  it  well  beseems
Thy  infinite  goodness  graciously  to  suffer  a  full
heart  to  seek  refreshment  in  Thee,  when  it  has
no  one  else  to  whom  it  can  make  its  plaint  or
who  can  comfort  it.  O  Lord,  I  call  Thee  to
witness,  who  knowest  all  things,  that  from  my
mother's  womb  all  my  life  through  I  have  had
a  tender  heart.     I  never  yet  saw  any  one  in


HIS  LOVING  COMPLAINT  TO  GOD.         137

pain  or  sadness  but  I  had  a  heartfelt  pity  for
him ;  and  I  never  willingly  gave  ear  to  talk
which  would  grieve  any  one,  whether  behind
his  back  or  in  his  presence.  All  my  com-
panions must  allow  that  it  has  been  seldom
heard  of  me  that  I  ever  by  my  words  made
worse  the  case  of  any  brother,  or  of  any  one
else,  either  to  the  prelate  or  to  others;  but  I
made  every  one's  case  better,  so  far  as  I  was
able;  and  when  I  could  not  do  this,  I  was
silent,  or  I  fled  away  that  I  might  not  hear  it.
Out  of  pity  I  showed  all  the  more  friendship
towards  those  who  were  wounded  in  their
honour,  that  they  might  more  easily  recover
their  good  repute.  I  was  called  the  faithful
father  of  the  poor.  I  was  a  special  friend  of
all  God's  friends.  All  who  ever  came  to  me
in  sorrow,  or  aggrieved,  always  received  some
good  counsel  from  me,  which  made  them  leave
me  joyful  and  consoled ;  for  I  wept  with  those
who  wept,  and  I  sorrowed  with  those  who  were
in  sorrow,  until,  like  a  mother,  I  brought  them
round  again.  No  one  ever  caused  me  any
suffering  however  great,  but  if  he  only  smiled
kindly  on  me  afterwards,  it  was  all  past  and
over  in  God's  name,  as  if  it  had  never  been.
O  Lord,  I  will  say  no  more  about  mankind,  for


138  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

I  could  not  even  see  or  hear  the  needs  and
sorrows  of  all  the  little  birds  and  beasts  and
other  creatures  of  God  without  being  pierced  to
the  heart  thereby,  and  I  used  to  pray  the  kind
Lord  of  all  to  help  them.  Whatever  lives  on
earth  met  with  favour  and  tender  treatment
from  me.  And  yet  Thou,  O  kind  Lord,  suf-
ferest  some,  of  whom  dear  Paul  speaks,  calling
them  false  brethren,  to  behave  to  me  so  exceed-
ing  cruelly,  as  Thou  knowest  well,  O  Lord,  and
it  is  manifest  enough.  Alas,  kind  Lord !  look
at  this,  and  console  me  for  it  with  Thyself.

After  he  had  spent  a  long  time  in  thus  re-
freshing his  heart  with  God,  there  came  upon
him  a  stillness  of  repose,  and  he  was  inwardly
illuminated  by  God  in  this  wise  : — The  childish
account  which  thou  hast  entered  into  with  Me
comes  from  this,  that  thou  dost  not  always  keep
before  thee  the  words  and  ways  of  the  suffer-
ing Christ.  Thou  must  know  that  God  is  not
satisfied  with  the  mere  kindliness  of  heart
which  thou  professest;  He  wants  still  more
from  thee.  What  He  wants  is,  that  when  thou
art  openly  ill-treated  by  any  one  in  words  or
behaviour,  thou  shalt  not  only  bear  it  patiently,
but  shalt  die  to  self  so  utterly  as  not  to  go  to
sleep  that  night  until  thou  hast  sought  out  thy


HIS  LOVING  COMPLAINT  TO  GOD.         139

persecutor,  and,  as  far  as  possible,  calmed  his
incensed  heart  with  thy  sweet  words  and  ways ;
for  with  such  meek  lowliness  thou  wilt  take
from  him  sword  and  knife,  and  make  him
powerless  in  his  malevolence.  See,  this  is  the
old  and  perfect  way  which  the  dear  Christ
taught  His  disciples,  when  He  said,  "Behold,
I  send  you  as  lambs  among  the  wolves"  (Luke
x.3).

When  the  Servitor  came  to  himself  again,
this  perfect  way  seemed  to  him  too  burdensome,
and  it  was  grievous  to  him  to  contemplate  it,
and  still  more  grievous  to  follow  it.  Neverthe-
less he  submitted  himself  thereto,  and  began  to
learn  it.

Now  it  happened  one  day  after  this  that  a
lay  brother  spoke  very  insolently  to  him,  and
abused  him  openly.  The  Servitor  bore  it  pati-
ently in  silence,  and  he  would  gladly  have  let
it  rest  there.  But  he  was  inwardly  admonished
that  he  must  do  something  better  than  this.  Ac-
cordingly, when  it  became  evening,  and  the  bro-
ther was  eating  in  the  infirmary,  the  Servitor
went  and  stood  in  front  of  the  infirmary,  waiting
for  him  to  come  out.  As  soon  as  he  came  out,
the  Servitor  fell  on  his  knees  before  him,  and
addressed  him  in  words  of  humble  entreaty : —


140  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

I  pray  thee,  dear  worthy  father,  honour  God  in
me,  poor  man,  and  if  I  have  troubled  you,  for-
give me,  for  God's  sake.  The  brother  stood
still,  and,  looking  up  in  amazement,  exclaimed,
with  a  loud  cry : — Ah  me !  what  a  marvellous
tiling  you  are  doing!  and  yet  you  never  in-
jured me,  nor  any  one  else:  It  is  I  who  have
openly  outraged  you  by  my  villanous  words.
You  must  indeed  forgive  me,  I  entreat  you.
In  this  way  his  heart  was  stilled  and  restored
to  peace.

Once  upon  a  time,  as  he  sat  at  table  in  the
guest-house,  a  brother  insulted  him  with  scorn-
ful talk.  Upon  which  the  Servitor  turned  to-
wards him  very  lovingly,  and  smiled  upon  him,
as  though  he  had  just  received  a  precious  jewel
from  him.  The  brother  was  so  moved  by  this,
that  he  became  silent,  and  turned  his  face  again
in  kindliness  towards  the  Servitor.  When  the
meal  was  ended,  the  brother  spoke  of  it  in  the
town,  saying: — I  have  never  been  so  grossly
insulted  as  I  was  to-day  at  table ;  for,  after  I
had  treated  the  Senator  with  open  rudeness  at
table,  he  bowed  his  face  towards  me  so  very
sweetly,  that  I  became  red  with  shame ;  and  it
shall  always  be  a  good  lesson  to  me.


HE  COMES  NIGH  TO  DEATH.  141

Chapter  XXXII.

How  his  sufferings  once  brought  him  nigh  to  death.

It  happened  to  him  once  during  many
nights,  that  the  moment  he  awoke  from  sleep
something  began  to  repeat  in  him  the  psalm  of
our  Lord's  sufferings,  "Deus,  Deus  meus,  re-
spice  in  me"  (Ps.  xxi.).  This  psalm  was  spoken
by  Christ  on  the  gallows  of  the  cross,  when  He
was  forsaken  in  His  distress  by  His  Heavenly
Father  and  by  every  one.  The  Servitor  was
struck  with  consternation  at  this  continual  in-
terior whispering  when  he  awoke,  and  weeping
bitterly,  he  cried  to  Christ  upon  the  cross  in
these  words  : — Alas,  my  Lord  and  my  God !  if
it  be  meet  and  necessary  that  I  should  once
more  suffer  a  new  crucifixion  with  Thee,  accom-
plish, I  beseech  Thee,  Thy  pure  and  innocent
death  in  me,  poor  man,  and  be  with  me,  and
help  me  to  come  forth  victorious  over  all  my
sufferings.

When  this  cross  arrived,  as  had  been  fore-
shown him,  sufferings  of  no  ordinary  kind,  and
of  whose  nature  nothing  is  here  said,  began  to
increase  continually  upon  him,  and  to  multi-
ply from  day  to  day,  until  at  last  they  became


142  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

so  great,  and  weighed  down  the  sick  man  so
heavily,  that  they  brought  him  to  the  very  ex-
tremity of  death.  One  evening  when  he  was
away  from  the  monastery,  and  had  gone  to  his
bed  to  rest,  there  fell  on  him  snch  an  utter  pro-
stration of  strength,  that  he  thought  he  must
now  inevitably  die  of  faintness,  and  he  lay  there
quite  motionless,  so  that  there  was  no  pulse  in
any  of  his  veins.  When  this  was  observed  by  a
faithful  and  good-hearted  man  who  tended  him,
and  whom  he  had  won  to  God  at  great  cost  to
himself,  the  man  ran  to  him  in  bitter  grief,  and
pressed  his  hand  against  his  heart,  to  try  whether
there  was  still  life  there.  But  his  heart  was
without  movement,  and  beat  no  more  than  that
of  a  dead  man  would.  At  this  he  sank  to  the
ground  in  great  sorrow,  and  while  the  tears
streamed  down  his  face,  he  cried  aloud  with
piteous  lamentations :  —  O  God !  alas  for  this
noble  heart,  which  many  a  day  has  borne  Thee,
O  merciful  God,  so  lovingly  within  it,  and  has
told  of  Thee  so  pleasantly  by  word  and  writing,
in  every  land,  to  so  many  erring  men  for  their
consolation — how  has  it  perished  to-day!  O
what  evil  tidings  is  it  that  this  noble  heart
must  rot,  and  cannot  live  a  long  time  yet  for
Thy  glory  and  the  consolation  of  many  !     Thus


HE  COMES  NIGH  TO  DEATH.  143

piteously  lamenting  with  streaming  eyes,  he
bent  over  the  Servitor  and  touched  his  heart
and  mouth  and  arms,  to  see  whether  he  still
lived  or  was  dead.  But  there  was  no  motion
there.  His  face  was  deadly  white,  his  mouth
black,  and  all  sign  of  life  had  vanished,  as  from
a  dead  man  laid  out  upon  his  bier.  This  lasted
as  long  as  it  would  take  to  walk  a  mile.  Mean-
while the  object  of  his  soul's  contemplation,
while  he  lay  thus  in  seeming  death,  was  naught
else  but  God  and  the  Godhead,  the  True  and
the  Truth,  in  indwelling  everlasting  oneness.  It
happened,  indeed,  that  before  he  became  so  very
weak,  and  was  carried  out  of  himself  in  ecstasy,
he  began  to  speak  in  his  heart  fond  words  to
God  in  this  wise : — Ah,  everlasting  Truth,  Thy
deep  abysses  are  hidden  from  every  creature.
I,  Thy  poor  Servitor,  see  clearly  that  there  is
now  an  end  of  me,  as  my  departed  strength  be-
tokens. I  speak  now  at  my  life's  verge  to  Thee,
mighty  Lord,  whom  no  one  can  deceive,  because
all  things  are  manifest  to  Thee.  Thou  alone
knowest  how  things  stand  between  me  and  Thee.
Therefore  I  seek  grace  of  Thee,  faithful  heavenly
Father;  and  wheresoever,  alas,  I  have  broken  out
into  unlikeness  and  deflection  from  the  supreme
Truth,  I  grieve  for  it,  and  repent  me  of  it  with


144  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

all  my  heart,  and  I  beseech  Thee  to  blot  it  out
with  Thy  precious  Blood,  according  to  Thy  gra-
ciousness  and  my  necessity.  Kemember  that
all  the  days  of  my  life  I  have  celebrated  and
exalted  as  highly  as  I  could  Thy  pure  and  inno-
cent Blood,  and  it  must  now  at  my  departure
wash  me  clean  from  all  my  sins.  Oh,  kneel
down,  I  entreat  you,  all  ye  Saints,  especially
thou,  my  kind  and  gracious  lord,  St.  Nicholas,
and  lift  up  your  hands  and  help  me  to  beseech
the  Lord  for  a  good  end.  O  pure,  gentle,  kind
Mother  Mary !  reach  me  thy  hand  to-day,  and
at  this  my  last  hour  graciously  receive  my  soul
beneath  thy  shelter,  for  thou  art  my  heart's  joy
and  consolation.  O  Lady  and  Mother  mine,  into
thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit.  O  dear  Angels,
be  mindful  that,  all  my  life  through,  my  heart
has  ever  laughed  within  me,  when  I  only  heard
you  named,  and  forget  not  how  often  }rou  have
brought  me  in  my  sorrows  heavenly  joys,  and
guarded  me  from  my  foes.  O  gentle  Spirits,
it  is  only  now  that  my  greatest  straits  are  come,
and  that  I  most  need  your  help.  Aid  me,  then,
and  shield  me  from  the  horrible  si^ht  0f  my
foes,  the  evil  spirits.  O  Lord  of  heaven,  I
praise  Thee  for  having  bestowed  on  me  at  my
death-hour  such  entire  consciousness ;  and  I  go


HE  COMES  NIGH  TO  DEATH.       145

hence  in  the  full  Christian  faith  without  a  doubt
and  without  fear ;  and  I  forgive  all  those  who
have  ever  made  me  suffer,  as  Thou  upon  the
cross  forgavest  those  who  slew  Thee.  Lord,
Lord,  Thy  divine  sacramental  Body,  which  I
received  to-day  at  Mass,  ill  though  I  was,  must
be  my  guardian  and  my  convoy  to  Thy  divine
countenance.  My  last  prayer  which  I  make  now
at  this  my  end,  gentle  Lord  of  heaven,  is  for
my  dear  spiritual  children,  who  whether  by  spe-
cial bonds  of  faithfulness,  or  by  confession,  have
lovingly  attached  themselves  to  me  in  this  mis-
erable world.  O  merciful  God,  as  Thou  at  Thy
departure  didst  commend  Thy  dear  disciples  to
Thy  Heavenly  Father,  even  so  in  that  self-same
love  let  these  be  commended  to  Thee,  and  grant
them  also  a  good  and  holy  end.  And  now  I
turn  myself  away  altogether  from  all  creatures,
and  I  turn  me  wholly  to  the  pure  Godhead,  the
primal  fountain-head  of  everlasting  bliss.

After  he  had  held  much  discourse  within  his
heart  in  this  fond  loving  fashion,  he  was  trans-
ported out  of  himself  in  ecstasy,  and  fell  into
the  faint  described  above.  At  length,  when  he
and  others  fancied  that  he  must  have  departed,
he  came  to  himself  again,  and  his  affrighted
heart  began  to  revive,  and  his  sick  limbs  to  re-

L


146  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

cover  strength,  and  he  got  well  and  returned  to
life  again,  as  before.


Chapter  XXXLTL

How  a  man  should  offer  up  his  sufferings  to  the  praise  and
glory  of  God.

When  the  suffering  Servitor  had  deeply
meditated  upon  this  long  and  weary  warfare,
and  moreover  had  come  to  see  in  it  God's  hid-
den marvels,  he  turned  one  day  to  God,  sighing
inwardly,  and  said: — Alas,  Lord,  these  suffer-
ings are  in  their  outward  aspect  like  sharp  thorns
which  pierce  through  flesh  and  bone.  There-
fore, gentle  Lord,  cause  some  sweet  fruit  of
good  instruction  to  issue  forth  from  these  sharp
thorns  of  sufferings,  that  we,  poor  men,  may
suffer  more  patiently,  and  be  better  able  to  offer
up  our  sufferings  to  Thy  praise  and  glory.

After  he  had  continued  for  a  long  time  ear-
nestly beseeching  God  for  this,  it  came  to  pass
one  day  that  he  was  rapt  in  ecstasy,  and  his
bodily  senses  being  abstracted,  it  was  sweetly
said  to  him  within  his  soul : — I  will  show  thee
to-day  the  high  nobility  of  My  life,  and  how  a


HOW  TO  SUFFER  FOR  GOD.  147

sufferer  should  offer  up   his   sufferings  to  the
praise  and  glory  of  the  loving  God.

At  these  sweet  interior  words  his  soul  was
melted  within  him,  and  his  bodily  senses  being
stilled  in  ecstasy,  the  arms,  as  it  were,  of  his
soul  stretched  themselves  forth,  out  .of  the  un-
fathomable fulness  of  his  heart  to  the  far-off
ends  of  the  universe,  even  to  heaven  and  earth  ;
and  he  thanked  God  with  a  boundless  heartfelt
yearning,  saying: — Hitherto,  O  Lord,  I  have
praised  Thee  in  my  musings  with  the  aid  of  all
that  is  pleasant  and  delightful  in  all  creatures ;
but  now  I  must  joyously  break  forth  into  a  new
song,  and  a  strange  kind  of  praise,  which  I  knew
not  before,  since  I  have  only  now  come  to  know
it  by  suffering.  And  it  is  this  :  I  pray  from
my  heart's  bottomless  depths  that  all  the  sorrow
and  pain  wThich  I  have  ever  suffered,  as  well  as
the  woes  and  agonies  of  every  human  heart,  the
smarts  of  all  wounds,  the  anguish  of  all  the  sick,
the  groans  of  all  sad  souls,  the  tears  of  all  weep-
ing eyes,  the  misery  of  all  the  oppressed,  the
distress  of  all  needy  widows  and  orphans,  the
pining  want  of  all  the  poor  and  hungry,  the  out-
poured blood  of  all  martyrs,  the  crushing  of  self-
will  in  all  who  are  young  and  blooming,  the
afflictive  exercises  of  all  God's  friends,  and  all


148  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

the  secret  and  open  pains  and  sorrows,  which  I
or  any  other  poor  sufferer  ever  endured  in  body,
goods,  or  honour,  in  weal  or  woe,  or  which  any
one  will  ever  have  to  suffer  from  now  to  dooms-
day,— all  these  I  pray  may  he  an  everlasting
source  of  praise  to  Thee,  O  Heavenly  Father,
and  an  eternal  honour  to  Thy  only-begotten
suffering  Son  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.
And  I,  Thy  poor  Servitor,  desire  to-day  to  be
the  faithful  representative  of  all  sufferers  who
perchance  have  been  unable  to  turn  to  full  ac-
count their  sufferings,  by  patient  thanksgiving
and  praise  of  God  for  them ;  and  I  wish  in  their
place  to  offer  up  their  sufferings  in  praise  of
God,  however  they  may  have  borne  them ;  and
I  now  offer  them  up  to  Thee  in  their  stead,  just
as  if  I  myself  alone  had  suffered  them  all  in  my
body  and  in  my  heart,  as  it  is  my  heart's  wish
to  do ;  and  I  tender  them-  all  this  day  to  Thy
only-begotten  suffering  Son,  that  they  may  be
an  everlasting  praise  to  Him,  and  that  the  suf-
ferers may  be  comforted,  whether  they  are  still
here  in  this  vale  of  sorrow,  or  in  the  next  world
in  Thy  hand.

O  all  ye  who  suffer  with  me,  look  at  me  and
give  ear  to  what  I  say  to  you !  We,  poor  mem-
bers, ought  to  console  ourselves  and  rejoice  in


HOW  TO  SUFFER  FOR  GOD.  149

our  venerable  Head,  God's  lovely  only-begotten
Son,  that  He  lias  suffered  for  us,  and  never
passed  one  pleasant  day  on  earth.  Behold !  if
there  is  only  one  rich  man  in  a  poor  family,  the
whole  family  rejoices  in  him.  Ah,  venerable
Head  of  us  all,  Thy  members,  be  gracious  to  us,
and  where  through  human  frailty  true  patience
fails  us  in  any  affliction,  do  Thou  make  it  up
for  us  before  Thy  Heavenly  Father.  Bethink
Thee  how  Thou  earnest  once  to  the  help  of  one
of  Thy  servants,  and  when  his  courage  was  all
but  failing  him  through  suffering,  Thou  saidst
to  him : — Be  of  good  cheer  and  look  at  Me.  I
was  noble  and  poor ;  I  was  tender  and  in  misery ;
I  was  born  from  out  the  fulness  of  all  joys,  and
yet  I  was  full  of  sorrow.  Therefore,  as  valiant
knights  of  our  imperial  Lord,  let  us  not  lose
heart;  as  noble  followers  of  our  venerable  Leader,
let  us  be  of  good  cheer,  and  rejoice  to  suffer;  for
if  there  were  no  other  profit  and  good  in  suffer-
ing, than  that  we  became  more  like  the  fair
bright  mirror  Christ,  the  more  closely  that  we
copied  Him  in  this,  our  sufferings  would  be  well
laid  out.  It  seems  to  me  in  truth,  that  even  if
God  meant  to  give  the  same  reward  hereafter
to  those  who  suffer  and  to  those  who  do  not  suf-
fer, we  ought  still  to  choose  suffering  for  our  lot,


150  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

were  it  only  to  be  like  Him ;  for  love  produces
likeness  and  devotion  to  the  beloved,  so  far  as
it  can  and  may.  But  oh !  how  dare  we  pre-
sume to  take  upon  ourselves  that  we  ought  to
resemble  Thee,  O  noble  Lord,  in  our  sufferings!
Thy  sufferings  and  our  sufferings  how  unlike
they  are !  O  Lord,  Thou  alone  art  the  sufferer
who  hast  never  deserved  to  suffer.  But  where  is
he,  alas,  who  can  pride  himself  that  he  has  never
given  cause  for  sufferings  I  For  if  on  the  one
hand  he  is  guiltless  in  that  for  which  he  suffers,
on  the  other  he  deserves  punishment  on  other
counts.  Therefore  we  place  ourselves,  I  mean
all  we  who  have  ever  suffered,  in  a  great  wide
ring  round  and  round;  and  we  place  Thee,  our
dear  gentle  Lover,  in  the  midst  of  us,  even  in  the
ring  of  us  suffering  mortals,  and  we  spread  out
far  and  wide  our  thirsty  veins  with  great  long-
ing towards  Thee,  the  rich  outbursting  foun-
tain of  all  grace.  Behold  and  marvel.  Just  as
the  earth  which  is  most  cracked  with  drought
takes  in  best  the  stormy  streams  of  watery  rain,
even  so  we  heavily-laden  men,  the  more  guilty
we  are  towards  Thee,  the  more  closely  do  we
clasp  Thee  to  us  with  outspread  hearts,  and
our  longing  desire  is  that,  come  what  may,  ac-
cording to  the  promise  of  Thy  divine  mouth,  we


THE  REWARDS  OF  SUFFERING.  151

may  be  washed  in  Thy  streaming  and  trickling
wounds,  and  be  set  free  thereby  from  every
sin ;  for  all  which  Thou  shalt  receive  everlasting
praise  and  honour  from  us,  and  we  shall  obtain
grace  from  Thee,  since  all  unlikeness  will  be
removed  from  us  by  Thy  almightiness.

After  the  Servitor  had  remained  sitting  with-
out movement  for  a  long  time,  during  which
all  this  was  revealed  to  him  with  great  solem-
nity in  the  innermost  interior  of  his  soul,  he
rose  up  joyfully  and  thanked  God  for  the  grace
which  he  had  received.


Chapter  XXXIV.

Of  the  joys  with  which  God  recompenses  in  this  present
life  those  who  suffer  for  Him.

On  a  joyful  Easter-day  the  Servitor  was  once
in  very  blithesome  mood,  and  as  he  sat  for  a
short  time,  according  to  his  custom,  in  the  re-
pose of  contemplation,  he  desired  earnestly  to
hear  from  God  what  meed  of  delights  they  shall
receive  from  Him  in  this  life  who  have  borne
manifold  sufferings  for  His  sake.  Whereupon,
being  rapt  in  ecstasy,  a  light  shone  into  his  soul
from  God  to  this  effect: — Let  all  who  suffer


152  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

with  detachment  rejoice,  for  their  patience  shall
be  gloriously  rewarded ;  and  as  they  have  been
here  below  an  object  of  pity  to  many,  even  so
shall  many  rejoice  eternally  at  the  deserved
praise  and  everlasting  honour  which  shall  be
theirs.  They  have  died  with  Me,  and  they
shall  also  rise  again  with  Me  in  gladness.
Three  special  gifts  I  will  give  them,  so  precious
that  no  one  can  reckon  up  their  value.  First,
I  will  give  absolute  power  to  their  wishes  in
heaven  and  on  earth,  so  that  whatever  they
wish  shall  come  to  pass.  Secondly,  I  will  give
them  My  divine  peace,  which  neither  angel,
nor  devil,  nor  man,  nor  any  other  creature  can
take  away  from  them.  Thirdly,  I  will  so  in-
wardly kiss  them  through  and  through,  and  so
lovingly  embrace  them,  that  I  in  them  and  they
in  Me,  and  we  together,  shall  abide  eternally,
one  undivided  unity  for  ever.  And  since  long
waiting  and  praying  are  painful  to  restless
hearts,  this  love  shall  not  be  withheld  from
them  during  this  short  present  hour  of  life,
which  lasts  but  for  a  moment,  but  it  shall  begin
even  now,  and  be  enjoyed  eternally,  so  far  as
man's  mortal  nature  can  in  each  case  more  or
less  support  it.

These  glad  tidings  filled  the  Servitor  with


THE  REWARDS  OF  SUFFERING.  153

joy;  and  when  he  came  to  himself  again,  he
sprang  up,  and  began  to  laugh  so  heartily  that
the  chapel  in  which  he  was  reechoed  to  the
sound,  and  he  said  within  himself  joyously : —
Let  him  who  has  suffered  come  forward  and
complain.  God  knows,  I  can  declare  that  as  to
myself,  methinks  I  have  never  had  any  thing
at  all  to  suffer.  I  know  not  what  suffering  is ;
but  I  know  well  what  joy  and  bliss  are.  Power
to  wish  and  to  obtain  is  given  me;  a  thing
which  many  erring  hearts  must  be  without.
What  want  I  more?  Then  he  turned  his
thoughts  to  the  eternal  Truth,  and  said : — Ah  !
eternal  Truth,  show  me  now  this  hidden  mys-
tery, so  far  as  words  can  tell  it,  for  it  is  a  truth
of  which  many  blinded  men  are  altogether  ig-
norant.

This  mystery  was  inwardly  manifested  to
him  thus  :  —  Mark  those  who  have  paid  due
.attention  to  the  breaking  away  from  creatures,
— in  other  words,  to  that  death  to  self  and  all
things  with  which  a  man  must  begin.  Alas  !
there  are  not  many  such.  The  mind  and
thoughts  of  these  men  have  so  passed  away  into
God,  that  they  know  nothing,  as  it  were,  of  them-
selves, save  only  that  they  view  themselves
and  all  things  in  their  primal  fountain-head;


154  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

and  therefore  they  have  the  same  pleasure  and
complacency  in  each  several  thing  which  God
does,  as  if  God  stood  by  unconcerned  with  it  and
inactive,  and  it  were  granted  to  them  to  carry
out  each  thing  according  to  their  own  mind;
and  thus  it  is  that  their  will  is  absolute  in
might,  for  heaven  and  earth  serve  them,  and
every  creature  is  subject  to  them,  in  what  each
does  or  leaves  undone.  Such  persons  feel  no
sorrow  of  heart  about  any  thing ;  for  I  only  call
that  pain  and  sorrow  of  heart  which  the  will
with  full  deliberation  wishes  to  be  freed  from.
Externally,  indeed,  they  have  a  sense  of  plea-
sure and  pain  like  other  people,  and  it  is  more
intense  perhaps  in  them  than  others,  because  of
their  great  tenderness ;  but  in  their  inmost  souls
it  finds  no  abiding- place,  and  exteriorly  they
remain  firm  against  impatience.  They  are  filled
to  the  full  even  in  this  life,  so  far  as  this  is
possible,  owing  to  their  detachment  from  self,,
and  hence  their  joy  is  complete  and  stable  in  all
things.  For  in  the  divine  essence,  into  which
their  hearts  have  passed  away  and  become
merged, — that  is,  supposing  they  have  not  gone
astray  from  the  right  path, — neither  pain  nor
sorrow  finds  place,  but  only  peace  and  joy.  If,
however,  thy  own  frailty  entices  thee  to  commit


THE  REWARDS  OF  SUFFERING.  155

sin,  from  which  pain  and  sorrow  justly  spring  np
for  the  sinner,  and  if  thou  committest  sin,  then,
and  then  only,  thou  wilt  find  a  flaw  in  thy
happiness.     But  if  thou  avoidest  sin,  and  goest
out  of  thyself  in  this  respect,  and  passest  away
into  that  in  which  thou  canst  have  neither  suf-
fering nor  sorrow — since  pain  is  not  pain  to  thee
there,  nor  suffering  suffering,  but  all  things  are
unmingled  peace — then  it  is  well  with  thee  in
very  truth.     And  all  this  comes  to  pass  because
their  self-will  is  lost  and  gone.   For  these  persons
are  of  themselves  driven  onward  with  a  longing
thirst  towards  God's  will  and  His  justice;  and
they  find  such  a  sweet  savour  in  God's  will,  and
they  so  delight  in  it,  and  take  such  pleasure
in  all  that  He  ordains  concerning  them,  that
they  have  no  wish  nor  desire  for  any  thing  else.
This,  however,  must   not  be   understood  as  if
they  were  forbidden  to  ask  things  of  God  and
to  pray  to  Him;  for  it  is  God's  will  that  we
pray  to  Him.     But  it  is  to  be  understood  of  the
due  and  rightful  going  forth  out  of  our  own
judgment  into  the  will  of  the  supreme    God-
head, as  has  been  said.     Now  there  lies  in  this
a  hidden  difficulty,  against  which  many  stumble,
and  it  is  this.     Who  knows,  they  say,  whether
it  is  God's  will?     See  now.     God  is  a  super-


156  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

essential  good,  and  He  is  more  interiorly  pre-
sent to  every  individual  thing  than  that  thing
can  be  to  itself;  and  against  His  will  nothing
can  happen,  nor  can  any  thing  exist  for  an  in-
stant. Therefore  they  must  be  miserable  who
are  always  struggling  against  God's  will  and
desiring  to  do  their  own  will,  if  they  could.
They  have  the  kind  of  peace  which  is  in  hell,
for  they  are  always  in  sadness  and  heaviness.
On  the  contrary,  a  soul  stripped  of  self  has  God
and  peace  at  all  times  present  to  it,  in  adversity
as  well  as  in  prosperity ;  for  if  He  is  truly  there
who  does  all  and  is  all,  how  can  the  sight  of
their  own  sufferings  be  grievous  to  them,  since
in  them  they  see  God,  find  God,  make  use  of
God's  will,  and  know  nothing  of  their  own  will?
not  to  speak  of  the  consoling  illuminations  and
heavenly  delights  with  which  God  often  secretly
sustains  His  suffering  friends.  These  persons
are,  as  it  were,  in  heaven.  What  happens  to
them  or  does  not  happen  to  them,  what  God  does
in  all  creatures  or  does  not  do,  all  turns  to  their
advantage.  And  thus  he  who  can  bear  suffer-
ing well  receives  in  this  world  a  portion  of  the
reward  of  his  sufferings ;  for  he  finds  peace  and
joy  in  all  things,  and  after  death  everlasting  life
awaits  him.


HIS  SPIRITUAL  DAUGHTER.  157

Chapter  XXXY.

Of  the  Servitor's  spiritual  daughter.

a  Filia  confide," — Be  of  good  heart,  daugh-
ter (Matt.  ix.  22).  The  Servitor  had  at  this
time  a  spiritual  daughter,  of  the  Order  of  Friars
Preachers,  in  an  enclosed  convent  at  Tosse.*
Her  name  was  Elizabeth  Staglin,  and  she  lived
a  very  holy  life  exteriorly,  and  was  of  an  an-
gelic disposition  within.  The  noble  and  ener-
getic way  in  which  she  turned  herself  with  her
whole  heart  and  soul  to  God  set  her  free  en-
tirely from  all  those  vain  things  which  cause  so
many  persons  to  neglect  their  eternal  salvation.
All  her  diligence  was  directed  towards  obtain-
ing spiritual  instruction,  that  she  might  thus  be
guided  to  a  blessed  and  perfect  life,  the  one  end
and  object  of  all  her  wishes.  She  wrote  down
whatever  she  met  with  that  pleased  her,  and
seemed  calculated  to  aid  herself  and  others  in
the  acquisition  of  divine  virtues ;  and  she  acted
in  this  like  the  industrious  bees,  which  bring
back  sweet  honey  collected  from  many  different
flowers.

In  the  convent  where  she  lived  among  the
sisters  as  a  mirror  of  every  virtue,  she  composed,

*  Thoss,  near  Winterthur,  in  Switzerland,


158  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

notwithstanding  her  bodily  infirmities,  a  large
book,  containing,  among  other  things,  an  ac-
count of  the  blessed  lives  which  the  deceased
holy  sisters  had  led,  and  the  great  marvels  God
had  wrought  in  them.  It  is  a  book  well  suited
to  excite  good-hearted  persons  to  devotion.*

This  blessed  daughter  came  to  hear  of  the
Servitor  of  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  and  God  in-
spired her  with  great  devotion  to  his  manner  of
life  and  teaching.  She  drew  from  him  secretly
the  way  in  which  he  broke  through  created
things  to  arrive  at  God,  and  she  wrote  it  down,
as  has  been  already  related.

At  the  first  beginning  of  her  conversion  to
God  she  came  across  a  great  many  deep  intel-
lectual views  regarding  the  pure  Godhead,  the
nothingness  of  all  things,  detachment  from  self,
abstraction  of  the  mind  from  all  sensible  forms,
and  such -like  high  things;  and  they  were
clothed  in  beautiful  language,  and  were  very-
pleasant  to  reflect  upon.  But  there  lay  con-
cealed beneath  them  something  hurtful  to
simple-minded  beginners  like  her ;  for  she  was
quite    ignorant    of  the    necessary   distinctions

*  Henry  Murcr  lias  extracted  many  of  these  lives  from
the  Chronicles  of  the  convent  at  Thoss,  and  inserted  them
in  his  Jlelcctla  San  eta.


HIS  SPIRITUAL  DAUGHTER.  159

which  ought  to  be  made,  inasmuch  as  the  words
were  capable  of  being  taken  in  a  spiritual  or
a  natural  sense,  according  to  the  disposition  of
those  who  used  them.  These  doctrines  were
good  in  themselves ;  but  they  were  insufficient
for  her  instruction.  She  therefore  wrote  to  the
Servitor,  asking  him  to  help  her,  and  guide  her
along  the  right  path.  Nevertheless,  as  she  had
already  tasted  of  the  pleasure  which  is  to  be
found  in  these  doctrines,  she  prayed  him  to  pass
over  the  common  ordinary  kind  of  instruction,
and  to  write  to  her  something  about  the  above-
mentioned  high  subjects.

The  Servitor  answered  her  thus: — Good
daughter,  if  thou  askest  me  concerning  high
things  through  curiosity,  in  order  to  become
acquainted  with  them,  and  to  be  able  to  talk
well  about  spiritual  matters,  what  I  have  to  say
to  thee  will  need  but  a  few  words.  Take  not
too  much  pleasure  in  them,  for  they  may  easily
lead  thee  into  dangerous  errors.  True  bliss  lies
not  in  beautiful  words,  but  in  good  works.  If,
however,  thou  askest  about  these  things  in  order
to  put  them  in  practice,  my  answer  is,  Let  alone
for  the  present  these  deep  questions,  and  attend
to  those  only  which  are  suitable  for  thee.  Thou
seemest  to  me  to  be  as  yet  a  young  unexercised


160  LIFE  OP  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

sister,  and  therefore  it  will  be  more  profitable  to
thee,  and  the  like  of  thee,  to  hear  about  the
first  beginnings  of  the  spiritual  life,  both  how  it
ought  to  be  begun  and  what  exercises  are  ap-
propriate to  it ;  and  also  about  good  and  holy-
examples,  as,  for  instance,  how  this  and  that
friend  of  God,  who  began  in  the  same  way,  first
of  all  exercised  themselves  in  imitating  Christ's
life  and  sufferings ;  what  kind  of  things  they  had
to  suffer  continually ;  how  they  bore  themselves
in  their  sufferings  interiorly  and  exteriorly ;  whe-
ther God  drew  them  onwards  by  sweetness  or
by  severity;  and  when  and  how  they  were  set
free  from  sensible  forms  and  images.  This  is
the  way  in  which  a  beginner  is  spurred  on  and
guided  to  perfection ;  for,  though  it  is  true  that
God  can  give  all  this  to  a  person  in  an  instant,
it  is  not  His  way  to  do  so,  but  it  is  to  be  ob-
tained ordinarily  only  by  hard  labour  and  many
conflicts.

On  receiving  this  letter,  the  daughter  re-
plied to  him  as  follows : — What  I  long  for  is
not  wise  words,  but  a  holy  life  ;  and  this  I  have
the  courage  truly  and  honestly  to  strive  after
until  I  attain  it,  whatever  pain  it  may  entail
upon  me,  and  no  matter  what  I  may  have  to
give  up  or  suffer,  or  die  to,  or  whatever  else


HIS  SPIRITUAL  DAUGHTER.  161

may  be  needful  to  bring  me  to  perfection ;  for
all  this  I  must  and  will  undergo.  And  fear  not
on  account  of  the  weakness  of  my  nature ;  for
whatever  you  have  the  courage  to  command  me,
which  is  painful  to  nature,  I  have  the  courage
to  accomplish,  with  the  help  of  God's  might.
Begin  first  with  the  lowest  things,  and  guide
me  in  them,  just  as  a  little  school-child  is  first
taught  what  is  adapted  to  its  childish  years,  and
then  afterwards  receives  more  and  more  instruc-
tion, until  it  becomes  at  last  a  master  in  the  art.
One  only  prayer  I  make  to  you,  and  this  you
must  grant  me,  for  God's  sake,  in  order  that  I
may  not  only  be  instructed  by  you,  but  may  be
also  strengthened  against  all  the  trials  which  I
may  have  to  encounter.  He  asked  what  this
request  might  be.  She  answered : — Sir,  I  have
heard  say  that  the  pelican  is  of  such  a  nature
that  it  bites  itself,  and,  from  natural  love,  feeds
with  its  own.  blood  its  young  offspring  in  the
nest.  Ah,  sir,  what  I  ask  is,  that  you  will  act
thus  towards  your  needy  child,  and  feed  her
with  the  spiritual  food  of  your  good  teaching ;
and  that  you  will  not  seek  for  this  from  afar,
but  take  it  from  yourself;  for  the  nearer  it  has
been  to  you  in  the  way  of  experience,  the  more
deeply  it  will  come  home  to  my  longing  soul.
M


162  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

The  Servitor  wrote  thus  to  her  in  answer: —
Thou  showedst  me  a  little  while  ago  some  high
thoughts  which  thou  hadst  thyself  culled  from
the  sweet  teaching  of  the  holy  Master  Eckart,
and  which,  as  is  just,  thou  valuedst  highly;  and
I  marvel  much,  that,  after  thou  hast  drunk  of
the  noble  drink  of  this  high  Master,  thou  de-
clarest  thyself  so  thirsty  for  the  coarse  drink  of
the  lowly  Servitor.  Nevertheless,  when  I  con-
sider it  well,  I  note  with  joy  thy  great  wisdom
in  this  matter ;  namely,  that  thou  art  so  busy  in
thy  questionings  about  what  is  the  first  begin-
ning of  a  high  and  secure  life,  and  what  are  the
exercises  which  must  be  first  practised  in  order
to  attain  it.


Chapter  XXXVI.

Of  the  first  beginnings  of  a  beginner.
The  beginnings  of  a  holy  life,  said  the
Servitor  to  the  daughter,  are  various.  One
person  begins  in  one  way,  and  another  in  an-
other; but  as  regards  the  beginning,  to  which
your  questions  refer,  I  will  tell  you  about  it.
I  know  a  man  in  Christ,  who,  when  he  began
to  give  himself  to  God,  first  cleared  out  his
conscience   by   a   general   confession ;    and  he


FIRST  BEGINNINGS.  163

spared  no  pains  to  make  tins  confession  well,
by  exposing  every  sin  that  lie  had  committed
to  a  prudent  confessor,  in  order  that  he  might
go  pure  and  clean  from  the  confessor,  who  sits
in  God's  place,  and  that  all  his  sins  might  be
forgiven  him,  as  happened  to  Mary  Magdalen,
when,  with  penitent  heart  and  tearful  eyes,  she
washed  Christ's  feet,  and  God  forgave  her  all
her  sins.  Such  was  the  first  beginning  of  this
man's  turning  to  God.

The  daughter  laid  this  example  very  much
to  heart,  and  she  wished  to  lose  no  time  in
imitating  it,  and  she  conceived  a  great  desire
to  make  her  confession  to  the  Servitor,  thinking
that  he  would  be  the  one  best  suited  for  her ;
and  it  was  her  intention  also,  in  doing  this,  to
become  thereby  his  spiritual  daughter,  and  so
to  have  a  greater  claim  upon  his  godly  care.

Now  it  so  happened  that  the  confession
could  not  be  made  by  word  of  mouth.  She
therefore  passed  in  review  her  whole  life,  which,
in  very  truth,  had  been  a  pure  and  innocent
one;  and  whatever  sins  it  seemed  to  her  that
she  had  committed,  she  wrote  down  on  a  large
waxen  tablet,  which  she  then  fastened  up  and
sent  to  him,  begging  him  to  pronounce  absolu-
tion over  her  sins.


164  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

When  he  read  through  the  confession,  lie
came  to  the  following  words  at  the  bottom  of
the  tablet: — Gracious  sir,  I,  a  sinful  creature,
fall  down  now  at  your  feet  and  beseech  you,
with  your  true  and  faithful  heart,  to  bring  me
back  again  into  God's  heart,  and  to  let  me  be
called  your  child  in  time  and  in  eternity.  The
daughter  s  confiding  devotion  touched  him  very
much,  and,  turning  to  God,  he  said : — Merciful
God,  what  answer  is  Thy  Servitor  to  make  to
this?  Shall  I  drive  her  from  me?  I  should
not  like  to  treat  a  dog  thus.  O  Lord,  if  I  did
this,  it  might  reflect  ill  upon  Thee,  my  Lord
and  Master ;  for  she  seeks  the  Lord's  wealth  in
His  servant.  O  gentle  Lord,  I  cast  myself  at
Thy  holy  feet,  and  beseech  Thee,  kind  Lord,  to
hear  her.  Let  her  have  the  benefit  of  her  good
faith  and  hearty  confidence,  for  she  cries  after
us.  How  didst  Thou  treat  the  heathen  woman?
Ah !  kind  Heart,  see  how  far  and  wide  the  fame
of  Thy  unfathomable  bountifulness  has  spread
amongst  us.  O  kindly  Goodness,  turn  Thy
gentle  eyes  towards  her,  and  say  to  her  one
single  little  word  of  consolation.  Say  then,
"  Confide  filia,  fides  tua  te  salvam  fecit," — Be
of  good  heart,  daughter;  thy  faith  has  saved
thee.     And  bring  Thou  it  to  pass  in  my  stead ;


FIRST  BEGINNINGS.  165

for  I  have  done  what  rests  with  me,  and  I  have
wished  her  a  full  absolution  from  all  her  sins.

He  wrote  back  the  following  answer  to  her
by  the  same  messenger: — What  thou  hast  asked
of  God  through  the  Servitor  has  come  to  pass,
and  thou  must  know  that  it  was  all  shown  to
him  by  God  beforehand.  Early  this  very  morn-
ing, when  his  prayer  was  ended,  he  sat  down
for  a  brief  moment  of  repose;  and  his  bodily
senses  being  stilled  in  ecstasy,  many  divine
mysteries  were  manifested  to  him.  Among
other  things,  he  was  enlightened  to  understand
how  God  has  made  diversity  of  form  to  be  the
individualising  principle  of  the  angelic  nature,
and  has  given  to  each  angel  a  special  property
which  distinguishes  him  from  the  rest ;  all  which
it  is  impossible  for  him  to  express  in  words.
After  he  had  spent  a  good  space  of  time  in
heavenly  recreation  with  the  angelic  spirits,  and
was  in  very  joyous  mood  through  the  exceeding
wonderment  which  his  soul  had  felt,  it  seemed
to  him,  in  the  same  vision,  that  thou  didst  come
in  and  stand  before  him  where  he  sat  among  the
heavenly  company,  and  then,  kneeling  down
with  great  earnestness  in  front  of  him,  didst
bow  thy  face  upon  his  heart,  and  continue
kneeling  thus  with  thy  face  bowed  upon  his


166  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

heart,  so  that  the  angels  who  stood  by  beheld
it.  The  brother  marvelled  at  thy  boldness,  and
yet  thy  bearing  was  so  holy  that  he  graciously
permitted  it.  What  manner  of  graces  the
Heavenly  Father  bestowed  on  thee,  whilst  thou
wert  bowed  down  upon  the  suffering  heart,  thou
knowest  right  well,  and  they  were  visible  upon
thee;  for  when  after  a  good  while  thou  didst
raise  up  thyself,  thy  countenance  was  so  joyous
and  full  of  grace,  that  it  was  quite  evident  God
had  bestowed  some  special  grace  upon  thee ;  and
He  will  do  still  more  for  thee  through  the  same
heart,  that  He  may  be  glorified  in  it,  and  thou
consoled.

The  like  happened  also  to  a  maiden  named
Anna,  a  noble  and  godly  person,  who  dwelt  in
a  castle,  and  who,  moreover,  led  a  life  of  pure
unmingled  suffering.  God  wrought  great  mar-
vels in  her  from  her  youth  up  until  her  death.
Before  she  knew  the  Servitor,  or  had  ever  heard
of  him,  she  was  one  day  rapt  in  ecstasy  at  her
devotions,  and  she  saw  how  the  Saints  gaze  upon
and  praise  God  in  the  court  of  heaven.  Upon
this  she  prayed  her  dear  Apostle  St.  John,  to
whom  she  had  a  sj)ecial  devotion,  to  hear  her
confession.  He  answered  her  very  lovingly : —
I  will  give  thee  a  good  confessor  in  my  place.


FIRST  BEGINNINGS.  167

God  has  granted  him  full  authority  over  thee,
and  he  can  comfort  thee  well  in  thy  manifold
sufferings.  She  asked  who  and  where  he  was,
and  what  was  his  name:  all  which  St.  John
made  known  to  her.  She  thanked  God,  and,
rising  early  in  the  morning,  went  to  the  monas-
tery which  God  had  shown  her,  and  asked  for
him.  He  came  to  her  to  the  outer  gate,  and
inquired  of  her  what  her  business  was.  Upon
this  she  made  her  confession  to  him,  and  when
he  heard  the  heavenly  message,  he  consented,
and  fulfilled  it.

This  holy  daughter  also  told  him,  that  she
had  once  seen  in  spirit  a  beautiful  rose-tree,
richly  adorned  with  red  roses,  and  on  the  rose-
tree  there  appeared  the  little  Child  Jesus,  with
a  garland  of  red  roses.  Beneath  the  rose-tree
she  saw  the  Servitor  sitting.  The  little  Child
broke  off  many  of  the  roses,  and  threw  them
upon  the  Servitor,  so  that  he  became  all  covered
and  bestrewed  with  roses.  Upon  this  she  asked
the  Child  what  the  roses  meant,  and  He  an-
swered : — The  great  quantity  of  roses  signifies
the  manifold  sufferings  which  God  will  send
him,  and  which  he  must  lovingly  accept  at
God's  hands,  and  bear  with  patience.


168  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.


Chapter  XXXVII.

Of  the  first  lessons  and  examples  which  are  suitable  for  a
beginner,  and  how  he  should  regulate  his  exercises  with
discretion.

At  the  first  beginning  of  the  Servitor's  in-
terior life,  after  he  had  purified  his  soul  properly
by  confession,  he  marked  out  for  himself,  in
thought,  three  circles,  within  which  he  shut
himself  up,  as  in  a  spiritual  intrenchment.
The  first  circle  was  his  cell,  his  chapel,  and
the  choir.  When  he  was  within  this  circle,  he
seemed  to  himself  in  complete  security.  The
second  circle  was  the  whole  monastery  as  far  as
the  outer  gate.  The  third  and  outermost  circle
was  the  gate;  and  here  it  was  necessary  for  him
to  stand'  well  upon  his  guard.  When  he  went
outside  these  three  circles,  it  seemed  to  him  that
he  was  in  the  plight  of  some  wild-animal  which
is  outside  its  hole,  and  surrounded  by  the  hunt,
and  therefore  in  need  of  all  its  cunning  and
watchfulness.

He  had,  moreover,  in  his  beginnings,  made
choice  of  a  chapel  as  a  place  of  retirement,  in
which  he  might  satisfy  his  devotion  by  means
of  pictures.  Now  it  should  be  observed  that,  in
his  youth,  he  had  caused  to  be  painted  for  him-


PICTURE  OF  THE  ETERNAL  WISDOM.      169

self,  upon  parchment,  a  picture  of  the  Eternal
Wisdom,  who  rules  supreme  over  heaven  and
earth,  and  far  surpasses  all  created  things  in
ravishing  beauty  and  loveliness  of  form;  for
which  reason,  when  he  was  in  the  bloom  of
youth,  he  had  chosen  Wisdom  for  his  beloved.
He  carried  this  lovely  picture  with  him  when
he  journeyed  to  the  place  of  studies,  and  he
always  set  it  before  him  in  the  window  of  his
oell,  and  used  to  look  at  it  lovingly  with  heart-
felt longings.  He  brought  it  back  home  with
him  on  his  return,  and  caused  it  to  be  trans-
ferred to  his  chapel-wall  as  a  token  of  affection.
What  other  kinds  of  symbolical  representations
were  there,  bearing  upon  the  interior  life,  and
adapted  to  himself  and  other  beginners,  may  be
learned  from  the  pictures  and  sayings  of  the
ancient  fathers  painted  on  the  walls.  A  part
of  these  sayings,  translated  into  the  vulgar
tongue,  follows  below,  exactly  as  they  were  in-
scribed upon  the  chapel : —

The  ancient  father  Arsenius  asked  the  angel
what  he  must  do  to  be  saved.  The  angel  an-
swered : — Thou  must  flee,  and  be  silent  and  sit
still.

Afterwards,  in  a  vision,  the  angel  read  these


170  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

words  to  the  Servitor  out  of  the  book  of  the
ancient  fathers : — A  well-spring  of  all  bliss  is  to
keep  thyself  quiet  and  in  solitude.

Abbot  Theodore.  To  keep  thyself  pure  and
spotless  will  advance  thee  more  in  knowledge
than  study  will.

Abbot  Moses.  Sit  in  thy  cell :  it  will  teach
thee  all  things.

Abbot  John.  Keep  thy  outward  man  still,
and  thy  inward  man  pure.

The  same.  A  fish  out  of  water  and  a  monk
out  of  his  monastery  will  equally  come  to  grief.

Anthony.  Bodily  mortification,  interior  devo-
tion, and  seclusion  from  men  beget  chastity.

The  same.  Wear  no  garment  in  which  vanity
can  be  discerned.  The  first  battle  of  a  beginner
is  boldly  to  resist  sins.

The  Shepherd.  Be  wroth  with  no  one,  until
he  tries  to  pluck  out  thy  right  eye.

Isidore.  A  wrathful  man  is  displeasing  to
God,  however  great  may  be  the  miracles  which
he  works.

Ipericius.  It  is  a  less  sin  to  eat  meat  when  it
should  have  been  avoided  than  to  backbite  thy
neighbour.

Pior.  It  is  very  wicked  to  bring  forward  the
sins  of  others,  and  to  keep  back  our  own.


MAXIMS  OF  THE  ANCIENT  FATHERS.      171

Zacliary.  A  man  must  suffer  great  humilia-
tions if  he  is  to  arrive  at  perfection.

Nestor.  Thou  must  first  become  an  ass,  if
thou  wouldst  possess  heavenly  wisdom.

An  Ancient.  Thou  shouldst  be  immovable
in  weal  and  woe,  like  one  dead.

Helias.  A  pale  complexion,  a  wasted  body,
and  a  lowly  bearing  beseem  well  a  spiritual  man.

Hilarion.  A  wanton  horse  and  an  unchaste
body  should  have  their  provender  cut  down.

An  Ancient.  Take  away  from  me  wine,  for
the  death  of  the  soul  lies  hidden  in  it.

The  Shepherd.  He  who  still  complains,  and
cannot  keep  from  anger  and  much  talking,  will
never  become  a  spiritual  man.

Cassian.  As  the  dying  Christ  bore  Himself
upon  the  cross,  so  should  our  manner  of  life  be
fashioned.

Anthony  said  to  a  brother: — O  man,  help
thyself;  otherwise  neither  God  nor  I  will  ever
help  thee.

A  woman  besought  the  ancient  father  Ar-
senius  to  remember  her  before  God.  He  an-
swered:— I  pray  God  to  blot  out  thy  image
from  my  heart.

Macarius.  I  inflict  many  hardships  on  my
body,  because  I  have  many  temptations  from  it.


172  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

John,  the  father,  said: — I  have  never  done
my  own  will,  and  I  never  taught  any  thing  in
words  which  I  had  not  first  practised  in  deeds.

An  Ancient.  Many  words  without  deeds  are
vain;  like  the  tree  which  bears  many  leaves,  but
no  fruit.

Nilus.  He  who  must  have  much  intercourse
with  the  world  must  needs  also  receive  many
wounds.

An  Ancient.  If  thou  canst  do  nothing  else,
keep  guard  at  least  over  thy  cell  for  God.

Ipericius.  He  who  keeps  himself  chaste  will
be  honoured  here,  and  crowned  by  God  hereafter.

Apollonius.  Kesist  beginnings,  and  stop  the
serpent  by  the  head.

Agathon.  I  have  carried  a  stone  in  my  mouth
for  three  years,  that  I  might  learn  silence.

Arsenius.  I  have  often  repented  of  having
spoken,  but  never  of  having  kept  silence.

An  ancient  father  was  asked  by  a  disciple
how  long  he  should  keep  silence.  The  father
answered : — Until  thou  art  asked  a  question.

St.  SyncUtica.  If  thou  art  sick,  rejoice  there-
at, for  God  has  been  mindful  of  thee.

Tlie  same.  If  thou  art  sick,  do  not  ascribe  it
to  thy  fasts,  for  those  also  fall  sick  who  do  not
fast.


MAXIMS  OF  THE  ANCIENT  FATHERS.      173

The  same.  If  thou  art  tried  by  temptations
of  the  flesh,  rejoice,  for  thou  mayest  become  a
second  Paul.

Nestor,  a  good  brother,  said: — The  sun
never  shone  upon  me  eating.

Another  called  John  added : — Nor  upon  me
angry.

Anthony.  The  greatest  virtue  is  to  be  able
to  observe  moderation  in  all  things.

Paphnutius.  It  is  no  use  to  begin  well,  unless
thou  dost  carry  it  through  to  a  good  end.

Abbot  Moses.  Avoid  whatever  would  deprive
thee  of  purity  of  soul,  however  good  it  may
appear.

Cassian.  The  term  of  all  perfection  is  at-
tained, when  the  soul,  with  all  its  powers,  is
gathered  up  into  one  only  object,  God.

The  Servitor  sent  these  examples  and  say-
ings of  the  ancient  fathers  to  his  spiritual
daughter,  who  drank  them  all  in,  and  applied
them  to  herself,  as  though  he  had  meant  her
also  to  exercise  her  body  with  severe  chastise-
ments, after  the  austere  fashion  of  the  ancient
fathers.  And  she  began  accordingly  to  mortify
and  torment  herself  with  hair-shirts,  and  cords,
and  cruel  bands  set  round  with  sharp  iron  nails,
and  many  other  such-like  instruments  of  penance.


174  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

But  when  the  Servitor  became  aware  of  this,
he  wrote  to  her  as  follows : — Dear  daughter,  if
thy  purpose  is  to  order  thy  spiritual  life  according
to  my  teaching,  as  was  thy  request  to  me,  cease
from  all  such  austerities,  for  they  suit  not  the
weakness  of  thy  sex  and  thy  well-ordered  frame.
The  dear  Jesus  did  not  say,  Take  My  cross
upon  you;  but  He  said  to  each,  Take  up  thy
cross.  Thou  shouldst  not  seek  to  imitate  the
austerity  of  the  ancient  fathers,  nor  the  severe
exercises  of  thy  spiritual  father.  Thou  shouldst
only  take  for  thyself  a  portion  of  them,  such  as
thou  canst  practise  easily  with  thy  infirm  body,
to  the  end  that  sin  may  die  in  thee,  and  yet  thy
bodily  life  may  not  be  shortened.  This  is  a  very
excellent  exercise,  and  the  best  of  all  for  thee.

She  wished  to  know  from  him  why  he  him-
self had  practised  such  great  austerities,  and
yet  would  not  advise  her  or  others  to  practise
them.  Upon  this  he  referred  her  to  the  holy
writings,  saying : — It  is  written  that,  in  former
times,  some  among  the  ancient  fathers  led  a  life
of  such  superhuman  and  incredible  austerity,
that  the  very  mention  of  it  is  a  horror  to  certain
delicate  persons  of  the  present  day;  for  they
know  not  what  burning  devotion  can  enable  a
man,  by  the  divine  aid,  to  do  and  suffer  for


AUSTERITIES  OF  THE  SAINTS.  175

God.  One  who  is  filled  with  such  fervour
finds  all  impossible  things  become  possible  of
accomplishment  in  God;  just  as  David  says,
that  with  God's  help  he  would  go  through
a  wall  (Ps.  xvii.  30).  It  is  also  written  in
the  book  of  the  ancient  fathers,  that  some  of
them  did  not  treat  themselves  with  such  great
severity  as  others  did,  and  yet  they  were  all
striving  to  reach  the  self-same  end.  St.  Peter
and  St.  John  had  not  the  same  training.  Who
can  fully  explain  this  marvel,  unless  it  be
that  the  Lord,  who  is  wonderful  in  His  Saints,
wills,  by  reason  of  His  high  sovereignty,  to  be
glorified  in  many  different  ways  f  Besides  this,
our  natures  are  not  all  alike,  and  what  is  suit-
able to  one,  suits  not  another.  Therefore  it
must  not  be  thought  that,  if  perchance  a  man
has  not  practised  such  great  austerities,  he  will
be  thereby  hindered  from  arriving  at  perfection.
At  the  same  time,  those  who  are  soft  and  deli-
cate should  not  despise  austerities  in  others,  or
judge  them  harshly.  Let  each  look  to  himself,
and  see  what  God  wants  of  him,  and  attend  to
this,  leaving  all  else  alone.  Speaking  generally,
it  is  much  better  to  be  moderate  rather  than  im-
moderate in  the  practice  of  austerities.  But  as
the  mean  is  hard  to  find,  it  is  wiser  to  keep  a


176  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

little  under  it,  than  to  venture  too  high  above  it ;
for  it  often  happens  that,  if  a  man  mortifies  his
bodily  frame  to  excess,  he  will  have  afterwards
to  indulge  it  to  excess ;  though  certainly  many
great  Saints  have  forgotten  themselves  in  this
point  through  the  fervour  of  their  devotion.
Such  austerity  of  life,  and  the  examples  which
have  been  mentioned,  may  be  of  use  to  those
who  are  too  tender  with  themselves,  and  to  their
own  injury  give  too  much  rein  to  their  rebellious
bodies ;  but  this  concerns  not  thee,  nor  the  like
of  thee.  God  has  many  kinds  of  crosses  with
which  He  chastens  His  friends.  I  look  for
Him  to  lay  another  sort  of  cross  upon  thy
shoulders,  which  will  be  far  more  painful  to
thee  than  these  austerities.  Accept  this  cross
with  patience  when  it  comes  to  thee.

Not  long  afterwards  God  afflicted  the  Ser-
vitor's spiritual  daughter  with  long  and  weary
illnesses,  so  that  she  continued  sickly  in  body
until  her  death.  She  sent  him  word  that  it
had  come  to  pass  with  her  as  he  had  predicted.
Upon  which  he  wrote  in  answer  thus: — Dear
daughter,  God  has  not  only  afflicted  thee  ac-
cording to  my  words,  but  He  has  also  wounded
me  in  thee;  for  I  have  now  no  one  left  who
will  help  me  with  the  same  diligence  and  godly


VISION  or  ANGELS.  177

faithfulness  to  complete  my  little  book,  as  thou
didst  when  thou  wert  well.  Therefore  the  Ser-
vitor besought  God  earnestly  on  thy  behalf,
that  it  might  be  His  good  will  to  give  thee  back
thy  health ;  and  when  God  would  not  forthwith
hearken  to  his  prayer,  he  was  angered  against
Him  with  a  loving  anger,  and  was  minded  that
he  would  write  no  more  books  about  the  faith-
ful God,  and  would  likewise  leave  off  his  usual
morning -greeting  through  ill-humour,  unless
God  made  thee  well  again.  Now  when  he  had
sat  down  in  the  disquiet  of  his  heart,  according
to  custom,  in  his  chapel,  his  senses  were  absorbed
in  ecstasy;  and  it  seemed  to  him  that  a  com-
pany of  angels  came  before  him  in  the  chapel,
and  sang  to  comfort  him  a  heavenly  song,  be-
cause they  knew  that  at  that  time  he  was  in
peculiar  sorrow;  and  they  asked  him  why  he
looked  so  sad  and  did  not  sing  with  them.
Then  he  told  them  how  he  had  behaved  in  his
excess  to  the  dear  God,  because  He  would  not
hearken  to  his  prayer  for  thy  recovery.  And
they  counselled  him  to  desist  from  it,  and  not
act  thus ;  for  that  God  had  ordained  this  sick-
ness for  the  best,  and  it  would  be  thy  cross  in
this  world,  and  through  it  thou  wouldst  earn
great  grace  here,  and  a  manifold  reward  in
N


178  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

heaven.  Therefore  be  patient,  my  daughter,
and  receive  it  simply  as  a  loving  gift  from  the
faithful  God.


Chapter  XXXVHI.

Of  certain  devout  practices  of  a  young  beginner  in  his
early  years.

Once  upon  a  time  the  sick  spiritual  daugh-
ter besought  the  Servitor,  who  had  come  to  see
her  in  her  illness,  to  tell  her  something  about
spiritual  things,  not  of  too  grave  a  kind,  but
yet  such  as  a  godly  soul  would  hear  with  plea-
sure. Upon  which  he  told  her  about  his  devout
practices  in  early  life,  in  the  following  words : —

As  the  Servitor  was  in  his  youth  of  a  lively
temperament,  he  made  it  a  practice  for  a  long
time,  whenever  he  was  bled,  to  turn  in  spirit  to
God  under  the  cross,  and,  lifting  up  his  wounded
arm,  to  say,  with  an  inward  sigh : — Ah,  Friend
of  my  heart  !  remember  that  it  is  the  way
with  lovers  to  go  to  their  beloved  ones  at  the
time  of  blood-letting,  in  order  that  the  new
blood  may  be  good.  But  Thou  knowest  well,
dear  Lord,  that  I  have  no  beloved  one  save
Thee  alone,  and  therefore  I  come  to  Thee  to
bless  my  wound  and  make  my  blood  good.


YOUTHFUL  DEVOTIONS.  179

At  this  same  season  of  his  youth,  when  his
face  was  still  in  its  fresh  bloom  and  beauty  of
colour,  it  was  his  practice,  as  often  as  he  shaved
himself,  to  go  to  the  Lord,  and  say : — Ah,
sweet  Lord,  if  my  countenance  and  mouth  were
as  rosy  as  the  hue  of  all  red  roses,  Thy  Servitor
would  keep  them  for  Thee,  and  give  them  to
no  one  else ;  and  though  Thou  lookest  only  to
the  heart,  and  regardest  little  what  is  outward,
nevertheless,  dearest  Lord,  my  heart  offers
Thee  herein  a  love-token  in  testimony  that  it
turns  to  Thee,  and  to  none  but  Thee.

When  he  put  on  a  new  tunic  or  cloak,  he
would  first  go  to  his  usual  place  of  prayer  and
beseech  the  Lord  of  heaven,  who  had  provided
him  with  this  garment,  to  wish  him  luck  and
happiness  in  it,  and  to  help  him  to  wear  it  out
in  the  fulfilment  of  His  all-lovely  will.

Before  this,  in  his  childhood,  it  had  been  his
custom,  when  the  beautiful  summer  came  and
the  tender  flowrets  first  began  to  spring  up,
never  to  pluck  or  touch  a  flower  until  he  had
greeted  with  the  gift  of  his  first  flowers  his
spiritual  love,  the  sweet,  blooming,  rosy  maid,
God's  Mother.  When  it  seemed  to  him  that
the  time  for  doing  this  had  come,  he  picked  the
flowers  with  many  loving  thoughts,  and,  carry-


180  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

ing  tliem  to  his  cell,  made  a  garland  of  them ;
and  then  he  went  into  the  choir,  or  into  our
Lady's  chapel,  and,  kneeling  down  very  humbly
before  our  dear  Lady,  placed  the  garland  upon
her  image,  in  the  hope  that,  as  she  was  the
fairest  of  all  flowers,  and  the  bliss  of  summer  to
his  heart,  she  would  not  disdain  to  accept  these
first  flowers  from  her  Servitor.

Once  upon  a  time,  when  he  had  thus
crowned  the  all-lovely  one,  it  seemed  to  him  in
a  vision  that  heaven  was  opened,  and  he  saw
the  bright  angels  ascending  and  descending  in
shining  garments.  He  heard  likewise  in  the
court  of  heaven  the  blissful  attendants  singing
the  loveliest  song  which  was  ever  heard.  But
chiefly  they  sang  a  song  about  our  dear  Lady,
which  rang  so  sweetly  that  his  soul  melted
within  him  from  excess  of  rapture,  and  it  was
like  what  is  sung  of  her  in  the  sequence  on  All-
Saints  day,  "  Illic  regina  virginum,  transcen-
dens  culmen  ordinum,  etc. ;"  which  means,
that  the  pure  Queen  soars  high  above  all  the
heavenly  host  in  honour  and  dignity.  He  too
began  to  sing  with  the  heavenly  company,  and
it  left  behind  in  his  soul  a  great  savour  of
heaven  and  longing  after  God.

Once,  at  the  beginning  of  May,  he  had,


YOUTHFUL  DEVOTIONS.  181

according  to  Ms  custom,  placed  with  great  de-
votion  a   garland   of  roses   upon   his   loveliest
heavenly  Lady ;  and  that  same  morning  early,
as  he  had  come  from  a  distance  and  was  tired,
he  intended  to  allow  himself  a  longer  sleep,  and
to  omit  his  usual  greeting  to  the  Virgin  at  the
proper  hour.     Now  when  the  time  had  come
for  him  to  greet  her,  as  he  was  wont  to  do,  and
he  should  have  got  up,  it  seemed  to  him  as  if
he  were  in  the  midst  of  a  heavenly  choir,  and
that  they  were  singing  the  Magnificat  in  praise
of  God's  Mother.     When   it   was   ended,   the
Virgin   came   forward,   and   bade   the   brother
begin   the   verse,    "  O   vernalis    rosula,   etc. ;"
which   signifies,    O   thou   lovely  little   rose   of
summer.     He  thought  within  himself  what  she
could  mean  by  this,  and  yet,  wishing  to  obey
her,  he  began  in  joyous  mood,  "  O  vernalis  ro-
sula."    Whereupon  immediately  three  or  four
youths   of  the   heavenly   company,   who  were
standing  there  in  choir,  began  to  sing  with  him,
and  then  the  rest  of  the  choir  took  up  the  strain,
as  if  in  rivalry,  and  they  sang  so  merrily,  that
the  sound  rang  out  as  sweetly  as  if  all  stringed
instruments   were    resounding    there   together.
But  his  mortal  frame  could  not  bear  this  excess
of  melody,  and  he  came  to  himself  again.


182  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

On  the  day  after  our  Lady's  feast  of  the
Assumption,  he  was  once  more  shown  a  vision
of  great  joy  in  the  court  of  heaven.     But  no
one  was  allowed  to  enter  in  who  was  not  worthy
to  be  present  there.     Now  when  the  Servitor
was  very  anxious  to  press   in,  there   came   a
youth  who  caught  him  by  the  hand,  saying : —
It  is  not  for  thee  to  enter  in  at  present.     Thou
hast  done  wrong,  and  must  expiate  thy  misdeed,
before  thou  wilt  be  allowed  to  hear  the  song  of
heaven.     Then  he  led  him  by  a  crooked  path
into  an  underground  hole,  which  was  dark  and
desolate,  and  very  miserable  to  look  at.     The
Servitor  could  not  move  in  it  either  to  the  one
side  or  to  the  other;  but  he  lay  there  like  a
man  in  a  dungeon,  who  cannot  see  either  the
sun  or  the  moon.     This  was  a  sore  suffering
to  him,  and  he  began  to  bemoan  and  lament
himself  on  account  of  his  imprisonment.     Soon
afterwards  the  youth  came  back,  and  asked  him
how  it  fared  with  him.    The  Servitor  answered:
— Very  ill.     Then  the    youth  said  to  him : —
Know  that  the  sovereign  Queen  of  Heaven  is
angry  with  thee  on  account   of  the  fault   for
which  thou  art  lying  here  in  prison.     The  Ser-
vitor was  greatly  terrified  at  this,  and  said : —
Woe  is  me !  utterly  miserable  that  I  am,  what


THE  QUEEN  OF  HEAVEN.  183

have  I  done  to  her?  He  answered: — She  is
angry  with  thee  for  being  so  unwilling  to  preach
about  her  on  her  festivals,  and  because  yester-
day on  her  great  festival  thou  didst  refuse  thy
superior's  request,  saying  that  thou  wouldst  not
preach  about  her.  The  Servitor  made  answer:
— Alas,  my  friend  and  master !  it  seems  to  me
in  truth  that  she  is  worthy  of  far  greater  honour
than  what  I  can  give  her,  and  that  I  am  of  too
little  account  to  undertake  this  office.  There-
fore I  yield  it  up  to  those  who  are  old  and
worthy;  for  methinks  they  can  preach  more
worthily  about  her  than  I,  poor  man,  can.
To  this  the  youth  replied :  —  Know  that  it
pleases  her  to  receive  this  honour  from  thee,
and  it  is  an  acceptable  service  from  thee  in  her
eyes.  Therefore  refuse  no  more.  The  Servitor
began  to  weep,  and  said  to  the  youth : — Ah,
dearest  youth !  make  my  peace  with  the  pure
Mother,  for  I  promise  thee  by  my  troth  that
it  shall  not  happen  again.  The  youth  smiled,
and  consoled  him  lovingly,  and  led  him  home
out  of  the  prison,  saying : — I  have  observed,
from  the  kindly  way  in  which  the  Queen  of
Heaven  looked  at  and  spoke  of  thee,  that  she
will  lay  aside  her  anger  against  thee,  and  will
always  love  thee  with  a  mother's  faithful  love.


184  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

It  was  the  Servitor's  practice  when  he  left
his  cell,  or  returned  to  it,  to  pass  through  the
choir  before  the  Sacrament;  for  he  thought
within  himself  that  he  who  has  a  very  dear
friend  any  where  upon  his  road,  is  very  glad  to
make  his  journey  a  little  longer  in  order  to  hold
some  loving  converse  with  him.

A  man  once  asked  God  to  bestow  upon  him
a  heavenly  carnival,  as  he  did  not  wish  for  an
earthly  one  from  creatures.  And  while  his
senses  were  stilled  in  ecstasy,  it  seemed  to
him  as  if  the  dear  Christ  came  in,  under  the
form  which  He  wore  when  He  was  thirty  years
of  age,  and  signified  to  him  that  He  would  grant
him  his  request,  and  make  for  him  a  heavenly
carnival.  Then  He  took  a  cup  of  wine  in  His
hand,  and  presented  it  to  three  men,  who  were
sitting  there  at  table,  one  after  the  other.  The
first  sank  down  powerless  ;  the  second  also
became  a  little  faint;  but  the  third  was  not
affected  by  it.  Upon  this  the  Lord  explained  to
him  the  difference  between  a  beginner,  a  pro-
ficient, and  a  perfect  man, — how  unlike  they
are  in  the  way  in  which  they  bear  themselves
in  spiritual  sweetness.

When  the  Servitor  had  finished  conversing
with   his   spiritual   daughter   about   these   and


HE  DRAWS  SINNERS  TO  GOD.  185

such-like  divine  endearments,  she  wrote  it  all
down  secretly,  and  then  placed  it  in  a  box,  which
she  locked  up  for  concealment  and  security.

Now  one  clay  there  came  to  her  a  good
sister,  to  whom  she  had  given  the  box  in
charge,  saying : — Dear  sister,  what  is  this  mar-
vellous heavenly  secret  which  thou  hast  in  thy
box !  I  dreamed  this  night  that  there  was  in
thy  box  a  young  heavenly  boy,  and  that  he  had
a  sweet  stringed  instrument  in  his  hands,  from
which  he  drew  such  ravishing  spiritual  melodies,
that  it  filled  many  a  one  with  spiritual  delight.
I  pray  thee  bring  forth  for  us  what  thou  hast
locked  up,  that  we  too  may  read  it.  But  she
kept  silence,  and  would  not  speak  to  her  about
it,  for  it  had  been  forbidden  her.


Chapter  XXXIX.

How  he  drew  light-minded  persons  to  God,  and  comforted
those  who  were  in  suffering.

The  Servitor  had  once  been  a  long  time
without  sending  any  message  to  his  spiritual
daughter.  Upon  this  she  wrote  a  letter  to  him,
telling  him  that  she  was  in  great  need  of  a
message  from  him  to  cheer  her  suffering  heart,


186  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

and  adding : — The  poor  find  a  little  consolation
when  they  see  those  who  are  poorer  than  them-
selves, and  sufferers  draw  a  little  courage  from
hearing  that  some  among  their  neighbours  have
been  in  greater  straits  than  they  are,  and  have
been  helped  out  of  them  by  God.

The  Servitor  wrote  thus  to  her  in  answer: —
In  order  that  thou  mayest  be  more  patient  in
thy  sufferings,  I  will  tell  thee  for  God's  glory
something  about  suffering.  I  know  a  man  on
whom  by  God's  appointment  there  fell  cruel
sufferings  in  regard  to  his  good  name  in  this
world.  This  man's  unceasing  desire  was  to
love  God  from  the  very  bottom  of  his  heart,
and  to  win  all  persons  to  the  same  love  of  God,
and  to  withdraw  them  from  all  vain  affections ;
and  he  brought  this  about  in  the  case  of  many,
both  men  and  women.  Since,  however,  by
doing  this  he  estranged  from  the  devil  those
who  had  been  his,  and  brought  them  back  to
God,  the  evil  spirit  took  it  ill,  and  appeared
to  certain  holy  persons,  and  threatened  that  he
would  avenge  himself  on  the  Servitor.

It  happened  once  that  the  Servitor  came  to
a  monastery  belonging  to  a  certain  Order  in
which  the  religious  men  are  accustomed  to  have
a  special  dwelling-place  for  themselves,  and  the


HE  DRAWS  SINNERS  TO  GOD.  187

religious  women  of  the  Order  likewise  a  special
dwelling-place  for  themselves.  Now  in  this
monastery  there  were  two  religious,  a  man  and
a  woman,  who  were  bound  to  each  other  by
closest  ties  of  great  affection  and  hurtful  inti-
macy ;  and  the  devil  had  so  disguised  it  to  their
blinded  hearts,  that  they  looked  upon  the  mis-
deed as  if  it  were  no  fault  or  sin,  but  a  thing
permitted  to  them  by  God.  When  the  Servitor
was  privately  asked  whether  they  could  go  on  in
this  way  without  being  in  opposition  to  God's
will,  he  answered : — No,  by  no  means ;  and  he
told  them  that  their  view  of  the  matter  was
false,  and  contrary  to  Christian  doctrine;  and
he  succeeded  in  making  them  leave  off  their
intimacy,  and  live  thenceforward  in  purity.
Whilst  he  was  occupied  about  this  matter,  a
holy  person  named  Anna  was  rapt  in  spirit
when  she  was  at  prayer,  and  she  saw  a  great
band  of  devils  gathered  together  in  the  air
above  the  Servitor,  and  they  all  cried  aloud
with  one  voice : — Death,  death,  to  the  wicked
monk!  and  they  reviled  and  cursed  him  for
having  driven  them  forth  by  his  good  counsels
from  that  place  which  was  so  pleasant  to  them ;
and  they  all  swore,  with  horrible  gestures,  that
they  would  never  let  him  alone  until  they  had


188  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

revenged  themselves  upon  him ;  and  that  if  they
were  not  allowed  to  touch  him  in  his  person  or
his  goods,  they  would  at  least  inflict  cruel  in-
jury upon  his  good  name  and  honour  in  men's
eyes,  by  laying  shameful  things  to  his  charge ;
and,  however  carefully  he  might  avoid  giving
any  cause  for  it,  they  would  by  falsehood  and
cunning  bring  it  about.  The  holy  woman
Anna  was  greatly  terrified  at  this,  and  she  be-
sought our  dear  Lady  to  come  and  help  him  in
his  impending  straits.  Upon  which  the  kind
Mother  said  to  her  lovingly : — They  can  do
nothing  to  him  without  my  Child's  ordinance.
What  He  ordains  concerning  him  will  be  the
best  and  the  most  profitable  for  him.  Bid  him
therefore  be  of  good  cheer.

When  she  told  this  to  the  brother,  he  began
to  feel  great  alarm  at  this  hostile  assembling  of
the  evil  spirits ;  and,  as  he  often  used  to  do  in
his  distresses,  he  ascended  the  hill  on  which  a
chapel  stands  dedicated  to  the  holy  angels,  and
he  went  nine  times  round  this  chapel,  according
to  his  custom,  saying  prayers  in  honour  of  the
nine  choirs  of  the  heavenly  host,  and  he  be-
sought them  earnestly  to  be  his  helpers  against
all  his  enemies.  Early  that  same  morning  he
was  earned  in  a  spiritual  vision  to  a  beautiful


HE  DRAWS  SINNERS  TO  GOD.  189

plain,  and  lie  saw  there  all  round  him  an  ex-
ceeding great  company  of  angels,  who  stood
ready  to  help  him,  and  they  comforted  him,
saying : — God  is  with  thee,  and  will  never  leave
thee  in  any  of  thy  straits.  Cease  not,  then,  to
draw  worldly  hearts  to  the  love  of  God.  This
confirmed  him  in  his  purpose,  and  he  busied
himself  all  the  more  diligently  in  bringing  back
both  the  wild  and  the  tame  to  God.

He  had  succeeded  by  his  good  words  in
coming  round  a  ferocious  man,  who  had  been
eighteen  years  without  confession.  This  man
was  inspired  by  God  with  confidence  in  the
Servitor,  and  confessed  to  him  with  such  great
contrition,  that  they  both  began  to  weep.  He
died  soon  afterwards,  and  made  a  happy  end.

He  once  converted  twelve  sinful  women  from
their  evil  life.  It  is  impossible  to  tell  how  much
he  suffered  from  them.  In  the  end,  however,
only  two  of  them  persevered.

There  were  at  that  time  up  and  down  the
country  many  persons  of  the  female  sex,  both
secular  and  religious,  who  from  the  frailty  of
their  disposition  had  fallen  openly  into  sinful
practices.  These  poor  women  through  shame
dared  not  confess  to  any  one  their  heart's  an-
guish ;  so  that  from  agony  and  distress  of  mind


190  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

they  were  often  assailed  by  the  temptation  to
destroy  themselves.  Now  when  these  persons
heard  that  the  Servitor  had  a  tender  heart  for
all  who  were  in  suffering,  they  took  courage  and
came  to  him, — each  one  at  the  time  when  her
distress  lay  heavy  upon  her, — and  disclosed  to
him  then*  anguish,  and  the  straits  in  which  they
were  held  captive.  When  lie  saw  these  poor
hearts  in  such  misery  and  suffering,  he  used
to  weep  with  them  and  console  them  lovingly.
He  often  risked  his  good  name  in  this  world  in
order  to  help  them  to  recover  their  souls  and
their  reputation ;  and  he  let  malicious  tongues
pass  what  judgment  on  him  they  pleased.

Among  others  there  was  a  lady  of  high  birth,
whose  contrition  for  her  fall  was  very  great.
One  day  our  Lady  appeared  to  her  and  said : —
Go  to  my  chaplain ;  he  will  set  thee  right  again.
She  answered : — Alas,  Lady,  I  know  him  not.
The  Mother  of  Compassion  replied: — Look  here
beneath  my  mantle,  where  I  keep  him  under  my
guard,  and  note  well  his  face,  that  thou  mayest
know  him  again.  He  is  a  help  in  need  and  a
comforter  of  all  who  suffer.  He  will  comfort
thee.  The  lady  came  to  the  Servitor  from  a
foreign  land,  and  she  recognised  his  face  as  she
had  seen  it  before  in  spirit,  and  she  prayed  him


VISION  OF  SUFFERINGS.  191

to  bring  her  back  to  grace,  and  told  him  what
had  befallen  her.  He  received  her  very  kindly,
and  set  her  right  again  to  the  best  of  his  ability,
according  as  the  Mother  of  Compassion  had  en-
joined him.


Chapter  XL.

Of  a  grievous  suffering  which  befell  him  while  thus
occupied.

Such  was  the  way  in  which  the  Servitor
aided  many  persons  who  were  in  suffering.  But
the  good  work  cost  him  dear,  owing  to  the
martyrdom  of  sufferings  which  fell  upon  him
in  consequence.  And  God  showed  him  these
afflictions  when  they  were  still  future,  in  the  fol-
lowing vision.  Once  when  he  was  travelling  he
arrived  one  evening  at  an  inn ;  and  just  before
daybreak  it  seemed  to  him  in  a  vision  that  he
was  taken  to  a  place  where  Mass  was  going  to
be  sung,  and  that  he  had  to  sing  it,  for  the  lot
had  fallen  upon  him.  The  singers  began  the
Mass  of  martyrs,  "Multse  tribulationes  jus-
torum ;"  that  is,  Many  are  the  sufferings  of  God's
friends.  He  was  not  pleased  at  hearing  this,
and  would  have  been  very  glad  to  change  it,
saying : — How  strange  !  Why  are  you  deafen-


192  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

ing  us  with  the  martyrs  ?  Why  do  you  sing  to-
day the  Mass  of  martyrs  ?  We  are  not  keeping
any  martyr's  feast  to-day.  They  looked  at  him,
and  pointing  at  him  with  their  fingers,  said : —
God  has  His  martyrs  now  at  this  time,  as  He  has
ever  had.     Get  ready,  then,  and  sing  for  thyself.

He  turned  over  the  pages  of  the  Missal  which
lay  before  him,  and  would  much  rather  have
sung  the  Mass  of  confessors,  or  any  other  one
except  that  of  the  suffering  martyrs ;  but  though
he  turned  the  book  over  and  over  again,  it  was  all
full  of  Masses  of  martyrs.  When  he  saw  that  it
could  not  be  otherwise,  he  sang  with  them,  and
his  singing  rang  forth  exceeding  mournfully.
After  a  little  while  he  began  again,  and  said
to  them : — This  is  very  singular.  One  would
much  rather  sing  Gaudeamus  (Let  us  rejoice)
about  joyful  things,  than  sing  as  we  are  do-
ing about  sorrowful  things.  They  answered : —
Good  friend,  thou  dost  not  understand  it  yet.
This  song  about  the  martyrs  goes  first,  and  then
when  the  proper  time  has  come  the  joyous  song
Gaudeamus  follows  after  it.

When  he  came  to  himself  again  his  heart
trembled  within  him  because  of  the  vision,  and
he  said: — Alas,  O  God!  must  I  once  more
suffer  martyrdom  !     In  consequence  of  this  his


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.      193

demeanour  became  so  sorrowful  as  lie  journeyed
onwards,  that  his  companion  asked  him,  say-
ing : — Ah !  father,  what  is  the  matter  with  you,
that  you  look  so  exceeding  sorrowful  ?  He  an-
swered : — Alas !  dear  companion,  I  have  to  sing
here  the  Mass  of  martyrs.  Meaning,  that  God
had  made  known  to  him  that  he  had  a  martyr-
dom to  suffer.  But  his  companion  understood
him  not ;  so  he  remained  silent,  and  kept  it  all
within  himself.

On  his  arrival  at  the  town,  which  took  place
in  the  dark  days  before  Christmas,  he  was,  as
usual,  so  sorely  visited  with  bitter  sufferings  that
it  seemed  to  him,  as  the  saying  is,  that  his  heart
within  his  body  must  break,  if  such  a  thing
has  ever  happened  to  those  in  sorrow.  For
these  sufferings  hedged  him  round  on  all  sides,
and  it  was  his  sad  lot  to  have  every  thing  taken
from  him  which  had  been  a  support  to  him  in  the
way  of  service,  consolation,  or  honour,  and  which
was  of  a  nature  calculated  to  comfort  a  man
here  below.  This  bitter  suffering  was  of  the
following  kind:  Among  those  persons  whom
he  had  tried  to  lead  to  God  there  came  to  him
a  deceitful  crafty  woman,  who  under  an  out-
wardly good  life  concealed  a  wolfish  heart,
which  she  hid  so  well  that  the  brother  for  a
o


194  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

very  long  time  did  not  perceive  it.  She  had  be-
fore this  fallen  into  great  sin  with  a  man,  and
had  added  to  her  crime  by  attributing  the  off-
spring to  a  different  person  from  the  guilty  man,
who  protested  his  own  innocence  in  the  matter.

The  Servitor  did  not  reject  the  woman  on
account  of  her  misdeeds ;  but  he  heard  her  con-
fession, and  helped  her  in  all  needful  and  proper
ways,  more  than  it  was  the  custom  of  the  other
religious  of  the  country,  who  are  called  Ter-
minerer  (mendicants),  to  do.  ,  After  this  had
gone  on  for  a  long  time,  it  came  to  the  knowledge
of  the  Servitor,  and  of  other  reliable  persons,
that  she  was  still  secretly  continuing  the  same
evil  practices  as  before.  He  said  nothing  about
it,  and  would  have  gladly  avoided  making  it
known ;  at  the  same  time  he  gave  up  his  rela-
tions with  her  and  ceased  to  help  her.  When
the  woman  became  aware  of  this,  she  sent  him
word  not  to  act  thus ;  and  threatened  him  that,
if  he  left  off  giving  her  the  same  assistance  as
heretofore,  he  should  suffer  for  it ;  for  that  she
would  father  upon  him  a  child,  which  she  had
had  by  a  secular  man,  and  he  would  thus  be
put  to  shame  by  means  of  the  child  and  be
covered  with  infamy  every  where.

The  Servitor  was  filled  with  consternation


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.      195

at  these  words,  and  stood  motionless;  then,
sighing  inwardly,  he  spoke  thus  within  himself :
— Anguish  and  distress  surround  me  on  all
sides,  and  I  know  not  which  way  to  turn ;  for
if  I  act  in  this  way,  woe  is  me,  and  if  I  do  not
act  thus,  still  woe  is  me;  and  I  am  so  girt  round
on  all  sides  by  distress  and  woe  that  I  am  like
to  sink  under  it.  And  thus,  with  terror  in  his
heart,  he  waited  for  whatever  God  might  allow
the  devil  to  bring  upon  him.  At  last,  after
taking  counsel  with  God  and  himself,  he  came
to  the  conclusion,  that  of  these  two  miserable
alternatives  it  was  better  for  him  in  soul  and
body  to  abandon  the  wicked  woman  altogether,
let  the  consequences  to  his  good  name  be  what
they  might ;   and  so  he  did.

This  inflamed  her  fierce  heart  with  such
rage  against  him,  that,  running  hither  and
thither  to  ecclesiastics  and  seculars,  she  strove
with  more  than  human  wickedness  to  defame
herself,  in  order  to  bring  suffering  upon  the
poor  man,  and  she  told  every  one  that  she  had
had  a  child,  and  that  it  was  by  the  brother.
All  who  believed  her  words  were  greatly  scan-
dalised at  it,  and  the  scandal  was  the  greater
the  wider  the  reputation  of  his  holiness  had
spread.     All  this  pierced  him  through  to  his


196  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

very  inmost  heart  and  soul,  and,  being  thus
encompassed  on  every  side  by  anguish  and
distress,  he  lived  absorbed  in  himself,  and  the
days  seemed  to  him  long  and  the  nights  miser-
able, and  his  short  sleep  was  mingled  with  panic
frights.  He  used  to  look  upwards  sorrowfully  to
God,  and  with  deep  groans  exclaim: — Alas,  O
God !  my  hour  of  woe  is  come.  How  shall  I,  or
how  can  I,  bear  this  agony  of  heart  ?  Alas,  O
God,  would  that  I  had  died  before  I  ever  saw
or  heard  of  this  misery !  Lord,  behold,  I  have
honoured  Thy  venerable  Name  all  the  days  of
my  life,  and  I  have  taught  many  persons  far
and  wide  to  love  and  honour  it.  And  wilt  Thou
bring  my  name  to  such  great  dishonour?  This
is  a  sore  thing  that  I  complain  of.  Behold  how
the  venerable  Order  of  Preachers  must  now  be
brought  to  disgrace  through  me.  I  grieve  for
this,  and  shall  always  grieve  for  it.  Woe  is  me,
by  reason  of  the  straits  into  which  my  heart  lias
come !  All  good  persons,  who  before  held  me
in  great  honour  as  a  holy  man — a  thing  which
gave  me  courage  to  persevere — now,  alas !  re-
gard me  as  a  wicked  deceiver  of  the  world ;  and
this  pierces  and  wounds  my  heart  through  and
through.

When   the  poor   sufferer  had  spent  much


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.  197

time  in  these  lamentations,  and  his  body  and
vital  powers  were  wasting  away,  there  came  to
him  a  woman,  saying : — Good  sir,  why  do  you
wear  yourself  away  through  this  excessive  grief?
Be  of  good  cheer.  I  will  give  you  such  counsel
and  assistance,  that,  if  you  will  follow  my  advice,
your  good  name  will  remain  uninjiued.  There-
fore take  courage.  He  looked  up,  and  said  to
her: — Dear  lady,  how  will  you  bring  this  to
pass?  She  answered: — I  will  take  away  the
child  by  stealth  under  my  cloak,  and  either  bury
it  alive  at  night,  or  stick  a  needle  into  its  brain
so  that  it  will  die.  Thus  the  vile  slander  will
fall  to  the  ground,  and  you  will  keep  your  good
name.  He  answered  in  a  voice  of  fury  : — Woe
is  me,  wicked  murderess !  alas  for  thy  murder-
ous heart!  Wouldst  thou  thus  kill  the  guiltless
babe  ?  What  matter  that  its  mother  is  a  wicked
woman  1  Wouldst  thou  bury  it  alive  %  No,  no ;
God  forbid  that  such  a  crime  should  ever  be
committed  through  me.  See;  the  very  worst
that  can  befall  me  in  this  matter  is  the  loss  of
my  worldly  honour;  but  if  the  worldly  honour  of
a  whole  country  depended  on  me,  I  would  rather
sacrifice  it  to-day  to  the  everlasting  glorious  God
than  let  this  innocent  blood  thus  perish.  She
replied : — And  yet  it  is  not  your  child.     Why


198  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

then  trouble  yourself  about  it?  Upon  which
she  drew  forth  a  sharp-pointed  knife,  and  said :
— Let  me  take  it  away  out  of  your  sight,  and
I  will  wring  its  neck,  or  stick  this  knife  into  its
little  heart.  It  will  be  dead  at  once,  and  you
will  be  at  peace  again.  He  answered: — Silence,
thou  unclean  and  wicked  devil.  Be  it  whose
child  it  may  on  earth,  it  is  still  formed  after
God's  image,  and  has  been  full  dearly  pur-
chased with  the  most  precious  and  innocent
Blood  of  Christ.  Therefore  I  will  not  that  its
young  blood  be  shed  in  this  way.  The  woman
made  answer  to  him  impatiently: — If  you  will
not  let  it  be  killed,  at  least  let  me  carry  it
secretly  into  the  church  some  morning,  that  it
may  fare  with  it  as  with  other  deserted  found-
lings ;  else  you  will  be  put  to  great  expense
and  annoyance,  until  the  child's  bringing  up
is  finished.  He  replied: — I  trust  in  the  rich
God  of  heaven,  who  has  always  provided  for  me
hitherto,  that  He  will  provide  henceforth  for  both
of  us.  And  then  he  added : — Go  and  bring  me
the  babe  very  secretly,  that  I  may  see  it.

When  he  took  the  babe  into  his  bosom  and
looked  at  it,  the  babe  smiled  at  him.  Upon
which,  fetching  a  deep  sigh,  he  said : — Should
I  then  kill  a  pretty  babe  that  smiles  at  me?


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.  199

No,  in  truth!  I  will  gladly  suffer  whatever
may  befall  me  through  it.  Then  turning  to
the  babe;  he  said: — Alas,  thou  hapless,  tender
babe !  thou  art  indeed  a  poor  orphan ;  for  thy
own  false  father  has  denied  thee,  and  thy  mur-
derous mother  has  sought  to  fling  thee  away,
like  an  ugly  good-for-nothing  whelp.  Well;
since  God's  providence  has  given  thee  to  me,
in  such  a  way  that  I  cannot  help  being  thy
father,  I  will  gladly  act  as  one  towards  thee,
and  I  will  receive  thee  from  God  and  from  no
one  else;  and  even  as  He  is  dear  to  me,  so  shalt
thou  too  be  dear  to  me,  my  own  sweet  babe.
Ah,  child  of  my  heart !  thou  sittest  in  my  sor-
rowful lap,  and  lookest  up  at  me  so  lovingly,  and
yet  canst  not  speak.  Alas !  and  I  too  look  at
thee  with  wounded  heart  and  tearful  eyes,  and
mouth  that  kisses  thee,  and  I  bedew  thy  infant
face  with  the  stream  of  my  hot  tears.

When  the  pretty  boy  felt  the  great  tears  of
the  weeping  man  fall  so  fast  upon  his  little  eyes,
he  too  began  to  weep  heartily  with  him ;  and
they  both  wept  together.  But  when  the  Ser-
vitor saw  the  babe  thus  weeping,  he  pressed  it
tenderly  to  his  heart,  and  said: — Be  still,  my
darling !  Alas,  child  of  my  heart !  should  I
kill  thee  because  thou   art  not  my  child,  but


200  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

must  cost  me  dear?  Alas,  my  beautiful,  dear,
tender  child !  I  would  not  hurt  thee ;  for  thou
must  be  my  child  and  God's  child;  and  so  long
as  God  provides  me  with  but  one  single  mouth-
ful, I  will  share  it  with  thee,  to  the  glory  of
the  good  God ;  and  I  will  bear  patiently  what-
ever may  befall  me  through  thee,  my  own  sweet
child.

When  the  cruel-hearted  woman  who  had
before  wished  to  kill  the  babe  heard  him  speak
thus  tenderly  amid  his  tears,  she  was  so  deeply
moved  by  it  to  great  pity,  and  broke  out  into
such  loud  cries  and  weeping,  that  he  was  ob-
liged to  quiet  her,  lest  some  one  should  come,
and  the  whole  thing  be  known.  At  length,
when  she  had  wept  her  full,  he  gave  her  back
the  babe,  and  blessed  it,  saying : — May  the
loving  God  bless  thee,  and  the  holy  angels
guard  thee  from  all  evil !  And  he  bade  her
provide  it  with  what  was  needful  at  his  cost.
Afterwards  the  wicked  woman,  the  child's
mother,  set  to  work  again;  and  as  she  had
already  greatly  slandered  the  brother,  so  she
continued  to  do  whenever  she  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  injuring  him;  on  which  account  lie
became  an  object  of  pity  to  many  pure  and
virtuous  souls,  and  they  often  wished  that  the


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.  201

just   God   would   take   her    away   out    of  the
world.

It  happened  once  that  one  of  the  Servitor's
kinsmen  came  to  him,  and  said: — Alas,  sir,
for  the  great  crime  which  this  wicked  woman
has  committed  against  you !  God  knows,  I  will
avenge  you  on  her.  I  will  secretly  station  my-
self on  the  long  bridge  which  goes  over  the
water ;  and  when  the  sacrilegious  wretch  passes
that  way,  I  will  throw  her  over  and  drown  her ;
and  her  great  crime  shall  be  avenged  upon  her.
He  answered : — No,  my  friend;  God  forbid  that
any  living  being  should  be  put  to  death  on  my
account.  God,  who  knows  all  hidden  things,
knows  that  she  has  done  me  wrong  about  the
child.  Therefore  I  leave  the  matter  in  His
hand,  either  to  slay  her  or  to  let  her  live,  ac-
cording to  His  will.  And  I  tell  thee  that,  even
if  I  were  willing  to  disregard  my  soul,  by  con-
niving at  her  death,  I  would  still  honour  in  her
the  dignity  of  all  pure  women,  and  allow  her  the
benefit  of  it.  The  man  answered  very  angrily :
— As  for  me,  I  would  as  soon  kill  a  woman  as
a  man,  if  she  had  behaved  to  me  so  villanously.
He  replied: — Nay;  for  that  would  be  an  act
of  most  unreasonable  and  blameworthy  ferocity.
Think  no  more  about  it,  and  let  all  the  suffer-


202  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

ings   fall   upon   me  which   God  wills    me.  to
suffer.

As  the  Servitor's  afflictions  were  continually
on  the  increase,  it  seemed  to  him  one  day,
through  infirmity  of  soul,  that  his  distress  had
reached  such  a  point  that  he  must  needs  go
forth  in  quest  of  something  to  support  and  cheer
him  in  his  sufferings.  Accordingly  he  went  out
to  seek  for  consolation,  and  he  hoped  to  meet  with
it  especially  at  the  hands  of  two  of  his  friends,
who  while  he  still  sat  on  the  upper  side  of  for-
tune's wheel  had  treated  him  as  though  they  were
his  true  friends  and  comrades.  It  was  from  them
that  he  now  sought  consolation  for  his  suffering
heart.  Alas !  God  showed  him  in  them  both
that  no  dependence  is  to  be  placed  in  creatures;
for  he  was  more  cruelly  humiliated  by  them
and  those  about  them  than  he  ever  was  by
ordinary  people.  One  of  these  friends  received
the  afflicted  brother  very  harshly,  and  turning
away  his  face  from  him  in  anger,  behaved  to  him
in  a  very  insulting  manner,  with  cutting  words.
Among  other  offensive  expressions  which  he  used
he  told  the  Servitor  to  cease  in  future  from  all
familiarity  with  him;  for  that  he  was  ashamed  of
his  company.  Alas!  this  pierced  the  Servitor's
inmost  heart ;  and  he  answered  mournfully: — O


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.  203

dear  friend,  if  by  God's  ordinance  thou  hadst
fallen  into  the  miry  pool,  as  I  have  done,  verily
I  would  have  sprung  in  after  thee,  and  lovingly
helped  thee  out  of  it.  O  misery !  it  is  not
enough  for  thee  to  see  me  lying  before  thee  deep
in  the  mire,  but  thou  must  needs  trample  on  me
besides.  Of  this  I  make  my  plaint  to  the  sor-
rowful Heart  of  Jesus  Christ.  His  friend  bade
him  be  silent,  and  said  to  him  insultingly : —
There  is  an  end  of  you  now.  Not  only  your
preaching,  but  your  books  too  which  you  have
written,  ought  to  be  treated  with  contempt.
The  Servitor  answered  him  very  sweetly,  and
looking  up  to  heaven,  said : — I  put  my  trust  in
the  good  God  of  heaven  that  my  books  will
be  still  more  valued  and  loved  than  they  have
ever  been,  when  the  appointed  time  shall  come.
Such  was  the  mournful  consolation  which  he
received  from  his  best  friends.

Hitherto  in  this  town  his  necessities  had  been
fully  supplied  by  kind-hearted  persons.  But
when  these  lying  and  slanderous  tales  were
carried  to  them,  those  who  believed  the  false
talemongers  withdrew  from  him  their  help  and
friendship,  until  at  length,  the  truth  having  been
manifested  to  them  by  God,  they  returned  to
him  and  acknowledged  that  he  was  guiltless.


204  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

One  day,  when  he  had  sat  down  to  take  a
little  rest,  his  bodily  senses  were  stilled  in  ecstasy,
and  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  carried  into  a
land  above  the  ken  of  sense.  Then  he  heard
something  say  in  the  very  depths  of  his  soul : —
Hearken,  hearken,  to  a  word  of  consolation
which  I  will  read  to  thee.  He  did  as  bidden,
and  listened  attentively.  Upon  which  the  voice
began  to  read  in  Latin  the  following  words  from
the  chapter  at  none  of  the  Vigil  of  Christmas,,
"Non  vocaberis  ultra  derelicta,  etc."  (Is.  lxii.  4);
that  is,  Thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  the  for-
saken of  God,  and  thy  land  shall  not  be  called
the  wasted  land.  Thy  name  shall  be,  God's
will  is  in  thee,  and  thy  land  shall  be  cultivated;,
for  the  heavenly  Father  is  well  pleased  with
thee.  When  the  voice  had  finished  reading
these  words,  it  began  again  to  read  the  same
words  over  and  over  again  full  four  times.

The  Servitor  in  astonishment  said: — Dear
friend,  what  meanest  thou  by  repeating  these
words  so  often?  The  voice  answered: — I  do
this  to  strengthen  thy  confidence  in  God,  who
will  provide  for  the  land  of  His  friends — that
is,  for  their  mortal  bodies — all  things  needful  to
them ;  and  when  what  they  require  is  withdrawn
from  them  on  one  side,  He  will  make  it  up  to


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDEEED.      205

them  on  another.  In  this  fatherly  way  the  al-
mighty and  everlasting  God  will  deal  with  thee.
And  in  truth  this  all  came  to  pass  so  manifestly,
that  many  a  heart  laughed  for  joy  at  it,  and
the  almighty  and  everlasting  God  was  praised
by  those  who  had  before  shed  many  tears  from
great  compassion.

It  fared  with  this  suffering  man  as  with  some
dead  animal  which  has  been  knocked  about  and
torn  in  pieces  by  wild  beasts,  and  yet  has  some
marrow  left  in  it.  Last  of  all,  the  hungry  flies
and  other  insects  settle  upon  it,  and  strip  bare
the  gnawed  bones,  and  carry  away  with  them
into  the  air  the  marrow  which  they  have  sucked
out.  Even  so  the  Servitor  was  miserably  pulled
to  pieces,  and  his  shame  was  carried  far  and  wide
into  distant  lands  by  persons  of  seeming  piety  ;
and  they  did  this  with  good  words,  and  under
the  cover  of  regrets,  and  with  outward  show  of
friendship,  which  was  notning  but  faithlessness
within.  In  consequence  of  this,  evil  thoughts
like  these  would  sometimes  dart  across  the  Ser-
vitor's mind: — Alas,  dear  God!  he  who  only
suffers  at  the  hands  of  Jews,  and  heathen,  and
open  sinners,  may  contrive  to  bear  it;  but
these  persons  who  are  tormenting  me  so  griev-
ously have  the  appearance  of  being  Thy  good


206  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HEKRY  SUSO.

friends,  and  therefore  it  is  so  much  more  pain-
ful.

But  when  he  came  to  himself,  and  took  a
reasonable  view  of  it,  he  excused  them  from  all
fault,  and  acknowledged  that  it  was  God  who
had  done  it  through  them,  and  that  it  was  fit-
ting he  should  suffer  thus,  and  that  Almighty-
God  often  orders  things  for  His  friends'  good  by
means  of  His  enemies.

Once  especially,  when  he  was  suffering  from
these  thoughts,  it  was  said  to  him  interiorly : —
Remember  that  Christ  the  Lord  would  not  only
have  His  beloved  disciple  John  and  His  faithful
St.  Peter  in  His  pure  company,  but  He  willed
also  to  endure  the  wicked  Judas  at  His  side.
And  dost  thou  desire  to  imitate  Christ,  and  yet
will  not  endure  thy  Judas  ?  A  thought  in  answer
flashed  at  once  across  his  mind : — Alas,  Lord !  if
a  suffering  friend  of  God  had  only  one  Judas,  it
would  be  bearable ;  but  in  these  times  every  cor-
ner is  full  of  Judases,  and  when  one  departs  four
or  five  spring  up.  To  this  there  came  the  fol-
lowing reply  within  him : — A  man  who  is  what
he  ought  to  be  should  not  look  on  any  Judas  as
a  Judas;  but  he  should  regard  him  as  God's
fellow-worker,  by  whom  he  is  to  be  trained  and
purified  for  his  good.     When  Judas  betrayed


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.      207

Christ  with  a  kiss,  Christ  called  him  his  friend,
saying : — My  friend,  wherefore  art  thou  come  ?

The  sufferings  of  this  poor  man  had  now
lasted  a  long  time ;  but  there  was  one  very  little
ground  of  comfort,  to  which  he  clung,  and  which
was  all  his  support — namely,  that  the  burden
which  weighed  him  down  had  not  been  brought
before  the  judges  and  prelates  of  the  Order.  This
little  comfort  was  speedily  withdrawn  from  him
by  God;  for  the  Master-general  of  the  whole
Order  and  the  Master  of  the  German  province
both  came  together  to  the  town  in  which  the
wicked  woman  had  slandered  the  pious  Servitor
of  God.  When  the  poor  man,  who  was  living
in  another  place,  heard  this  news,  his  heart  died
within  him  utterly,  and  he  said  to  himself: — ■
If  perchance  the  Masters  give  credence  to  the
wicked  woman  against  thee,  thou  art  dead ;  for
they  will  condemn  thee  to  such  a  penitential
prison,  that  it  were  better  for  thee  to  die.  He
remained  under  the  weight  of  this  anguish  twelve
days  and  nights  continuously,  and  during  this
time  he  was  in  constant  expectation  of  this  ago-
nising penance,  as  soon  as  they  should  arrive
there.

One  day,  overcome  by  the  state  of  misery
in  which  he  was,  he  broke  out,  through  human


208  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

frailty,  into  unseemly  gestures  and  behaviour;
and  in  this  sad  condition  of  his  outer  and  inner
man  he  went  apart  from  every  one  into  a  place
of  secrecy,  where  none  could  hear  or  see  him,
and  he  gave  way  at  intervals  to  deep  and  re-
peated groans.  The  tears  stood  in  his  eyes,  and
then  streamed  down  his  cheeks.  His  distress
was  so  intense  that  he  could  not  remain  still,
but  he  would  sit  down  on  a  sudden,  and  then
spring  up  again  and  run  up  and  down  the  room
like  a  man  wrestling  with  grief  and  anguish.
Then  there  shot  through  his  heart  a  thought
which  took  the  form  of  a  remonstrance,  thus : —
Alas  !  O  everlasting  God,  what  is  Thy  purpose
with  me  f  Meanwhile,  when  he  was  in  this  sad
disordered  state,  a  voice  from  God  spoke  within
him,  saying: — Where  is  now  thy  detachment
and  that  evenness  of  soul  in  weal  and  woe  which
thou  hast  so  often  and  so  joyously  counselled  to
others,  whilst  thou  didst  lovingly  point  out  to
them  how  entirely  a  man  should  abandon  him-
self to  God,  and  hold  fast  by  nothing?

To  this  he  answered  with  many  tears : —
Askest  thou  me  where  my  detachment  is  ?  lea-
ther do  thou  tell  me  where  is  God's  unfathom-
able pity  for  His  friends  ?  For  in  spite  of  it  I
am  waiting  here  in  utter  desolation,  like  a  man


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.      20$

condemned  to  forfeit  his  life,  property,  and  hon-
our. I  had  fancied  that  God  was  kind.  I  had
fancied  that  he  was  a  good  and  gracious  Lord  to
all  who  ventured  to  abandon  themselves  to  Him.
Woe  is  me!  God  has  failed  me!  Alas!  that
vein  of  kindness  whose  compassionate  streams
never  yet  ran  dry  has  run  dry  for  me,  poor  man.
Alas!  the  kind  Heart  whose  kindness  the, whole
world  proclaims  has  deserted  me,  poor  man,  mis-
erably. He  has  turned  away  from  me  His  beau-
tiful eyes  and  His  gracious  countenance.  O
thou  Divine  countenance !  O  thou  kind  Heart !
I  had  never  deemed  of  Thee  that  Thou  wouldst
have  cast  me  off  so  utterly.  O  fathomless  abyss,
come  to  my  aid,  for  I  am  altogether  undone.
Thou  knowest  that  all  my  consolation  and  re-
liance is  in  Thee  alone,  and  in  no  one  else  on
earth.  Oh,  hearken  to  me  this  day  for  God's
sake,  all  ye  suffering  hearts!  See  that  no
one  take  scandal  at  my  disordered  state ;  for  so
long  as  detachment  was  in  my  mouth  it  was
sweet  to  me  to  speak  of  it ;  but  now  my  whole
heart  is  wounded  through  and  through,  and  the
inmost  core  of  all  my  veins  and  brain  is  trans-
pierced with  anguish,  and  there  is  not  a  limb  of
my  body  which  is  not  tortured  and  wounded  in
every  part  of  it.  How  can  I  then  be  detached  ?
P


210  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

When  he  had  spent  about  half  a  day  in  this
disordered  state,  and  his  brain  was  quite  shat-
tered, he  sat  still  at  last,  and,  turning  from  him-
self to  God,  gave  himself  up  to  God's  will  in
these  words  : — May  it  not  he  otherwise  !  u  Fiat
voluntas  Tua"  (Thy  will  be  done).

As  he  sat  thus,  with  his  senses  rapt  in  ec-
stasy, it  seemed  to  him  in  a  vision  that  there  came
and  stood  before  him  one  of  his  holy  spiritual
daughters,  who  when  she  was  yet  alive  had  often
told  him  that  he  would  have  many  sufferings,
but  that  the  everlasting  God  would  help  him  out
of  them.  She  now  appeared  to  him,  and  tried
lovingly  to  comfort  him ;  but  he  received  her
consolations  angrily,  and  charged  her  with  un-
truthfulness. She  smiled  at  this,  and  drawing
near,  offered  him  her  holy  hand,  saying : — Ac-
cept my  Christian  troth,  hi  God's  stead,  that  lie
will  not  forsake  you,  but  will  help  you  to  come
out  victorious  from  these  and  all  other  sufferings.
He  answered : — See,  daughter !  The  weight  of
my  afflictions  is  so  great,  that  I  can  no  longer
credit  thee,  unless  thou  givest  me  some  token
that  thy  words  are  true.  She  replied: — God
Himself  will  manifest  your  innocence  to  all  good
and  pure  hearts.  As  for  wicked  hearts,  things
look  to  them  according  to  the  colour  of  their  own


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.      211

wickedness.  A  wise  friend  of  God  heeds  them
not.  Moreover,  the  Order  of  Preachers  which  you
bewail  shall  be  the  more  pleasing  to  God  and  all
reasonable  men,  on  your  account.  And  as  a  sign
that  these  words  are  true,  note  this.  The  ever-
lasting God  will  soon  avenge  you,  and  will  let
fall  His  wrathful  hand  upon  the  wicked  heart
which  has  thus  troubled  you.  Moreover,  all  those
who  have  specially  abetted  her  by  their  malicious
slanderings  will  soon  feel  His  vengeance.  Be
sure  of  this.  The  brother  was  much  comforted
hy  these  words,  and  waited  steadfastly  in  expec-
tation of  how  God  would  bring  this  matter  to
an  end.

Very  soon  afterwards,  it  all  came  to  pass  ex-
actly as  she  had  said.  For  the  monster  who  had
thus  tormented  him  died,  and  she  died  too  by  a
sudden  death.  And  many  others  also  among
those  who  had  been  the  chief  causes  of  his  suf-
ferings were  snatched  hence  by  death ;  some  of
them  dying  insensible,  and  others  without  con-
fession and  communion.

One  of  these  persons,  who  had  been  a  prelate,
and  had  caused  very  great  suffering  to  the  Ser-
vitor, appeared  to  him  in  a  vision  after  death,
and  told  him  that  it  was  on  this  account  God
had  cut  short  his  life  and  term  of  office,  adding,


212  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

that  he  would  have  to  waste  and  wither  in  pur-
gatory for  a  long  time  as  a  penance  for  it.

Many  persons  who  knew  what  had  happened,
and  were  favourably  disposed  towards  the  Ser-
vitor, on  seeing  this  unusual  vengeance,  and  the
deaths  which  God  sent  so  suddenly  upon  his  ad-
versaries, praised  Almighty  God,  saying  : — Of  a
truth  God  is  with  this  good  man ;  and  we  see
well  that  wrong  has  been  done  him,  and  it  is  but
just  that  he  should  henceforth  be  of  more  account
in  the  eyes  of  reasonable  men,  and  be  looked  upon
as  higher  in  holiness  than  if  God  had  not  visited
him  with  these  sufferings.

Moreover,  the  prelate  of  the  German  province
exculpated  him,  saying  that  he  and  the  Master-
general  of  the  Order  had  held  a  strict  visitation
about  him,  as  was  fitting,  and  had  found  nothing
against  him,  save  that  a  wicked  woman,  who  was
unworthy  to  be  believed,  had  spoken  maliciously
of  the  honest  man ;  a  thing  which  might  very
well  happen,  if  people  would  give  ear  to  wicked
tongues.

Thus  the  kind  God  succoured  the  Servitor,
and  very  graciously  caused  this  terrible  storm  of
suffering  to  subside  and  pass  away,  according  as
the  holy  daughter  in  the  vision  had  told  him  for
his  consolation.     And  he  often  thought  within


HE  IS  CRUELLY  SLANDERED.      213

himself : — Ah,  Lord,  how  true  the  words  are
which  are  said  of  Thee :  He  to  whom  God  wishes
well  can  be  harmed  by  no  one  !

The  friend,  also,  who  behaved  to  him  in
such  an  unfriendly  way  was  shortly  afterwards
taken  hence  by  God.  After  his  death,  when
all  the  hindrances  which  had  delayed  him  from
beholding  God  face  to  face  had  been  removed,
he  appeared  to  the  Servitor  in  golden  garments
radiant  with  light,  and  embracing  him  lovingly,
pressed  his  face  tenderly  against  his  cheeks  and
besought  his  pardon  for  all  the  wrong  he  had
done  him,  and  prayed  him  that  a  true  heavenly
friendship  might  continue  between  them  ever-
lastingly. The  Servitor  accepted  this  proposal
with  joy,  and  embraced  him  in  turn  very  lovingly;
upon  which  he  vanished  out  of  sight,  and  entered
again  into  the  bliss  of  God.

Afterwards,  when  the  appointed  time  had
come,  God  gladdened  the  sufferer  in  return  for
all  his  sufferings  with  inward  peace  of  heart,  still
repose,  and  bright  illuminations  of  grace;  so  that
he  praised  God  with  all  his  heart  for  the  past
suffering,  saying  that  he  would  not  take  the
whole  world  not  to  have  suffered  it  all.  More-
over, it  was  given  to  him  to  see  clearly  that  by
this  crushing  blow  he  had  been  in  a  more  noble


214  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENPwY  SUSO.

fashion  drawn  out  of  himself  and  transported
into  God  than  by  all  the  manifold  sufferings
which  he  had  endured  from  his  youth  upwards
until  then.


Chaptek  XLI.

Of  interior  sufferings.

When  the  Servitor's  spiritual  daughter  had
read  the  account  of  the  grievous  sufferings  just
related,  and  had  shed  many  tears  over  it  through
pity,  she  prayed  him  to  explain  to  her  in  the
next  place  what  is  the  nature  of  interior  suf-
ferings ?  He  answered : — I  will  tell  you  two
things  about  interior  sufferings.  There  was  a
man  of  high  position  in  a  certain  Religious
Order  on  whom  God  had  laid  an  interior  suffer-
ing; and  the  poor  brother's  heart  and  spirits
were  so  overwhelmed  by  it,  that  he  ceased  not
night  and  day  from  tears  and  cries  and  lamen-
tations. At  length  he  came  with  great  devotion
to  the  Servitor  of  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  and  told
him  his  distress,  and  besought  him  to  pray  to
God  for  him  that  he  might  be  delivered.

Early  one  morning,  when  the  Servitor  was
sitting  in  his  chapel  and  praying  for  the  brother,,
he  saw  the  evil  spirit  come  and  stand  before


INTERIOR  SUFFERINGS.  215

him,  under  the  form  of  a  hideous  Moor,  with
eyes  of  fire  and  a  terrific  hellish  look,  and  with
a  how  in  his  hand.  The  Servitor  said  to  him :
— I  adjure  thee  hy  the  living  God  to  tell  me
who  thou  art,  and  what  thou  wantest  here.
He  answered  in  a  very  fiendish  fashion  :  —  I
am  "  Spiritus  BlasphemiaB"  (the  Spirit  of  Blas-
phemy), and  thou  shalt  soon  know  what  I  want.

The  Servitor  turned  towards  the  door  of  the
choir,  and,  as  he  did  this,  the  suffering  brother
came  in  by  the  same  door  on  his  way  to  the
choir  for  Mass.  Thereupon  the  evil  spirit  drew
his  bow  and  shot  a  fiery  arrow  into  the  brother's
heart,  so  that  he  almost  fell  backwards,  and
could  not  come  into  the  choir.  The  Servitor
was  greatly  pained  at  this,  and  severely  re-
proved the  devil  for  it.  On  which  the  proud
fiend  became  exceeding  wroth  with  him,  and
drawing  the  bow  once  more,  with  a  fiery  arrow
upon  it,  tried  to  shoot  him  also  through  the
heart.  But  the  Servitor  turned  quickly  to  our
dear  Lady  for  help,  saying : — "  Nos  cum  prole
pia  benedicat  Virgo  Maria"  (0  Virgin  Mary,
bless  us  with  thy  gentle  Babe);  and  immediately
the  devil's  strength  left  him,  and  he  vanished
out  of  sight.

"When  morning  came,  the  Servitor  related


216  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENHY  SUSO.

what  lie  had  seen  to  the  suffering  brother,  and
consoled  him,  and  at  the  same  time  told  him
the  remedies  which  would  be  of  avail,  as  they
are  set  forth  in  the  sermon  of  his  which  begins :
; — "  Lectulus  noster  floridus,  etc."

Among  the  many  persons  afflicted  with
interior  sufferings  who  sought  his  help,  there
once  came  to  him  a  secular  man  from  a  foreign
country,  saying: — Sir,  I  have  within  me  the
greatest  of  all  sufferings  which  a  man  ever  had,
and  no  one  can  help  me.  A  little  while  ago
I  despaired  of  God,  and  I  was  so  despondent,
that  through  excess  of  anguish  I  resolved  to
destroy  myself,  and  kill  both  body  and  soul.  In
this  agony  of  mind,  just  as  I  was  on  the  point
of  springing  into  a  raging  torrent,  and  had
already  taken  a  run  with  the  deliberate  purpose
of  drowning  myself,  I  heard  a  voice  above  me
say,  "Stop!  stop!  Put  not  thyself  to  this  shame-
ful death:  seek  a  friar  preacher."  And  the
voice  named  you  to  me  by  your  name,  which  I
had  never  heard  before,  and  it  said,  u  He  will
help  you  and  set  you  right."  I  was  full  of  joy
at  this,  and  gave  up  the  thought  of  killing
myself;  and  I  have  sought  you  out  by  asking
after  you,  as  I  was  bidden.  When  the  Servitor
saw  the  miserable  state  in  which  the  man  was,


THE  BENEFITS  OF  SUFFERING.     217

he  turned  lovingly  to  the  poor  sufferer,  and
comforting  him,  made  his  heart  light,  and  taught
him  what  to  do  in  order  to  avoid,  by  God's  help,
falling  again  into  such  a  temptation.


Chapter  XLII.

What  sufferings  are  the  most  useful  to  men,  and  bring
most  glory  to  God  1

The  holy  daughter  asked  him,  saying: — I
would  gladly  know  what  kind  of  sufferings  are,
above  all  others,  most  useful  to  men,  and  bring
most  glory  to  God.  He  answered  as  follows : —
Thou  must  know  that  there  are  many  kinds  of
sufferings  by  which  a  man  is  disciplined  and  set
forward  on  the  road  to  bliss,  if  only  he  can  use
them  rightly.  Sometimes  God  sends  heavy
sufferings  on  a  man  without  any  fault  of  his,
either  to  try  how  firm  he  stands,  or  to  show  him
what  he  is  in  himself,  as  we  often  read  in  the
Old  Testament ;  or,  again,  merely  to  manifest
His  own  glory,  as  is  related  in  the  Gospel  about
the  man  born  blind  whom  Christ  the  Lord  de-
clared to  be  without  fault,  and  restored  to  sight.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  some  sufferers
who  well  deserve  their  sufferings,  as  the  thief
did  who  was  crucified  with  Christ  the   Lord,


218  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

and  to  whom  Christ  gave  everlasting  bliss  be-
cause of  his  trne  conversion  to  Him  amid  his  suf-
ferings. There  are  others,  again,  who  are  guilt-
less in  regard  to  the  particular  thing  for  which
they  are  at  the  moment  suffering,  but  yet  there
is  something  else  faulty  in  them,  on  account  of
which  God  makes  them  suffer ;  just  as  it  often
happens  that  Almighty  God  crushes  haughty
arrogance,  and  brings  persons  of  this  description
to  themselves  by  letting  their  pride  and  super-
ciliousness meet  with  a  heavy  fall  in  things  in
which,  perhaps,  they  are  wholly  and  entirely
free  from  guilt.  Again,  God  sometimes  sends
sufferings  upon  men  out  of  special  love  for  them,
to  save  them  in  this  way  from  a  still  greater
suffering,  as  is  the  case  with  those  to  whom  God
gives  their  purgatory  in  this  life  by  sicknesses,
poverty,  or  such  like,  that  so  they  may  be  de-
livered from  sufferings  in  the  life  to  come ;  or
with  those  whom  He  permits  to  be  tried  and  ex-
ercised by  fiendish  men,  that  they  may  thus  be
saved  from  the  sight  of  the  foul  fiend  at  death.
There  are  others  also  who  suffer  from  burning
love,  like  the  martyrs,  whose  joy  it  was  by  the
manifold  deaths,  whether  of  body  or  soul,  which
they  endured,  to  show  forth  to  the  dear  God  their
love.


THE  BENEFITS  OF  SUFFEEING.  219

Besides  all  this,  we  find  in  this  world  many
sufferings  which  are  vain  and  without  consola-
tion ;  such,  for  example,  as  are  undergone  by  those
who  make  it  their  aim  to  please  the  world  in
worldly  things.  These  persons  purchase  hell  at
a  very  dear  price,  while,  on  the  contrary,  those
who  suffer  for  God  find  help  in  their  tribulations.
Again,  there  are  some  persons  who  are  often  in-
wardly admonished  by  God  to  give  themselves
to  Him  without  reserve,  because  He  wishes  to
admit  them  to  His  intimacy.  Now  if  they
resist  the  call  through  negligence,  God  draws
them  to  Him  by  sufferings ;  and  to  whichever
side  they  turn  in  their  endeavours  to  escape
Him,  the  faithful  God  sends  upon  them  tem-
poral misfortunes  and  discomfort,  and  thus  holds
them  by  the  hair,  that  they  cannot  get  away
from  Him.

There  are  many  others  also  to  be  met  with
who  have  no  sufferings  except  those  which  they
make  for  themselves,  by  estimating  too  highly
what  is  not  worthy  of  being  taken  into  account
at  all.  Once  when  a  man  who  was  heavily
laden  with  afflictions  chanced  to  pass  by  a  cer-
tain house,  he  heard  a  woman  within  uttering
very  great  lamentations.  The  thought  came  to
him: — Go  in  and  comfort  the  woman  in  her


220  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

sufferings.  Accordingly Jie  went  in  and  said : —
Dear  lady,  what  lias  happened  to  you,  that  you
are  bewailing  yourself  thus  ?  She  answered  :
— I  have  let  a  needle  drop,  and  cannot  find  it
any  where.  He  turned  round,  and  thought  to
himself  as  he  went  out: — O  foolish  woman,  if
thou  hadst  my  burden  on  thee  thou  wouldst  not
weep  for  a  needle!  In  this  way  some  soft-
natured  persons  make  for  themselves  sufferings
in  a  multitude  of  things  where  there  is  nothing
to  suffer.

But  the  noblest  and  best  kind  of  suffering  is
after  the  pattern  of  Christ's  sufferings — I  mean
those  which  the  heavenly  Father  gave  to  His
only-begotten  Son,  and  which  He  still  gives  to
His  dear  and  chosen  friends.  This  must  not
be  taken  as  if  any  one  were  altogether  without
fault,  except  indeed  the  dear  Jesus  Christ,  who
never  sinned  ;  but  it  is  to  be  understood  of  the
example  of  patience  which  Christ  gave  us  when
He  bore  Himself  in  His  sufferings  like  a  gentle
little  lamb  among  wolves.  Hence  it  is  that  He
sometimes  gives  great  sufferings  to  some  of  His
dear  and  chosen  friends,  that  we,  who  are  so  im-
patient under  suffering,  may  learn  patience  from
these  blessed  men,  and  in  every  case  by  sweet-
ness of  heart  to  overcome  evil  with  good.     All


THE  BENEFITS  OF  SUFFERING.  221

this  thou  shouldst  consider,  my  daughter,  and
be  ready  to  suffer  without  reluctance ;  for  from
whatever  quarter  sufferings  come  they  can  be
turned  to  profit,  if  only  the  sufferer  accepts  them
all  as  sent  by  God,  and  refers  them  back  again
to  God,  and  so  gets  the  mastery  over  them  with
His  help.

The  daughter  answered : — The  noblest  kind
of  suffering,  of  which  you  spoke  last,  I  mean
when  a  person  suffers  innocently,  is  the  lot  of
few.  Therefore  I  would  gladly  hear  how  those
who  for  their  sins  have  deserved  to  suffer  cany
by  God's  help,  come  forth  victorious  from  their
sufferings ;  for  such  persons  have  a  twofold  source
of  pain  :  they  have  angered  the  Almighty  God,
and  they  are  tormented  from  without.

He  replied : — I  will  tell  you.  I  knew  a  man
who,  whenever  he  fell  into  a  sin  through  human
frailty,  used  to  do  like  a  good  washerwoman,  who
takes  the  clothes,  when  she  has  steeped  and  soft-
ened them,  to  the  pure  spring,  and  there  by  wash-
ing makes  every  thing  clean  and  fresh  which  be-
fore was  dirty.  Even  so  this  man  would  never
rest  until  some  of  the  innocent,  down-trickling
Blood  of  Christ,  which  the  Lord  shed  with  un-
speakable love,  that  it  might  be  a  help  and  com-
fort to  all  sinners,  had  been  spiritually  poured


222  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

forth  iii  sufficient  measure  upon  him :  and  in
this  hot  Blood  he  washed  himself  and  all  his  stains
away,  and  he  bathed  himself  in  the  healthful
brook  of  Blood  as  a  little  child  is  bathed  in  a
warm  water -bath;  and  this  he  did  with  heart-
felt devotion  in  a  well-grounded  Christian  faith
that  this  Blood  must  and  would  wash  away  all
his  sins,  and  cleanse  him  from  all  guilt  by  its
almighty  power.  In  this  way,  however  things
might  be,  whether  he  was  guilty  or  free  from
guilt,  he  always  referred  them  ultimately  to  the
good  God.


Chapter  XLIIL

How  he  drew  certain  hearts  from  earthly  love  to  the
love  of  God.

While  the  Servitor  was  occupied  in  drawing
souls  from  earthly  love  to  God,  he  remarked  that
in  certain  monasteries  there  were  persons  who,
though  they  wore  the  religious  habit,  had  worldly
hearts  beneath  it.  Among  others  there  was  one
who  had  steadfastly  fixed  her  heart  upon  a  pe-
rishable affection,  of  a  kind  which  goes  by  the
name  of  "  sponsiren,"  and  is  a  very  poison  to  all
happiness  in  religion.  The  Servitor  told  her  that
if  she  wished  to  lead  a  godly  and  quiet  life,  she


HE  WINS  SOULS  TO  GOD.  223

must  renounce  this  practice,  and  in  place  of  her
earthly  lover  take  the  Eternal  Wisdom  for  her
beloved.     This  was  a  hard  thing  for  her  to  do ;
for  she  was  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  and  completely
entangled  in  this  kind  of  company.     Neverthe-
less, he  brought  her  thus  far,  that  she  formed  the
good  resolution  to  do  it.     "When,  however,  she
broke  this  good  resolution  again,  through  the  in-
fluence of  her  friends,  he  said  to  her: — Daughter,
leave  off  this  practice ;  for  I  tell  thee  that  if  thou
wilt  not  do  it  cheerfully,  thou  wilt  have  to  do  it
sorrowfully.     As  she  would  not  be  converted  by
his  friendly  counsels,  he  prayed  to  God  very  ear-
nestly to  withdraw  her  from  this  affection,  cost
her  what  it  might.     One  day  he  went  up  into
the  pulpit  under  the  crucifix,  as  his  wont  was,
and  he  took  a  severe  discipline  on  his  bare  back,
so  that  the  blood  streamed  from  it,  and  he  be-
sought God  for  her  that  she  might  be  tamed.
And  so  it  came  to  pass ;  for  immediately  upon
her  return  home  there  grew  an  ill-shaped  hump
upon  her  back,  which  made  her  look  hideous,
and  thus  necessity  obliged  her  to  give  up  what
she  had  refused  to  renounce  for  God.

In  the  same  unenclosed  monastery,  there
was  a  young,  beautiful,  and  noble  maiden,  who
having  been  caught  in  the  same  devil's  net,  had


224  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

been  for  many  years  wearing  away  her  heart
and  her  time  in  frivolous  light-mindedness  with
all  kinds  of  persons ;  and  she  had  become  so
infatuated  in  these  practices,  that  she  always
fled  like  a  wild  animal  from  the  Servitor  of  the
Eternal  Wisdom,  because  she  feared  that  he
would  order  her  to  give  up  the  kind  of  life
which  she  was  leading.  Now  the  sister  of  this
maiden  besought  the  Servitor  to  try  his  luck
with  her,  and  see  whether  he  could  not  bring
her  back  from  her  ruinous  courses  to  the  ever-
lasting God.  This  seemed  to  him  an  impossible
request,  and  he  made  answer  that,  in  his  opinion,
it  would  be  more  possible  for  the  sky  to  fall
than  for  her  to  give  up  this  practice ;  and  that
only  death  could  take  it  from  her.  The  sister,
however,  was  very  urgent  with  him  in  her
entreaties,  saying  that  it  was  her  firm  belief
that  whatever  he  asked  of  the  everlasting  God
with  earnestness,  God  never  refused  to  him.
At  length  she  overcame  him  by  her  impor-
tunities, and  he  promised  her  to  undertake  it.

As  the  maiden  always  fled  from  him,  so  that
he  could  never  come  to  words  with  her,  he  took
note  one  day,  about  the  time  of  St.  Margaret's
feast,  that  she  had  gone  out  with  the  other
young  sisters  into  a  field  to  pick  flax.     He  stole


HE  WINS  SOULS  TO  GOD.  22  5

after  them,  and  went  round  the  field,  and  in  this
way  managed  to  come  gently  up  to  her.

When  she  perceived  that  he  was  drawing
near  to  her,  she  turned  her  back  upon  him  very
insolently,  and,  with  her  face  all  on  fire  with
anger,  cried  out  passionately  to  him : — Sir  monk,
what  mean  you  by  coming  out  here  to  me  ?  keep
to  your  own  road,  I  advise  you ;  for  you  have
nothing  to  do  with  me.  I  tell  you  that  I  would
rather  have  my  head  cut  off  than  confess  to  you,
and  I  would  sooner  be  buried  alive  than  obey
you  and  give  up  my  practices  (sponsiren).

Her  playmate,  who  stood  next  her,  tried  to
quiet  her;  and  reproved  her,  saying  that  the
Servitor  had  only  done  it  out  of  kindness.  But
she,  tossing  up  her  head  in  fury,  answered : —
See,  I  will  not  deceive  him;  I  wall  show  him  by
my  words  and  ways  what  I  have  in  my  heart.
The  Servitor  was  so  horror-struck  by  these
insolent  words  and  unseemly  gestures,  that  he
blushed  with  shame  and  kept  silence ;  for  he
could  not  speak.  The  other  sisters,  who  heard
her  outcries  against  him,  were  grieved  at  it,  and
chid  her  sharply.  He  soon  withdrew  on  one
side  and  left  her;  and  then  looking  upwards,
he  began  to  sigh  deeply,  and  would  have  given
up  the  attempt ;  only  that  there  still  remained
Q


226  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENKY  SUSO.

in  him  a  kind  of  interior  impulse  from  God,
reminding  him  that  he  who  wishes  to  accom-
plish any  thing  either  for  God  or  for  the  world
must  not  give  up  so  soon.  This  took  place  after
midday.

On  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  after  sup-
per, the  sisters  went  in  a  body  into  the  court-
yard to  pill  the  flax  which  they  had  gathered,
and  the  afore-mentioned  sister  went  with  them.
Now  they  were  obliged  to  pass  by  the  guest-
quarters,  in  which  the  Servitor  was  staying.
He,  therefore,  besought  one  of  the  maiden's  play-
mates to  contrive  to  bring  her  to  him,  and  then
to  leave  the  room  again  herself.  This  was  man-
aged, though  with  difficulty.

As  soon  as  she  came  into  the  room  where  the
brother  was,  and  had  seated  herself  near  him
under  the  window,  he  fetched  a  deep  sigh  from
his  full  heart,  and  said:— Ah!  beautiful  and
gentle  maiden,  God's  chosen  one!  how  long
will  you  abandon  your  beautiful  lovely  body
and  your  tender  heart  to  the  vile  and  wicked
devil !  And  yet  you  are  so  richly  adorned  by
the  everlasting  God  with  every  grace,  that  it  is
indeed  an  evil  tale  that  such  a  well-formed,
noble,  and  angelic  maiden  should  be  the  be-
loved of  any  other  save  the  All-adorable  One


HE  WINS  SOULS  TO  GOD.  227

alone.  Who  lias  a  greater  right  to  pluck  the
fair  and  tender  rose  than  He  whose  own  it  is  f
No,  dear  lovely  maiden,  open  your  bright  fal-
con-eyes, and  think  of  that  beautiful  chosen
love,  which  begins  here  and  lasts  for  ever  and
ever.  Think,  too,  what  sorrow  and  unfaithful-
ness, what  pain  and  suffering  in  body  and
goods,  in  soul  and  honour,  they  must  needs
endure,  willingly  or  unwillingly,  who  pursue
earthly  love;  only  they  are  so  blinded  by  the
honeyed  poison  that  they  forget  the  great  hurt
which  thence  results  to  them  in  time  and  in
eternity.  Come,  then,  thou  angelic  form,  thou
loving  noble  heart,  and  turn  thy  nature's  high
nobility  to  Him  who  is  noble  from  eternity,
and  cease  from  this.  I  promise  thee,  by  my
troth,  that  God  will  take  thee  for  His  darling,
and  will  be  altogether  true  to  thee,  and  love
thee  right  well,  here  and  hereafter,  everlast-
ingly.

The  moment  was  propitious.  These  fiery
words  shot,  as  it  were,  through  her  heart,  and
softened  her  so  exceedingly,  that,  at  once  lifting
up  her  eyes  and  sighing  very  deeply,  she  said
to  him  these  determined  and  courageous  words :
— Ah,  sir,  my  father !  I  surrender  myself  this
day  to  God  and  you ;  and  from  this  hour  I  will


228  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HEXRY  SUSO.

have  done  with  my  wild  unbridled  life,  and,  by
your  counsel  and  help,  I  will  give  myself  to  the
loving  God,  to  be  His  own,  and  will  serve  Him
only  until  my  death.  He  answered: — This  is
an  hour  of  gladness.  Praised  be  the  kind  Lord,
who  is  ready  to  receive  back  again  with  joy  all
those  who  return  to  Him.

While  the  two  were  thus  conversing  toge-
ther in  private  about  God,  her  playmates  whom
she  had  left  stood  outside  the  door,  and  they
were  vexed  at  the  length  of  the  discourse,  for
they  feared  lest  she  should  abandon  their  light-
minded  society.  So  they  called  out  to  her  to
finish  with  him.  Upon  this  she  rose  up,  and
went  away  with  them,  saying : — My  playmates,
God  bless  you!  I  bid  you  now  farewell — you
and  all  our  comrades,  with  whom,  alas,  I  have
wasted  my  time  so  frivolously ;  for  henceforth  I
will  have  no  one  but  the  faithful  God,  and  all
else  I  will  let  go.

From  that  time  the  maiden  began  to  avoid
all  hurtful  company,  and  to  keep  herself  re-
tired; and  though  in  after  times  the  attempt
was  often  made  to  bring  her  back  to  her  old
life,  nothing  ever  came  of  it ;  and  her  conduct
continued  such,  that,  in  the  enjoyment  of  an
honourable  reputation  and  the  practice  of  every


HE  WINS  SOULS  TO  GOD.  229

virtue,  she  remained  firmly  and  steadfastly  at-
tached to  God  until  her  death.

Once,  later  on,  the  Servitor  set  forth  from
home  to  visit  his  new  daughter,  that  he  might
confirm  her  in  a  good  and  holy  life,  and  console
her  lovingly,  if  she  were  in  any  sorrow ;  and  he
put  himself  to  much  suffering  by  undertaking
the  journey  at  a  time  when  he  was  ill.  As  he
walked  along  in  this  state  through  the  deep
mire,  and  climbed  over  lofty  mountains,  he  often
lifted  up  his  eyes  to  the  living  God,  and  said : —
Merciful  God,  be  mindful  of  the  painful  steps
which  Thou  didst  take  for  man's  salvation,  and
keep  safe  my  child.  His  companion,  on  whom
he  leant  from  time  to  time,  said  to  him  in  pity :
« — It  well  beseems  God's  goodness  that  many
souls  should  be  kept  safe  through  you.

When  he  had  gone  on  until  he  could  go  no
further,  but  was  quite  exhausted,  his  companion
said  to  him  once  more: — Ah,  father!  God
should  have  considered  how  very  ill  you  are,
and  He  should  have  sent  you  a  horse  to  ride
upon,  until  you  come  to  where  people  are.  He
answered : — Well,  if  we  both  ask  God  for  it,  I
have  confidence  that  He  will  let  me  have  the
benefit  of  thy  virtue,  and  that  it  will  come  to
pa  ss.


230  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

Then  the  Servitor  looked  round  about  him,
and  he  saw  there  on  the  right  hand,  coming
forth  out  of  a  wood,  a  handsome  horse,  properly
bridled  and  saddled,  and  it  was  coming  along
alone.  His  companion  joyfully  exclaimed: — ■
See,  dear  father,  how  God  will  not  forsake  you !
He  answered: — Son,  look  round  about  on  all
sides  of  this  broad  plain,  and  observe  whether
there  is  any  one  to  whom  it  can  belong.  He
looked  far  and  near,  and  could  see  no  one,  but
only  the  horse  trotting  up  to  them.  Then  he
said:— Of  a  truth,  father,  God  has  sent  it  to
you;  sit  upon  it  and  ride.  He  answered: —
Well,  comrade,  if  the  horse  stops  still  when  it
comes  to  us,  I  trust  in  God  that  He  has  sent  it
hither  for  our  necessity.  The  horse  came  up
quietly,  and  stood  still  before  him.  He  said : —
So  be  it,  in  God's  name.  Then  his  companion
helped  him  on  the  horse  and  made  him  ride
upon  it,  and  walked  by  his  side  for  some  dis-
tance, until  he  was  well  rested.  When  they
came  near  a  village  the  Servitor  got  off,  and
laying  the  reins  upon  the  horse's  neck,  let  it  go
its  way  to  the  place  from  which  it  came.  But
whence  it  came,  or  whose  it  was,  he  never  could
discover  afterwards.

When  the  Servitor  had  arrived  at  his  jour-


HE  WINS  SOULS  TO  GOD.  231

ney's  encl?  it  happened  one  evening  that  he  was
sitting  with  his  spiritual  children  speaking  to
them  in  disparagement  of  perishable  love,  while
at  the  same  time  he  praised  and  celebrated  to
them  the  excellence  of  eternal  love.  When  they
left  him,  his  heart  was  greatly  inflamed  with  Di-
vine love  through  the  ardour  of  his  discourse;  for
it  seemed  to  him  that  his  Beloved,  whom  he  both
loved  himself  and  advised  others  to  love,  was  in-
finitely better  than  all  earthly  objects  of  love.
While  he  meditated  on  this,  his  senses  were
stilled  in  ecstasy,  and  it  appeared  to  him  in  a
vision  that  he  was  carried  to  a  beautiful  green
heath,  and  that  by  his  side  there  went  a  heavenly
youth  of  comely  form  and  noble  bearing,  who
led  him  by  the  hand.  Then  the  youth  began
to  sing  in  the  brother's  soul  a  song  which  rang
forth  so  joyously  that  all  his  senses  took  to  flight
before  the  mighty  power  of  that  sweet  melody,
and  it  seemed  to  him  that  his  heart  became  so
exceeding  full  of  burning  love  and  longing  after
God  that  it  began  to  leap  and  rage  within  his
body,  as  if  it  were  on  the  point  of  breaking,
from  the  intense  strain  that  was  upon  it;  and
he  was  forced  to  lay  his  right  hand  upon  his
heart  as  a  relief,  and  his  eyes  became  so  full  that
the  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks.


232  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

When  the  song  was  ended,  a  picture  was
placed  before  him,  with  the  intent  to  teach  him
this  song  in  such  a  way  that  he  might  not  forget
it.  He  looked,  and  saw  there  our  Lady  pressing
her  Child,  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  to  her  maternal
heart.  Over  the  Child's  head  the  beginning  of
the  song  was  written  in  beautiful  and  well-formed
letters,  and  yet  the  writing  was  so  concealed
that  it  was  not  every  one  could  read  it.  Only
those  who  had  gained  the  knowledge  of  it  by
experience  and  spiritual  exercises  read  it  well ;
and  the  writing  was,  "  Heart's  darling."

The  Servitor  read  the  writing  rapidly ;  and
then  the  Babe  looked  up  and  gazed  at  him  with
love;  upon  which  he  felt  in  his  inmost  soul  how
true  it  is  that  the  Divine  Babe  alone  is  our
heart's  darling — the  sole  object  of  all  our  joy  and
sorrow.  Then  he  pressed  the  Babe  to  the  very
centre  of  his  heart,  and  began  to  sing  with  the
youth  this  song  from  end  to  end.  In  these
burning  sentiments  of  heartfelt  love  he  came  to
himself  again,  and  he  found  his  right  hand  lying
upon  his  heart,  just  as  he  had  placed  it  there
as  a  relief,  when  his  heart  was  agitated  so  vio-
lently.


DRINK  MULTIPLIED.  233

Chapter  XLIV.

How  God  multiplied  drink  for  His  friends.
Once  upon  a  time  the  Servitor,  having  tra-
velled to  a  distance,  became  very  tired,  and  on
arriving  in  the  evening  at  a  hermitage,  where  it
was  proposed  to  spend  the  night,  no  wine  was  to
be  found  either  in  the  village  or  the  hermitage ;
until  at  length,  a  certain  good  woman  came  and
said  that  she  had  a  small  bottle  of  wine  left,  about
half  a  quart,  adding,  "  But  what  is  this  among  so
many  f*  For  they  were  in  number  about  twenty
persons,  good  children,  together  with  those  who
had  come  thither  desiring  to  hear  the  word  of
God  from  his  mouth.  The  Servitor  told  her  to
bring  the  bottle  and  place  it  on  the  table,  and
they  prayed  him  to  pronounce  a  blessing  from
God  upon  it.  He  did  this  in  the  mighty  power
of  the  loving  Name  of  Jesus,  and  then  began  to
drink  of  it,  for  he  was  very  thirsty  from  the  jour-
ney ;  after  which  he  offered  it  to  the  others,  and
they  all  drank  together.  The  bottle  was  placed
upon  the  table  openly,  in  the  sight  of  every  one,
and  no  more  wine  or  water  was  poured  into  it,
for  there  was  no  other  wine  there.  They  con-
tinued drinking  again  and  again  out  of  the  same
bottle ;  and  they  were  so  eager  to  hear  from  him


234  LITE  OF"  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

the  word  of  God,  that  no  one  took  note  of  the
Divine  miracle.  At  last,  when  they  came  to
themselves,  and  saw  God's  almighty  power  so
manifestly  displayed  in  the  multiplication  of  the
drink,  they  began  to  praise  God,  and  wished  to
attribute  the  miracle  which  had  taken  place  to
the  Servitor's  holiness.  But  he  would  not  on
any  account  suffer  this,  saying : — Children,  this
is  not  my  doing.  God  has  permitted  this  pure
company  to  reap  the  benefit  of  their  good  faithj
and  has  given  them  drink  both  bodily  and  spi*
ritually.


Chapter  XLY.

Of  certain  sufferers,  who  were  attached  to  the  Servitor  by
special  ties  of  friendship  and  affection.

In  a  certain  town  there  were  two  persons  of
eminent  holiness,  both  intimate  friends  of  the
Servitor.  The  one  stood  in  high  repute  before
the  people,  and  abounded  in  divine  sweetnesses.
The  other  was  held  in  no  esteem,  and  God  ex-
ercised him  continually  with  sufferings.

After  they  were  both  dead,  the  Servitor  wished
much  to  know  what  was  the  difference  between
their  rewards  in  the  next  world,  inasmuch  as  the
roads  by  which  they  had  been  led  in  this  life  were-


HIS  MOTHER.  235

so  unlike.  Early  one  morning,  the  one  who  had
been  held  in  such  esteem  here  below  appeared
to  the  Servitor,  and  told  him  that  he  was  still  in
purgatory ;  and  when  asked  how  this  could  be,
he  replied,  that  the  only  sin  for  which  he  had  to
suffer  was  a  certain  spiritual  pride  which  had
assailed  him,  through  the  high  esteem  in  which
he  had  been  held,  and  which  he  had  not  driven
away  quickly  enough.  He  added,  that  his  suf-
ferings would  soon  be  at  an  end.  The  other,
whose  life  had  been  full  of  humiliations  and  suf-
ferings, passed  at  once  without  any  hindrance
to  God.

The  Servitor's  mother  was  all  the  days  of  her
life  a  very  great  sufferer.  This  arose  from  the
painful  dissimilarity  which  there  was  between  her
and  her  husband.  She  was  full  of  the  Almighty
God,  and  her  whole  desire  was  to  live  a  spiritual
life.  But  her  husband  was  full  of  the  world,  and
opposed  her  with  great  harshness  and  severity;
and  through  this  she  had  much  to  suffer.

It  was  her  custom  to  cast  all  her  sorrows
into  the  bitter  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
in  this  way  to  get  the  mastery  over  them.
Before  her  death  she  confessed  to  the  Servitor
that  for  thirty  years  she  had  never  assisted  at
Mass  without  weeping  bitterly  from  heartfelt


236  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

compassion  for  the  torments  of  our  clear  Lord
and  His  faithful  Mother.  She  told  him  also
that,  from  the  excessive  love  which  she  felt  for
God,  she  had  once  fallen  ill,  and  kept  her  bed
for  twelve  weeks,  longing  and  pining  for  God
so  ardently  that  the  physicians  clearly  perceived
it  and  were  edified  by  it.

Once,  at  the  beginning  of  Lent,  she  went  to
the  Cathedral,  where  the  taking  down  of  the
Lord  Jesus  from  the  cross  is  represented  in
carved  wood  over  an  altar.  While  she  was
before  this  image  she  experienced  sensibly  the
great  anguish  which  the  tender  Mother  felt
beneath  the  cross ;  and  so  intense  was  the  agony
which  it  caused  this  good  woman,  through  com-
passion, that  her  heart  became  sick  within  her
body,  and  she  sank  down  fainting  to  the  ground,
and  could  neither  see  nor  speak.  She  was
helped  home,  and  lay  there  sick  until  Good
Friday  at  none,  and  died  while  the  Passion  was
being  read.

Her  son,  the  Servitor,  was  at  this  time  at
Cologne,  engaged  with  his  studies.  She  ap-
peared to  him  there  in  a  vision,  and  said  to  him
with  great  joy  : — Ah,  my  child !  love  God  and
trust  Him  well,  for  He  will  never  forsake  thee
in  any  trouble.     See,  I  have  departed  from  this


HIS  MOTHER,  237

world,  and  yet  I  am  not  dead.  I  shall  live  ever-
lastingly in  the  presence  of  the  everlasting  God.
She  kissed  him  in  motherly  fashion  upon  his
mouth,  and  blessed  him  lovingly,  and  then  dis-
appeared. He  began  to  weep,  and  cried  out
after  her,  saying : — O  my  true-hearted  holy  mo-
ther, be  true  to  me  in  God's  presence!  and
thus  weeping  and  sighing,  he  came  to  himself
again.

In  his  young  days,  when  he  was  at  the
place  of  studies,  God  provided  him  once  with
a  dear  and  holy  companion.  On  one  occasion,
when  they  were  alone,  and  had  conversed  to-
gether much  and  tenderly  about  God,  the  com-
panion besought  the  Servitor  by  the  sincerity
of  their  friendship  to  show  him  the  lovely  Name
of  Jesus  which  was  engraven  over  his  heart.
The  Servitor  was  reluctant  to  do  this;  never-
theless, when  he  saw  his  companion's  great  devo-
tion, he  granted  his  request,  and  drawing  aside
his  habit  where  it  covered  his  heart,  let  him
look  at  this  jewel  of  his  heart  as  much  as  he
would.  The  companion  was  not  content  with
this ;  but  when  he  saw  the  sweet  Name  standing
out  visibly  in  the  middle  over  the  Servitor's
heart,  he  put  out  his  hand  and  face,  and  after
passing  his  hand  across  it,  laid  his  mouth  upon


238  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HEXRY  SUSO.

it,  and  began  to  weep  so  heartily  from  devo-
tion that  the  tears  ran  down  over  the  heart.
After  this  the  Servitor  covered  up  the  Name,
and  he  never  would  allow  any  one  else  to  see  it,
save  only  one  of  God's  chosen  friends,  to  whom
this  was  permitted  by  the  everlasting  God;  and
this  person  also  contemplated  it  with  the  same
devout  feelings  as  the  other.

When  these  two  dear  companions  had  spent
many  years  together  in  spiritual  companionship,
and  the  time  was  come  for  them  to  separate,
they  blessed  each  other  lovingly,  and  made  a
compact  between  them,  that  whichever  of  them
might  die  first,  the  survivor  should,  as  a  token
of  their  mutual  friendship,  say  for  his  departed
friend  two  Masses  weekly  during  a  year;  the
one  to  be  a  Eequiem  Mass  on  the  Mondays,  and
the  other  a  Mass  of  our  Lord's  Passion  on  the
Fridays.  Many  years  passed  away  after  this,
until  at  length  the  Servitor's  dear  companion
died  before  him ;  but  the  Servitor  had  forgotten
the  promise  about  the  Masses,  though,  without
reference  to  it,  he  faithfully  remembered  his
friend's  soul  to  God.  One  morning,  as  he  sat  in
ecstasy  in  his  chapel,  his  companion  appeared  to
him  in  a  vision,  and  said  to  him  very  piteously : —
Alas,  friend,  how  great  is  thy  unfaithfulness  !


CHRIST  UNDER  THE  FORM  OF  A  SERA


CM


How  hast  thou  forgotten  me  !    The  Serv
swerecl : — And  yet  I  remember  thee  e\
in  my  Mass.     His  companion  replied  :—
not  enough.   Fulfil  what  we  promised  about  the
Masses,  that  some  of  the  sinless  Blood  may  thus
come  down  upon  me  and  quench  the  severity
of  my  purgatory.     In  this  way  I  shall  be  soon
set  free.    The  Servitor  accomplished  this  with  af-
fectionate fidelity,  grieving  much  for  his  forget-
fulness ;  and  his  companion  was  soon  released.


Chapter  XLVI.

How  Christ  appeared  to  him  under  the  form  of  a  Seraph,
and  taught  him  how  to  suffer.

Once  upon  a  time,  when  the  Servitor  had
turned  to  God  with  great  fervour,  beseeching
Him  to  instruct  him  how  to  suffer,  there  ap-
peared to  him  in  a  vision  a  likeness  of  Christ
upon  the  cross  in  the  form  of  a  Seraph :  and  the
Seraph  had  six  wings :  with  two  he  covered  his
head,  with  two  his  feet,  and  with  two  he  flew.
On  the  two  lowest  wings  was  written,  "Re-
ceive sufferings  willingly;"  on  the  two  middle
wings,   "Bear    sufferings    patiently;"    and   on


2&0  LITE  OF  BLESSED  HElSTtY  SUSO.

the  two  highest  wings,  "Learn  to  suffer  after
Christ's  pattern."

He  told  this  vision  of  love  to  one  of  his  inti-
mate friends,  who  was  a  very  holy  person.  The
answer  which  he  received  was: — Be  assured
that  God  has  once  more  prepared  for  you  new
sufferings,  which  you  will  have  to  suffer.  He
asked  what  kind  of  sufferings  these  might  be.
He  was  answered : — You  will  be  raised  to  the
dignity  of  a  prelate,  in  order  that  those  who  are
disaffected  to  you  may  be  the  better  able  to
strike  you,  and  may  humble  you  so  much  the
more  deeply.  Therefore  stablish  yourself  in
patience,  as  has  been  shown  you  under  the
figure  of  the  Seraph.  He  fetched  a  sigh,  and
looked  out  for  the  coming  of  a  new  storm ;  and
so  in  truth  it  came  to  pass  as  the  holy  person
had  foretold  him.

It  happened  at  this  time  that  there  were
several  years  of  scarcity,  and  no  one  gave  alms
of  bread  or  wine  to  the  convent  in  which  he
then  was ;  so  that  the  convent  fell  greatly  into
debt.  The  brothers  resolved  in  common  to  elect
the  Servitor  prior  during  the  great  scarcity,  not-
withstanding his  sorrow  and  repugnance;  for
he  well  understood  that  herein  new  sufferings
were  prepared  for  him.


HE  IS  MADE  PRIOR.  241

On  the  first  day  he  caused  the  bell  to  be
rung  for  chapter,  and  he  exhorted  the  commu-
nity to  call  upon  the  dear  St.  Dominic,  inas-
much as  he  had  promised  his  brothers  that  if
they  called  upon  him  when  they  were  in  need,
he  would,  with  God's  permission,  come  and
help  them.  Now  there  were  two  of  the  bro-
thers sitting  side  by  side  in  the  chapter,  one
of  whom  whispered  to  the  other  very  scorn-
fully:— See  what  a  foolish  man  this  prior  is,
that  he  bids  us  turn  to  God  in  our  need.  Does
he  fancy  that  God  will  open  heaven,  and  send
us  down  meat  and  drink?  The  other  an-
swered : — He  js  not  the  only  fool.  We  are  all
fools  for  having  made  him  prior,  though  we
knew  well  beforehand  that  he  is  quite  ignor-
ant about  earthly  things,  and  does  nothing  but
gape  upwards  continually  to  heaven.  Many  a
contemptuous  judgment  of  this  kind  was  passed
upon  him.  When  morning  came,  he  ordered
a  mass  of  St.  Dominic  to  be  sung,  that  the
saint  might  provide  for  them  what  they  needed.
Now,  while  he  was  standing  in  the  choir  deep
sunk  in  thought,  the  porter  came  and  called
him  out  to  a  rich  canon,  who  was  his  particular
friend.  The  canon  said  to  him : — Dear  sir,
you  have  no  experience  in  temporal  things;
R


242  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

but  I  have  been  inwardly  admonished  by  God
last  night  to  help  you  in  His  stead,  and  ac-
cordingly I  have  brought  you  twenty  pounds
weight  of  Constance  pennies  for  a  beginning.
Put  your  trust  in  God.  He  will  not  forsake
you.  The  Servitor  was  filled  with  joy,  and,
taking  the  money,  ordered  wine  and  corn  to  be
bought  with  it.  Moreover,  God  and  St.  Do-
minic so  helped  him  during  the  whole  time  that
he  was  prior,  that  the  convent  never  wanted
for  provisions  of  any  kind ;  and  besides  this,  he
paid  off  all  the  debt.

The  above-mentioned  canon,  when  he  lay
upon  his  death-bed,  made  large  bequests  for
his  soul's  health  to  various  objects  towards
which  he  had  a  devotion.  Afterwards  he  sent
for  the  Servitor,  who  was  then  prior,  and
intrusted  him  with  a  considerable  number  of
florins,  bidding  him  distribute  them  in  other
places  among  poor  friends  of  God  who  had
worn  out  their  strength  in  austere  exercises.
The  Servitor  was  reluctant  to  undertake  this,
for  he  feared  that  he  would  have  to  suffer  for
it  afterwards,  as  in  fact  happened.  At  last  lie
was  over-persuaded  to  take  the  money,  and  he
went  out  into  the  neighbouring  country  and
distributed  the  sum,  as  he  had  promised,  here


HIS  LIFE  IS  THREATENED.  243

and  there  where  he  believed  that  it  would  be
most  beneficial  to  the  donor's  soul ;  and  he  took
proper  receipts  for  it,  and  gave  account  of  it  all
to  his  superiors.  A  heavy  tribulation,  however,
fell  upon  him  in  consequence  of  this.

The  canon  had  an   ill-conditioned   natural
son,  who,  after  squandering  away  what  his  fa-
ther had  given  him,  abandoned  himself  to  pro-
fligate and  ruinous  courses.    This  man  was  very
anxious  to  obtain  possession  of  the   money  in
question,  and,  as  he  could  not  succeed  in  this,
he  sent  word  to  the  Servitor,  under  a  solemn
oath,   that   wherever   he   fell   in  with  him  he
would   kill   him.     No   one   could   appease  this
man's  enmity,  however  often  the   attempt  was
made.    Nothing  would  do  but  he  must  kill  him.
The  poor  Servitor  was  for  a  long  time  in  an-
guish and  distress,  and  he  did  not  venture  to
travel  about  from  place   to  place,  for  fear  of
being   murdered  by  the   reprobate   man.     He
used  to  lift  up  his  eyes  to  God,  and  with  many
sighs  exclaim:  —  Alas,  O   God!    what    miser-
able kind  of  death  hast  Thou  ordained  for  me !
His  distress  was  all  the  greater  because  a  short
time  before  a  brother  of  good  repute  had  been
cruelly  murdered  in  another  town  for  the  same
sort  of  thing.     The  poor  Servitor  found  no  one


244  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

who  had  the  will  or  the  courage  to  undertake  to
shield  him  from  the  ferocity  of  this  savage  man.
So  he  betook  himself  to  the  sovereign  Lord  of
all,  who  set  him  free  from  his  persecutor,  and
cut  short  his  young  and  vigorous  life  by  death.

To  these  afflictions  was  added  another  bitter
suffering.  There  was  a  certain  ecclesiastical
community  which  had  received  great  gifts  from
the  canon.  But  this  did  not  satisfy  them,  and
they  all  fell  upon  the  brother  with  great  indig-
nation because  he  would  not  let  all  the  above-
mentioned  money  come  to  them.  He  was  sadly
insulted  on  this  account,  and  they  accused  him
before  seculars  and  ecclesiastics,  and  the  slan-
derous tale,  making  him  out  guilty  by  a  per-
version of  the  facts,  was  carried  far  and  wide
throughout  the  country,  and  he  had  to  bear  the
loss  of  his  good  name  among  men  for  things  in
which  he  was  guiltless  in  the  eyes  of  God.

At  this  time  the  deceased  canon  appeared  to
him  in  a  vision,  clothed  in  a  beautiful  green
vestment  worked  all  over  with  red  roses.  He
told  the  Servitor  that  it  was  well  with  him  in
the  other  world ;  and  he  entreated  him  to  bear
patiently  the  great  wrong  which  was  being  done
him,  for  that  God  would  make  it  all  up  to  him
abundantlv.      The    Servitor    asked   him   what


SPIRITUAL  TOURNAMENT.  245

his  beautiful  vestment  signified.  He  answered :
— The  red  roses  on  the  green  ground  represent
your  patient  suffering,  with  which  you  have
richly  clothed  me ;  and  for  this  God  will  clothe
you  with  Himself  everlastingly.


Chapter  XL VII.

How  steadfastly  he  must  fight  who  would  win  the  spiritual
prize.

At  the  first  beginning  of  the  Servitor's
conversion,  he  desired  with  all  his  heart  to
be  singularly  and  pre-eminently  well-pleasing
to  the  loving  God,  but  he  expected  to  accom-
plish this  without  labour  and  suffering.

Now  it  happened  once,  when  he  went  out
into  the  country  to  preach,  that  he  embarked
on  board  a  passenger  ship  on  the  Lake  of  Con-
stance, and  he  observed  there,  sitting  among
the  other  passengers,  a  comely  youth,  gaily  at-
tired. He  drew  near  the  youth,  and  asked  him
what  manner  of  man  he  was.  The  youth  ans-
wered : — I  am  an  esquire  errant,  and  I  bring  the
gentlefolk  together,  and  arrange  tournaments,
in  which  they  tilt  and  fight,  and  pay  homage
to  fair  ladies ;  and  he  who  proves  himself  to  be


246  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

the  best  of  all  carries  off  the  honour  and  the
reward.     The  Servitor  said : — And  what  is  the
reward?    The  esquire  replied : — The  most  beau-
tiful of  the  ladies  present  places  a  gold  ring
upon  his  finger.    The  Servitor  asked  further: — I
But  tell  me,  dear  friend,  what  must  one  do  to
carry  off  the  honour  and  the  ring?     He  an-
swered : — He   who  proves   to   be   the  best   at
bearing   sword- strokes   and   assaults,  and  who
shows  no  faintheartedness  in  this,  but  behaves
himself  courageously   and    manfully,    and   sits
firm,  and  bears  up  against  the  blows — he  it  is
who   receives  the  prize.      The  Servitor   asked
once   more : — Tell   me ;    if  a  man  were   only
bold  in  the  first  onset,  would  that  be  enough?
He  replied : — No ;  he  must  remain  firm  to  the
very  end  of  the  tournament ;    and  though  the
blows  which  he   receives  bring  sparks   of  fire
into  his  eyes,  and  make  the  blood  burst  from
his  mouth  and  nose,  he  must  endure  them  all,
if  he  is  to  obtain  the  glory  of  victory.     The
Servitor  replied: — But,  dear  comrade,  may  he
not  weep  or  look  mournful  when  he  gets  such
terrible  blows  ?    He  answered : — No ;  and  though
his  heart  sinks  within  him,  as  happens  to  many,
he  may  not  do  anything  of  the  kind ;    but  he
must  bear  himself  joyously  and  bravely,  other-


SPIRITUAL  TOURNAMENT.  247

wise  he  will  become  a  laughing-stock,  and  lose
the  glory  and  the  ring.

This  discourse  made  the  Servitor  enter  into
himself,  and,  fetching  a  sigh  from  the  depths  of
his  heart,  he  said : — Ah  !  glorious  Lord  God !
must  the  knights  of  this  world  endure  so  much
suffering  for  such  a  small  reward,  which  is  in  itself
a  very  nothing !  How  fitting  then  it  is  that  much
greater  labours  should  be  undergone  for  the  ever-
lasting prize !  O  sweet  Lord,  would  that  I  were
worthy  to  be  Thy  spiritual  knight !  O  lovely
Eternal  Wisdom,  who  art  rich  in  graces  beyond
aught  in  any  land,  would  that  my  soul  might
receive  a  ring  from  Thee !  To  win  it,  I  would
suffer  whatever  might  be  Thy  will!  And  he  be-
gan to  weep,  from  the  great  fervour  which  he  felt.

When  he  arrived  at  the  place  to  which  he
was  going,  God  sent  him  great  and  cruel  suf-
ferings in  such  plenty  that  the  poor  Servitor
nearly  lost  all  his  trust  in  God ;  and  many  eyes
became  wet  with  tears  through  pity  for  him.
He  had  forgotten  all  his  knightly  daring  and
his  promise,  and  he  became  melancholy  and
peevish  with  God,  wondering  within  himself
what  God  could  have  against  him  that  He  had
sent  him  such  great  sufferings.  In  the  morn-
ing, at  daybreak,  there  came  a  calm  over  his


248  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

soul;  and  his  bodily  senses  being  stilled  in
ecstasy,  a  voice  spoke  within  him: — Where  is
now  thy  knightly  prowess  ?  What  a  knight  of
straw,  and  a  scarecrow  of  a  man  he  must  be,
who  is  so  daring  in  prosperity,  and  so  despair-
ing in  adversity !  This  is  not  the  way  to  win
the  everlasting  ring,  for  which  thou  longest.
He  replied: — O  Lord!  the  jousts  of  the  inte-
rior life,  which  must  be  borne  for  Thee,  are  far
too  long  and  wearisome.  To  this  there  came
an  answer : — Therefore  the  glory,  and  the  hon-
our, and  the  ring  of  My  knights,  who  receive
honour  from  Me,  are  stable  and  everlasting.
Upon  this  the  Servitor,  entering  into  himself,
said  very  humbly : — Lord !  I  am  in  the  wrong.
Only  permit  me  to  weep  while  I  suffer,  for
my  heart  is  very  full.  The  answer  came : —
Alas  for  thee!  Dost  thou  want  to  weep  like
a  woman,  and  disgrace  thyself  before  the  court
of  heaven  I  Wipe  thy  eyes,  and  bear  thyself
joyously,  so  that  neither  God  nor  men  may
perceive  that  thou  hast  wept  on  account  of
sufferings.  The  Servitor  began  to  laugh,  and
yet  at  the  same  time  the  tears  were  running
down  his  cheeks,  and  he  promised  God  that  he
would  no  more  wish  to  weep,  that  so  he  might
obtain  from  Him  the  spiritual  ring.


HIS  FACE  SHINES.  249


Chapter  XLVIII.

How  the  Servitor's  face  was  once  seen  to  shine  with  light
while  he  was  preaching.

Once  when  the  Servitor  was  preaching  at
Cologne  with  great  fervour,  there  sat  among  his
hearers  a  beginner  in  the  spiritual  life,  who  had
been  recently  converted  to  God.  Now  while
this  beginner  was  attending  diligently  to  the
preacher,  he  saw  with  the  eyes  of  his  soul  that
the  preacher's  face  began  to  be  transfigured
with  a  ravishing  brightness,  and  three  times  it
became  like  the  radiant  sun  when  its  splendour
is  at  the  highest ;  and  the  face,  moreover,  was
so  pure,  that  the  beginner  saw  himself  reflected
in  it.  This  vision  brought  him  very  great  con-
solation in  his  sufferings,  and  confirmed  him  in
a  holy  life.


Chapter  XLIX.

Of  the  lovely  Name  of  Jesus.
The  Servitor  of  the  Eternal  Wisdom  once
made  a  journey  from  the  upper  country  to  Aix-
la-Chapelle,  to  visit  our  dear  Lady.     And  on


250  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

his  return,  our  dear  Lady  appeared  to  a  holy
person,  and  said: — Behold,  my  Child's  Servitor
has  come  hither,  and  he  has  carried  about  His
sweet  Name  of  Jesus  far  and  wide,  with  the
same  ardent  desire  with  which  His  Apostles  of
old  carried  it;  and  just  as  their  desire  was  to
make  all  men  know  this  Name  through  the
preaching  of  the  faith,  even  so  all  his  strivings
have  been  to  set  all  cold  hearts  on  fire  with
new  love  for  this  Name  of  Jesus.  Therefore
he  shall  receive,  after  his  death,  an  everlasting
reward  with  them.

Afterwards,  this  holy  person  saw  our  dear
Lady  holding  a  beautiful  candle  in  her  hand,
and  it  burned  so  beautifully  that  its  light  shone
throughout  the  whole  world ;  and  all  round  and
round  the  candle  the  Name  of  Jesus  was  writ-
ten. Then  our  dear  Lady  said  to  this  person  : —
Behold,  this  burning  candle  signifies  the  Name
of  Jesus,  because  He  in  very  truth  illuminates
the  hearts  of  all  who  receive  His  Name  with
devotion,  and  pay  it  honour,  and  bear  it  lov-
ingly about  with  them.  To  this  end,  my  Child
has  chosen  out  His  Servitor,  that  devotion  to
His  Name  may  be  lit  up  through  him  in  the
hearts  of  many,  and  that  these  may  be  helped
onwards  by  him  to  everlasting  bliss.


THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  251

When  this  holy  maiden,  of  whom  mention
has  been  made  above,  perceived  that  her  spirit-
ual father  was  so  devout  to,  and  had  such  firm
faith  in,  the  loving  Name  of  Jesus,  which  he
bore  upon  his  breast  over  his  heart,  she  con-
ceived a  great  and  peculiar  love  for  it,  and  out
of  devotion  she  marked  the  Name  of  Jesus  in  red
silk  on  a  little  piece  of  cloth,  in  the  following
form:  IHS — and  wore  it  secretly  upon  her-
self. She  also  made  an  almost  countless  number
of  similar  Names,  and  persuaded  the  Servitor  to
lay  them  on  his  bare  heart,  and  then  send  them,
with  a  blessing  from  God,  to  his  spiritual  chil-
dren in  different  parts.  Moreover,  it  was  re-
vealed to  her  by  God  that  those  who  bore  the
Name  upon  them,  and  said  daily  with  devotion
an  "Our  Father"  in  honour  of  it,  would  be
treated  lovingly  by  God  in  this  world,  and
would  find  grace  before  Him  at  their  last
passage.

Such  were  the  austere  exercises  and  such
the  godly  examples  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  dear
friends,  according  to  which  the  beginnings  of
this  holy  maiden's  spiritual  life  were  fashioned.


252  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.


Chapter  L.

A  good  distinction  between  a  true  and  false  use  of  reason
noticeable  in  certain  persons.

"As  the  eagle  enticing  her  young  to  fly"  (Deut.  xxxii.  11).
When  this  holy  daughter,  by  the  good
instructions  of  her  spiritual  father,  had  been
thoroughly  fashioned  after  the  outward  man
to  every  branch  of  holiness  which  can  be
taught  by  examples,  just  as  a  piece  of  soft
wax  before  the  fire  takes  the  form  of  the  seal
which  is  impressed  upon  it,  and  when  she  had
been  for  a  long  time  regularly  trained  in  the
imitation  of  the  mirror-like  life  of  Christ,  which
is  the  surest  way,  she  received  the  following
letter  from  her  spiritual  father,  the  Servitor : —
Daughter,  the  time  is  now  come  for  thee  to  aim
at  something  higher,  and  to  fly  upwards  out  of
the  nest  of  forms  and  images,  and  the  conso-
lations which  proceed  from  them.  Do  like  a
young,  newly-fledged  eagle,  and  soar  upwards
on  thy  well-grown  pinions — I  mean  thy  soul's
highest  powers — to  the  heights  of  that  noble
contemplation  which  belongs  to  a  blissful  and
perfect  life.  Knowest  thou  not  what  Christ
said  to  His  disciples,  who  clung  so  closely  to


TRUE  AND  FALSE  USE  OF  REASON.   253

His  sensible  presence? — It  is  expedient  for  you
that  I  go  away  from  you,  if  you  are  to  receive
the  Holy  Ghost  (John  xvi.  7).  Thy  former
exercises  have  been  a  good  preparation  to  bring
thee  onwards  through  the  wilderness  of  an  ani-
mal and  unconscious  life,  into  the  promised  land
of  a  pure  and  quiet  heart,  where  bliss  begins  in
this  world,  and  will  continue  everlastingly  in
the  next.  But  that  thou  mayest  better  under-
stand this  high  intellectual  way,  I  will  cause  to
shine  before  thee  the  light  of  a  good  distinction,
which,  if  thou  clearly  comprehendest  it,  will  save
thee  from  all  error,  however  high  thou  mayest
soar  with  thy  mind.

Observe  this  then.  Two  courses  are  to
be  met  with  among  apparently  good  persons.
Some  pursue  a  course  in  harmony  with  reason,
and  others  a  course  at  variance  with  it.  The
first  are  those  who  make  it  their  aim  to  shape
all  their  thoughts,  actions,  and  omissions  accord-
ing to  the  rule  of  sound  discretion,  in  harmony
with  the  sentiments  of  holy  Christendom,  to
God's  glory,  and  the  peace  and  quiet  of  all
other  men ;  while  at  the  same  time  they  keep
diligent  watch  over  their  words  and  ways,  so
as  to  give  scandal  to  no  one,  unless  indeed  a
person  takes  scandal  at  them  through  his  own


254  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

fault,  as  often  happens.  Now  the  very  name
and  nature  of  reason  admonish  us  to  pursue  a
guarded  walk  and  manner  of  life  like  this.  And
the  reason  of  these  persons  is  after  the  fashion
of  the  Divine  reason,  and  worthy  of  praise,  for
its  light  shines  inwards  in  itself  in  a  true  though
hidden  way,  just  as  the  heavens  shine  in  the
bright  stars.  On  the  contrary,  in  those  appa-
rently good  persons  who  follow  a  course  at
variance  with  reason,  and  with  an  unmortified
nature  make  self  their  aim,  and  only  gaze  in-
tently upon  objects  with  their  reason  after  the
manner  of  contemplation,  and  are  able  to  dis-
course about  them  overbearingly  before  the  un-
learned, while  by  word  and  deed  they  testify
contempt  for  every  unfavourable  judgment  passed
upon  them; — in  such  persons  the  intellectual
light  streams  outwards,  and  not  inwards;  and
just  as  decayed  wood,  from  the  glimmer  it  sends
forth  at  night,  seems  to  be  something,  and  yet
is  nothing,  even  so  the  inward  light  and  outward
walk  of  these  persons  show  themselves  to  be  in
all  respects  unlike  that  which  they  ought  to
resemble.

What  these  persons  are  may  be  easily  ga-
thered from  the  free  and  un weighed  maxims
which  they  put  forth.     We  will  only  take  one


TRUE  AND  FAUSE  USE  OF  REASON.   255

of  these  maxims,  and  by  it  we  can  estimate  all
the  rest.  The  following  words  occur  in  a  poem
by  one  of  them,  "  The  just  needs  shun  no  ob-
stacle." This  saying,  and  others  like  it,  have
an  air  of  importance  in  the  eyes  of  certain  dim-
sighted  persons,  but  will  meet  with  no  praise
from  those  who  see  well  and  understand  what
they  really  mean.  This  is  evident  in  the  case
of  the  saying  just  quoted,  "The  just  needs  shun
no  obstacle."  For  what  is  "  the  just,"  and  what
is  an  "obstacle"?  "The  just,"  according  to  the
usual  meaning  of  the  term,  is  a  just  man  re-
garded as  actually  existing  in  creation.  For
the  quality  "just"  has  no  existence  by  itself,
but  needs  a  subject  in  which  it  can  exist,  and
this  subject  in  the  present  case  is  the  just  man.
Again,  what  is  an  "  obstacle"  ?  It  is  sin  which
separates  a  man  from  God.  Is  a  just  man,  then,
to  shun  no  obstacle — that  is  to  say,  is  he  to
avoid  or  shun  no  sin  1  Such  an  assertion  would
be  simply  false,  and  at  variance  with  all  rea-
son. It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  just  man,  and
all  other  things,  when  viewed,  antecedently  to
their  coming  into  being  and  their  creation,  as
existing  ideally  from  everlasting  in  God's  essen-
tial reason,  are  all  one  and  the  same,  without
any  formal  difference,  and  therefore  the  saying,


2oQ        life  of  blessed  henry  suso.

if  understood  in  this  sense,  may  be  allowed  to
pass.  But  then  it  must  be  remembered  that
the  just  man,  regarded  as  existing  only  in  this
simple  super-essential  basis,  is  not  the  corporeal
man ;  for  there  is  nothing  corporeal  in  the  God-
head, neither  is  there  any  obstacle  there.  But
it  is  outside  this  basis  that  each  man  finds  him-
self to  be  this  or  that  individual  man;  for  outside
of  it  he  is  mortal,  and  within  it  he  is  immortal :
and  it  is  outside  of  it  that  he  now  exists  in  his
frail  created  nature,  in  which  he  has  great  need
to  shun  every  hurtful  obstacle.  If,  then,  I  were
to  try  to  regard  myself  in  my  own  mind  as
non-existent,  and  in  this  way  to  know  nothing  of
myself;  and  if,  without  distinguishing  between
myself  and  God,  I  were  to  do  all  corporeal  ac-
tions as  though  the  uncreated  Being  did  them
— this  would  be  a  crime  above  all  crimes.

From  this  we  see,  that  such  maxims  as  these
have  really  nothing  rational  in  them.  In  saying
this,  however,  it  is  not  meant  to  condemn  ra-
tional doctrine  or  rational  well-weighed  maxims
and  poems,  by  which  men  are  refined,  and
guided  towards  intellectual  truth,  even  though
they  are  not  understood  by  every  body.  For  it
is  manifestly  true,  that  no  one  can  speak  with
sufficient  clearness  to  be  understood  bv  those


MISUSE  OF  REASON.  257

who  are  grossly  blind,  and  as  ignorant  as  brute
beasts.

The  daughter  answered: — Praised  be  God
for  this  good  distinction !  But  I  should  also  be
very  glad  to  hear  the  distinction  between  a  well-
ordered  reason  and  one  which  is  all  flowers  and
outward  show,  as  well  as  between  true  and  false
detachment.


Chapter  LI.

How  to  distinguish  between  a  well-ordered  reason  and  one
which  is  all  flowers  and  glitter.

The  Servitor  replied  as  follows: — At  the
end  of  the  first  combats,  which  have  for  their
object  to  bring  flesh  and  blood  into  subjection,
a  man  arrives  at  a  deep  sea  in  which  many
perish ;  and  this  is  a  use  of  reason  which  is  all
glitter  and  external  show.  Now  what  is  meant
by  this  f  The  following  is  what  I  mean  by  a
use  of  reason  which  is  all  glitter  and  outward
show: — When  a  man  has  been  emptied  inte-
riorly of  the  grossness  caused  by  sin,  and  his
mind  is  freed  from  the  forms  and  images  which
used  to  cling  to  it,  and  he  is  able  to  soar  up-
wards joyously  above  time  and  space,  which  till
then  held  him  in  bondage,  so  that  he  could  not


258  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

use  liis  nature's  noble  powers — at  such  a  time,
when  he  has  already  begun  to  open  his  soul's
eyes  and  to  taste  a  new  and  better  pleasure,
even  that  which  springs  from  the  perception  of
truth,  the  enjoyment  of  divine  bliss,  the  gazing
into  the  now  of  eternity  which  lies  before  him,
and  such  like,  and  when,  moreover,  his  created
reason  begins  to  recognise  in  itself  and  in  all
things  a  portion  of  the  everlasting  and  uncreated
reason,  it  comes  to  him  as  something  wondrous
strange,  when,  for  the  first  time,  he  sees  himself
as  he  was  before  and  as  he  is  now,  and  he  dis-
covers that  he  was  before  like  a  poor,  godless,
needy  creature,  both  blind  and  far  from  God ;
whereas  now  it  seems  to  him  that  he  is  full  of
God,  and  that  there  is  nothing  which  is  not
God;  nay,  more,  that  God  and  all  things  are
absolutely  one.  And  he  catches  at  this  view
too  hastily,  and  in  an  unseasonable  way,  and
his  mind  runs  wild,  like  new  wine  which  is  still
fermenting  and  has  not  settled,  and  he  seizes
upon  that  which  is  present  to  his  thoughts,  or
which  is  suggested  to  him,  without  the  needful
distinction,  by  some  One,  who  is  Himself  that
very  One  to  whom  alone  he  should  give  ear,
and  to  no  one  else;  and  then  he  resolves  ac-
cording to  his  self-satisfied  judgment  to  dismiss


MISUSE  OF  REASON.  259

from  his  thoughts  every  thing  created,  and  he
regards  no  longer  hell  or  heaven,  devil  or  angel,
in  their  own  created  nature;  nay,  he  disdains
also  Christ's  suffering  Humanity  as  soon  as  he
has  beheld  God  in  it.  Yet  for  all  this,  he  has
not  gone  to  the  bottom  in  his  knowledge  of
things ;  namely,  in  regard  to  their  distinctions,
and  what  is  permanent  and  what  is  transient  in
them.  It  fares,  in  fact,  with  such  men  as  with
the  honey-bees.  When  the  bees  are  fully  grown,
and  for  the  first  time  burst  forth  out  of  the  hive,
they  fly  at  random  on  this  side  and  on  that,  they
know  not  whither ;  and  some  go  astray  in  their
flight  and  are  lost,  while  others  return  again  in
due  course  to  the  hive.  The  same  thing  hap-
pens with  these  persons  when,  with  their  undis-
ciplined reason,  they  try  to  behold  God  as  all
in  all,  and  endeavour,  according  to  their  imper-
fect intelligence,  to  let  go  this  and  that,  they
know  not  how.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  every
thing  must  be  let  go  by  him  who  would  attain
perfection ;  but  they  do  not  understand  how
this  letting-go  of  things  is  to  be  managed,  and
they  try  to  let  go  this  and  that  without  discre-
tion, and  to  rid  themselves  of  all  things  without
attending  to  the  necessary  distinctions.  This
fault  arises  either  from  unlearned  simplicity  or


260  LITE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

unmortified  craftiness.  Hence  many  a  one  ima-
gines that  he  has  attained  everything  if  only  he
can  go  forth  ont  of  himself  in  this  way,  and
detach  himself  from  himself.  But  it  is  not  so.
For  he  has  only  slunk  over  the  outer  ditch  of
the  still  unstormed  fortress,  under  cover  of  the
screen  behind  which  he  skilfully  and  secretly
conceals  himself,  and  he  cannot  yet,  by  the
orderly  annihilation  of  his  spiritual  being,  pass
away  into  a  veritable  poverty  of  spirit,  in  which
every  foreign  object  is  in  a  certain  sense  let  go,
and  to  which  the  possession  of  the  everlasting
and  simple  Godhead  corresponds,  now  that  all
human  activity  has  come  to  an  end,  as  will  be
shown  hereafter  with  the  requisite  distinctions.

Behold,  this  is  the  point  where  some  persons,
without  knowing  it,  stick  fast  for  many  years,
and  can  neither  come  in  nor  go  out.  But  I  will
show  thee,  by  the  help  of  a  distinction,  the  right
road,  so  that  thou  mayest  not  be  able  to  go  astray.


Chapter  LIT.

A  good  distinction  between  true  and  false  detachment.
Know,  then,  that  there  are  three  kinds  of
passing  away.     The  first  is  a  complete  passing


TRUE  AND  FALSE  DETACHMENT.    261

away.  This  takes  place  when  a  thing  passes
away  so  entirely  that  it  ceases  to  exist;  as  a
shadow  passes  away  and  is  no  more.  In  this
sense  of  the  word,  the  spirit  of  a  man,  to  which
we  give  the  name  of  a  rational  soul,  does  not
pass  away  at  its  going  forth,  but  it  continues
for  ever,  in  virtue  of  the  high  nobility  of  its
rational  nature  and  godlike  powers.  For  God,
after  whose  image  it  is  fashioned,  is  a  super-
essential  reason,  and  therefore  it  is  impossible
for  the  soul  to  cease  to  exist,  as  the  mortal  body
does.

Another  kind  of  passing  away  may  be  termed
a  half  passing  away,  and  has  its  own  hour  and
time.  This  is  the  case  with  those  who  are  rapt
in  contemplation  into  the  pure  Godhead,  as
Paul  was;  or  again,  in  another  way,  when  a
man  becomes  abstracted  in  thought,  as  often
happens,  and  thus  passes  away  out  of  himself.
This  kind,  however,  is  transitory;  for  when
Paul  came  to  himself  again,  he  found  himself
the  same  Paul,  a  man  as  before.

The  third  kind  may  be  called  a  metaphorical
passing  away.  This  takes  place  when  a  man,
by  the  renunciation  of  his  free-will,  abandons
himself  to  God  at  each  moment  that  he  finds
himself,  just  as  if  he  knew  nothing  about  him-


262  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

self,  and  God  alone  was  lord  and  master.  This
kind  of  passing  away  cannot  be  complete  and
perpetual,  so  long  as  the  body  and  soul  are
united;  for  at  the  very  moment  when  a  man
has  detached  himself  from  himself,  and  fancies
that  he  has  so  entirely  passed  away  into  God
that  he  will  never  resume  himself,  so  far  as  his
lower  or  sensual  nature  is  concerned,  all  at  once,
in  an  instant,  he  and  his  perverse  self  are  back
again,  and  he  is  the  same  that  he  was  before,
and  has  to  forsake  himself  again  and  again.  To
think,  then,  that  in  this  imperfect  state  of  detach-
ment a  man  may  lawfully  do  just  whatever  he
pleases,  would  be  a  simple  delusion.  Though
certainly  it  is  true,  that  the  more  any  one
estranges  himself  from  himself,  and  passes  away
out  of  himself  into  God,  the  more  completely
he  is  established  in  the  very  truth.

Thou  must  know  further  that  there  are  two
kinds  of  detachment  from  self.  The  one  is
called  antecedent,  and  the  other  subsequent
detachment.  Thou  wilt  understand  this  better
from  an  example.  A  thief  feels  in  himself
through  the  wickedness  of  his  nature  an  im-
pulse and  craving  to  steal.  But  his  conscience
opposes  this,  saying : — Thou  shouldst  not  steal,
for  it  is  a  sin.     Now  if  the  thief  went  out  of


TRUE  AND  FALSE  DETACHMENT.    263

himself  and  obeyed  his  conscience,  this  would
be  antecedent  detachment,  and  the  nobler  of
the  two,  for  he  would  remain  in  his  innocence.
If,  however,  he  will  not  detach  himself  from
himself  in  this  matter,  but  resolves  to  satisfy  his
wicked  propensities,  later  on,  when  he  has  been
caught  and  he  sees  that  he  must  hang  for  it,  the
subsequent  detachment  comes,  moving  him  to
yield  himself  patiently  to  death,  since  it  cannot
be  otherwise.  This  kind  of  detachment  is  good
and  saves  the  man's  soul,  but  the  other  is  be-
yond comparison  nobler  and  better.  Hence  we
ought  not  to  be  so  daring  as  to  abandon  our-
selves to  sin,  according  to  the  sentiments  of
some  foolish  persons,  who  say  that  he  who  would
arrive  at  perfect  detachment  must  wade  through
all  sins.  This  is  false ;  for  a  man  would  be  a
fool  to  throw  himself  wantonly  into  a  filthy
pool,  in  order  that  he  might  afterwards  become
more  beautiful.

Therefore  the  most  pious  of  God's  friends
earnestly  desire  to  be  brought  to  naught,  and
to  abide  steadfastly  in  antecedent  detachment,
without  ever  resuming  themselves  in  any  thing
so  far  as  human  frailty  will  permit ;  and  when-
ever they  fail  in  this,  it  is  a  source  of  lamenta-
tion to  them.     It  is  true,  indeed,  that  they  have


264  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

this  advantage  over  other  men,  that  they  can
rid  themselves  more  speedily  of  the  obstacle  (i.e.
of  the  sin  which  stands  between  them  and  God) ;
for  out  of  their  lamentation  itself  springs  up  at
once  a  subsequent  detachment,  which  replaces
them  quickly  where  they  were  before,  and  this
happens  when  a  man,  finding  himself  still  a  man,
bears  with  himself  as  such  for  God's  glory.

Moreover  this  subsequent  detachment  be-
comes in  a  certain  sense  profitable  to  them,
through  the  self-knowledge  which  results  from
it;  and  here  their  lamentation  ceases  to  be  a
lamentation,  and  they  are  born  again  into  their
former  state  of  simplicity,  and  become  once
more  what  they  were  before.  If,  however,  a
man  who  is  thus  incomplete  were  to  try  by
subtlety  to  help  himself,  alleging,  What  harm
can  it  do  a  man  if  he  resumes  himself  in  what
is  only  accidental,  and  thereby  commits  some
sin  exteriorly,  provided  that  the  essence  of  the
man  remains  as  it  was,  without  being  resumed
in  any  point  ?  To  this  I  answer,  that  he  neither
understands  himself  nor  what  he  says.  And  all
learned  doctors  will  agree  to  this,  if  only  they
understand  what  the  term  accident  means.  For
the  name  of  accident  is  given  to  that  which  may
be  added  to  or  taken  from  the  substantial  essence


TRUE  AND  FALSE  DETACHMENT.    265

without  destroying  the  substance,  as  colour  on
a  board.  But  here  the  case  is  different ;  for  the
soul  and  body,  which  in  their  ignorance  they
term  accidents,  are  two  essential  parts  which
make  up  a  man's  essence,  and  do  not  belong  to
him  as  accidents.  Therefore  every  man,  however
perfectly  he  may  be  able  to  detach  himself  from
himself,  and  to  bring  himself  back  again,  has
still  that  in  him  by  which  he  can  act  virtuously
or  sinfully.  For  the  annihilation  of  the  spirit,
its  passing  away  into  the  simple  Godhead,  and
all  its  nobility  and  perfection,  are  not  to  be  re-
garded as  a  transformation  of  man's  created  es-
sence into  God,  in  virtue  of  which  all  that  he  is
is  God,  only  that  he  does  not  perceive  it  through
his  grossness,  or,  in  other  words,  that  he  has  be-
come God,  and  his  own  essence  is  annihilated ;
but  they  are  to  be  understood  of  a  going  out  of
self,  and  a  contempt  for  self,  such  as  has  been
described.  And  thus  it  is  that  the  spirit  of  a
man  is  taken  out  of  itself  and  passes  away  duly
and  rightfully,  and  then  for  the  first  time  it  is
well  with  him.  For  God  has  now  become  all
things  to  him,  and  all  things  have  become,  as  it
were,  God  to  him ;  for  all  things  present  them-
selves to  him  now  in  the  manner  in  which  they
are  in  God,  and  yet  they  all  remain  each  one


266  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

what  it  is  in  its  own  natural  essence.  This  is
what  those  who  are  blindly  ignorant  and  unex-
ercised in  reasoning  cannot  or  will  not  admit
into  their  bewildered  minds  according  to  the
above  true  distinction.

Thou  mayest  now,  with  the  help  of  this
good  distinction,  proceed  to  consider  the  follow-
ing rational  maxims  and  instructions,  which
have  for  their  object  to  free  men  from  their
grossness  of  spirit,  and  to  lead  them  onwards
to  their  highest  bliss.


Chapter  LIII.

Maxims,  conformable  to  right  reason,  for  the  guidance  of
an  exterior  man  into  his  interior.

Let  thy  walk  be  an  interior  one,  and  be  not
given  to  break  out  either  in  words  or  in  thy
walk.

Act  according  to  the  truth  in  simplicity,  and
whatever  happens,  be  not  helpful  to  thyself;  for
he  who  helps  himself  too  much  will  not  be
helped  by  the  Truth.

When  thou  art  with  men  pay  no  heed  to
what  thou  seest  or  hearest,  and  cleave  to  that
alone  which  has   shown  itself  to  thee  (i.e.  re-


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  267

member  God  alone  who  has  shown  Himself  to
thee  under  these  outward  things).

Be  careful  that  in  thy  actions  thy  reason
goes  first;  for  when  the  sensual  appetite  gets
the  start,  every  evil  comes  of  it.

God  wishes  not  to  deprive  us  of  pleasure ;
but  He  wishes  to  give  us  pleasure  in  its  totality,
that  is  to  say,  all  pleasure.

The  more  mightily  thou  humblest  thyself,
the  higher  thou  shalt  be  exalted.

He  who  wishes  to  dwell  in  his  inmost  inte-
rior, must  rid  himself  of  all  multiplicity.  We
must  habitually  reject  all  that  is  not  the  one
thing.

Where  the  sensual  appetite  is  the  moving
principle  of  a  man's  actions,  there  is  toil,  suffer-
ing, and  mental  darkness.

What  greater  pleasure  is  there  than  to  find
myself  the  one  thing  that  I  ought  to  be,  and  the
whole  thing  that  I  ought  to  be  (t.  e.  one  with
God,  who  is  one  and  all)  1

A  man  should  remain  steadfast  in  his  state
of  freedom  from  mental  images,  and  of  self-
restraint.     Herein  lies  the  greatest  delight.

In  what  does  a  truly  detached  man  exercise
himself  ?     In  annihilating  himself.

When  our  love  is  given  to  a  sensible  image


268  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

or  person,  it  is  accident,  loving  accident,  and
this  we  have  no  right  to  do ;  nevertheless  I  bear
with  myself  in  this  until  I  get  quit  of  it.  It  is,
however,  an  interiorly  simple  act,  when  a  man
does  not  love  the  image,  which  is  present  to  him,
but  when  all  things  are  to  him  one,  and  that
one  is  God.

When  a  man  detaches  himself  from  himself
without  allowing  the  sensual  appetite  to  break
out,  he  destroys  self.  If  he  acted  otherwise,  he
would  be  helping  himself  by  means  of  his  sen-
sual appetite.

Keep  thy  feelings  within  thee  both  in  weal
and  woe ;  for  a  man  who  does  this  loves  more
in  one  year  than  one  who  lets  his  feelings  break
out  loves  in  three.

Wilt  thou  be  of  use  to  all  creatures,  turn
thyself  away  from  all  creatures.

If  a  man  cannot  comprehend  the  matter,  let
him  be  passive,  and  the  matter  will  comprehend
him.

Take  heed  not  to  break  out  exteriorly  in
a  way  unlike  the  (divine  and  interior)  pat-
tern.

A  man  should  be  on  his  guard  against  the
inclination  which  leads  him  to  catch  at  eveiy
thing  which  may  save  him  from  having  to  yield


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  269

to  the  invitations  of  the  simple  Truth.  If  thou
wilt  not  submit  to  be  simple,  thou  wilt  have  to
submit  to  be  manifold.

Live  as  if  there  were  no  creature  on  earth
but  thee.

Say  to  creatures : — What  thou  art  to  me  I
will  not  be  to  thee  (Res  tibi,  te  Deo).

Nature  loves  nature  and  makes  itself  its  aim.
Some  men's  nature  has  not  been  sufficiently
crushed,  and  when  this  happens,  they  continue
exterior.

The  power  of  refraining  from  things  gives
a  man  more  power  than  the  possession  of  the
things  would.

One  deflection  from  the  right  course  brings
along  with  it  another.

See  that  nature  in  thee  is  unburdened,  and
that  thy  outward  man  is  conformable  to  thy  in-
ward man.

Look  well  to  the  inward  man ;  for  on  this
depends  thy  exterior  and  interior  life.

It  belongs  to  perfect  detachment  to  keep
nature  at  all  times  bridled.

A  man  should  never  lose  sight  of  himself,
lest  nature  should  run  away.

Thou  lamentest  that  thou  art  still  too  active,
undetached,  and  impatient.     Nevertheless  de-


270  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

spair  not.  The  more  keenly  thou  feelest  this
the  better.

Perishable  love  is  a  root  of  all  vices,  and  a
eloak  of  all  truth.

The  setting  of  the  sensual  nature  is  the
rising  of  the  truth.  When  the  powers  of  the
soul  have  ceased  to  work,  and  the  elements
have  been  purified,  the  powers  remain  fixed
upon  their  eternal  object,  if  they  have  been
directed  towards  it  according  to  their  ability.

All  the  powers  have  one  object  and  one  work,
and  this  is  to  be  conformed  to  the  eternal  Truth.

There  is  nothing  pleasurable  save  what  is
uniform  with  the  most  inmost  depths  of  the
Divine  nature.

Some  men  are  to  be  met  with  who  have  had
an  interior  drawing  from  God,  and  have  not
followed  it.  The  interior  and  exterior  of  these
men  are  far  apart,  and  it  is  in  this  that  many
fail.

Our  nature  in  its  present  state  is  richly
endowed.  The  more  it  goes  out  of  itself,  the
further  it  is  from  God;  and  the  more  it  turns
inwards,  the  nearer  to  Him  it  is.

He  who  has  attained  to  the  purification  of
the  senses  in  God  performs  so  much  the  better
all  the  operations  of  the  senses.


SPIEITUAL  MAXIMS.  271

If  a  man  subjects  his  nature,  when  it  has
been  purified,  to  the  Truth,  his  nature  is  guided
in  such  sort  that  it  performs  much  more  per-
fectly all  exterior  actions.  Otherwise  it  wastes
itself  upon  temporal  matters,  and  can  do  nothing
really  well.

Purity,  intelligence,  and  virtue  give  a  feel-
ing of  wealth  to  those  who  possess  them.  When
the  sensible  possession  of  these  virtues  is  with-
drawn from  such  persons  by  God,  it  sometimes
happens  that  they  die  to  all  creatures.  Those
who  profit  by  this  withdrawal  are  brought  nigher
to  God  by  it.

What  is  that  which  drives  a  man  to  pur-
sue evil  courses?  It  is  the  craving  for  some-
thing which  may  satisfy  him.  Yet  we  can
only  find  this  in  abnegation,  and  not  in  evil
courses.

The  reason  why  some  men  so  often  fall  into
a  faulty  sadness  is  that  they  do  not  at  all  times
keep  an  eye  upon  themselves  to  avoid  in  every
thing  doing  what  deserves  punishment.

To  be  worsted  is  to  gain  the  victory  in  the
estimation  of  God's  friends  (Matt.  v.  39).

Abide  within  thyself.  The  plea  of  seeking
things  outside  thee  presents  itself  as  a  necessity;
but  it  is  only  a  way  of  helping  self.


272  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

It  is  bad  to  begin  many  things  and  to  bring
none  to  an  end.

We  should  not  move  until  we  have  ob-
served whether  it  be  God  or  nature  that  is
working  in  us.

Take  care  that  nature  works  in  thee  its
works  from  out  itself  without  the  concurrence  of
other  causes.

A  truly  detached  man  should  attend  to  four
things.  First,  he  should  be  very  virtuous  in
his  walk,  that  things  may  flow  from  him  with-
out him.  Secondly,  he  should  also  be  virtuous
and  quiet  with  regard  to  his  senses,  and  not
carry  tales  hither  and  thither,  for  this  is  calcu-
lated to  fill  his  mind  with  images.  Thus  Ins
interior  senses  will  be  able  to  act  inactively.
Thirdly,  he  should  not  be  given  to  attach  him-
self; and  he  should  take  care  that  there  is
nothing  heterogeneous  in  him.  Fourthly,  he
should  not  be  contentious,  but  he  should  be-
have lovingly  to  those  by  whom  God  may  be
pleased  to  purify  him.

Remain  steadfastly  in  thyself  until  thou  art
drawn  out  of  thyself  without  any  act  of  thine.

Observe  whether  the  intimacy  between  good
people  arises  from  inclination  or  from  simplicity.
The  first  is  far  too  common.


SPIKITUAL  MAXIMS.  273

Offer  not  thyself  too  much  to  any  one.
Those  please  least  who  offer  most. .

An  interior  humble  walk  beseems  thee.
When  a  thing  acts  in  opposition  to  its  nature,
it  is  always  unbecoming  to  it.

Happy  the  man  whose  words  and  ways  are
few.  The  more  words  and  ways  there  are  in
any  man,  the  more  there  is  of  what  is  acci-
dental. Stay  within  thyself,  and  be  not  like
such  men,  otherwise  thou  wilt  suffer  for  it.

Some  men  act  from  their  sensible  feelings
both  in  suffering  and  in  joy ;  but  a  man  should
not  look  to  himself  in  this.

In  the  spiritual  annihilation  of  self  the  final
consummation  is  attained.  When  Christ  had
said,  "Into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit,"
He  added  immediately,  u  It  is  consummated."

God  and  the  devil  are  in  man.  He  who
guides  himself  and  he  who  forsakes  himself
discover  the  difference  (i.e.  the  self-willed
find  in  themselves  hell,  and  the  detached
heaven).

He  who  desires  to  have  rest  at  all  times
must  be  on  his  guard  against  himself  in  this  as
in  every  thing  else  (i.  e.  this  desire  is  a  species
of  self-seeking).

He  who  is  interior  amid  exterior  things  is


274  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

much  more  interior  than  he  who  is  only  interior
when  within  himself.

It  is  good  for  a  man  to  guide  himself  in
nothing ;  and  he  is  on  the  right  road  who  con-
templates under  the  forms  of  things  their  eternal
essences.

There  are  many  more  reasoning  men  than
simple  men.  Those  are  called  reasoning  men
in  whom  reason  rules.  But  the  simple  man,
through  his  inaction,  is  freed  from  the  multi-
plicity of  images  which  are  generated  by  sen-
sible objects,  and  he  does  not  contemplate  things
as  sensible,  for  simplicity  has  become  his  nature,
and  he  is  like  a  vessel  (full  of  God)  and  like  a
child.

He  who  wishes  to  possess  all  things  must
become  as  nothing  to  himself  and  all  things.

How  happy  is  the  man  who  abides  steadfast
against  multiplicity !  What  a  sensible  entrance
he  has  into  familiar  intercourse  with  heaven !

A  good  intention  often  impedes  true  union.

Our  eyes  should  not  look  outwards,  except
to  rid  ourselves  of  interior  images.

We  should  bear  as  readily  with  that  part  of  us
which  comes  from  Adam  (i.  e.  the  consequences
of  the  fall)  as  with  that  by  which  we  attain
eternal  bliss.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  275

A  detached  man  is  always  interiorly  alike.

When  a  man  still  complains  and  is  impa-
tient, all  this  springs  from  imperfection.  It
must  therefore  be  got  rid  of.

All  those  who  allow  themselves  a  wrong
liberty  make  themselves  their  own  aim  and
object.

A  detached  man  must  be  unformed  from
the  forms  and  images  of  creatures ;  he  must  be
formed  upon  Christ,  and  transformed  into  the
Godhead.

He  who  regards  himself  in  Christ  lets  all
things  follow  their  rightful  course.

When  a  man  has  died  to  self  and  begun  to
live  in  Christ,  it  is  well  with  him.

When  a  man  strives  by  turning  inwards  to
conform  himself  to  the  Truth,  it  is  clearly  brought
home  to  him  that  he  has  gone  forth  out  of
himself,  and  he  observes  that  there  is  still  some-
thing of  the  creature  in  him,  on  which  the
attraction  acted.  In  this  he  bears  with  him-
self, and  perceives  that  he  has  not  yet  ceased
from  all  action.  Now,  thus  to  bear  with  self
is  to  become  simple.  The  going  out  of  self
produces  a  kind  of  weariness;  but  when  he
has  turned  away  from  creatures  this  weariness
passes  off.


276  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

What  is  a  truly  detached  man's  object  in  all
things?  It  is  to  die  to  himself;  and  when  he
dies  to  himself  all  things  die  to  him.

What  is  the  least  obstacle  ?  It  is  a  thought.
What  is  the  greatest  obstacle  !  It  is  when  the
soul  abides  in  the  obstinacy  of  its  self-will.

A  detached  man  should  not  let  any  moment
pass  away  unmarked.

A  detached  man  should  not  be  always  looking
to  see  what  he  needs,  but  he  should  be  always
looking  to  see  what  he  can  do  without.

If  a  detached  man  wishes  to  conform  him-
self to  the  Truth,  he  must  hi  the  first  place  be
diligent  in  turning  inwards  from  things  of  sense,
for  God  is  a  spirit.  Secondly,  he  must  take
note  whether  he  has  attached  himself  to  any
obstacle  (i.  e.  any  thing  which  stands  between
him  and  God).  Thirdly,  he  must  observe
whether  he  is  his  own  guide  in  any  thing,
owing  to  the  sensual  appetite  having  got  the
start.  Fourthly,  he  must,  in  the  light  which
fills  his  soul,  consider  the  presence  of  the  all-
penetrating  Divine  essence  in  him,  and  that  he
is  one  of  Its  vessels.

The  more  a  man  turns  away  from  himsel
and  all  created  things,  the  more  perfect  are  the
union  and  bliss  to  which  he  attains.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  277

Wouldst  thou  be  a  detached  man?  take
care  that,  however  God  may  act  towards  thee,
whether  directly  by  Himself  or  indirectly  by  His
creatures,  thou  abidest  always  the  same,  by  a
complete  renunciation  of  what  is  thine.

Keep  thy  senses  closed  to  every  image
which  may  present  itself.

Be  empty  of  every  thing  which  the  outward-
gazing  mind  selects,  which  takes  captive  the
will,  and  which  brings  earthly  joy  or  delight
into  the  heart:

Rest  on  nothing  which  is  not  God.

If  thou  art  where  a  sin  or  imperfection  is
committed,  add  not  aught  of  thine  to  it,  and
have  nothing  to  do  with  it.

He  who  always  dwells  with  himself  becomes
possessed  of  very  ample  means.

The  recreation  which  a  detached  man  grants
to  his  nature  should  be  confined  to  strict  neces-
sity, and  it  should  be  taken  in  harmless  occupa-
tions, from  which  he  can  readily  and  without
attachment  turn  away  to  God.

The  more  or  less  detachment  a  man  has,  the
more  or  less  will  he  be  disturbed  by  transitory
things.

It  happened  once  to  a  half-detached  man
that,  on  a  certain  occasion  when  he  had  been


278  LITE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

too  self-conscious  in  suffering,  it  was  said  to
him: — Thou  shouldst  be  so  attentive  to  Me
and  so  forgetful  of  thyself,  that  when  thou
knowest  it  is  well  with  Me  thou  shouldst  care
nothing  how  it  fares  with  thee.

In  the  case  of  a  detached  man  who  draws
his  senses  inwards  from  external  objects  and
establishes  himself  in  the  inner  castle  of  his
soul,  the  less  he  finds  within  to  cling  to,  the
more  painful  are  his  interior  sufferings,  and  the
more  quickly  he  dies,  the  more  swiftly  he  bursts
through  to  God.

To  give  the  senses  a  wide  field  withdraws  a
man  from  his  interior.

See  that  thou  undertakest  nothing  which
will  carry  thee  out  of  thyself.

If  things  come  in  search  of  thee,  let  them
not  find  thee.

Be  quick  in  turning  inwards  into  thyself.

Natural  life  shows  itself  in  movement  and
in  the  operations  of  the  senses.  He  who  de-
taches himself  from  himself  in  this,  and  dies  to
himself  in  stillness,  begins  a  supernatural  life.

Some  persons  find  no  hindrance  in  going
out  of  themselves,  but  they  want  steadfastness
in  this  state.

Establish  thyself  in   absolute   detachmen


SPIKITUAL  MAXIMS.  279

for  an  unbounded  longing,  even  for  what  is
divine,  when  it  is  excessive,  may  become  a
secret  obstacle.

A  detached  man  should  keep  the  powers  of
his  soul  under  such  restraint  that,  on  looking
within,  this  is  apparent  to  him.

A  detached  man  remains  always  inactive  as
regards  himself,  just  as  if  he  were  unconscious
of  himself ;  for  in  that  object,  which  is  God,  all
things  are  well  and  harmoniously  ordered  in
him.

Give  heed  also  to  thy  outward  man  that  it
be  at  one  with  thy  inward  man,  by  the  subjec-
tion of  all  fleshly  appetites.

To  return  again  into  God  by  detachment  is
often  more  pleasing  to  Him  than  a  self-satisfied
stability.

Gather  together  and  draw  in  thy  soul  from
the  external  senses,  through  which  it  has  dissi-
pated itself  upon  the  multiplicity  of  outward
things.

Go  in  again,  and  return  over  and  over  again
into  unity,  and  enjoy  God.

Be  steadfast,  and  never  rest  content  until
thou  hast  obtained  the  now  of  eternity  as  thy
present  possession  in  this  life,  so  far  as  this  is
possible  to  human  infirmity.


280  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.


Chapter  LIY.

Of  the  high  questions  which  the  well-exercised  daughter
put  to  her  spiritual  father.

After  the  introduction  of  the  outward  into
the  inward  man  had  taken  place  in  a  way  con-
formable to  right  reason,  high  thoughts  arose  in
the  daughter's  mind,  and  she  inquired  whether
she  might  yet  venture  to  ask  questions  about
them.  The  Servitor  replied: — Yes;  if  thou  hast
been  duly  led  through  the  proper  intermediate
stages,  it  is  quite  lawful  now  for  thy  spiritual
intelligence  to  ask  about  high  things.  Ask
what  thou  wilt.  She  made  answer : — Tell  me
what  is  God?  and  where  is  God?  and  how  is
God  ? — I  mean  how  He  is  single  and  yet  three-
fold?

The  Servitor  replied : — God  knows,  these
are  high  questions.  As  to  the  first — what  is
God? — thou  must  know  that  all  the  learned
doctors  who  ever  were  cannot  fully  explain
it;  for  God  is  above  all  sense  and  reason.
And  yet  a  diligent  man,  by  hard  seeking,
gains  some  knowledge  of  God,  though  in  a
very  far-off  way;  and  it  is  in  this  knowledge
that  man's  supreme  bliss  consists.  Thus  it  was
that  in  days   of  old  certain  virtuous  heathen


WHAT  GOD  IS.  281

doctors  sought  after  God,  especially  the  intel-
lectual Aristotle.  He  pried  minutely  into  the
course  of  nature,  in  order  to  discover  who  he  is
who  is  the  lord  of  nature.  He  searched  after
Him  diligently,  and  found  Him.  He  proved,
from  the  well-ordered  course  of  nature,  that
there  must  necessarily  be  one  only  prince  and
lord  of  all  creatures,  and  that  is  what  we  mean
by  the  name  God.

Of  this  God  and  Lord  we  know  thus  much :
that  He  is  a  substantial  being;  that  He  is
everlasting,  without  before  or  after;  that  He
is  simple  and  unchangeable;  an  unembodied
and  essential  Spirit ;  whose  being  is  to  live  and
work;  whose  essential  reason  knows  all  things
in  itself  and  by  itself;  whose  being's  fathom-
less delight  is  in  itself;  and  who  is  to  Him-
self, and  to  all  who  shall  enjoy  Him  in  the  way
of  contemplation,  a  supernatural,  unspeakable,
and  entrancing  bliss.

The  daughter  looked  upwards  and  said: —
This  is  good  to  hear,  for  it  stirs  the  heart  and
lifts  the  soul  sursum,  on  high  above  itself.
Therefore,  dear  father,  tell  me  more  about  it.

He  answered: — Behold,  then.  The  divine
essence,  of  which  it  is  said  that  it  is  a  rational
substance,  of  such  nature  that  no  mortal  eye


282  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

can  see  it  in  itself,  may  nevertheless  be  dis-
cerned in  its  effects,  just  as  we  trace  a  good
craftsman  in  his  works.  For,  as  Paul  says,
creatures  are  like  a  mirror  which  reflect  God.
And  this  mode  of  gaining  knowledge  we  term
reflection  (speculiren).

But  let  us  pause  here  awhile,  and  reflect
upon  the  high  and  venerable  Master  as  mir-
rored in  his  works.  Look  above  thee  and
around  thee  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  uni-
verse, and  see  how  wide  and  high  the  beautiful
heaven  is  in  its  swift  course,  and  how  nobly  its
Master  has  adorned  it  with  the  seven  planets,
each  of  which,  not  to  reckon  in  the  moon,  is  much
bigger  than  the  whole  earth,  and  how  He  has
decked  it  with  the  countless  multitude  of  the
bright  stars.  Oh!  when  in  summer  time  the
beautiful  sun  bursts  forth  unclouded  and  serene,
what  fruitfulness  and  blessings  it  bestows  un-
ceasingly upon  the  earth  I  See  how  the  leaves
and  grass  shoot  up,  and  the  lovely  flowers  smile;
how  forest,  heath,  and  meadow  ring  again  with
the  sweet  song  of  nightingales  and  other  little
birds ;  how  all  those  little  creatures,  which  stem
winter  had  shut  up,  issue  forth  rejoicing,  and
pair  together;  and  how  men  too,  both  young
and  old,  entranced  with  joy,  disport  themselves-


WHAT  GOD  IS.  283

right  merrily.  All,  gentle  God,  if  Thou  art  so
lovely  in  Thy  creatures,  how  exceeding  beauti-
ful and  ravishing  Thou  must  be  in  Thyself!
But  look  again,  I  pray  thee,  and  behold  the
four  elements — earth,  water,  air,  and  fire,  with
all  the  wondrous  things  which  they  contain  in
manifold  variety — men,  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  and
sea-monsters ;  and  mark  how  they  all  cry  aloud
together,  Praise  and  honour  be  to  the  unfathom-
able immensity  that  is  in  Thee !  Who  is  it,
Lord,  that  sustains  all  this  f  Who  feeds  it  all  %
It  is  Thou  who  providest  for  all,  each  in  its  own
way ;  for  great  and  small,  for  rich  and  poor.
It  is  Thou,  O  God,  who  doest  this.  Thou,  O
God,  art  God  indeed !

Come,  daughter,  thou  hast  now  found  thy
God,  whom  thy  heart  has  so  long  sought  after.
Look  upwards,  then,  with  sparkling  eyes  and
radiant  face  and  bounding  heart,  and  behold
Him  and  embrace  Him  with  the  infinite  out-
stretched arms  of  thy  soul  and  thy  affections,
and  give  thanks  and  praise  to  Him,  the  noble
Prince  of  all  creatures.  See  how,  by  gazing  on
this  mirror,  there  springs  up  speedily,  in  a  soul
susceptible  of  such  impressions,  an  intense  in-
ward jubilee;  for  by  jubilee  is  meant  a  joy
which  no  tongue  can  tell,  but  which  pours  it-


284  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

self  with  might  through  heart  and  soul.  Alas !
I  feel  now  within  me  that,  be  it  painful  or
pleasant,  my  soul's  closed  mouth  is  opened  to
thee,  and  I  must  needs  tell  thee,  for  God's
glory,  somewhat  of  my  hidden  secrets,  which
I  never  yet  have  told  to  any  one.  See,  I  knew
a  friar  preacher  who,  at  the  beginning  of  his
conversion,  used  commonly  to  receive  from  God
twice  every  day,  morning  and  evening,  during
ten  years,  an  outpouring  of  grace  like  this,  and
it  lasted  for  about  the  space  of  two  nocturns.*
At  these  moments  he  was  so  utterly  absorbed
in  God,  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  that  he  could  not
speak  of  it.  Sometimes  he  would  lovingly  con-
verse with  God  within  him,  while  at  other  times
he  would  sigh  piteously,  or  weep  longingly,  or
again  smile  silently.  It  often  seemed  to  him  as
if  he  were  floating  in  the  air,  and  swimming
between  time  and  eternity  in  the  deep  sea  of
God's  unfathomable  marvellousness.  And  his
heart  became  so  full  through  this,  that  he  would
at  times  lay  his  hand  upon  it,  as  it  beat  wildly,
saying : — Alas,  my  heart,  how  will  it  fare  with
thee  to-day  f  One  day  it  seemed  to  him  that
the  Eternal  Father's  heart  was,  in  a  spiritual
and  ineffable  manner,  pressed  tenderly,  and  with
*  About  half  an  hour.


SPIEITUAL  JUBILEE.  285

naught  between  them,  upon  his  heart,  as  it  lay
open  over  against  the  Father's  heart  in  longing
desire,  and  it  appeared  to  him  that  the  Father's
heart,  in  a  way  of  love  transcending  all  forms
and  images,  spoke  in  his  heart  the  uncreated
Word,  the  Eternal  Wisdom.  Then  he  began
to  exclaim  joyously  in  spiritual  jubilee : — Be-
hold now,  my  loveliest  love  !  thus  do  I  lay  bare
to  Thee  my  heart,  and  in  simplicity  and  naked-
ness with  regard  to  all  created  things  I  embrace
Thy  formless  Godhead.  Alas,  my  love !  Thou
who  art  far  above  all  other  loves!  Earthly
lovers,  however  greatly  they  may  love,  must
needs  bear  to  be  distinct  and  separate  from
each  other ;  but  Thou,  O  unfathomable  fulness
of  all  love,  meltest  away  into  Thy  beloved's
heart,  and,  in  virtue  of  Thy  being  absolutely
all  in  all,  pourest  Thyself  so  utterly  into  the
soul's  essence  that  no  part  of  Thee,  the  loved
One,  remains  outside,  and  is  not  lovingly  made
one  with  Thy  beloved.

The  daughter  answered : — Ah,  God  !  what
a  great  grace  it  is  for  any  one  to  be  thus  caught
up  into  God  in  jubilee.  But  I  would  fain  know
whether  this  is  the  most  perfect  kind  of  union
or  not.  The  Servitor  replied : — No  ;  it  is  only
a  preliminary  preparation  for   arriving   at   an


286  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENEY  SUSO.

essential  mode  of  being  taken  up  into  God.
She  answered : — What  mean  you  by  essential
and  non-essential  I  He  replied : — I  call  him  an
essential  man  who,  by  the  good  and  persevering
exercise  of  all  the  virtues,  has  so  completely
mastered  them,  that  the  practice  of  them  in  their
highest  perfection  has  become  pleasant  to  him,
and  that  they  dwell  in  him  abidingly,  as  the
sunshine  in  the  sun.  On  the  other  hand,  I  call
him  a  non-essential  man  in  whom  the  light  of
virtue  shines  in  a  borrowed,  unsteadfast,  and
imperfect  way,  as  the  moonlight  in  the  moon.
The  sweet  abundance  of  sensible  grace  which  I
have  just  described  is  such  a  dainty  treat  to  the
spirit  of  a  non-essential  man,  that  he  would  fain
always  have  it;  and  as  its  presence  begets  in
him  delight,  even  so  its  withdrawal  causes  in
him  undue  sadness,  as  I  will  now  show  you  by
an  example.  It  happened  once,  when  the  Ser-
vitor had  gone  into  the  chapter-house,  and  his
heart  was  full  of  heavenly  jubilee,  that  the  por-
ter came  and  summoned  him  to  the  door  to  a
woman  who  wanted  to  confess  to  him.  The
Servitor  tore  himself  unwillingly  from  his  inte-
rior joys,  and,  receiving  the  porter  harshly,  re-
plied, that  the  woman  must  send  for  some  one
else,  as  he  would  not  confess  her  then.     Now


WITHDEAWAL  OF  DIVINE  CONSOLATIONS.  287

she  had  a  burdened  and  sinful  heart,  and  her
message  was,  that  she  had  a  particular  drawing
to  seek  consolation  from  him,  and  that  she  would
confess  to  no  one  else.  But  when  she  heard
that  he  would  not  come  to  her,  she  began  to
weep  from  grief  of  heart,  and  going  aside  into
a  corner,  sat  down  there  in  wretchedness,  and
wept  long  and  bitterly.  Meanwhile  God  with-
drew very  quickly  from  the  Servitor  the  delights
of  sensible  grace,  and  his  heart  became  as  hard
as  a  flint;  and  when  he  sought  to  know  the
meaning  of  this,  God  answered  him : — As  thou
hast  driven  from  thee  uncomforted  the  poor
woman  with  her  burdened  heart,  even  so  I  have
withdrawn  from  thee  My  divine  consolations.
The  Servitor  sighed  deeply  and  beat  his  breast,
and  ran  with  speed  to  the  door,  and,  as  he  did
not  find  the  woman  there,  was  in  great  distress.
The  porter  ran  about  in  every  direction  looking
for  her,  and  when  at  last  he  found  her,  where
she  was  sitting  weeping,  he  brought  her  back
with  him  to  the  door,  and  the  Servitor,  receiving
her  with  great  kindness,  graciously  consoled  her
repentant  heart.  Then  he  went  back  from  her
to  the  chapter-house,  and  immediately  in  an  in-
stant the  kind  Lord  was  there  again  with  His
divine  consolations,  just  as  before.


288  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENTtY  SUSO.

The  daughter  answered: — He  may  well  bear
sufferings  to  whom  God  gives  such  rapturous
jubilee.  The  Servitor  replied: — Oh!  it  had
all  to  be  paid  for  afterwards  with  great  suffer-
ing, as  has  been  already  related.  At  length,
however,  when  all  this  had  passed  away,  and
God's  appointed  time  had  come,  this  same  grace
of  jubilee  returned,  and  was  with  him  in  an
abiding  manner  both  at  home  and  abroad,  in
company  and  when  alone.  Ofttimes  in  the
bath  or  at  table  the  same  grace  was  with  him ;
but  its  working  was  now  interior,  and  no  longer
broke  forth  into  exterior  manifestations.


Chapter  LV.

An  explanation  where  and  how  God  is.
The  good  daughter  said: — Sir,  I  have  now
indeed  found  out  what  God  is ;    but  I  would
fain  know  also  where  God  is.     He  answered : —
Thou  shalt  hear  this.     The  learned  doctors  say
that  God  has  no  where,  but  that  He  is  all  in  all.
Open  then  the  inward  ears  of  thy  soul  and  givt
good  heed.     These  same  doctors  tell  us  in  the
art  of  logic,  that  we  come  to  know  what  a  thim
is  through  its  name.    Now,  one  doctor  says  thai


WHERE  GOD  IS.  289

being  is  the  first  name  of  God.  Turn,  then,
thine  eyes  to  being  in  its  pure  and  naked  sim-
plicity, and  take  no  note  of  this  or  that  partial
being.  Consider  only  being  in  itself,  unmixed
with  all  non-being.  For  as  all  non-being  is  the
negation  of  all-being,  even  so  being  in  itself  is
the  negation  of  all  non-being.  A  thing  which
has  yet  to  be,  or  which  once  was,  is  not  now
at  this  moment  in  actual  being.  Moreover,
we  can  have  no  knowledge  of  mixed  being  or
non-being,  unless  we  take  into  account  that
which  is  all-being.  For  if  we  would  under-
stand what  any  thing  is,  the  first  point  which
our  mind  meets  with  in  it  is  being,  and  this  is  a
being  which  is  the  efficient  cause  of  all  things.
It  is  not  the  partial  and  particular  being  of  this
or  that  creature;  for  partial  being  is  always
mixed  with  some  other  element,  and  has  a
capacity  for  receiving  something  new  into  it.
Therefore,  the  nameless  Divine  Being  must  be  in
itself  a  being  that  is  all-being,  and  that  sustains
all  particular  beings  by  its  presence.

It  is  a  proof  of  the  singular  blindness  of
man's  reason,  that  it  cannot  examine  into  that
which  it  contemplates  first  before  every  thing,
and  without  which  it  cannot  perceive  any  thing.
It  is  with  the  reason  as  with  the  eye.  When
u


290  LITE  OF  BLESSED  HENKY  SUSO.

the  eye  is  intent  upon  observing  a  variety  of
coloured  objects,  it  does  not  notice  the  light
which  enables  it  to  see  all  these  objects,  and
even  if  it  looks  at  the  light,  it  still  does  not  see
it.  Thus,  too,  is  it  with  our  soul's  eye ;  when  it
looks  at  this  or  that  particular  being,  it  takes
no  heed  of  the  being,  which  is  every  where  one,
absolute  and  simple,  and  which  enables  it  to
apprehend  all  other  beings.  Hence  a  wise  doc-
tor says,  that  the  eye  of  our  intelligence,  owing
to  its  infirmity,  is  affected  towards  that  being
which  is  in  itself  the  most  manifest  of  all  beings,
as  the  eye  of  a  bat  or  a  night-owl  towards  the
bright  light  of  the  sun;  for  particular  beings
distract  and  dazzle  the  mind,  so  that  it  cannot
see  the  Divine  darkness,  which  is  in  itself  the
brightest  of  all  brightness.

Open  now  thy  inward  eyes  and  gaze  as  best
■thou  canst  on  being  in  its  naked  simple  purity,
and  thou  wilt  see  at  once  that  it  comes  from  no
one,  and  has  no  before  nor  after,  and  no  ca-
pacity of  change,  either  from  within  or  from
without,  because  it  is  a  simple  being.  Thou
wilt  note  too  that  it  is  the  most  actual,  the  most
present,  and  the  most  perfect  of  all  beings,  with-
out flaw  or  alteration,  because  it  is  absolutely
one  in  naked  simplicity.     And  this  truth  is  so


WHERE  GOD  IS.  291

evident  to  an  enlightened  reason,  that  it  is  im-
possible for  it  to  think  otherwise ;  for  one  point
proves  and  implies  the  other.  Thus,  because  it
is  a  simple  being,  it  must  needs  be  the  first  of
beings,  and  without  origin  and  everlasting ;  and
because  it  is  the  first  and  everlasting  and  simple,
it  must  be  the  most  present.  It  is  at  the  very
highest  summit  of  perfection  and  simplicity,  to
which  nothing  can  be  added  and  from  which
nothing  can  be  taken  away.  If  thou  canst  un-
derstand what  I  have  just  told  thee  about  the
pure  Godhead,  thou  wilt  have  been  guided  a
long  way  into  the  incomprehensible  light  of
God's  hidden  truth.  This  pure  and  simple
being  is  the  first  and  highest  cause  of  all  beings
which  have  a  cause  (created  beings),  and  by  its
peculiar  presence  it  encloses,  as  the  beginning
and  end  of  all  things,  whatever  comes  into  being
in  time.  It  is  altogether  in  all  things,  and  alto-
gether outside  all  things.  Hence  a  certain  doc-
tor says : — God  is  a  circular  ring,  whose  centre
is  every  where  and  circumference  nowhere.

The  maiden  answered : — Praised  be  God,  I
have  been  shown,  as  far  as  can  be,  what  God  is
and  where  God  is.  I  would  fain  now  learn
how,  if  God  is  so  exceeding  simple,  He  can  be
at  the  same  time  threefold.


292  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

The  Servitor  replied : — Each  several  being,
the  more  simple  it  is  in  itself,  the  more  manifold
it  is  in  its  productive  efficacy.  That  which  has
nothing  gives  nothing,  and  that  which  has  much
can  give  much.  Now,  I  have  already  spoken  of
that  inflowing  and  overflowing  fountain-head  of
good  which  God  is  in  Himself,  and  of  God's
unfathomable  supernatural  goodness  which  con-
strains Him  not  to  keep  all  this  to  Himself,  but
to  communicate  it  joyfully  both  within  and  with-
out Himself.  But  the  highest  and  most  perfect
outpouring  of  the  supreme  Good  must  of  neces-
sity take  place  within  itself,  and  this  can  be
none  other  than  a  present,  interior,  substantial,
personal,  and  natural  outpouring,  necessary,  yet
without  compulsion,  alike  infinite  and  perfect.
All  other  outpourings  which  take  place  in  time
and  in  creatures  are  but  a  reflection  of  the  eter-
nal outpouring  of  the  unfathomable  Divine  good-
ness. And  learned  doctors  say  that,  in  the
outflow  of  creatures  from  their  primal  fountain-
head,  there  is  a  circular  return-movement  of  the
end  to  the  beginning;  for  as  the  outflowing  of
the  Person  from  God  is  an  image  and  repre-
sentation of  the  origin  of  creatures,  so  also  it
foreshadows  the  flowing  back  again  of  creatures
into  God.


THE  TRINITY  IN  UNITY.  293

Now,  observe  the  difference  between  the
creature's  outpouring  and  God's  outpouring.
Inasmuch  as  a  creature  is  only  a  partial  being,
its  giving  and  its  outpouring  is  also  partial  and  in
measure.  Thus  a  human  father  gives  his  son,
when  he  begets  him,  only  a  part  of  his  own  be-
ing ;  he  does  not  give  him  wholly  and  eutirely
all  that  he  is,  for  he  himself  is  but  a  partial  good.
But  since  the  Divine  outpouring  is  manifestly
of  a  far  more  interior  and  nobler  kind  than  the
creature's  outpouring,  in  proportion  to  the  great-
ness of  the  good  which  God  is  in  Himself  and
His  immeasurable  superiority  over  all  other
goods,  it  follows  as  a  necessary  consequence
from  this  that  the  outpouring  must  be  like  the
being;  and  this  cannot  be  unless  God  pours  out
His  being  according  to  the  personal  relations.

If  now  with  cleansed  eye  thou  canst  look
into  and  gaze  upon  the  most  pure  goodness  of
the  supreme  Good,  which  goodness  is  of  its  own
nature  a  present  active  principle  of  the  natural
and  spontaneous  love  with  which  the  supreme
Good  loves  itself,  thou  wilt  behold  the  exuberant
supernatural  outpouring  of  the  Word  from  the
Father,  by  which  act  of  begetting  and  speaking
all  things  are  spoken  forth  and  produced;  and
thou  wilt  see  too  in  the  supreme  Good  and  in


294  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

the  highest  outpouring  the  divine  Trinity,  Fa-
ther, Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  necessarily  bursting
forth.  And  if  it  be  that  from  the  supreme  es-
sential goodness  the  highest  and  most  perfect
outpouring  gushes  forth,  it  follows  that  there
must  be  in  the  aforenamed  Trinity  the  most
supreme  and  intimate  community  of  behig,  as
well  as  the  most  perfect  similarity  and  identity
of  that  being,  which  the  Persons  possess  in  the
jubilee  of  their  outpouring,  without  any  division
or  partition  of  the  substance  and  the  almighti-
ness  of  the  three  Persons  of  the  Godhead.

The  maiden  exclaimed: — O  wonderful!  I
swim  in  the  Godhead  as  an  eagle  in  the  air.
He  answered: — It  is  impossible  to  express  in
words  how  the  Trinity  of  the  Divine  Persons
can  subsist  in  the  unity  of  one  essence.  Never-*
theless,  to  say  what  can  be  said  about  it,  St.
Augustin  lays  down  that  the  Father  is  the  foun-
tain-head of  all  the  Godhead  of  the  Son  and
of  the  Holy'  Ghost,  personally  and  essentially.
St.  Denys  says,  that  in  the  Father  there  is  an
outflowing  of  the  Godhead,  and  that  this  out-
flowing or  stream  pours  itself  out  naturally  in
the  outrunning  Word,  who  is  the  Son  by  nature.
He  also  pours  Himself  out  according  to  the
loving  bountifulness  of  the  will  into  the  Son,


THE  TKINITY  IN  UNITY.  Z*dj

and  the  Son  in  turn  pours  Himself  out  accord-
ing to  the  lovingness  of  the  will  into  the  Father,
and  this  is  called  a  reciprocal  love,  and  is  the
Holy  Ghost.  The  hidden  meaning  of  this  is
disclosed  and  proved  to  us  by  that  bright  light
the  dear  St.  Thomas,  the  teacher,  who  speaks
thus: — In  the  outpouring  of  the  Word  from
the  Father's  heart  and  reason,  it  must  needs  be
that  God,  with  His  luminous  intellect,  contem-
plates Himself,  bending  back,  as  it  were,  upon
His  Divine  essence;  for  if  the  reason  of  the
Father  had  not  the  Divine  essence  for  its  object,
the  Word  conceived  would  be  a  creature  and
not  God,  which  would  be  false.  But  in  the  way
described,  the  Word  is  a  Divine  being  from  a
Divine  being.  Again,  this  backward  look  upon
the  Divine  essence  in  the  reason  of  the  Father
must  take  place  in  a  manner  productive  of  a
natural  likeness,  otherwise  the  Word  would  not
be  the  Son.  Here,  then,  we  have  unity  of
essence  with  diversity  of  Persons;  and,  as  a
good  attestation  of  this  distinction,  the  high-
soaring  eagle,  St.  John,  has  said : — "  The  Word
was  in  the  beginning  with  God."

With  regard  to  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  thou  shouldst  know  that  the  substance
of  the  Divine  intellect  is  an  act  of  cognition  (in-


296  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

tellectio),  and  this,  moreover,  must  have  an  in-
clination for  its  object  under  the  form  in  which
it  has  been  received  into  the  intellect.    This  in-
clination is  the  will,  and  the  longing  of  the  will
is  to  seek  after  pleasure  as  best  it  can.     Thou
shouldst  also  observe  that  the  object  loved  is  not
in  the  person  loving  under  the  likeness  of  its  natu-
ral form,  as  is  the  case  with  the  object  of  the  in-
tellect in  the  light  of  the  cognition.    Now,  inas-
much as  the  Word  flows  out  from  the  looking
forth  of  the  Father  according  to  the  form  of  the
nature,  without  confusion  of  Persons,  this  outpour-
ing of  the  Father  is  called  a  begetting.    But  since
this  mode  of  procession  does  not  occur  in  the  out-
flowing of  the  will  and  of  the  love,  which  is  the
third  Person,  who  is  poured  forth  like  a  stream
of  love  by  the  Father,  and  also  by  His  express
image  the  Son,  from  out  His  very  inmost  depths,
therefore  this  outflowing  cannot  be  termed  a  Son
or  begotten.     And  since  this  love  is  in  the  will
after  an  intellectual  or  spiritual  fashion,  like  an
inclination  or  love-bond  present  inwardly  in  the
lover  towards  the  object  of  his  love,  the  third
Person  in  the  procession,  who  j)roceeds  accord-
ing to  the  loving  manner  of  the  will,  fittingly  re-
ceives the  name  of  Spirit.   But  when  a  man  has
reached  this  point  he  is  transformed  by  the  Divine


DIFFERENT  VIEWS  OF  GOD.  297

light  in  that  mysterious  way  which  they  only  can
understand  who  have  experienced  it.

The  daughter  said : — Ah,  sir,  this  is  indeed
a  sublime  fulness  of  Christian  doctrine.  Never-
theless, there  are  to  be  met  with  certain  intel-
lectual men  who  deny  what  has  been  just  said
about  God,  and  whose  view  is,  that  he  who
would  attain  to  perfect  union  will  find  the  con-
templation of  God  a  hurtful  impediment.  He
should,  on  the  contrary,  according  to  them,
divest  himself  of  God  and  of  the  spirit,  and
cast  behind  him  all  visions,  and  turn  himself
only  to  the  inwardly-shining  truth,  which  he  is
himself.

He  answered : — This  doctrine  is  false  if  the
words  are  taken  in  their  ordinary  sense.  There-
fore keep  clear  of  it,  and  hearken  to  what  the
Christian  faith  teaches  on  this  point.  The
common  view  which  men  take  of  God  is  that
He  is  the  Lord  and  Creator  of  the  whole  world,
who  suffers  no  wickedness  to  pass  unpunished,
and  no  good  deed  unrewarded.  He,  then,  who
commits  sin  regards  God  as  a  terrible  God ;  as
the  good  Job  said,  u  I  have  always  feared  God
as  shipmen  fear  the  great  waves"  (Job  xxxi.  23).
He  also  who  serves  God  for  reward  has  a  great
and  munificent  God,  able  to  recompense  him


298  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

abundantly.  But  a  well-exercised  and  experi-
enced man,  who  by  manifold  dyings  has  rid
himself  of  the  sinful  things  which  God  hates,
and  who  serves  God  at  all  times  with  burning
love,  this  man  loves  God  in  his  heart,  and  not
after  the  afore-mentioned  fashion.  And  he  has
in  a  certain  sense  divested  himself  of  God,  and
he  loves  Him  as  his  heart's  own  loved  one ;  for
servile  fear  has  passed  from  him,  as  St.  Paul
says.  Thus  to  the  spiritual  man  God  remains
truly  God  and  Lord,  and  yet  at  the  same  time
he  has  emptied  himself  of  God,  according  to  the
grosser  acceptation  of  the  term,  for  he  has  at-
tained to  a  more  perfect  conception  of  Him.

Now  as  to  the  way  in  which  a  man  should
be  divested  of  the  spirit,  hearken  to  the  true
account  of  it.  When  a  man  at  the  outset  of
his  interior  life  begins  to  observe  that  he  is  a
creature  composed  of  body  and  soul,  and  that
his  body  is  mortal,  but  that  his  soul  is  an  ever-
lasting spirit,  he  gives  his  body  and  all  his
animal  nature  their  dismissal,  and  cleaves  to
the  spirit,  and  brings  his  body  into  subjection
to  it;  and  every  thing  he  does  is  interiorly  in
thought  directed  to  this  one  end,  how  he  may
discover  the  superessential  Spirit,  and  how  lay
hold  of  It,  and  how  unite  his  spirit  with  It.     A


TRUE  AND  FALSE  VISIONS.  299

man  of  this  kind  is  called  a  spiritual  and  holy
man.  Now,  supposing  that  all  goes  right  with
him,  after  he  has  exercised  himself  in  this  for
a  long  time,  and  yet  the  superessential  Spirit,
though  ever  playing  as  it  were  before  him,  has
always  eluded  his  grasp,  his  created  spirit  begins
at  last  to  realise  its  own  helplessness,  to  abandon
itself  by  an  utter  renunciation  of  self  to  the
everlasting  Divine  might,  and  to  turn  away
from  itself,  with  contempt  for  what  comes  from
the  senses,  to  the  immensity  of  the  Supreme
Being.  In  this  taking-up  of  the  spirit  into  God
it  attains  to  a  forgetfulness  and  loss  of  self,  of
which  St.  Paul  speaks,  "I  live,  but  not  I"
(Gal.  ii.  20)  ;  and  of  which  Christ  has  said,
"Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit"  (Matt.  ii.  3).
Thus  it  is  that  a  man's  spirit,  while  it  remains
what  it  was  as  to  its  essence,  is  nevertheless
divested  of  itself  in  regard  to  the  possession  of
itself  through  the  senses.

I  will  also  explain  to  you  the  difference
between  pure  truth  and  doubtful  visions.  To
gaze  without  any  medium  upon  the  unveiled
Godhead  is  undoubtedly  absolute  and  unmingled
truth;  and  the  more  intellectual  and  unima-
ginary  a  vision  is,  and  the  more  nearly  it  ap-
proaches to  the  unveiled  contemplation,  the  more


300  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

noble  is  its  character.  Some  of  the  prophets
had  imaginary  visions,  as  Jeremias  and  others.
And  snch  imaginary  visions  are  still  often  gran-
ted to  God's  intimate  friends,  sometimes  when
asleep  and  sometimes  when  awake,  their  out-
ward senses  being  at  the  time  stilled  to  rest  and
abstracted.  A  learned  doctor  says,  that  angelic
appearances  happen  to  some  persons  oftener
in  sleep  than  when  awake,  and  for  this  reason :
because  a  man  in  sleep  is  in  a  state  of  greater
quietude  with  regard  to  the  multiplicity  of  his
external  operations  than  when  awake.  But  when
it  is  that  a  vision  which  takes  place  in  sleep
may  and  ought  to  be  deemed  a  true  vision — as
the  dream  in  the  Old  Testament  which  King
Pharaoh  had  about  the  seven  fat  and  seven  lean
kine,  and  many  similar  dreams  mentioned  in
Holy  Writ — and  also  how  the  truth  of  such
visions  is  to  be  discerned, — for  dreams  are  usu-
ally deceptive,  though  undoubtedly  they  some-
times announce  the  truth, — all  this  thou  mayest
learn  from  what  St.  Augustin  writes  about  his
holy  mother.  God,  she  told  him,  had  given  her
this  gift :  that  when  He  showed  her  any  thing
in  sleep  or  half-sleep,  she  received  at  the  same
time  the  inward  power  of  discerning  whether  it
was  merely  a  common  dream,  which  she  should


THE  SOUL'S  HIGHEST  FLIGHT.  301

disregard,  or  an  imaginary  vision,  to  which  she
should  attend.  Those  persons  who  have  this
gift  from  God  can  all  the  better  explain  to
themselves  how  this  is.  But  no  one  can  com-
municate it  to  another  by  words.  Those  only
understand  it  who  have  had  experience  of  it.


Chapter  LVI.

Of  the  very  highest  flight  of  a  soul  experienced  in  the  ways
of  God.

The  wise  daughter  said : — There  is  nothing
which  I  would  more  gladly  learn  from  Scrip-
ture than  the  answer  to  this  deep  and  pregnant
question,  where  and  how  a  well-exercised  per-
son's understanding  may  arrive  at  its  highest
end  and  aim  in  the  deepest  abyss  of  the  God-
head, in  such  a  manner  that  what  is  actually
experienced  will  harmonise  with  the  teaching  of
Holy  Writ?

The  Servitor  drew  from  Scripture  an  answer
conformable  to  right  reason,  and  its  purport  ac-
cording to  its  hidden  meaning  was  as  follows.
Every  one  who  has  attained  to  the  true  nobility
of  spirit  ponders  in  simplicity  and  inactivity
the   pregnant  word  which   the   Eternal    Son


302  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENKY  SUSO.

spoke  in  the  Gospel,  "  Where  I  am,  there  also
shall  My  servant  be"  (John  xii.  26).  Now  he
who  has  not  shrunk  from  following  the  Son
to  that  bitter  ivhere,  on  which  according  to  His
manhood  He  took  post  in  death  upon  the  cross,
has,  in  virtue  of  this  promise,  the  right  and  the
possibility  of  enjoying,  after  a  blissful  and  in-
tellectual manner,  in  time  and  in  eternity,  the
delightful  where  of  the  Son's  pure  Godhead,  so
far  as  this  is  possible  more  or  less.  But  where
is  the  where  of  the  Son's  pure  Godhead  1  It  is
in  the  form-pregnant  light  of  the  divine  Unity,
— a  light  which  may  be  termed  in  its  unname-
ableness  a  nothingness;  in  its  inward  concen-
tration, an  essential  stillness;  in  its  indwelling
outflow,  a  triune  nature ;  in  its  peculiar  property,
a  self-comprehending  light;  in  its  uncreated
creativeness,  an  existence  which  makes  things
to  be.  And  in  the  modeless  darkness  of  this
light  all  multiplicity  ceases,  and  the  spirit  loses
itself  as  self,  and  comes  to  an  end  as  regards  its
own  activity.  This  is  the  highest  aim  and  the
endless  where,  in  which  the  spirituality  of  all
spirits  finds  its  end.  Ever  to  lose  oneself  in
this  is  everlasting  bliss.

Thou  must  know,   moreover,   in   order  to
understand  this  better,  that  in  the  form-pregnant


THE  SOUL'S  HIGHEST  FLIGHT.  303

light  of  the  Divine  Unity  there  is  an  indwelling
outspringing  impulse  by  which  the  Persons  are
ponred  forth  out  of  the  almighty  and  eternal
Godhead.  For  the  Trinity  of  the  Persons  is  in
the  Unity  of  the  nature,  and  the  Unity  of  the
nature  is  in  the  Trinity  of  the  Persons.  The
Unity  has  its  actuality  in  the  Trinity,  and  the
Trinity  has  its  potentiality  in  the  Unity;  ac-
cording to  what  St.  Augustin  says  in  his  book
about  the  Trinity  —  namely,  that  the  Trinity
of  the  Persons  contains  in  itself  the  Unity  as
Their  nature  and  essence,  and  hence  it  is  that
each  Person  is  God,  and  according  to  the  sim-
plicity of  the  nature  so  also  is  the  Godhead.
Now  the  Unity  shines  forth  in  the  Trinity  after
a  divided  fashion;  but  the  Trinity,  viewed  as
tending  inwards  and  as  indwelling,  shines  forth
in  the  Unity  after  a  simple  fashion,  just  as  the
three  Persons  contain  in  themselves  the  Unity
after  the  same  simple  fashion.  The  Father  is
the  fountain-head  of  the  Son,  and  the  Son  is  an
outflowing  of  the  Father,  gushing  forth  from
Him  eternally  as  regards  the  Personality,  and
dwelling  in  Him  as  regards  the  being  or  essence.
The  Father  and  the  Son  pour  forth  Their
Spirit;  and  the  Unity,  which  is  the  being  of
the  primal  fountain-head,  is  the  being  of  all  the


304  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

three  Persons.  But  as  to  how  the  Trinity  is
one,  and  the  Trinity  in  the  Unity  of  the  nature
is  one,  while  nevertheless  the  Trinity  comes
forth  from  the  Unity,  this  cannot  be  expressed
in  words,  owing  to  the  simplicity  of  that  deep
abyss.  Hither  it  is,  into  this  intellectual  where,
that  the  spirit,  spiritualising  itself,  soars  up,  now
flying  on  the  summitless  heights,  now  swimming
in  the  bottomless  depths  of  the  sublime  marvels
of  the  Godhead.  Nevertheless,  the  spirit  re-
tains there  its  own  nature  as  a  spirit,  while  it
enjoys  the  co-eternal,  co-omnipotent,  indwelling
and  outflowing  Persons,  and  high  above  the
clouds  and  bustle  of  things  below  contemplates
with  fixed  gaze  the  Divine  marvellousness.  For
what  greater  marvel  can  there  be  than  the  pure
Unity,  into  which  the  Trinity  of  the  Persons
merges  itself  in  simplicity,  and  in  which  all
the  multiplicity  of  sensible  objects  ceases.  And
this  is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  that  the
outflowing  of  the  Persons  poured  forth  is  al-
ways tending  back  again  into  the  Unity  of
the  self-same  essence,  and  that  all  creatures  in
regard  to  their  indwelling  outflow  (i.  e,  their
ideal  procession)  are  from  eternity  in  this  one
essence,  and  have  in  it  an  existence  identical
with  God's  life,  God's  knowledge,  and  God's


THE  SOUL'S  HIGHEST  FLIGHT.  305

essence,  according  to  the  words  in  the  beginning
of  St.  John's  Gospel,  "  That  which  was  made,
was  in  Him  life  from  everlasting."*  This  pure
Unity  is  a  dark  stillness  and  an  inactive  in-
activity, which  no  one  can  understand,  save  he
alone  whom  the  Unity  in  itself  illumines.  Out
of  this  still  inactivity  there  shines  forth  freedom
without  any  admixture  of  wickedness,  for  free-
dom is  the  fruit  of  the  new  birth  of  self-anni-
hilation; and  there  shines  forth  likewise  deep
hidden  truth  without  speck  of  falsehood,  and
this  truth  is  born  of  the  unveiling  of  the  veiled
Divine  purity ;  for  now  at  length,  after  the  reve-
lation of  these  things,  the  spirit  is  unclothed  of
that  dusky  light  which  has  hitherto  followed  it,
and  in  which  it  has  till  now  viewed  objects  in
a  human  and  earthly  way.  And  it  finds  that
it  has  now  become,  strictly  speaking,  another,
and  something  quite  different,  from  what  it  till
then  understood  itself  to  be  according  to  its
previous  light;  as  St.  Paul  has  said,  "I  live,
but  not  I"  (Gal.  ii.  20) ;  and  in  this  manner  it
is  unclothed  and  simplified  in  the  modeless  sim-

*  Quod  factum,  est,  in  ipso  vita  erat  (Joan.  i.  3,  4).  Ac-
cording to  this  deeply-suggestive  reading,  the  clause  qvod
factum  est  is  referred  to  the  words  that  follow  instead  of
to  those  which  precede.  Many  of  the  Fathers  read  the
passage  thus.

X


306  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

plicity  of  the  Divine  essence,  which  makes  its
light  to  shine  into  all  things  in  simplicity  and
stillness.  In  this  simple  and  modeless  contem-
plation the  spirit  takes  no  note  of  the  permanent
distinction  of  the  Persons,  viewed  as  separate.
For,  as  Christian  doctrine  teaches,  it  is  not  the
Person  of  the  Father,  taken  by  itself,  whicli
produces  bliss,  nor  the  Person  of  the  Son,  taken
by  itself,  nor  the  Person  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
taken  by  itself;  but  it  is  the  three  Persons,  in-
dwelling in  the  Unity  of  the  essence,  that  is
eternal  bliss.  And  this  is  the  being  itself  of
the  Persons  by  nature,  and  it  is  that  which
gives  being  to  creatures  by  grace,  and  it  con-
tains in  itself  the  form  and  idea  of  all  things
in  simplicity  and  essentially.  Now,  just  as  this
form-pregnant  light  subsists  as  being,  even  so
all  things  subsist  in  it  according  to  their  essen-
tial being,  and  not  according  to  their  accidental
character ;  and  since,  moreover,  it  pours  itself
as  light  into  all  things,  therefore  its  property  is
to  subsist  as  light.  And  hence  it  is  that  all
things  shine  forth  in  this  absolute  being  in  inte-
rior stillness,  without  detriment  to  its  simplicity.
This  intellectual  where,  in  which,  as  has
been  just  set  forth,  the  tried  servant  of  God
should  dwell  with  the  eternal  Son,  may  be  re-


THE  SOUL'S  HIGHEST  FLIGHT.  307

garded  as  the  essentially  existing  unnameable
Nothingness.  And  here  it  is  that  the  spirit
arrives  at  the  naught  of  the  Unity;  and  this
Unity  is  termed  naught  because  the  spirit  can-
not discover  any  mode  of  being  under  which  to
frame  a  conception  of  what  it  is.  Nevertheless
the  spirit  clearly  feels  that  it  is  contained  by
another,  quite  different  from  what  it  is  itself;
for  which  reason  that  which  contains  it  deserves
more  properly  the  name  of  something  than
naught,  though  it  seems  to  the  spirit  naught
because  it  cannot  find  any  mode  of  conceiving
what  it  is.  Now  when  the  spirit,  by  the  loss
of  its  self-consciousness,  has  in  very  truth  esta-
blished its  abode  in  this  glorious  and  dazzling
obscurity,  it  is  set  free  from  every  obstacle  to
union  and  from  all  its  individual  properties,
as  St.  Bernard  says;  and  this  takes  place  less
or  more  according  as  the  spirit  remains  in  the
body  or  goes  out  of  it  when  it  passes  away  out
of  itself  into  God.  And  this  loss  of  the  spirit's
self  is  after  that  Divine  manner  in  which  all
things,  so  to  speak,  have  come  to  be  for  it,  as
the  Scripture  says  (1  Cor.  xv.  28).

In  this  merging  of  itself  in  God  the  spirit
passes  away,  and  yet  not  wholly;  for  it  receives
indeed  some  attributes  of  the  Godhead,  but  it


308  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

does  not  become  God  by  nature.  What  befalls  it
is  all  of  grace,  for  it  is  still  a  something  which
has  been  created  out  of  nothing,  and  continues
to  be  this  everlastingly.  Thus  much  then  we
may  say :  When  the  spirit  has  passed  away  out
of  itself  and  has  been  taken  up  into  God,  it  is
rid  of  that  wondering  doubt  which  it  felt  while
losing  itself,  and  it  ceases  to  exist  in  regard  to
the  sense,  so  far  as  its  own  knowledge  of  itself
is  concerned.  For,  to  use  ordinary  language,
the  spirit  is  drawn  upwards  by  the  might  of  the
all-luminous  Divine  essence  above  its  natural
capacity  into  the  purity  of  the  Divine  naught,
in  which  it  is  unclothed  of  all  created  modes,
though  without  ceasing  to  retain  its  own  proper
mode  of  existence  as  a  creature.  This  modeless
mode  is  the  being  of  the  Persons,  which  they
contain  within  Them  as  their  nature  in  absolute
simplicity  and  perfection.  And  it  is  by  gazing
upon  this  that  the  spirit  is  divested  of  itself,  as
has  been  said ;  and  this  takes  place  in  the  naught
of  the  Unity,  when  the  spirit  ceases  to  be  conscious
of  its  own  proper  name  and  existence,  in  the
perfect  knowledge  of  this  naught  to  which  it  has
attained;  for  in  it  the  spirit  loses  itself  in  a  forget-
fulness  of  self  and  all  things ;  and  this  happens
to  it  the  moment  it  turns  away  from  itself  and


THE  SOUL'S  HIGHEST  FLIGHT.  309

all  created  things  to  the  purity  of  the  uncreated
naught.  On  this  wild  mountain  range  of  the
Divine  wJiere,  there  is  an  abyss,  perceptible  to  all
pure  spirits,  disporting  itself,  so  to  speak,  before
them,  and  opening  itself  out  to  their  gaze, — here
it  is  they  enter  into  the  hidden  depths  of  that
which  is  unnameable  and  into  that  wild  estrange-
ment ;  and  this  is  the  fathomless  abyss  of  all
creatures,  which  naught  but  itself  can  fathom,
and  which  lies  hid  from  all  that  is  not  God,  save
only  from  those  to  whom  God  pleases  to  reveal
it.  And  these  persons  must  seek  it  in  detach-
ment, and  in  a  certain  sense  they  must  behold
it  with  God  Himself;  according  to  the  words  of
Scripture,  "We  shall  know  then,  even  as  we
are  known"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12 ;  1  John  iii.  2).

The  spirit  has  not  this  knowledge  from  its
own  self,  for  the  Unity  in  the  Trinity  draws  it
up  into  Itself — that  is  to  say,  into  the  spirit's
true  supernatural  dwelling-place,  in  which  it
dwells  above  itself  in  that  which  has  drawn  it
up  thither.  Here  the  spirit  dies,  and  yet  is  all
alive  in  the  marvels  of  the  Godhead.  The
dying  of  the  spirit  consists  in  this :  that  when
it  has  passed  away  into  God  it  no  longer  takes
note  of  any  distinction  between  individual  ex-
istences ;  nevertheless,  as  regards  the  outpour-


310  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

ing  of  the  Persons  and  of  creatures,  it  holds
firmly  the  distinction  between  the  three  Per-
sons, and  also  the  separate  existence  of  every
creature,  as  is  explained  in  the  Servitor's  short
treatise  concerning  Truth.  Observe,  moreover,
that  when  the  spirit  has  passed  out  of  itself  in
the  way  described  above,  there  shines  forth  out
of  the  Unity  a  simple  light,  and  this  modeless
light  streams  out  from  the  three  Persons  into  the
purity  of  the  spirit.  When  this  light  falls  upon
the  spirit,  it  sinks  down  out  of  itself  and  all  that
belongs  to  self,  the  activity  of  all  its  powers
comes  to  an  end,  and  it  is  divested  of  its  opera-
tions and  its  self-existence.  This  arises  from
the  entering  of  the  spirit  into  God,  when  it  has
passed  away  out  of  itself  as  regards  the  sense,
and  is  lost  in  the  stillness  of  the  glorious  dazzling
obscurity  and  of  the  naked  simple  Unity.  It  is
in  this  modeless  where  that  the  highest  bliss  is
to  be  found.

The  maiden  exclaimed  i — Oh,  wonderful !
But  how  is  one  to  enter  into  it?  He  answered :
— I  leave  the  answer  of  this  question  to  that
bright  light  St.  Denys,  who  speaks  thus  to  his
disciple :  If  thou  wouldst  enter  into  the  hidden
mysteriousness,  mount  boldly  upwards ;  and
disregarding  thy  outer  and  inner  senses,  and


THE  SOUL'S  HIGHEST  FLIGHT.  311

the  workings  of  thy  reason  in  itself,  and  all
things  visible  and  invisible,  and  all  that  is  and
is  not,  mount  upwards  to  the  simple  Unity.
Into  this  thou  must  press  forward  without
knowing  it,  even  into  that  silence  which  is
above  all  being  and  above  all  science,  with  the
purity  and  simplicity  of  a  mind  utterly  abstracted
from  every  creature,  right  into  the  very  splen-
dours of  the  Divine  darkness.  Here  thou  must
let  go  every  hold,  and  part  with  every  thing
created;  for  in  the  superessential  Trinity  of
the  God-transcending  Godhead,  on  that  mys-
terious, incomprehensible,  all-dazzling  pinnacle
of  pinnacles,  marvellous  things  are  heard  from
out  the  low  whispering  silence,  and  marvellous
things  are  felt,  new  and  yet  unchangeable,  amid
the  splendours  of  that  dark  obscurity,  which  is
the  fulness  of  light  and  glory  manifested,  where-
in all  that  is  shines  forth,  and  which  fills  to
overflowing  the  sightless  mind  of  the  beholder
with  its  incomprehensible,  invisible,  and  efful-
gent luminousness.


312  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.


Chapter  LVLT.

The  conclusion  of  the  contents  of  this  book  in  a  few  simple
words.

The  daughter  said: — Ah,  sir,  you  speak
with  so  much  Christian  learning,  both  from
your  own  experience  and  from  Holy  Writ,
concerning  the  mystery  of  the  pure  Godhead,
and  the  flowing  forth  and  the  flowing  in  again
of  the  spirit,  could  you  not  draw  out  for  me
this  mysterious  teaching,  as  you  understand
it,  under  the  form  of  a  similitude,  that  I  may
be  the  better  able  to  comprehend  it?  And  I
should  also  be  very  glad  if  you  would  gather
together  in  a  short  discourse,  and  illustrate  by
figures,  all  the  sublime  doctrines  which  you
have  handled  at  length,  that  they  may  be  more
firmly  fixed  in  my  weak  mind.

He  answered : — How  can  one  express  in
figures  what  has  no  figure,  and  set  forth  in
words  what  has  no  mode  of  being,  seeing  that
it  is  above  the  ken  of  sense  and  human  reason  ?
For  every  thing  to  which  it  may  be  likened
is  a  thousand  times  more  unlike  than  like  it.
Nevertheless,  in  order  to  expel  from  your  ima-
gination figures  by  figures,  I  will  try,  so  far  as


CONCLUSION.  313

is  possible,  to  image  forth  for  you  in  similitudes
these  form-transcending  thoughts,  as  in  truth
they  may  be  termed,  and  thus  conclude  a  long
discourse  in  a  few  words.

Hearken  then.  It  is  said  by  a  learned  doc-
tor that  God,  in  regard  to  His  Godhead,  is  like
a  very  wide  ring,  whose  centre  is  every  where,
and  circumference  nowhere.  Now  picture  to
your  imagination  what  follows.  If  a  stone  is
flung  with  violence  into  the  centre  of  a  sheet
of  still  water,  a  ring  is  formed  in  the  water,  and
this  ring  by  its  own  might  makes  a  second  ring,
and  the  second  makes  a  third;  and  in  proportion
to  the  force  of  the  first  fling  will  be  the  breadth
and  width  of  the  circles ;  and  the  force  of  the
fling  might  be  even  great  enough  to  pass  beyond
the  limit  of  the  water.  Imagine  now  that  the
first  ring  represents  the  infinite  might  of  the
Divine  nature  in  the  Father.  This  produces  a
second  ring  like  it,  according  to  the  Person,  and
this  ring  is  the  Son.  And  the  two  produce  the
third,  which  is  the  Spirit  of  both,  co-eternal  and
co-omnipotent  with  them.  Thus  the  three  cir-
cles signify  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  In
this  deep  abyss,  the  Divine  nature  in  the  Father
is  everlastingly  speaking  forth  and  begetting  the
Word  as  to  the  personality,  and  dwelling  in  Him


314  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

as  to  the  essence — that  self-same  Word,  I  mean,
who  has  taken  upon  Him  human  nature.  If  any
one  wishes  to  picture  this  to  his  imagination,  let
him  figure  to  himself  a  man,  from  the  depths  of
whose  heart  a  form  like  the  man's  own  springs
forth,  yet  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  always  gazing
fixedly  upon  and  returning  back  again  into  him
out  of  whom  he  sprang.  This  spiritual  super-
essential  begetting  of  the  Divine  Word  is  the
full  and  entire  cause  of  the  bringing  forth  of  all
creatures  and  spirits  into  their  natural  state  of
existence.  The  supreme  superessential  Spirit
has  ennobled  man,  by  illuminating  him  with
a  ray  from  His  eternal  Godhead;  and  this  is
God's  image  in  the  rational  soul,  which  also  is
everlasting.  Hence  from  out  the  great  ring,
which  represents  the  eternal  Godhead,  there  flow
forth,  to  carry  on  the  metaphor,  little  rings,  which
may  be  taken  to  signify  the  high  nobility  of
rational  creatures.

Now  there  are  some  persons  who,  to  their
own  hurt,  turn  away  from  this  nobility  of  their
reason,  and,  plastering  over  the  radiant  image
of  God  within  them,  turn  themselves  to  the
bodily  pleasures  of  this  world ;  and  when  they
fancy  that  they  possess  the  joy  which  they  are
pursuing,  stern  death  comes  and  puts  an  end  to


CONCLUSION.  315

them.  But  a  man  who  acts  conformably  to
reason  turns  away  from  the  bright  spark  of  his
soul  to  that  which  is  eternal,  and  out  of  which
the  spark  came  forth;  and  he  gives  all  creatures
their  dismissal,  and  cleaves  to  the  eternal  Truth
alone.

Attend,  likewise,  to  the  right  and  orderly
way  in  which  the  flowing  back  again  of  the
spirit  into  God  should  take  place,  as  set  forth
in  the  following  instruction : — The  first  thing
which  a  man  should  do  is  to  turn  away  entirely
and  with  all  his  might  from  the  pleasures  of  the
world,  and  from  sinful  practices,  to  God,  with
persevering  prayer,  seclusion,  and  virtuous  dis-
creet exercises,  in  order  thus  to  bring  his  body
into  subjection  to  the  spirit.  The  second  thing
is  to  offer  himself  willingly  and  patiently  to  bear
the  countless  multitude  of  contradictions  which
may  come  upon  him  from  God  or  creatures.
The  third  thing  is  to  take  the  sufferings  of
Christ  crucified  as  the  model  on  which  to  form
himself,  and  to  copy  Him  in  His  sweet  teach-
ing, gentle  walk,  and  pure  life,  which  He  pro-
posed to  us  as  our  example,  and  in  this  manner
to  press  onwards  through  Him.  The  fourth  thing
to  be  done  is  to  divest  himself  of  exterior  occu-
pations, and  to  establish  himself  in  a  stillness


316  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

and  repose  of  soul  by  an  energetic  detachment
from  all  things,  as  if  he  were  dead  to  himself,
and  could  not  guide  himself,  and  had  no  other
thought  but  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  Christ
and  His  Heavenly  Father.  To  this  he  should
add  an  humble  bearing  towards  all  men,  whether
friends  or  foes.  After  a  man  has  passed  through
these  exercises,  the  next  point  at  which  he  ar-
rives is,  that  his  outward  senses,  which  until
then  were  much  too  actively  employed  on  ex-
terior objects,  cease  from  action ;  and  his  spirit's
highest  powers,  dying  to  their  natural  opera-
tion, acquire  a  supernatural  sensitiveness.

Here  it  is  that  the  spirit,  having  parted  with
every  jk^tm  ofrft&fcire  which  had  clung  to  it,
presses  ft^ierun^krotkjh  the  ring,  which  signi-
fies line  eteuaft  Godhelraj^nd  arrives  at  spiritual
perfection^  ^nW  suWime$fc health  of  the  spirit
in  iK^iwn  p^fj&ffiont.  doafiKts  in  this:  that
bein^Ii^  freetkfroia£ihe  weiffftfc  of  sin,  it  soars
upwarok  in.  the  naigMrra  GoTL  into  its  divinely
illuminatiji  reason, ^hesgjit  enjfys  a  perpetual
influx  of  nokvenly  consol^fronsi  It  can  now
behold  the  secrefc^elations  o^ftings,  and  inter-
pret them  according  ^Treason  with  true  dis-
crimination, and  it  is  duly  set  free  from  bondage
by  the  Son  in  the  Son.     It  still,  however,  con-


CONCLUSION.  317

tinues  to  view  things  in  their  outflow  from  God,
and  to  contemplate  them  as  existing  each  one  in
its  own  proper  nature.  This  may  be  called  the
transport  of  the  spirit,  for  it  is  now  lifted  up
above  time  and  place,  and  has  passed  away  by
intense  loving  contemplation  into  God.  Now,
he  who  can  clear  a  way  for  himself  still  further,
and  to  whom  God  is  pleased  to  give  great  and
special  help  by  drawing  him  away  mightily  from
creatures,  as  He  did  to  St.  Paul,  and  may  pos-
sibly still  do  to  others,  according  to  what  St.
Bernard  says — this  man  finds  his  created  spirit
seized  upon  by  the  superessential  Spirit,  and
drawn  into  that  which  it  never  could  have  at-
tained to  in  its  own  strength.  This  entry  of  the
spirit  into  God  strips  it  of  all  images,  forms,  and
multiplicity,  and  it  loses  consciousness  of  itself
and  all  things,  and  becomes  merged  with,  the
three  Persons  in 'the-'  abyss  of ;  their  indwelling
simplicity,  and  enjoys  there  its  highest  and
truest  bliss.  Here  all*1  striving  and  seeking
cease,  for  the  beginning  arid  the  end  have  be-
come one,  and  the  spirit,  being  divested  of  itself,
has  become  one  with  them,  as  is  explained  else-
where with  the  help  of  figures.*  But  as  to  how
a  man  can  pass  away  in  this  life,  either  perma-
*  In  the  Treatise  on  Truth.


318  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.

nently  or  transiently,  and  how,  while  he  is  still
in  time,  he  can  be  caught  up  above  time,  more
or  less,  and  be  drawn  out  of  himself  and  trans-
ported into  the  formless  Unity — all  this  I  have
already  set  forth  with  the  necessary  distinctions.
And  now,  daughter,  remember  that  all  these
figures  and  images,  with  their  interpretations,
are  as  remote  from  and  unlike  the  formless
Truth  as  a  black  Moor  is  unlike  the  beautiful
sun ;  and  this  comes  from  the  formless  and  in-
comprehensible simplicity  of  the  Truth.

The  maiden  looked  upwards,  and  said: —
Praised  be  the  eternal  Truth  for  the  beautiful
instruction  which  I  have  received  from  your
wise  words  concerning  the  first  entry  of  a  be-
ginner into  the  interior  life,  the  hindrances
which  he  will  meet  with  as  he  advances,  the
things  which  he  will  have  to  avoid,  his  suffer-
ings and  his  exercises,  as  well  as  the  hidden
mystery  of  the  pure  and  absolute  Truth,  accord-
ing to  the  good  distinctions  which  you  have
laid  down.     Glory  be  to  God  eternally  for  this.

Now,  when  this  holy  maiden  had  been  thus
nobly  guided  by  her  spiritual  father,  with  the
help  of  good  distinctions  and  in  accordance  with
the  whole  Christian  truth,  along  all  the  ways
which  end  in  supreme  bliss,  and  when  she  had


CONCLUSION.  319

well  mastered  it,  as  far  as  is  possible  in  this  life,
he  wrote  to  her  in  his  last  letter  thus : — Come
now,  daughter;  give  creatures  their  dismissal,
and  leave  off  thy  questionings.  Give  ear,  and
listen  for  thyself  to  what  God  will  say  within
thee.  Thou  mayest  well  rejoice  that  thou  hast
obtained  that  which  to  many  a  one  is  wanting.
Painfully  as  thou  hast  earned  it,  all  this  is  now
past  and  over.  Henceforth  there  is  nothing
more  for  thee  to  do  except  to  possess  Divine
peace  in  still  repose,  and  joyfully  to  await  the
moment  when  thou  shalt  pass  away  from  this
life  into  the  fulness  of  everlasting  bliss.

It  came  to  pass  soon  afterwards  that  the  holy
maiden  died;  and  her  end  was  a  blessed  one,
even  as  her  life  had  been.*  After  her  death  she
appeared  in  a  vision  to  her  spiritual  father  clad
in  snow-white  garments,  shining  with  a  dazzling
brightness,  and  full  of  heavenly  joy.  She  drew
nigh  to  him,  and  showed  him  in  what  noble
fashion  she  had  passed  away  into  the  pure  God-
head. He  saw  and  heard  this  with  delight,  and
the  vision  filled  his  soul  with  heavenly  consola-
tion. When  he  came  to  himself  again,  he
sighed  deeply,  and  thought  within  himself: —

*  Elizabeth  Stiiglin  died  in  the  convent  of  Thoss,  near
Winterthur,  A.d.  1360,  five  years  before  her  spiritual  father.


320  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  HENRY  SUSO.


Ah,  God!  how  blessed  is  the  man  who  strives,
after  Thee  alone !  He  may  well  be  content  t(l
suffer  whose  sufferings  Thou  rewardest  thus.V^
God  help  us  to  rejoice  in  this  maiden  and  in
all  His  dear  friends,  and  to  enjoy  His  Divine
countenance  eternally.     Amen.


THE  END.


wanton:

ROBSON  ASD  AD*,  UKK.VT  SOUTHERN  PBINTIUG  WORKS,
I'ASCSAS  BO  AD,  K.W.


B  765  .S74  A313  1865  SMC

Seuse,  Heinrich,

1295-1366.
The  1  i  f e  of  B  lessed

Henry  Suso  /
AXF-3903
