Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series (D.T. Suzuki, 1927)
==========================================================
Suzuki's 1927 Essays in Zen Buddhism — the book that introduced Zen to the West; the foundation of all Western Zen literature. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Buddhism 


“Suzuki's works on Zen Buddhism are among the best 
contributions to the knowledge of living Buddhism.” 


Carl Jung 


A, 


i. 


i 


Pree > UO ZU K I 


m 
" 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 


httos://archive.org/details/isbn_9780285638679 


JUN 7 2016 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


(First Series) 


D.T. SUZUKL purr 


Foreword by Christmas Humphreys 


Souvenir Press 


EMMINGe NAR mrmrin tiemapy 
errueGuals PUBLIC LIBRARY 


Copyright © The Buddhist Society Trust, 1927 
Reprinted with permission from The Buddhist Society Trust, London 


This edition published in Great Britain in 2010 by Souvenir Press Ltd 
43 Great Russell Street, London WC1B 3PD 


The right of D.T. Suzuki to be identified as the 
author of this work has been asserted in accordance with 
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without the prior 


permission of the Copyright owner. 


ISBN 9780285638679 


Printed and bound in Great Britain by CPI Bookmarque, Croydon 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 


Essay I 
INTRODUCTION 


Essay IT 


ZEN AS CHINESE INTERPRETATION OF THE DOCTRINE 
OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


Essay III 
ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


Essay IV 
History oF ZEN BuDDHISM FROM BODHIDHARMA 
To Hul-Nénc (YENO) 


Essay V 
On SATOoRI—THE REVELATION OF A NEw TRUTH IN 
ZEN BUDDHISM 


Essay VI 
Practica Metuops OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


Essay VII 
Tue MeEpITaTION HALL AND THE IDEALS OF THE 
MonkiIsH DISCIPLINE 


Essay VII 
THe TEN Cow-HErpInG PicrureEs 


INDEX 


PAGE 


163 


229 


267 


314 


363 
377 


PLATE 
PLATE 
PLATE 
PLATE 
PLATE 
PLATE 


PLATE 


PLATE 


PLATE 


PLATE 


Vill 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


(Following page 376) 


LooKING FOR THE Cow 

SEEING THE TRACES OF THE Cow 
SEEING THE Cow 

CATCHING THE Cow 

HERDING THE Cow 

Cominc HoME oN THE Cow’s BAcK 


THE Cow ForcortTen, LEAVING THE MAN 
ALONE 


Tue Cow AND THE MAN BotH GONE Our 
oF SIGHT 


RETURNING TO THE ORIGIN, BACK TO THE 
SouRCcE 


ENTERING THE CITY WITH BLISS-BESTOW- 
InG HaAnpbs 


PREFACE 


see most fruitful growth of Buddhism in the Far East 
has resulted in the development of Zen and Shin. Zen 
attained its maturity in China and Shin in Japan. The 
vigour and vitality which Buddhism still has after more 
than two thousand years of history will be realized when 
one comes in contact with these two branches of Buddhism. 
The one appeals to the inmost religious consciousness of 
mankind, while the other touches the intellectual and 
practical aspects of the Oriental mind, which is more in- 
tuitive than discursive, more mystical than logical. If Zen 
is the ultra ‘self-power’ wing of Buddhism, Shin represents 
the other extreme wing known as the ‘other-power’, and 
these two extremes are synthesized in the enlightened 
Buddha-consciousness. 

Since the publication of my short note on Zen Buddhism 
in the Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1907, nothing of im- 
portance has been published in English on the subject 
except Professor Kwaiten Nukariya’s Religion of the Samurai, 
1913. In fact, even in Japanese or Chinese, this branch of 
Buddhism has received very slight attention from modern 
writers of Buddhism. This is due to the peculiar difficulties 
which accompany the study of it. The ‘Goroku’ (sayings) 
is the only literary form in which Zen expresses itself; and 
to understand it requires some special practical training in 
Zen, for mere knowledge of the Chinese, classical and 
historical, is far from being enough; even with the masterly 
understanding of the philosophy of general Buddhism, Zen 
is found quite hard to fathom. Some of such scholars some- 
times try to explain the truth and development of Zen, but 
they sadly fail to do justice to the subject. 

On the other hand, the Zen masters so called are unable 
to present their understanding in the light of modern 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


thought. Their most intellectually productive years are 
spent in the Meditation Hall, and when they successfully 
graduate from it they are looked up to as adepts thoroughly 
versed in the ko-ans, So far so good; but, unfortunately 
from the scholarly point of view, they remain contented 
with this, and do not show any lively intellectual interest 
in the psychology and philosophy of Zen. Thus Zen is left 
to lie quietly sealed up in the ‘Sayings’ of the masters and 
in the technical study of the koans; it is thus incapacitated 
to walk out of the seclusion of the cloisters. 

Of course, great mistake it would be if one should ever 
take the notion even for a moment that Zen could be 
mastered from its philosophical presentation or its psy- 
chological description ; but this ought not to mean that Zen 
is not to be intelligently approached or to be made some- 
what accessible by our ordinary means of reasoning. I need 
not mention that my attempts in the following pages are 
anything but adequate for the rational treatment of the 
subject. But as a tentative experiment to present Zen from 
our common-sense point of view and as a direct lineage of 
Buddhist faith as first proclaimed, or rather realized, by the 
Buddha, I hope I have worked towards removing some of 
the difficulties usually besetting us in the mastery of Zen 
thought. How far I have succeeded or how utterly I have 
failed—this is naturally for the reader to judge. 

The book is a collection of the Essays originally published 
in The Eastern Buddhist, except one on the ‘History of Zen 
Buddhism’ which was written specially for this volume; but 
all of them have been thoroughly revised and in some parts 
entirely rewritten and new chapters added. The book will 
be followed by a second series of Essays before long, in 
which some more of the important points in the con- 
stitution of Zen will be treated. 

The publication of these Essays in book form is princi- 
pally due to the most liberal encouragement, both material 
and moral, of Mr. Yakichi Ataka, of Osaka, who is an old 
friend of the author’s and who has not forgotten the pledge 
half seriously and half dreamily made in our youthful days. 


PREFACE 


The author also owes a great deal to his wife in the pre- 
paration and revision of the MS., without which the book 
would have shown many more imperfections than it does 
now in various ways. 

Lastly, in sending this humble work, not written in the 
author’s native tongue, out to the world, he cannot help 
thinking of his late teacher in Zen, Soyen Shaku, of 
Engakuji, Kamakura, with regret that his life had not been 
spared for several years yet, not only for the sake of 
Japanese Buddhism but for many of his lamenting friends. 
This is the seventh autumn for the maple-trees to scatter 
their crimson leaves over his grave at Matsuga-oka. Might 
his spirit not for once be awakened from deep meditation 
and criticize the book now before the reader! 

Datsetz TErrARo Suzuki. 
Kyoto, October, 1926. 


EDITOR’S FOREWORD 


[Deets TEITARO SuZUKI, D.LITT., Professor of 
Buddhist Philosophy in the Otani University, Kyoto, was 
born in 1869. He is probably now the greatest living 
authority on Buddhist philosophy, and is certainly the 
greatest authority on Zen Buddhism. His major works in 
English on the subject of Buddhism number a dozen or 
more, and of his works in Japanese as yet unknown to 
the West there are at least eighteen. He is, moreover, as 
a chronological bibliography of books on Zen in English 
clearly shows, the pioneer teacher of the subject outside 
Japan, for except for Kaiten Nukariya’s Religion of the 
Samurai (Luzac and Co., 1913) nothing was known of 
Zen as a living experience, save to the readers of The 
Eastern Buddhist (1921-1939) until the publication of 
Essays in Ken Buddhism (Volume I) in 1927. 

Dr. Suzuki writes with authority. Not only has he studied 
original works in Sanskrit, Pali, Chinese and Japanese, but 
he has an up-to-date knowledge of Western thought in 
German and French as well as in the English, which he 
speaks and writes so fluently. He is, moreover, more than 
a scholar: he is a Buddhist. Though not a priest of any 
Buddhist sect, he is honoured in every temple in Japan, for 
his knowledge of spiritual things, as all who have sat at his 
feet bear witness, is direct and profound. When he speaks 
of the higher stages of consciousness he speaks as a man 
who dwells therein, and the impression he makes on those 
who enter the fringes of his mind is that of a man who seeks 
for the intellectual symbols wherewith to describe a state 
of awareness which lies indeed ‘beyond the intellect’. 

To those unable to sit at the feet of the Master his 
writings must be a substitute. All these, however, were out 
of print in England by 1940, and all remaining stocks in 
Japan were destroyed in the fire which consumed three 


EDITOR’S FOREWORD 


quarters of Tokyo in 1945. When, therefore, I reached 
Japan in 1946, I arranged with the author for the Buddhist 
Society, London—my wife and myself as its nominees— 
to begin the publication of his Collected Works, reprinting 
the old favourites, and printing as fast as possible transla- 
tions of the many new works which the Professor, self- 
immured in his house at Kyoto, had written during the 
war. 

This undertaking, however, was beyond the powers of 
the Buddhist Society, and we therefore secured the assist- 
ance of Rider and Co., who, backed by the vast resources 
of the House of Hutchinson, can honour the needs of such a 
considerable task. 

Of Zen itself I need say nothing here, but the increasing 
sale of books on the subject, such as The Spirit of Ken by 
Alan Watts (Murray) and the series of original transla- 
tions of Chinese Zen Scriptures and other works published 
by the Buddhist Society, prove that the interest of the 
West is rising rapidly. Zen, however, is a subject ex- 
tremely easy to misunderstand, and it is therefore important 
that the words of a qualified Master should come readily 
to hand. 

CuRIisTMAS HUMPHREYS 
President of the Buddhist Society, London 


INTRODUCTION! 


Les in its essence is the art of seeing into the nature of 
one’s own being, and it points the way from bondage to 
freedom. By making us drink right from the fountain of 
life, it liberates us from all the yokes under which we finite 
beings are usually suffering in this world. We can say that 
Zen liberates all the energies properly and naturally 
stored in each of us, which are in ordinary circumstances 
cramped and distorted so that they find no adequate 
channel for activity. 

This body of ours is something like an electric battery 
in which a mysterious power latently lies. When this power 
is not properly brought into operation, it either grows 
mouldy and withers away or is warped and expresses itself 
abnormally. It is the object of Zen, therefore, to save us 
from going crazy or being crippled. This is what I mean by 
freedom, giving free play to all the creative and benevolent 
impulses inherently lying in our hearts. Generally, we are 
blind to this fact, that we are in possession of all the 
necessary faculties that will make us happy and loving 
towards one another. All the struggles that we see around 
us come from this ignorance. Zen, therefore, wants us to 
open a ‘third eye’, as Buddhists call it, to the hitherto un- 
dreamed-of region shut away from us through our own 
ignorance. When the cloud of ignorance disappears, the 
infinity of the heavens is manifested, where we see for the 
first time into the nature of our own being. We now know 
the signification of life, we know that it is not blind striving 
nor is it a mere display of brutal forces, but that while we 
know not definitely what the ultimate purport of life is, 


1 One of the popular lectures prepared by the author for students of 
Buddhism, rg1t. It was first published in The Eastern Buddhist, under the 
title, ‘Zen Buddhism as Purifier and Liberator of Life’. Since it treats of 
Zen in its general aspect, I have decided to make it serve as Introduction 
to this book. 


4) 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


there is something in it that makes us feel infinitely blessed 
in the living of it and remain quite contented with it in all 
its evolution, without raising questions or entertaining 
pessimistic doubts. 

When we are full of vitality and not yet awakened to the 
knowledge of life, we cannot comprehend the seriousness of 
all the conflicts involved in it which are apparently for the 
moment in a state of quiescence. But sooner or later the 
time will come when we have to face life squarely and solve 
its most perplexing and most pressing riddles. Says Con- 
fucius, ‘At fifteen my mind was directed to study, and at 
thirty I knew where to stand.’ This is one of the wisest 
sayings of the Chinese sage. Psychologists will all agree to 
this statement of his ; for, generally speaking, fifteen is about 
the age youth begins to look around seriously and inquire 
into the meaning of life. All the spiritual powers until now 
securely hidden in the subconscious part of the mind break 
out almost simultaneously. And when this breaking out is 
too precipitous and violent, the mind may lose its balance 
more or less permanently ; in fact, so many cases of nervous 
prostration reported during adolescence are chiefly due to 
this loss of the mental equilibrium. In most cases the effect 
is not very grave and the crisis may pass without leaving 
deep marks. But in some characters, either through their 
inherent tendencies or on account of the influence of en- 
vironment upon their plastic constitution, the spiritual 
awakening stirs them up to the very depths of their per- 
sonality. This is the time you will be asked to choose 
between the ‘Everlasting No’ and the ‘Everlasting Yea’. 
This choosing is what Confucius means by ‘study’; it is 
not studying the classics, but deeply delving into the 
mysteries of life. 

Normally, the outcome of the struggle is the ‘Everlasting 
Yea’, or ‘Let thy will be done’; for life is after all a form of 
affirmation, however negatively it might be conceived by 
the pessimists. But we cannot deny the fact that there are 
many things in this world which will turn our too sensitive 
minds towards the other direction and make us exclaim with 


14 


INTRODUCTION 


Andreyev in The Life of Man: ‘I curse everything that you 
have given. I curse the day on which I was born. I curse 
the day on which I shall die. I curse the whole of my 
life. I fling everything back at your cruel face, senseless 
Fate! Be accursed, be forever accursed! With my curses I 
conquer you. What else can you do to me? . . . With my 
last thought I will shout into your asinine ears: Be accursed, 
be accursed!’ This is a terrible indictment of life, it is a 
complete negation of life, it is a most dismal picture of the 
destiny of man on earth. ‘Leaving no trace’ is quite true, 
for we know nothing of our future except that we all pass 
away, including the very earth from which we have come. 
There are certainly things justifying pessimism. 

Life, as most of us live it, is suffering. There is no denying 
the fact. As long as life is a form of struggle, it cannot be 
anything but pain. Does not a struggle mean the impact 
of two conflicting forces, each trying to get the upper hand 
of the other? If the battle is lost, the outcome is death, and 
death is the fearsomest thing in the world. Even when 
death is conquered, one is left alone, and the loneliness is 
sometimes more unbearable than the struggle itself. One 
may not be conscious of all this, and may go on indulging 
in those momentary pleasures that are afforded by the 
senses. But this being unconscious does not in the least alter 
the facts of life. However insistently the blind may deny the 
existence of the sun, they cannot annihilate it. The tropical 
heat will mercilessly scorch them, and if they do not take 
proper care they will all be wiped away from the surface 
of the earth. 

The Buddha was perfectly right when he propounded 
his ‘Fourfold Noble Truth’, the first of which is that life is 
pain. Did not everyone of us come to this world screaming 
and in a way protesting? To come out into cold and pro- 
hibitive surroundings after a soft, warm motherly womb 
was surely a painful incident, to say the least. Growth is 
always attended with pain. Teething is more or less a pain- 
ful process. Puberty is usually accompanied by a mental as 
well as a physical disturbance. The growth of the organism 


15 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


called society is also marked with painful cataclysms, and 
we are at present witnessing one of its birth-throes. We may 
calmly reason and say that this is all inevitable, that inas- 
much as every reconstruction means the destruction of the 
old regime, we cannot help going through a painful opera- 
tion. But this cold intellectual analysis does not alleviate 
whatever harrowing feelings we have to undergo. The pain 
heartlessly inflicted on our nerves is ineradicable. Life is, 
after all arguing, a painful struggle. 

This, however, is providential. For the more you suffer 
the deeper grows your character, and with the deepening 
of your character you read the more penetratingly into the 
secrets of life. All great artists, all great religious leaders, 
and all great social reformers have come out of the intensest 
struggles which they fought bravely, quite frequently in 
tears and with bleeding hearts. Unless you eat your bread 
in sorrow, you cannot taste of real life. Mencius is right 
when he says that when Heaven wants to perfect a great 
man it tries him in every possible way until he comes out 
triumphantly from all his painful experiences. 

To me Oscar Wilde seems always posing or striving for 
an effect; he may be a great artist, but there is something 
in him that turns me away from him. Yet he exclaims in his 
De Profundis: ‘During the last few months I have, after 
terrible difficulties and struggles, been able to comprehend 
some of the lessons hidden in the heart of pain. Clergymen 
and people who use phrases without wisdom sometimes 
talk of suffering as a mystery. It is really a revelation. One 
discerns things one never discerned before. One approaches 
the whole of history from a different standpoint.’ You will 
observe here what sanctifying effects his prison life pro- 
duced on his character. If he had had to go through a 
similar trial in the beginning of his career, he might have 
been able to produce far greater works than those we have 
of him at present. 

We are too ego-centred. The ego-shell in which we live 
is the hardest thing to outgrow. We seem to carry it all the 
time from childhood up to the time we finally pass away. 


16 


INTRODUCTION 


We are, however, given many chances to break through this 
shell, and the first and greatest of them is when we reach 
adolescence. This is the first time the ego really comes to 
recognize the ‘other’. I mean the awakening of sexual love. 
An ego, entire and undivided, now begins to feel a sort of 
split in itself. Love hitherto dormant deep in his heart lifts 
its head and: causes a great commotion in it. For the love 
now stirred demands at once the assertion of the ego and its 
annihilation. Love makes the ego lose itself in the object it 
loves, and yet at the same time it wants to have the object 
as its own. This is a contradiction, and a great tragedy of 
life. This elemental feeling must be one of the divine 
agencies whereby man is urged to advance in his upward 
walk. God gives tragedies to perfect man. The greatest bulk 
of literature ever produced in this world is but the harping 
on the same string of love, and we never seem to grow 
weary of it. But this is not the topic we are concerned with 
here. What I want to emphasize in this connection is this: 
that through the awakening of love we get a glimpse into 
the infinity of things, and that this glimpse urges youth to 
Romanticism or to Rationalism according to his tempera- 
ment and environment and education. 

When the ego-shell is broken and the ‘other’ is taken 
into its own body, we can say that the ego has denied itself 
or that the ego has taken its first steps towards the infinite. 
Religiously, here ensues an intense struggle between the 
finite and the infinite, between the intellect and a higher 
power, or, more plainly, between the flesh and the spirit. 
This is the problem of problems that has driven many a 
youth into the hands of Satan. When a grown-up man 
looks back to these youthful days he cannot but feel a sort 
of shudder going through his entire frame. The struggle to 
be fought in sincerity may go on up to the age of thirty, 
when Confucius states that he knew where to stand. The 
religious consciousness is now fully awakened, and all the 
possible ways of escaping from the struggle or bringing it 
to an end are most earnestly sought in every direction. 
Books are read, lectures are attended, sermons are greedily 


B 17 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


taken in, and various religious exercises or disciplines are 
tried. And naturally Zen too comes to be inquired into. 


How does Zen solve the problem of problems? 

In the first place, Zen proposes its solution by directly 
appealing to facts of personal experience and not to book- 
knowledge. The nature of one’s own being where appar- 
ently rages the struggle between the finite and the infinite 
is to be grasped by a higher faculty than the intellect. For 
Zen says it is the latter that first made us raise the question 
which it could not answer by itself, and that therefore it is 
to be put aside to make room for something higher and 
more enlightening. For the intellect has a peculiarly dis- 
quieting quality in it. Though it raises questions enough to 
disturb the serenity of the mind, it is too frequently unable 
to give satisfactory answers to them. It upsets the blissful 
peace of ignorance and yet it does not restore the former 
state of things by offering something else. Because it points 
out ignorance, it is often considered illuminating, whereas 
the fact is that it disturbs, not necessarily always bringing 
light on its path. It is not final, it waits for something higher 
than itself for the solution of all the questions it will raise 
regardless of consequences. If it were able to bring a new 
order into the disturbance and settle it once for all, there 
would have been no need for philosophy after it had been 
first systematized by a great thinker, by an Aristotle or by a 
Hegel. But the history of thought proves that each new 
structure raised by a man of extraordinary intellect is sure 
to be pulled down by the succeeding ones. This constant 
pulling down and building up is all right as far as philosophy 
itself is concerned; for the inherent nature of the intellect, 
as I take it, demands it and we cannot put a stop to the 
progress of philosophical inquiries any more than to our 
breathing. But when it comes to the question of life itself 
we cannot wait for the ultimate solution to be offered by the 
intellect, even if it could do so. We cannot suspend even for 
a moment our life-activity for philosophy to unravel its 
mysteries. Let the mysteries remain as they are, but live 


18 


INTROD UCTION 


we must. The hungry cannot wait until a complete analysis 
of food is obtained and the nourishing value of each element 
is determined. For the dead the scientific knowledge of food 
will be of no use whatever. Zen therefore does not rely on 
the intellect for the solution of its deepest problems. 

By personal experience it is meant to get at the fact at 
first hand and not through any intermediary, whatever this 
may be. Its favourite analogy is: to point at the moon 
a finger is needed, but woe to those who take the finger 
for the moon; a basket is welcome to carry our fish home, 
but when the fish are safely on the table why should we 
eternally bother ourselves with the basket? Here stands the 
fact, and let us grasp it with the naked hands lest it should 
slip away—this is what Zen proposes to do. As nature 
abhors a vacuum, Zen abhors anything coming between 
the fact and ourselves. According to Zen there is no 
struggle in the fact itself such as between the finite and the 
infinite, between the flesh and the spirit. These are idle 
distinctions fictitiously designed by the intellect for its own 
interest. Those who take them too seriously or those who 
try to read them into the very fact of life are those who take 
the finger for the moon. When we are hungry we eat; when 
we are sleepy we lay ourselves down; and where does the 
infinite or the finite come in here? Are not we complete 
in ourselves and each in himself? Life as it is lived suffices. 
It is only when the disquieting intellect steps in and tries 
to murder it that we stop to live and imagine ourselves to 
be short of or in something. Let the intellect alone, it has its 
usefulness in its proper sphere, but let it not interfere with 
the flowing of the life-stream. If you are at all tempted to 
look into it, do so while letting it flow. The fact of flowing 
must under no circumstances be arrested or meddled with; 
for the moment your hands are dipped into it, its trans- 
parency is disturbed, it ceases to reflect your image which 
you have had from the very beginning and will continue 
to have to the end of time. 

Almost corresponding to the ‘Four Maxims’ of the 
Nichiren Sect, Zen has its own four statements: 


oe) 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘A special transmission outside the Scriptures ; 
No dependence upon words and letters ; 

Direct pointing to the soul of man; 

Seeing into one’s nature and the attainment of 


Buddhahood.’! 


This sums up all that is claimed by Zen as religion. Of 
course we must not forget that there is a historical back- 
ground to this bold pronunciamento. At the time of the 
introduction of Zen into China, most of the Buddhists 
were addicted to the discussion of highly metaphysical 
questions, or satisfied with the merely observing of the 
ethical precepts laid down by the Buddha or with the 
leading of a lethargic life entirely absorbed in the con- 
templation of the evanescence of things worldly. They all 
missed apprehending the great fact of life itself, which 
flows altogether outside of these vain exercises of the in- 
tellect or of the imagination. Bodhidharma and _ his 
successors recognized this pitiful state of affairs. Hence 
their proclamation of “The Four Great Statements’ of Zen 
as above cited. In a word, they mean that Zen has its own 
way of pointing to the nature of one’s own being, and that 
when this is done one attains to Buddhahood, in which 
all the contradictions and disturbances caused by the 
intellect are entirely harmonized in a unity of higher 
order. 

For this reason Zen never explains but indicates, it does 
not appeal to circumlocution, nor does it generalize. It 
always deals with facts, concrete and tangible. Logically 
considered, Zen may be full of contradictions and repeti- 
tions. But as it stands above all things, it goes serenely on 
its own way. As a Zen master aptly puts it, ‘carrying his 
home-made cane on the shoulder, he goes right on among 
the mountains one rising above another.’ It does not 
challenge logic, it simply walks its path of facts, leaving 
all the rest to their own fates. It is only when logic neglect- 
ing its proper functions tries to step into the track of Zen 


* See also the Essay entitled ‘History of Zen Buddhism’, p. 163 ff. 
20 


INTRODUCTION 


that it loudly proclaims its principles and forcibly drives 
out the intruder. Zen is not an enemy of anything. There 
is no reason why it should antagonize the intellect which 
may sometimes be utilized for the cause of Zen itself. To 
show some examples of Zen’s direct dealing with the funda- 
mental facts of existence, the following are selected : 

Rinzai! (Lin-chi) once delivered a sermon, saying : ‘Over 
a mass of reddish flesh there sits a true man who has no 
title ; he is all the time coming in and out from your sense- 
organs. If you have not yet testified to the fact, Look! 
Look!’ A monk came forward and asked, ‘Who is this true 
man of no title?’ Rinzai came right down from his straw 
chair and taking hold of the monk exclaimed: ‘Speak! 
Speak !? The monk remained irresolute, not knowing what 
to say, whereupon the master, letting him go, remarked, 
‘What worthless stuff is this true man of no title!’ Rinzai 
then went straight back to his room. 

Rinzai was noted for his ‘rough’ and direct treatment of 
his disciples. He never liked those roundabout dealings 
which generally characterized the methods of a lukewarm 
master. He must have got this directness from his own 
teacher Obaku (Huang-po), by whom he was struck 
three times for asking what the fundamental principle of 
Buddhism was. It goes without saying that Zen has nothing 
to do with mere striking or roughly shaking the questioner. 
If you take this as constituting the essentials of Zen, you 
would commit the same gross error as one who took the 
finger for the moon. As in everything else, but most par- 
ticularly in Zen, all its outward manifestations or demon- 
strations must never be regarded as final. They just in- 
dicate the way where to look for the facts. Therefore these 
indicators are important, we cannot do well without them. 
But orice caught in them, which are like entangling meshes, 
we are doomed ; for Zen can never be comprehended. Some 
may think Zen is always trying to catch you in the net of 
logic or by the snare of words. If you once slip your steps, 
you are bound for eternal damnation, you will never get to 

1 The founder of the Rinzai School of Zen Buddhism, died 867. 


21 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


freedom, for which your hearts are so burning. Therefore, 
Rinzai grasps with his naked hands what is directly pre- 
sented to us all. If a third eye of ours is opened undimmed, 
we shall know in a most unmistakable manner where 
Rinzai is driving us. We have first of all to get into the very 
spirit of the master and interview the inner man right there. 
No amount of wordy explanations will ever lead us into the 
nature of our own selves. The more you explain, the further 
it runs away from you. It is like trying to get hold of your 
own shadow. You run after it and it runs with you at the 
identical rate of speed. When you realize it, you read deep 
into the spirit of Rinzai or Obaku, and their real kind- 
heartedness will begin to be appreciated. 

Ummon! (Yiin-mén) was another great master of Zen 
at the end of the T‘ang dynasty. He had to lose one of his 
legs in order to get an insight into the life-principle from 
which the whole universe takes rise, including his own 
humble existence. He had to visit his teacher Bokuju 
(Mu-chou), who was a senior disciple of Rinzai under 
Obaku, three times before he was admitted to see him. The 
master asked, ‘Who are you?’ ‘I am Bun-yen (Wén-yen),’ 
answered the monk. (Bun-yen was his name, while Ummon 
was the name of the monastery where he was settled later.) 
When the truth-seeking monk was allowed to go inside the 
gate, the master took hold of him by the chest and de- 
manded: ‘Speak! Speak!’ Ummon hesitated, whereupon 
the master pushed him out of the gate, saying, ‘Oh, you 
good-for-nothing fellow !’? While the gate was hastily shut, 
one of Ummon’s legs was caught and broken. The intense 
pain resulting from this apparently awakened the poor 
fellow to the greatest fact of life. He was no more a solicitous, 
pity-begging monk; the realization now gained paid more 
than enough for the loss of his leg. He was not, however, 
a solitary instance in this respect, there were many such 
in the history of Zen who were willing to sacrifice a part 
of the body for the truth. Says Confucius, ‘If a man under- 


The founder of the Ummon School of Zen Buddhism, died 996. 
? Literally, an old clumsy gimlet of the Ch‘in dynasty. 


22 


INTRODUCTION 


stands the Tao in the morning, it is well with him even when 
he dies in the evening.’ Some would feel indeed that truth 
is of more value than mere living, mere vegetative or 
animal living. But in the world, alas, there are so many 
living corpses wallowing in the mud of ignorance and 
sensuality. 

This is where Zen is most difficult to understand. Why 
this sarcastic vituperation? Why this seeming heartlessness? 
What fault had Ummon to deserve the loss of his leg? He 
was a poor truth-seeking monk, earnestly anxious to get 
enlightenment from the master. Was it really necessary 
for the latter from his way of understanding Zen to shut 
him out three times, and when the gate was half opened to 
close it again so violently, so inhumanly? Was this the truth 
of Buddhism Ummon was so eager to get? But the outcome 
of all this singularly was what was desired by both of them. 
As to the master, he was satisfied to see the disciple attain 
an insight into the secrets of his being; and as regards the 
disciple he was most grateful for all that was done to him. 
Evidently, Zen is the most irrational, inconceivable thing 
in the world. And this is why I said before that Zen was not 
subject to logical analysis or to intellectual treatment. It 
must be directly and personally experienced by each of us 
in his inner spirit. Just as two stainless mirrors reflect each 
other, the fact and our own spirits must stand facing each 
other with no intervening agents. When this is done we are 
able to seize upon the living, pulsating fact itself. 

Freedom is an empty word until then. The first object 
was to escape the bondage in which all finite beings find 
themselves, but if we do not cut asunder the very chain 
of ignorance with which we are bound hands and feet, 
where shall we look for deliverance? And this chain of 
ignorance is wrought of nothing else but the intellect and 
sensuous infatuation, which cling tightly to every thought 
we may have, to every feeling we may entertain. They are 
hard to get rid of, they are like wet clothes as is aptly 
expressed by the Zen masters. ‘We are born free and equal.’ 
Whatever this may mean socially or politically, Zen 


23 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


maintains that it is absolutely true in the spiritual domain, 
and that all the fetters and manacles we seem to be carrying 
about ourselves are put on later through ignorance of the 
true condition of existence. All the treatments, sometimes 
literary and sometimes physical, which are most liberally 
and kindheartedly given by the masters to inquiring souls, 
are intended to get them back to the original state of free- 
dom. And this is never really realized until we once per- 
sonally experience it through our own efforts, independent 
of any ideational representation. The ultimate standpoint 
of Zen, therefore, is that we have been led astray through 
ignorance to find a split in our own being, that there was 
from the very beginning no need for a struggle between 
the finite and the infinite, that the peace we are seeking so 
eagerly after has been there all the time. Sotoba (Su 
Tung-p‘o), the noted Chinese poet and statesman, ex- 
presses the idea in the following verse: 


‘Misty rain on Mount Lu, 

And waves surging in Che-chiang ; 
When you have not yet been there, 
Many a regret surely you have; 

But once there and homeward you wend, 
And how matter-of-fact things look! 
Misty rain on Mount Lu, 

And waves surging in Che-chiang.’ 


This is what is also asserted by Seigen Ishin (Ch‘ing- 
yiian Wei-hsin), according to whom, ‘Before a man 
studies Zen, to him mountains are mountains and waters 
are waters; after he gets an insight into the truth of Zen 
through the instruction of a good master, mountains to 
him are not mountains and waters are not waters; but after 
this when he really attains to the abode of rest, mountains 
are once more mountains and waters are waters.’ 

Bokuju (Mu-chou), who lived in the latter half of the 
ninth century, was once asked, ‘We have to dress and eat 
every day, and how can we escape from all that?’ The 
master replied, ‘We dress, we eat.’ ‘I do not understand 


24 


INTRODUCTION 


you,’ said the questioner. ‘If you don’t understand put 
your dress on and eat your food.’ 

Zen always deals in concrete facts and does not indulge in 
generalizations. And I do not wish to add unnecessary legs 
to the painted snake, but if I try to waste my philosophical 
comments on Bokuju, I may say this: We are all finite, we 
cannot live out of time and space; inasmuch as we are 
earth-created, there is no way to grasp the infinite, how can 
we deliver ourselves from the limitations of existence? 
This is perhaps the idea put in the first question of the monk, 
to which the master replies : Salvation must be sought in the 
finite itself, there is nothing infinite apart from finite things ; 
if you seek something transcendental, that will cut you off 
from this world of relativity, which is the same thing as the 
annihilation of yourself. You do not want salvation at the 
cost of your own existence. If so, drink and eat, and find 
your way of freedom in this drinking and eating. This was 
too much for the questioner, who, therefore, confessed him- 
self as not understanding the meaning of the master. There- 
fore, the latter continued : Whether you understand or not, 
just the same go on living in the finite, with the finite; for 
you die if you stop eating and keeping yourself warm on 
account of your aspiration for the infinite. No matter how 
you struggle, Nirvana is to be sought in the midst of Sarh- 
sara (birth-and-death). Whether an enlightened Zen master 
or an ignoramus of the first degree, neither can escape the 
so-called laws of nature. When the stomach is empty, both 
are hungry; when it snows, both have to put on an extra 
flannel. I do not, however, mean that they are both 
material existences, but they are what they are, regardless 
of their conditions of spiritual development. As the Buddhist 
scriptures have it, the darkness of the cave itself turns into 
enlightenment when a torch of spiritual insight burns. It 
is not that a thing called darkness is first taken out and 
another thing known by the name of enlightenment is 
carried in later, but that enlightenment and darkness are 
substantially one and the same thing from the very be- 
ginning; the change from the one to the other has taken 


m8) 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


place only inwardly or subjectively. Therefore the finite is 
the infinite, and vice versa. These are not two separate things, 
though we are compelled to conceive them so, intellectu- 
ally. This is the idea, logically interpreted, perhaps con- 
tained in Bokuju’s answer given to the monk. The mistake 
consists in our splitting into two what is really and abso- 
lutely one. Is not life one as we live it, which we cut to 
pieces by recklessly applying the murderous knife of in- 
tellectual surgery? 

On being requested by the monks to deliver a sermon, 
Hyakujo Nehan (Pai-chang Nieh-p‘an) told them to work 
on the farm, after which he would give them a talk on the 
great subject of Buddhism. They did as they were told, and 
came to the master for a sermon, when the latter, without 
saying a word, merely extended his open arms towards the 
monks. Perhaps there is after all nothing mysterious in Zen. 
Everything is open to your full view. If you eat your food 
and keep yourself cleanly dressed and work on the farm 
to raise your rice or vegetables, you are doing all that is 
required of you on this earth, and the infinite is realized in 
you. How realized? When Bokuju was asked what Zen 
was he recited a Sanskrit phrase from a Sitra, ‘Mahapraj- 
faparamita!’? (in Japanese, Makahannyaharamit!). The 
inquirer acknowledged his inability to understand the 


purport of the strange phrase, and the master put a com- 
ment on it, saying: 


“My robe is all worn out after so many years’ usage. 
And parts of it in shreds loosely hanging have been 
blown away to the clouds.’ 


Is the infinite after all such a poverty-stricken mendicant? 

Whatever this is, there is one thing in this connection 
which we can never afford to lose sight of—that is, the 
peace or poverty (for peace is only possible in poverty) is 
obtained after a fierce battle fought with the entire strength 
of your personality. A contentment gleaned from idleness 
or from a laissez-faire attitude of mind is a thing most to be 


26 


INTRODUCTION 


abhorred. There is no Zen in this, but sloth and mere vege- 
tation. The battle must rage in its full vigour and mascu- 
linity. Without it, whatever peace that obtains is a simula- 
crum, and it has no deep foundation; the first storm it may 
encounter will crush it to the ground. Zen is quite emphatic 
in this. Certainly, the moral virility to be found in Zen, 
apart from its mystic flight, comes from the fighting of the 
battle of life courageously and undauntedly. 

From the ethical point of view, therefore, Zen may be 
considered a discipline aiming at the reconstruction of 
character. Our ordinary life only touches the fringe of per- 
sonality, it does not cause a commotion in the deepest 
parts of the soul. Even when the religious consciousness is 
awakened, most of us lightly pass over it so as to leave no 
marks of a bitter fighting on the soul. We are thus made to 
live on the superficiality of things. We may be clever, 
bright, and all that, but what we produce lacks depth, 
sincerity, and does not appeal to the inmost feelings. Some 
are utterly unable to create anything except makeshifts 
or imitations betraying their shallowness cf character and 
want of spiritual experience. While Zen is primarily re- 
ligious, it also moulds our moral character. It may be better 
to say that a deep spiritual experience is bound to effect a 
change in the moral structure of one’s personality. 

How is this so? 

The truth of Zen is such that when we want to compre- 
hend it penetratingly we have to go through with a great 
struggle, sometimes very long and exacting constant 
vigilance. To be disciplined in Zen is no easy task. A Zen 
master once remarked that the life of a monk can be 
attained only by a man of great moral strength, and that 
even a minister of the State cannot expect to become a 
successful monk. (Let us remark here that in China to be 
a minister of the State was considered to be the greatest 
achievement a man could ever hope for in this world.) Not 
that a monkish life requires the austere practice of asceticism 
but that it implies the elevation of one’s spiritual powers 
to their highest notch. All the utterances or activities of the 


27 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


great Zen masters have come from this elevation. They 
are not intended to be enigmatic or driving us to con- 
fusion. They are the overflowing of a soul filled with deep 
experiences. Therefore, unless we are ourselves elevated 
to the same height as the masters, we cannot gain the same 
commanding views of life. Says Ruskin: ‘And be sure also, 
if the author is worth anything, that you will not get at his 
meaning all at once—nay, that at his whole meaning you 
will not for a long time arrive in any wise. Not that he does 
not say what he means, and in strong words, too; but he 
cannot say it all and what is more strange, will not, but in 
a hidden way and in parable, in order that he may be sure 
you want it. I cannot see quite the reason of this, nor 
analyse that cruel reticence in the breasts of wise men which 
makes them always hide their deeper thought. They do not 
give it you by way of help, but of reward, and will make 
themselves sure that you deserve it before they allow you to 
reach it.’ And this key to the royal treasury of wisdom is 
given us only after patient and painful moral struggle. 

The mind is ordinarily chock full with all kinds of 
intellectual nonsense and passional rubbish. They are of 
course useful in their own ways in our daily life. There is 
no denying that. But it is chiefly because of these accumu- 
lations that we are made miserable and groan under the 
feeling of bondage. Each time we want to make a move- 
ment, they fetter us, they choke us, and cast a heavy veil 
over our spiritual horizon. We feel as if we are constantly 
living under restraint. We long for naturalness and freedom, 
yet we do not seem to attain them. The Zen masters know 
this, for they have gone through with the same experiences 
once. They want to have us get rid of all these wearisome 
burdens which we really do not have to carry in order to 
live a life of truth and enlightenment. Thus they utter a 
few words and demonstrate with action that, when rightly 
comprehended, will deliver us from the oppression and 
tyranny of these intellectual accumulations. But the com- 
prehension does not come to us so easily. Being so long 
accustomed to the oppression, the mental inertia becomes 


28 


INTRODUCTION 


hard to remove. In fact it has gone down deep into the 
roots of our own being, and the whole structure of per- 
sonality is to be overturned. The process of reconstruction 
is stained with tears and blood. But the height the great 
masters have climbed cannot otherwise be reached; the 
truth of Zen can never be attained unless it is attacked with 
the full force of personality. The passage is strewn with 
thistles and brambles, and the climb is slippery in the 
extreme. It is no pastime but the most serious task in life; 
no idlers will ever dare attempt it. It is indeed a moral anvil 
on which your character is hammered and hammered. To 
the question, ‘What is Zen?’ a master gave this answer, 
‘Boiling oil over a blazing fire.’ This scorching experience 
we have to go through with before Zen smiles on us and 
says, ‘Here is your home.’ 
One of these utterances by the Zen masters that will stir 
a revolution in our minds is this: Hékoji (P‘ang-yiin), 
formerly a Confucian, asked Baso (Ma-tsu, —788), ‘What 
kind of man is he who does not keep company with any 
thing?’ Replied the master, ‘I will tell you when you have 
swallowed up in one draught all the waters in the West 
River.’ What an irrelevant reply to the most serious 
question one can ever raise in the history of thought! It 
sounds almost sacrilegious when we know how many 
souls there are who go down under the weight of this 
question. But Baso’s earnestness leaves no room for doubt, 
as is quite well known to all the students of Zen. In fact, 
the rise of Zen after the sixth patriarch, Hui-néng, was due 
to the brilliant career of Baso, under whom there arose 
more than eighty fully qualified masters, and Hokoji, who 
was one of the foremost lay disciples of Zen, earned a well- 
deserved reputation as the Vimalakirti of Chinese Budd- 
hism. A talk between two such veteran Zen masters could 
not be an idle sport. However easy and even careless it may 
‘appear, there is hidden in it a most precious gem in the 
literature of Zen. We do not know how many students of 
Zen were made to sweat and cry in tears because of the in- 
scrutability of this statement of Baso’s. 


29 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


To give another instance: a monk asked the master Shin 
of Chésa (Chang-sha Ching-ch‘én), ‘Where has Nansen 
(Nan-ch‘iian) gone after his death?’ Replied the master, 
‘When Sekité (Shih-t‘ou) was still in the order of young 
novitiates, he saw the sixth patriarch.’ ‘I am not asking 
about the young novitiate. What I wish to know is, where is 
Nansen gone after his death?’ ‘As to that,’ said the master, 
‘it makes one think.’ 

The immortality of the soul is another big question. The 
history of religion is built upon this one question, one may 
almost say. Everybody wants to know about life after death. 
Where do we go when we pass away from this earth? Is 
there really another life? Or is the end of this the end of all? 
While there may be many who do not worry themselves as 
to the ultimate significance of the solitary, ‘companionless’ 
One, there are none perhaps who have not once at least in 
their lives asked themselves concerning their destiny after 
death. Whether Sekit6 when young saw the sixth patriarch 
or not does not seem to have any inherent connection with 
the departure of Nansen. The latter was the teacher of 
Chosa, and naturally the monk asked him whither the 
teacher finally passed. Chdsa’s answer is no answer, judged 
by the ordinary rules of logic. Hence the second question, 
but still a sort of equivocation from the lips of the master. 
What does this ‘making one think’ explain? From this it is 
apparent that Zen is one thing and logic another. When we 
fail to make this distinction and expect of Zen to give us 
something logically consistent and intellectually illuminat- 
ing, we altogether misinterpret the signification of Zen. Did 
I not state in the beginning that Zen deals with facts and 
not with generalizations? And this is the very point where 
Zen goes straight down to the foundations of personality. 
The intellect ordinarily does not lead us there, for we do not 
live in the intellect, but in the will. Brother Lawrence speaks 
the truth when he says (The Practice of the Presence of God), 
‘that we ought to make a great difference between the acts 
of the understanding and those of the will: that the first 
were comparatively of little value, and the others, all’, 


30 


INTRODUCTION 


Zen literature is all brim full of such statements, which 
seem to have been uttered so casually, so innocently, but 
those who actually know what Zen is will testify to the fact 
that all these utterances dropped so naturally from the lips 
of the masters are like deadly poisons, that when they are 
once taken in they cause such a violent pain as to make 
one’s intestines wriggle nine times and more, as the 
Chinese would express it. But it is only after such pain and 
turbulence that all the internal impurities are purged and 
one is born with quite a new outlook on life. It is strange 
that Zen grows intelligible when these mental struggles are 
gone through. But the fact is that Zen is an experience 
actual and personal, and not a knowledge to be gained by 
analysis or comparison. ‘Do not talk poetry except to a 
poet; only the sick know how to sympathize with the sick.’ 
This explains the whole situation. Our minds are to be so 
matured as to be in tune with those of the masters. Let this 
be accomplished, and when one string is struck, the other 
will inevitably respond. Harmonious notes always result 
from the sympathetic resonance of two or more chords. And 
what Zen does for us is to prepare our minds to be yielding 
and appreciative recipients of old masters. In other words, 
psychologically Zen releases whatever energies we may have 
in store, of which we are not conscious in ordinary circum- 
stances, 

Some say that Zen is self-suggestion. But this does not 
explain anything. When the word ‘Yamato-damashi’ is 
mentioned it seems to awaken in most Japanese a fervent 
patriotic passion. The children are taught to respect the flag 
of the rising sun, and when the soldiers come in front of the 
regimental colours they involuntarily salute. When a boy 
is reproached for not acting like a little samurai, and with 
disgracing the name of his ancestor, he at once musters his 
courage and will resist temptations. All these ideas are 
energy-releasing ideas for the Japanese, and this release, 
according to some psychologists, is self-suggestion. Social 
conventions and imitative instincts may also be regarded as 
self-suggestions. So is moral discipline. An example is given 


3I 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


to the students to follow or imitate it. The idea gradually 
takes root in them through suggestion, and they finally 
come to act as if it were their own. Self-suggestion is a 
barren theory, it does not explain anything. When they say 
that Zen is self-suggestion, do we get any clearer idea of 
Zen? Some think it scientific to call certain phenomena by 
a term newly come into fashion, and rest satisfied with it 
as if they disposed of them in an illuminating way. The 
study of Zen must be taken up by the profounder psycho- 
logists. 

Some think that there is still an unknown region in our 
consciousness which has not yet been thoroughly and 
systematically explored. It is sometimes called the Uncon- 
scious or the Subconscious. This is a territory filled with 
dark images, and naturally most scientists are afraid of 
treading upon it. But this must not be taken as denying the 
fact of its existence. Just as our ordinary field of conscious- 
ness is filled with all possible kinds of images, beneficial and 
harmful, systematic and confusing, clear and obscure, force- 
fully assertive and weakly fading; so is the Subconscious a 
storehouse of every form of occultism or mysticism, under- 
standing by the term all that is known as latent or abnormal 
or psychic or spiritualistic. The power to see into the nature 
of one’s own being may lie also hidden there, and what 
Zen awakens in our consciousness may be that. At any rate, 
the masters speak figuratively of the opening of a third eye. 
‘Satori’ is the popular name given to this opening or 
awakening. 

How is this to be effected? 

By meditating on those utterances or actions that are 
directly poured out from the inner region undimmed by 
the intellect or the imagination, and that are calculated 
successfully to exterminate all the turmoils arising from 
ignorance and confusion.! 

* Zen has its own way of practising meditations so called, for the Zen 
methods are to be distinguished from what is popularly or Hinayanisti- 


cally understood by the term. Zen has nothing to do with mere quietism 


or losing oneself in trance. I may have an occasion to speak more about 
the subject elsewhere. 


32 


INTRODUCTION 


It may be interesting to readers in this connection to get 
acquainted with some of the methods! used by the masters 
in order to open the spiritual eye of the disciple. It is natural 
that they frequently make use of the various religious in- 
signia which they carry when going out to the Hall of the 
Dharma. Such are generally the ‘hossu’,? ‘shippe’,® 
‘nyol’,* or ‘shujvo” (or a staff). The last-mentioned seems 
to have been the most favourite instrument used in the 
demonstration of the truth of Zen. Let me cite some ex- 
amples of its use. 

According to Yery6 (Hui-léng), of Chdkei (Chang- 
ch‘ing), ‘when one knows what that staff is, one’s life study 
of Zen comes to an end’. This reminds us of Tennyson’s 
flower in the crannied wall. For when we understand the 
reason of the staff, we know ‘what God and man is’; that 
is to say, we get an insight into the nature of our own 
being, and this insight finally puts a stop to all the doubts 
and hankerings that have upset our mental tranquillity. The 
significance of the staff in Zen can thus readily be compre- 
hended. 

Yesei (Hui-ch‘ing), of Bash6 (Pa-chiao), probably of 
the tenth century, once made the following declaration: 
‘When you have a staff, I will give you one; when you have 
none, I will take it away from you.’ This is one of the most 
characteristic statements of Zen, but later Bokitsu (Mu-chi), 
of Daiyi (Ta-wei), was bold enough to challenge this by 
saying what directly contradicts it, viz: ‘As to myself, I 
differ from him. When you have a staff, I will take it away 
from you; and when you have none, I will give you one. 
This is my statement. Can you make use of the staff? or 
can you not? If you can, Tokusan (Té-shan) will be your 
vanguard and Rinzai (Lin-chi) your rearguard. But if you 
cannot, let it be restored to its original master.’ 

A monk approached Bokuju and said, ‘What is the 

1See also the Essay entitled, ‘Practical Methods of Zen Instruction’. 

3 Originally a mosquito driver in India. 

3 A bamboo stick a few feet long. 


4 Also a stick or baton fancifully shaped and made of all kinds of 
material, It means literally ‘as one wishes or thinks’ (cinta, in Sanskrit). 


Gc. 33 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


statement surpassing [the wisdom of] all Buddhas and 
Patriarchs?’ The master instantly held forth his staff before 
the congregation, and said, ‘I call this a staff, and what do 
you call it?? The monk who asked the question uttered not 
a word. The master holding it out again said, ‘A statement 
surpassing [the wisdom of] all Buddhas and Patriarchs— 
was that not your question, O monk?’ 

Those who carelessly go over such remarks as Bokuju’s 
may regard them as quite nonsensical. Whether the stick is 
called a staff or not it does not seem to matter very much, 
as far as the divine wisdom surpassing the limits of our 
knowledge is concerned. But the one made by Ummon, 
another great master of Zen, is perhaps more accessible. 
He also once lifted his staff before a congregation and re- 
marked: ‘In the scriptures we read that the ignorant take 
this for a real thing, the Hinayanists resolve it into a 
nonentity, the Pratyekabuddhas regard it as a hallucination, 
while the Bodhisattvas admit its apparent reality, which is, 
however, essentially empty.’ ‘But,’ continued the master, 
‘monks, you simply call it a staff when you see one. Walk 
or sit as you will, but do not stand irresolute.’ 

The same old insignificant staff and yet more mystical 
statements from Ummon. One day his announcement was, 
“My staff has turned into a dragon, and it has swallowed 
up the whole universe; where would the great earth with 
its mountains and rivers be?’ On another occasion, Um- 
mon, quoting an ancient Buddhist philosopher who 
said ‘Knock at the emptiness of space and you hear a voice; 
strike a piece of wood and there is no sound,’ took out his 
staff and, striking space, cried, ‘Oh, how it hurts!’ Then 
tapping at the board, he asked, ‘Any noise?? A monk 
responded, “Yes, there is a noise.’ Thereupon the master 
exclaimed, ‘Oh you ignoramus!’ 

If I go on like this there will be no end. So I stop, but 


? This reminds one of the remarks made by the master Ten (Chan), of 
Hofuku (Pao-fu), who, seeing a monk approach, took up is staff di 
struck a pillar, and then the monk. When the monk naturally cried with 
pain, said the master, ‘How is it that this does not get hurt?” 


34 


INTRODUCTION 


expect some of you to ask me the following questions: 
“Have these utterances anything to do with one’s seeing 
into the nature of one’s being? Is there any relationship 
possible between those apparently nonsensical talks about 
the staff and the all-important problem of the reality of 
life?’ 

In answer I append these two passages, one from Jimyo 
(T‘zu-ming) and the other from Yengo (Yiian-wu): In one 
of his sermons, Jimyo said: ‘As soon as one particle of dust 
is raised, the great earth manifests itself there in its entirety. 
In one lion are revealed millions of lions, and in millions 
of lions is revealed one lion. Thousands and thousands of 
them there are indeed, but know ye just one, one only.’ 
So saying he lifted up his staff, and continued, ‘Here is my 
own staff, and where is that one lion?’ Bursting out into a 
“Kwatz’ (hé), he set the staff down, and left the pulpit. 

In the Hekigan (Pi-yen-lu),) Yengo expresses the same 
idea in his introductory remark to the ‘one-finger Zen’ of 
Gutei (Chuk-chth i chth t‘ou ch‘an)?: 


1 Hekiganshu is a collection of one hundred ‘cases’ with Secch6’s 
(Hstieh-tou’s) poetical comments and Yengo’s partly explanatory and 
partly critical annotations. The book was brought to Japan during the 
Kamakura era, and ever since it is one of the most important text-books 
of Zen, especially for the followers of the Rinzai school. 

2 Gutei was a disciple of Tenryu (T‘ien-lung), probably towards the 
end of the T‘ang dynasty. While he was first residing in a small temple, 
he had a visit from a travelling nun, who came right into the temple 
without removing her headgear. Carrying her staff with her, she went 
three times around the meditation chair in which Gutei was sitting. Then 
she said to him, ‘Say a word of Zen, and I shall take off my hat.’ She 
repeated this three times, but Gutei did not know what to say. When the 
nun was about to depart, Gutei suggested, ‘It is growing late, and why 
not stay here overnight?’ Jissai (Shih-chi), which was the name of the 
nun, said, ‘If you say a word of Zen, I shall stay.’ As he was still unable 
to say a word, she left. 

This was a terrible blow to poor Gutei, who pitifully sighed : “While 
I have the form of a man, I seem not to have any manly stamina!’ He 
then resolved to study and master Zen. When he was about to start on 
his Zen ‘wanderings’, he had a vision of the mountain god who told 
him not to go away from his temple, for a Bodhisattva in flesh would be 
coming here before long and enlighten him in the truth of Zen. Surely 
enough a Zen master called Tenryu (T‘ien-lung) appeared the following 


35 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘One particle of dust is raised and the great earth lies 
therein; one flower blooms and the universe rises with it. 
But where should our eye be fixed when the dust is not yet 
stirred and the flower has not yet bloomed? Therefore, it is 
said that, like cutting a bundle of thread, one cut cuts all 
asunder ; again like dyeing a bundle of thread, one dyeing 
dyes all in the same colour. Now yourself get out of all the 
entangling relations and rip them up to pieces, but do not 
lose track of your inner treasure; for it is through this that 
the high and the low universally responding and the 
advanced and the backward making no distinction, each 
manifests itself in full perfection.’ 


The foregoing sketch of Zen I hope will give the reader a 
general, though necessarily vague, idea of Zen as it is and 
has been taught in the Far East for more than one thousand 
years. In what follows I will try first to seek the origin of 
Zen in the spiritual enlightenment itself of the Buddha; 
for Zen has been frequently criticized for deviating too far 
from what is popularly understood to be the teaching of the 
Buddha as it is recorded, especially in the Agamas or 
Nikayas. While Zen, as it is, is no doubt the native product 
of the Chinese mind, the line of its development must be 
traced back to the personal experience of the Indian founder 
himself. Unless this is understood in connection with the 
psychological characteristics of the people, the growth of 
Zen among the Chinese Buddhists would be unintelligible. 
Zen is, after all, one of the Mahayana schools of Buddhism 


day. Gutei told the master all about the humiliating experience of the 
previous day and his firm resolution to attain the secrets of Zen. Tenryu 
Just lifted one of his fingers and said nothing. This, however, was enough 
to open Gutei’s mind at once to the ultimate meaning of Zen, and it is 
said that ever since Gutei did or said nothing but just hold up a finger 
to all the questions that might be asked of him concerning Zen. 

There was a boy in his temple, who seeing the master’s trick imitated 
him when the boy himself was asked about what kind of preaching his 
master generally practised. When the boy told the master about it show- 
ing his lifted little finger, the master cut it right off with a knife. The boy 
ran away screaming in pain, when Gutei called him back. The boy 
turned back, the master lifted his own finger, and the boy instantly 
realized the meaning of the ‘one-finger Zen’ of Tenryu as well as Gutei, 


36 


INTRODUCTION 


shorn of its Indian garb. Next I have tried to write a history 
of Zen in China after Bodhi-Dharma, who is the real 
author of the school. Zen was quietly matured and trans- 
mitted by the five successive patriarchs so-called after the 
passing of the first propagator from India. When Hui-néng, 
the sixth patriarch, began to teach the gospel of Zen 
Buddhism, it was no more Indian but thoroughly Chinese, 
and what we call Zen now in the form as we have it dates 
from him. The course thus definitely given shape by the 
sixth patriarch to the development of Zen in China gained 
its strength not only in volume but in content by the master- 
ful handling of it by the spiritual descendants of Hui-néng. 
The first section of the Chinese history of Zen therefore 
naturally closes with him. As the central fact of Zen lies 
in the attainment of ‘Satori’ or the opening of a spiritual 
eye, I have next dwelt upon the subject. The treatment is 
somewhat popular, for the main idea is to present the fact 
that there is such a thing as an intuitional understanding of 
the truth of Zen, which is ‘satori’, and also to illustrate the 
uniqueness of ‘satori’ as experienced by Zen devotees. When 
we understand the significance of ‘satori’ in Zen, we may 
logically wish to know something about the methods 
whereby the masters contrive to bring about such a re- 
volutionary experience, more or less noetic, in the minds 
of the students. Some of the practical Zen methods resorted 
to by the masters are classified under a certain number of 
headings, but in this classification I have not attempted to 
be thoroughly exhaustive here. The Meditation Hall is an 
institution quite peculiar to Zen Buddhism, and those who 
want to know something about Zen and its educational 
system cannot afford to ignore the subject. This unique 
organ of Zen Buddhism, however, has never been described 
before. The reader I hope will find here a subject interesting 
enough for his thorough investigation. While Zen claims to 
be the ‘ultra-abrupt’ wing of Buddhism, it has a well- 
marked gradation in its progress towards the ultimate goal. 
Hence the concluding chapter on “The Ten Cowherding 
Pictures’. 


BF 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


There are many more topics with which one ought to be 
acquainted in the study of Zen Buddhism, and some of 
them, considered by the author the more important, will 
be treated in the second series of the Essays. 


38 


KEN AS CHINESE INTERPRETATION OF 
THE DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


Foreword 


leeaae I proceed to the discussion of the main idea of 
this essay, which is to consider Zen the Chinese way of 
applying the doctrine of Enlightenment in our practical 
life, I wish to make some preliminary remarks concerning 
the attitude of some Zen critics and thereby to define the 
position of Zen in the general body of Buddhism. Accord- 
ing to them Zen Buddhism is not Buddhism; it is something 
quite foreign to the spirit of Buddhism, and is one of those 
aberrations which we often see growing up in the history 
of any religion. Zen is thus, they think, an abnormality 
prevailing among the people whose thought and feeling 
flow along a channel different from the main current of 
Buddhist thought. Whether this allegation is true or not 
will be decided, on the one hand, when we understand what 
is really the essence or genuine spirit of Buddhism, and, on 
the other, when we know the exact status of Zen doctrine 
in regard to the ruling ideas of Buddhism as they are 
accepted in the Far East. It may also be desirable to know 
something about the development of religious experience in 
general. When we are not prepared thoroughly to under- 
stand these questions in the light of the history and philo- 
sophy of religion, we may come dogmatically to assert that 
Zen is not Buddhism just because it looks so different on its 
surface from what some people with a certain set of pre- 
conceived notions consider Buddhism to be. The statement 
of my position as regards these points will therefore pave the 
way to the development of the principal thesis. 
Superficially, indeed, there is something in Zen so bizarre 
and even irrational as to frighten the pious literary followers 


a9 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


of the so-called primitive Buddhism and to make them de- 
clare that Zen is not Buddhism but a Chinese anomaly of 
it. What, for instance, would they really make out of such 
statements as follows: In the Sayings of Nan-ch‘ian we read 
that, when T‘sui, governor of Ch‘i District, asked the fifth 
patriarch of the Zen sect—that is, Hung-jén—how it was 
that while he had five hundred followers, Hui-néng, in 
preference to all others, was singled out to be given the 
orthodox robe of transmission as the sixth patriarch, the 
fifth patriarch replied: ‘Four hundred and ninety-nine out 
of my disciples understand well what Buddhism is, except 
one Hui-néng. He is a man not be measured by an ordinary 
standard. Hence the robe of faith was handed over to him.’ 
On this comments Nan-ch‘iian: ‘In the age of Void there 
are no words whatever ; as soon as the Buddha appears on 
earth, words come into existence, hence our clinging to 
signs. .. . And thus as we now so firmly take hold of words, 
we limit ourselves in various ways, while in the Great Way 
there are absolutely no such things as ignorance or holiness. 
Everything that has a name thereby limits itself. Therefore, 
the old master of Chiang-hsi declared that “‘it is neither 
mind, nor Buddha, nor a thing”’. It was in this way that he 
wished to guide his followers, while these days they vainly 
endeavour to experience the Great Way by hypostatizing 
such an entity as mind. If the Way could be mastered in this 
manner, it would be well for them to wait until the appear- 
ance of Maitreya Buddha [which is said to be at the end 
of the world] and then to awaken the enlightenment- 
thought. How could such ones ever hope for spiritual free- 
dom? Under the fifth patriarch, all of his five hundred 
disciples, except one Hui-néng, understood Buddhism well. 
The lay-disciple, Néng, was quite unique in this respect, for 
he did not at all understand Buddhism.1 He understood the Way 
only and no other thing.’ 

These are not very extraordinary statements in Zen, but 


Compare this with the statement made by the sixth patriarch him- 
self when he was asked how it was that he came to succeed the fifth 
patriarch, ‘Because I do not understand Buddhism’. Let me also cite 
a passage from the Kena-Upanishad, in which the readers may find a 


40 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


to most of the Zen critics they must spell abomination. 
Buddhism is flatly denied, and its knowledge is regarded 
not to be indispensable to the mastery of Zen, the Great 
Way, which on the contrary is more or less identified with 
the negation of Buddhism. How is this? In the following 
pages an attempt is made to answer this question. 


The Life and Spirit of Buddhism 


To make this point clear and to justify the claim for Zen 
that it transmits the essence of Buddhism and not its form- 
ulated articles of faith as are recorded in letters, it is 
necessary to strip the spirit of Buddhism of all its outer 
casings and appendages, which, hindering the working of 
its original life-force, are apt to make us take the unessential 
for the essential. We know that the acorn is so different from 
the oak, but as long as there is a continuation of growth 
their identity is a logical conclusion. To see really into the 
nature of the acorn is to trace an uninterrupted develop- 
ment through its various historical stages. When the seed 
remains a seed and means nothing more, there is no life in 
it; it is a finished piece of work and, except as an object of 
historical curiosity, it has no value whatever in our religious 
experience. In like manner, to determine the nature of © 
Buddhism we must go along its whole line of development 
and see what are the healthiest and most vital germs in it 
which have brought it to the present state of maturity. 
When this is done we shall see in what manner Zen is to be 
recognized as one of the various phases of Buddhism and, 
in fact, as the most essential factor in it. 


singular coincidence between the Brahman seer and those Zen masters, 
not only in thought but in the way it is expressed : 

‘It is conceived of by him by whom it is not conceived of; 

He by whom It is conceived of, knows It not. 

It is not understood by those who understand It; 

It is understood by those who understand It not.’ 
Lao-tzti, founder of Taoist mysticism, breathes the same spirit when he 
says: ‘He who knows it speaks not, he who speaks knows not.’ 


41 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


To comprehend fully, therefore, the constitution of any 
existent religion that has a long history, it is advisable 
to separate its founder from his teaching, as a most powerful 
determinant in the development of the latter. By this I 
mean, in the first place, that the founder so called had in 
the beginning no idea of being the founder of any religious 
system which would later grow up in his name; in the 
second that to his disciples, while he was yet alive, his 
personality was not regarded as independent of his teaching, 
at least as far as they were conscious of the fact; in the 
third that what was unconsciously working in their minds 
as regards the nature of their master’s personality came out 
in the foreground after his passing with all the possible 
intensity that had been latently gaining strength within 
them, and lastly, that the personality of the founder grew 
up in his disciples’ minds so powerful as to make itself 
the very nucleus of his teaching; that is to say, the latter 
was made to serve as explanation of the meaning of the 
former. 

It is a great mistake to think that any existent religious 
system was handed down to posterity by its founder as the 
fully matured product of his mind, and, therefore, that 
what the followers had to do with their religious founder 
and his teaching was to embrace both the founder and his 
teaching as sacred heritage—a treasure not to be profaned 
by the content of their individual spiritual experience. For 
this view fails to take into consideration what our spiritual 
life is and petrifies religion to its very core. This static con- 
servatism, however, is always opposed by a progressive 
party which looks at a religious system from a dynamic 
‘point of view. And these two forces which are seen con- 
flicting against each other in every field of human activity 
weave out the history of religion as in other cases. In fact 
history is the record of these struggles everywhere. But the 
very fact that there are such struggles in religion shows that 
they are here to some purpose and that religion is a living 
force; for they gradually bring to light the hidden implica- 
tions of the original faith and enrich it in a manner un- 


42 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


dreamed of in the beginning. This takes place not only with 
regard to the personality of the founder but with regard to 
his teaching, and the result is an astounding complexity or 
rather confusion which sometimes prevents us from pro- 
perly seeing into the constitution of a living religious 
system. 


While the founder was still walking among his followers 
and disciples, the latter did not distinguish between the 
person of their leader and his teaching ; for the teaching was 
realized in the person and the person was livingly explained 
in the teaching. To embrace the teaching was to follow his 
steps—that is, to believe in him. His presence among them 
was enough to inspire them and convince them of the truth 
of his teaching. They might not have comprehended it 
thoroughly, but his authoritative way of presenting it left 
in their hearts no shadow of doubt as to its truth and eternal 
value. So long as he lived among them and spoke to them 
his teaching and his person appealed to them as an in- 
dividual unity. Even when they retired into a solitary place 
and meditated on the truth of his teaching, which they did 
as a form of spiritual discipline, the image of his person was 
always before their mental eyes. 

' But things went differently when his stately and in- 
spiring personality was no more seen in the flesh. His 
teaching was still there, his followers could recite it per- 
fectly from memory, but its personal connection with the 
author was lost, the living chain which solidly united him 
and his doctrine as one was for ever broken. When they 
reflected on the truth of the doctrine, they could not help 
thinking of their teacher as a soul far deeper and nobler than 
themselves. The similarities that were, either consciously or 
unconsciously, recognized as existing in various forms 
between leader and disciple gradually vanished, and as 
they vanished, the other side—that is, that which made him 
so distinctly different from his followers—came to assert 
itself all the more emphatically and irresistibly. The result 
was the conviction that he must have come from quite a 


43 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


unique spiritual source. The process of deification thus con- 
stantly went on until, some centuries after the death of the 
Master, he became a direct manifestation of the Supreme 
Being himself—in fact, he was the Highest One in the 
flesh, in him there was a divine humanity in perfect 
realization. He was Son of God or the Buddha and the 
Redeemer of the world. He will then be considered by him- 
self independently of his teaching; he will occupy the 
centre of interest in the eyes of his followers. The teaching is 
of course important, but mainly as having come from the 
mouth of such an exalted spirit, and not necessarily as con- 
taining the truth of love or Enlightenment. Indeed, the 
teaching is to be interpreted in the light of the teacher’s 
divine personality. The latter now predominates over the 
whole system; he is the centre whence radiate the rays of 
Enlightenment, salvation is only possible in believing in 
him as saviour.? 

Around this personality or this divine nature there will 
now grow various systems of philosophy essentially based 
on his own teaching, but more or less modified according 
to the spiritual experiences of the disciples. This would per- 
haps never have taken place if the personality of the 
founder were not such as to stir up the deep religious 
feelings in the hearts of his followers, which is to say, what 
most attracted the latter to the teaching was not primarily 
the teaching itself but that which gave life to it, and without 
which it would never have been what it was. We are not 
always convinced of the truth of a statement because it is 
so logically advanced, but mainly because there is an in- 
spiring life-impulse running through it. We are first struck 


1 The conception of Dharmakaya apart from the physical body 
(rapakdya) of the Buddha was logically inevitable, as we read in the 
Ekottara-Agama, XLIV, ‘The Life of the Sakyamuni-Buddha is extremely 
long, the reason is that while his physical body enters into Nirvana, his 
Law-body exists.’ But the Dharmakaya could not be made to function 
directly upon suffering souls, as it was too abstract and transcendental; 
they wanted something more concrete and tangible towards which they 
could feel personally intimate. Hence the conception of another Buddha- 
body—that is, Sambhogakaya-Buddha or Vipakaja-Buddha, complet- 
ing the dogma of the Triple Body (Trikaya). 


44 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


with it and later try to verify its truth. The understanding is 
needed, but this alone will never move us to risk the fate 
of our souls. 

One of the greatest religious souls in Japan once con- 
fessed,1 ‘I do not care whether I go to hell or elsewhere, but 
because my old master taught me to invoke the name of the 
Buddha, I practise the teaching.’ This was not a blind 
acceptance of the master, in whom there was something 
deeply appealing to one’s soul, and the disciple embraced 
this something with his whole being. Mere logic never moves 
us; there must be something transcending the intellect. 
When Paul insisted that ‘if Christ be not raised, your faith 
is vain; ye are yet in your sins’, he was not appealing to our 
logical idea of things, but to our spiritual yearnings. It did 
not matter whether things existed as facts of chronological 
history or not, the vital concern of ours was the fulfilment 
of our inmost inspirations; even so-called objective facts 
could be so moulded as to yield the best result to the re- 
quirements of our spiritual life. The personality of the 
founder of any religious system that has survived through 
centuries of growth must have had all the qualities that 
fully meet such spiritual requirements. As soon as the person 
and his teaching are separated after his own passing in the 
religious consciousness of i1is followers, if he was sufficiently 
great, he will at once occupy the centre of their spiritual 
interest and all his teachings will be made to explain this 
fact in various ways. 

To state it more concretly, how much Christianity, for 
instance, as we have it today is the teaching of Christ him- 
self? and how much of it is the contribution of Paul, 


1 The absolute faith Shinran had in the teaching of Hénen as is 
evidenced in this quotation proves that the Shin sect is the result of 
Shinran’s inner experience and not the reasoned product of his phil- 
osophy. His experience came first, and to explain it to himself as well as 
to communicate it to others, he resorted to various Sitras for verification. 
The Teaching, Practice, Faith, and Attainment was thus written by him 
giving an intellectual and scriptural foundation to the Shin-shu faith. 
In religion, as in other affairs of human life, belief precedes reasoning. 
It is important not to forget this fact when tracing the development of 
ideas. 


45 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


John, Peter, Augustine, and even Aristotle? The magnifi- 
cent structure of Christian dogmatics is the work of Christian 
faith as has been experienced successively by its leaders ; 
it is not the work of one person, even of Christ. For dog- 
matics is not necessarily always concerned with historical 
facts which are rather secondary in importance compared 
with the religious truth of Christianity: the latter is what 
ought to be rather than what is or what was. It aims at the 
establishment of what is universally valid, which is not to be 
jeopardized by the fact or nonfact of historical elements as 
is maintained by some of the modern exponents of Christian 
dogmatics. Whether Christ really claimed to be the Messiah 
or not is a great historical discussion still unsettled among 
Christian theologians. Some say that it does not make any 
difference as far as Christian faith is concerned whether or 
not Christ claimed to be the Messiah. In spite of all such 
theological difficulties, Christ is the centre of Christianity. 
The Christian edifice is built around the person of Jesus. 
Buddhists may accept some of his teachings and sympathize 
with the content of his religious experience, but so long as 
they do not cherish any faith in Jesus as ‘Christ’ or Lord, 
they are not Christians. 

Christianity is therefore constituted not only with the 
teaching of Jesus himself but with all the dogmatical and 
speculative interpretations concerning the personality of 
Jesus and his doctrine that have accumulated ever since 
the death of the founder. In other words, Christ did not 
found the religious system known by his name, but he was 
made its founder by his followers. If he were still among 
them, it is highly improbable that he would sanction all the 
theories, beliefs, and practices which are now imposed upon 
self-styled Christians. If he were asked whether their 
learned dogmatics were his religion, he might not know how 
to answer. He would in all likelihood profess complete 
ignorance of all the philosophical subtleties of Christian 
theology of the present day. But from the modern Christians’ 
point of view they will most definitely assure us that their 
religion is to be referred to ‘a unitary starting point and to 


46 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


an original basic character’, which is Jesus as Christ, and 
that whatever manifold constructions and transformations 
that were experienced in the body of their religion did not 
interfere with their specific Christ-faith. They are Christians 
just as much as the brethren of their primitive community 
were; for there is an historical continuation of the same 
faith all along its growth and development which is its 
inner necessity. To regard the form of culture of a par- 
ticular time as something sacred, and to be transmitted for 
ever as such is to suppress our spiritual yearnings after 
eternal validity. This I believe is the position taken up by 
progressive modern Christians. 

How about progressive modern Buddhists then in regard 
to their attitude towards Buddhist faith constituting the 
essence of Buddhism? How is the Buddha conceived by his 
disciples? What is the nature and value of Buddhahood? 
When Buddhism is defined merely as the teaching of the 
Buddha, does it explain the life of Buddhism as it moves on 
- through the course of history? Is not the life of Buddhism the 
unfolding of the inner spiritual life of the Buddha himself 
rather than his exposition of it, which is recorded as the 
Dharma in Buddhist literature? Is there not something in 
the wordy teaching of the Buddha, which gives life to it and 
which lieth underneath all the arguments and controversies 
characterizing the history of Buddhism throughout Asia? 
This life is what progressive Buddhists endeavour to lay 
hands on. 

It is therefore not quite in accordance with the life and 
teaching of the Buddha to regard Buddhism merely as a 
system of religious doctrines and practices established by 
the Buddha himself; for it is more than that, and com- 
prises as its most important constituent elements all the 
experiences and speculations of the Buddha’s followers, 
especially concerning the personality of their master and 
his relations to his own doctrine. Buddhism did not come 
out of the Buddha’s mind fully armed, as did Minerva 
from Jupiter. The theory of a perfect Buddhism from the 
beginning is the static view of it, and cuts it short from 


47 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


its continuous and never-ceasing growth. Our religious 
experience transcends the limitations of time, and its ever- 
expanding content requires a more vital form which will 
grow without doing violence to itself. Inasmuch as Budd- 
hism is a living religion and not an historical mummy 
stuffed with dead and functionless materials, it must be 
able to absorb and assimilate all that is helpful to its 
growth, This is the most natural thing for any organism 
endowed with life. And this life may be traceable under 
divergent forms and constructions. 

According to scholars of Pali Buddhism and of the 
Agama literature, all that the Buddha taught, as far as his 
systematic teaching went, seems to be summed up by the 
Fourfold Noble Truth, the Twelvefold Chain of Causation, 
the Eightfold Path of Righteous Living, and the doctrine 
of Non-ego (Andtman) and Nirvana. If this was the case, 
what we call primitive Buddhism was quite a simple affair 
when its doctrinal aspect alone is considered. There was 
nothing very promising in these doctrines that would 
eventually build up a magnificent structure to be known as 
Buddhism, comprising both the Hinayana and the Maha- 
yana. When we wish to understand Buddhism thoroughly 
we must dive deep into its bottom where lies its living 
spirit. Those that are satisfied with a superficial view of its 
dogmatical aspect are apt to let go the spirit which will 
truly explain the inner life of Buddhism. To some of the 
Buddha’s immediate disciples the deeper things in his 
teachings failed to appeal, or they were not conscious of the 
real spiritual forces which moved them towards their 
Master. We must look underneath if we want to come in 
contact with the ever-growing life-impetus of Buddhism. 
However great the Buddha was, he could not convert a 
jackal into a lion, nor could a jackal comprehend the 
Buddha above his beastly nature. As the later Buddhists 
state, a Buddha alone understands another Buddha; when 
our subjective life is not raised to the same level as the 
Buddha’s, many things that go to make up his inner life 
escape us; we cannot live in any other world than our 


48 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


own.! Therefore, if the primitive Buddhists read so much in 
the life of their Master as is recorded in their writings, and 
no more, this does not prove that everything belonging to the 
Buddha has thereby been exhausted. There were probably 
other Buddhists who penetrated deeper into his life, as their 
own inner consciousness had a richer content. The history 
of religion thus becomes the history of our own spiritual 
unfolding. Buddhism must be conceived biologically, so to 
speak, and not mechanically. When we take this attitude, 
even the doctrine of the Fourfold Noble Truth becomes 
pregnant with yet deeper truths. 

The Buddha was not a metaphysician and naturally 
avoided discussing such subjects as were strictly theoretical 
and had no practical bearing on the attainment of Nirvana. 
He might have had his own views on those philosophical 
problems that at the time engaged Indian minds, But like 
other religious leaders his chief interest was in the practical 


1 This was very well understood by the Buddha himself when he first 
attained Enlightenment; he knew that what he realized in his en- 
lightened state of mind could not be imparted to others, and that if it 
were imparted they could not understand it. This was the reason why he, 
in the beginning of his religious career, expressed the desire to enter into 
Nirvana without trying to revolve the Wheel of the Dharma. We read 
in one of the Sitras belonging to the Agama class of Buddhist literature, 
which is entitled Sutra on the Cause and Effect in the Past and Present (fas. II.) : 
‘My original vows are fulfilled, the Dharma [or Truth] I have attained 
is too deep for the understanding. A Buddha alone is able to understand 
what is in the mind of another Buddha. In this age of the Five Taints 
(pafica-kashaya), all beings are enveloped in greed, anger, folly, false- 
hood, arrogance, and flattery; they have few blessings and are stupid 
and have no understanding to comprehend the Dharma I have at- 
tained. Even if I make the Dharma-Wheel revolve, they would surely 
be confused and incapable of accepting it. They may on the contrary 
indulge in defamation, and, thereby falling into the evil paths, suffer 
all kinds of pain. It is best for me to remain quiet and enter into Nirvana.’ 
In the Sitra on the Story of the Discipline, which is considered an earlier 
translation of the preceding text and was rendered into Chinese by an 
Indian Buddhist scholar, Ta-li and a Tibetan, Mangsiang, in A.D. 197, 
no reference is yet made to the Buddha’s resolution to keep silent about 
his Enlightenment, only that what he attained was all-knowledge which 
was beyond the understanding and could not be explained, as its height 
was unscalable and its depth unfathomable, ‘containing the whole 
universe in it and yet penetrating into the unpenetrable’. . . . Cf. the 
Mahdapadana Suttanta (Digha Nikaya, XIV), and the Ariyapariyesana 
Suttam (Majjhima, XXVI). 


D 49 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


result of speculation and not in speculation as such. He was 
too busy in trying to get rid of the poisonous arrow that had 
pierced the flesh, he had no desire to inquire into the 
history, object, and constitution of the arrow; for life was 
too short for that. He thus took the world as it was; that is, 
he interpreted it as it appeared to his religious insight and 
according to his own valuation. He did not intend to go any 
further. He called his way of looking at the world and life 
‘Dharma’, a very comprehensive and flexible term, though 
it was not a term first used by the Buddha; for it had been 
in vogue some time prior to him, mainly in the sense of 
ritual and law, but the Buddha gave it a deeper spiritual 
signification. 

That the Buddha was practical and not metaphysical 
may be seen from the criticism which was hurled at him 
by his opponents: ‘As Gautama is always found alone 
sitting in an empty room, he has lost his wisdom. . . . Even 
Sariputra, who is the wisest and best disciple of his, is like 
a babe, so stupid and without eloquence.’ Here however 
lies the seed of a future development. If the Buddha had 
been given up to theorizing his teaching never could be 
expected to grow. Speculation may be deep and subtle, but 
if it has no spiritual life in it its possibilities are soon ex- 
hausted. The Dharma was ever maturing, because it was 
mysteriously creative. 

The Buddha evidently had quite a pragmatic conception 
of the intellect and left many philosophical problems un- 
solved as unnecessary for the attainment of the final goal 
of life. This was quite natural with him. Whilst he was still 
alive among his disciples, he was the living illustration of all 
that was implied in his doctrine. The Dharma was mani- 
fest in him in all its vital aspects, and there was no need to 
indulge in idle speculation as to the ultimate meaning of 
such concepts as Dharma, Nirvana, Atman (ego), Karma, 
Bodhi (enlightenment), etc. The Buddha’s personality was 
the key to the solution of all these. The disciples were not 
fully aware of the significance of this fact. When they 

1 Cf. Sarnyukta Agama (Chinese), Fas. XXXII. 


50 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


thought they understood the Dharma, they did not know 
that this understanding was really taking refuge in the 
Buddha. His presence somehow had a pacifying and satisfy- 
ing effect on whatever spiritual anguish they had; they felt 
as if they were securely embraced in the arms of a loving, 
consoling mother; to them the Buddha was really such.1 
Therefore, they had no need to press the Buddha very 
hard to enlighten them on many of the philosophical 
problems that they might have grown conscious of. They 
were easily reconciled in this respect to the Buddha’s un- 
willingness to take them into the heart of metaphysics. 
But at the same time this left much room for the later 
Buddhists to develop their own theories not only as to the 
teaching of the Buddha but mainly as to its relation to his 
personality. 

The Buddha’s entrance into Nirvana meant to his 


1 That the personality of the Buddha was an object of admiration and 
worship as much as, or perhaps more than, his extraordinary intellectual 
attributes, is gleaned throughout the Agama literature. To quote one or 
two instances: ‘When Subha-Manava Todeyyaputta saw the Blessed 
One sitting in the woods, the Brahman was struck with the beautiful 
serenity of his personality which most radiantly shone like the moon 
among the stars; his features were perfect, glowing like a golden moun- 
tain; his dignity was majestic with all his senses under perfect control, 
so tranquil and free from all beclouding passions, and so absolutely calm 
with his mind subdued and quietly disciplined.’ (The Middle Agama, 
fas. XX XVIII.) This admiration of his personality later developed into 
the deification of his being, and all the evils moral and physical were 
supposed to be warded off if one thought of him or his virtues. ‘When 
those beings who practised evil deeds with their bodies, mouths, or 
minds, think of the merits of the Tathagata at the moment of their 
deaths, they would be kept away from the three evil paths and born in 
the heavens; even the vilest would be born in the heavens.’ (The 
Ekottara-Agama, fas. XXXII.) ‘Wherever Sramana Gautama appears, 
no evil spirits or demons can approach him; therefore let us invite him 
here and all those evil gods [who have been harassing us] would by 
themselves take to their heels.’ (Loc. cit.) It was quite natural for the 
Buddhists that they later made the Buddha the first object of Recollec- 
tion (smrti), which, they thought, would keep their minds from wander- 
ing away and help them realize the final aim of the Buddhist life. These 
statements plainly demonstrate that while on the one hand the teaching 
of the Buddha was accepted by his followers as the Dharma beautiful in 
the beginning, beautiful in the middle, and beautiful in the end, his 
person was on the other hand regarded as filled with miraculous powers 
and divine virtues, so that his mere presence was enough to create a 
most auspicious atmosphere not only spiritually but materially. 


5! 
SPRINGDALE PUBLIC LIBRARY 


sG 


Springdale, AR 72784 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


disciples the loss of the World-Light,? through which they 
had such an illuminating view of things. The Dharma was 
there, and in it they tried to see the Buddha as they were 
instructed by him, but it had no enlivening effect on them 
as before; the moral precepts consisting of many rules were 
regularly observed in the Brotherhood, but the authori- 
tativeness of these regulations was missed somehow. They 
retired into a quietude and meditated on the teaching of 
the Master, but the meditation was not quite so life-giving 
and satisfying because they were ever assailed by doubts, 
and, as a natural consequence, their intellectual activities 
were resumed. Everything was now to be explained to the 
full extent of the reasoning faculty. The metaphysician 
began to assert himself against the simple-hearted devotion 
of the disciple. What had been accepted as an authoritative 
injunction from the mouth of the Buddha was now to be 
examined as a subject of philosophical discussion. ‘Two 
factions were ready to divide the field with each other, and 
radicalism was opposed to conservatism and between the 
two wings there were arranged schools of various tendencies. 
The Sthaviras were pitted against the Mahasarhghikas, 
with twenty or more different schools representing various 
grades of diversity.? 

We cannot, however, exclude from the body of Budd- 
hism all the divergent views on the Buddha and his teach- 
ing as something foreign and not belonging to the con- 
stituent elements of Buddhism. For these views are exactly 


1 When the Buddha entered Nirvana, the monks cried, ‘Too soon has 
the Tathagata passed away, too soon has the World-honoured One 
passed away, too soon has the Great Law died out; all beings are for ever 
left to misery ; for the Eye of the World is gone.’ Their lamentation was 
beyond description, they lay on the ground like great trees with roots, 
stems, and branches all torn and broken to pieces, they rolled and 
wriggled like a slain snake. Such excessive expressions of grief were quite 

- natural for those Buddhists whose hearts were directed towards the per- 
sonality of their master more than towards his sane and rationalistic 
teachings. Cf. the Pali Parinibbdna-suttanta. 

* For a more or less detailed account of the various Buddhist schools 
that came up within a few centuries after the Buddha, see Vasumitra’s 
Samayabhedo-paracana-cakra. Professor Suisai Funahashi recently pub- 
lished an excellent commentary on this book. 


52 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


what support the frame of Buddhism, and without them 
the frame itself will be a non-entity altogether. The error 
with most critics of any existent religion with a long history 
of development is to conceive it as a completed system 
which is to be accepted as such, while the fact is that any- 
thing organic and spiritual—and we consider religion such 
—has no geometrical outline which can be traced on paper 
by ruler and compass. It refuses to be objectively defined, 
for this will be setting a limit to the growth of its spirit. 
Thus to know what Buddhism is will be to get into the life 
of Buddhism and to understand it from the inside as it un- 
folds itself objectively in history. Therefore, the definition 
of Buddhism must be that of the life-force which carries 
forward a spiritual movement called Buddhism. All these 
doctrines, controversies, constructions, and interpretations 
that were offered after the Buddha’s death as regards his 
person, life, and teaching were what essentially constituted 
the life of Indian Buddhism, and without these there could 
be no spiritual activity to be known as Buddhism. 

In a word, what constituted the life and spirit of Budd- 
hism is nothing else than the inner life and spirit of the 
Buddha himself; Buddhism is the structure erected around 
the inmost consciousness of its founder. The style and 
material of the outer structure may vary as history moves 
forward, but the inner meaning of Buddhahood which 
supports the whole edifice remains the same and ever 
living. While on earth the Buddha tried to make it in- 
telligible in accordance with the capacities of his immediate 
followers; that is to say, the latter did their best to com- 
prehend the deeper significance of the various discourses 
of their master, in which he pointed the way to final 
deliverance. As we are told, the Buddha discoursed ‘with 
one voice’,! but this was interpreted and understood by his 


1 Cf. The Sukhdavati-vyitha (edited by Max Muller and B. Nanjio), p. 7 
where we have: ‘Buddhasvaro anantaghoshah’; that is, the Buddha’s 
voice is of infinite sounds. See also the Saddharma-pundarika (p. 128), 
where we read: ‘Savarena caikena vadami dharmam’—I preach the 
law with one voice. The parable of the water of one taste (ekarasam vari), 
variously producing herbs, shrubs, and others, is very well known among 
the Mahayanists. 


oe) 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


devotees in as manifold manners as possible. This was in- 
evitable, for we have each our own inner experience which 
is to be explained in terms of our own creation, naturally 
varying in depth and breadth. In most cases these so-called 
individual inner experiences, however, may not be so deep 
and forceful as to demand absolutely original phraseology, 
but may remain satisfied with new interpretations of the 
old terms—once brought into use by an ancient original 
spiritual leader. And this is the way every great historical 
religion grows enriched in its contents or ideas. In some 
cases this enrichment may mean the overgrowth of super- 
structures ending in a complete burial of the original spirit. 
This is where critical judgment is needed, but otherwise we 
must not forget to recognize the living principle still in 
activity. In the case of Buddhism we must not neglect to 
read the inner life of the Buddha himself asserting itself in 
the history of a religious system designated after his name. 
The claim of the Zen followers that they are transmitting 
the essence of Buddhism is based on their belief that Zen 
takes hold of the enlivening spirit of the Buddha, stripped 
of all its historical and doctrinal garments. 


Some Vital Problems of Buddhism 


To the earlier Buddhists the problem did not present 
itself in this light; that is to say, they did not realize that 
the centre of all their dogmatics and controversies was to 
ascertain the real inner life of the Buddha, which con- 
stituted their active faith in the Buddha and his teaching. 
Without exactly knowing why, they first entertained, after 
the passing of the Buddha, a strong desire to speculate on 
the nature of his personality. They had no power to check 
the constant and insistent cry of this desire brimming over 
in their inmost hearts. What constituted Buddhahood? 
What was the essence of Buddhahood? Questions like these 
assailed them one after another, and among those there 


oF 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


were the following which stood out more prominently as 
they were more vitally interesting. They were those con- 
cerned with the Enlightenment of the Buddha, his entrance 
into Nirvana, his former life as a Bodhisattva (that is, as one 
capable of Enlightenment), and his teaching as viewed 
from their way of understanding the Buddha. Thus his 
teaching ceased to be considered independently of its 
author, the truth of the teaching was so organically con- 
nected with the Buddha’s personality, the Dharma was to 
be believed because it was the very embodiment of Buddha- 
hood, and not necessarily because it was so logically con- 
sistent or philosophically tenable. The Buddha was the key 
to the truth of Buddhism. 

When attention thus centres in the person of the Buddha 
as the author of the Dharma, the question of his inner 
experience known as Enlightenment becomes the most 
vital one. Without this experience the Buddha could not be 
called a Buddha; in fact, the term ‘Buddha’, the Enlight- 
ened One, was his own making. If a man understands what 
enlightenment is or really experiences it in himself, he 
knows the whole secret of the Buddha’s superhuman 
nature and with it the riddle of life and the world. The 
essence of Buddhism must then lie in the Doctrine of Perfect 
Enlightenment. In the enlightened mind of the Buddha 
there were many things which he did not, and could not, 
divulge to his disciples. When he refused to answer meta- 
physical questions, it was not because the minds of the 
questioners were not developed enough to comprehend the 
full implications of them. If, however, the Buddhists really 
desired to know their master, and his teaching, they had to 
study the secrets of Enlightenment. As they had no living 
master now they had to solve the problems by themselves 
if they could, and they were never tired of exhausting their 
intellectual ingenuity on them. Various theories were then 
advanced, and Buddhism grew richer in content, it came 
to reflect something eternally valid besides mere personal 
teaching of an individual. It ceased to be a thing merely 
historical, but a system ever living, growing, and energy- 


55 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


imparting. Various Mahayana Sitras and Shastras were 
produced to develop various aspects of the content of 
Enlightenment as realized by the Buddha. Some of them 
were speculative, others mystical, and still others ethical 
and practical. In the idea of Enlightenment was thus 
focused all Buddhist thought. 

Nirvana as the ideal of Buddhist life next engaged the 
serious attention of Buddhist philosophers. Was it an 
annihilation of existence, or that of passions or desires, or 
the dispelling of ignorance, or a state of egolessness? Did the 
Buddha really enter into a state of utter extinction leaving 
all sentient beings to their own fate? Did the love he showed 
to his followers vanish with his passing? Would he not come 
back among them in order to guide them, to enlighten 
them, to listen to their spiritual anguish? The value of such 
a grand personality as the Buddha could not perish with his 
physical existence, it ought to remain with us for ever as a 
thing of eternal validity. How could this notion be recon- 
ciled with the annihilation theory of Nirvana so prevalent 
among the personal disciples of the Buddha? When history 
conflicts with our idea of value, can it not be interpreted 
to the satisfaction of our religious yearnings? What is the 
objective authority of ‘facts’ if not supported by an inwardly 
grounded authority? Varieties of interpretation are then set 
forth in the Mahayana texts as to the implications of 
Nirvana and other cognate conceptions to be found in the 
‘original’ teaching of the Buddha. 

What is the relationship between Enlightenment and 
Nirvana? How did Buddhists come to realize Arhatship? 
What convinced them of their attainment? Is the En- 
lightenment of an Arhat the same as that of the Buddha? To 
answer these questions and many others in close connection 


+ Here we find the justification of a ‘mystic’ interpretation of the 
sacred books of any religion. The Swedenborgian doctrine of Correspon- 
dence thus grows illuminating. The philosophy of Shingon mysticism 
somewhat reflects the idea of correspondence, though naturally it is based 
on a different set of philosophical ideas. Varieties of interpretation are 
always possible in anything not only because of the presence of the sub- 


jective elements in every judgment, but because of infinite compli- 
cations of objective relationship. 
56 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


with them was the task imposed upon various schools of 
Hinayana and Mahayana Buddhism. While they quarrelled 
much, they never forgot that they were all Buddhists and 
whatever interpretations they gave to these problems they 
were faithful to their Buddhist experience. They were 
firmly attached to the founder of their religion and only 
wished to get thoroughly intimate with the faith and 
teaching as first promulgated by the Buddha. Some of 
them were naturally more conservative and wished to sub- 
mit to the orthodox and traditional way of understanding 
the Dharma; but there were others, as in every field of 
human life, whose inner experience meant more to them, 
and to harmonize this with the traditional authority they 
resorted to metaphysics to its fullest extent. Their efforts, 
there is no doubt, were honest and sincere, and when they 
thought they solved the difficulties or contradictions they 
were satisfied inwardly as well as intellectually. In fact they 
had no other means of egress from the spiritual impasse in 
which they found themselves through the natural and 
inevitable growth of their inmost life. This was the way 
Buddhism had to develop if it ever had in it any life to 
row. 
: While Enlightenment and Nirvana were closely related 
to the conception of Buddhahood itself, there was another 
idea of great importance to the development of Buddhism, 
which, however, had no direct connection apparently, 
though not in its ultimate signification, with the per- 
sonality of the Buddha. This idea naturally proved to be 
most fruitful in the history of Buddhist dogmatics along 
with the doctrines of Enlightenment and Nirvana. I mean 
by this the doctrine of non-Atman which denies the 
existence of an ego-substance in our psychic life. When the 
notion of Atman was ruling Indian minds, it was a bold 
announcement on the part of the Buddha to regard it as the 
source of ignorance and transmigration. The theory of 
Origination (pratitya-samutpdda) which seems to make up 
the foundation of the Buddha’s teaching is thus finally 
resolved into the finding of a mischievous ‘designer’ who 


57 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


works behind all our spiritual restlessness. Whatever inter- 
pretation was given to the doctrine of non-Atman in the 
early days of Buddhism, the idea came to be extended to 
things inanimate as well. Not only was there no ego-sub- 
stance behind our mental life, but there was no ego in the 
physical world, which meant that we could not separate 
in reality acting from actor, force from mass, or life from its 
manifestations. So far as thinking goes, we can establish 
these two pairs of conception as limiting each other, but in 
the actuality of things they must all be one, as we cannot 
impose our logical way of thinking upon reality in its con- 
creteness. When we transfer this separation from thought 
into reality we encounter many difficulties not only in- 
tellectual but moral and spiritual, from which we suffer un- 
speakable anguish later. This was felt by the Buddha, and 
he called this mixing up Ignorance (avidyd). The Maha- 
yana doctrine of Sinyata was a natural conclusion. But I 
need not ‘make any remark here to the effect that the 
Sinyata theory is not nihilism or acosmism, but that it has 
its positive background which sustains it and gives life 
to it. 

It was in the natural order of thought now for Buddhists 
to endeavour to find a philosophical explanation of En- 
lightenment and Nirvana in the theory of non-Atman or 
Sanyata, and this to the best of their intellectual power and 
in the light of their spiritual experience. They finally found 
out that Enlightenment was not a thing exclusively belong- 
ing to the Buddha, but that each one of us could attain it if 
he got rid of ignorance by abandoning the dualistic con- 
ception of life and of the world ; they further concluded that 
Nirvana was not vanishing into a state of absolute non- 
existence, which was an impossibility as long as we had to 
reckon with the actual facts of life, and that Nirvana in its 
ultimate signification was an affrmation—an affirmation 
beyond opposites of all kinds. This metaphysical under- 
standing of the fundamental problem of Buddhism marks 
the features of the Mahayana philosophy. As to its practical 
side where the theory of Sinyata and the doctrine of 


58 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


Enlightenment are harmoniously united and realized in 
life, or where the Buddhists aim to enter into the inner 
consciousness of the Buddha as was revealed to him under 
the Bodhi-trees, we will refer to it in the following section. 


Almost all Buddhist scholars in Japan agree that all these 
characteristic ideas of the Mahayana are systematically 
traceable in Hinaydna literature; and that all the recon- 
structions and transformations which the Mahaydnists are 
supposed to have put on the original form of Buddhism are 
really nothing but an unbroken continuation of one original 
Buddhist spirit and life, and further that even the so-called 
primitive Buddhism, as is expounded in the Pali canons 
and in the Agama texts of the Chinese Tripitaka, is also the 
result of an elaboration on the part of the earlier followers 
of the Buddha. If the Mahayana is not Buddhism proper, 
neither is the Hinayana, for the historical reason that 
neither of them represents the teaching of the Buddha as it 
was preached by the Master himself. Unless one limits the 
use of the term Buddhism very narrowly and only to a 
certain form of it, no one can very well refuse to include 
both Mahayana and Hinaydna in the same denomination. 
And, in my opinion, considering the organic relation 
between system and experience and the fact that the spirit 
of the Buddha himself is present in all these constructions, 
it is proper that the term Buddhism should be used in a 
broad, comprehensive, and inward sense. 

This is not the place to enter into the details of organic 
relationship existing between the Hinayana and the 
Mahayana; for the object of this essay is to delineate the 
course of development as traversed by Zen Buddhism 
before it reached the present form. Having outlined my 
position with regard to the definition of Buddhism and the 
Mahayana in general as a manifestation of Buddhist life 
and thought, or rather of the inner experience of the 
Buddha himself, the next step will be to see where lies the 
source of Zen and how it is one of the legitimate successors 
and transmitters of the Buddha’s spirit. 


oo 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


xen and Enlightenment 


The origin of Zen, as is the case with all other forms of 
Buddhism, is to be sought in Supreme Perfect Enlighten- 
ment (anuttara-samyak-sambodhi) attained by the Buddha 
while he was sitting under the Bodhi-tree, near the city of 
Gaya. If this Enlightenment is of no value and signification 
to the development of Buddhism, Zen then has nothing to 
do with Buddhism, it was altogether another thing created 
by the genius of Bodhidharma, who visited China early 
in the sixth century. But if Enlightenment is the raison 
d’étre of Buddhism—that is to say, if Buddhism is an edifice 
erected on the solid basis of Enlightenment, realized by the 
Buddha and making up his being—Zen is the central pillar 
which supports the entire structure, it composes the direct 
line of continuation drawn out from the content of the 
Buddha’s illumined mind. Traditionally Zen is considered 
to have been transmitted by the Buddha to his foremost 
disciple, Mahakasyapa, when the Buddha held out a bunch 
of flowers to his congregation, the meaning of which was at 
once grasped by Mahakasyapa, who quietly smiled at him. 
The historicity of this incident is justly criticized, but know- 
ing the value of Enlightenment we cannot ascribe the 
authority of Zen just to such an episode as this. Zen was in 
fact handed over not only to Mahakasyapa but to all beings 
who will follow the steps of the Buddha, the Enlightened 
One. 

Like a true Indian the Buddha’s idea of ascetic meditation 
was to attain Vimoksha (or simply Moksha, deliverance) 
from the bondage of birth and death. There were several 
ways open to him to reach the goal. According to the 
Brahman philosophers of those days, the great fruit of 
deliverance could be matured by embracing religious truth, 
or by practising asceticism or chastity, or by learning, or 
by freeing oneself from passions. Each in its way was an 
excellent means, and if they were practised severally or all 
together, they might result in emancipation of some kind. 


60 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


But the philosophers talked about methods and did not give 
one any trustworthy information concerning their actual 
spiritual experience, and what the Buddha wished was this 
self-realization, a personal experience, an actual insight into 
truth, and not mere discoursing about methods, or playing 
with concepts.1 He detested all philosophical reasonings 
which he called drishti or dargana, for they would lead him 
nowhere, bring him no practical result in his spiritual life. 
He was never satisfied until he inwardly realized the Bodhi 
as the truth immediately presented to his transcendental 
consciousness and whose absolute nature was so inner, so 
self-convincing that he had no doubt whatever in regard to 
its universal validity. 

The content of this Enlightenment was explained by the 
Buddha as the Dharma which was to be directly perceived 
(sanditthika), beyond limits of time (akalika), to be per- 
sonally experienced (ehipassika), altogether persuasive 
(opanayika), and to be understood each for himself by the 
wise (paccattam veditabbo vififiuhi). This meant that the 
Dharma was to be intuited and not to be analytically 
reached by concepts. The reason why the Buddha so 
frequently refused to answer metaphysical problems was 
partly due to his conviction that the ultimate truth was to 
be realized in oneself through one’s own efforts ;? for all 
that could be gained through discursive understanding was 
the surface of things and not things themselves, conceptual 
knowledge never gave full satisfaction to one’s religious 
yearning. The attainment of the Bodhi could not be the 

1Cf, such Siitras as the Tevijja, Mahdli, Brahmajala, etc., in the 
Digha Nikdya. See also the Sutta Nipdta, especially the Atthakavagga, 
which is one of the earliest Buddhist texts in our possession at present. 
There we read about ‘Ajjhattasanti’ (inward peace), which cannot be 
attained by philosophy, nor by tradition, nor by good deeds. ‘ 

2 That the Buddha never neglected to impress his disciples with the 
idea that the ultimate truth was to be realized by and in oneself is 
evidenced throughout the Agamas. Everywhere we encounter with such 
phrases as ‘without depending upon another, he believed, or thought, or 
dissolved his doubts, or attained self-confidence in the Law’. From this 
self-determination followed the consciousness that one had all one’s evil 


leakages (dsrava) stopped or drained off, culminating in the realization 
of Arhatship—which is the goal of Buddhist life. 


61 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


accumulation of dialectical subtleties. And this is the position 
taken up by Zen Buddhism as regards what it considers a 
final reality. Zen in this respect faithfully follows the in- 
junction of the Master. 

That the Buddha had an insight of higher order into the 
nature of things than that which could be obtained through 
ordinary logical reasoning is evidenced everywhere even in 
the so-called Hinayana literature. To cite just one instance 
from the Brahmajala Sutta in which the Buddha deals with 
all the heretical schools that were in existence in his days, 
he invariably makes reference after refuting them to the 
Tathagata’s deeper understanding which goes beyond their 
speculations ‘wriggling like an eel’. What they discuss just 
for the sake of discussion and to show the keenness of their 
analytical faculty about the soul, future life, eternity, and 
other important spiritual subjects, is not productive of any 
actual benefits for our inner welfare. The Buddha knew 
well where these reasonings would finally lead to and how 
trivial and unwholesome they were after all. So we read in 
the Brahmajala Sutta: ‘Of these, Brethren, the Tathagata 
knows that these speculations thus arrived at, thus insisted 
on, will have such and such a result, such and such an 
effect on the future condition of those who trust in them. 
That does he know, and he knows also other things far 
beyond (far better than those speculations): and having 
that knowledge he is not puffed up, and thus untarnished he 
has in his own heart realized the way of escape from them, 
has understood, as they really are, the rising up and passing 
away of sensations, their sweet taste, their danger, how they 
cannot be relied on; and not grasping after any [of those 
things men are eager for], he, the Tathagata, is quite set 
free.’} 

While the ideal of Arhatship was no doubt the entering 
into Nirvana that leaves nothing behind (anupddhisesha), 
whatever this may mean, it did not ignore the significance 
of Enlightenment ; no, it could not very well do so without 

1 


The Dialogues of the Buddha, Sacred Books of the Buddhists, Vol. II, 
Pp. 29. 


62 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


endangering its own reason of existence. For Nirvana was 
nothing else in its essence than Enlightenment, the content 
was identical in either case. Enlightenment was Nirvana 
reached while yet in the flesh, and no Nirvana was ever 
possible without obtaining Enlightenment. The latter may 
have a more intellectual note in it than the former, which is 
a psychological state realized through Enlightenment. 
Bodhi is spoken of in the so-called primitive Buddhism just 
as much as Nirvana. So long as passions (klefa) were not 
subdued, and the mind still remained enshrouded in 
ignorance, no Buddhists could ever dream of obtaining a 
Moksha (deliverence) which is Nirvana, and this deliver- 
ance from Ignorance and passions was the work of En- 
lightenment. Generally Nirvana is understood in its 
negative aspect as the total extinction of everything, body 
and soul, but in the actuality of life no such negativist con- 
ception could ever prevail, and the Buddha never meant 
Nirvana to be so interpreted. If there were nothing 
affirmative in Nirvana, the Mahayanists could never have 
evolved the positive conception of it later. Though the 
immediate disciples of the Buddha were not conscious of 
this, there was always the thought of Enlightenment 
implied in it. Enlightenment attained by the Buddha after 
a week’s meditation under the Bodhi-tree could not be of 
no consequence to his Arhat-disciples, however negatively 
the latter tended to apply this petal to the attainment of 
their life-object. 

The true significance of Enlightenment was effectively 
brought out by the Mahay4nists not only in its intellectual 
implications but in its moral and religious bearings. The 
result was the conception of Bodhisattvaship in contra- 
distinction to Arhatship, the ideal of their rival school. ‘The 
Arhat and the Bodhisattva are essentially the same. But the 
Mahayanists, perceiving a deeper sense in Enlightenment 
as the most important constituent element in the attain- 
ment of the final goal of Buddhism, which is spiritual free- 
dom (ceto-vimutti), as the Nikayas have it, did not wish to 
have it operated in themselves only, but wanted to see it 


63 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


realized in every being sentient and even non-sentient. 
Not only was this their subjective yearning, but there was 
an objective basis on which the yearning could be justified 
and realized. It was the presence in every individual of a 
faculty designated by the Mahay4nists as Prajfia.1 This was 
the principle that made Enlightenment possible in us as well 
as in the Buddha. Without Prajfia there could be no En- 
lightenment, which was the highest spiritual power in our 
possession. The intellect, or what is ordinarily known by 
Buddhist scholars as Vijfiana, was relative in its activity, 
and could not comprehend the ultimate truth which was 
Enlightenment. And it was due to this ultimate truth that 
we could lift ourselves above the dualism of matter and 
spirit, of ignorance and wisdom, of passion and non- 
attachment. Enlightenment consisted in personally realiz- 
ing the truth, ultimate and absolute and capable of 
affirmation. Thus we are all Bodhisattvas now, beings of 
Enlightenment, if not in actuality, then potentially. Bodhi- 
sattvas are also Prajiia-sattvas, as we are universally en- 
dowed with Prajfia, which, when fully and truly operating, : 
will realize in us Enlightenment, and intellectually (in its 
highest sense) lift us above appearances, which is a state 
designated by Nikaya Buddhists as ‘emancipation of mind 
or reason’ (pafita-vimutti or sammad-aiifia vimutti). 

If by virtue of Enlightenment Gautama was trans- 
formed into the Buddha, and then if all beings are en- 
dowed with Prajiia and capable of Enlightenment—that 
is, if they are thus Bodhisattvas—the logical conclusion will 
be that Bodhisattvas are all Buddhas, or destined to be 
Buddhas as soon as sufficient conditions obtain. Hence the 
Mahayana doctrine that all beings, sentient or non-sentient, 


1 In fact, the term, prajfid or pafifid in Pali, is not an exclusive pos- 
session of the Mahay4nists, for it is also fully used by their rival dis- 
ciples of the Buddha. The latter, however, failed to lay any special 
emphasis on the idea of enlightenment and its supreme significance in 
the body of Buddhism, and as the consequence Prajiia was compara- 
tively neglected by the Hinayanists. Mahayanism on the other hand 
may be designated as the religion of Prajfia par excellence. It is even deified 
and most reverently worshipped. 


64 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


are endowed with the Buddha-nature, and that our minds 
rare the Buddha-mind and our bodies are the Buddha-body. 
The Buddha before his Enlightenment was an ordinary 
mortal, and we, ordinary mortals, will be Buddhas the 
moment our mental eyes! open in Enlightenment. In 
this do we not see plainly the most natural and most logical 
course of things leading up to the main teaching of Zen as 
it later developed in China and Japan? 

How extensively and intensively the concept of Enlighten- 
ment influenced the development of Mahayana Buddhism 
may be seen in the composition of the Saddharmapundarika, 
which is really one of the profoundest Mahayana protests 
against the Hinayana conception of the Buddha’s En- 
lightenment. According to the latter, the Buddha attained 
it at Gaya while meditating under the Bodhi-tree, for they 
regarded the Buddha as a mortal being like themselves, 
subject to historical and psychological conditions. But the 
Mahayanists could not be satisfied with such a realistic 
common sense interpretation of the personality of the 
Buddha; they saw something in it which went deep into 
their hearts and wanted to come in immediate touch with 
it. What they sought was finally given and they found that 
the idea of the Buddha’s being a common soul was a 
delusion, that the Tathagata arrived in .his Supreme Per- 
fect Enlightenment ‘many hundred thousand myriads of 
kotis of zons ago’, and that all those historical ‘facts’ in his 
life which are recorded in the Agama or Nikaya literature 
are his ‘skilful devices’ (updaya-kauSalya) to lead creatures to 
full ripeness and go in the Buddha Way.? In other words, 
this means that Enlightenment is the absolute reason of the 
universe and the essence of Buddhahood, and therefore 
that to obtain Enlightenment is to realize in one’s inner 
consciousness the ultimate truth of the world which for 
ever is. ’ 

1 This is no other than ‘the opening of the pure eye of the Dharma’ 
(virajam vitamalam dhamma-cakkhum udapadi), frequently referred to in the 
Agamas when one attains to Arhatship. 


3 Read, for instance, chapter xv, entitled ‘Duration of Life of the 
Tathagata’. 


E pai 65 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


While the Pundarika emphasizes the Buddha-aspect of 
Enlightenment, Zen directs its attention mainly to the 
Enlightenment-aspect of Buddhahood. When this latter 
aspect is considered intellectually, we have the philosophy 
of Buddhist dogmatics, which is studied by scholars of the 
Tendai (t‘ien-tai), Kegon (avatamsaka), Hosso (dharmalaksha), 
and other schools. Zen approaches it from the practical 
side of life—that is, to work out Enlightenment in life 
itself. 

Seeing that the idea of Enlightenment played such an 
important role in the development of Mahayana Buddhism, 
what is the content of it? Can we describe it in an intelli- 
gible manner so that our analytical intellect could grasp 
it and make it an object of thought? The Fourfold Noble 
Truth was not the content of Enlightenment, nor was the 
Twelvefold Chain of Causation, nor the Eightfold Right- 
eous Path. The truth flashed through the Buddha’s con- 
sciousness was not such a thought capable of discursive un- 
folding. When he exclaimed: 


‘Through birth and rebirth’s endless round, 
Seeking in vain, I hastened on, 
To find who framed this edifice, 

What misery !—birth incessantly ! 


‘O builder! I’ve discovered thee! 
This fabric thou shall ne’er rebuild! 
The rafters are all broken now, 
And pointed roof demolished lies ! 
This mind has demolition reached, 
And seen the last of all desire !?1 


he must have grasped something much deeper than mere 

dialectics. There must have been something most funda- 

mental and ultimate which at once set all his doubts at rest, 

not only intellectual doubts but spiritual anguish. Indeed, 

forty-nine years of his active life after Enlightenment were 

commentaries on it, and yet they did not exhaust its con- 
* Dhammanadam, 153, 154. 


66 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


tent; nor did all the later speculations of Nagarjuna, 
ASvaghosha, Vasubandhu, and Asanga explain it away. 
In the Lankdvatdra therefore the author makes the Buddha 
confess that since his Enlightenment till his passing into 
Nirvana he uttered not a word.! 

Therefore, again with all his memory and learning, 
Ananda could not sound the bottom of the Buddha’s wis- . 
dom, while the latter was still alive. According to tradition, 
Ananda’s attainment to Arhatship took place at the time 
of the First Convocation in which he was not allowed to 
take part in spite of his twenty-five years’ attendance upon 
the Buddha. Grieving over the fact, he spent the whole 
night perambulating in an open square, and when he was 
about to lay himself down on a couch all exhausted, he all 
of a sudden came to realize the truth of Buddhism, which 
with all his knowledge and understanding had escaped 
him all those years. 

What does this mean? Arhatship is evidently not a matter 
of scholarship ; it is something realized in the twinkling of an 
eye after a long arduous application to the matter. The pre- 
paratory course may occupy a long stretch of time, but the 
crisis breaks out at a point instantaneously, and one is an 
Arhat, or a Bodhisattva, or even a Buddha. The content of 
Enlightenment must be quite simple in nature, and yet tre- 
mendous in effect. That is to say, intellectually, it must 
transcend all the complications involved in an episte- 
mological exposition of it; and psychologically, it must be 
the reconstruction of oné’s entire personality. Such a funda- 
mental fact naturally evades description, and can be 
grasped only by an act of intuition and through personal 
experience. It is really the Dharma in its highest sense. If by 
‘the stirring of one thought’ Ignorance came into our life, 


1 Ata etasmatokaranan mahamate mayedam uktarh: yarh ca ratrimh © 
tathagato ’bhisambuddho yam ca ratrim parinirvasyati atrantara ekam 
api akshararh tathagatena na udahritarh na udaharishyati Lankavatara, 
chapter iii, p. 144. See also chapter vii, p. 240. (For this reason, O 
Mahamati. I say unto you: During the time that elapsed between the 
night of the Tathagata’s Enlightenment and the night of his entrance 
into Nirvana, not one word, not one statement was given out by him.) 


67 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


the awakening of another thought must put a stop to 
Ignorance and bring about Enlightenment.* And in this 
there is no thought to be an object of logical consciousness 
or empirical reasoning; for in Enlightenment thinker and 
thinking and thought are merged in the one act of seeing 
into the very being of Self. No further explanation of the 
Dharma is possible, hence an appeal to via negativa, And 
this has reached its climax in the Sinyata philosophy of 
Nagarjuna which is based upon the teaching of the 
Prajfiaparamita literature of Buddhism. 

So we see that Enlightenment is not the outcome of an 
intellectual process in which one idea follows another in 
sequence finally to terminate in conclusion or judgment. 
There is neither process nor judgment in Enlightenment, it 
is something more fundamental, something which makes a 
judgment possible, and without which no form of judgment 
can take place. In judgment there are a subject and a 
predicate; in Enlightenment subject is predicate, and pre- 
dicate is subject; they are here merged as one, but not as 
one of which something can be stated, but as one from 
which arises judgment. We cannot go beyond this absolute 
oneness ; all the intellectual operations stop here ; when they 
endeavour to go further, they draw a circle in which they 
for ever repeat themselves. This is the wall against which 
all philosophies have beaten in vain. This is an intellectual 
terra incognita, in which prevails the principle, ‘Credo quia 
absurdum est’, This region of darkness, however, gives up 
its secrets when attacked by the will, by the force of one’s 
entire personality. Enlightenment is the illuminating of this 
dark region, when the whole thing is seen at one glance, 
and all intellectual inquiries find here their rationale. 
Hitherto one may have been intellectually convinced of the 
truth of a certain proposition, but somehow it has not yet 


1 According to Afvaghosha’s Awakening of Faith, Ignorance means the 
sudden awakening of a thought (citia) in consciousness, This may be 
variously interpreted, but as long as Ignorance is conceived, not as a 
process requiring a certain duration of time, but an event instantane- 
ously taking place, its disappearance which is Enlightenment must also 
be an instantaneous happening. 


68 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


entered into his life, the truth still lacks ultimate confir- 
mation, and he cannot help feeling a vague sense of in- 
determinateness and uneasiness. Enlightenment now comes 
upon him in a mysterious way without any previous an- 
nouncement, and all is settled with him, he is an Arhat or 
even a Buddha. The dragon has got its eyes dotted, and it 
is no more a lifeless image painted on a canvas, but winds 
and rains are its willing servants now. 

It is quite evident that Enlightenment is not the con- 
sciousness of logical perspicuity or analytical completeness, 
it is something more than an intellectual sense of con- 
clusiveness, there is something in it which engages the en- 
tire field of consciousness not only by throwing light on the 
whole series of links welded for the purpose of solving the 
problems of life, but by giving a feeling of finality to all the 
spiritual anguish that has ever been so disquieting to one’s 
soul, The logical links, however accurately adjusted and 
perfectly wrought together, fail by themselves to be pacifying 
to the soul in the most thoroughgoing manner. We require 
something more fundamental or more immediate for the 
purpose, and I maintain that the mere reviewing of the 
Fourfold Noble Truth or the Twelvefold Chain of Origi- 
nation does not result in the attainment of the Anuttara- 
samyak-sarnbodhi. The Buddha must have experienced 
something that went far deeper into his inmost conscious- 
ness than the mere intellectual grasping of empirical truths. 
He must have gone beyond the sphere of analytical reason- 
ing. He must have come in touch with that which makes our 
intellectual operations possible, in fact that which conditions 
the very existence of our conscious life. 


When Sariputra saw Aégvajit he noticed how composed 
the latter was, with all his organs of sense well controlled 
and how clear and bright the colour of his skin was. Sari- 
putra could not help asking him who was his teacher and 
what doctrine he taught. To this Agvajit replied : “The great 
Sakyamuni, the Blessed One, is my teacher and his 
doctrine in substance is this: 


69 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘The Buddha hath the cause told 

Of all things springing from a cause; 
And also how things cease to be— 
’Tis this the Mighty Monk proclaims.’ 


It is said that on hearing this exposition of the Dharma, 
there arose in the mind of Sariputra a clear and distinct 
perception of the Dharma that whatever is subject to 
origination is subject also to cessation. Sariputra then 
attained to the deathless, sorrowless state, lost sight of and 
neglected for many myriads of kalpas. 

The point to which I wish to call attention here is this: 
is there anything intellectually remarkable and extra- 
ordinary and altogether original in this stanza that so 
miraculously awakened Sariputra from his habitually 
cherished way of thinking? So far as the Buddha’s Dharma 
(Doctrine) was concerned, there was not much of anything 
in these four lines. It is said that they are the substance of 
the Dharma; if so, the Dharma may be said to be rather 
devoid of substance, and how could Sariputra ever find 
here a truth concrete and efficient enough to turn him away 
from the old rut? The stanza which is noted for having 
achieved the conversion of not only Sariputra but Maud- 
galyayana, has really nothing characteristic of Buddhistic 
thought strong enough to produce such a great result. The 
reason for this, therefore, must be sought somewhere else ; 
that is, not in the formal truth contained in the stanza, but 
in the subjective condition of the one to whose ears it 
chanced to fall and in whom it awakened a vision of an- 
other world. It was in the mind of Sariputra itself that 
opened up to a clear and distinct understanding of the 
Dharma; in other words, the Dharma was revealed in him 
as something growing out of himself and not as an external 
truth poured into him. In a sense the Dharma had been in 
his mind all the time, but he was not aware of its presence 
there until Agvajit’s stanza was uttered. He was not a mere 
passive recipient into which something not native to his 
Self was poured. The hearing of the stanza gave him ‘an 


7O 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


Opportunity to experience the supreme moment. If 
Sariputra’s understanding was intellectual and discursive, 
his dialogue with Ananda later on could not have taken 
place in the way it did. In the Sarhyutta-Nikaya, iii., 235/f, 
we read: 

Ananda saw Siriputra coming afar off, and he said to 
him: ‘Serene and pure and radiant is your face, Brother 
Sariputra! In what mood has Sariputra been today?’ 

‘I have been alone in Dhyana, and to me came never the 
thought: J am attaining it! J have got it! J have emerged 
from it!’ 

Here we noticed the distinction between an intellectual 
and a spiritual understanding which is Enlightenment. 
When Sariputra referred to the cause of his being so serene, 
pure and radiant, he did not explain it logically but just 
stated the fact as he subjectively interpreted it himself. 
Whether this interpretation of his own was correct or not 
takes the psychologist to decide. What I wish to see here is 
that Sariputra’s understanding of the doctrine of ‘origi- 
nation and cessation’ was not the outcome of his intellectual 
analysis but an intuitive comprehension of his own inner 
life-process. Between the Buddha’s Enlightenment which is 
sung in the Hymn of Victory and Sariputra’s insight into 
the Dharma as the doctrine of causation, there is a close 
connection in the way their minds worked. In the one 
Enlightenment came first and then its expression; in the 
other a definite statement was addressed first and then 
came an insight; the process is reversed here. But the in- 
adequacy of relation between antecedent and consequence 
remains the same. The one does not sufficiently explain the 
other, when the logical and intellectual understanding 
alone is taken into consideration. The explanation must be 
sought not in the objective truth contained in the doctrine 
of causation, but in the state of consciousness itself of the 
enlightened subject. Otherwise, how do we account for the 
establishment of such a firm faith in self-realization or self- 
deliverance as this? ‘He has destroyed all evil passions 
(dsava); he has attained to heart-emancipation (cetovimuttt) 


7i 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


dod 


and intellect-emancipation (paffavimutti), here in this 
visible world he has by himself understood, realized, and 
mastered the Dharma, he has dived deep into it, has passed 
beyond doubt, has put away perplexity, has gained full 
confidence, he has lived the life, has done what was to be 
done, has destroyed the fetter of rebirth, he has compre- 
hended the Dharma as it is truly in itself.’? 

This is why the Lankdvatdra-Sitra tries so hard to tell us 
that language is altogether inadequate as the means of 
expressing and communicating the inner state of Enlighten- 
ment. While without language we may fare worse at least 
in our practical life, we must guard ourselves most deli- 
berately against our trusting it too much beyond its legiti- 
mate office. The Sitra gives the main reason for this, which 
is that language is the product of causal dependence, sub- 
ject to change, unsteady, mutually conditioned, and based 
on false judgment as to the true nature of consciousness. For 
this reason language cannot reveal to us the ultimate 
signification of things (paramdartha). The noted analogy of 
finger and moon is most appropriate to illustrate the re- 
lation between language and sense, symbol and reality. 

If the Buddha’s Enlightenment really contained so much 
in it that he himself could not sufficiently demonstrate or 
illustrate it with his ‘long thin tongue’ (prabhiitatanujihva) 
through his long peaceful life given to meditation and dis- 
coursing, how could those less than he ever hope to grasp it 
and attain spiritual emancipation? This is the position 
taken up by Zen: to comprehend the truth of Enlighten- 
ment, therefore, we must exercise some other mental power 
than intellection, if we are at all in possession of such. 

Discoursing fails to reach the goal, and yet we have an 
unsatiated aspiration after the unattainable. Are we then 
meant to live and die thus tormented for ever? If so, 
this is the most lamentable situation in which we find our- 
selves on earth. Buddhists have applied themselves most 
earnestly to the solution of the problem and have finally 


* This is the usual formula given as the qualification of an Arhat, to 
be met with throughout the Nikayas. 


72 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


come to see that we have after all within ourselves what we 
need. This is the power of intuition possessed by spirit and 
able to comprehend spiritual truth which will show us all 
the secrets of life making up the content of the Buddha’s 
Enlightenment. It is not an ordinary intellectual process of 
reasoning, but a power that will grasp something most 
fundamental in an instant and in the directest way. Prajiia 
is the name given to this power by the Buddhists, as I said, 
and what Zen Buddhism aims at in its relation to the 
doctrine of Enlightenment is to awaken Prajfia by the 
exercise of meditation. 

We read in the Saddharma-pundarika: ‘O Sariputra, the 
true Law understood by the Tathagata cannot be reasoned, 
is beyond the pale of reasoning. Why? For the Tathagata 
appears in the world to carry out one great object, which is 
to make all beings accept, see, enter into, and comprehend 
the knowledge and insight gained by the Tathagata, and 
also to make them enter upon the path of knowledge and in- 
sight attained by the Tathagata. . . . Those who learn it from 
the Tathagata also reach his Supreme Perfect Enlighten- 
ment.”! If such was the one great object of the Buddha’s 
appearance on earth, how do we get into the path of in- 
sight and realize Supreme Perfect Enlightenment? And if 
this Dharma of Enlightenment is beyond the limits of the 
understanding, no amount of philosophizing will ever bring 
us nearer the goal. How do we then learn it from the 
Tathagata? Decidedly not from his mouth, nor from the 
records of his sermons, nor from the ascetic practice, but 
from our own inner consciousness through the exercise of 
dhyana. And this is the doctrine of Zen. 


Enlightenment and Spiritual Freedom 


When the doctrine of Enlightenment makes its appeal 
to the inner experience of the Buddhist and its content is 
to be grasped immediately without any conceptual medium, 

1 Chapter ii, ‘On Skilfulness’. 


7S 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


the sole authority in his spiritual life will have to be found 
within himself; traditionalism or institutionalism will 
naturally lose all its binding force. According to him, then, 
propositions will be true—that is, living—because they are 
in accordance with his spiritual insight ; and his actions will 
permit no external standard of judgment; so long as they 
are the inevitable overflow of his inner life, they are good, 
even holy. The direct issue of this interpretation of Enlighten- 
ment will be the upholding of absolute spiritual freedom in 
every way, which will further lead to the unlimited ex- 
pansion of his mental outlook going beyond the narrow 
bounds of monastic and scholastic Buddhism. This was not, 
however, from the Mahay4anistic point of view, against the 
spirit of the Buddha. 

The constitution of the Brotherhood will now have to 
change. In the beginning of Buddhism, it was a congre- 
gation of homeless monks who subjected themselves to a 
certain set of ascetic rules of life. In this Buddhism was an 
exclusive possession of the élite, and the general public or 
Upasaka group who accepted the Threefold Refuge 
Formula was a sort of appendage to the regular or pro- 
fessional Brotherhood. When Buddhism was still in its 
first stage of development, even nuns (bhikshuni) were not 
allowed to come into the community; the Buddha received 
them only after great reluctance, prophesying that Budd- 
hism would now live only half of its normal life. We can 
readily see from this fact that the teaching of the Buddha 
and the doctrine of Enlightenment were meant to be 
practised and realized only among limited classes of people. 
While the Buddha regarded the various elements of his 
congregation with perfect impartiality, cherishing no pre- 
judices as to their social, racial, and other distinctions, the 
full benefit of his teaching could not extend beyond the 
monastic boundaries. If there was nothing in it that could 
benefit mankind in general, this exclusiveness was naturally 
to be expected. But the doctrine of Enlightenment was some- 
thing that could not be kept thus imprisoned, it had many 
things in it that would overflow all the limitations set to it. 


74 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


When the conception of Bodhisattvahood came to be 
emphatically asserted, a monastic and self-excluding com- 
munity could no longer hold its ground, a religion of 
monks and nuns had to become a religion of laymen and 
laywomen. An ascetic discipline leading to the Anitpad- 
hisesha-Nirvana had to give way to a system of teaching 
that would make anyone attain Enlightenment and 
demonstrate Nirvana in his daily life. In all the Mahayana 
Sutras, this general tendency in the unfoldment of Budd- 
hism is vehemently asserted, showing how intense was the 
struggle between conservatism and progressivism. 


This spirit of freedom, which is the power impelling 
Buddhism to break through its monastic shell and bringing 
forward the idea of Enlightenment ever vigorously before 
the masses, is the life-impulse of the universe—this un- 
hampered activity of spirit, and everything that interferes 
with it, is destined to be defated. The history of Buddhism 
is thus also a history of freedom in one’s spiritual, intel- 
lectual, and moral life. The moral aristocracy and discip- 
linary formalism of primitive Buddhism could not bind our 
spirit for a very long period of time. As the doctrine of 
Enlightenment grew to be more and more inwardly inter- 
preted, the spirit rose above the formalism of Buddhist 
discipline. It was of no absolute necessity for one to leave 
his home life and follow the footsteps of the wandering 
monks in order to reach the supreme fruit of Enlighten- 
ment. Inward purity, and not external piety, was the thing 
needed for the Buddhist life. The Upasakas were in this 
respect as good as the Bhikshus. The fact is most eloquently 
illustrated in the Vimalakirti-Sitra. The chief character here 
is Vimalakirti, a lay philosopher, outside the pale of the 
Brotherhood. None of the Buddha’s disciples were his 
matches in the depth, breadth, and subtleties of thought, 
and when the Buddha told them to visit his sick-room they all 
excused themselves for some reason or other, except 
Maijijuéri, who is Prajfia incarnate in Mahayana Buddhism. 

That the lay-devotees thus asserted themselves even at 


3) 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


the expense of the Arhats may also be gleaned from other 
sources than the Vimalakirti, but especially from such 
Siittras as the Srimald, Gandhavyitha, Vajrasamadhi, Can- 
drottara-darikd, etc. What is the most noteworthy in this 
connection is that woman plays an important rdéle on 
various occasions. Not only is she endowed with philos- 
ophizing talents, but she stands on equal footing with man. 
Among the fifty-three philosophers or leaders of thought 
visited by Sudhana in his religious pilgrimage, he inter- 
viewed many women in various walks of life, some of whom 
were even courtesans. They all wisely discoursed with the 
insatiable seeker of truth. What a different state of affairs 
this was when compared with the reluctant admission of 
women into the Sangha in the early days of Buddhism! 
Later Buddhism may have lost something in austerity, 
aloofness, and even saintliness, which appeal strongly to 
our religious imagination, but it has gained in democracy, 
picturesqueness, and largely in humanity. 


The free spirit which wanders out beyond the monastic 
walls of the Brotherhood now follows its natural consequence 
and endeavours to transcend the disciplinary rules and the 
ascetic formalism of the Hinayanists. The moral rules that 
were given by the Buddha to his followers as they were 
called for by the contingencies of life, were concerned more 
or less with externalism. When the Buddha remained with 
them as the living spirit of the Brotherhood, these rules were 
the direct expressions of the subjective life; but with the 
Buddha’s departure they grew rigid and failed to reach the 
inner spirit of their author, and the followers of Enlighten- 
ment revolted against them, upholding ‘the spirit that 
giveth life’. They advocated perfect freedom of spirit, even 
after the fashions of antinomians. If the spirit were pure, 
no acts of the body could spoil it; it could wander about 
anywhere it liked with absolute immunity. It would even 
go down to hell if it were necessary or expedient for them 
to do so, for the sake of the salvation of the depraved. It 
would indefinitely postpone the entering into Nirvana if 


76 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


there were still souls to save and minds to enlighten. Accord- 
ing to ‘the letter that killeth’, no Buddhists were allowed 
to enter a liquor-shop, or to be familiar with inmates of 
the houses barred from respectability; in short, even for a 
moment to be thinking of violating any of the moral pre- 
cepts. But to the Mahaydnists all kinds of ‘expediency’ or 
“devices’ were granted if they were fully enlightened and 
had their spirits thoroughly purified. They were living in a 
realm beyond good and evil, and as long as they were there, 
no acts of theirs could be classified and judged according to 
the ordinary measure of ethics ; they were neither moral nor 
immoral. These relative terms had no application in a king- 
dom governed by free spirits which soared above the rel- 
ative world of differences and oppositions. 

This was most slippery ground for the Mahayanists. 
When they were really enlightened and fathomed the depths 
of spirituality, every deed of theirs was a creative act of 
God, but in this extreme form of idealism, objectivity had 
no room, and consequently who could ever distinguish 
libertinism from spiritualism? In spite of this pitfall the 
Mahayanists were in the right in consistently following up 
all the implications of the doctrine of Enlightenment. Their 
parting company with the Hinayanists was inevitable. 


The doctrine of Enlightenment leads to the inwardness 
of one’s spiritual experience, which cannot be analysed 
intellectually without somehow involving logical contra- 
dictions. It thus seeks to break through every intelligent 
barrier that may be set against it; it longs for emancipation 
in every form, not only in the understanding but in life 
itself. The unscrupulous followers of Enlightenment are 
thus liable to degenerate into votaries of libertinism. If the 
Mahay4nists had remained here and had not seen further 
into the real nature of Prajfia, they would have certainly 
followed the fate of the Friends of the Free Spirit, but they 
knew how Enlightenment realizes its true signification in 
love for all beings and how freedom of spirit has its own 
principle to follow though nothing external is imposed upon 


re 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


it. For freedom does not mean lawlessness, which is the 
destruction and annihilation of itself, but creating out of its 
inner life-force all that is good and beautiful. This creating 
is called by the Mahayanists ‘skilful device’ (upaya- 
kaugalya), in which Enlightenment is harmoniously wedded 
to love. Enlightenment when intellectually conceived is not 
dynamical and stops at illumining the path which love will 
tread. But Prajiia is more than merely intellectual, it pro- 
duces Karuna (love or pity), and with her co-operation it 
achieves the great end of life, the salvation of all beings 
from Ignorance and passions and misery. It now knows no 
end in devising all kinds of means to carry out its own 
teleological functions. 

The Saddharma-Pundarika regards the Buddha’s appear- 
ance on earth and his life in history as the ‘skilful devices’ 
of world-salvation on the part of the Supreme Being of 
Eternal Enlightenment. This creation, however, ceases to 
be a creation in its perfect sense when the creator grows 
conscious of its teleological implications'; for here then is 
a split in his consciousness which will check the spon- 
taneous flowing-out of spirit, and then freedom will be 
lost at its source. Such devices as have grown conscious of 
their purposes are no more ‘skilful devices’, and according 

1 In this connection it may not be amiss to say a word about what is 
known in Buddhism as the ‘act of no-effort or no-purpose’ (andbhogacarya) 
or ‘the original vows of no-purpose’ (andbhogapranidhana). This corres- 
ponds, if I judge rightly, to the Christian idea of not letting the right 
hand know what the left hand is doing. When spirit attains to the reality 
of enlightenment and as a result is thoroughly purified of all defilements, 
intellectual and affective, it grows so perfect that whatever it does is pure, 
unselfish, and conducive to the welfare of the world. So long as we are 
conscious of the efforts we make in trying to overcome our selfish im- 
pulses and passions, there is a taint of constraint and artificiality, which 
interferes with spiritual innocence and freedom, and love which is the 
native virtue of an enlightened spirit cannot work out all that is implied 
in it and meant to be exercised for the preservation of itself. The ‘original 
vows’ are the content of love and begin to be operative, anabhoga (un- 
purposely), only when enlightenment is really creative. This is where 
religious life differs from mere morality, this is where the mere enuncia- 


tion of the Law of Origination (pratitya-samutpada) does not constitute 
Buddhist life, and this is where Zen Buddhism maintains its reason of 


existence against the alleged positivism of the Hinayana and against the 
alleged nihilism of the Prajia-paramita school. 


78 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


to the Buddhists they do not reflect the perfect state of 
Enlightenment. 

Thus the doctrine of Enlightenment is to be supple- 
mented by the doctrine of Device (updya), or the latter may 
be said to evolve by itself from the first when it is conceived 
dynamically and not as merely a contemplative state of 
consciousness. The earlier Buddhists showed the tendency 
to consider Enlightenment essentially reflective or a state of 
tranquillity. They made it something lifeless and altogether 
uncreative. This, however, did not bring out all that was 
contained in Enlightenment. The effective or will element 
which moved the Buddha to come out of his Sagaramudra- 
Samadhi—a samadhi in which the whole universe was re- 
flected in his consciousness as the moon stamps her image 
upon the ocean—has now developed into the doctrine of 
Device. For the will is more fundamental than the intellect 
and makes up the ultimate principle of life. Without the 
‘devising’ and self-regulating will, life will be the mad dis- 
play of a mere blind force. The wantonness of ‘a free spirit’ 
is thus now regulated to operate in the great work of 
universal salvation. Its creative activity will devise all 
possible means for the sake of love for all beings animate as 
well as inanimate. Dhy4na is one of those devices which will 
keep our minds in balance and well under the control of the 
will. Zen is the outcome of the dhyana discipline applied to 
the attainment of Enlightenment. 


Ken and Dhyana 


The term ‘Zen’ (ch‘an in Chinese), is an abbreviated form 
of Zenna or Ch‘anna, which is the Chinese rendering of 
‘dhyana’, or ‘jhana’, and from this fact alone it is evident 
that Zen has a great deal to do with this practice which has 
been carried on from the early days of the Buddha, indeed 
from the beginning of Indian culture. Dhyana is usually 
rendered in English meditation, and, generally speaking, 
the idea is to meditate on a truth, religious or philosophical, 


79 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


so that it may be thoroughly comprehended and deeply 
engraved into the inner consciousness. This is practised in a 
quiet place away from the noise and confusion of the world. 
Allusion to this abounds in Indian literature; and ‘to sit 
alone in a quiet place and to devote oneself to meditation 
exclusively’ is the phrase one meets everywhere in the 
Agamas. 

The following conversation between Sandhana, a 
Buddhist, and Nigrodha, an ascetic, which is recorded in 
the Udumbarika Sihanada Suttanta,+ will throw much light on 
the habit of the Buddha. Says Sandhana, ‘But the Exalted 
One haunts the lonely and remote recesses of the forest, 
where noise, where sound there hardly is, where the breezes 
from the pastures blow, yet which are hidden from the eyes 
of men, suitable for self-communing.’ To this, the ascetic 
wanderer answers: ‘Look you now, householder, know you 
with whom the Samana Gotama talks? with whom he holds 
conversation? By intercourse with whom does he attain 
the lucidity in wisdom? The Samana Gotama’s insight is 
ruined by his habit of seclusion. He is not at home in con- 
ducting an assembly. He is not ready in conversation. So he 
keeps apart from others in solitary places. Even as a one- 
eyed cow that, walking in a circle, follows only the out- 
skirts, so is the Samana Gotama.’ 

Again we read in the Sdmaififia-phala Sutta:? ‘Then, the 
master of this so excellent body of moral precepts, gifted 
with this so excellent self-restraint as to the senses, en- 
dowed with this so excellent mindfulness and self-possession, 
filled with this so excellent content, he chooses some lonely 
spot to rest at on his way—in the woods, at the foot of a 
tree, on a hill side, in a mountain glen, in a rocky cave, in 
a charnel place, or on a heap of straw in the open field. And 
returning thither after his round for alms he seats himself, 
when his meal is done, cross-legged, keeping his body erect, 
and his intelligence alert, intent.’ 

Further, in the days of the Buddha, miracle-working 


1 Dialogues of the Buddha, Part III, p. 35. 
2 Ibid., Part I, p. 82. 


80 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


and sophistical discussions seem to have been the chief 
business of the ascetics, wanderers, and Brahman meta- 
physicians. The Buddha was thus frequently urged to join 
in the debates on philosophical questions and also to per- 
form wonders in order to make people embrace his teaching. 
Nigrodha’s comment on the Buddha conclusively shows 
that the Buddha was a great disapprover of empty reason- 
ing, devoting himself to things practical and productive of 
results, as well as that he was always earnestly engaged in 
meditation away from the world. When Chien-ku, son of a 
wealthy merchant in Nalanda, asked the Buddha to give 
his command to his disciples and make them perform for the 
benefit of his townspeople, the Buddha flatly refused, say- 
ing : ‘My disciples are instructed to sit in solitude quietly and 
to be earnestly meditating on the Path. If they had some- 
thing meritorious, let them conceal it, but if they had faults, 
let them confess.’! 

An appeal to the analytical understanding is never 
sufficient to, comprehend thoroughly the inwardness of a 
truth, especially when it is a religious one, nor is mere com- 
pulsion by an external force adequate for bringing about a 
spiritual transformation in us. We must experience in our 
innermost consciousness all that is implied in a doctrine, 
when we are able not only to understand it but to put it in 
practice. There will then be no discrepancy between know- 
ledge and life. The Buddha knew this very well, and he 
endeavoured to produce knowledge out of meditation ; that 
is, to make wisdom grow from personal, spiritual experience. 
The Buddhist way to deliverance, therefore, consisted in 
threefold discipline: moral rules ‘(sila) tranquillization 
(samadhi), and wisdom (prajfda). By Sila one’s conduct is 


1 The Pali text that will correspond to this Chinese Sitra in the 
Dirgha-Agama is the Kevaddha Sutta, but the passage quoted here is 
missing. See also the Lohicca (Lou-ché) and Samafifia-phala tn the Chinese 
Agamas, in which the Buddha tells how essential the life of a recluse is to 
the realization of enlightenment and the destruction of the evil passions. 
Constant application, earnest concentration, and vigilant watchfulness 
-—without these no Buddhists are ever expected to attain the end of 
their lives. ; 


F 81 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


regulated externally, by Samadhi quietude is attained, and 
by Prajfia real understanding takes place. Hence the 
importance of meditation in Buddhism. 

That this threefold discipline was one of the most 
characteristic features of Buddhism since its earliest days is 
well attested by the fact that the following formula, which 
is culled from the Mahdparinibbana-Sutta, is repeatedly re- 
ferred to in the Sutra as if it were a subject most frequently 
discussed by the Buddha for the edification of his followers: 
‘Such and such is upright conduct (Sila) ; such and such is 
earnest contemplation (samadhi); such and such is intelli- 
gence (prajfa). Great becomes the fruit, great the advan- 
tage of intellect when it is set round with earnest contem- 
plation. The mind set round with intelligence is set quite 
free from the intoxications (dsrava) ; that is to say, from the 
intoxication of sensuality (kdéma), from the intoxication of 
becoming (bhdva), from the intoxication of delusion 
(drishti), from the intoxication of ignorance (avidyd).”} 

Samadhi and dhyana are to a great extent synonymous 
and interchangeable, but strictly samadhi is a psychological 
state realized by the exercise of dhyana. The latter is 
the process and the former is the goal. The Buddhist 
scriptures make reference to so many samadhis, and before 
delivering a sermon the Buddha generally enters into a 
samadhi,’ but never I think into a dhyana. The latter is 
practised or exercised. But frequently in China dhyana and 
samadhi are combined to make one word, ch‘an-ting, mean- 
ing a state of quietude attained by the exercise of meditation 

1 The rendering is by Rhys Davids, who states in the footnote: ‘The 
word I have here rendered “earnest contemplation” is Samadhi, which 
occupies in the Five Nikayas very much the same position as faith does in 
the New Testament ; and this section shows that the relative importance 
of Samadhi, Pafifia, and Sila played a part in early Buddhism just as the 
distinction between faith, reason, and works did afterwards in Western 
theology. It would be difficult to find a passage in which the Buddhist 
view of the relation of these conflicting ideas is stated with greater beauty 
of thought, or equal succinctness of form.’ But why conflicting? 

* One hundred and eight sam&dhis are enumerated in the Mahdvyut- 


patti, Elsewhere we read of ‘innumerable samadhis’. Indians have been 


great adepts in this exercise, and many wonderful spiritualistic achieve- 
ments are often reported. 


82 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


or dhyana. There are some other terms analogous to these 
two which are met with in Buddhist literature as well as in 
other Indian religious systems. They are Sampatti (coming 
together), Samdhita (collecting the thoughts), Samatha 
(tranquillization), Cittatkagrataé (concentration), Drishta- 
dharma-sukha-vihdra (abiding in the bliss of the Law per- 
ceived), Dhdrani or Dhdrana (abstraction), etc. They are all 
connected with the central idea of dhyana, which is to 
tranquillize the turbulence of self-assertive passions and to 
bring about a state of absolute identity in which the truth 
is realized in its inwardness; that is, a state of Enlighten- 
ment. The analytical tendency of philosophers is also 
evident in this when they distinguish four or eight kinds of 
dhyana.} 

The first dhyana is an exercise in which the mind is made 
to concentraie on one single subject until all the coarse 
affective elements are vanished from consciousness except 
the serene feelings of joy and peace. But the intellect is 
still active, judgment and reflection operate upon the object 
of contemplation. When these intellectual operations too 
are quieted and the mind is simply concentrated on one 
point, it is said that we have attained the second dhyana, 
but the feelings of joy and peace are still here. In the third 
stage of dhyana, perfect serenity obtains as the concen- 
tration grows deeper, but the subtlest mental activities are 
not vanished and at the same time a joyous feeling remains. 
When the fourth and last stage is reached, even this feeling 
of self-enjoyment disappears, and what prevails in conscious- 

1 This series of dhyanas has also been adopted by Buddhists, especially 
by Hinayanists. No doubt the Mahayana conception of dhyana is 
derived or rather has developed from them, and how much it differs 
from the Hinayana dhyanas will be seen later as we go on. The detailed 
description of these dhyanas is given in the Agamas; see for instance the 
Samaftita-phala Sutta, in which the fruits of the life of a recluse are discussed. 
These mental exercises were not strictly Buddhistic, they were taught 
and practised more or less by all Indian philosophers and méndicants. 
The Buddha, however, was not satisfied with them, because they would 
not bring out the result he was so anxious to have; that is, they were not 
conducive to enlightenment. This was the reason why he left his two old 


teachers, Arada and Udraka, under whom he first began his homeless 
life. 


83 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


ness now is perfect serenity of contemplation. All the in- 
tellectual and the emotional factors liable to disturb 
spiritual tranquillity are successively controlled, and mind 
in absolute composure remains absorbed in contemplation. 
In this there takes place a fully adjusted equilibrium be- 
tween Samatha and Vipasayana; that is, between tran- 
quillization or cessation and contemplation. 

In all Buddhist discipline this harmony is always sought 
after. For when the mind tips either way, it grows either too 
heavy (stydnam) or too light (auddhatyam), either too torpid 
in mental activity or too given up to contemplation. The 
spiritual exercise ought to steer ahead without being 
hampered by either tendency, they ought to strike the 
middle path. 

There are further four stages of dhyana called ‘Ariipa- 
vimoksha’ which are practised by those who have passed 
beyond the last stage of dhyana. The first is to contemplate 
the infinity of space, not disturbed by the manifoldness of 
matter; the second is on the infinity of consciousness as 
against the first ; the third is meant to go still further beyond 
the distinction of space and thought; and the fourth is to 
eliminate even this consciousness of nondistinction, to be 
thus altogether free from any trace of analytical intellection. 
Besides these eight Sam4patti (‘coming together’) exer- 
cises, technically so called, the Buddha sometimes refers to 
still another form of meditation which is considered to be 
distinctly Buddhist. This is more or less definitely contrasted 
to the foregoing by not being so exclusively intellectual but 
partly effective, as it aims at putting a full stop to the 
operation of Sarnjiia (thought) and Vedita (sensation) ; that 
is, of the essential elements of consciousness. It is almost a 
state of death, total extinction, except that one in this 
dhyana has life, warmth, and the sense-organs in perfect 
condition. But in point of fact it is difficult to distinguish 
this Nirodha-vimoksha (deliverance by cessation) from the 
last stage of the Aruppa (or Ariipa) meditation, in both of 


which consciousness ceases to function even in its simplest 
and most fundamental acts. 


84 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


Whatever this was, it is evident that the Buddha, like 
the other Indian leaders of thought, endeavoured to make 
his disciples realize in themselves the content of Enlighten- 
ment by means of dhyana, or concentration. They were 
thus made to progress gradually from a comparatively 
simple exercise up to the highest stage of concentration in 
which the dualism of the One and the Many vanished even 
to the extent of a total cessation of mentation. Apart from 
these general spiritual exercises, the Buddha at various 
times told his followers to meditate on such objects! as 
would make them masters of their disturbing passions and 
intellectual entanglements. 

We can now see how Zen developed out of this system 
of spiritual exercises. Zen adopted the external form of 
dhyana as the most practical method to realize the end it 
had in view, but as to its content Zen had its own way of 
interpreting the spirit of the Buddha. The dhyana practised 
by primitive Buddhists was not in full accord with the 
object of Buddhism, which is no other than the attaining of 
Enlightenment and demonstrating it in one’s everyday life. 
To do away with consciousness so that nothing will dis- 
turb spiritual serenity was too negative a state of mind to be 
sought after by those who at all aspired to develop the 
positive content of the Buddha’s own enlightened mind. 
Tranquillization was not the real end of dhyana, nor was 
the being absorbed in a samadhi the object of Buddhist life. 
Enlightenment was to be found in life itself, in its fuller 
and freer expressions, and not in its cessation. 

What was it that made the Buddha pass all his life in 
religious peregrination? What was it that moved him to 
sacrifice his own well-being, in fact his whole life, for the 
sake of his fellow-creatures? If dhyana had no positive 
object except in pacifying passions and enjoying absorption 

1 For example, the ten subjects for meditation are: Buddha, Dharma, 
Sangha, Morality, Charity, Heaven, Serenity, Breathing, Imperman- 
ence, and Death. The five subjects of tranquillization are: Impurity, 
Compassion, Breathing, Origination, and Buddha. The four subjects of 


recollection are: Impurity of the Body, Evils of the Senses, Constant 
Change of Thought, and Transitoriness of Existence. 


85 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


in the unconscious, why did the Buddha leave his seat under 
the Bodhi-tree and come out into the world? If Eniighten- 
ment was merely a negative state of cessation, the Buddha 
could not find any impulse in him that would urge him to 
exertion in behalf of others. Critics sometimes forget this 
fact when they try to understand Buddhism simply as a 
system of teaching as recorded in the Agamas and in Pali 
Buddhist literature. As I said before, Buddhism is also a 
system built by his disciples upon the personality of the 
Buddha himself, in which the spirit of the Master is more 
definitely affirmed. And this is what Zen has in its own way 
been attempting to do—to develop the idea of Enlighten- 
ment more deeply, positively, and comprehensively by the 
practice of dhyana and in conformity with the spirit of 
general Buddhism, in which life, purged of its blind im- 


pulses and sanctified by an insight into its real values, will 
be asserted. 


Ken and the Lankdvatara 


Of the many Siitras that were introduced into China 
since the first century A.D., the one in which the principles 
of Zen are more expressly and directly expounded than any 
others, at least those that were in existence at the time of 
Bodhidharma, is the Lankdvatdra Sitra. Zen, as its followers 
justly claim, does not base its authority on any written 
documents, but directly appeals to the enlightened mind of 
the Buddha. It refuses to do anything with externalism in all 
its variegated modes; even the Sutras or all those literary 
remains ordinarily regarded as sacred and coming directly 
from the mouth of the Buddha are looked down upon, as 
we have already seen, as not touching the inward facts of 
Zen. Hence its reference to the mystic dialogue between the 
Enlightened One and Mahakasyapa on a bouquet of 
flowers. But Bodhidharma, the founder of Zen in China, 
handed the Lankavatdra over to his first Chinese disciple 


86 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


Hui-k‘é as the only literature in existence at the time in 
China in which the principles of Zen are taught. 

When Zen unconditionally emphasizes one’s immediate 
experience as the final fact on which it is established it may 
well ignore all the scriptural sources as altogether un- 
essential to its truth; and on this principle its followers have 
quite neglected the study of the Lankdvatara. But to justify 
the position of Zen for those who have not yet grasped it 
and yet who are desirous of learning something about it, 
an external authority may be quoted and conceptual argu- 
' ments resorted to in perfect harmony with its truth. This 
was why Dharma selected this Sittra out of the many that 
had been in existence in China in his day. We must 
approach the Lankdvatara with this frame of mind. 

There are three Chinese translations of the Sitra still in 
existence. There was a fourth one, but it was lost. The 
first in four volumes was produced during the Lu-Sung 
dynasty (A.D. 443) by Gunabhadra, the second in ten 
volumes comes from the pen of Bodhiruci, of the Yiian-Wei 
dynasty (A.D. 513), and the third in seven volumes is by 
Sikshananda, of the T‘ang dynasty (A.D. 700). The last- 
mentioned is the easiest to understand and the first the 
most difficult, and it was this, the most difficult one, that 
was delivered by Dharma to his disciple Hui-k‘é as con- 
taining the ‘essence of mind’. In form and in content this 
translation reflects the earliest text of the Sitra, and on it 
are written all the commentaries we have at present in 
Japan. 

The special features of this Sittra, which distinguish it 
from the other Mahayana writings, are, to give the most 
noteworthy ones: first, that the subject-matter is not system- 
atically developed as in most other Sitras, but the whole 
book is a series of notes of various lengths; secondly, 
that the Siitra is devoid of all supernatural phenomena, 
but filled with deep philosophical and religious ideas con- 
cerning the central teaching of the Siitra, which are very 
difficult to comprehend, due to tersity of expression and to 
the abstruse nature of the subject matter; thirdly, that it is 


87 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


in the form of dialogues exclusively between the Buddha 
and the Bodhisattva Mahamati, while in the other Maha- 
yana Sitras the principal figures are generally more than 
one besides the Buddha himself, who addresses them in turn ; 
and lastly, that it contains no Dharanis or Mantrams— 
those mystical signs and formulas supposed to have a 
miraculous power. These singularities are enough to make 
the Lankdvatara occupy a unique position in the whole lore 
of the Mahayana school. 

In this characterization of the Lankdvatdra Sitra 1 am 
referring to the first Chinese text of Gunabhadra. The two 
later ones have three new chapters in addition: one of 
which forming the first chapter is a sort of introduction to 
the whole Sutra, giving the main idea of what is discussed in 
the body of the text itself; the remaining two are attached 
to the end. Of these, the one is a short collection of Dharanis, 
and the other which is the conclusion is known as the 
Gatha chapter written throughout in verse and sum- 
marizes the contents of the whole Sitra. It has, however, no 
paragraph making up the ‘regular ending’ in which the 
whole congregation unites in the praise of the Buddha and 
in its assurance of observing his instructions. There is no 
doubt that these three new chapters are later growth. 

The main thesis of the Lankdvatdra Sitra is the content of 
Enlightenment; that is, the Buddha’s own inner experience 
(pratydtmagati) concerning the great religious truth of 
Mahayana Buddhism. Most of the readers of the Sutra 
have singularly failed to see this, and contend that it prin- 
cipally explains the Five Dharmas, the Three Character- 
istics of Reality (svabhava), the Eight Kinds of Consciousness 
(viyftana) and the Two Forms of Non-Ego (nairdtmya). 

It is true that the Sitra reflects the psychological school 
of Buddhism advocated by Asanga and Vasubandhu, when 
for instance it refers to the Alayavijfiana as the storage of all 
karmic seeds; but such and other references in fact do not 
constitute the central thought of the Siitra, they are merely 
made use of in explaining the ‘noble understanding of the 
Buddha’s inner experience’ (pratydtmaryajfiana). Therefore 


88 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


when Mahamati finishes praising the Buddha’s virtues 
before the whole assembly at the summit of Mount Lanka, 
the Buddha is quite definite in his declaration of the main 
theme of his discourse in this Sitra. Let us, however, first 
quote the song of the Bodhisattva Mahamati, since it sums 
up in a concise and definite manner all the essentials of 
Mahayana Buddhism and since at the same time it illus- 
trates my statement concerning the union of Enlighten- 
ment and Love. 

The hymn runs as follows: 

‘When thou reviewest the world with thy wisdom and 
compassion, it is to thee like the ethereal flower, and of 
which we cannot say whether it is created or vanishing, 
as the categories of being and non-being are inapplicable 
to it. 

‘When thou reviewest all things with thy wisdom and 
compassion, they are like visions, they are beyond the reach 
of mind and consciousness, as the categories of being and 
non-being are inapplicable to them. 

‘When thou reviewest the world with thy wisdom and 
compassion, it is eternally like a dream, of which we cannot 
say whether it is permanent or it is subject to destruction, 
as the categories of being and non-being are inapplicable to 
it. 

‘In the Dharmakaya whose self-nature is a vision and a 
dream, what is there to praise? Real existence is where rises 
no thought of nature and no-nature. 

‘He whose appearance is beyond the senses and sense- 
objects and is not to be seen by them or in them—how 
could praise or blame be predicated of him, O Muni? 

‘With thy wisdom and compassion, which really defy all 
qualifications, thou comprehendest the ego-less nature of 
things and persons and art eternally clean of the evil 
passions and of the hindrance of knowledge. 

‘Thou dost not vanish in Nirvana, nor does Nirvana abide 
in thee; for it transcends the dualism of the enlightened 
and enlightenment as well as the alternatives of being and 
non-being. 


89 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘Those who see the Muni so serene and beyond birth, 
are detached from cravings and remain stainless in this life 
and after.’ 

After this says the Buddha: ‘O you, sons of the Jina, 
question me anything you feel like asking. I am going to 
tell you about the state of my inner attainment (pratyat- 
magatigocaram).’ This is conclusive, nothing is left to dis- 
cussion concerning the theme of the Lankdvatara. The five 
Dharmas, the three Characteristics, etc., are referred to only 
in the course of the Buddha’s exposition of the principal 
matter. 

The two later translations, which, as aforementioned, 
contain some extra chapters, are divided regularly in the 
one into ten and in the other into eighteen chapters, while 
the earliest one of Gunabhadra has just one chapter title 
for the whole book, “The Gist of all the Buddhawords’. The 
first extra chapter which is not found in Gunabhadra’s text 
is remarkable in that it gives the outlines of the whole 
Sitra in the form of a dialogue between the Buddha and 
Ravana, Lord of the Yakshas, in the Isle of Lanka. When 
the Buddha, coming out of the Naga’s palace, views the 
castle of Lanka, he smiles and remarks that this was the 
place where all the Buddhas of the past preached regarding 
the excellent understanding of Enlightenment realized in 
their inner consciousness, which is beyond the analysis of 
logic and is not the state of mind attainable by the Tirthya, 
Sravaka, or Pratyekabuddha. The Buddha then adds that 
for this reason the same Dharma will be propounded for 
Ravana, Lord of the Yakshas. In response to this, the latter, 
making all kinds of costly offerings to the Buddha, sings in 
the praise of his insight and virtues: ‘O Lord, instruct me 
in thy system of doctrine which is based on the self-nature 
of mind, instruct me in the doctrine of non-ego, free from 
prejudices and defilements, the doctrine that is revealed in 
thy inmost consciousness.’ 

In the conclusion of this chapter the Buddha reaffirms 
his doctrine of inner realization which is Enlightenment: 
“It is like seeing one’s own image in a mirror or in water, 


go 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


it is like seeing one’s own shadow in moonlight or lamp- 
light, again it is like hearing one’s voice echoed in the valley : 
as a man clings to his own false assumptions, he erroneously 
discriminates between truth and falsehood, and on account 
of this false discrimination he fails to go beyond the dualism 
of opposites, indeed he cherishes falsity and cannot attain 
tranquillity. By tranquillity is meant singleness of purpose 
(or oneness of things), and by singleness of purpose is meant 
the entrance into the most excellent samadhi, whereby is 
produced the state of noble understanding of self-reali- 
zation, which is the receptacle of Tathagatahood (tatha- 
gatagarbha).’ 

From these quotations we can easily see why Bodhi- 
Dharma recommended this Sitra for the special perusal 
of his Zen disciples. But in order to impress the reader 
further with the great importance of the Lankdvatara Sitra 
in the historical study of Zen in India and China, I quote 
a few more passages showing how the teaching of self- 
realization is developed in the Sitra. 

According to the author, the anuttara-samyak-sambodhi 
attained by the Muni of the Sakyas, whereby he became the 
Buddha, is realizable by transcending the ideas of being 
and non-being (ndsy-asti-vikalpa). This being the funda- 
mental error—this cherishing of dualism—must he got 
rid of as the first necessary step to reach the state of self- 
realization. The error comes from not perceiving the truth 
that all things are empty (Sanya), uncreated (anutpdda), non- 
dualistic (advaya), and have no immutably individualistic 
characters (nihsvabhdvalakshana). By the emptiness of things 
is meant principally that, their existence being so thoroughly 
mutually conditioning, nowhere obtains the false notion of 
distinctive individuality, and that when analysis is carried 
to its logical consequence there exists nothing that will 
separate one object from another in a final way; therefore 
says the Sitra, ‘Sva-para-ubhaya-abhavat’ (there exists 
neither one nor another nor both). Secondly, things are 
uncreated, because they are not self-created, nor are they 
created by an outside agency. Thirdly, as their existence is 


g! 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


reciprocally conditioning, a dualistic conception of the 
world is not the ultimate one, and thus it is a mistake, due 
to this wrong discrimination (vikalpa), to seek Nirvana out- 
side of Sarnsara (birth-and-death) and Sarnsara outside of 
Nirvana. Fourthly, this principle of mutuality means the 
denial of individuality as absolute reality, for there is 
nothing in existence that will absolutely maintain its in- 
dividuality standing above all conditions of relativity or 
mutual becoming—in fact, being is becoming. 

For these reasons we can realize the truth of Enlighten- 
ment only by transcending the first condition of intellection, 
which is, according to the Lankdvatara, Parikalpa, or Vikalpa 
(discrimination). ‘The warning against this Vikalpa which 
is the analysing tendency of mind, or, we may say, the 
fundamentally dualistic disposition of consciousness, is the 
constant refrain of the Sitra, while on the other hand it never 
forgets to emphasize the importance of self-realization 
which is attained by overcoming this fundamental tendency. 

By thus transcending the intellectual condition, Para- 
marthasatya is realized, which is the ultimate truth, and 
which subjectively constitutes Pratyatmajfiana; it is also 
the eternally abiding law of the universe (paurdnasthiti- 
dharmatd). This inwardly realized truth has many names 
as it is viewed in various relations in which it stands to 
human activities, moral, spiritual, intellectual, practical, 
and psychological. ‘Bodhi’ is enlightenment and used most 
generally, in Mahayana as well as in Hinayana literature, 
to designate the mind in which Ignorance is completely 
wiped out; Tathata (thatness) or Bhitata (reality) is 
metaphysical. Nirvana is conceived as a spiritual state in 
which all passional turmoil is quieted ; Tathagatagarbha is 
more psychological than ontological; Citta is used as 
belonging to the series of mental terms such as Manas, 
Manovijiiana, and other Vijfianas, and is not always synony- 
mous with Bodhi or Pratyatmajfiana unless it is qualified 
with adjectives of purity; Sinyata is a negative term and 
distinctively epistemological, and Buddhist scholars, especi- 
ally of the Prajfidparamita school, have been quite fond of 


92 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


this term, and we see that the Lankavatara too has indulged 
in the use of it. It goes without saying, however, that these 
synonyms are helpful only as sign-posts indicating the way 
to the content of self-realization. 

Besides these, we have two or three most frequently 
repeated phrases to characterize the central idea of the 
Mahayana text. In fact, when the meaning of these phrases 
is grasped together with psychological discourse on the 
Citta and Vijiiana, the whole philosophy of Zen as it is 
expounded in the Sitra grows transparent, and also with it 
the general tendency of Mahayana thought. The phrases are: 
‘Vag-vikalpa-ahita’, or ‘vdg-akshara-prativikalpanam vinihata’, or 
$a$vata-uccheda-sad-asad-drishti-vivarjita’. With these the reader 
is most frequently greeted in the Sutra. The first and the 
second phrases mean that the inner content of the noble 
understanding is beyond the reach of words and analytical 
reasoning, and the third phrase says that the ultimate 
truth is not to be found in eternalism, or nihilism, or 
realism, or non-realism. 

The Sitra sometimes goes so far as this: ‘O Mahamati, 
it is because the Sutras are preached to all beings in accord- 
ance with their modes of thinking, and do not hit the mark 
as far as the true sense is concerned ; words cannot reinstate 
the truth as it is. It is like mirage, deceived by which the 
animals make an erroneous judgment as to presence of 
water where there is really none; even so, all the doctrines 
in the Sutras are intended to satisfy the imagination of the 
masses they do not reveal the truth which is the object of the 
noble understanding. Therefore O Mahamati, conform 
yourself to the sense, and do not be engrossed in words and 
doctrines.”* 

The purport of these adjectives and phrases is that no 
conceptual interpretation is possible of Enlightenment or 
self-realization and that the realization must issue from 
one’s own inner consciousness, independent of scriptural 
teaching or of another’s help. For all that is needed to lead 
one to the attainment of Pratyatmaryajfiana is within one- 

1 Lankavatara, Nanjé Edition, p. 77. 


93 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


self, only that it is in a state of confusion owing to wrong 
judgments (vkalpa) cherished and infused (vasana) in the 
mind since beginningless time. It requires a direct, personal 
confirmation or transmission from the Buddhas, but even 
these latter are unable to awaken us to the exalted state of 
Enlightenment unless we ourselves concentrate our spiritual 
efforts in the work of self-emancipation. Therefore, 
meditation (dhydna) is recommended in the Sitra as the 
means of attaining to the truth of the inmost consciousness. 

The idea of dhyana as explained in the Lankdvatara, how- 
ever, is different from what we generally know in Hina- 
yana literature'—that is, from those kinds of dhyana 
mentioned in the previous part of this essay. The Sitra dis- 
tinguishes four dhydnas: the first is practised by the un- 
learned (bdlopacarika), such as the Sravakas, Pratyeka- 
buddhas, and devotees of the Yoga. They have been in- 
structed in the doctrine of nonatman, and regarding the 
world as impermanent, impure, and pain-producing, they 
persistently follow these thoughts until they realize the 
samadhi of thought-extinction. The second dhyana is 
designated ‘statement-reviewing’ (artha-pravicaya), by which 
is meant an intellectual examination of statements or 
propositions, Buddhist or non-Buddhist, such as ‘Each 
object has its individual marks’, ‘There is no personal 


1 There is however a Sitra in the Sarnyukta Agama, fas. XX XIII, p. 
93b (Anguttara-Nikaya, XI, 10), dealing with true dhyana (djdniya- 
jhafla) which is to be distinguished from untrained dhyana (khaluka- 
jhafia). The latter is compared to an ill-disciplined horse (khalunka) kept 
in the stable that thinks nothing of his duties but only of the fodder he is 
to enjoy. In a similar way dhyana can never be practised successfully 
by those who undertake the exercise merely for the satisfaction of their 
selfish objects ; for such will never come to understand the truth as it is, 
If emancipation and true knowledge are desired, anger, sleepiness, 
worrying, and doubt ought to be got rid of, and then the dhyana can be 
attained that does not depend upon any of the elements, or space, or 
consciousness, or nothingness, or unthinkability—the dhyana that is not 
dependent upon this world or that world or the heavenly bodies, or 
upon hearing or seeing or recollecting or recognizing—the dhyana that 
is not dependent upon the ideas of attachment or seeking—the dhyana 
that is not in conformity with knowledge or contemplation. This 
‘true dhyana’ then, as is described in this Satra in the Nikayas, is more 
of the Mahayana than of the Hinayana so called. 


oF 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


Atman’, ‘Things are created by an external agency’, or 
‘things are mutually determined’ ; and after the examination 
of these themes the practiser of this dhyana turns his 
thought on the non-atman-ness of things (dharmanairatmya) 
and on the characteristic features of the various stages 
(bhiim:) of Bodhisattvaship, and finally in accordance with 
the sense involved therein he goes on with his contemplative 
examination. The third dhyana is called ‘Attaching oneself 
to Thatness’ (tathatalambana), whereby one realizes that to 
discriminate the two forms of non-atman-ness is still due 
to an analytical speculation and that when things are truth- 
fully (yathdbhitam) perceived, no such analysis is possible, 
for then there obtains absolute oneness only. The fourth and 
last is “T'athagata-dhydna’. In this one enters into the stage 
of Buddhahood where he enjoys a threefold beatitude 
belonging to the noble understanding of self-realization 
and performs wonderful deeds for the sake of all sentient 
beings. 

In these dhyanas we observe a gradual perfection of 
Buddhist life culminating in the utmost spiritual freedom of 
Buddhahood, which is above all intellectual conditions and 
beyond the reach of relative consciousness. Those wonder- 
ful, unthinkable (acintya) deeds issuing from spiritual free- 
dom are technically called ‘deeds performed with no sense 
of utility’ (andbhogacarya), or the “deeds of no purpose’ as 
referred to elsewhere, and mean the perfection of Buddhist 
life. 

The Lankavatara was thus handed over by Bodhi- 
dharma to his first disciple Hui-k‘é as the most illuminating 
document on the doctrine of Zen. But the development of 
Zen in China naturally did not follow the line as was 
indicated in the Sitra—that is, after the Indian fashion; 
the soil where the dhyana of the Lankdvatara was trans- 
planted did not favour its growth in the same manner as 
it did in the original climate. Zen was inspired with the 
life and spirit of the dhyana of the Tathagata, but it created 
its own mode of manifestation. Indeed this was where it 
showed its wonderful power of vitality and adaptation. 


95 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


The Doctrine of Enlightenment as Zen in China 


To understand how the doctrine of Enlightenment or 
self-realization came to be translated in China as Zen 
Buddhism, we must first see where the Chinese mind varies 
from the Indian generally. When this is done, Zen will 
appear as a most natural product of the Chinese soil, where 
Buddhism has been successfully transplanted in spite of 
many adverse conditions. Roughly, then, the Chinese are 
above all a most practical people, while the Indians are 
visionary and highly speculative. We cannot perhaps judge 
the Chinese as unimaginative and lacking in the dramatic 
sense, but when they are compared with the inhabitants of 
the Buddha’s native land they look so grey, so sombre. 

The geographical features of each country are singularly 
reflected in the people. The tropical luxuriance of imagi- 
nation so strikingly contrasts with the wintry dreariness of 
common practicalness. The Indians are subtle in analysis 
and dazzling in poetic flight; the Chinese are children of 
earthly life, they plod, they never soar away in the air. 
Their daily life consists in tilling the soil, gathering dry 
leaves, drawing water, buying and selling, being filial, 
observing social duties, and developing the most elaborate 
system of etiquette. Being practical means in a sense being 
historical, observing the progress of time and recording its 
traces as they are left behind. The Chinese can very well 
boast of their being great recorders—such a contrast to the 
Indian lack of sense of time. Not satisfied with books 
printed on paper and with ink, the Chinese would engrave 
their deeds deep in stone, and have developed a special art of 
stone-cutting. This habit of recording events has developed 
their literature, and they are quite literary and not at all 
warlike ; they love a peaceful life of culture. Their weakness 
is that they are willing to sacrifice facts for literary effects, 
for they are not very exact and scientific. Love of fine 
rhetoric and beautiful expressions has frequently drowned 
their practical sense, but here is also their art. Well re- 


96 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


strained even in this, their soberness never reaches that 
form of fantasy which we encounter in most of the Maha- 
yana texts. 

The Chinese are in many ways great, their architecture 
is great indeed, their literary achievements deserve the 
world’s thanks, but logic is not one of their strong points; 
nor are their philosophy and imagination. When Buddhism 
with all its characteristically Indian dialectics and imageries 
was first introduced into China, it must have staggered the 
Chinese mind. Look at its gods with many heads and arms 
—something that has never entered into their heads, in 
fact into no other nation’s than the Indian’s. Think of the 
wealth of symbolism with which every being in Buddhist 
literature seems to be endowed. The mathematical con- 
ception of infinities, the Bodhisattvas’ plan of world- 
salvation, the wonderful stage-setting before the Buddha 
begins his sermons, not only in their general outlines but 
in their details—bold, yet accurate, soaring in flight, yet 
sure of every step—these and many other features must 
have been things of wonderment to the practical and earth- 
plodding people of China. 


One quotation from a Mahay4dna Sitra will convince 
readers of the difference between Indian and Chinese 
minds, in regard to their imaginative powers. In the 
Saddharma-pundarika the Buddha wishes to impress his 
disciples as to the length of time passed since his attainment 
of Supreme Enlightenment; he does not merely state that it 
is a mistake to think that his Enlightenment took place 
some countable number of years ago, under the Bodhi-tree 
near the town of Gaya; nor does he say in a general way 
that it happened ages ago, which is very likely the way with 
the Chinese, but he describes in a most analytical way in 
how remote an age it was that he came to Enlightenment. 

‘But, young men of good family, the truth is-that many 
hundred thousand myriads of kotis of eons ago I have 
arrived at Supreme, Perfect Enlightenment. By way of 
example, young men of good family, let there be the atoms 


G 97 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


of earth of fifty hundred thousand myriads of kotis of worlds ; 
let there exist some man who takes one of these atoms of 
dust and then goes in an eastern direction fifty hundred 
thousand myriads of kotis of worlds further on, there to 
deposit that atom of dust; let the man in this manner carry 
away from all those worlds the whole mass of earth, and in 
the same manner, and by the same act as supposed, de- 
posit all those atoms in an eastern direction. Now would 
you think, young men of good family, that anyone should 
be able to weigh, imagine, count, or determine the number 
of these worlds? The Lord having thus spoken, the Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva Maitreya and the entire host of Bodhi- 
sattvas replied: They are incalculable, O Lord, those 
worlds, countless, beyond the range of thought. Not even 
all the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, O Lord, with their 
Arya-knowledge, will be able to imagine, count, or deter- 
mine them. For us also, O Lord, who are Bodhisattvas 
standing on the place from whence there is no turning back, 
this point lies beyond the sphere of our comprehension; so 
innumerable, O Lord, are those worlds. 

‘This said, the Buddha spoke to those Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas as follows: I announce to you, young men of 
good family, I declare to you: However numerous be those 
worlds where that man deposits those atoms of dust and 
where he does not, there are not, young men of good family, 
in all those hundred thousands of myriads of kotis of worlds, 
so many dust atoms as there are hundred thousands of 
myriads of kotis of zons since I have arrived at Supreme, 
Perfect Enlightenment. 

Such a conception of number and such a method of 
description would never have entered the Chinese mind. 
They are, of course, capable of conceiving long duration, 
and great achievements, in which they are not behind any 
nation; but to express their idea of vastness in the manner 


of the Indian philosophers would be beyond their under- 
standing. 


? Kern’s translation, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXI, Pp. 299-300. 
98 . 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


When things are not within the reach of conceptual 
description and yet when they are to be communicated to 
others, the ways open to most people will be either to 
remain silent, or to declare them simply to be beyond words, 
or to resort to negation saying, ‘not this’, ‘not that’, or if 
one were a philosopher, to write a book explaining how 
logically impossible it was to discourse on such subjects; but 
the Indians found quite a novel way of illustrating philo- 
sophical truths that cannot be applied to analytical reason- 
ing. They resorted to miracles or supernatural phenomena 
for their illustration. Thus they made the Buddha a great 
magician; not only the Buddha but almost all the chief 
characters appearing in the Mahayana scriptures became 
magicians. And in my view this is one of the most charming 
features of the Mahayana texts—this description of super- 
natural phenomena in connection with the teaching of 
abstruse doctrine. Some may think it altogether childish 
and injuring the dignity of the Buddha as teacher of solemn 
religious truths. But this is a superficial interpretation of the 
matter. The Indian idealists knew far better; they had a 
more penetrating imagination which was always effectively 
employed by them whenever the intellect was put to a task 
beyond its power. ; 

We must understand that the motive of the Mahayanists 
who made the Buddha perform all these magical feats was 
to illustrate through imageries what in the very nature of 
things could not be done in an ordinary method open to 
human intellect. When the intellect failed to analyse the 
essence of Buddhahood, their rich imagination came in to 
help them out by visualizing it. When we try to explain 
Enlightenment logically we always find ourselves involved 
in contradictions. But when an appeal is made to our 
symbolical imagination—especially if one is liberally en- 
dowed with this faculty—the matter is more readily com- 
prehended. At least this seems to have been the Indian way 
of conceiving the signification of supernaturalism. 

When Vimalakirti was asked by Sariputra how such 
a small room as his with just one seat for himself could 


99 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


accommodate all the hosts of Bodhisattvas and Arhats 
and Devas numbering many thousands, who were coming 
there with Majijusri to visit the sick philosopher, replied 
Vimalakirti, ‘Are you here to seek chairs or the Dharma? 
. . . One who seeks the Dharma finds it in seeking it in 
nothing.’ Then learning from Majfijusri where to obtain 
seats, he asks a Buddha called Sumerudiparaja to supply 
him with 32,000 lion-seats, majestically decorated and as 
high as 84,000 yojanas. When they were brought in, his 
room, formerly large enough for one seat, now miracu- 
lously accommodated all the retinue of Majfijusri, each 
one of whom was comfortably seated in a celestial chair, 
and yet the whole town of Vaisali and the rest of the world 
did not appear on this account crammed to overflowing. 
Sariputra was surprised beyond measure to witness this 
supernatural event, but Vimalakirti explained that for 
those who understand the doctrine of spiritual emancipa- 
tion, even the Mount of Sumeru could be sealed up in a 
seed of mustard, and the waves of the four great oceans 
could be made to flow into one pore of the skin (romakipa), 
without even giving any sense of inconvenience to any of 
the fishes, crocodiles, tortoises, and other living beings in 
them ; the spiritual kingdom was not bound in space and 
time. 

To quote another instance from the first chapter of the 
Lankdvatara sitra, which does not appear in the oldest 
Chinese translation. When King Ravana was requesting 
the Buddha through the Bodhisattva Mahamati to disclose 
the content of his inner experience, the king unexpectedly 
noticed his mountain-residence turned into numberless 
mountains of precious stones and most ornately decorated 
with celestial grandeur, and on each of these mountains he 
saw the Buddha manifested. And before each Buddha there 
stood King Ravana himself with all his assemblage as well 
as all the countries in the ten quarters of the world, and in 
each of those countries there appeared the Tathagata, 
before whom again there were King Ravana, his families, 
his palaces, his gardens, all decorated exactly in the same 


100 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


style as his own. There was also the Bodhisattva Mahamati 
in each of these innumerable assemblies asking the Buddha 
to declare the content of his inner spiritual experience; and 
when the Buddha finished his discourse on the subject with 
hundreds of thousands of exquisite voices, the whole scene 
suddenly vanished, and the Buddha with all his Bodhi- 
sattvas and his followers were no more; then King Ravana 
found himself all alone in his old palace. He now reflected : 
“Who was he that asked the question? Who was he that 
listened? What were those objects that appeared before 
me? Was it a dream? or a magical phenomenon?’ He 
again reflected: “Things are all like this, they are all 
creations of one’s own mind. When mind discriminates 
there is manifoldness of things; but when it does not it 
looks into the true state of things.’ When he thus reflected 
he heard voices in the air and in his own palace, saying: 
“Well you have reflected, O King! You should conduct 
yourself according to this view.’ 

The Mahayana literature is not the only recorder of the 
miraculous power of the Buddha, which transcends all the 
relative conditions of space and time as well as of human 
activities, mental and physical. The Pali scriptures are by 
no means behind the Mahayana in this respect. Not to 
speak of the Buddha’s threefold knowledge, which consists 
in the knowledge of the past, the future, and of his own 
emancipation, he can also practise what is known as the 
three wonders, which are the mystic wonder, the wonder of 
education, and the wonder of manifestation. But when we 
carefully examine the miracles described in the Nikayas, 
we see that they have no other objects in view than the 
magnification and deification of the personality of the 
Buddha. 

The recorders of these miracles must have thought that 
they could thus make their master greater and far above 
ordinary mortals in the estimate of their rivals. From our 
modern point of view it was quite childish for them to 
imagine that any unusual deeds performed by their master 
would attract, as we read in the Kevaddha Suita, people’s 


IO! 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


attention to Buddhism and recognize its superior value on 
that very account; but in those ancient days in India, the 
masses, nay even learned scholars, thought a great deal of 
supernaturalism, and naturally the Buddhists made the 
best possible use of this belief. But when we come to the 
Mahayana Siitras we at once perceive that the miracles 
described here on a much grander scale have nothing to do 
with supernaturalism as such or with any ulterior motives 
such as propagandism or self-aggrandizement, but that 
they are essentially and intimately connected with the 
doctrine itself which is expounded in the texts. For instance, 
in the Prajid-pdramitad Sitra every part of the body of the 
Buddha simultaneously emits innumerable rays illuminat- 
ing at once the furthest ends of the worlds, whereas in the 
Avatamsaka Sutra the different parts of his body shoot out 
beams of light on different occasions. In the Saddharma- 
pundarika Sitra a ray of light issues from within the circle 
of hair between the eyebrows of the Buddha which illu- 
minates over eighteen hundred thousand Buddha-countries 
in the eastern quarter, revealing every being in them, even 
the inhabitants of the deepest hell called Avici. It is 
evident that the Mahayana writers of these Sitras had in 
their minds something much different from the Hinayana 
compilers of the Nikayas in their narratives of the miracu- 
lous power of the Buddha. What that something was I have 
here pointed out in a most general way. A systematic study 
in detail of the Mahayana supernaturalism will no doubt 
be an interesting one. 

At all events the above references will suffice, I believe, 
to establish my thesis that the reason for the introduction of 
supernaturalism into the Mahayana literature of Buddhism 
was to demonstrate the intellectual impossibility of com- 
prehending spiritual facts. While philosophy exhausted its 
resources logically to explain them, Vimalakirti like 
Bahva, a Vedic mystic, remained silent; not satisfied with 
this, the Indian Mahayana writers further introduced 
supernaturalistic symbolism, but it remained with the 
Chinese Zen Buddhists to invent their own methods to 


102 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


cope, according to their own needs and insight, with 
the difficulties of communicating one’s highest and 


deepest spiritual experience known as Enlightenment in 
Buddhism. S48 


The Chinese have no aptitude like the Indians to hide 
themselves in the clouds of mystery and super-naturalism. 
Chwang-tztii and Lieh-tzti were the nearest to the Indian 
type of mind in ancient China, but their mysticism does not 
begin to approach that of the Indian Mahday4nists in 
grandeur, in elaborateness, and in the height of soaring 
imagination. Chwang-tzi did his best when he rode up in 
the air on the back of the Tai-p‘eng, whose wings soared 
like overhanging clouds; and Lieh-tzii when he could com- 
mand winds and clouds as his charioteers. The later Taoists 
dreamed of ascending to the heavens after so many years 
of ascetic discipline and by taking an elixir of life concocted 
from various rare herbs. Thus in China we have so many 
Taoist hermits living in the mountains far away from 
human habitations. No Chinese saints or philosophers are, 
however, recorded in history who have been capable of 
equalling Vimalakirti or Majfijugri or even any of the 
Arhats. The Confucian verdict that superior man never 
talks about miracles, wonders, and supernaturalism, is the 
true expression of Chinese psychology. The Chinese are 
thoroughly practical. They must have their own way of 
interpreting the doctrine of Enlightenment as applied to 
their daily life, and they could not help creating Zen as 
an expression of their inmost spiritual experience. 

If the imagery of supernaturalism did not appeal to sober 
Chinese character, how did the Chinese followers of En- 
lightenment contrive to express themselves? Did they adopt 
the intellectual method of the Sinyata philosophy? No; 
this, too, was not after their taste, nor was it quite within 
the reach of their mental calibre. The Prajid-paramita was 
an Indian creation and not the Chinese. They could have 
produced a Chwang-tzii or those Taoist dreamers of the Six 
Dynasties, but not a Nagarjuna or a Sankara. 


103 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


The Chinese genius was to demonstrate itself in some 
other way. When they began inwardly to assimilate Budd- 
hism as the doctrine of Enlightenment, the only course that 
opened to their concrete practical minds was to produce 
Zen. When we come to Zen after seeing all the wonderful 
miracles displayed by the Indian Mahayana writers, and 
after the highly abstracted speculations of the Madhyamika 
thinkers, what a change of scenery do we have here? No 
rays are issuing from the Buddha’s forehead, no retinues of 
Boddhisattvas reveal themselves before you, there is indeed 
nothing that would particularly strike your senses as odd or 
extraordinary, or as beyond intelligence, beyond the ken 
of logical reasoning. The people you associate with are all 
ordinary mortals like yourselves, no abstract ideas, no 
dialectical subtleties confront you. Mountains tower high 
towards the sky, rivers all pour into the ocean. Plants 
sprout in the spring and flowers bloom in red. When the 
moon shines serenely, poets grow mildly drunk and sing 
a song of eternal peace. How prosaic, how ordinary, we 
may say! but here was the Chinese soul, and Buddhism 
came to grow in it. ; 

When a monk asks who is the Buddha, the master points 
at his image in the Buddha Hall; no explanations are given, 
no arguments are suggested. When the mind is the subject 
of discourse, asks a monk, ‘What is mind, anyway?’ ‘Mind,’ 
says the master. ‘I do not understand, Sir.’ ‘Neither do I,’ 
quickly comes from the master. On another occasion, a 
monk is worried over the question of immortality. ‘How can 
I escape the bondage of birth and death?’ Answers the 
master, ‘Where are you?’ The Zen adepts as a rule never 
waste time in responding to questions, nor are they at all 
argumentative. Their answers are always curt and final, 
which follow the questions with the rapidity of lightning. 
Someone asked, ‘What is the fundamental teaching of the 
Buddha?’ Said the master, ‘There is enough breeze in this 
fan to keep me cool.’ What a most matter-of-fact answer 
this! That inevitable formula of Buddhism, the Fourfold 
Noble Truth, apparently has no place in the scheme of Zen 


104 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


teaching, nor does that persistently enigmatic statement in 
the Prajiid-paramita, ‘taccittam yaccittam acittam’, threaten 
us here. 

Ummon (Yiin-mén) once appeared in the pulpit, and 
said, ‘In this school of Zen no words are needed; what, 
then, is the ultimate essence of Zen teaching?’ Thus him- 
self proposing the question, he extended both his arms, and 
without further remarks came down from the pulpit. This 
was the way the Chinese Buddhists interpreted the doctrine 
of Enlightenment, this was the way they expounded the 
Pratydtmajfidnagocara of the Lankdvatara. And for the 
Chinese Buddhists this was the only way, if the inner 
experience of the Buddha were to be demonstrated, not 
intellectually or analytically, nor in supernatural manners, 
but directly in our practical life. For life, as far as it is lived 
in concreto, is above concepts as well as images. To under- 
stand it we have to dive into it and to come in touch with it 
personally ; to pick up or cut out a piece of it for inspection 
murders it; when you think you have got into the essence of 
it, it is no more, for it has ceased to live but lies immobile 
and all dried up. For this reason Chinese minds, ever since 
the coming of Bodhidharma, worked on the problem how 
best to present the doctrine of Enlightenment in their 
native garment cut to suit their modes of feeling and 
thinking, and it was not until after Hui-néng (Yen6) that 
they satisfactorily solved the problem and the great task of 
building up a school to be known thenceforward as Zen 
was accomplished. 

That Zen was the thing Chinese minds wanted to have 
when they thoroughly comprehended the teaching of 
Buddhism is proved by the two incontestable historical 
facts; first, after the establishment of Zen, it was this teach- 
ing that ruled China while all the other schools of Budd- 
hism, except the Pure Land sect, failed to survive; and 
secondly, before Buddhism was translated into Zen it never 
came into an intimate relation with the native thought of 
China, by which I mean Confucianism. 


105 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Let us see first how Zen came to rule the spiritual life 
of China. The inner sense of Enlightenment was not under- 
stood in China, except intellectually, in the earlier days of 
Buddhism. This was natural, seeing that it was in this 
respect that the Chinese mind was excelled by the Indian. 
As I said before, the boldness and subtlety of Mahayana 
philosophy must have fairly stunned the Chinese, who had, 
before the introduction of Buddhism, practically no system 
of thought worthy of the name, except moral science. In 
this latter they were conscious of their own strength; even 
such devout Buddhists as I-ching (Gij6) and Hs‘tian- 
chuang (Genjd) acknowledged it, with all their ardour for 
the Yogacara psychology and the Avatarhsaka metaphysics ; 
they thought that their country, as far as moral culture was 
concerned, was ahead of the land of their faith or at least 
had nothing to learn from the latter. 

As the Mahayana Sitras and Shastras were translated 
in rapid succession by able, learned, devout scholars, both 
native and Indian, the Chinese mind was led to explore a 
region where they had not ventured very far before. In the 
early Chinese biographical histories of Buddhism, we notice 
commentators, expounders, and philosophers far out- 
numbering translators and adepts in dhyana so called. The 
Buddhist scholars were at first quite busily engaged in 
assimilating intellectually the various doctrines propounded 
in Mahayana literature. Not only were these doctrines deep 
and complicated but they were also contradicting one 
another, at least on the surface. If the scholars were to 
enter into the depths of Buddhist thought, they had to 
dispose of these entanglements somehow. But if they were 
sufficiently critical, they could do that with comparative 
ease, which was, however, something we could never ex- 
pect of those earlier Buddhists; for even in these modern 
days critical Buddhist scholars will, in some quarters, be 
regarded as not quite devout and orthodox. They all had 
not a shadow of doubt as to the genuineness of the Maha- 
yanist texts as faithfully and literally recording the very 
words of the Buddha, and therefore they had to plan out 


106 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


some systems of reconciliation between diverse doctrines 
taught in the Scriptures. They had to find out what was 
the primary object of the Buddha’s appearance in the 
world ignorant, corrupted, and given up to the karma of 
eternal transmigration. Such efforts on the part of Buddhist 
philosophers developed what is to be distinctly designated 
as Chinese Buddhism. 

While this intellectual assimilation was going on on the 
one hand, the practical side of Buddhism was also assidu- 
ously studied. Some were followers of the Vinaya texts, 
and others devoted themselves to the mastery of dhyana. 
But what was here known as dhyana was not the dhyana of 
Zen Buddhism; it was a meditation, concentrating one’s 
thought on some ideas such as impermanence, egolessness 
of things, chain of causation, or the attributes of the Buddha. 
Even Bodhidharma, the founder of Zen Buddhism, was 
regarded by historians as belonging to this class of dhyana- 
adepts, his peculiar merits as teacher of an entirely novel 
school of Buddhism were not fully appreciated. This 
was inevitable; the people of China were not yet quite 
ready to accept the new form, for they had only in- 
adequately grasped the doctrine of Enlightenment in all its 
bearings. 

The importance of Enlightenment in its practical 
aspects, however, was not altogether overlooked in the 
maze of doctrinal intricacies. Chih-i (Chigi, 531-597), one 
of the founders of the T‘ien Tai school and the greatest 
Buddhist philosopher in China, was fully awake to the 
significance of dhyana as the means of attaining Enlighten- 
ment. With all his analytical powers, his speculation had 
room enough for the practice of dhyana. His work on 
‘Tranquillization and Contemplation’ is explicit on this 
point. His idea was to carry out intellectual and spiritual 
exercises in perfect harmony, and not partially to emphasize 
either one of the two, Samadhi or Prajfia, at the expense 
of the other. Unfortunately, his followers grew more and 
more onesided until they neglected the dhyana practice for 
the sake of intellection. Hence their antagonistic attitude 


107 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


later towards advocates of Zen Buddhism, for which, how- 
ever, the latter were to a certain extent to be responsible 
too. 

It was due to Bodhidharma (died 528)! that Zen came 
to be the Buddhism of China. It was he that started this 
movement which proved so fruitful among a people given 
up to the practical affairs of life. When he declared his 
message, it was still tinged with Indian colours, he could not 
be entirely independent of the traditional Buddhist meta- 
physics of the times. His allusion to the Vajra-samadht and 
the Lankdvatdara was natural, but the seeds of Zen were 
sown by his hands, It now remained with his native dis- 
ciples to see to it that these seeds grew up in harmony with 
the soil and climate. It took about two hundred years for 
the Zen seeds to bear fruit, rich and vigorous in life, and 
fully naturalized while retaining intact the essence of what 
makes up Buddhism. 

Hui-néng (637-713), who was the sixth patriarch after 
Bodhidharma, was the real Chinese founder of Zen; for 
it was through him and his direct followers that Zen could 
cast off the garment borrowed from India and began to 
put on one cut and sewn by the native hands. The spirit 
of Zen was of course the same as the one that came to 
China transmitted without interruption from the Buddha, 
but the form of expression was thoroughly Chinese, for it 
was their own creation. The rise of Zen after this was 
phenomenal. The latent energy that had been stored up 
during the time of naturalization suddenly broke out in 
active work, and Zen had almost a triumphal march 
through the whole land of Cathay. During the T‘ang 
dynasty (618-906), when Chinese culture reached its con- 
summation, great Zen masters succeeded one after another 
in building up monasteries and educating monks as well as 
lay-disciples who were learned not only in the Confucian 
classics but in the Mahayana lore of Buddhism. The 
emperors too were not behind them in paying respects to 


1 For this and the following, see the Essay entitled, ‘History of Z 
Buddhism from Bodhidharma to Hui-néng’, i 15\ff. ‘ i 


108 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


these Zen seers, who were invited to come to the court in 
order to give sermons to these august personages. When 
for political reasons Buddhism was persecuted, which 
caused the loss of many valuable documents, works of art, 
and the decline of some schools, Zen was always the first 
to recover itself and to renew its activities with redoubled 
energy and enthusiasm. Throughout the Five Dynasties, in 
the first half of the tenth century, when China was torn up 
into minor kingdoms again, and general political situations 
seemed to be unfavourable to the thriving of religious senti- 
ments, Zen prospered as before and the masters kept up 
their monastic centres undisturbed. 

With the rise of the Sung dynasty (960-1279) Zen 
reached the height of its development and influence, while 
the other sects of Buddhism showed signs of rapid decline. 
When history opens on the pages of the Yiian (1280-1367) 
and the Ming (1368-1661) dynasties, Buddhism is found 
identified with Zen. The Kegon (Avatamsaka), Tendai 
(T‘ien-tai), Sanron (San-lun), Kusha (Abhidharma-koéa), 
Hoss6 (Yogacara) and Shingon (Mantra), if they were not 
completely wiped out through persecution, suffered tre- 
mendously from the lack of fresh blood. Perhaps they were 
to die out anyway on account of their not having been 
completely assimilated by Chinese thought and feeling; 
there was too much of an Indian element which prevented 
them from being fully acclimatized. In any event Zen as 
the essence of the Buddha’s mind continued to flourish so 
that any Chinese minds at all inclined towards Buddhism 
came to study Zen and neglected the rest of the Buddhist 
schools still in existence though at the last stage of their pro- 
ductive activity. The only form of Buddhism that retains its 
vitality to a certain extent even to this day is Zen, more or 
less modified to accommodate the Pure Land tendency 
that had been growing soon after the introduction of Budd- 
hism into China. 

There was reason for this state of things in the religious 
history of China, and it was thus that Zen dispensed with 
the images and concepts and modes of thinking that were 


109 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


imported from India along with Buddhist thought; and 
out of its own consciousness Zen created an original 
literature best adapted to the exposition of the truth of 
Enlightenment. This literature was unique in many senses, 
but it was in perfect accordance with the Chinese mental 
modus operandi and naturally powerfully moved them to the 
core. Bodhidharma taught his disciples to look directly 
into the essence of the teaching of the Buddha, discarding 
the outward manners of presentation; he told them not to 
follow the conceptual and analytical interpretation of the 
doctrine of Enlightenment. Literary adherents of the Sttras 
objected to this and did all they could to prevent the 
growth of the teaching of Dharma. But it grew on in spite 
of oppositions. 

The disciples mastered the art of grasping the central 
fact of Buddhism. When this was accomplished, they pro- 
ceeded to demonstrate it according to their own methods, 
using their own terminology, regardless of the traditional or 
rather imported way of expression. They did not entirely 
abandon the old manner of speaking; for they refer to 
Buddha, Tathagata, Nirvana, Bodhi, Trikaya, Karma, 
transmigration, emancipation, and many other ideas making 
up the body of Buddhism ; but they make no mention of the 
Twelvefold Chain of Origination, the Féurfold Noble 
Truth, or the Eightfold Righteous Path. When we read 
Zen literature without being told of its relation to Buddhism, 
we may almost fail to recognize in it such things as are 
generally regarded as specifically Buddhist. When Yakusan 
(Yiieh-shan, 751-834) saw a monk, he asked, ‘Where do 
you come from?’ ‘I come from south of the Lake.’ ‘Is the 
Lake overflowing with water?’ ‘No, sir, it is not yet over- 
‘flowing.’ ‘Strange,’ said the master, ‘after so much rain 
why does it not overflow?’ To this last query the monk 
failed to give a satisfactory answer, whereupon Ungan 
(Yiin-yen), one of Yakusan’s disciples, said, ‘Overflowing, 
indeed !’ while Dosan (Tung-shan), another of his disciples, 
exclaimed, ‘In what kalpa did it ever fail to over-flow?’ 
In these dialogues do we detect any trace of Buddhism? 


110 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


Do they not look as if they were talking about an 
affair of most ordinary occurrence? But, according to the 
masters, their talks are brim-full of Zen, and Zen literature 
is indeed abounding in such apparent trivialities. In fact, 
so far as its phraseology and manner of demonstration are 
concerned, Zen looks as if it had nothing to do with Budd- 
hism, and some critics are almost justified in designating 
Zen as a Chinese anomaly of Buddhism as was referred to 
at the beginning of this Essay. 

In the history of Chinese literature, Zen writings known 
as Yii-lu (Goroku) form a class by themselves, and it is due 
to them that the Chinese colloquialism of the T‘ang and 
the early Sung dynasties has been preserved. Men of 
letters in China despised to write except in classical style, 
deliberately choosing such words, phrases, and expressions 
as enhanced the grace of the composition. All the literature 
we have of those early days of Chinese culture therefore is 
the model of such a cultivated style. The Zen masters were 
not necessarily despisers of classicism, they took to fine 
literature as much as their contemporaries, they were well 
educated and learned too; but they found colloquialism a 
better and more powerful medium for the utterance of their 
inner experiences. This is generally the case with spiritual 
reformers, who want to express themselves through the 
medium most intimate to their feelings and best suited for 
their original ways of viewing things. They avoid wherever 
possible such nomenclature as has been in use and filled 
with old associations which are apt to lack in living pur- 
poses and therefore in vivifying effects. Living experiences 
ought to be told in a living language and not in worn-out 
images and concepts. The Zen masters therefore did what 
they could not help doing and made free use of the living 
words and phrases of the day. Does this not prove that in 
China Buddhism through Zen ceased to be a foreign im- 
portation and was transformed into an original creation 
of the native mind? And just because Zen could turn itself 
into a native product, it survived all the other schools of 
Buddhism. In other words, Zen was the only form in which 


II! 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


the Chinese mind could accommodate, appreciate, and 
assimilate the Buddhist doctrine of Enlightenment. 


I hope I have shown how Buddhism—that is, the 
doctrine of Enlightenment—had to be transformed into Zen 
in China, and through this transformation Zen survived 
the other schools of Buddhism. Let us now take up the 
second point, as referred to before, in which we will see 
how Zen came to create the Sung philosophy. When I say 
that Buddhism did not really affect Chinese thought until 
it was converted into Zen, through which the creative 
genius of China began to formulate its philosophy along a 
much deeper and more idealistic line of thought than that 
of the Ante-Ch‘in period, there will be many who will object 
to this view. It is true that Buddhism began to make its 
influence felt among Chinese thinkers even during the 
latter Han dynasty, as we see, for instance, in Mou-tzii’s 
‘Essay on Reason and Error’ written between A.D. 190-220. 
After this there were many writers who discussed the Budd- 
hist doctrines of Karma and Causation and Immortality ; 
for these were some of the ideas introduced from India 
through Buddhism. 

It was with the Taoists, however, the Buddhists had much 
heated controversy from the sixth century on. The way 
Buddhism exerted its influence over Taoism was not only 
in form of controversy but in actually moulding their 
thought and literature. There were so many points of 
contact between Taoism and Buddhism: and‘naturally the 
first object against which Buddhism worked, as it grew in 
importance and power not only as a religious system but 
as philosophy and the possessor of an inexhaustible wealth 
of knowledge, was Taoism; while it was admitted that 
Buddhism in its turn borrowed many things from Taoism 
in order to make itself more easily acceptable to the native 
minds. On the whole, Taoism owes more to Buddhism so 
far as its organization, rituals, literature and philosophy 
are concerned. Taoism systematized after the Buddhist 
model all the popular superstitions native to China and 


T12 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


built up a religious medley in which the Indian elements 
are found more or less incongruously blended with Laot- 
zuanism and the popular desire for immortality, worldy 
welfare, and what they call ‘purity’, 

But Taoism as it is believed popularly is so full of super- 
stitions that it is not in vital contact with the main current 
of orthodox Chinese thought which is represented, main- 
tained, and cherished by the literati including the govern- 
ment officials. To a greater extent Taoism is the popular 
and superstitious Chinese rendering of Buddhism, but 
there will be many critics, the present writer for one, who 
rather hesitate to consider the essence of Buddhism suffici- 
ently transcribed in terms of the Taoists. Unless the Con- 
fucians were not moved to assimilate Buddhist thought in 
their system, so naturally that they attempted to recon- 
struct the whole frame of Confucian ideas, not merely for 
the sake of reconciliation, but for the sake of deepening, 
enriching, and resuscitating it, we cannot say that Budd- 
hism entered into the life of Chinese thought and became 
the real possession of the Chinese mind. But this was 
done during the Sung dynasty when the Confucian 
philosophers took in Buddhist ideas into their teach- 
ing and reconstructed the whole system on a new basis, 
which, however, was considered by them to be the 
necessary course of growth for Confucianism. Whatever 
this was, there is no doubt that the Sung philosophy was 
enriched and deepened by absorbing Buddhist views. In 
this, all the historians of Chinese intellectual development 
agree. 

There is a question, however, one may ask concerning 
this general reconstruction of Confucianism on the idealistic 
Buddhist scheme. If Zen did not grow up in China as the 
native interpretation of the Doctrine of Enlightenment and 
prepare the way for the rise of such great Confucian 
writers as Chou Tun-I (1017-1073), the Ch‘éng brothers, 
Ch‘éng Hao (1032-1085) and Ch‘éng I (1035-1107), and 
Chu Hsi (1130-1200), would there have been a Sung 
revival of the orthodox Chinese teaching? To my view, 


H 113 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


without Zen the Sung dynasty would not have seen the 
phenomenal uprising of what the Chinese historians call the 
‘Science of Reason’. As we already said, Zen was the only 
form in which Buddhism could enter into the Chinese mind. 
This being the case, whatever they later produced in the 
realm of thought could not but be tinged with Zen. See how 
the psychological school of Yogacara was received by the 
native thinkers. It was first advocated, propounded, and 
commented by Hsiian-chuang and his great disciples, but 
this profound study of the human mind was too analytical 
even for the best minds of China, and did not thrive very 
long after Hsiian-chuang. 

Then how did the Prajfia-paramita philosophy fare? 
It was brought into China in the first century soon after 
the introduction of Buddhism itself and later most ably 
supported and interpreted by Kuméarajiva and his Chinese 
pupils. It had a better prospect than the Yogacara because 
its Chinese counterpart was found in the teaching of 
Lao-tzi and his followers. Those two groups of philo- 
sophers, Buddhist and Laotztian, may be classed as be- 
longing to the same type of thought; but even in this case 
the Chinese did not show any great disposition to embrace 
this Sinyata system. Why was this? The reason was obvious, 
seeing that in spite of a certain agreement between the two 
schools on a very broad basis, the Sinyata mode of think- 
ing was altogether too metaphysical, too high-flown, or, 
from the Chinese point of view, too much in nubibus, 
and the practical tendency of the native minds naturally 
failed to grow on it; even in the disciples of Lao-tzii and 
Chwang-tzii there was the taint or virtue of utilitarianism 
which is deeply ingrained in all the Chinese modes of 
feeling. 

Besides the Madhyamika school of Nagarjuna and the 
Yogacara school of Asanga, both of which developed in the 
country of the Buddha itself, there were chih-i’s Tendai 
philosophy and Hsien-shou’s (643-712) Avatarhsaka system 
of Buddhism. These latter were in a sense the creations of 
the native Buddhist thinkers, and if they were at all assimil- 


lig 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


able by their compatriots, they would not have been 
neglected, and their study, instead of being confined within 
a narrow circle of Buddhist specialists, would have over- 
flowed into the Confucian as well as the Taoist boundaries. 
That they did not do so proves the fact that they were still 
foreign and a kind of translation, not literary indeed, but 
more or less conceptional. Therefore, there was no other 
way left for Buddhism but to be transformed into Zen before 
it could be thoroughly acclimatized and grow as a native 
plant. When this was achieved because it was in the in- 
herent nature of Buddhism that this achievement was to 
take place, Zen became the flesh and bones of Chinese 
thought and inspired the Confucians of the Sung dynasty 
to reconstruct the foundation of their philosophy on the 
idealistic plans of Buddhism. 


We may conclude now that Zen, in spite of the uncouth- 
ness and extraordinariness of its outward features, belongs 
to the general system of Buddhism. And by Buddhism we 
mean not only the teaching of the Buddha himself as 
recorded in the earliest Agamas, but the later speculations, 
philosophical and religious, concerning the person and life 
of the Buddha. His personal greatness was such as occasion- 
ally made his disciples advance theories somewhat contrary 
to the advice supposed to have been given by their Master. 
This was inevitable. The world with all its contents, in- 
dividually as well as a whole, is subject to our subjective 
interpretation, not a capricious interpretation indeed, but 
growing out of our inner necessity, our religious yearnings. 
Even the Buddha as an object of one’s’ religious experience 
could not escape this, his personality was so constituted as to 
awaken in us every feeling and thought that goes under the 
name of Buddhism now. The most significant and fruitful 
ideas that were provoked by him were concerned with his 
Enlightenment and Nirvana. These two facts stood out 
most prominently in his long peaceful life of seventy-nine 
years, and all the theories and beliefs that are bound up 
with the Buddha are attempts to understand these facts in 


115 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


terms of our own religious experience. Thus Buddhism has 
grown to have a much wider meaning than is understood 
by most scholars. 

The Buddha’s Enlightenment and Nirvana were two 
separate ideas in his life as it unfolded in history so many 
centuries ago, but from the religious point of view they are 
to be regarded as one idea. That is to say, to understand the 
content and the value of Enlightenment is the same as 
realizing the signification of Nirvana. Taking a stand on 
this, the Mahayanists developed two currents of thought: 
the one was to rely on our intellectual efforts to the furthest 
extent they could reach, and the other, pursuing the prac- 
tical method adopted by the Buddha himself, indeed by all 
Indian truth-seekers, endeavoured to find in the practice of 
dhyana something directly leading to Enlightenment. It 
goes without saying that in both of these efforts the original 
impulse lies in the inmost religious consciousness of pious 
Buddhists. 

The Mahayana texts compiled during a few centuries 
after the Buddha testify to the view here presented. Of 
these, the one expressly composed to propagate the teach- 
ing of the Zen school is the Lankdvatdra, in which the content 
of Enlightenment is, so far as words admit, presented from a 
psychological, philosophical, and practical point of view. 
When this was introduced into China and thoroughly 
assimilated according to the Chinese methods of thinking 
and feeling, the main thesis of the Sitra came to be demon- 
strated in such a way as is now considered characteristically 
Zen. The truth has many avenues of approach through 
which it makes itself known to the human mind. But the 
choice it makes depends on certain limitations under which 
it works. The superabundance of Indian imagination 
issued in supernaturalism and wonderful symbolism, and 
the Chinese sense of practicalness and its love for the solid 
everyday facts of life, resulted in Zen Buddhism. We may 
now be able to understand, though only tentatively by most 


readers at present, the following definitions of Zen offered 
by its masters: 


116 


DOCTRINE OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


When Jéshu was asked what Zen was, he answered, ‘It is 
cloudy today and I won’t answer.’ 

To the same question, Ummon’s reply was, ‘That’s it.’ 
On another occasion the master was not at all affirmative, 
for he said, ‘Not a word to be predicated.’ 

These being some of the definitions given to Zen by the 
masters, in what relationship did they conceive of Zen as 
standing to the doctrine of Enlightenment taught in the 
Sitras? Did they conceive it after the manner of the 
Lankdvatara or after that of the Prajfd-pdramita? No, Zen 
had to have its own way; the Chinese mind refused blindly 
to follow the Indian models. If this is still to be contested, 
read the following: 

A monk asked Kan (Chien), who lived in Haryo 
(Pa-ling), ‘Is there any difference between the teaching of 
the Patriarch and that of the Sutras, or not?’ Said the 
master, ‘When the cold weather comes, the fowl flies up in 
the trees, while the wild duck goes down into water.’ 
Ho-yen (Fa-yen) of Gosozan (Wu-tsu-shan) commented on 
this, saying: ‘The great teacher of Pa-ling has expressed 
only a half of the truth. I would not have it so. Mine is: 
When water is scooped in hands, the moon is reflected in 
them; when the flowers are handled, the scent soaks into 
the robe.’ 


117 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


I 


Cae though it may seem, the fact is that Buddhist 
scholars are engrossed too much in the study of what they 
regard as the Buddha’s teaching and his disciples’ exposition 
of the Dharma, so called, while they neglect altogether the 
study of the Buddha’s spiritual experience itself. According 
to my view, however, the first thing we have to do in the 
elucidation of Buddhist thought is to inquire into the nature 
of this personal experience of the Buddha, which is recorded 
to have presented itself to his inmost consciousness at the 
time of Enlightenment (sambodhi). What the Buddha taught 
his disciples was the conscious outcome of his intellectual 
elaboration to make them see and realize what he himself 
had seen and realized. This intellectual outcome, however 
philosophically presented, does not necessarily enter into the 
inner essence of Enlightenment experienced by the Buddha. 
When we want, therefore, to grasp the spirit of Buddhism, 
which essentially develops from the content of Enlighten- 
ment, we have to get acquainted with the signification of 
the experience of the founder—experience by virtue of 
which he is indeed the Buddha and the founder of the 
religious system which goes under his name. Let us see what 


record we have of this experience, and what were its ante- 
cedents and consequences.! 


1 The story of Enlightenment is told in the Digha-Nikaya, XIV, and 
also in the Introduction to the Jataka Tales, in the Mahavastu, and the 
Majjhima-Nikaya, XXVI and XXXVI, and again in the Samyutta- 
Nikaya, XII. In detail they vary more or less, but not materially. The 
Chinese translation of the Sutra on the Cause and Effect in the Past and Present, 
which seems to be a later version than the Pali Mahdpadana, gives a some- 
what different story, but as far as my point of argument is concerned, the 
main issue remains practically the same. Agvaghosha’s Buddhacarita is 
highly poetical. The Lalita-vistara belongs to the Mahayana. In this 


118 


ENLIGIITENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


There is a Sitra in the Digha-Nikaya known as the 
Mahdpadana Sutianta, in which the Buddha is represented 
as enlightening his disciples concerning the six Buddhas 
anterior to him. The facts relating to their lives as Bodhi- 
sattvas and Buddhas are almost identical in each case 
except some incidental details: for the Buddhas are all 
supposed to have had one and the same career. When 
therefore Gautama, the Buddha of the present Kalpa, talks 
about his predecessors:in this wise, including the story of 
Enlightenment, he is simply recapitulating his own earthly 
life, and everything he states here as having occurred to his 
predecessors, except such matters as parentage, social rank, 
birthplace, length of life, etc., must be regarded as also 
having happened to himself. This is especially true with his 
spiritual experience known as Enlightenment.! 

When the Bodhisattva, as the Buddha is so designated 
prior to his attainment of Buddhahood, was meditating in 
seclusion, the following consideration came upon him: 
‘Verily this world has fallen upon trouble (kiccha); one is 
born, and grows old, and dies, and falls from one state, and 
springs up in another. And from this suffering, moreover, 
no one knows of any way of escape, even from decay and 
death. O when shall a way of escape from this suffering be 
made known, from decay and death?’ Thus thinking, the 


Essay I have tried to take my material chiefly from The Dialogues of the 
Buddha, translated by Rhys Davids, The Kindred Sayings, translated by 
Mrs. Rhys Davids, Majjhima-Nikaya, translated by Silacdra, and the 
same by Neumann, the Chinese Agamas and others. 

1 The idea that there were some more Buddhas in the past seems to 
have originated very early in the history of Buddhism as we may notice 
here, and its further development, combined with the idea of the Jataka, 
finally culminated in the conception of a Bodhisattva, which is one of the 
characteristic features of Mahayana Buddhism. 

The six Buddhas of the past later increased into twenty-three or 
twenty-four in the Buddha-vamsa and Prajita-paramita and even into forty- 
two in the Lalita-vistara. This idea of having predecessors or forerunners 
seems to have been general among ancient peoples. In China, Con- 
fucius claimed to have transmitted his doctrine from Yao and Shun, 
and Lao-tzti from the Emperor Huang. In India, Jainism, which has, not 
only in the teaching but in the personality of the founder, many 
similarities to Buddhism, mentions twenty-three predecessors, naturally 
more or less corresponding so closely to those of Buddhism. 


119 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Bodhisattva reasoned out that decay and death arose, 
from birth, birth from becoming, becoming from grasping, 
grasping from craving, until he came to the mutual con- 
ditioning of name-and-form (ndmariipa) and cognition 
(vififidna).1 Then he reasoned back and forth from the 
coming-to-be of this entire body of evil to its final ceasing- 
to-be—and at this thought there arose to the Bodhisattva 
an insight (cakkhu)? into things not heard of before, and 
knowledge arose, and reason arose, wisdom arose, light 
arose. (Bodhisattassa pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhum 
udapddi, fanam udapddi, pata udapddi, vijjd udapadi, aloka 
udapddi.) 

He then exclaimed: ‘I have penetrated this Dharma, 
deep, hard to perceive, hard to understand, calm, sublime, 
no mere dialectic, subtle, intelligible, only to the wise. 
(Dhammo gambhiro duddaso duranubodho santo panito atakka- 
vacaro nipuno pandito vedaniyo.) But this is a race devoting 
itself to the things to which it clings, devoted thereto, de- 
lighting therein. And for a race devoting itself to the things 
to which it clings, devoted thereto, delighting therein, this 


1It is highly doubtful that the Buddha had a very distinct and de- 
finite scheme for the theory of Causation or Dependence or Origination, 
as the Paticca-samuppada is variously translated. In the present Siitra 
he does not go beyond Vififiana (consciousness or cognition), while in 
its accepted form now the Chain starts with Ignorance (avijja). We have, 
however, no reason to consider this Tenfold Chain of Causation the 
earliest and most authoritative of the doctrine of Paticca-samuppada. 
In many respects the Sitra itself shows evidence of a later compilation. 
The point I wish to discuss here mainly concerns itself with the Buddha’s 
intellectual efforts to explain the realities of life by the theory of causation. 
That the Buddha regarded Ignorance as the principle of birth-and- 
death, and therefore of misery in this world, is a well-established fact 
in the history of Buddhism. 

? Cakkhu literally means an eye. It is often found in combination 
with such terms as pafifid (wisdom or reason), buddha, or samanta (all- 
round), when it means a faculty beyond ordinary relative understand- 
ing. As was elsewhere noticed, it is significant that in Buddhism, both 
Mahayana and Hinaydana, seeing (passato) is so emphasized, and 
especially in this case the mention of an ‘eye’ which sees directly into 
things never before presented to one’s mind is quite noteworthy. It is 
this cakkhu or pafifid-cakkhu in fact that, transcending the conditionality 
of the Fourfold Noble Truth or the Chain of Origination, penetrates 


(sacchikato) into the very ground of consciousness, from which springs 
the opposition of subject and object. 


120 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


were a matter hard to perceive, to wit, that this is condition- 
ed by that, and all that happens is by way of cause. This, 
too, were a matter hard to discern: the tranquillization of 
all the activities of life, the renunciation of all substrata 
of rebirth, the destruction of craving, the death of passion, 
quietude of heart, Nirvana.’ 

The Buddha then uttered the following verse in which 
he expressed his reluctance to preach the Dharma to the 
world at large—the Dharma which was realized in him by 
nana—which he saw visibly, face to face, without any 
traditional instruction: 


‘This that through many toils I’ve won— 
Enough! why should I make it known 
By folk with lust and hate consumed 
Not this the Truth! that can be grasped ! 
Against the stream of common thought, 
Deep, subtle, difficult, delicate, 

Unseen ’twill be by passion’s slaves 
Cloaked in the murk of Ignorance.’”? 


According to this report, transmitted by the compilers 
of the Nikayas, which is also confirmed by the other 
literature we have of the Buddha’s Enlightenment, what 
flashed through his mind must have been an experience 
most unusual and not taking place in our everyday con- 
sciousness, even in the consciousness of a wise, learned, 
and thoughtful man. Thus, he naturally wished to pass 
away into Nirvana without attempting to propagate the 
Dharma, but this idea was abandoned when Great Brahma 
spoke to the Buddha in verse thus: 


1 Here, as well as in the next verse, ‘the truth’ stands for Dharma. 
2 We have, besides this, another verse supposed to have been uttered 
by the Buddha at the moment of Supreme Enlightenment ; it is known as 
the Hymn of Victory. It was quoted in my previous Essay on Zen 
Buddhism and the Doctrine of Enlightenment. The Hymn is unknown 
in the Mahayana literature. The Lalita-vistara has only this: ‘ 
‘Chinna vartmopasanta rajah sushk4 4srava na punah sravanti; 
Chinne vartmani vartata duhkhasyaisho ’nta ucyate.’ 


I2i 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘As on a crag, on crest of mountain standing, 

A man might watch the people far below, 
E’en so do thou, O Wisdom fair, ascending, 

O Seer of all, the terraced heights of Truth, 
Look down, from grief released, upon the nations 

Sunken in grief, oppressed with birth and age. 


Arise, thou Hero! Conqueror in the battle! 
Thou freed from debt! Lord of the pilgrim band! 
Walk the world o’er, and sublime and blessed Teacher! 
Teach us the Truth; there are who’ll understand.’ 


There is no doubt that it was this spiritual experience 
that converted the Bodhisattva into the Buddha, the Per- 
fectly Wise, the Bhagavat, the Arhat, the King of the 
Dharma, the Tathagata, the All-knowing One, and the 
Conqueror. In this, all the records we have, Hinayana and 
Mahayana agree. 

Here, then, arises the most significant question in the 
history of Buddhism. What was it in this experience that 
made the Buddha conquer Ignorance (avijjd, avidya) and 
freed him from the Defilements (dsava, asrava)? What was 
the insight or vision he had into things, which had never 
before been presented to his mind? Was it his doctrine of 
universal suffering due to Thirst (tanhd, trishnd) and Grasp- 
ing (updddna)? Was it his causation theory by which he 
traced the source of pain and suffering to Ignorance? 

It is quite evident that his intellectual activity was not 
the efficient cause of Enlightenment. ‘Not to be grasped by 
mere logic’ (atakkdvacara) is the phrase we constantly en- 
counter in Buddhist literature, Pali and Sanskrit. The 
satisfaction the Buddha experienced in this case was alto- 
gether too deep, too penetrating, and too far-reaching in 
result to be a matter of mere logic. The intellectual solution 
of a problem is satisfying enough as far as the blockage has 
been removed, but it is not sufficiently fundamental to 
enter into the depths of our soul-life. All scholars are not 
saints and all saints are by no means scholarly. The 
Buddha’s intellectual survey of the Law of Origination 


122 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


(paticca-samuppdda), however perfect and thoroughgoing, 
could not make him so completely sure of his conquest over 
Ignorance, Pain, Birth, and Defilements. Tracing things to 
their origin or subjecting them to a scheme of concatenation 
is one thing, but to subdue them, to bring them to subjection 
in the actuality of life, is quite another thing. In the one the 
intellect alone is active, but in the other there is the 
operation of the will—and the will is the man. The Buddha 
was not the mere discoverer of the Twelvefold Chain of 
Causation, he took hold of the chain itself in his hands 
and broke it into pieces so that it would never again bind 
him to slavery. 

His insight reached the bottom of his being and saw it 
really as it was, and the seeing was like the seeing of your 
own hand with your own eyes—there was no reflection, no 
inference, no judgment, no comparison, no moving either 
backward or forward step by step, the thing was seen and 
that was the end of it, there was nothing to talk about, 
nothing to argue, or to explain. The seeing was something 
complete in itself—it did not lead on to anything inside or 
outside, within or beyond. And it was this completeness, this 
finality, that was so entirely satisfying to the Buddha, who 
now knew that the chain was found broken and that he was 
a liberated man. The Buddha’s experience of Enlighten- 
ment therefore could not be understood by referring it to the 
intellect which tantalizes but fails to fulfil and satisfy. 

The Buddha’s psychological experience of life as pain 
and suffering was intensely real and moved him to the very 
depths of his being, and in consequence the emotional 
reaction he experienced at the time of Enlightenment was 
in proportion to this intensity of feeling. All the more 
evident, therefore, it is that he could not rest satisfied with 
an intellectual glancing or surveying of the facts of life. In 
order to bring a perfect state of tranquillity over the waves 
of turmoil surging in his heart, he had to have recourse to 
something more deeply and vitally concerned with his in- 
most being. For all we can say of it, the intellect is after all a 
spectator, and when it does some work it is as a hireling 


123 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


for better or for worse. Alone it cannot bring about the 
state of mind designated as enlightenment. The feeling of 
perfect freedom, the feeling that ‘aham hi araha loke, aham 
sattha anuttaro’, could not issue from the consciousness of 
an intellectual superiority alone. There must have been in 
the mind of the Buddha a consciousness far more funda- 
mental which could only accompany one’s deepest spiritual 
experience. 


To account for this spiritual experience the Buddhist 
writers exhaust their knowledge of words relating to the 
understanding, logical or otherwise. ‘Knowledge’ (via), 
‘understanding’ (pajdnand), ‘reason’ (fidna), ‘wisdom’ (pafifid), 
‘penetration’ (abhisameta), ‘realization’ (abhisambuddha), 
‘perception’ (safjananam), and ‘insight’ (dassana),1 are some 
of the terms they use. In truth, so long as we confine our- 
selves to intellection, however deep, subtle, sublime, and 
enlightening, we fail to see into the gist of the matter. This 
is the reason why even the so-called primitive Buddhists 
who are by some considered positivists, rationalists, and 
agnostics, were obliged to assume some faculty dealing with 
things far above relative knowledge, things that do not 
appeal to our empirical ego. 

The Mahayana account of Enlightenment as is found in 
the Lalita-vistara (chapter on ‘Abhisambodhana’) is more 
explicit as to the kind of mental activity or wisdom which 
converted the Bodhisattva into the Buddha. For it was 
through ‘ekacitiekshana-samyukta-prajia’ that supreme per- 
fect knowledge was realized (abhisambodha) by the Buddha. 
What is this Prajfia? It is the understanding of a higher 
order than that which is habitually exercised in acquiring 
relative knowledge. It is a faculty both intellectual and 
spiritual, through the operation of which the soul is en- 
abled to break the fetters of intellection. The latter is always 

1 The Mahdvyutpatti, CXLII, gives a list of thirteen terms denoting the 
act of comprehending with more or less definite shades of meaning : 


buddhi, mati, gati, matarh, drishtam, abhisamitavi, samyagavabodha, 


supratividdha, abhilakshita, gatirngata, avabodha, pratyabhijfia, and 
menire. 


124 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


dualistic inasmuch as it is cognizant of subject and object, 
but in the Prajiia which is exercised ‘in unison with one- 
thought-viewing’ there is no separation between knower 
and known, these are all viewed (ikshana) in one thought 
(ekacitta), and enlightenment is the outcome of this. By thus 
specifying the operation of Prajfia, the Mahay4nists have 
achieved an advance in making clearer the nature of 
sambodhi: for when the mind reverses its usual course of 
working and, instead of dividing itself externally, goes 
back to its original inner abode of oneness, it begins to 
realize the state of ‘one-thought-viewing’ where Ignorance 
ceases to scheme and the Defilements do not obtain. 
Enlightenment we can thus see is an absolute state of 
mind in which no ‘discrimination’ (parikalpana or vikalpa), 
so called, takes place, and it requires a great mental effort 
to realize this state of viewing all things ‘in one thought’. In 
fact, our logical as well as practical consciousness is too 
given up to analysis and ideation; that is to say, we cut up 
realities into elements in order to understand them; but 
when they are put together to make the original whole, its 
elements stand out too conspicuously defined, and we do not 
view the whole ‘in one thought’. And as it is only when ‘one 
thought’ is reached that we have enlightenment, an effort 
is to be made to go beyond our relative empirical con- 
sciousness, which attaches itself to the multitudinosity and 
not to the unity of things. The most important fact that lies 
behind the experience of Enlightenment, therefore, is that 
the Buddha made the most strenuous attempt to solve the 
problem of Ignorance and his utmost will-power was 
brought forth to bear upon a successful issue of the struggle. 
We read in the Katha-Upanishad: ‘As rain water that has 
fallen on a mountain ridge runs down on all sides, thus 
does he who sees a difference between qualities run after 
them on all sides. As pure water poured into pure water 
remains the same, thus, O Gautama, is the self of a thinker 
who knows.’ This pouring pure water into pure water is, 
as we have it here, the ‘viewing all qualities in one thought’ 
which finally cuts off the hopelessly entangling logical mesh 


125 


ESSAYS'IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


by merging all differences and likenesses into the absolute 
oneness of the knower (jfidnin) and the known (jfieya). This, 
however, in our practical dualistic life, is a reversion, a 
twisting, and a readjustment. 
Eckhart, the great German mystic, is singularly one with 
the ‘one-thought-viewing’ of things as done by Buddhists 
when he expresses his view thus: ‘Das Auge darin ich Gott 
sehe, ist dasselbe Auge, darin Gott mich sieht. Mein Auge 
und Gottes Auge ist ein Auge und ein Gesicht und ein 
Erkennen und eine Liebe.’! The idea of reversion is more 
clearly expressed in Jacob Boehme’s simile of the ‘umge- 
wandtes Auge’ with which God is recognized. 
Enlightenment, therefore, must involve the will as well 
as the intellect. It is an act of intuition born of the will. The 
will wants to know itself as it is in itself, yathabhiitam dassana, 
free from all its cognitive conditions. The Buddha attained 
this end when a new insight came upon him at the end of 
his ever-circulatory reasoning from decay and death to 
Ignorance and from Ignorance to decay and death, through 
the twelve links of the Paticca-samuppada. The Buddha had 
to go over the same ground again and again, because he 
was in an intellectual ¢mpasse through which he could not 
move further on. He did not repeat the process, as is 
originally imagined, for his own philosophical edification. 
The fact was that he did not know how to escape this 
endless rotation of ideas; at this end there was birth, there 
was decay and death, and at the other end there was 
Ignorance. The objective facts could not be denied, they 
boldly and uncomfortably confronted him, while Ignorance 
balked the progress of his cognitive faculty moving farther 
onward or rather inward. He was hemmed in on both sides, 
he did not know how to find his way out, he went first this 
way and then that way, forever with the same result—the 
utter inutility of all his mental labour. But he had an in- 
domitable will; he wanted, with the utmost efforts of his 
will, to get into the very truth of the matter; he knocked 
and knocked until the doors of Ignorance gave way: and 
* Franz Pfeiffer, p. 312, Martensen, p. 29. 


126 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


they burst open to a new vista never before presented to his 
intellectual vision. Thus he was able to exclaim to Upaka, 
the naked ascetic, whom he happened to meet on his way 
to Benares after Enlightenment: 


‘All-conqueror I, knower of all, 

From every soil and stain released, 
Renouncing all, from craving ceased, 
Self-taught ; whom should I Master call? 


That which I know I learned of none, 
My fellow is not on the earth. 

Of human or of heavenly birth 

To equal me there is not one. 


I truly have attained release, 

The world’s unequalled teacher I, 
Alone, enlightened perfectly, 

I dwell in everlasting peace.’! 


When we speak of enlightenment or illumination we are 
apt to think of its epistemological aspect and to forget the 
presence of a tremendous will-power behind it—the power 
in fact making up the entire being of an individual. Especi- 
ally as in Buddhism the intellect stands forth prominently, 
perhaps more than it ought to, in the realization of the ideal 
Buddhist life; scholars are tempted to ignore the signi- 
ficance of the will as the essentially determinate factor in 
the solution of the ultimate problem. Their attention has 
thus been directed too much towards the doctrine of the 
Paticca-samuppada or the Ariyasacca, which they con- 
sidered constituted the final teaching of Buddhism. But in 


1 Translated by Bhikkhu Silacara. The original Pali runs as follows: 
Sabbabhibhii sabbavidi "ham asmi, 
Sabbesu dhammesu aniipalitto, 
Sabbamjaho tanhakkhaye vimutto 
Sayarh abhififidya kam uddiseyyam. 
Na me 4cariyo atthi, sadiso me na vijjati, 
Sadevakasmirm lokasmim na ’tthi me patipuggalo. 
Aharn hi araha loke, aharh sattha anuttaro, 
Eko ’mhi sammasambuddho, sitibhito ’smi, nibbuto. 
: Digha-Nikaya, XXVI. 


127 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


this they have been sadly at fault, nor have they been right 
in taking Buddhism for a sort of ethical culture, declaring 
that it is no more than a system of moral precepts (sila), 
without a soul, without a God, and consequently without a 
promise of immortality. But the true Buddhist ideas of 
Ignorance, Causation, and Moral Conduct had a far deeper 
foundation in the soul-life of man. Ignorance was not a 
cognitive ignorance, but meant the darkness of spiritual 
outlook. If Ignorance were no more than cognitive, the 
clearing-up of it did not and could not result in enlighten- 
ment, in freedom from the Fetters and Defilements, or 
Intoxicants as some P4li scholars have them. The Buddha’s 
insight penetrated the depths of his being as the will, and he 
knew what this was, yathabhitam, or in its tathabhava 
(thatness or suchness), he rose above himself as a Buddha 
supreme and peerless. The expression ‘Anuttara-samyak- 
sambodhi’ was thus used to designate this pre-eminently 
spiritual knowledge realized by him. 

Ignorance, which is the antithesis of Enlightenment, 
therefore acquires a much deeper sense here than that 
which has hitherto been ascribed to it. Ignorance is not 
merely not knowing or not being acquainted with a theory, 
system or law; it is not directly grasping the ultimate facts 
of life as expressive of the will. In Ignorance knowing is 
separated from acting, and the knower from that which is 
to be known; in Ignorance the world is asserted as distinct 
from the self; that is, there are always two elements stand- 
ing in opposition. This is, however, the fundamental 
condition of cognition, which means that as soon as cog- 
nition takes place there is Ignorance clinging to its very 
act. When we think we know something, there is something 
we do not know. The unknown is always behind the known, 
and we fail to get at this unknown knower, who is indeed 
the inevitable and necessary companion to every act of 
cognition. We want, however, to know this unknown 
knower, we cannot let this go unknown, ungrasped without 
actually seeing what it is; that is, Ignorance is to be en- 
lightened. This involves a great contradiction, at least 


128 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


epistomologically. But until we transcend this condition 
there is no peace of mind, life grows unbearable. 

In his search for the ‘builder’ (gahdkara), the Buddha 
was always accosted by Ignorance, an unknown knower 
behind knowing. He could not for a long time lay his hands 
on this one in a black mask until he transcended the dualism 
of knower and known. This transcending was not an act of 
cognition, it was self-realization, it was a spiritual awakening 
and outside the ken of logical reasoning, and therefore not 
accompanied by Ignorance. The knowledge the knower has 
of himself, in himself—that is, as he is to himself—is un- 
attainable by any proceedings of the intellect which is not 
permitted to transcend its own conditions. Ignorance is 
brought to subjection only by going beyond its own prin- 
ciple. This is an act of the will. Ignorance in itself is no evil, 
nor is it the source of evil, but when we are ignorant of 
Ignorance, of what it means in our life, then there takes 
place an unending concatenation of evils. Tanha (craving) 
regarded as the root of evil can be overcome only when 
Ignorance is understood in its deeper and proper signi- 
fication, Z 


rf 


Therefore, it betrays an utter ignorance on the part of 
Buddhist scholars when they relegate Ignorance to the past 
in trying to explain the rationale of the Twelvefold Chain of 
Causation (paticca-samuppada)' from the temporal point of 
view. According to them the first two factors (angant) of the 
Paticca-samuppada belong to the past, while the following 
eight belong to the present and the last two to the future. 


1 Ordinarily, the Chain runs as follows: 1. Ignorance (avijja, avidya) ; 
2. Disposition (sankhara, samskara) ; 3. Consciousness (vififfana, vijhana) ; 
4. Name and Form (ndmariipa); 5. Six Sense-organs (salayatana, sada- 
yatana) ; 6. Touch (phassa, sparsa) ; 7. Feeling (vedana) ; 8. Desire (tanha, 
trshnd); 9. Clinging (upddana) ; 10. Becoming (bhava) ; 11. Birth (jatt) ; 
and 12, Old Age and Death ( jardmaranam). 


i’ 129 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Ignorance, from which starts the series of the Nidanas, 
has no time-limits, for it is not of time but of the will, as is 
enlightenment. When time-conception enters, enlighten- 
ment, which is negatively the dispelling of Ignorance, loses 
all its character of finality, and we begin to look around for 
something going beyond it. The Fetters would ever be 
tightening around us, and the Defilements would be our 
eternal condition. No gods would sing of the Awakened One 
as ‘a lotus unsoiled by the dust of passion, sprung from the 
lake of knowledge; a sun that destroys the darkness of 
delusion ; a moon that takes away the scorching heat of the 
inherent sins of existence.’! 

If Enlightenment made the whole universe tremble in 
six different ways as is recorded in the Sutras, Ignorance 
over which it finally prevailed must have as much power, 
though diametrically opposed to it in value and virtue, as 
Enlightenment. To take Ignorance for an intellectual term 
and then to interpret it in terms of time-relation, altogether 
destroys its fundamental character as the first in the series of 
the Twelve Nidanas. The extraordinary power wielded by 
the Buddha over his contemporaries as well as posterity was 
not entirely due to his wonderful analytical acumen, though 
we have to admit this in him; it was essentially due to his 
spiritual greatness and profound personality, which came 
from his will-power penetrating down into the very basis of 
creation. The vanquishing of Ignorance was an exhibition 
of this power which therefore was invincible and against 
which Mara with all his hosts was utterly powerless either 
to overwhelm or to entice. The failure to see into the true 
meaning of Ignorance in the system of the Paticca-samup- 
pada or in the Ariyasacca will end unavoidably in miscon- 
struing the essential nature of Enlightenment and con- 
sequently of Buddhism. 

In the beginning, which is really no beginning and which 
has no spiritual meaning except in our finite life, the will 
wants to know itself, and consciousness is awakened, and 
with the awakening of consciousness the will is split in two. 

1 The Buddhacarita, Book XIV. 


130 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


The one will, whole and complete in itself, is now at once 
actor and observer. Conflict is inevitable; for the actor now 
wants to be free from the limitations under which he has 
been obliged to put himself in his desire for consciousness. 
He has in one sense been enabled to see, but at the same time 
there is something which he, as observer, cannot see. In the 
trail of knowledge, Ignorance follows with the inevitability 
of fate, the one accompanies the other as shadow accom- 
panies object, no separation can be effected between the two 
companions. But the will as actor is bent on going back to 
his own original abode where there was yet no dualism, 
and therefore peace prevailed. This longing for the home, 
however, cannot be satisfied without a long, hard, trying 
experience. For the thing once divided in two cannot be 
restored to its former unity until some struggle is gone 
through with. And the restoration is more than a mere 
going back, the original content is enriched by the division, 
struggle, and resettlement. 

When first the division takes place in the will, conscious- 
ness is so enamoured of its novelty and its apparent effici- 
ency in solving the practical problems of life that it forgets 
its own mission, which is to enlighten the will. Instead of 
turning its illuminating rays within itself—that is, towards 
the will from which it has its principle of existence—con- 
sciousness is kept busy with the objective world of realities 
and ideas; and when it tries to look into itself, there is a 
world of absolute unity where the object of which it wishes 
to know is the subject itself. The sword cannot cut itself. 
The darkness of Ignorance cannot be dispelled because it 
is its own self. At this point the will has to make a heroic 
effort to enlighten itself, to redeem itself, without destroying 
the once-awakened consciousness or rather by working out 
the principle lying at the basis of consciousness. ‘This was 
accomplished as we see in the case of the Buddha, and he 
became more than mere Gautama, he was the Awakened 
One and the Exalted and supremely Enlightened. In willing 
there is really something more than mere willing, there is 
thinking and seeing. By this seeing, the will sees itself and is 


131 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


thereby made free and its own master. This is knowing 
in the most fundamental sense of the term and herein 
consists the Buddhist redemption. 


Ignorance prevails as long as the will remains cheated 
by its own offspring or its own image, consciousness, in 
which the knower always stands distinguished from the 
known. The cheating, however, cannot last, the will wishes 
to be enlightened, to be free, to be by itself. Ignorance al- 
ways presupposes the existence of something outside and 
unknown. This unknown outsider is generally termed ego or 
soul, which is in reality the will itself in the state of Ignor- 
ance. Therefore, when the Buddha experienced Enlighten- 
ment, he at once realized that there was no Atman, no soul- 
entity as an unknown and unknowable quantity. Enlighten- 
ment dispelled Ignorance and with it all the bogies con- 
jured up from the dark cave of ego disappeared. Ignorance 
in its general use is opposed to knowledge, but from the 
Buddhist point of view, in which it stands contrasted to 
Enlightenment, it means the ego (dtman), which is so em- 
phatically denied by the Buddha. This is not to be wondered 
at, seeing that the Buddha’s teaching centred in the doctrine 
of Enlightenment, the dispelling of Ignorance. 

Those who see only the doctrine of non-atman in Budd- 
hism, and fail to inquire into the meaning of Enlightenment 
are incapable of appreciating the full significance of the 
Buddha’s message to the world. If he simply denied the 
existence of an ego-entity from the psychological point of 
view after reducing it into its component factors, scienti- 
fically he may be called great as his analytical faculties 
stood far above those of his contemporaries in this respect; 
but his influence as a spiritual leader would not have 
reached so far and endured so long. His theory of non-4tman 
was not only established by a modern scientific method, but 
essentially was the outcome of his inner experience. When 
Ignorance is understood in the deeper sense, its dispelling 
unavoidably results in the negation of an ego-entity as the 

_ basis of all our life-activities. Enlightenment is a positive 


132 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


conception, and for ordinary minds it is quite hard to com- 
prehend it in its true bearings. But when we know what it 
means in the general system of Buddhism, and concentrate 
our efforts in the realization of it, all the rest will take care 
of themselves, such as the notion of Ego, attachment to 
it, Ignorance, Fetters, Defilements, etc. Moral Conduct, 
Contemplation, and Higher Understanding—all these are 
meant to bring about the desired end of Buddhism; that 
is, Enlightenment. The Buddha’s constant reiteration of 
the theory of causation, telling his disciples how, when this 
is cause, that is effect, and how, when cause disappears, 
effect also disappears, is not primarily to get them ac- 
quainted with a kind of formal logic, but to let them see how 
Enlightenment is casually related to all human happiness 
and spiritual freedom and tranquillity. 

So long as Ignorance is understood as logical inability 
to know, its disappearance can never bring out the spiritual 
freedom to which even the earliest known literature of 
Buddhism makes so frequent and so emphatic allusions. 
See how the Arhat’s declaration of spiritual independence 
reads in the Nikayas: “There arose in me insight, the 
emancipation of my heart became unshakeable, this is my 
last birth, there is now no rebirth for me.”! This is quite a 
strong statement showing how intensely and convincingly 
one has seized the central facts of life. The passage is indeed 
one of the characterizations of Arhatship, and when a fuller 
delineation of it is made, we have something like the 
following: ‘To him, thus knowing, thus seeing,? the heart 
is set free from the defilement of lust, is set free from the 


1 Nanafi ca pana me dassanarh udapadi akuppa me ceto-vimutti 
ayarh antima jati natthi dani punabbhavo. 

2*Thus knowing, thus seeing’ (evam janato evam passato) is one of the 
set phrases we encounter throughout Buddhist literature, Hinayana and 
Mahayana. Whether or not its compilers were aware of the distinction 
between knowing and seeing in the sense we make now in the theory of 
knowledge, the coupling is of great signification. They must have been 
conscious of the inefficiency and insufficiency of the word ‘to know’ in the 
description of the kind of knowledge one has at the moment of enlighten- 
ment. ‘To see’ or ‘to see face to face’ signifies the immediateness and 
utmost perspicuity and certainty of such knowledge. As was mentioned 
elsewhere, Buddhism is rich in terminology of this order of cognition. 


133 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


defilement of becoming, is set free from the defilement of 
Ignorance. In him, thus set free, there arises the knowledge 
of his emancipation, and he knows that rebirth has been 
destroyed, that the Higher Life has been fulfilled, that 
what had to be done has been accomplished, and after this 
present life there will be no beyond.’! In essence the Arhat 
is the Buddha and even the Tathagata, and in the begin- 
ning of the history of Buddhism the distinction between 
these terms did not seem quite sharply marked. Thus to a 
great extent they may be qualified in the same terms. 


When the Buddha was talking with his disciples con- 
cerning various speculations prevalent in his days, he made 
the following remarks about the knowledge of things in 
command by the Tathagata: 

‘That does he know, and he knows also other things far 
beyond, far better than those speculations ; and having that 
knowledge he is not puffed up; and thus untarnished he 
has, in his own heart, realized the way of escape from them, 
has understood, as really they are, the rising up and passing 
away of sensations, their sweet taste, their danger, how they 
cannot be relied on, and not grasping after any of those 
things men are eager for, he the Tathagata is quite set free. 
These are those other things, profound, difficult to realize, 
and hard to understand, tranquillizing, sweet, not to be 
grasped by logic, subtle, comprehensible only by the wise, 
which the Tathagata, having himself realized and seen 
face to face, hath set forth; and it is concerning these that 
they who would rightly praise the Tathagata in accordance 
with the truth, should speak.’? 

These virtues for which the Tathagata was to be praised 
were manifestly not derived from speculation and analytical 
reasoning. His intellectual sight was just as keen and 
far-reaching as any of his contemporaries, but he was 


* Tassa evam janato evam passato kamAsavapi cittarn vimuccati 
bhavasavapi cittarn vimuccati avijjasavapi cittarn vimuccati, vimut- 
tasmimh vimuttamit fidnam hoti. Khina jati vusitarn brahmacariyarh 
katarh karaniyam naparath itthattayati pajanati. 

* The Brahmajala Sutta, p. 43. Translation by Rhys Davids. 


134 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


endowed with a higher faculty, will-power, which was exer- 
cised to its fullest capacity in order to bring about all these 
virtues which belonged to the entire being of Tathagata- 
hood. And naturally there was no need for him to face these 
metaphysical problems that agitated the philosophers of his 
days ; they were solved in him, when he attained his spiritual 
freedom and serenity, in their entirety, in their synthetic 
aspect, and not partially or fragmentarily—which should 
be the case if they were presented to the Buddha’s cognition 
as philosophical problems. In this light is to be read the 
Mahali Sutta. Some scholars wonder why two entirely dis- 
connected ideas are treated together in one body of the 
Sitra, which, however, shows scholarly ignorance in re- 
gard to matters spiritual, as they fail to notice the true 
import of Enlightenment in the system of Buddhist faith. 
To understand this we need imaginative intuition directly 
penetrating the centre of life, and not always do mere 
literary and philological talents succeed in unravelling its 
secrets. i 

The Mahdli Suita is a Pali Sitra in the Digha-Nikaya, 
in which Mahali asks the Buddha as to the object of the 
religious life practised by his disciples, and the following is 
the gist of his answer: The Buddhists do not practise self- 
concentration in order to acquire any miraculous power 
such as hearing heavenly sounds or seeing heavenly sights.1 

1 The idea of performing miracles systematically through the power 
seapines by self-concentration seems to have been greatly in vogue in 
India even from the earliest days of her civilization, and the Buddha was 
frequently approached by his followers to exhibit his powers to work 
wonders. In fact, his biographers later turned him into a regular miracle- 
performer, at least as far as we may judge by the ordinary standard of 
logic and science. But from the Prajfid-paramita point of view, according 
to which ‘because what was preached by the Tathagata as the possession 
of qualities, that was preached as no-possession of qualities by the 
Tathagata, and therefore it is called the possession of qualities’ (yaisha 
bhagavan lakshanasampat tathagatena bhashita alakshanasampad 
esha tathagatena bhashita; tenocyate lakshanasampad iti), the idea of 
performing wonders acquires quite a new signification spiritually. In the 
Kevaddha Sutta three wonders are mentioned as having been understood 
and realized by the Buddha: the mystic wonder, the wonder of educa- 


tion, and the wonder of manifestation. The possessor of the mystic 
wonder can work the following logical and physical impossibilities : 


150 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


There are things higher and sweeter than that, one of which 
is the complete destruction of the Three Bonds (delusion of 
self, doubt, and trust in the efficacy of good works and 
ceremonies) and the attainment of such a state of mind as 
to lead to the insight of the higher things in one’s spiritual 
life. When this insight is gained the heart grows serene, is 
released from the taint of Ignorance, and there arises the 
knowledge of emancipation. Such questions as are asked 
by you, O Mahili, regarding the identity of body and soul, 
are idle ones; for when you attain to the supreme insight 
and see things as they really are in themselves—that is, 
emancipated from the Bonds, Taints, and Deadly Flows— 
those questions that are bothering you at the moment will 
completely lose their value and no more be asked in the 
way you do. Hence no need of my answering your questions. 

This dialogue between the Buddha and Mahili well 
illustrates the relation between Enlightenment and the 
problem of the soul. There is no need of wondering why the 
Buddha did not definitely solve the ever-recurring question 
instead of ignoring it in the manner as he did and talking 
about something apparently in no connection with the 
point at issue. This is one of the instances by which we 
must try to see into the meaning of Ignorance. 


Il 


One of the reasons, however, why the Buddha left some 
metaphysical questions unanswered or indeterminate 


‘From being one he becomes multiform, from being multiform he be- 
comes one; from being visible he becomes invisible; he passes without 
hindrance to the further side of a wall or a battlement or a mountain, as 
if through air; he penetrates up and down through solid ground as if 
through water; he walks on water without dividing it, as if on solid 
ground ; he travels cross-legged through the sky like the birds on wing; 
he touches and feels with the hand even the moon and sun, beings of 
mystic power and potency though they be ; he reaches even in the body up 
to the heaven of Brahma.’ Shall we understand this literally and intell- 
ectually? Cannot we interpret it in the spirit of the Prajna-paramita 


idealism? Why? Taccittam yacittam acittam. (Thought is called thought 
because it is no-thought.) 


136 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


(avydkata) was due to the fact that Buddhism is a practical 
system of spiritual discipline and not a metaphysical dis- 
course. The Buddha naturally had his theory of cognition, 
but this was secondary inasmuch as the chief aim of Budd- 
hist life was to attain Enlightenment from which spiritual 
freedom ensues. Enlightenment vanquishes Ignorance ly- 
ing at the root of birth and death and laying fetters of 
every description, intellectual as well as effective. And this 
vanquishing of Ignorance cannot be achieved except by the 
exercise of one’s will-power; all the other attempts, es- 
pecially merely intellectual, are utterly futile. Hence the 
Buddha’s conclusion: “These questions! are not calculated 
to profit, they are not concerned with the Dharma, they 
do not redound to the elements of right conduct, nor to 
detachment, nor to purification from lusts, nor to quietude, 
nor to tranquillization of heart, nor to real knowledge, nor 
to the insight of the higher stages of the Path, nor to 
Nirvana. Therefore is it that I express no opinion upon 
them.’ What the Buddha on the other hand expounded 
was: ‘What pain is, what the origin of pain is, what the 
cessation of pain is, and the method by which one may 
reach the cessation of pain.’ For these are all practical 
matters to be not only fully understood and realized, but 
actively mastered by any one who really desires to accom- 
plish the great deed of emancipation. 

That the Buddha was very much against mere knowledge 
and most emphatically insisted on actually seeing and per- 
sonally experiencing the Dharma, face to face, is in evidence 
everywhere in the Nikayas as well as in the Mahayana 
texts. This has been indeed the strongest point in the teach- 
ing of Buddhism. When a Brahman philosopher was refer- 
ring to his knowledge of the Three Vedas and a union with 
that which he has not seen, the Buddha ridiculed him in 
one of his strong phrases: ‘So you say that the Brahmans 
are not able to point the way to union with that which they 
have seen, and you further say that neither any one of them, 


1 The questions are: Is the world eternal? Is the world not eternal? 
Is the world finite? Is the world infinite? Potthapdda-Sutta. 


137 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


nor of their pupils, nor of their predecessors even to the 
seventh generation, has ever seen Brahma. And you further 
say that even the Rishis of old, whose words they hold in 
such deep respect, did not pretend to know, or to have seen 
where, or whence, or whither Brahma is. Yet these 
Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas say, forsooth, that 
they can point out the way to union with that which they 
know not, neither have seen. . . . They are like a string of 
blind men clinging one to the other, neither can the fore- 
most see, nor can the middle one see, nor can the hindmost 
see. The talk of those Brahmans versed in the Three Vedas 
is but blind talk: the first sees not, the middle one sees not, 
nor can the last see.’ 

Enlightenment or the dispelling of Ignorance, which is 
the ideal of the Buddhist life, we can see now most clearly, 
is not an act of the intellect, but the transforming or re- 
modelling of one’s whole being through the exercise of the 
most fundamental faculty innate in every one of us. Mere 
understanding has something foreign in it and does not 
seem to come so intimately into life. If Enlightenment had 
really such a tremendous effect on our spiritual outlook as 
we read in the Siitras, it could not be the outcome of just 
getting acquainted with the doctrine of Causation. En- 
lightenment is the work of Pafifia, which is born of the will 
which wants to see itself and to be in itself. Hence the 
Buddha’s emphasis on the importance of personal experi- 
ence; hence his insistence on meditation in solitude as the 
means of leading to the experience. Meditation, through 
which the will endeavours to transcend the condition it has 
put on itself in the awakening of consciousness, is therefore 
by no means the simple act of cogitating on the theory of 
Origination or Causation, which for ever moves in a circle, 
starting from Ignorance and ending in Ignorance. This is 
the one thing that is most needed in Buddhism. All the 
other metaphysical problems involve us in a tangled skein, 
in a matted mass of thread. 

Ignorance is thus not to be got rid of by metaphysical 
means but by the struggle of the will. When this is done, 


138 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


we are also freed from the notion of an ego-entity which 
is the product or rather the basis of Ignorance, on which it 
depends and thrives. The ego is the dark spot where the 
rays of the intellect fail to penetrate, it is the last hiding- 
lair of Ignorance, where the latter serenely keeps itself from 
the light. When this lair is laid bare and turned inside out, 
Ignorance vanishes like frost in the sun. In fact, these two 
are one and the same thing, Ignorance and the idea of ego. 
We are apt to think that when Ignorance is driven out.and 
the ego loses its hold on us, we have nothing to lean against 
and are left to the fate of a dead leaf blown away hither and 
thither as the wind listeth. But this is not so; for Enlighten- 
ment is not a negative idea meaning simply the absence of 
Ignorance. Indeed, Ignorance is the negation of Enlighten- 
ment and not the reverse. Enlightenment is affirmation in 
the truest sense of the word, and therefore it was stated by 
the Buddha that he who sees the Dharma sees the Buddha, 
and he who sees the Buddha sees the Dharma, and again 
that he who wants to see the Buddha ought not to seek him 
in form, nor in voice, etc. When Ignorance ruled supreme, 
the ego was conceived to be a positive idea, and its denial 
was nihilistic. It was quite natural for Ignorance to uphold 
the ego where it found its original home. But with the 
realization of Enlightenment, the whole affair changes its 
aspect, and the order instituted by Ignorance is reversed 
from top to bottom. What was negative is now positive, 
and what was positive now negative. Buddhist scholars 
ought not to forget this revaluation of ideas that comes 
along with Enlightenment. Since Buddhism asserts En- 
lightenment to be the ultimate fact of Buddhist life, there is 
in it nothing negativistic, nothing pessimistic. 


IV 


As philosophy tends to emphasize unduly the import- 
ance of abstract ideas and logical inferences and forgets 
to keep itself constantly in touch with the actual world of 


139 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


experience, the Buddha, as I have repeatedly stated, flatly 
refused to subscribe to theorization (takka or vitakka) at the 
expense of practical discipline. Enlightenment was the fruit 
of such discipline, and the dispelling of Ignorance could not 
be effected by any other means. If the Buddha could be 
said to have had any system of thought governing the whole 
trend of his teaching, it was what we may call radical 
empiricism. By this I mean that he took life and the world 
as they were and did not try to read them according to his 
own interpretation. Theorists may say this is impossible, 
for we put our subjectivity into every act of perception, and 
what we call an objective world is really a reconstruction 
of our innate ideas. Epistemologically this may be so, but 
spiritually a state of perfect freedom is obtained only when 
all our egoistic thoughts are not read into life and the world 
is accepted as it is as a mirror reflects a flower as flower and 
the moon as moon. When therefore I say Buddhism is 
radical empiricism, this is not to be understood episte- 
mologically but spiritually. This is really the meaning of 
‘yathabhitam’, or ‘yathatatham’—the term quite fre- 
quently used in the Buddhist canon and in fact forming a 
most important refrain of Buddhist thought. 

In the Sdmafifia-phala Sutta, in the Digha-Nikaya, we 
are told in an ascending scale what the ultimate fruits of 
Buddhist life are, and the scale terminates in the ‘ya- 
thabhitam’ acceptance of the world: 

‘With his heart thus serene, made pure, translucent, 
cultured, devoid of evil, supple, ready to act, firm, and 
imperturbable, he directs and bends down to the know- 
ledge of the destruction of the Defilements (dsava@). He 
knows as it really is: ““This is pain.”” He knows as it really 
is: “This is the origin of pain.”” He knows as it really is: 
“This is the cessation of pain.” He knows as it really is: 
“This is the path that leads to the cessation of pain.” He 
knows as they really are: “These are the Defilements.” He 
knows as it really is: ‘“This is the origin of the Defilements.” 
He knows as it really is: ‘“This is the cessation of the Defile- 
ments.” He knows as it really is: ‘This is the path that 


140 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


leads to the cessation of the Defilements.”? To him, thus 
knowing, thus seeing, the heart is set free from the Defile- 
ment of Lusts (kdma), is set free from the Defilement of 
Existence (bhdva), is set free from the Defilement of Ignor- 
ance (avijjd). In him, thus set free, there arises the knowledge 
of his emancipation, and he knows: ‘‘Rebirth has been 
destroyed. The higher life has been fulfilled. What had to be 
done has been accomplished. After this present life there 
will be no beyond !”? ’ 

How shall we understand this? As in the case of the 
Twelve Nidanas, the Fourfold Noble Truth will surely fail 
to yield up its deepest signification when we approach it 
intellectually. For it is no more than a restatement of the 
dogma of dependent origination, however different in form, 
the same principle is asserted both in the Paticca-samup- 
pada and in the Ariya-sacca. The latter points out the 
practical method of escape from the fetters of karma 
while the former draws out in view the plans of its modus 
operandi. As concepts, both formulas remain just what they 
are—that is, effectless and inefficient to produce a spiritual 
revolution. The Buddha’s idea of formulating the Four- 
fold Truth was to see it practically applied to the reali- 
zation of an ideal. The elaborate mental discipline which is 
explained in the previous parts of the Sdmaffaphala is but 
preparatory to this final catastrophe. Without a serene, pure, 
and firm heart, the truth can never be grasped as it really 
is. A keen, penetrating intellect may know of the truth and 
discourse about it, but as to its realization in life a dis- 
ciplined mind is required. 

The passages above quoted are intelligible only when 
they are seen in the light of spiritual life. Buddhism may be 
logical, but if we fail to perceive anything further than that 
we sorely distort it. The logicality of Buddhist teaching is 
just one aspect of it and not a very important one. We may 
even regard this logicalness as incidental to Buddhism, and 
those who are entranced by it remain quite ignorant of the 
true import of Buddhism. ‘He knows as it really is,’ ti 
yathabhittam pajanati—we must come to this; for Yatha- 


I4I 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


bhiita-iiana-dassana is the insight that destroys the Defile- 
ments (dsavdnar khaya-fiana) and produces the consciousness 
of spiritual emancipation (cetovimutti). Without this Nana 
or Nana-dassana (insight or intuition), no detachment, no 
freedom would be possible to a Buddhist, nor would he ever 
be assured of his ultimate deliverance from the bondage of 
existence as well as of the attainment of the higher life 
(brahmacarya). The ‘knowing thus, seeing thus’ does not 
mean an intellectual comprehension of facts or truths which 
fall outside the pale of one’s own experience, but it is the 
perception of events that have actually taken place within 
oneself. Even an intellectual comprehension will be im- 
possible when there is no experience that goes to support its 
validity. For those who have no spiritual training along the 
line of the Hindu dhyana exercises, the mental state 
culminating in the yathabhitam contemplation of the 
world will be a very difficult subject to be in sympathy 
with. But in this light only the Buddha’s discourse on the 
fruits of the Samafifia life is to be understood. 

The Defilements (dsav@), or Oozings (low), as the 
Chinese translators have them, are three, sometimes four, 
in number. They are the Defilements of Desire (kama), 
Existence (bhdva), Ignorance (avijja), and Intellection 
(dittht), What kind of insight is it that destroys all these 
Defilements? And what is it that will be left in us after such 
a destruction? The answers may be anticipated to be 
thoroughly nihilistic, because nothing but absolute void 
will be seemingly the result of such destruction. Especially 
when we read a verse like the following (Sutta-nipdta, vv. 949 
and 1099) we may reasonably be tempted to regard the 
teaching of the Buddha as absolutely negativistic : 


‘What is before thee, lay it aside; 

Let there be nothing behind thee; 

If thou wilt not grasp after what is in the middle, 
Thou wilt wander calm.’! 


1 Cf. Dhammapdda, v. 385. ‘He for whom there is neither this nor 


that side, nor both, him, the fearless and unshackled, I call indeed a 
Brahman.’ 


142 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


But the fact is, from the spiritual point of view, that it is 
only after the destruction of the Defilements and a release 
from every form of attachment that one’s inmost being 
gets purified and sees itself as it really is, not indeed as an 
ego standing in contrast to the not-ego, but as something 
transcending opposites and yet synthesizing them in itself. 
What is destroyed is the dualism of things and not their one- 
ness. And the release means going back to one’s original 
abode. The insight therefore is to see unity in multiplicity 
and to understand the opposition of the two ideas as not 
conditioning each other but as both issuing from a higher 
principle; and this is where perfect freedom abides. When 
the mind is trained enough, it sees that neither negation 
(niratta) nor affirmation (atta) applies to reality, but that 
the truth lies in knowing things as they are, or rather as 
they become. A mind really sincere and thoroughly purified 
is the necéssary preliminary to the understanding of reality 
in its suchness. As the result we have ‘ti yathabhitam 
pajanati’, and this came later to be formulated by the 
Mahayanists into the doctrine of Thatness or Suchness 
(bhiitatathata). The trained mind that has gone through the 
four dhyana exercises as prescribed in the Nikayas further 
develops into what is known among the MahayAanists as the 
Adar$a-jfianam (mirror-insight), which corresponds to the 
Bhita-fiana in the Anguttara Nikaya. The last simile in the 
Buddha’s discourse on the fruits of the Samajifia life, which 
sums up the spiritual attainment of the Buddhists, becomes 
now quite intelligible. It runs thus: 

‘Just, O king, as if in a mountain fastness there were a 
pool of water, clear, translucent, and serene; and a man, 
standing on the bank and with eyes to see, should perceive 
the oysters and the shells, the gravel and the pebbles and 
the shoals of fish, as they move about or lie within it: he 
would know: This pool is clear, transparent, and serene, 
and there within it are the oysters and the shells, and the 
sand and gravel, and the shoals of fish are moving about or 
lying still.’ 

The radical empiricism of the ‘Yathabhiitam’ teaching 


143 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


of the Buddha is here graphically presented, which re- 
minds us of the Buddha in the Jtivuttaka, v. 109, describing 
himself as the spectator standing on the shore (cakkhuma 
puriso tire thito). To understand this simile intellectually will 
be sheer nonsense. The writer describes his mental attitude 
from a higher plane of thought which has been realized 
by him after a long training. Sambodhi or Enlightenment is 
the Buddhist term given to this realization. The destruction 
of the four Defilements is the negative phase of the experi- 
ence which is the insight to which the Buddha’s serene and 
translucent mind was directed and bent down. When the 
destructive activity alone is considered, Enlightenment is 
annihilating and negativistic; but when the insight opens 
to the suchness of truth, it is most emphatically affirmative. 
This is where lies that ‘matchless island possessing nothing 
and grasping after nothing, called Nirvana, the destruction 
of decay and death’. (Sutia-nipdta, v. 1094.) Remember that 
what is here destroyed is decay and death and not life; for it 
is through Enlightenment that life is for the first time 
restored to its native freedom and creativeness. 

The simile of mirror (ddarsd) may, however, suggest that 
the Buddhist attitude towards the world is merely passive 
and lacking in energizing inspirations. This, however, 
betrays the ignorance on the part of the critic of the 
Buddha’s own life, which was so unselfishly devoted for 
forty-nine long and peaceful years to the promotion of the 
general spiritual welfare of his people; not only this, but 
the critic has also forgotten to notice the extraordinary 
missionary enterprises of the Buddha’s disciples as well as 
their intellectual activities which developed into the 
Mahayanist school of Buddhism. Whatever this be, the 
charge of passivity against Buddhist weltanschauung is wrong 
even when it is considered apart from the historical facts 
of Buddhism. Passivity, we notice in Enlightenment, is 
merely apparent. As a general statement, a thing abso- 
lutely passive is unthinkable, unless it is a state of absolute 
nothingness without any kind of content in it. So long as 
Enlightenment is the outcome of a most strenuous spiritual 


144 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


effort, it is a positive state of mind in which lies hidden an 
inexhaustible reservoir of possibilities ; it is a unity in which 
a world of multitudinosity is lodged. ‘Noisy go the small- 
waters, silent goes the vast ocean.’! In the vast ocean of 
Enlightenment there is the silence of unity. The Avatarn- 
saka philosophers too compare it to the immense expanse of 
an ocean, calm and translucent, which reflects all the shin- 
ing bodies of heaven, but where at the same time possi- 
bilities of roaring and all-devouring waves lie innocently 
embosomed. 

So asks the Buddha in the Mahdéli Sutta: ‘When a monk 
knows thus and sees thus, would that make him ready to 
take up the question, Is the soul the same as the body, or is 
the soul one thing and the body another?’ It is thus evident 
that the Buddha’s teaching always centred in the practical 
realization of Enlightenment as ‘asavem khata-nana’, in- 
sight that destroys the Defilements and releases one from 
every attachment (updddna). He did not shun the discussion 
of the metaphysical problems merely because they were 
metaphysical, but because they were not conducive to the 
attainment of the ultimate end of Buddhist life, which is the 
purification of spirit and not the display of epistemological 
subtlety. Ignorance was to be dispelled in our inner 
experience, and not by intellectually understanding the 
principle of dependent origination whether expressed as the 
Paticca-samuppada or as the Ariya-sacca. 

Further, that Enlightenment consists in seeing into things 
‘yathabhitam’ or ‘yathatatham’, free from doubt, not dis- 
turbed by intellection or theorization, may be gleaned from 
the last gatha in the I#vuttaka, where the Buddha is praised 
for his various virtues. I quote the first three stanzas: 


‘Having insight into all the world, 

In all the world as it really is, 

He is detached from all the world 
And without compare in all the world. 


1 Sutta-nipata, v. 720. Sananta yanti kussobbh4, tunhi yati maho- 
dadhi. 


K 145 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


All surpassing in everything, steadfast, 

Freed from all ties, 

The highest repose belongs to him 

Who has attained Nirvana, with no fear from any side. 


This Enlightened One, with Defilements destroyed, 
Undisturbed, and free from doubt, 

Has attained destruction of all karma, 

And is released in the destruction of the substratum.’ 


Vv 


Viewing things ‘yathabhitam’ is, so to speak, the in- 
tellectual or noetic aspect of Enlightenment, though not in 
the sense of discursive understanding; there is another 
aspect of Enlightenment which will be the subject of con- 
sideration here. I mean its relation to samadhi or dhyana. 
This is preliminary, as I said before, to the realization, but 
it also shows that the realization thus attained is something 
more than merely seeing into truth. If Enlightenment were 
just this seeing or having insight, it would not be so 
spiritually enlightening as to bring about a complete 
riddance of evil passions and the sense of perfect freedom. 
Intuitions could not go so penetratingly into the source of 
life and set all doubts at rest and sever all bonds of attach- 
ment unless one’s consciousness were thoroughly prepared 
to take in the All in its wholeness as well as its suchness. 
Our senses and ordinary consciousness are only too apt to 
be disturbed and to turn away from the realization of 
truth. Mental discipline thus becomes indispensable. 

We must remember that the Buddha had this discipline 
under his two Samkhya teachers and that even after his 
Enlightenment he made it a rule for his disciples to train 
themselves in the dhyana exercises. He himself retired into 
solitude whenever he had opportunities for it. This was not 
of course merely indulging in contemplation or in making 
the world reflect in the mirror of consciousness. It was a 


146 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


kind of spiritual training even for himself and even after 
Enlightenment. In this respect the Buddha was simply 
following the practice of all other Indian sages and philo- 
sophers. This, however, was not all with him; he saw some 
deeper meaning in the discipline which was to awaken the 
highest spiritual sense for comprehending the Dharma. In- 
deed, without this ultimate awakening, dhyana, however 
exalting, was of no import to the perfection of Buddhist life. 
So we have in the Dhammapdda, v. 372: ‘Without know- 
ledge ( paiifid, prajfd) there is no meditation (jhana, dhyana), 
without meditation there is no knowledge: he who has 
knowledge and meditation is near unto Nirvana.’ This 
mutual dependence of jhana and pafifia is what distin- 
guished Buddhism from the rest of the Indian teachings at 
the time. Jhana or dhyana must issue in paffia, must 
develop into seeing the world as it really is (yathdbhitam) ; 
for there is no Buddhism in meditation merely as such. And 
this was the reason why the Buddha got dissatisfied with 
the teaching of his teachers; it, to use his own words, did 
‘not lead to perfect insight, to supreme awakening, to 
Nirvana’ (na abhififidya na sambhodaya na nibbdndya sam- 
vattati). To be abiding in the serenity of nothingness was 
enjoyable enough, but it was falling into a deep slumber, 
and the Buddha had no desire to sleep away his earthly 
life in a daydream. There must be a seeing into the life and 
soul of things. To him pafifia or prajfia was the most 
essential part of his doctrine, and it had to grow out of 
dhyana, and the dhyana that did not terminate in pafifia 
was not at all Buddhistic. The boat was to be emptied in- 
deed, but staying in an ‘empty house’ (suffidgdram) and 
doing nothing is blankness and annihilation; an eye must 
open and see the truth fully and clearly, the truth (para- 
mam ariyasaccam) that liberates life from its many bondages, 
and encumbrances. (Majjhima Nikaya, 140.) Sings the 
Dhammapdda again (v. 373): 


‘A monk who has entered his empty house, and whose mind 
is tranquil, 


147 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Feels a more than human delight when he sees the truth 
clearly.’ 


As thus the aim of the dhy4na exercises is to prepare 
the mind for the realization of the paramasacca which 
destroys and liberates, and as the truth is realizable only 
by the awakening of the parama-pafifia which is the 
knowledge (fana) that puts an end to all misery (sabba- 
dukkha), the Buddha never fails duly to impress the im- 
portance of pafifia on the minds of his disciples; for in- 
stance, in his general disciplinary scheme given to them 
under the three headings: sila (morality), jhana (medita- 
tion), and pafifia (intuitive knowledge). Whatever super- 
sensual pleasures one may experience in the jhana exer- 
cises, the Buddha considered them to be far short of the 
ultimate goal of Buddhist life; every one of such pleasures 
had to be abandoned as it would entangle the mind and 
interrupt its ascending course to the awakening of pajifia. 
It was through this awakening alone that the consciousness 
of emancipation or going back to one’s original spiritual 
abode could be attained. And by emancipation the Buddha 
meant to be free from all forms of attachment, both sensual 
(ripam) and intellectual (vififidnam). So says he in the 
Majjhima Nikaya, 138: Let not thy mind be disturbed by 
external objects, nor let it go astray among thy own ideas. 
Be free from attachments, and fear not. This is the way to 
overcome the sufferings of birth and death. 

As long as there is the slightest trace of attachment any- 
where, outwardly or inwardly, there remains the sub- 
stratum of selfhood, and this is sure to create a new force of 
karma and involve us in the eternal cycle of birth-and- 
death. This attachment is a form of obsession or illusion or 
imagination. Nine of such self-conceited illusions are 
mentioned in the Nikayas, all of which come out of the 
wrong speculations of selfhood and naturally lead to 
attachment in one way or another. They are the ideas that 
‘I am’, ‘I am that’, ‘I shall be’, ‘I shall not be’, ‘I shall have 
form’, ‘I shall be without form’, ‘I shall have thought’, ‘I 


148 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


shall be without thought’, ‘I shall neither have thought nor 
be without thought’.1 We have to get rid of all these 
maifitams, arrogant, self-asserting conceptions, in order to 
reach the final goal of Buddhist life. For when they are 
eliminated, we cease to worry, to harbour hatred, to be 
belabouring, and to be seized with fears—which is tran- 
quillization (santi), and Nirvana, and the seeing into the 
reality and truth of things. When pafifia is awakened in us, 
morality is abandoned, meditation left behind, and there 
remains only an enlightened state of consciousness in which 
spirit moveth as it listeth. 

The well-known simile of the raft (kullipamam)? which 
may seem somewhat unintelligible to some of the Buddhist 
critics who are used to an altogether different ‘intellectual 
landscape’, is a good illustration of the Buddhist teaching 
of non-attachment. The teaching, ‘Kullipamam vo 
bhikkhave ajanantehi dhamma pi vo pahatabba, pageva 
adhamma’ (Like unto a raft, all dharmas indeed must be 
abandoned, much more un-dharmas!), is really the most 
fundamental keynote running through the whole course 
of the history of Buddhist dogmatics. The philosophy of 
Prajfid-paramita, which is considered by some quite 
deviating from the spirit of primitive Buddhism, is in no 
way behind in upholding this doctrine of non-attachment— 
for instance, as we see in the Vajracchedika Sitra. In fact, the 
theory of Sinyata as expounded in all the Prajfiasiitras is 
no more than philosophizing on the doctrine of non- 
attachment.? The Vajracchedika has: 

‘Tasmad iyarh thathagatena sandhaya vag bhashi 


1 The Majjhima-Nikaya, 140, Dhdtuvibhangasuttam. Asmiti bhikkhu 
mafifiitam etarm; Ayam aham asmiti majifiitarhn etam; Bhavissan ti 
mafifiitam etam; Na bhavissan ti mafifiitarh etam; Ripi bhavissan ti 
maiifiitarhn etarn ; Ariipi bhavissan ti mafifiitarh etarh ; Saiifii bhavissan ti 
mafifitarn etarn: Asafifii bhavissan ti mafifiitarhn etarn; Nevasafini- 
nasafifii bhavissan ti mafifiitam etam. 

2 Majjhima Nikaya, 22. 

3 Cf. Sutta-~Nipata, v. 21. ‘By me is made a well-constructed raft, so 
said Bhagavat, I have passed over to Nirvana, I have reached the further 
bank, having overcome the torrent of passions; there is no further use 
for a raft; therefore, if thou like, rain, O sky!’ 


149 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


kolopamarh dharmaparyayam 4janadbhir dharma eva ta 
prahatavyah prageva adharma.’ 

The simile itself runs as follows (Majjhima Nikaya, 22): 

‘In the simile of a raft do I teach my doctrine to you, 
O monks, which is designed for escape, not for retention. 
Listen attentively and remember well what I am going to 
say. Suppose that a man coming upon a long journey finds 
in his way a great broad water, the hither side beset with 
fears and dangers, but the further side secure and free from 
fears, and no boat wherewith to cross the flood nor any 
bridge leading from this to the other shore. And suppose 
this man to say to himself: Verily this is a great and wide 
water, and the hither side is full of fears and dangers, but 
the further side secure and free from fears; and there is 
neither boat nor bridge to take me from this to that further 
shore. How if I gather some reeds and twigs and leaves and 
bind them together into a raft; and then, supported on that 
raft, and labouring with hands and feet, cross in safety to 
that other shore? Accordingly, O monks, suppose this man 
to gather together reeds and twigs and leaves and branches 
and bind them all together into a raft, and launching forth 
upon it and labouring with hands and feet, attain in safety 
the other shore. And now, the flood crossed, the further 
shore attained, suppose the man should say: Very service- 
able indeed has this my raft been to me. Supported by 
this raft and working with hands and feet, I am safely 
crossed to this other shore; how now if I lift the raft up 
on my head or lay it upon my shoulder, and so proceed 
withersoever I wish? What think ye, O monks? So 
doing, would this man be acting rightly as regards his 
raft? 

‘Nay, verily, O Lord! 

‘And what then ought this man to do if he would act 
rightly as regards the raft? Thus, O monks, ought the man 
to consider: Truly this raft has been serviceable to me! 
Supported by this raft and exerting hands and feet, I am 
crossed in safety to this further shore. How now if I lay this 
raft up on the bank or leave it to sink in the water and so 


150 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


proceed upon my journey? So doing, O monks, the man 
would be acting rightly as regards his raft. 

‘In like manner also do I teach my doctrine to you in the 
simile of a raft, which is meant, O monks, for escape and 
not for retention. Understanding the simile of the raft, 
O monks, you must leave dharmas behind, how much 
more un-dharmas!?! 

The teaching of the Buddha may now be summed up as 
follows : Seeing things thus or ‘yathabhitam’ is the same as 
the attainment of perfect spiritual freedom; or we may say 
that when we are detached from evil passions based upon 
the wrong idea of selfhood and when the heart grows con- 
scious of its own emancipation, we are then for the first 
time fully awakened to the truth as it really is. These two 
events, seeing and being freed, are mutually dependent, so 
intimately that the one without the other is unthinkable, is 
impossible; in fact they are two aspects of one identical 
experience, separated only in our limited cognition. Pafifla 


1] left here ‘dharmas’ untranslated. For this untranslatable term, 
some have ‘righteousness’, some ‘morality’, and some ‘qualities’. This is, 
as is well known, a difficult term to translate. The Chinese translators 
have rendered it by fa, everywhere, regardless of the context. In the pre- 
sent case, ‘dharma’ may mean ‘good conduct’, ‘prescribed rules of 
morality’, or even ‘any religious teaching considered productive of good 
results’. In the Lankdvatéra-siitra, chapter i, reference is also made to the 
transcending of both ‘adharma’ and ‘dharma’, saying: ‘Dharma eva 
prahatavyah pragevadharmah.’ And it is explained that this distinction 
comes from falsely asserting (vikalpagrahanam) the dualism of what is and 
what is not, while the one is the self-reflection of the other. You look into 
the mirror and finding an image thereon you take it for a reality, while 
the image is yourself and nobody else. The one who views the world thus 
has the rightful view of it, ‘ya evam pasyati sa samyakpasyati.’ Indeed, 
when he takes hold of eka@gra (one-pointedness or oneness of things) he 
realizes the state of mind in which his inner wisdom reveals itself 
(svapratydtmaryajftanagocara) and which is called the Tathagatagarbha. 
In this illustration ‘dharma’ and ‘adharma’ are synonyms of being (sat) 
and non-being (asat) or affirmation (asti) and negation (ndsti). There- 
fore, the abandoning of dharma and adharma (dharmddharmayohk 
prahanam) means the getting rid of dualism in all its complexities and 
implications. Philosophically, this abandoning is to get identified with 
the Absolute, and morally to go beyond good and evil, right and wrong. 
Also compare Sutta-Nipata, verse 886, where dualism is considered to be 
the outcome of false philosophical reasoning ‘Takkafi ca ditthisu 
pakappayitva, saccarh musa ti dvayadhammam 4hu.’ 


151 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


without jhana is no pafifia, and jhana without pafifia is no 
jhana. Enlightenment is the term designating the identi- 
fication-experience of pafifia and jhana, of seeing ‘yatha- 
bhitam’ and abandoning the dharma-raft of every de- 
nomination. In this light should the following be under- 
stood : 

‘Therefore, O monks, whatever of matter (or body, 
riipam) there is, whether of the past, of the future, or of the 
present time, whether internal or external, whether coarse 
or fine, mean or exalted, far or near, all matter (or body) is 
to be regarded as it really is, in the light of perfect know- 
ledge (sammapafa), thus: ‘“This is not of me,” ‘““This am I 
not,” “This is not my Self.” So with the rest of the five 
aggregates (khanda): vedand (sensations), safifia (concepts), 
sankhara (formative principle), and vzfifidnam (consciousness). 
One who thus seeing the world turns away from the world 
is truly freed from evil passions and has the consciousness 
of freedom. Such is called one who has the obstacles re- 
moved, trenches filled, one who has destroyed, is free, one 
whose fight is over, who has laid down his burden, and is 
detached.”! 

In short, he has every quality of the Enlightened, 


in whom the will and the intellect are harmoniously 
blended. 


VI 


Ignorance is departure from home and Enlightenment 
is returning. While wandering, we lead a life full of pain 
and suffering, and the world wherein we find ourselves 
is not a very desirable habitat. This is, however, put a 
stop to by Enlightenment, as thus we are enavled once 
more to get settled at home where reign freedom and peace. 
The will negates itself in its attempt to get an insight into 


1 Abridged from the Majjhima Nikaya, 22, p. 139. Cf. also t 
Samyutta Nikaya, XII, 70, a 125. i Dee ag 


152 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


its own life, and dualism follows. Consciousness cannot 
transcend its own principle. The will struggles and grows 
despondent over its work. ‘Why?’ the intellect asks, but it 
is the question no human intellect can ever hope to solve; 
for it is a mystery deeply inherent in the will. Why did the 
Heavenly Father have to send his only child to redeem the 
creation which was his own handiwork and yet went 
further astray from its home? Why had Christ to be so de- 
jected over the destiny of the erring children of God? This 
is an eternal mystery, and no relative understanding is 
made to grapple with these questions. But the very fact that 
such questions are raised and constantly threaten one’s 
spiritual peace shows that they are not idle metaphysical 
problems to be solved by professional philosophers, but that 
they are addressed directly to one’s inmost soul, which must 
struggle and make effort to subdue them by a higher and 
deeper power native to itself—far higher and deeper than 
mere dialectic of cognition. 

The story of the prodigal son! is such a favourite theme, 
both for Buddhists and Christians, and in this do we not 
discover something eternally true, though tragic and un- 
fathomable, which lies so deep in every human heart? 
Whatever this may be, the will finally succeeds in recogniz- 
ing itself, in getting back to its original abode. The sense of 
peace one finds in Enlightenment is indeed that of a 
wanderer getting safely home. The wandering seems to have 
altogether been unnecessary from the logical point of view. 
What is the use of losing oneself if one has to find oneself 
again? What boots it after all—this going over from one to 
ten and from ten to one? Mathematically, all this is non- 
sensical. But the spiritual mystery is that returning is not 
merely counting backwards so many figures that were 
counted before in a reverse way. There is an immense 
difference here between physics and psychology. After 
returning one is no longer the same person as before. The 


1 For the Buddhist version of the story, see the Saddharma-pundarika 
Sutra, chapter iv, and the Vajrasamadhi Sétra, chapter iv (Chinese trans- 
lation). 


138 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


will, back from his excursion through time-consciousness, is 
God himself. 

In the Vajrasamadhi Sitra the Bodhisattva Apratisthita 
asks the Buddha why the father was so unkind as not to 
recall his wandering son before fifty years expired, to which 
the Buddha answers, ‘Fifty years is not to be understood as 
indicating time-relation here; it means the awakening of a 
thought.’ As I would interpret, this means the awakening 
of consciousness—a split in the will, which now, besides 
being actor, is knower. The knower, however, gradually 
grows to be the spectator and critic, and even aspires to be 
the director and ruler. With this arises the tragedy of life, 
which the Buddha makes the basis of the Fourfold Noble 
Truth. That pain (duhka) is life itself as it is lived by most of 
us, is the plain, undisguised statement of facts. This all 
comes from Ignorance, from our consciousness not being 
fully enlightened as to its nature, mission, and function in 
relation to the will. Consciousness must first be reduced to 
the will when it begins to work out its ‘original vows’ 
(piirvapranidhdna) in obedience to its true master. “The 
awakening of a thought marks the beginning of Ignorance 
and is its condition. When this is vanquished, ‘a thought’ is 
reduced to the will, which is Enlightenment. Enlighten- 
ment is therefore returning. 

In this respect Christianity is more symbolic than Budd- 
hism. The story of Creation, the Fall from the Garden of 
Eden, God’s sending Christ to compensate for the ancestral 
sins, his Crucifixion, and Resurrection—they are all sym- 
bolic. To be more explicit, Creation is the awakening of 
consciousness, or the ‘awakening of a thought’; the Fall is 
consciousness going astray from the original path; God’s 
idea of sending his own son among us is the desire of the will 
to see itself through its own offspring, consciousness; 
Crucifixion is transcending the dualism of acting and know- 
ing, which comes from the awakening of the intellect; and 
finally Resurrection means the will’s triumph over the in- 
tellect—in other words, the will seeing itself in and through 
consciousness. After Resurrection the will is no more blind 


ist 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


striving, nor is the intellect mere observing the dancer 
dance. In real Buddhist life these two are not separated ; 
seeing and acting, they are synthesized in one-whole spiritual 
life, and this synthesis is called by Buddhists Enlighten- 
ment, the dispelling of Ignorance, the loosening of the 
Fetters, the wiping-off of the Defilements, etc. Buddhism is 
thus free from the historical symbolism of Christianity; 
transcending the category of time, Buddhism attempts to 
achieve salvation in one act of the will; for returning effaces 
all the traces of time. _ 


The Buddha himself gave utterance to the feeling of 
return when his eye first opened to the Dharma unheard 
of before at the realization of Enlightenment. He said, 
‘I am like a wanderer who, after going astray in a desolate 
wilderness, finally discovers an old highway, an old track 
beaten by his predecessors, and who finds, as he goes along 
the road, the villages, palaces, gardens, woods, lotus- 
ponds, walls, and many other things where his predecessors 
used to have their dwellings.1 Superficially, this feeling of 


1 Samyutta XII, 65, Nagara; cf. also one of the Prajfid-paramita siitras 
which is known as one preached by Mafijugri (Nanjé Catalogue, No. 
21). In the Sdtra we find that the Buddha, after mentioning the simile of 
a gem-digger, makes reference to a man who feels overwhelmed with 
delight when people talk pleasantly about the old towns and villages 
once visited by himself. The same sort of a delightful feeling is expressed 
by one who will listen to the discourse on Prajiia-paramita and under- 
stand it; for he was in his past lives present at the assembly which was 
gathered about the Buddha delivering sermons on the same subject. 
That the understanding of the doctrine of Prajiia-paramita is a form of 
memory is highly illuminating when considered in relation to the theory 
of Enlightenment as advanced here. 

That the ushering of Enlightenment is accompanied by the feeling 
of return or remembrance is also unmistakably noted by the writer of 
the Kena-Upanishad (VI, 50): 

‘Now in respect to the Atman: 

It is as though something forces its way into consciousness 

And consciousness suddenly remembers— 

Such a state of mind illustrates the awakening of knowledge of 
the Atman.’ 

Sonadanda the Brahman had the following to say when he grasped 
the meaning of the Buddha’s discourse on the characteristics of the true 
Brahman (Rhys Davids’ translation) : ‘Most excellent, O Gotama, most 
excellent! Just as if a man were to set up that which has been thrown 


155 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


returning to an old familiar abode seems to contradict the 
statement made concerning ‘an insight to things never be- 
fore presented to one’s mind’; but the contradiction is 
logical and not spiritual. So long as the Buddha was going 
over the Chain of Origination from the epistemological 
point of view—that is, as long as he attempted to get back 
to his native will through the channel of empirical con- 
sciousness—he could not accomplish his end. It was only 
when he broke through the wall of Ignorance by the sheer 
force of his will that he could tread the ancient path. The 
path was altogether unrecognizable by his intelligent eye, 
which was one of the best of the kind; even the Buddha 
could not ignore the law governing its usage ; the Chain was 
not to be cut asunder by merely reckoning its links of cause 
and effect backward and forward. Knowledge—that is, 
Ignorance—drove Adam from the Garden of Eden to the 
world of pain and patience (sahaloka), but it was not know- 
ledge that would reconcile him to his Father, it was the Will 
dispelling Ignorance and ushering Enlightenment. 

The sense of return or that of recognizing old acquaint- 
ances one experiences at the time of Enlightenment is a 
familiar fact to students of Zen Buddhism. To cite one in- 
stance, Chi-i (531-597), who is generally known by his 
honorary title as Chih-ché Tai-shih, was the founder of the 
T‘ien-tai school of Buddhist philosophy in China. He was 
also trained in meditation by his teacher Hui-szii (513-577), 
and though not belonging to the orthodox lineage of the 
Zen masters, he is reckoned as one. When he came to the 
master, he was set to exercise himself in a Samadhi known 
as ‘Fa-hua San-mei’ (saddharmapundarikasamadhi). While 
exercising himself in it, he came across a certain passage in 
the Siitra, and his mind was opened, and he at once realized 
the statement referred to by his master, which was this— 
that he with the master personally attended the Buddha’s 
down, or were to reveal that which had been hidden away, or were to 
point out the right road to him who has gone astray, or were to bring a 
light into the darkness so that those who had eyes could see external 


forms—just even so has the truth been made known to me, in many a 
figure, by the venerable Gotama.’ 


156 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


congregation at the Vulture Peak where the Buddha dis- 
coursed on the Sitra. Then said the master, ‘If not for you 
no one could see the truth: and if not for me no one could 
testify it.’ It is often remarked by Zen masters that the holy 
congregation at the Vulture Peak is still in session. This, 
however, ought not to be confounded with the remember- 
ing of the past, which is one of the miraculous gifts of the 
Buddhist saints. It has nothing to do with such memory, for 
in Enlightenment there are more things than are implied 
in mere time-relations. Even when the Prajid-pdramita- 
stitras expressly refer to one’s previous presence at the dis- 
course on the subject, this is not a form of mere recollection ; 
the understanding is not a psychological phenomenon, the 
prajfia goes much more penetratingly into the depths of one’s 
personality. The sense of return to something familiar, to 
the one thoroughly acquainted with it, really means the will 
getting settled once more in its old abode, after many a 
venturesome wandering, with an immense treasure of 
experience now and full of wisdom that will light up its 
unending career. 


VII 


It may not be altogether out of place here to make a 
few remarks concerning the popular view which identifies 
the philosophy of Schopenhauer with Buddhism. According 
to this view, the Buddha is supposed to have taught the 
negation of the will to live, which was insisted upon by the 
German pessimist, but nothing is further from the correct 
understanding of Buddhism than this negativism. The 
Buddha does not consider the will blind, irrational, and 
therefore to be denied; what he really denies is the notion 
of ego-entity due to Ignorance, from which notion come 
craving, attachment to things impermanent, and the giving 
way to egoistic impulses. The object the Buddha always 
has in view and never forgets to set forth whenever he 


a 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


thinks opportune is the Enlightenment of the will and not 
its negation. His teaching is based upon affirmative pro- 
positions. The reason why he does not countenance life as 
it is lived by most of us is because it is the product of 
Ignorance and egoism, which never fail to throw us into the 
abyss of pain and misery. The Buddha pointed the way to 
escape this by Enlightenment and not by annihilation. 

The will as it is in itself is pure act, and no taint of egoism 
is there; this is awakened only when the intellect through 
its own error grows blind as to the true working of the will 
and falsely recognizes here the principle of individuation. 
The Buddha thus wants an illumined will and not the 
negation of it. When the will is illumined, and thereby 
when the intellect is properly directed to follow its original 
course, we are liberated from the fetters which are put upon 
us by wrong understanding, and purified of all the defile- 
ments which ooze from the will not being correctly inter- 
preted. Enlightenment and emancipation are the two 
central ideas of Buddhism. 

The argument ASvaghosha puts into the mouth of the 
Buddha against Arada (or Alara Kalama), the Samkhya 
philosopher, is illuminating in this respect. When Arada 
told the Buddha to liberate the soul from the body as when 
the bird flies from the cage or the reed’s stalk is loosened 
from its sheath, which will result in the abandonment of 
egoism, the Buddha reasons in the following way: ‘As long 
as the soul continues there is no abandonment of egoism. 
The soul does not become free from qualities as long as it is 
not released from number and the rest; therefore, so long 
as there is no freedom from qualities, there is no liberation 
declared for it. There is no real separation of the qualities 
and their subject; for fire cannot be conceived apart from 
its form and heat. Before the body there will be nothing 
embodied, so before the qualities there will be no subject; 
how, if it was originally free, could the soul ever become 
bound? The body-knower (the soul), which is unembodied, 
must be either knowing or unknowing; if it is knowing there 
must be some object to be known, and if there is this object 


158 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


it is not liberated. Or if the soul be declared to be unknow- 
ing, then what use to you is this imagined soul? Even 
without such a soul, the existence of the absence of know- 
{edge is notorious, as, for instance, in a log of wood or a wall. 
And since each successive abandonment is held to be still 
accompanied by qualities, I maintain that the absolute 
attainment of our end can only be found in the abandon- 
ment of everything.”! 

As long as the dualistic conception is maintained in 
regard to the liberation of the soul, there will be no real 
freedom as is truly declared by the Buddha. ‘The aban- 
donment of everything’ means the transcending of the 
dualism of soul and body, of subject and object, of that 
which knows and that which is known, of ‘it is’ and ‘it 
is not’, of soul and soul-lessness; and this transcending is 
not attained by merely negating the soul or the will, but 
by throwing light upon its nature, by realizing it as it is in 
itself. This is the act of the will. An intellectual contem- 
plation which is advocated by the Samkhya philosophers 
does not lead one to spiritual freedom, but to the realm of 
passivity which is their ‘realm of nothingness’. Buddhism 
teaches freedom and not annihilation, it advocates spiritual 
discipline and not mental torpor or emptiness. There must 
be a certain turning away in one’s ordinary course of life, 
there must be a certain opening up of a new vista in one’s 
spiritual outlook if one wants to be the true follower of the 
Buddha. His aversion to asceticism and nihilism as well as 
to hedonism becomes intelligible when seen in this light. 


The Majjhima-Nikaya’s account of the Buddha’s inter- 
view with the Samkhya thinkers somewhat differs from the 
Mahiayana poet’s, but in a way gives a better support to my 
argument as regards the Buddha’s Enlightenment. The 
reason why he was not satisfied with the teaching and 
discipline of Alara Kalama and Uddaka is stated to be 
this: ‘This doctrine does not lead to turning away, to dis- 
passion, to cessation, to quietude, to perfect penetration, to 

3 Buddhacarita, translated by E. B. Cowell, pp. 131-192. 


159 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


supreme awakening, to Nirvana, but only to attainment 
to the Realm of Nothingness.’ What did then the Buddha 
understand by Nirvana which literally means annihilation 
or cessation, but which is grouped here with such terms as 
awakening, turning away (that is, revaluation), and pene- 
tration, and contrasted to nothingness? There is no doubt, 
as far as we can judge from these qualifications, that 
Nirvana is a positive conception pointing to a certain deter- 
minable experience. When he came up to the bank of the 
Nairanjana and took his seat of soft grass on a shady, peace- 
ful spot, he made up his mind not to leave the place until 
he realized in himself what he had been after ever since his 
wandering away from home. According to the Lalitavistara, 
he at that moment made this vow (pranidhana) : 


‘Let my body be dried up on this seat, 

Let my skin and bones and flesh be destroyed: 

So long as Bodhi is not attained, sd hard to attain for many a 
kalpa, 

My body and thought will not be removed from this seat.’ 


Thus resolved, the Buddha finally came to realize Supreme 
Enlightenment for which he had belaboured for ever so 
many lives. How does this vary from his former attain- 
ments under Uddaka and Alara Kalama? Let him express 
himself: 

“Then, disciples, myself subject to birth, but perceiving 
the wretchedness of things subject to birth and seeking after 
the incomparable security of Nirvana which is birthless, to 
that incomparable security I attained, even to Nirvana 
which is birthless. 

“Myself subject to growth and decay, but perceiving 
the wretchedness of things subject to growth and decay 
and seeking after the incomparable security of Nirvana 
which is free from growth and decay, to that incomparable 
security I attained, even to Nirvana which is free from 
growth and decay. 

1 Lefmann’s edition, p. 289. 


160 


ENLIGHTENMENT AND IGNORANCE 


“Myself subject to disease, but perceiving the wretched- 
ness of things subject to disease and seeking after the in- 
comparable security of Nirvana which is free from disease, 
to that incomparable security I attained, even to Nirvana 
which is free from disease. - 

‘Myself subject to death, but perceiving the wretchedness 
of things subject to death and seeking after the incom- 
parable security of Nirvana which is deathless, to that in- 
comparable security I attained, even to Nirvana which is 
deathless. 

“Myself subject to sorrow, but perceiving the wretched- 
ness of things subject to sorrow and seeking after the incom- 
parable security of Nirvana which is sorrowless, to that 
incomparable security I attained, even to Nirvana which is 
sorrowless. 

‘Myself subject to stain, but perceiving the wretchedness 
of things subject to stain and seeking the incomparable 
security of Nirvana which is stainless, to that incomparable 
security I attained, even to Nirvana which is stainless. 

“Then I saw and knew: ‘Assured am I of deliverance; 
this is my final birth; never more shall I return to this 
hte r"*4 

When Nirvana is qualified as birthless, deathless, stain- 
less, sorrowless, and free from growth and decay and 
disease, it looks negativistic enough. But if there were 
nothing affirmed even in these negations, the Buddha 
could not rest in ‘the incomparable security’ (anuttaram 
yogakkhemam) of Nirvana and been assured of final emanci- 
pation. What thus the Buddha denied, we can see, was 
Ignorance as to the true cause of birth and death, and this 
Ignorance was dispelled by the supreme effort of the will 
and not by mere dialectic reasoning and contemplation. 
The will was asserted and the intellect was awakened to its 
true significance. All the desires, feelings, thoughts, and 
strivings thus illuminated cease to be egoistic and are no 
more the cause of defilements and fetters and many other 
hindrances, of which so many are referred to in all Buddhist 


1 Ariyapapariyesana-sutta, Majjhima-Nikaya, XXVI, p. 167. 
pe 161 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


literature. Mahayana and Hinayana. In this sense the 
Buddha is the Jina, Conqueror, not an empty conqueror 
over nothingness, but the conqueror of confusion, darkness, 
and Ignorance. 


162 


HISTORY OF ZEN BUDDHISM FROM 
BODHIDHARMA TO HUI-NENG (YENO) 
(A.D. 520—A.D, 713) 


My INTENTION here is not to make a_ thoroughly 
critical and scientific study of the history of Zen Buddhism ; 
for this presupposes some knowledge of the development of 
Buddhism in China, and there are, as far as my knowledge 
extends, no text-books on the subject, which are accessible 
to readers of this book. The main object of the present 
Essay will therefore be to acquaint them first with the 
traditional history of Zen as it is told by its followers both 
in Japan and China. Its critical investigation will follow 
when readers are in a degree prepared for the task. 

The traditional origin of Zen in India before its intro- 
duction into China, which is recorded in Zen literature, is 
so mixed with legends that no reliable facts can be gathered 
from it. In the days when there was yet no critical study 
of anything and when things, especially relating to religion, 
were believed in a wholesale manner, we could not expect 
anything else. It may now be too late to try to unravel the 
mysteries enveloping the origin of Zen in India except in a 
general and logical way from the historical facts already 
known concerning the development of Mahayana Budd- 
hism. In fact, Zen Buddhism, as was already discussed, is the 
product of the Chinese mind, or rather the Chinese elabora- 
tion of the Doctrine of Enlightenment. Therefore, when we 
want to narrate the history of Zen, it may be better in some 
respects not to go to India but to stay in China and study 
the psychology and philosophy of her people and the sur- 
rounding conditions that made it possible for Zen to 
achieve a successful growth in the land of the celestials, 
always remembering that it is a practical interpretation of. 
the Doctrine of Enlightenment. 


163 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Some scholars may, however, object to this kind of treat- 
ment of the subject, on the ground that if Zen is at all a 
form of Buddhism, or even the essence of it as is claimed 
by its followers, it cannot be separated from the general 
history of Buddhism in India. This is quite true, but as far 
as facts are concerned, Zen as such did not exist in India— 
that is, in the form as we have it today ; and therefore when 
we try to go beyond China to trace its origin and develop- 
ment, the only way open to us will be the one I have 
followed in my previous Essays collected here. That is to 
say, we must consider Zen the Chinese interpretation of the 
Doctrine of Enlightenment, which is expounded in all 
Buddhist literature, most intensively in the Mahayana and 
more or less provisionally in the Hinayana. As time went on 
this doctrine steadily grew to occupy the minds of the 
Buddha’s followers and to control the course of develop- 
ment of Buddhist thought generally ; for was it not through 
Enlightenment that Gautama became the Buddha, the 
Enlightened One? and is it not the object of Buddhism to 
follow the footsteps of its founder in the attainment of 
final emancipation? But the Chinese adherents of Bodhism! 
or the upholders of Enlightenment did not wish to swallow 
Indian Buddhism undigested. The practical imagination 
of the Chinese people came thus to create Zen, and de- 
veloped it to the best of their abilities to suit their own 
religious requirements. 

When we compare Zen as a finished product with the 
Doctrine of Enlightenment, as the latter began to unfold 
itself in primitive Buddhism, we find a wide and seemingly 
impassable gap between the two. This was, however, natur- 
ally to be expected. Let us consider the following facts. In 
the beginning the Buddha was somewhat timid to disclose 
the entire secrets of the reason of Buddhahood, thinking that 
his disciples were not quite capable of following every step 
he had taken himself. The feeling he first had after En- 
lightenment governed him almost throughout the entire 


_ 2 Used to designate the school which upholds the Doctrine of En- 
lightenment (sambodhi). 


164 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


course of his earthly life. It was this: that the Perfect 
Supreme Enlightenment attained by him was too exalted 
an object for sentient beings to strive after, and that even 
when it were disclosed to them they would not fully com- 
prehend it but might defile it to their own demerit. Did he 
not even think of passing into Nirvana right after Enlighten- 
ment? His whole life, in spite of the advice of the Brah- 
madeva, seems to have been controlled by this feeling—the 
reluctance to reveal the entirety of his inmost self-reali- 
zation (pratydtmajfidna, according to the terminology of the 
Lankavatara). In point of fact, the Buddha himself might 
have communicated what he realized to all his disciples 
unreservedly, but the impression we get from the Agama 
or Nikaya literature is that he was actually reluctant to do 
so. At least this was the way the earlier writers of the canoni- 
cal books attempted to represent their master whatever 
their motives might be. This being the case, the idea of 
Enlightenment was not brought forward so fully and con- 
spicuously in Hinaydna literature as at once to command 
our attention. But as I pointed out, this idea lies only 
superficially buried among the other and less-important 
ideas, and can easily be made manifest by logically and 
psychologically following up the course of events related in 
the canonical writings concerning the Enlightenment of the 
Buddha. 

The earlier writers conceived the Fourfold Noble Truth 
or the Twelvefold Chain of Causation, or the Eightfold Path 
of Righteousness to be the central teaching of Buddhism, 
which also included on the psychological side the theory of 
non-ego (andtman). But when we reflect, both philoso- 
phically and from the Zen point of view, on the life of the 
Buddha and on the ultimate principle of Buddhahood,we 
cannot help thinking of his Enlightenment as the most 
significant and most essential and most fruitful part of 
Buddhism. Therefore, what the Buddha really wished to 
impart to his disciples must be said to have been the 
Doctrine of Enlightenment in spite of the Hinayanistic inter- 
pretation or understanding of what is known as primitive 


165 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Buddhism. But so long as Buddhism flourished in India, this 
its central idea remained what it was; that is, such as is 
developed in most of the Mahayana Sitras. It was only 
after Bodhidharma, who brought it to China, that the 
idea took root there and grew up to what we designate now 
specifically as the Zen school of Buddhism. The history of 
Zen, therefore, properly speaking or in its narrower sense, 
may best be regarded as beginning in China. The Indian 
soil was too metaphysical, too rich in romantic imagination, 
for Zen to grow as such in its pure form. 

While the attainment of Buddhahood or Arhatship was 
the ultimate goal of his teaching, the Buddha was practical 
and always close to the facts of life and insisted in his 
ordinary sermons on a life regulated by moral rules. Nor 
had he any desire to disclose intellectually or metaphy- 
sically the content of Enlightenment which must be ex- 
perienced but cannot be explained. He never neglected 
to emphasize the significance of self-realization, for Nirvana 
or Enlightenment was to be attained personally through 
one’s own efforts in one’s own inner consciousness. The 
Fourfold Noble Truth or the Twelvefold Chain of Causation 
or the Theory of Non-ego was an intellectual guide to the 
realization of the Buddhist life. Such teaching could not 
have any practical meaning except as finally leading to 
Enlightenment. 

The Buddha never thought that his followers would 
come to lay the entire stress of his teaching on these in- 
tellectual structures which could not stand by themselves 
without being supported by an inner spirit. The Eightfold 
Path of Righteousness was an ethical guide to Enlighten- 
ment, and as such it was regarded by the Buddha. Those 
who have no higher insight into his teaching than reading 
a moral signification in it take it for a kind of ethical culture 
and no more. They think that Buddhism is a positivism as 
philosophy and its Brotherhood (samgha) a body of moral 
ascetics. They praise the Buddha as the originator of a 
scientific religious system free from spiritualistic super- 
stitions which so frequently and abundantly grow around 


166 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


religion, But we know better because these comments are 
not in full accord with the teaching of the Buddha, for they 
only reflect one side of it and fail to take an inner and com- 
prehensive view of the whole field. If these critics took up 
the practice of dhyana as constituting the essence of 
Buddhism along with the above considerations, they may 
be said to have come nearer to the goal; but even this 
dhyana is a form of spiritual exercise which will prepare 
the way to the final realization of Nirvana. Dhy4na in itself 
does not distinguish Buddhism from the other philoso- 
phico-religious systems which existed in India in the day 
of the Buddha. Therefore, to understand Zen as expressing 
the Doctrine of Enlightenment, which is the reason of 
Buddhism, we must wait for the rise of the Mahayana 
movements. And when this was introduced into China by 
Bodhidharma, it grew up to what we now know by the 
name of Zen Buddhism. 


I 


The legendary stcry of the origin of Zen in India runs 
as follows: Sakyamuni was once engaged at the Mount 
of the Holy Vulture in preaching to a congregation of his 
disciples. He did not resort to any lengthy verbal discourse 
to explain his point, but simply lifted a bouquet of flowers 
before the assemblage, which was presented to him by one 
of his lay-disciples. Not a word came out of his mouth. 
Nobody understood the meaning of this except the old 
venerable MahakaSyapa, who quietly smiled at the 
master, as if he fully comprehended the purport of this 
silent but eloquent teaching on the part of the Enlightened 
One. The latter perceiving this opened his gold-tongued 
mouth and proclaimed solemnly, ‘I have the most precious 
treasure, spiritual and transcendental, which this moment 
I hand over to you, O venerable Mahakafyapa!’ 

Orthodox Zen followers generally blindly take this 


167 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


incident to be the origin of their doctrine, in which, 
according to them, is disclosed the inmost mind of the 
Buddha as well as the secret of the religion. As Zen claims 
to be the inmost essence of Buddhism and to have been 
directly transmitted by the Buddha to his greatest dis- 
ciple, Mahakagyapa, its followers naturally look for the 
particular occasion when this transmission took place 
between the master and the disciple. We know in a general 
way that Mahakasyapa succeeded the Buddha as the leader 
of the Faith, but as to his special transmission of Zen, we 
have no historical records in the Indian Buddhist writings 
at present in our possession. This fact is, however, specially 
mentioned for the first time, as far as we know, in a Chinese 
Zen history called The Records of the Spread of the Lamp, 
compiled by Li Tsun-hsii, in 1029, and also in The Accounts 
of the Orthodox Transmission of the Dharma, compiled by 
Ch‘i-sung in 1064, where this incident is only referred to as 
not quite an authentic one historically. In The Records of the 
Transmission of the Lamp, written in 1004, which is the 
earliest Zen history now extant, the author does not record 
any particular event in the life of the Buddha regarding the 
Zen transmission. As all the earlier histories of Zen are lost, 
we have at present no means to ascertain how early the 
Zen tradition started in China. Probably it began to be 
talked about among the Zen followers when their religion 
had been well established in China late in the eighth 
century. 

In those days there must have been some necessity to 
invent such a legend for the authorization of Zen Budd- 
hism ; for as Zen grew in strength the other schools of Budd- 
hism already in existence grew jealous of its popular in- 
fluence and attacked it as having no authorized records of 
its direct transmission from the founder of Buddhism, which 
was claimed by the devotees of Zen. This was the case 
especially when the latter made so light of the doctrinal 
teaching discussed in the Sitras and Sastras, as they 
thought that the ultimate authority of Zen issued out of 
their own direct personal experience. In this latter they 


168 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


were quite insistent; but they were not, nor could they be, 
so critical and independent as to ignore altogether the 
authority of historical Buddhism, and they wanted some- 
how to find the record that the Buddha handed Zen over 
to Mahakasyapa and from Mahakasyapa on to the twenty- 
eighth patriarch, Bodhidharma, who became the first 
patriarch of Zen in China. A line of twenty-eight Indian 
patriarchs thus came to be established by Zen historians, 
while, according to other schools, there were only twenty- 
three or twenty-four patriarchs after the founder. When 
the historians had the need for the special transmission of 
Zen from the Buddha to Mahakasyapa, they felt it necessary 
to fill up the gap between the twenty-third or twenty- 
fourth patriarch and Bodhidharma himself, who accord- 
ing to them was the twenty-eighth. 

From the modern critical point of view it did not matter 
very much whether Zen originated with Bodhidharma in 
China or with the Buddha in India, inasmuch as Zen is 
true, and has an enduring value. And again from the his- 
torian’s point of view, which tries scientifically to ascertain 
the source of development resulting in Zen Buddhism, it is 
only important to find a logical connection between the 
Mahayana Doctrine of Enlightenment in India and its 
practical application by the Chinese to the actualities of 
life; and as to any special line of transmission in India 
before Bodhidharma as was established by the Zen 
devotees, it is not a matter of much concern nor of great 
importance. But as soon as Zen is formulated into an in- 
dependent system, not only with its characteristic features 
but with its historically ascertainable facts, it will be neces- 
sary for the historians to trace its line of transmission com- 
plete and not interrupted ; for in Zen, as we shall see later, 
it is of the utmost importance for its followers to be duly 
certified or approved (abbhanumodana) by the master as to 
the genuineness or orthodox character of their realization. 
Therefore, as long as Zen is the product of the Chinese soil 
from the Indian seed of Enlightenment as I take it, no 
special line of transmission need be established in India 


169 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


unless it is in a general logical manner such as was attempted 

in my previous Essays. 
The twenty-eight patriarchs of Zen regarded by its 

followers as the orthodox line of transmission are as follows: 


1. Sakyamuni. 15. Kanadeva. 

2. Mahakasyapa. 16. Arya Rahulata. 
3. Ananda. 17. Sarnghanandi. 
4. Sanavasa. 18. Sarnghayasgas. 
5. Upagupta. 19. Kumarata. 

6. Dhritaka. 20. Jayata. 

7. Micchaka. 21. Vasubandhu. 
8. Buddhanandi. 22. Manura. 

g. Buddhamitra. 23. Haklenayafas. 
10. Bhikshu Par$va. 24. Bhikshu Simha. 
rr. Punyayagas. 25. Vaésasita. 

12. Agvaghosha. 26, Punyamitra. 
13. Bhikshu Kapimala. 27. Prajfiatara. 

14. Nagarjuna. 28. Bodhidharma. 


To be consistent with the view that Zen was a ‘special 
transmission from the Buddha outside of his doctrinal 
teaching’, Zen historians have extended this transmission 
even beyond Sakyamuni; for, according to tradition 
prevalent already among primitive Buddhists, there were 
at last six Buddhas prior to the Buddha of the present 
kalpa who was the Muni of the Sakyas; and these several 
Buddhas had each to leave a gatha of ‘Dharma trans- 
mission’ which is systematically preserved in Zen history. 
Now if the six Buddhas of the past had their gathads, why 
not those patriarchs between Sakyamuni and Bodhi- 
dharma, all inclusively? Or, if any one of them had at all 
any kind of gatha, why not the rest of them too? So, they 
have all bequeathed their gathas of transmission regularly 
prefaced with the words, ‘I now hand over to you the eye- 
treasure of the Great Law, which you will guard and ever 
be mindful of.’ No doubt they are fictitious productions of 
the historical imagination which was so highly exercised by 


170 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


the early writers of Zen history, evidently inspired by an 
extraordinary zeal for their orthodox faith. 

The translators of these patriarchal verses are, according 
to the author of the Records of the Right Transmission, Chih- 
chaing-liang-lou, of the First Wei dynasty, and Na-lien-ya- 
shé, of the Eastern Wei; the former came from Middle 
India and the latter from Kabul. Their book, known as the 
Account of Succession in the Law, disappeared after the re- 
peated persecutions carried out by the reigning dynasties, 
but the stories of these patriarchs were quoted at least in 
the two books, the Pao-lin Ch‘uan and the Shéng-chou Chi, 
both compiled prior to the Transmission of the Lamp, in 
which they are referred to. But they too were lost some time 
after Kaisu (Ch‘i-sung) in the Sung dynasty. Therefore at 
present the Transmission of the Lamp is the earliest history of 
Zen, where the twenty-eight patriarchs and their verses of 
law-trarismission are recorded in detail. 

To quote as samples two of the six Buddhas’ gathas, 
the first Buddha Vipagyi declares: 


‘This body from within the Formless is born, 

It is like through magic that all forms and images appear: 

Phantom beings with mentality and consciousness have no 
reality from the very beginning ; 

Both evil and happiness are void, have no abodes.’ 


The gatha of the sixth Buddha, Kasyapa, who just pre- 
ceded the Muni of the Sakyas, runs thus: 


‘Pure and immaculate is the nature of all sentient beings ; 

From the very beginning there is no birth, no death; 

This body, this mind—a phantom creation it is; 

And in phantom transformation there are neither sins nor 
merits,” 


When the Buddha belonging to the present age ordered 
Mahakasyapa to be the orthodox transmitter of the Good 
Law, he uttered the following verse: 


171 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘The Dharma is ultimately a dharma which is no-dharma ; 

A dharma which is no-dharma is also a dharma ; 

As I now hand this no-dharma over to thee; 

What we call the Dharma, the Dharma—where after all is the 
Dharma?”! 


The sixth patriarch, Dhritaka, has: 


‘Penetrate into the ultimate truth of mind, 

And we have neither things nor no-things ; 
Enlightened and not-enlightened—they are the same ; 
Neither mind nor thing there is.’ 


The twenty-second patriarch, Manura, gave his view 
thus : 


‘The mind moveth with the ten thousand things: 
Even when moving, it is serene. 

Perceive its essence as it moveth on, 

And neither joy nor sorrow there is.’ 


In these gathas we notice the teaching generally 
characteristic of Mahayana Buddhism as it prevailed in 
India. As I said before, as far as the doctrinal side of 
Buddhism was concerned, Zen had nothing particularly to 
offer as its own; for its raison d’étre consists in its being a 
spiritual experience and not in its being a special system of 
philosophy or of certain dogmas conceptually synthesized. 
We have Zen only when the Mahayana Buddhist specula- 
tion is reduced to the actual things of life and becomes the 
direct expression of one’s inner life. And this did not come 
to pass until Buddhism was transplanted into China and 
made there to grow nourished by a people whose practical 
turn of mentality refused to swallow the Indian tradition 
undigested. The form of thought as adopted in the so-called 
patriarchal verses did not appeal to the Chinese mind. When 
they got into the thought itself, they wished to express it in 
their own way, they wished to live the thought as was 

1 This translation is not at all satisfactory. 


172 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


natural to them, and not to hoard it as something im- 
ported from abroad and not inherently belonging to their 
psychology. 

When Bodhidharma gave his full sanction to his 
disciples, he is supposed to have composed the following 
gatha: 


‘The original reason of my coming to this country 

Was to transmit the Law in order to save the confused ; 
One flower with five petals is unfolded, 

And the bearing of fruit will by itself come.’ 


By this ‘bearing of fruit? did Dharma prophesy the full 
development of Zen later in China? The ‘five petals’ are 
supposed to mean the five Zen Fathers in China after 
Dharma when Zen came to be recognized as a branch of 
Buddhism with a message of its own. Whether this gatha 
was really a prophetic one by Dharma himself, or whether 
it was composed by some Zen historian after the sixth 
patriarch Hui-néng (YenG), we have no means to decide. 
The one thing is certain historically that Dharma’s teach- 
ing began to be naturalized in China about two hundred 
years after him and assimilated by her people in a manner 
best suited to their mental idiosyncrasies. Zen in the form we 
have it today could not mature anywhere outside China. 
India was too metaphysical, or too given up to mystic 
imagination. It was the home for the Yuishiki (Yog4cara), 
the Shingon (Mantra school), the Kegon (Avatamsaka), 
or the Sanron (Sinyataé or Madhyamika). As for Zen, it 
needed a mind which had already been deeply steeped in 
the Laotziian ideas and feelings and yet could not detach 
itself from the details of daily life. Aloofness, romanticism, 
a certain practical temperament, and yet an even, steady, 
well-balanced character—these were needed to develop 
Zen to its present form. That is to say, if Mahayana 
Buddhism, as was expounded by Nagarjuna and Agvaghosha, 
and in the Vimalakirti, Prajfapdramita, and other Sutras, 
especially in the Lankdvatdra, were not worked upon by 


173 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Chinese genius, Zen as such could not at all have come into 
existence. 

It may not altogether be out of place here to show by 
concrete examples how much the Indian method diverges 
from the typically Chinese one in demonstrating the truth 
of Zen Buddhism. As I have repeatedly illustrated, Budd- 
hism, whether primitive or developed, is a religion of free- 
dom and emancipation, and the ultimate aim of its dis- 
cipline is to release the spirit from its possible bondage so 
that it can act freely in accordance with its own principles. 
This is what is meant by non-attachment (apratishtita- 
cittam). The idea is negative inasmuch as it is concerned 
with untying the knots of the intellect and passion, but the 
feeling implied is positive, and the final object is attained 
only when the spirit is restored to its original activity. The 
spirit knows its own way, and what we can do is to rid it of 
all the obstacles our ignorance has piled before it. “Throw 
them down’ is therefore the recurring note in the Buddhist 
teaching. 

The Indian Buddhist way of impressing the idea is this: 
. a Brahman named Black-nails came to the Buddha and 
offered him two huge flowering trees which he carried each 
in one of his hands through his magical power. The 
Buddha called out, and when the Brahman responded the 
Buddha said, ‘Throw them down!’ The Brahman let down 
the flowering tree in his left hand before the Buddha. The 
latter called out again to let them go, whereupon Black- 
nails dropped the other flowering tree in the right hand. 
The Buddha still kept up his command. Said the Brahman: 
‘I have nothing now to let go. What do you want me to do?’ 
‘I never told you to abandon your flowering plants,’ said the 
Buddha, ‘what I want you to do is to abandon your six 
objects of sense, your six organs of sense, and your six 
consciousnesses. When these are all at once abandoned and 
there remains nothing further to be abandoned, it is then 
that you are released from the bondage of birth-and- 
death.’ 


In contrast to this plain, though somewhat roundabout, 
174 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


talk of the Buddha, the following case of Jéshu (Chao- 
chou)! is direct and concise and disposes of the matter in a 
most unequivocal manner. A monk came and asked. the 
master, ‘How is it when a man brings nothing with him?’ 
“Throw it away!’ was Jéshu’s immediate response. ‘What 
shall he throw down when he is not burdened at all?’ ‘If so, 
carry it along!’ The Zen masters delight in paradoxes, and 
Joéshu’s remark here is a typical one. 

The problem of emancipation is important, but the still 
more important one is, ‘Who or what is the Buddha?’ When 
this is mastered, Buddhism has rendered its full service. 
What did the Indian philosophers think of the Buddha? 
There was an old lady who lived at the time of the Buddha. 
She was born at the same time as the Buddha himself and 
lived in the eastern part of the city. She had a singular 
aversion against the Buddha and never wished to see him. 
Whenever he passed by she would run away. But which- 
ever way she turned she would encounter him, east or west. 
She covered her face with her hands, and lo! she saw the 
Buddha between her fingers. This is beautiful and illuminat- 
ing. What follows is the Zen way of treating the subject: A 
monk came to Ch‘i-an, who was one of the disciples of 
Ma-tsu, and asked, ‘What is the original body of Vairo- 
chana?’ Said the master, ‘Would you mind passing that 
water-pitcher over to me?’ The monk handed it to the 
master as asked. Then the master requested him to put it 
back where he got it. The monk did so. But not getting any 
answer as he thought to his first question, he asked again, 
‘What is the original body of Vairochana Buddha?’ The 
master expressed his regret, saying, ‘Long it is since the de- 
parture of the old Buddha!’ These two instances will suffice 
to illustrate where the Chinese Zen mind deviates from the 
Indian. 


1 Jéshu (778-897) was one of the early masters of Zen in the T‘ang 
dynasty when it began to flourish with its vigorous freshness. He attained 
to a high age of one hundred and twenty. His sermons were always short 
and to the point, and his answers are noted for their being so natural and 
yet so slippery, so hard to catch. 


175 


Il 


The history of Zen dates with the coming of Bodhi- 
dharma (Bodai-Daruma) from the west, A.D. 520. He 
came to China with a special message which is summed 
up in the following lines: 


‘A special transmission outside the scriptures ; 

No dependence upon words and letters ; 

Direct pointing at the soul of man; 

Seeing into one’s nature and the attainment of Buddhahood.’ 


These four lines as describing the principles of Zen 
teaching as distinguished from other schools of Buddhism 
already in existence in China were formulated later and not 
by Dharma himself. We cannot exactly tell who was the 
real author, as we have no definite information on this 
subject. One historian, Tsung-chien, who compiled from 
the T‘ien-tai point of view a Buddhist history entitled The 
Rightful Lineage of the Sakya Doctrine in 1257, ascribes it to 
Nansen Fu-gwan; probably the formula originated in those 
days when Baso (Ma-tsu), Hyakjo (Pai-chang), Obaku 
(Huang-po), Sekité (Shih-tou), and Yakusan (Yiieh-shan) 
were flourishing in the ‘West of the River’ and in the ‘South 
of the Lake’. Since then they have been regarded as 
characteristically Zen, and it was Dharma that breathed 
this spirit into the minds of the Chinese Buddhists. The 
latter had more or less been given up, on the one hand, to 
philosophizing, and, on the other hand, to practising 
contemplation. They were not acquainted with the direct 
method of Zen which was to see straightway into the 
truth of Enlightenment and attain Buddhahood without 


going through so many stages of preparation prescribed by 
the scholars, 


Our knowledge of the life of Bodhidharma comes from 
two sources. One, which is the earliest record we have of 


176 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


him is by Tao-hsiian in his Biographies of the High Priests 
which was compiled early in the T‘ang dynasty, a.p. 645. 
The author was the founder of a Vinaya sect in China and a 
learned scholar, who, however, was living before the 
movement of the new school to be known as Zen came into 
maturity under Hui-néng, the sixth patriarch, who was 
nine years old when Tao-hsiian wrote his Biographies. The 
other source is the Records of the Transmission of the Lamp, 
A.D. 1004, compiled by Tao-yiian early in the Sung dynasty. 
This was written by a Zen monk after Zen had received full 
recognition as a special branch of Buddhism, and contains 
sayings and doings of its masters. The author often refers to 
some earlier Zen histories as his authorities, which are, 
however, lost now, being known by the titles only. 

It is quite natural that these two accounts of the life of 
Bodhi-Dharma should vary at several points. The first was 
written when Zen was not yet fully established as a school, 
and the second by one of the Zen masters. In the first, 
Dharma, the founder of Zen, is treated as one of the many 
other Buddhist priests eminent in various fields as trans- 
lators, commentators, scholars, Vinaya-followers, masters 
of meditation, possessors of miraculous virtues, etc., and 
Dharma could not naturally occupy in such a history any 
very prominent position distinguishing himself from the 
other ‘high priests’. He is described merely as one of those 
‘masters of meditation’ whose conception of dhyana did not 
differ from the old traditional one as was practised by the 
Hinayana followers. 

Tao-hsiian did not understand the message of Dharma 
in its full signification, though he could read in it some- 
thing not quite of the so-called ‘practice of meditation’. 
And therefore it is sometimes argued by scholars that there 
is not much of Zen in Tao-hsiian’s account of Dharma 
worthy of its first Chinese promulgator and that therefore 
Dharma could not be so regarded as is claimed by the 
followers of the Zen school of Buddhism. But this is not 
doing justice to Zen, nor to Tao-hsiian, who never thought 
of writing a Zen history before Zen came to be known as 


M 177 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


such. Tao-hsiian could not be a prophetic historian. While 
the biographical history of Tao-yiian contains much that is 
to be discredited as regards the life of Bodhidharma, 
especially that part of his life before-he came to China, we 
have reason to believe that the greater part of Tao-yiian’s 
account of Dharma’s doings after his arrival in China is 
historical. In this latter respect Tao-hsiian must be taken as 
complementing Tao-yiian. It is not quite in accord with 
the spirit of fair critical judgment to be partial to one 
authority at the expense of the other without duly weighing 
all the historically known circumstances that contributed to 
the making of these histories. 

According to Tao-hsiian, Bodhidharma left many 
writings or sayings which were apparently still in circula- 
tion at the time of the author of the Biographies of the High 
Priests, but the only authentic writing of the Zen founder’s 
at present in our possession is a very short one, which is 
preserved in Tao-hsiian’s Biographies, as well as in Tao- 
yiian’s Records. There are some other essays ascribed to 
Dharma,! but most of which, though deeply imbibing the 
spirit of Zen, are spurious except one which I am inclined 
to think to be genuinely his. It is entitled ‘On the Pacifi- 
cation of the Soul’. Together with the first one, which is 
generally known under the title ‘Meditation on Four Acts’, 
we have just two pieces of writings handed down as 
Dharma’s. Though I do not think that the ‘Meditation on 
Four Acts’ could be the best possible specimen of writing 
to be bequeathed by the founder of Zen, which will admit 
us straightway into the very essence of Zen, I will give here 
an English translation of it as the most reliable essay of 
Bodhidharma, the first patriarch of Zen in China. 

There are two versions, as I said before, of this writing, 
the one in the Biographies and the other in the Records, 
and they do not quite agree with each other in some 
points. The main drift is the same, but in detail they vary. 


* Six Essays by Bodhidharma is the book in which the so-called writings 


of Bodhidharma are collected. See also the Essay ‘On Satori’ which 
follows. 


178 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


The question now is: which is the more original one? 
Chronologically the Biographies were compiled earlier than 
the Records, but the latter presupposes some earlier writings 
which were utilized for its compilation. We have no means 
to ascertain the reliability of the documents thus made usé 
of, and then the authority of the Biographies is not absolute. 
Therefore the only profitable method of judging the 
respective merit of the two versions is to compare them 
from the literary point of view and see what light such 
comparison will shed on the nature of each. The result I 
have reached is that the author of the Biographies used the 
one preserved in the Records, which is more faithful to the 
original if there were any such besides this very version. The 
reason for this conclusion is that Dharma’s writing appears 
much improved after the editing of Tao-hsiian, the author 
of the Biographies ; for he had to edit it for his own purposes. 
Thus edited, Dharma’s writing is now in a better style; 
that is, more concise, more to the point, and more refined. 
For this reason the following translation is made from Tao- 
yiian’s Records in which the author had every reason to 
reproduce the original as it stood. 

‘[Bodhidharma], the Teacher of the Law, was the third 
son of a great Brahman king in South India, of the Western 
Lands. He was a man of wonderful intelligence, bright and 
far-reaching ; he thoroughly understood everything that he 
ever learned. As his ambition was to master the doctrine 
of the Mahayana, he abandoned the white dress of a lay- 
man and put on the black robe of monkhood, wishing to 
cultivate the seeds of holiness. He practised contemplation 
and tranquillization, he knew well what was the true 
significance of worldly affairs. Inside and outside he was 
transpicuous; his virtues were more than a model to the 
world. He was grieved very much over the decline of the 
orthodox teaching of the Buddha in the remoter parts of 
the earth. He finally made up his mind to cross over land 
and sea and come to China and preach his doctrine in the 
kingdom of Wei. Those that were spiritually inclined 
gathered about him full of devotion, while those that could 


179 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


not rise above their own one-sided views talked about him 
slanderingly. ; 

‘At the time there were only two monks called Tao-yih 
and Hui-k‘é, who while yet young had a strong will and 
desire to learn higher things. Thinking it a great oppor- 
tunity of their lives to have such a teacher of the Law in 
their own land, they put themselves under his instruction 
for several years, Most reverently they followed him, asked 
questions to be enlightened, and observed his directions 
well. The Teacher of the Law was moved by their spirit 
of sincerity and disciplined them in the true path, telling 
them, ‘This is the way to obtain peace of mind,” and ‘“This 
is the way to behave in the world,” ‘““This is the way to live 
harmoniously with your surroundings,” and “This is the 
upaya (means).” These being the Mahayana ways to keep 
the mind tranquil, one has to be on guard against their 
wrongful applications. By this mental pacification Pi-kuan* 
is meant; by this behaviour, the Four Acts ; by this harmony 
with things, the protection from slander and ill-disposition ; 
and by this Upaya, detachment. 

‘Thus I? have briefly stated the story of what follows. 

“There are many ways to enter the Path, but briefly 
speaking they are of two sorts only. The one is ‘“‘Entrance 
by Reason” and the other “Entrance by Conduct’. By 
“Entrance by Reason’ we mean the realization of the 
spirit of Buddhism by the aid of the scriptural teaching. We 
then come to have a deep faith in the True Nature which is 
one and the same in all sentient beings. The reason why it 
does not manifest itself is due to the overwrapping of 


1 This is the most significant phrase in Dharma’s writing. I have left 
it untranslated, for later this will be explained fully. 

* The author of this story or prefatory note is T‘an-lin (Donrin), who, 
according to Dr. Tokiwa, of the Tokyo Imperial University, was a 
learned scholar partaking in the translation of several Sanskrit works. 
He is also mentioned in connection with Yeka (Hui-k‘é) in the bio- 
graphy of the latter by Tao-hsiian. If Donrin were more of a scholar as 
we can see by this identification than a genuine Zen master, it was quite 
natural for him to write down this ‘Meditation on Four Acts’, which 
mainly appeals as it stands to the scholarly interpretation of Zen, While 
the doctrine of Pi-kuan is emphatically Zen, there is much in the ‘Medita- 
tion’ that lends itself to the philosophizing of Zen. 


180 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


external objects and false thoughts. When one, abandoning 
the false and embracing the true, and in simpleness of 
thought abides in Pi-kuan, one finds that there is neither 
selfhood nor otherness, that the masses and the worthies 
are of one essence, and firmly holds on to this belief and 
never moves away therefrom. He will not then be guided by 
any literary instructions, for he is in silent communion with 
the principle itself, free from conceptual discrimination, for 
he is serene and not-acting. This is called “Entrance by 
Reason”’. 

‘By “Entrance by Conduct” is meant the Four Acts in 
which all other acts are included. What are the four? 
1. How to requite hatred; 2. To be obedient to karma; 
3. Not to seek after anything; and 4. To be in accord with 
the Dharma. 

‘1. What is meant by “How to requite hatred”? Those 
who discipline themselves in the Path should think thus 
when they have to struggle with adverse conditions: 
During the innumerable past ages I have wandered through 
multiplicity of existences, all the while giving myself to 
unimportant details of life at the expense of essentials, and 
thus creating infinite occasions for hate, ill-will, and wrong- 
doing. While no violations have been committed in this 
life, the fruits of evil deeds in the past are to be gathered 
now. Neither gods nor men can foretell what is coming 
upon me. I will submit myself willingly and patiently to all 
the ills that befall me, and I will never bemoan or complain. 
In the Sitra it is said not to worry over ills that may happen 
to you. Why? Because through intelligence one can survey 
[the whole chain of causation]. When this thought arises, 
one is in concord with the principle because he makes the 
best use of hatred and turns it into the service in his advance 
towards the Path. This is called the ‘‘way to requite hatred”. 

‘2, By “being obedient to karma” is meant this: There 
is no self (Atman) in whatever beings that are produced by 
the interplay of karmaic conditions; pain and pleasure 
we suffer are also the results of our previous action. If I am 
rewarded with fortune, honour, etc., this is the outcome 


181 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


of my past deeds which, by reason of causation, affect my 
present life. When the force of karma is exhausted, the 
result I am enjoying now will disappear; what is then the 
use of being joyful over it? Gain or loss, let us accept karma 
as it brings us the one or the other; the spirit itself knows 
neither increase nor decrease. The wind of gladness does 
not move it, as it is silently in harmony with the Path. 
Therefore this is called “‘being obedient to karma”’. 

‘9, By “‘not seeking after anything” is meant this: Men 
of the world, in eternal confusion, are attached everywhere 
to one thing or another, which is called seeking. The 
wise, however, understand the truth and are not like the 
vulgar. Their minds abide serenely in the uncreated while 
the body turns about in accordance with the laws of 
causation. All things are empty and there is nothing 
desirable and to be sought after. Wherever there is the 
merit of brightness there follows the demerit of darkness. 
This triple world where one stays too long is like a house 
on fire; all that has a body suffers, and who would ever 
know what is rest? Because the wise are thoroughly ac- 
quainted with this truth, they get never attached to any- 
thing that becomes, their thoughts are quieted, they never 
seek. Says the Sittra: Wherever there is seeking, there you 
have sufferings; when seeking ceases you are blessed. Thus 
we know that not to seek is verily the way to the truth. 
Therefore I preach to you not ‘“‘to seek after anything”’. 

“4. By “being in accord with the Dharma” is meant that 
the reason in its essence is pure which we call the Dharma, 
and that this reason is the principle of emptiness in all that 
is manifested, as it is above defilements and attachments, 
and as there is no Self or Other in it. Says the Sitra: in the 
Dharma there are no sentient beings, because it is free from 
the stains of being; in the Dharma there is no Self because 
it is free from the stain of selfhood. When the wise under- 
stand this truth and believe in it, their conduct will be “‘in 
accordance with the Dharma’’. 

‘As the Dharma in essence has no desire to possess, the 
wise are ever ready to practise charity with their body, 


182 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


life, property, and they never begrudge, they never know 
what an ill grace means. As they have a perfect under- 
standing of the threefold nature of emptiness they are above 
partiality and attachment. Only because of their will to 
cleanse all beings of their stains, they come among them as 
of them, but they are not attached to the form. This is 
known as the inner aspect of their life. They, however, 
know also how to benefit others, and again how to glorify 
the path of enlightenment. As with the virtue of charity, 
so with the other five virtues [in the Prajfiaparamita]. 
That the wise practise the six virtues of perfection is to get 
rid of confused thoughts, and yet they are not conscious 
of their doings. This is called ‘‘being in accord with the 


Dharma’. 


The doctrine of the Two Entrances is evidently taken 
from the Vajrasamddhi-sitra;! and that of the Four Acts 
is an amplification of the second form of Entrance as is 
expounded in the Sitra. A comparison with the passage 
from it will make this point clear at once: 

‘Said the Buddha: The two entrances are “Entrance by 
Reason” and “Entrance by Conduct”. “Entrance by 
Reason” means to have a deep faith in that all sentient 
beings are identical in essence with the true nature which 
is neither unity nor multiplicity; only it is beclouded by 
external objects. The nature in itself neither departs nor 
comes. When a man in singleness of thought abides in 
chtieh-kuan, he will clearly see into the Buddha-nature, of 
which we cannot say whether it exists or exists not, and in 
which there is neither selfhood nor otherness. He will also 
find that the nature is the same both in the masses and in 
the worthies. He thus firmly holds the ground of the 
diamond-heart and never moves away therefrom; he is 
serene and not-doing, and free from conceptual discrimi- 
nation. This is called “‘“Entrance by Reason’’. 

‘ “Entrance by Conduct’? means not to be unsteady and 


i Translated into Chinese during the Northern Liang dynasty, which 
lasted from A.D. 397-439. The translator’s name is lost. 


183 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


reclining in mind and not to be in its shadows changing 
like a stream. Wherever you are, let your thought be serene 
and not to be seeking after anything. Let it be like unto 
the great earth unmoved even in a raging storm. Giving 
up all thoughts of egoism in your heart, save all beings and 
let them cross over to the other shore. There are no births, 
no signs, no clinging, no abandoning; in the mind of a 
Bodhisattva there is no going-out, no coming-in. When this 
mind which neither goes out nor comes in enters into that 
which is never entered into, it is called entering. This is the 
way the Bodhisattva enters into the Dharma. The Dharma 
is not empty in form, and the Dharma of non-emptiness is 
not to be put aside as non-entity. Why? The Dharma that 
is not non-entity is filled with virtues. It is neither mind nor 
shadows, it is pure in its suchness.’ 

In comparing these two texts the reader will be im- 
pressed with the most important and most striking change 
Bodhi-Dharma made in his quotation, which is the sub- 
stituting of pi-kuan for chiieh-kuan. Pi ‘ordinarily means ‘wall’ 
or ‘precipice’, and is often found in combination with i, 
‘standing’, in such phrases as 1 (1 wan jén, to describe an 
unscalable wall, or figuratively to represent the attitude, for 
instance, of Acala-Vidyaraja standing straight up. What 
was the reason of Dharma’s changing chiieh, ‘to awaken’, or 
‘to be enlightened’ into a word which apparently has no 
organi crelation to the following kuan, ‘to perceive’ or ‘to 
contemplate’? The novel combination is a very important 
one, for it alters the sense of the whole context in which it 
occurs. 

Tao-hsiian, the author of the Biographies, refers to 
Dharma’s tai ch‘éng pi kuan (Mahayanistic wall-contempla- 
tion) in his commentary notes to Zen, as the most meri- 
torious work Dharma achieved in China. For this reason 
he is often spoken of as the pi-kuan Brahman—that is, wall- 
contemplating Brahman—and in Japan the monks belong- 
ing to the Sdtd school of Zen are supposed to follow the 
example of the founder of their religion when they keep up 
the practice of sitting facing the wall while meditating. But 


184 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


this is evidently a superficial interpretation of the phrase 
pi-kuan; for how could mere wall-gazing start a revolu- 
tionary movement in the Buddhist world as is implied in 
Tao-hsiian’s life of Dharma?! How could such an innocent 
practice provoke a terrible opposition among scholars of 
those days? To my view, pi-kuan has a far deeper meaning, 
and must be understood in the light of the following 
passage in the Records, which is quoted from a work known 
as the Pieh-chi, meaning some special document of prior 
existence : 

‘The master first stayed in the ShGrinji (Shao-lin-szd) 
monastery for nine years, and when he taught the second 
patriarch, it was only in the following way : “‘Exterally keep 
yourself away from all relationships, and, internally, have 
no pantings (or hankerings, ch‘uan) in your heart;? when 
your mind is like unto a straight-standing wall you may 
enter into the Path.’ Hui-k‘é tried variously to explain [or to 
discourse on] the reason of mind, but failed to realize the 
truth itself. The master simply said, “No! No!” and never 
proposed to explain to his disciple what was the mind- 
essence in its thought-less state [that is, in its pure being]. 
{Later] said Hui-k‘é, “I know now how to keep myself 
away from all relationships.”’ ““You make it a total anni- 
hilation, do you not?” queried the master. “No, master,”’ 
replied Hui-k‘é, “I do not make it a. total annihilation.” 


1 We read in Tao-hsiian’s Biographies that wherever Bodhidharma 
stayed he taught people in his Zen doctrine, but as the whole country at 
the time was deeply plunged into scholastic discussions, there was a great 
deal of slanderous talk against meditation when they learned of Bodhi- 
dharma’s message. 

21s it possible that this passage has some reference to the Vajrasa- 
madhi where Bodhisattva Mahabala speaks of a ‘flaccid mind’ and a 
‘strong mind’? The former which is possessed by most common people 
‘pants’ (or gasps or hankers) very much, and prevents them from 
successfully attaining to the Tathagata-dhyana, while the ‘strong mind’ 
is characteristic of one who can enter upon the realm of reality (bhiitakott). 
So long as there are ‘pantings’ (or gaspings) in the mind, it is not free, 
it is not liberated, and cannot identify itself with the suchness of reason. 
The mind must be ‘strong’ or firm and steady, self-possessed and con- 
centrating, before it is ready for the realization of Tathagata-dhyana—a 
dhyana going far beyond the reach of the so-called four dhyanas and 
eight samadhis. 


185 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


“How do you testify your statement?” “For I know it 
always in a most intelligible manner, but to express 1t in 
words—that is impossible.” Thereupon, said the master, 
“That is the mind-essence itself transmitted by all the 
Buddhas. Harbour no doubts about it.” ’ 

In fact, this passage sums up the special message con- 
tained in Dharma’s teaching, and in it we may get an ade- 
quate answer as to the exact meaning of pi-kuan. The term 
must have been a novel one in his day, and the originality 
of his views really lay in the creative sense of the one 
word ‘pi’. It was so concrete, so graphic, and there was 
nothing abstract and conceptual about it. Hence Tao- 
hsiian’s special reference to Dharma’s teaching as the 
Tai-chéng pi-kuan (Mahayanistic wall-contemplation). While 
there was nothing specifically Zen in his doctrine of “Iwo 
Entrances and Four Acts’, the teaching of pi-kuan, wall- 
contemplation, was what made Bodhidharma the first 
patriarch of Zen Buddhism in China. 

The author of the Rightful Transmission of the Sakya 
Doctrine interprets pi-kuan as meaning the state of mind 
where no ‘external dusts get in’. This may be all right, but 
we are not told where he finds the authority for this way of 
understanding. Had he in mind Dharma’s remark to 
Hui-k‘é as recorded in the document known as Pieh-chi? 
In any event the underlying meaning of the ‘wall-con- 
templation’ must be found in the subjective condition of a 
Zen master, which is highly concentrated and rigidly ex- 
clusive of all ideas and sensuous images. To understand the 
phrase “pi-kuan’ as simply meaning ‘wall-gazing’ will be 
sheer absurdity. If the specific message of Dharma as the 
founder of Zen in China is to be sought anywhere in the 
writings of his, which are still in existence, it must be in this 
‘Mahayanistic wall-contemplation’. 

Besides this writing, which is the only one left by 
Dharma in our possession at present, we have the Lanka- 
vatara-siitra, Vajrasamdadhi-siitra, and Vajracchedika-sittra, 
through which we can also have a glimpse into the central 
teaching of Bodhidharma, Zen, unlike other schools of 


186 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


Buddhism, has no particular Siitras to be called the 
‘foundation canon’ on which its followers would base the 
principal tenets of their school; but Dharma recommended 
the Lankavatara to his first disciple Hui-k‘é (Yeka), as con- 
taining the teaching most intimately related to Zen, and 
after him this scriptural writing came to be studied chiefly 
by Zen scholars. As to the importance of the Vajrasamadhi 
as expounding the philosophy of Zen, we can easily under- 
stand it from Dharma’s own reference to the Sitra in his 
writing as was already pointed out. 

With regard to the Vajracchedika-siitra, most people think 
of it as having nothing to do with Zen prior to the fifth 
patriarch, Hungjén (Gunin) ; for it was he who, for the 
first time, introduced it among his own disciples, while 
Dharma himself made no allusion whatever to this, one of 
the most popular Buddhist texts in China. But according to 
Hui-néng’s Preface to the Vajracchedika, which is still pre- 
served, ‘ever since the coming-west of Dharma he wanted to 
propagate the meaning of this Sitra and lead people to 
understand the Reason and to see into the Nature.’ If this 
were actually the case, Dharma, to say the least, must have 
had some knowledge of this Siitra from the very beginning 
of his career in China, and the connection in a way between 
this and Zen must have been more fundamental than that 
between the Lankdvatara and Zen. The prevalent notion 
then that the Vajracchedikd came only in vogue after Hung- 
jén and Hui-néng must be revised. Whatever this may be, 
the Lankavatara is too difficult a material for popular con- 
sumption, and it was natural that this Sutra came to be 
gradually superseded by the Vajracchedika as Zen gained 
more and more in power and influence. As one of the 
Sutras belonging to the Prajfiaparamita class of Buddhist 
literature, the teaching of the Vajracchedikd was compara- 
tively simple and had something much akin to the Laot- 
ziian ideas of emptiness and non-doing. It was not hard for 
the average Chinese to follow its philosophy of Sanyata ; in 

1 This subject was treated in another place, though rather sketchily, 
and will be further elaborated later in an independent Essay. 


187 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


fact this agreed well with a certain aspect of Chinese 
thought.! ; 

However, with Zen followers all literature was like a 
finger pointing at the moon, and there was not much in 
itself that will actually lead one to the seeing of one’s own 
inner nature; for this seeing was a realization which must be 
attained by one’s own personal efforts apart from the mere 
understanding of letters. All Buddhist Siitras including the 
Lankavatara, Vajrasamadhi, and Vajracchediké could not be of 
much help to the real earnest seekers of the truth, so long 
as his idea is to grasp the naked facts with his own ungloved 
hands. This was possible only when his own inner con- 
sciousness opened by itself, from within, through his whole- 
souled efforts. Literature is helpful only when it indicates 
the way, it is not the thing itself. 

The earlier part of Bodhidharma’s life while in India as 
narrated in the Records may be discredited as containing a 
large dose of fiction, but the latter part of it cannot so 
easily be disposed of. This is where it supplements the story 
in Tao-hsiian’s Biographies, which was written by a good 
historian however, who did not know anything about the 
future development of Zen. According to the Records then, 
the first great personage Dharma had an interview with 
when he came to China was the king of Liang, the greatest 
Buddhist patron of the time. And the interview took place 
in the following manner: 

The Emperor Wu of Liang asked Dharma: 


1In this connection I wish to make some remarks against certain 
scholars who consider the philosophy of Sinyati to be really the founda- 
tion of Zen. Such scholars fail utterly to grasp the true purport of Zen, 
which is first of all an experience and not at all a philosophy or dogma. 
Zen can never be built upon any set of metaphysical or psychological 
views; the latter may be advanced after the Zen experience has taken 
place, but never before. The philosophy of the Prajfiaparamita can never 
precede Zen, but must always follow it. Buddhist scholars like those at 
the time of Dharma are too apt to identify teaching and life, theory and 
experience, description and fact. When this confusion is allowed to grow, 
Zen Buddhism will cease to yield an intelligent and satisfactory inter- 
pretation. Without the fact of Enlightenment under the Bodhi-tree near 


e Nairafijana, no Nagarjunas could ever hope to write a single book 
on the Prajiia philosophy. 


188 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


“Ever since the beginning of my reign I have built so 
many temples, copied so many sacred books, and sup- 
ported so many monks and nuns; what do you think my 
merit might be?’ 62 

‘No merit whatever, sire!’ Dharma bluntly replied. 

‘Why?’ demanded the Emperor astonished. 

‘All these are inferior deeds,’ thus began Dharma’s 
significant reply, ‘which would cause their author to be 
born in the heavens or on this earth again. They still show 
the traces of worldliness, they are like shadows following 
objects. Though they appear actually existing, they are no 
more than mere non-entities. As to a true meritorious deed, 
it is full of pure wisdom and is perfect and mysterious, and 
its real nature is beyond the grasp of human intelligence. 
Such as this is not to be sought after by any worldly achieve- 
ment.’ 

The Emperor Wu thereupon asked Bodhidharma 
again, ‘What is the first principle of the holy doctrine?’ 

‘Vast emptiness, and there is nothing in it to be called 
holy, sire!’ answered Dharma. 

‘Who is it then that is now confronting me?’ 

‘I know not, sire!’ 

The answer was simple enough, and clear enough too, 
but the pious and learned Buddhist Emperor failed to grasp 
the spirit pervading the whole attitude of Dharma. 

Seeing that there was no further help to be given to the 
Emperor, Dharma left his dominion and retired into a 
monastery in the state of Wei, where he sat quietly prac- 
tising the ‘wall-contemplation’, it is said, for nine long years, 
until he came to be known as the Pi-kuan Brahman. 

One day a monk Shén-kuang visited him and most 
earnestly implored him to be enlightened in the truth of 
Zen, but Dharma paid no attention. Shén-kuang was not 
to be disappointed, for he knew that all the great spiritual 


1 As I stated before, there is a confusion between Dharma’s mien-pi 
habit of sitting and his doctrine of the pi-kuan meditation. The confusion 
dates quite early, and even at the time of the author of the Records the 
original meaning of pi-kuan, wall-contemplation, must have been lost. 


189 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


leaders of the past had gone through with many a heart- 
rending trial in order to attain the final object of their 
aspiration. One evening he stood in the midst of the snow 
waiting for Dharma to notice him when at last the fast- 
falling snow buried him almost to his knees. 

Finally, the master turned back and said, ‘What do you 
wish me to do for you?’ Said Kuang, ‘I am come to receive 
your invaluable instructions; pray open your gate of 
mercy, and extend your hand of salvation to this poor 
suffering mortal.’ ‘The incomparable doctrine of Budd- 
hism,’ replied Dharma, ‘can be comprehended only after 
a long hard discipline and by enduring what is most 
difficult to endure, and by practising what is most difficult 
to practise. Men of inferior virtue and wisdom are not 
allowed to understand anything about it. All the labours 
of such ones will come to naught.’ 

Kuang at last cut off his left arm with the sword! he was 
carrying, and presented it before the teacher as a token 
of his sincerity in the desire to be instructed in the doctrine 
of all the Buddhas. Said Dharma, “This is not to be sought 
through another.’ 

‘My soul is not yet pacified. Pray, master, pacify it.’ 

‘Bring your soul here, and I will have it pacified.’ 

Kuang hesitated for a moment but finally said, ‘I have 
sought it these many years and am still unable to get hold 
of it! 


‘There! it is pacified once for all.’ This was Dharma’s 
sentence.” 


1 Sometimes this man is said to be a civilian and sometimes a soldier 
embracing Confucianism. 

* As one can readily see, this story is more or less fictitious. I mean 
Kuang’s standing in the snow and cutting off his arm in order to 
demonstrate his earnestness and sincerity. Some think that the snow 
story and that of self-mutilation do not belong to that of Kuang, but are 
borrowed from some other sources, as Tao-hsiian makes no reference to 
them in his book. The loss of the arm was due to a party of robbers who 
attacked Kuang after his interview with Dharma. We have no way to 
verify these stories cither way. The whole setting, however, is highly 
dramatic, and there must have been once in the history of Zen some 


— to interweave imagination largely with facts, whatever they 
tay be, 


1g0 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


Dharma then told him to change his name into Hui-k‘é, 

Nine years passed, and Dharma wished to return to his 
native country. He called in all his disciples before him, 
and said, “The time is come for me to depart, and I want to 
see what your attainments are.’ 

‘According to my view,’ said Tao-fu, ‘the truth is above 
affirmation and negation, for this is the way it moveth.’ 

Dharma said, ‘You have got my skin.’ 

Next came in the nun, Tsung-ch‘ih, and said, ‘As I under- 
stand it, it is like Ananda’s viewing the Buddhaland of 
Akshobhya : it is seen once and never again.’ 

Dharma said, ‘You have got my flesh.’ 

Tao-yii was another disciple who presented his view, 
saying: ‘Empty are the four elements and non-existent the 
five skandhas. According to my view, there is not a thing to 
be grasped as real.’ 

Dharma said, ‘You have got my bone.’ 

Finally, Hui-k‘é—that is, Shén-kuang—reverently bow- 
ing to the master, kept standing in his seat and said 
nothing. 

Dharma then announced, ‘You have my marrow.’! 

Mystery envelops the end of Bodhidharma’s life in 
China; we do not know how, when, and where he passed 
away from this earth. Some say that he was poisoned by 
his rivals, others say that he went back to India, crossing 
the desert, and still others report that he came over to 
Japan. In one thing they all agree, which is this: he was 
quite old, being, according to Tao-hsiian, over one hundred 
and fifty years at his death. 


1 According to Hsieh-sung, the author of the Right Transmission of the 
Law, Bodhidharma has here followed Nagarjuna in the anatomy of 
Zen-understanding. For Nagarjuna says in his famous commentary on 
the Prajitapdramitd-siitra, ‘Moral conduct is the skin, meditation is the 
flesh, the higher understanding is the bone, and the mind subtle and 
good is the marrow.’ ‘This subtle mind,’ says Hsieh-sung, is what is 
secretly transmitted from the Buddha to his successors in the faith. He 
then refers to Chih-I-of the Sui dynasty, who regards this mind as the 
abode of all the Buddhas and as the middle way in which there is 
neither unity nor multiplicity and which can never be adequately ex- 
pressed in words. 


Ig! 


Ill 


After Bodhidharma, Hui-k‘é (486-593) was the chief 
exponent of Zen Buddhism. He was already a learned 
scholar before he came to his teacher for instruction, not 
only in the Chinese classics but in Buddhist lore. No amount 
of learning, however, satisfied him; indeed he seems to 
have had a sort of enlightenment in his way, which he 
wanted to be testified to by Dharma. After he left the 
master he did not at once begin his preaching, hiding him- 
self among the lower strata of society. He evidently shunned 
being looked up to as a high priest of great wisdom and 
understanding. However, he did not neglect quietly preach- 
ing the Law whenever he had an occasion. He was simply 
quiet and unassuming, refusing to show himself off. But 
one day when he was discoursing about the Law before a 
temple gate, there was another sermon going on inside the 
temple by a resident priest, learned and honoured. The 
audience, however, left the reverend lecturer inside and 
gathered around the street-monk, probably clad in rags 
and with no outward signs of ecclesiastical dignity. The high 
priest got angry over the situation. He accused the beggar- 
monk to the authorities as promulgating a false doctrine, 
whereupon Hui-k‘é was arrested and put to death. He did 
not specially plead innocent but composedly submitted, 
saying that he had according to the law of karma an old 
debt to pay up. This took place in A.D. 593, and he was one 
hundred and seven years old when he was killed. 

According to Tao-hsiian, Hui-k‘é’s eloquence flew 
directly from his heart, not encrusted with learning or 
scholarly discourse. While he was preaching in an im- 
portant city on the meaning of Zen, those who could not 
rise above ‘the letter that killeth’ took his teaching for 
heresy, as the words of a devil devoid of sense. Especially 
among them a master of meditation called Tao-hiian, who 
had about one thousand followers about him, at once 


192 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


assumed an offensive attitude towards Hui-k‘é. He sent 
one of his disciples to the Zen exponent, perhaps to find 
out what kind of man he really was. As soon as the disciple 
learned what was the teaching of the so-called heretic, he 
was so deeply impressed by this man that he was con- 
verted into a Zen advocate. Tao-hiian despatched another 
of his followers to call the first one back, but he followed the 
example of the predecessor. Several other messengers were 
sent one after another, but the result was altogether dis- 
couraging. Later when Tao-hiian happened to meet his 
first messenger, he asked : ‘How was it that I had to send for 
you so many times? Did I not open your eye after taking 
pains so much on my part?’ The former disciple, however, 
mystically answered: ‘My eye has been right from the 
first, and it was through you that it came to squint.’ This 
stirred the master’s ire, and it was through his machination, 
writes Tao-hsiian, that Hui-k‘é had to suffer official per- 
secution. 

This story taken from Tao-hsiian’s Biographies varies 
from that in the Tao-yiian’s Records, but they both agree 
in making Hui-k‘é a martyr at the hands of his enemy. 
There is no doubt that in the Zen teaching of Bodhi- 
dharma and his first Chinese disciple, Hui-k‘é, there was 
something that was unintelligible to most of the Buddhists 
of the time who had been trained either in the abstract 
metaphysics or in the tranquillizing exercises, or in the 
mere morality, of Buddhism. The exponents of Zen then 
must have emphasized the truth to be awakened in one’s 
inner consciousness, even at the expense of the canonical 
teaching as is variously elucidated in the Sitras and Sastras, 
many of which in translations had already been in circula- 
tion. This must have excited the conservatists and literalists. 

Like Bodhidharma, Hui-k‘é did not leave any literary 
writing, though we know from their biographies that both 
had their sermons collected and in the case of Hui-k‘é 
‘classified’,! whatever this may mean. The following pre- 


1 According to this, there must have been a special volume of sermons, 
and letters by Hui-k‘é, which were compiled evidently by his disciples 


N 193 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


served extracts, however, may throw light on the teaching 
of Hui-k‘é. A lay-disciple called Hsiang wrote a letter to 
Hui-k‘é; ‘Shadow follows a body and echo rises from a 
sound. He who in pursuit of the shadow tires out the body, 
does not know that the body produces the shadow; and he 
who attempts to stop an echo by raising his voice, does not 
understand that the voice is the cause of the echo. [In a 
similar way] he who seeks Nirvana by cutting desires and 
passions is to be likened to one who seeks a shadow apart 
from its original body ; and he who aspires to Buddhahood 
thinking it to be independent of the nature of sentient beings 
is to be likened to one who tries to listen to an echo by 
deadening its original sound. Therefore, the ignorant and 
the enlightened are walking in one passageway ; the vulgar 
and the wise are not to be differentiated from each other. 
Where there are no names, we create names, and because 
of these names judgments are formed. Where there is no 
theorizing, we theorize, and because of this theorizing, dis- 
putes arise. They are all phantom creations and not 
realities, and who knows who is right and who is wrong? 
They are all empty, no substantialities have they, and who 
knows what is and what is not? So we realize that our gain 
is not real gain and our loss not real loss. This is my view 
and may I be enlightened if I am at fault?’ 

To this Hui-k‘é answered: ‘You have truly compre- 
hended the Dharma as it is; the deepest truth lies in the 
principle of identity. It is due to one’s ignorance that the 
mani-jewel is taken for a piece of brick, but lo! when one is 
suddenly awakened to self-enlightenment it is realized that 
one is in possession of the real jewel. The ignorant and the 
enlightened are of one essence, they are not really to be 
separated. We should know that all things are such as they 
are. Those who entertain a dualistic view of the world are 
to be pitied, and I write this letter for them. When we 


and admirers before they were put down in writing and thoroughly re- 
vised by the author himself. In the case of Bodhidharma too, according 
to Tao-hsiian, his sayings were apparently in circulaticn in the day of 
Tao-hsiian, that is, early in the T‘ang dynasty. 


194 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


know that between this body and the Buddha there is 
nothing to separate one from the other, what is the use of 
seeking after Nirvana [as something external to ourselves] ?’ 

Next to Hui-k‘é came Séng-ts‘an, who succeeded as 
the third patriarch. The interview between master and 
disciple took place in this manner: A layman of forty 
troubled with féng-yang! according to the Records, came to 
Hui-k‘é and asked: 

‘I am suffering from féng-yang ; pray cleanse me of my sins.” 

‘Bring your sins here,’ said Hui-k‘é, ‘and I will cleanse 
you of them.’ 

The lay-disciple was silent for a while but finally said, 
‘As I seek my sins, I find them unattainable.’ 

‘I have then finished cleansing you altogether. You should 
thenceforth take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and 
Samgha (Brotherhood), and abide therein.’ 

‘As I stand before you, O master,’ asked Séng-ts‘an, ‘I 
know that you belong to the Brotherhood, but pray tell 
me what are the Buddha and the Dharma?’ 

Replied the master: ‘Mind is the Buddha, Mind is the 
Dharma; and the Buddha and the Dharma are not two. 
The same is to be said of the Brotherhood (sarmgha).’ 

This satisfied the disciple, who now said, “Today for the 
first time I realize that sins are neither within nor without 
nor in the middle; just as Mind is, so is the Buddha, so is the 
Dharma; they are not two.”? 

He was then ordained by Hui-k‘é as a Buddhist monk, 
and after this he fled from the world altogether, and noth- 
ing much of his life is known. This was partly due to the 
persecution of Buddhism carried on by the Emperor of the 
Chou dynasty. It was in the twelfth year of K‘ai-huan, of 

1 Understood by some to be leprosy. 

2 In the Vimalakirti, chapter iii, ‘The Disciples’, we have the follow- 
ing : ‘Do not worry about the sins you have committed, O monks,’ said 
Vimalakirti. ‘Why? Because sins are in their essence neither within nor 
without nor in the middle. As the Buddha taught us, all things are de- 
filed when Mind is defiled ; all things are pure when Mind is pure; and 
Mind is neither within nor without nor in the middle. As is Mind, so are 
sins and defilements, so are all things—they never transcend the such- 
ness of truth.’ 


E99 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


the Sui dynasty (A.D. 592), that he found a disciple worthy 
to be his successor. His name was Tao-hsin. He asked the 
master : 

‘Pray show me the way to deliverance.’ 

“Who has ever put you in bondage?’ 

‘Nobody.’ 

‘If so,’ said the master, ‘why should you ask for de- 
liverance?’ 

This put the young novice on the way to final enlighten- 
ment, which he attained after many years’ study under the 
master. When Séng-ts‘an thought that the time was ripe 
to consecrate him as his successor in the faith, he handed 
him, as the token of the rightful transmission of the Law, 
the robe which had come down from Bodhidharma, the 
first patriarch of Zen in China. He died in a.p. 606. While 
much of his life is obscure, his thought is gleaned from a 
metrical composition known as Hsin-hsin-ming, or ‘In- 
scribed on the Believing Mind’, which is one of the most 
valuable contributions by the masters to the interpretation 


of Zen teaching. Here follows a somewhat liberal translation 
of the poem: 


INSCRIBED ON THE BELIEVING Minp! 


The Perfect Way knows no difficulties 
Except that it refuses to make preference: 


1 Hsin is one of those Chinese words which defy translation. When 
the Indian scholars were trying to translate the Buddhist Sanskrit works 
into Chinese they discovered that there were five classes of Sanskrit terms 
which could not be satisfactorily rendered into Chinese. We thus find in 
the Chinese Tripitaka such words as prajfta, bodhi, buddha, nirvana, 
dhyana, bodhisattva, etc., almost always untranslated; and they now 
appear in their original form among the technical Buddhist terminology. 
If we could leave Asin with all its nuance of meaning in this translation, 
it would save us from the many difficulties that face us in its English 
rendering. For Asin means mind, heart, soul, spirit—each singly as well 
as all inclusively. In the present composition by the third patriarch of 
Zen it has sometimes an intellectual connotation, but at other times it 
can properly be done by ‘heart’. But as the predominant note of Zen 

uddhism is more intellectual than anything else, though not in the 


sense of being logical or philosophical, I decided here to translate hsin 
by ‘mind’ rather than by ‘heart’. 


196 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


Only when freed from hate and love, 
It reveals itself fully and without disguise. 


A tenth of an inch’s difference, 

And heaven and earth are set apart: 

If you want to see it manifest, 

Take no thought either for or against it. 


To set up what you like against what you dislike— 

This is the disease of the mind: 

When the deep meaning [of the Way] is not under- 
stood 

Peace of mind is disturbed and nothing is gained. 


[The Way is] perfect like unto vast space, 
With nothing wanting, nothing superfluous: 
It is indeed due to making choice 

That its suchness is lost sight of. 


Pursue not the outer entanglements, 

Dwell not in the inner void; 

When the mind rests serene in the oneness of things, 
The dualism vanishes by itself. 


And when oneness is not thoroughly understood, 

In two ways loss is sustained— 

The denial of reality may lead to its absolute negation, 

While the upholding of the void may result in contra- 
dicting itself. 

Wordiness and intellection— 

The more with them the further astray we go; 

Away therefore with wordiness and intellection, 

And there is no place where we cannot pass freely.' 

1 This means: When the absolute oneness of things is not properly 
understood, negation as well as affirmation will tend to be a one-sided 
view of reality. When Buddhists deny the reality of an objective world, 
they do not mean that they believe in the unconditioned emptiness of 
things; they know that there is something real which cannot be done 
away with, When they uphold the doctrine of void, this does not mean 
that all is nothing but an empty hollow, which leads to a self-contra- 


diction. The philosophy of Zen avoids the error of one-sidedness in- 
volved in realism as well as in idealism. 


197 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


When we return to the root, we gain the meaning; 

When we pursue the external objects, we lose the 
reason. 

The moment we are enlightened within, 

We go beyond the voidness of a world confronting us. 


Transformations going on in an empty world which 
confronts us, 

Appear real all because of Ignorance: 

Try not to seek after the true, 

Only cease to cherish opinions. 


Tarry not with dualism, 

Carefully avoid pursuing it; 

As soon as you have right and wrong, 
Confusion ensues, the mind is lost. 


The two exist because of the one, 

But hold not even to this one; 

When the one mind is not disturbed, 
The ten thousand things offer no offence. 


When no offence is offered by them, they are as if not 
existing ; 

When the mind is not disturbed, it is as if there is no 
mind. 

The subject is quieted as the object ceases, 

The object ceases as the subject is quieted. 


The object is an object for the subject, 

The subject is a subject for an object: 
Know that the relativity of the two 

Rests ultimately on the oneness of the void. 


In the oneness of the void the two are one, 

And each of the two contains in itself all the ten thou- 
sand things: 

When no discrimination is made between this and that, 

How can a one-sided and prejudiced view arise? 


198 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


The Great Way is calm and large-minded, 
Nothing is easy, nothing is hard: 

Small views are irresolute, 

The more in haste the tardier they go. 


Clinging never keeps itself within bounds, 

It is sure to go in the wrong way: 

Let go loose, and things are as they may be, 
While the essence neither departs nor abides. 


Obey the nature of things, and you are in concord with 
the Way, 

Calm and easy and free from annoyance; 

But when your thoughts are tied, you turn away from 
the truth, 

They grow heavier and duller and are not at all sound. 


When they are not sound, the soul is troubled ; 
What is the use of being partial and one-sided then? 
If you want to walk the course of the One Vehicle, 
Be not prejudiced against the six-sense-objects. 


When you are not prejudiced against the six sense- 
objects, 

You in turn identify yourself with Enlightenment ; 

The wise are non-active, 

While the ignorant bind themselves up ; 

While in the Dharma itself there is no individuation, 

They ignorantly attach themselves to particular objects. 

It is their own minds that create illusions— 

Is it not the greatest of self-contradictions? 


Ignorance begets the dualism of rest and unrest, 

The enlightened have no likes and dislikes: 

All forms of dualism 

Are ignorantly contrived by the mind itself. 

They are like unto visions and flowers in the air: 
Why should we trouble ourselves to take hold of them? 


199 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Gain and loss, right and wrong— 
Away with them once for all! 


If an eye never falls asleep, 

All dreams will by themselves cease : 

If the mind retains its oneness, 

The ten thousand things are of one suchness. 

When the deep mystery of one suchness is fathomed, 

All of a sudden we forget the external entanglements : 

When the ten thousand things are viewed in their one- 
ness, 

We return to the origin and remain what we are. 


Forget the wherefore of things, ? 
And we attain to a state beyond analogy: 
Movement stopped is no movement, 

And rest set in motion is no rest. 

When dualism does no more obtain, 

Even oneness itself remains not as such. 


The ultimate end of things where they cannot go any 
further, 


Is not bound by rules and measures: 


The mind in harmony [with the Way] is the principle 
of identity 


In which we find all doings in a quiescent state ; 
Irresolutions are completely done away with, 
And the right faith is restored to its native straightness ; 


Nothing is retained now, 

Nothing is to be memorized, 

All is void, lucid, and self-illuminating, 

There is no stain, no exertion, no wasting of energy— 
This is where thinking never attains, 

This is where the imagination fails to measure. 


In the higher realm of True Suchness 
There is neither ‘other’ nor ‘self’: 


200 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


When a direct identification is asked for, 
We can only say, ‘Not two.’! 


In being not two all is the same, 

All that is is comprehended in it: 
The wise in the ten quarters, 

They all enter into this absolute faith. 


This absolute faith is beyond quickening [time] and 
extension [space]. 

One instant is ten thousand years; 

No matter how things are conditioned, whether with 
‘to be’ or ‘not to be’, 

It is manifest everywhere before you 


The infinitely small is as large as large can be, 
When external conditions are forgotten ; 

The infinitely large is as small as small can be, 
When objective limits are put out of sight. 


What is is the same with what is not, 
What is not is the same with what 1s: 
Where this state of things fails to obtain, 
Be sure not to tarry. 


One in all, 

All in one— 

If only this is realized, 

No more worry about your not being perfect! 


The believing mind is not divided, 

And undivided is the believing mind— 
This is where words fail, 

For it is not of the past, future, or present. 


Under Tao-hsin (580-651), the fourth patriarch, Zen 
was divided into two branches. The one known as 
11.e. Tat tvam asi. 
201 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Gozusan (Niu-t‘ou Shan), did not live long after the passing 
of its founder, Fa-jung, who lived at Mount Niu-t‘ou, and is 
considered not belonging to the orthodox line of Zen. The 
other branch was headed by Hung-jén, who is regarded by 
historians as the fifth patriarch, and it is his school that has 
survived. He game to the master when he was still a mere 
boy, and what pleased his master at their interview was 
the way he answered. When Tao-hsin asked what was his 
family name (hsing), he said: 

‘I have a nature (Asing), and it is not an ordinary 
one.’ 

‘What is that?’ 

‘It is the Buddha-nature (_fo-hsing).’ 

‘Then you have no name?” 

‘No, master,’ said the boy, ‘for it is empty in its nature.’ 
Here is a play of words; the characters denoting ‘family 
name’ and that for ‘nature’ are both pronounced hsing. 
When Tao-hsin was referring to the ‘family name’ the 
young follower took it for ‘nature’ purposely, whereby to 
express his view’ by a figure of speech. 

Tao-hsin’s interview with Fa-jung, the founder of the 
Niu-t‘ou school of Zen, was significant, showing where 
their views differed and how the one came to be converted 
into the orthodox understanding of Zen. It was during the 
Chén-kuan era of the T‘ang dynasty that Tao-hsin, learn- 
ing of the presence of an extraordinary saintly man in 
Niu-t‘ou mountains, decided to see who he could be. When 
Tao-hsin came to a Buddhist temple in the mountains he 
inquired after the man and was informed of a lonely 
anchorite who would never rise from his seat nor salute 
people even when they were approaching him. When 
Tao-hsin proceeded further into the mountains he saw 
him as he was told, sitting quietly and paying no attention 
to the presence of a stranger. He then asked the hermit what 
he was doing here. ‘I am contemplating on Mind,’ was the 
reply. Tao-hsin then demanded: ‘What is he that is con- 
templating? What is Mind that is contemplated?’ Fa-jung 
was not prepared to answer such questions. Thinking that 


202 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


the visitor was a man of deep understanding, he rose from 
the seat and saluting him asked who he was. When he 
found that the visitor was no other personage than Tao-hsin 
himself, whose reputation he was not ignorant of, he 
thanked him for the visit. They were now about to enter a 
little hut nearby where they might talk about religion, when 
Tao-hsin saw some wild animals such as tigers and wolves 
wandering about the place, and he threw up his hands as 
if he were greatly frightened. Fa-jung remarked, ‘I see this 
is still with you.’ The fourth patriarch responded at once, 
‘What do you see yet?’ No answer came from the hermit. 
After a while the patriarch traced the character ‘Buddha’ 
(fo) on the stone on which Fa-jung was in the habit 
of sitting in meditation. Seeing it, the latter looked 
as if shocked. Said the patriarch, ‘I see this is still with 
you.’ But Fa-jung failed to see the meaning of this 
remark and earnestly implored to be instructed in the 
ultimate teaching of Buddhism. This was done, and 
Fa-jung became the founder of the Niu-t‘ou school of Zen 
Buddhism. — 

Tao-hsin died at the age of seventy-two, A.D. 651. 

Hung-jén, 601-674, the fifth patriarch, came from the 
same province as his predecessor, Ch‘i-chou, now in the 
district of Fu-pei. His temple was situated in Wang-mei 
Shan (Yellow Plum Mountain), where he preached and 
gave lessons in Zen to his five hundred pupils. He is claimed 
by some to have been the first Zen master who attempted to 
interpret the message of Zen according to the doctrine of 
the Vajracchedika-siitra. Though I cannot quite agree with 
this view, for the reason already referred to elsewhere, we 
can consider the fifth patriarch the beginning of a turning 
in the history of Zen, which opened up to a full view under 
the sixth patriarch, Hui-néng. Until now the Zen followers 
had kept quiet, though working steadily, without arresting 
public attention; the masters had retired either into the 
mountains or in the hurly-burly of the world where nobody 
could tell anything about their doings. But the time had at 
last come for a full proclamation of Zen, and Hung-jén was 


203 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


the first who appeared in the field preparing the way for 
his successor, Hui-néng. 


Besides this orthodox line of patriarchs, there were some 
sporadic expositors of Zen throughout the sixth and the 
seventh centuries. Several of them are mentioned, but there 
must have been many more such who were either altogether 
forgotten or not at all known to the world. The two best 
known are Pao-chih (died 514) and Fu-hsi (died 569) ; and 
their lives are recorded in the Records as ‘adepts in Zen but 
not appearing in the world, though well-known at the 
time’. This is a strange phrasing, and it is hard to know 
definitely what ‘not appearing in the world’ means. Usually 
it applies to one who does not occupy any recognized position 
in an officially registered monastery. But of those that are 
classed under this heading there is one at least to whom the 
designation does not properly apply; for Chi-i was a great 
high priest occupying an influential ecclesiastical post in 
the Sui dynasty. Whatever this was, those recorded here 
did not belong to the orthodox Zen school. The Tendai 
(T‘ien-tai) followers object to see two of their Fathers 
Hui-szii and Chi-i mentioned as ‘adepts in Zen but not 
appearing in the world, though well-known at the time’, 
They think that these two are great names in the history 
of their school and ought not to be so indifferently referred 
to in the records of the Zen masters. But from the Zen point 
of view this classification is justifiable for the reason that the 
Tendai, except its metaphysics, is another current of Zen 
started independently of the line of Bodhidharma, and if 
this were allowed to take a more practical course of develop- 
ment it should surely have resulted in Zen as we have it 
now. But its metaphysical side came to be emphasized at 
the expense of the practical, and for this reason the Tendai 
philosophers were ever at war with the Zen, especially 
with the ultra-left wing, which was inflexible in denouncing 
an appeal to ratiocination and literary discoursing and 
Sitra-learning. In my view the Tendai is a variation of Zen 
and its first promulgators may justly be classed as Zen 


204 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


masters, though not of the pedigree to which belong Shih- 
t‘ou, Yiieh-shan, Ma-tsu, Lin-chi, etc. 

While there were thus in the sixth and seventh centuries 
some other lines of Zen about to develop, the one started 
by Bodhidharma was uninterruptedly carried on by 
Hui-k‘é, Shéng-t‘san, Tao-hsin, and Hung-jén, who 
proved to be the most fruitful and successful. The differ- 
entiation of two schools under the fifth patriarch, by 
Hui-néng and Shén-hsiu, helped the further progress of 
pure Zen by eliminating unessential or rather undigested 
elements. That the school of Hui-néng survived the other 
proves that his Zen was in perfect accord with Chinese 
psychology and modes of thinking. The Indian elements 
which had been found attached to the Zen of Bodhi- 
dharma and his successors down to Hui-néng, were some- 
thing grafted and not native to Chinese genius. And there- 
fore when Zen came to be fully established under Hui-néng 
and his followers, it had nothing further to obstruct its free 
development until it became almost the only ruling power 
in the Chinese world of Buddhism. We must carefully 
watch how Hui-néng came to be Hung-jén’s successor 
and where he differed from his rival school under Shén- 
hsiu. 


IV 


Hui-néng (638-713) came from Hsin-chou in the 
southern parts of China. His father died when he was 
yet young. He supported his mother by selling wood in 
town. When one day he came out of a house where he sold 
some fuel, he heard a man reciting a Buddhist Sutra. The 
words deeply touched his heart. Finding what Sitra it was 
and where it was possible to get it, a longing came over him 
to study it with the master. The Sitra was the Diamond 
Sitra (Vajracchedikd-sitra) and the master was the fifth 
patriarch residing at Yellow Plum in Chin-chou. Hui-néng 


205 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


somehow managed to get money enough for the support of 
his aged mother while he was gone. 

It took him about a month to reach Yellow Plum, where 
he at once proceeded to see Hung-jén at the head of five 
hundred monks (sometimes said to be seven or even ten 
hundred). At the first interview asked the patriarch : 

‘Where do you come from? and what do you want here?” 

‘I am a farmer from Hsin-chou and wish to become a 
Buddha.’ 

‘So you are a Southerner,’ said the patriarch, ‘but the 
Southerners have no Buddha-nature ; how could you expect 
to attain Buddhahood?’ 

This, however, did not discourage the bold seeker after 
the truth, for he at once responded, “There may be 
Southerners and Northerners, but as far as Buddha-nature 
goes, how could you make such a distinction in it?’ 

This pleased the master very much. Hui-néng was given 
an office as rice-pounder for the Brotherhood. More than 
eight months, it is said, he was employed in this menial 
labour, when the fifth patriarch wished to select his spiritual 
successor from among his many disciples. One day he made 
an announcement that any one who could prove his 
thorough comprehension of the religion would be given the 
patriarchal mantle and proclaimed as his legitimate heir. 
Shén-hsiu (died 706), who was the most learned of all the 
disciples and thoroughly versed in the lore of his religion, 
and who was therefore considered by his brethren in the 
faith to be in possession of an unqualified right to the 
honour, composed a stanza expressing his view, and posted 
it on the outside wall of the meditation hall, which read: 


‘This body is the Bodhi-tree, 

The soul is like a mirror bright; 
Take heed to keep it always clean, 
And let not dust collect on it.’ 


All those who read these lines were greatly impressed, 
and secretly cherished the idea that the author of this 


206 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


gatha would surely be awarded the prize. But when they 
awoke the next morning they were surprised to see another 
written alongside of it, which ran as follows: 


‘The Bodhi is not like the tree, 

The mirror bright is nowhere shining; 
As there is nothing from the first, 
Where can the dust itself collect?’ 


The writer of these lines was an insignificant layman in the 
service of the monastery, who spent most of his time in 
pounding rice and splitting wood for the Brotherhood. He 
had such an unassuming air that nobody ever thought 
much of him, and therefore the entire community was now 
set astir to see this challenge made upon its recognized 
authority. But the fifth patriarch saw in this unpretentious 
monk a future leader of mankind, and decided to transfer 
to him the robe of his office. He had, however, some mis- 
givings concerning the matter; for the majority of his 
disciples were not enlightened enough to see anything of 
deep religious intuition in the lines by the rice-pounder, 
Hui-néng: and if he were publicly awarded the honour 
they might do him harm. So the fifth patriarch gave a 
secret sign to Hui-néng to come to his room at midnight, 
when the rest of the Brotherhood was fast asleep. Then he 
gave him the robe as insignia of his authority and in acknow- 
ledgment of his unsurpassed spiritual attainment, and with 
the assurance that the future of their faith would be brighter 
than ever. The patriarch then advised him that it would be 
wise for him to hide his own light under a bushel until the 
proper time arrived for his public appearance and active 
propaganda, and also that the robe which was handed 
down from Bodhidharma as the sign of faith should no 
more be given up to Hui-néng’s successors, because Zen 
was now fully recognized by the outside world in general 
and there was no more necessity to symbolize the faith by 
the transference of the robe. That night Hui-néng left the 
monastery. 
207 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


This narrative is taken from the literature left by the 
followers of the sixth patriarch and is naturally partial in 
his favour. If we had another record left by Shén-hsiu and 
his school, the account here reproduced may materially 
differ. In fact, we have at least one document telling Shén- 
hsiu’s relation to Hung-jén. It is the memorial inscription 
on his gravestone written by Chang-shuo, one of his lay- 
disciples. In this inscription Shén-hsiu is referred to as the 
one to whom the Dharma has been transmitted from his 
master, Hung-jén. Judging from this, the patriarchal 
authority of Hui-néng was not an undisputed one at the 
time, or the orthodox order of succession was not settled 
until some time later, when the school of Hui-néng had been 
well established in authority over all the other schools of 
Zen that might have been existing then. Unfortunately, 
this memorial inscription does not give any further infor- 
mation concerning Hui-néng’s relation to Hung-jén, but 
even from the above narrative we can gather certain facts 
of importance which will shed light on the history of Zen. 

First, what necessity was there to make Hui-néng an 
unlearned rustic in contrast with the erudition and wide 
information ascribed to Shén-hsiu? Or was Hui-néng really 
such an ignoramus as could not read anything written? 
But the Fa-pao-t‘an-ching, a collection of his sermons, con- 
tains passages quoted from such Sitras as the Nirvana, 
Vajracchedikd, Lankavatara, Saddharma-pundarika, Vimalakirti, 
Amitabha, and Bodhisattva-Sila-siitra. Does this not evince the 
fact that the author was not altogether unacquainted with 
Mahayana literature? Probably he was not a learned 
scholar as compared with Shén-hsiu, but in the narratives 
of his life we can trace some systematic effort to make him 
more unlettered than he actually was. What, let me ask, do 
we read in this attempt at the hand of the editors? In my 
opinion this emphasizing of the contrast between the two 
most eminent disciples of the fifth patriarch was at the same 
time the emphasizing of the real character of Zen as in- 
dependent of learning and intellectuality. If Zen is, as its 
followers claim, a ‘special transmission outside the scriptural 


208 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


teaching’, the understanding of it must be possible even for 
the unlettered and unphilosophizing. The greatness of 
Hui-néng as Zen master is all the more enhanced. This was 
in all likelihood the reason why the sixth patriarch was un- 
reasonably and sometimes even dramatically made un- 
lettered. 

Secondly, why was not the patriarchal robe transferred 
beyond Hui-néng? If Hung-jén advised him to keep it with 
him, what does the advice really imply? That the life of the 
possessor of the robe would be threatened points to the fact 
that there was a dispute among the disciples of Hung-jén. 
Did they regard the robe as the symbol of patriarchal 
authority? But what advantages, material or spiritual, 
accrued from the ownership of it? Did the teaching of 
Bodhidharma come now to be believed as the genuine 
transmission of the Buddha? And for that reason did the 
robe really cease to signify anything relative to the truth of 
Zen? If so, when Bodhidharma first declared his special 
mission as teacher of Zen, was he looked upon as a heretic 
and persecuted accordingly? The legend that he was 
poisoned by his rival teachers from India seems to cor- 
roborate this, At all events, the question of the robe is deeply 
connected with the status of Zen teaching among the 
various schools of Buddhism at the time, and also with its 
firmer hold on the popular minds than ever before. 

Thirdly, the secrecy observed in all the transactions 
between Hung-jén and Hui-néng concerning the trans- 
mission of the Dharma naturally arrests our attention. To 
raise the rice-pounder, who is not even an ordained monk, 
to the rank of a patriarch, though only in name, to succeed 
a great master who stands at the head of several hundred 
disciples, seems to be a real cause for envy and jealousy and 
even for hatred. But if one were really enlightened enough 
to take charge of the important position of spiritual leader- 
ship, could not a combined effort of master and pupil 
withstand all the opposition? Perhaps even enlightenment 
could not stand against human passions so irrational and 
elemental. I cannot, however, help imagining an attempt 


oO 209 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


on the part of the biographers of Hui-néng at the dramati- 
zation of the whole scene. I am very likely mistaken, and 
there might have been some historical conditions of which 
we are now ignorant due to the lack of documents. 

Three days after the flight of Hui-néng from the Yellow 
Plum Mountain, the news of what had happened in secret 
became noised abroad throughout the monastery, and a 
party of indignant monks, headed by one named Ming, 
pursued the fugitive, Hui-néng, who, in accordance with 
his master’s instructions, was silently leaving the Brother- 
hood. When he was overtaken by the pursuers while cros- 
sing a mountain-pass far from the monastery, he laid down 
his robe on a rock near by and said to the monk, Ming: 
‘This robe symbolizes our patriarchal faith and is not to 
be carried away by force. Take this along with thee, how- 
ever, if thou so desirest.’ 

Ming tried to lift it, but it was as heavy as a mountain. 
He halted, hesitated, and trembled with awe. At last he 
said: ‘I come here to obtain the faith and not the robe. 
O my brother monk, pray dispel my ignorance.’ 

Said the sixth patriarch: ‘If thou comest for the faith, 
stop all thy hankerings. Think not of good, think not of 
evil, but see what at this moment thy own original face 
doth look like, which thou hadst even prior to thy own 
birth.’ 

Being thus demanded, Ming at once perceived the funda- 
mental truth of things, which hitherto he had sought in 
things without. He now understood everything, as if he had 
taken a cupful of cold water and tasted it to his own satis- 
faction. Out of the immensity of his feeling he was literally 
bathed in tears and perspiration, and most reverently 
approaching the patriarch he saluted him and asked, ‘Be- 
sides this hidden sense as is embodied in these significant 
words, is there anything which is secret?’ 

The patriarch answered: ‘In what I have shown to thee 
there is nothing hidden. If thou reflectest within thyself 
and recognizest thy own face, which was before the world, 
secrecy is in thyself.’ 


210 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


Whatever historical circumstances surrounded Hui-néng 
in those remote days, it is certain that in this statement, ‘to 
see one’s own face even before one was born,’ we find the 
first proclamation of the new message, which was destined 
to unroll a long history of Zen and to make Hui-néng 
really worthy of the patriarchal robe. We can see here what 
a new outlook Hui-néng has succeeded in opening to the 
traditional Indian Zen. In him we do not recognize any- 
thing of Buddhism as far as phraseology goes, which means 
that he opened up his own way of presenting the truth of 
Zen after his original and creative experience. Prior to him 
the Zen experience had some borrowings, either in wording 
or in method, to express itself. To say ‘You are the Buddha’, 
or ‘You and the Buddha are one’, or “The Buddha is living 
in you’, is too stale, too flat, because too abstract and too 
conceptual, They contain deep truth but are not concrete 
nor vivifying enough to rouse our dormant souls from in- 
sensibility. They are filled up too much with abstractions 
and learned phraseology. Hui-néng’s simple-mindedness, 
not spoiled by learning and philosophizing, could grasp the 
truth at first hand. Hence his unusual freshness in the way 
he handled the problem. We may come to this again later. 


Vv 


Hung-jén died, a.p. 675, four years! after the Dharma 
was transmitted to Hui-néng. He was seventy-four years old. 
But Hui-néng never started his mission work until some 
years later, for in accordance with the advice of his master 
he lived a secluded life in the mountains. One day he 
thought that it was time for him to go out in the world. 
He was now thirty-nine years old, and it was in the first 
year of I-féng (A.D. 676) during the T‘ang dynasty. He came 
to Fa-hsing temple in the province of Kuang, where a 

1 There is, however, a variation from five years to fifteen years 
according to different authorities. 

211 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


learned priest, Yin-tsung, was discoursing on the Nirvana 
Sitra. He saw some monks arguing on the fluttering 
pennant; one of them said, “The pennant is an inanimate 
object and it is the wind that makes it flap.’ Against this it 
was remarked by another monk that ‘Both wind and 
pennant are inanimate things, and the flapping is an im- 
possibility.’ A third one protested, “The flapping is due to 
a certain combination of cause and condition’; while a 
fourth one proposed a theory, saying, ‘After all there is no 
flapping pennant, but it is the wind that is moving by itself.’ 
The discussion grew quite animated when Hui-néng in- 
terrupted with the remark, ‘It is neither wind nor pennant 
but your own mind that flaps.’ This at once put a stop to 
the heated argument. The priest-scholar, Yin-tsung, was 
greatly struck by the statement of Hui-néng, so con- 
clusive and authoritative. Finding out very soon who this 
Hui-néng was, Yin-tsung asked him to enlighten him on the 
teaching of the master of Yellow Plum Mountain. The gist 
of Hui-néng’s reply was as follows: 

‘My master had no special instruction to give; he simply 
insisted upon the need of our seeing into our own Nature 
through our own efforts; he had nothing to do with 
meditation, or with deliverance. For whatever can be 
named leads to dualism, and Buddhism is not dualistic. To 
take hold of this non-duality of truth is the aim of Zen. The 
Buddha-Nature of which we are all in possession, and the 
seeing into which constitutes Zen, is indivisible into such 
oppositions as good and evil, eternal and temporal, 
material and spiritual. To see dualism in life is due to con- 
fusion of thought; the wise, the enlightened, see into the 
reality of things unhampered by erroneous ideas.’ 

This was the beginning of Hui-néng’s career as Zen 
master. His influence seems to have been immediate and 
far-reaching. He had many disciples numbering thousands. 
He did not, however, go around preaching and prosely- 
tizing. His activities were confined in his own province in 
the south, and the Pao-lin monastery at T‘sao-ch‘i was his 
headquarters. When the Emperor Kao-tsung learned that 


212 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


Hui-néng succeeded Hung-jén as one of Dharma’s spiritual 
descendants in the faith of Zen, he sent him one of his 
Court officials with an imperial message, but Hui-néng 
refused to come up to the capital, preferring his stay in the 
mountains. The messenger, however, wished to be in- 
structed in the doctrine of Zen, that he might convey it to 
his august master at Court. Said Hui-néng in the main as 
follows : 

“It is a mistake to think that sitting quietly in contem- 
plation is essential to deliverance. The truth of Zen opens 
by itself from within and it has nothing to do with the 
practice of dhyana. For we read in the Vajracchedika that 
those who try to see the Tathagata in one of his special 
attitudes, as sitting or lying, do not understand his spirit, 
and that the Tathagata is designated as Tathagata because 
he comes from nowhere and departs nowhere, and for that 
reason he is the Tathagata. His appearance has no whence, 
and his disappearance no whither, and this is Zen. In Zen, 
therefore, there is nothing to gain, nothing to understand; 
what shall we then do with sitting cross-legged ard prac- 
tising dhyana? Some may think that understanding is 
needed to enlighten the darkness of ignorance, but the 
truth of Zen is absolute in which there is no dualism, no 
conditionality. To speak of ignorance and enlightenment, 
or of Bodhi and Klega (wisdom and passions), as if they 
were two separate objects which cannot be merged in one, 
is not Mahay4nistic. In the Mahay4na every possible form 
of dualism is condemned as not expressing the ultimate 
truth. Everything is a manifestation of the Buddha-Nature, 
which is not defiled in passions, nor purified in enlighten- 
ment. It is above all categories. If you want to see what is 
the nature of your being, free your mind from thought of 
relativity and you will see by yourself how serene it is and 
yet how full of life it is.’ 


While Hui-néng was working for the cause of Zen in 
the South, Shén-hsiu, representing another school, was 
active in the North. Before he was converted into Buddhism 


213 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


he was a learned Confucian and thus destined from the 
start to cut a different figure, compared with his brother- 
disciple, Hui-néng. The Emperor Wu of the T‘ang dynasty 
was one of the devoted followers of Shén-hsiu, and naturally 
around him were gathered a large number of courtiers and 
government officers. When the Emperor Chung-tsung 
came to the throne, A.D. 685, he was all the more treated 
with reverence, and it was Chang-shuo, one of the state 
ministers, who inscribed a biographical sketch and eulogy 
on the memorial stone erected over his grave when he died. 
One of his sermons recorded reads: 


‘The teaching of all the Buddhas 

In one’s own Mind originally exists: 
To seek the Mind without one’s Self, 
Is like running away from the father.’ 


He died in a.p. 706, seven years prior to Hui-néng. 
His school, known as the Northern in contrast to Hui- 
néng’s Southern school, prospered in the North far better 
than the latter did in the South. But when Ma-tsu (died 
788) and Shih-t‘ou (700-790) began their active propa- 
ganda in the South and finally established the foundations 
of Zen teaching, Shén-hsiu’s school failed to find able 
successors and finally disappeared altogether, so that all 
the records we have of their movements come from the 
rival school. It thus came to pass that Hui-néng, and not 
Shén-hsiu, was recognized as the sixth patriarch of Zen 
Buddhism in China. 

The difference between the Southern and the Northern 
school of Zen is one inherent in human mind; if we call the 
one intellectual or intuitional, the other would be regarded 
as pragmatical. The reason why the Southern school is 
known as ‘abrupt’ or ‘instant’ (yugapad) against the 
‘gradual’ kramavrittya school of the North is because it up- 
holds that the coming of enlightenment is instantaneous, 
and does not allow any gradation as there are no stages of 
progress in it; whereas the Northern school emphasizes the 


214 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


process of arriving at enlightenment which is naturally 
gradual, requiring much time and concentration. Hui- 
néng was a great advocate of absolute idealism, while 
Shén-hsiu was a realist and refused to ignore a world of 
particulars where Time rules over all our doings. An idealist 
does not necessarily ignore the objective aspect of reality, 
but his eyes are always fixed at one point which stands by 
itself, and his surveyings are done from this absolute point. 
The doctrine of abruptness is thus the result of looking at 
the multitudinousness of things in absolute unity. All true 
mystics are followers of the ‘abrupt’ school. The flight from 
the alone to the alone is not, and cannot be, a gradual 
process. The teaching of Shén-hsiu is to be heeded as the 
practical advice to those who are actually engaged in the 
‘study of Zen, but it fails to describe the character of the 
experience known as ‘the seeing into one’s own Nature’, 
which was the special message of Hui-néng as distinguished 
from those of the other Buddhist schools. That the school of 
Shén-hsiu could not survive as a branch of Zen was 
natural enough, for Zen could not be anything else but an 
instantaneous act of intuition. As it opens up all of a sud- 
den a world hitherto undreamed of, it is an abrupt and 
discrete leaping from one plane of thought to another. Hsiu 
missed the ultimate object of Zen when he emphasized the 
process to reach the end. As a practical adviser he was 
excellent and full of merit. 

The ideas of instantaneity and graduation in the 
realization of the truth of Zen originally comes from the 
Lankdvatéra (Nanjé’s edition, p. 55), where this distinction 
is made in regard to cleansing one’s mind of its stream of 
ideas and images. According to the Sutra, this cleansing 
is in one sense gradual but in another abrupt or instan- 
taneous. When it is regarded as like the ripening of a fruit, 
the modelling of a vessel, the growing of a plant, or the 
mastering of an art, which takes place gradually and in 
time, it is an act of gradual process; but when it is com- 
parable to a mirror reflecting objects, or to the Alaya re- 
producing all mental images, the cleansing of mind takes 


215 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


place instantaneously. Thus the Sutra recognizes the two 
types of minds: with some the cleansing to a state of en- 
lightenment can be obtained gradually after a long practice 
of meditation, perhaps through many a successive life; but 
to others it may come all of a sudden, even without pre- 
viously conscious efforts. The division of the two schools as 
regards the abrupt realization of enlightenment is based 
not only on the statements in the Sitra but ultimately on 
facts of psychology. The point at issue, however, was not a 
question of time; whether enlightenment took place as an 
act of one moment or not ceased to concern them; for 
the difference now developed into that of their general 
philosophical attitude and outlook towards the fact of 
enlightenment itself. The question of physical time has 
thus turned into that of psychology in its more profound 
aspect. 

When process is emphasized, the end is forgotten, and 
process itself comes to be ideritified with end. When a 
disciple of Shén-hsiu came to Hui-néng to be instructed in 
Zen, he asked what was the teaching of Shén-hsiu, and the 
disciple informed him thus: ‘My master usually teaches us 
to stop the working of our minds and to sit quietly in 
meditation for a long time at a stretch, without lying down.’ 
To this Hui-néng responded, “To stop the working of mind 
and to sit quietly in meditation is a disease and not Zen, 
and there is no profit whatever to be gained from a long 
sitting.’ Then he gave him the following gatha: 


‘While living, one sits up and lies not, 
When dead, one lies and sits not; 

A set of ill-smelling skeleton! 

What is the use of toiling and moiling so?’ 


This shows exactly where Hui-néng stands in relation to his 
rival Shén-hsiu, who is so taken up with the practical details 
of the process of Zen. Those two gathis inscribed on the 
monastery wall at Yellow Plum Mountain while they were 
yet under the tutorship of Hung-jén, are eloquent enough 


216 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


to bring out the characteristic features of the two 
schools.} 

When Hui-néng further asked the monk from the north 
as to the teaching of his teacher in regard to morality 
(fila), meditation (dhyana), and wisdom (prajfid), the monk 
said, ‘According to my master Hsiu, morality consists in 
not doing anything that is bad; wisdom in reverently 
practising all that is good; and meditation in purifying the 
heart.’ Replied Hui-néng: ‘My view is quite different. All 
my teaching issues from the conception of Self-nature, and 
those who assert the existence of anything outside it betray 
their ignorance of its nature. Morality, Meditation, and 
Wisdom—all these are forms of Self-Nature. When there is 
nothing wrong in it, we have morality ; when it is free from 
ignorance, it is wisdom; and when it is not disturbed, it is 
meditation. Have a thorough understanding once for all as 
to the being of Self-Nature, and you know that nothing 
dualistic obtains in it; for here you have nothing to be 
particularly distinguished as enlightenment, or ignorance, 
or deliverance, or knowledge, and yet from this nothingness 
there issues a world of particulars as objects of thought. For 
him who has once had an insight into his own Nature, no 
special posture as a form of meditation is to be recom- 
mended ; everything and anything is good to him, sitting, 
or lying, or standing. He enjoys perfect freedom of spirit, 
he moves along as he feels, and yet he does nothing wrong, 
he is always acting in accord with his Self-Nature, his work 
is play. This is what I call ‘‘the seeing into one’s own 
Nature’; and this seeing is instantaneous as much as the 
working is, for there is no graduating process from one stage 
to another.’ 


1 These accounts, whether truly historical or not, concerning the 
controversy between the two leaders of Zen early in the T‘ang dynasty 
prove how heated was the rivalry between the North and the South. The 
Sermons of the Sixth Patriarch (Fa-pao-t‘an-ching) themselves appear as if 
written with the sole object of refuting the opponents of the ‘abrupt’ 
school. 


217 


VI 


Some of the sermons of the sixth patriarch are preserved 
in the book known as the Platform Siitra on the Treasure of the 
Law (Fa-pao-t‘an-ching). The title ‘Sutra’ has generally been 
given to writings ascribed to the Buddha or those somehow 
personally connected with him, and that a collection of the 
sermons of Hui-néng has been so honoured shows what a 
significant position he occupies in the history of Chinese 
Buddhism. ‘The Platform Sitra’ has a reference to the 
famous ordination platform erected by Gunabhadra, the 
first translator of the Lankdvatara, of the Liu-sung dynasty, 
A.D. 420-479. At the time of the erection during the 
Liang dynasty, as well as later, it was prophesied by 
Chih-yiieh (according to another authority by Para- 
martha) that some years later a Bodhisattva in the flesh 
would be ordained on this platform and deliver sermons 
on the Buddha’s ‘spiritual seal’. Thus the ‘Platform Sitra’ 
means orthodox teaching of the Zen given from this 
platform. 

The sermons here preserved are mere fragments of those 
delivered during the thirty-seven years of Hui-néng’s active 
missionary life. Even of these fragments how much is to be 
regarded as genuine and authoritative is a question to 
which we cannot at present give a definite answer, as the 
book seems to have suffered the vicissitudes of fate, partly 
showing the fact that the Zen message of the sixth patriarch 
was extraordinary in many respects so as to arouse antag- 
onism and misunderstanding among Buddhists. When this 
antagonism later reached its climax, it is reported that the 
book was burned up as against the genuine teaching of 
Buddhism. Except a few sentences and passages, however, 
which can at once be rejected as spurious, we may take the 
Platform Siitra on the whole as expressing the spirit and 
teaching of the sixth patriarch of Zen. 

The principal ideas of Hui-néng, which make him the 


218 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


real Chinese founder of Zen Buddhism, may be summed up 
as follows : 

1. We can say that Zen has come to its own conscious- 
ness by Hui-néng. While Bodhidharma brought it from 
India and successfully transplanted it in China, it did not 
fully realize its special message at the time. More than two 
centuries were needed before it grew aware of itself and knew 
how to express itself in the way native to the Chinese mind; 
the Indian mode in which its original teaching had been 
expressed, as was the case with Bodhidharma and his 
immediate disciples, had to give way as it were to become 
truly Chinese. As soon as this transformation or trans- 
plantation was accomplished in the hands of Hui-néng his 
disciples proceeded at once to work out all its implications. 
The result was what we have as the Zen school of Budd- 
hism. How then did Hui-néng understand Zen? 

According to him Zen was the ‘seeing into one’s own 
Nature’. This is the most significant phrase ever coined in 
the development of Zen Buddhism. Around this Zen is now 
crystallized, and we know where to direct our efforts and 
how to represent it in our consciousness. After this the 
progress of Zen Buddhism was rapid. It is true that this 
phrase occurs in the life of Bodhidharma in the Records 
of the Transmission of the Lamp, but it is in the part of his life 
on which we cannot put much reliance. Even when the 
phrase was actually used by Dharma it was not necessarily 
considered by him the essence of Zen as distinguishing itself 
from other schools of Buddhism. Hui-néng, however, was 
fully aware of its signification, and impressed the idea un- 
equivocally upon the minds of his audience. When he made 
his first declaration of Zen for the benefit of Yin-tsung, the 
statement was quite unmistakable: ‘We talk of seeing into 
our own Nature, and not of practising dhyana or obtaining 
liberation.’ Here we have the gist of Zen, and all his later 
sermons are amplifications of this idea. 

By ‘Nature’ he understood Buddha-Nature, or, more 
particularly from the intellectual point of view, Prajfia. He 
says that this Prajfia is possessed by every one of us, but 


219 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


owing to the confusion of thought we fail to realize it in 
ourselves. Therefore, we must be instructed and properly 
guided by an adept in Zen Buddhism, when we shall open 
a spiritual eye and by ourselves see into the Nature. This 
Nature knows no multiplicity, it is absolute oneness, being 
the same in the ignorant as well as in the wise. The differ- 
ence comes from confusion and ignorance. People talk so 
much, think so much of Prajfia, but fail altogether to 
realize it in their own minds. It is like talking about food 
all day; however much we may talk we forever remain 
hungry. You may explain the philosophy of Sinyata for 
ten thousand years, but so long as you have not yet seen 
into your Nature it is absolutely of no avail. There are 
again some people who regard Zen as consisting in sitting 
quietly with an empty mind devoid of thoughts and 
feelings. Such know not what Prajfia is, what Mind is. It 
fills the universe, and never rests from work. It is free, 
creative, and at the same time it knows itself. It knows all 
in one and one in all. This mysterious working of Prajiia 
issues from your own Nature. Do not depend upon letters 
but let your own Prajfia illumine within yourself. 

2. The inevitable result of it was the ‘abrupt’ teaching of 
the Southern school. The seeing is an instant act as far 
as the mental eye takes in the whole truth at one glance 
—the truth which transcends dualism in all form; it is 
abrupt as far as it knows no gradations, no continuous 
unfolding. Read the following passage from the Platform 
Siitra, in which the essentials of the abrupt doctrine are 
given: 

‘When the abrupt doctrine is understood there is no 
need of disciplining oneself in things external. Only let a 
man always have a right view within his own mind, no 
desires, no external objects will ever defile him. This is the 
seeing into his Nature. O my friends, have no fixed abode 
inside or outside1, and your conduct will be perfectly free 


- } This is a constant refrain in the teaching of the Prajitaparamita 
Siitras—to awaken one’s thought where there is no abode whatever (no 
kvacit pratishtitarh cittarn utpadayitavyam). When Jéshu called on 


220 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


and unfettered. Take away your attachment and your 
walk will know no obstructions whatever... . The ignorant 
will grow wise if they abruptly get an understanding and 
open their hearts to the truth. O my friends, even the 
Buddhas will be like us common mortals when they have no 
enlightenment, and even we mortals will be Buddhas when 
we are enlightened. Therefore we know that all things are 
in our own minds. Why do we not then instantly see into 
our own minds and find there the truth of Suchness? In the 
Siitra on the Moral Conduct of the Bodhisattva we read that we 
are all pure in our Self-Nature, and that when we know our 
own minds we see into this Nature and all attain to Buddha- 
hood. Says the Vimalakirt: Sutra, ‘‘An instant opening leads 
us into the Original Mind.” O my good friends, while 
under my master Jén I realized the truth the moment I 
heard him speak and had an instant [i.e. abrupt] glimpse 
into the true essence of Suchness. This is the reason why I 
now endeavour by means of this doctrine to lead truth- 
seekers to an instant [i.e. abrupt] realization of Bodhi. 
When you by yourselves look into your minds, you perceive 
at once what the Original Nature is... . 

‘Those who know by themselves do not look for anything 
external. If they adhere to the view that liberation comes 
through external aid, through the office of a good, wise 
friend, they are entirely at fault. Why? There is a knower in 
your own mind, and it is this that makes you realize the 
truth by yourselves. When confusion reigns in you and false 
views are entertained, no amount of teaching by others, 
good, wise friends of yours, will be of use for your salvation. 
When, on the other hand, your genuine Prajfia shines 
forth, all your confused thoughts will vanish in an instant. 
Ungo, the latter asked, ‘O you, old wanderer! how is it that you not do 
seek an abiding place for yourself?’ ‘Where is my abiding place?’ ‘There 
is an old temple ruin at the foot of this mountain.’ ‘That is a fitting place 
for your old self,’ responded Jéshu. Later, he came to Shiiyiisan, who 
asked him the same question, saying, ‘O you, old wanderer! why don’t 
you get settled?’ ‘Where is the place for me to get settled?’ “Why, this 
old wanderer doesn’t know even where to get settled for himself.’ Said 


Jéshu, ‘I have been engaged these thirty years in training horses, and 
today I have been kicked around by a donkey!’ 


221 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Knowing thus what your Self-Nature is, you reach Buddha- 
hood by this single understanding, one knowledge.’ 

3. When the seeing into Self-Nature is emphasized and 
intuitive understanding is upheld against learning and 
philosophizing, we know that as one of its logical conclusions 
the old view of meditation begins to be looked down on as 
merely a discipline in mental tranquillization. And this was 
exactly the case with the sixth patriarch. Since the begin- 
ning of Buddhism there have been two currents of thought 
concerning the meaning of meditation: the one was, like 
Arada and Udraka, who were the two teachers of the 
Buddha, to take it for suspending all psychic activities or for 
wiping consciousness clean of all its modes; and the other 
was to regard meditation simply as the most efficacious 
means for coming in touch with the ultimate reality. This 
fundamental difference of views with regard to meditation 
was a cause of the unpopularity at first of Bodhidharma 
among the Chinese Buddhists, scholars, and dhyana- 
masters of the time. It was also a factor of divergence 
between the Niu-t‘ou school of Zen and the orthodox 
teaching of the fourth patriarch, as well as between the 
Northern and the Southern schools of Zen Buddhism after 
the fifth patriarch. Hui-néng, the sixth patriarch, came out 
as a strong advocate of intuitionalism and refused to inter- 
pret the meaning of dhyana statically, as it were. For the 
Mind, according to him, at the highest stage of meditation 
was not a mere being, mere abstraction devoid of content 
and work. He wanted to grasp something which lay at the 
foundation of all his activities mental and physical, and this 
something could not be a mere geometrical point, it must 
be the source of energy and knowledge. Hui-néng did not 
forget that the will was after all the ultimate reality and 
that enlightenment was to be understood as more than in- 
tellection, more than quietly contemplating the truth. The 
Mind or Self-Nature was to be apprehended in the midst of 
its working or functioning. The object of dhyana was thus 
not to stop the working of Self-Nature but to make us 
plunge right into its stream and seize it in the very act. His 


222 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


intuitionalism was dynamic. In the following dialogues both 
Hui-néng and his disciples are still using the older termin- 
ology, but the import of this parley is illustrative of the 
point I want to specify. 

Hsiian-chiao first studied T‘ien-tai philosophy and later 
while reading the Vimalakirti he discovered his Self-Nature. 
Being advised to see the sixth patriarch in order to have his 
experience certified or testified, he came to Tsao-ch‘i. He 
walked round the master three times, and erecting his staff 
straight stood before him. Said the master, ‘Monks are 
supposed to observe three hundred rules of conduct and 
eighty thousand minor ones; whence comest thou, so full of 
pride?’ 

‘Birth-and-death is a matter of grave concern, and time 
waits for nobody!’ said the Tien-tai philosopher. 

‘Why dost thou not grasp that which is birthless and see 
into that which is timeless?’ the master demanded. 

‘Birthless is that which grasps, and timeless is that which 
sees into.’ . 

‘That is so, that is so,” agreed the master. 

When this was over, Hsiian-chiao came to Hui-néng 
again in the full attire of the Buddhisk monk, and rever- 
ently bowing to the master wished to take leave of him. 

Said the master, ‘Why departest thou so soon?’ 

‘There is from the very beginning no such thing as move- 
ment, and then why talkest thou of being soon?’ 

‘Who knows that there is no movement?’ retorted the 
master. 

‘There,’ exclaimed Hsiian-chiao, ‘thou makest a judg- 
ment thyself!’ 

‘Thou truly comprehendest the intent of that which is 
birthless.’ 

‘How could the birthless ever have an intent?’ Hsiian- 
chiao asked. 

‘If there were no intent, who could ever judge?’ 

‘Judgments are made with no intent whatever.’ This was 
the conclusion of Chiao. 

The master then expressed his deep appreciation of 


223 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Hsiian-chiao’s view on the subject, saying, ‘Well thou hast 
said !’ 

Chih-huang was an adept in meditation, which he 
studied under the fifth patriarch. After twenty years’ dis- 
cipline he thought he well understood the purport of 
meditation or samadhi. Hsiian-t‘sé, learning his attainment, 
visited him, and said, ‘What are you doing there?’ ‘I am 
entering into a samadhi.’ ‘You speak of entering, but how 
do you enter into samadhi—with a thought-ful mind or 
with a thought-less mind? If you say with a thought-less 
mind, all non-sentient beings such as plants or bricks could 
attain samadhi. If you say with a thought-ful mind, all 
sentient beings could attain it.’ ‘When I enter into samadhi,’ 
said Chih-huang, ‘I am not conscious of either being 
thought-ful or being thought-less.’ ‘If you are conscious of 
neither, you are right in samadhi all the while; why do you 
then talk at all of entering into it or coming out of it? If, how- 
ever, there is really entering or coming out, it is not Great 
Samadhi.’ Chih-huang did not know how to answer. After 
a while he asked who was Hsiian-t‘sé’s teacher and what was 
his understanding of samadhi. Said Hsiian-t‘sé, ‘Hui-néng 
is my teacher, and according to him [the ultimate truth] 
lies mystically serene and perfectly quiet; substance and 
function are not to be separated, they are of one Suchness. 
The five skandhas are empty in their nature, and the six 
sense-objects have no reality. [The truth knows of} neither 
entering nor going out, neither being tranquil nor dis- 
turbed. Dhyana in essence has no fixed abode. Without 
attaching yourself to an abode, be serene in dhy4dna. 
Dhyana in essence is birthless; without attaching yourself 
to the thought of birth [-and-death], think in dhyana. Have 
your mind like unto space and yet have no thought of 
space.’ Thus learning of the sixth patriarch’s view on 
samadhi or dhyana, Chih-huang came to the master himself 
and asked to be further enlightened. Said the patriarch: 
‘What Hsiian-t‘sé told you is true. Have your mind like 
unto space and yet entertain in it no thought of emptiness. 
Then the truth will have its full activity unimpeded. Every 


224 


HISTORY OF ZEN 


movement of yours will come out of an innocent heart, and 
the ignorant and the wise will have an equal treatment in 
your hands. Subject and object will lose their distinction, 
and essence and appearance will be of one suchness. [When 
a world of absolute oneness is thus realized,] you have 
attained to eternal samadhi.’ 

To make the position of the sixth patriarch on the subject 
of meditation still clearer and more definite, let me quote 
another incident from his Platform Siitra. A monk once made 
reference to a gatha composed by Wo-luan which read as 
follows : 


‘I, Wo-luan, know a device 

Whereby to blot out all my thoughts: 

The objective world no more stirs the mind, 
And daily matures my Enlightenment!’ 


Hearing this, the sixth patriarch remarked : “That is no en- 
lightenment but leads one into a state of bondage. Listen 
to my gathd@: 


‘I, Hui-néng, know no device, 

My thoughts are not suppressed : 

The objective world ever stirs the mind, 

And what is the use of maturing Enlightenment?’ 


These will be sufficient to show that Hui-néng, the sixth 
patriarch, was on the one hand no quietist, nor nihilist 
advocating the doctrine of absolute emptiness, while on 
the other hand he was no idealist either, in the sense of 
denying an objective world. His dhyana was full of action, 
yet above a world of particulars, so long as it was not carried 
away by it and in it. 

4. Hui-néng’s method of demonstrating the truth of Zen 
was purely Chinese and not Indian. He did not resort to 
abstract terminology nor to romantic mysticism. The 
method was direct, plain, concrete, and highly practical. 
When the monk Ming came to him and asked for in- 
struction, he said, ‘Show me your original face before you 


P 225, 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


were born.’ Is not the statement quite to the point? No 
philosophic discourse, no elaborate reasoning, no mystic 
imagery, but a direct unequivocal dictum. In this the sixth 
patriarch cut the first turf and his disciples quickly and 
efficiently followed in his steps. Notice how brilliantly 
Lin-chi made use of this method in his sermon on a ‘true 
man of no title’. (See the Introduction.) 

To give another instance. When Hui-néng saw Huai- 
jang, of Nan-yiieh, he said, ‘Whence comest thou?’ which 
was followed by ‘What is it that so cometh?’ It took Huai- 
jang eight long years to answer the question satisfactorily. 
Afterwards this way of questioning became almost an 
established form of greeting with Zen masters. Nan-yiian 
asked a newly arrived monk, ‘Whence comest thou?’ ‘I 
am from Han-shang.’ Said the master, ‘You are at fault as 
much as I am.’ Hsiang-yén asked San-shéng, ‘Whence 
comest thou?’ ‘From Lin-chi.’ ‘Bringest thou his sword?’ 
San-shéng took up his seat-cloth (tso-chu) and struck Hsiang- 
yén across his mouth and went away. The Venerable 
Ch‘en asked a monk, ‘Whence comest thou?’ ‘From Yang- 
shan.’ ‘You art a liar!’ was the verdict of the master. An- 
other time he asked another monk, ‘Whence comest thou?’ 
‘From West of the River, sir.’ ‘How many sandals hast thou 
worn out?’ This monk had evidently a gentler treatment. 

This difference of method between the Indian and the 
Chinese often raised the question as to the difference, if 
there be, between the “Tathagata Dhyana’ and the 
‘Patriarchal Dhyana’. For instance, when Hsiang-yén 
showed his song of poverty to Yang-shan, the latter said, 
“You understand the Tathagata Dhyana but not yet the 
Patriarchal Dhyana.’ When asked about the difference, 
Mu-chou replied, ‘The green mountains are green moun- 
tains, and the white clouds are white clouds.’ 


226 


Vit 


Hui-néng died at the age of seventy-six in a.D. 713, while 
the T‘ang dynasty was enjoying its halcyon days and 
Chinese culture reached the highest point in its history. A 
little over one hundred years after the passing of the sixth 
patriarch, Liu Tsung-yiian, one of the most brilliant 
literati in the history of Chinese literature, wrote a memorial 
inscription on his tombstone when he was honoured by the 
Emperor Hsien-tsung with the posthumous title, Great 
Mirror (tat-chien), and in this we read: ‘In a sixth trans- 
mission after Dharma there was Tai-chien. He was first 
engaged in menial labour and servile work. Just a few words 
from the master were enough and he at once understood 
the deepest meaning conveyed in them. The master was 
greatly impressed, and finally conferred on him an insignia 
of faith. After that he hid himself in the Southern district; 
nobody heard of him again for sixteen years, when he 
thought the time was ripe for him to come out of the 
seclusion. He was settled at T‘sao-ch‘i! and began to teach. 
The number of disciples is said once to have reached several 
thousands. 

‘According to his doctrine, non-doing is reality, emptiness 
is the truth, and the ultimate meaning of things is vast and 
immovable. He taught that human nature in its beginning 
as well as in the end is thoroughly good and does not re- 
quire any artificial weeding-out, for it has its root in that 
which is serene. The Emperor Chung-tsung heard of him 
and sent his courtier twice asking him to appear at Court, 
but failed to get him out. So the Emperor had his words 
instead which he took for his spiritual guidance. The 
teaching [of the sixth patriarch] in detail is generally 
accessible today; all those who talk at all about Zen find 
their source of information in T“sao-ch‘i.’ 

1 This is the name of the place where Hui-néng had his Zen head- 
quarters. 

227 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


After Hui-néng Zen was split up into several schools, 
two of which have survived even down to this day, in China 
as well as in Japan. The one represented by Hsing-szu, of 
Ch‘ing-yiian (died 740), continues now as the S6té (T‘sao- 
tung) school of Zen, and the other, coming down the line 
of Huai-jang, of Nan-yiieh (677-744), is now represented 
by the Rinzai (Lin-chi) school. Though much modified in 
various aspects, the principle and spirit of Zen Buddhism is 
still alive as it was in the days of the sixth patriarch, and 
as one of the great spiritual heritages of the East it is still 
wielding its unique influence, especially among the cul- 
tured people in Japan. 


228 


ON SATORI—THE REVELATION OF A 
NEW TRUTH IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


I 


|e essence of Zen Buddhism consists in acquiring a new 
viewpoint of looking at life and things generally. By this I 
mean that if we want to get into the inmost life of Zen, we 
must forgo all our ordinary habits of thinking which control 
our everyday life, we must try to see if there is any other 
way of judging things, or rather if our ordinary way is 
always sufficient to give us the ultimate satisfaction of our 
spiritual needs. If we feel dissatisfied somehow with this 
life, if there is something in our ordinary way of living that 
deprives us of freedom in its most sanctified sense, we must 
endeavour to find a way somewhere which gives us a sense 
of finality and contentment. Zen proposes to do this for us 
and assures us of the acquirement of a new point of view in 
which life assumes a fresher, deeper, and more satisfying 
aspect. This acquirement, however, is really and naturally 
the greatest mental cataclysm one can go through with in 
life. It is no easy task, it is a kind of fiery baptism, and one 
has to go through the storm, the earthquake, the over- 
throwing of the mountains, and the breaking in pieces of the 
rocks. 

This acquiring of a new point of view in our dealings with 
life and the world is popularly called by Japanese Zen 
students ‘satori’ (wu in Chinese). It is really another name 
for Enlightenment (annuttara-samyak-sambodhi), which is the 
word used by the Buddha and his Indian followers ever 
since his realization under the Bodhi-tree by the River 
Nairafijana. There are several other phrases in Chinese 
designating this spiritual experience, each of which has a 
special connotation, showing tentatively how this pheno- 
menon is interpreted. At all events there is no Zen without 


229 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


satori, which is indeed the Alpha and Omega of Zen Budd- 
hism. Zen devoid of satori is like a sun without its light and 
heat. Zen may lose all its literature, all its monasteries, 
and all its paraphernalia; but as long as there is satori in 
it it will survive to eternity. I want to emphasize this most 
fundamental fact concerning the very life of Zen; for there 
are some even among the students of Zen themselves who 
are blind to this central fact and are apt to think when Zen 
has been explained away logically or psychologically, or as 
one of the Buddhist philosophies which can be summed 
up by using highly technical and conceptual Buddhist 
phrases, Zen is exhausted, and there remains nothing 
in it that makes it what it is. But my contention is, the 
life of Zen begins with the opening of satori (kai wu in 
Chinese). 

Satori may be defined as an intuitive looking into the 
nature of things in contradistinction to the analytical or 
Jogical understanding of it. Practically, it means the un- 
folding of a new world hitherto unperceived in the con- 
fusion of a dualistically-trained mind. Or we may say that 
with satori our entire surroundings are viewed from quite 
an unexpected angle of perception. Whatever this is, the 
world for those who have gained a satori is no more the old 
world as it used to be; even with all its flowing streams and 
burning fires, it is never the same one again. Logically 
stated, all its opposites and contradictions are united and 
harmonized into a consistent organic whole. This is a 
mystery and a miracle, but according to the Zen masters 
such is being performed every day. Satori can thus be had 
only through our once personally experiencing it. 

Its semblance or analogy in a more or less feeble and 
fragmentary way is gained when a difficult mathematical 
problem is solved, or when a great discovery is made, or 
when a sudden means of escape is realized in the midst of 
most desperate complications; in short, when one exclaims 
‘Eureka! Eureka!’ But this refers only to the intellectual 
aspect of satori, which is therefore necessarily partial and 
incomplete and does not touch the very foundations of life 


230 


SATORI 


considered one indivisible whole. Satori as the Zen ex- 
perience must be concerned with the entirety of life. For 
what Zen proposes to do is the revolution, and the re- 
valuation as well, of oneself as a spiritual unity. The solving 
of a mathematical problem ends with the solution, it does 
not affect one’s whole life. So with all other particular 
questions, practical or scientific, they do not enter the basic 
life-tone of the individual concerned. But the opening of 
satori is the remaking of life itself. When it is genuine—for 
there are many simulacra of it—its effects on one’s moral 
and spiritual life are revolutionary, and they are so en- 
hancing, purifying, as well as exacting. When a master was 
asked what constituted Buddhahood, he answered, ‘The 
bottom of a pail is broken through.’ From this we can: see 
what a complete revolution is produced by this spiritual 
experience. The birth of a new man is really cataclysmic. 

In the psychology of religion this spiritual enhancement 
of one’s whole life is called ‘conversion’. But as the term is 
generally used by Christian converts, it cannot be applied 
in its strict sense to the Buddhist experience, especially to 
that of the Zen followers; the term has too affective or 
emotional a shade to take the place of satori, which is above 
all noetic. The general tendency of Buddhism is, as we know, 
more intellectual than emotional, and its doctrine of En- 
lightenment distinguishes it sharply from the Christian 
view of salvation; Zen as one of the Mahayana schools 
naturally shares a large amount of what we may call 
transcendental intellectualism, which does not issue in 
logical dualism. When poetically or figuratively ex- 
pressed, satori is ‘the opening of the mind-flower’, or ‘the 
removing of the bar’, or ‘the brightening up of the mind- 
works’. 

All these tend to mean the clearing up of a passage which 
has been somehow blocked, preventing the free, unob- 
structed operation of a machine or a full display of the 
inner works. With the removal of the obstruction, a new 
vista opens before one, boundless in expanse and reaching 
the end of time. As life thus feels quite free in its activity, 


231 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


which was not the case before the awakening, it now enjoys 
itself to the fullest extent of its possibilities, to attain which 
is the object of Zen discipline. This is often taken to be 
equivalent to ‘vacuity of interest and poverty of purpose’. 
But according to the Zen masters the doctrine of non- 
achievement concerns itself with the subjective attitude of 
mind which goes beyond the limitations of thought. It 
does not deny ethical ideals, nor does it transcend them; it 
is simply an inner state of consciousness without reference 
to its objective consequences. 


II 


The coming of Bodhi-dharma (Bodai-daruma in 
Japanese, P‘u-ti Ta-mo in Chinese) to China early in the 
sixth century was simply to introduce this satori element 
into the body of Buddhism, whose advocates were then so 
engrossed in subtleties of philosophical discussion or in the 
mere literary observance of rituals and disciplinary rules. 
By the ‘absolute transmission of the spiritual seal’, which 
was claimed by the first patriarch, is meant the opening of 
satori, obtaining an eye to see into the spirit of the Buddhist 
teaching. 

The sixth patriarch, Yené (Hui-néng), was distinguished 
because of his upholding the satori aspect of dhyana 
against the mere mental tranquillization of the Northern 
school of Zen under the leadership of Jinshu (Shén-hsiu). 
Baso (Ma-tsu), Obaku (Huang-po), Rinzai (Lin-chi), and 
all the other stars illuminating the early days of Zen in the 
T‘ang dynasty were advocates of satori. Their life-activities 
were unceasingly directed towards the advancement of 
this ; and as one can readily recognize, they so differed from 
those merely absorbed in contemplation or the practising of 
dhyana so called. They were strongly against quietism, 
declaring its adherents to be purblind and living in the cave 
of darkness. Before we go on it is advisable, therefore, to 


232 


SATORI 


have this point clearly understaod so that we leave no 
doubt as to the ultimate purport of Zen, which is by no 
means wasting one’s life away in a trance-inducing practice, 
but consists in seeing into the life of one’s being or opening 
an eye of satori. 

There is in Japan a book going under the title of Six 
Essays by Shoshitsu (that is, by Bodhidharma, the first 
patriarch of Zen) ; the book contains no doubt some of the 
sayings of Dharma, but most of the Essays are not his; they 
were probably composed during the T‘ang dynasty when 
Zen Buddhism began to make its influence more generally 
felt among the Chinese Buddhists. The spirit, however, 
pervading the book is in perfect accord with the principle 
of Zen. One of the Essays entitled ‘Kechimyakuron’, or 
“Treatise on the Lineage of Faith’, discusses the question of 
Chien-hsing,1 or satori, which, according to the author, 
constitutes the essence of Zen Buddhism. The following 
Passages are extracts. 

‘If you wish to seek the Buddha, you ought to see into 
your own Nature (hsing) ; for this Nature is the Buddha him- 
self. If you have not seen into your own Nature, what is the 
use of thinking of the Buddha, reciting the Sutras, observing 
a fast, or keeping the precepts? By thinking of the Buddha, 
your cause [i.e. meritorious deed] may bear fruit ; by recit- 
ing the Siitras your intelligence may grow brighter; by 
keeping the precepts you may be born in the heavens; by 


1 Hsing means nature, character, essence, soul, or what is innate to 
one. ‘Seeing into one’s Nature’ is one of the set phrases used by the Zen 
masters, and is in fact the avowed object of all Zen discipline. Satori is 
its more popular expression. When one gets into the inwardness of 
things, there is satori. This latter, however, being a broad term, can be 
used to designate any kind of a thorough understanding, and it is only in 
Zen that it has a restricted meaning. In this article I have used the term 
as the most essential thing in the study of Zen; for ‘seeing into one’s 
Nature’ suggests the idea that Zen has something concrete and sub- 
stantial which requires being seen into by us. This is misleading, though 
satori too I admit is a vague and naturally ambiguous word. For ordinary 
purposes, not too strictly philosophical, satori will answer, and whenever 
chten-hsing is referred to it means this: the opening of the mental eye. As 
to the sixth patriarch’s view on ‘seeing into one’s Nature’, see above under 
History of Zen Buddhism. 


233 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


practising charity you may be rewarded abundantly ; but 
as to seeking the Buddha, you are far away from him. If 
your Self is not yet clearly comprehended, you ought to see 
a wise teacher and get a thorough understanding as to the 
root of birth-and-death. One who has not seen into one’s 
own Nature is not to be called a wise teacher. 

‘When this [seeing into one’s own Nature] is not attained, 
one cannot escape from the transmigration of birth-and- 
death, however well one may be versed in the study of the 
sacred scriptures in twelve divisions. No time will ever come 
to one to get out of the sufferings of the triple world. 
Anciently there was a Bhikshu Zensh6 (Shan-hsing!) who 
was capable of reciting all the twelve divisions of scriptures, 
yet he could not save himself from transmigration, because 
he had no insight into his own Nature. If this was the 
case even with Zenshé, how about those moderners who, 
being able to discourse only on a few Sitras and Sastras, 
regard themselves as exponents of Buddhism? They are 
truly simple-minded ones. When Mind is not understood 
it is absolutely of no avail to recite and discourse on idle 
literature. If you want to seek the Buddha, you ought to see 
into your own Nature, which is the Buddha himself. The 
Buddha is a free man—a man who neither works nor 
achieves. If, instead of seeing into your own Nature, you 
turn away and seek the Buddha in external things, you will 
never get at him. 

“The Buddha is your own Mind, make no mistake to 
bow (to external objects]. ““Buddha” is a Western word, 
and in this country it means “enlightened nature”; and 
by “enlightened” is meant “‘spiritually enlightened”’. It is 
one’s own spiritual Nature in enlightenment that responds 
to the external world, comes in contact with objects, raises 
the eyebrows, winks the eyelids, and moves the hands and 
legs. This Nature is the Mind, and the Mind is the Buddha, 

* According to the Mahaparinirvana-siltra, translated into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksha, a.p. 423, Vol. XX XIII, he was one of the three sons of 


the Buddha while he was still a Bodhisattava. He was most learned in 


all Buddhist lore, but his views tended to be nihilistic and he finally fell 
into hell. 


234 


SATORI 


and the Buddha is the Way, and the Way is Zen. This 
simple word, Zen, is beyond the comprehension both of the 
wise and the ignorant. To see directly into one’s original 
Nature, this is Zen. Even if you are well learned in hundreds 
of the Satras and Sastras, you still remain an ignoramus in 
Buddhism when you have not yet seen into your original 
Nature. Buddhism is not there [in mere learning]. The 
highest truth is unfathomably deep, is not an object of 
talk or discussion, and even the canonical texts have no 
way to bring it within our reach. Let us once see into our 
own original Nature and we have the truth, even when we 
are quite illiterate, not knowing a word.... 

“Those who have not seen into their own Nature may 
reach the Sitras, think of the Buddha, study long, work 
hard, practise religion throughout the six periods of the 
day, sit for a long time and never lie down for sleep, and 
may be wide in learning and well informed in all things; 
and they may believe that all this is Buddhism. All the 
Buddhas in successive ages only talk of seeing into one’s 
Nature. All things are impermanent; until you get an in- 
sight into your Nature, do not say “I have perfect know- 
ledge’’. Such is really committing a very grave crime. 
Ananda, one of the ten great disciples of the Buddha, was 
known for his wide information, but did not have any in- 
sight into Buddhahood, because he was so bent on gaining 
information only... .’ ; 


The sixth patriarch, Hui-néng (YenG), insists on this in a 
most unmistakable way when he answers the question: ‘As 
to your commission from the fifth patriarch of Huang- 
mei, how do you direct and instruct others in it?’ The 
answer was, ‘No direction, no instruction there is; we 
speak only of seeing into one’s Nature and not of practising 
dhyana and seeking deliverance thereby.’ Elsewhere they 
are designated as the ‘confused’ and ‘not worth consulting 
with’; they that are empty-minded and sit quietly, having 
no thoughts whatever ; whereas ‘even ignorant ones, if they 
all of a sudden realize the truth and open their mental eyes, 


235 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


are, after all, wise men and may attain even to Buddha- 
hood’. Again, when the patriarch was told of the method of 
instruction adopted by the masters of the Northern school 
of Zen, which consisted in stopping all mental activities, 
quietly absorbed in contemplation, and in sitting cross- 
legged for the longest while at a stretch, he declared such 
practices to be abnormal and not at all to the point, being 
far from the truth of Zen, and added this stanza which was 
quoted elsewhere: 


‘While living, one sits up and lies not, 
When dead, one lies and sits not; 

A set of ill-smelling skeleton ! 

What is the use of toiling and moiling so?’ 


When at Demboin, Baso used to sit cross-legged all day 
and meditating. His master, Nangaku Yejo (Nan-yiieh 
Huai-jang, 677-744), saw him and asked: 

‘What seekest thou here thus sitting cross-legged ?’ 

‘My desire is to become a Buddha.’ 

Thereupon the master took up a piece of brick and 
began to polish it hard on a stone near by. 

‘What workest thou on so, my master?’ asked Baso. 

‘I am trying to turn this into a mirror.’ 

‘No amount of polishing will make a mirror of the brick, 
sir.’ 

‘If so, no amount of sitting cross-legged as thou doest will 
make of thee a Buddha,’ said the master. 

“What shall I have to do then?’ 

‘It is like driving a cart; when it moveth not, wilt thou 
whip the cart or the ox?” 

Baso made no answer. 

The master continued: ‘Wilt thou practise this sitting 
cross-legged in order to attain dhyana or to attain Buddha- 
hood? If it is dhyana, dhyana does not consist in sitting or 
lying ; if it is Buddhahood, the Buddha has no fixed forms. 
As he has no abiding place anywhere, no one can take hold 
of him, nor can he be let go. If thou seekest Buddhahood by 


236 


SATORI 


thus sitting cross-legged, thou murderest him. So long as 
thou freest thyself not from sitting so,} thou never comest 
to the truth.’ 

These are all plain statements, and no doubts are left 
as to the ultimate end of Zen, which is not sinking oneself 
into a state of torpidity by sitting quietly after the fashion 
of a Hindu saint and trying to exclude all the mental 
ripplings that seem to come up from nowhere, and after 
a while pass away—where nobody knows. These pre- 
liminary remarks will help the reader carefully to consider 
the following ‘Questions and Answers’ (known as Mondé 
in Japanese) ; for they will illustrate my thesis that Zen aims 
at the opening of satori, or at acquiring a new point of view 
as regards life and the universe. The Zen masters, as we see 
below, are always found trying to avail themselves of every 
apparently trivial incident of life in order to make the 
disciples’ minds flow into a channel hitherto altogether un- 
perceived. It is like picking a hidden lock, the flood of new 
experiences gushes forth from the opening. It is again like 
the clock’s striking the hours; when the appointed time 
comes it clicks, and the whole percussion of sounds is re- 
leased. The mind seems to have something of this mechan- 
ism; when a certain moment is reached, a hitherto closed 
screen is lifted, an entirely new vista opens up, and the 
tone of one’s whole life thereafter changes. This mental 
clicking or opening is called satori by the Zen masters and 
is insisted upon as the main object of their discipline. 

In this connection the reader will find the following 
words of Meister Eckhart quite illuminative: ‘Upon this 
matter a heathen sage hath a fine saying in speech with 
another sage: “‘I become aware of something in me which 
flashes upon my reason. I perceive of it that it is something, 


1 That is, from the idea that this sitting cross-legged leads to Buddha- 
hood. From the earliest periods of Zen in China, the quietest tendency 
has been running along the whole history with the intellectual tendency 
which emphasizes the satori element. Even today these currents are re- 
presented to a certain extent by the Sdt6 on the one hand and the 
Rinzai on the other, while each has its characteristic features of excel- 
lence. My own standpoint is that of the intuitionalist and not that of the 
quietest ; for the essence of Zen lies in the attainment of satori. 


237 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


but what it is I cannot perceive. Only meseems that, could 
I conceive it, I should comprehend all truth”’.’? 


Il 


The records quoted below do not always give the whole 
history of the mental development leading up to a satori; 
that is, from the first moment when the disciple came to the 
master until the last moment of realization, with all the 
intermittent psychological vicissitudes which he had to go 
through. The examples are just to show that the whole 
Zen discipline gains meaning when there takes place this 
turning of the mental hinge to a wider and deeper world. 
For when this wise and deeper world opens, everyday life, 
even the most trivial thing of it, grows loaded with the 
truths of Zen. On the one hand, therefore, satori is a most 
prosaic and matter-of-fact thing, but on the other hand, 
when it is not understood it is something of a mystery. But 
after all, is not life itself filled with wonders, mysteries, and 
unfathomabilities, far beyond our discursive understand- 
ing? 

A monk asked Jéshu (Chao-chou Tsung-shén, 778- 
897) to be instructed in Zen. Said the master, ‘Have you 
had your breakfast or not?’ ‘Yes, master, I have,’ answered 
the monk. ‘If so, have your dishes washed,’ was an im- 
mediate response, which, it is said, at once opened the 
monk’s mind to the truth of Zen. 

This is enough to show what a commonplace thing 
satori is; but to see what an important role this most trivial 
incident of life plays in Zen, it will be necessary to add 
some remarks which were made by the masters, and 
through these the reader may have a glimpse into the con- 
tent of satorii Ummon (Yiin-mén Wén-yen, died 949), 
who lived a little later than Jéshu, commented on him: 


? W. Lehmann, Meister Eckhart. Gdttingen, 1917, p. 243. Quoted by 
Professor Rudolf Otto in his The Idea of the Holy, p. 201. 


238 


SATORI 


“Was there any special instruction in the remark of Jéshu, 
or not? If there was, what was it? If there was not, what 
satori was it that the monk attained?’ Later, Umpé 
Monyetsu (Yiin-feng Wén-ytieh, 997-1062) made a re- 
tort, saying: “The great master Ummon does not know 
what is what, hence this comment of his. It was altogether 
unnecessary, it was like painting legs to the snake and 
growing a beard to the eunuch. My view differs from his: 
that monk who seems to have attained a satori goes to hell 
as straight as an arrow!’ 

Now, what does this all mean—Jéshu’s remark about 
washing the dishes, the monk’s attainment of satori, 
Ummon’s alternatives, and Monyetsu’s assurance? Are 
they speaking against each other? Is this much ado about 
nothing? This is where Zen is difficult to grasp and at the 
same time difficult to explain. Let me add a few more 
queries. How did Jéshu make the monk’s eye open by such 
a prosaic remark? Did the remark have any hidden mean- 
ing, however, which happened to coincide with the mental 
tone of the monk? How was the monk so mentally pre- 
pared for the final stroke of the master, whose service was 
just pressing the button, as it were? Nothing of satori is so 
far gleaned from washing the dishes ; we have to look some- 
where else for the truth of Zen. At any rate, we could not 
say that Joshu had nothing to do with the monk’s reali- 
zation. Hence Ummon’s remark, which is somewhat 
enigmatic, yet to the point. As to Monyetsu’s comment, 
it is what is technically known as Nenro, ‘handling and 
playing’, or ‘playful criticism’. He appears to be making a 
disparaging remark about Ummon, but in truth he is 
joining hands with his predecessors. 

Tokusan (Teh-shan Hsiian-chien, 779-865) was a great 
scholar of the Diamond Siitra (Vajracchedika). Learning that 
there was such a thing as Zen ignoring all the written 
scriptures and directly laying hands on one’s soul, he came 
to Ryutan (Lung-t‘an) to be instructed in the doctrine. One 
day Tokusan was sitting outside trying to see into the 
mystery of Zen. Ryutan said, ‘Why don’t you come in?’ 


239 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Replied Tokusan, ‘It is pitch dark.’ A candle was lighted 
and handed over to Tokusan. When the latter was at the 
point of taking it, Ryutan suddenly blew the light out, 
whereupon the mind of Tokusan was opened.? 

Hyakujo (Pai-chang Huai-hai, 724-814) one day went 
out attending his master Baso (Ma-tsu). A flock of wild 
geese was seen flying and Baso asked : 

‘What are they?’ 

‘They are wild geese, sir.’ 

‘Whither are they flying?’ 

‘They have flown away, sir.’ 

Baso, abruptly taking hold of Hyakujo’s nose, gave it a 
twist. Overcome with pain, Hyakujo cried aloud: ‘Oh! 
Oh!” 

“You say they have flown away,’ Baso said, ‘but all the 
same they have been here from the very beginning.’ 

This made Hyakujo’s back wet with cold perspiration. 
He had satori. 

Is there any connection in any possible way between 
the washing of the dishes and the blowing out of a candle 
and the twisting of the nose? We must say with Ummon: 
If there is none, how could they all come to the realization 
of the truth of Zen? If there is, what inner relationship is 
there? What is this satori? What new point of viewing things 
is this? So long as our observation is limited to those con- 
ditions which preceded the opening of a disciple’s eye we 
cannot perhaps fully comprehend where lies the ultimate 
issue. They are matters of everyday occurrence, and if Zen 
lies objectively among them, every one of us is a master 
before we are told of it. This is partly true inasmuch as 
there is nothing artificially constructed in Zen, but if the 
nose is to be really twisted or the candle blown out in order 


1In Claud Field’s Mystics and Saints of Islam, p. 25, we read under 
Hasan Basri: “Another time I saw a child coming toward me holding a 
lighted torch in his hand, “Where have you brought the light from?” I 
asked him. He immediately blew it out, and said to me, ““O Hasan, tell 
me where it is gone, and I will tell you whence I fetched it’’.’ Of course 
the parallel is here only apparent, for Tokusan got his enlightenment 
from quite a different source than the mere blowing out of the candle. 
Still, the parallel in itself is interesting enough to be quoted here. 


240 


SATORI 


to take the scale off the eye, our attention must be directed 
inwardly to the working of our minds, and it will be there 
where we are to take hold of the hidden relation existing 
between the flying geese and the washed dishes and the 
blown-out candle and any other happenings that weave 
out infinitely variegated patterns of human life. 

Under Daiye (Tai-hui, 1089-1163), the great Zen 
teacher of the Sung dynasty, there was a monk named 
Dodken (Tao-ch‘ien) who had spent many years in the 
study of Zen, but who had not yet delved into its secrets, 
if there were any. He was discouraged when he was sent 
on an errand to a distant city. A trip requiring half a year 
to finish would surely be a hindrance rather than a help to 
his study. Sogen (Tsung-yiian), one of his fellow-monks, 
took pity on him and said: ‘I will accompany you on this 
trip and do all that I can for you. There is no reason why 
you cannot go on with your meditation even while travel- 
ling.’ They started together. 

One evening Doken despairingly implored his friend to 
assist him in the solution of the mystery of life. The friend 
said: ‘I am willing to help you in every way, but there are 
five things in which I cannot be of any help to you. These 
you must look after yourself.’ Déken expressed the desire to 
know what they were. ‘For instance,’ said the friend, ‘when 
you are hungry or thirsty, my eating of food or drinking 
does not fill your stomach. You must drink and eat yourself. 
When you want to respond to the calls of nature, you must 
take care of them yourself, for I cannot be of any use to you. 
And then it will be nobody else but yourself that will carry 
this corpse of yours [i.e. the body] along this highway.’ This 
remark at once opened the mind of the truth-seeking monk, 
who, transported with his discovery, did not know how to 
express his joy. Sogen now told him that his work was done 
and that his further companionship would have no meaning 
after this. So they parted company and Doken was left 
alone to continue the trip. After the half-year, Doken came 
back to his own monastery. Daiye, his teacher, happened to 
meet him on his way down the mountain, and made the 


Q 241 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


following remark, ‘This time he knows it all.” What was it, 
one may remark, that flashed through Déken’s mind when 
his friend gave him such matter-of-fact advice? 

Kydégen (Hsian-yen) was a disciple of Hyakujo. After 
the master’s death he went to Yisan (Wei-shan, 771-853) 
who was a senior disciple of Hyakujo. Yisan asked him: 
‘I am told that you have been under my late master 
Hyakujo, and also that you have remarkable intelligence; 
but the understanding of Zen through this medium 
necessarily ends in intellectual and analytical compre- 
hension, which is not of much use. Yet you may have had 
an insight into the truth of Zen. Let me have your view as 
to the reason of birth-and-death; that is, as to your own 
being before your parents gave birth to you.’ 

Thus asked, Kydgen did not know how to reply. He 
retired into his own room and assiduously made research 
among his notes which he had taken of the sermons given by 
his late master. He failed to come across a suitable passage 
he might present as his own view. He returned to Yisan 
and implored him to teach in the faith of Zen. But Yisan 
said : ‘I really have nothing to impart to you, and if I tried 
to do so you may have occasion to make me an object of 
ridicule later on. Besides, whatever I can instruct you is my 
own and will never be yours.’ Kyégen was disappointed 
and considered his senior disciple unkind. Finally he came 
to the decision to burn up all his notes and memorandums 
which were of no help to his spiritual welfare, and, retiring 
altogether from the world, to spend the rest of his life in 
solitude and simplicity in accordance with the Buddhist 
rules. He reasoned : ‘What is the use of studying Buddhism, 
so difficult to comprehend and too subtle to receive in- 
structions from another? I shall be a plain homeless monk, 
troubled with no desire to master things too deep for 
thought.’ He left Yisan and built a hut near the tomb of 
Chu (Hui-chung), the National Master, at Nan-yang. One 
day he was weeding and sweeping the ground, and when a 
piece of rock brushed away struck a bamboo, the sound 
produced by the percussion unexpectedly elevated his 


242 


SATORI 


mind to a state of satori. The question proposed by Yisan 
became transparent; his joy was boundless, he felt as if 
meeting again his lost parent. Besides, he came to realize 
the kindness of his abandoned senior brother monk who 
refused him instruction. For he now knew that this would 
not have happened to him if Yisan had been unkind 
enough to explain things for him. 

Below is the verse he composed soon after his achieve- 
ment, from which we may get an idea of his satori: 


“One stroke has made me forget all my previous knowledge, 
No artificial discipline is at all needed; 

In every movement I uphold the ancient way, 

And never fall into the rut of mere quietism ; 

Wherever I walk no traces are left, 

And my senses are not fettered by rules of conduct; 
Everywhere those who have attained to the truth, 

All declare this to be of the highest order.’ 


IV 


There is something, we must admit, in Zen that defies 
explanation, and to which no master however ingenious can 
lead his disciples through intellectual analysis. Kyogen or 
Tokusan had enough knowledge of the canonical teachings 
or of the master’s expository discourses; but when the real 
thing was demanded of them they significantly failed to 
produce it either to their inner satisfaction or for the master’s 
approval. The satori, after all, is not a thing to be gained 
through the understanding. But once the key is within one’s 
grasp, everything seems to be laid bare before him; the 
entire world assumes then a different aspect. By those who 
know, this inner change is recognized. The Doken before 
he started on his mission and the Déoken after the reali- 
zation were apparently the same person; but as soon as 
Daiye saw him he knew what had taken place in him, even 
when he uttered not a word. Baso twisted Hyakujo’s nose, 


243 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


and the latter turned into such a wild soul as to have the 
audacity to roll up the matting before his master’s discourse 
had hardly begun (see below). The experience they have 
gone through within themselves is not a very elaborate, 
complicated, and intellectually demonstrable thing; for 
none of them ever try to expound it by a series of learned 
discourses ; they do just this thing or that, or utter a single 
phrase unintelligible to outsiders, and the whole affair 
proves most satisfactory both to the master and to the 
disciple. The satori cannot be a phantasm, empty and 
contentless, and lacking in real value, while it must be the 
simplest possible experience perhaps because it is the very 
foundation of all experiences. 

As to the opening of satori, all that Zen can do is to in- 
dicate the way and leave the rest all to one’s own experi- 
ence; that is to say, following up the indication and arriving 
at the goal—this is to be done by oneself and without 
another’s help. With all that the master can do, he is help- 
less to make the disciple take hold of the thing unless the 
latter is inwardly fully prepared for it. Just as we cannot 
make a horse drink against his will, the taking hold of the 
ultimate reality is to be done by oneself. Just as the flower 
blooms out of its inner necessity, the looking into one’s 
own nature must be the outcome of one’s own inner over- 
flowing. This is where Zen is so personal and subjective, 
in the sense of being inner and creative. In the Agama or 
Nikaya literature we encounter so frequently such phrases 
as ‘Atta-dipa viharatha atta saranda anafifia-sarana’, or 
‘sayarh abhififia’, or ‘Dittha-dhammo patta-dhammo 
vidita-dhammo _ pariyogalha-dhammo __aparappaccayo 
satthu sasane’; they show that Enlightenment is the 
awakening, within oneself and not depending on others, of 
an inner sense in one’s consciousness, enabling one to create 
a world of eternal harmony and beauty—the home of 
Nirvana. 

I said that Zen does not give us any intellectual assist- 
ance, nor does it waste time in arguing the point with us; 
but it merely suggests or indicates, not because it wants to 


244 


SATORI 


be indefinite, but because that is really the only thing it can 
do for us. If it could, it would do anything to help us come 
to an understanding. In fact Zen is exhausting every 
possible means to do that; as we can see ip all the great 
masters’ attitudes towards their disciples.1 When they are 
actually knocking them down, their kindheartedness is 
never to be doubted. They are just waiting for the time 
when their pupils’ minds get all ripened for the final 
moment. When this is come, the opportunity of opening an 
eye to the truth of Zen lies everywhere. One can pick it up 
in the hearing of an inarticulate sound, or listening to an 
unintelligible remark, or in the observation of a flower 
blooming, or in the encountering of any trivial everyday 
incident such as stumbling, rolling up a screen, using a fan, 
etc. These are all sufficient conditions that will awaken one’s 
inner sense. Evidently a most insignificant happening, and 
yet its effect on the mind infinitely surpasses all that one 
could expect of it. A light touch of an ignited wire, and an 
explosion shaking the very foundations of the earth. In fact, 
all the causes of satori are in the mind. That is why when the 
clock clicks, all that has been lying there bursts up like a 
volcanic eruption or flashes out like a bolt of lightning.? 
Zen calls this ‘returning to one’s own home’ ; for its followers 
will declare: ‘You have now found yourself; from the very 
beginning nothing has been kept away from you. It was 
yourself that closed the eye to the fact. In Zen there is 
nothing to explain, nothing to teach, that will add to your 
knowledge. Unless it grows out of yourself, no knowledge 
is really of value to you, a borrowed plumage never 
grows.” 

Kozankoku (Huang San-ku), a Confucian poet and 
statesman, came to Kwaido (Hui-t‘ang, 1024-1100) to be 
initiated into Zen. Said the Zen master: “There is a 
passage in the text you are so thoroughly familiar with 

1 See the Essay entitled ‘Practical Methods of Zen Instruction’. 

® The lightning simile in the Kena-Upanishad (IV, 30), as is supposed 
by some scholars, is not to depict the feeling of inexpressive awe as 


regards the nature of Brahman, but it illustrates the bursting out of 
enlightenment upon consciousness. ‘A—a—ah’ is most significant here. 


245 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


which fitly describes the teaching of Zen. Did not Con- 
fucius declare: “Do you think I am holding back some- 
thing from you, O my disciples? Indeed, I have held 
nothing back from you?’ Sankoku tried to answer, but 
Kwaido immediately made him keep silence by saying, 
‘No, no!’ The Confucian disciple felt troubled in mind, and 
did not know how to express himself. Some time later they 
were having a walk in the mountains. The wild laurel was 
in full bloom and the air was redolent. Asked the Zen 
master, ‘Do you smell it?? When the Confucian answered 
affirmatively, Kwaido said, ‘There, I have kept nothing 
back from you!’ This suggestion from the teacher at once 
led to the opening of Kézankoku’s mind. Is it-not evident 
now that satori is not a thing to be imposed upon another, 
but that it is self-growing from within? Though nothing is 
kept away from us, it is through a satori that we become 
cognizant of the fact, being conyinced that we are all 
sufficient unto ourselves. All that therefore Zen contrives 
is to assert that there is such a thing as self-revelation, or the 
opening of satori. 


Vv 


As satori strikes at the primary fact of existence, its attain- 
ment marks a turning-point in one’s life. The attainment, 
however, must be thorough-going and clear-cut in order 
to produce a satisfactory result. To deserve the name 
‘satori’ the mental revolution must be so complete as to 
make one really and sincerely feel that there took place a 
fiery baptism of the spirit. The intensity of this feeling is 
proportional to the amount of effort the opener of satori has 
put into the achievement. For there is a gradation in satori 
as to its intensity, as in all our mental activity. The possessor 
of a lukewarm satori may suffer no such spiritual revolution 
as Rinzai, or Bukk6 (Fo-kuang), whose case is quoted 
below. Zen is a matter of character and not of the intellect, 


246 


SATORI 


which means that Zen grows out of the will as the first 
principle of life. A brilliant intellect may fail to unravel all 
the mysteries of Zen, but a strong soul will drink deep of the 
inexhaustible fountain. I do not know if the intellect is 
superficial and touches only the fringe of one’s personality, 
but the fact is that the will is the man himself, and Zen 
appeals to it. When one becomes penetratingly conscious 
of the working of this agency, there is the opening of satori 
and the understanding of Zen. As they say, the snake has 
now grown into the dragon; or, more graphically, a com- 
mon cur—a most miserable creature wagging its tail for 
food and sympathy, and kicked about by the street boys so 
mercilessly—has now turned into a golden-haired lion 
whose roar frightens to death all the feeble-minded. 

Therefore, when Rinzai was meekly submitting to the 
‘thirty blows’ of Obaku, he was a pitiable sight ; as soon as 
he attained satori he was quite a different personage, and 
his first exclamation was, “There is not much after all in the 
Buddhism of Obaku.’ And when he saw the reproachful 
Obaku again, he returned his favour by giving him a slap 
on the face. ‘What an arrogance, what an impudence!’ 
Obaku exclaimed; but there was reason in Rinzai’s rude- 
ness, and the old master could not but be pleased with this 
treatment from his former tearful Rinzai. 

When Tokusan gained an insight into the truth of Zen he 
immediately took up all his commentaries on the Diamond 
Siitra, once so valued and considered indispensable that he 
had to carry them wherever he went; he now set fire to 
them, reducing all the manuscripts to nothingness. He 
exclaimed, ‘However deep your knowledge of abstruse 
philosophy, it is like a piece of hair placed in the vastness of 
space; and however important your experience in things 
worldly, it is like a drop of water thrown into an unfathom- 
able abyss.’ 

On the day following the incident of the flying geese, to 
which reference is made elsewhere, Baso appeared in the 
preaching-hall, and was about to speak before a congre- 
gation, when Hyakujo came forward and began to roll up 


247 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


the matting.! Baso without protesting came down from his 
seat and returned to his own room. He then called Hyakujo 
and asked him why he rolled up the matting before he had 
uttered a word. 

‘Yesterday you twisted my nose,’ replied Hyakujo, ‘and 
it was quite painful’ 

‘Where,’ said Baso, ‘was your thought wandering 
then?’ 

‘It is not painful any more today, master.’ 

How differently he behaves now! When his nose was 
pinched, he was quite an ignoramus in the secrets of Zen. 
He is now a golden-haired lion, he is master of himself, and 
acts as freely as if he owned the world, pushing away even 
his own master far into the background. 

There is no doubt that Satori goes deep into the very 
root of individuality. The change achieved thereby is 
quite remarkable, as we see in the examples above cited. 


VI 


Some masters have left in the form of verse known as 
‘Ge’ (gdthd) what they perceived or felt at the time when 
their mental eye was opened. The verse has the special 
name of “Toki-no-ge’’, and from the following translations 
the reader may draw his own conclusions as to the nature 
and content of a satori so highly prized by the Zen followers. 
But there is one thing to which I would like to call his atten- 
tion, which is that the contents of these gath4s are so varied 
and dissimilar as far as their literary and intelligible sense is 
concerned that one may be at a loss how to make a com- 
parison of these divers exclamations. Being sometimes 
merely descriptive verses of the feelings of the author at the 

+ This is spread before the Buddha and on it the master performs his 
bowing ceremony, and its rolling up naturally means the end of asermon. 


4 Tou chi chia, meaning ‘the verse of mutual understanding’ which 


takes place when the master’s mind and the disciple’s are merged in 
each other’s. 


248 


SATORI 


moment of satori, analysis is impossible unless the critic 
himself has once experienced them in his own inner life. 
Nevertheless these verses will be of interest to the psy- 
chological students of Buddhist mysticism even as merely 
emotional utterances of the supreme moment. 

The following is by Chékei (Chang-ching, died 932), 
whose eye was opened when he was rolling up the screen: 


‘How deluded I was! How deluded indeed! 
Lift up the screen and come see the world! 
*‘What religion believest thou?” you ask. 

I raise my hossu! and hit your mouth.’ 


Hoyen (Fa-yen) of Gosozan (Wu-tso-shan), who died 
in 1104, succeeded Shutan (Shou-tuan), of Haku-un 
(Pai-yiin), and was the teacher of Yengo (Yiian-wu), com- 
posed the following when his mental eye was first opened : 


‘A patch of farm land quietly lies by the hill. 

Crossing my hands over the chest I ask the old farmer kindly: 
*“How often have you sold it and bought it back by yourself?” 
I like the pines and bamboos that invite a refreshing breeze.’ 


Yengo (Yiian-wu, 1063-1135) was one of the greatest 
teachers in the Sung dynasty and the author of a Zen text 
book known as the Hekiganshu. His verse stands in such 
contrast to that of his teacher, Héyen, and the reader will 
find it hard to unearth anything of Zen from the following 
romanticism : 


‘The golden duck no more issues odorous smoke behind the 
brocade screens, 

Amidst flute-playing and singing, he retreats, thoroughly in 
liquor and supported by others: 

A happy event in the life of a romantic youth, 

It is his sweetheart alone that is allowed to know.’ 


1It was originally a mosquito driver, but now it is a symbol of 
religious authority. It has a short handle, a little over a foot long, anda 
longer tuft of hair, usually a horse’s tail or a yak’s. 


249 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Yenju, of Yémeiji (Yung-ming Yen-shou, 904—-97 5), who 
belonged to the Hégen school of Zen Buddhism, was the 
author of a book called Shukyéroku (‘Record of Truth- 
Mirror’) in one hundred fasciculi, and flourished in the 
early Sung. His realization took place when he heard a 
bundle of fuel dropping on the ground. 


‘Something dropped! It is no other thing ; 

Right and left, there is nothing earthy: 

Rivers and mountains and the great earth,— 

In them all revealed is the Body of the Dharmaraja. 


The first of the following two verses is by Y6dainen 
(Yang Tai-nien, 973-1020), a statesman of the Sung 
dynasty, and the second by Iku, of Torys (Tu-ling Yii), who 
was a disciple ef Yogi (Yang-ch‘i, 1024-1072), the founder 
of the Yogi Branch of the Rinzai school: 


‘An octagonal millstone rushes through the air; 

A golden-coloured lion has turned into a cur: 

If you want to hide yourself in the North Star, 

Turn round and fold your hands behind the South Star.’ 


‘I have one jewel shining bright, 

Long buried it was underneath worldly worries ; 

This morning the dusty veil is off, and restored is its lustre, 
Iilumining rivers and mountains and ten thousand things.’ 


A sufficient variety of the verses has been given here to 
show how they vary from one another and how it is im- 
possible to suggest any intelligible explanation of the con- 
tent of satori by merely comparing them or by analysing 
them. Some of them are easily understood, I suppose, as 
expressive of the feeling of a new revelation; but as to what 
that revelation itself is, it will require a certain amount of 
personal knowledge to be able to describe it more in- 
telligently. In any event, all these masters testify to the fact 


250 


SATORI 


that there is such a thing in Zen as satori through which one 
is admitted into a new world of value. The old way of 
viewing things is abandoned and the world acquires a new 
signification. Some of them would declare that they were 
‘deluded’ or that their ‘previous knowledge’ was thrown 
into oblivion, while others would confess they were hitherto 
unaware of a new beauty which exists in the ‘refreshing 
breeze’ and in the ‘shining jewel’. 


VII 


When our consideration is limited to the objective side 
of satori as illustrated so far, it does not appear to be a very 
extraordinary thing—this opening an eye to the truth of 
Zen. The master makes some remarks, and if they happen 
to be opportune enough, the disciple will come at once to a 
realization and see into a mystery hitherto undreamed of. 
It seems all to depend upon what kind of mood or what 
state of mental preparedness one is in at the moment. Zen 
is after all a haphazard affair, one may be tempted to think ; 
but when we know that it took Nangaku (Nan-yiieh) eight 
long years to answer the question ‘Who is he that thus 
cometh towards me?” we shall realize the fact that there was 
in him a great deal of mental anguish and tribulation which 
he had to go through before he could come to the final 
solution and declare, ‘Even when one asserts that it is a 
somewhat, one misses it altogether.” We must try to look 
into the psychological aspect of satori, where is revealed 
the inner mechanism of opening the door to the eternal 
secrets of the human soul. This is done best by quoting 
some of the masters themselves whose introspective state- 
ments are on record. 

KGho (Kao-féng, 1238-1285) was one of the great 
masters in the latter part of the Sung dynasty. When his 


251 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


master first let him attend to the ‘Jéshu’s Mu’,! he exerted 
himself hard on the problem. One day his master, Set- 
sugan (Hsiieh-yen), suddenly asked him, ‘Who is it that 
carries for you this lifeless corpse of yours?’ The poor fellow 
did not know what to make of the question, for the master 
was merciless, and it was usually followed by a hard 
knocking down. Later, in the midst of his sleep one night, he 
recalled the fact that once when he was under another 
master he was told to find out the ultimate signification of 
the statement ‘All things return to one’,? and this kept him 
up the rest of that night and through the several days and 
nights that succeeded. While in this state of an extreme 
mental tension he found himself one day looking at Goso 
Hdyen’s verse on his own portrait, which partly read: 


‘One hundred years—thirty-six thousand morns, 
This same old fellow moveth on for ever!’ 


This at once made him dissolve his eternal doubt as to 
‘Who’s carrying around this lifeless body of yours?’ He was 
baptized and became an altogether new man. 

He leaves us in his Goroku (‘Sayings Recorded’) an 
account of those days of the mental strain in the following 
narrative: ‘In olden days when I was at Sdkei (Shuang- 
ching), and before one month was over after my return to 
the Meditation Hall there, one night while deep in sleep I 


1 This is one of the most noted koans and generally given to the uniniti- 
ated as an eye-opener. When Jéshu was asked by a monk whether 
there was Buddha-Nature in the dog, the master answered ‘Mu!’ (ww in 
Chinese), which literally means ‘no’. But as it is nowadays understood 
by the followers of Rinzai, it does not mean anything negative as the 
term may suggest to us ordinarily, it refers to something most assuredly 
Positive, and the novice is told to find it out by himself, not depending 
upon others (aparapaccaya), as no explanation will be given nor is any 
possible. This koan is popularly known as ‘Jéshu’s Mu or Muji’. A 
koan is a theme or statement or question given to the Zen student for 
solution, which will lead him to a spiritual insight. The subject will be 
fully treated in the Second Series of the Essays in Zen Buddhism. 

? Another koan for beginners. A monk once asked Jéshu, ‘All 
things return to the One, but where does the One return?’ To which the 
master answered, ‘When I was in the province of Seiju (Ts‘ing-chou) I 
had a monkish garment made which weighed seven kin (chin). 


252 


SATORI 


suddenly found myself fixing my attention on the question 
“All things return to the One, but where does this One 
return?” My attention was so rigidly fixed on this that I 
neglected sleeping, forgot to eat, and did not distinguish 
east from west, nor morning from night. While spreading 
the napkin, producing the bowls, or attending to my 
natural wants, whether I moved or rested, whether I 
talked or kept silent, my whole existence was wrapped up 
with the question “Where does this One return?” No other 
thoughts ever disturbed my consciousness; no, even if I 
wanted to stir up the least bit of thought irrelevant to 
the central one, I could not do so. It was like being screwed 
up or glued; however much I tried to shake myself off, it 
refused to move. Though I was in the midst of a crowd or 
congregation, I felt as if I were all by myself. From morning 
till evening, from evening till morning, so transparent, so° 
tranquil, so majestically above all things were my feelings. 
Absolutely pure and not a particle of dust! My one thought 
covered eternity ; so calm was the outside world, so oblivi- 
ous of the existence of other people I was. Like an idiot, 
like an imbecile, six days and nights thus elapsed when I 
entered the Shrine with the rest, reciting the Sutras, and 
happened to raise my head and looked at the verse by 
Goso. This made me all of a sudden awake from the spell, 
and the meaning of “Who carries this lifeless corpse of 
yours ?’’ burst upon me—the question once given by my old 
master, I felt as if this boundless space itself were broken up 
into pieces, and the great earth were altogether levelled 
away. I forgot myself, I forgot the world, it was like one 
mirror reflecting another. I tried several koan in my mind 
and found them so transparently clear! I was no more 
deceived as to the wonderful working of Prajfia (trans- 
cendental wisdom).’ When K6h6G saw his old master later, 
the latter lost no time in asking him, ‘Who is it that carries 
this lifeless corpse of yours?’ ‘K6h6 burst out a ‘Kwatz!’ 
Thereupon the master took up a stick ready to give him a 
blow, but the disciple held it back, saying, ‘You cannot give 
me a blow today.’ ‘Why can’t I?’ was the master’s demand. 


253 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Instead of replying to him, however, K6hG left the room 
briskly. The following day the master asked him, ‘All 
things return to the One, and where does the One return 
to?’ ‘The dog is lapping the boiling water in the cauldron.’ 
‘Where did you get this nonsense?’ reprimanded the 
master. ‘You had better ask yourself,’ promptly came the 
response. The master rested well satisfied. 


Hakuin (1683-1768)! is another of those masters who 
have put down their first Zen experience in writing, and we 
read in his book entitled Orategama the following account: 
‘When I was twenty-four years old I stayed at the Yegan 
Monastery of Echigo. [‘‘Joshu’s Mu” being my theme at 
the time] I assiduously applied myself to it. I did not sleep 
days and nights, forgot both eating and lying down, when 
quite abruptly a great mental fixation? (tai-1) took place. I 
felt as if freezing in an ice-field extending thousands of 
miles, and within myself there was a sense of utmost 
transparency. There was no going forward, no slipping 
backward ; I was like an idiot, like an imbecile, and there 
was nothing but “Jdshu’s Mu’. Though I attended the 
lectures by the master, they sounded like a discussion going 
on somewhere in a distant hall, many yards away. Some- 
times my sensation was that of one flying in the air. Several 
days passed in this state, when one evening a temple-bell 
struck, which upset the whole thing. It was like smashing 
an ice-basin, or pulling down a house made of jade. When 
I suddenly awoke again I found that I myself was Ganté? 


1 He is the founder of the modern Japanese Rinzai school of Zen. All 
the masters belonging to this school at present in Japan trace back their 
line of transmission to Hakuin. 

* Literally, ‘a great doubt’, but it does not mean that, as the term 
‘doubt’ is not understood here in its ordinary sense. It means a state of 
concentration brought to the highest pitch. 

§ Gantd (Yen-t‘ou, 828-887) was one of the great Zen teachers in the 
‘T‘ang dynasty. But he was murdered by an outlaw, when his death-cry 
is said to have reached many miles around. When Hakuin first studied 
Zen, this tragic incident in the life of an eminent Zen master who is 
supposed to be above all human ailments, troubled him very much, and 
he wondered if Zen were really the gospel of salvation. Hence this 
allusion to Ganté. Notice also here that what Hakuin discovered was a 


254 


SATORI 


(Yen-t‘ou) the old master, and that all through the shifting 
changes of time not a bit [of my personality] was lost. 
Whatever doubts and indecisions I had before were com- 
pletely dissolved like a piece of thawing ice. I called out 
loudly: ‘““How wondrous! how wondrous! There is no 
birth-and-death from which one has to escape, nor is there 
any supreme knowledge (Bodhi) after which one has to 
strive. All the complications' past and present, numbering 
one thousand seven hundred, are not worth the trouble of 


33°93 


even describing them’’. 


The case of Bukk6 (Fo-kuang), the National Teacher,? 
was more extraordinary than that of Kakuin, and fortu- 
nately in this case, too, we have his own recording of it in 
detail. ‘When I was fourteen,’ writes Bukk6, ‘I went up to 
Kinzan. When seventeen I made up my mind to study 
Buddhism and began to unravel the mysteries of ‘“‘Jéshu’s 
Mu”. I expected to finish the matter within one year, but 
I did not come to any understanding of it after all. Another 
year passed without much avail, and three more years, also 


living person and not an abstract reason or anything conceptual. Zen 
leads us ultimately to somewhat living, working, and this is known as 
‘seeing into one’s own Nature’ (chien-hsing). 

1Koans (kung-an) are sometimes called ‘complications’, (ké-t‘éng) 
literally meaning ‘vines and wistarias’ which are entwining and en- 
tangling, for according to the masters there ought not to be any such 
thing as a koan in the very nature of Zen, it was an unnecessary in- 
vention making things more entangled and complicated than ever 
before. The truth of Zen has no need for koans. It is supposed that 
there are one thousand seven hundred koans which will test the 
genuineness of satori. 

4 Tsu-yiian (1226-1286) came to Japan when the H6jé family was in 
power at Kamakura. He established the Engakuji monastery, which is 
one of the chief Zen monasteries in Japan. While still in China his 
temple was invaded by soldiers of the Yiian dynasty, who threatened to 
kill him, but Bukk6é was immovable and quietly uttered the following 
verse: 
‘Throughout heaven and earth there is not a piece of ground 

where a single stick could be inserted; 
I am glad that all things are void, myself and the world: 
Honoured be the sword, three feet long, wielded by the great 
Yiian swordsmen ; , 
For it is like cutting a spring breeze in a flash of lightning.’ 


255 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


finding myself with no progress. In the fifth or sixth year, 
while no special change came over me, the ‘““Mu’”’ became 
so inseparably attached to me that I could not get away 
from it even while asleep. This whole universe seemed to be 
nothing but the “Mu” itself. In the meantime I was told 
by an old monk to set it aside for a while and see how things 
would go with me. According to this advice, I dropped the 
matter altogether and sat quietly. But owing to the fact 
that the “Mu” had been with me so long, I could in no 
way shake it off however much I tried. When I was sitting, 
I forgot that I was sitting; nor was I conscious of my own 
body. Nothing but a sense of utter blankness prevailed. 
Half a year thus passed. Like a bird escaped from its cage, 
my mind, my consciousness moved about [without restraint] 
sometimes eastward, sometimes westward, sometimes north- 
ward or southward. Sitting! through two days in succession, 
or through one day and night, I did not feel any fatigue. 

‘At the time there were about nine hundred monks re- 
siding in the monastery, among whom there were many 
devoted students of Zen. One day while sitting, I felt as if 
my mind and my body were separated from each other and 
lost the chance of getting back together. All the monks 
about me thought that I was quite dead, but an old monk 
among them said that I was frozen to a state of immov- 
ability while absorbed in deep meditation, and that if I 
were covered up with warm clothings I should by myself 
come to my senses. This proved true, for I finally awoke 
from it; and when I asked the monks near my seat how 
long I had been in that condition, they told me it was one 
day and night. 

‘After this, I still kept up my practice of sitting. I could 
now sleep a little. When I closed my eyes a broad expanse 
of emptiness presented itself before them, which then 
assumed the form of a farmyard. Through this piece of land 
I walked and walked until I got thoroughly familiar with 
the ground. But as soon as my eyes were opened the vision 
altogether disappeared. One night, sitting far into the 

1 That is, sitting cross-legged in meditation. 


256 


SATORI 


night, I kept my eyes open and was aware of my sitting 
up in my seat. All of a sudden the sound of striking the 
board in front of the head monk’s room reached my ear, 
which at once revealed me the “original man’ in full. 
There was then no more of that vision which appeared at 
the closing of my eyes. Hastily I came down from the seat 
and ran out into the moonlit night and went up to the 
garden house called Ganki, where looking up to the sky I 
laughed loudly, ““Oh, how great is the Dharmakaya! Oh, 
how great and immense for evermore!” 

“Thence my joy knew no bounds, I could not quietly sit 
in the Meditation Hall; I went about with no special 
purpose in the mountains, walking this way and that. I 
thought of the sun and the moon traversing in a day 
through a space 4,000,000,000 miles wide. ‘‘My present 
abode is in China”, I reflected then, ‘‘and they say the 
district of Yang is the centre of the earth. If so, this place 
must be 2,000,000,000 miles away from where the sun rises ; 
and how is it that as soon as it comes up its rays lose no time 
in striking my face?” I reflected again, ““The rays of my 
own eye must ravel just as instantaneously as those of the 
sun as it reaches the latter; my eyes, my mind, are they not 
the Dharmakaya itself?”? Thinking thus, I felt all the 
bounds snapped and broken to pieces that had been tying 
me for so many ages. How many numberless years had I 
been sitting in the hole of ants! Today even in every pore 
of my skin there lie all the Buddha-lands in the ten quarters ! 
I thought within myself, ‘Even if I have no greater 
satori, I am now all-sufficient unto myself”.’ 

Here is the stanza composed by Bukké at the moment of 
satori, describing his inner feelings: 


‘With one stroke I have completely smashed the cave of the ghosts ; 
Behold, there rushes out the iron face of the monster Nata! 
Both my ears are as deaf and my tongue is tied ; 

If thou touchest it idly, the fiery star shoots out |’? 


1 This lively utterance reminds one of a lightning simile in the 
Kena-Upanishad (IV, 30): 


R 257 


VIll 


‘These cases will be sufficient to show what mental 
process one has to to through before the opening of satori 
takes place. Of course these are prominent examples and 
highly accentuated, and every satori is not preceded by 
such an extraordinary degree of concentration. But an 
experience more or less like these must be the necessary 
antecedent to all satori, especially to that which is to be 
gone through at the outset of the study. The mirror of 
mind or the field of consciousness then seems to be so 
thoroughly swept clean as not to leave a particle of dust on it. 

When thus all mentation is temporarily suspended, even 
the consciousness of an effort to keep an idea focused at the 
centre of attention is gone—that is, when, as the Zen 
followers say, the mind is so completely possessed or identi- 
fied with its object of thought that even the consciousness of 
identity is lost as when one mirror reflects another, the sub- 
ject feels as if living in a crystal palace, all transparent, 
refreshing, buoyant, and royal. But the end has not yet 
been reached, this being merely the preliminary condition 
leading to the consummation called satori. If the mind 
remains in this state of fixation, there will be no occasion for 
its being awakened to the truth of Zen. The state of ‘Great 
Doubt’ (taz-gi), as it is technically known, is the antecedent. 
It must be broken up and exploded into the next stage, 


‘This is the way It [that is, Brahman] is to be illustrated: 
When lightnings have been loosened, — 
a—a—ah! 
When that has made the eyes to be closed,— 
a—a—ah 
So far concerning Deity [devata].’ 
Lightning flash is a favourite analogue with the Zen masters too; the 
unexpected onrush of satori into the ordinary field of consciousness has 
something of the nature of lightning. It comes so suddenly and when it 
comes the world is at once illumined and revealed in its entirety and in 


its harmonious oneness; but when it vanishes everything falls back into 
its old darkness and confusion. 


258 


SATORI 


which is looking into one’s nature or the opening of satori. 

The explosion, as it is nothing else, generally takes place 
when this finely balanced equilibrium tilts for one reason 
or another. A stone is thrown into a sheet of water in perfect 
stillness, and the disturbance at once spreads all over the 
surface. It is somewhat like this. A sound knocks at the gate 
of consciousness so tightly closed, and it at once reverberates 
through the entire being of the individual. He is awakened 
in the most vivid sense of the word. He comes out baptized 
in the fire of creation. He has seen the work of God in his 
very workshop. The occasion may not necessarily be the 
hearing of a temple bell, it may be reading a stanza, or 
seeing something moving, or the sense of touch irritated, 
when a most highly accentuated state of concentration 
bursts out into a satori. 

The concentration, however, may not be kept up to such 
an almost abnormal degree as in the case of Bukko. It may 
last just a second or two, and if it is the right kind of con- 
centration, and rightly handled by the master, the in- 
evitable opening of the mind will follow. When the monk 
Jo (Ting) asked Rinzai ‘What is the ultimate principle of 
Buddhism?’ the master came right down from his seat, took 
hold of the monk, slapped him with his hand, and pushed 
him away from him. The monk stood stupefied. A bystander 
suggested, ‘Why don’t you make a bow?’ Obeying the 
order, J6 was about to bow, when he abruptly awoke to the 
truth of Zen. 

In this case JG’s self-absorption or concentration did not 
seemingly last very long; the bowing was the turning 
point, it broke up the spell and restored him to sense, not 
to an ordinary sense of awareness, but to the inward con- 
sciousness of his own being. Generally we have no records 
of the inner working prior to a satori, and may pass lightly 
over the event as a merely happy incident or some in- 
tellectual trick having no deeper background. When we 
read such records, we have to supply from our own ex- 
perience, whatever this is, all the necessary antecedent 
conditions for breaking up into a satori. 


259 


IX 


So far the phenomenon called satori in Zen Buddhism 
has been treated as constituting the essence of Zen, as the 
turning point in one’s life which opens the mind to a wider 
and deeper world, as something to be gleaned even from a 
most trivial incident of everyday life; and then it was 
explained how satori is to come out of one’s inner life, and 
not by any outside help except as merely indicating the way 
to it. Next I proceeded to describe what a change satori 
brings in one’s idea of things—that is, how it all upsets the 
former valuation of things generally, making one stand now 
entirely on a different footing. For illustrations, some verses 
were quoted which were composed by the masters at the 
moment of their attainment of satori, They are mostly 
descriptive of the feelings they experienced, such as those 
by Bukk6 and Yédainen and Yengo and others are typical 
of this class, as they have almost no intellectual elements in 
them. If one tries to pick up something from these verses 
by a mere analytical process, one will be greatly disappoint- 
ed. The psychological side of satori, which is minutely 
narrated by Hakuin and others, will be of great interest to 
those who are desirous of making a psychological inquiry 
into Zen. Of course these narratives alone will not do, for 
there are many other things one has to consider in order to 
study it thoroughly, among which I may mention the 
general Buddhist attitude towards life and the world and the 
historical atmosphere in which the students of Zen find 
themselves. 

I wish to close this Essay by making a few general re- 
marks in the way of recapitulation on the Buddhist ex- 
perience known as satori. 

1, People often imagine that the discipline of Zen is to 
induce a state of self-suggestion through meditation. This 
is not quite right. As we can see from the various instances 
above cited, satori does not consist in producing a certain 


260 


SATORI 


premeditated condition by intensely thinking of it. It is the 
growing conscious of a new power in the mind, which en- 
abled it to judge things from a new point of view. Ever since 
the unfoldment of consciousness we have been led to re- 
spond to the inner and outer conditions in a certain con- 
ceptual and analytical manner. The discipline of Zen con- 
sists in upsetting this artificially constructed framework 
once for all and in remodelling it on an entirely new basis. 
The older frame is called ‘Ignorance’ (avidyd) and the new 
one ‘Enlightenment’ (sambodhi). It is evident therefore 
that meditating on a metaphysical or symbolical statement 
which is a product of our relative consciousness plays no 
part in Zen, as I have touched on this in the Introduction. 

2. Without the attainment of satori no one can enter 
into the mystery of Zen. It is the sudden flashing of a new 
truth hitherto altogether undreamed of. It is a sort of mental 
catastrophe taking place all at once after so much piling of 
matters intellectual and demonstrative. The piling has 
reached its limit and the whole edifice has now come to the 
ground, when behold a new heaven is opened to your full 
survey. Water freezes suddenly when it reaches a certain 
point, the liquid has turned into a solidity, and it no more 
flows. Satori comes upon you unawares when you feel you 
have exhausted your whole being. Religiously this is a new 
birth, and, morally, the revaluation of one’s relationship 
to the world. The latter now appears to be dressed in a 
different garment which covers up all the ugliness of 
dualism, which is called in Buddhist phraseology delusion 
(maya) born of reasoning (tarka) and error (vikalpa). 

3. Satori is the raison d’étre of Zen, and without which 
Zen is no Zen. Therefore every contrivance (updya), dis- 
ciplinary or doctrinal, is directed toward the attainment 
of satori. Zen masters could not remain patient for satori 
to come by itself; that is, to come sporadically and at its 
own pleasure. They earnestly seek out some way to make 
people deliberately or systematically realize the truth of 
Zen. Their manifestly enigmatical presentations of it were 
mostly to create a state of mind in their disciples, which 


261 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


would pave the way to the enlightenment of Zen. All the 
intellectual demonstrations and exhortatory persuasions so 
far carried out by most religious and philosophical leaders 
failed to produce the desired effect. The disciples were led 
further and further astray. Especially when Buddhism was 
introduced into China with all its Indian equipments, 
with its highly metaphysical abstractions, and in a most 
complicated system of moral discipline, the Chinese were 
at a loss how to grasp the central point of the doctrine of 
Buddhism. Daruma, Yené, Baso, and other masters noticed 
the fact. The natural outcome was the proclamation of 
Zen; satori was placed above Sitra-reading and scholarly 
discussion of the Sastras, and it came to be identified with 
Zen. Zen therefore without satori is like pepper without its 
pungency. But at the same time we must not forget that 
there is such a thing as too much satori, which is indeed to 
be detested. 

4. This emphasizing in Zen of satori above everything 
else makes the fact quite significant that Zen is not a system 
of dhyana as practised in India and by other schools of 
Buddhism than the Zen. By dhyana is understood popularly 
a kind of meditation or contemplation ; that is the fixing of 
thought, especially in Mahayana Buddhism, on the doctrine 
of emptiness (siinyatd). When the mind is so trained as to be 
able to realize the state of perfect void in which there is not 
a trace of consciousness left, even the sense of being uncon- 
scious having departed—in other words, when all forms of 
mental activity are swept clean from the field of conscious- 
ness, which is now like a sky devoid of every speck of cloud, 
a mere broad expanse of blue—dhydana is said to have 
reached its perfection. This may be called ecstasy or trance, 
but it is not Zen. In Zen there must be a satori; there must 
be a general mental upheaval which destroys the old 
accumulations of intellectuality and lays down a foundation 
for a new faith ; there must be the awakening of a new sense 
which will review the old things from an angle of percep- 
tion entirely and most refreshingly new. In dhyana there 
are none of these things, for it is merely a quieting exercise 


262 


SATORI 


of the mind. As such it has doubtless its own merits, but 
Zen ought not to be identified with such dhyanas. The 
Buddha therefore got dissatisfied with his two Sankhya 
teachers, in whose teaching the meditations were so many 
stages of self-abstraction or thought-annihilation. 

5. Satori is not seeing God as he is, as may be con- 
tended by some Christian mystics. Zen has from the very 
beginning made clear its principal thesis, which is to see 
into the work of creation and not interview the creator him- 
self. The latter may be found then busy moulding his 
universe, but Zen can go along with its own work even 
when he is not found there. It is not depending on his 
support. When it grasps the reason of living a life, it is 
satisfied. Hoyen, of Gosozan, used to produce his own hand 
and asked his disciples why it is called a hand. When one 
knows the reason, there is satori and one has Zen. Whereas 
with the God of mysticism there is the grasping of a definite 
object, and when you have God, what is not God is ex- 
cluded. This is self-limiting. Zen wants absolute freedom, 
even from God. ‘No abiding place’ means that; ‘Cleanse 
your mouth even when you utter the word “Buddha”’ 
amounts to the same thing. It is not that Zen wants to be 
morbidly unholy and godless, but that it knows the in- 
completeness of a name. Therefore when Yakusan (Yiieh- 
shan) was asked to give a lecture, he did not say a word, but 
instead came down from the pulpit and went off to his own 
room. Hyakujo (Pai-chang) merely walked forward a few 
steps, stood still, and opened his arms—which was his 
exposition of a great principle of Buddhism. 

6. Satori is the most intimate individual experience and 
therefore cannot be expressed in words or described in any 
manner. All that one can do in the way of communicating 
the experience to others is to suggest or indicate, and this 
only tentatively. The one who has had it understands 
readily when such indications are given, but when we try 
to have a glimpse of it through the indices given we utterly 
fail. We are then like the man who says that he loves the 
most beautiful woman in the world and yet who knows 


263 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


nothing of her pedigree or social position, of her personal 
name or family name, knows nothing of her individuality, 
physical as well as moral. We are again like the man who 
puts up a staircase in a place where four crossroads meet, 
to mount up thereby into the upper story of a mansion, and 
yet who knows not just where that mansion is, in the East or 
West, in the North or South. The Buddha was quite to the 
point when he thus derided all those philosophers and vain 
talkers of his day, who merely dealt in abstractions, empty 
hearsays, and fruitless indications. Zen therefore wants 
us to build the staircase right at the front of the very palace 
into whose upper story we are to mount up. When we can 
say “This is the very personality, this is the very house,’ we 
have the satori interviewed face to face and realized by 
oneself. (Ditthe va dhamme sayam abhififia sacchikatvd.) 

7. Satori is not a morbid state of mind, a fit subject for 
abnormal psychology. If anything it is a perfectly normal 
state of mind. When I speak of a mental upheaval, one may 
be led to consider Zen something to be shunned by ordinary 
people. This is a mistaken view of Zen, unfortunately often 
held by prejudiced critics. As Nansen (Nan-ch‘iian) de- 
clared, it is your ‘everyday thought’. When later a monk 
asked a master! what was meant by ‘everyday thought’, he 
said, 


‘Drinking tea, eating rice, 

I pass my time as it comes; 

Looking down at the stream, looking up at the mountains, 
How serene and relaxed I feel indeed!’ 


It all depends upon the adjustment of the hinge whether 
the door opens in or out. Even in the twinkling of an eye, 
the whole affair is changed, and you have Zen, and you 
are as perfect and normal as ever. More than that, you have 
in the meantime acquired something altogether new. All 
your mental activities are now working to a different key, 


. aoe Wén-ch‘in, a disciple of Pao-fu Ts‘ung-chan, who died 
A.D. 928, 


264 


SATORI 


which is more satisfying, more peaceful, and fuller of joy 
than anything you ever had. The tone of your life is 
altered. There is something rejuvenating in it. The spring 
flowers look prettier, and the mountain stream runs cooler 
and more transparent. The subjective revolution that 
brings out this state of things cannot be called abnormal. 
When life becomes more enjoyable and its expanse is as 
broad as the universe itself, ther: must be something in 
satori quite healthy and worth one’s striving after its attain- 
ment. 

8. We are supposedly living in the same world, but who 
can tell the thing we popularly call a stone lying before this 
window is the same thing to all of us? According to the way 
we look at it, to some the stone ceases to be a stone, while to 
others it forever remains a worthless specimen of geological 
product. And this initial divergence of views calls forth an 
endless series of divergencies later in our moral and 
spiritual lives. Just a little twisting, as it were, in our 
modes of thinking, and yet what a world of difference will 
grow up eventually between one another! So with Zen, 
satori is this twisting, or rather screwing, not in the wrong 
way, but in a deeper and full sense, and the result is the 
revelation of a world of entirely new values. 

Again, you and I sip a cup of tea. The act is apparently 
alike, but who can tell what a wide gap there is sub- 
jectively between you and me? In your drinking there may 
be no Zen, while mine is brim full of it. The reason is, the 
one moves in the logical circle and the other is out of it; 
that is to say, in one case rigid rules of intellection so called 
are asserting themselves, and the actor even when acting 
is unable to unfetter himself from these intellectual bonds ; 
while in the other case the subject has struck a new path and 
is not at all conscious of the duality of his act; in him life is 
not split into object and subject or into acting and acted. 
The drinking at the moment to him means the whole fact, 
the whole world. Zen lives and is therefore free, whereas 
our ‘ordinary’ life is in bondage; satori is the first step to 
freedom. 

265 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


g. Satori is Enlightenment (sambodhi). So long as Budd- 
hism is the doctrine of Enlightenment, as we know it to be, 
from its earliest as well as from its later literature, and so 
long as Zen asserts satori to be its culmination, satori must 
be said to represent the very spirit of the Buddhist teaching. 
When it announces itself to be the transmission of the 
Buddha-citta (fo-hsin) not dependent upon the logical and 
discursive exposition in the canonical writings, either 
Hinayana or Mahay4na, it is by no means exaggerating its 
fundamental characteristic as distinguished from the other 
schools of Buddhism that have grown up in Japan and 
China. Whatever this may be, there is no doubt that Zen 
is one of the most precious and in many respects the most 
remarkable spiritual possessions bequeathed to Eastern 
people. Even when it is considered the Buddhist form of 
speculative mysticism not unknown to the West in the 
philosophy of Plotinus, Eckhart, and their followers, its 
complete literature alone since the sixth patriarch, Yend 
(Hui-néng, 638-713), so well preserved, is worth the serious 
study of scholars and truth-seekers. And then the whole 
body of the koans systematically grading the progress of 
the spiritual awakening is the wonderful treasure in the 
hands of the Zen monks in Japan at present. 


266 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF 
REN INSTRUCTION 


Waar is Zen?’ This is one of the most difficult ques- 
tions to answer—I mean to the satisfaction of the inquirer; 
for Zen refuses even tentatively to be defined or described 
in any manner. The best way to understand it will be, of 
course, to study and practice it at least some years in the 
Meditation Hall. Therefore, even after the reader has care- 
fully gone over this Essay, he will still be at sea as to the 
real signification of Zen. It is, in fact, in the very nature of 
Zen that it evades all definition and explanation; that is to 
say, Zen cannot be converted into ideas, it can never be 
described in logical terms. For this reason the Zen masters 
declare that. it is ‘independent of letter’, being ‘a special 
transmission outside the orthodox teachings’. But the pur- 
pose of this Essay is not just to demonstrate that Zen is an 
unintelligible thing and that there is no use of attempting to 
discourse about it. My object, on the contrary, will be to 
make it clear to the fullest extent of my ability, however 
imperfect and inadequate that may be. And there are 
several ways to do this. Zen may be treated psychologically, 
ontologically, or epistemologically, or historically as I did 
in the first part of this book to a certain extent. These are all 
extremely interesting each in its way, but they are a great 
undertaking requiring years of preparation. What here I 
propose to do, therefore, will be a practical exposition of the 
subject-matter by giving some aspects of the modus operandi 
of Zen instruction as carried out by the masters for the en- 
lightenment of the pupils. The perusal of these accounts 
will help us to get into the spirit of Zen to the limits of its 
intelligibility. 


267 


I 


As I conceive it, Zen is the ultimate fact of all philosophy 
and religion. Every intellectual effort must culminate in it, 
or rather must start from it, if it is to bear any practical 
fruits. Every religious faith must spring from it if it has to 
prove at all efficiently and livingly workable in our active 
life. Therefore Zen is not necessarily the fountain of Budd- 
hist thought and life alone; it is very much alive also in 
Christianity, Mahommedanism, in Taoism, and even in 
positivistic Confucianism. What makes all these religions 
and philosophies vital and inspiring, keeping up their use- 
fulness and efficiency, is due to the presence in them of what 
I may designate as the Zen element. Mere scholasticism or 
mere sacerdotalism will never create a living faith. Religion 
requires something inwardly propelling, energizing, and 
capable of doing work. The intellect is useful in its place, but 
when it tries to cover the whole field of religion it dries up 
the source of life. Feeling or mere faith is so blind and will 
grasp anything that may come across and hold to it as the 
final reality. Fanaticism is vital enough as far as its ex- 
plosiveness is concerned, but this is not a true religion, and 
its practical sequence is the destruction of the whole system, 
not to speak of the fate of its own being. Zen is what makes 
the religious feeling run through its legitimate channel and 
what gives life to the intellect. 

Zen does this by giving one a new point of view of looking 
at things, a new way of appreciating the truth and beauty 
of life and the world, by discovering a new source of energy 
in the inmost recesses of consciousness, and by bestowing 
on one a feeling of completeness and sufficiency. That is to 
say, Zen works miracles by overhauling the whole system of 
one’s inner life and opening up a world hitherto entirely 
undreamt of. This may be called a resurrection. And Zen 
tends to emphasize the speculative element, though con- 
fessedly it opposes this more than anything else in the whole 


268 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


process of the spiritual revolution, and in this respect Zen 
is truly Buddhistic. Or it may be better to say that Zen 
makes use of the phraseology belonging to the sciences of 
speculative philosophy. Evidently, the feeling element is 
not so prominently visible in Zen as in the Pure Land 
sects where ‘bhakti’ (faith) is all in all; Zen on the other 
hand emphasizes the faculty of seeing (darsana) or knowing 
(vidya) though not in the sense of reasoning out, but in that 
of intuitively grasping. 

According to the philosophy of Zen, we are too much of 
a slave to the conventional way of thinking, which is 
dualistic through and through. No ‘interpenetration’ is 
allowed, there takes place no fusing of opposites in our 
everyday logic. What belongs to God is not of this world, 
and what is of this world is incompatible with the divine. 
Black is not white, and white is not black. Tiger is tiger, 
and cat is cat, and they will never be one. Water flows, 
a mountain towers. This is the way things or ideas go in 
this universe of the senses and syllogisms. Zen, however, 
upsets this scheme of thought and substitutes a new one in 
which there exists no logic, no dualistic arrangement of 
ideas. We believe in dualism chiefly because of our tradi- 
tional teaching. Whether ideas really correspond to facts is 
another matter requiring a special investigation. Ordinarily 
we do not inquire into the matter, we just accept what is 
instilled into our minds; for to accept is more convenient 
and practical, and life is to a certain extent, though not in 
reality, made thereby easier. We are in nature conservatives, 
not because we are lazy, but because we like repose and 
peace, even superficially. But the time comes when tradi- 
tional logic holds true no more, for we begin to feel con- 
tradictions and splits and consequently spiritual anguish. 
We lose trustful repose which we experienced when we 
blindly followed the traditional ways of thinking. Eckhart 
says that we are all seeking repose whether consciously or 
not just as the stone cannot cease moving until it touches 
the earth. Evidently the repose we seemed to enjoy before 
we were awakened to the contradictions involved in our 


269 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


logic was not the real one, the stone has kept moving down 
towards the ground. Where then is the ground of non- 
dualism on which the soul can be really and truthfully 
tranquil and blessed? To quote Eckhart again, ‘Simple 
people conceive that we are to see God as if He stood on that 
side and we on this. It is not so; God and I are one in the 
act of my perceiving Him.’ In this absolute oneness of 
things Zen establishes the foundations of its philosophy. 
The idea of absolute oneness is not the exclusive pos- 
session of Zen, there are other religions and philosophies 
that preach the same doctrine. If Zen, like other monisms or 
theisms, merely laid down this principle and did not have 
anything specifically to be known as Zen, it would have 
long ceased to exist as such. But there is in Zen something 
unique which makes up its life and justifies its claim to be 
the most precious heritage of Eastern culture. The following 
‘mondo’ or dialogue (literally questioning and answering) 
will give-us a glimpse into the ways of Zen. A monk asked 
Jéshu (Chao-chou), one of the greatest masters in China, 
‘What is the one ultimate word of truth?’ Instead of giving 
him any specific answer he made a simple response saying, 
*Yes.’ The monk who naturally failed to see any sense in 
this kind of response asked for a second time, and to this the 
master roared back, ‘I am not deaf! See how irrelevantly 
(shall I say) the all-important problem of absolute oneness 
or of the ultimate reason is treated here! But this is 
characteristic of Zen, this is where Zen transcends logic and 
overrides the tyranny and misrepresentation of ideas. As 
I said before, Zen mistrusts the intellect, does not rely upon 


1 Another time when Jéshu was asked about the ‘first word’, he 
coughed. The monk remarked, ‘Is this not it?’ ‘Why, an old man is not 
even allowed to cough!’—this came quickly from the old master. 
Jéshu had still another occasion to express his view on the one word. A 
monk asked, “What is the one word?’ Demanded the master, ‘What do 
you say?’ ‘What is the one word?’—the question was repeated when 
J6shu gave his verdict, ‘You make it two.’ 

Shuzan (Shu-shan) was once asked, ‘An old master says, “There is 
one word which when understood wipes out the sins of innumerable 
kalpas” : what is this one word?’ Shuzan answered, ‘Right under your 
nose !’ “What is the ultimate meaning of it?’ ‘This is all I can say’ :—this 
was the conclusion of the master. 


270 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


traditional and dualistic methods of reasoning, and handles 
problems after its own original manners. 

To cite another instance before going further into the 
subject proper. The same old Jéshu was asked another 
time, ‘One light divides itself into hundreds of thousands 
of lights; may I ask where this one light originates?’! This 
question like the last mentioned is one of the deepest and 
most baffling problems of philosophy. But the old master 
did not waste much time in answering the question, nor did 
he resort to any wordy discussion. He simply threw off one 
of his shoes without a remark. What did he mean by it? 
To understand all this, it is necessary that we should 
acquire a ‘third eye’, as they say, and learn to look at things 
from a new point of view. 

How is this new way of looking at things demonstrated 
by the Zen masters? Their methods are naturally very un- 
common, unconventional, illogical, and consequently in- 
comprehensible to the uninitiated. The object of the pre- 
sent Essay will be to describe those methods classified under 
the following general headings: I. Verbal Method, and IT. 
Direct Method. The first method may be further divided 
into: 1. Paradox; 2. Going Beyond Opposites; 3. Con- 
tradiction; 4. Affirmation; 5. Repetition; and 6. Excla- 
mation. The Direct Method, so called, means a display of 
physical force, and may be subdivided into several groups 


1 There are many mondoes purporting to the same subject. The best 
known one by Jéshu is quoted elsewhere; of others we mention the 
following. A monk asked Risan (Li-shan), ‘All things are reduced to 
emptiness, but where is emptiness reduced?’ Risan answered, “The 
tongue is too short to explain it to you.’ ‘Why is it too short?’ ‘Within 
and without, it is of one suchness,’ said the master. 

A monk asked Keisan (Ch‘i-shan), ‘When relations are dissolved, all 
is reduced to emptiness; but where is emptiness reduced?’ The master 
called out to the monk, and the monk responded ‘Yes’, whereupon the 
master called his attention, saying, ‘Where is emptiness?’ Said the monk, 
‘Pray, you tell me.’ Keisan replied, ‘It is like the Persian tasting pepper.’ 
While the one light is an etiological question as long as its origin is the 
point at issue, the questions here referred to are teleological because the 
ultimate reduction of emptiness is the subject for solution. But as Zen 
transcends time and history, it recognizes only one beginningless and 
endless course of becoming. When we know the origin of the one light, 
we also know where emptiness ends. 


271 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


such as gesture, striking, performance of a definite set of 
acts, directing others to move about, etc. But as I do not 
mean to offer here any scientific and thorough-going 
classification of the Zen masters’ ways of dealing with their 
pupils in order to initiate them into the mysteries of Zen, I 
will not attempt to be exhaustive in this article. Later I will 
write fully about the Direct Method. If I make the reader 
acquire here a kind of understanding as to the general 
tendencies and peculiarities of Zen Buddhism, I regard my 
task as a success. 


II 


It is well known that all mystics are fond of paradoxes 
to expound their views. For instance, a Christian mystic 
may say: ‘God is real, yet he is nothing, infinite emptiness ; 
he is at once all-being and no-being. The divine kingdom is 
real and objective; and at the same time it is within myself 
—I myself am heaven and hell.’ Eckhart’s ‘divine darkness’ 
or ‘immovable mover’ is another example. I believe we can 
casually pick up any such statements in mystic literature 
and compile a book of mystic irrationalities. Zen is no 
exception in this respect, but in its way of thus expressing 
the truth there is something we may designate characteris- 
tically Zen. It principally consists in the concreteness and 
vividness of expression. It generally .efuses to lend an ear 
to abstractions. A few examples will be given. According to 
Fudaishi (Fu-ta-shih) : 


‘Empty-handed I go and yet the spade is in my hands; 

I walk on foot, and yet on the back of an ox I am riding: 
When I pass over the bridge, 

Lo, the water floweth not, but the bridge doth flow.’ 


This sounds altogether out of reason, but in fact Zen 
abounds with such graphic irrationalities. ‘The flower is 
not red, nor is the willow green’—is one of the best known 


272 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


utterances of Zen, and is regarded as the same as its 
affirmative: “The flower is red and the willow is green.’ To 
put it in logical formula, it will run like this: ‘A is at once 
A and not-A.’ If so, I am I and yet you are I. An Indian 
philosopher asserts that Tat twam asi, Thou art it. If so, 
heaven is hell and God is Devil. To pious orthodox 
Christians, what a shocking doctrine this Zen is! When Mr. 
Chang drinks Mr. Li grows tipsy. The silent thundering 
Vimalakirti confessed that he was sick because all his 
fellow-beings were sick. All wise and loving souls must be 
said to be the embodiments of the Great Paradox of the 
universe. But I am digressing. What I wanted to say was 
that Zen is more daringly concrete in its paradoxes than 
other mystical teachings. The latter are more or less con- 
fined to general statements concerning life or God or the 
world, but Zen carries its paradoxical assertions into every 
detail of our daily life. It has no hesitation in flatly denying 
all our most familiar facts of experience. ‘I am writing here 
and yet I haye not written a word. You are perhaps reading 
this now and yet there is not a person in the world who 
reads. I am utterly blind and deaf, but every colour is 
recognized and every sound discerned.’ The Zen masters 
will go on like this indefinitely. Basho (Pa-chiao), a Korean 
monk of the ninth century, once delivered a famous sermon 
which ran thus: ‘If you have a staff (shujo, or chu-chang in 
Chinese), I will give you one; if you have not, I will take 
it away from you.’ 

When Jéshu, the great Zen master of whom mention was 
repeatedly made, was asked what he would give when a 
poverty-stricken fellow should come to him, he replied, 
‘What is wanting in him?’! When he was asked on another 

1 Another time a monk was told, ‘Hold on to your poverty!’ Nanyin 
Yegu’s (Nan-yiian Hui-yung’s) answer to his poverty-stricken monk was 
more consoling: ‘You hold a handful of jewels yourself.’ The subject of 
poverty is the all-important one in our religious experience—poverty 
not only in the material but also in the spiritual sense. Asceticism must 
have as its ground-principle a far deeper sense than to be merely curbing 
human desires and passions; there must be in it something positive and 


highly religious. ‘To be poor in spirit,” whatever meaning it may have in 
Christianity, is rich in signification for Buddhists, especially for Zen 


8 273 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


occasion, ‘When a man comes to you with nothing, what 
would you say to him?’ his immediate response was, 
‘Cast it away !’ We may ask him, When a man has nothing, 
what will he cast? When a man is poor, can he be said to be 
sufficient unto himself? Is he not in need of everything? 
Whatever deep meaning there may be in these answers of 
Jéshu, the paradoxes are quite puzzling and baffle our 
logically trained intellect. ‘Carry away the farmer’s oxen, 
and make off with the hungry man’s food’ is a favourite 
phrase with the Zen masters, who think we can thus best 
cultivate our spiritual farm and fill up the soul hungry for 
the substance of things. 

It is related that Okubo Shibun, famous for painting 
bamboo, was requested to execute a kakemono represent- 
ing a bamboo forest. Consenting, he painted with all his 
known skill a picture in which the entire bamboo grove was 
in red. The patron upon its receipt marvelled at the 
extraordinary skill with which the painting had been 
executed, and, repairing to the artist’s residence, he said, 
“Master, I have come to thank you for the picture; but, 
excuse me, you have painted the bamboo red.’ ‘Well,’ cried 
the master, ‘in what colour would you desire it?’ ‘In black 
of course,’ replied the patron. ‘And who,’ answered the 
artist, ‘ever saw a black-leaved bamboo?’ When one is so 
used to a certain way of looking at things, one finds it so full 
of difficulties to veer round and start on a new line of pro- 
cedure. The true colour of the bamboo is perhaps neither 
red nor black nor green nor any other colour known to us. 
Perhaps it is red, perhaps it is black just as well. Who 


knows? The imagined paradoxes may be after all really not 
paradoxes. 


followers. A monk, Sei-jei (Ch‘ing-shi), came to Sozan (Ts‘ao-shan), a 
great master of the Sét6 school in China, and said, ‘I am a poor lonely 
monk : pray have pity on me.’ ‘O monk, come on forward !’? Whereupon 
the monk approached the master, who then exclaimed, ‘After enjoying 
three cupfuls of fine chiu (liquor) brewed at Ch‘ing-yiian, do you still 
protest that your lips are not at all wet?’ As to another aspect of poverty, 
cf. Hsiang-yen’s poem of poverty. 


274 


III 


The next form in which Zen expresses itself is the denial 
of opposites, somehow corresponding to the mystic ‘via 
negativa’. The point is not to be ‘caught’, as the masters 
would say, in any of the four propositions (catushkotia) : 
1. “It is A’; 2. ‘It is not-A’; 3. ‘It is both A and not-A’; and 
4. ‘It is neither A nor not-A.” When we make a negation or 
an assertion, we are sure to get into one of these logical 
formulas according to the Indian method of reasoning. So 
long as the intellect is to move among the ordinary dualistic 
groove, this is unavoidable. It is in the nature of our logic 
that any statement we can make is to be so expressed. But 
Zen thinks that the truth can be reached when it is neither 
asserted nor negated. This is indeed the dilemma of life, 
but the Zen masters are ever insistent on escaping the 
dilemma. Let us see if they escape free. 

According to Ummon, ‘In Zen there is absolute freedom ; 
sometimes it negates and at other times it affirms; it does 
either way at pleasure.’ A monk asked, ‘How does it negate?’ 
‘With the passing of winter there cometh spring.’ ‘What 
happens when spring cometh?’ ‘Carrying a staff across the 
shoulders, let one ramble about in the fields, East or West, 
North or South, and beat the old stumps to one’s heart’s 
content.’ This was one way to be free as shown by one of the 
greatest masters in China. Another way follows. 

The masters generally go about with a kind of short stick 
known as shippé (chu-pi), or at least they did so in old 
China. It does not matter whether it is a shippé or not; any- 
thing, in fact, will answer our purpose. Shuzan, a noted Zen 
master of the tenth century, held out his stick and said to a 
group of his disciples: ‘Call it not a shippé; if you do, you 
assert. Nor do you deny its being a shippé; if you do, you 
negate. Apart from affirmation and negation, speak, 
speak!’ The idea is to get our heads free from dualistic 
tangles and philosophic subtleties. A monk came out of the 


275 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


rank, took the shippé away from the master’s hand, and 
threw it down on the floor. Is this the answer? Is this the 
way to respond to the master’s request ‘to speak’? Is this the 
way to transcend the four propositions—the logical con- 
ditions of thinking? In short, is this the way to be free? 
Nothing is stereotyped in Zen, and somebody else may solve 
the difficulty in quite a different manner. This is where Zen 
is original and creative. 

Ummon expressed the same idea with his staff, which he 
held up, saying : ‘What is this? If you say it is a staff, you go 
right to hell; but if it is not a staff, what is it?’ Hima’s 
(Pi-mo’s) way somewhat deviated from this. He used to 
carry a forked stick and whenever a monk came up to him 
and made a bow, he applied the stick on the neck of the 
monk, and said: ‘What devil taught you to be a homeless 
monk? What devil taught you to go round? Whether you 
can say something, or whether you cannot say anything, 
all the same you are to die under my fork: speak, speak, 
be quick!’ Tokusan (Té-shan) was another master who 
flourished a stick to the same effect; for he used to say, ‘No 
matter what you say, or what you say not, just the same 
thirty blows for you!’ 

When the ownership of a kitten was disputed between 
two parties of monks, the Master Nansen (Nan-ch‘iian 
P‘u-yiian, 749-835) came out, took hold of the animal, 
and said to them, ‘If you can say a word, this will be saved: 
if not, it will be slain.’ By ‘a word’, of course, he meant one 
that transcended both affirmation and negation, as when 
Jéshu was asked for ‘one word of the ultimate truth’. No 
one made a response, whereupon the master slew the poor 
creature. Nansen looks like a hard-hearted Buddhist, but 
his point is: To say it is involves us in a dilemma; to say it 
is not puts us in the same predicament. To attain to the 
truth, this dualism must be avoided. How do you avoid it? 
It may not only be the loss of the life of a kitten, but the loss 
of your own life and soul, if you fail to ride over this im- 
passe. Hence Nansen’s drastic procedure. Later, in the even- 
ing, Jéshu, who was one of his disciples, came back, when 


276 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


the master told him of the incident of the day. Jéshu at 
once took off one of his straw sandals and putting it over his 
head began to depart. Upon this, said the master, ‘What a 
pity you were not today with us, for you could have saved 
the kitten.” This strange behaviour, however, was Joshu’s 
way of affirming the truth transcending the dualism of ‘to 
be’ (sat) and ‘not to be’ (asat). 

While Kyézan (Yang-shan, 804-899) was residing at 
Téhei (Tung-ping), of Shao-chou, his master Isan (Wei- 
shan, 771-853), both of whom were noted Zen masters of 
the T‘ang dynasty, sent him a mirror accompanied with a 
letter. Kydzan held forth the mirror before a congregation 
of monks and said: ‘O monks, Isan has sent here a mirror. 
Is this Isan’s mirror or mine own? If you say it is Isan’s, 
how is it that the mirror is in my hands? If you say it is 
mine own, has it not come from Isan? If you make a proper 
statement, it will be retained here. If you cannot, it will be 
smashed in pieces.’ He said this for three times, but nobody 
even made-an attempt to answer. The mirror was then 
smashed. This was somewhat like the case of Nansen’s 
kitten. In both cases the monks failed to save the innocent 
victim or the precious treasure, simply because their minds 
were not yet free from intellectualism and were unable to 
break through the entanglements purposely set up by Nan- 
sen in one case and by Kydzan in the other. The Zen 
method of training its followers thus appears so altogether 
out of reason and unnecessarily inhuman. But the master’s 
eyes are always upon the truth absolute and yet attainable 
in this world of particulars. If this can be gained, what does 
it matter whether a thing known as precious be broken and 
an animal be sacrificed? Is not the recovering of the soul 
more important than the loss of a kingdom? 

Kyégen (Hsiang-yen), a disciple of Isan (Wei-shan), 
with whom we got acquainted just now, said in one of his 
sermons: ‘It is like a man over a precipice one thousand 
feet high, he is hanging himself there with a branch of a 
tree between his teeth; the feet are far off the ground, and 
his hands are not taking hold of anything. Suppose another 


277 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


man coming to him to propose a question, ‘‘What is the 
meaning of the first patriarch coming over here from the 
West?” If this man should open the mouth to answer, he is 
sure to fall and lose his life; but if he would make no answer, 
he must be said to ignore the inquirer. At this critical 
moment what should he do?’ This is putting the negation 
of opposites in a most graphically illustrative manner. The 
man over the precipice is caught in a dilemma of life and 
death, and there can be no logical quibblings. The cat may 
be sacrificed at the altar of Zen, the mirror may be smashed 
on the ground, but how about one’s own life? The Buddha 
in one of his former lives is said to have thrown himself 
down into the maw of a man-devouring monster, in order 
to get the whole stanza of the truth. Zen, being practical, 
wants us to make the same noble determination to give up 
our dualistic life for the sake of enlightenment and eternal 
peace. For it says that its gate will open when this deter- 
mination is reached. 

The logical dualism of ‘to be’ (asti) and ‘not to be’ 
(nastt) is frequently expressed by Zen masters by such terms 
of contrast as are used in our daily parlance: ‘taking life’ 
and ‘giving life’, ‘capturing’ and ‘releasing’, ‘giving’ and 
‘taking away’, ‘coming in contact’ and ‘turning away from’, 
etc. Ummon once held up his staff and declared, ‘The 
whole world, heaven and earth, altogether owes its life and 
death to this staff.” A monk came out and asked, ‘How is it 
killed?’ ‘Writhing in agony! ‘How is it restored to life?’ 
“You had better be a chef.’ ‘When it is neither put to death 
nor living, what would you say?’ Ummon rose from his 
seat and said, ‘Mo-hé-pan-jé-po-lo-mi-ta!’ (Mahd-prajita- 
paramita). This was Ummon’s synthesis—‘the one word’ of 
the ultimate truth, in which thesis and antithesis are con- 
cretely unified, and to which the four propositions are 
inapplicable (rahiia). 


278 


IV 


We now come to the third class I have styled ‘Con- 
tradiction’, by which I mean the Zen master’s negation, 
implicitly or expressly, of what he himself has stated or 
what has been stated by another. To one and the same 
question his answer is sometimes ‘No’, sometimes ‘Yes’. Or 
to a well-known and fully established fact he gives an un- 
qualified denial. From an ordinary point of view he is 
altogether unreliable, yet he seems to think that the truth 
of Zen requires such contradictions and denials; for Zen 
has a standard of its own, which, to our common-sense 
minds, consists just in negating everything we properly 
hold true and real. In spite of these apparent confusions, 
the philosophy of Zen is guided by a thorough-going prin- 
ciple which, when once grasped, its topsy-turviness be- 
comes the plainest truth. 

A monk asked the sixth patriarch of the Zen sect in 
China, who flourished late in the seventh and early in the 
eighth centuries, ‘Who has attained to the secrets of Wobai 
(Huang-mei) ?? Wobai is the name of the mountain where 
the fifth patriarch, Hung-jén, used to reside, and it was a 
well-known fact that Hui-néng, the sixth patriarch, studied 
Zen under him and succeeded in the orthodox line of 
transmission. The question was therefore really not a 
plain regular one, seeking an information about facts. It 
had quite an ulterior object. The reply of the sixth pat- 
riarch was, ‘One who understands Buddhism has attained 
to the secrets of Wobai.’ 

‘Have you then attained them?’ 

‘No, I have not.’ 

‘How is it,’ asked the monk, ‘that you have not?’ 

The answer was, ‘I do not understand Buddhism.”! 


1 An analogous story is told of Sekito Kisen (Shih-t‘ou Hsi-ch‘ien), 


who is grandson in faith of the sixth patriarch, The story is quoted else- 
where. 


79 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Did he not really understand Buddhism? Or is it that 
not to understand is to understand? This is also the 
philosophy of the Kena-Upanishad. 

The self-contradiction of the sixth patriarch is somewhat 
mild and indirect when compared with that of Dégo 
(Tao-wu). He succeeded to Yakusan (Yiieh-shan Wei- 
yen, 751-834), but when he was asked by Gohé (Wu-féng) 
whether he knew the old master of Yakusan, he flatly denied 
it, saying, ‘No, I do not.’ Gohd was, however, persistent. 
‘Why do you not know him?’ ‘I do not, I do not’ was the 
emphatic statement of Dégo. The latter thus singularly 
enough refused to give any reason except simply and 
forcibly denying the fact which was apparent to our com- 
mon-sense knowledge. 

Another emphatic and unequivocal contradiction by 
Tesshikaku (T‘ieh-tsui Chiao) is better known to students 
of Zen than the case just cited. He-was a disciple of Jéshu 
(Chao-chou). When he visited Higen (Fa-yen Wén-i, died 
958), another great Zen master, the latter asked him what 
was the Jast place he came from. Tesshikaku replied that he 
came from Jéshu. Said Hogen: 

‘I understand that a cypress tree once became the sub- 
ject of his talk: was that really so?’ 

Tesshikaku was positive in his denial, saying, ‘He had 
no such talk.’ 

Hoégen protested. ‘All the monks coming from Jéshu 
lately speak of his reference to a cypress tree in answer 
to a monk’s question, ““What was the real object of the 
coming East of Bodhidharma?” How do you say that 
Joshu made no such reference to a cypress tree?’ 

Whereupon Tesshikaku roared, ‘My late master never 
made such a talk; no slighting allusion to him, if you 
please !’ 

Hogen greatly admired this attitude on the part of the 
disciple of the famous Jéshu, and said, ‘Truly, you are a 
lion’s child !? 

In Zen literature, Dharma’s coming from the West— 
that is, from India—is quite frequently made the subject 


280 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


of the discourse. When a question is asked as to the real 
object of his coming over to China, it refers to the ultimate 
principle of Buddhism, and has nothing to do with his per- 
sonal motive which made him cross the ocean, landing him 
at some point along the southern coast of China. The his- 
torical fact is not the issue here. And to this all-important 
question numerous answers are given, but so varied and so 
unexpectedly odd, yet according to Zen masters all expres- 
sive of the truth of their teaching. 

This contradiction, negation, or paradoxical statement 
is the inevitable result of the Zen way of looking at life. 
The whole emphasis of its discipline is placed on the in- 
tuitive grasping of the inner truth deeply hidden in our 
consciousness. And this truth thus revealed or awakened 
within oneself defies intellectual manipulation, or at least 
cannot be imparted to others through any dialectical 
formulas. It must come out of oneself, grow within oneself, 
and become one with one’s own being. What others—that 
is, ideas or images—can do is to indicate the way where lies 
the truth. This is what Zen masters do. And the indicators 
given by them are naturally unconventionally free and 
refreshingly original. As their eyes are always fixed on the 
ultimate truth itself, anything and everything they can 
command is utilized to accomplish the end, regardless of its 
logical conditions and consequences. This indifference to 
logic is sometimes asserted purposely, just to let us know the 
truth of Zen is independent of the intellect. Hence the 
statement in the Prajftd-paramita-Sitra, that ‘Not to have any 
Dharma to discourse about—this is discoursing about the 
Dharma.’ (Dharmadesand dharmadeSaneti subhiite nasti sa 
kaScid dharmo yo dharmadesana namotpalabhyate.) 

Haikyu (P‘ei Hsiu), a state minister of the T'ang dynasty, 
was a devoted follower of Zen under Obaku. One day he 
showed him a manuscript in which his understanding of 
Zen was stated. The master took it, and setting it down 
beside him, made no movement to read it, but remained 
silent for some little while. He then said, ‘Do you under- 
stand?’ ‘Not quite,’ answered the minister. ‘If you have an 


281 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


understanding here,’ said the master, ‘there is something of 
Zen. But if it is committed to paper and ink, nowhere is our 
religion to be found.’ Something analogous to this we have 
already noticed in Hakuin’s interview with Shdju Ronin. 
Being a living fact, Zen is only where living facts are handled. 
Appeal to the intellect is real and living as long as it issues 
directly from life. Otherwise, no amount of literary accom- 
plishment or of intellectual analysis avails in the study of 
Zen. 


Vv 


So far Zen appears to be nothing but a philosophy of 
negation and contradiction, whereas in fact it has its 
affirmative side, and in this consists the uniqueness of Zen. 
In most forms of mysticism, speculative or emotional, their 
assertions are general and abstract, and there is not much 
in them that will specifically distinguish them from some of 
the philosophical dictums. Sings Blake, for instance: 


“To see a world in a grain of sand, 
And a heaven in a wild flower, 

Hold infinity in the palm of your hand 
And eternity in an hour.’ 


Again, listen to the exquisite feelings expressed in the lines 
of Wither : 


‘By the murmur of a spring, 
Or the least bough’s rustling ; 
By a daisy, whose leaves spread 
Shut when Titan goes to bed; 
Or a shady bush or tree— 
She could more infuse in me 
Than all nature’s beauties can 
In some other wiser men.’ 


dg is not very difficult to understand these poetic and 
mystical feelings as expressed by the highly sensitive souls, 


282 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


though we may not all realize exactly as they felt. Even 
when Eckhart declares that ‘the eye with which I see God 
is the same with which God sees me’, or when Plotinus 
refers to ‘that which mind, when it turns back, thinks before 
it thinks itself’, we do not find it altogether beyond our 
understanding to get at their meaning as far as the ideas are 
concerned which they try to convey in these mystical 
utterances. But when we come to statements by the Zen 
masters, we are entirely at sea how to take them. Their 
affirmations are so irrelevant, so inappropriate, so irra- 
tional, and so nonsensical—at least superficially—that those 
who have not gained the Zen way of looking at things can 
hardly make, as we say, head or tail of them. 

The truth is that even with full-fledged mystics they are 
unable to be quite free from the taint of intellection, and 
leave, as a rule, ‘traces’ by which their holy abode could be 
reached. Plotinus’ ‘flight from alone to alone’ is a great 
mystical utterance proving how deeply he delved into the 
inner sanctuary of our consciousness. But there is still some- 
thing speculative or metaphysical about it, and when it is 
put side by side with the Zen utterances to be cited below, 
it has, as the masters would say, a mystic flavour on the 
surface. So long as the masters are indulging in negations, 
denials, contradictions, or paradoxes, the stain of specu- 
lation is not quite washed off them. Naturally, Zen is not 
opposed to speculation as it is also one of the functions of 
the mind. But Zen has travelled along a different path alto- 
gether unique, I think, in the history of mysticism, whether 
Eastern or Western, Christian or Buddhist. A few examples 
will suffice to illustrate my point. 

A monk asked Jéshu, ‘I read in the Sitra that all things 
return to the One, but where does this One return to?’ 
Answered the master, ‘When I was in the province of Tsing 
I had a robe made which weighed seven chin.’ When K6rin 
(Hsiang-lin Yiian) was asked what was the signification of 
Bodhidharma’s coming from the West, his reply was, 
‘After a long sitting one feels fatigued.’ What is the logical 
relation between the question and the answer? Does it 


283 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


refer to Dharma’s nine years’ sitting against the wall, as 
the tradition has it? If so, was his propaganda much ado 
for nothing except his feeling fatigued? When Kwazan 
(Hé-shan) was asked what the Buddha was, he said, ‘I 
know how to play the drum, rub-a-dub, rub-a-dub!” (chieh 
ta ku). When Baso Déichi was sick, one of his disciples came 
and inquired about his condition, ‘How do you feel today?’ 
‘Nichimen-butsu, Gwachimen-butsu !’ was the reply, which 
literally means ‘sun-faced Buddha, moon-faced Buddha!’ A 
monk asked Jéshu, ‘When the body crumbles all to pieces 
and returns to the dust, there eternally abides one thing. Of 
this I have been told, but where does this one thing abide?’ 
The master replied, ‘It is windy again this morning.” When 
Shuzan (Shou-shan) was asked what was the principal 
teaching of Buddhism, he quoted a verse: 


‘By the castle of the king of Ch’u, 
Eastward flows the stream of Ju.’ 


‘Who is the teacher of all the Buddhas?’ was the question 
put to Bokuju (Mu-chou), who in reply merely hummed a 
tune, ‘“Ting-ting, tung-tung, ku-ti, ku-tung!’ To the 
question what Zen was, the same master gave the following 
answer, ‘Namu-sambo!’ (namoratnatrayadya). The monk, 
however, confessed that he could not understand it, where- 
upon the master exclaimed, ‘O you miserable frog, whence 
is this evil karma of yours?’ On another occasion the same 
question called forth a different answer, which was, 
*‘Makahannyaharamii!’ (mahdprajnadpadramita). When the 
monk failed to comprehend the ultimate meaning of the 
phrase, the master went on: 


‘My robe is all worn out after so many years’ usage, 
And parts of it in shreds loosely hanging, have been blown 
away to the clouds.’ 


To quote another case from Bokuju, he was once asked 
by a monk, ‘What is the doctrine that goes beyond the 
Buddhas and Fathers?’ The master, immediately holding 


284 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


up his staff, said to the congregation, ‘I call this a staff, 
and what would you call it?’ No answer. was forthcoming, 
whereupon the master, again holding ‘forth the staff, asked 
the monk, “Did you not ask me about the doctrine that goes 
beyond the Buddhas and Fathers?’ 

When Nanyin Yegu (Nan-yiian Hui-yung) was once 
asked what the Buddha was, he said, ‘What is not the 
Buddha?’ Another time his answer was, ‘I never knew him.’ 
There was still another occasion when he said, ‘Wait until 
there is one, for then I will tell you.’ So far Nanyin does 
not seem to be so very incomprehensible, but what follows 
will challenge our keenest intellectual analysis. When the 
inquiring monk replied to the master’s third statement, 
saying, ‘If so, there is no Buddha in you,’ the master 
promptly asserted, ‘You are right there.’ This evoked a 
further question, ‘Where am I right, sir?’ ‘This is the 
thirtieth day of the month,’ replied the master. 

Kisu Chijo (Kuei-tsung Chih-ch‘ang) was one of the 
able disciples of Baso (Ma-tsu). When he was weeding in 
the garden, a Buddhist scholar versed in the philosophy of 
Buddhism came to see the master. A snake happened to pass 
by them, and the master at once killed it with a spade. The 
philosopher-monk remarked, ‘How long I have heard of 
the name of Kisu, and how reverently I have thought of it! 
But what do I see now but a rude-mannered monk?’ ‘O my 
scholar-monk,’ said the master, ‘you had better go back to 
the Hall and have a cup of tea over there.’ Kisu’s retort 
as it stands here is quite unintelligible as far as our com- 
mon-sense knowledge of worldly affairs goes ; but according 
to another informant Kisu is reported, when he was 
reproached by the monk, to have said, ‘Who is the rude- 
mannered one, you or I?’ Then said the monk, ‘What is 
rude-mannered?’ The master held up the spade. ‘What is 
refined?? He now assumed the attitude as if to kill the 
snake. ‘Ifso,’ said the monk, ‘you are behaving according to 
the law.’ ‘Enough with my lawful or unlawful behaviour, 
demanded the master; ‘when did you see my killing the 
snake, anyway?’ The monk made no answer. 


285 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Perhaps this is sufficient to show how freely Zen deals 
with those abstruse philosophical problems which have 
been taxing all human ingenuity ever since the dawn of 
intelligence. Let me conclude this part with a sample sermon 
delivered by Goso Héyen (Wu-tsu Fa-yen); for a Zen 
master occasionally—no, quite frequently—comes down to 
the dualistic level of understanding and tries to deliver a 
speech for the edification of his pupils. But being a Zen 
sermon we naturally expect something unusual in it. Goso 
was one of the ablest Zen masters of the twelfth century. 
He was the teacher of Yengo (Yiian-wu), famous as the 
author of the Hekiganshu. One of his sermons runs thus: 

‘Yesterday I came across one topic which I thought 
I might communicate to you, my pupils, today. But an old 
man such as I am is apt to forget, and the topic has gone off 
altogether from my mind. I cannot just recall it.’ So saying, 
Goso remained quiet for some little time, but at last he 
exclaimed, ‘I forget, I forget, I cannot remember!’ He 
resumed, however : ‘I know there is a mantram in one of the 
Sitras known as The King of Good Memory. Those who are 
forgetful may recite it, and the thing forgotten will come 
again. Well, I must try.’ He then recited the mantram, 
‘Or o-lo-lok-kei svaha !’ Clapping his hands and laughing 
heartily, he said: ‘I remember, I remember; this it was: 
When you seek the Buddha, you cannot see him: when 
you look for the patriarch, you cannot see him. The 
muskmelon is sweet even to the stems, the bitter gourd is 
bitter even to the roots.’ 


He then came down from the pulpit without further 
remark, 


VI 


In one of his sermons Eckhart, referring to the mutual 
relationship between God and man, says: ‘It is as if one 
stood before a high mountain and cried, ‘“‘Art thou there?” 
The echo comes back, “Art thou there?” If one cries, 


286 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


“Come out!” the echo answers, “Come out!’ Some- 
thing like this is to be observed in the Zen masters’ answers 
now classified under ‘Repetition’. It may be found hard for 
the uninitiated to penetrate into the inner meaning of those 
parrot-like repetitions which sometimes sound like mimicry 
on the part of the master. In this case, indeed, the words 
themselves are mere sounds, and the inner sense is to be 
read in the echoing itself if anywhere. The understanding, 
however, must come out of one’s own inner life, and what 
the echoing does is to give this chance of self-awakening to 
the earnest seekers of truth. When the mind is so turned as 
to be all ready to break into a certain note, the master turns 
the key and it sings out its own melody, not learned from 
anybody else but discovered within itself. And this turning 
the key in the form of repetition in this case is what interests 
us in the following quotations. 

Chosui (Ch‘ang-shui Tzu-hsiian) once asked Yekaku 
(Hui-chiao), of Mount Réya (Lang-yeh), who lived in the 
first half of the eleventh century, ‘How is it that the 
Originally Pure has all of a sudden come to produce 
mountains and rivers and the great earth?’ The question 
is taken from the Sdrangama-sitra in which Purna asks of the 
Buddha how the Absolute came to evolve this phenomenal 
world. For this is a great philosophical problem that has 
perplexed the greatest minds of all ages. So far all the inter- 
pretations making up the history of thought have proved 
unsatisfactory in one way or another. Chdsui, also being a 
student of philosophy in a way, has now come to his 
teacher to be enlightened on the subject. But the teacher’s 
answer was no answer as we understand it, for he merely 
repeated the question, ‘How is it that the Originally Pure 
has all of a sudden come to produce mountains and rivers 
and the great earth?’ Translated into English, this dialogue 
loses much of its zest. Let me write it down in Japanese- 
Chinese: Chésui asked, ‘56-76 hon-nen un-ga kos-sho sen-ga 
dai-ji?? and the master echoed, ‘Shé-j6 hon-nen un-ga kos-sho 
sen-ga dai-ji?’ 

This was not, however, enough. Later, in the thirteenth 

287 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


century, another great Zen master, Kido (Hsii-t‘ang), 
commented on this in a still more mystifying manner. His 
sermon one day ran in this wise: ‘When Chésui asked 
Yekaku, “‘Shd-j6 hon-nen un-ga kos-sho sen-ga dai-fi?”’ the 
question was echoed back to the questioner himself, and 
it is said that the spiritual eye of the disciple was then 
opened. I now want to ask you how this could have 
happened. Were not the question and the answer exactly 
the same? What reason did Chésui find in this? Let me 
comment on it.” Whereupon he struck his chair with the 
hossu, and said, ‘Sh6-j6 hon-nen un-ga kos-sho sen-ga dat-ji?’ His 
comment complicates the matter instead of simplifying it. 

This has ever been a great question of philosophy— 
this question of unity and multiplicity, of mind and matter, 
of thought and reality. Zen, being neither idealism nor 
realism, proposes its own way of solution as is illustrated in 
the case of the Originally Pure. The following one solves 
the problem also in its own way. A monk asked Chésa 
Keishin, ‘How do we, transforming (chuan) mountains and 
rivers and the earth, reduce them into the Self?’ Replied 
the master, ‘How do we, transforming the Self, produce 
mountains and rivers and the earth?’ The monk confessed 
ignorance, whereupon said the master: 


‘In this city south of the Lake, people are thriving well,— 
Cheap rice and plentiful fuel and prospering neighbourhood.’ 


Tésu Daido (T‘ou-tzi Tai-t‘ung), of the T‘ang dynasty, 
who died in the year 914, answered ‘The Buddha’ when he 
was questioned, ‘What is the Buddha?’ He said ‘Tao’ when 
the question was, ‘What is Tao?’ He answered ‘The 
Dharma’ to the question ‘What is the Dharma?’ 

When Jéshu asked Kwanchu (Tai-tz‘t Huan-chung) 
of the ninth century, ‘What is the being [or substance] 
of Prajfia?? Kwanchu, without giving any answer, simply 
echoed the question, ‘What is the being of Prajfia?’ And 
this brought out a hearty laugh on the part of Jéshu. 
Prajfia may be translated supreme intelligence, and 


288 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


Mafijugri is regarded by the Mahay4nists as the embodi- 
ment of Prajfia. But in this case Mafijusri has nothing to 
do with it. The question is concerned with the substantial 
conception of Prajfia, which, being a form of mental 
activity, requires something to abide in. According to 
Buddhist philosophy, there are three fundamental con- 
ceptions to explain the problem of existence: Substance or 
Being (bhava), Appearance or Aspect (lakshana), and 
Function or Activity (kritya). Or, to use the terms of the 
Madhyamika, the three conceptions are actor, act, and 
acting. Prajfia being an intellectual acting, there must be 
an agent or substance behind it. Hence the question, What 
is the being or body of Prajfia? Now, the answer or echo 
given out by Kwanchu does not explain anything; we are 
at a loss as far as its conceptual signification goes. The Zen 
masters do not give us any literary clue to get around what 
we see on the surface. When we try to understand it in- 
tellectually, it slips away from us. It must be approached 
therefore from another plane of unconsciousness. Unless we 
move on to the same plane where the masters stand, or un- 
less we abandon our so-called common-sense way of reason- 
ing, there is no possible bridge which will carry us over the 
chasm dividing our intellection from their apparently 
psittacine repetitions. 

In this case, as in other cases, the idea of the masters is 
to show the way where the truth of Zen is to be experienced, 
but not in and through the language which they use and 
which we all use, as the means of communicating ideas. 
Language, in case they resort to words, serves as an ex- 
pression of feelings or moods or inner states, but not of 
ideas, and therefore it becomes entirely incomprehensible 
when we search its meaning in the words of the masters as 
embodying ideas. Of course, words are not to be altogether 
disregarded, inasmuch as they correspond to the feelings or 
experiences. To know this is more important in the under- 
standing of Zen. 

Language is then with the Zen masters a kind of ex- 
clamation or ejaculation as directly coming out of their 


T 289 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


inner spiritual experience. No meaning is to be sought in 
the expression itself, but within ourselves, in our own minds, 
which are awakened to the same experience. Therefore 
when we understand the language of the Zen: masters, it is 
the understanding of ourselves and not the sense of the 
language which reflects ideas and not the experienced 
feelings themselves. Thus it is impossible to make those 
understand Zen who have not had any Zen experience yet, 
just as it is impossible for the people to realize the sweetness 
of honey who have never tasted it before. With such people, 
‘sweet? honey will ever remain as an idea altogether 
devoid of sense; that is, the word has no life with them. 

Goso Héyen first studied the Yogacara school of Buddhist 
philosophy and came across the following passage, ‘When 
the Bodhisattva enters on the path of knowledge, he finds 
that the discriminating intellect is identified with Reason, 
and that the objective world is fused with Intelligence, and 
there is no distinction to be made between the knowing 
and the known.’ The anti-Yog4carians refuted this state- 
ment, saying that if the knowing is not distinguished from 
the known, how is knowledge at all possible? The Yoga- 
carians could not answer this criticism, when Hsiian-chuang, 
who was at the time in India, interposed and saved his 
brethren in faith from the quandary. His answer was, ‘It is 
like drinking water ; one knows by oneself whether it is cold 
or not.” When Goso read this he questioned himself, ‘What 
is this that makes one know thus by oneself?’ This was the 
way he started on his Zen tour, for his Yogacara friends, 
being philosophers, could not enlighten him, and he finally 
came to a Zen master for instruction. 

Before we proceed to the next subject, let me cite an- 
other case of echoing. Hégen Mon-yeki (Fa-yen Wen-i), 
the founder of the Hogen branch of Zen Buddhism, 
flourished early in the tenth century. He asked one of his 
disciples, ‘What do you understand by this: “Let the 
difference be even a tenth of an inch, and it will grow as 
wide as heaven and earth”?’ The disciple said, ‘Let the 
difference be even a tenth of an inch, and it will grow as 


290 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


wide as heaven and earth.’ Hégen, however, told him that 
such an answer will never do. Said the disciple, ‘I cannot do 
otherwise; how do you understand?’ The master at once 
replied, ‘Let the difference be even a tenth of an inch and it 
will grow as wide as heaven and earth.’! 

Hogen was a great master of repetitions, and there is 
another interesting instance. After trying to understand the 
ultimate truth of Zen under fifty-four masters, Tokushéd 
(Té-shao, 907-971) finally came to Hégen; but tired of 
making special efforts to master Zen, he simply fell in with 
the rest of the monks there. One day when the master 
ascended the platform, a monk asked, ‘What is one drop of 
water dripping from the source of So? (Ts‘ao) ?’ Said the 
master, “That is one drop of water dripping from the source 
of So.’ The monk failed to make anything out of the re- 
petition and stood as if lost; while Tokushé, who happened 
to be by him, had for the first time his spiritual eye opened 
to the inner meaning of Zen, and all the doubts he had been 
cherishing secretly down in his heart were thoroughly 
dissolved. He was altogether another man after that. 

Such cases as this conclusively show that Zen is not to 
be sought in ideas or words, but at the same time they also 
show that without ideas or words Zen cannot convey itself 
to others. To grasp the exquisite meaning of Zen as expres- 
sing itself in words and yet not in them is a great art which 
is to be attained only after so many vain attempts. Tokushé, 
who after such an experience finally came to realize the 
mystery of Zen, did his best later to give vent to his view 
which he had gained under Hégen. It was while he was 
residing at the Monastery of Prajfia that he had the 
following ‘mond6’ and sermon. When Tokushé came out 
into the Hall a monk asked him: ‘I understand this was an 
ancient wise man’s saying: When a man sees Prajfia he is 


1 When this is literally translated, it grows too long and loses much of 
its original force. The Chinese runs thus: Hao li yu ch‘a t‘ien ti hstian chiieh. 
It may better be rendered, ‘An inch’s difference and heaven and earth 
are set apart.’ a ‘ 

2 That is, Ts‘ao-ch‘i, where the sixth patriarch of Zen used to reside. 
It is the birthplace of Chinese Zen Buddhism. 


291 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


tied to it; when he sees it not he is also tied to it. Now I 
wish to know how it is that a man seeing Prajfia could be 
tied to it.’ Said the master, ‘You tell me what it is that is 
seen by Prajfid.’ Asked the monk, ‘When a man sees not 
Prajfia, how could he be tied to it?’ ‘You tell me,’ said the 
master, ‘if there is anything that is not seen by Prajfia.’ The 
master then went on: ‘Prajfia seen is no Prajfia, nor is 
Prajfia unseen Prajfia: how could one apply the predicate, 
seen or unseen, to Prajfia? Therefore it is said of old that 
when one thing is missing the Dharmakaya is not complete ; 
when one thing is superfluous the Dharmakaya is not com- 
plete: and again that when there is one thing to be asserted 
the Dharmakaya is not complete; when there is nothing to 
be asserted the Dharmakaya is not complete. This is indeed 
the essence of Prajiia.’ 

The ‘repetition’ seen in this light may grow to be in- 
telligible to a certain degree. 


Vid 


As was explained in the preceding section, the principle 
underlying the various methods of instruction used by the 
Zen masters is to awaken a certain sense in the pupil’s own 
consciousness, by means of which he intuitively grasps the 
truth of Zen. Therefore, the masters always appeal to what 
we may designate ‘direct action’ and are loth to waste any 
lengthy discourse on the subject. Their dialogues are always 
pithy and apparently not controlled by rules of logic. The 
‘repetitive’ method as in other cases conclusively de- 
monstrates that the so-called answering is not to explain 
but to point the way where Zen is to be intuited. 

To conceive the truth as something external which is to 
be perceived by a perceiving subject is dualistic and appeals 
to the intellect for its understanding, but according to Zen 
we are living right in the truth, by the truth, from which 
we cannot be separated. Says Gensha (Hsitan-sha), ‘We are 


292 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


here as if immersed in water head and shoulders under- 
neath the great ocean, and yet how piteously we are ex- 
tending our hands for water!’ Therefore, when he was 
asked by a monk, ‘What is my self?’ he at once replied, 
“What would you do with a self?’ When this is intellectually 
analysed, he means that when we begin to talk about self 
we immediately and inevitably establish the dualism of self 
and not-self, thus falling into the errors of intellectualism. 
We are in the water—this is the fact, and let us remain so, 
Zen would say, for when we begin to beg for water we put 
ourselves in an external relation to it and what has hitherto 
been our own will be taken away from us. 

The following case may be interpreted in the same light: 
A monk came to Gensha and said, ‘I understand you to say 
that the whole universe is one transpicuous crystal ; how do 
I get at the sense of it?’ Said the master, “The whole universe 
is one transpicuous crystal, and what is the use of under- 
standing it?’ The day following the master himself asked the 
monk, “The whole universe is one transpicuous crystal, and 
how do you understand it?’ The monk replied, “The whole 
universe is one transpicuous crystal, and what is the use of 
understanding it?’ ‘I know,’ said the master, ‘that you are 
living in the cave of demons.’ While this looks another case 
of ‘Repetition’, there is something different in it, some- 
thing more of intellection, so to speak. 

Whatever this is, Zen never appeals to our reasoning 
faculty, but points directly at the very object one wants to 
have. While Gensha on a certain occasion was treating an 
army officer called Wei to tea, the latter asked, ‘What does 
it mean when they say that in spite of our having it every 
day we do not know it?’ Gensha without answering the 
question took up a piece of cake and offered it to him. After 
eating the cake the officer asked the master again, who then 
remarked, ‘Only we do not know it even when we are using 
it every day.’ This is evidently an object lesson. Another 
time a monk came to him and wanted to know how to 
enter upon the path of truth. Gensha asked, ‘Do you hear 
the murmuring of the stream?’ ‘Yes, I do,’ said the monk. 


293 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘There is a way to enter,’ was the master’s instruction. 
Gensha’s method was thus to make the seeker of the truth 
directly realize within himself what it was, and not to make 
him merely the possessor of a second-hand knowledge. ‘Ein 
begriffener Gott ist kein Gott,’ declares Terstegen. 

It is thus no wonder that the Zen masters frequently 
make an exclamatory utterance! in response to questions, 
instead of giving an intelligible answer. When words are 
used, if at all intelligible we may feel that we can somehow 
find a clue to get at the meaning, but when an inarticulate 
utterance is given we are quite at a loss how to deal with it, 
unless we are fortified with some previous knowledge such 
as I have at some length attempted to give to. my readers. 

Of all the Zen masters who used to give exclamatory 
utterance, the most noted ones are Ummon and Rinzai, 
the former for his ‘Kwan!’ and the latter for his ‘Kwatz!’ 
At the end of one summer sojourn Suigan (Ts‘ui-yen) made 
the following remark: ‘Since the beginning of this summer 
sojourn I have talked much; see if my eyebrows are still 
there.’ This refers to the tradition that when a man makes 
false statements concerning the Dharma of Buddhism he 
will lose all the hair on his face. As Suigan gave many ser- 
mons during the summer for the edification of his pupils, 
while no amount of talk can ever explain what the truth is, 
his eyebrows and beard might perhaps by this time have 
disappeared altogether. This, as far as its literary meaning 
is concerned, is the idea of his remark whatever Zen may be 
concealed underneath. 

Hofuku (Pao-fu), one of the masters, said, ‘One who turns 
into a highwayman has a treacherous heart.’ Chdkei 
(Ch‘ang-ch‘ing), another master, remarked, ‘How thickly 
they are growing!’ Ummon, one of the greatest masters 
towards the end of the T‘ang dynasty, exclaimed, ‘Kwan!’ 
Kwan literally means the gate on a frontier pass where 
travellers and their baggage are inspected. In this case, how- 
ever, the term does not mean anything of the sort; it is 


1 Does this not remind us of an old mystic who defined God as an 
unutterable sigh? 


294 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


simply ‘Kwan!’, an exclamatory utterance which does not 
allow any analytical or intellectual interpretation. Secché, 
the original compiler of the Hekigan, comments on this, ‘He 
is like one who, besides losing his money, is incriminated,’ 
while Hakuin has this to say, ‘Even an angry fist does not 
strike a smiling face.’ Something like this is the only com- 
ment we can make on such an utterance as Ummon’s. 
When we try anything approaching a conceptual inter- 
pretation on the subject we shall be ‘ten thousand. miles 
away beyond the clouds’, as the Chinese would say. 

While Rinzai is regarded as the author of ‘Kwatz!’ (hé), 
we have an earlier record of it; for Baso, successor to 
Nangaku (Nan-yiieh), and an epoch-maker in the history 
of Zen, uttered “‘Kwatz!’ to his disciple, Hyakujo (Pai- 
chang), when the latter came up to the master for a second 
time to be instructed in Zen. This ‘Kwatz!’ is said to have 
deafened Hyakujo’s ear for the following three days, But it 
was principally due to Rinzai that this particular cry was 
most effectively and systematically made use of and later 
came to be one of the special features of the Rinzai Zen in 
distinction to the other schools. In fact, the cry came to be 
so abused by his followers that he had to make the following 
remark: ‘You are all so given up to learning my cry (hé), 
but I want to ask you this: Suppose one man comes out 
from the eastern hall and another from the western hall, and 
suppose both give out the ““Kwatz!” simultaneously; and 
yet I say to you that subject and predicate are clearly dis- 
cernible in this. But how will you discern them? If you are 
unable to discern them, you are forbidden hereafter to 
imitate my cry.’ 

Rinzai distinguishes four kinds of ‘Kwatz!’ The first, 
according to him, is like the sacred sword of Vajraraja; 
the second is like the golden-haired lion squatting on the 
ground ; the third is like the sounding rod or the grass used 
as a decoy; and the fourth is the one that does not at all 
function as a ‘Kwatz!’ 

Rinzai once asked his disciple, Rakuho (Lé-p‘u), ‘One 
man has been using a stick and another resorting to the 


295 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


“Kwatz!? Which of them do you think is the more in- 
timate to the truth?’ Answered the disciple, ‘Neither of 
them !’ ‘What is the most intimate then?’ Rakuho cried out, 
‘K watz!’ Whereupon Rinzai struck him. This swinging of a 
stick was the most favourite method of Tokusan and stands 
generally contrasted to the crying utterance of Rinzai; but 
here the stick is used by Rinzai and the latter’s speciality 
is taken up in a most telling manner by his disciple Rakuho. 


Besides these ‘skilful contrivances’ (updya-kauSalya) so far 
enumerated under seven headings, there are a few more 
‘contrivances’, though I am not going to be very exhaustive 
here on the subject. 

One of them is ‘silence’. Vimalakirti was silent when 
Majfijuésri asked him as to the doctrine of non-duality, and 
his silence was later commented upon by a master as 
‘deafening like thunder’, A monk asked Basho Yesei 
(Pa-chiao Hui-ch‘ing) to show him the ‘original face’ 
without the aid of any intermediary conception, and the 
master, keeping his seat, remained silent. When Shifuku 
(Tzi-fu) was asked as to a word befitting the understand- 
ing of the inquirer, he did not utter a word, he simply 
kept silent. Bunki (Wén-hsi) of Koshu (Hang-chou) was 
a disciple of Kyézan (Yang-shan); he was asked by a 
monk, ‘What is the self?’ but he remained silent. As the 
monk did not know what to make of it, he asked again, to 
which the master replied, ‘When the sky is clouded, the 
moon cannot shine out.’ A monk asked Sozan (Ts‘ao-shan), 
‘How is the silence inexpressible to be revealed?’ ‘I do not 
reveal it here.’ “Where would you reveal it?’ ‘At midnight 
last night,’ said the master, ‘I lost three pennies by my 
bed.’ 

Sometimes the masters sit quiet, ‘for some little while’ 
(liang-chiu), either in response to a question or when in the 
pulpit. This diang-chiu does not always merely indicate the 
passage of time, as we can see in the following cases: A 
monk came to Shuzan (Shou-shan) and asked, ‘Please play 
me a tune on a stringless harp.’ The master was quiet for 


296 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


some little while, and said, ‘Do you hear it?’ ‘No, I do not 
hear it.’ ‘Why,’ said the master, ‘did you not ask louder?’ 
A monk asked Hofuku (Pao-fu), ‘I am told that when one 
wants to know the path of the uncreate, one should know 
the source of it. What is the source, sir?’ Hofuku was silent 
for a while, and then asked his attendant, ‘What did the 
monk ask me now?’ When that monk repeated the question, 
the master ejected him, exclaiming, ‘I am not deaf!’ 


Next, we may mention the method of counter-question- 
ing, wherein questions are not answered by plain state- 
ments but by counter-questionings. In Zen, generally 
speaking, a question is not a question in its ordinary sense— 
that is, it is not simply asked for information—and there- 
fore it is natural that what ordinarily corresponds to an 
answer is not an answer at all. Some Zen authority enum- 
erates eighteen different kinds of questions, against which we 
may distinguish eighteen corresponding answers. Thus a 
counter-question itself is in its way an illuminating answer. 
A monk requested Jimyo (Tzii-ming) to ‘set forth the idea 
of Dharma’s coming from the West’, and the master said, 
‘When did you come?’ When Rasan Dokan (Lo-shan Tao- 
hsien) was asked, ‘Who is the master of the triple world?’ 
he said, ‘Do you understand how to eat rice?’ Tenryu 
(T‘ien-lung), the teacher of Gutei, was hailed by a monk 
who asked him, ‘How are we released from the triple world?’ 
He retorted, ‘Where are you this very moment?’ A monk 
asked Jéshu, ‘What would you say when a man is without 
an inch of cloth on him?’ ‘What did you say he has not on 
him?’ ‘An inch of cloth on him, sir.’ ‘Very fine this, not to 
have an inch of cloth!’ responded the master. 

When we go on like this, there may be no end to this way 
of treating the various ‘contrivarices’ devised by the Zen 
masters for the benefits of their truth-thirsty pupils. Let me 
conclude this section by quoting two more cases in which a 
kind of reasoning in a circle is employed, but from another 
point of view we may detect here a trace of absolute 
monism in which all differences are effaced. Whether the 


297 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Zen masters agree with this view, however, remains to be 
seen; for while the absolute identity of meum et tuum is 
asserted, facts of individualization are not ignored either. 

A monk asked Daizui (Tai-sui), ‘What is my [pupil’s]} 
Self?? ‘That is my [master’s] Self’, answered the master. 
‘How is it that my Self is your Self?’ The ultimate dictum 
was, ‘That is your Self.’ To understand this in a logical 
fashion, put ‘ignorant’, or ‘confused’, or ‘human’ in place 
of ‘my [pupil’s] Self’, and in place of ‘your [master’s] Self” 
put ‘enlightened’, or ‘Buddha’s’, or ‘divine’, and we may 
have a glimpse into what was going on in the mind of 
Daizui. But without his last remark, “That is your Self’, the 
whole affair may resolve into a form of pantheistic philo- 
sophy. In the case of Sansho Yenen (San-shéng Hui-jén) 
and Kyozan Yejaku (Yang-shan Hui-chi), the thought 
of Daizui is more concretely presented. Yejaku asked Yenen, 
‘What is your name?’ and Yenen replied, ‘My name is 
Yejaku’. Yejaku protested, ‘Yejaku is my name.’ Thereupon 
said Yenen, ‘My name is Yenen,’ which brought out a 
hearty laugh from Yejaku. These dialogues remind one of 
the famous Hindu saying, ‘Tat tvam asi!’, but the difference 
between this and ‘My name is Yejaku’ is that between 
Vedanta philosophy and Zen Buddhism, or that between 
Indian idealism and Chinese realism or practicalness. The 
latter does not generalize, nor does it speculate on a higher 
plane which has no hold on life as we live it. 

According to the philosophy of the Kegon (Avatarhsaka) 
school of Buddhism, there is a spiritual world where one 
particular object holds within itself all other particular 
objects merged, instead of all particular objects being 
absorbed in the Great All. Thus in this world it so happens 
that when you lift a bunch of flowers or point at a piece of 
brick, the whole world in its multitudinosity is seen re- 
flected here. Ifo, the Zen masters may be said to be moving 
also in this mystic realm which reveals its secrets at the 
moment of supreme enlightenment (anuttara-samyak-samn- 


bodht). 


298 


VU 


We now come to the most characteristic feature of Zen 
Buddhism, by which it is distinguished not only from all the 
other Buddhist schools, but from all forms of mysticism that 
are ever known to us. So far the truth of Zen has been 
expressed through words, articulate or otherwise, however 
enigmatic they may superficially appear: but now the 
masters appeal to a more direct method instead of verbal 
medium. In fact, the truth of Zen is the truth of life, and 
life means to live, to move, to act, not merely to reflect. 
Is it not the most natural thing for Zen, therefore, that its 
development should be towards acting or rather living its 
truth instead of demonstrating or illustrating it in words; 
that is to say, with ideas? In the actual living of life there is 
no logic, for life is superior to logic. We imagine logic in- 
fluences life, but in reality man is not a rational creature 
so much as we make him out; of course he reasons, but he 
does not act according to the result of his reasoning pure 
and simple. There is something stronger than ratiocination. 
We may call it impulse, or instinct, or, more comprehen- 
sively, will. Where this will acts there is Zen, but if I am 
asked whether Zen is a philosophy of will, I rather hesitate 
to give an affirmative answer. Zen is to be explained, if at 
all explained it should be, rather dynamically than 
statically. When I raise the hand thus, there is Zen. But 
when I assert that I have raised the hand, Zen is no more 
there. Nor is there any Zen when I assume the existence 
of somewhat that may be named will or anything else. Not 
that the assertion or assumption is wrong, but that the thing 
known as Zen is three thousand miles away, as they say. 
An assertion is Zen only when it is in itself an act and does 
not refer to anything that is asserted in it. In the finger 
pointed at the moon there is no Zen, but when the pointing 
finger itself is considered, altogether independent of any 

_external references, there is Zen. 


=o 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Life delineates itself on the canvas called time; and time 
never repeats: once gone, forever gone; and so is an act: 
once done, it is never undone. Life is a sumiye-painting, 
which must be executed once and for all time and without 
hesitation, without intellection, and no corrections are per- 
missible or possible. Life is not like an oil-painting, which 
can be rubbed out and done over time and again until the 
artist is satisfied. With a sumiye-painting, any brush stroke 
painted over a second time results in a smudge; the life has 
left it. All corrections show when the ink dries. So is life. 
We can never retract what we have once committed to 
deeds; nay, what has once passed through consciousness can 
never be rubbed out. Zen therefore ought to be caught while 
the thing is going on, neither before nor after. It is an act of 
one instant. When Dharma was leaving China, as the legend 
has it, he asked his disciples what was their understanding 
of Zen, and one of them who happened to be a nun, re- 
plied, ‘It is like Ananda’s looking into the kingdom of 
Akshobhya Buddha, it is seen once and has never been re- 
peated.” This fleeting, unrepeatable, and ungraspable 
character of life is delineated graphically by Zen masters 
who have compared it to lightning or spark produced by 
the percussion of stones: shan tien kuang, chi shih huo is the 
phrase. 

The idea of direct method appealed to by the masters 
is to get hold of this fleeting life as it flees and not after 
it has flown. While it is fleeing, there is no time to recall 
memory or to build ideas. No reasoning avails here. Lan- 
guage may be used, but this has been associated too long with 
ideation, and has lost directness or being by itself. As soon 
as words are used, they express meaning, reasoning; they 
represent something not belonging to themselves; they have 
no direct connection with life, except being a faint echo or 
image of something that is no longer here. This is the reason 
why the masters often avoid such expressions or statements 
as are intelligible in any logical way. Their aim is to have the 
pupil’s attention concentrated in the thing itself which he 
wishes to grasp and not in anything that is in the remotest 


300 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


possible connection liable to disturb him. Therefore when 
we attempt to find meaning in dharanis or exclamations or a 
nonsensical string of sounds taken as such, we are far away 
from the truth of Zen. We must penetrate into the mind 
itself as the spring of life, from which all these words are 
produced. The swinging of a stick, the crying of a ‘Kwatz!’, 
or the kicking of a ball must be understood in this sense; 
that is, as the directest demonstration of life—no, even as 
life itself. The direct method is thus not always the violent 
assertion of life-force, but a gentle movement of the body, 
the responding to a call, the listening to a murmuring 
stream, or to a singing bird, or any of our most ordinary 
everyday assertions of life. 

Reiun (Ling-yiin) was asked, ‘How were things before 
the appearance of the Buddha in the world?’ He raised his 
hossu. ‘How were things after the appearance of the 
Buddha?’ He again raised the hossu. This raising of the 
hossu was quite a favourite method with many masters to 
demonstrate the truth of Zen. As I stated elsewhere, the 
hossu and the staff were the religious insignias of the master, 
and it was natural that they would be in much display when 
the monks approached with questions. One day Obaku 
Kiun (Huang-po Hsi-yiin) ascended the pulpit, and as soon 
as monks were gathered, the master took up his staff and 
drove them all out. When they were about all out, he called 
them, and they turned their heads back. The master said, 
‘The moon looks like a bow, less rain and more wind.’ 
The staff was thus wielded effectively by the masters, but 
who would ever have thought of a cane being made an 
instrument of illustrating the most profound truth of 
religion? 

Joshu was the readiest master for pithy retorts and his 
‘Sayings’ (Goroku) is filled with them, but he was also 
an adept at the direct method. When he was in his pulpit one 
day, a monk came out of the rank and made bows to 
him. Without waiting, however, for further movements 
on the part of the monk, Jéshu folded his hands and a 
parting salutation was given. Hyakujo Isei’s (Pai-chang 


gol 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Wei-chéng’s) way was somewhat different. He said to the 
monks, ‘You open the farm for me and I will talk to you 
about the great principle [of Zen].? When the monks 
finished attending to the farm and came back to the master 
to discourse on the great principle, he merely extended his 
open arms and said nothing. 

A monk came to Yenkwan An, the National Teacher, 
and wanted to know what was the original body of Vairo- 
chana Buddha. The Teacher told him to pass the pitcher, 
which he did. The Teacher then said, ‘Put it back where 
you got it.” The monk faithfully obeyed, but not being told 
what was the original body of the Buddha, he proposed the 
question once more, ‘Who is the Buddha?’ Answered the 
master, ‘Long gone is he!’ In this case the direct method 
was practised more by the monk himself under the direction 
of the master, but unfortunately the pupil’s spiritual con- 
dition was not ripe enough to grasp the meaning of his own 
‘direct method’, and alas, let go ‘the old Buddha!’ Some- 
thing similar to this case may be found in the following 
one: 

Sekis6 (Shih-shuang) asked Yenchi (Yiian-chih), who 
was a disciple of Yakusan (Yiieh-shan), ‘If some one after 
your death asked me about the ultimate fact, what should I 
say to him?’ The master gave no answer, but instead called 
up the boy attendant, who at once responded. He said, 
‘Fill up the pitcher’, and remained quiet for some little 
while. He now asked Sekis6, ‘What did you ask me before?’ 
Sekis6 restated the question, whereupon the master rose 
from his seat and left the room. 

As some Zen masters remarked, Zen is our ‘ordinary 
mindedness’; that is to say, there is in Zen nothing super- 
natural or unusual or highly speculative that transcends 
our everyday life. When you feel sleepy, you retire; when 
you are hungry, you eat, just as much as the fowls of the 
air and the lilies of the field, taking ‘no thought for your 
life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for 
your body, what ye shall put on’. This is the spirit of 
Zen. Hence no specially didactic or dialectical instruction 


302 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


in the study of Zen except such as is given below by 
Dégo. 

Ryutan Sdshin (Lung-t‘an Sui-hsin) was a disciple of 
Tenno Dégo (Tao-wu). He served the master as one of his 
personal attendants. He was with him for some time, when 
one day he said to the master, ‘Since I came to you, I have 
not at all been instructed in the study of mind.’ Replied the 
master, ‘Ever since you came to me, I have always been 
pointing to you how to study mind.’ ‘In what way, sir?’ 
“When you brought me a cup of tea, did I not accept it? 
When you served me with food, did I not partake of it? 
When you made bows to me, did I not return them? When 
did I ever neglect in giving you instructions?’ Ryutan kept 
his head hanging for some time, when the master told him, 
‘If you want to see, see directly into it; but when you try 
to think about it, it is altogether missed.’ 

Dogo Yenchi (Tao-wu Yiian-chih) and Ungan Donjo 
(Yiin-yen Tan-shéng) were standing by the master Yakusan 
(Yiieh-shan)’ as attendants, when Yakusan remarked: 
‘Where our intellect cannot reach, I verily tell you to 
avoid talking about it; when you do, horns will grow on 
you. O Yenchi, what will you say to this?’ Yenchi thereupon 
rose from his place and left the room. Ungan asked the 
master, ‘How is it, sir, that Brother Chi does not answer 
you?’ ‘My back aches today,’ said Yakusan. ‘You’d better 
go to Yenchi himself, for he understands.’ Ungan came to 
his brother monk and inquired thus. ‘O Brother Senior, 
why did you not answer our master just now?’ ‘You'd better 
go back to the master himself and ask,’ was all that poor 
Ungan could get out of his senior brother. 

There was another favourite movement often practised 
by Zen masters, which was to call out to the questioner or 
somebody else. One case of this has already been given 
somewhere else in another connection. The following are 
the typical and classical ones. Chu, the National Teacher, 
called out to his attendant monk three times, to which the 
latter responded regularly. Said the Teacher, ‘I thought 
I was not fair to you, but it was you that were not fair to 


393 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


me.’! This calling and responding took place also three 
times between Mayoku (Ma-ku) and Ryosui (Liang-sui), 
which at last made the latter exclaim, ‘O this stupid fellow!’ 

This trick of calling out and responding was frequently 
practised, as is seen in the following cases: A high govern- 
ment dignitary called upon Ungo Déyé (Yiin-chii Tao- 
ying) and asked, ‘I am told that the World-Honoured One 
had a secret phrase and Mahakaéyapa did not keep it 
hidden ; what was the secret phrase?’ The master called out, 
‘O honoured officer!’ and the officer responded. ‘Do you 
understand?’ demanded the master. ‘No, Reverend Sir!’ 
was his natural answer. ‘If you do not understand, there is 
the secret phrase: if you understand, there is Mahakasyapa 
in full revelation.’ 

Haikyu (P‘ai-hsiu) was a local governor in Shinan 
(Hsin-an) before he was appointed a state minister. He 
once visited a Buddhist monastery in his district. While 
going around in the premises of the monastery, he came 
across a fine fresco painting and asked the accompanying 
priests whose portrait this was. ‘He was one of the high 
priests,’ they answered. The governor now turned towards 
them and questioned, ‘Here is his portrait, but where is the 
high priest himself?’ They all did not know how to answer 


1A monk asked Hsiian-sha, ‘What is the idea of the National 
Teacher’s calling out to his attendant?’ Said Hstian-sha, ‘The attendant 
knows well.’ Yiin-chii Hsi commented on this : ‘Does the attendant really 
know, or does he not? If we say he does, why does the National Teacher 
say, “It is you that are not fair to me’’? But if the attendant knows not, 
hes aloout Hsiian-sha’s assertion? What would be our judgment of the 
case?’ 

Hsiian-chiao Cheng said to a monk, ‘What is the point the attendant 
understands?’ Replied the monk, ‘If he did not understand, he would 
never have responded.’ Hsiian-chiao said, ‘You seem to understand 
some. 

A monk asked Fa-yen, ‘What is the idea of the National Teacher’s 
calling out to his attendant?’ Fa-yen said, ‘You go away now, and come 
back some other time.’ Remarked Yiin-chii, ‘When Fa-yen says this, 
—, he really know what the National Teacher’s idea is? or does he 
not?’ 

A monk approached Chao-chou with the same question, to which he 
replied, ‘It is like writing characters in the dark: while the characters 
are not properly formed, their outlines are plainly traceable.’ 


304 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


him. He then further asked if there were any Zen monks 
about here. They replied, ‘We have recently a newcomer in 
this monastery, he does some menial work for us and. looks 
very much like a Zen monk.’ He was then brought in the 
presence of the governor, who at once said to him, ‘I have 
one question in which I wish to be enlightened, but the 
gentlemen here grudge the answer. May I ask you to give 
me a word for them?’ ‘I humbly wish you to ask,’ politely 
requested the monk. The officer repeated the first question, 
whereupon the monk loudly and clearly called out, ‘O 
Haikyu !’ Haikyu responded at once, ‘Here, sir!’ ‘Where is 
the high priest now?’ cross-questioned the monk. This 
opened the governor’s eye to the sense of the monk’s 
counter-question, in which he could now read the solution 
of his first query. 

The case between Yisan (Wei-shan) and Kyézan (Yang- 
shan) was more intellectual and to that extent more in- 
telligible than this mere calling and responding. Kyézan 
was the chief disciple of Yisan, and one of the peculiar 
features of this school was to demonstrate the truth of Zen 
concordantly both by the master and disciple. They once 
went out picking tea-leaves. The master said to Kydzan, 
‘Picking tea-leaves all day, I hear only your voice and do not 
see your body ; manifest your original body and let me see it.’ 
Ky6ozan shook the tea-plant. Said Yisan, “You have only 
got its function, you have not got the substance.’ Ky6zan 
said, ‘Master, how with you then?’ The master was quiet for 
a while, whereupon the disciple said, ‘O master, you have 
got only the substance, you have not got the function.’ ‘You 
will be spared of my twenty blows,’ concluded the master. 
In Buddhist ontology three conceptions are distinguished, 
as was referred to previously: substance or body, appear- 
ance, and function or activity. ‘Body’ or bhdva corresponds 
to the idea of mass or being, ‘appearance’ (lakshana) to that 
of form, and ‘function’ (kritya) to that of force. Every reality 
is regarded by Buddhist philosophers as analysable into 
these three notions. Sometimes, however, the second con- 
ception, ‘appearance’, is absorbed in that of ‘being’, or 


U 395 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘body’. Without functioning no objects exist, but function- 
ing cannot take place without something functioning. The 
two ideas, according to Buddhist philosophers, are thus 
inseparable for our understanding of the universe. But 
Yisan and Kyézan were not metaphysicians and would not 
argue on the subject. The one shook the tree and the other 
stood still. We cannot say that there is Zen in this standing 
and shaking, as we may interpret them philosophically, 
but we may glean something of Zen in their remarks on 
‘body’ and ‘function’ together with their direct method. 

So far the direct method has not been of any violent 
character as to involve a bodily injury or nervous shock, 
but the masters had no qualms if they thought necessary 
to shake the pupils roughly. Rinzai for one was noted for 
the directness and incisiveness of his dealings; the point of 
his sword cut through the heart of the opponent. The monk 
J6 (Ting) was one of his disciples, and when he asked the 
master what the fundamental principle of Buddhism was 
Rinzai came down from his straw chair, and taking hold of 
the monk slapped him with the palm of his hand, and let 
him go. J6 stood still without knowing what to make of the 
whole procedure, when a bystanding monk blamed him for 
not bowing to the master. While doing so, J6 all of a sudden 
awoke to the truth of Zen. Later, when he was passing over 
a bridge, he happened to meet a party of three Buddhist 
scholars, one of whom asked J6: “The river of Zen is deep, 
and its bottom must be sounded. What does this mean?’ Jé, 
disciple of Rinzai, at once seized the questioner and was at 
the point of throwing him over the bridge, when his two 
friends interceded and asked J6’s merciful treatment of the 
offender. J6 released the scholar, saying, ‘If not for the inter- 
cession of his friends I would at once let him sound the 
bottom of the river himself.’ With these people Zen was no 
joke, no mere play of ideas; it was, on the contrary, a most 
serious thing on which they would stake their lives. 

Rinzai was a disciple of Obaku (Huang-po), but while 
under the master he did not get any special instruction on 
Zen; for whenever he asked him as to the fundamental 


306 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


truth of Buddhism, he was struck by Obaku. But it was 
these blows that opened Rinzai’s eyes to the ultimate truth 
of Zen and made him exclaim, ‘After all, there is not much 
in the Buddhism of Obaku!’ In China and in Korea what 
little of Zen is left mostly belongs to the school of Rinzai, 
In Japan alone the Sdt6 branch is flourishing as much as 
the Rinzai. The rigour and vitality of Zen Buddhism that is 
still present in the Rinzai school of Japan comes from the 
three blows of Obaku so mercifully dealt out to his poor 
disciple. There is in fact more truth in a blow or a kick 
than in the verbosity of logical discourse. At any rate 
the Zen masters were in dead earnest whenever the 
demonstration of Zen was demanded. See the following 
instance. 

When Té-Impo (Téng Yin-féng) was pushing a cart, 
he happened to see his master Baso stretching his legs a 
little too far out in the roadway. He said, ‘Will you please 
draw your legs in?’ Replied the master, ‘A thing once 
stretched out will never be contracted.’ ‘If so,’ said Té, ‘a 
thing once pushed will never be retracted.’ His cart went 
right over the master’s legs, which were thus hurt. Later 
Baso went up to the Preaching Hall, where he carried an 
axe and said to the monks gathered, ‘Let the one who 
wounded the old master’s legs a while ago come out of the 
congregation.’ T6 came forth and stretched his neck ready 
to receive the axe, but the master, instead of chopping the 
disciple’s head off, quietly set the axe down. 

T6-Impo was ready to give up his life to reassert the 
truth of his deed through which the master got hurt. 
Mimicry or simulation was rampant everywhere, and there- 
fore Baso wanted to ascertain the genuineness of T6’s 
understanding of Zen. When the thing is at stake, the 
masters do not hesitate to sacrifice anything. In the case of 
Nansen, a kitten was done away with: Kyézan broke a 
mirror in pieces; a woman follower of Zen burned up a 
whole house; and another woman threw her baby into a 
river. This latter was an extreme case and perhaps the only 
one of the kind ever recorded in the history of Zen. As to 


5°97 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


minor cases such as mentioned above, they are plentiful and 
considered almost matters of course with Zen masters. 


IX 


While I have not attempted to be very exhaustive in 
describing all the different methods of demonstration, or 
rather realization, of the truth of Zen resorted to by the 
masters of various schools, the statements so far made in 
regard to them may suffice to give us at least a glimpse into 
some of the peculiar features of Zen Buddhism. Whatever 
explanations may be given by critics or scholars to the 
philosophy of Zen, we must first of all acquire a new point 
of view of looking at things, which is altogether beyond our 
ordinary sphere of consciousness. Rather, this new view- 
point is gdined when we reach the ultimate limits of our 
understanding, within which we think we are always bound 
and unable to break through. Most people stop at these 
limits and are easily persuaded that they cannot go any 
further. But there are some whose mental vision is able to 
penetrate this veil of contrasts and contradictions. They 
gain it abruptly. They beat the wall in utter despair, and lo, 
it unexpectedly gives way and there opens an entirely new 
world, Things hitherto regarded as prosaic and ordinary, 
and even binding, are now arranged in quite a novel 
scheme. The old world of the senses has vanished, and 
something entirely new has come to take its place. We seem 
to be in the same objective surrounds, but subjectively we 
are rejuvenated, we are born again, 

Wu Tao-tzii, or Godoshi, was one of the greatest painters 
of China, and lived in the reign of the Emperor Hsuan- 
tsung, of the T‘ang dynasty. His last painting, according to 
legend, was a landscape commissioned by the Emperor for 
one of the walls of his palace. The artist concealed the com- 
plete work with a curtain till the Emperor’s arrival, then 
drawing it aside exposed his vast picture. The Emperor 


308 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


gazed with admiration on a marvellous scene: forests, and 
great mountains, and clouds in immense distances of sky, 
and men upon the hills, and birds in flight. ‘Look,’ said the 
painter, ‘in the cave at the foot of this mountain dwells a 
spirit.” He clapped his hands; the door at the cave’s en- 
trance flew open. “The interior is beautiful beyond words,’ 
he continued ; ‘permit me to show the way.’ So saying, he 
passed within; the gate closed after him; and before the 
astonished Emperor could speak or move, all had faded to 
white wall before his eyes, with not a trace of the artist’s 
brush remaining. Wu Tao-tzti was seen no more. 

The artist has disappeared, and the whole scene has been 
wiped out; but from this nothingness there arises a new 
spiritual world, abiding in which the Zen masters perform 
all kinds of antics, assert all kinds of absurdities, and yet 
they are in perfect accord with the nature of things in which 
a world moves on stripped of all its falsehoods, conventions, 
simulations, and intellectual obliquities. Unless one gets 
into this world of realities, the truth of Zen will be eternally 
a sealed book. This is what I mean by acquiring a new point 
of view independent of logic and discursive understanding. 

Emerson expresses the same view in his own character- 
istic manner: ‘Foremost among these activities (that is, 
mathematical combination, great power of abstraction, 
the transmutings of the imagination, even versatility, and 
concentration) are the somersaults, spells, and _ resur- 
rections, wrought by the imagination. When this wakes, 
a man seems to multiply ten times or a thousand times his 
force. It opens the delicious sense of indeterminate size, and 
inspires an audacious mental habit. We are as elastic as the 
gas of gunpowder, and a sentence in a book, or a word 
dropped in conversation, sets free our fancy, and instantly 
our heads are bathed with galaxies, and our feet tread the 
floor of the pit. And this benefit is real, because we are en- 
titled to these enlargements, and, once having passed the 
bounds, shall never again be quite the miserable pedants 


we were.’ 
Here is a good illustration of the difference between a 


5309 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘miserable pedant’ and one who has ‘passed the bounds’. 
There was a monk called Gensoku (Hsiian-tsé), who was 
one of the chief officials of the monastery under the Zen 
master Hégen (Fa-yen), of the early tenth century. He 
never came to the master to make inquiries about Zen, 
so the master one day asked him why he did not come. 
The chief official answered, ‘When I was under Seiho 
(Chi‘ng-féng) I got an idea as to the truth of Zen.’ ‘What is 
your understanding then?’ demanded the master. ‘When I 
asked my master who was the Buddha, he said, Ping-ting 
T‘ung-tzii comes for fire.’ ‘It is a fine answer,’ said Hogen, 
‘but probably you misunderstand it. Let me see how you 
_take the meaning of it.’ ‘Well,’ explained the official, 
‘Ping-ting is the god of fire; when he himself comes for 
fire, it is like myself, who, being a Buddha from the very 
beginning, wants to know who the Buddha is. No question- 
ing is then needed, as I am already the Buddha himself.’ 
‘There!’ exclaimed the master. ‘Just as I thought! You are 
completely off.’ Soku, the chief official, got highly offended 
because his view was not countenanced and left the monas- 
tery. Hégen said, ‘If he comes back he may be saved; if not, 
he is lost.’ Soku after going some distance reflected that a 
master of five hundred monks as Héogen was would not 
chide him without cause, and returned to the old master 
and expressed his desire to be instructed in Zen. Hogen 
said, ‘You ask me and I will answer.’ ‘Who is the Buddha?’ 
—the question came from the lips of the now penitent 
monk. ‘Ping-ting T‘ung-tzii comes for fire.’ This made his 
eyes open to the truth of Zen quite different from what he 
formerly understood of it. He was now no more a second- 
hand ‘pedant’ but a living creative soul. I need not repeat 
that Zen refuses to be explained, but that it is to be lived. 
Without this all talk is nothing but an idea, woefully inane 
and miserably unsatisfactory. 

Below is another story illustrating the peculiarity of Zen 
understanding as distinguished from our ordinary in- 
tellectual understandings, which are based on ideas and 
representations. The same phrase is repeated here as in the 


310 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


preceding case, and as far as its literal meaning goes, we 
have no reason to suppose its producing different effects on 
the mind of the recipient. But as I said elsewhere, Zen is the 
opening’ of one’s own inner consciousness occasioned by 
some external incidental happening which may be of 
purely physical nature, but may invoke some mental 
operation. This opening is therefore something we as out- 
siders, not belonging to the inner life of the individual con- 
cerned, have no means to judge beforehand ; we know only 
when it is opened ; but the masters seem to know when this 
opening is going to take place and how it is to be brought 
about from their own experience. Students of the psychology 
of Zen will here find an interesting problem to investigate. 

Suigan Kashin (Ts‘ui-yen K‘é-chén) was a disciple of 
Jimyo (T‘zu-ming, 986-1040), who was one of the greatest 
Sung masters and under whom the Rinzai school of Zen 
was divided into two branches, Woryu (Huang-lung) and 
Y6gi (Yang-ch‘i). Kashin was quite proud of being one of 
the disciples of the master; he was not yet really a master 
himself, but he thought he was. When he had a talk with 
another of Jimyo’s disciples he was found out and laughed 
at. When they were having a walk together one day they 
discussed Zen. His friend picked up a piece of a broken tile 
and putting it on a flat rock, said, ‘If you can say a word at 
this juncture I will grant your really being Jimyo’s dis- 
ciple.’ Kashin wavered, looked this way and that, trying to 
make some answer. His friend was impatient, and broke 
out, ‘Hesitating and wavering you have not yet penetrated 
through illusion, you have never yet even dreamt as to 
what the true insight of Zen is.’ Kashin was thoroughly 
ashamed of himself. He at once returned to the master, who 
severely reproached him, saying that he came before the 
termination of the summer session, which was against the 
regulations. Full of tears, he explained how he was taken to 
task by his fellow-monk and that it was the reason why he 
was here even against the monastery rules. The master 
abruptly asked him, ‘What is the fundamental principle of 
Buddhism?’ Replied Kashin: 


311 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


‘No clouds are gathering over the mountain peaks, 
And how serenely the moon is reflected on the waves!’ 


The master’s eyes flashed with indignation, and he 
uhundered: ‘Shame on you! To have such a view for an 
old-seasoned man like you! How can you expect to be 
delivered from birth-and-death?’ Kashin earnestly im- 
plored to be instructed. Said the master, “You ask me.’ 
Thereupon he repeated the master’s first question, ‘What is 
the fundamental principle of Buddhism?’ The master 
roared : 


‘No clouds are gathering over the mountain peaks, 
And how serenely the moon is reflected on the waves!’ 


This opened Kashin’s eye, and another man was he after 
that. 


Let me conclude with a sermon from Goso (Wu-tsu), of 
whom mention has already been made: 

‘If people ask me what Zen is like I will say that it is like 
learning the art of burglary. The son of a burglar saw his 
father growing older and thought: “If he is unable to carry 
out his profession, who will be the bread-winner of this 
family, except myself? I must learn the trade.” He inti- 
mated the idea to his father, who approved of it. One night 
the father took the son to a big house, broke through the 
fence, entered the house, and opening one of the large chests, 
told the son to go in and pick out the clothings. As soon as 
he got into it the lid was dropped and the lock securely 
applied. The father now came out to the courtyard, and 
loudly knocking at the door woke up the whole family, 
whereas he himself quietly slipped away by the former hole 
in the fence. The residents got excited and lighted candles, 
but found that the burglars had already gone. The son, who 
remained all the time in the chest securely confined, thought 
of his cruel father. He was greatly mortified, when a fine 
idea flashed upon him. He made a noise which sounded 


312 


PRACTICAL METHODS OF ZEN INSTRUCTION 


like the gnawing of a rat. The family told the maid to take a 
candle and examine the chest. When the lid was unlocked, 
out came the prisoner, who blew out the light, pushed away 
the maid, and fled. The people ran after him. Noticing a 
well by the road, he picked up a large stone and threw it 
into the water. The pursuers all gathered around the well 
trying to find the burglar drowning himself in the dark 
hole. In the meantime he was safely back in his father’s 
house. He blamed him very much for his narrow escape. 
Said the father: ‘‘Be not offended, my son. Just tell me how 
you got off.”” When the son told him all about his adventures 
the father remarked, ‘““There you are, you have learned the 
arti? 


ats 


THE MEDITATION HALL, AND THE 
IDEALS OF THE MONKISH DISCIPLINE 


I 


As GET a glimpse into the practical and disciplinary 
side of Zen, we have to study the institution known as the 
Meditation Hall. It is an educational system quite peculiar 
to the Zen sect. Most of the main monasteries belonging to 
this sect are provided with Meditation Halls, and in the 
life of the Zen monk more than anywhere else we are re- 
minded of that of the Buddhist Brotherhood (Samgha) in 
India. This system was founded by the Chinese Zen master, 
Hyakujo (Pai-chang, 720-814), more than one thousand 
years ago. Until his time the monks used to live in monas- 
teries belonging to the Vinaya sect, which were governed 
by a spirit not quite in accordance with the principles of 
Zen. As the latter grew more and more flourishing and its 
followers kept on increasing in number and in influence, 
there was need for its own institution, exclusively devoted 
to the promotion of its objects. According to Hyakujo, the 
Zen monasteries were to be neither Hinaydnistic nor 
Mahfayanistic, but they were to unite the disciplinary 
methods of both schools in a new and original manner, best 
suited to the realization of the Zen ideals, as they were con- 
ceived by the masters of the earlier days. 

The original book compiled by Hyakujo giving detailed 
regulations of the Zen monastery was lost. The one we 
have now was compiled during the Yuan dynasty from the 
actual life in the monastery at the time, which was then 
supposed to be a faithful continuation of the old institution, 
though naturally with some modifications and transfor- 
mations due to historical exigencies. This book was com- 
piled under the auspices of the reigning Emperor Shud, 


of 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


and is known as ‘The Imperial Edition of the Regulations 
in the Zen Monastery’. In Japan the Zen monasteries have 
never been established on such a grand scale as in China, 
and as a result all the regulations as detailed in the Im- 
perial Edition were not practised. But their spirit and all 
that was applicable to Japanese life and conditions were 
adopted. The ideals of Zen life were never lost sight of any- 
where. And before I proceed further I wish to speak briefly 
of one of such ideals set before the eyes of all Zen students, 
for it is really the most important and noteworthy feature 
in the monastery life of Zen. 

It is indeed this that distinguishes Zen from the other 
Buddhist schools originated in China, and is to be con- 
sidered most characteristically Zen, and at the same time 
animating its long history. By this I mean the notion of 
work or service. Hyakujo left a famous saying which was the 
guiding principle of his life, and is pre-eminently the spirit 
of the Meditation Hall. It is this: ‘No work, no eating.’ 
When he was thought by his devoted disciples too old to 
work in the garden, which was his daily occupation be- 
sides lecturing and educating the monks in Zen, they hid all 
his garden implements, as he would not listen to their 
repeated oral remonstrances. He then refused to eat, saying, 
‘No work, no eating.’ 

At all the Meditation Halls work is thus considered a vital 
element in the life of a monk. It is altogether a practical one, 
and chiefly consists in manual labour, such as sweeping, 
cleaning, cooking, fuel-gathering, tilling the farm, or going 
about begging in the villages far and near. No work is 
considered beneath their dignity, and a perfect feeling of 
brotherhood and democracy prevails among them. How- 
ever hard, or mean from the ordinary point of view, a work 
may be, they will not shun it. They believe in the sanctity of 
manual labour. They keep themselves busy in every way 
they can; they are no idlers as some of the so-called monks 
or mendicants are, physically at least, as in India, for 


instance. ; 
We can see in this sanctification of work the practical 


315 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


attitude of the Chinese mind well reflected. When I said 
that Zen was the Chinese interpretation of the doctrine 
of Enlightenment, the Zen conception of work did not 
essentially or theoretically enter into my conclusion. But 
from the practical point of view work is such an integral 
part of the Zen life now that the one cannot be conceived 
as independent of the other. In India the monks are mendi- 
cants; when they meditate they retire into the quiet corner 
from worldly cares; and inasmuch as they are supported 
economically by their secular devotees, they do not pro- 
pose to work in any menial employment such as Chinese and 
Japanese Zen monks are used to. What saved Zen Budd- 
hism from deteriorating into quietism or mere intellectual 
gymnastics, which was more or less the fate befalling other 
schools of Buddhism, was surely due to the gospel of work. 
Apart from its psychological value, it proved-an efficient 
agency in preserving the health and sanity of Zen Budd- 
hism throughout its long history of growth. 

Whatever may be this historical importance of work, 
Hyakujo must have had a profound knowledge of human 
psychology when he made work the ruling spirit of the 
monastery life. His idea of ‘No work, no eating,”! did not 
necessarily originate from an economic or ethical valuation 
of life. His sole motive was not that nobody deserved his 
daily bread if he did not earn it with the sweat of his face. 
True, there is a virtue in not eating the bread of idleness, 
and there have been so many Buddhists since the early days 
of Buddhism who thought it a most disgraceful thing to be 
living on other’s earnings and savings, that Hyakujo’s 
object, while it might have been unconsciously conceived, 
was more psychological in spite of his open declaration, ‘No 
work, no eating.’ It was to save his monks from a mental 
inactivity or an unbalanced development of mind which too 
often results from the meditative habit of the monkish life. 


* Literally, ‘A day [of] no work [is] a day [of] no eating.’ cf. II 
Thessalonians iii, 10: ‘If any would not work, neither should he eat.’ It is 


noteworthy that St. Francis of Assisi made this the first rule of his 
Brotherhood. 


316 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


When the muscles are not exercised for the execution of 
spiritual truths, or when the mind and body are not 
put to practical test, the severance generally issues in 
inimical results. As the philosophy of Zen is to transcend 
the dualistic conception of flesh and spirit, its practical 
application will naturally be, dualistically speaking, to 
make the nerves and muscles the most ready and abso- 
lutely obedient servants of the mind, and not to make us 
say that the spirit is truly ready but the flesh is weak. What- 
ever religious truths of this latter statement, psychologically 
it comes from the lack of a ready channel between mind and 
muscles. Unless the hands are habitually trained to do the 
work of the brain, the blood ceases to circulate evenly all 
over the body, it grows congested somewhere, especially in 
the brain. The result will be not only an unsound con- 
dition of the body in general, but a state of mental torpidity 
or drowsiness in which ideas are presented as if they were 
wafting clouds. One is wide awake and yet the mind is 
filled with the wildest dreams and visions which are not at 
all related to realities of life. Fantasies are fatal to Zen, and 
those who practise Zen considering it a form of meditation 
are too apt to be visited upon by this insidious enemy. 
Hyakujo’s insistence upon manual work has saved Zen from 
falling into the pitfalls of antinomianism as well as a hallu- 
cinatory mode of mind. 

Apart from these psychological considerations, there is 
a moral reason which ought not to escape attention in our 
estimate of Hyakujo’s wisdom in instituting work as a vital 
part of Zen life. For the soundness of ideas must be tested 
finally by their practical application. When they fail in this 
—that is, when they cannot be carried out in everyday life 
producing lasting harmony and satisfaction and giving real 
benefit to all concerned—to oneself as well as to others— 
no ideas can be said to be sound and practical. While 
physical force is no standard to judge the value of ideas, the 
latter, however logically consistent, have no reality when 
they are not joined to life. Especially in Zen, abstract 
ideas that do not convince one in practical living are of no 


317 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


value whatever. Conviction must be gained through ex- 
perience and not through abstraction, which means that 
conviction has no really solid basis, except when it can be 
tested in our acting efficient life. Moral assertion or “bear- 
ing witness’ ought to be over and above an intellectual 
judgment; that is to say, the truth must be the product of 
one’s living experiences. An idle reverie is not their business, 
the Zen followers will insist. They, of course, sit quiet and 
practice ‘zazen’;! for they want to reflect on whatever 
lessons they have gained while working. But as they are 
against chewing the cud all the time, they put in action 
whatever reflections they have made during hours of quiet- 
sitting and test their validity in the vital field of practicality. 
It is my strong conviction that if Zen did not put faith in 
acting its ideas, the institution would have long before this 
sunk into a mere somniferous and trance-inducing system, 
so that all the treasure thoughtfully hoarded by the master 
in China and Japan would have been cast away as heaps of 
rotten stuff. 

Perhaps unwittingly supported by these reasons, the 
value of work or service has been regarded by all Zen 
followers as one of their religious ideals. No doubt the 
idea was greatly enforced by the characteristic industry 
and practicalness of the Chinese people by whom Zen was 
mainly elaborated. The fact is that if there is any one thing 
that is most emphatically insisted upon by the Zen masters 
as the practical expression of their faith, it is serving others, 
doing work for others; not ostentatiously, indeed, but 
secretly without making others know of it. Says Eckhart, 


1 Tso-ch‘an is one of those compound Buddhist terms made of Sanskrit 
and Chinese. Tso is Chinese meaning ‘to sit’, while ch‘an stands for 
dhyana or jhana. The full transliteration of the term is ch‘anna, but for 
brevity’s sake the first character alone has been in use. The combination 
of tso-ch‘an comes from the fact that dhyana is always practised by 
sitting cross-legged. This posture has been considered by the Indians 
the best way of sitting for a long while in meditation. In it, according to 
some Japanese physicians, the centre of gravitation rests firmly in the 
lower regions of the body, and when the head is relieved of an unusual 
congestion of blood the whole system will work in perfect order and the 
mind be put in suitable mood to take in the truth of Zen. 


318 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


“What a man takes in by contemplation he must pour out in 
love.’ Zen would say, ‘pour it out in work’, meaning by 
work the active and concrete realization of love. Tauler 
made spinning and shoe-making and other homely duties 
gifts of the Holy Ghost; Brother Lawrence made cooking 
sacremantal; George Herbert wrote: 


“Who sweeps a room as to thy laws 
Makes that and the action fine.’ 


These are all expressive of the spirit of Zen, as far as its 
practical side is concerned. Mystics are thus all practical 
men; they are far from being visionaries whose souls are 
too absorbed in things unearthly or of the other-world to 
be concerned with their daily life. The common notion 
that mystics are dreamers and star-gazers ought to be cor- 
rected, as it has no foundation in facts. Indeed, psycho- 
logically there is a most intimate and profound relationship 
between a practical turn of mind and a certain type of 
mysticism; the relationship is not merely conceptual or 
metaphysical. If mysticism is true its truth must be a 
practical one, verifying itself in every act of ours, and, most 
decidedly, not a logical one, to be true only in our dialectics. 
Sings a Zen poet known as Hokoji:! 


‘How wondrously supernatural, 
And how miraculous this! 
I draw water, and I carry fuel!’ 


1 He was the noted Confucian disciple of Baso (Ma-tsu), and his wife 
and daughter were also devoted Zen followers. When he thought the 
time had come for him to pass away, he told his daughter to watch the 
course of the sun and let him know when it was midday. The daughter 
hurriedly came back and told the father that the sun had already passed 
the meridian and was about to be eclipsed. Ho came out, and while he 
was watching the said eclipse, she went in, took her father’s own seat, 
and passed away in meditation. When the father saw his daughter 
already in Nirvana, he said, ‘What a quick-witted girl she is?” Ho him- 
self passed away some days later. 


319 


i 


The Meditation Hall (Zendo in Japanese and Ch‘an 
T‘ang in Chinese), as it is built in Japan, is generally a 
rectangular building of various size according to the 
number of monks to be accommodated. One at Engakuji,* 
Kamakura, was about 36 feet by 65 feet. The floors, about 
eight feet wide and three feet high, are raised along the 
longer sides of the building, and an empty space is left in the 
middle throughout the entire length of the Hall. This 
space is used for practising an exercise known as ‘kinhin’ 
(ching hsing), which means literally ‘sitra-walking’. The 
space allotted to each monk on the tatami floor does not 
exceed one mat, three by six feet, where he sits, meditates, 
and sleeps at night. The bedding for each is never more 
than one large wadded quilt, summer or winter. He has 
no regular pillow except that which is temporarily made 
up by himself out of his own private possessions. These 
latter, however, are next to nothing: for they are kesa 
(kashaya in Sanskrit) and koromo (priestly robe), a few books, 
a razor, and a set of bowls, all of which are put up in a box 
about thirteen by ten by three and a half inches large. In 
travelling this box is carried in front supported with a 
sash about the neck. The entire property thus moves with 
the owner. ‘One dress and one bowl, under a tree and on a 
stone’ was the graphical description of the monkish life in 
India. Compared with this, the modern Zen monk must be 
said to be abundantly supplied. Still, his wants are re- 
duced to a minimum, and no one can fail to lead a simple, 
perhaps the simplest, life if he models his after that of the 
Zen monk. 

The desire to possess is considered by Buddhism to be 
one of the worst passions mortals are apt to be obsessed 
with, What, in fact, causes so much misery in the world is 


? This historical temple was unfortunately wisi by the earth- 
quake of 1923, with many other buildings. 


320 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


due to a strong impulse of acquisitiveness. As power is 
desired, the strong always tyrannize over the weak: as 
wealth is coveted, the rich and poor are always crossing 
their swords of bitter enmity. International wars rage, 
social unrest ever goes on, unless the impulse to have and 
hold is completely uprooted. Cannot a society be reor- 
ganized upon an entirely different basis from what we have 
been used to seeing from the beginning of history? Cannot 
we ever hope to stop the amassing of wealth and the 
wielding of power merely from the desire for individual or 
national aggrandizement? Despairing of the utter irration- 
ality of human affairs, the Buddhist monks have gone to the 
other extreme and cut themselves off even from reasonable 
and perfectly innocent enjoyments of life. However, the 
Zen ideal of putting up the monk’s belongings in a tiny box 
a little larger than a foot square and three inches high is 
their mute protest, though so far ineffective, against the 
present order of society. 


In this connection it will be of interest to read the 
admonition left by Dait6 the National Teacher (1282- 
1337) to his disciples. He was the founder of Daitdkuji, 
Kyoto, in 1326, and is said to have spent about one-third 
of his life, which was not a very long one, among the 
lowest layers of society under the Gojo bridge, begging his 
food, doing all kinds of menial work, and despised by the 
so-called respectable people of the world. He did not care 
for the magnificence of a prosperous and highly honoured 
temple life led by most Buddhist priests of those days, nor 
did he think much of those pious and sanctimonious deeds 
that only testify to the superficiality of their religious life. 
He was for the plainest living and the highest thinking. The 
admonition reads: 

‘O you, monks, who are here in this mountain monastery, 
remember that you are gathered for the sake of the religion 
and not for the sake of clothes and food. As long as you have 
shoulders [that is, the body] you shall have clothes to wear, 
and as long as you have a mouth you shall have food to eat. 


x gat 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Be ever mindful, throughout the twelve hours of the day, to 
apply yourselves to the study of the Unthinkable. Time 
passes like an arrow; never let your minds be disturbed by 
worldly cares. Ever, ever be on the look-out. After my 
wandering away, some of you may have fine temples in 
prosperous conditions, towers and halls and holy books all 
decorated in gold and silver, and devotees may noisily 
crowd into the grounds; some may pass hours in reading 
Sitras and reciting dhardnis, and, sitting long in con- 
templation, may not give themselves up to sleep; they may, 
eating once a day and observing the fast-days, and through- 
out the six periods of the day, practise all the religious 
deeds. 

‘Even when they are thus devoted to the cause, if their 
thoughts are not really dwelling on the mysterious. and 
intransmissible Way of the Buddhas and Fathers, they 
may yet come to ignore the law of moral causation, ending 
in a complete downfall of the true religion. Such all belong 
to the family of evil spirits; however long my departure 
from the world may be, they are not to be called my 
descendants. Let, however, there be just one individual, who 
may be living in the wilderness in a hut thatched with one 
bundle of straw and passing his days by eating the roots of 
wild vegetables cooked in a pot with broken legs; but if he 
single-mindedly applies himself to the study of his own 
[spiritual] affairs, he is the very one who has a daily inter- 
view with me and knows to be grateful for his life. Who 
should ever despise such a one? O monks, be diligent, be 
diligent.”! 

In India the Buddhist monks never eat in the afternoon. 
They properly eat only once a day, as their breakfast is no 
breakfast in the sense that an English or American breakfast 
is. So the Zen monks, too, are not supposed to have any 
meal in the evening. But the climatic necessity in China and 
Japan could not be ignored, and they have an evening meal 


* In those monasteries which are connected in some way with the 
author of this admonition, it is read or rather chanted before a lecture 
or Teisho begins. _ 


322 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


after a fashion; but to ease their conscience it is called 
‘medicinal food’ (yiieh-shih). The breakfast, which is taken 
very early in the morning, while it is still dark, consists of 
rice gruel and pickled vegetables (ésukemono). 

The principal meal at 10 a.m. is rice (or rice mixed with 
barley), vegetable soup, and pickles. In the afternoon, at 
four, they have only what is left of the dinner—no special 
cooking is done. Unless they are invited out or given an 
extra treatment at the house of some generous patrons, their 
meals are such as above described, year in, year out. 
Poverty and simplicity is their motto. 

One ought not, however, to consider asceticism the ideal 
life of Zen. So far as the ultimate signification of Zen is con- 
cerned, it is neither asceticism nor any other ethical system. 
Ifit appears to advocate either the doctrine of suppression or 
that of detachment, the supposed fact is merely on the sur- 
face; for Zen as a school of Buddhism more or less inherits 
the odium of a Hindu discipline. The central idea, however, 
of the monkish life is not to waste, but to make the best 
possible use of things as they are given us, which is also 
the spirit of Buddhism in general. In truth the intellect, 
imagination, and all other mental faculties as well as the 
physical objects surrounding us, our own bodies not 
excepted, are given us for the unfolding and enhancing of 
the highest powers possessed by us as spiritual entities and 
not merely for the gratification of our individual whims or 
desires, which are sure to conflict with and injure the in- 
terests and rights asserted by others. These are some of the 
inner ideas underlying the simplicity and poverty of the 
monkish life. 


III 


As there is something to be regarded as peculiarly Zen 
in the table manners of the monks, some description of them 


will be given here. 
At meal-times a gong is struck, and the monks come out 


323 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


of the Meditation Hall in procession carrying their own 
bowls to the dining-room. The low tables are laid there all 
bare. They sit when the leader rings the bell. The bowls are 
set—which, by the way, are made of wood or paper and 
well lacquered. A set consists of four or five dishes, one in- 
side the other. As they are arranging the dishes and the 
waiting monks go around to serve the soup and rice, the 
Prajftd-paramita-hridaya-siitrat is recited, followed by the 
‘Five Meditations’ on eating, which are: ‘First, of what 
worth am I? Whence is this offering? Secondly, accepting 
this offering, I must reflect on the deficiency of my virtue. 
Thirdly, to guard over my own heart, to keep myself away 
from faults such as covetousness, etc.—this is the essential 
thing. Fourthly, this food is taken as good medicine in 
order to keep the body in a healthy condition. Fifthly, to 
ensure spiritual attainment this food is accepted.’ After 
these ‘Meditations’ they continue to think about the essence 
of Buddhism, “The first mouthful is to cut off all evils; the 
second mouthful is to practice every good; the third mouth- 
ful is to save all sentient beings so that everybody will finally 
attain to Buddhahood.’ 

They are now ready to take up their chop-sticks, but 
before they actually partake of the sumptuous dinner, the 
demons or spirits living somewhere in the triple world 
are remembered; and each monk taking out about seven 
grains from his own bowl, offers them to those unseen, 
saying, ‘O you, demons and other spiritual beings, I now 
offer this to you, and may this food fill up the ten quarters 
of the world and all the demons and other spiritual beings 
be fed therewith.’ 


+I must not forget to mention that after the reading of the Hridaya 
Sitra the following names of the Buddhas and others are invoked: 1. 
Vairocana-Buddha in his immaculate Body of the Law; 2. Vairocana- 
Buddha in his perfect Body of Bliss; 3. Sakyamuni-Buddha in his in- 
finite manifestations as Body of Transformation; 4. Maitreya-Buddha 
who is to come in some future time; 5. All the Buddhas past, present, 
and future in the ten quarters of the world; 6. The great holy Bodhi- 
sattva Majijugri; 7. The great morally perfect Bodhisattva Samantab- 
hadra; 8. The great compassionate Bodhisattva Avalokitegvara; 9. All 
the venerable Bodhisattva-mahasattvas ; and 10. Mahaprajiiaparamita. 


324 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


While eating quietude prevails. The dishes are handled 
noiselessly, no word is uttered, no conversation goes on. 
Fating is a serious affair with them. When a second bowl 
of rice is wanted, the monk folds his hands before him. The 
monk-waiter notices it, comes round with the rice re- 
ceptacle called ohachi, and sits before the hungry one. The 
latter takes up his bowl and lightly passes his hand around 
the bottom before it is handed to the waiter. He means by 
this to take off whatever dirt that may have attached itself 
to the bowl and that is likely to soil the hand of the serving 
monk. While the bowl is filled, the eater keeps his hands 
folded. If he does not want so much, he gently rubs the 
hands against each other, which means ‘Enough, thank 
you.’ 

Nothing is to be left when the meal is finished. The 
monks eat up all that is served them, ‘gathering up of the 
fragments that remain’. This is their religion. After a fourth 
helping of rice, the meal generally comes to an end. The 
leader claps the wooden blocks and the serving monks bring 
hot water. Each diner fills the largest bowl with it, and in it 
all the smaller dishes are neatly washed, and wiped with a 
piece of cloth which each monk carries. Now a wooden 
pail goes around to receive the slops.1 Each monk gathers 
up his dishes and wraps them up once more, saying, ‘I have 
now finished eating and my physical body is well nourished : 
I feel as if my will-power would shake the ten quarters of the 
world and dominate over the past, present, and future: 
turning both the cause and the effect over to the general 
welfare of all beings, may we all unfailingly gain in powers 
miraculous!’ The tables are now empty as before except 
those rice grains offered to the spiritual beings at the 
beginning of the meal. The wooden blocks are clapped, 
thanks are given, and the monks leave the room in orderly 
procession as they came in. 

1 When the slop-basin goes around, spiritual beings are again re- 
membered: ‘This water in which my bowls were washed tastes like 
nectar from heaven. I now offer this to the numerous spirits of the world: 


may they all be filled and satisfied! Orh ma-ku-ra-sai (in Pekingese, 
mo-hsui-lo-hsi) svaha \’ 


a3 


IV 


Their industry is proverbial. When the day is not set for 
study at home, they are generally seen, soon after breakfast, 
about half past five in summer and about half past six in 
winter, out in the monastery grounds, or in the neigh- 
bouring villages for begging, or tilling the farm attached to 
the Zend6. They keep the monastery, inside as well as out- 
side, in perfect order. When we sometimes say, “This is like 
a Zen monastery,’ it means that the place is kept in the 
neatest possible order. When begging they go miles away. 
Commonly, attached to a Zendo there are some patrons 
whose houses the monks regularly visit and get a supply of 
rice or vegetables. We often see them along the country 
road pulling a cart loaded with pumpkins or potatoes. They 
work as hard as ordinary labourers. They sometimes go to 
the woods to gather kindlings or fuel. They know something 
of agriculture, too. As they have to support themselves in 
these ways, they are at once farmers, labourers, and skilled 
workmen. For they often build their own Meditation Hall 
under the direction of an architect. 

These monks are a self-governing body. They have their 
own cooks, proctors, managers, sextons, masters of ceremony, 
etc. In the days of Hyakujo there seem to have been ten 
such offices, though the details are not now known, due to 
the loss of his Regulations. While the master or teacher of a 
Zend6 is its soul, he is not directly concerned with its 
government. This is left to the senior members of the com- 
munity, whose characters have been tested through many 
years of discipline. When the principles of Zen are dis- 
cussed, one may marvel at their deep and subtle meta- 
physics, if there is any, and imagine what a serious, pale- 
faced, head-drooping, and world-forgetting group of 
thinkers these monks are. But in their actual life they are, 
after all, common mortals engaged in menial work, but 
they are cheerful, cracking jokes, willing to help one 


326 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


another, and despising no work which is usually considered 
low and not worthy of an educated hand. The spirit of 
Hyakujo is ever manifest among them. 

It was not only the monks that worked but the master 
himself shared their labour. This was according to Hyakujo 
to co-operate in and equalize the work among all con- 
cerned without distinction of rank. Therefore the master 
together with his disciples tilled the farm, planted trees, 
weeded the garden, picked tea-leaves, and was engaged in 
all other kinds of manual work. Making use of such oppor- 
tunities, he gave them practical lessons in the study of Zen, 
and the disciples, too, did not fail to appreciate his in- 
structions. 

When Joshu was sweeping the courtyard a monk asked 
him, ‘How does a speck of dust come into this holy ground?’ 
To this Joshu answered, ‘Here comes another !’ On another 
occasion, when the master was found again sweeping the 
ground, Liu, minister of state, paid a visit to the temple 
and said to the master gardener, ‘How is it that a great wise 
man like you has to sweep off the dust?’ ‘It comes from the 
outside,”! replied Jéshu. 

When Nansen was working outdoors with his monks, 
Joshu, who was told to watch over a fire, suddenly cried 
out: ‘Fire! Fire!’ The alarm made all the monks rush back 
to the dormitory hall. Seeing this, Joshu closed the gate 
and declared, ‘If you could say a word the doors would be 
opened.’ The monks did not know what to say. Nansen, 
the master, however, threw the key into the hall through a 
window. Thereupon Jéshu flung open the gate. 

While working on the farm a monk happened to cut an 
earth-worm in twain with his spade, whereupon he asked 
the master Chésa (Chang-sha Ch‘én), “The earth-worm is 
cut in twain and both parts are still wriggling: in which of 
them is the Buddha-nature present?’ The master said, ‘Have 
no illusion!’ But the monk insisted, ‘I cannot help this 
wriggling, sir.’ ‘Don’t you see that fire and air elements 


1 This question of dust reminds one of Berkeley’s remark, “We have 
just raised a dust and then complain we cannot see.’ 


O27 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


have not yet been dispersed?? When Shiko (Tzti-hu) and 
Shoko (Shéng-kuang) were out gardening, a similar thing 
happened, and Shdk6 asked the master concerning the 
real life of the earth-worm. Without answering him, the 
master took up the rake, first struck the one end of the worm, 
then the other, and finally the space between the two. He 
then threw down the rake and went away. 

One day Obaku was weeding with a hoe, and seeing 
Rinzai without one, asked, ‘How is it that you do not carry 
any hoe?’? Answered Rinzai, ‘Somebody has carried it 
away, sir.’ Thereupon, Obaku told him to come forward as 
he wanted to discuss the matter with him. Rinzai stepped 
forward. Said Obaku, lifting his hoe, ‘Only this, but all the 
world’s unable to hold it up.’ Rinzai took the hoe away 
from the master and lifted it up, saying, ‘How is it that it is 
now in my own hands?’ Obaku remarked, ‘Here is a man 
doing a great piece of work today!’ He then returned to 
his own room. 

Another day, observing Rinzai resting on a hoe, Obaku 
said to him, ‘Are you tired?’ Rinzai replied, ‘I have not 
even lifted my hoe, and how should I be tired?’ Obaku then 
struck him, who, however, snatching the stick away from 
the master, pushed him down. Obaku called out to the 
Yino (karmadana) to help him up from the ground. The Yino 
responded to the call and helped up the master, saying, 
“Why do you permit this crazy fellow’s rudeness?’ As soon 
as the master was again on his feet, he struck the Yino. 
Rinzai then began to dig the earth and made this announce- 
ment, ‘In other places they cremate, but here you will all 
be buried alive.’ 

The story of Isan and Kydézan, while they were out 
picking tea-leaves, has already been told in one of the pre- 
ceding essays. Zen history, indeed, abounds with such in- 
cidents as here referred to, showing how the masters try to 
discipline their pupils on every possible occasion. The events 
of daily life, manifestly trivial on the surface, thus handled 
by the masters, grow full of signification. At any rate all 
these mondé most eloquently illustrate the whole trend of the 


328 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


monastery life in olden days, where the spirit of work and 
service was so thoroughly and harmoniously blended with 
the high thinking on matters deeply spiritual. 


Vv 


The monks thus develop their faculties all round. They 
receive no literary—that is, formal—education, which is 
gained mostly from books and abstract instruction. But 
their discipline and knowledge are practical and efficient; 
for the basic principle of the Zend6 life is ‘learning by 
doing’. They despise the so-called soft education, which is 
like those predigested foods meant for the convalescent. 
When a lioness gives birth to her cubs, it is proverbially 
believed that after three days she will push them down over 
a deep precipice and see if they can climb up to her. Those 
that fail to come out of this trial are not taken care of any 
more. Whether this is true or not, something like that is 
aimed at by the Zen master, who will treat the monks with 
every manner of seeming unkindness. The monks have not 
enough clothes to put on, not enough food to indulge in, 
not enough time to sleep, and, to cap these, they have plenty 
of work to do, menial as well as spiritual. 

The outer needs and the inward aspirations, if they work 
on harmoniously and ideally, will finally end in producing 
fine characters well trained in Zen as well as in the real 
things of life. This unique system of education, which is 
still going on at every Zend6, is not so well known among the 
laity even in this country. And then the merciless tides of 
modern commercialism leave no corner uninvaded, and 
before long the solitary island of Zen may be found buried, 
as everything else, under the waves of sordid materialism. 
The monks themselves are beginning not to understand the 
great spirit of the successive masters. Though there are some 
things in the monastic education which may be improved, 
its highly religious and reverential feeling must be pre- 


329 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


served if Zen is at all to live for many years yet to come. 

Theoretically, the philosophy of Zen transcends the 
whole range of discursive understanding, and is not bound 
by rules of antithesis. But this is very slippery ground, and 
there are many who fail to walk erect. When they stumble, 
the result is sometimes disastrous. Like some of the medieval 
mystics, the Zen students may turn into libertines, losing 
all control over themselves. History is a witness to this, and 
psychology can readily explain the process of such degenera- 
tion. Therefore, says a Zen master, ‘Let one’s ideal rise as 
high as the crown of Vairochana (the highest divinity), 
while his life may be so full of humility as to make him 
prostrate before a baby’s feet.’ Which is to say, ‘If any man 
desire to be first the same shall be last of all, and servant 
of all.’ Therefore, the monastery life is minutely regulated 
and all the details are enforced in strict obedience to the 
spirit already referred to. Humility, poverty, and inner 
sanctification—these ideals of Zen are what saves Zen 
from sinking into the level of the medieval antinomians. 
Thus we can see how the Zendé6 discipline plays a great 
part in the teachings of Zen and their practical application 
to our daily life. 

When Tanka (Tan-hsia T‘ien-jan, 738-824) of the 
T‘ang dynasty stopped at Yerinji of the Capital, it was so 
severely cold that he finally took one of the Buddha-images 
enshrined there and made a fire with it in order to warm 
himself. The keeper of the shrine, seeing this, was greatly 
exercised. 

‘How dare you burn up my wooden Buddha?’ 

Said Tanka, who looked as if searching for something 
with his stick in the ashes, ‘I am gathering the holy ariras! 
in the burnt ashes.’ 

‘How,’ said the keeper, ‘could you get Sariras by burning 
a wooden Buddha?’ 

“If there are no Sariras to be found in it, may I have the 
remaining two Buddhas for my fire?’ retorted Tanka. 


1 She-li is some indestructible substance, generally in pebble-form 
found in the body of a saint when it is cremated. . aes i 


56° 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


The shrine-keeper later lost his eye-brows for remon- 
strating against the apparent impiety of Tanka, while the 
Buddha’s wrath never was visited upon the latter. 

Though one may doubt its historical occurrence, this is a 
notable story, and all the Zen masters agree as to the 
higher spiritual attainment of the Buddha-desecrating 
Tanka. When later a monk asked a master about Tanka’s 
idea of burning a Buddha’s statue, said the master: 

“When cold we sit around the hearth with burning fire.’ 

“Was he then at fault or not?’ 

“When hot, we go to the bamboo grove by the stream,’ 
was the answer. 

I cannot help quoting another comment on the story, as 
this is one of the most significant subjects in the study of 
Zen. When Suibi Mugaku (T‘sui-wei Wu-hsiao), a dis- 
ciple of Tanka, was making offerings to the Arhats, pro- 
bably carved in wood, a monk came up and asked, “Tanka 
burned a wooden Buddha and how is it that you make 
offerings to the Arhats?’ The master said, ‘Even when it was 
burned, it could not be burned up; and as to my making 
offerings, just leave me alone as I please.’ ‘When these 
offerings are made to the Arhats, would they come to 
receive them, or not?’ ‘Do you eat everyday, or not?’ the 
master demanded. As the monk remained silent, the master 
declared, ‘Intelligent ones are hard to meet!’ 

Whatever the merit of Tanka from the purely Zen point 
of view, there is no doubt that such deeds as his are to be 
regarded as highly sacrilegious and to be avoided by all 
pious Buddhists. Those who have not yet gained a thorough 
understanding of Zen may go all lengths to commit every 
manner of crime and excess, even in the name of Zen. For 
this reason the regulations of the monastery are very rigid 
that pride of heart may depart and the cup of humility be 
drunk to the dregs. 

When Shuké (Chu-hung) of the Ming dynasty was 
writing a book on the ten laudable deeds of a monk, one 
of those high-spirited, self-assertive fellows came to him, 
saying, ‘What is the use of writing such a book when in 


33! 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Zen there is not even an atom of thing to be called laudable 
or not?’ The writer answered, ‘The five aggregates (skandha) 
are entangling, and the four elements (mahdbhita) grow 
rampant, and how can you say there are no evils?’ The 
monk still insisted, ‘The four elements are ultimately all 
empty and the five aggregates have no reality whatever.’ 
Shuké, giving him a slap on his face, said, ‘So many are 
mere learned ones; you are not the real thing yet; give me 
another answer.’ But the monk made no answer and went 
off filled with angry feelings. ‘There,’ said the master 
smilingly, ‘why don’t you wipe the dirt off your own face?’ 
In the study of Zen the power of an all-illuminating insight 
must go hand in hand with a deep sense of humility and 
meekness of heart. 

Let me cite, as one instance of teaching humility, the 
experience which a new monk-applicant is first made to go 
through when he first approaches the Meditation Hall. 
The applicant may come duly equipped with certificates of 
his qualifications and with his monkish paraphernalia con- 
sisting of such articles as are already mentioned, but the 
Zend6 authorities will not admit him at once into their 
company. Generally, some formal excuse will be found: 
they may tell him that their establishment is not rich enough 
to take in another monk, or that the Hall is already too full. 
If the applicant quietly retires with this, there will be no 
place for him anywhere, not only in that particular Zendé 
which was his first choice but in any other Zendé through- 
out the land. For he will meet a similar refusal everywhere. 
If he wants to study Zen at all, he ought not to be dis- 
couraged by any such excuse as that. 

The persistent applicant will now seat himself at the 
entrance porch, and, putting his head down on the box 
which he carries in front of him, calmly wait there. Some- 
times a strong morning or evening sun shines right over the 
recumbent monk on the porch, but he keeps on in this 
attitude without stirring. When the dinner-hour comes he 
asks to be admitted and fed. This is granted, for no Buddhist 
monasteries will refuse food and lodging to a travelling 


332 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


monk. After eating, however, the novice goes out again on 
the porch, and continues his petition for admittance. No 
attention will be paid to him until the evening, when he 
asks for lodging. This being granted as before, he takes off 
his travelling sandals, washes his feet, and is ushered into a 
room reserved for such purposes. But most frequently he 
finds no bedding there, for a Zen monk is supposed to pass 
his night in deep meditation. He sits upright all night, 
evidently absorbed in the contemplation of a ‘koan’.1 In 
the following morning he goes out as on the previous day 
to the entrance hall and resumes the same posture as before 
expressive of an urgent desire to be admitted. This may go 
on three or five or sometimes even seven days. The patience 
and humility of the new applicant are tried thus hard until 
finally he will be taken in by the authorities, who, appar- 
ently moved by his earnestness and perseverance, will try 
somehow to accommodate him. 

This procedure is growing somewhat a formal affair, 
but in olden days when things were not yet settled into a 
mere routine, the applicant monk had quite a hard time, 
for he would actually be driven out of the monastery by 
force. We read in the biographies of the old masters of still 
harder treatments which were mercilessly dealt out to them. 

The Meditation Hall is regulated with militaristic 
severity and precision to cultivate such virtues as humility, 
obedience, simplicity, and earnestness in the monkish 
hearts that are ever prone to follow indiscriminately the 
extraordinary examples of the old masters, or that are liable 
to put in practice in a crude and undigested manner the 
high doctrines of a Sinyata philosophy such as is expounded 
in the Prajfia-paramita class of Mahayana literature. A 


1 Kung-an is a question of theme given to the student for solution. It 
literally means ‘public document’, and, according to a Zen scholar, it is 
so called because it serves as such in testing the genuineness of enlighten- 
ment a student claims to have attained. The term has been in use since 
the early days of Zen Beddhism in the T‘ang dynasty. The so-called 
‘cases’ or ‘dialogues’ (mondo) are generally used as koans. A special 
chapter devoted to the subject will be found in the second series of the 
Essays. 


333 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


partial glimpse of such life we have already gained in the 
description of the table manners as above. 


VI 


There is a period in the monastic life exclusively set apart 
for mental discipline, and not interrupted by any manual 
labour except such as is absolutely needed. It is known as 
great ‘Sesshin’ (Ché-hsin)! and lasts a week, taking place 
once a month during the seasons called the ‘Summer 
Sojourn’ and the ‘Winter Sojourn’. The summer sojourn 
begins in April and ends in August, while the winter one 
begins in October and ends in February. ‘Sesshin’ means 
‘collecting or concentrating the mind’. While this period is 
lasting the monks are confined at the Zend6, get up earlier 
than usual, and sit further into the night. There is a kind of 
lecture every day during the period. Text-books are used, 
the most popular of which are the Hekiganshu and Rin- 
zairoku, the two being considered the most fundamental 
books of the Rinzai school. The Rinzairoku is a collection of 
sermons and sayings of the founder of the Rinzai Zen sect. 
The Hekiganshu, as has been noted elsewhere, is a collection 
of one hundred Zen ‘cases’ or ‘themes’ with critical 
annotations and poetical comments. It goes without saying 
that there are many other books used for the occasion. To an 
ordinary reader, such books generally are a sort of obscurum 
per obscurius. After listening to a series of lectures he is left 
in the lurch as ever. Not necessarily that they are too ab- 
struse, but that the reader is still wanting in insight into the 
truth of Zen. 


The lecture is a solemn affair. Its beginning is an- 


1 I cannot tell how early this ‘Sesshin’ originated in the history of the 
Zendé. It is not in Hyakujo’s Regulations, and did not start in China, but 
in Japan probably after Hakuin. The Sojourn period generally being a 
‘stay-at-home’ season, the monks do not travel, but practise ‘Sesshin’ 
and devote themselves to the study of Zen; but in the week specially 
set up as such, the study is pursued with the utmost vigour. 


334 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


nounced by a bell, which stops ringing as soon as the 
master appears in the hall where what is known as ‘Teisho’! 
takes place. While the master is offering incense to the 
Buddha and to his departed master, the monks recite a 
short dharani-sitra called Daihiju,2 which means ‘the 
dharani of great compassion’. Being a Chinese translitera- 
tion of the Sanskrit original, mere recitation of the Sutra 
does not give any intelligent sense. Probably the sense is not 
essential in this case; the assurance is sufficient that it con- 
tains something auspicious and conducive to spiritual 
welfare. What is more significant is the way in which it is 
recited. Its monotone, punctuated with a wooden time- 
keeper known as ‘mokugyo’ (Wooden Fish), prepares the 
mind of the audience for the coming event. After the 
Dharani, which is recited three times, the monks read in 
chorus generally the exhortatory sermon left by the founder 
of the monastery. In some places nowadays Hakuin’s 
‘Song of Zazen’ is often chanted. The following are tran- 
slations of Hakuin and of Musd Kokushi,? whose last 
exhortatory sermon is one of the most popular. 


Muso Koxusui’s EXHORTATORY SERMON 


I have three kinds of disciples: those who, vigorously 
shaking off all entangling circumstances, and with single- 
ness of thought apply themselves to the study of their own 


1 That is, ti-ch‘ang. Tei means ‘to carry in hand’, ‘to show forth’, or 
‘manifest’, and sho ‘to recite’. Thus by a Teisho the old master is revived 
before the congregation and his discourses are more or less vividly pre- 
sented to view. It is not merely explaining or commenting on the text. 

2 DharAni is a Sanskrit term which comes from the root dhyi, meaning. 
‘to hold’. In Buddhist phraseology, it is a collection, sometimes short, 
sometimes long, of exclamatory sentences which are not translated into 
other languages. It is not therefore at all intelligible when it is read by 
the monks as it is done in the Chinese and Japanese monasteries. But it is 
supposed to ‘hold’ in it in some mysterious way something that is most 
meritorious and has the power to keep evil ones away. Later, dharanis 
and mantrams have grown confused with one another. 

8 The founder of Tenryuji, Kyoto. He is known as ‘Teacher of Seven 


Emperors’ (1274-1361). 
535 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


[spiritual] affairs, are of the first class. Those who are not 
so single-minded in the study, but, scattering their attention, 
are fond of book-learning, are of the second. Those who, 
covering their own spiritual brightness, are only occupied 
with the dribblings of the Buddhas and Fathers, are called 
the lowest. As to those minds that are intoxicated by 
secular literature and engaged in establishing themselves 
as men of letters are simply laymen with shaven heads, 
they do not belong even to the lowest. As regards those 
who think only of indulging in food and sleep and give 
themselves up to indolence—could such be called members 
of the Black Robe? They are truly, as were designated by 
an old master, clothes-racks and rice-bags. Inasmuch as 
they are not monks, they ought not to be permitted to call 
themselves my disciples and enter the monastery and sub- 
temples as well; even a temporary sojourn is to be pro- 
hibited, not to speak of their application as student-monks. 
When an old man like myself speaks thus, you may think 
he is lacking in all-embracing love, but the main thing 
is to let them know of their own faults, and, reforming 
themselves, to become growing plants in the patriarchal 
gardens. 


Haxuin’s Sonc oF MEDITATION 


All sentient beings are from the very beginning the Budd- 
has: 

It is like ice and water; 

Apart from water no ice can exist. 

Outside sentient beings, where do we seek the Buddhas? 

Not knowing how near the Truth is, 

People seek it far away,—what a pity! 

They are like him who, in the midst of water, 

Cries in thirst so imploringly ; 

They are like the son of a rich man 

Who wandered away among the poor. 

The reason why we transmigrate through the six worlds 


336 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


Is because we are lost in the darkness of ignorance; 
Going astray further and further in the darkness, 
When are we able to get away from birth-and-death? 


As regards the Meditation practised in the Mahayana, 

We have no words to praise it fully. 

The Virtues of Perfection such as charity and morality, 

And the invocation of the Buddha’s name, confession, and 
ascetic discipline, 

And many other good deeds of merit,— 

All these issue from the practice of Meditation. 

Even those who have practised it first for one sitting 

Will see all their evil karma wiped clean; 

Nowhere will they find the evil paths, 

But the Pure Land will be near at hand. 

With a reverential heart, let them to this Truth 

Listen even for once, 

And let them praise it, and gladly embrace it, 

And they will surely be blessed most infinitely. 


For such as, reflecting within themselves, 

Testify to the truth of Self-nature, 

To the truth that Self-nature is no-nature, 

They have really gone beyond the ken of sophistry. 

For them opens the gate of the oneness of cause and effect, 

And straight runs the path of non-duality and non-trinity. 

Abiding with the Not-particular in particulars, 

Whether going or returning, they remain for ever un- 
moved ; 

Taking hold of the Not-thought in thoughts, 

In every act of theirs they hear the voice of the truth. 

How boundless the sky of Samadhi unfettered ! 

How transparent the perfect moon-light of the Fourfold 
Wisdom ! 

At that moment what do they lack? 

As the Truth eternally calm reveals itself to them, 

This very earth is the Lotus Land of Purity, 

And this body is the body of the Buddha. 


Y 337 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


The lecture lasts about an hour. It is quite different from 
an ordinary lecture on a religious subject. Nothing is eX- 
plained, no arguments are set forward, no apologetics, no 
reasonings. The master is supposed simply to reproduce in 
words what is treated in the text-book before him. When 
the lecture ends, the Four Great Vows are repeated 
three times, and the monks retire to their quarters. The 
Vows are: 

‘How innumerable sentient beings are, I vow to save 

them all; 

How inexhaustible our evil passions are, I vow to ex- 

terminate them; 

How immeasurable the holy doctrines are, I vow to 

study them; 

How inaccessible the path of Buddhas is, I vow to attain 

ats 


Vil 


During the ‘sesshin’, they have besides lectures what is 
known as ‘sanzen’,! To do ‘sanzen’ is to go to the master 
and present one’s views on a koan for his critical exami- 
nation. In those days when a special ‘sesshin’ is not going on, 
‘sanzen’ will probably take place twice a day, but during 
the period of thought-collection—which is the meaning of 
‘sesshin’—the monk has to see the master four or five times 
a day. This seeing the master does not take place openly,? 
the monk is required to come up individually to the 
master’s room, where the interview goes on in a most 
formal and solemn manner. When the monk is about to 


? San-ch‘an literally means ‘to attend or study Zen’. As it is popularly 
used now in Japan, it has, besides its general meaning, the special one as 
is referred to in the text. 

* Formerly, this was an open affair, and all the mondé (askings and 
answerings) took place before the whole congregation, as is stated in the 
Regulations of Hyakujo. But, later, undesirable results followed, such as 
mere formalism, imitations, and other empty nonsenses. In modern Zen, 
therefore, all sanzen is private, except on formal occasions. 


338 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


cross the threshold of the master’s room, he makes three 
bows, prostrating himself on the floor. He now enters the 
room keeping his hands folded, palm to palm, before the 
chest, and when he comes near the master he sits down and 
makes another bow. Once in the room, all worldly con- 
vention is disregarded. If absolutely necessary from the Zen 
point of view, blows may be exchanged. To make manifest 
the truth of Zen with all sincerity of heart is the sole con- 
sideration here, and everything else receives only a sub- 
ordinate attention. Hence this elaborate formalism. The 
presentation over, the monk retires in the same way as 
before. One ‘sanzen’ for over thirty monks will occupy 
more than one hour and a half, and this is the time of the 
utmost tension for the master, too. To have this four or five 
times a day must be a kind of ordeal for the master himself, 
if he is not of robust health. 

An absolute confidence is placed in the master as far as 
his understanding of Zen goes. But if the monk has sufficient 
reason to doubt the master’s ability, he may settle it per- 
sonally with him at the time of sanzen. This presentation of 
views, therefore, is no idle play for either of the parties con- 
cerned. It is indeed a most serious affair, and because it is so 
the discipline of Zen has a great moral value outside its 
philosophy. How serious this is may be guessed from the 
famous interview between the venerable Shéju and Hakuin, 
father of modern Zen in Japan. 

One summer evening when Hakuin presented his view 
to the old master, who was cooling himself on the veranda, 
the master said, ‘Stuff and nonsense.’ Hakuin echoed, 
loudly and rather satirically, ‘Stuff and nonsense!’ There- 
upon the master seized him, struck him several times, and 
finally pushed him off the veranda. It was soon after the 
rainy weather, and poor Hakuin rolled in the mud and 
water. Having recovered himself after a while, he came up 
and reverentially bowed to the teacher, who then re- 
marked again, ‘O you, denizen of the dark cavern!’ 

Another day Hakuin thought that the master did not 
know how deep his knowledge of Zen was and decided to 


339 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


have a settlement with him anyhow. As soon as the time 
came Hakuin entered the master’s room and exhausted all 
his ingenuity in contest with him, making his mind up not 
to give way an inch of ground this time. The master was 
furious, and finally taking hold of Hakuin gave him several 
slaps and let him go over the porch again. He fell several 
feet at the foot of the stone wall, where he remained for a 
while almost senseless. The master looked down and 
heartily laughed at the poor fellow. This brought Hakuin 
back to consciousness. He came up again all in perspiration. 
The master, however, did not release him yet and stig- 
matized him as ever with, ‘O you, denizen of the dark 
cavern !’ 

Hakuin grew desperate and thought of leaving the old 
master altogether. When one day he was going about 
begging in the village, a certain accident! made him all ofa 
sudden open his mental eye to the truth of Zen, hitherto 
completely shut off from him. His joy knew no bounds and 
he came back in a most exalted state of mind. Before he 
crossed the front gate, the master recognized him and 
beckoned to him, saying, ‘What good news have you 
brought home today? Come right in, quick, quick!’ 
Hakuin told him all about what he had been through that 
day. The master tenderly stroked him on the back and said, 
“You have it now, you have it now.’ After this, Hakuin was 
never called names. 

Such was the training the father of modern Japanese 
Zen had to go through. How terrible the old Shdju was 
when he pushed Hakuin down the stone wall! But how 
motherly when the disciple, after so much ill-treatment, 


* While thus going around, he came to a house where an old woman 
refused to give him any rice; he kept on standing in front of it, however, 
looking as if nothing were said to him. His mind was so intensely con- 
centrated on the subject which concerned him most at the time. The 
woman got angry, because she thought he was altogether ignoring her 
and trying to have his own way. She struck him with a big broom with 
which she was sweeping and told him to depart right at once. The heavy 
broom smashed his large monkish hat and knocked him down on the 
ground. He was lying there for a while, and when he came to his senses 
again everything became to him clear and transparent. 


349 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


finally came out triumphantly! There is nothing lukewarm 
in Zen. If it is lukewarm, it is not Zen. It expects one to 
penetrate into the very depths of truth, and the truth can 
never be grasped until one comes back to one’s native 
nakedness shorn of all trumperies, intellectual or other- 
wise. Each slap dealt by Shédju stripped Hakuin of his 
insincerities. We are all living under so many casings which 
really have nothing to do with our inmost self. To reach the 
latter, therefore, and to gain the real knowledge of our- 
selves, the Zen masters resort to methods seemingly in- 
human. In this case, however, there must be absolute 
faith in the truth of Zen and in the master’s perfect under- 
standing of it. The lack of this faith will also mean the same 
in one’s own spiritual possibilities. So exclaims Rinzai: ‘O 
you, men of little faith! How can you ever expect to fathom 
the depths of the ocean of Zen?’ 


Vill 


In the life of the Zendd there is no fixed period of 
graduation as in a school education. With some, gradua- 
tion may not take place even after his twenty years’ board- 
ing there. But with ordinary abilities and a large amount of 
perseverance and indefatigability, one is able to probe into 
every intricacy of the teachings of Zen within a space of 
ten years. 

To practise the principle of Zen, however, in every 
moment of life—that is, to grow fully saturated in the spirit 
of Zen—is another question. One life may be too short for 
it, for it is said that even Sakyamuni and Maitreya them- 
selves are yet in the midst of self-training. 

To be a perfectly qualified master, a mere understanding 
of the truth of Zen is not sufficient. One must go through a 
period which is known as ‘the long maturing of the sacred 
womb’. The term must have originally come from Taoism ; 
and in Zen nowadays it means, broadly speaking, living a 


34! 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


life harmonious with the understanding. Under the 
direction of a master, a monk may finally attain to a 
thorough knowledge of all the mysteries of Zen; but this is 
more or less intellectual, though in the highest possible 
sense. The monk’s life, in and out, must grow in perfect 
unison with this attainment. To do this a further training is 
necessary, for what he has gained at Zend is after all the 
pointing of the direction where his utmost efforts have to be 
put forth. But it is not at all imperative now to remain in 
the Zend6. On the contrary, his intellectual attainments 
must be further put on trial by coming into actual contact 
with the world. There are no prescribed rules for this 
‘maturing’. Each one acts on his own discretion in the 
accidental circumstances in which he may find himself. He 
may retire into the mountains and live as a solitary hermit, 
or he may come out into the ‘market’ and be an active 
participant in all the affairs of the world. The sixth patriarch 
is said to have been living among the mountaineers for 
fifteen years after he left the fifth patriarch. He was quite 
unknown in the world until he came out to a lecture by 
Inshu (Yin-tsung). 

Chu, the National Teacher of Nan-yang, spent forty 
years in Nanyang and did not show himself out in the 
capital. But his holy life became known far and near, and 
at the urgent request of the Emperor he finally left his hut. 
Isan (Wei-shan) spent several years in the wilderness, living 
on nuts and befriending monkeys and deer. However, he 
was found out and big monasteries were built about his 
anchorage, he became master of 1,500 monks. Kwanzan, 
the founder of Myéshinji, Kyoto, retired in Mino Province, 
and worked as day-labourer for the villagers. Nobody 
recognized him until one day an accident brought out his 
identity and the court insisted on his founding a monastery 
in the capital.t Hakuin became the keeper of a deserted 
temple in Suruga which was his sole heritage in the world. 
We can picture to ourselves the scene of its dilapidations 


ee As to the life of his teacher, Daité, reference was made to it else- 
where. 


342 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


when we read this: ‘There were no roofs and the stars 
shone through at night. Nor was there any floor. It was 
necessary to have a rain-hat and to put on a pair of high 
getas when anything was going on while raining in the main 
part of the temple. All the property attached to it was in the 
hands of the creditors, and the priestly belongings were 
mortgaged to the merchants.’—This was the beginning of 
Hakuin’s career. 

There are many other notable ones; the history of Zen 
abounds with such instances. The idea, however, is not 
to practise asceticism, it is the ‘maturing’, as they have 
properly designated, of one’s moral character. Many ser- 
pents and adders are waiting at the porch, and if one fails 
to trample them down effectively they raise their heads 
again and the whole edifice of moral culture built up in 
vision may collapse even in one day. Antinomianism is 
also the pitfall for Zen followers against which a constant 
vigil is needed. Hence this ‘maturing’. 


IX 


In some respects, no doubt, this kind of education pre- 
vailing at the Zend6 is behind the times. But its guiding 
principles such as simplification of life, not wasting a 
moment idly, self-independence, and what they call ‘secret 
virtue’, are sound for all ages. Especially this latter is one 
of the most characteristic features of Zen discipline. ‘Secret 
virtue’ means practising goodness without any thought of 
recognition, neither by others nor by oneself. The Christians 
may call this the doing of ‘Thy Will’. A child is drowning, 
and I get into the water, and it is saved. What was to be 
done was done. Nothing more is thought of it. I walk away 
and never turn back. A cloud passes, and the sky is as blue 
and as broad as ever. Zen calls it a ‘deed without merit’, and 
compares it to a man’s work who tried to fill up a well with 
snow. 


343 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


This is the psychological aspect of ‘secret virtue’. When 
it is religiously considered, it is to regard and use the world 
reverentially and gratefully, feeling as if one were carrying 
on one’s shoulders all the sins of the world. An old woman 
asked Jéshu, ‘I belong to the sex that is hindered in five 
ways from attaining Buddhahood ; and how can I ever be 
delivered from them?’ Answered the master, ‘O let all 
other people be born in heaven and let me, this humble self, 
alone continue suffering in this ocean of pain!’ This is the 
spirit of the true Zen student. There is another story illus- 
trating the same spirit of long-suffering. The district of 
Jéshu where this Zen master’s monastery was situated, and 
where he got his popular title, was noted for the fine stone 
bridge. A monk one day came up to the master and asked, 
‘We hear so much of the splendid stone bridge of Jéshu, 
but I see here nothing but a miserable old rustic log bridge.’ 
Jéshu retorted, ‘You just see the rustic log bridge, and fail 
to see the stone’ bridge of Joshu.’ ‘What is the stone bridge 
then?’ ‘Horses go over it, asses go over it,’ was Joshu’s 
reply. 

This seems to be but a trivial talk about a bridge, but 
considered from the inner way of looking at such cases, 
there is a great deal of truth touching the centre of one’s 
spiritual life. We may inquire what kind of bridge is repre- 
sented here. Was Jéshu speaking only of a stone bridge in 
his monastery premises, which was strong enough for all 
kinds of passengers over it? Let each one of us reflect 
within himself and see if he is in possession of one bridge 
over which pass not only horses and asses, men and women, 
carts heavy and light, but the whole world with its in- 
sanities and morbidities, and which is not only thus passed 
over but quite frequently trampled down and even cursed— 
a bridge which suffers all these treatments, good as well as 
despised, patiently and uncomplainingly. Was Jéshu 
referring to this kind of bridge? In any event we can read 
something of the sort in the cases above cited. 

But this Zen spirit of self-suffering ought not to be under- 
stood in the Christian sense that man must spend all his 


344 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


time in prayer and mortification for the absolution of sin. 
For a Zen monk has no desire to be absolved from sin; this 
is too selfish an idea, and Zen is free from egotism. The Zen 
monk wishes to save the world from the misery of sin, and 
as to his own sin he lets it take care of itself, as he knows it is 
not a thing inherent in his nature. For this reason it is 
possible for him to be one of those who are described as 
‘they that weep as though they wept not; and they that 
rejoice as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy as 
though they possessed not; and they that use this world as 
not abusing it.’ 

Says Christ, “When thou doest alms, let not thy left hand 
know what they right hand doeth ; that thine alms may be in 
secret.’ This is a ‘secret virtue’ of Buddhism. But when he 
goes on to say that ‘thy Father who seeth in secret shall 
recompense thee’, there we see a deep cleavage between 
Buddhism and Christianity. So long as there is any thought 
of anybody, whether he be God or Devil, knowing of your 
doings, Zen would say, ‘You are not yet one of us.’ Deeds 
that are accompanied by such thought are not ‘meritless 
deeds’, but full of tracks and shadows. If a Spirit is tracing 
you, he will in no time get hold of you and make you account 
for what you have done. The perfect garment shows no 
seams, inside and outside; it is one complete piece and 
nobody can tell where the work began and how it was 
woven. In Zen, therefore, there ought not to be left any 
trace of consciousness after the doing of alms, much less 
the thought of recompense even by God. The Zen ideal is to 
be ‘the wind that bloweth where it listeth, and the sound of 
which we hear but cannot tell whence it cometh and 
whither it goeth’. 

Lieh-tzii, the Chinese philosopher, described this frame 
of mind in a figurative manner as follows: ‘I allowed my 
mind without restraint to think of whatever it pleased and 
my mouth to talk about whatever it pleased; I then forgot 
whether the “this and not-this’” was mine or other’s, 
whether the gain and loss was mine or other’s: nor did I 
know whether Lao-shang-shin was my teacher, and 


345 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


whether Pai-kao was my friend. In and out, I was thoroughly 
transformed; and then it was that the eye became like the 
ear, and the ear like the nose, and the nose like the mouth; 
and there was nothing that was not identified. The mind 
was concentrated, and the form dissolved, and the bones 
and flesh all thawed away: I did not know where my form 
was supported, where my feet were treading; I just moved 
along with the wind, east and west, like a leaf of a tree 
detached from the stem, I was not conscious whether I was 
riding on the wind or the wind riding on me.’! 


xX 


As I stated before, Zen followers do not approve of 
Christians, even Christian mystics being too conscious of 
God, who is the creator and supporter of all life and all 
being. Their attitude towards the Buddha and Zen is that 
of Lieh-tzii on the wind; a complete identification of the 
self with the object of thought is what is aimed at by the 
disciples of Joshu, Ummon, and other leaders of Zen. This 
is the reason why they are all loth to hear the word Buddha 
or Zen mentioned in their discourse, not because indeed 
they are anti-Buddhist, but because they have so thoroughly 
assimilated Buddhism in their being. Listen to the gentle 


remonstrance given by Héyen, of Gosozan, to his disciple 
Yengo: 


1 The wind is probably one of the best imageries to get us into the 
idea of non-attachment or Sinyata philosophy. The New Testament has 
at least one allusion to it when it says ‘The wind bloweth as it listeth’, and 
here we see the Chinese mystics making use of the wind to depict their 
inner consciousness of absolute identity, which is also the Buddhist 
notion of the void. Now compare the following passage from Echkart: 
Darum ruft die Braue auch weiter: ‘Weiche von mir, mein Geliebter, 
weiche von mir’: ‘Alles, was irgend der Darstellung fahig ist, das halte 
ich nicht fur Gott. Und so flieche ich vor Gott, Gottes wegen !’—‘Ei, wo 
ist dann der Seele Bleiben?’—‘Auf den Fittichen der Winde!’ (Bittner, 
Meister Eckeharts Schriften und Predigten, Erster Band, p. 189) ‘So flieche 
ich vor Gott, Gottes wegen |’ reminds us of a Zen master who said, ‘I hate 
even to hear the name of the Buddha.’ From the Zen point of view, 
“Gottes wegen’ may better be left out. 


346 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


Goso said, ‘You are all right, but you have a trivial 
fault.’ Yengo asked two or three times what that fault 
was. Said the master at last, ‘You have altogether too 
much of Zen.’ ‘Why,’ protested the disciple, ‘if one is study- 
ing Zen at all, don’t you think it the most natural thing for 
one to be talking of it? Why do you dislike it?’ Replied 
Goso, ‘When it is like an ordinary everyday conversation, 
it is somewhat better.’ A monk happened to be there with 
them, who asked, ‘Why do you specially hate talking 
about Zen?’ ‘Because it turns one’s stomach,’ was the 
master’s verdict. 

Rinzai’s way of expressing himself in regard to this point 
is quite violent and revolutionary. And if we were not 
acquainted with the methods of Zen teachings, such pas- 
sages as are quoted below would surely make our teeth 
chatter and our hair stand on end. The reader may think 
the author is simply horrible, but we all know well how 
earnestly he feels about the falsehoods of the world and how 
unflinchingly he pushes himself forward through its con- 
fusion worse confounded. His hands may be compared to 
Jehovah’s in trying to destroy the idols and causing the 
images to cease. Read the following, for instance, in which 
Rinzai endeavours to strip one’s spirit off its last raiment 
of falsehood : 

‘O you, followers of Truth, if you wish to obtain an 
orthodox understanding [of Zen], do not be deceived by 
others. Inwardly or outwardly, if you encounter any 
obstacles, lay them low right away. If you encounter the 
Buddha, slay him: if you encounter the Patriarch, slay him ; 
if you encounter the Arhat or the parent or the relative, 
slay them all without hesitation: for this is the only way to 
deliverance. Do not get yourselves entangled with any 
object, but stand above, pass on, and be free. As I see those 
so-called followers of Truth all over the country, there are 
none who come to me free and independent of objects. In 
dealing with them, I strike them down any way they come. 
If they rely on the strength of their arms, I cut them right 
off; if they rely on their eloquence, I make them shut them- 


347 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


selves up; if they rely on the sharpness of their eyes, I will 
hit them blind. There are indeed so far none who have pre- 
sented themselves before me all alone, all free, all unique. 
They are invariably found caught by the idle tricks of the 
old masters. I have really nothing to give you; all that I can 
do is to cure you of the diseases and deliver you from bond- 
age. , 

0 you, followers of Truth, show yourselves here inde- 
pendent of all objects, I want to weigh the matter with 
you. For the last five or ten years I have waited in vain for 
such, and there are no such yet. They are all ghostly 
existences, ignominious gnomes haunting the woods or 
bamboo-groves, they are elfish spirits of the wilderness. 
They are madly biting into all heaps of filth. O you, mole- 
eyed, why are you wasting all the pious donations of the 
devout! Do you think you deserve the name of a monk, 
when you are still entertaining such a mistaken idea [of 
Zen]? I tell you, no Buddhas, no holy teachings, no dis- 
cipling, no testifying! What do you seek in a neighbour’s 
house? O you, mole-eyed! You are putting another head 
over your own! What do you lack in yourselves? O you, 
followers of Truth, what you are making use of at this very 
moment is none other than what makes a Patriarch or a 
Buddha. But you do not believe me, and seek it outwardly. 
Do not commit yourselves to an error. There are no realities 
outside, nor is there anything inside you may lay your 
hands on. You stick to the literal meaning of what I speak 
to you, but how far better it is to have all your hankerings 
stopped, and be doing nothing whatever!’ etc., etc. 

This was the way Rinzai wanted to wipe out all trace of 

God-consciousness in the mind of a truth-seeker. How he 
wields Thor-like his thunder-bolt of harangue! 


348 


ca 


The state of mind in which all traces of conceptual con- 
sciousness are wiped out is called by the Christian mystics 
poverty, and Tauler’s definition is ‘Absolute poverty is 
thine when thou canst not remember whether anybody has 
ever owed thee or been indebted to thee for anything; 
just as all things will be forgotten by thee in the last 
journey of death.’ 

The Zen masters are more poetic and positive in their 
expression of the feeling of poverty; they do not make a 
direct reference to things worldly. Sings Mumon (Wu- 
mén) : 


‘Hundreds of spring flowers; the autumnal moon; 
A refreshing summer breeze; winter snow: 

Free thy mind of all idle thoughts, 

And for thee how enjoyable every season is!’ 


Or according to Shuan (Shou-an) : 


‘At Nantai I sit quietly with an incense burning, 

One day of rapture, all things are forgotten, 

Not that mind is stopped and thoughts are put away, 
But that there is really nothing to disturb my serenity.’ 


This is not to convey the idea that he is idly sitting and 
doing nothing particularly; or that he has nothing else to 
do but to enjoy the cherry-blossoms fragrant in the morning 
sun, or the lonely moon white and silvery; he may be in 
the midst of work, teaching pupils, reading the Sitras, 
sweeping and farming as all the masters have done, and yet 
his own mind is filled with transcendental happiness and 
quietude. He is living in God, as Christians may say. All 
hankerings of the heart have departed, there are no idle 
thoughts clogging the flow of life-activity, and thus he is 
empty and poverty-stricken. As he is poverty-stricken, he 


a0 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


knows how to enjoy the ‘spring flowers’ and the ‘autumnal 
moon’. When worldly riches are amassed in his heart, there 
is no room left there for such celestial enjoyments. The Zen 
masters are wont to speak positively about their content- 
ment and unworldly riches. Instead of saying that they are 
empty-handed, they talk of the natural sufficiency of things 
about them. Yégi (Yang-ch‘i), however, refers to his 
deserted habitation where he found himself to be residing 
as keeper. One day he ascended the lecturing chair in the 
Hall and began to recite his own verse: 


‘My dwelling is now here at Y6gi; the walls and roof, how 
weather-beaten ! 

The whole floor is covered white with snow crystal, 

Shivering down the neck, I am filled with thoughts.’ 


After a pause he added the fourth line: 


‘How I recall the ancient masters whose habitat was no better 
than the shade of a tree!’ . 


Kyogen (Hsiang-yen) is more direct apparently in his 
allusion to poverty: 


‘My last year’s poverty was not poverty enough, 

My poverty this year is poverty indeed ; 

In my poverty last year there was room for a gimlet’s point, 
But this year even the gimlet is gone.’ 


Later, a master called Koboku Gen (K‘u-mu Yiian) com- 


mented on this song of poverty by Kydgen in the following 
verse: 


‘ “Neither a gimlet’s point nor the room for it”? some sing; but 
this is not yet real poverty: 

As long as one is conscious of having nothing, there still remains 
the guardian of poverty. 

I am lately poverty-stricken in all conscience, 


For from the very beginning I do not see even the one that is 
poor.’ 


300 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


Ummon was not poverty-stricken, but lean and emaci- 
ated; for when a monk asked him what were the special 
features of his school, the master answered, ‘My skin is dry 
and my bones are sticking out.’ Corpulence and opulence 
have never been associated with spirituality, at least in the 
East. As a matter of fact, they are not inconsistent ideas; but 
the amassing of wealth under our economic conditions has 
always resulted in producing characters that do not go very 
well with our ideals of saintliness. Perhaps our too emphatic 
protest against materialism has done this. Thus not to have 
anything, even wisdom and virtue, has been made the object 
of Buddhist life, though this does not mean that it despises 
them. In despising there is in a large measure something 
impure, not thoroughly purgated ; as true Bodhisattvas are 
even above purity and virtuousness, how much more so 
they would be above such petty weaknesses of human 
being! When the Buddhists are thus cleansed of all these, 
they will truly be poverty-stricken and thin and trans- 
parent. 

The aim of Zen discipline is to attain to the state of ‘non- 
attainment’ (cittam nopalabhyate) as is technically expressed. 
All knowledge is an acquisition and accumulation, whereas 
Zen proposes to deprive one of all one’s possessions. The 
spirit is to make one poor and humble—thoroughly cleansed 
of inner impurities. Learning, on the contrary, makes one 
rich and arrogant. Because learning is earning, the more 
learned, the richer, and therefore ‘in much wisdom is much 
grief; and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow’. 
It is, after all, ‘vanity and a striving after wind’. Zen will 
heartily endorse this too. Says Lao-tzt,, ‘Scholars gain every- 
day while the Taoists lose everyday.’! The consummation of 
this kind of loss is ‘non-attainment’, which is poverty. 
Poverty in another word is emptiness, Sinyata. When the 
spirit is all purged of its filth accumulated from time 


1 The full passage is: ‘He who seeks learnedness gets daily enriched. 
He who seeks the Tao is daily made poor. He is made poorer and 
poorer until he arrives at non-action (wu-wei). With non-action, there is 
nothing that he cannot achieve.’ (Chapter xlviii.) 


oo 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


immemorial, it stands naked, with no raiments, with no 
trappings. It is now empty, free, genuine, assuming its 
native authority. And there is a joy in this, not that kind of 
joy which is liable to be upset by its counterpart, grief, 
but an absolute joy which is ‘the gift of God’, which makes a 
man ‘enjoy good in all his labour’, and from which nothing 
can be taken, to which nothing can be put, but which shall 
stay for ever. Non-attainment, therefore, in Zen is positive 
conception, and not merely privative. The Buddhist modes 
of thinking are sometimes different from those of the West, 
and Christian readers are often taken aback at the idea of 
emptiness and at the too unconditioned assertion of idealism. 
Singularly, however, all the mystics, Buddhist or no, agree 
in their idea of poverty being the end of their spiritual 
development. 

In Christianity we seem to be too conscious of God, 
though we say that in Him we live and move and have our 
being. Zen wants to have even this last trace of God-con- 
sciousness, if possible, obliterated. That is why Zen fol- 
lowers advise us not to linger even where the Buddha is and 
to pass quickly away where he is not. All the training of the 
monk in the Zend6, in theory as well as in practice, is based 
on the notion of ‘meritless deed’. Poetically, this idea is 
expressed. as follows: 


‘The bamboo shadows are sweeping the stairs, 
But no dust is stirred: 


The moonlight penetrates deep in the bottom of the pool, 
But no trace is left in the water.’ 


When this is expressed in the more Indian and technical 
terms of the Lankdvatdra-siitra, it is as follows: 

‘Habit-energy is not separated from mind, nor is it to- 
gether with mind ; though enveloped in habit-energy, mind 
has no marks of difference. 

‘Habit-energy, which is like a soiled garment produced 
by manovijfiana, keeps mind from shining forth, though 
mind itself is a robe of the utmost purity. 


352 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


‘I state that the dlaya is like empty space, which is 
neither existent nor non-existent; for the dlaya has nothing 
to do with being or no-being. 

“Through the transformation of manovijiiana, mind is 
cleansed of foulness ; it is enlightened as it now thoroughly 
understands all things: this I preach.’} 


XII 


The monastery life is not all working and sitting quiet 
meditating on the ‘koan’. There is something of intellectual 
life, in the form of lecturing, as has already been referred to. 
Anciently, however, there was no regular ‘sesshin’, and all 
the lecturing or giving sermons to the congregation was 
carried out on the feast days, memorial days, or on other 
auspicious occasions such as receiving visitors, honourably 
discharging .the officials, or completing given pieces of 
work. Every available opportunity was thus used intel- 
lectually to enlighten earnest seekers of the truth. These 
discourses, sermons, exhortations, and short, pithy remarks 
so characteristic of Zen are recorded in its literature, the 
bulk of which indeed consists of nothing but these. While 
claiming to be above letters, Zen is filled with them, almost 
over-filled. Before giving some of such sermons, let me 
digress and say a few words about the Chinese language as 
the vehicle of Zen philosophy. 

To my mind the Chinese language is pre-eminently 
adapted for Zen; it is probably the best medium of expression 
for Zen as long as its literary side alone is thought of. Being 

1 Na vasanair bhidyate cit na cittarh vasanaih saha, 
Abhinnalakshanarn cittarn vasanaih pariveshtitarh. 
Malavad vasana yasya manovijfiana-sambhava, 
Pata-suklopamarn cittarh vasanair na virajate. 
Yatha na bhavo nabhavo gaganarn kathyate maya, 
Alayam hi tatha kaya bhavabh4va-vivarjitarn. 
Manovijfiana vy4vfittarh cittarn kalushya varjitam, 
Sarvadharmavabodhena cittarn buddharh vadamyaham. 
The Lankavatara, p. 296. 


2A 353 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


monosyllabic, the language is terse and vigorous, and a 
single word is made to convey so much meaning in It. While 
vagueness of sense is perhaps an unavoidable shortcoming 
accompanying those advantages, Zen knows how to avail 
itself of it, and the very vagueness of the language becomes 
a most powerful weapon in the hand of the master. He is far 
from wanting to be obscure and misleading, but a well- 
chosen monosyllable grows when it falls from his lips into a 
most pregnant word loaded with the whole system of Zen. 
Ummon is regarded as the foremost adept in this direction. 
To show how extremely laconic were his sayings, the 
following are quoted: 

When he was asked what was the sword of Ummon, he 
replied, ‘Hung!’ 

‘What is the one straight passage to Ummon?’ 

‘Most intimate!’ 

‘Which one of the Trikaya [Three Bodies of Buddha] 
is it that will sermonize?’ “To the point!’ 

‘I understand this is said by all the old masters, that when 
you know [the truth], all the karma-hindrances are empty 
from the beginning; but if you do not, you have to pay all 
the debts back. I wonder if the second patriarch knew this 
or not.’ Replied the master, ‘Most certainly !’ 

‘What is the eye of the true Dharma?’ ‘Everywhere!’ 

‘When one commits patricide, or matricide, one goes to 
the Buddha to confess the sin; when, however, one murders 
a Buddha or Patriarch, where should one go for confes- 
sion?’ ‘Exposed !’ 

‘What is the Tao [path, way, or truth]?’ ‘Walk on!’ 

“How is it that without the parent’s consent one cannot 
be ordained?’ ‘How shallow!’ ‘I cannot understand.’ ‘How 
deep! 

‘What kind of phrase is it that does not cast any shadow?” 
“Revealed !? 


“How do you have an eye in a question?’! ‘Blind.’ 


_* Not an ordinary question asking enlightenment, but one that has a 
point in it showing some understanding on the part of the inquirer. All 
those questions already quoted must not be taken in their superficial or 


Son 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


Just one monosyllable, and the difficulties are disposed 
of. The Zen master has generally nothing to do with cir- 
cumlocution ; if anyone is a direct and plain speaker he is the 
directest in hitting the point and the plainest in expressing 
his thoughts without any encumbering appendages. To 
these purposes the Chinese language is eminently suited. 
Brevity and forcefulness are its specific qualities, for each 
single syllable is a word and sometimes even makes a com- 
plete sentence. A string of a few nouns with no verbs or with 
no connectives is often sufficient to express a complex 
thought. Chinese literature is naturally full of trenchant 
epigrams and pregnant aphorisms. The words are un- 
wieldy and disconnected: when they are put together, they 
are like so many pieces of rock with nothing cementing 
them to one another. They do not present themselves as 
organic. Each link in the chain has a separate independent 
existence. But as each syllable is pronounced the whole 
effect is irresistible. Chinese is a mystic language par ex- 
cellence. 

As terseness and directness is the life of Zen, its literature 
is full of idiomatic and colloquial expressions. The Chinese, 
as you all know, being such partisans to classic formalism, 
scholars and philosophers did not know how to express 
themselves but in elegant and highly polished style. And 
consequently all that is left to us in ancient Chinese 
literature is this classicism; nothing of popular and collo- 
quial lore has come down to posterity. Whatever we have 
of the latter from the T‘ang and the Sung dynasties is to be 
sought in the writings of the Zen masters. It is an irony of 
fate that those who so despised the use of letters as con- 


literary sense. They are generally metaphors. For instance, when one 
asks about a phrase having no shadow, he does not mean any ordinary 
ensemble of words known grammatically as such, but an absolute pro- 
position whose verity is so beyond a shadow of doubt that every rational 
being will at once recognize as true on hearing it. Again, when reference 
is made to murdering a parent or a Buddha, it has really nothing to do 
with such horrible crimes, but as we have in Rinzai’s sermon elsewhere, 
the murdering is transcending the relativity of a phenomenal world. 
Ultimately, therefore, this question amounts to the same thing as asking 
‘Where is the one to be reduced, when the many are reduced to the one?’ 


393 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


veyors of truth and directly appealed to the understanding 
of an intuitive faculty became the bearers and transmitters 
of ancient popular idioms and expressions which were 
thrown away by the classical writers as unworthy and vulgar 
from the main body of literature. The reason, however, is 
plain. The Buddha preached in the vernacular language of 
the people; so did Christ. The Greek or Sanskrit (or even 
Pali) texts are all later elaboration when the faith began to 
grow stale, and scholasticism had the chance to assert itself. 
Then the living religion turned into an intellectual system 
and had to be translated into a highly but artificially 
polished, and therefore more or less stilted, formalism. This 
has been what Zen most emphatically opposed from the 
very beginning, and the consequence was naturally that 
the language it chose was that which most appealed to the 
people in general; that is, to their hearts open for a new 
living light. ~' 

The Zen masters, whenever they could, avoided the 
technical nomenclature of Buddhist philosophy; not only 
did they discuss such subjects as appealed to a plain man, 
but they made use of his everyday language, which was 
the vehicle appreciated by the masses and at the same 
time most expressive of the central ideas of Zen. Thus Zen 
literature became a unique repository of ancient wisdom. 
In Japan, too, when Hakuin modernized Zen he utilized 
profusely slangy phrases, colloquialisms, and even popular 
songs. This neological tendency of Zen is inevitable, 
seeing that it is creative and refuses to express itself 
in the worn-out, lifeless language of scholars and stylists. 
As the result even learned students of Chinese literature 
these days are unable to understand the Zen writings, 
and their spiritual meanings as well. Thus has Zen literature 
come to constitute a unique class of literary work in China, 
standing all by itself outside the main bulk of classical 
literature. 

As I said elsewhere, Zen became truly the product of the 
Chinese mind by thus creating a unique influence in the 
history of Chinese culture. As long as Indian influence pre- 


356 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


dominated, Zen could not be free from the speculative 
abstraction of Buddhist philosophy, which meant that Zen 
was not Zen in its specialized sense. Some scholars think 
that there is no Zen in the so-called primitive Buddhism 
and that the Buddha was not at all the author of Zen. But 
we must all remember that such critics are entirely ignoring 
the fact that religion, when transplanted, adapts itself to the 
genius of the people among whom it is introduced, and that 
unless it does so it gradually dies out, proving that there 
was no life-giving soul in that religion. Zen has claimed from 
the beginning of its history in China that it is transmitting 
the spirit and not the letter of the Buddha, by which we 
understand that Zen, independent of traditional Buddhist 
philosophy including its terminology and modes of thinking, 
wove out its own garment from within just as the silkworm 
weaves its own cocoon. Therefore the outer garment of 
Zen is original, befitting itself wonderfully well, and there 
are no patchings on it, nor any seams, either: Zen is truly 
the traditional celestial robe. 


XIII 


Before closing I must not forget to give some of the 
sermons by the masters which are recorded chiefly in The 
Record of the Transmission of the Lamp, as well as in the 
‘Sayings’. 

Joshu says: ‘This thing is like holding up a transparent 
crystal in your hand. When a stranger comes it reflects him 
as such; when a native Chinese comes it reflects him as 
such. I pick up a blade of grass and make it work as a 
golden-bodied one! sixteen feet high. I again take hold of a 
golden-bodied one sixteen feet high and make him act as a 
blade of grass. The Buddha is what constitutes human 


1 This means Buddha, who is supposed by Buddhists to have been the 
owner of a golden-coloured body, sixteen feet in height. 


357 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


desires and human desires are no other than Buddhahood.’ 
A monk asked : 

‘For whom are the Buddha’s desires roused?’ 

‘His desires are roused for all sentient beings.’ 

‘How does he get rid of them, then?’ 

‘What is the use of getting rid of them?’ answered the 
master. 

On another occasion he said, ‘Ka%yapa handed [the 
Law] over to Ananda, and can you tell me to whom Bodhi- 
dharma handed it over?’ 

A monk interposed, ‘How is it that we read about the 
second patriarch’s getting its marrow from Dharma?’? 

‘Don’t disparage the second patriarch,’ J6shu continued : 
‘Dharma claims that the one who was outside got the skin 
and the inside one got the bone; but can you tell me what 
the inmost one gets?’ 

A monk said, ‘But don’t we all know that there was one 
who got the marrow?’ 

Retorted the master: ‘He has just got the skin. Here in 
my place [ do not allow even to talk of the marrow.’ 

‘What is the marrow, then?’ 

‘If you ask me thus, even the skin you have not traced.’ 

“How grand then you are!’ said the monk. ‘Is this not 
your absolute position, sir?’ 

‘Do you know there is one who will not accept you?’ 

‘If you say so, there must be one who will take another 
position.’ 

“Who is such another?’ demanded the master. 

‘Who is not such another?’ retorted the monk. 

‘I will let you talk all you like.’ 

The sermons are generally of this nature, short, and 
to outsiders unintelligible or almost nonsensical. But, 
according to Zen, all these remarks are the plainest and 
most straightforward exposition of the truth. When the 


1 Generally after a sermon the monks come out and ask various 


questions bearing on the subject of the sermon, though frequently in- 
different ones are asked too. 


2 See the article on the ‘History of Zen Buddhism’, p. 163 et seq. 
358 . 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


formal logical modes of thinking are not resorted to, and 
yet the master is asked to express himself what he under- 
stands in his inmost heart, there are no other ways but 
to speak in a manner so €nigmatic and so symbolic as to 
stagger the uninitiated. However, the masters themselves 
are right in earnest, and if you attach even the remotest 
notion of reproach to their remarks, thirty blows will be 
instantly on your head. 

The next are from Ummon. 

Ummon ascended the platform and said: ‘O you, 
venerable monks! Don’t get confused in thought. Heaven 
is heaven, earth is earth, mountains are mountains, water 
is water, monks are monks, laymen are laymen.’ He 
paused for a while, and continued, ‘Bring me out here that 
hill of Ansan and let me see!’ 

Another time he said, ‘Bodhisattva Vasudeva turned 
without any reason into a staff.’ So saying he drew a line on 
the ground with his own staff, and resumed, ‘All the 
Buddhas as numberless as sands are here talking all kinds 
of nonsense.’ He then left the Hall. 

One day when he came out in the Hall as usual to give a 
sermon, a monk walked out of the congregation and made 
bows to him, saying, ‘I beg you to answer.’ Ummon called 
out aloud, ‘O monks!’ The monks all turned towards the 
master, who then came down from the seat. 

Another day when he was silent in his seat for a while, 
a monk came out and made bows to him; said the master, 
‘Why so late?? The monk made a response, whereupon the 
master remarked, ‘O you, good-for-nothing simpleton’ ! 

Sometimes his sermon would be quite disparaging to the 
founder of his own faith; for he said, ‘Iévara, great lord of 
heaven, and the old Sakyamuni are in the middle of the 
courtyard, discoursing on Buddhism; are chey not noisy?’ 

At another time he said: 

‘All the talk so far I have had—what is it all about, 
anyway? Today, again not being able to help myself, I am 
here to talk to you once more. In this wide universe is there 
anything that comes up against you, or puts you in bondage? 


359 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


If there is ever a thing as small as the point of a pin lying in 
your way or obstructing your passage, get it out for me! 
What is it that you call a Buddha or a Patriarch? What are 
they that are known as mountains, rivers, the earth, sun, 
moon, or stars? What are they that you call the four 
elements and the five aggregates? I speak thus, but it is no 
more than the talk of an old woman from a remote village. 
If I suddenly happen to meet a monk thoroughly trained 
in this matter, he will, on learning what I have been talking 
to you, carry me off the feet and throw me down the steps. 
And for this would he be blamed? Whatever this may be, 
for what reason is it so? Don’t be carried away by my talk 
and try to make nonsensical remarks. Unless you are the 
fellow who has really gone through with the whole thing, 
you will never do. When you are caught unawares by such 
an old man as myself, you will at once lose your way and 
break your legs. And for that, am I to be at all blamed? 
This being so, is there any one amtong you who wants to 
know a thing or two about the doctrine of our school? Come 
out and let me answer you. After this you may get a turning 
and be free to go out in the world, east or west.’ 

A monk came out and was at the point of asking a 
question when the master hit his mouth with the staff, 
and descended from the seat. 

One day when Ummon was coming up to the Lecture 
Hall he heard the bell, whereupon he said, ‘In such a wide, 
wide world, why do we put our monkish robes on when the 
bell goes like this?’ 

Another time he simply said, ‘Don’t you try to add frost 
over snow; take good care of yourselves, good-bye’; and 
went out. 

‘Lo, and behold, the Buddha Hall has run into the 
monks’ quarters.’ Later his own remark was, ‘They are 
beating the drum at Lafu (Lo-fu), and a dance is going on 
at Shdju (Shao-chou).’ 

Ummon seated himself in a chair before the congregation, 
there was a pause for a while, and he remarked, ‘Raining so 
long, and not a day has the sun shone.’ 


360 


THE MEDITATION HALL 


Another time, ‘Lo, and behold ! No life’s left!’ So saying, 
he acted as if he were falling. Then he asked: ‘Do you 
understand? If not, ask this staff to enlighten you.’ 

As soon as Yégi (Yang-ch‘ih), a great master of the 
eleventh century under the Sung dynasty, got seated in his 
chair, he laughed loudly, ‘Ha, ha, ha!’ and said: ‘What is 
this? Go back to your dormitory hall and each have a cup 
of tea.’ 

One day Yégi ascended the seat, and the monks were all 
assembled. The master, before uttering a word, threw his 
staff away and came right down, jumping from the chair. 
The monks were about to disperse, when he called out, ‘O 
monks!’ The latter turned back, whereupon said the 
master, “Take my staff in, O monks!’ This said, the master 
went off, 

Yakusan (Yiieh-shan, 751-834) gave no sermons for 
some little time and the chief secretary came up to him 
asking for one. The master said, ‘Beat the drum then.’ 
As soon as the congregation was ready to listen to him he 
went back to his own room. The secretary followed him and 
said, ‘You gave consent to give them a sermon, and how is it 
that you uttered not a word?’ Said the master, “The 
Sutras are explained by the Sitra specialists, and the 
Sastras by the Sastra specialists; why, then, do you wonder 
at me? [Am I not a Zen master? ]’ 

One day Goso (Fa-yen) entered the Hall and seated him- 
self in the chair. He looked one way over the shoulder and 
then the other. Finally, he held out his staff high in his hand 
and said, ‘Only one foot long!’ And without further com- 
ment he descended. 


The foregoing selections from Ummon and Jéshu and 
others will be sufficient to acquaint the reader with what 
kind of sermons have been carried on in the monastery 
for the intellectual or super-intellectual consumption of the 
monks. They are generally short. The masters do not waste 
much time in explaining Zen, not only because it is beyond 
the ken of human discursive understanding, but because 


361 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


such explanations are not productive of any practical and 
lasting benefits for the spiritual edification of the monks. 
The masters’ remarks are, therefore, necessarily laconic; 
sometimes they do not even attempt to make any wordy 
discussion or statement, but just raising the staff, or shaking 
the hossu, or uttering a cry, or reciting a verse, is all that 
the congregation gets from the master. Some, however, seem 
to have their own favourite way of demonstrating the truth 
of Zen; for instance, Rinzai is famous for his ‘Kwatsu’ (hé in 
Chinese), Tokusan for his flourishing staff, Gutei for his 
lifting up a finger, Hima for a bifurcate stick, Kwasan for 
beating a drum, and so on.! It is wonderful to observe what 
a variety of methods have sprung up, so extraordinary, so 
ingenious, and so original, and all in order to make the 
monks realize the same truth, whose infinite aspects as 
manifested in the world may be comprehended by various 
individuals, each according to his own capacity and 
opportunity. 

Taking it all in all, Zen is emphatically a matter of 
personal experience; if anything can be called radically 
empirical, it is Zen. No amount of reading, no amount of 
teaching, and no amount of contemplation will ever make 
one a Zen master. Life itself must be grasped in the midst of 
its flow ; to stop it for examination and analysis is to kill it, 
leaving its cold corpse to be embraced. Therefore, every- 
thing in the Meditation Hall and every detail of its dis- 
ciplinary curriculum is so arranged as to bring this idea 
into the most efficient prominence. The unique position 
maintained by the Zen sect among other Mahayana schools 
in Japan and China throughout the history of Buddhism in 


the Far East is no doubt due to the institution known as the 
Meditation Hall or Zendé. 


1 For detail see ‘Practical Methods of Zen Instruction’. 


362 


THE TEN COW-HERDING PICTURES 


ee attainment of Buddhahood or the realization of 
Enlightenment is what is aimed at by all pious Buddhists, 
though not necessarily during this one earthly life; and Zen, 
as one of the Mahayana schools, also teaches that all our 
efforts must be directed towards this supreme end. While 
most of the other schools distinguish so many steps of 
spiritual development and insist on one’s going through all 
the grades successively in order to reach the consummation 
of the Buddhist discipline, Zen ignores all these, and boldly 
declares that when one sees into the inmost nature of one’s 
own being, one instantly becomes a Buddha, and that there 
is no necessity of climbing up each rung of perfection 
through eternal cycles of transmigration. This has been 
one of the most characteristic tenets of Zen ever since the 
coming east of Bodhidharma in the sixth century. ‘See into 
thy own nature and be a Buddha’ has thus grown the 
watchword of the Sect. And this ‘seeing’ was not the out- 
come of much learning or speculation, nor was it due to the 
grace of the supreme Buddha conferred upon his ascetic 
followers ; but it grew out of the special training of the mind 
prescribed by the Zen masters. This being so, Zen could not 
very well recognize any form of gradation in the attainment 
of Buddhahood. The ‘seeing into one’s nature’ was an in- 
stant act. There could not be any process in it which would 
permit scales or steps of development. 

But in point of fact, where the time-element rules 
supreme, this was not necessarily the case. So long as our 
relative minds are made to comprehend one thing after 
another by degrees and in succession and not all at once 
and simultaneously, it is impossible not to speak of some 
kind of progress. Even Zen as something possible of demon- 
stration in one way or another must be subjected to the 


363 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


limitations of time. That is to say, there are, after all, 
grades of development in its study ; and some must be said 
to have more deeply, more penetratingly realized the truth 
of Zen. In itself the truth may transcend all form of 
limitation, but when it is to be realized in the human mind, 
its psychological laws are to be observed. The ‘seeing into 
thy nature’ must admit degrees of clearness, Transcendent- 
ally we are all Buddhas just as we are, ignorant and sinful 
if you like; but when we come down to this practical 
life, pure idealism has to give way to a more particular and 
palpable form of activity. This side of Zen is known as its 
‘constructive’ aspect, in contradistinction to its ‘all-sweeping’ 
aspect. And here Zen fully recognizes degrees of spiritual 
development among its followers, as the truth reveals itself 
gradually in their minds until the ‘seeing into one’s nature’ 
is perfected. 

Technically speaking, Zen belongs to the group of Budd- 
hist doctrines known as ‘discrete’ or ‘discontinuous’ or 
‘abrupt’ (tun in Chinese), in opposition to ‘continuous’ or 
‘gradual’ (chien)!; and naturally the opening of the mind, 
according to Zen, comes upon one as a matter of discrete or 
sudden happening and not as the result of a gradual, con- 
tinuous development whose every step can be traced and 
analysed. The coming of satori is not like the rising of the 
sun gradually bringing things to light, but it is like the 
freezing of water, which takes place abruptly. There is no 
middle or twilight condition before the mind is opened to 
the truth, in which there prevails a sort of neutral zone, or a 
state of intellectual indifference. As we have already ob- 
served in several instances of satori, the transition from 
ignorance to enlightenment is so abrupt, the common cur, 
as it were, suddenly turns into a golden-haired lion. Zen 
is an ultra-discrete wing of Buddhism. But this holds true 
only when the truth of Zen itself is considered, apart from 
its relation to the human mind in which it is disclosed. Inas- 
much as the truth is true only when it is considered in the 


1 Cf. also ‘History of Zen Buddhism’, where reference is made to the 
Northern and Southern school of Zen under the fifth patriarch in China. 


364 


THE TEN COW-HERDING PICTURES 


light it gives to the mind and cannot be thought of at all 
independent of the latter, we may speak of its gradual and 
progressive realization in us. The psychological laws exist 
here as elsewhere. Therefore when Bodhidharma was 
ready to leave China he said that Défuku got the skin, the 
nun S6ji got the flesh, and Dédiku the bone, while Yeka had 
the marrow (or essence) of Zen, 

Nangaku, who succeeded the sixth patriarch, had six 
accomplished disciples, but their attainments differed in 
depth. He compared them with various parts of the body, 
and said: ‘You all have testified to my body, but each has 
grasped a part of it. The one who has my eyebrows is the 
master of manners; the second, who has my eyes, knows 
how to look around; the third, who has my ears, under- 
stands how to listen to reasoning; the fourth, who has my 
nose, is well versed in the act of breathing; the fifth, who 
has my tongue, is a great arguer; and finally, the one who 
has my mind knows the past and the present. This grada- 
tion was impossible if ‘seeing into one’s nature’ alone was 
considered ; for the seeing is one indivisible act, allowing 
no stages of transition. It is, however, no contradiction . 
of the principle of satori, as we have repeatedly asserted, 
to say that in fact there is a progressive realization in the 
seeing, leading one deeper and deeper into the truth of 
Zen, finally culminating in one’s complete identification 
with it. 


Lieh-tzti, the Chinese philosopher of Taoism, describes 
in the following passage certain marked stages of develop- 
ment in the practice of Tao: 

‘The teacher of Lieh-tztt was Lao-shang-shih, and his 
friend Pai-kao-tzt. When Lieh-tzii was well advanced in 
the teachings of these two philosophers, he came home 
riding on the wind. Yin-shéng heard of this and came to 
Lieh-tzii to be instructed. Yin-shéng neglected his own 
household for several months. He never lost opportunities 
to ask the master to instruct him in the arts [of riding on 
the wind] ; he asked ten times, and was refused each time 


365 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


Yin-shéng grew impatient and wanted to depart. Lieh-tzi 
did not urge him to stay. For several months Yin-shéng kept 
himself away from the master, but did not feel any easier 
in his mind. He came over to Lieh-tzii again. Asked the 
master, ““Why this constant coming back and forth?” 
Yin-shéng replied, “The other day, I, Chang Tai, wished 
to be instructed by you, but you refused to teach me, which 
naturally I did not like. I feel, however, no grudge against 
you now, hence my presence here again.” 

‘“T thought the other time,” said the master, “you 
understood it all. But seeing now what a commonplace 
mortal you are, I will tell you what I have learned under 
the master. Sit down and listen! It was three years after 
I went to my master Lao-shang and my friend Pai-kao 
that my mind began to cease thinking of right and wrong, 
and my tongue talking of gain and loss, whereby he 
favoured me with just a glance. At the end of five years 
my mind again began to think of right and wrong, and my 
tongue to talk about gain and loss. Then for the first time 
the master relaxed his expression and gave me a smile. At 
the end of seven years I just let my mind think of whatever 
it pleased, and there was no more question of right and 
wrong, I just let my tongue talk of whatever it pleased, and 
there was no more question of gain and loss. Then for the 
first time the master beckoned me to sit beside him. At the 
end of nine years, just letting my mind think of whatever it 
pleased and letting my tongue talk of whatever it pleased, 
I was not conscious whether I or anybody else was in the 
right or wrong, whether I or anybody else gained or lost; 
nor was I aware of the old master’s being my teacher or the 
young Pai-kao’s being my friend. Both inwardly and out- 
wardly I was advanced. It was then that the eye was like 
the ear, and the ear like the nose, and the nose like the 
mouth ; for they were all one and the same. The mind was 
in rapture, the form dissolved, and the bones and flesh all 
thawed away ; and I did not know how the frame supported 
itself and what the feet were treading upon. I gave myself 
away to the wind, eastward or westward, like leaves of a 


366 


THE TEN COW-HERDING PICTURES 


tree or like a dry chaff. Was the wind riding on me? or was 
I riding on the wind? I did not know either way. 

***Your stay with the master has not covered much space 
of time, and you are already feeling grudge against him. 
The air will not hold even a fragment of your body, nor 
will the earth support one member of yours. How then 
could you ever think of treading on empty space and riding 
the wind?” 

“Yin-shéng was much ashamed and kept quiet for some 
time, not uttering even a word.’ 


The Christian and Mahommedan mystics also mark the 
stages of spiritual development. Some Sufis describe the 
‘seven valleys’! to traverse in order to reach the court of 
Simburgh, where the mystic ‘birds’? find themselves 
gloriously effaced and yet fully reflected in the Awful Pre- 
sence of themselves. The ‘seven valleys’ are: 1. The Valley of 
Search; 2. The Valley of Love, which has no limits; 3. The 
Valley of Knowledge; 4. The Valley of Independence; 5. 
The Valley of Unity, pure and simple; 6. rhe Valley of 
Amazement; and 7. The Valley of Poverty and Annihilation, 
beyond which there is no advance. According to St. Teresa, 
there are four degrees of mystic life: Meditation, Quiet, a 
numberless intermediate degree, and the Orison of Unity; 
while Hugo of St. Victor has also his own four degrees: 
Meditation, Soliloquy, Consideration, and Rapture. There 
are other Christian mystics having their own three or four 
steps of ‘ardent love’ or of ‘contemplation’.? 

Professor R. A. Nicholson gives in his Studies in Islamic 
Mysticism a translation of Ibnu ’I-Farid’s “The Poem of 
the Mystic’s Progress’ (7d’zyya), parts of which at least 
are such exact counterparts of Buddhist mysticism as to 
make us think that the Persian poet is simply echoing the 
Zen sentiment. Whenever we come across such a piece of 
mystic literature, we cannot help being struck with the 

1 According to Fariduddin Attar, A.D. 1119-1229, of Khorassan, 


Persia. Cf. Claud Field’s Mystics and Saints of Islam, p. 123 et seq. 
2 Underhill—Mysticism, p. 369. 


367 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


inmost harmony of thought and feeling resonant in the 
depths of human soul, regardless of its outward accidental 
differences. The verses 326 and 327 of the Td’tyya 
read: 

‘From “I am She’? I mounted to where is no “to”, and 
I perfumed [phenomenal] existence by my returning: 

‘And [I returned] from “I am I’ for the sake of an 
esoteric wisdom and external laws which were instituted 
that I might call [the people to God].’ 

The passage as it stands here is not very intelligible, but 
read the translator’s comments which throw so much light 
on the way the Persian thought flows: 

‘Three stages of Oneness (ittihdd) are distinguished here: 
1. “I am She”, ie. union (jam‘) without real separation 
(tafriqa), although the appearance of separation is main- 
tained. This was the stage in which al-Hallaj said “‘Ana 
*J-Haqq’’, “I am God”. 2. “I am I’, i.e. pure union without 
any trace of separation (individuality). This stage is tech- 
nically known as the “intoxication of union” (sukru ’I-jam‘). 
3. The “sobriety of union” (sahwu *J-jam‘), i.e. the stage in 
which the mystic returns from the pure oneness of the 
second stage to plurality in oneness and to separation in 
union and to the Law in the Truth, so that while con- 
tinuing to be united with God he serves Him as a slave 
serves his lord and manifests the Divine Life in its perfection 
to mankind. 

‘ “Where is no ‘to’ ”’, i.e. the stage of “I am I’’, beyond 
which no advance is possible except by means of retro- 
gression. In this stage the mystic is entirely absorbed in the 
undifferentiated oneness of God. Only after he had “re- 
turned”, i.e. entered upon the third stage (plurality in 
oneness), can he communicate to his fellows some perfume 
(hint) of the experience through which he has passed. “An 
esoteric wisdom”, i.e. the Divine providence manifested 
by means of the religious law. By returning to consciousness, 
the “‘united”’ mystic is enabled to fulfil the law and to act 
as a spiritual director.’ 

When this is compared with the progress of the Zen 


368 


THE TEN COW-HERDING PICTURES 


mystic, as is pictorially illustrated and poetically com- 
mented in the following pages, we feel that the comments 
were written expressly for Zen Buddhism. 


During the Sung dynasty a Zen teacher called Seikyo 
illustrated stages of spiritual progress by a gradual puri- 
fication or whitening of the cow until she herself disappears. 
But the pictures, six in number, are lost now.! Those that 
are still in existence, illustrating the end of Zen discipline 
in a more thorough and consistent manner, come from the 
ingenious brush of Kakuan, a monk belonging to the 
Rinzai school. His are, in fact, a revision and perfection of 
those of his predecessor. The pictures are ten in number, 
and each has a short introduction in prose, followed by a 
commentary verse, both of which are translated below. 
There were some other masters who composed stanzas on 
the same subjects using the rhymes of the first commen- 
tator, and some of them are found in the popular edition of 
“The Ten Cow-herding Pictures’. 

The cow has been worshipped by the Indians from very 
early periods of their history. The allusions are found in 
various connections in the Buddhist scriptures. In a 
Hinayana Sutra entitled ‘On the Herding of Cattle’,? 
eleven ways of properly attending them are described. In 
a similar manner a monk ought to observe eleven things 
properly in order to become a good Buddhist; and if he 


1 Since this book went to press I have come across an old edition of 
the spiritual cow-herding pictures, which end with an empty circle 
corresponding to the eighth of the present series. Is this the work of 
Seikyo as referred to in Kakuan’s Preface? The cow is shown to be 
whitening here gradually with the progress of discipline. 

2 See also a Sitra in the Anguttara Agama bearing the same title 
which is evidently another translation of the same text. Also compare 
‘The Herdsman, I’, in The First Fifty Discourses of Gotama the Buddha,Vol. II, 
by Bhikkhu Silacara. (Leipzig, 1913.) This is a partial translation of the 
Majjhima Nikaya of the Pali Tripitaka. The eleven items as enumerated 
in the Chinese version are just a little differently given. Essentially, of 
course, they are the same in both texts. A Buddhist dictionary called 
Daizo Hossu gives reference on the subject to the great Mahayana work 
of Nagarjuna, the Mahaprajftaparamita-Siitra, but so far I have not been 
able to identify the passage. 


2B 369 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


fails to do so, just like the cow-herd who neglects his duties, 
he will be condemned. The eleven ways of properly 
attending cattle are: 1. To know the colours; 2. To know 
the signs; 3. Brushing; 4. Dressing the wounds; 5. Making 
smoke; 6. Walking the right path; 7. Tenderly feeling for 
them; 8. Fording the streams; 9. Pasturing; 10. Milking; 
11. Selecting. Some of the items cited here are not quite 
intelligible. 

In the Saddharma-pundarika Siitra, chapter iii., ‘A Parable’, 
the Buddha gives the famous parable of three carts— 
bullock-carts, goat-carts, and deer-carts—which a man 
promises to give to his children if they come out of a house 
on fire. The finest of the carts is the one drawn by bullocks 
or cows (goratha), which represents the vehicle for the 
Bodhisattvas, the greatest and most magnificent of all 
vehicles, leading them directly to the attainment of 
supreme enlightenment. The cart is described thus in the 
Sitra: ‘Made of seven precious substances, provided with 
benches, hung with a multitude of small bells, lofty, 
adorned with rare and wonderful jewels, embellished with 
jewel wreaths, decorated with garlands of flowers, carpeted 
with cotton mattresses and woollen coverlets, covered with 
white cloth and silk, having on both sides rosy cushions, 
yoked with white, very fair and fleet bullocks, led by a 
multitude of men.’ 

Thus reference came to be made quite frequently in Zen 
literature to the ‘white cow on the open-air square of the 
village’, or to the cow in general. For instance, Tai-an of 
Fu-chou asked Pai-chang, ‘I wish to know about the 
Buddha; what is he?’ Answered Pai-chang, ‘It is like 
seeking for an ox while you are yourself on it.’ ‘What shall 
I do after I know?” ‘It is like going home riding on it.’ ‘How 
do I look after it all the time in order to be in accordance 
with [the Dharma]?’ The master then told him, ‘You 
should behave like a cow-herd, who, carrying a staff, sees 
to it that his cattle won’t wander away into somebody else’s 
rice-fields.’ 


“The Ten Cow-herding Pictures’ showing the upward 
370 | 


THE TEN COW-HERDING PICTURES 


steps of spiritual training is doubtless another such instance, 
more elaborate and systematized than the one just cited. 


THE TEN STAGES OF SPIRITUAL COW-HERDING ? 
I 


Looking for the Cow. She has never gone astray, so what is 
the use of searching for her? We are not on intimate terms 
with her, because we have contrived against our inmost 
nature. She is lost, for we have ourselves been led out of the 
way through the deluding senses. The home is growing 
farther away, and byways and crossways are ever confusing. 
Desire for gain and fear of loss burn like fire, ideas of right 
and wrong shoot up like a phalanx. 


Alone in the wilderness, lost in the jungle, he is searching, 
searching ! 

The swelling waters, far-away mountains, and unending 
path; 

Exhausted and in despair, he knows not where to go, 

He only hears the evening cicadas singing in the maple- 
woods. 


II 


Seeing the Traces of the Cow. By the aid of the Siitras and by 
inquiring into the doctrines he has come to understand 
something; he has found the traces. He now knows that 
things, however multitudinous, are of one substance, and 
that the objective world is a reflection of the self. Yet he is 
unable to distinguish what is good from what is not; his 


1The ten pictures reproduced between pages 378 and 379 were 
specially prepared for the author by Reverend Seisetsu Seki, Abbot of 
Tenryuji, Kyoto, which is one of the principal historical Zen monasteries 
in Japan. 


37! 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


mind is still confused as to truth and falsehood. As he has 
not yet entered the gate, he is provisionally said to have 
noticed the traces. 


By the water, under the trees, scatteréd are the traces of the 
lost : 

Fragrant woods are growing thick—did he find the way? 

However remote, over the hills and far away, the cow may 
wander, 

Her nose reaches the heavens and none can conceal it. 


III 


Seeing the Cow. He finds the way through the sound ; he sees 
into the origin of things, and all his senses are in harmonious 
order. In all his activities it is manifestly present. It is like 
the salt in water and the glue in colour. [It is there, though 
not separably distinguishable.] When the eye is properly 
directed, he wilt find that it is no other thing than himself. 


Yonder perching on a branch a nightingale sings cheer- 
fully ; 

The sun is warm, the soothing breeze blows through the 
willows green on the bank; 

The cow is there all by herself, nowhere is there room to hide 
herself; 

The splendid head decorated with stately horns, what 
painter can reproduce her? 


IV 


Catching the Cow. After getting lost long in the wilderness, 
he has at last found the cow and laid hand on her. But 
owing to the overwhelming pressure of the objective world, 


372 


THE TEN COW-HERDING PICTURES 


the cow is found hard to keep under control. She constantly 
longs for sweet grasses. The wild nature is still unruly, and 
altogether refuses to be broken in. If he wishes to have her 
completely in subjection, he ought to use the whip freely. 


With the energy of his whole soul, he has at last taken hold 
of the cow: 

But how wild her will, ungovernable her power! 

At times she struts up a plateau, 

When lo! she is lost in a misty, impenetrable mountain- 
pass. 


Vv 


Herding the Cow. When a thought moves, another follows, 
and then another—there is thus awakened an endless 
train of thoughts. Through enlightenment all this turns into 
truth; but falsehood asserts itself when confusion prevails. 
Things oppress us not because of an objective world, but 
because of a self-deceiving mind. Do not gtt the nose- 
string loose ; hold it tight, and allow yourself no indulgence. 


Never let yourself be separated from the whip and the 
tether, 

Lest she should wander away into a world of defilement: 

When she is properly tended, she will grow pure and docile, 

Even without chain, nothing binding, she will by herself 
follow you. 


VI 


Coming Home on the Cow’s Back. The struggle is over; he 
is no more concerned with gain and loss. He hums a rustic 
tune of the woodman, he sings simple songs of the village- 
boy. Saddling himself on the cow’s back, his eyes are fixed 


B95 


ESSAYS IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


on things not of the earth, earthy. Even if he is called to, he 
will not turn his head ; however enticed, he will no more be 
kept back. 


Riding the cow he leisurely wends his way home: 

Enveloped in the evening mist, how tunefully the flute 
vanishes away ! 

Singing a ditty, beating time, his heart is filled with a joy 
indescribable ! 

That he is now one of those who know, need it be told? 


VII 


The Cow Forgotten, Leaving the Man Alone. Things are one 
and the cow is symbolic. When you know that what you 
need is not the snare or set-net but the hare or fish, it is 
like gold separated from the dross, it is like the moon rising 
out of the clouds. The one ray of light serene and pene- 
trating shines even before days of creation. 


Riding on the cow he is at last back in his home, 

Where lo! there is no more the cow, and how serenely he 
sits all alone! 

Though the red sun is held up in the sky, he seems to be 
still quietly asleep; 

Under a straw-thatched roof are his whip and rope idly 
lying beside him. 


VIIl 


The Cow and the Man Both Gone out of Sight. All confusion 
is set aside, and serenity alone prevails; even the idea of 
holiness does not obtain. He does not linger about where 
the Buddha is, and as to where there is no Buddha he 
speedily passes on. When there exists no form of dualism, 


374 


THE TEN COW-HERDING PICTURES 


even a thousand-eyed one fails to detect a loophole. A 
holiness before which birds offer flowers is but a farce.! 


All is empty, the whip, the rope, the man, and the cow: 

Who has ever surveyed the vastness of heaven? 

Over the furnace burning ablaze, not a flake of snow can 
fall: 

When this state of things obtains, manifest is the spirit of the 
ancient master. 


IX 


Returning to the Origin, Back to the Source. From the very 
beginning, pure and immaculate, he has never been 
affected by defilement. He calmly watches the growth and 
decay of things with form, while himself abiding in the 
immovable serenity of non-assertion. When he does not 
identify himself with magic-like transformations, what 
has he to do with artificialities of self-discipline? The 
water flows blue, the mountain towers green. Sitting alone, 
he observes things undergoing changes. 


To return to the Origin, to be back at the Source—already 
a false step this! 

Far better it is to stay home, blind and deaf, straightway 
and without much ado. 

Sitting within the hut he takes no cognizance of things out- 
side, 

Behold the water flowing on—whither nobody knows ; and 
those flowers red and fresh—for whom are they? 


1 It will be interesting to note what a mystic philosopher would say 
about this ; ‘A man shall become truly poor and as free from his creature 
will as he was when he was born. And I say to you, by the eternal truth, 
that as long as ye desire to fulfil the will of God, and have any desire 
after eternity and God ; so long are ye not truly poor. He alone hath true 
spiritual poverty who wills nothing, knows nothing, desires nothing.’— 
From Eckhart as quoted by Inge in Light, Life, and Love. 


Bf 


xX 


Entering the City with Bliss-bestowing Hands. His humble 
cottage door is closed, and the wisest know him not. No 
glimpes of his inner life are to be caught ; for he goes on his 
own way without following the steps of the ancient sages. 
Carrying a gourd he goes out into the market; leaning 
against a stick he comes home. He is found in company 
with wine-bibbers and butchers; he and they are all con- 
verted into Buddhas. 


Barechested and barefooted, he comes out into the market- 
place; 

Daubed with mud and ashes, how broadly he smiles! 

There is no need for the miraculous power of the gods, 

For he touches, and lo! the dead trees come into full bloom. 


INDEX 


‘Anrupr’ school, 364 

Account of Succession in the Law, 171 

Accounts ‘of the Orthodox Trans- 
mission of the Dharma, by Ch’i- 


sung, | 
Adsrie-) fies (mirror insight), 


Amitabha Sitra (Chinese), 208; see 
also Sukhavativyitha 

Anabhogacarya (Act of no purpose), 
78 fn., 95 

Ananda, 67, 71, and Aks’hobhya, 

Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi 
(supreme, perfect enlighten- 
ment), 69, 91; see also En- 
lightenment 

— (or Alara Kalama), 83 fn., 


Arhat, qualified, 72 fn. 
Arhatship, 62, 67, 133 
Ariyapariyesana-suttam, 49 fn. 


), 61 
Aégvaghosha, 67, 68 fn., 158, 173 
Afvajit, 69 
Avatamsaka Sétra (Chinese), 102 
Awakening of Faith, the, by ASvagho- 
sha, 68 fn. 


BAnva, a Vedic Mystic, 102 

Basho (Pa-chiao), on ‘shujd’, 273 ; 
silent, 296 

Baso (Ma-tsu), 29, 176, 205, 214, 
232, 236 ; and To-Impo, 307; in 
his sick bed, 284; ‘Kwatz’, 295 

Berkeley, on dust, 327 fn. 

Bhitata, 92 

Bhitatathata, 143 

Biographies of the High Priests, by 
Tao-hsiian, 177 

Black-nails, the Brahman, 174 

Blake, 282 

Bliss-bestowing, 376 

Bodhi, 92 (et seq.); see also En- 
lightenment 

Bodhidharma (Daruma, Tamo), 
20, 37, 86, 95, 107, 108, 169, 


Bodhidharma—contd. 
232; and a nun, 300; and his 
disciples, 191; and his four dis- 
ciples, 365; and Nagarjuna, 
191 fn.; and the Emperor of 
Liang, 188-9; his coming from 
the West, 280; his last days, 
191 ; his life, 175 et seq.; his life 
by Donrin, 180 fn; in Wei, 189; 
Six Essays by, 178; the gatha 
by, 173 

Bodhiruci, a translator of the 
Lankdvatir 


87 

Bodhisattvahood, 75; contrasted 
with Arhatship, 63 

Bodhisattva-Sila  Sitra (Chinese), 
208, 221 

Bodhism, 164 

Boehme, Jacob, 126 

Bokitsu (Mu-chi), on staff, 33 

Bokuju (Mu-chou), on doctrine 
going beyond Buddhas, 284 et 
seg.; on dressing and eating, 24, 
25; on staff, 34; on teacher of 
Buddhas, 284, 285 ; treatment of 
Ummon, 22; on Zen, 284 

Brahmajala, 61 fn., 62 

Buddha, and an old lady, 175, 
and metaphysics, 136-7; as a 
magician, 99; as empiricist, 
140; as mind, 234 ; as the world- 
light, 52; deified, 51 fn.; his 
deification, 44 ; his gatha of law- 
transmission, 171; his personal 
experience, 118; his personality, 
115; his predecessors, 119; his 
ccc ai to Upaka, 127; 

is reluctance to preach, 121; 

hissecluded habit, 80 ; motherly, 
51; no metaphysician, 49; the 
reason of his appearance, 73 

Bugiliaagsite, by Agvaghosha, 159 
n. 

Buddhas, the six, 171; invoked at 
meal, 324 fn. 

Buddhism, acting on Confucian 
ideas, 113; and its divisions, 52; 
and its founder, 41 et seg.; and 


au9 


INDEX 


Buddhism—contd. 
its Pali scholars, 48; and 
women, 76; as a life, 47; as a 
living system of Buddhist ex- 

ience, 53, 55; as the teach- 

ing of the Buddha, 47 ; Chinese, 
characterized, 105; defined, 
115; growing beyond monas- 
ticism, 74 et seq. ; its essence, 54; 
its influence on Taoism, 112; 
its vital problems, 54 ef seq.; 
persecuted in China, 109; to be 
comprehensively and inwardly 
conceived, 59 

Builder (or designer, gahakara), 

Ri see also ay 2 

6 (Fo-kuang), or Tsu-yiian, 

255 ‘ seq.; his tdki-no-gé, 257 
fn., 258 fa. 

Bunki (Wen-hsi), silent, 296 


[es Sitra (Chinese), 


Catushkotika, four logical pro- 
portions, 275 

Causation, the twelvefold chain of, 
48, 66, 67, 120, 129, 138, 165, 
166; see also under Origination 

Cause and Effect in the Past and 
Present, Stitra on the, 49 fn. 

Cetovimutti, 71 

Chao-chou, see Joshu 

Ch‘éng-hao, Confucian, philo- 
sopher, 113 

a Confucian philosopher, 


Chien-ku, 81 

Chih-chiang-liang-lou, a Bud- 
dhist translator, 171 

Chih-huang (Chiko) disciple of 


Hui-néng 
u), a Buddhist 


Chih-yueh (Chi 
from India, 218 

Chi-i (Chigi), a Buddhist philo- 
sopher, 107, 114, 156, 204 

Chinese language, as a vehicle of 
Zen, 353 et seq. 

Chinese mind, compared with the 
Indian, 96 et seq. ; practical, 104 

Ché-kei (Ch‘ang-ching), his toki- 
no-pé, 249-50 ; on Suigan’s eye- 
brows, 


Chésa (Ch‘ang-sha), on earth- 
worm, 327; on Nansen’s death, 
30; on the self, 288 

Chésui (Ch‘ang-shui) on the 
evolution of the absolute, 287 

Chou-tun-i, a Chinese philosopher, 
113 

Chéyetsu (Ch‘ang-shuo), a Chin- 
ese officer, 208 

Christ, in the light of Zen, 345 

Christian mystics, 367 

Christianity, and its founder, 45 
et seg.; symbolic, 154 

Chu (Chung), calling to his at- 
tendant, 304; the national 
teacher, 342 

Chuang-tzii, 103, 114 

a a Chinese philosopher, 

13 


Citta, 93 

Confucius, 14, 17, 22 

Contradictions, in Zen, 279 et seq. 

Counter-questioning, in Zen, 297 
et P 

Cow, catching the, 372; for- 
gotten, 374; gone out of sight, 
374; herding the, 373; looking 
for the, 371; on the back of, 
373; on the herding of the, 369 ; 
revered by the Indians, 369; 
seeing the, 370; secing the 
traces of the, 371 


Darve (Tai-hui), 241 

Daizui (Tai-sui), on self, 298 

Daruma (or Tamo), see Bodhi- 
dharma 


Democracy, in the monastery, 326 
Desgeer (or builder, gahakara), 
1 


Dhammapdda, 66, 147 

Dharanf, 335 fn. 

Dharma, the, 70; and Buddhist 
life, 47; defined, 61; manifest 
in the Buddha, 50; the com- 
prehensive, 50; the eye of, 65 

Dharmakaya, 44 fn.; 89 

Dhritaka, a Zen patriarch, 172 

Dhyana ee: and Prajiia, 79; 
and Zen, 79; against anti- 
nomianism, 79; as a spiritual 


380 


INDEX 


Dhyana—contd. 
exercise, 168 ef seq.; different 
kinds of, 83; distinguished from 


Zen, 107; four kinds of, in the 
Lankdvatara, 94; the patriar- 
chal, 226; the Tathagata, 226; 
the true, defined in the Sam- 
yukta-agama, 94 fn; (see also 
under Zen) 

Direct action, in Zen, 292 

Direct method, in Zen, 299 et seq. 

so arey (Siksha), the threefold, 


Discipline, Siitra on the Story of, 
Chinese, 49 fn. 

Défuhu (Tao-fu), disciple of 
Bodhidharma, 191 


Digo (Tao-wu), Yin-chi disciple 
of Yakusan, knows not Ris 
master, 280; with Yakusan, 303 

— Tenno, instructing Ryitan, 


Déiku (Tao-yu), disciple of Bodhi- 


Déshin (Tao-hsin), 196, 200, 201; 
and Hoyu (Fa-jung), 202, 203 
Duhka (pain), 154 


Eastern Buddhist, The, 13 fn. 
Eating, in the monastery, 323 et 


$eq. 
Eckhart, cited, 126, 237, 269, 270, 
272, 283, 318-19, 346 fn., 375 


fn. 
Ego, 17; -centric, 17; -substance, 
not existence, 57, 
Ekacitta (one ete 125 
Ekottara-Agama, 43 fn., 51 fn. 
Emerson, on imagination, 309 
Emptiness (Siinyata), 180 et seq. ; 
as poverty, 351 
Engakuji, in Kamakura, 320 
Enlightenment, a returning, 152 
et seq.; an essential fact of 
Buddhism, 164; and darkness, 
25; and ignorance, 118 et seq.; 
and intellection, 118; and 
Nirvana, 55; and Samadhi (or 
dhyana), 146 et seg.; and 


Enlightenment—conid. 
spiritual freedom, 73 ef seq.; 
and the intellect, 153; and the 
will, 130; as a significant fact 
in the Buddha’s life, 116; as 
affirmation, 144; as final truth, 
69; as Nirvana, 62; as satori, 
229; as the Dharma, 61; at- 
tainable by us, 58; essence of 
Buddhism, 55 ; fuller expression 
of life, 85; graded, 361 e# seg. ; in 
the jvatara, 72; in the 
Saddharmapundarika, 97; its re- 
lation to Zen, 60 et seg.; not a 
passive reflection, 143; not con- 
ceptual, 93; not discursive 
understanding, 73; not in- 
tellectual, 67, 122; not negative, 
157; not nihilistic, 142; syn- 
thetical, 155 

Everlasting No, 14 

Everlasting Yea, 14 

Exclamation in Zen, 293 et seq. 

Eye (insight), 120 


Fa-pao-t‘an-ching, by Hui-n 
217 fn. = 


Finger pointing at the moon, 19 
First Fifty Discourses of the Buddha, 
tr. by Sitacara, 369 fn. 
Freedom, spiritual, 133 
ro (Funky6, or Fudaishi), 204, 
7 


Gandavyitha Siitra, Chinese, 76 

Ganto (Yen-t‘ou), 254-5 fn. 

Gathas of transmission, 171-2 

Genkaku (Hsiian-chiao), 223 

Genkakucho (Hstian-Chiao 
Chéng), on Chu the national 
teacher, 304 fn. 

Gensaku (Hsitan-t'se), 224 

Gensha (Hsiian-sha), and a piece 
of cake, 293; in water, 293; on 
Chu the national teacher, 304; 
on self, 293; on the murmuring 
of a stream, 293; on transparent 
crystal, 293 

Gensoku (Hsiian-tsé), and the 
god of fire, 310 


381 


INDEX 


God-consciousness, in Zen, 352 
Godoshi (Wu Tao-tsii), and the 
emperor Hsiian-tsung, 308-9 
Goroku (Yi-lu), Chinese collo- 
quialism in, 111 

Gozusan (Niu-t‘ou Shan), 202 

‘Gradual’ school, in Zen, 364 

Gunabhadra, a translator of the 
Lanikavatéra, 87, 218 

Gunin (Hung-jén), the fifth patri- 
arch, 40, 187, 202, 205 

Gutei (Chuh-chih), one finger 
Zen, 35 

Gwarin (Wo-luan) a disciple of 
the sixth patriarch, 225 


Haryé (P‘ci-hsiu), and Obaku, 
281 et seg., 305 

Hakuin, 253-4, 282, 342, 343, 
354; and his teacher Shdju, 
339, 340 ; on Ummon’s ‘Kwan’, 
295 


Hekiganshu, an important book on 
Zen, 35 fn., 334 

Herbert, George, cited, 319 

Hima (Pi-Mo), with his forked 
stick, 276 

Hinayanism, as aescetic formalism, 


76 

Hofuku (Pao-fu), 34 fn., his ‘for a 
while’, 296; on Suigan’s cye- 
brows, 294 

Hdgen (Fa-yen), on an inch’s 
difference, 290-1; on Chu the 
national teacher, 304 fn. ; on one 
drop of water, 291; with Gen- 
soku, 310 

H6ji Bunkin (Pao-tz‘i Wen- 
pet on everyday thought, 
264 fn. 


ee (Fa-hua san-mei), 
1 


(P‘ang-yiin), Chinese 

irti, 29; on drawing 

water, 319; on the companion- 
less man, 29 

Hénen ShGnin, 45 fn. 

Héshi (Pao-chih), 204 

Hossu, 249 

Héyen (Fa-yen), of Gosozan, and 
the yogacara, 290; his sermon, 
286; his téki-no-gé, 249; on 


Hokoji 
Vi 


382 


Héyen—conid. : 
Maryo Kan, 117; on his own 
portrait, 252 ; on two much Zen, 
347; sermon on burglary, 312; 
sermon on staff, 361 

Hsiang-yen, see Kydgen 

Hsien-chou (Genju), a_ great 
Buddhist philosophen, 114 

Hsing-szii, see Seigen, Gydshi 

Hsiian-chuang (Genjé Sanzo), 
106, 114 

Huang-po, see Obaku 

Hui-chung, see Chu the national 


teacher 

Hui-k‘é, see Yeka 

Hui-néng, see Yeno 

Hui-szi: (Yeshi), a Chinese Bud- 
dhist teacher, 156 

— taught in the monas- 
tery, 332 


Hyakujo (Pai-chang), 176; and 
wild geese, 240; as founder of 
Zen monastery, 314; deafened 
by Baso’s ‘Kwatz’, 295; on 
cow-herding, 370; rolling up 
the matting, 248 

Hyakujo Nehan (Pai-chang Nieh- 
ai, 26, 263, 301-2 

Hyakujo Shingi, regulations of the 


Zen monastery, 314 


Isnu ‘I-Fdrid, a Persian mystic, 
367 


I-ching (Gijd), a Chinese pilgrim 
and translator, 106 

Ignorance, avidya, 13, 58; and 
ego, 132, 139; how conquered, 
122; not cognitive, 128 

Iku, or Toryd (Tu-ling Yu), his 
toki-no-gé, 250 

Immortality, 30 

Indian imagination, and the 
Mahday4na texts, 97 

Inshu (Yin-tsung), converted by 
Yeno, 212 

Insight, its synonyms in Sanskrit, 
124 et seq.; see also eye (cakkhu) 

Intellect, disturbing, 18 

Isan (Wei-shan), picking tea- 

leaves, 305, 328; in the remote 

mountains, 342 


INDEX 


Ishin Seigen (Wei-hsin Ch‘in- 
yiian), his view of Zen, 24 

Islamic Mysticism, by R. D. 
Nicholson, 367 

Itivuttaka, 144, 145 


Jiwyo (T‘zu-ming), and Suigan 
Kashin, 311; his counter- 
questioning, 297; on dust, 35 

Jinshu (Shén-hsiu), 206, 208, 213, 
214, 215, 216, 232 

J6-j6za (Ting the Monk), and 
Rinzai, 259; with Buddhist 
scholars, 306 

Joshu, (Chao-chou) and an old 
woman, 344; crying ‘fire’, 327; 
his counter-questioning, 297; 
his direct method, 301; his 
stone bridge, 344; ‘Mu’, 252, 
256 ; no abiding place, 220; ona 
crystal, 357; on Bodhidharma, 
357; on Chu the national 
teacher, 304 fn.; on dust, 327; 
on his new robe, 283; on Nan- 
sen’s cat, 276; on poverty, 373 
fn.; on Prajiid, 288; on washing 
dishes, 238; on Zen, 117; one 
thing abiding, 284; one ulti- 
mate word, 276; ‘throw it 
down’, 175 


Karsu (Ch‘i-sung), a Chinese 
historian, 171 

Kakuan (K‘uo-an), on ten cow- 
herding pictures, 369 

air Haryo (Pa-ling Chien), 

Katha-Upanishad, 125 

‘Kechimyak-ron’, one of the Six 
iy by Bodhidharma, quoted, 
2 

Kegon (Avatathsaka), 66, 173 

Keisan (Chi-shan), 271 fn. 

Kena-Upanished, 40 fn., 155 fn. 

Kensho, seeing into one’s nature, 


363 

Kevaddha Sutta, 81 fn., 101 

Kido, (Hsii-t‘ang), on the evolu- 
tion of the absolute, 288 

Kisu (Kuei-tsung), weeding, 285 

Kéan, 255 fn., 266; its meaning 
explained, 333 fn. 


Koboku Gen (K‘u-mu Yuan), on 
poverty, 350, 351 

K6h6 (Kao-féng), his Zen experi- 
ence, 251-4 


Kozankoku (Huang-shan-ku), and 
Kwaido, 245 

Kumirajiva, 114 

Kwanchu (Huan-chung), on 


‘Kwatz!’ (hé), 35; four forms of, 
295 


Kydgen (Hsiang-yén), 226, a 
man up in a tree, 277; his 
satori, 242; on poverty, 350 

Kydézan (Yang-shan), and San- 
sho, 298, on Isan’s mirror, 277; 
picking tea leaves, 305, 328 


Lalita-vistara, 160 

Lankavatara Siitra, 72, 95, 108, 116, 
117, 186, 187, 188, 208, 218, 
352-3; a hymn cited from, 89; 
its main thesis, 88; its special 
features discussed, 88; not one 
word uttered, 67; on abrupt 
understanding, 215-16; pas- 
sages often repeated in, 93; 
quotation from the first chapter 
of, 97-8; three Chinese trans- 
lations of, 87 

Lao-tzi, 41 fn. 114, 351 

Lawrence, Brother, 30, 319 

‘Learning by doing’, in the monas- 
tery, 329 

Liang-chiu (‘for a little while’), 


296 
Lieh-tzi, 103, 345, 365 
Life, as affirmation, 14; assertion 
of, 301; suffering, 15 
Lightning simile, 245, 257, 300 
Lin-chi, see Rinzai 
Lohiccd, 81 fn. 


MaApuyamiKA, the, 104, 114, 173 

Mahakasyapa, or Kasyapa, 60, 86, 
167, 171 

Mahdli-sutta, 61, 135, 145 


383 


INDEX 


Mahapadaéna-suttanta, 48 fn., 119 
Mee ee irvana Sitra, Chinese, 
fn. 

Mahasarhghikas, 52 

Mahayana, traceable in Hina- 
yana, 59 

MahayAanism, and libertinism, 76 

Mahayutpatti, 82 fn. 

Maitreya, 98 

Majjhima-nikaya, 159, 161 fn. 

Manas, 92 

Maifijuésri, 75, 100, 103; as Prajiia, 
289 


Maijfifiitarhs (self-assertion), 149 

Manovijiiana, 92 

Manura, the twenty-second pat- 
riarch of Zen, 172 

Ma-tsu, see Baso. 

Maturing, of Zen life, 341 et seq. 

Maudgalyadyana, 70 

Mee (Ma-ku), and Ryosui, 


Meaningless affirmation in Zen, 
283 


Meditation, 94; five objects of, 
85 fn.; in Zen, 32, et seq.; 
on food, 325; ten objects of, 


ae oe 345 ; meritless deeds, 
Mupales, Buddhist view of, 135 
in. 


Moksha, 63; see also Vimoksha 

Monastery life, described, 321-2; 
practical, 318 

Mondd (questions and answers), 


> 

Monks, as labourers, 326 
Moon, and a finger, 19 
Mu-chou, see Bokujii 
Musé-Kokushi, 335 et seq. 
Myé6-jdka (Ming the Monk), 210 
Mystics and Saints of Islam, by 

Claud Field, 240 fn. 


NAcAryuna, 87, 68, 114, 173, 369 

Na-lien-ya-shé, a Buddhist trans- 
lator from India, 171 

Nan-ch‘iian, see Nansen 


384 


Nangaku an-yiich), 226, 228, 
236, od i disciples, 365 

Nansen (Nan-ch‘iian), 30, 40, 
176, 307; and his cat, 276; 
everyday thought, 264 

Nanyin (Nan-yiian), 226 

Nan-yiich, see Nangaku 

Negation, in Zen, 275 

Nenro, remark peculiar to Zen, 
239 


Nigrodha, 80 

Nirvana, 48, 56, 116; conditioned 
by sarmsara, 92; described as 
security, 160; in enlightenment, 
62; in samsara, 25; in Sutta 
Nipata, 144; not annihilation, 
58; the aniipadiéesha, 62, 75 

Niroaza Siitra, Chinese, 208, 212; 
see also Mahaparinirvdna 

‘No work, no eating’, 315-16 

Noble Truth, the Fourfold, 48, 
A9, 66, 69, 110, 141-2, 154, 166 

Non-achievement, 232 

Non-attachment, 174 

Non-attainment, 351-2 

Non-ego, 48, 165, 166 

Nyoi, 33 


Oxaxu (Huang-po), 21, 176, 232; 

ond ee 3067 3 with a noe 
3 wi ikyi, 304; with his 

staff, 301 a 

Okubo Shibun, and his bamboo 
picture, 274 

‘One thought’ (Ekacitta), 67 

‘One voice ’(ekagvara), 53 fn. 

Orategama, a collection of letters by 


Original force, the, 210, 225 

Origination, theory or chain of 
(pratitya-samutpada), 57, 78 {fn., 
122-3, 156; see also Causation 


PAI-CHANG, see Hyakujo 

Panfid, and enlightenment, 138; 
its Pali synonyms, 124; see also 
Praja 

Pafifid-vimutti, 72 

a ae a lost Zen history, 

Paradox, in Zen, 272-4 


INDEX 


Paramartha, or paramarthasatya, 
92, 218 

Pagani, virtues of perfection, 

Parikalpana (or vikalpa), 125 | 

Parinibbdna-suttanta, 52 fn. ~ 

Paticca-samuppada, 126, 127, 
141; see also Origination and 
Causation 

Patriarchs, the twenty-eight, 170 

Pieh-chi, a Zen document, 185 

Pi-kwan, wall-gazing, 180, 184-6 

Blais ar by Hui-néng, 225; 
see also Fa-pao-tan-ching 

Plotinus, 283 

Praja, 64, 73, 78, 107, 125, 147, 
288, 289; see also Paiifia, and 
under Dhyana and Enlighten- 
ment 

Prajfid-paramita Siitra, 102, 103, 
105, 114, 117, 155 fn., 173, 
220-1 fn., 281; its school, 92; 
the philosophy of, 148-9 

Pratyatmajiiana, or -gocara, 88 
et seq., 93, 105, 165 

Prodigal son, the, in the Buddhist 
texts, 153“ 


Rart, the simile of, 149-51 
Rakuho (Lé-p‘u), his ‘Kwatz! 
295-6 


Zen history by Ch‘i-sung, 171 
Records of the Spread of the Lamp, a 
Zen history by Li-tsun-hsii, 168 
Records of the Transmission of the 
Lamp, a Zen history by Tao- 
yiian, 168, 171, 177, 219 
Refuge formula, me pie 74 
Reiun (Ling-yiin), on the appear- 
eee roe 301 
Religion of the Samurai, by Kwaiten 
Nukariya, 9 
Repetition, in Zen, 287 et seq. 
Returning, 152; to the origin, 375 
Rhys Davids, 82 fn. 
Righteousness, the eightfold path 
of, 48, 66, 165, 166 


Mighihis Lineage of the Sakya Doc- 


Rinzai ee ; 205, and Obaku, 
; his ‘Kwatz!’, 295; his 

‘rough’ method, 306-7; on a 
man of no title, 21; on Obaku’s 
Buddhism, 247; on staff, 33; 
sermon on Zen life, 347-8; the 
school of, 228; with a hoe, 328 

Rinzairoku, Sayings of Rinzai, 334 

Risan aan); 271 fn. 

5] 

Rydsui (Liang-sui), 
Mayoku, 304 

Ryitan (Lung-t‘an), receiving 
instructions from Dogo, 303 


answering 


Saddharma-pundarika Siitra, 53 fn., 

65, 66, 73, 78, 97, 102, 208, 370 

Sai-an (Chi-an), and Vairocana 
Buddha, 175 

Samadhi, 108, 224; distinguished 
from dhydna, 82; its synonyms, 
82-3 

Samaftiia-phala Sutta, 80, 81 fn., 83 
fn., 140, 141 

Samsara, 92 

Samyutta-nikaya, 71, 155 fn. 

Sandhana, a follower of the 
Buddha, 80 

Sangha, 76 

Sansho (San-shéng), 226; and 


Sariputra, 73, 99; in the Punda- 
rika, 73; his spiritual attain- 
ment, 69 

Satori (awakening) 32, 37, 229 et 
seq.; absolutely needed in Zen, 
261 -2; and conversion, 231; 
and freedom, 265; and mental 
effort, 246; and seeing God, 
263; and self-suggestion, 261 ; 
as enlightenment, 266; as in- 
tuitive understanding, 230; as 
kenshé (chien-hsing), 233; in- 
timate experience, 263; not 
abnormal, 264; not discursive, 
243; not meditation, 262 

Schopenhauer, 157 


385 


INDEX 


Secché (Hstich-tou), compiler of 
Hekigan, 35 fn.; on Ummon’s 
‘Kwatz!’, 295 

Secret Virtue, 344 

Gydéshi, (Ch‘ing-yi 


, the source the 

Seizei creel), 274 fn. 

Seki, Seisetsu, 371 

Sekisd (Shih-shuang), on the ulti- 
mate fact, 302 

Sekitd (Shih-t' ou), 30, 176, 205, 
214, 279 fn. 

Self-suffering, in Zen, 344-5 

Séng-t’san, see Sdsan 

Sesshin period, 334 et seq. 

Shari (Sarir4), 330 

Shén-hsiu, see Jinshu 

5 i a lost Zen history, 

7 


Shifuku (Tzu-fu, silent), 296 
Shih-t‘ou, see Sekitd 
a (Tzi-hu), on earthworm, 


Set 173; and Swedenborg, 
Shinko (Shén-kuang), 189; see also 


shew ’(Shéng-kuang » on earth- 
worm 328 
Shuan (Shou-an), on poverty, 349 
Shake” (Ch hung) 
us on er, 
391-2 ung), anger, 


Shuzan (Shu-shan), 270 fn.; his 
‘for a while’, 296 ; on Buddhism, 
284; on shippé, 275 

Sikshinanda, a translator of the 
Lankavatara, 87 

Silence, and Zen masters, 296; in 
Zen, 296-7; Vimalakirti’s, 296 

Six Essays by Bodhidharma; see 
also under Bodhidharma, 232 et 
Seq. 

Sixth Patriarch, see Yeno 

Sdji (Tsung-chih), 191 

Sonadanda, the Brahman, 155 fn. 

Sorrow, sanctifying, 16 

Sdsan (Seng-t' san), 195-6 

S6td school, the, 228 


Sotdba (Su Tung-p‘o), on Mount 

Lu, 24 

a Team: silence re- 
by, 296 

apna fed at meal, 324 


Srimala Satra, Chinese, 76 
St. Francis, on work, 316 fn. 


Suibi gran Mugaku, on 
Tanka, 

Suigan Tsui-yen), on his eye- 
Penk aera ‘J 09-10 

, and Jimyo, 309- 

a een vyitha "Siitra, §3 fn. 

Sumeru, Mount, 100 

Sumiye-painting, and Zen, 300 

—— emptiness, 58, 68, 92, 
11 

Supernaturalism, Indian, 99; 
frig wonders, etc., 101, 


stim Siitra, Chinese, 287 
Sutta Nipata, 61 fn., 142, 144 
Swendenborg, 56 fn. 


TAI-AN, on cow-he 

Taigi (tai-i), fixation, 

Tanka (Tan-hsia), ” burning a 
Buddha’s um e, 330-1 

‘Tat twam asi’, 273 

Tathagata, his. encanta 134 

Tathagata-dhyana, 95 

Tathagata-garbha, 91, 92 

Tathata, 92 

Tac-hstian, a Buddhist historian, 

Tao-shin, see Doshin 

Tao-wu, see Dogo 

Tao- ai a Zen historian, 177, 


vitiicr, 319, 349 

Teisho, Zen lecture, 335 

Ten Cow-herding Pictures, 363 

et seq. 

Tendai, 66; and Zen, 204 

Tennyson, 33 

Tenryu (T“ien-lung), his counter- 
estioning, 297; ‘one finger’ 
en, 35 fn. 


, 370 


386 


INDEX 


es in Kyoto, 335 fn., 371 
n. 


Terstegen, 294 

Té-shan, see Tokusan 

Tesshikaku (T‘ieh-tsui Chiao), 
knows not his master, 280 

Tevijja Siitra, 61 fn. 

Three conceptions of being, 305 

Td-Impo (Téng-yin-féng), crush- 
ing Baso’s legs, 307 

Todki-no-gé, 248, by Bukkd, 255; 
by Chokei, 249 ; by Hiyen Goso, 
249; by Yengo, 249; by Yenju, 
250; by Yédainen, 250 

Tokusan (Té-shan), and his stick, 
276, 296; and the Diamond 
Siitra, 239, 247 ; on staff. 33 

Tokushé6 (Té-shao), on Prajfia, 
291 ; one drop of water, 291 

Tésu (T‘ou-tzii), on the Buddha, 
etc., 288 

Trikaya, 44 fn. 

Tsung-chien (Sékan), a Buddhist 
historian, 176 

Tung-shan, see Dozan 

T‘zu-ming, see Jimyo 


Upraka, 83 fn. 

Udumbarika-sthanadda Suttanta, 80 

Ummon (Yiin-mén), defines Zen, 
117; his ‘Kwan!’, 294; his 
laconism, 354; on a good-for 
nothing fellow, 22; on Jéshu’s 
washing dishes, 238 ; on poverty, 
351; on staff, 34, 275, 278; on 
Zen, 275 

Umpé (Yiin-féng), on Ummon’s 
comment on Jéshu, 239 

Ungan (Yiin-yen), ‘overflowing!’, 
110; with Yakusan, 303 

Ungo, Shaku, on Chu the national 
teacher, 304 fn. 

Ungo (Yiin-chii), Doyd, and an 
officer, 304 

Upaya (expediency, or device), 78 


Vajracchedika Stitra, 149, 187, 188, 
203, 205, 213 

Vajrasamadhi Sitra, Chinese, 76, 
108, 183, 187; the prodigal 
son in, 154 

Vasumitra, 52 fn. 


Vie negativa, 68 

ictory, the h of, 66, 71 

Vitalin: 9294 

Vimalakirti, 99, 102, 273, 296 

Vimalakirti Stra, Chinese, 75, 76, 
173, 195 fn., 208, 220, 223 

Vimoksha (or Moksha), 60 

Vimutti, 63, 64 ; see also Vimoksha 
and Moksha 

Vipagyi, 171 


WEI-SHAN, see Isan 
Wilde, Oscar, quoted, 16 
Wind, the simile of, 346 
Wither, 282 


Yaxusan (Yiich-shan), 110, 176, 
205, 263 ; giving nosermon, 361 ; 
with his disciples, 302 

Yang-shan, see Kydzan 

Yathabhiitam, 126, 128, 142, 145; 
empirical, 143;  intuitional, 
141-2 

Yegu (Hui-yii), 273 fn., 285 

Yeka (Hui-k‘é), 87, 95, 180, 186, 
191 ; his life, 192 et seg. 

Yenchi (Ytian-chih), with Sekiso, 
302 et seq. 

Yengo (Yiian-wu), 35; his t6ki-no- 
gé, 249; on dust and flower, 35 

Yenkwan (Yen-kuan), on Vairo- 
cana Buddha, 302 

Yend (Hui-néng), the sixth patri- 
arch, 29, 37, 40, 105, 108, 173, 
203, et seg., 232, 266; and the 
Vajracchedtka, 187; as dynamic 
intuitionalist, 223; his death, 
227; his method of instruction, 
225; his view of Zen in the 
Platform Sutra, 218 ; long sitting, 
216; on abrupt teaching, 220; 
on his understanding of Budd- 
hism, 40; on Praja, 219-20; on 
quiet sitting, 236; on samadhi 
and dhyana, 224; on seeing into 
one’s nature, 212; on self- 
nature, 217; on the flapping 
pennant, 212; talk with the 
imperial messenger, 213 

Yeny6d Chokei, on staff, 33 

Yeshi Bashé, on staff, 33 


387 


INDEX 


Yeshi (Hui-szii), a Tendai philo- 
s her, 

Ye en, his tdki-no-gé, 250 

Yogacara, 114, 173 

bt Wang-ch'i), on poverty, 


Vout see Yakusan 
Yiin-mén, see Ummon 


Zen: (1) in its relation to Budd- 

hism, 40 

and the doctrine of enlighten- 
ment, 40, 94 et seq.; and the 
Laokavatara, 86; and the 
theory of Sanyata, 187-8; as 
the essence of Buddhism, 54; 
is the enlightenment of Buddha, 
68 et seq. 

(2) in its relation to the 
Chinese mind, 109 

and other Buddhist sects in 
China, 108-9; and the Sung 
hilosophy, 112; and _ the 

endai, 204; as Chinese pro- 
duct, 168 ; how it ruled in China 
106-7; in the Sung dynasty, 
109; in the T‘ang Soot 180; 
in the Yuan and Ming dynas- 
Vee 109; legendary history of, 
1 


(3) as a discipline, 27 

and asceticism, 27, 323; and 
poverty, 273 fn. ; and the boil- 
ing oil, 29; deadly poison, 31; 
its monastery training, 341 etseq. 

(4) in its relation to the in- 
tellect, 18 


asa liberating agent, 13; as 
as unutterable sigh, 294 fn. ; 3 as 
self-power, 122; as the solution 
of life problems, 18; irrational, 
23; never explains, 20-1; no 


efforts, 268 

(5) psychologically aoe 

leaving no traces, 15; self- 
suggestion, 32; me i 
ness, 32; the sense of returning, 
156 

(6) specific features of, 20 

acquiring a new viewpoint, 
229; and dhyana, 79-80; and 
meditation, 80; and the sumiye 
painting, 300; defined, 117; 
different from tranquillization, 
85; its derivation, 78-9; its 
gradation, 37 (see also the — 
Cow-herding Pictures) ; 
methods of teaching, 37, 255. a 
Seq.; its monastery system psy- 
chologically and morally con- 
sidered, 316 et seg.; methods 
classified, 267; not quiet se 
236; nothing secret in, ; 
practical, 66; seeing into one’s 
own nature, 217; Southern and 
Northern schools, 214; summed 
in four lines, 20, 176; the in- 
stant and the gradual, 214-15 

(7) its language, 289-90 

and colloquialism, 359-60 


es 


es 


Oprittgder 
Fablic Lilpmeney 
Library ih the Caio 


405 S. PreagaapSt 
Springdale, AR 7 
479-750- 
www.springdalelib .Org 


Zen in its essence is th 


Essays in Zen buddhi 
D.T, Suzuki was the g 


in the twentieth centul _ 


34224302545112 
explores the history of Buddhism, the daily life of a Zen monk and the patn 


to enlightenment. Essays on Zen Buddhism is a meditation on the meaning | 
of existence as well as a critical account of Buddhism . 
“Dr Suzuki writes with authority...he is a Buddhist...He is honoured 
in every temple in Japan for his knowledge of spiritual things: 
Christmas Humphreys 


Zen is a unique school of spiritual development, focussing on 
self-understanding and enlightenment. Suzuki explains how Zen 
has its origins in the spiritual enlightenment of the Buddha while 
its central fact is the attainment of ‘Satori’, an intuitional 
understanding of the truth of Zen. He explains how Satori can 
be attained, and the methods that are needed to bring it about 


Zen is not a religion, it is a way of perceiving, acting and being 
and these essays are the classic introduction to it, providing a 
foundation for living a fulfilled life. 


“He speaks of what he has experienced 
the essential quality of Zen.” 
Erich Fromm 


Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki was born in Japan and educated at the 


famous monastery at Kamakura. He attained his Zen enlightenmé\_y 
at the age of 27, wrote and taught for 65 years. He wrote over 


one hundred books in English and Japanese. He taught at 


INA 


U: 
See ae - = 
Columbia University, New York, and died in 1966 L= 
ee 
i 
ISBN 978-0-28563 = ES 
| o= 
Cover by e-Digital Design oO = 
Image © iStockphoto.com/FreezeFrameStudio ; = 
P : Me Ee 
£14.99 Ce
