Emanuel Swedenborg, The True Christian Religion (1771)
==========================================================================
Swedenborg's culminating theological work — the universal theology of the New Church, treating God, creation, redemption, and the afterlife. The doctrinal summa of Swedenborgianism. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

3%
ZVl
A2
>9ol
14 3 O


CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY


1924 092 464 902


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924092464902


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION
VOL. I


1907 &otclj Litton

OF

SWEDENBORG’S WORKS

VOLS.

1-19 HEAVENLY ARCANA

20 INDEX ARCANA

21 HEAVEN AND HELL

22 MISCELLANEOUS WORKS

Final Judgment
White Horse
Earths in the Universe
Summary Exposition

23 FOUR DOCTRINES

New Jerusalem and its Heavenly
Doctrines

24 DIVINE LOVE AND WISDOM

Intercourse between the Soul
and the Body

25 DIVINE PROVIDENCE
26-28 APOCALYPSE REVEALED

29 MARRIAGE LOVE
30-32 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


THE

TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


CONTAINING

THE UNIVERSAL THEOLOGY

OF

THE NEW CHURCH

FORETOLD BY THE LORD IN DANIEL VII, 13, 14
AND IN THE APOCALYPSE XXI, 1, 2

BY

EMANUEL SWEDENBORG

SERVANT OF THE LORD JESUS CHRIST


First published in Latin , Amsterdam, 1771


Kotcf) (EUttfon

VOL. I


BOSTON AND NEW YORK
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY

1907

U


1 saw in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of
Man came from the clouds of the heavens. And there was given
Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom; and all people, na-
tions, and languages shall serve Him. His dominion is an ever-
lasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed.

Apocalypse XXI, i, 2, 5, 9, 10

I John saw a new heaven and a new earth. And I saw the
holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And an
angel talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will show thee
The Bride y The Lamb's Wife. And he carried me away in the
spirit, upon a great and high mountain, and showed me that
great city, the Holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from
God.

He that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. And He said unto me, Write : for these words are true
and faithful. P3


CONTENTS


Contents of Volume One.

The Faith of the New Heaven and the New
Church, n. 1-3.


CHAPTER I.

God the Creator, n. 5-80.

The Unity 0} God . n. 5-15.

I. The whole Sacred Scripture, and hence all doctrines of the
churches in the Christian world, teach that there is a God, and that He
is one. n. 6, 7.

II. There is a universal influx from God into the souls of men,
that there is a God, and that He is one. n. 8.

III. Hence in all the world there is no nation having religion and
sound reason, which does not acknowledge a God, and that God is
one. n. 9, 10.

IV. As to what the one God is, nations have differed, and still
differ, from several causes, n. 11.

V. Human reason, from many things in the world, may perceive
or conclude that there is a God, and that He is one. n. 12.

VI. Unless God were one, the universe could not have been created
and preserved, n. 13.

VII. The man who does not acknowledge a God, is excommu-
nicated from the church and condemned, u. 14.

VIII. With men who do not acknowledge one God, but more than
one, nothing of the church coheres, n. 15.

The Divine Esse , which is Jehovah. 11. 18-24.

I. The one God is called Jehovah from Esse , because He alone is
and was and will be; and because He is the First and the Last, the
Beginning and the End, the Alpha and the Omega, u. 19.


vi


CONTENTS


II. The one God is Substance itself and Form itself, and angels
and men are substances and forms from Him, and as far as they are
in Him and He in them, they are images and likenesses of Him. n. 20.

IH. The Divine Esse is Esse in itself, and, likewise, Existere in
itself, n. 2i, 22.

IV. The Divine Esse and Existere cannot produce another Divine
Esse and Existere in itself, consequently, another God of the same
essence is not possible, n. 23.

V. A plurality of Gods, in ancient and modern times, originated
from not understanding the Divine Esse, n. 24,

The Infinity , Immeasurableness , and Eternity of God. n. 27-34.

I. God is infinite, since He is and exists in Himself, and all things
in the universe are and exist from Him. u. 28.

II. God is infinite, for He was before the world, thus before spaces
and times arose, u. 29.

III. God, since the world was made, is in space without space,
and in time without time. n. 30.

IV. God’s Infinity in relation to space is called Immeasurableness,
and in relation to time, Eternity; and though there are these relations,
there is nothing of space in His Immeasurableness, and nothing of
time in His Eternity, n. 31.

V. Enlightened reason, from many things in the world, may see
the Infinity of God. n. 32.

VI. Every created thing is finite, and the Infinite is in finites as in
receptacles, and in men as in its images, n. 33,

The Essence of God , which is Divine Love and Divine Wisdom.

11. 36-47.

I. God is Love itself and Wisdom itself, and these make His
essence, u. 37.

II. God is Good itself and Truth itself, because good is of love,
and truth is of wisdom, n. 38.

III. God, because He is Love itself and Wisdom itself, is Life
itself, which is Life in itself, u. 39, 40.

TV. Love and Wisdom, in God, make one. n. 41, 42.

V. The essence of love is to love others outside of itself, to desire
to be one with them, and to make them happy from itself, n. 43-45.


CONTENTS


Vll


VI. These essentials of Divine Love were the cause of the creation,
and are the cause of preservation, n. 46, 47.

The Omnipotence , Omniscience , and Omnipresence of God. n. 49-70.

I. Omnipotence, Omniscience, and Omnipresence, belong to the
Divine Wisdom from the Divine Love. n. 50, 51.

II. God’s Omnipotence, Omniscience, and Omnipresence cannot
be known unless Order be known, and unless it be known that God is
Order, and that at creation He introduced order into the universe,
and every part of it. 11. 52-55.

III. The Omnipotence of God, in the universe and every part of
it, proceeds and operates according to His order, n. 56-58.

IV. God is Omniscient, that is, perceives, sees, and knows every
thing, even the most minute, which is done according to order; hence
also what is contrary to order, n. 59-62.

V. God is Omnipresent from the firsts to the lasts of His order,
n. 63, 64.

VI. Man was created a form of Divine order, n. 65-67.

VII. Man is so far in power against evil and falsity from the Divine
Omnipotence, and in wisdom concerning good and truth from the
Divine Omniscience, and in God from the Divine Omnipresence,
as he lives according to order, n. 68-70.

Creation of the Universe, u. 75-80.

No one can obtain a just idea of the creation of the universe, unless;
some universal knowledges put the understanding in a state of per-
ception. n. 75.

The creation described by five Relations, n. 76-80.


CHAPTER II.

The Lord the Redeemer, n. 82-109.

I. Jehovah God descended and assumed the Human, that He
might redeem and save men. n. 82-84.

II. Jehovah descended as the Divine Truth, which is the Word,
and yet did not separate the Divine Good. n. 85-88.


VU1


CONTENTS


in. God assumed the Human according to His order, n. 89-91.

IV. The Human, hy which God sent Himself into the world, is
the Son of God. n. 92-94.

V. The Lord, by acts of Redemption, made Himself Righteous-
ness. n. 95, 96.

VI. The Lord, by the same acts, united Himself to the Father,
and the Father to Him, also according to order, n. 97-100.

VII. Thus God became Man, and Man God, in one Person,
n. 101-103.

VIII. The progress to union was the state of His Exinanition and
the union itself is the state of His Glorification, n. 104-106.

IX. Hereafter no one from Christians comes into heaven, unless
he believes in the Lord God the Saviour, and goes to Him alone,
n. 107, 108.

X. Corollary: the state of the church before the Coming of the
Lord, and its state after it. n. 109.


Redemption . n. 1 14-133.

I. Redemption itself was subjugation of hell, and establishment of
order in heaven, and thereby preparation for a new spiritual church,
n. ns- 117 -

II . Without Redemption, no man could have been saved, nor
could the angels have continued to exist in integrity, n. 118-120.

III. The Lord thus redeemed not only men, but also angels,
n. 121, 122.

IV. Redemption was a work purely Divine, n. 123.

V. This Redemption could not have been effected, but by God
Incarnate, n. 124, 125.

VI. The Passion of the Cross was the last temptation which the
Lord as the greatest Prophet sustained, and was the means of the
Glorification of His Human; but it was not Redemption, n. 126-131.

VII. The belief that the Passion of the Cross was Redemption
itself is a fundamental error; and that error, with the error concerning •
three Divine Persons from eternity, has perverted the whole church,
so that nothing spiritual is left in it. n. 132, 133,


* CONTENTS


ix


CHAPTER III,

The Holy Spirit and the Divine Operation, n. 139-158.

I. The Holy Spirit is the Divine Truth, and also the virtue and
operation, proceeding from the One God in whom is the Trinity, thus
from the Lord God the Saviour, n. 139-141.

II. The virtue and operation meant by the Holy Spirit are, in
general, reformation and regeneration; and, according to these, reno-
vation, verification, sanctification, and justification; and, according
to these, purification from evils and remission of sins and finally
salvation, n. 142-145.

III. That virtue and operation which is meant by the sending of
the Holy Spirit, with the clergy, is enlightenment and instruction,
n. 146-148.

IV. The Lord operates those virtues in those who believe in Him.
n. 149-1 52.

V. The Lord operates out of Himself from the Father, and not the
reverse, n. 153-155.

VI. Man’s spirit is his mind, and whatever proceeds from him.
n. 156, 157.

Corollary: In the Old Testament, it is nowhere said that the
prophets spoke from the Holy Spirit, but from Jehovah; but other-
wise in the New. n. 158.

The Divine Trinity, n. 163-184.

I. There is a Divine Trinity, which is the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, n. 164, 165.

II. The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are the three Essentials of
one God, which make one, as the soul, body, and operation in man.
n. 166-169.

III. Before the world was created, there was not this Trinity; but
after the world was created, when God became incarnate, it was pro-
vided; and then in the Lord God, the Redeemer and Saviour, Jesus
Christ, u. 170, 171.

IV. A Trinity of Persons from eternity, or before the world was
created, is, in the thought, a trinity of Gods; and this cannot be abol-
ished by oral confession of one God. n. 172, 173.


X


CONTENTS .


V. A Trinity of Persons was unknown in the Apostolic Church;
but was first broached by the Nicene Council, and hence was intro-
duced into the Roman Catholic Church, and from this into the
churches separated from it. n. 174-176.

VI. From the Nicene Trinity and the Athanasian together, a faith
arose which had perverted the whole Christian Church, n. 177, 178.

VII. Thence is that abomination of desolation and the affliction
such as has not been nor ever shall be, which the Lord foretold in
Daniel, and the Evangelists, and the Apocalypse, n. 179-181.

VIII. Hence unless a New Heaven and a New Church are founded
by the Lord, no flesh would be saved, n. 182.

IX. From a Trinity of Persons, each one of whom is God, accord-

ing to the Athanasian Creed, have arisen discordant ideas about God,
which are hallucinations, n, 183, 184. •


CHAPTER IV.

The Sacred Scripture or the Word of the Lord. n. 189-276.

I. The Sacred Scripture, or the Word, is Divine Truth itself,
n. 189-192.

II. In the Word there is a spiritual sense, hitherto unknown,
n. 193.

(1.) What the spiritual sense is. n. 194.

(2.) From the Lord proceeds the Celestial Divine, the Spiritual
Divine, and the Natural Divine, n. 195.

(3.) The spiritual sense is in every thing in the Word. n. 196-198.

(4.) The Lord when in the world spake by correspondences, thus
when He spake naturally He also spake spiritually, n. 199.

(5.) From the spiritual sense the Word is Divinely inspired, and
holy in every word. n. 200.

(6.) The spiritual sense of the Word has been hitherto unknown,
but it was known to the ancients; correspondences among them,
n. 201-207.

(7.) The spiritual sense of the Word will not be given to any one
hereafter who is not in genuine truths, n. 208.

(8.) Wonderful things concerning the Word, from its spiritual
sense, n. 209.


CONTENTS


XI


III. The sense of the letter of the Word is the basis, container, and
support of its spiritual and celestial senses, n. 2 10-2 13.

IV. Divine Truth, in the sense of the letter of the Word, is in its
fulness, holiness, and power, n. 214-216.

(1.) The truths of the letter of the Word are meant by the precious
stones of the foundations of the New Jerusalem; and this from corre-
spondence. n. 217.

(2.) The goods and truths of the Word in the sense of its letter are
meant by the Urim and Thummin on the ephod. n. 218.

(3.) Truths and goods in the ultimates, such as are in the sense of
the letter, are meant by the precious stones in the garden of Eden,
where the King of Tyre is said to have been. u. 219.

(4.) The same were represented by the curtains, veils, and pillars
of the tabernacle, n. 220.

(5.) Likewise by the externals of the temple at Jerusalem, n. 221.

(6.) The Word in its glory was represented in the Lord trans-
figured. n. 222.

(7.) The power of the Word in ultimates was represented by the
Nazarites. n. 223.

(8.) Concerning the inexpressible power of the Word. n. 224.

V. The doctrine of the church is to be drawn from the sense of the
letter of the Word, and confirmed by it. n. 225, 229, 230.

(1.) Without doctrine the Word is not understood, n. 226-228.

(2.) Genuine truth does not appear in the sense of the letter of the
Word to any but those who are in enlightenment from the Lord,
n. 231-233.

VI. By the sense of the letter of the Word, there is conjunction
with the Lord, and consociation with the angels, u. 234-239.

VII. The Word is in all the heavens, and angelic wisdom is from
it. n. 240-242.

VIII. The church is from the Word, and it is such with man as his
understanding of the Word is. n. 243-247.

IX. In every thing in the Word is the marriage of the Lord and the
church, and hence of good and truth, n. 248-253.

X. Heresies may be taken from the sense of the letter of the Word,
but it is hurtful to confirm, them. u. 254-260.

(1.) Many things in the Word are appearances of truth in which
genuine truths lie concealed, n. 257. *

(2.) By confirming the appearances of truth, fallacies arise, n. 258.

(3.) The sense of the letter of the Word is a guard for the genuine
truths concealed within, n. 260.


Xll


CONTENTS


(4.) The sense of the letter of the Word was represented by .cherubs
in the Word. n. 260.

XI. The Lord, in the world, fulfilled all things of, and thereby
became, the Word, the Divine Truth, in ultimates. n. 261-263.

XII. Before the Word in the world at this day, there was a Word
which is lost. n. 264-266.

XIII. By means of the Word they also have light who are out of
the church, and ha ye not the Word. n. 267-272.

XIV. If there were no Word, no one would have knowledge of
God, of heaven and hell, of the life after death, and still less of the
Lord. n. 273-276.


THE


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


CONTAINING

Gbe 'Universal Gbeoloai?

OF

THE NEW HEAVEN AND NEW CHURCH


THE FAITH OF THE NEW HEAVEN AND
NEW CHURCH.

1. The faith is prefixed in a universal and in a particular
form, that it may be as a face before the work which follows;
and as a gate through which entrance is made into a temple;
and a summary in which the particulars which follow are
duly contained. The Faith of the New Heaven and the New
Church is said because the heaven where angels are and the
church in which men are, make one, as the internal and the
external with man. For this reason the man of the church
who is in the good of love from the truths of faith and in the
truths of faith from the good of love, is as to the interiors of
his mind an angel of heaven; and therefore, after death he
comes into heaven, and there enjoys happiness according to
the state of the conjunction of his love and faith. It should
be known that in the New Heaven which the Lord is at this
day establishing, this faith is its face, gate, and summary.

2. The Faith of the New Heaven and New Church in the


2


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 2


universal form , is this: — That the Lord from eternity, who
is Jehovah, came into the world, to subjugate the hells and
glorify His Human; and that without this no mortal could
have been saved; and that they are saved who believe in Him.

In the universal form is said, because this is the universal
of faith; and a universal of faith is that which must be in the
whole and every part. It is a universal of faith that God
is one in essence and in person, in whom is the Divine
Trinity, and that He is the Lord God the Saviour Jesus
Christ. It is a universal of faith that no mortal could have
been saved unless the Lord had come into the world. It is
a universal of faith that He came into the world to remove
hell from man, and that He did remove it by means of com-
bats against it and victories over it; thus He subjugated it
and reduced it to order and under obedience to Himself.
It is a universal of faith that He came into the world to
glorify His Human which He assumed in the world, that is,
to unite it with the Divine from which it was; thus He holds
hell in order and under obedience to Himself forever. Since
this could not have been done but by means of temptations
admitted into His Human, even to the last of them, and
the last was the passion of the cross, therefore He endured
that. These are the universal of faith as to the Lord.

On man’s part the universal of faith is, that he should
believe in the Lord; for by believing in Him conjunction
with Him by which is salvation, is effected. To believe in
Him is to have confidence that He saves; and because no
one can have this confidence but he who lives well, there-
fore by believing in Him this also is meant. The Lord also
says this in John: This is the Father’s willy that every one
who believeth in the Son , may have eternal life (vi. 40); and in
another place, He that believeth in the Son , hath eternal life;
but he that believeth not the Son y shall not see life , but the wrath
of God abideth on him (iii. 36).

3. The Faith of the New Heaven and New Churchy in
the particular form , is this: — That Jehovah God is love


No, 3] FAITH OF THE NEW HEAVEN, ETC.


3


itself and wisdom itself, or that He is good itself and truth
itself : and that as to Divine Truth, which is the Word, and
which was God with God, He descended and assumed the
Human, to the end that He might reduce to order all things
which were in heaven, and all things which were in hell, and
all things which were in the church ; because at that time the
power of hell prevailed over the power of heaven, and upon
earth the power of evil over the power of good, and thence a
total damnation stood before the door and threatened.
This impending damnation Jehovah God removed by means
of His Human, which was Divine truth, and thus He re-
deemed angels and men; and afterward He united in His
Human Divine truth with Divine good or Divine wisdom
with Divine love, and thus together with and in the glorified
Human returned into His Divine, in which He was from
eternity. These things are meant by this passage in John:
The Word was with God , and the Word was God: and the
Word became flesh (i. i, 14); and in the same, I came forth
from the Father , and have come into the world: again I leave
the world , and go to the Father (xvi. 28); and also by this,
We know that the Son of God hath come , and given us an
understanding , that we may know Him that is true; and we
are in Him that is true , in His Son Jesus Christ: This is the
true God and eternal life (1 John v. 20). From these pas-
sages it is manifest that without the coming of the Lord into
the world, no one could have been saved. It is similar at
this day; wherefore, unless the Lord come again into the
world, in Divine truth, which is the Word, no one can be
saved.

The particulars of faith on man's part are these: — 1.
That God is One, in whom is the Divine Trinity, and He
is the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ. 2. That saving
faith is to believe in Him. 3. That evils are not to be done,
because they are of the devil and from the devil. 4. That
goods are to be done, because they are of God and from
God. 5. And that these are to be done by man as from


4


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 3


himself; but it must be believed that they are from the Lord,
with man and through him. The first two particulars are
of faith, the next two are of charity, and the fifth is of the
conjunction of charity and faith, thus of the Lord and man.


CHAPTER FIRST.


GOD THE CREATOR.

4. The Christian Church, since the time of the Lord, had
passed through the several stages from infancy to extreme
old age. Its infancy was in the time when the Apostles
lived and preached throughout the world repentance and
faith in the Lord God the Saviour. That they preached
these two is evident from these words in the Acts of the
Apostles: Paul testified , both to the Jews and to the Greeks ,
repentance toward God , and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ
(xx. 21). It is a memorable event that the Lord some
months ago called together His twelve disciples, now angels,
and sent them forth into all the spiritual world with the
command that they should there preach the Gospel anew,
since the church which was established by the Lord through
them has at this day become so fully consummated, that
scarce any remains of it are left; and that this has come to
pass because the church has divided the Divine Trinity into
three persons, each one of them being God and Lord; and
from this a sort of frenzy has gone forth into the whole of
theology, and thus into the church, which from the Lord’s
name is called Christian. A frenzy is said because the
minds of men have been driven by it into such a delirium
that they do not know whether there is one God, or whether
there are three. There is one in the speech of the lips, but
three in the thought of the mind, and thus there is a dis-
agreement between their mind and lips, or between their
thought and speech, from which disagreement the result is
that there is no God. The naturalism which reigns at this
day is from no other source. Consider, if you will, whether
while the lips speak of one and the mind thinks of three, the


6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 4


one thought does not inwardly as they meet cast out in turn
the other; from this cause man scarce thinks otherwise con-
cerning God, if he thinks at all, than from the bare word,
God, without any meaning which involves knowledge of
Him. Since the idea of God, with all conception of Him,
has been thus torn to pieces, I wish to treat in their order of
God the Creator, of the Lord the Redeemer, and of the Holy
Spirit the Operator, and lastly of the Divine Trinity; to the
end that what is torn to pieces may be made again whole;
which is effected while human reason is convinced from the
Word and the light thence, that there is a Divine Trinity,
and that this is in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ,
as the soul and the body and the proceeding life in man; and
thus that this article in the Athanasian Creed is true —
That in Christ, God and Man, or the Divine and the Human,
are not two, but in one person; and that, as the rational soul
and flesh are one man, so God and Man are one Christ.

THE UNITY OF GOD.

5. Since the acknowledgment of God from knowledge of
Him is the very essence and soul of all things in universal
theology, it is necessary to begin with a declaration of the
unity of God, which will be demonstrated in order by these
articles: I. The whole Sacred Scripture , and from it the
doctrines of the churches in the Christian world , teach that
God is one. II. There is a universal influx from God into
the souls of men , that there is a God , and that He is one. III.
Hence it is that in the whole world there is no nation having
religion and sound reason , which does not acknowledge God ,
and that God is one. IV. As to the quality of the one God ,
nations and people have differed and still differ , from several
causes. V. Human reason from many things in the world
may , if it will , perceive or conclude that there is a God , and
that He is one. VI. Unless God were one , the universe could
not have been created and conserved. VII. The man who


No. 6]


GOD THE CREATOR


7


does not acknowledge God y is excommunicated from the church
and condemned. VIII. With the man who does not acknowl-
edge one God , but more than one , nothing of the church coheres .
These articles are to be unfolded one by one.

6. I. The whole Sacred Scripture , and from it all the
doctrines of the churches in the Christian world , teach that
there is a God , and that He is one. The whole Sacred Scrip-
ture teaches that there is a God, for the reason that in its
inmosts it is no other than God, that is, the Divine which
proceeds from God; for it has been dictated by God, and
nothing else can proceed from God than that which is Him-
self and is called Divine; this the Sacred Scripture is in its
inmosts. But in its derivatives, which are below and from
the inmosts that Sacred Scripture is accommodated to the
perception of angels and men. In these it is likewise Divine,
but in another form, in which this Divine is called Celestial,
Spiritual, and Natural, which are no other than coverings of
God; since God Himself, such as He is in the inmosts of the
Word, cannot be seen by any created being. For He said to
Moses, when he entreated that he might see the glory of
Jehovah, that no one can see God and live. It is the same
with the inmosts of the Word, where God is in His esse and
in His essence. But still the Divine, which is the inmost,
and is covered with such things as are accommodated to the
perceptions of angels and men, shines forth like light through
crystalline forms, yet variously according to the state of
mind which man has formed for himself, from God or from
himself. To every one who has formed the state of his mind
from God, the Sacred Scripture is like a mirror in which he
sees God, but each in his own way. The truths which he
learns from the Word, and with which he becomes imbued
by a life according to them, compose that mirror: from these
it is first evident that the Sacred Scripture is the fulness of
God. That it not only teaches that there is a God, but also
that God is one, may be evident from the truths which, as


8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 6


just said, compose that mirror, in that they cohere in one
series, and make it impossible for man to think of God but
as one. From this cause, every one whose reason is imbued
with any holiness from the Word, knows as from himself that
God is one, and perceives that it is madness to say that there
are more. Angels cannot open their lips to utter the word
Gods; for the heavenly aura, in which they live, resists.
That God is one, the Sacred Scripture teaches not only thus
universally, as above said, but also particularly in many
passages — as in the following: Hear , O Israel; Jehovah our
God is one Jehovah (Deut. vi. 4; and likewise Mark. xii. 29).
Surely God is in thee , and there is no God beside Me (Isa. xlv.
14). Am not I Jehovah? and there is no God else beside Me
(xlv. 21). I am Jehovah thy God , and thou shall know no
God beside Me (Hos. xiii. 4). Thus saith Jehovah , the King
0} Israel , I am the First and the Last , and beside Me there is no
God (Isa. xliv. 6). In that day Jehovah shall be King over
all the earth; in that day Jehovah shall be one , and His name
one (Zech. xiv. 9).

7. That the doctrines of the churches in the Christian
world teach that God is one, is well known. They teach this
because all their doctrines are from the Word, and have co-
herence so far as one God is acknowledged not only with the
lips, but also with the heart. To those who confess one God
with the lips only, and in heart three, as is the case with
many at this day in Christendom, God is nothing but an
utterance of the mouth; and every tenet of theology is to
them but as an idol of gold enclosed in a shrine, the key to
open it being in the possession of the priests only; and when
they read the Word, they do not perceive any light in it or
from it, and not even that God is one. The Word, with such
persons, is as if blotted with erasures; and, as to the unity of
God, covered over. These are they who are described by
the Lord in Matthew: By hearing ye shall hear , and shall not
understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:
their eyes they have closed , lest they should see with their eyes t


No. 8]


GOD THE CREATOR


9


and hear with their ears , and should understand with their
heart y and turn themselves , and I should heal them (xiii. 14,
15). All such persons are like those who shun the light, and
enter chambers where there are no windows, and feel about
the walls, and search for food and money, and at length
acquire a vision like that of birds of the night, and see in
darkness. They are like a woman having several husbands,
who is not a wife but a wanton harlot; and like a maiden who
accepts rings from several suitors, and after the nuptials
spends nights with one, and again with others.

II. 8. There is a universal influx from God into the souls
of men, that there is a God , and that He is one. That there is
an influx from God into man, is evident from the confession
of all, that all good which in itself is good and is in man and
is done by him, is from God; in like manner all of charity and
all of faith; for it is read, A man can take nothing, except it be
given him from heaven (John iii. 27); and Jesus said, With-
out Me ye can do nothing (xv. 5); that is, nothing which is of
charity and faith. This influx is into men’s souls because
the soul is the inmost and highest part of man, and the influx
from God is into that, and descends thence into what is
below, which it vivifies according to reception. The truths
which are to be of faith, indeed, flow in by hearing, and so
are implanted in the mind, thus below the soul. But man
by these truths is only disposed for receiving the influx from
God through the soul; and as is the disposition, such is the
reception, and such the transformation of natural faith into
spiritual faith. There is an influx from God into the souls
of men that God is one, because all the Divine, taken uni-
versally as well as particularly, is God; and because all the
Divine coheres as one, it cannot but inspire into man the
idea of one God. This idea is corroborated day by day as
man is elevated by God into the light of heaven, for angels in
their light cannot force themselves to say Gods; accordingly,
their speech at the end of every sentence terminates as to


IO


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 8


accent in a one, which is from no other cause than from the
influx into their souls, that God is one. The reason that,
though it flows into the souls of all men that God is one, still
many think His Divinity to be divided into more than one of
the same essence, is that when that influx descends it falls
into forms not correspondent, and the form itself varies it, as
is the case in all the subjects of the three kingdoms of na-
ture. The same God who vivifies man vivifies every beast;
but the recipient form causes beast to be beast, and man to
be man. It is similar with man while he induces on his
mind the form of a beast. There is the same influx from
the sun into every tree, but it is varied according to the form
of each; the same flows into the vine as flows into the thorn;
but if the thorn is ingrafted into a vine, the influx is in-
verted, and proceeds according to the form of the thorn.
The case is similar in the subjects of the mineral kingdom :
the light flowing into lime-stone and into the diamond is the
same, but it shines through the one and is absorbed in the
other. As to human minds, they are varied according to
their forms, which inwardly are spiritual according to faith
in God and life at the same time from God, and those
forms become transparent and angelic by faith in one God;
but on the contrary, they become dark and bestial by faith
in more than one God, which differs but little from faith in
no God.

9. III. Hence it is that in the whole world there is no
nation having religion and sound reason , which does not
acknowledge God , and that God is one. From the Divine
influx into the souls of men, described above, it follows that
there is an internal dictate with every man that there is a
God, and that He is one. That still there are those who
deny God, those who acknowledge nature as God, those who
acknowledge more Gods than one, and those who worship
images as Gods, is because they have blocked up the in-
teriors of their reason or understanding with worldly and


No. 9 ] GOD THE CREATOR 1 1

corporeal things, and thereby have obliterated the primitive
idea or the idea of childhood concerning God, at the same
time casting religion from the hreast to the back. That
Christians acknowledge one God — but in what manner —
appears from their general Confession of faith, which is as
follows: — The Catholic jaith is this , that we should worship
one God in a Trinity , and the Trinity in Unity ; there are three
Divine Persons , the Father , the Son , and the Holy Spirit , and
yet there are not three gods , but there is one God; and there
is one Person of the Father , another of the Son , and another of
the Holy Spirit , and their Divinity is one , their glory equal ,
and their majesty coeternal; thus the Father is God , the Son
is God , and the Holy Spirit is God: but although we are com-
pelled by Christian verity to confess each Person singly to be
God and Lord , yet we are forbidden by the Catholic religion to
say three Gods , and three Lords. Such is the Christian faith
concerning the unity of God; but that the trinity of God and
the unity of God in that Confession are inconsistent with
each other, will be seen in the chapter on the Divine Trinity.
The other nations in the world who have religion and sound
reason, agree in acknowledging that God is one, all Moham-
medans in their empires, the Africans in many kingdoms of
their continent, also the Asiatics in many of theirs, and more-
over the Jews at this day. Of the most ancient people in the
golden age, those who had religion worshipped one God
whom they called Jehovah; and likewise the ancient people
in the following age, before monarchical governments were
formed, when worldly and at length corporeal loves began to
close up the higher parts of their understanding, which be-
fore had been open and were then as temples and sacred
recesses for the worship of one God. But the Lord God,
that He might open them again and so restore the worship of
one God, instituted a church among the posterity of Jacob
and put at the head of all the precepts of their religion this:
Thou shalt have no other Gods before My face (Exod. xx. 3).
Jehovah, also, by which name He called Himself anew be-


12


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 9


fore them, signifies the supreme and only Being, from whom
is every thing that is and exists in the universe. Ancient
Gentiles acknowledged Jove as the supreme God, so called
perhaps from Jehovah; and to many others who composed
his court, they also attributed divinity; but the wise men in
the following age, as Plato and Aristotle, confessed that these
were not gods, but so many properties, qualities, and attri-
butes of one God, which were called gods because there
was divinity in each of them.

10. All sound reason, even though not from religion, sees
that every thing divided, unless it depend on one, would of
itself fall to pieces; as for instance man, composed of so
many members, viscera, and organs of motion and sensation,
unless he depended upon one soul; and the body itself unless
it depended upon one heart; in like manner a kingdom unless
it depended upon one king; a household unless upon one
master; and every administration which is manifold in every
kingdom, unless upon one officer. What would an army
avail against enemies without a leader having supreme
power, and officers subordinate to him, each with his proper
command over soldiers? It would be similar with the
church unless it acknowledged one God, and also with the
angelic heaven, which is as a head to the church upon earth,
in both of which the Lord is the very Soul. Wherefore
heaven and the church are called His body, which if they
did not acknowledge one God would both be like a lifeless
corpse, that being of no use would be cast away and buried.

n. IV. As to the quality of the one God , nations and
peoples have differed and still differ , from several causes. The
first cause is, that knowledge concerning God, and thence
acknowledgment of Him, is not attainable without revela-
tion; and knowledge concerning the Lord and thence ac-
knowledgment, that in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily, is not attainable except from the Word,
which is the crown of revelations. For by the revelation


No. ii]


GOD THE CREATOR


13


which is given man is able to approach God and to receive
influx, and so from natural to become spiritual. The revela-
tion of the first age pervaded the whole world, and the
natural man had perverted it in many ways; whence arose
disputes, dissensions, heresies, and schisms of religions.
The second cause is, that the natural man can perceive noth-
ing about God, but only something about the world, and
can apply this to himself; for which reason it is among the
canons of the Christian Church that the natural man is
opposed to the spiritual, and that they fight against each
other. Hence those who have recognized from the Word or
other revelation that there is a God, have differed and still
differ concerning the nature of God, and concerning His
unit y. In consequence those whose mental sight depended
on the senses of the body, and who still wished to see God,
formed for themselves images of gold, silver, stone, and
wood, so that under these, as objects of sight, they might
worship God; and others who rejected such images, from
their religion, formed for themselves ideal images of God
from the sun and moon, the stars, and various things upon
the earth. But those who believed themselves to be wise
above the common people and still remained natural, from
the immeasurableness and omnipresence of God in creating
the world acknowledged nature as God, some in its inmost,
some in its outmost parts. And some, that they might
separate God from nature, conceived an idea of something
most universal, which they called the Ens [Being] of the
universe; but because they know nothing more of God, this
Ens becomes with them an entity of reason, which signifies
nothing. Who cannot comprehend that knowledges con-
cerning God are mirrors of God, and that those who know
nothing concerning God, do not see God in a mirror facing
their eyes, but in a mirror inverted, with its back toward
them, which being covered with mercury, or some dark ad-
hesive coating, does not reflect but extinguishes the image?
The faith of God enters into man through the prior way,


14


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 11


which is from the soul into the higher parts of the under
standing; but knowledges concerning God enter through the
posterior way, because they are drawn from the revealed
Word by the understanding through the senses of the body;
and the meeting of the influxes takes place in the midst of the
understanding. There natural faith, which is only per-
suasion, becomes spiritual, which is real acknowledgment;
and thus the human understanding is as an exchange, in
which the change is made.

12. V. Human reason from many things in the world may
perceive or conclude if it will that there is a God , and that He
is One. This truth may be confirmed by innumerable things
in the visible world; for the universe is as a stage upon which
are continually exhibited evidences that there is a God, and
that He is one. But to illustrate this, I will adduce this
memorable relation from the spiritual world. Once, while
I was conversing with angels, there were present some
newly arrived spirits from the natural world. Seeing them,
I wished them a happy coming, and told many things before
unknown to them concerning the spiritual world; and after
this I inquired of them what learning they brought with
them from the world concerning God and nature. They
said, This, that nature effects all things that are done in the
created universe; and that God after creation induced and
impressed upon nature that faculty and power; and that God
only sustains and preserves things lest they should perish;
wherefore all things that exist, are produced and reproduced
upon the earth, are at this day ascribed to nature.

But I replied that nature of itself does not effect any thing,
but God through nature; and because they asked for proof,
I said, Those who believe the Divine operation to be ip every
thing of nature, can confirm themselves in favor of God
from very many things which they see in the world much
more than in favor of nature; for those who confirm them-
selves in favor of the Divine operation in every thing of


No. 12]


GOD THE CREATOR


IS


nature, give heed to the wonders which are seen in the pro-
ductions both of plants and of animals. In the productions
of plants, they observe that from a little seed sown in the
ground a root goes forth, and by means of the root a stem,
and successively branches, buds, leaves, flowers, and fruits,
even to new seeds, just as if the seed knew the order of suc-
cession, or the process by which it was to renew itself. What
rational man can think that the sun which is pure fire knows
this, or can endue its heat and light with power to effect such
things, and can intend uses ? The man whose rational has
been elevated, while he sees and properly considers those'
things, cannot think otherwise than that they are from Him
who has infinite wisdom, thus from God. They who ac-
knowledge the Divine operation in every thing of nature, also
confirm themselves in this when they see these things; but,
on the contrary, they who do not acknowledge it, do not see
such things with the eyes of their reason in the forehead, but
in the back of the head. These are such as derive all ideas
of their thought from the senses of the body, and confirm
the fallacies of the senses, saying, “Do you not see the sun
operating all those things by its heat and light? What is
that which you do not see ? Is it any thing ?”

Again they who confirm themselves in favor of the Divine,
attend to the wonders which they see in the productions of
animals; and first with regard to eggs, that in them the
chicken lies hid in its seed, with every thing requsite for its
formation, and also with every thing for progress after its
exclusion, even until it becomes a bird in the form of its
parent. Moreover, if we attend to winged creatures in gen-
eral, things are presented to the mind that thinks deeply,
which cause astonishment — as, that in the least as well as in
the greatest of them, in the invisible as well as in the visible,
that is, in minute insects as well as in birds and great beasts,
there are organs of the senses of sight, hearing, smell, taste,
and touch ; also organs of motion, the muscles by which they
fly and walk; as also viscera connected with the heart and


1 6 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 12

lungs, which are kept in action by the brains. They who
ascribe all things to nature see such things, indeed, but they
think only that they are, and say that nature produces them;
and they say this because they have turned away the mind
from thinking of the Divine. And those who have turned
away from the Divine, while they behold the wonders in
nature, cannot think rationally concerning them, still less
spiritually; but they think sensually and materially, and
then in nature from nature, and not above it; with only
this difference from beasts, that they have rational ability,
that is, ability to understand if they will. Those who have
turned away from thinking of the Divine, and have thereby
become corporeal sensual, do not consider that the sight of
the eye is so gross and material that it sees many little insects
as one obscure object; and yet every one of them is organized
for feeling and for moving, and so is provided with fibres and
vessels, and also with a little heart, plumonary tubes, little
viscera, and brains; and that these are woven from the purest
things in nature, and that those tissues correspond to life in
its lowest degree, by which the minutest of them are dis-
tinctly put in action. Since the sight of the eye is so gross
that many insects, with the innumerable parts of each,
appear to it as a small, obscure thing, and yet sensual men
think and draw conclusions from that sight, it is manifest
how very gross their mind is, and thus in what darkness they
are with respect to spiritual things.

Every man, if he will, may confirm himself in favor of the
Divine, from things visible in nature; and he also does con-
firm himself who thinks concerning God and His omnip-
otence in creating the universe and His omnipresence in
preserving it as when, for instance, he observes the winged
creatures of the air, how each species of them knows its
proper food and where to find it and recognizes its fellows
from sound and sight: how among birds they can distinguish
which are their friends, and which their enemies; that they
know how to choose their mates and couple together; that


No. 12]


GOD THE CREATOR


17


they build nests with art, there they lay their eggs, sit upon
them, know the time of sitting, which being ended, they help
the young from the shell, love them most tenderly, cherish
them under their wings, offer them food, and nourish them
until they beome of age and are able to do these things for
themselves. Every man who is willing to think of the Di-
vine influx through the spiritual world into the natural, may
see it in these creatures, and he may also say in his heart, if
he will, that such knowledges cannot be given to them from
the sun by its heat and light. For the sun from which na-
ture takes its rise and essence, is pure fire; and the heat and
light flowing forth from it are altogether dead; and thus they
may conclude that such things are from the Divine influx
through the spiritual world into the ultima tes of nature.

Every one from things visible in nature may confirm him-
self in favor of the Divine while he sees worms which, from
the enjoyment of a certain love, seek and aspire after a
change of their earthly state into one analogous to the heav-
enly state; and for this purpose crawl into suitable places,
envelop themselves with a covering, and thus put them-
selves as into a womb to be born again, thus becoming chry-
salises, aureliae, nymphs, and at length butterflies; and when
they have undergone these changes of form, and according
to their species, have been endowed with beautiful wings,
they fly abroad into the open air as into their heaven, and
there indulge in merry sports, take their mates, lay eggs, and
provide for themselves a posterity; then nourishing them-
selves with choice and sweet food from flowers. Who that
confirms himself in favor of the Divine from things visible
in nature, does not see some image of the earthly state of man
in them as worms, and an image of the heavenly state in
them as butterflies? But those who confirm themselves in
favor of nature, see those things indeed, but, because they
have rejected the heavenly state of man from the mind, they
call them mere operations of nature.

Every one from things visible in nature may confirm him-


1 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 12

self in favor of the Divine while he attends to what is known
about bees, that they know how to gather wax from roses and
other blossoms, and suck out honey, and build cells like little
houses, and arrange them in the form of a city with streets
through which they may come and go; that from afar they
smell the flowers and herbs from which they may gather wax
for their houses and honey for their food; and that laden
with these they fly back in the right direction to their hive;
and so they provide for themselves food for the coming win-
ter, as if they forsaw it. They also set over them a mistress,
as queen, from whom a posterity may be propagated; and
build for her as it were a palace above them, guarded round
about. When the time of bringing forth has come, she goes,
accompanied by her attendants called drones, from cell to
cell and lays her eggs, which her attendants cover with a sort
of cement, that they may not be injured by the air. From
these arises a new generation. Afterward, when this has
reached the proper age and is able to do like things, it is ex-
pelled from the hive; the swarm first gathers itself into a band
so as not to be divided and dispersed, and afterward flies
abroad to seek for itself a habitation. About the time of
autumn those drones, because they have brought in no wax
nor honey, are led forth and deprived of their wings, that they
may not return and consume the food which they took no
pains to provide, besides many other things that might be
added. Thus it is evident that, on account of the use which
they perform to the human race, they have from the Divine
influx through the spiritual world a form of government
such as there is with men on earth, yea, with angels in the
heavens. What person of sound reason does not see that
such things with the bees are not from the natural world?
What has the sun from which nature is, in common with a
government the rival and the analogue of heavenly govern-
ment?

From these and other such things observable in brute
animals, the advocate and worshipper of nature confirms


No. 12]


GOD THE CREATOR


19


himself in favor of nature; while the advocate and worshipper
of God, from the same things confirms himself in favor of
God: for the spiritual man sees in them spiritual things, and
the natural man sees in them natural things; thus each ac-
cording to his quality. As to myself, such things have been
to me evidences of the influx of the spiritual world into the
natural from God. Consider also whether you can think
analytically about any form of government, or any civil law,
or any moral virtue, or any spiritual verity, unless the Di-
vine from its wisdom flows in through the spiritual world.
For my part, I never could, nor can I now; for I have per-
ceptibly and sensibly observed that influx now for twenty-six
years, continually; wherefore I say this from observation.

Can nature have use as its end, and dispose uses into orders
and forms? This can he done only by one who is wise; and
the universe can be thus ordered and formed only by God,
whose wisdom is infinite. Who else can foresee and pro-
vide for men what they need for food and clothing? their
food from the harvests of the field, the fruits of the earth, and
from animals? and their clothing from the same? It is
among these wonders that those petty worms called silk-
worms should clothe with silk and magnificently adorn both
women and men, from kings and queens even to maid-ser-
vants and man-servants; and that those petty insects called
bees should furnish wax for lights, by which temples and
palaces are illuminated. These and many other things are
standing proofs that God operates from Himself through the
spiritual world all things which are done in nature.

To these things it is to be added, that in the spiritual world
those have been seen who, from things visible in the world,
confirmed themselves in favor of nature to such a degree
that they became atheists; and that their understanding in
spiritual light appeared open below and closed above, be-
cause in thought they looked downward to earth and not up-
ward to heaven. Above their sensual, which is the lowest
of the understanding, there appeared as it were a veil gleam-


20 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION’ [No. 12

ing with infernal fire; but with some black as soot, with others
livid like a corpse. Let every one therefore beware of con-
firmations in favor of nature; but let him confirm himself in
favor of God: material is not wanting.

, 13. VI. Unless God were one , the universe could not have
been created and conserved. The unity of God may be in-
ferred from the creation of the universe, because the universe
is a work cohering as one from firsts to lasts; and the uni-
verse depends upon the one God as the body on its soul.
The universe is so created that God can be everywhere pres-
ent, and hold all and every part of it under His direction, and
hold it together as one perpetually, which is to conserve it.
Hence also it is, that Jehovah God says, that He is the First
and the Last; the Beginning and the End, the Alpha and the
Omega (Isa. xliv. 6: Apoc. i. 8, 17); and, in another place,
That He maketh all things, spreadeth out the heavens, and
stretcheth out the earth by Himself (Isa. xliv. 24). This
great system, which is called the universe, is a work cohering
as one from firsts to lasts, because God in creating it had one
end in view, which was an angelic heaven from the human
race; and all things of which the earth is composed are
means to that end. For he who wills an end wills also the
means; wherefore he who contemplates the world as a work
containing means to that end, may contemplate the created
universe as a work cohering as one, and may see that the
world is a complex of uses in successive order for the human
race, from which is the angelic heaven. The Divine love can
intend no other end than the eternal blessedness of men from
its own Divine; and its Divine wisdom can produce nothing
else than uses which are means to that end. From the world
surveyed with this universal idea, every wise man may com-
prehend that the Creator of the universe is one, and that His
essence is love and wisdom; wherefore there is not a single
thing in the universe, in which is not hidden a use, more or
less remote, for man. It is among these wonders that those


No. 14]


GOD THE CREATOR


21


petty worms called silk-worms should clothe with silk and
magnificently adorn both women and men, from kings and
queens even to maid-servants and man-servants; and that
those petty insects called bees should furnish wax for lights,
by which temples and palaces are ill umi nated.

Those who view some things in the world singly, and not
all things universally in a series in which are ends, mediate
causes, and effects, and who do not deduce creation from the
Divine love through the Divine wisdom, cannot see that the
universe is the work of one God, and that He dwells in every
use, because He dwells in the end; for every one who is in the
end, is also in the means; since the end is inmostly in all the
means, actuating and directing them. Those who do not
contemplate the universe as the work of God and the dwel-
ling place of His love and wisdom, but as the work of nature,
and the dwelling place of the heat and light of the sun, close
the higher regions of their mind for God, and open its lower
regions for the devil; thereby putting off the nature of man,
and putting on the nature of beasts; and they not only be-
lieve themselves to be like the beasts, but they also become
so; for they become foxes in cunning, wolves in ferocity,
leopards in treachery, tigers in cruelty, and crocodiles, ser-
pents, owls and other birds of night, according to their na-
ture. In the spiritual world those who are such also appear
from a distance like those wild beasts; their love of evil so
figures itself.

14. VII. The man who does not acknowledge God , is ex-
communicated from the church and condemned. The man
who does not acknowledge God is excommunicated from
the church, because God is the all of the church, and Di-
vine things which are called theological constitute the church;
wherefore a denial of God is a denial of all things of the
church; and this denial itself excommunicates him; thus the
man himself, and not God, causes the excommunication.
He is also condemned, because he who is excommunicated


22


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[NO. 14


from the church, is also excommunicated from heaven;
for the church upon earth and the angelic heaven act as one,
like the internal and external, and like the spiritual and nat-
ural in man. And man has been so created by God as to be
in the spiritual world as to his internal, and in the natural
world as to his external; thus he has been created a native
of both worlds, in order that the spiritual which is of heaven
may be implanted in the natural which is of the world, as
seed in the ground; and that thus man may accquire a con-
stant and lasting existence. The man who by a denial of
God has excommunicated himself from the church and thus
from heaven, has closed up his internal man as to the will,
and thus as to his natural love; for man’s will is the recep-
tacle of his love, and becomes its habitation. He cannot
however close up his internal man as to the understanding,
for if he could and should do this, the man would be no
longer man; but the love of his will infatuates the higher
regions of the understanding with falsities, whereby the un-
derstanding becomes as it were closed as to the truths which
are of faith, and as to the goods which are of charity; thus
more and more against God, and at the same time against the
spiritual things of the church. Thus man is excluded from
communion with the angels of heaven, and when thus ex-
cluded he enters into communion with the satans of hell and
thinks as one with them. But all satans deny God, and
think foolishly concerning God and the spiritual things of
the church; and so does the man who is conjoined with
them. When he is in his spirit, as he is when left to him-
self at home, he suffers his thoughts to be led by the enjoy-
ments of evil and falsity which he has conceived and brought
forth in himself; and then he thinks of God as having no
existence except as a word sounded from the pulpits, to bind
the common people to obedience to the laws of justice, which
are the laws of society. He also thinks that the Word, from
which ministers proclaim God, is a collection of visionary
stories, endued with sanctity only from authority; and that


No. 15]


GOD THE CREATOR


23


the Decalogue or Catechism is a little book which, after be-
ing well worn by children’s hands, may be thrown away.
For it ordains that we should honor our parents, that we
should not do murder, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor
bear false winess; and who does not know the same things
from the civil law ? Concerning the church, he thinks it is
only an assemblage of simple, credulous, weak-minded people,
who see what they do not see. Respecting man, and himself
as a man, he thinks as he does of a beast; and concerning the
life after death, he thinks as he does of a beast’s life after
death. So his internal man thinks, however differently the
external man speaks; for, as already said, every man has an
internal and an external; and his internal makes the man,
which is called the spirit, and which lives after death; and
the external, in which by outward morality he acts the
hypocrite, is buried; and then, on account of his denial of
God, he is condemned. Every man as to his spirit is con-
sociated with his like in the spiritual world, and is as one with
them; and it has often been given me to see in societies the
spirits of men still living, some in angelic societies and some
in infernal; and I have also been permitted to converse with
them for days, and have wondered that man himself while
he lives in his body should know nothing about this other
life. From this it was manifest that whoever denies God,
is already among the condemned and after death is gathered
to his own.

15. VIII. With men who do not acknowledge one God , but
more than one , nothing of the church coheres . He who in
faith acknowledges and in heart worships one God, is in the
communion of saints on earth, and in the communion of
angels in the heavens; they are called communions and are so
because they are in one God, and one God is in them. The
same are also in conjunction with the whole angelic heaven,
and I venture to say with all and every one there, for they are
all as the children and descendants of one father, whose


24


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 15


minds, manners, and faces are similar, whereby they mutu-
ally recognize one another. The angelic heaven is coordi-
nated into societies according to all the varieties of the love
of good; which varieties tend toward one most universal love,
which is love to God; from this love have come forth all those
who in faith acknowledge and in heart worship one God, the
Creator of the universe, and at the same time the Redeemer
and Regenerator. But the case is altogether different with
those who do not approach and worship one God, but more
than one; or who have one on their lips, and three in their
thought as do those in the church at this day who distin-
guish God into three persons, and declare each person by
himself to be God, and attribute separate qualities or prop-
erties to each which do not belong to either of the others.
Hence it comes to pass that not only is the unity of God
actually divided, but also theology itself, and likewise the
human mind in which it must dwell; what can result but per-
plexity and incoherence in the things of the church ? That
the state of the church is such at this day, will be shown in
the Appendix. The truth is, that the division of God or of
the Divine essence into three persons, each of whom by him-
self, or singly, is God, leads to the denial of God. It is as if
one should enter a temple to worship, and should see in a
picture above the altar one God painted as the Ancient of
Days, another as the High Priest, and a third as the flying
iEolus, with this inscription beneath, These three are one
God; or as if he should there see the Unity and Trinity
painted as a man with three heads upon one body, or with
three bodies under one head, which is the form of a monster.
If any one should enter heaven with such an idea, he would
certainly be cast down headlong, though he should say that
the head or heads signified the essence, and the body or
bodies, the distinct properties.

16. To the above I will add a Relation. I saw some new
comers from the natural world into the spiritual, talking
together about three Divine Persons from eternity; they


No. 1 6]


GOD THE CREATOR


25


were dignitaries of the church, and one of them a bishop.
They came to me and after some conversation about the
spiritual world, of which they had before known nothing, I
said, “ I heard you talking about three Divine Persons from
eternity; and I beg you to open to me this great mystery,
according to your ideas which you conceived in the natural
world from which you have lately come.”

Then the primate looking to me said, “ I see that you are
a layman, and so I will open the ideas of my thought con-
cerning this great mystery and teach you. My ideas have
been and still are that God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Spirit, sit in the midst of heaven, upon lofty
and magnificent seats or thrones — God the Father upon
a throne of the finest gold, with a sceptre in His hand; God
the Son at His right hand upon a throne of the purest silver,
with a crown on His head; and God the Holy Spirit near
them upon a throne of brilliant crystal, holding a dove in
His hand: that lamps hang round about them in triple order,
glittering with precious stones; and that at a distance from
this circle stand innumerable angels, all worshipping and
singing praises: moreover, that God the Father is continually
conversing with His Son about those who are to be justified
and that they together decree and determine who upon earth
are worthy to be received by them among the angels and
crowned with eternal life; and that God the Holy Spirit,
having heard their names, forthwith hastens to them over
all parts of the earth, bearing with Him the gifts of justice,
as so many tokens of salvation for those who are to be jus-
tified; and as soon as He arrives and breathes upon them,
He disperses their sins, as a ventilator disperses the smoke
from a furnace and makes it clear; and also He takes away
from their hearts the hardness of stone, and puts into them
the softness of flesh; and at the same time He renews their
spirits or minds, and gives them new birth, inducing upon
them childlike faces; and at last marks their foreheads with
the sign of the cross, and calls them the elect, and children


26


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 6


of God.” The primate, having ended this statement, said
to me, “ Thus I unravelled this great mystery in the world;
and because most of onr order there applauded these my
opinions, I am persuaded that you also, who are a layman,
give them credence.”

After these things were said by the primate, I looked at
him, and at the same time at the dignitaries with him, and
observed that they all favored him with their full assent.
Then I began to reply, and said, “I have considered the
declaration of your faith, and have gathered from it that you
have conceived and still cherish a merely natural and sen-
sual, yea, material idea concerning the triune God, whence
inevitably flows the idea of three Gods. Is it not to think
sensually of God the Father that He sits upon a throne with
a sceptre in His hand ? and of the Son that He sits upon His
throne with a crown on His head ? and of the Holy Spirit that
He sits upon His with a dove in His hand, and according to
what he hears, He runs throughout the world? And be-
cause such an idea thence results, I cannot give credence to
what you have declared; for from my infancy I have not
been able to admit into my mind any other idea than that of
one God; and since I have received and still retain only this
idea, all that you have said falls away with me. And then I
saw that, by the throne upon which, according to the Scrip-
ture, Jehovah is said to sit, is meant kingdom; by the sceptre
and crown, rule and dominion; by sitting on the right hand
the omnipotence of God by His Human; and by those things
which are related of the Holy Spirit, the operations of the
Divine omnipresence. Assume, sir, if you please, the idea
of one God, and revolve it well in your reason, and you will
at length clearly perceive that it is so. Indeed, you also say
that there is one God, arid this because you make the essence
of those three persons one and indivisible; yet you do not
allow any one to say that the one God is one Person, but that
still there are three; and this you do, lest the idea of three
Gods, such as yours is, should be lost; and you also ascribe


No. 17]


GOD THE CREATOR.


27


to each a character distinct from that of another: do you not
thus divide your Divine essence? Since it is so, how can
you at the same time think that God is one ? I could over-
look it if you should say that the Divine is one. When any
one hears that the Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy
Spirit is God, and that each Person singly is God, how can
he conceive that God is one? Is it not a contradiction to
which no one can give credence? That this cannot be
called one God, but like Divinity, may be illustrated by
these examples. It cannot be said of several men who com-
pose one senate, synod, or council, that they are one man;
but while they hold all and each one opinion, it may be said
that they think one thing. Neither can it be said of three
diamonds of one substance that they are one diamond, but
that they are one as to substance; and also each diamond
differs from the others in value, according to its own weight;
but it would not be so, if they were one, and not three. I
perceive, however, that the reason why you call the three
Divine persons, each of whom by Himself or singly is God,
one God, and why you insist that every one in the church
should so speak is, that sound and enlightened reason
throughout the whole world acknowledges that God is one;
and therefore you would be covered with shame if you also
should not speak so. But even while you utter one God,
though you think of three, still the shame does not keep the
words within your lips, but you speak them out.”

After this had been said and heard, the bishop retired
with his clerical attendants, and in retiring he turned about,
and wished to exclaim, There is one God, but could not, be-
cause his thought drew back his tongue; and then with open
mouth he breathed out, Three Gods. Those who were
standing by laughed aloud at the strange sight, and departed.

17. Afterward I inquired where I might find those of the
learned who are of the most acute talent, and who maintain
that there is a Divine Trinity divided into three Persons.
Three presented themselves, to whom I said, “ How can you


2 8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 17


divide the Divine Trinity into three Persons, and assert that
each Person by himself, or singly, is God and Lord? Is
not such a confession of the mouth that God is one, as dis-
tant from the thought as the south from the north?” To
which they answered, “It is not in the least, because the
three Persons have one essence, and the Divine essence is
God. We were in the world guardians of a Trinity of Per-
sons; and the ward under our care was our faith, in which
each Divine Person had his office: God the Father, the office
of imputation and donation; God the Son, that of inter-
cession and mediation; and God the Holy Spirit, that of
effecting the uses of imputation and mediation.”

But I asked, “What do you mean by the Divine essence?”
They said, “We mean omnipotence, omniscience, omni-
presence, immeasurableness, eternity, equality of majesty.”
To which I said, “If that essence makes one out of several
Gods, you may add still more, as for example a fourth who
is mentioned in Moses, Job, and Ezekiel, and is called God
Shaddai. In like manner also did the ancients in Greece
and Italy, who ascribed equal attributes and thus a like
essence to their gods, as to Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto,
Apollo, Juno, Diana, Minerva, yea, also to Mercury and
Venus; but still they could not say that all these were one
God. And also you, who are three and, as I perceive, of
like learning, and so of like essence as to that, are still not
able to combine yourselves into one learned man.”

But at this they laughed, saying, “You are jesting; it is
otherwise with the Divine essence; this is one, and not tri-
partite, and it is indivisible, and so not divided; partition and
division do not fall to it.” To this I rejoined, “ Let us come
down to this ground and argue the subject.” And I asked,
“What do you mean by Person, and what does the word
signify?” And they said, “The term Person signifies not
a part or quality in another, but what subsists by itself.
Thus do all the Doctors of the church define Person, and
we agree with them.”


No. 17]


GOD THE CREATOR


29


And I said, “Is this the definition of Person ?” And
they replied, “It is.” To which I answered, “Then there
is not any part: of the Father in the Son, nor any of either in
the Holy Spirit; whence it follows that each has His own
judgment, right, and power; and so there is not any thing
which joins them together except the will which is proper to
each, and thus is communicable at pleasure : are not the three
persons thus three distinct Gods? Further, you have also
defined Person, that it is what subsists by itself : consequently
there are three substances into which you divide the Divine
essence; and yet this, as you also say, is incapable of divi-
sion, because it is one and indivisible; and moreover to each
substance, that is, to each Person, you attribute properties
which are not in another and cannot be communicated to
another, such as imputation, mediation, and operation; and
what else thence results than that the three Persons are three
Gods?” At these words they withdrew, saying, “We will
discuss these things, and after discussion we will answer.”

There stood by a certain wise man, who on hearing these
things said, “ I do not wish through such subtle lattice-work
to look into this subject; but outside of those subtilties, I see
in clear light that in the ideas of your thought there are three
Gods; but because it would be to your shame before the
whole world if you should publish them, as then you would
be called madmen and idiots, therefore to avoid that dis-
grace it is expedient for you to confess with your lips one
( God.” But the three disputants, still tenacious of their
' opinion, paid no attention to these words; and in going away
they muttered some terms borrowed from metaphysical
science; whence I perceived, that that was their oracle, from
which they wished to give answers.


30


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[NO. 18


THE DIVINE ESSE, WHICH IS JEHOVAH.

1 8. To treat first of the Divine Esse , and afterward of
the Divine essence, it appears as if these two were one and
the same; but still esse is more universal than essence, for an
essence supposes an esse , and from esse essence is derived.
The Esse of God, or the Divine Esse , cannot be described,
because it is above every idea of human thought, into which
nothing else falls than what is created and finite, but not
what is uncreate and infinite, thus not the Divine Esse. The
Divine Esse is Esse itself, from which are all things, and
which must be in all things, that they may be. A further
notion of the Divine Esse may flow in from the following arti-
cles: I. The one God is called Jehovah from Esse , thus from
this, that He alone is, was , and will be, and He is the First
and the Last, the Beginning and the End, the Alpha and the
Omega. II. The one God is substance itself and form itself,
and angels and men are substances and forms from Him ; and
as far as they are in Him and He in them, so far they are
images' and likenesses of Him. III. The Divine Esse is Esse
in itself and at the same time Existere in itself. IV. The
Divine Esse and Existere in itself cannot produce another
Divine which is Esse and Existere in itself ; consequently,
there cannot be another God of the same essence . V. The
plurality of Gods in ancient and also in modern times existed
from no other cause than from not understanding the Divine
Esse. But these articles are to be explained one by one.

19. I. The one God is called Jehovah from Esse, thus
from this, that He alone is, was, and will be, and He is the
First and the Last, the Beginning and the End, the Alpha
and the Omega. That Jehovah signifies I am and Being, is
known; and that God was so called from most ancient times
is evident from the book of Creation, or Genesis, where in
the first chapter He is named God, but in the second and the
following, Jehovah God; and afterward, when the descend-


No. 19]


GOD THE CREATOR


31


ants of Abraham by Jacob during their sojourning in Egypt
forgot the name of God, it was recalled to their remem-
brance — as is thus written: Moses said unto God , What is
Thy name? God said , I AM WHO AM. Thus shalt thou
say to the sons 0} Israel , I AM hath sent me unto you . . .
and thou shalt say } JEHOVAH , the God 0} your fathers . . .
hath sent me unto you ; this is My name for ever , and this is
My memorial unto generation and generation (Exod. iii. 13-
15). Since God alone is the I AM, and the BEING [Esse],
or Jehovah, therefore there is nothing in the created uni-
verse which does not derive its esse from Him; but in what
manner will be seen below. The same is also meant by
these words: I am the First and the Last , the Beginning and
the End , the Alpha and the Omega (Isa. xliv. 6: and Apoc.
i. 8, rr ; xxii. 13); by which is siginfied, who is the Itself and
the Only, from firsts to lasts, from which are all things.
God is called the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and
the End, because Alpha is the first and Omega is the last
letter in the Greek alphabet, and hence they signify all things
in the complex. The reason is, that every alphabetic letter
in the spiritual world signifies something; and a vowel, which
serves for tone, something of affection or love: spiritual or
angelic speech, and also writing are from this origin. But
this is an arcanum hitherto unknown; for there is a uni-
versal language, in which all angels and spirits are; and this
has nothing in common with any language of men in the
world. Every man comes into this language after death,
for it is implanted in every one from creation; wherefore all
can understand one another throughout the whole spiritual
world. It has been given me very often to hear that lan-
guage, and I have compared it with languages in the world,
and have found that it does not even in any least particular
make one with any natural language upon earth: it differs
from them in its first principle, which is, that each letter of
every word signifies some thing. For this reason God is
called the Alpha and the Omega, by which is signified that


32


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 19


He is the Itself and the Only, from firsts to lasts, from which
are all things. But in regard to this language and its writing,
flowing from the spiritual thought of angels, see what is said
in the work on “Marriage Love" (n. 326-329), and also in
the following pages.

20. II. The one God is substance itself and form itself ,
and angels and men are substances and forms from Him; and
as far as they are in Him and He in them , so far they are
images and likenesses of Him. Since God is Esse , He is also
substance, for esse , unless it be substance, is only an entity of
reason; for substance is an entity which subsists: and he who
is substance is also form, for substance, unless it be form, is
an entity of reason; therefore both can be predicated of God,
but so that He is the only, the very, and the first substance
and form. That this form is the Human itself, that is, that
God is very Man, all things of whom are infinite, has been
demonstrated in the Angelic Wisdom concerning the Divine
Love and Wisdom , published at Amsterdam in the year 1763 :
likewise that angels and men are substances and forms,
created and organized for receiving the Divine things flow-
ing into them through heaven; wherefore in the book of
Creation they are called images and likenesses of God (Gen.
i. 26, 27); and in other places, His sons, and born of Him.
And in the course of this work it will be fully shown that,
as far as man lives under the Divine auspices, that is, suffers
himself to be led by God, so far he becomes an image of Him,
more and more interiorly. Unless an idea be formed of God
that He is the first substance and form, and of His form that
it is the Human itself, the minds of men would readily' take
on idle fancies, like spectres, concerning God Himself, the
origin of men, and the creation of the world. Of God they
would conceive no other notion than as of the nature of the
universe in its firsts, thus as of the expanse of the universe, or
as of emptiness or nothing; of the origin of men, as of the
confluence of elements into such a form fortuitously; of the


No. 21]


GOD THE CREATOR


33


creation of the world, that the origin of its substances and
forms is from points, then from geometrical lines, which,
because nothing can be predicated of them, are therefore
in themselves not any thing. With such persons every thing
of the church is like the Styx, or the thick darkness of
Tartarus.

21. III. The Divine Esse is Esse in itself , and at the same
time , Existere in itself. Jehovah God is Esse in itself because
He is the I AM, the Itself, the Only, and the First, from
eternity to eternity, from which is every thing which is, that
it may be anything; thus and not otherwise He is the Begin-
ning and the End, the First and the Last, the Alpha and the
Omega. It cannot be said that His Esse is from itself, be-
cause this from itself supposes what is prior, and thus time,
which is not applicable to the Infinite, which is called from
eternity; and also it supposes another God, who is God in
Himself, thus a God from God, or that God formed Himself,
and so would not be uncreate or infinite, because thus He
finited Himself from Himself, or from another. From this,
that God is Esse in itself, it follows that He is love in itself,
wisdom in itself, and life in itself, and that He is the Itself,
from which are all things, and to which all things refer them-
selves that they may be any thing. That God is life in itself,
and thus God, is evident from the Lord’s words in John (v.
26), and in Isaiah: I Jehovah make all things , and spread out
the heavens alone , and stretch out the earth by Myself (xliv.
24); and that He alone is God , and beside Him there is no
God (xlv. 14, 15, 21, 22: Hos.xiii. 4). That God is not only
Esse in itself, but also Existere in itself, is because esse , unless
it exist, is not any thing, and in like manner existere , unless it
be from esse; wherefore one being given the other must be
given. In like manner substance is not any thing unless it
be also form; of substance, unless it be form, nothing can be
predicated; and this because it has no quality is in itself
nothing. The reason why esse and existere are said here, and


34


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 21


not essence and existence, is that a distinction is to be ob-
served between esse and essence, and hence between existere
and existence, as between prior and posterior; and the prior
is more universal than the posterior. Infinity and eternity
are applicable to the Divine Esse , but to the Divine essence
and existence Divine love and Divine wisdom are applicable,
and by means of these two, omnipotence and omnipresence
which therefore will be treated in their order.

22. That God is the Itself, the Only, and the First, which
is called Esse and Existere in itself, from which are all things
that are and exist, the natural man by his own reason can
in no way discover; for the natural man by his own reason
can apprehend nothing but what is of nature, which squares
with his essence, because from his infancy and childhood
nothing else has entered into it. But since man was created
to be spiritual, because he is to live after death and then
among the spiritual in their world, therefore God has pro-
vided the Word, in which He has revealed not only Himself,
but also that there is a heaven and a hell, in one or the other
of which every man is to live to eternity, each according to
his life together with his faith. He has also revealed in the
Word that He is the I AM, or the Esse , and the Itself, and the
Only, which is in itself, and so the First or the Beginning,
from which are all things. From this revelation the natural
man can elevate himself above nature, thus above himself,
and see such things as are of God, but yet only as from afar,
though God is nigh to every man, for He is in him with His
essence; and because it is so, He is nigh to those who love
Him, and those love Him who live according to His com-
mandments and believe in Him. These as it were see Him.
What is faith, but spiritual sight that He is ? And what is
life according to His commandments, but actual acknowledg-
ment that from Him are salvation and eternal life ? Those
however who have not spiritual but natural faith, which is
only sensuous knowledge, and . a life in accordance, see God,
indeed, but from afar, and this only when they speak of


No. 23]


GOD THE CREATOR


35


Him. The difference between the former and the latter is
like that between those who standing in clear light see men
near by and touch them, and those who stand in a thick fog,
from which they do not know whether they see men, or trees,
or stones. Or it is as the difference between those standing
upon a high mountain where there is a city, who go to and
fro and talk with their fellow citizens, and those who look
down from that mountain and know not whether what they
see are men, or beasts, or statues. Indeed, it is like that
between those who stand upon some planet and see their
companions there, and those who are on another planet, with
telescopes in their hands, and look thither and say that they
see men, when yet they have only a general sight of earthy
parts as lunar brightness, and of waters as spots. There is a
similar difference between seeing God and the Divine things
which proceed from Him in their mind, with those who are in
faith and at the same time in the life of charity, and with
those who are only in knowledge about them; thus between
natural and spiritual men. But they who deny the Divine
holiness of the Word, and yet carry the things of religion as
in a sack upon the back, do not see God, but only utter the
name God, differing little from parrots.

23. IV. The Divine Esse and Existere in itself cannot
produce another Divine that is Esse and Existere in itself;
consequently , another God of the same essence is not possible.
That the one God, who is the Creator of the universe, is Esse
and Existere in itself, thus God in Himself, has already been
shown; from which it follows that a God from God is not
possible, because the very essential Divine, which is Esse and
Existere in itself, is in Him incommiinicable. It is the same
whether it be said, begotten by God, or proceeding from
Him; in either case it would mean produced by God; and
this differs but little from being created. Therefore, to
introduce into the church the faith that there are three
Divine persons, each of whom singly is God, and of the same


36


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 23


essence, and one born from eternity, and a third proceeding
from eternity, is wholly to destroy the idea of the unity of
God, and with this all notion of Divinity, and so to cause all
the spiritual of reason to be banished into exile; thereby man
becomes no longer man, but totally natural, differing from
a beast only in possessing the power of speech, and opposed
to all the spiritual things of the church, which the natural
man calls foolishness. From this source and from this only
have originated so enormous heresies concerning God; and
thus a Divine Trinity divided into persons has brought into
the church not only night, but even death. That identity
of three Divine essences is an offence to reason, was evident
to me from the angels, who said that they could not even
utter, three equal Divinities; and that if any one should
come to them and wish to utter that expression, he could not
but turn himself away; and after having given it utterance,
he would become like the trunk of a man, and would be cast
down and then would go away to those in hell who do not
acknowledge any God. The truth is that, to implant in
children and youths an idea of three Divine persons to which
inevitably adheres the idea of three Gods, is to take away
from them all spiritual milk and then all spiritual meat, and
lastly all spiritual reason, and to bring spiritual death upon
those who confirm themselves in it. The difference is this: —
Those who in faith and in heart worship one God, the
Creator of the universe, and Him at the same time the
Redeemer and Regenerator, are as the city of Zion was in the
time of David, and as the city of Jerusalem in the time of
Solomon after the temple was built; but the church which
believes in three persons, and in each as a distinct God, is
like the city of Zion and Jerusalem destroyed by Vespasian,
and the temple burnt therein. Moreover, the man who wor-
ships one God, in whom is the Divine Trinity, thus who is
one Person, becomes more and more living and a man angel;
but he who confirms himself in a plurality of Gods, from a
plurality of persons, gradually becomes like a statue made


No - 24 ] god the creator 37

with flexible joints, in the middle of which Satan stands, and
speaks through its jointed mouth.

24. V. A plurality of gods , in ancient and also in modern
times , originated from no other cause than from not under-
standing the Divine Esse. That the unity of God is inmostly
inscribed on the mind of every man, since it is in the midst of
all things which flow into the soul of man from God, has
been shown above (n. 8); but still it has not descended
therefrom into the human understanding, because the knowl-
edges by means of which man ought to ascend to meet God
have been wanting; for every one must prepare the way for
God, that is, must prepare himself for reception, and this
must be done by means of knowledges. The knowledges
which have hitherto been wanting to enable the understand-
ing to penetrate where it might see that God is one, and that
only one Divine Esse is possible, and that all things of nature
are from that, are as follows: — 1. Hitherto no one has
known any thing concerning the spiritual world, where
spirits and angels are, and into which every man comes after
death. 2. Also, in that world there is a sun, which is pure
love from Jehovah God, who is in the midst of it. 3. From
that sun proceed heat which in its essence is love, and light
which in its essence is wisdom. 4. Hence all things which
are in that world are spiritual, and affect the internal man,
and make its will and understanding. 5. Jehovah God out
of His sun not only produced the spiritual world and all its
spiritual things, which are innumerable and substantial, but
He also produced the natural world and all its natural things,
which are also innumerable, but material. 6. Hitherto no
one has known the distinction between the spiritual and the
natural, nor even what the spiritual is in its essence. 7. Nor
that there are three degrees of love and wisdom, according
to which the angelic heavens are arranged. 8. The human
mind is distinguished into as many degrees, to the end that
it may be elevated after death into one of the three heavens,


38


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 24


which is effected according to man’s life and faith con-
jointly. 9. And finally, all those things could not have
existed as to a single point but from the Divine Esse , which
in itself is the Itself, and so the First, and the Beginning,
from which are all things. These knowledges have hitherto
been wanting; yet they are the means by which man may
ascend and have knowledge of the Divine Esse. It is said
that man ascends, but it is meant that he is raised up by
God; for man has free will in providing himself with knowl-
edges; and as he provides himself with them from the Word
by means of the understanding, he thus prepares the way
by which God descends and elevates him. The knowledges
by means of which the human understanding ascends —
God holding him in His hand and leading him — may be
compared to the steps of the ladder seen by Jacob, which
was set on the earth whose top reached to heaven, and by
which the angels ascended, and Jehovah stood above it
(Gen. xxviii. 12, 13). But it is quite otherwise when those
knowledges are wanting, or when man despises them; then
the elevation of the understanding may be compared to a
ladder set up from the ground to the windows of the first
story of a magnificent palace, where men dwell, and not to
the windows of the second story where spirits are, and still
less to the windows of the third story where angels are. For
this reason man abides in the atmospheres and material
things of nature, in which he keeps his eyes, ears, and nos-
trils; from which he derives no other ideas of heaven, and of
the esse and essence of God, than such as are of the atmos-
phere and material; and while a man thinks from these, he
does not form any judgment concerning God, whether He
exists or not, or whether He is one or more; and still less
what He is as to His esse and as to His essence. From this
arose in ancient, and also in modern times, a plurality of
gods.

25. To the above I shall add this Relation. Once having
awaked from sleep I fell into profound meditation concern-


No. 25]


GOD THE CREATOR


39


ing God; and when I looked up, I saw above me in heaven a
bright white light in oval form; and when I fixed my gaze
upon the light, it receded to the sides and passed into the
circumference. And then, lo, heaven was opened to me, and
I saw magnificent things, and angels standing in the form of
a circle on the southern side of the opening and talking to-
gether; and because I had an ardent desire to hear what they
were saying, it was therefore given me first to hear the tone,
which was full of heavenly love, and afterward the speech,
which was full of wisdom from that love. They were talk-
ing together about the one God, and about conjunction
with Him, and thence salvation. They spoke ineffable
things, most of which cannot fall into the words of any nat-
ural language; but because I had sometimes been in com-
pany with angels in heaven itself, and then in similar speech
with them because in similar state, I was therefore able now
to understand them, and to select from their conversation
some things which may be rationally expressed in the words
of natural language. They said that the Divine Esse is One,
the Same, the Itself, and Indivisible. This they illustrated
by spiritual ideas, saying that the Divine Esse cannot fall to
several, each of whom has the Divine Esse , and still itself be
One, the Same, the Itself, and Indivisible; for each one would
think from his own Esse from himself, and singly by him-
self; if then also from the others and by the others, unani-
mously, there would he several unanimous Gods, and not
one God; for unanimity, because it is the agreement of sev-
eral, and at the same time of each one from himself and by
himself, does not accord with the unity of God, hut with a
plurality — they did not say, of Gods, hecause they could
not; for the light of heaven from which was their thought,
and the aura in which their speech was uttered, resisted it.
They said also that when they wished to pronounce the
word Gods, and each one as a Person by himself, the effort
of pronouncing fell instantly into One, yea, to the Only
God. To this they added that the Divine Esse is a Divine


40


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 25


Esse in Itself, not from itself; because from itself supposes
an Esse in itself from another prior; thus it supposes a God
from God, which is not possible. What is from God is not
called God, but is called Divine; for what is a God from
God ? thus, what is a God born of God from eternity ? and
what is a God proceeding from God through a God born
from eternity, but words, in which there is nothing of light
from heaven ? They said moreover that the Divine Esse y
which in itself is God, is the Same, not the same simply,
but infinitely; that is, the Same from eternity to eternity: it
is the Same everywhere, and the Same with every one, and
in every one; but that all variety and change are in the re-
cipient, and caused by the state of the recipient. That the
Divine Esse } which is God in Himself, is the Itself, they
illustrated thus. God is the Itself, because He is love itself
and wisdom itself, or because He is good itself and truth
itself, and thence life itself, which, unless they were the It-
self in God, would not be any thing in heaven and the
world, because there would not be any thing in them hav-
ing relation to the Itself. Every quality draws its quality
from that which is the Itself, from which it is, and to
which it has relation that it may be such as it is. This Itself,
which is the Divine Esse , is not in place, but is with those
and in those who are in place, according to reception; since
of love and wisdom, or of good and truth, and thence of life,
which are the Itself in God, yea, God Himself, place cannot
be predicated, nor progression from place to place; whence is
omnipresence: wherefore the Lord says that He is in the
midst of them; and also that He is in them, and they in Him.
But because He cannot be received by any one such as He is
in Himself, He appears as He is in His essence, as a sun
above the angelic heavens; the proceeding from which as
light is Himself as to wisdom, and the proceeding as heat is
Himself as to love. That sun is not Himself; but the Divine
love and the Divine wisdom first emanating from Him round
about Him, appear to the angels as a sun. He within the


No. 26]


GOD THE CREATOR


41


sun is Man; He is our Lord Jesus Christ, both as to the
Divine from which He came forth, and also as to the Di-
vine Human; since the Itself, which is love itself and wis-
dom itself, was a soul to Him from the Father; thus the Di-
vine life, which is life in itself. It is otherwise in every man;
in him the soul is not life, but a recipient of life. The Lord
also teaches this, saying, I am the way , the truth , and the life;
and in another place, As the Father hath life in Himself , so
also hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself (John
v. 26). Life in Himself is God. To this they added that
those who are in any spiritual light may perceive from these
things that the Diving Esse , because it is One, the Same, the
Itself, and thence Indivisible, cannot be in more than one;
and that, if it should be said to be, manifest contradictions
would result.

26. When I heard these things, the angels perceived in
my thought the common ideas of the Christian Church, con-
cerning a Trinity of Persons in unity and their unity in the
Trinity, in regard to God; and also concerning the birth of
the Son of God from eternity; and then they said, “What
are you thinking? Do you not have those thoughts from
natural light, with which our spiritual light does not agree ?
Wherefore unless you remove the ideas of that thought, we
close heaven to you and depart.” But then I said, “ Enter,
I pray, more deeply into my thought, and perhaps you will
see an agreement.” They did so and saw that by three
Persons I understood three proceeding Divine attributes,
which are Creation, Redemption, and Regeneration; and
that they are attributes of one God; and that by the birth of
the Son of God from eternity I understood His birth fore-
seen from eternity and provided in time; and that it is not
above what is natural and rational, but contrary to what is
natural and rational, to think that any Son was born of God
from eternity; but not so, that the Son born of God by the
Virgin Mary in time is the only Son of God, and the only
begotten; and that to believe otherwise is an enormous


42 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 26

error. And then I told them that my natural thought con-
cerning the Trinity of Persons and their unity, and con-
cerning the birth of a Son of God from eternity, I had from
the doctrine of faith in the church, which has its name from
Athanasius. Then the angels said, “Weil.” And they
asked me to say from their mouth that, if any one does not
go to the very God of heaven and earth, he cannot come in-
to heaven, because heaven is heaven from this only God;
and that this God is Jesus Christ, who is the Lord Jehovah,
from eternity Creator, in time Redeemer, and to eternity
Regenerator; thus who is at once the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit; and that this is the Gospel which is to be
preached. After these things the heavenly light, which was
before seen over the opening, returned, and gradually
descended thence, and filled the interiors of my mind, and
enlightened my ideas concerning the trinity and unity of
God. And then I saw the ideas at first entertained con-
cerning them, which had been merely natural, separated as
chaff is separated from wheat by winnowing, and carried
away as by a wind to the north of heaven, and dispersed.

THE INFINITY OF GOD, OR HIS IMMEASURABLENESS
AND ETERNITY.

27. There are two properties of the natural world, which
cause all things there to be finite; one is space, and the other
is time; and because this world was created by God, and
spaces and times were created together with this world and
make it finite, therefore it is necessary to treat of their two
beginnings, which are immeasurableness and eternity; for
the immeasurableness of God has relation to spaces, and His
eternity to times; and infinity comprehends both immeasur-
ableness and eternity. But because infinity transcends
what is finite, and the knowledge of it transcends a finite
mind, therefore, that it may in some measure be perceived,
it is to be treated of in this series: — I. God is infinite , since


No. 28]


GOD THE CREATOR


43


He is and exists in Hints el}, and all things in the universe
are and exist from Him. II. God is infinite , for He was
before the world , thus before spaces and times arose. III.
God, since the world was made, is in space without space , and
in time without time. IV. The Infinity of God in relation
to spaces is called immeasurableness, and in relation to times
is called eternity; and, though there are these relations, still
there is nothing 0} space in His immeasurableness, and noth -
ing of time in His eternity. V. Enlightened reason , from
very many things in the world, may see the infinity 0} God the
Creator. VI. Every created thing is finite, and the infinite
is in finite things as in its receptacles, and in men as in its
images. But these things shall be explained one by one.

28. I. God is infinite, since He is and exists in Himself,
and all things in the universe are and exist from Him. It
has already been shown that God is One, and that He is the
Itself, and that He is the first Esse of all things, and that all
things which are, exist, and subsist in the universe, are
from Him; hence it follows that He is infinite. That human
reason may see this from very many things in the created
universe, will be shown in what follows. But though the
human mind from those things may acknowledge that the
first Being, or the first Esse, is infinite, still it cannot know
what that is, and therefore it cannot define it otherwise than
that it is the infinite All, and that it subsists in itself, and
thence that it is the very and the only Substance, and be-
cause nothing is predicable of substance unless it be form,
that it is the very and the only Form. But still what are
these things? It does not thus appear what the Infinite is;
for the human mind, however highly analytic and elevated,
is itself finite, and the finiteness in it cannot be removed;
wherefore it is by no means capable of seeing the infinity of
God as it is in itself, thus God; but it may see Him in the
shade from behind, as is said of Moses, while he entreated to
see God, that he was put into the hole of a rock, and saw His


44


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 28


back (Exod. xxxiii. 20-23). By the back of God are meant
the things visible in the world, and especially the things
perceptible in the Word. Thus it is manifest that it is vain
to wish to have knowledge of what God is in His Esse or in
His Substance; but that it is enough to acknowledge Him
from finite, that is, created things, in which He is infinitely.
Who ever is anxious to know more may be compared to a
fish drawn up into the air, or to a bird put into the receiver
of an air-pump, which, as the air is pumped out, gasps for
breath, and at last expires. He may also be compared to a
ship, which when it is overcome by a tempest and does not
obey the rudder, is borne upon rocks and shoals. So it is
with those who wish to have knowledge of the infinity of God
from within, not content that they may acknowledge it
from without, from manifest tokens. It is related of a cer-
tain philosopher among the ancients, that because he could
not see in the light of his mind, or comprehend, the eternity
of the world, he cast himself into the sea: what would he have
done if he had desired to comprehend the infinity of God ?

29. II. God is infinite , for He was before the world , thus
before spaces and times arose. In the natural world there are
times and spaces, but in the spiritual world, not so actually,
and still apparently. The reason why times and spaces
were introduced into the worlds, was that one thing might be
distinguished from another, great from small, many from
few; thus quantity from quantity, and so quality from
quality; and that, by this means the senses of the body might
be able to distinguish their objects, and the senses of the
mind theirs, and thus might be affected, think, and choose.
Times were introduced into the natural world by the earth’s
rotating about its axis, and by the progression of those rota-
tions from sign to sign along the zodiac; while these changes
appear to be made by the sun, from which the whole ter-
raqueous globe derives its heat and light. Hence are the
times of the day, morning, noon, evening, and night; and


No. 29]


GOD THE CREATOR


45


the times of the year, spring, summer, autumn, and winter;
times of days for light and darkness, and times of years for
heat and cold. But spaces were introduced into the natural
world by the earth’s being compacted into a globe, composed
of various materials, the parts of which were distinct from
one another, and at the same time extended. In the
spiritual world, however, there are not material spaces, and
times corresponding with them; but still there are appear-
ances of them, which appearances are according to the
differences of states in which are the minds of spirits and
angels there; wherefore, times and spaces there conform
themselves to the affections of their will, and thence to the
thoughts of their understanding; but those appearances are
real, because constant according to their states. The com-
mon opinion concerning the state of souls after death, and
thence also of angels and spirits, is that they are not in any
extense, and, consequently, not in space and time; according
to which idea it is said of souls after death, that they are in
an undetermined somewhere, and that spirits and angels are
forms of spirits, of which no other idea is entertained than
as of ether, air, vapor, or wind; when, nevertheless they are
substantial men, and live together like men of the natural
world upon spaces and in times, which, as said above, are
determined according to the states of their minds. If it
were not so, that is, if there were no spaces and times, that
whole world where souls are gathered after death, and where
spirits and angels dwell, might be drawn through the eye of
a needle, or concentrated upon the point of a single hair.
This would be possible if there were no substantial extense
there; but since this is there, therefore angels dwell separately
and distinctly from each other, yea, more distinctly than men
who have a material extense. But times there are not dis-
tinguished into days, weeks, months, and years, because the
sun there does not appear to rise and set, nor to be borne
along, but it remains stationary in the east, in the middle
degree between the zenith and the horizon. They also


4 6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 29


have spaces, because all things in that world are substantial,
as in the natural world they are material; but concerning
these things, more will be said in the section of this chapter
concerning Creation. From what has been said above it
may be comprehended that spaces and times make finite
all things and every thing in both worlds, and thence that
men are finite, not only as to their bodies, but also as to their
souls; and in like manner angels and spirits. From all these
things it may be concluded that God is infinite, that is, not
finite; because He, as the Creator, Maker, and Former of the
universe, finited all things; and He finited them by means of
His sun, in the midst of which He is and which is of the
Divine essence, that proceeds from Him as a sphere. There
and thence is the first of finiting, and its progression extends
even to ultimates in the nature of the world. It follows that
He in Himself is infinite, because He is uncreated. But
what is infinite appears to man as not any thing, because
man is finite, and thinks from what is finite; therefore, if
the finite which adheres to his thought were taken away,
the residue would seem to him as if it were not any thing;
yet the truth is that God is infinitely all, and that man
respectively is of himself not any thing.

30. III. God, since the world was made , is in space with-
out space , and in time without time. That God, and the
Divine which proceeds immediately from Him, is not in
space, though He is omnipresent, with every man in the
world, with every angel in heaven, and with every spirit
under heaven, cannot be comprehended by a merely natural
idea, but it may to some extent by a spiritual idea. The
reason why it cannot be comprehended by a merely natural
idea, is that in that idea there is space; for it is formed from
such things as are in the world, in all and in every one of
which that is visible to the eye, there is space. Every thing
great and small there is of space; every thing long, broad,
and high there is of space; in a word, every measure, figure,


No. 30]


GOD THE CREATOR


47


and form there is of space. But still man may to some
extent comprehend this by natural thought, provided he
admit into it something of spiritual light. But something
shall be said in the first place concerning an idea of spiritual
thought. This derives nothing from space, but it derives
its all from state. State is predicated of love, of life, of wis-
dom, of affections, of joys,- in general of good and truth; a
truly spiritual idea concerning these things has nothing in
common with space; it is above, and looks down upon the
ideas of space under it, as heaven looks down upon earth.
The reason why -God is present in space without space, and
in time without time, is that God is always the same from
eternity to eternity; thus such since the world was created as
He was before it; and in God and in the sight of God there
were no spaces nor times before creation, but after it; there-
fore, because He is the same, He is in space without space,
and in time without time. Hence it follows that nature is
separate from Him, and yet He is omnipresent in it; scarce
otherwise than as life is in every thing substantial and mate-
rial of man, though it does not mingle itself therewith. It is
comparatively as light in the eye, sound in the ear, taste in
the tongue, or as ether in the land and water, by means of
which the terraqueous globe is held together and revolved,
and so on; and if these agents should be taken away, the
things made substantial and material would in a moment
fall to pieces or be dispersed. Even the human mind, if
God were not everywhere and at all times present in it,
would float away like a bubble in the air; and both spheres
of the brain, in which it acts from its beginnings, would go
off into froth; and thus every thing human would become
dust of the earth, or an odor flying in the atmosphere. Since
God is in all time without time, therefore in His Word He
speaks of the past and of the future in the present, as in
Isaiah : Unto us a Child is born; unto us a Son is given, whose
name is Mighty , the Prince 0 } Peace (ix. 6); and in David: I
will declare the decree , Jehovah said to Me, Thou art My Son;


48


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 30


this day have I begotten Thee (Ps. ii. 7). These words are
concerning the Lord who was to come; wherefore it is also
said in the same, A thousand years in Thy sight are as yester-
day (Ps. xc. 4). That God is everywhere present, in the
whole world, and yet not any thing proper to the world is in
Him, that is, not any thing which is of space and time, may
be clearly seen from very many other passages in the Word,
by those who look with vigilance, as from this passage in
Jeremiah: Am 1 a God at hand , and not a God ajar off? Can
any hide himself in secret places , that I shall not see him? Do
not I fill heaven and earth? (xxiii. 23, 24.)

31. IV. God’s infinity in relation to spaces is called im-
measurableness , and in relation to times is called eternity; and
although there are these relations , still there is nothing of
space in His immeasurableness , and nothing of time in His
eternity. The infinity of God in relation to spaces is called
immensity, because immeasurableness is predicated of what-
ever is great and large, and also of what is extended, and of
what is spacious therein. But the infinity of God in relation
to times is called eternity, because to eternity is predicated of
things progressive, which are measured by times, and with-
out end; as for example, the things which are of space are
predicated of the terraqueous globe viewed in itself, and the
things which are of time are predicated of its rotation and
progression; the latter also makes times and the former
makes spaces, and they are thus presented from the senses in
the perception of reflecting minds. But in God there is noth-
ing of space and time, as was shown above; and yet the be-
ginnings of these are from God; hence it follows that His
infinity in relation to spaces is understood by immeasurable-
ness, and that His infinity in relation to times is understood
by eternity. But in heaven the angels perceive by the im-
measurableness of God, Divinity as to esse f and by His
eternity, Divinity as to existere; as also by immeasurableness
Divinity as to love, and by eternity as to wisdom. The rea-


No. 31]


GOD THE CREATOR


49


son is that angels abstract spaces and times from Divinity,
and then these notions result. But since man cannot think
otherwise than from ideas derived from things of space and
time, he cannot perceive any thing concerning God’s im-
measurableness before spaces, and His eternity before times;
indeed, when he wishes to perceive them, it is as if his mind
; were falling into a swoon — almost like one who having
, fallen into the water, is at the point of drowning, or like one
settling down in an earthquake, at the point of being swal-
lowed up. Nay, if he should persist in penetrating into those
things, he might easily fall into delirium, and from this be
led to denial of God. Once I myself was in such a state,
while thinking what God was from eternity; what He did
before the world was created, whether He deliberated about
creation and thought out the plan of it, whether deliberate
thought were possible in a pure vacuum, with other vain
things. But lest by such things I should fall into delirium,
I was taken up by the Lord into the sphere and light in which
interior angels are; and after the idea of space and time, in
which my thought was before, was there a little removed, it
was given me to comprehend that the eternity of God is not
an eternity of time, and that, because time was not before the
world, it was utterly vain to think any such things of God;
and also because the Divine from eternity, thus abstracted
from all time, does not involve days, years, and ages, but all
these are to God an instant, I concluded that the world was
created by God, not in time, but that times were intro-
duced by God with creation. To these things I shall add
this noteworthy fact: — There appear, at one end of the
spiritual world, two statues, in monstrous human form, with
mouths open and jaws wide-stretched, by which those seem
to themselves to be swallowed who think vain and foolish
things concerning God from eternity. But they are the
fantasies into which those cast themselves who think ab-
surdly and unduly concerning God before the world was
created.


50


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 32


32. V. Enlightened reason , from very many things in the
world , may see the infinity 0} God the Creator . Some things
shall be enumerated from which human reason may see the
infinity of God, namely: — I. In the created universe there
are not two things which are the same. That such identity
does not exist in simultaneous things, human learning from
reason has seen and proved; and yet the substantial and
material things in the universe, regarded individually, are
infinite in numher. And that there is not an identity of two
effects in things which are successive in the world may he
concluded from the rotation of the earth, in that its eccen-
tricity at the poles causes that there is never a return to the
same point. That it is so is evident from human faces, in
that throughout the whole world there is not any one face
wholly like another’s or the same as another’s, neither can
there be to eternity: this infinite variety could not hy any
means exist, but from the infinity of God the Creator. II.
The disposition of one is never exactly like another’s, so
that it is said, Many men, many minds. Consequently the
mind, that is, the will and the understanding, of one is never
wholly like another’s, or the same as another’s; hence, also,
neither is the speech of one, as to the tone and as to the
thought whence it proceeds, nor his action, as to gesture and
as to affection, exactly similar to that of another; from which
infinite variety, also, the infinity of God the Creator may be
seen as in a mirror. III. There is a certain immeasurable-
ness and eternity inherent in every seed, as well of animals as
of plants — an immeasurableness, in that it may be multi-
plied to infinity; and an eternity, in that such multiplication
has continued hitherto without interruption from the crea-
tion of the world, and continues perpetually. From the ani-
mal kingdom take for example the fishes of the sea, which if
they should multiply according to the abundance of their
seed, within twenty or thirty years would fill the ocean, so
that it would consist of mere fishes, and its water would
overflow and so destroy all the earth ; but that this might not


No. 32]


GOD THE CREATOR


51


happen, it was provided by God that one kind of fish should
be food for another. It is similar with the seeds of plants:
if as many of them as annually arise from one should be
planted, within twenty or thirty years they would cover the
surface not only of one earth, but also of several; for there
are shrubs of which every single seed produces a hundred
and a thousand others. Try it by calculation, reckoning
the product of a single seed in a series of twenty or thirty
terms, and you will see. From both cases, of plants and of
animals, the Divine immeasurableness and eternity, from
which a resemblance cannot but be produced, may be seen
as in a common face. IV. The infinity of God may appear
to the eye of enlightened reason, from the infinity to which
every science may grow, and thence the intelligence and wis-
dom of every man, both of which may grow as a tree from
seeds, and as forests and gardens from trees; for there is no
end to them. The memory of man is their ground, the un-
derstanding is where their germination and the will is where
their fructification takes place; and these two faculties, the
understanding and the will, are such that they may be culti-
vated and perfected in the world to the end of life, and after-
ward to eternity. V. The infinity of God the Creator may
also be seen from the infinite number of stars, which are so
many suns, and thus so many systjems. That in the starry
heaven also there are earths, upon which are men, beasts,
birds, and plants, has been shown in a little work describing
what has been seen. VI. The infinity of God has appeared
still more evident to me from the angelic heaven, and also
from hell, seeing that they are both of them ordered and ar-
ranged into innumerable societies or communities, according
to all the varieties of the love of good and of evil, and that
every one is allotted a place according to his love. For there
are all of the human race, gathered from the creation of the
world and to be gathered to ages of ages; and though every
one has his own place or habitation, still all there are so con-
joined that the whole angelic heaven represents one Divine


52 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No, 32

man, and all hell one monstrous devil. From these two, and
from the infinite wonders in them, the immeasurableness
with the omnipotence of God is manifestly exhibited to view.
VII. Who also cannot understand, if he elevates the rational
powers of his mind a little, that the life to eternity, which
every man has after death, is not possible but from an eter-
nal God? VIII. Besides all this there is a certain infinity
in many things which fall into natural light and into spiritual
light with man: — Into natural light, that there are various
series in geometry which go on to infinity; that, between the
three degrees of altitude there is progress to infinity, in that
the first degree, which is called natural, cannot be perfected
and elevated to the perfection of the second degree, which is
called spiritual, nor this to the perfection of the third, which
is called celestial. The case is similar with respect to end,
cause, and effect; as that the effect cannot be perfected so
that it may become as its cause, nor the cause so that it may
become as its end. This may be illustrated by the atmos-
pheres, of which there are three degrees; for there is a highest
aura, under this the ether, and below this the air; and no
quality of the air can be elevated to any quality of the ether,
nor any of this to any quality of the aura; and yet an eleva-
tion of perfections to infinity is possible in each. Into spiri-
tual light, that natural love, which is that of a beast, cannot
be elevated into spiritual love, which from creation was im-
parted to man; and that it is similar with the natural intelli-
gence of a beast in relation to the spiritual intelligence of a
man; but these things, because they are as yet unknown, will
be explained in another place. Thus it may be evident that
the universal of the world are perpetual types of the infinity
of God the Creator; but in what manner particulars emulate
universals, and represent the infinity of God, is an abyss; and
it is an ocean in which the human mind may, as it were, sail,
but must beware of the tempest arising from the natural man,
which, from the helm where the natural man stands trusting
in himself, will submerge the ship with its masts and sails.


No. 33]


GOD THE CREATOR


53


33. VI. Every created thing is finite , and the infinite is in
finite things as in receptacles , and in men as in its images .
Every created thing is finite because all things are from Jeho-
vah God, by means of the sun of the spiritual world, which
proximately encompasses Him; and that sun is of the sub-
ance which has gone forth from Him, the essence of which
is love: out of that sun by means of its heat and light the
universe was created, from its firsts to its lasts. But to set
forth in order the progress of creation, does not belong to
this place: some outline of it will be given in the following
pages. It is important here only to know that one thing was
formed from another, and that thus were made degrees, three
in the spiritual world, and three corresponding to them in the
natural world, and as many in the quiescent things of which
the terraqueous globe consists. But whence and what those
degrees are has been fully set forth in the Angelic Wisdom
concerning the Divine Love and Wisdom , published at Am-
sterdam in the year 1763; and in a small treatise on The In-
tercourse of the Soul and Body , published at London in the
year 1769. It is by means of these degrees that all posterior
things are receptacles of prior things, and these of things still
prior, and thus, in order, receptacles of the primitives of
which the sun of the angelic heaven consists, and thus that
finite things are receptacles of the infinite. This also coin-
cides with the wisdom of the ancients, according to which all
things and each are divisible to infinity. The common idea
is that, because what is finite does not comprehend what is
infinite, finite things cannot be receptacles of the infinite.
But, from what has been shown in my works concerning the
creation, it is evident that God first finited His infinity, by
substances emitted from Himself, from which existed His
proximate encompassing sphere, which makes the sun of the
spiritual world; and that afterward by means of that sun
He perfected other encompassing spheres, even to the last,
which consists of things quiescent; and that thus, by means
of degrees, He made the world more and more finite. These


54


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 33


things are adduced in order that human reason, which does
not rest unless it see the cause, may be satisfied.

34. That the infinite Divine is in men as in its images, is
evident from the Word, where this is read: And God said ,
Let us make man in our image , after our likeness; so God cre-
ated man into His own image , into the image of God created
He him (Gen. i. 26, 27); from which it follows that man is
an organ recipient of God, and that he is an organ according
to the quality of reception. The human mind, from which
and according to which man is man, is formed into three re-
gions according to three degrees. In the first degree it is
celestial, in which also are the angels of the highest heaven;
in the second degree it is spiritual, in which also are the an-
gels of the middle heaven; and in the third degree it is natu-
ral, in which also are the angels of the lowest heaven. The
human mind, organized according to those three degrees, is
a receptacle of the Divine influx; but still the Divine flows in
no further than as man prepares the way, or opens the door;
if he does this even to the highest or celestial degree, then
man becomes truly an image of God, and after death he be-
comes an angel of the highest heaven; but if he prepares the
way, or opens the door, only to the middle or spiritual de-
gree, then indeed man becomes an image of God, but not
in that perfection, and after death he becomes an angel of
the middle heaven ; and if he prepares the way, or opens the
door, only to the lowest or natural degree, then man, if he
acknowledges God and worships Him with actual piety, be-
comes an image of God in the lowest degree, and after death
he becomes an angel of the lowest heaven. If, however, he
does not acknowledge God and does not worship Him with
actual piety, he puts off the image of God, and becomes like
some animal, except that he enjoys the faculty of understand-
ing and thence of speech. If he then shuts up the highest
natural degree, which corresponds to the highest heavenly, he
becomes as to love like a beast of the earth; but if he shuts
up the middle natural degree, which corresponds to the mid-


No. 35]


GOD THE CREATOR


55


die spiritual, he becomes as to love like a fox, and as to the
sight of the understanding like a bird of the evening; but if
he also shuts up the lowest natural degree as to its spiritual,
he becomes as to love like a wild beast, and as to the under-
standing of truth like a fish. The Divine life, which by in-
flux from the sun of the angelic heaven actuates man, may
be compared with the light from the sun of the world, and
with its influx into a transparent object; the reception of life
in the highest degree, with the influx of light into a diamond;
the reception of life in the second degree, with the influx of
light into a crystal; and the reception of life in the lowest de-
gree, with the influx of light into glass, or into a transparent
membrane. But if this degree as to its spiritual be entirely
closed, which is done when God is denied and Satan is wor-
shipped, the reception of life from God may be compared
with the influx of light into opaque things of the earth, as into
rotten wood, or into the turf of a bog, or into dung, and the
like; for man then becomes a spiritual carcass.

35. To the above I will add this Relation. I was once in
amazement at the vast mutlitude of men who ascribe crea-
tion, and hence all things which are under the sun and which
are above the sun, to nature; saying from an acknowledgment
of the heart, when they see any thing, Is not this of nature ?
And when they are asked why they say that those things are
of nature, and why not of God, when yet they sometimes say
with the common voice that God created nature, and thence
they may just as well say that the things which they see are
of God, as that they are of nature, they answer with an almost
tacit internal tone, What is God but nature ? All these from
persuasion concerning the creation of the universe by nature,
and from that insanity as from wisdom, appear so vainglo-
rious that they look upon those who acknowledge the crea-
tion of the universe by God as ants creeping on the ground
and treading the beaten path, and upon some as butterflies
flying in the air, calling their opinions dreams, because they
see what they do not see, saying, Who has seen God? and
who does not see nature?


56 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 35

While I was in amazement at the multitude of such per-
sons, an angel stood at my side and said to me, “ What are
you meditating about ?” And I answered, “ About the mul-
titude of persons who believe that nature is of itself, and thus
the creator of the universe.” And the angel said to me, “ All
hell is of such, and they are called there satans and devils;
satans those who have confirmed themselves in favor of na-
ture and hence have denied God; devils, those who have lived
wickedly, and have thus rejected from their hearts all ac-
knowledgment of God. But I will conduct you to the
schools, which are in the south western quarter, where there
are such who are not yet in hell.” And he took me by the
hand and led me along, and I saw small houses in which
were schools, and in the midst of them, one which was as the
public hall of the rest. This was built of stones black as
pitch, which were overlaid with little plates as of glass, spark-
ling as if of gold and silver, like what are called selenites,
or mirror-stones; and here and there were interspersed glit-
tering shells.

Hither we came and knocked; and presently one opened
the door and said, “ Welcome.” And he ran to a table, and
brought four books, and said, “ These books are the wisdom
which is at this day applauded by many kingdoms; this book
or wisdom is applauded by many in France; this by many in
Germany; this by some in Holland; and this by some in
Britain.” He said further, “If you wish to see it, I will
make these four books shine before your eyes; ” and then he
poured forth and around the glory of his fame, and the books
presently shone as from light, but this light before our eyes
immediately vanished. And then we asked what he was
now writing; and he answered that he was producing and
bringing forth from his treasures things that are of inmost
wisdom, which in a summary are these: — I. Whether na-
ture be 0} life, or life be of nature. II. Whether the centre be
of the expanse , or the expanse be of the centre. III. Con-
cerning the centre and the expanse of nature and of life. Hav-


No. 35]


GOD THE CREATOR


57


ing said this, he placed himself again upon the seat at the
table, but we walked in his school, which was spacious. He
had a candle upon the table, because the light of the sun was
not there, but the nocturnal light of the moon; and what ap-
peared to me wonderful, the candle seemed to be carried
round about there, and to give light; but because it had not
been snuffed, it gave but little light. And when he wrote we
saw images in various forms, flying from the table to the walls,
which, in that nocturnal lunar light, appeared like beautiful
birds of India; but when we opened the door, in the daylight
of the sun they appeared like the birds of evening with net-
like wings; for they were resemblances of truth, which by
confirmations became fallacies, that had been ingeniously
connected by him into series.

After we had seen these things, we came up to the table
and asked him what he was now writing. He said, Con-
cerning the first question, Whether nature be of life , or life be
of nature ; and of this he said that he could confirm either
side, and make it true; but because something lurked within,
which he feared, he durst confirm only this, That nature is of
life, that is, from life, and not that life is of nature, that is,
from nature. We asked him courteously what it was that
lurked within, which he feared. He answered that it was
that he might be called by the clergy a naturalist, and thus
an atheist, and by the laity a man of unsound reason, since
both clergy and laity either believe from a blind faith or see
from the sight of those who confirm it.

But then, from some indignation of zeal for the truth, we
addressed him, saying, “ Friend, you are very much deceived;
your wisdom, which is ingenuity in writing, has misled you,
and the glory of fame has induced you to confirm what you
do not believe. Do you not know that the human mind is
capable of being elevated above the sensual things which are
in the thoughts from the senses of the body, and that when
it is elevated it sees those things which are of life above, and
those things which are of nature below? What else is life


58


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 35


but love and wisdom? and what else is nature but their
receptacle, by which they may work their effects or uses?
Can these be one except as principal and instrumental are ?
Can light be one with the eye, or sound with the ear ? Whence
are the sensations of these but from life ? whence their forms
but from nature ? What is the human body but an organ
of life? Are not all things and every thing therein organi-
cally formed for producing those things which the love wills
and the understanding thinks? Are not the organs of the
body from nature, and love and thought from life? And
are not these wholly distinct from each other ? Elevate the
keen sight of your genius yet a little higher, and you will see
that it is of life to be affected and to think, and that it is of
love to be affected, and of wisdom to think, and both are of
life; for, as just said, love and wisdom are life. If you ele-
vate the faculty of understanding a little higher still, you will
see that love and wisdom do not exist unless their origin is
somewhere, and that their origin is Love itself, and Wisdom
itself, and thence Life itself; and these are God from whom
nature is.”

Afterward we conversed with him about the second ques-
tion, Whether the expanse be of the centre , or the centre be of
the expanse ; and we asked him why he discussed this. He
answered, to the end that he might conclude concerning the
centre and the expanse of nature and of life, thus concerning
the origin of the one and the other. And when we asked
him what was his opinion, he answered just as before, that
he could confirm either side, but that for fear of the loss of
fame he would confirm that the expanse is of the centre, that
is, from the centre, “ though I know that before the sun there
was something, and this everywhere in the expanse; and that
this from itself flowed together into order, thus into the
centre.” But then we again addressed him from indignant
zeal, and said, “ Friend, you are insane.”

And when he heard this, he drew back the seat from the
table, and looked timidly at us, and then listened, but laugh-


No. 35]


GOD THE CREATOR


59


ing: we, however, continued the discussion by saying, “What
can be said more insane than that the centre is from the ex-
panse ? By your centre we understand the sun, and by your
expanse we understand the universe; and thus that the uni-
verse existed without the sun. Does not the sun make na-
ture and all its properties, which depend solely on the light
and heat proceeding from the sun through the atmospheres ?
Where were these things before? But whence they are we
will say in the discussion that is to follow. Are not the
atmospheres and all things upon the earth as surfaces, and
the sun their centre ? What are all those things without the
sun? Can they subsist a moment? Then what were all
these things before the sun ? Could they have existed ? Is
not subsistence perpetual existence? Since therefore the
subsistence of all things of nature is from the sun, it follows
that the existence of all things is so too. Every one sees this
and acknowledges it from seeing it himself. Does not what
is posterior subsist from what is prior even as it exists from
it ? If the surface were prior and the centre posterior, would
not the prior subsist from the posterior, which yet is con-
trary to the laws of order? How can posterior things pro-
duce prior, or exterior interior, or grosser purer ? Then how
can surfaces, which make the expanse, produce the centre?
Who does not see that this is contrary to nature’s laws? We
have adduced these arguments from analysis of reason, to
prove that the expanse exists from the centre, and not the
reverse, though every one who thinks j-ustly sees this without
argument. You said that the expanse flowed together into
the centre from itself. Did it thus flow by chance into such
wonderful and stupendous order, that one thing is for the
sake of another, and all things and each for the sake of man
and his eternal life ? Can nature from any love, by any wis-
dom, intend ends, provide causes, and thus provide effects,
that such things may exist in their order ? Can nature from
men make angels, and of these heaven, and cause those who
are there to live for ever? Imagine these things and reflect,


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


6o


[No. 35


and your idea concerning the existence of nature from na-
ture will fall.”

After this, we asked him what he had thought and what he
then thought about the third question, Concerning the centre
and the expanse of nature and of life; whether he believed the
centre and expanse of life to be the same with the centre
and expanse of nature. He said that he hesitated, and that
he had formerly thought that the interior activity of nature
was life, and that love and wisdom, which essentially make
the life of man, were therefrom; and that the fire of the sun
by heat and light, through the medium of the atmospheres,
produced it; but that now, from what he had heard concern-
ing the life of men after death, he was in doubt; and that this
doubt carried his mind now upward, and now downward;
and when upward, he acknowledged a centre of which he be-
fore had not known any thing; and when downward, he saw
the centre which he had believed to be the only one; and that
life was from the centre of which he before had not known
any thing, and that nature was from the centre which he be-
fore believed to be the only one, and that each centre had an
expanse around it.

To this we said, “Well;” provided he would also look at
the centre and expanse of nature from the centre and ex-
panse of life, and not the reverse. And we informed him
that above the angelic heaven is a sun, which is pure love, to
appearance, of fire like the sun of the world; and that from
the heat which proceeds from that sun angels and men have
will and love, and from the light thence understanding and
wisdom; and that the things therefrom are called spiritual,
while the things which proceed from the sun of the world are
containers or receptacles of life, and are called natural; also
that the expanse of the centre of life is called the Spiritual
World, which subsists from its sun; and that the expanse of
nature’s centre is called the Natural World, which subsists
from its sun. Now, because spaces 'and times cannot be
predicated of love and wisdom, but states in their stead, it


No - 35] GOD THE CREATOR 6 1

follows that the expanse around the sun of the angelic heaven
is not an extense, but still is in the extense of the natural sun,
and with the living subjects there according to reception, and
the reception is according to forms and states.

But then he asked, u Whence is the fire of the sun of the
world or of nature ?” We answered that it is from the sun
of the angelic heaven, which is not fire, but the Divine love
first proceeding from God, who is in the midst of it; and be-
cause he wondered at this, we demonstrated it thus: “Love
in its essence, is spiritual fire; thence it is that fire in the
Word in its spiritual sense signifies love; therefore priests in
the temples pray that heavenly fire may fill the hearts, by
which they mean love. The fire of the altar and the fire of
the candlestick in the tabernacle with the Israelites repre-
sented nothing else than the Divine love. The heat of the
blood, or the vital heat of men and of animals in general, is
from no other source than the love which makes their life;
thence it is that man is enkindled, grows warm, and is en-
flamed, whilst his love is exalted to zeal, or excited to anger
and burning passion. Therefore from this, that spiritual
heat which is love produces natural heat with men, so far as
to enkindle and inflame their faces and limbs, it may be evi-
dent that the fire of the natural sun has existence from no
other source than from the fire of the spiritual sun, which
is Divine love. Now, because the expanse arises from the
centre, and not the reverse, as we said before, and the centre
of life, which is the sun of the angelic heaven, is the Divine
love first proceeding from God, who is in the midst of that
sun; and because from this is the expanse of that centre,
which is called the spiritual world; and because from that
sun existed the sun of the world, and from this, its expanse,
which is called the natural world, it is plain that the uni-
verse was created by God.” After this we departed, and he
accompanied us out of the court of his school, and talked
with us about heaven and hell, and about the Divine auspices
from new sagacity of thought.


62


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 36


THE ESSENCE OF GOD, WHICH IS DIVINE LOVE AND
DIVINE WISDOM.

36. We have distinguished between the esse of God and
the essence of God, because there is a distinction between
the infinity of God and the love of God; and the term infinity
is used in application to the esse of God, and love to the
essence of God; for the esse of God, as said above, is more
universal than the essence of God: in like manner the infinity
is more universal than the love of God; wherefore infinite
becomes an adjective of the essentials and attributes of God,
all which are called infinite; as it is said of the Divine love
that it is infinite, of the Divine wisdom that it is infinite, and
of the Divine power likewise; not that the esse of God existed
before the essence, but because it enters into it as an adjunct,
cohering with, determining, forming, and at the same time
elevating it. But this portion of this chapter, like the former,
shall be divided into articles, as follows: — I. God is love
itself and wisdom itself , and these two make His essence . II.
God is good itself and truth itself , because good is of love and
truth is of wisdom . III. God, because He is love itself and
wisdom itself is life itself , which is life in itself. IV. Love
and wisdom in God make one. V. The essence of love is to
love others out of itself , to desire to be one with them , and to
make them happy from itself. VI. These essentials of the
Divine love were the cause of the creation of the universe , and
they are the cause of its conservation. But of these one by
one.

37. I. God is love itself and wisdom itself , and these two
make His essence. That love and wisdom are the two essen-
tials to which all the infinite things that are in God and pro-
ceed from Him refer themselves, was seen by those of most
ancient times; but the ages following successively, as they
withdrew their minds from heaven and immersed them in


No. 37]


GOD THE CREATOR


63


worldly and corporeal things, could not see it; for they began
not to know what love is in its essence, and thence what wis-
dom is in its essence; not knowing that there cannot be love
abstracted from form, and that love operates in form and by
form. Now because God is the very and the only and thus
the first substance and form, the essence of which is love and
wisdom, and because from Him all things were made that
were made, it follows that He created the universe, with all
things and every thing of it, from love by wisdom; and that
thence the Divine love together with the Divine wisdom is
in all created subjects and in every one. Love, moreover,
is not only the essence which forms all things, but it also
unites and conjoins them, and thus keeps them in connec-
tion when formed. These things may be illustrated by in-
numerable things in the world as by the heat and light from
the sun, which are the two essentials and universals, by
means of which all things and every thing upon the earth
exist and subsist: these are there, because they correspond to
the Divine love and the Divine wisdom; for the heat which
proceeds from the sun of the spiritual world is in its essence
love; and the light thence is in its essence wisdom. They
may also be illustrated by the two essentials and universals
by which human minds exist and subsist, which are the will
and the understanding; for of these two the mind of every
one consists, and the two are and operate in all things and
everything of it. The reason is, that the will is the recep-
tacle and habitation of love, and the understanding of wis-
dom in like manner; therefore the two correspond to the Di-
vine love and the Divine wisdom, from which they originate.
Moreover, the same may be illustrated by the two essentials
and universals by which human bodies exist and subsist,
which are the heart and the lungs; or the systole and diastole
of the heart, and the respiration of the lungs: that these two
operate in all things and every thing there, is known; the rea-
son being, that the heart corresponds to love, and the lungs
to wisdom; which correspondence has been fully demon-


6 4


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 37


strated in the Angelic Wisdom concerning the Divine Love
and Wisdom , published at Amsterdam. That love as the
bridegroom and husband produces or begets all forms, but
by wisdom as the bride and wife, may be proved by innumer-
able things, both in the spiritual and the natural world; this
only is to be observed, that the whole angelic heaven is ar-
ranged into its form and preserved in it from the Divine love
by the Divine wisdom. Those who deduce the creation of
the world from any other source than from the Divine love
by the Divine wisdom, and do not know that those two make
the Divine essence, descend from the sight of reason to the
sight of the eye, and kiss nature as the creator of the uni-
verse, and thence conceive chimeras and bring forth phan-
toms; they think fallacies and reason from them, and their
conclusions are eggs in which are birds of night. Such can-
not be called minds, but eyes and ears without understand-
ing, or thoughts without a soul; they speak of colors as if
they existed without light, of the existence of trees as if
without seed, and of all things of the world as if without
the sun; since they make derivatives primitives, and effects
causes; and so they turn every thing upside-down, and lull
to sleep the powers of reason, and thus see dreams.

38. II. God is good itself and truth itself , because good is
of love y and truth is 0} wisdom. It is universally known that
all things have reference to good and truth, a proof that all
things have their existence from love and wisdom; for all that
proceeds from love is called good, for this is felt, and the en-
joyment by which love manifests itself every one calls good;
but all that which proceeds from wisdom is called truth, for
wisdom consists of nothing but truths, and affects its objects
with the charm of light; and this charm while perceived is
truth from good. Therefore love is the aggregate of all
kinds of goodness, and wisdom the aggregate of all truths;
but both are from God, who is love itself and thence good it-
self, and wisdom itself and thence truth itself. From this


No. 38]


GOD THE CREATOR


65


source there are in the church two essentials, which are called
charity and faith, of which all things and every thing of the
church consist, and which are to be in all things and every
thing of it. The reason is that all the goods of the church
are of charity and are called charity, and all its truths are of
faith and are called faith. The enjoyments of love, which
are also the enjoyments of charity, cause what is good to be
called good; and the charms of wisdom, which are also the
charms of faith, cause what is true to be called true; for en-
joyments and charms of various kinds make their life, and
without life from these, goods and truths are like inanimate
things, and are also unfruitful. But love’s enjoyments are of
two kinds, as are also the charms which appear as of wisdom;
for there are enjoyments of the love of good and enjoyments
of the love of evil, and thence there are charms of the faith of
truth and charms of the faith of falsity. In the subjects in
which they are, those two enjoyments of love, from the sen-
sation of them, are called goods, and those two charms of
faith, from the perception of them, are also called goods; but
because they are in the understanding, they are no other than
truths. They are so called, though they are opposite to
each other, the good of one love being good, and the good of
the other love being evil, and the truth of one faith being true,
and the truth of the other faith being false. But the love the
enjoyment of which is essentially good is like the heat of the
sun, fructifying, vivifying, and operating on a fertile soil, on
fruit trees and fields of corn, and where it operates there is
produced, as it were, a paradise, a garden of Jehovah, and
a land of Canaan; and the charm of its truth is as the light
of the sun in the time of spring, and as light flowing into a
crystal vessel in which are beautiful flowers, from which as
they open breathes forth a fragrant perfume; but the enjoy-
ment of the love of evil is as the heat of the sun, parching,
killing, and operating on barren ground, on noxious plants,
as on thorns and briers; and where it operates there is pro-
duced a desert of Arabia, where are hydras and venomous


66


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 38


serpents; and the charm of its falsity is as the light of the sun
in the time of winter, and as light flowing into a bottle in
which there are little worms swimming in vinegar, and noi-
some reptiles. It should be known that every good forms
itself by truths, and also clothes itself with them, and thus dis-
tinguishes itself from other goods; and also that the goods of
one stock or kind bind themselves into bundles, and clothe
them together, and thus distinguish themselves from others.
That formations are so effected is plain from all things and
every thing in the human body; and that similar formations
are effected in the human mind is evident, because there is a
perpetual correspondence of all things of the mind with all
things of the body. From this it follows that the human
mind is organized inwardly of spiritual substances, and out-
wardly of natural substances, and lastly of material sub-
stances. The mind the enjoyments of whose love are goods
consists inwardly of spiritual substances such as are in heaven,
but the mind the enjoyments of whose love are evils consists
inwardly of spiritual substances such as are in hell: the evils
of the latter are bound into bundles by falsities, and the goods
of the former are bound into bundles by truths. Since there
are such bindings of goods and evils into bundles, therefore
the Lord says, That the tares are to be bound together into
bundles, to be burned, and in like manner all things that
offend (Matt. xiii. 30, 40, 41: John xv. 6).

39. III. God, because He is love itself and wisdom itself , is
life itself, which is life in itself. It is said in John, The Word
was with God , and the Word was God; in Him was life, and
the life was the light of men (i. 1,4). By God there is meant
the Divine love, and by the Word the Divine wisdom; and
Divine wisdom is properly life, and life is properly light which
proceeds from the sun of the spiritual world, in the midst of
which is Jehovah God. Divine love forms life, as fire forms
light. There are two elements in fire, burning and shining;
from its burning proceeds heat, and from its shining proceeds


No. 40]


GOD THE CREATOR


67


light. In like manner, there are two things in love, one to
which the burning of fire corresponds, which is something in-
mostly affecting the will of man; and another to which the
shining of fire corresponds, which is something inmostly af-
fecting the understanding of man. Hence man has love and
intelligence, for, as has been often said above, from the sun of
the spiritual world proceed heat which in its essence is love,
and light which in its essence is wisdom; and those two flow
into all things and every thing of the universe, and affect them
inmostly; and with men into their will and understanding,
which two were created receptacles of the influx, the will the
receptacle of love, and the understanding the receptacle of
wisdom. From this it is manifest that the life of man dwells
in his understanding, and that it is such as his wisdom is, and
that the love of the will modifies it.

40. We also read in John, . 4 $ the Father hath life in Him-
self , so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself (v. 26) ;
by which is meant that as the Divine Itself, which was from
eternity, lives in Itself, so also the Human, which was as-
sumed in time, lives in Itself. Life in itself is the very and
the only life, from which all angels and men live. Human
reason may see this from the light which proceeds from the
sun of the natural world, in that this is not creatable, but
that forms receiving it have been created; for eyes are its re-
cipient forms, and the light flowing in from the sun causes
them to see. It is similar with life, which, as above said, is
light proceeding from the sun of the spiritual world, that it
is not creatable, but that it flows in continually, and as it en-
lightens it also gives life to the understanding of man; con-
sequently that, because light, life, and wisdom are one, wis-
dom is not creatable, and so neither is faith, nor truth, nor
love, nor charity, nor good; but that forms receiving them
have been created: human and angelic minds are those
forms. Let every one, therefore, be cautious how he per-
suades himself that he lives from himself; and also, that he is
wise, believes, loves, perceives truth, and wills and does good


68


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 40


from himself. For as far as any one acquires this persua*
sion, he casts down his mind from heaven to earth, and from
spiritual becomes natural, sensual, and corporeal. Thus
he shuts up the higher regions of his mind, whence he be-
comes blind as to all the things which are of God, of heaven,
and of the church; and then, all that he by chance thinks,
reasons, and says concerning them, is done in foolishness be-
cause in darkness, at the same time that he becomes confi-
dent that they are of wisdom. For when the higher re-
gions of the mind, where the true light of life dwells, are
closed, the region below them opens itself, into which only
the light of the world is admitted. And this light separate
from the light of the higher regions, is a delusive light in
which falsities appear as truths, and truths as falsities, and
reasoning from falsities as wisdom, and from truths as mad-
ness; and then one believes himself to be endued with the
keen sight of an eagle, though he sees the things which are
of wisdom no more than a bat sees in the light of day.

41. IV. Love and wisdom in God make one. Every wise
man in the church knows that all the good of love and char-
ity is from God, and in like manner all the truth of wisdom
and faith; that it is so, human reason may also see if it only
knows that the origin of love and wisdom is from the sun of
the spiritual world, in the midst of which is Jehovah God;
or, what is the 'same, that it is from Jehovah God through
the sun, which is round about Him; for the heat proceeding
from that sun in its essence is love, and the light thence pro-
ceeding in its essence is wisdom: hence it is manifest, as in
clear daylight, that love and wisdom in that origin are one,
and consequently one in God, from whom is the origin of
that sun. This may be illustrated also from the sun of the
natural world, which is pure fire, in that heat proceeds from its
fieriness and light proceeds from its splendor; and thus that
both are in their origin one. But that they are divided in
proceeding is evident from their subjects, some of which re-


No. 41]


GOD THE CREATOR


69


ceive more of heat, and some more of light. This is the case
especially with men; in them the light of life, which is intelli ■
gence, and the heat of life, which is love, are divided; and this
is done because man is to be reformed and regenerated, which
cannot be effected unless the light of life, or intelligence,
teaches him what ought to be willed and loved. It should
however be known that God is continually working for the
conjunction of love and wisdom in man, but that man, unless
he looks to God and believes in Him, continually works for
their division. Therefore, as far as those two, the good of
love or charity and the truth of wisdom or faith, are con-
joined in man, so far man becomes an image of God, and is
elevated to heaven and into heaven where the angels are;
and on the contrary as far as those two are divided by man,
so far he becomes an image of Lucifer and the dragon, and
is cast down from heaven to earth, and then under the earth
into hell. From the conjunction of those two the state of
man becomes like that of a tree in the time of spring, when
the heat conjoins itself equally with the light, whence come
its buds, blossoms, and fruit. But on the other hand from
the division of those two, the state of man becomes as that
of a tree in the time of winter, when the heat recedes from
the light, whence it is stripped and divested of all its foliage.
When spiritual heat, which is love, separates itself from spiri-
tual light, which is wisdom, or, what is the same, charity
from faith, the man becomes like sour or rotting ground,
in which worms are bred; and, if it produces shrubs, their
leaves are covered with lice and are consumed. For the
allurements of the love of evil, which in themselves are lusts,
burst forth, when the understanding, instead of subduing
and restraining, loves, pampers, and cherishes them. In a
word, to divide love and wisdom, or charity and faith, which
two God continually endeavors to join together, is com-
paratively like depriving the face of its red color, when a
death like paleness results; or like taking away the white
from the red, when the face becomes like a firebrand. It is


70


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 41


also like dissolving the marriage tie between two partners
and making the wife to become a harlot, and the husband an
adulterer. For love or charity is as the husband, and wis-
dom or faith is as the wife; and when those two are sepa-
rated, spiritual harlotry and whoredom ensue, which are the
falsification of truth and the adulteration of good.

42. Moreover it should be known that there are three de-
grees of love and wisdom, and hence three degrees of life,
and that the human mind according to these degrees is
formed, as it were, into regions, and that life in the highest
region is in the highest degree, and in the second region in
a lower degree, and in the last region in the lowest degree.
These regions are successively opened in man; the last re-
gion, where life is in the lowest degree, is opened from in-
fancy to childhood, and this by means of knowledges; the
second region, where life is in a higher degree, from child-
hood to youth, and this by means of thoughts from knowl-
edges; and the highest region, where life is in the highest
degree, from youth to early manhood and onward, and this
is effected by perceptions of truths, both moral and spiritual.
It should be further known that the perfection of life con-
sists not in thought, but in perception of truth from the light
of truth. The differences of life with men may be con-
cluded from their perception, for there are some who, as
soon as they hear the truth, perceive that it is truth; these
are represented in the spiritual world by eagles. There are
some who do not perceive truth, but conclude it from con-
firmations, by appearances; and these are represented by
singing birds. There are others who believe a thing to be
true because it has been asserted by a man of authority;
these are represented by magpies. And there are also others
who are not willing, and who are not able, to perceive truth,
but only falsity, for the reason that they are in delusive light,
in which falsity appears as truth, and truth either as some-
thing above the head hid in a thick cloud, or as a meteor,
or as falsity: the thoughts of these are represented by birds of


No. 43]


GOD THE CREATOR


71


night, and their speech by screech-owls. Those among
them who have confirmed their falsities cannot bear to hear
truths; and as soon as any truth strikes the drum of their
ear, they repel it with aversion, just as the stomach when
loaded with bile nauseates and vomits food.

43. V. The essence of love is to love others outside of it-
self , to desire to he one with them } and to make them happy
from itself. Two things make the essence of God, love and
wisdom; but three make the essence of His love — loving
others out of itself, desiring to be one with them, and ma-
king them happy from itself. The same three also make the
essence of His wisdom, because love and wisdom in God
make one, as has been shown above; but love wills these three
and wisdom produces them. The first essential , which is
loving others outside of itself, is known from the love of God
toward the whole human race; and for their sake God loves
all the things which He has created, because they are means
to this end; for he who loves the end also loves the means.
All persons and all things are outside of God, because they
are finite, and God is infinite. The love of God goes and
extends itself, not only to good persons and things, but also
to evil persons and things; consequently not only to thoSe
which are in heaven, but also to those which are in hell; thus
not only to Michael and Gabriel, but also to the devil and
Satan; for God is everywhere, and from eternity to eternity
the same. He says also that He maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on
the unjust (Matt. v. 45). But the reason that evil persons
and things are still evil is in the subjects and objects them-
selves, in that they do not receive the love of God as it is, and
as it is inmostly in them, but as they themselves are; just as
the thorn and the nettle do with the heat of the sun and the
rain of heaven. The second essential of God’s love, which is
desiring to be one with them, is known also from His conjunc-
tion with the angelic heaven, with the church upon earth,


72


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 43


with every one there, and with every good and truth which
enter into and make man and the church. Love also, viewed
in itself, is nothing else than an effort to conjunction; there-
fore that this object of the essence of love might be attained,
God created man into His image and likeness, with which
conjunction may be effected. That the Divine love con-
tinually intends conjunction is manifest from the words of
the Lord, that He wills that they may be one, He in them
and they in Him, and that the love of God may be in them
(John xvii. 21-23, 2 6). The third essential of God’s love,
which is making them happy from itself, is known from the
eternal life, which is blessedness, joy, and happiness without
end, which God gives to those who receive His love in them-
selves; for God, as He is love itself, is also blessedness itself;
for every love breathes forth from itself enjoyment, and the
Divine love breathes forth blessing, joy, and happiness itself
to eternity. Thus God from Himself blesses angels, and also
men after death, which is effected by conjunction with them.

44. That such is the Divine love is recognized from its
sphere, which pervades the universe, and affects every one
according to his state. It especially affects parents, causing
them tenderly to love their children, who are outside of them-
selves, to desire to be one with them, and to wish to make
them happy from themselves. This sphere of Divine love
affects not only the good, but also the evil; and not only men,
but also beasts and birds of every kind. What else does a
mother think of, when she has brought forth her child, than
that she may, as it were, unite herself with it, and provide
for its good ? What other concern has a bird, when she has
hatched her young from the egg, than to cherish them under
her wings, and through their little mouths to put food into
their throats? That dragons and vipers also love their
young is known. This universal sphere affects in a special
manner those who receive that love of God in themselves,
who are those that believe in God and love their neighbor:
charity with them is an image of that love. Friendship


No. 45]


GOD THE CREATOR


73


among those not good also simulates that love; for a friend,
at his table gives to a friend the better things: he kisses and
caresses him, takes him by the hand, and proffers his ser-
vices. The sympathies and the efforts of homogeneous and
similar creatures to conjunction, derive their origin from no
other source. That same Divine sphere operates also into
inanimate things, as into trees and plants, but through the
sun of the world and its heat and light; for the heat enters
them from without, conjoins itself with them, and causes
them to bud, blossom, and bear fruit, in place of the blessed-
ness in animals; the heat does this because it corresponds to
spiritual heat, which is love. Representations of the opera-
tion of this love are also to be seen in various subjects of the
mineral kingdom; types of it are presented in their elevation
to uses, and thence to higher values.

45. From the description of the essence of Divine love, it
may be seen what is the essence of diabolical love; this may
be seen from the opposite. Diabolical love is the love of
self, which is called love, but viewed in itself is hatred, for it
does not love any one outside of itself, nor does it desire to be
conjoined to others that it may do good to them, but only
that it may benefit itself; from its inmost it continually de-
sires to rule over all, and also to possess the goods of all, and
at last to be worshipped as God. This is the reason why
those who are in hell do not acknowledge God, but in place
of gods those who have power above others; thus lower and
higher, or lesser and greater gods, according to the extent of
their power. And because every one there has this at heart,
he also burns with hatred against his god, and the god against
those who are under his power; and he reputes them as vile
slaves, with whom, indeed, he speaks courteously as long as
they adore him, but rages as from fire against others, and
also inwardly or in his heart against his dependents; for the
love of self is the same with the love in robbers, who kiss one
another while they are engaged in robberies, but afterward
burn with the desire of killing to seize one another’s share


74


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 45


of the booty. This love causes its lusts to appear in the dis-
tance in hell where it reigns like various species of wild beasts,
some like foxes and leopards, some like wolves and tigers,
and some like crocodiles and venomous serpents; it causes
the deserts where they live to consist only of heaps of stones
or of naked gravel, with bogs interspersed, in which frogs are
croaking; and causes doleful birds to fly over their huts and
screech. The ochim, tziim, and ijim, which are mentioned
in the prophetic parts of the Word, where the love of ruling
from the love of self is spoken of, are nothing else (Isa. xiii.
21 : Jer. 1 . 39: Ps. lxxiv. 14).

46. VI. These essentials oj the Divine love were the cause
of the creation of the universe , and they are the cause of its
conservation . That those three essentials of the Divine love
were the cause of creation may be clearly seen from an atten-
tive examination of them. That this first , which is loving
others outside of itself, was a cause, is evident from the uni-
verse, which is outside of God, as the world is outside of the
sun, and into which He can extend and in which can exer-
cise His love, and so rest. It is read also that after God had
created the heaven and the earth, He rested; and that this was
the origin of the day of the Sabbath (Gen. ii. 2, 3). That
the second , which is willing to be one with them, was a cause,
is evident from the creation of man into the image and like-
ness of God; by which is meant that man was made a form
to receive love and wisdom from God, so that God can unite
Himself with him, and, for his sake with all things and every
thing of the universe, which are no other than means; for
conjunction with a final cause is also a conjunction with the
mediate causes. That all things were created for the sake
of man is plain also from the book of creation (Gen. i. 28-30).
That the third , which is making them happy from itself, is a
cause, is evident from the angelic heaven, which is provided
for every man who receives the love of God, where the happi-
ness of all is from God alone. Those three essentials of


No. 48]


GOD THE CREATOR


75


God’s love are also the cause of the conservation of the uni-
verse because conservation is perpetual creation, as sub-
sistence is perpetual existence; and the Divine love from
eternity to eternity is the same; thus such as it was in crea-
ting the world, such it is and continues to be in the world
created.

47. From these things rightly perceived it may be seen
that the universe is a work cohering from firsts to lasts, be-
cause it is a work comprising ends, causes, and effects, in
indissoluble connection; and because in all love there is an
end or purpose, and in all wisdom the promotion of an end
by mediate causes, and through them to effects, which are
uses, it follows also that the universe is a work comprising
Divine love, Divine wisdom, and uses, and thus a work alto-
gether cohering from firsts to lasts. That the universe con-
sists of perpetual uses produced by wisdom and hegun by
love, every wise man may see as in a mirror, when he gains
a general idea of the creation of the universe, and in that
views the particulars; for particulars adapt themselves to
their general, and the general disposes them into form so that
they agree. That it is so, will be more fully illustrated in
the following pages.

48. To this will be added this Relation. I once conversed
with two angels, one from the eastern and the other from the
southern heaven. When they perceived that I was medi-
tating upon arcana of wisdom as to love, they said, “ Do you
know any thing about the schools of wisdom in our world ?”
I answered, that I did not yet; and they said, “There are
many; and those who love truths from spiritual affection, or
truths because they are truths, and because through them is
wisdom, come together at a given signal, and discuss and
determine those questions which are of deeper understand-
ing.’ 7 They then took me by the hand, saying, “ Follow us
and you shall see and hear; the signal of a meeting has been
given to-day.’ 7

I was led over a plain to a hill, and behold at the foot of


76


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 48


the hill an avenue of palm-trees, continued even to its top;
we entered it and went up, and on the top or summit of the
hill was seen a grove; and among the trees the raised ground
formed as it were a theatre, within which was a level space,
paved with stones of various colors. Around it in a square
were placed seats, upon which the lovers of wisdom were sit-
ting; and in the middle of the theatre was a table, upon which
lay a paper sealed with a seal. Those who sat on the seats
invited us to seats still vacant; and I answered, “I have been
led hither by two angels that I may see and hear, and not to
take a seat.”

Then the two angels went into the middle of the area to
the table, and loosed the seal of the paper, and read in the
presence of those who were sitting the arcana of wisdom
written on the paper, which they were now to discuss and
unfold. They were written by angels of the third heaven,
and let down upon the table. There were three arcana: The
first , “ What is the image of God, and what the likeness of
God, into which man was created?” The second , “Why is
not man born into the knowledge of any love, when yet beasts
and birds, noble as well as ignoble, are born into the knowl-
edges of all their loves ?” The third , “ What does the tree
of life signify; and what the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil; and what the eating from them ?” Underneath was
written, u Join those three together into one conclusion, and
write it upon a new paper, and lay it upon this table, and we
shall see it; if the opinion when weighed appear equal and
just, to each of you shall be given a reward of wisdom.” The
two angels having read this withdrew and were taken up
into their heavens. And then those who sat upon the seats
began to discuss and unfold the arcana proposed to them;
and they spoke in order; first those who sat at the North, then
those at the West, afterward those at the South, and lastly
those at the East. And they took up the first subject of dis-
cussion, which was, What is the image of God , and what the
likeness of God y into which man was created? And then first


No. 48]


GOD THE CREATOR


77


these words from the book of Creation were read in presence
of all: God said , Let us make man in our image, after our like-
ness; and God created man into His own image; into the
hnage of God created He him (Gen. i. 26, 27). In the day
that God created man in the likeness of God made He him
(Gen. v. 1).

Those who sat at the North spoke first, saying that the im-
age of God and the likeness of God are the two lives breathed
into man by God, which are the life of the will, and the life of
the understanding; for we read, Jehovah God breathed into
the nostrils of Adam the soul of lives , and man was made a
living soul (Gen. ii. 7); by which seems to be meant that
there was breathed into him the will of good and the per-
ception of truth, and thus the soul of lives; and because life
from God was breathed into him, an image and a likeness
signify integrity from love and wisdom, and from justice and
judgment in him. Those who sat at the West favored these
things, adding however this, that the state of integrity
breathed into him by God is continually breathed into every
man after him; but that it is in man as in a receptacle, and
that man, as he is a receptacle, is an image and likeness of
God.

Afterward the third in order, who were those who sat at
the South, said, “The image of God and the likeness of
God are two distinct things, but united in man from creation;
and we see as from a certain inner light, that the image of
God may be destroyed by man, but not the likeness of God.
This appears as through a lattice from this, that Adam re-
tained the likeness of God after he had lost the image of God;
for it is read after the curse, Behold the man is become as one
of us } by knowing good and evil (Gen. iii. 22). And after-
ward he is called the likeness of God, and not the image of
God (Gen. v. 1). But let us leave to our associates who sit
at the East and so are in superior light, to say what is prop-
erly an image of God, and what is properly a likeness of
God.”


78


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 48


And then, after there was silence, those sitting at the East
arose from their seats and looked up to the Lord; and after-
ward they sat down again upon their seats and said, that an
image of God is a receptacle of God; and because God is love
itself and wisdom itself, an image of God is the reception of
love and wisdom from God in it; but that a likeness of God
is a perfect likeness and a full appearance as if love and wis-
dom were in man, and thence altogether as his; for man is not
sensible but that he loves from himself and is wise from him-
self; or that he wills good and understands truth from him-
self; when yet none of this whatever is from himself, but
from God. God alone loves from Himself and is wise from
Himself, because God is love itself and wisdom itself. The
likeness or appearance that love and wisdom, or good and
truth, are in man as his, causes that man may be man, and
that he can be conjoined to God, and thus live to eternity;
from which it flows that man is man from this, that he can
will good and understand truth altogether as from himself,
and still know and believe that it is from God; for as he
knows and believes this, God puts His image in man; it
would be otherwise, if he should believe that it is from him-
self and not from God. When these things were said, there
came upon them a zeal from the love of truth, from which
they spoke these words: “How can man receive any thing of
love and wisdom, and retain it and reproduce it, unless he
feels it as his own ? And how can conjunction with God be
given by means of love and wisdom, unless there has been
given to man some reciprocal of conjunction ? For without
a reciprocal no conjunction is possible, and the reciprocal of
conjunction is that man loves God, and does those things
which are of God, as from himself, and yet believes that it is
from God. Also, how can man live to eternity, unless he be
conjoined to the eternal God? consequently, how can man
be man, without that likeness in him ?” All favored these
words, and said, Let a conclusion be made from them; and
it was made thus: “ Man is a receptacle of God, and a recep-


No. 48]


GOD THE CREATOR


79


tacle of God is an image of God; and because God is love
itself and wisdom itself, man is a receptacle of these; and a
receptacle becomes an image of God according to the recep-
tion.” Also this: “Man is a likeness of God from this, that
he feels in himself that the things which are from God are in
him as his; but still, from that likeness he is so far an image
of God as he acknowledges that love and wisdom, or good
and truth, are not his in him, and therefore are not from him,
but are in God only, and thence are from God.”

After this, they took up the second subject of discussion,
Why man is not born into the knowledge 0} any love , when
yet beasts and birds , noble as well as ignoble , are born into the
knowledges 0} all their loves. First they confirmed the truth
of the proposition from various things; as concerning man,
that he is born into no knowledge, not even into the knowl-
edge of marriage love; and they inquired and heard from
investigators that an infant does not even know the breast of
its mother from any connate knowledge, but that it learns this
from its mother or nurse by being put to the breast; and that
it only knows how to suck, and that it has imbibed this knowl-
edge from a continual suction in the mother’s womb; and that
afterward it does not know how to take a step, nor to articu-
late sound into any human' word, nor yet to sound the affec-
tions of love, as beasts do; further, that it knows not what
food is suitable for it, as beasts do, but that it lays hold of
whatever comes in its way, whether clean or unclean, and
puts it into its mouth. The investigators said that man with-
out instruction knows nothing at all about the modes of lov-
ing the sex, and that not even maidens and young men know
any thing of this without instruction from others. In a word,
man is bom corporeal as a worm, and remains corporeal un-
less he learns from others to know, understand, and be wise.
After this they proved that animals, noble as well as ignoble,
as the beasts of the earth, the fowls of the air, reptiles, fishes,
and the little creatures called insects, are bom into all the
knowledges of the loves of their life; as into all things of


8o


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 48


nourishment, of habitation, of the love of the sex and pro-
lification, and of the education of their young. These things
they confirmed by wonders which they recalled to memory
from what they had seen, heard, and read in the natural
world in which they once lived, and in which there are not
representative but real beasts. After the truth of the propo-
sition was thus established, they applied their minds to in-
vestigate and discover the causes by means of which they
might unfold and lay open this mystery; and all said that
those things could not but exist from the Divine wisdom in
order that that man may be man, and beast may be beast;
and that thus the imperfection of man’s nativity is his
perfection, and the perfection of a beast’s nativity is its
imperfection.

Then those on the North began first to open their minds,
and they said, that man was born without knowledges, that
he might be able to receive them all; but if he were born into
knowledges, he would not be able to receive any except those
into which he was born, and then he would not be able to
make any his own; which they illustrated by this compari-
son: “ Man when first born is like ground in which no seeds
have been planted, but which can yet receive all, and bring
them forth, and cause them to bear fruit. But a beast is like
ground already sown and filled with grass and herbs, which
receives no other seeds than those which have been sown;
and if others were sown they would be choked. For this
reason man is many years in coming to his growth, during
which he may be cultivated like the ground, and bring forth
as it were grain of every kind, flowers, and trees; but a beast
comes to its growth in a few years, during which it can be
cultivated for no other things than those which are born with
it.”

Afterward those on the West spoke and said that man is
not born knowledge, like a beast, but is born a faculty and
an inclination, a faculty for knowing and an inclination for
loving; and that he is born a faculty not only for knowing,


No. 48]


GOD THE CREATOR


Si


but also for understanding and for being wise; and also that
he is born a most perfect inclination not only for loving those
things which are of himself and the world, but also those
which are of God and of heaven; consequently, that man is
born an organism which barely lives by the external senses,
and only obscurely, and by no internal senses, to the intent
that he may successively live and become a man; first natu-
ral, afterward rational, and at length spiritual; which would
not be the case if he were born into knowledges and loves as
beasts are; for the knowledges and affections of love which
are bom with one, limit the progress; but mere faculties and
inclinations born with one, limit nothing; therefore man may
be perfected in knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom to
eternity.

Those on the South took up the subject and declared their
opinion, saying that it is impossible for man to derive any
knowledge from himself, but he must take it frqm others,
since no knowledge is connate with him; and as he cannot
derive any knowledge from himself, so neither can he derive
any love, since where there is no knowledge there is no love;
knowledge and love are inseparable companions; they can
no more be separated than will and understanding, or affec-
tion and thought, yea, no more than essence and form; as,
therefore, man receives knowledge from others, so love ad-
joins itself to it as its companion. The universal love which
adjoins itself is the love of knowing, and afterward of under-
standing and of being wise; man alone and no beast has these
loves, and they flow in from God. We agree with our asso-
ciates from the West that man is not born into any love, and
thence not into any knowledge; but that he is born only into
an inclination for loving, and thence into a faculty for re-
ceiving knowledge, not from himself, but from others, that
is, through others: we say, through others, because neither
have these received any thing from themselves, but originally
from God. We agree also with our associates at the North,
that man when first born is like ground in which no seeds


82


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 48


have been planted, but in which all seeds, as well noble as
ignoble, can be planted. This is why man was called homo
from humus , the ground; and also Adam from Adama , which
too means ground. To this we add that beasts are born into
natural loves, and hence into the knowledges corresponding
to them; but that still from the knowledges they do not know,
think, and understand any thing, nor are wise; but that they
are led to them from their loves, almost as blind men are led
through the streets by dogs, being blind as to the understand-
ing, or rather they are like persons walking in sleep, who do
what they do from blind knowledge, while the understand-
ing is asleep.

Lastly those on the East spoke and said, “We assent to
those things which our brothers have spoken, that man
knows nothing from himself, but from others and through
others, that he may learn and acknowledge that all things
which he knows, understands, and is wise in, are from God;
and that man cannot otherwise be born and begotten of
God, and become an image and likeness of Him. For he
becomes an image of God by acknowledging and believing
that he has received and receives all the good of love and
charity and all the truth of wisdom and faith from God, and
nothing at all from himself: and he is a likeness of God by
feeling those things in himself as if from himself; and he feels
this, because he is not born into knowledges, but receives
them; and the receiving appears to him as from himself.
To feel thus is also given to man by God, that he may be a
man, and not a beast; since by this, that he wills, thinks,
loves, knows, understands, and is wise, as from himself, he
receives knowledges, and exalts them into intelligence, and
by their uses into wisdom; thus God conjoins man to Him-
self, and man conjoins himself to God. These things could
not have been done unless it had been provided by God that
man should be born in utter ignorance.”

After this statement all desired that a conclusion should
be made from the things discussed; and it was made thus:


No. 48]


GOD THE CREATOR


83


Man is bom into no knowledge in order that he may be able
to come into all knowledge, and advance into intelligence,
and through this into wisdom; and man is born into no love
in order that he may come into all love by applications of
knowledges from intelligence, and into love to God through
love toward the neighbor, and thus be conjoined to God, and
by that means become a man and live to eternity.

After this they took the paper, and read the third subject
for investigation, which was. What does the tree 0} life sig-
nify; what the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; and
what the eating from them? And they all asked that those
who were from the East would unfold this arcanum, because
it is of deeper understanding, and because those who are
from the East are in flamy light, that is, in the wisdom of
love; and this wisdom is meant by the garden of Eden, in
which those two trees were placed. And they answered,
“We will speak; but because man does not take any thing
from himself, but from God, we will speak from Him, but
still from ourselves as if from ourselves.” And then they
said, “ A tree signifies man, and its fruit the good of life-;
hence by the tree of life is signified man living from God; and
because love and wisdom, and charity and faith, or good and
truth, make the life of God in man, by the tree of life is sig-
nified the man in whom are those things from God, and who
has thence eternal life. The like is signified by the tree of
life, from which it will be given to eat, in the Apocalypse (ii.
7, xxii. 2. 14). By the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil is signified the man believing that he lives from himself,
and not from God; thus that love and wisdom, charity and
faith, that is, good and truth, are in man his, and not God’s;
believing this, because he thinks and wills, and speaks and
acts, in all likeness and appearance as from himself. And
because man thence persuades himself that he is also God,
therefore the serpent said, God doth know that , in the day ye
eat 0} the fruit of that tree , your eyes will be opened , and ye will
be as God , knowing good and evil (Gen. iii. 5). By eating


84


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 48


from those trees is signified reception and appropriation, by
eating from the tree of life, the reception of eternal life, and
by eating from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
the reception of damnation. By the serpent is meant the
devil, as to the love of self and the pride of one’s own intelli-
gence; and this love is the possessor of that tree, and the men
who are in pride from this love are those trees.

“They are therefore in enormous error who believe that
Adam was wise and did good from himself, and that this was
his state of integrity; when yet Adam was himself cursed on
account of that belief, for this is signified by eating of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil; wherefore he then fell
from the state of integrity which he had from believing that
he was wise and did good from God and nothing from him-
self, for this is meant by eating from the tree of life. The
Lord alone, when He was in the world, was wise from Himself
and did good from Himself, because the Divine Itself was in
Him and was His from the nativity; therefore also He be-
came Redeemer and Saviour by His own power.” From all
these things they drew this conclusion, that “ By the tree of
life, and by the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and
by eating from them, is meant that life to man is God in
him, and that he thus has heaven and eternal life; and that
death to man is the persuasion and belief that God is not
life to man, but that man is life to himself, whence he has
hell and eternal death, which is damnation.”

After this they looked at the paper which was left by the
angels upon the table, and saw written underneath, Join
the three together into one opinion. And then they collected
them, and saw that the three cohered in one series, and that
the series or opinion is this: Man was created to receive love
and wisdom from God, and yet in all likeness as from him-
self, and this for the sake of reception and conjunction; and
therefore man is not bom into any love, nor into any knowl-
edge, nor even into any power of loving and being wise from
himself. Therefore, if he ascribes all the good of love and


No. 49]


GOD THE CREATOR.


*5


all the truth of wisdom to God, he becomes a living man ; but
if he ascribes them to himself, he becomes a dead man. This
they wrote on a new paper and laid it upon the table; and lo,
suddenly the angels were present in a bright cloud, and car-
ried the paper away into heaven; and after it was read there,
those who sat upon the seats heard thence the words, “Well,
well, well.” And forthwith there appeared one from heaven
as if flying, who had as it were two wings about the feet and
two about the temples, bringing the rewards, which were
robes, caps, and wreaths of laurel. And he alighted, and
gave to those who sat at the North robes of an opaline color;
to those at the West, robes of a scarlet color; to those at the
South, caps, the borders of which were adorned with bands
of gold and pearls, and tbe higher parts of the left side with
diamonds cut in the form of flowers; but to those at the East
he gave wreaths of laurel in which wtere rubies and sapphires.
And they all went home with joy from the school of wisdom,
decorated with these rewards.

THE OMNIPOTENCE, OMNISCIENCE, AND OMNIPRESENCE
OF GOD.

49. The Divine love and the Divine wisdom have been
treated of and it was shown that these two are the Divine
essence. We come now to treat of the omnipotence, omni-
science, and omnipresence of God, because these three pro-
ceed from the Divine love and the Divine wisdom, scarce
otherwise than the power and presence of the sun are in this
world, and in the whole and every part of it, by means of
light and heat. Also, the heat from the sun of the spiritual
world, in the midst of which is Jehovah God, is in its essence
Divine love, and the light thence is in its essence Divine
■wisdom; from which it is manifest that as infinity, immeas-
urableness, and eternity pertain to the Divine Esse y so om-
nipotence, omniscience, and omnipresence pertain to the Di-
vine essence. But as those three universals predicable of the


86


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 49


Divine essence have not hitherto been understood, because
their progression according to their ways, which are the laws
of order, has been unknown, it is needful to present them
here by distinct articles, as follows: — I. Omnipotence , omni-
science , and omnipresence belong to the Divine wisdom from
the Divine love. II. There cannot be knowledge of God’s
omnipotence , omniscience , and omnipresence , unless it be
known what order is, and unless these things belonging to it
be known, namely, that God is order, and that at the creation
He introduced order into the universe, and into all and every
part of it. III. The omnipotence of God in the universe, and
in the whole and every part of it, proceeds and operates accord-
ing to the laws of His order. IV. God is omniscient, that is,
perceives, sees, and knows all things and every thing, even to
the most minute, which is done according to order; and thence
also what is done contrary to order. V. God is omnipresent
from the firsts to the lasts of His order . VI. Man was created
a form of Divine order. VII. Man is so far in power against
evil and falsity from the Divine omnipotence, and so far in
wisdom concerning good and truth from the Divine omni-
science, and so far in God from the Divine omnipresence, as
he lives according to Divine order. But these articles are to
be unfolded one by one.

50. I. Omnipotence, omniscience, and omnipresence belong
to the Divine wisdom from the Divine love . That omnip-
otence, omniscience, and omnipresence belong to the Divine
wisdom from the Divine love, but not to the Divine love by
means of the Divine wisdom, is an arcanum from heaven,
which has not hitherto given its light in the undertsanding
of any one; because no one has yet known what love is in its
essence, nor what wisdom thence is in its essence, and still
less anything of the influx of one into the other; which is,
that love, with all things and every thing of it, flows into
wisdom, and resides in it as a king in his kingdom, or as a
master in his house, and relinquishes all the government of


No, 51]


GOD THE CREATOR


87


justice to its judgment; and, because justice is of love and
judgment is of wisdom, it relinquishes all the government of
love to its wisdom. But this arcanum will receive additional
light in what follows; in the mean time let it stand as a canon.
That God is omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent, by
means of the wisdom of His love, is also meant by these words
in John: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God , and the Word was God. All things were made by
Him , and without Him was not any thing made that was
made . In Him was lije , and the UJe was the light of men;
and the world was made by Him; and the Word was made
flesh (i. 1, 3, 4, 10, 14). By the Word is there meant the Di-
vine truth, or what amounts to the same, the Divine wisdom;
therefore it is also called life and light; and life and light are
no other than wisdom.

51. Since in the Word justice is predicated of love, and
judgment of wisdom, some passages shall be adduced to
prove that the government of God is effected in the world by
means of those two as follows: O Jehovah , Justice and Judg-
ment are the support of Thy throne (Ps. Ixxxix. 15). Let him
that glorieth , glory in this , that Jehovah doeth Judgment and
Justice in the earth (Jer. ix. 24). Let Jehovah be exalted ,
because He hath filled Zion with Judgment and Justice (Isa.
xxxiii. 5). Let Judgment run down as water, and Justice as
a mighty stream (Amos v. 24). Thy Justice , O Jehovah , is
like the mountains 0} God, Thy Judgments are as a great
deep (Ps. xxxvi. 6). Jehovah will bring forth thy Justice as
the light, and thy Judgment as the noonday (Ps. xxxvii. 6).
Jehovah shall judge His people in Justice, and His poor in
Judgment (Ps. lxxii. 2). When I shall have learned the
Judgments 0} thy Justice. Seven times a day do I praise
Thee because of the Judgments of Thy Justice (Ps. cxix. 7,
164). I will betroth thee unto Me in Justice and Judgment
(Hosea ii. 19). Zion shall be redeemed in Judgment, and her
converts in Justice (Isa. i. 27). He shall sit upon the throne
of David, and upon his kingdom , to establish it in Judgment


88


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 51


and Justice (Isa. ix. 7). I will raise unto David a righteous
Branch , who shall reign as King , and shall do Judgment and
Justice in the earth (Jer. xxiii. 5; xxxiii. 15). And in other
places it is said that they ought to do Justice and Judgment
(as in Isa. i. 21; v. 16; lviii. 2: Jer. iv. 2; xxii. 3, 13, 15: Ezek.
xviii. 5; xxxiii. 14, 16, 19: Amos vi. 12: Micah vii. 9: Deut.
xxxiii. 21: John xvi. 8, 10, 11).

52. II. There can be no knowledge of God's omnipotence ,
omniscience , and omnipresence , unless it be known what order
is, and unless these things belonging to it be known, namely,
that God is order, and that at the creation He introduced order
into the universe, and into the whole and every part of it. How
many and how great absurdities have crept into the minds
of men, and hence through the heads of innovators into the
church, in consequence of their not understanding the order
into which God created the universe and all things and each
within it, will be evident from the bare mention of them in
the following pages. But here we will first open the subject
of order by a general definition of it. Order is the quality
of the disposition , determination, and activity of the parts,
substances, or entities which make the form , whence is the
state; the perfection of which is produced by wisdom from its
love, or the imperfection of which is hatched out by insanity
of reason from cupidity. In this definition substance, form,
and state are mentioned; and by substance we at the same
time mean form, because every substance is a form; and the
quality of the form is its state, the perfection or imperfec-
tion of which results from the order. But these things, be-
cause they are metaphysical, cannot but be in darkness,
which however will be dispersed in what follows by applica-
tion to examples, that will illustrate the subject.

53. God is order because He is substance itself and form
itself; substance, because all things which subsist existed and
exist from Him; form, because all the quality of substances
arose and arises from Him, and quality is derived from no


No. 54]


GOD THE CREATOR


8 9


other source than from form. Now, because God is the
very and the only and the first substance and form, and
at the same time the very and the only love, and the very
and the only wisdom, and because wisdom from love makes
form, and the state and quality of this is according to the
order therein, it follows that God is order itself, and that
from Himself He introduced order both into the whole uni-
verse, and also into each and every part of it, and that He
introduced most perfect order because all things which He
created were good, as is read in the book of Creation. It
will be demonstrated in its proper place that evils began to
exist at the same time with hell, thus after creation. But
now to such things as more readily enter, more clearly en-
lighten, and more gently affect the understanding.

54. The quality of the order into which the universe was
created, cannot however be fully explained but by many
pages. Some sketch of it will be presented in the following
proposition concerning creation. It is to be held that the
things in the universe were all and each created into their
orders, so that they may subsist each one by itself, and that
from the beginning they were so created that they may con-
join themselves with the order of the universe, to the intent
that the particular orders may subsist in the universal, and
thus make one. But to refer to some examples: — Man was
created into his order, and also every particular part of him
into its order; as the head and the body, each into its order;
the heart, the lungs, the liver, the pancreas, the stomach,
into their orders; every organ of motion, which is called a
muscle, into its order; and every organ of sense, as the eye,
the ear, the tongue, each respectively into its order; nay,
there is not the smallest artery or fibril which was not created
into its order; and yet these innumerable parts conjoin them-
selves with his common order, and so insert themselves in
it that all together make one. The case is similar with
other things, the bare mention of which is sufficient for illus-
tration. Every beast of the earth, every bird of the air, every


90


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 54


fish of the sea, every reptile, nay, every least one, even to the
moth, has been created into its own order; in like manner,
every tree of forest and orchard, every shrub and plant, into
its order; and moreover every stone and every mineral, even
to every particle of the dust of the earth, into its order.

55. Who does not see that there is not an empire, king-
dom, dukedom, republic, state, or family, which is not estab-
lished by laws, which make the order and thus the form of
its government ? In each of them the laws of justice are in
the highest place, political laws in the second, and economic
laws in the third: if these are compared with man, the laws
of justice make the head, political laws the body, and eco-
nomic laws the garments; therefore these also, like the gar-
ments, may be changed. But as regards the order into
which the church has been established by God, it is this:
that God should be in all things and every thing of it; and
the neighbor toward whom order is to be exercised. The
laws of that order are as many as there are truths in the
Word; the laws which relate to God will make its head, the
laws which relate to the neighbor will make its body, and the
ceremonies will make the garments; for unless these con-
tained the truths in their order, it would be as if the body
were stripped naked, and exposed to the heat in summer and
to the cold in winter; or as if the walls and roof should be
removed from a temple, and thus the sacred repository, the
altar, and the pulpit should stand without protection, ex-
posed to all manner of violence.

56. III. The omnipotence 0 j God, as well in the universe
as in the whole and every part 0} it, proceeds and operates
according to the laws oj His order . God is omnipotent, be-
cause He has all power from Himself, and all others have
power from Him. His power and His will are one, and be-
cause He wills nothing but what is good, therefore He can
do nothing but what is good. In the spiritual world, no one
can do any thing contrary to his will; this they derive there


NO. 57 J GOD THE CREATOR 9 1

from God, whose power and will are one. God also is good
itself; therefore, while He does good, He is in Himself and
cannot go out of Himself. From this it is manifest that His
omnipotence proceeds and operates within the sphere of the
extension of good, which is infinite; for this sphere from the
inmost fills the universe and all things and every thing therein
and from the inmost it governs those things which are with-
out, as far as they conjoin themselves according to their
orders; and if they do not conjoin themselves, still it sus-
tains them, and with all effort labors to bring them into order,
in harmony with the universal order in which God is in His
omnipotence, and according to which He acts; and if this
is not effected, they are cast out from Him, where neverthe-
less He sustains them from the inmost. From this it is evi-
dent that the Divine omnipotence can by no means go out
from itself to the contact of any thing evil, nor promote it
from itself, for evil turns itself away; thence it comes about
that evil is entirely separated from Him and cast into hell;
between which and heaven, where He is, there is a great gulf.
From these few things it may be seen how delirious they are
who think, still more they who believe, and yet more they
who teach, that God can condemn any one, curse any one,
cast any one into hell, predestine the soul of any one to eternal
death, avenge injuries, be angry, or punish. He cannot even
turn away His face from man and look at him with a hard
countenance; such things are contrary to His essence, and
what is contrary to this is contrary to Himself.

57. It is at this day a prevailing opinion that the omnip-
otence of God is like the absolute power of a king in the world
who can at his pleasure do whatever he wills, absolve and con-
demn whom he pleases, make the guilty innocent, declare the
faithless faithful, exalt the unworthy and undeserving above
the worthy and deserving: nay, that he can under whatever
pretext deprive his subjects of their goods, and sentence them
to death; with other such things. From this absurd opinion,
faith, and doctrine concerning the Divine omnipotence, as


92


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 57


many falsities, fallacies, and chimeras have flowed into the
church, as there are subjects, divisions, and derivations of
faith therein ; and as many more may yet flow in as pitchers
might be filled with water from a large lake, or as serpents
that creep out of their holes and bask in the sunshine in the
desert of Arabia. What need is there of more than two
words, omnipotence and faith; and then to spread before
the people conjectures, fables, and trifles, as many as occur
to the senses of the body ? For reason is banished from them
both; and when reason is banished, in what does the thought
of man excel the reason of a bird that flies over his head; or
what then is the spiritual, which man has above the beasts,
but something like the effluvia in the dens of beasts, which
is agreeable to the wild beasts there, but not to man, unless
he be like them ? If the Divine omnipotence were extended
to do evil as well as good, what would be the distinction be-
tween God and the devil ? Would there be any but such as
is between two monarchs, one of whom is a king and at the
same time a tyrant, and the other a tyrant whose power has
been restrained, so that he is not to be called a king ? or that
between two shepherds, one of whom is permitted to act the
part of a sheep and that of a leopard also, while to the other
this double part is not permitted? Who cannot know that
good and evil are opposites, and that if God from His omnip^
otence could will both the one and the other, and from willing
do them, He could do nothing at all ? Thus He would have
no power, much less omnipotence. This Would be as if two
wheels with opposite motion should mutually act against
each other, from which reaction both wheels would stop and
have no motion at all; or like a ship in a current driving it
contrary to its course, which unless it should rest at anchor
would be carried away and lost; or like a man having two
wills opposing each other, of which while one is acting, the
other must necessarily be at rest; for if both should act at
once, delirium or vertigo would seize his mind.

58. If God’s omnipotence were, according to the faith at


No. 58]


GOD THE CREATOR


93


this day, absolute for doing evil as well as good, would it not
be possible, nay, easy, for God to elevate all hell into heaven,
and convert devils and satans into angels, and cleanse every
sinner on earth from his sins in a moment, renew, sanctify,
and regenerate him, and from a child of wrath make a child
of grace, that is, justify him? which would be done merely
by the application and imputation of the righteousness of
His Son. But God from His omnipotence cannot do this,
because it is contrary to the laws of His order in the universe,
and at the same time contrary to the laws of order appointed
for every man, which are, that conjunction should be mutual,
on the part of both; that this is so, will be seen in what fol-
lows in this work. From this absurd opinion and faith con-
cerning God’s omnipotence, it would result that God could
convert every man-goat into a man-sheep, and of His good
pleasure remove him from His left to His right side; also,
that He could of His good pleasure change the spirits of the
dragon into angels of Michael, and that He could give the
eagle’s sight to a man whose understanding is like that of
a mole; in a word, make a man-dove out of a man-owl.
These things God cannot do, because they are contrary to
the laws of His order, though He continually wills and en-
deavors to effect them. If He could have done such things,
He would not have permitted Adam to hearken to the ser-
pent, and take fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, and put it to his mouth; if He could have done so,
He would not have permitted Cain to kill his brother, David
to number the people, Solomon to build temples for idols, and
the kings of Judah and Israel to profane the temple, as they
did so many times; nay, if He could have done so, He would
have saved the whole human race without exception through
the redemption of His Son, and would have extirpated all
hell. The ancient gentiles ascribed such omnipotence to
their gods and goddesses; whence arose their fabulous stories,
as of Deucalion and Pyrrha, that the stones thrown behind
them became men and women; of Apollo, that he changed


94


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 58


Daphne into a laurel; of Diana, that she changed a hunter
into a stag; and that another of their gods turned the virgins
of Parnassus into magpies. There is at this day a similar be-
lief concerning the Divine omnipotence, from which so many
fanatical and thus heretical opinions have been introduced
into the world, in every country where there is any religion.

59. IV. God is omniscient , that is , perceives , sees, and
knows all things and every thing , even to the most minute,
which is done according to order ; and hence also what is done
contrary to order. God is omniscient, that is, perceives, sees,
and knows all things, because He is wisdom itself and light
itself; and wisdom itself perceives all things, and light itself
sees all things. That God is wisdom itself has been shown
above; that He is light itself is because He is the sun of the
angelic heaven, which enlightens the understanding of all,
both angels and men; for, as the eye is illumined by the
light of the natural sun, so the understanding is illumined by
the light of the spiritual sun. Nor is it merely illumined,
but it is also filled with intelligence, according to the love of
receiving it, since this light in its essence is wisdom. Hence
in David it is said that God dwelleth in light inaccessible;
and in the Apocalypse, that in the New Jerusalem they have
no need of a candle, because the Lord God giveth them light;
and in John that the Word which was with God, and was
God, is the Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world. By the Word is meant the Divine wisdom. And
thus angels, in the degree that they are in wisdom, are in
brilliancy of light; and hence also it is that in the Word
where light is named wisdom is meant.

60. God perceives, sees, and knows all things, even to the
most minute, which are done according to order, because
order is universal from the least single parts; for the single
parts all taken together are called a universal, as particu-
lars taken together are called a general; and a universal
together with all its single parts is a work cohering as one,


No. 61]


GOD THE CREATOR


95


so that one part cannot be touched and affected without
some sense of it rebounding to all the rest. It is from this
quality of order in the universe that there is something
similar in all created things in the world; but this will be
illustrated by comparisons taken from visible things. In
the whole man there are generals and particulars, and the
generals involve the particulars therein, and they join them-
selves togeher by such a connection that one belongs to
another. This comes about by there being a general wrap-
ping about every member there, which insinuates itself into
every part therein, so that they make one in every office and
use. For example, the sheath of every muscle enters among
its several moving fibres, and clothes them from itself; in
like manner the wrappings of the liver, the pancreas, and the
spleen, enter into all the particular parts within; in like
manner the coating of the lungs, which is called the pleura,
enters into their interior parts; and in like manner the peri-
cardium, into every part of the heart; and the peritonaeum
generally, by anastomoses with the coats of all the viscera;
in like manner the meninges of the brain, by threads emitted
from them, enter into all the underlying little glands, and
through these into all the fibres, and through these into all
parts of the body; and thereby the head from the brains
governs all things and every thing put beneath it. These
things are adduced merely for the purpose that from visible
things some idea may be formed how God perceives, sees,
and knows all things, even to the most minute, which are
done according to order.

61. God from the things which are of order perceives,
knows, and sees all things and every thing, even to the most
minute, which are done contrary to order, because God does
not hold man in evil, but withholds him from evil; thus He
does not lead him on, but strives with him. From the per-
petual striving, struggling, resistance, repugnance, and re-
action of evil and falsity against His good and truth, thus
against Himself, He perceives both their quantity and qual-


96


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 61


ity. This follows from the omnipresence of God in all
things and each of His order, and at the same time from
His omniscience of all things and every thing there; compar-
atively, as he who has an ear for music and harmony accu-
rately notices every discordant and unharmonious sound
as soon as it enters, with the extent and nature of the dis-
cord; in like manner he whose senses are in their enjoy-
ment, notices the intrusion of what is undelightful; or as
he whose sight rests on a beautiful object sees it distinctly
while any thing ugly is beside it; and so painters are apt to
place an ugly face near a beautiful one. It is similar with
good and truth while evil and falsity strive against them;
when these are distinctly perceived from their opposites;
for every one who is in good can perceive what is evil, and
he who is in truth can see what is false. The reason is that
good is in the heat of heaven and truth in its light, but evil
is in the cold of hell and falsity in its darkness; which ma}
be illustrated by this, that the angels of heaven can see what-
ever is done in hell and what monsters are there; but, on
the other hand, the spirits of hell cannot see any thing at all
that is done in heaven, and not even the angels, any more
than a blind man, or than the eye looking into mere air or
ether. Those whose understandings are in the light of wis-
dom are like those who at noonday stand upon a mountain
and see clearly all things that are below; and those who are
in still higher light are comparatively like those who through
telescopes see the objects around and below them as if they
were present; but those who are in the delusive light of
hell, from the confirming of falsities, are like those who stand
upon the same mountain in the time of night with lanterns
in their hands, and see nothing but the nearest objects, and
the forms of these indistinctly, and their colors confusedly.
A man who is in some light of truth and yet in evil of life,
while he is in the enjoyment of his love of evil, does not at
first see truths otherwise than as a bat sees the linen hanging
in a garden, to which it flies as to its place of refuge; and


No. 63]


GOD THE CREATOR


97


afterward the man becomes as a bird of night, and at length
as an owl; and then he becomes like a chimney-sweeper
clinging to a smoky chimney, who when he raises his eyes
upward sees the sky through the smoke, and when he looks
downward sees the fire from which the smoke arises.

62. It is to be observed that the perception of opposites
differs from the perception of relatives; for the opposite to
a thing is what is outside of it and contrary to it, since an
opposite takes its rise when one thing entirely ceases to be
any thing, and another thing rises up with the effort of coun-
teracting the former, as a wheel acting against a wheel, or a
stream against a stream; but relatives belong to the dispo-
sition of many and various things into suitable and har-
monious order, as precious stones of divers colors in the
stomacher of a queen, or flowers of different colors in a
garland, to be pleasing to the sight. There are, therefore,
relatives in each opposite, in good as well as in evil, and in
truth as well as in falsity, thus in heaven as well as in hell;
but the relatives in hell are all opposite to the relatives in
heaven. Now, because God perceives and sees, and thus
knows all the relatives in heaven, from the order in which
He is, and thereby perceives, sees, and knows all the oppo-
site relatives in hell, as follows from what was said above, it
is plain that God is omniscient in hell as well as in heaven,
and likewise among men in the world; thus that He per-
ceives, sees, and knows their evils and falsities from the good
and the truth in which He is, and which in their essence are
Himself; for it is said — If I ascend into heaven , Thou art
there; if I lay me down in hell , behold Thou art there (Ps.
cxxxix. 8) ; and in another place, If they dig through into hell ,
thence shall My hand take them (Amos ix. 2).

63. V. God is omnipresent from the firsts to the lasts of
His order. God is omnipresent from the firsts to the lasts
of His order, by means of the heat and light from the sun of
the spiritual world, in the midst of which He is. By means


9 8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 63


of this sun He produced order, and from it He sends forth
heat and light, which pervade the universe from firsts to its
lasts, and produce the life of men and every animal, and also
the vegetable life in every germ upon the earth; and those
two flow into all and every thing, and cause every subject to
live and grow, according to the order impressed upon them
from creation; and because God is not extended, and yet
fills all the extenses of the universe, He is omnipresent. That
God is in all space without space, and in all time without
time, and that therefore the universe as to essence and order
is in the fulness of God, has been elsewhere shown ; and be-
cause it is so, by omnipresence He perceives all things, by
omniscience He provides all things, and by omnipotence He
operates all things. Thus it is manifest that omnipresence,
omniscience, and omnipotence make one, or that one implies
another, and thus that they cannot be separated.

64. Divine omnipresence may be illustrated by the won-
derful presence of angels and spirits in the spiritual world.
In that world, because there is no space but only appearance
of space, an angel or a spirit may in a moment become pres-
ent to another, provided he comes into a similar affection of
love and thence similar thought, for these two make the
appearance of space. That such is the presence of all there,
was made manifest to me from this, that I could see inhabi-
tants of Africa and of India there very near, though they are
so many miles apart on earth; and even that I could become
present to those who are in other planets of this system, and
also to those who are in the planets of other solar systems.
By virtue of this presence, not of place but of the appear-
ance of place, I have conversed with apostles, deceased popes,
emperors, and kings; with the founders of the present
church, Luther, Calvin, and Melancthon; and with others
from countries widely separated. Since such presence is
given to angels and spirits, what is not the Divine presence
of the universe, which is infinite! The reason that angels
and spirits have such presence is that all affection of love,


No. 65]


GOD THE CREATOR


99


and thence thought of the understanding, is in space with-
out space, and in time without time; for any one can think
of a brother, relation, or friend in the Indies, and then
have him as it were present with him; in like manner he
may be affected with love for them by calling them to mind.
By these things, because they are familiar to every one, the
Divine omnipresence may in some measure be illustrated;
so, too, by human thoughts, as, when any one recalls to re-
membrance what he has seen in journeying in various places,
he may be in them, as if they were present. Nay, the sight
of the body emulates the same presence; the eye does not
perceive distance except by intermediate objects which as it
were measure them. The sun itself would be near the eye,
even as it were in the eye, unless intermediate objects gave
evidence that it is so distant: that it is so, writers on optics
have also observed in their books. Such presence has both
the intellectual and the corporeal sight of man, for his spirit
sees through his eyes; but no beast has similar presence,
because beasts have not any spiritual sight. From these
things it may be evident that God is omnipresent from the
firsts to the lasts of His order. That He is also omnipresent
in hell was shown in the preceding article.

65. VI. Man was created a form of Divine order. Man
was created a form of Divine order, because he was created
an image and likeness of God; and as God is order itself,
man was created an image and likeness of order. There
are two things from which order has existed and by which it
subsists — Divine love and Divine wisdom; and man was
created their receptacle; therefore, also, he was created
into the order according to which those two act in the uni-
verse, and principally that according to which they act in
the angelic heaven. Thus that whole heaven is in the great-
est effigy a form of Divine order; and this heaven is in God’s
sight as one man. There is also a full correspondence be-
tween this heaven and man ; for there is no society in heaven


100


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 65


which does not correspond to some member, viscus, or organ
in man. Therefore it is said in heaven that such a society
is in the province of the liver, the pancreas, the spleen, the
stomach, the eye, the ear, or the tongue, and so on; the
angels themselves also know in what quarter of some part
of man they dwell. That it is so, has been given me to know
to the life. I have seen as one man a society consisting of
several thousands of angels; from which it was manifest
that heaven in the complex is an image of God, and an image
of God is a form of Divine order.

66. It is to be known that all things which proceed from
the sun of the spiritual world, in the midst of which is Jeho-
vah God, have reference to man, and that therefore what-
ever things exist in that world conspire to the human form,
and in their inmost present it; and thus all the objects which
are presented to the eyes there are representatives of man.
Animals appear there of every kind, and they are likenesses
of the affections of the love and the thoughts of the angels,
as also are' shrubberies, flower-gardens, and green fields
there; and it is given to know what affection this and that
object represents. And, what is wonderful, when their in-
most sight is opened, they recognize their own image in those
things, which is the case because every man is his own love
and hence his own thought; and because the affections and
hence thoughts in every man are various and manifold, and
some of them answer to the affection of one animal, and
some to that of another, therefore images of their affections
are thus presented. But more will be seen concerning these
things in the following chapter concerning creation. From
these things also the truth is. manifest that the end of creation
was an angelic heaven from the human race, consequently
man, in whom God might dwell as in His home; this is the
reason why man was created a form of Divine order.

67. Before the creation God was love itself and wisdom
itself, and these two in the endeavor to effect uses; for love
and wisdom without use are only fleeting things of reason;


No. 68] GOD THE CREATOR IOI

and they also fly away unless they apply themselves to use.
The two prior also, separate from the third, are like birds fly-
ing over a great ocean, that at length, wearied with flying,
fall down and are drowned. Thus it is evident that the uni-
verse was created by God that uses might exist, from which
the universe may be called a theatre of uses; and because
man is the principal end of creation it follows that all things
and every thing have been created for the sake of man, and
consequently that all things and each of order have been
brought together into him, and concentrated in him, that
God may do uses of highest order through him. Love and
wisdom without their third, which is use, may be compared
to the heat and light of the sun, which, unless they operated
upon men, animals, and vegetables, would be empty things;
but they become real by influx into them and operation in
them. There are also three things which follow each other
in order — end, cause, and effect; and it is known in the
learned world that the end is nothing unless it looks to the
efficient cause, and that the end and this cause are nothing
unless the effect is produced. The end and the cause may,
indeed, be contemplated abstractly in the mind, but still for
the sake of some effect which the end intends, and for which
the cause provides. It is similar with love, wisdom, and use.
Use is what love intends, and produces by the cause; and
when the use is produced, love and wisdom really exist and
make for themselves a habitation and abode in it, and rest
as in their house. It is similar with the man in whom are
the love and wisdom of God while he is doing uses; and
that he may do the uses of God he has been created an
image and likeness, that is, a form of Divine order.

68. VII. Man is so far in power against evil and jalsity
from the Divine omnipotence , and so far in wisdom concern-
ing good and truth from the Divine omniscience , and so far in
God from the Divine omnipresence , as he lives according to
Divine order. Man is in power against evil and falsity from


102


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 68


the Divine omnipotence so far as he lives according to Di-
vine order, because no one can resist evils and their falsities
but God alone; for all evils and their falsities are from hell,
and in hell they cling together as one, just as all goods and
their truths do in heaven. For, as was said above, the whole
heaven is in the sight of God as one man, and, on the other
hand, hell is as one giant, who is a monster; therefore, to act
against one evil and its falsity is to act against that mon-
strous giant, or hell, and this no one can do but God, because
He is omnipotent. Thus it is manifest that man, unless he
goes to the omnipotent God, has of himself no more power
against evil and the falsity thence than a fish has against the
ocean, than a flea against a whale, or than a particle of dust
against a falling mountain; far less than a locust has against
an elephant, or a fly against a camel. And, moreover, man
has still less power against evil and the falsity thence, be-
cause he is born into evil, and evil cannot act against itself.
Hence it follows that unless a man lives according to order,
that is, unless he acknowledges God and His omnipotence,
and protection thereby against hell; and further unless man
on his part fights with the evil in himself, for this combat
together with that acknowledgment is of order, he cannot
but be immersed and overwhelmed in hell, and there be
driven about by evils, one after another, as a boat on the sea
is driven about by tempests.

69. The reason that man is in wisdom concerning good
and truth, from the Divine omniscience, so far as he lives
according to Divine order, is that all the love of good and all
the wisdom of truth, or all the good of love and all the truth
of wisdom, are from God. That it is so is also according to
the confession of all churches in the Christian world; from
which it follows that man cannot be interiorly in any truth
of wisdom unless from God, because God has omniscience,
that is, infinite wisdom. The human mind is distinguished
into three degrees like the angelic heaven, and therefore it
may be elevated to a higher and a higher degree, and also it


No. 69]


GOD THE CREATOR


103


may be let down to a lower and a lower degree. As far as it
is elevated to the higher degrees, so far it is elevated into wis-
dom, because so far into the light of heaven; and this can-
not be done except by God; and as far as the mind is ele-
vated thither, so far it is a man; and as far as it is let down
to the lower degrees, so far it is in the delusive light of hell,
and is not a man, but a beast. Man, also, for this reason
stands erect upon his feet, and looks toward heaven with the
face and can lift his eyes to the zenith; but a beast stands
upon the feet in a position parallel with the earth, and with
the whole countenance looking toward it; nor can this with-
out difficulty be turned up toward heaven. The man who
lifts his mind to God, and acknowledges that all truth of wis-
dom is from Him, and at the same time lives according to
order, is like one who stands on a high tower, and sees a pop-
ulous city below him, and whatever is being done there in
the streets. But the man who confirms in himself the idea
that all the truth of wisdom is from the natural light in him,
thus from himself, is like one who stays in a cavern under
that tower, and looks through the holes there into the same
city; he sees nothing but the walls of a single house in that
city, and how the bricks there are joined. Again, the man
who derives wisdom from God is like a bird flying aloft,
which looks about upon all things that are in the gardens,
woods, and villages, and flies to those things which are of
use to it; but the man who derives from himself such things
as are of wisdom, without a belief that they still are from
God, is like a hornet, which flies along near the ground, and
where it sees a heap of dung flies to it and finds enjoyment
in its stench. Every man, as long as he lives in the world,
walks in the midst between heaven and hell, and thus is in
equilibrium and so in freedom of will to look upward to God
or downward to hell. If he looks upward to God he ac-
knowledges that all wisdom is from God, and as to his spirit
he is actually with angels in heaven; but he who looks down-
ward, as every one does who is in falsities from evil, is as to
his spirit actually with devils in hell.


104


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 70


70. Man, from the Divine omnipresence, is so far in God
as he lives according to order, because God is omnipresent,
and because where He is in His order there He is as in Him-
self; for He is order itself, as was shown above. Now, be-
cause man was created a form of Divine order, God is in
him, and so far as he lives according to Divine order, fully;
but if he does not live according to Divine order, still God is
in him, but in his highest parts, and gives him ability to un-
derstand truth and to will good; that is, gives him faculty
for understanding and inclination for loving. But as far as
man lives contrary to order, so far he shuts up the lower parts
of his mind or spirit, and thus prevents God from descending
and filling them with His presence; consequently God is in
him, but he is not in God. It is a general law in heaven
that God is in every man, evil as well as good, but that man
is not in God unless he lives according to order; for the Lord
says that He wills that man should be in Him, and He in
man (John xv. 4). Man is in God by a life according to
order, because God is omnipresent in the universe, and in the
whole and every part of it in their inmosts, for these are in
order; but in those that are contrary to order, which are
such only as are outside of the inmost, God is omnipresent
by a continual struggle with them and by a continual effort
to bring them back to order. Therefore, as far as man suf-
fers himself to be brought back into order, so far God is omni-
present in the whole of him; consequently, so far God is in
him and he in God. The absence of God from man is no
more possible than the absence of the sun by its heat and
light from the earth. The objects of the earth, however, are
not in the sun’s power except so far as they receive the light
and heat proceeding from it, as in the time of spring and
summer. These things may be thus applied to the omni-
presence of God — that man is in spiritual heat and at the
same time in spiritual light, that is, in the goods of love and
in the truths of wisdom, so far as he is in order. Spiritual
heat and light, however, are not like natural heat and light;


NO. 71]


GOD THE CREATOR


105


for natural heat recedes from the earth and its objects in the
time of winter, and light in the time of night; and this be-
cause the earth, hy its rotations about its axis and its revolu-
tions ahout the sun, makes those times. But spiritual heat
and light are not so; for God by means of His sun is pres-
ent with them both, and does not make changes, as the sun
of the world apparently does. Man himself turns away,
similarly, as the earth turns from its sun; and when he turns
himself away from the truths of wisdom, he is like the earth
turned from its sun in the time of night; and when he turns
himself away from the goods of love, he is like the earth
turned from its sun in the time of winter. Such is the cor-
respondence between the effects and uses from the sun of
the spiritual world and the effects and uses from the sun of
the natural world.

71 . To the above will be added three Relations. First : —
I once heard under me, as it were, the roaring of the sea;
and I asked, What is this ? And one said to me that it was
a tumult among those who were gathered together in the
lower earth, which is next above hell. And presently the
ground, which made a roof over them, gaped open; and lo,
through the opening birds of night flew out in flocks which
spread themselves to the left hand; and immediately after
them rose up locusts, which leaped upon the grass of the
earth, and made a desert wherever they were; and a little
afterward I heard by turns from those birds of night as it
were a screeching, and at the side a confused cry, as if from
spectres in the woods. After this I saw heautiful birds from
heaven, which spread themselves to the right hand. The
birds were distinguished by having wings as of gold, with
stripes and spots as of silver interspersed, and upon the heads
of some of them crests in the form of crowns.

While I was looking and wondering at these things, sud-
denly a spirit came up from the lower earth, where that tu-
mult was, who could make himself appear an angel of light;
and he cried, “ Where is he who speaks and writes concern-


1 06


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 71


ing the order to which the omnipotent God has bound Him-
self in relation to man ? We have heard these things below,
through our roof.” While he was above that earth he ran
through a paved street, and at length came to me and at once
feigned himself an angel of heaven; and speaking in a tone
not his own he said, " Are you the one who thinks and speaks
concerning order ? Tell me briefly what order is, and some
things which are of order.” And I answered, “I will tell
you the generals, but not the particulars, because you do not
accept them.”

I said, “ I. God is order itself. II. He created man from
order, in order, and into order. III. He created his rational
mind according to the order of the whole spiritual world, and
his body according to the order of the whole natural world;
wherefore man was called by the ancients a little heaven and
a little world. IV. Hence it is a law of order that man from
his little heaven or little spiritual world should govern his
microcosm or his little natural world, as God from his great
heaven or the spiritual world governs the macrocosm or the
natural world in the whole and every part of it. V. It is a
law of order thence resulting, that man must introduce him-
self into faith by truths from the Word, and into charity by
good works, and thus reform and regenerate himself. VI.
It is a law of order that man should purify himself from sins
by his own exertion and power, and not stand still in a belief
of his inability, and expect God to wash away his sins by
immediate power. VII. It is also a law of order that man
should love God with all his soul, and with all his heart, and
his neighbor as himself, and not wait and expect that these
two loves should be infused into his mind and heart imme-
diately by God, as bread from the baker may be put into his
mouth;” and more to the same effect.

When the satan had heard these things, he replied with
a gentle voice, in which there was inward craft, “ What is it
that you say? that man, of his own power, is to introduce
himself into order by obeying those laws of it ? Do you not


No. 72]


GOD THE CREATOR


107


know that man is not under the law, but under grace ? that
all things are given to him of grace ? and that he cannot take
any thing to himself unless it be given him from heaven?
and that in spiritual things man has no more power to act
from himself than the pillar of Lot’s wife, or no more than
Dagon the idol of the Philistines at Ekron? and that so it
is impossible for man to justify himself, which must be done
by faith and charity?”

To these questions I only answered, “ It is also a law of
order that man by his own exertion and power should pro-
cure to himself faith by means of truths from the Word, and
yet should believe that not a grain of faith is from himself,
but from God; and also that man by his own exertion and
power should justify himself, and yet should believe that
nothing whatever of justification is from himself, but from
God. Is it not commanded that man should believe in God,
and love God with all his strength, and his neighbor as him-
self? Think, and say how these things could have been
commanded by God, if man had no power to obey and do
them.” When the satan had heard this his face was changed
and from white became at first ghastly and then black; and
speaking from his own mouth he said, “You have spoken
paradoxes upon paradoxes;” and then he instantly sunk
down to his companions and disappeared. And the birds
on the left hand, together with the spectres, uttered strange
sounds and cast themselves into the sea, which is there called
the Sea Suph, and the locusts leaped after them; and the air
was cleansed, and the earth was cleared of those wild crea-
tures, and the tumult below ceased, and it became tranquil
and serene.

72. Second Relation. I once heard an unusual murmur at
a distance, and in spirit I followed the direction of the sound,
and approached it. When I came to the source of it, behold
there was a company of spirits reasoning about Imputation
and Predestination. They were from Holland and from
Britain, and some from other nations were mingled with


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 72


108

them, who, at the conclusion of every argument, cried, Won-
derful! Wonderful! The question discussed was, “Why
God does not impute the merit and righteousness of His Son
to all and to every one created and afterward redeemed by
Him. Is He not omnipotent? Can He not, if He will,
make archangels of Lucifer, the dragon, and all the goats?
Is He not omnipotent? Why does He permit the injustice
and impiety of the devil to triumph over the justice of His
Son and over the piety of the worshippers of God? What
is easier for God than to bestow faith, and thus salvation,
upon all ? What is necessary for this but a little word ? .■ And
if all are not saved, does He not act contrary to His own
words, which are that He wills the salvation of all and the
death of none ? Say, therefore, from whom and in whom is
the cause of the damnation of those who perish.” And then
one of the Hollanders, a Supralapsarian Predestinarian, said,
“Is not this at the good pleasure of the Almighty? Shall
the clay find fault with the potter because he has made of it
a vessel without honor?” And another said, “The salva-
tion of every one is in His hand as a balance in the hand of
the weigher.” There stood at the sides some who were sim-
ple in faith and upright in heart, some of them with inflamed
eyes, some as if amazed, some as if intoxicated, and some as
if suffocated, muttering among themselves, “ What have we
to do with these ravings? Their faith has infatuated them,
which is that God the Father imputes the justice of His Son
to whom He will and when He will, and sends the Holy Spirit
to give assurances of that justice; and lest man should claim
any thing to himself in the work of his salvation, he must be
just like a stone in the business of justification and like a
stock in spiritual things.”

And then one of them thrust himself into the company, and
speaking with a loud voice he said, “O madmen! Your
reasoning is about goat’s wool. You do not know at all that
the omnipotent God is order itself, and that the laws of order
are myriads, even as many as there are truths in the Word,


No. 73]


GOD THE CREATOR


IO9


and that God cannot act contrary to them, because to act
contrary to them would be to act contrary to Himself, and
thus not only contrary to His justice, but also contrary to His
omnipotence.” And he saw in the distance at his right hand
as it were a sheep and a lamb and a flying dove; and at his
left hand as it were a goat, a wolf, and a vulture; and he said,
“Do you believe that God by His omnipotence can change
this goat into a sheep, or that wolf into a lamb, or the vulture
into a dove, or the converse? No; for it is contrary to the
laws of His order, of which hot even a tittle can fall to the
ground, according to His own words. How then can He in-
duce the justice of His Son’s redemption upon any one who
rebels against the laws of His justice? How can justice it-
self commit injustice, predestine any one to hell, and cast him
into the fire at which the devil stands with torches in his hand
to feed it ? O madmen ! empty in spirit ! your faith has se-
duced you. Is it not in your hands as a snare for catching
doves?” A certain magician, hearing these words, formed a
snare, as it were, from that faith, and hung it upon a tree, say-
ing, “ You will see that I shall catch that dove.” And pres-
ently a hawk flew up, and put his neck into the snare, and
hung there; and the dove, seeing the hawk, flew away.
Those who stood by wondered, and exclaimed, “ Even this
scene is the award of justice.”

73. The next day there came to me some from the com-
pany who were in the faith of predestination and imputation,
and said, “ We are, as it were, drunken, not from wine, but
from what was said by that man yesterday. He spoke of
omnipotence, and at the same time of order; and he con-
cluded that as omnipotence is Divine, so also order is Divine,
nay, that God Himself is order; and he said that there are as
many laws of order as there are truths in the Word, which
are not only thousands, but myriads of myriads, and that
God is bound to His laws therein, and man to his. What
then is the Divine omnipotence, if it is bound by laws? for
thus all absolute power is wanting to omnipotence; and so


I IO


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 73


has not God less power than a king in the world who is sole
ruler? for such a king can change the laws of justice as he
can turn over his hand, and act absolutely, like Octavius
Augustus and like Nero. After we thought of omnipotence
bound to laws, we became as if drunken, and ready to fall
into a swoon unless a remedy be quickly applied; for, accord-
ing to our faith, we have prayed that God the Father would
have mercy on us for the sake of His Son, and have believed
that He can have mercy on whom He will, and remit sins to
whom He pleases, and save whom He will; and we have
not dared to take away the least particle from His omnipo-
tence. Therefore, to bind God with the chains of any of His
own laws we regard as a great wrong, because contradictory
to His omnipotence.”

Having said these words they looked on me, and I on them,
and I saw that they were amazed; and I said, “I will pray
to the Lord, and will thereby bring you a remedy by giving
light on this subject; but now only by examples.” And I
said, “ The omnipotent God created the world from the order
in Himself, and thus into the order in which He is, and ac-
cording to which He governs; and He stamped upon the uni-
verse, and upon the whole and every part of it, its order; upon
man his order, upon beast his, upon bird, fish, worm, and tree
of every kind, even upon the grass, each its own order. But
to let examples illustrate, I will briefly adduce the following.
The laws of order appointed for man are that he should ac-
quire for himself truths from the Word, and think of them
naturally and, as far as he can, rationally, and thus procure
for himself natural faith. The laws of order on the part of
God then are that He should approach, fill the truths with
His Divine light, and thus fill with the Divine essence man’s
natural faith, which is only knowledge and persuasion; thus,
and not otherwise, saving faith is obtained. It is similar
with charity; but we will briefly mention some particulars.
According to His laws of order God cannot remit sins to any
man, except so far as man according to his laws desists from


No. 74]


GOD THE CREATOR


III


them. God cannot spiritually regenerate man, except so far
as man according to his laws regenerates himself naturally.
God is in the perpetual endeavor to regenerate and thus to
save man; but He cannot effect this, except as man prepares
himself as a receptacle, and so clears the way for God and
opens the door. A bridegroom cannot enter the chamber
of a maiden not betrothed to him; she shuts the door, and
keeps the key with her within; but after the maiden has be-
come a bride, she gives the key to the bridegroom. God
could not of His omnipotence redeem men, unless He be-
came Man; nor could He make His Human Divine, unless
His Human were at first as the human of an infant, and after-
ward as the human of a boy, and unless the Human after-
ward formed itself into a receptacle and habitation into which
His Father might enter; which was done by His fulfilling all
things of the Word, that is, all the laws of order therein; and
as far as He did this, so far He united Himself to the Father,
and the Father united Himself to Him. But these are only
a few things, adduced for the sake of illustration, that you
may see that the Divine omnipotence is in order, and that its
government which is called Providence is according to order;
and that it acts continually and eternally according to the
laws of its order; and that it cannot act contrary to them nor
change them as to a single tittle, because order with all its
laws is [the Divine] Himself.”

When these words were spoken, a radiant light of a golden
color flowed in through the roof, and formed cherubs flying
in the air; and the effulgence therefrom lighted up the tem-
ples of some toward the hindhead, but not as yet toward the
forehead; for they murmured, “We do not yet know what
omnipotence is.” And I said, “It will be revealed when the
things now said to you have lent some light.”

74. Third Relation. I saw, at a distance, many gathered
together, with caps on their heads; some with caps bound
round with silk, who were of the ecclesiastical order; some
with caps whose borders were adorned with bands of gold,


1 1 2


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 74


who were of the civil order; all of them men of learning; and
besides, I saw some with turbans, who were not learned. I
approached, and heard them conversing together ahout
Divine power being unlimited; saying that if it proceeded
according to any established laws of order it could not be
unlimited, but limited, and would thus he power and not om-
nipotence. “ But who does not see that no necessity of law
can compel omnipotence to do thus and not otherwise ? Cer-
tainly while we think of omnipotence, and at the same time
of the laws of order according to which it is obliged to pro-
ceed, our preconceived ideas concerning omnipotence fall,
like a hand when its staff is broken.” When they saw me
near them, some of them ran up to me, and with some vehe-
mence said, “ Are you the one who has circumscribed God
with laws, as with bonds? How impudent this is! Thus
you have also rent in pieces our faith upon which our salva-
tion is founded, in the centre of which we place the justice of
the Redeemer, upon that the omnipotence of God the Father,
and we make the operation of the Holy Spirit an appendage,
with its efficacy in man’s absolute impotency in spiritual
things, for whom it is enough to speak of the completeness of
justification which is in that faith from the omnipotence of
God. But I have heard that you see emptiness in it, because
there is in it nothing of Divine order on the part of man.”

On hearing these words I opened my mouth, and, speak-
ing with a loud voice, I said, “ Learn the laws of Divine order,
and afterward open that faith, and you will see a vast desert,
and in it Leviathan, long and crooked, and all around nets
entangled as in knots that cannot he untied; but do as is
read of Alexander when he saw the Gordian knot, that he
drew his sword and cut it in two, and thus loosed its en-
tanglements, and threw its cords on the ground and trampled
them under his feet.”

At these words those who were assembled bit their tongues,
wishing to sharpen them for invectives; but they durst not,
because they saw heaven opened above me, and heard a voice


No. 74]


GOD THE CREATOR


113

thence — “ Hear first with self-control what the order is ac-
cording to the laws of which the omnipotent God acts.”
And I said, li God from Himself as Order created the uni-
verse in order and for order; and likewise man, in whom He
fixed the laws of His order from which he became an image
and likeness of God; which laws, in the sum, are that he
should believe in God and love the neighbor, and as far as he
does those two things by natural power, so far he makes him-
self a receptacle of the Divine omnipotence, and so far God
conjoins Himself to man and man to Himself; hence his
faith becomes living and saving, and his doing becomes char-
ity, also living and saving. But it should be known that God
is perpetually present, and continually strives and acts in
man, and also is in touch with his free will, but never violates
it; for if He should violate the free will of man, man’s dwel-
ling in God would perish, and there would be only God’s
dwelling in man; and this dwelling is in all, as well in those
who are upon the earth as in those who are in the heavens,
and also in those who are in the hells; for from it they have
their ability, their will, and their understanding. But there
is no reciprocal dwelling of man in God, except with those
who live according to the laws of order prescribed in the
Word; and these become images and likenesses of Him, and
to them paradise is given for a possession, and the fruit of the
tree of life for food. But the rest gather themselves together
around the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and talk
with the serpent there, and eat; but afterward they are driven
out of paradise; yet God does not leave them, but they leave
God.”

Those in caps understood and approved these words; but
those in turbans denied, and said, “ Is not omnipotence thus
limited ? and limited omnipotence is a contradiction.” But
I replied, “ It is not a contradiction to act omnipotently ac-
cording to the laws of justice with judgment, or according
to the laws inscribed on love from wisdom; but it is a con-
tradiction that God can act contrary to the laws of His jus-


1 14 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 74

tice and love; and this would be from what is not judgment
and wisdom. Such a contradiction is implied in your faith,
which is that God can out of mere grace justify the unjust,
and endow him with all the gifts of salvation and the rewards
of life. But I will say in a few words what the omnipotence
of God is. God from His omnipotence created the universe,
and at the same time introduced order into all and every part
of it; God also by His omnipotence preserves the universe,
and guards the order there with its laws perpetually, and
when any thing falls from order, He brings it back and re-
stores the order. Moreover, God from His omnipotence es-
tablished the church, and revealed the laws of its order in
the Word; and when it fell from order He re-established it,
and when it fell totally He came down into the world, and
by means of the assumed Human took on omnipotence, and
restored it. God by His omnipotence and also His omni-
science explores every one after death, and prepares the just
or the sheep for their places in heaven, and of them builds
up heaven; and He prepares the unjust or the goats for their
places in hell, and of these forms hell. Both the just and the
unjust He disposes into societies and assemblies according
to all the varieties of their love, which in heaven are as many
as the stars in the firmament of the world. The societies of
heaven He joins together into one, that they may be as one
man before Him : in like manner the congregated bodies in
hell, that they may be as one devil; and He separates the
latter from the former by a gulf, lest hell should bring vio-
lence upon heaven, and lest heaven should bring torment
upon hell; for those who are in hell are tormented so far as
heaven flows in. Unless God by His omnipotence should
every instant do all these things, the nature of the wild beast
would enter into men to such a degree that they could no
longer be restrained by the laws of any order, and so the
human race would perish. These and such like things
would happen, unless God were order and omnipotent in
order.*' On hearing these words those who wore caps went


No. 75] GOD THE CREATOR I I 5

away, with their caps under their arms, praising God; for in
that world the intelligent wear caps. Not so those who wore
turbans, because they are bald, and baldness signifies gross-
ness; and these went away to the left, but the others to the
right.


THE CREATION OF THE UNIVERSE.

75. Since in this first chapter the subject is God the Crea-
tor, the creation of the universe by Him must also be con-
sidered; as in the following chapter where the subject is
the Lord the Redeemer, redemption must also be treated of.
But no one can obtain for himself a just idea concerning the
creation of the universe, unless some universal knowledges
premised put the understanding into a state of perception:
such are the following. I. There are two worlds, the spiri-
tual world in which angels and spirits are; and the natural
world in which men are. II. In each world there is a sun,
and the sun of the spiritual world is pure love from Jehovah
God, who is in the midst of it; and from that sun proceed
heat and light; and the heat thence proceeding in its essence
is love, and the light thence proceeding in its essence is wis-
dom, and these two affect the will and understanding of man,
the heat his will, and the light his understanding; but the
sun of the natural world is pure fire, and therefore the heat
therefrom is dead; in like manner the light; and these serve
for clothing and support to spiritual heat and light, that they
may pass to man. III. Further, those two things which
proceed from the sun of the spiritual world, and consequently
all things existing there by means of them, are substantial
and are called spiritual; and the two like things which pro-
ceed from the sun of the natural world, and so all things exist-
ing there by means of them, are material and are called natu-
ral. IV. In each world there are three degrees, which are
called degrees of altitude, and hence three regions according
to which the three angelic heavens are arranged, and accord-


II 6 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 75

ing to which human minds also are arranged, thus corre-
sponding to the three angelic heavens; and other things in
like manner in the two worlds. V. There is a correspond-
ence between the things in the spiritual world, and the things
in the natural world. VI. There is an order into which all
things and every thing in both worlds were created. VII. An
idea of these things ought by all means to be first obtained;
and unless this is done the human mind from mere ignorance
of them easily falls into the idea of the creation of the uni-
verse by nature, and says only from the authority of the
church that nature was created by God; but because the
mind knows not how, if it inquires into it more interiorly, it
falls headlong into naturalism which denies God. But be-
cause it would be the work of a large volume to set forth and
demonstrate these things in a proper manner one by one, and
also as it does not properly enter into the system of theology
of this book, as a lemma or argument, I will only adduce
some Relations, from which an idea of the creation of the
universe by God may be conceived, and from conception
some birth representing it may be produced.

76. First Relation. On a certain day I was in meditation
about the creation of the universe; and because this was per-
ceived by angels who were above me on the right side, where
were some who at times meditated and reasoned on the same
subject, therefore one descended and invited me to join them.
Then I became in the spirit and accompanied him, and after
entering I was conducted to the prince, in whose palace I
saw some hundreds assembled, and the prince in their midst.
And then one of them said, “We perceived here that you
were meditating about the creation of the universe, and we
have at times been in similar meditation, but could not come
to a conclusion, since there clung to our thoughts the idea of
a chaos, and that this was as a great egg, out of which were
brought forth all things and every thing of the universe in
their order; when yet we now perceive that so great a uni-
verse could not have been so brought forth. Then, also,


No. 76]


GOD THE CREATOR


ii 7

there clung to our minds another idea, which was that all
things were created by God out of nothing; and yet we now
perceive that out of nothing nothing is produced; and our
minds have not yet been able to escape from these two ideas,
and to see creation in any light as to how it was effected:
we have therefore called you out from the place where you
were, that you may make known to us your meditation upon
this subject.”

On hearing these words I answered that I would do so.
And I said, “ I meditated on this subject for a long time, to
no purpose; but afterward, when I was admitted by the Lord
into your world, I perceived that it would be vain to conclude
anything concerning the creation of the universe, unless it
were first known that there are two worlds, one in which
angels are, and the other in which men are; and that men
by death pass out of their world into the other; and then
also I saw that there were two suns, one from which all spiri-
tual things flow forth, and the other from which all natural
things flow forth; and that the sun from which all spiritual
things flow forth is pure love from Jehovah God, who is in
the midst of it; and that the sun from which all natural things
flow forth is pure fire. Having learned this, on a certain time
when I was in enlightenment I was enabled to perceive that
the universe was created by Jehovah God by means of the
sun in the midst of which He is; and because there cannot be
love except together with wisdom, that the universe was cre-
ated by Jehovah God from His love by His wisdom. That
it is so is evinced by all things and every thing that I have
seen in the world where you are, and that I have seen in the
world in which I am as to the body.

“ To set forth from the beginning how the progress of crea-
tion was effected would be too prolix; but when I have been
in enlightenment I have perceived that by means of the light
and heat from the sun of your world, spiritual atmospheres,
which in themselves are substantial, were created one from
another; and because there were three, and thence three de-


I 1 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 76

grees of them, three heavens were made; one for the angels
who are in the highest degree of love and wisdom, another
for the angels who are in the second degree, and the third for
the angels who are in the lowest degree. But because this
spiritual universe cannot exist without a natural universe in
which it may produce its effects and uses, then the sun from
which all natural things proceed was created at the same time
and by this likewise by means of light and heat three atmos-
pheres encompassing the spiritual, as shells enclose kernels,
or the bark of a tree the wood; and at last by means of these,
the terraqueous globe, the abode of men, beasts, and fishes,
also of trees, shrubs, and herbs, was formed of lands consist-
ing of soil, stones, and minerals. But this is a very general
sketch of the creation and its progress; the particular and
single things of which cannot be presented except by vol-
umes; but all things lead to the conclusion that God did
not create the universe out of nothing, because, as you said,
out of nothing nothing is produced; but by means of the sun
of the angelic heaven, which is from His Esse , and thence is
pure love, together with wisdom.

“ That the universe, by which are meant both worlds, the
spiritual and the natural, was created from the Divine love
by the Divine wisdom, all and every part of it witnesses and
proves; and if you consider the parts of the universe in their
order and connection, from the light in which the percep-
tions of your understanding are, you may clearly see it. But
it should be kept in mind that the love and wisdom which in
God make one, are not love and wisdom in an abstract sense,
but in Him as substance; for God is the very, the only, and
hence the first substance, and essence, which is and subsists
in itself. That all things and every thing were created from
the Divine love and the Divine wisdom is meant by these
words in John: The Word was with God , and the Word was
God . . alt things were made by Him . . . and the world
was made by Him (i. 1, 3, 10). God there signifies the Di-
vine love, and the Word signifies the Divine truth, or the Di-


No. 77]


GOD THE CREATOR


ll 9

vine wisdom; wherefore the Word there is called light, and
by light, when spoken of God, is meant the Divine wisdom.”
This having been said, when I was saying farewell, rays
of light from the sun there descended through the angelic
heavens into their eyes, and through these into the abodes of
their mind; and when thus enlightened they favored the
things that had been said by me, and afterward followed me
into the hall, and my former companion went with me to the
house where I was dwelling and from thence he reascended
to his society.

77. Second Relation . One morning, when awakened
from sleep, and meditating in the early and serene light be-
fore full wakefulness, I saw through the window as it were
the lightning flashing, and presently I heard as it were thun-
der crashing. While I was wondering whence this was, I
heard from heaven that there were then some not far from
me who were reasoning sharply concerning God and Na-
ture, and that the flashing of light as of lightning and the
crashing of the air as of thunder were correspondences and
thence appearances of the conflict and collision of argu-
ments, on one side in favor of God, and on the other in
favor of nature. The beginning of this spiritual conflict
was this. There were some satans in hell who said among
themselves, “ Would that we might be allowed to speak with
the angels of heaven, and we would completely and fully
demonstrate that nature is that which they call God, from
whom are all things; thus, that God is only a word, unless
nature be understood.” And because those satans believed
this with the whole heart and the whole soul, and desired to
speak with the angels of heaven, it was given them to ascend
out of the foulness and darkness of hell, and to speak with
two angels then descending from heaven. They were in the
world of spirits, which is mediate between heaven and hell.

The satans, when they saw the angels there, ran quickly
to them, and cried with a furious voice, “ Are you the angels
of heaven with whom we are allowed to engage in reasoning


120


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 77


concerning God and concerning nature? You are called
wise, because you acknowledge God; but oh, how simple
you are ! Who has seen God ? Who understands what God
is ? Who conceives that God rules, and that He can rule the
universe, and the whole and every part of it ? Who but the
mob and the rabble acknowledges what is not seen and un-
derstood ? What is more manifest than that nature is all in
all? Who has seen with the eye any thing but nature?
Who has heard with the ear any thing but nature ? Who
has smelled with the nose any thing but nature ? Who has
tasted with the tongue any thing but nature ? Who by any
touch of the hand and of the body has felt any thing but na-
ture ? Are not the senses of our body the witnesses of truth ?
Who cannot swear from them that it is so ? Is not respira-
tion by which our body lives also a witness ? What else do
we breathe but nature ? Are not our heads and yours in
nature? Whence is there influx into the thoughts of the
head but from nature ? If that be taken away, can you think
any thing? beside many other things of a similar kind.”

The angels, on hearing these things, answered, “You
speak thus because you are merely sensual: all in hell have
the ideas of their thoughts immersed in the senses of the
body, nor are they able to elevate their minds above them,
and therefore we pardon you. A life of evil, and thence a
faith of falsity, has so closed up the interiors of your minds
that with you elevation above sensual things is not possible,
except in a state removed from the evils of life and the falsi-
ties of faith; for a satan can understand the truth when he
hears it, equally with an angel, but he does not retain it, be-
cause evil obliterates the truth and induces falsity. And we
perceive that you are now in a state thus removed and so can
understand the truth which we speak; attend therefore to
what we shall say.” Then they said, u You were in the nat-
ural world, and you died there, and now you are in the spiri-
tual world; did you ever till now know any thing about the
life after death ? Did you not before deny it and make your-


No. 77]


GOD THE CREATOR


12 1


selves on a level with the beasts ? Did you know any thing
before about heaven and hell? or any thing about the light
and heat of this world ? or about this, that you would be no
longer within nature, but above it? For this world and all
things of it are spiritual; and spiritual things are above natu-
ral, so that not even the least thing of nature, in which you
were, can flow into this world. But you, because you be-
lieved nature to be a god or goddess, also believe the light and
heat of this world to be the light and heat of the natural
world, when yet it is not so at all; for natural light is here
darkness and natural heat is here cold. Did you know any
thing concerning the sun of this world, from which our light
and our heat come forth ? Did you know that this sun is
pure love and the sun of the natural world pure fire ? and
that the sun of the world, which is pure fire, is that from
which nature existed and subsists? and that the sun of
heaven, which is pure love, is that from which life itself,
which is love together with wisdom, exists and subsists ? and
thus that nature, which you make a god or a goddess, is
wholly dead? You can, if a guard is given you, ascend with
us into heaven; and we can, if a guard is given, descend with
you into hell; and you will see in heaven magnificent and
splendid things, but in hell vile and filthy things. There
are those differences because all in heaven worship God, and
all in hell worship nature; and those magnificent and splen-
did things in the heavens are correspondences of the affec-
tions of the love of good and truth; but those vile and filthy
things in the hells are correspondences of the affections of
the love of evil and falsity. From all these things now con-
clude whether God or nature be all in all.”

To this the satans answered, “ In the state in which we are
now, we are able to conclude from what we have heard that
there is a God; but when the enjoyment of evil fills our minds
we see nothing but nature.” The two angels and the satans
were standing not far from me, so that I saw and heard them;
and lo, I saw around them many who had been celebrated


122


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 77


for erudition in the natural world; and I wondered that those
learned men now stood near the angels, and now near the
satans, and that they favored those near whom they were
standing. And I was told that the changes of their situation
were changes of the state of their mind, which favored now
one side and now the other; for they are as to faith as change-
able as Vertumnus.

And the angels said, “ We will tell you a strange thing : we
looked down upon the earth at those who were celebrated for
learning, and we found six hundred out of a thousand for
nature and the rest for God; and these were for God, be-
cause they had frequently said, not from the understanding
but from what they had heard, that nature is from God; and
frequent speaking from memory and recollection, though not
at the same time from thought and intelligence, brings about
a species of faith . ”

After this a guard was given to the satans, and they as-
cended with the two angels into heaven and saw magnificent
and splendid things; and then in enlightenment from the
light of heaven they there acknowledged that there is a God,
and that nature was created to serve the life which is from
God, and that nature in itself is dead; and that thus it does
nothing from itself, but is acted upon by life. Having seen
and perceived these things they descended; and as they
descended the love of evil returned, and closed their under-
standing above and opened it below; and then there ap-
peared above it as it were a screen, glowing from infernal
fire; and as soon as they touched the earth with their feet the
ground under them opened, and they sunk down again to
their companions.

78. Third Relation. The next day an angel came to me
from another society in heaven, and said, “ We have heard
in our society that, in consequence of meditating on the cre-
ation of the universe, you were invited into a society near
ours, and that there you said such things about the creation
as they favored at the time, and afterward rejoiced in. I will


No. 78]


GOD THE CREATOR


123


now show you how animals and vegetables of every kind were
produced by God.” And he led me on into a large green
field, and told me to look around. And I looked around and
saw birds of most beautiful colors, some flying, some perch-
ing upon the trees, and some upon the ground, plucking lit-
tle leaves from the roses; among the birds were also doves
and swans. After these things vanished from my sight I saw,
not far from me flocks of sheep with lambs, and of kids and
she-goats; and round about the flocks I saw herds of cows
and calves, and also of camels and mules; and in a grove
stags with high horns, and also unicorns. After these things
were seen he said, “Turn your face toward the east.” And
I saw a garden, in which were fruit-trees, as orange-trees, cit-
rons, olives, vines, fig-trees, pomegranates, and also shrubs
bearing berries. Afterward he said, “ Look now toward the
south.” And I saw fields of grain of various kinds, wheat,
oats, barley, also beans; and round about them beds of roses,
with a beautiful variety of color; but toward the north, groves
full of chestnut-trees, palm-trees, linden-trees, plane-trees,
and other shade trees.

When I had seen these he said, “All those things which
you have seen are correspondences of the affections of the
love of the angels who are near by.” And they told me to
what affections they severally corresponded; and they added,
“Not only those things, but also all the other things which
are presented before our eyes to be seen, are correspondences;
such as houses and the furniture in them, tables, and food,
and clothes, and also coins of gold and silver, as also dia-
monds and other precious stones with which wives and
maidens in the heavens were adorned. From all these things
we perceive the quality of each one as to love and wisdom.
The things which are in our houses and serve for uses con-
stantly there remain; but to the eyes of those who wander
from one society to another, such things are changed accord-
ing to the company they are in. These things have been
shown you in order that in a particular type you might see


124


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 78


[the nature of] all creation; for God is love itself and wisdom
itself; and of His love there are infinite affections, and of
His wisdom there are infinite perceptions; and each thing
and all things that appear upon the earth are correspond-
ences of these affections and perceptions; hence are birds
and beasts, hence trees and shrubs, hence corn and other
grain, hence herbs and grasses; for God is not extended, but
still He is in the extense everywhere, thus in the universe
from its firsts to its lasts; and because He is omnipresent,
such correspondences of the affections of His love and wis-
dom are in the whole natural world.

“ But in our world, which is called the spiritual world, there
are like correspondences with those who receive affections
and perceptions from God, with the difference that such
things in our world are created by God instantaneously,
according to the affections of the angels; but in your world,
while they were created in like manner at the beginning, it
was provided that they should be perpetually renewed by
generations of one from another, and that creation should be
so continued. The reason why creation in our world is in-
stantaneous, and in yours continued by generations, is that
the atmospheres and earths of our world are spiritual, and
the atmospheres and earths of your world are natural; and
natural things were created that they might clothe spiritual
things, as the skin clothes the bodies of men and animals,
as the rind and bark clothe the trunks and branches of trees,
as the dura mater, the arachnoid, and the pia mater clothe the
brain, as their coats clothe the nerves, and delicate mem-
branes the nerve-fibres. It is for this reason that all things
in your world are constant, and constantly return from year
to year.” To this the angel added, “Relate these things
which you have seen and heard to the inhabitants of your
world, because hitherto they have been in entire ignorance
about the spiritual world; and without some knowledge of
it no one can know or even guess that creation is continual
in our world, and that in yours it was similar to this while the
universe was created by God.”


No. 79] GOD THE CREATOR I2g

After this we talked upon various subjects, and at last
about hell, that nothing of such things as are in heaven are
seen there, but only the opposites; since the affections of
their love, which are lusts of evil, are opposite to the affec-
tions of the love in which the angels 'of heaven are. There-
fore with those in hell and generally in their deserts appear
birds of night, as bats, and owls of various kinds, and also
wolves, leopards, tigers, rats, and mice, besides venomous
serpents of every kind, dragons and crocodiles; and where
there is any herbage, there grow briers, nettles, thorns, and
thistles, and some poisonous plants, which at times vanish,
and then there appear only heaps of stones, and bogs in which
are croaking frogs. All these things are also correspond-
ences, but, as already said, correspondences of the affections
of their love, which are the lusts of evil. Yet such things are
not created there by God, nor were they created by Him in
the natural world where similar things exist; for all things
that God created and creates were and are good; but such
things upon the earth arose together with hell, which existed
from men who, by aversion from God, after death became
devils and satans. But because these direful things began
to hurt our ears, we turned our thoughts away from them
and back to the things which we saw in the heavens.

79. Fourth Relation. Once, when I was thinking of the
creation of the universe, there came to me some from the
Christian world, who in their time were philosophers among
the most celebrated, and reputed the wisest; and they said,
“We perceive that you are thinking of the creation; tell us
what your mind is about it.” But I answered, “Tell first
what is yours.” And one said, “My mind is, that creation
is from nature, and thus that nature created itself, and that
it was from eternity; for there is not and cannot be a vacuum.
But what do we see with our eyes, hear with our ears, smell
with our nostrils, and inhale into our breast, except nature,
which because it is without us is also within us ?”

Another hearing these words said, “You talk of nature,


126


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 79


and make it the creator of the universe; but you do not know
how nature has operated in producing the universe, and so I
will tell you. It rolled itself into whirls which dashed against
each other like clouds, or like houses when they fall together
in an earthquake; and by means of that collision the denser
portions were collected together, of which was formed the
earth; and the more fluid portions separated themselves
from these, and also gathered together into one mass of which
were formed seas; and the lighter parts of these also sepa-
rated themselves, of which were formed the air and ether;
and from the lightest of these, the sun. Have you not seen
that when oil, water, and dust of the earth are mixed together,
they separate of their own accord, and arrange themselves
in order, one above another ?”

Then another hearing this said, “You speak from fancy.
Who does not know that the first origin of all things was
chaos, which in magnitude had filled a fourth part of the uni-
verse; and that in the midst of it was fire, and round about
this, ether, and around this, matter; and that that chaos was
cleft, and through the fissures burst out fire as from JE tna
and Vesuvius, whence originated the sun; and that after this
the ether issued forth and diffused itself, from which was the
atmosphere; and at last the residue of matter collected itself
into a globe, of which was formed the earth ? As to the stars
they are only luminaries in the expanse of the universe, which
sprang from the sun and its fire and light; for the sun at
first was as it were an ocean of fire, which, lest it should burn
the earth, separated from itself little shining flames, which
being allotted places in the circumference completed the
universe; of these were formed the starry heavens.”

But there stood one among them who said, “You are mis-
taken; you appear to yourselves to be wise, and I appear to
you simple; but still in my simplicity I have believed and do
believe that the universe was created by God; and because
nature is of the universe, that all nature was then created at
the same time. If nature created itself, would it not have
been from eternity? But oh what folly!”


No. 79]


GOD THE CREATOR


127


And then one of those so-called wise men ran up nearer
and nearer to him who was speaking, and put his left ear
toward his mouth, for his right ear was stopped as with cot-
ton, and asked what he said; and he repeated the same; and
then he who ran up looked around to see whether any priest
were present; and he saw one at the side of him who was
speaking; and then he replied, saying, “I also confess that
all nature is from God, but — ”. And then he went away and
said in a whisper to his companions, “ I said so because the
priest was present; but you and I know that nature is from
nature; and because thus nature is God I said that all na-
ture is from God. But — ”.

Then the priest, hearing their whispering, said, “Your
wisdom which is merely philosophical has seduced you, and
has so closed the interiors of your minds that no light from
God and from His heaven could flow in and enlighten you;
you have extinguished it. Consider, and decide among
yourselves, whence are your souls, which are immortal; were
they from nature, or were they at the same time in that great
chaos ?”

On hearing this, the former speaker went away to his com-
panions, asking that they together with him would solve this
knotty question; and they concluded that the human soul is
nothing but ether, and that thought is nothing but a modifi-
cation of ether by means of the sun’s light; and ether is of
nature. And they said, “ Who does not know that we speak
by means of the air, and what is thought but speech in a purer
air, which is called ether? Thence it is that thought and
speech make one. Who cannot perceive this from man
while he is an infant? He first learns to speak, and by de-
grees to speak with himself, and this is to think. What
then is thought but a modification of ether? and what else
is the sound of speech but a modulation of that ? Whence
we conclude that the soul which thinks is of nature.”

But some of them, not indeed dissenting from the rest,
but to throw light on the state of the question, said: “Souls


128


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 79


sprang into existence when the ether gathered itself together
from that great chaos, and then in the highest region divided
itself into innumerable individual forms, which infuse them-
selves into men while they begin to think from the purer air;
and these are then called souls.” Hearing this another said,
“ I grant that the individual forms, formed from the ether in
the upper region, were innumerable; but still the men born
since the creation of the world have exceeded their number;
how then could those ethereal forms suffice? Wherefore
I have thought with myself that the souls which go out of the
mouth of men when they die return to the same after some
thousands of years, and enter into and pass a life similar to
the former; that many wise men believe in such things and
metempsychosis, is well known.” Besides these, other con-
jectures were broached by the rest, which, since they were
mere insanities, I pass by.

After an hour or so the priest returned; and then he who
before spoke of the creation of the universe by God told him
their decisions concerning the soul; on hearing which the
priest said to them, “You have spoken just as you thought
in the world, not knowing that you are not in that world, but
in another, which is called the spiritual world: all those who
have become corporeal-sensual, by confirmations in favor of
nature, know no otherwise than that they are in the same
world in which they were born and brought up. The rea-
son is, that there they were in a material body, while here
they are in a substantial body; and the substantial man sees
himself and his companions around him, just as the material
man sees himself and his companions around him; for the
substantial is the primitive of the material ; and because you
think, see, smell, taste, and speak in like manner as in the
natural world, therefore you suppose that the same nature is
here, when yet the nature of this world is as different and
distinct from the nature of that world as substantial is from
material, or spiritual from natural, or prior from posterior;
and because the nature of the world in which you before


No. 79]


GOD THE CREATOR


I29


lived is relatively dead, therefore, by confirmations in favor
of it, you have become as it were dead; and this in respect
to the things which are of God, heaven, and the church, and
also in respect to that which concerns your souls. But still
every man, bad as well as good, may be elevated as to the un-
derstanding even into the light in which the angels of heaven
are, and then see that there is a God, and that there is a life
after death, and that the soul of man is not ethereal, and thus
from the nature of the natural world, but spiritual, and there-
fore to live to eternity. The understanding can be in that
angelic light provided natural loves be removed, which are
from the world and for the world and its nature, and from
the body and for it and what is proper to it.” And then in
an instant those loves were removed by the Lord; and it was
given them to speak with angels, and from their conversa-
tion, while in that state, they perceived that there is a God,
and that after death they live in another world; wherefore
they were covered with shame, and exclaimed, “We have
been insane, we have been insane!”

But because this was not the state that belonged to them,
and so after some minutes became tedious and irksome, they
turned themselves away from the priest, and would not hear
his speech any longer; and so they returned into their former
loves, which were merely natural, worldly, and corporeal;
and they went away to the left from society to society, till at
length they came to a way where the enjoyments of those
loves blew upon them, and they said, Let us go this way; and
they went, and descended, and at length they came to those
who were in the enjoyments of similar loves, and so went on.
And because their enjoyment was the enjoyment of doing
evil, and on the way they also did evil to many, they were
imprisoned, and became demons. Then their enjoyment
was changed into the opposite, because by punishments and
the fear of punishments they were restrained and held in
check from their former enjoyment, which made their na-
ture; and they asked those who were in the same prison


130 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 79

whether they were to live so to eternity. Some there ans-
wered, “ We have been here some ages, and we are to remain
for ages of ages, since the nature which we contracted in the
world cannot be changed, nor expelled by punishments; and
whenever it is expelled by them it still after a short lapse of
time returns.”

80. Fifth Relation. Once a satan by permission as-
cended out of hell together with a woman, and came to the
house where I was. On seeing them I shut the window, but
yet through it I spoke with them and asked the satan whence
he came. He said that he came from the company of his
associates. And I asked whence came the woman. And
he said, from the same. She was from a company of sirens,
who are skilled in taking upon themselves by means of fan-
tasies all fashions and forms of beauty and adornment : now
they assume the beauty of Venus; now the grace of address
of a nymph of Parnassus; and again they adorn themselves
as with the crown and robes of a queen, and walk superbly,
leaning upon a silver staff. Such in the world of spirits are
harlots and study fantasies. Fantasy is produced by sen-
sual thought, while ideas from any interior thought are shut
out. I asked the satan whether she was his wife. He an-
swered, “ What is a wife ? I do not know, nor does my so-
ciety. She is my harlot.” And then she inspired the man
with lascivious desire, which also sirens are skilled in doing;
and on receiving it he kissed her, and said, “ Ah, my Adonis!”

But to proceed to serious things: I asked the satan what
was his occupation; and he said, “ My occupation is the pur-
suit of learning; do you not see the laurel upon my head?”
for his Adonis had formed this by her art, and she placed
it upon his head from behind. And I said, “ Since you are
come from a society where there are schools of learning, tell
me what you believe and what your associates believe con-
cerning God.” He answered, “God to us is the universe,
which also we call nature, and which the simple among us
call the atmosphere, by which they mean the air; but the


No. 80 ] GOD THE CREATOR 1 3 I

wise call it the atmosphere, meaning the ether also. God,
heaven, angels, and the like, about which many tell many
fables in this world, are empty words and fictions taken from
meteors which play before the eyes of many here. Are not
all the things which appear upon the earth created by the
sun ? Are not worms, with wings and without wings, pro-
duced at every coming of the sun, in the time of spring?
And do not the birds from its heat love each other and breed ?
Does not the earth warmed by its heat develop seeds into
plants and at length fruits, as offspring ? Is not thus the
universe God and nature a goddess; and does not she as the
partner of the universe conceive, bring forth, educate, and
nourish them?”

I asked further, what he and his society believed concern-
ing religion. He answered: “Religion, with us who are
more learned than the multitude, is nothing but a spell for
the common people, which is as an aura about the sensitive
and imaginative powers of their mind, in which the ideas of
piety fly like butterflies in the air; and their faith, which
weaves those ideas as into a chain, is like a silk -worm in its
silken envelope, from which it flies forth as the king of butter-
flies. For the uneducated common people love imaginations
above the things of sense of the body and of the thought
thence, on account of their strong desire to fly; and so they
make for themselves wings, that they may raise themselves
on high like eagles, and boastfully cry to those on the ground,
‘Look at me? But we believe what we see, and love what
we touch.” And then he touched his harlot, and said, “I
believe in this, because I see and touch it; but as for such
ridiculous things, we cast them out through our open win-
dows, and drive them away with a blast of ridicule.”

Afterward I asked what he with his associates believed
about heaven and hell. He answered with a loud laugh,
“ What is heaven but the expanse of ether in its height ? and
what are the angels there but spots wandering about the sun ?
and the archangels but comets with a long tail, on which


132


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 80


dwell a troop of them ? And what is hell but swamps where
are frogs and crocodiles, which in the imagination of those
people are devils? Beyond these ideas of heaven and hell
all others are trifles, introduced by some primate for gaining
glory from an ignorant populace.” All these things he spoke
just as he had thought about them in the. world, not knowing
that he was living after death, and having forgotten all that
he heard when he first entered the world of spirits. So,
also, to an inquiry about life after death, he answered, “ It is
an imaginary entity; and perhaps some effluvium arising
from a dead body in the tomb, in form as a man, or some-
thing which is called a spectre, about which some people tell
fabulous stories, introduced such notions into the imagina-
tions of men.”

On hearing these words I could no longer restrain my
laughter, and I said, “Satan, you are raving mad. ,JVhy,
are you not now in form a man ? Do you not speak, see,
hear, and walk? Recollect that you once lived in another
world, which you have forgotten, and that you are living now
after death, and that you have been talking just as you did
before.” And recollection was given to him, and he remem-
bered, and then he was ashamed, and cried, “I am crazy: I
saw heaven above, and heard angels there speaking ineffable
things; but this was when I had lately arrived here; but
now I will retain this, to relate it to my companions from
whom I came, and perhaps they likewise will then be
ashamed.” And he kept it on his tongue, to call them crazy;
but, as he descended, forgetfulness expelled memory, and
when he was there, he was as insane as ever, and called those
things which he heard from me nonsense. Such is the state
of thought and speech of^satans after death. Those are
called satans who have confirmed themselves in falsities,
even to belief, and those are called devils who have con-
firmed evils in themselves by the life.


CHAPTER SECOND.


THE LORD THE REDEEMER.

81. In the previous chapter we have treated of God the
Creator, and at the same time of creation; and now in this
chapter we are to treat of the Lord the Redeemer, and at the
same time also of redemption; and in the following chapter,
of the Holy Spirit, and at the same time of the Divine opera-
tion. By the Lord the Redeemer we understand Jehovah
in the Human; for that Jehovah Himself descended and
assumed the Human that He might accomplish redemption,
will be demonstrated in what follows. The reason why the
Lord is said, and not Jehovah, is because Jehovah in the Old
Testament is called the Lord in the New, as may be evident
from these passages — it is said in Moses, Hear , O Israel ,
Jehovah your God is one Jehovah; and thou shall love
Jehovah thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul
(Deut. vi. 4, 5); but in Mark, The Lord your God is one
Lord, and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul (xii. 29, 30): also in Isaiah, Pre-
fare ye the way of Jehovah; make smooth in the desert a
highway for our God (xl. 3); but in Luke, Thou shalt go
before the face of the Lord to prepare His ways (i. 76) — be-
sides other passages. And also the Lord commanded His
disciples to call Him Lord, and therefore He was so called
by the apostles in their epistles, and afterward by the apos-
tolic church, as appears from its creed, which is called the
Apostles' Creed. The reason was, that the Jews durst not
use the name Jehovah, on account of its sanctity; and also
by Jehovah is meant the Divine Esse , which was from eter-
nity, and the human which He assumed in time was not that


134


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 8i


Esse . What the Divine Esse or Jehovah is, was shown in
the foregoing chapter (n. 18-26, and n. 27-35). For this
reason, here and in what follows, by the Lord we mean Jeho-
vah in His Human. Now, because knowledge of the Lord
surpasses in excellence all the knowledges which are in the
church, even those which are in heaven, the subject shall be
arranged that this knowledge may come in such order into
light — as follows: I. Jehovah God the Creator of the uni-
verse descended and assumed the Human that He might re-
deem and save men . II. He descended as Divine truth ,
which is the Word , and yet He did not separate Divine good .

III. He assumed the Human according to His Divine order .

IV. The Human by which He sent Himself into the world ,
is what is called the Son of God. V. The Lord by acts of re-
demption made Himself righteousness. VI. By the same acts
He united Himself to the Father , and the Father Himself to
Him; also according to Divine order. VII. Thus God be-
came Man , and Man God , in one person. VIII. The pro-
gression to union was the state of His exinanition , and the
union itself is the state of His glorification. IX. Hereafter
no one from among Christians comes into heaven unless he
believes in the Lord God the Saviour , and goes to Him alone.
But these things shall be explained one by one.

82. I. Jehovah God the Creator 0} the universe descended
and assumed the Human that He might redeem and save men.
In Christian churches at this day it is believed that God
the Creator of the universe begat a Son from eternity, and
that this Son descended and assumed the Human to redeem
and save men; but this is erroneous, and falls of itself when
it is considered that God is one, and that it is more than
fabulous in the eye of reason that the one God begat a Son
from eternity, and also that God the Father together with
the Son and the Holy Spirit, each of whom singly is God, is
one God. This fabulous belief is entirely dissipated, as a
falling star into vapor, when it is demonstrated from the


No. 82]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


135


Word that Jehovah God Himself descended and became
Man and also Redeemer. As for the first, that Jehovah
God Himself descended and became Man is evident from
these passages: Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son y who shall be called God with us (Isa. vii. 14: Matt. i.
22, 23). Unto us a Child is born; unto us a Son is given;
and the government shall be upon His shoulder , and His
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor , God , Mighty,
Father of Eternity, the Prince of Peace (Isa. ix. 6). It shall
be said in that day , Lo, this is our God, we have waited for
Him to deliver us ; this is Jehovah, we have waited for Him ;
let us be glad and rejoice in His salvation ( xxv . 9). The
voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
Jehovah ; make smooth in the desert a highway for our God
. . . and all flesh shall see it together (xl. 3, 5). Behold, the
Lord Jehovih cometh in strength, and His arm shall rule for
Him; behold, His reward is with Him, and He shall feed
His flock like a shepherd (xl. 10, 11). Jehovah said, Sing
and rejoice, O daughter of Zion ; for lo, I come to dwell in the
midst of thee ; then many nations shall cleave to Jehovah in
that day (Zech. ii. 10, n). I Jehovah have called thee in
righteousness . . . and I will give thee for a covenant of the
people ... I am Jehovah; that is My name, and My glory
I will not give to another (Isa. xlii. 6, 8). Behold, the days
are coming, when I will raise up unto David a righteous
Branch, who shall reign King, and do judgment and jus-
tice in the earth, and this is His name, Jehovah our Righteous-
ness (Jer. xxiii. 5, 6; xxxiii. 15, 16); besides many passages
where the coming of the Lord is called the day of Jehovah
(as Isa. xiii. 6, 9, 13, 22: Ezek. xxxi. 15: Joel i. 15; ii. 1, 2,
11, 29, 31; iii. 1, 14, 18: Amos v. 13, 18, 20: Zeph. i. 7-18:
Zech. xiv, 1, 4-21; and other places). That Jehovah Him-
self descended and assumed the Human is very evident in
Luke, where are these words: Mary said unto the angel,
How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the angel
answered and said, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and


136 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 82

the power 0} the Highest shall overshadow thee ; wherefore
also the Holy Thing that is born of thee , shall be called the
Son of God (i. 34, 35). And in Matthew: The angel said to
Joseph, the bethrothed husband of Mary, in a dream, That
which is begotten in her is of the Holy Spirit . . . and Joseph
knew her not , until she had brought forth a Son f and called
His name Jesus (i. 20, 25). That by the 'Holy Spirit is
meant the Divine which proceeds from Jehovah God will be
seen in the third chapter of this work. Who does not know
that the child has its soul and life from the father, and that
the body is from the soul ? What therefore is said more
plainly than that the Lord had His soul and life from Jeho-
vah God ? and because the Divine cannot be divided, that
the Divine itself of the Father was His soul and life?
Wherefore the Lord so often called Jehovah God His Father,
and Jehovah God called Him His Son. What then can be
heard more absurd than that the soul of our Lord was from
the mother Mary? as both the Roman Catholics and the
Reformed at this day dream, not having as yet been awak-
ened by the Word.

83. That any Son born from eternity descended and
assumed the Human, utterly falls as erroneous and is dis-
sipated, from the passages in the Word in which Jehovah
Himself says that He is the Saviour and the Redeemer, which
are the following: Am not I Jehovah ? and there is no God
else beside Me; a just God and a Saviour , there is none be-
side Me (Isa. xlv. 21, 22). I am Jehovah } and beside Me
there is no Saviour (xliii. 11). I Jehovah am thy God , and
thou shalt acknowledge no God beside Me , and there is no
Saviour beside Me (Hos. xiii. 4). That all flesh may know
that I Jehovah am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer (Isa. xlix.
26; lx. 16). As for our Redeemer , Jehovah Zebaoth is His
name (xlvii. 4). Their Redeemer is strong; Jehovah Zeba-
oth is His name (Jer. 1 . 34). Jehovah , my Rock and my
Redeemer (Ps. xix. 14). Thus said Jehovah , thy Redeemer ,
the Holy One of Israel , I am Jehovah thy God (Isa. xlviii. 17;


No. 84]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


137


xliii. 14; xlix. 7). Thus said Jehovah thy Redeemer , l am
Jehovah , that maketh all things , even alone by Mysel} (xliv.
24). Thus said Jehovah , the King 0} Israel , and His Re -
deemer , Jehovah Zebaoth , I am the First and the Last ,
beside Me there is no God (xliv. 6). Thou t Jehovah , ar/ owr
Father , owr Redeemer from everlasting is Thy name (lxiii. 16).

everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee , smd
Jehovah thy Redeemer (liv. 8). Thou hast redeemed me y
Jehovah , Gtfi 0} truth (Ps. xxxi. 5). Ze/ Israel hope in Jeho-
vah , for with Jehovah is mercy , and with Him is plenteous
Redemption , and He will redeem Israel from all his iniquities
(cxxx. 7, 8). Jehovah God , and Redeemer the Holy One
of Israel , the God of the whole earth shall He be called (Isa.
liv. 5). From these passages and very many others, every
man who has eyes, and whose mind has been opened by
means of them, can see that God, who is one, descended
and became Man for the purpose of accomplishing the work
of redemption. Who cannot see this as in the morning light
while he attends to these Divine declarations themselves,
which have been presented ? But those who are in the shade
of night, from confirmation in favor of the birth of another
God from eternity, and of His descent and redemption, close
their eyelids to those Divine declarations, and under them
think how they may apply these words to their falsities and
pervert them.

84. There are several reasons, which will be disclosed in
course in the following pages, why God could not redeem
men, that is, deliver them from damnation and hell, except
by the assumed Human; for redemption was the subjuga-
tion of the hells and the ordering of the heavens, and after
this the establishment of a church. These things God by
His omnipotence could not effect except by means of the
Human; as no one can work unless he has an arm, and His
Human is called in the Word the Arm of Jehovah (Isa. xl.
10; liii. 1); and also as no one can attack a fortified city and
destroy the shrines of the idols therein, except by means of


138 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 84

armed forces. That in this Divine work God had omnip-
otence by means of His Human is manifest also from the
Word; for otherwise God, who is in what is inmost and
purest, could but to no purpose pass to what is outmost, in
which are the hells and in which the men of that time were —
comparatively as the soul cannot do any thing without a
body, or as no one can conquer enemies who do not come into
his sight, or whom he cannot approach and reach with any
arms, as spears, shields, or muskets. To accomplish the
work of redemption without the Human was as impossible
for God as for man to subjugate the Indies without trans-
porting soldiers thither by ships; or as it is to make trees
grow by merely the heat and light of the sun, without air
being created through which the heat and light might pass,
and without the creation of the earth, out of which they
might be produced; nay, it is as impossible as to cast nets
into the air and catch fishes there, instead of in the water;
for Jehovah, as He is in Himself, cannot by His omnipotence
touch any devil in hell nor any devil upon earth, and curb
Him and His fury, and subdue His violence, unless He be in
lasts as He is in firsts: He is in lasts in His Human; where-
fore, in the Word, He is called the First and the Last, the
Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End.

85. n. Jehovah descended as Divine truth , which is the
Word , and yet He did not separate Divine good . Two things
make God’s essence, Divine love and Divine wisdom; or
what is the same, Divine good and Divine truth. That
these two are the essence of God was shown above (n. 36-
48). These two in the Word are meant also by Jehovah
God; by Jehovah, Divine love or Divine good, and by God,
Divine wisdom or Divine truth. This is the reason of the dis-
tinction in the Word in various ways, when sometimes only
Jehovah is named, and sometimes only God; for where the
subject is Divine good, Jehovah is said; and where it is Di-
vine truth, God is named; and where both are meant, Jeho-


No. 85]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


139


vah God is said. That Jehovah God descended as Divine
truth, which is the Word, is evident in John, where are these
words: In the beginning was the Word , and the Word was
with God , and the Word was God. ... All things were made
by Him , and without Him was not any thing made that was
made. . . . And the Word became -flesh , and dwelt among us
(i. 1, 3, 14). By the Word is there meant Divine truth be-
cause the Word which is in the church is Divine truth itself;
for it was dictated by Jehovah Himself, and what is dictated
by Jehovah is purely Divine truth, and can be no other; hut
because that passed through the heavens even into the world,
it became accommodated to angels in heaven and also to
men in the world. Hereby there is in the Word a spiritual
sense in which Divine truth is in light, and a natural sense in
which Divine truth is in shade; therefore Divine truth in this
Word is what is meant in John. This appears still further
from the fact that the Lord came into the world in order to
fulfil all things of the Word as it is so often said that this and
that was done by Him, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
Nor is any other than the Divine truth meant by the Messiah
or Christ; nor any other by the Son of Man; nor any other
by the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, which the Lord sent after
His departure. That He presented Himself as that Word in
His transfiguration before the three disciples on the mount
(Matt, xvii: Mark ix., and Luke ix.), and also before John
in the Apocalypse (i. 12-16), will be seen in the chapter con-
cerning the Sacred Scripture. That the Lord in the world
was the Divine truth, appears from His own words: I am
the Way , the Truth and the Life (John xiv. 6); and from
these of John, We know that the Son of God hath come , and
given us understanding , that we may know the truth , and we
are in the truth , in His Son Jesus Christ : This is the true
God and eternal life (1 John v. 20); and still further by His
being called the light, as in these passages: He was the true
light , which lighteth every man that cometh into the world
(John i. 9). Jesus said , Yet a little while is the light with


140 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 85

you : walk while ye have the light , lest darkness come upon
you ; while ye have light , believe in the light , that ye may be
children 0} light (xii. 35, 36). I am the light of the world
(ix. 5). Simeon said, Mine eyes have seen Thy salvation
... a light to lighten the gentiles (Luke ii. 30, 32). This is
the judgment , that light is come into the world ... he that
doeth the truth , cometh to the light (John iii. 19, 21); besides
other places. By the light is meant Divine truth.

86. The reason why Jehovah God descended into the
world as Divine truth was that He might do the work of
redemption; and redemption was the subjugation of the
hells, the ordering of the heavens, and, after this, the estab-
lishment of a church. To effect these things the Divine
good does not avail, but Divine truth from the Divine good.
The Divine good, regarded in itself, is as the round hilt of a
sword, or as blunt wood, or as a bare bow; but Divine truth
from the Divine good is as a sharp sword, and as wood in the
form of a spear, and as a bow with arrows, which are ser-
viceable against an enemy. By swords, spears, and bows,
in the spiritual sense of the Word, also are meant truths
fighting — see the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 52, 299, 436),
where this is shown; nor could the falsities and evils in which
all hell was and always is, be attacked, conquered, and subju-
gated otherwise than by Divine truth from the Word; nor
could the new heaven, which also was then made, be founded,
formed, and arranged in order by any other means; nor
could the new church upon earth be established by any other
means. Moreover, all the strength, all the virtue, and all
the power of God, is of Divine truth from the Divine good.
This was the reason why Jehovah God descended as Di-
vine truth, which is the Word; therefore it is said in David,
Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh , O Mighty One , and in
Thine honor mount up; ride upon the Word of Truth; Thy
right hand will teach Thee wonderful things ; Thy weapons
are sharp; Thine enemies shall fall under Thee (Ps. xlv.
3-5). These words are said of the Lord, and of His com-
bats with the hells, and of His victories over them.


No. 87] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 1 4 *

87. What good without truth is, and what truth from good
is, appears manifestly from man; all his good resides in the
will, and all his truth in the understanding; and the will
from its good cannot do any thing except by the understand-
ing; it cannot work, it cannot speak, it cannot feel: all its
virtue and power is by means of the understanding, conse-
quently by means of truth, for the understanding is the re-
ceptacle and habitation of truth. The case is similar with
these as with the operation of the heart and lungs in the body;
the heart without the respiration of the lungs does not pro-
duce any motion or any feeling, but the respiration of the
lungs from the heart does both; which is evident in the
swooning of persons who are suffocated or who are sunk in
water, in whom respiration ceases while the systolic activity
of the heart still continues; that such have neither motion
nor feeling is known. It is similar with an embryo in the
mother’s womb. The reason is, that the heart corresponds
to the will and its goods, and the lungs to the understanding
and its truths. In the spiritual world, the power of truth
is most conspicuous. An angel who is in Divine truths from
the Lord, though as to the body weak as a child, can yet put
to flight, pursue to hell, and thrust into caverns there, a troop
of infernal spirits appearing as Anakim and Nephilim, that
is, as giants; and when they go out of the caverns, they dare
not approach the angel. Those who are in Divine truths
from the Lord are in that world as lions, though as to their
bodies they have no more strength than sheep. It is similar
with men who are in Divine truths from the Lord, when act-
ing against evils and falsities, and so against bands of devils,
who regarded in their essence are no other than evils and
falsities. There is such strength inherent in Divine truth
because God is good itself and truth itself, and He created
the universe by Divine truth; and all the laws of order by
which He conserves the universe, are truths. Therefore it
is said in John that by the Word all things were made , and
without it nothing was made that was made (i. 3); and in


142


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 87


David, By the Word 0} Jehovah were the heavens made , and
all the host oj them by the breath of His mouth (Ps. xxxiii. 6).

88. That God, though He descended as Divine truth, still
did not separate Divine good, is evident from the concep-
tion, of which it is said that the power of the Highest
overshadowed Mary (Luke i. 35); and by the power of the
Highest is meant Divine good. The same is evident from
the passages where He says that the Father is in Him, and
He in the Father; that all things of the Father are His;
and that the Father and He are one; and from other pas-
sages. By the Father is meant the Divine good.

89. III. God assumed the Human according to His Di-
vine order. In the section concerning the Divine omnip-
otence and omniscience, it was shown that God at the crea-
tion introduced order into the universe, and into all and
every part of it; and that therefore the omnipotence of God,
in the universe and in all and every part of it, proceeds and
operates according to the laws of His order — of which above
in series (from n. 47-74). Now because God descended
and because He is order itself, as also was there shown, in
order that He might become actually Man, He could not but
be conceived, carried in the womb, brought forth, brought
up, and successively gain knowledges, and by them be intro-
duced into intelligence and wisdom. Therefore as to the
Human He was an infant as an infant, a boy as a boy, and so
on; with this difference only, that He accomplished that
progress more quickly, more fully, and more perfectly, than
others. That He advanced thus progressively according to
order, is evident from these words in Luke: And the child
Jesus grew , and waxed strong in spirit . . . and increased
in wisdom and stature , and in favor with God and man (ii. 40,
52). That He did so more quickly, more fully, and more
perfectly than others, is manifest from what else is said of
Him in the same Evangelist, as that when He was a boy of
twelve years, He sat in the temple in the midst of the doctors,


No. 90]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


143


and taught; and all who heard Him were astonished at His
understanding and answers (ii. 46, 47; see also chap. iv. 16-
22, 32). This was done hecause the Divine order is that
man should prepare himself for the reception of God; and
as he prepares himself, so God enters into him as into His
habitation and house; and that preparation is made by means
of knowledges concerning God and the spiritual things of the
church, and thus by intelligence and wisdom; for it is a law
of order that as far as man approaches and draws near to
God, which he must do altogether as of himself — so far
God approaches and draws near to man, and conjoins Him-
self with him in his interiors. That the Lord proceeded
according to this order, even to union with His Father, will
be further shown in what follows.

90. They who do not know that the Divine omnipotence
proceeds and operates according to order, may hatch out of
their fancy many things opposed and contradictory to sound
reason, as why God did not assume the Human immediately,
without such a progression; why He did not create or com-
pose for Himself a body out of the elements, from the four
quarters of the world, and thus exhibit Himself to be seen as
God Man, before the Jewish people, nay, before the whole
world; or, if He would be born, why He did not infuse into
the embryo itself, or into Himself as an infant, all His Di-
vine; or why He did not, after His birth, raise Himself up
to the stature of manhood, and at once speak from the Di-
vine wisdom. Such and similar things those may conceive
and bring forth who think about the Divine omnipotence
without order; and thus they may fill the church with absur-
dities and trifles, as has been really done: for example, that
God could beget a Son from eternity, and cause that a third
God should then proceed from Himself and the Son; also
that He could be angry with mankind, give them over to
destruction, and be willing to be brought back to mercy by
His Son, and this by the Son’s intercession and the remem-
brance of His cross; and moreover that He could put into


144


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 90


man the righteousness of His Son, and insert it in his heart,
like the simple substance of Wolfius, in which, as that author
himself says, are all things of the Son’s merit, but that it can-
not be divided, since if it be divided it falls to nothing; and
moreover that He can as by a papal bull remit sins to whom-
soever He will, or purify the most impious one from his dark
evils, and thus make one who is black as a devil white as an
angel of light, without man’s moving himself any more than
a stone, or while he stands still as a statue or as an idol; be-
side many other insane notions, which those who maintain
the Divine power to be absolute, without knowledge or
acknowledgment of any order, may scatter abroad as a win-
nower scatters chaff into the air. In spiritual things, which
are of heaven and the church, and thence of eternal life, these
may wander from Divine truths, as a blind man in the woods,
who now falls upon stones, now dashes his forehead against a
tree, now entangles his hair in its branches.

91. Divine miracles also have been done according to
Divine order, but according to the order of the influx of the
spiritual world into the natural; concerning which order no
one has hitherto known any thing, because no one has known
any thing of the spiritual world. But what that order is will
be made manifest in its time, when we treat of Divine Mir-
acles, and of Magical Miracles.

92. IV. The Human , by which God sent Himself into
the world , is the Son 0} God. The Lord frequently said that
the Father sent Him into the world, and that He was sent by
the Father (as Matt. x. 40; xv. 24: John iii. 17, 34; v. 23,
24, 36-38; vi. 29, 39, 40, 44, 57; vii. 16, 18, 28, 29; viii. 16,
18, 29, 42; ix. 4; and in many other places); and this He
says because by being sent into the world is meant to descend
and come among men; and this was done through the Hu-
man, which He assumed by means of the virgin Mary; and
also the Human is actually the Son of God, because it was
conceived of Jehovah God as a Father (according to Luke


No. 93]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


145


i- 3 2 > 35)* He is called the Son of God, the Son of Man, and
the Son of Mary; and by the Son of God is meant Jehovah
God in His Human; by the Son of Man, the Lord as to the
Word; and by the Son of Mary, properly the human which
He assumed. That by the Son of God and by the Son of
Man those two things are meant will be shown in what fol-
lows. That by the son of Mary is meant the merely human,
is very manifest from the generation of men, that the soul is
from the father and the body from the mother; for the soul
is in the seed of the father, and it is clothed with a body in the
mother; or, what is the same, all the spiritual that man has
is from the father, and all the material is from the mother.
As to the Lord, the Divine which He had was from Jehovah,
the Father, and the human was from the mother; these two
united are the Son of God. That it is so, is clearly evident
from the nativity of the Lord, of which this is written in Luke:
The angel Gabriel said to Mary, The Holy Spirit shall come
upon thee , and the power 0} the Highest shall overshadow thee ;
therefore the Holy Thing that is born of thee shall be called the
Son of God (i. 35). The Lord called Himself sent by the
Father, also for the reason that by sent is signified the same
as by angel; for angel, in the original language, is sent.
Thus it is said in Isaiah, The angel 0} the presence of Jehovah
delivered them ; in His love and in His pity He redeemed
them (lxiii. 9); and in Malachi, The Lord , whom ye seek ,
shall suddenly come to His temple , even the angel of the cove-
nant, whom ye delight in (iii. 1 ) — besides other places. That
the Divine Trinity, God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, is in the Lord, and that the Father in Him is the Di-
vine from which He is, the Son the Divine Human, and the
Holy Spirit the Divine proceeding, will be seen in the third
chapter of this work, where the subject is the Divine Trinity.

93. Since it was said to Mary by the angel Gabriel, The
Holy Thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son
of God , passages shall be adduced from the Word to show
that the Lord as to the Human is called the Holy One of


14 6 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 93

Israel, which are these: I was seeing in visions ; lo, a
Watcher and a Holy One descending jrom heaven (Dan. iv.
10, 13). God came jrom Teman , and the Holy One jrom
mount Paran (Hab. iii. 3). I Jehovah , the Holy One , the
Maker 0} Israel , your Holy One (Isa. xliii. n, 14, 15). Thus
said Jehovah , the Redeemer 0} Israel , His Holy One (xlix. 7).
I Jehovah thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour (xliii.
3). As } or our Redeemer, Jehovah Zebaoth is His name, the
Holy One 0} Israel (xlvii. 4). Thus saith Jehovah your
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel (xliii. 14; xlviii. 17). Je-
hovah Zebaoth is His name, and thy Redeemer, the Holy
One 0} Israel (liv. 5). They tempted God and limited the
Holy One of Israel (Ps. lxxviii. 41). They have forsaken
Jehovah and have provoked the Holy One 0} Israel (Isa. i. 4).
They said, Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before
us; wherefore, thus said the Holy One 0} Israel (xxx. 11, 12).
Who say, Let Him hasten His work, that we may see , and let
the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come
(v. 19). In that day they shall stay upon Jehovah, the Holy
One of Israel, in truth (x. 20). Cry out and sing aloud, O
daughter of Zion , because great is the Holy One of Israel in
the midst of thee (xii. 6). Thus saith the God of Israel; At
that day His eyes shall look to the Holy One of Israel (xvii. 7).
The poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel
(xxix. 19; xli. 16). Their land was filled with sin against
the Holy One of Israel (Jer. li. 5) — see also Isaiah (lv. 5;
lx. 9) and other places. By the Holy One of Israel is meant
the Lord as to the Divine Human; for the angel said to
Mary, The Holy Thing which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son 0} God (Luke i. 35). That Jehovah and the
Holy One of Israel are one, though named as if distinct, may
be evident from the passages also here adduced to show that
Jehovah is that Holy One of Israel. That the Lord is called
the God of Israel, is evident also from very many passages
as Isa. xvii. 6; xxi. 10, 17; xxiv. 15; xxix. 23: Jer. vii. 3;
ix. 15; xi. 3; xiii. 12; xvi. 9; xix. 3, 15; xxiii. 2; xxiv. 5;


No. 94]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


147


xxv. 15, 27; xxix. 4, 8, 21, 25; xxx. 2; xxxi. 23; xxxii. 14,
15, 36; xxxiii. 4; xxxiv. 2, 13; xxxv. 13, 17-19; xxxvii. 7;
xxxviii. 17; xxxix. 16; xlii. 9, 15, 18; xliii. 10; xliv. 2, 7, 11,
25; xlviii. 1; 1 . 18; li. 33: Ezek. viii. 4; ix. 3; x. 19, 20;
xi. 22; xliii. 2; xliv. 2: Zeph. ii. 9: Ps. xli. 13; lix. 5;
lxviii. 8.

94. In Christian churches at the present time it is com-
mon to call the Lord our Saviour the Son of Mary, and rarely
the Son of God unless they then mean a Son of God born
from eternity. The reason of this is that the Roman Cath-
olics have sanctified Mary*the mother above the others, and
have exalted her as a goddess or queen over all their saints;
and yet the Lord when He glorified His Human put off all
from His mother, and put on all from the Father, as will be
fully demonstrated in the following parts of this work. From
this common saying in the mouth of all, that He is called the
Son of Mary, many enormities have flowed into the church,
especially with those who have not admitted into their judg-
ment what is said in the Word concerning the Lord, as that
the Father and He are one; that He is in the Father, and the
Father in Him; that all things of the Father are His; that
He called Jehovah His Father, and Jehovah the Father
called Him His Son. The enormities which have flowed
into the church from their calling Him the Son of Mary and
not the Son of God, are that concerning the Lord the idea of
Divinity is lost, and with this, all that is said in the Word
about Him as the Son of God; then that through that enter
Judaism, Arianism, Socinianism, Calvinism such as it was
in the beginning, and at length Naturalism, and with this
the delirium that He was the son of Mary by Joseph, and
also that He had His soul from the mother, and hence that
He is called the Son of God when He is not. Let every one,
clergyman as well as layman, question himself whether he
has conceived and cherishes any other idea concerning the
Lord, as the Son of Mary, than as of a mere man. Since
such an idea began already to prevail among Christians in


148


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 94


the third century, when the Arians arose, therefore the coun-
cil of Nice, to vindicate the Divinity of the Lord, asserted a
Son of God born from eternity; but by this fiction the Hu-
man of the Lord was indeed elevated then, and with many
also at this day it is elevated, to the Divine; but not with
those who by the hypostatic union understand a union as
between two, of whom one is above and the other is below.
But what else results from this than that the whole Chris-
tian Church perishes, which was founded solely upon the
worship of Jehovah in the Human, consequently upon God
Man ? That no one can see the Father, nor know Him, nor
come to Him, nor believe in Him, unless through His Hu-
man, the Lord declares in many passages. If this is not
done, all the noble seed of the church is turned into ignoble
seed; the seed of the olive into the seed of the pine; the seed
of the orange, the lemon, the apple, and the pear, into the
seed of the willow, the elm, the linden, and the oak; the vine
into the rush of the bog; the wheat and barley into chaff;
nay, all spiritual food becomes as the dust which serpents
eat; for in man spiritual light becomes natural, and at length
corporeal sensual, which viewed in itself is delusive light;
nay, man then becomes as a bird, which, while it flies on
high, with its wings clipped falls to the earth, where walking,
it sees no more around it than what lies before its feet; and
then of the spiritual things of the church, which must be
for eternal life, he thinks no otherwise than a soothsayer.
These things take place when man regards the Lord God,
the Redeemer and Saviour, as the mere son of Mary, thus as
a mere man.

95. V. The Lord , by the acts of redemption , made Him-
self righteousness. That the Lord alone had merit and
righteousness by the obedience which He yielded in the world
to God the Father, and especially by the passion of the cross,
is said and believed at this day in Christian churches; but
it has been supposed that the passion of the cross was the


No. 96]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


I49


very act of redemption, when yet that was not the act of
redemption, but the act of the glorification of His Human,
of which we shall treat in the following article, concerning
Redemption. The acts of redemption by which the Lord
made Himself righteousness, were that He executed a final
judgment, which took place in the spiritual world, and then
separated the evil from the good, and the goats from the
sheep, and expelled from heaven those who made one with
the beasts of the dragon, and of the worthy He founded a
new heaven, and of the unworthy a hell, and successively
reduced all things in both to order; and moreover estab-
lished a new church. These acts were the acts of redemp-
tion, by which the Lord made Himself righteousness; for
righteousness is doing all things according to Divine order;
and reducing to order those things which have fallen out
of order; since righteousness is Divine order itself. Those
things are meant by these words of the Lord: It becometh
Me to fulfil all righteousness (Matt. iii. 15); and by these in
the Old Testament: Behold the days come , when I shall raise
unto David a righteous branch , who shall reign King , and do
righteousness in the earth , and this is His name , Jehovah
our righteousness (Jer. xxiii. 5, 6; xxxiii. 15, 16). I speak
in righteousness , mighty to save (Isa. lxiii. 1). He shall sit
upon the throne of David y to establish it in judgment and
righteousness (ix. 7). Zion shall be redeemed ... in right-
eousness (i. 27).

96. The men of our time who bear rule in the church de-
scribe the righteousness of the Lord quite differently; aDd
also by inscribing it upon man they make their faith saving;
when yet the truth is that the righteousness of the Lord, be-
cause it is such and is hence, and in itself purely Divine, can-
not be conjoined to any man, and thus cannot produce any
salvation, any more than the Divine life, which is Divine
love and Divine wisdom. The Lord enters with these into
every man; but unless man lives according to order, that life
is in him, indeed, but contributes nothing at all to his salva-


1 50 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 96

tion; it only gives the faculty of understanding truth and of
doing good. To live according to Divine order is to live ac-
cording to the commandments of God; and when man so
lives and does, then he procures for himself righteousness;
not the righteousness of the Lord’s redemption, but the Lord
Himself as righteousness. These are they who are meant
by these words: Unless your righteousness shall exceed that of
the Scribes and Pharisees , ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of the heavens (Matt. v. 20). Blessed are they who are per-
secuted for righteousness 9 sake , for theirs is the kingdom of the
heavens (v. 10). In the consummation of the age } the angels
will go forth , and separate the wicked from the midst of the
righteous (xiii. 49) ; besides other places. By the righteous
in the Word are meant those who have lived according to
Divine order, since Divine order is righteous. Righteous-
ness itself, which the Lord became by the acts of redemption,
cannot be ascribed to man, inscribed upon him, adapted and
conjoined to him, otherwise than as light to the eye, sound to
the ear, will to the muscles of one acting, thought to the lips
of one speaking, air to the lungs of one breathing, heat to the
blood, and so on; that these flow in and adjoin themselves,
and also conjoin themselves, every one perceives from him-
self. But righteousness is acquired so far as man exercises
righteousness; and he exercises righteousness as far as he
acts with his neighbor from the love of what is just and true;
in the good itself or in the use itself which he does, righteous-
ness dwells; for the Lord says, that every tree is known by
its fruit. Who does not have knowledge of another by his
works, if he attends to them, with reference to the end and
purpose of the will, and the cause and intention from which
they are done? All angels attend to these things, and also
all wise men in our world. In general, every shrub and
plant is known from its flower and seed, and from its use;
every metal, from its goodness; every stone, from its quality;
every field, every kind of food, every animal of the earth, and
every bird of the heaven, from their quality: why not man ?


No. 98] THE LORD THE REDEEMER I 5 I

But as to the quality of man’s works, whence it is, will be dis-
closed in the chapter concerning Faith.

97. VI. The Lord , by the same acts , united Himself to the
Father , and the Father Himself to Him also according to
Divine order. That the union was effected by the acts of
redemption is hecause the Lord wrought them from His
Human; and as He wrought, so the Divine, which is meant
by the Father, came nearer, assisted, and cooperated, and
at length They so conjoined Themselves that They were not
two, hut one; and this union is glorification, of which in the
following pages.

98. That the Father and the Son, that is, the Divine and
the Human in the Lord, are united as soul and hody, is in-
deed according to the faith of the church at this day, and also
according to the Word; but still scarce five in a hundred or
fifty in a thousand know it. This is because of the doctrine
of justification by faith alone, which most of the clergy, who
seek the reputation of learning for the sake of honors and
riches, emhrace with all zeal, until at this day that doctrine
gets complete possession of their minds; and because this
has intoxicated their thoughts, like the spirit of wine called
alcohol, therefore as if intoxicated they have not seen this
most essential thing of the church, that Jehovah God de-
scended and assumed the Human; when yet solely by this
union is given to man conjunction with God, and by con-
junction salvation. That salvation depends on the knowl-
edge and acknowledgment of God, may he evident to every
one who considers that God is the all in all of heaven, and
thence the all in all of the church; consequently, the all in all
of theology. But first it shall here be shown that the union
of the Father and the Son, or of the Divine and the Human
in the Lord, is as the union of soul and body; and afterward
that this union is reciprocal. That the union is as of the
soul and the body is established in the Athanasian creed,
which is received in all the Christian world as the doctrine


152


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 98


concerning God. There we read these words: Our Lord
Jesus Christ is God and Man ; and although He be God and
Man , still there are not two , but there is one Christ : He is one ,
because the Divine took the Human to itself ; yea , He is alto-
gether one , and He is one person ; for as the soul and body is
oite man , so God and Man is one Christ. Here however it is
meant that there is such a union of a Son of God from eter-
nity with the Son bom in time; but because God is one and
not three, when by that union is meant union with the one
God from eternity, the doctrine agrees with the Word. In
the Word we read that He was conceived of Jehovah the
Father (Luke i. 34, 35), whence was His soul and life; where-
fore He says that He and the Father are one (John x. 30);
that He who seeth and knoweth Him, seeth and knoweth the
Father (xiv. 9). He says, If ye had known Me , ye should
have known My Father also (viii. 19); He that receiveth Me
receiveth Him that sent Me (xiii. 20); also that He is in the
bosom of the Father (i. 18); and that all things whatsoever
the Father hath are His (xvi. 15). He is called the Father
of eternity (Isa. ix. 6) ; and it is said that He hath power over
all flesh (John xvii. 2); and all power in heaven and in earth
(Matt, xxviii. 18). From these and other passages in the
Word it may be clearly seen that the union of the Father and
Himself is as of the soul and the body; accordingly in the
Old Testament He is often named Jehovah, Jehovah Ze-
baoth, and Jehovah the Redeemer; see above (n. 83).

99. That the union is reciprocal is very evident from these
passages in the Word: Philip , believest thou not that I am in
the Father , and the Father in Me? Believe Me that I am in
the Father , and the Father in Me (John xiv. 10, 11); That
ye may know and believe that the Father is in Me , and I in the
Father (x. 38); That they all may be one , as Thou , Father ,
art in Me, and 1 in Thee (xvii. 21); Father , all Mine are
Thine , and Thine are Mine (xvii. 10). The union is recip-
rocal, because no union or conjunction between two is given,
unless on the part of each they accede one to the other: all


No. IOO] the lord the redeemer 153

conjunction in the whole heaven, in the whole world, and in
the whole of man, is from no other source than the reciprocal
accession of one to another, when they both will one thing;
hence come homogeneity, sympathy, unanimity, and con-
cord in every part of each. Such is the reciprocal conjunc-
tion of soul and body with every man; such is the conjunc-
tion of the spirit of man with the organs of sensation and
motion in his body; such is the conjunction of heart and
lungs; such is the conjunction of will and understanding;
such is the conjunction of all the members and viscera in
themselves and with one another in man; such is the con-
junction of minds, among all those who inwardly love each
other, for it is inscribed on all love and friendship, since love
wishes to love and to be loved. There is a reciprocal con-
junction of all things in the world that are closely conjoined
to each other; such is the conjunction of the heat of the sun
with the heat of wood and of stone; of the vital heat with the
heat of all the fibres in animals; such is that of the soil with
the root, through the root with the tree, and through the tree
with the fruit; such is that of the magnet with iron, and so
on. Unless conjunction be effected reciprocally and mu-
tually by the accession of one to another, only an external
conjunction and not an internal is effected; and this in time
is mutually dissolved by them, and sometimes so that they
no longer recognize each other.

100. Now because there is no conjunction which is con-
junction unless it be effected mutually and reciprocally,
therefore the conjunction of the Lord and man is not dif-
ferent, as is very manifest from these passages: He that
eateth My flesh , and drinketh My blood , dwelleth in Me and
I in Him (John vi. 56). Abide in Me, and I in you: he
that abideth in Me, and I in him, bringeth forth much fruit
(xv. 4, 5). Whosoever openeth the door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with Me (Apoc. iii. 20) ;
besides other places. This conjunction is effected by man’s
going to the Lord, and the Lord to him; for it is a fixed and


154 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. ioo

immutable law, that as far as man goes to the Lord so far the
Lord goes to man: but more will be seen on this subject in
the chapters concerning Charity and Faith.

ioi. VII. Thus God became Man , and Man God , in one
Person . That Jehovah God became Man, and Man God,
in one Person, follows as a conclusion from all the preceding
articles of this chapter, particularly from these two; that
Jehovah, the Creator of the universe, descended and as-
sumed the Human, that He might redeem and save men
(n. 82-84); and that the Lord by the acts of redemption
united Himself to the Father, and the Father united Him-
self to Him, thus reciprocally and mutually (n. 97-100).
From that reciprocal union it is very manifest that God be-
came Man, and Man God, in one Person. The same also
follows as a consequence of the union of both, that it is as
of the soul and body. That this is according to the faith of
the church at this day, from the creed of Athanasius, may be
seen above (n. 98); also according to the faith of the evan-
gelical Protestants, in their chief book of orthodoxy, which
is called the Formula Concordia, where it is firmly established
both from the Sacred Scripture and from the fathers, and
also by rational arguments, that the human nature of Christ
is exalted to Divine majesty, omnipotence, and omnipres-
ence; and that in Christ, Man is God and God Man {Form-
ula Concordia , pp. 607, 765). Moreover in this chapter it
has been proved that Jehovah God as to His Human is called
in the Word, Jehovah, Jehovah God, Jehovah Zebaoth, and
also the God of Israel; wherefore Paul says that In Jesus
Christ dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (Col. ii.
9); and John says that Jesus Christ , the Son of God , is the
true God and eternal life (1 John v. 20). That by the Son of
God is properly meant His Human, may be seen above (n. 92,
etc.). And moreover, Jehovah God calls both Himself and
Him Lord; for we read, The Lord said unto my Lord , Sit
Thou at My right hand (Ps. cx. 1); and in Isaiah: Unto us


No. 102]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


155


a Child is born , unto us a Son is given, whose name is God,
the Father of eternity (ix. 6). By Son, also, is meant the
Lord as to the Human, in David: 1 will declare the decree,
Jehovah said, Thou art My Son; to-day I have begotten

Thee Kiss the Son , lest He be angry, and ye perish in

the way (Ps, ii. 7, 12). Here a Son from eternity is not meant,
but the Son bom in the world; for it is prophetical of the
Lord, who was to come: therefore it is called the decree,
which Jehovah declared to David; and in the same Psalm
it is written, in the previous verse, I have anointed my King
upon Zion (v. 6); and in the following, I will give to Him
the nations for an inheritance (v. 8) ; therefore to-day, there,
is not from eternity, but in time, for with Jehovah the future
is present.

102. It is believed that the Lord as to the Human both
was and is the son of Mary; but in this the Christian world
is under a delusion. That He was the son of Mary is true,
but that He is so still is not true; for by the acts of redemp-
tion He put off the human from the mother, and put on a
Human from the Father; hence it is, that the Human of the
Lord is Divine, and that in Him God is Man and Man God.
That He put off the human from the mother, and put on a
Human from the Father, which is the Divine Human, may
be seen from this, that He nowhere called Mary His mother,
as may be evident from these passages: The mother of Jesus
said to Him, They have no wine. Jesus said to her, Woman,
what is there to Me and to thee? My hour is not yet come
(John ii. 3, 4). And in another place: Jesus from the cross,
seeing His mother, and the disciple standing by, whom He
loved, saith unto His mother, Woman, behold thy Son! Then
saith He to the disciple, Behold thy mother (xix. 26, 27). And
once He did not acknowledge her: It was told Jesus by
some, Thy mother and Thy brethren stand without, desiring
to see Thee. Jesus, answering, said, My mother and My
brethren are these which hear the Word of God , and do it (Luke
viii. 20, 21: Matt. xii. 46-50: Mark iii. 31-35). Thus the


i $6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 102


Lord did not call her Mother, but Woman, and gave her to
John for a mother; in other places she is called His mother,
but not by His own mouth. This also is confirmed by this,
that He did not acknowledge Himself to be the son of David;
for it is read in the Evangelists, Jesus asked the Pharisees,
saying, What think ye of Christ? Whose son is He? They
say unto Him , David’s. He saith unto them , How , then ,
doth David , in the Spirit , call Him his Lord , saying , The
Lord said to my Lord f Sit on My right hand , until I make
Thine enemies Thy footstool. If David then call Him Lord ,
how is He his Son? And no man was able to answer Him a
word (Matt. xxii. 42-45: Mark. xii. 35-37: Luke xx. 41-44:
Ps. cx. 1). To the above I will add this that is new: It was
once given me to speak with Mary the mother. She at the
time passed by and was seen in heaven over my head, in
white raiment as of silk; and then, tarrying a little, she said
that she was the mother of the Lord, as He was born of her;
but that when He became God, He put off all the human
which He had from her, and therefore she adores Him as her
God, and that she is unwilling that any one should account
Him her son, because in Him all is Divine. From these
things this truth now shines forth, that thus Jehovah is Man,
as in firsts, also in lasts, according to these words: I am the
Alpha and the Omega , the Beginning and the End , He who
is , and who was , and who is to come , the Almighty (Apoc.
i. 8, 11). John, when he saw the Son of Man in the midst
of the seven candlesticks, fell at His feet as dead; but He
laid His right hand upon him, saying, I am the First and the
Last (Apoc. i. 13, 17; xxi. 6). Behold , I come quickly , that I
may give to every one according to his work. I am the Alpha
and the Omega , the Beginning and the End , the First and
the Last (xxii. 12, 13). And in Isaiah: Thus said Jehovah ,
the King of Irsael , and his Redeemer , Jehovah Zebaoth y I am
the First and I am the Last (xliv. 6; xlviii. 12).

103. To the above I will add this arcanum. The soul
which is from the father is the man himself, and the hody


No. 103 ] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 1 57

which is from the mother is not the man in itself, but is from
hi m . The body is only a covering of the soul, composed of
such things as are of the natural world; but the soul is of
such things as are in the spiritual world. Every man, after
death, lays down the natural. which he had from the mother,
and retains the spiritual which he had from the father, to-
gether with a kind of border from the purest things of nature,
around it; but this border is with those who come into
heaven below, and the spiritual above; but the border with
those who come into hell is above, and the spiritual below.
Hence a man-angel speaks from heaven, thus what is good
and true; but a man-devil speaks from hell while speaking
from his heart, and from heaven while speaking from his
mouth: this he does abroad, but that at home. Since the
soul of man is the very man, and is spiritual from its origin,
it is plain whence it is that the mind, the disposition, the incli-
nation, and the affection of the father’s love dwell in offspring
after offspring, and return and show themselves plainly from
generation to generation. It is from this cause that many
families, even nations, are recognized from their first father;
there is the common image in the face of each descendant,
which shows itself; and this image is not changed except by
the spiritual things of the church. The reason that the com-
mon image of Jacob and Judah still remains in their pos-
terity, and that by it they may be distinguished from others,
is, that they have hitherto adhered firmly to their religion;
for in the seed from which every one is conceived, there is a
graft or offset of the father’s soul, in its fulness, within a cer-
tain envelope of elements from nature. By these its body is
formed in the womb of the mother, which may grow into the
likeness of the father, or into the likeness of the mother, the
father’s image still remaining within it, and continually en-
deavoring to put itself forth; therefore, if it cannot do this in
the first descendant, it effects it in others who follow. The
reason why the image of the father is in its fulness in the seed,
is as already said, that the soul is spiritual from its origin, and


158


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 103


what is spiritual has nothing in common with space; so it is
like itself in little compass as in great. With respect to the
Lord, He while in the world by the acts of redemption put
off the human from the mother, and put on a Human from
the Father, which is the Divine Human; hence it is that in
Him Man is God, and God Man.

104. VIII. The progress to union was the state of His
exinanition , and the union itself is the state of His glorifica-
tion . That the Lord, while He was in the world, was in two
states, which are called states of exinanition and of glorifi-
cation, is known in the church; the former state, which was
that of exinanition, is described in many passages in the
Word, especially in the Psalms of David, and also in the
prophets, and particularly in Isaiah (liii.), where it is said,
that He poured out His soul unto death (v. 12). This same
state was the state of His humiliation before the Father, for
in it He prays to the Father and says that He does His will,
and ascribes to the Father all that He has done or said. That
He prayed to the Father is evident from many passages (Matt,
xxvi. 39, 44: Mark i. 35; vi. 46; xiv. 32-39: Luke v. 16;
vi. 12; xxii. 41-44: John xvii. 9, 15, 20); and that He did
the will of the Father (John iv. 34; v. 30); and that He
ascribed to the Father all that He did and said (John viii. 26-
29; xii. 49, 50; xiv. 10). Yea, upon the cross He cried out,
My God , My God , why hast Thou forsaken Me? (Matt, xxvii.
46: Mark xv. 34.) Moreover, without this state He could
not have been crucified. The state of glorification is also
the state of union. He was in this state when He was trans-
figured before His three disciples, and when He did miracles,
and whenever He said that the Father and He were one; that
the Father was in Him, and He in the Father; that all things
of the Father were His; and when the union was full, that
He had power over all flesh (John xvii. 2) ; and all power in
heaven and in earth (Matt, xxviii. 18); and more to the same
effect.


No. 105 ] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 159

105. The reason that the Lord had those two states of
exinanition and glorification, was, that there is no other pos-
sible way of progressing to union, since it is according to the
Divine order, which is unchangeable. The Divine order is,
that man should dispose himself for the reception of God,
and prepare himself as a receptacle and habitation into which
God may enter and dwell as in His temple. Man must do
this from himself, but still acknowledge that it is from God;
he must acknowledge this, because he does not feel the pres-
ence and operation of God, though God being intimately
present operates in man all the good of love and all the truth
of faith. According to this order every man proceeds and
must proceed, that from being natural he may become spiri-
tual. In like manner the Lord, that He might make His
natural human Divine: it is from this cause that He prayed
to the Father, that He did His will, that all He did and said
He attributed to Him, and that upon the cross He said, My
Godj. My God , why jorsakest Thou Me? For in this state
God appears absent; but after this state comes another
which is a state of conjunction with God. In this man acts
in like manner as before, but now from God; nor has he now
need in like manner as before to ascribe to God all the good
which he wills and does, and all the truth which he thinks
and speaks, because this is inscribed upon his heart, and
thereby is inwardly in all his actions and speech. In like
manner the Lord united Himself to His Father, and the
Father united Himself to Him; in a word, the Lord glorified
His Human, that is, made it Divine, in the same manner in
which He regenerates man, that is, makes him spiritual.

That every man who from natural becomes spiritual un-
dergoes two states, and that through the first he passes into
the other, and thus from the world to heaven, will be fully
shown in the chapters concerning Free-will, Charity and
Faith, and Reformation and Regeneration; here needs only
to be said that in the first state, which is called the state of
reformation, man is in full liberty of acting according to the


l 60 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 105

rational of his understanding; and that in the second, which
is the state of regeneration, he is also in similar liberty; but
that he then wills and acts, and thinks and speaks, from a
new love and a new intelligence which are from the Lord.
For in the first state the understanding acts the first part, and
the will the second; in the other the will acts the first, and the
understanding the second; but still, the understanding acts
from the will, and not the will through the understanding.
The conjunction of good and truth, of charity and faith, and
of the internal and the external man, is not effected other-
wise.

106. Those two states are represented by various things
in the universe. The reason is, that they are according to
Divine order, and Divine order fills all things and every thing,
even to each minutest particular in the universe. The first
state is represented with every man by the state of his infancy
and childhood, even to puberty, youth, and early manhood,
which is the state of his humiliation before his parents, and
then of obedience and also of instruction from masters and
ministers. But the other state is represented by the state
of the same person when he becomes his own master, and
freely exercises his own will and understanding, in which
state he has control in his own house. The first state is also
represented by the state of a prince, the son of a king or of a
duke, before he becomes king or duke; in like manner by
the state of every citizen before he becomes a magistrate;
of every subject before he discharges any office; of every
student who is preparing for the ministry before he becomes
a priest; and of the priest before he becomes a pastor; and
then of the pastor before he becomes a primate; also of every
maiden before she becomes a wife, and of every maid-servant
before she becomes a mistress; in general, of every clerk be-
fore he becomes a merchant, of every soldier before he be-
comes an officer, of every servant before he becomes a master.
The first of these states is a state of servitude; the other is
that of one’s own will and the understanding therefrom.


No. 107] the lord the REDEEMER 16 1

Those two states are represented also by various things in the
animal kingdom: the first by beasts and birds as long as they
are with their parents, which they then follow constantly,
and are nourished and led by them; and the other state when
they leave them and take care of themselves: in like manner
by worms; the first state while they crawl and feed upon
leaves, the second when they cast off their skins and become
butterflies. Those two states are represented also in the sub-
jects of the vegetable kingdom: the first when the plant
springs up from the seed and displays branches, buds, and
leaves; the other, when it bears fruit, and produces new
seeds; this may be likened to the conjunction of good and
truth, since all things of a tree correspond to truths, and the
fruit to goods. But the man who stops in the first state, and
does not enter the second, is like a tree which bears only
leaves and not fruit, of which it is said in the Word that it is
to be rooted up, and cast into the fire (Matt. vii. 19: Luke
iii. 9; xiii. 6-9: John xv. 5, 6). And he is like a slave that
is not willing to be free, in regard to whom it was com-
manded that He should be brought to the door, or to the
door-post, and his ear should be bored through with an awl
(Exod. xxi. 6). Servants are those who are not conjoined
to the Lord, but the free are those who are conjoined to Him;
for the Lord says, If the Son maketh you free , ye are truly
free (John viii. 36).

107. IX. Hereafter no one from among Christians comes
into heaven , unless he believes in the Lord God the Saviour ,
and goes to Him alone. We read in Isaiah: Behold I create
a new heaven and a new earth , and the former shall not be re-
membered, nor come into mind . . . and behold , I create Jeru-
salem a rejoicing , and her people a joy (lxv. 17, 18). And in
the Apocalypse: I saw a new heaven and a new earth . . .
and I saw the holy city Jerusalem coming down from God
out 0} heaven , prepared as a bride for her husband . . . and
He that sat upon the throne said , Behold , I make all things


162


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 107


new (xxi. 1, 2, 5). And it is often said that no others will
enter into heaven, than those who are written in the Lamb's
book of life (Apoc. xiii. 8; xvii. 8; xx. 12, 15; xxi. 27). By
heaven is not there meant the heaven which is visible to our
eyes, but the angelic heaven; by Jerusalem, not any city
from heaven, but the church which will descend out of that
heaven from the Lord; and by the Lamb’s book of life, not
any book written in heaven which will be opened, but the
Word which is from the Lord and concerning Him. That
Jehovah God, who is called the Creator and Father, de-
scended and assumed the Human, in order that He may be
approached, and that there may be conjunction with Him,
has been proved, confirmed, and established in the preceding
articles of this chapter. For who that draws near to a man
goes to his soul? and who can do so? But he goes to the
man himself, whom he sees face to face, and with whom he
speaks mouth to mouth. The case is similar with God the
Father and the Son, for God the Father is in the Son, as the
soul in its body. That there must be belief in the Lord God
the Saviour is evident from these passages in the Word : God
so loved the world , that He gave His only-begotten Son , that
whosoever believeth in Him may not perish y but have eternal
life (John iii. 15, 16). He that believeth in the Son is not
judged , but he that believeth not is judged already , because he
hath not believed in the name of the only-begotten Son of God
(iii. 18). He that believeth in the Son hath eternal life , but he
that believeth not the Son shall not see life y but the wrath of
God shall abide on him (iii. 36). The bread 0} God is He that
cometh down from heaven y and giveth life to the world . . .
he that cometh to Me shall never hunger , and he that believeth
in Me shall never thirst (vi. 33, 35). This is the will 0} Him
that sent Me y that every one that seeth the Son y and believeth in
Him y may have eternal life ; and I will raise him up at the
last day (vi. 40). They said to Jesus, What shall we do that
we may work the works 0} God? Jesus answered y This is the
work of God y that ye believe in Him "whom He hath sent (vi.


No. 107] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 1 63

28, 29). Verity I say unto you , he that believeth in Me hath
eternal life (vi. 47). Jesus cried, saying, If any man thirst,
let him come unto Me and drink; he that believeth in Me,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water (vii. 37, 38).
If ye believe not tlmt I am, ye shall die in your sins (viii. 24).
Jesus said, I am the resurrection and the life ; he that be-
lieveth in Me, though he die, yet shall he live ; but every one
that liveth in Me, and believeth in Me, shall never die (xi.
25, 26)* Jesus said, I am come a Light into the world, that
whosoever believeth in Me may not abide in darkness (xii. 46;
viii. 12). As long as ye have light, believe in the light, that
ye may be children of the light (xii. 36). Also that they should
abide in the Lord, and the Lord in them (xiv. 20; xv. 1-5;
xvii. 23); which is done by faith. Paul testified, both to the
Jews and to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ (Acts xx. 21). I am the way, and
thedruth, and the life ; no man cometh to the Father but by Me
(John xiv. 6). That he who believes in the Son believes in
the Father since, as above said, the Father is in Him, as the
soul in the body, is evident from these passages: If ye had
known Me, ye would have known my Father also (John viii.
19; xiv. 7). He that seeth Me, seeth Him that sent Me (xii.
45). He that receiveth Me, receiveth Him that sent Me (xiii.
20). The reason is, that no one can see the Father and live
(Exod. xxxiii. 20). Wherefore the Lord says, No man hath
seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, He hath manifested Him (John i. 18).
No man hath seen the Father, but He that is of God, He hath
seen the Father (vi. 46). Ye have neither heard the voice of
the Father at any time, nor seen His shape (v. 37). But
those who do not know any thing about the Lord, as most
who live in the two divisions of the world, Asia and Africa,
and also in the Indies, if they believe in one God, and live
according to the precepts of their religion, are saved on
account of their faith and life. For imputation is to those
who know, and not to those who know not, as it is not to the


1 64 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 107

blind when they stumble; for the Lord says, If ye were blind
ye would not have sin; but now ye say that ye see , therefore
your sin remaineth (John ix. 41).

108. To confirm this further, I will relate what I know,
because I have seen and therefore can testify, as follows.
The Lord at this day is forming a new angelic heaven, and
it is being formed from those who believe in the Lord God
the Saviour* and go immediately to Him, while others are
rejected. If therefore any one hereafter comes from Chris-
tendom into the spiritual world, into which every man £omes
after death, and does not believe in the Lord and go to Him
alone, and then is not able to receive this faith because he
has lived wickedly or has confirmed himself in falsities, he
is repelled at his first approach to heaven, and his face is
then averted from it, and turned toward the lower earth;
whither he also goes and conjoins himself with those there
who are meant in the Apocalypse by the dragon and the false
prophet. Every man also in Christian lands who does not
believe in the Lord, is not hereafter heard with acceptance;
his prayers are in heaven like unpleasant odors, and like
exhalations from diseased lungs; and if it is thought that his
prayer is like the perfume of incense, still it does not ascend
to the angelic heaven otherwise than as the smoke of a fire,
which is driven back by a whirlwind down into his eyes, or as
the fumes from a censer under a monk’s cloak. So is it
henceforth with all piety which is determined to a divided
Trinity, and not to one conjoined. To show that the Divine
Trinity is conjoined in the Lord is the principal object of this
work. Here I will add this news that some months since, the
twelve apostles were called together by the Lord, and sent
forth into all the spiritual world, as before into the natural
world, with the command that they should preach this gos-
pel; hnd then every apostle had his province assigned him;
which command, also, they are executing with all zeal and
industry. But of this subject we shall treat particularly in
the last chapter of this work, where we shall speak concern-


No. 109] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 1 65

mg The Consummation of the Age, The Coming of the Lord,
and The New Church.

log. A Corollary. All the churches which had been be-
fore the coming of the Lord were representative churches,
which could not see Divine truths unless in shade; but after
the coming of the Lord into the world, a church was insti-
tuted by Him which saw, or rather was able to see, Divine
truths in light. The difference is like that between evening
and morning; the state of the church before the coming of
the Lord is also called evening in the Word, and the state of
the church after His coming is called morning. The Lord
before His coming into the world was indeed present with
the men of the church, but mediately through angels who
represented Him; but since His coming He is present with
the men of the church immediately; for in the world He put
on also the Divine natural, in which He is present with men.
The glorification of the Lord is the glorification of His Hu-
man which He assumed in the world, and the glorified Hu-
man of the Lord is the Divine Natural. That it is so is evi-
dent from this, that the Lord rose from the sepulchre with
His whole Body which He had in the world; nor did He
leave any thing in the sepulchre; consequently, that He took
thence with Him the Human Natural itself, from the firsts
to the lasts of it; wherefore He said to the disciples after the
resurrection, when they supposed that they saw a spirit,
Behold My hands and My feet , that it is I Myself; handle
Me, and see ; for a spirit hath not -flesh and bones as ye see Me
have (Luke xxiv. 37, 39). From this it is manifest that His
natural body by glorification was made Divine. Wherefore
Paul says that In Christ dwelleth all the fulness of the God-
head bodily (Col. ii. 9); and John, that The Son of God ,
Jesus Christ , is the true God (1 Epistle v. 20). Hence the
angels know that the Lord alone, in the whole spiritual world,
is fully MAN.

It is known in the church that all the worship with the
nation of Israel and Judah was merely external, and that it


1 66 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION ] [No. 109

shadowed forth the internal worship which the Lord opened;
and thus that worship before the coming of the Lord con-
sisted in types and figures, which represented true worship in
its just effigy. The Lord Himself, indeed, was seen by the
ancients; for He said to the Jews, Your father Abraham re-
joiced to see My day , and he saw it and was glad ... I say
unto you } before Abraham was } I was (John viii. 56, 58). But
because the Lord then was represented only, which was
effected through angels, therefore all things of the church
with them were made representative; but after He came into
the world those representations vanished; the interior rea-
son of which was, that the Lord in the world put on also the
Divine Natural, and from this He enlightens not only the
internal spiritual man hut also the external natural; and
unless the two are enlightened at the same time, man is as in
shade; but while hoth are enlightened at the same time, he
is as it were in daylight; for while the internal man alone is
enlightened, and not at the same time the external, or while
the external only, and not at the same time the internal, he
is like one who sleeps and dreams, and presently when he
awakes, he recalls the dream, and from it he concludes vari-
ous things which are nevertheless imaginary. And he is also
like one walking in sleep, who thinks that the objects which
he sees are seen in daylight. The difference between the
state of the church before the coming of the Lord and after
His coming, is like the difference between reading a writing
in the night by the light of the moon and stars, and reading it
by the light of the sun; that the eye in the former light, which
is only pale, is liahle to mistake, and in the latter, which is
also flamy, is not liable to mistake, is well known. Accord-
ingly we read concerning the Lord, The God 0} Israel said ,
the Rock 0} Israel spake to me ... He is as the light of the
morning when the sun ariseth , a morning without clouds (2
Sam. xxiii. 3, 4). The God of Israel and the Rock of Israel
is the Lord. And in Isaiah, The light of the moon shall be as
the light 0} the sun , and the light 0} the sun shall be sevenfold . ,


No. no] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 1 67

as the light of seven days , in the day when Jehovah shall hind
up the breach of His people (xxx. 26). These things are said
concerning the state of the church after the coming of the
Lord. In a word, the state of the church before the coming
of the Lord may be compared to an old woman whose face
has been painted, and who from the red paint has appeared
to herself beautiful; but the state of the church after the
coming of the Lord may be compared to a maiden, beautiful
from her natural bloom. And also the state of the church
before the coming of the Lord may be compared to the skin
of any fruit, as of an orange, apple, pear, or grape, and its
flavor; but the state of the church after His coming may be
compared to the inside of those fruits and its flavor; with
many other comparisons. The reason of this difference is,
that the Lord, since He put on also the Divine Natural, en-
lightens the internal spiritual man and the external natural
at the same time; for while only the internal man is enlight-
ened, and not at the same time the external, a shade is pro-
duced; in like manner while only the external is enlightened
and not at the same time the internal.

no. Here the following Relations will be presented.
First : — Once in the spiritual world I saw an ignis fatuus
in the air, falling to the earth, and a border of light around
it; it was a meteor, which the common people call a dragon.
I observed the place where it fell; but it disappeared in the
morning twilight, before sunrise, as an ignis fatuus always
does. After sunrise I went to the place where I saw it fall
in the night, and behold the ground there was of a mixture
of sulphur, iron-filings, and clay; and then suddenly there
appeared two tents, one directly over the place, and the other
at the side toward the south. And I looked up and saw a
certain spirit falling down from heaven like lightning, and
cast into the tent which stood directly over the place where
the meteor fell, while I was in the other, which was near it
toward the south: in the door of this I stood, and saw the
spirit in the other also standing in the door of his tent. Then


1 68 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. iio

I asked him why he thus fell down from heaven, to which he
answered that he was cast down, as an angel of the dragon,
by the angels of Michael — “ because I said some things con-
cerning my faith, in which I confirmed myself in the world,
among which was this, that God the Father and God the
Son are two, and not one; for all in the heavens at this day
believe that they are one, as soul and body; and every word
spoken against that is like a sting in their nostrils, and like
an awl boring through their ears, whence they have disturb-
ance and pain; and, therefore, whoever contradicts their be-
lief is commanded to go out, and if he hesitates he is cast
down headlong.”

On hearing this I said to him, “ Why did you not believe
as they did ?” He replied, “ After having left the world, no
one can believe any thing else than what he had by confirma-
tion impressed upon himself; this remains fixed in him and
cannot be torn away, especially that which any one has con-
firmed in himself about God, since every one in the heavens
has his place according to his idea of God.” Then I asked,
by what he had confirmed the idea that the Father and the
Son were two. He said, “By these things in the Word —
that the Son prayed to the Father, not only before the pas-
sion of the cross, but also upon the cross; as also that He
humbled Himself before His Father; how then can they be
one, as soul and body are one in man? Who prays as to
another, and humbles himself as before another, while he
himself is that other? No one does so, much less the Son
of God; and, besides, the whole Christian Church in my
time divided the Divinity into persons; and each person is
one by himself, and is defined to be what subsists in itself”

When I had heard these things from him, I replied, “I
have perceived from what you say that you do not know at all
how God the Father and the Son are one; and because you
know not how, you had confirmed yourself in the falsities in
which the church still is concerning God. Do you not know
that the Lord when He was in the world had a soul, as every


No. no] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 1 69

other man has? Whence had He this soul but from God
the Father ? That it is so, is abundantly manifest from the
Word of the Evangelists. What then is that which is called
the Son but the Human, which was conceived from the Di-
vine of the Father, and horn of the virgin Mary ? A mother
cannot conceive a soul; this is totally repugnant to the order
according to which every man is born; nor can God the
Father impart a soul from Himself, and then recede from it,
as every father in the world can, since God is His Divine
essence, and this is one and indivisible; and because it is
indivisible, it is Himself. From this it is that the Lord says
that the Father and He are one; and that the Father is in
Him and He in the Father; with many more such words.
The composers of the Athanasian Creed also saw this far off,
and so, after they divided God into three persons, they say
still that in Christ God and Man, that is, the Divine and the
Human, are not two but one, as soul and body in man. That
the Lord in the world prayed to the Father as to another, and
that He humbled Himself before the Father as before another,
was according to the order established from creation, which
is immutable, and according to which every one must pro-
ceed to conjunction with God. The order is, that as a man by
a life according to the laws of order which are the command-
ments of God, conjoins himself with God, so God conjoins
Himself with the man, and from natural makes him spiri-
tual. In like manner the Lord united Himself to His Father,
and God the Father united Himself to Him. While an in-
fant, was not the Lord as an infant, and while a boy, as a
boy ? Is it not read that He increased in wisdom and favor ?
and afterward, that He asked the Father that He should glor-
ify His Name, that is, His Human ? To glorify is to make
Divine by union with Himself. From this it is manifest that
the Lord in the state of His exinanition, which was the state
of His progress to union, prayed to the Father. The same
order is inscribed from creation on every man; that is, as
man by means of truths from the Word prepares his under-


170


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. no


standing, so he adapts it to receive faith from God; and as by
works of charity he prepares his will, so he accommodates it
to receive love from God; just as an artist cuts a diamond, and
so fits it to receive and emit the splendor of light. To pre-
pare one’s self for the reception of God and for conjunction, is
to live according to Divine order; and the laws of order are
all the commandments of God; these the Lord fulfilled to
every tittle, and thus made Himself a receptacle of the Divin-
ity in all fulness. Therefore Paul says that in Jesus Christ
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; and the Lord
Himself says that all things of the Father are His. It is
further to be held that the Lord alone is active in man, and
that man of himself is merely passive; but that by an influx
of life from the Lord he is also active. From this perpetual
influx from the Lord it appears to man as if he were active
from himself; and because it is so, he also has free will, and
this is given him that he may prepare himself for receiving
the Lord, and thus for conjunction, which cannot be unless
it be reciprocal; and it becomes reciprocal while man acts
from his freedom, and yet from faith attributes all power of
action to the Lord.”

After this I asked whether he like the others, his compan-
ions, confessed that God is one. He answered that he did;
and then I said, “ But I fear that the confession of your heart
is that there is no God. Does not all the speech of the mouth
proceed from the thought of the mind? It cannot then be
otherwise than that the confession of the mouth that God is
one, should expel from the mind the thought that there are
three; and conversely, that the thought of the mind should
expel from the mouth the confession that He is one. What
else results from this than that there is no God ? Is not all
the interval from the thought to the mouth and from the
mouth back to the thought, thus rendered void ? And what
else is then concluded by the mind concerning God, but that
nature is God ? and concerning the Lord, but that His soul
was either from the mother or from Joseph? from which


No. in] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 17 1

two things, as dreadful and abominable, all the angels of
heaven turn themselves away.” After these things were
said, that spirit was sent away into the abyss, of which we
read in the Apocalypse (ix. 2, and the following), where the
angels of the dragon discuss the mysteries of their faith.

The next day, when I looked toward the same place, I saw
instead of the tents two statues in the likeness of human
beings, made of the dust of the earth, which was a mixture
of sulphur, iron, and clay; and one statue seemed to have
a sceptre in the left hand, a crown on the head, and a book
in the right hand, and also a stomacher obliquely crossed by
a sash set with precious stones, and behind, a robe flowing
to the other statue; but these things were induced upon that
statue by fantasy; and then a voice was heard thence, from
a certain dragonist: “This statue represents our faith as a
queen; and the other behind it, charity as her maid-servant.”
This was composed of a similar mixture of dust, and placed
at the end of the robe that trailed behind the queen; and she
held in her hand a paper, upon which was written, “ Beware
lest you approach nearer and touch the robe.” But then
suddenly a shower fell from heaven and penetrated both the
statues, which, because they were composed of a mixture of
sulphur, iron, and clay, began to effervesce, as is the case
with a mixture of those ingredients when water is poured
upon it; and being thus caused to burn by an inward fire,
they fell to ashes and became heaps, which afterward stood
upon that ground like sepulchral mounds.

hi. Second Relation. In the natural world man has two-
fold speech, because his thought is twofold, external and
internal; for a man can speak from internal thought and at
the same time from external thought, and he can speak from
external thought and not from the internal, even contrary
to the internal; thereby come dissimulation, flattery, and
hypocrisy. In the spiritual world, however, man has not
twofold speech, but single; he speaks there as he thinks,
otherwise the sound is grating and hurts the ear; but still he


1 72


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. HI


can be silent and so not divulge the thoughts of his mind.
Wherefore a hypocrite, when he comes among the wise,
either goes away, or gets himself into a corner of the room,
makes himself inconspicuous, and sits in silence. Once
there were many assembled in the world of spirits, and were
conv^sing together upon this subject, saying that “Not to
be able to speak except as one thinks is hard for those who
have not thought justly concerning God and the Lord, while
they are in company with the good.”

In the middle of the assembly were the reformed and many
of the clergy, and next to them the papists with the monks;
and both at first said, “This is not hard; what need is there
for one to speak otherwise than he thinks ? and, if by chance
he does not think justly, can he not close his lips and keep
silence ?” And one of the clergy said, “ Who does not think
justly concerning God and the Lord ?” But some of the as-
sembly said, “ Let us try them.” And they said to those who
had confirmed themselves in a trinity of Persons concern-
ing God, that they from thought should say, One God; but
they could not. They twisted and turned their lips into
many contortions, but could not articulate sound into other
words than such as were consonant with the ideas of their
thought, which were of three persons, and thence of three
Gods. Then it was said to those who confirmed faith sepa-
rate from charity, that they should name Jesus; but they
could not, although they all could say Christ, and also God
the Father. They wondered at this and asked the reason,
and found it to be this: that they had prayed to God the
Father for the sake of the Son, and had not prayed to the
Saviour Himself; and Jesus means Saviour.

Moreover they were told, from their thought concerning
the Human of the Lord, to say Divine Human; but no one
of the clergy who was there present could do it, yet some of
the laity could, and so this was submitted to a serious dis-
cussion. Then these passages in the Evangelists were read
to them: —


No. iii]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


173


I. The Father hath given all things into the hand of the
Son (John iii. 35); The Father hath given to the Son power
over all flesh (xvii. 2); All things are delivered to Me by the
Father (Matt. xi. 27); All power is given unto Me in heaven
and in earth (xyviii. 18). And it was said to them, From
these things, keep in thought that Christ is the God of heaven
and earth, both as to His Divine and as to His Human, and
so pronounce Divine Human; but still they could not; and
they said that from this they indeed had some thought about
it from the understanding, but still no acknowledgment, and
therefore could not say it.

II. Then it was read from Luke (i. 32, 34, 35) that the
Lord as to the Human was the Son of Jehovah God, and that
He is there called the Son of the Highest, and in various other
places the Son of God, and also the only-begotten; and they
were asked to keep this in their thought, and also that the
only-begotten Son of God bom in the world could not but be
God as the Father is God, and then to say distinctly Divine
Human. But they said, “ We cannot, because our spiritual
thought which is interior does not admit into the thought next
to speech any other than similar ideas”; also from this they
perceived that it was not now allowable for them to divide
their thoughts, as in the natural world.

III. Then were read to them these words of the Lord to
Philip: Philip said y Lord , shew us the Father . . . and the
Lord said , He that seeth Me seeth the Father . . . believest
thou not that I am in the Father , and the Father in Me (John
xiv. 8-1 1); and also in other passages, that the Father and
He are one (as John x. 30). And they were told to keep this
in their thought, and to say, Divine Human; but because
that thought was not rooted in the acknowledgment that the
Lord was God even as to the Human, they twisted and con-
torted their lips even to indignation, and wished to force their
mouth to speak it out, but they could not. The reason was,
that the ideas of thought, which flow from acknowledgment,
make one with the words of the tongue with those who are in


174


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. in


the spiritual world; and where there are not those ideas,
words are not given, for ideas become words in speech.

IV. Then were read to them, from the doctrine received
in all the Christian world, these words, that the Divine and
the Human in the Lord are not two, but one; yea, one Per-
son, united as the soul and the body in man. These words
are from the Confession of Faith named from Athanasius,
and acknowledged by councils. And it was said to them,
“You can from this certainly have an idea from acknowl-
edgment, that the Human of the Lord is Divine, because His
soul is Divine; for it is from the doctrine of your church,
which you acknowledged in the world; moreover, the soul
is the very essence of man, and the body is its form, and
essence and form make one, as esse and existere , and as the
effecting cause and the effect itself.” They retained that
idea, and wished from it to pronounce Divine Human; but
they could not; for their interior idea concerning the Human
of the Lord exterminated and expunged this new adscititious
idea, as they called it.

V. Then this passage from John was read to them: The
Word was with God , and the Word was God , and the Word
became flesh (i. i, 14); and also this: Jesus Christ is the true
God , and eternal Life (1 Epistle of John, v. 20); and from
Paul: In Jesus Christ dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily (Col. ii. 9); and it was said to them that they should
think in like manner, that is, that God who was the Word
became Man, that He was the true God, and that all the ful-
ness of the Godhead dwelt in Him bodily. They did so, but
only in external thought; and so they could not, on account
of the resistance of the internal, pronounce Divine Human,
saying openly that they could not have an idea of Divine
Human , because God is God, and man is man; and “God
is a Spirit, and concerning spirit we have thought no other-
wise than as concerning wind or ether.”

VI. At length it was said to them, “You know that the
Lord said, Abide in Me, and I in you; he that abideth in Me,


No. Ill] the lord the redeemer I7S

and I in him , beareth much fruit ; for without Me, ye can do
nothing ” (John xv. 4, 5); and because some of the clergy of
England were present, it was read to them, from one of their
exhortations at the Holy Communion, “For when we spirit-
ually eat the flesh of Christ and drink His blood, then we
dwell in Christ and Christ in us.” And it was said, “ If now
you think that this cannot be, unless the Human of the Lord
is Divine, then say Divine Human from the acknowledg-
ment in the thought”; and still they could not, as the idea
was so deeply impressed on them that the Divine could not
be Human, and the Human could not be Divine, and that His
Divine was from the Divine of the Son from eternity, and His
Human like the human of another man. But it was said to
them, “How can you think so? Can a rational mind ever
think that any Son was born of God from eternity?”

VII. Then they turned themselves to the evangelical, say-
ing, that the Augsburg Confession and Luther taught that the
Son of God and the Son of Man is one Person in Christ, and
that He even as- to the human nature is omnipotent and omni-
present; and that as to this He sits at the right hand of God
the Father, and governs all things in the heavens and on
earth, fills all things, is with us, dwells and operates in us;
and that there is no difference of adoration; because, through
the nature which is discerned, the Divinity which is not dis-
cerned is adored; and that in Christ God is Man and Man
God. On hearing these things they answered, “Is it so?”
And they looked around and presently said, “ We did not
know this before; and therefore we cannot say Divine Hu-
man.” But one and another said, “ We have read it and we
have written it, but still when we thought about it in our-
selves, these were only words of which we had no interior
idea.”

Vin. At last, turning about to the papists, they said, “ Per-
haps you can say Divine Human , because you believe that in
your eucharist Christ is entire in the bread and wine and in
every part thereof; and also you adore Him, when you ex-


176


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. ill


hibit and carry about the host, as the most holy God; also be-
cause you call Mary Deipara , or the Mother of God; con-
sequently you acknowledge that she brought forth God, that
is, the Divine Human.” And they then wished to speak it,
but because there arose then a material idea concerning the
body and blood of Christ, and also the faith that His Human
is separable from the Divine, and that it is actually divided
with the pope, to whom only His human and not His Divine
power was transferred, they could not speak it. And then
a monk arose and said that he could think of a Divine Hu-
man in respect to the most holy virgin Mary, and also in re-
spect to a saint of his monastery. And another monk came
forward, saying, “ From the idea of my thought which I now
entertain, I can say Divine Human of the most holy Pope,
rather than of Christ.” But then some of the papists pulled
him back, and said, “Shame on you!” After this, heaven
appeared open, and there were seen tongues like little flames,
descending and flowing in with some; and then they cele-
brated the Divine Human of the Lord , saying, “ Remove the
idea of three Gods, and believe that in the Lord dwells all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily, and that the Father and He
are one, as soul and body are one, and that God is not wind
and ether, but that He is Man, and then you will be con-
joined to heaven, and you will be able from the Lord to speak
the name Jesus , and to say Divine Human”

1 1 2. Third Relation . Once, having awaked just after
daybreak, I went out into the garden before the house, and
saw the sun rising in his splendor, and round about him a
halo, at first faint, and afterward more distinct, shining as
from gold, and under its border a cloud ascending, which
gleamed like a carbuncle from the flame of the sun. And
then I fell into meditation about the fables of the ancients,
that they formed Aurora with wings of silver feathers, and
her face with the lustre of gold. While my mind was de-
lighting in these things, I became in the spirit, and heard
some talking together and saying, “ Would that we might be


No. 1 1 2]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


1 77


allowed to speak with the innovator who has thrown the
apple of discord among the rulers of the church, which many
of the laity have run after, and picking it up have presented
it to our eyes.” By that apple they meant a little pamphlet,
entitled, A Summary Exposition of the Doctrine of the New
Church. And they said, “It is indeed a schismatical thing,
which no one ever before conceived.” And then I heard
one of them exclaiming, “What! schismatical? it is here-
tical.” But some at his side retorted, “Hush, hold your
tongue; it is not heretical; he quotes an abundance of pas-
sages from the Word, to which our inexperienced ones, by
whom we mean the laity, attend and assent.”

When I heard these things, because I was in the spirit, I
went to them and said, “Here I am; what is the matter?”
And presently one of them, who as I afterward heard was a
German, a native of Saxony, speaking in a tone of authority
said, “ Whence had you the audacity to invert the worship in
the Christian world, established for so many ages, which was,
that God the Father should be invoked as the Creator of the
universe, and His Son as the Mediator, and the Holy Spirit
as the Operator? And you separate the first and the last
God from our personality, when yet the Lord Himself says,
When ye pray , pray thus , Our Father , who art in the heavens ,
hallowed be Thy name , Thy kingdom come. Thus is it not
commanded that we should invoke God the Father?” These
things being said, there was silence, and all who favored him
stood like brave soldiers on ships of war when they see a hos-
tile fleet, ready to cry, “ Now let us fight; the victory is sure.”

And then I began to speak, and said, “ Who of you does not
know that God descended from heaven and became man?
for we read, The Word was with God , and the Word was God;
and the Word became Flesh: also, who of you does not know,
and I looked at the evangelical, among whom was that dic-
tator who had just addressed me, that in Christ, who was
bom of the virgin Mary, God is Man, and Man God?” But
at these words the assembly made a great noise; and so I said,


i ;8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 112


“ Do you not know this ? It is according to the doctrine of
your confession, ^called the Formula Concordia , where this is
said and corroborated by many things.” Then that dic-
tator turned himself toward the assembly, and asked whether
they knew this. And they answered, “ We have studied very
little in that book concerning the person of Christ, but we
have sweat over the article there concerning Justification by
faith alone: and yet if that is read there, we acquiesce.”
And then one of them, recollecting, said, “It is read there,
and still further, that the human nature of Christ is exalted
to Divine majesty and to all its attributes, and also that in it
Christ sits at the right hand of His Father.”

Having heard these words they were silent; and after this
consent I spoke again saying, “ Since it is so, what then is the
Father but the Son, and what the Son but the Father also?”
But because this again made a din in their ears, I continued,
saying, “ Hear the very words of the Lord, and if you have
not attended to them before, attend now, for He said, The
Father and I are one; the Father is in Me, and I in the Father;
Father, all Mine are Thine and all Thine are Mine; he that
seeth Me seeth the Father. What else do those words mean
than that the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father,
and that they are one as the soul and the body in man, and
so that they are one person? This also must be of your
faith if you believe the Athanasian Creed, in which like things
are said. But take from the words adduced only this decla-
ration of the Lord: Father, all Mine are Thine, and all Thine
are Mine; what else is this than that the Divine of the Father
belongs to the Human of the Son, and the Human of the Son
to the Divine of the Father? consequently that, in Christ,
God is Man, and Man God? and so that they are one, as
soul and body are one. Every man also may say the same
concerning his soul and his body, namely, All thine are mine,
and all mine thine; thou in me, and I in thee; he who sees
me, sees thee; we are one as to person and as to life. The
reason is, that the soul is in the whole and in every part of


No. 112 ] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 1 79

man; for the life of the soul is the life of the body, and there
is mutuality between them. Thus it is plain that the Divine
of the Father is the soul of the Son, and that the Human of
the Son is the body of the Father. Whence is the soul of a
son but from the father? and whence is his body, but from
the mother? We speak of the Divine of the Father, and
mean the Father Himself, since He and His Divine are the
same; this also is one and indivisible. That it is so, is evi-
dent also from these words of the angel Gabriel to Mary:
The power of the Highest shall overshadow thee , and the Holy
Spirit come upon thee , and the Holy thing that shall be born of
thee shall be called the Son of God; and just above He is called
the Son of the Highest, and elsewhere, the only -begotten Son.
You however who call him only the Son of Mary lose the idea
of His Divinity; but none lose it except the learned of the
clergy and scholars among the laity, who while they elevate
their thoughts above the sensual things of the body, look at
the glory of their own reputation, which not only overshadows
but also extinguishes the light by which the glory of God en-
ters. But let us return to the Lord’s prayer, where it is said,
Our Father who art in the heavens , hallowed be Thy Name ,
Thy kingdom come . You who are here understand by these
words the Father in His Divine alone; but I understand
Him in His Human, and this also is the Father’s Name; for
the Lord said, Father , glorify Thy Name ; that is, Thy Hu-
man; and when this is done the kingdom of God comes; and
this prayer was commanded for this end, namely, that God
the Father may be approached through His Human. The
Lord also said, No one cometh unto the Father but by Me;
and by the prophet, XJnto us a Child is born , unto us a Son is
given , and His name is God , Mighty , the Father of eternity;
and in another place, Thou , O Jehovah , art our Father; our
Redeemer from everlasting is Thy Name; beside a thousand
other places, where the Lord our Saviour is called Jehovah.
This is the true explanation of the words of that prayer.”
After these things were said, I looked at them, and observed


1 80 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. na

the changes of their countenances, according to the changes
of the state of their minds; some favoring and looking toward
me, and some not favoring and turning themselves away
from me; and then on the right I saw a cloud of an opal color,
and on the left a dusky cloud, and under each the appear-
ance of a shower; under the latter, as a fall of rain in the end
of autumn, and under the former, as a fall of dew at the be-
ginning of spring; and then suddenly I came out of the spirit
into the body, and thus returned from the spiritual world into
the natural world.

1 13. Fourth Relation. I looked forth into the world of
spirits, and saw an army on red and black horses. They
who sat upon them appeared like apes, with face and breast
turned toward the loins and tails of the horses, and the hinder
part of the head and the back turned toward the horses’ necks
and heads, and the bridles hanging about the necks of the
riders; and they were crying out against those who rode upon
white horses, and shaking the bridles with both hands, and
thus pulling the horses back from the fight, and this continu-
ally. Then two angels descended from heaven, and came to
me, and said, “ What do you see ? ” And I answered, that I
saw this ludicrous company of horsemen; and I asked, what
it was and who they were. And the angels answered, “ They
are from the place which is called Armageddon (Apoc. xvi.
16), into which are gathered some thousands to fight against
those who are of the Lord’s New Church, which is called the
New Jerusalem. They were talking in that place about the
church and religion; and yet there was not any thing of the
church in them, because no spiritual truth; nor any thing of
religion, because no spiritual good. They were talking there
with the mouth and the lips about religion and the church,
but for the sake of having dominion by means of them. They
had learned in their youth to confirm faith alone, and some-
thing about God; but when they were promoted to higher
offices in the church, for a while they retained what they had
learned; but because they then began to think no more about


No. 1 13] the lord the REDEEMER 1 81

God and heaven, but about themselves and the world, thus
not about eternal blessedness and happiness, but about tem-
poral eminence and opulence, they rejected the doctrines ac-
quired in their youth from the interiors of the rational mind,
which communicate with heaven and thence are in the light
of heaven, to the exteriors of the rational mind which com-
municate with the world and thence are in the light of the
world; and at length they thrust them down into the sensual
natural region; whereby the doctrines of the church became
with them things of the mouth only, and no longer of thought
from reason, and still less of affection from love; and be-
cause they have made themselves such, they do not admit
any Divine truth which is of the church, nor any genuine
good which is of religion; the interiors of their mind have
become comparatively like bottles Med with iron-Mngs
mixed with powdered sulphur, into which if water is poured,
there is at first heat and then flame, by which the bottles are
burst; so when they hear any thing about living water, which
is the genuine truth of the Word, and it enters through their
ears, they are violently heated and inflamed, and reject it as
something that would burst their heads. These are they
who appeared to you like apes riding backward upon red and
black horses, with the bridles about their necks; since they
who do not love the truth and good of the church from the
Word do not wish to look at the front parts of a horse, but at
his hinder parts; for a horse signifies the understanding of
the Word, a red horse the understanding of the Word de-
stroyed. as to good, and a black horse the understanding of
the Word destroyed as to truth. They cried for battle against
those who were riding upon white horses, because a white
horse sig nifie s the understanding of the Word as to truth and
good; they seemed to pull back their horses by their necks
because they feared the battle, lest the truth of the Word
should come to many, and so into the light. This is the
interpretation.”

The angels further said, “ We are from the society of heaven


182


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 13


which is called Michael, and were commanded by the Lord
to descend into the place called Armageddon, whence issued
that company of horsemen, which you saw. By Armaged-
don, with us in heaven, is signified the state and disposition
of fighting from falsified truths, arising from the love of ruling
and being supereminent above all; and as we perceive in you
a desire to know about that battle, we will tell you something
about it. After our descent from heaven we came to the
place called Armageddon, and saw there some thousands
assembled. We did not, indeed, enter into their assembly,
but there were some houses on the southern side of that place,
where were boys with their masters; we went in there, and
were courteously received. We were delighted with their
company; they were all beautiful in face from the life in
their eyes, and from the zeal in their speech. The life in
their eyes was from the perception of truth, and the zeal in
their speech from the affection of good; and so we gave them
caps, the borders of which were adorned with bands of golden
threads interwoven with pearls; and we gave them also gar-
ments variegated with white and blue. We asked them
whether they ever looked into the place near them called
Armageddon. They said that they had looked through a
window, which was under the roof of the house, and they saw
there an assembly, but under various forms, sometimes as
tall men, and sometimes not as men, but as statues and carved
idols, and around them a multitude of people bending the
knee. These also appeared to us under various forms; some
like men, some like leopards, and some like goats, and these
with horns pointing downward, with which they dug up the
ground. We have interpreted those transformations, whom
they represented, and what they signified.

“ But to the point: — They who were assembled, when they
heard that we had entered into the houses, said among them-
selves, ‘What business have they among those boys? Let
us send some of our company to turn them out/ So they
sent; and when they came, they said to us, ‘Why have you


No. 1 13]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


183


entered into these houses? Whence are you? We by au-
thority command you to depart/ But we answered, You
cannot give that order by authority. You are indeed in your
own eyes like the Anakim, and those who are here are like
dwarfs; but still you have no power and jurisdiction here,
except by means of cunning, which yet will not avail; so go
and tell your companions that we were sent hither from
heaven to see whether there is any religion with you or not;
if there is not, you will be cast out of this place. Therefore,
propose to them this, in which is the very essential of the
church and of religion — how they understand these words in
the Lord’s prayer, Our Father , who art in the heavens , hallowed
be Thy name , Thy kingdom come. When they had heard
these words, at first they said, ‘What is this ? ’ and afterward
they said that they would propose it. And they went away
and told these things to their companions, who answered,
‘What sort of a proposition is that?’ But they understood
the hidden purpose, and said, ‘ They wish to know whether
those words confirm the way of our faith to God the Father/
And so they said, ‘ The words are clear, that we ought to pray
to God the Father; and because Christ is our Mediator, that
we ought to pray to God the Father for the sake of the Son/
And then in indignation they determined that they would go
to us, and make this declaration to our faces, saying also that
they would pull our ears.

“ So they went out of that place, and entered a grove near
those houses in which the boys were with their masters, in
the middle of which grove there was a plain, elevated like a
field for exercise; and they held each other by their hands,
and entered into that field where we were awaiting them.
There were there sods rising from the ground like hillocks:
upon these they reclined, for they said one to another, ‘ We
will not stand in their presence, but will sit/ And then one
of them, who could make himself appear like an angel of
light, and who had been appointed by the rest to speak with
us, said, ‘You have proposed to us to open our minds con-


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[NO. 1 13


I84

cerning the first words of the Lord’s prayer, how we under-
stand them. I say to you, therefore, that we understand
them thus: that we must pray to God the Father; and be-
cause Christ is our Mediator, and we are saved by His merit,
that we must pray to God the Father from faith in His merit.’
But we then said to them, We are from the society of heaven
which is called Michael, and we were sent to visit and to in-
quire whether or not you who are assembled in this place
have any religion; for the idea of God enters into every thing
of religion, and by it conjunction is effected, and by conjunc-
tion salvation. We in heaven read that prayer daily, as men
do on earth; and we do not then think of God the Father,
because He is invisible; but we think of Him in His Divine
Human, because in this He is visible; and in this He is called
by you Christ, but by us the Lord; and so to us the Lord is
the Father in the heavens. The Lord also taught that He
and the Father are one; that the Father is in Him, and He
in the Father; and that he that seeth Him seeth the Father;
also, that no one cometh to the Father but by Him; and also
that it is the will of the Father that men should believe in the
Son; and that he who does not believe in the Son does not
see life; yea, that the wrath of God abideth on him; from
which it is plain that the Father is approached through Him
and in Him; and because it is so, He also taught that all
power is given unto Him in heaven and in earth. It is said
in that prayer, hallowed be Thy name, Thy kingdom come. We
have shown from the Word that His Divine Human is the
Father’s name, and that the Father’s kindgom then is when
the Lord is approached immediately, and by no means when
God the Father is approached immediately. Therefore,
also, the Lord commanded the disciples that they should
preach the kingdom of God; and this is the kingdom of
God.

“Having heard these words, the combatants said, ‘ You
recite many things from the Word, and perhaps we have
read such there, but we do not remember; therefore open


No. 1 13] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 185

the Word before us, and read them from it, especially this,
that the kingdom of the Father then comes when the king-
dom of the Lord does.’ And then they said to the boys,
4 Bring hither the Word/ And they brought it; and we read
from it the following passages: John, preaching the gospel
of the kingdom, said, The time is fulfilled; the kingdom of
God is at hand (Mark i. 14, 15: Matt. iii. 2). Jesus Himself
preached the gospel of the kingdom, and that the kingdom
of God was at hand (Matt. iv. 17, 23; ix. 35). Jesus com-
manded the disciples that they should preach and show the
glad tidings of the kingdom of God (Mark xvi. 15: Luke
viii. 1; ix. 6); in like manner the seventy whom He sent
forth (x. 9, 11); besides other places, as Matt. xi. 5; xvi.
27, 28: Mark viii. 35; ix. 1, 47; x. 29, 30; xi. 10: Luke i.
19; ii. 10, 11 ; iv. 43; vii. 22; xxi. 31; xxii. 18. The king-
dom of God, of which the good tidings were made known,
was the kingdom of the Lord, and so the Father’s king-
dom: that it is so is manifest from these passages: The
Father hath given all things into the hand of the Son (John
iii. 35). The Father hath given to the Son power over all flesh
(John xvii. 2). All things are delivered to Me of My Father
(Matt. xi. 27). All power is given unto Me in heaven and
in earth (xxviii. 18). And moreover from these: Jehovah
Zebaoth is His name; and thy Redeemer , the Holy One of
Israely the God of the whole earth shall He be called (Isa. liv.
5). I saw andy behold , one like the Son of Man , to whom was
given dominiony glory , and a kingdom , and all peoples and
nations shall worship Him; His dominion is an everlasting
dominiony which shall not pass away , and His kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed (Dan. vii. 13, 14). When the
seventh angel soundedy there were great voices in the heavens ,
saying. The kingdoms 0} the world are become our Lord’s and
His Christ’ Sy and He shall reign for ever and ever (Apoc. xi.
15; xii. 10). And, besides, we instructed them from the
Word that the Lord came into the world not only to redeem
angels and men, but also that they might be united to God


1 86


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No- 1 13


the Father by Him and in Him; for He taught that He is in
those who believe in Him, and that they are in Him (John
vi. 56; xiv. 20; xv. 4, 5).

“Having heard these things, they asked, ‘How, then, can
your Lord be called Father ?’ We said, From those pas-
sages which have been read, and also from these: Unto us
a Child is born , unto us a Son is given , whose name is God ,
Mighty , the Father of eternity (Isa. ix. 6). Thou art our
Father; Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel doth not ac-
knowledge us, Thou , Jehovah, art our Father; our Redeemer
from everlasting is Thy name (Isa. lxiii. 16). Did He not
say to Philip, who wished to see the Father, Hast thou not
known Me, Philip? He that seeth Me, seeth the Father
(John xiv. 9; xii. 45). Who else, then, is the Father, but
He whom Philip saw with his eyes? To which we added
this: It is said in the whole Christian world that they who
are of the church make the body of Christ, and are in His
body: how, then, can a man of the church go to God the
Father, except through Him in whose body he is? If other-
wise, he must go entirely out of His body, and go to Him.
Finally, we informed them that the Lord is at this day estab-
lishing the New Church, which is meant by the New Jerusa-
lem in the Apocalypse, in which will be the worship of the
Lord alone, as in heaven, and that thus every thing will be
fulfilled which is contained in the Lord’s prayer from begin-
ning to end. We confirmed all from the Word in the Evan-
gelists and in the Prophets, also from the Apocalypse in
which that church is treated of from the beginning to the end,
and this we did in so great abundance that they were tired of
hearing.

“ While hearing these things with indignation, the Arma-
geddons wished at every turn to interrupt our discourse; and
at length they broke in, and exclaimed, ‘You have spoken
contrary to the doctrine of our church, which is, that God
the Father is to be approached immediately, and that we
must believe in Him: you have thus made yourselves guilty


No. 1 14]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


I87


of a violation of our faith; so go out from this place, and if
not, you shall be cast out.’ And their minds being in-
flamed, from threats they proceeded to violence; but then,
by power given us, we struck them with blindness; and not
seeing us because of this, they rushed forth, and in their
wandering they ran in different directions, and some fell into
the abyss which is mentioned in the Apocalypse (ix. 2),
which is now in the southern quarter, toward the east, where
those are who confirm justification by faith alone; and those
there who confirm it from the Word are sent forth into a des-
ert, in which they are brought even to the extremity of the
Christian world, and there mixed with pagans.”

REDEMPTION.

1 14. That there are with the Lord two offices, those of
priest and of king, is known in the church; but few know
in what the one and the other consist; therefore it shall be
told. The Lord is called Jesus from the office of priest;
and from the office of king He is called Christ : and from the
office of priest He is also called in the Word Jehovah and
Lord; and from the office of king, God, and the Holy One
of Israel, as also King. These two offices are distinguished
from each other as love and wisdom, or what is the same, as
good and truth are distinguished from each other; and so
whatever the Lord did and wrought from Divine love or
Divine good, He did and wrought from His priestly office;
but whatever from Divine wisdom or Divine truth, from His
kingly office. In the Word, also, priest and priesthood sig-
nify Divine good; and king and royalty signify Divine truth:
these two were represented by priests and kings in the Israel-
itish Church. As to redemption, that pertains to both
offices; but what part of it to the one, and what part to the
other, will be shown in what follows. But that every thing
may be distinctly perceived, the exposition of redemption
will be divided into canons or articles, as follows: — I. Re >


i88


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 14


demption itself was the subjugation of the hells , and the estab-
lishment of order in the heavens , and thereby preparation for
a new spiritual church . II. Without that redemption no
man could have been saved , nor could the angels have con-
tinued to exist in a state of integrity. III. The Lord thus
redeemed not only men } but also angels. IV. Redemption
was a work purely Divine. V. This redemption itself could
not have been effected but by God incarnate. VI. The pas-
sion of the cross was the last temptation which He as the great-
est prophet sustained , and was the means 0} the glorification
0} His Human , that is } of union with the Divine of His
Father , and it was not redemption . VII. The belief that the
passion of the cross was redemption itself , is a fundamental
error of the church; and that error together with the error con-
cerning three Divine Persons from eternity , has perverted the
whole church , so that nothing spiritual is left in it. These
things will now be unfolded one by one.

1 15. I. Redemption itself was the subjugation of the hells ,
and the establishment 0} order in the heavens y and thereby a
preparation for a new spiritual church . That these three
are redemption, I can say with all certainty, since the Lord
is also at this day performing a redemption, which He com-
menced in the year 1757, together with the Final Judgment
which was then performed. This redemption has continued
from that time even to this: the reason is, that the Second
Coming of the Lord is at this time, and a new church is to be
instituted, which cannot be done unless the subjugation of
the hells, and the establishment of order in the heavens pre-
cede; and because it was granted me to see all things, I can
describe how the hells were subjugated, and how the new
heaven was founded and put in order, which however would
be the subject of a whole work. But how the Final Judg-
ment was executed, I have made known in a small volume
published at London in the year 1758. The subjugation of
the hells, the establishment of order in the heavens and the


No. 1 1 6]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


189


establishment of a new church were redemption, because
without these no man could have been saved. They follow
also in order; for first the hells are to be subjugated before
a new angelic heaven can be formed; and this is to be formed
before a new church upon earth can be instituted; for men
in the world are so conjoined with angels of heaven and
spirits of hell, that in the interiors of the mind on both sides
they make one; but this will be treated in the last chapter
of this work, where especially the Consummation of the Age,
the Coming of the Lord, and the New Church will be treated.

1 16. That the Lord, while He was in the world, fought
against the hells, and conquered and subjugated them, and
thus brought them under obedience to Him, is evident from
many passages in the Word, of which I shall select these few
— in Isaiah: Who is this that cometh from Edom , with dyed
garments from Bozrah, this that is glorious in His apparel ,
travelling in the greatness of His strength? I that speak in
righteousness , mighty to save. Wherefore art Thou red in
Thine apparel , and Thy garments as of Him that treadeth in
the wine-fat? I have trodden the wine-press alone , and of the
people not a man with Me; for I have trodden them in Mine
anger , and trampled them in My fury , hence their victory is
sprinkled upon My garments; for the day of vengeance is in
My heart , and the year of My redeemed is come . . . My arm
brought salvation to Me ... I made their victory descend to
the earth. ... He said, Behold My people , children ... so
He became their Saviour; for His love and for His pity He
redeemed them (lxiii. 1-9). These things are said of the
Lord’s combat against the hells; by the garment in which
He was glorious, and which was red, is meant the Word, to
which violence was offered by the Jewish people. The
battle itself against the hells, and the victory over them, is
described by this, that He trod them in His anger, and tram-
pled them in His fury. That He fought alone and from His
own power, is described by the words, Of the people not a
man with Me; My arm brought salvation to Me; I made


190 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 116

their victory descend to the earth. That thereby He saved
and redeemed, by the words, Therefore He became their
Saviour; for His love and for His pity He redeemed them.
That this was the cause of His coming is meant by these
words, The day of vengeance is in My heart, and the year of
My redeemed is come. Again in Isaiah: He saw that there
was no man , and wondered that there was no intercessor; there-
fore His arm brought salvation unto Him, and His righteous-
ness it upheld Him; therefore He put on righteousness as a
breastplate , and a helmet of salvation upon His head , and He
put on garments of vengeance , and covered Himself with zeal
as a cloak . . . then came to Zion the Redeemer (lix. 16, 17,
20). In Jeremiah: They were dismayed . . . their strong
ones were beaten down; they have fled a flight, and they looked
not back . . .. this is the day of the Lord Jehovih Zebaoth, a
day of vengeance, that He may avenge Him of His adver-
saries; that the sword may devour and be satisfied (xlvi. 5, 10).
Both of these passages are concerning the Lord’s battle
against the hells, and concerning the victory over them. In
David: Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Mighty One . . .
Thy arrows are sharp, the people shall fall under Thee , ene-
mies of the King from the heart. Thy throne is for ever and
ever. . . . Thou hast loved righteousness , therefore God hath
anointed Thee (Ps. xlv. 4-7); besides many other places.
Since the Lord alone conquered the hells, without help from
any angel, therefore He is called a Hero, and a Man of wars
(Isa. xlii. 13; ix. 6); the King of glory , Jehovah the Mighty,
the Hero in War (Ps. xxiv. 8, 10); The Mighty One 0} Jacob
(cxxxii. 2); and in many places, Jehovah Zebaoth , that is,
Jehovah of hosts. And also His advent is called the day of
Jehovah, terrible, cruel, a day of indignation , of wrath, of
anger, of vengeance, of ruin, of war, 0} a trumpet, of a loud
noise , of tumult, and so on. In the Evangelists we read:
Now is the judgment of this world; the prince of this world
shall be cast out (John xii. 31). The prince of this world is
judged (xvi. n). Be of good cheer; I have overcome the


No. 1 17] the lord the redeemer 1 91

world (xvi. 33). I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven
(Luke x. 18). By the world, the prince of the world, Satan,
and the devil, is meant hell. Moreover, in the Apocalypse
from beginning to end is described the state of the Christian
Church at this day, and it is also told that the Lord is about
to come again, and subjugate the hells, and make a new an-
gelic heaven, and then establish a new church upon earth.
All these things are there predicted, but they have not been
discovered till the present time; for the reason that the Apoc-
alypse, like all the prophetic parts of the Word, was written
throughout solely by correspondences; and unless these had
been made known by the Lord, scarce any one would have
been able rightly to understand a single little verse therein;
but now, for the sake of the New Church, all the things
therein have been disclosed in The Apocalypse Revealed ,
published at Amsterdam in the year 1766; and they will see
them who believe the Word of the Lord in Matthew (chap,
xxiv.) concerning the state of the church at the present time,
and concerning His coming. But this belief is as yet only
wavering with those who have impressed on their hearts, so
deeply that it cannot be rooted out, the faith of the present
church regarding a trinity of Divine Persons from eternity,
and regarding the passion of Christ, that it was redemption
itself. But these, as was shown in the Relation above (n.
1 13), are like bottles filled with iron-filings and powdered
sulphur, into which if water be poured, there is first pro-
duced a heat, and afterward a flame, by which the bottles
are burst: so they, when they hear any thing concerning
living water, which is the genuine truth of the Word, and
this enters through their eyes or ears, are violently heated
and inflamed, and reject it, as something which would burst
their heads.

1 17. The subjugation of the hells, the establishment of
order in the heavens, and afterward the establishment of the
church, may be illustrated by various comparisons: the state
of the hells by comparison with an army of robbers or rebels


192


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 17


who invade a kingdom or a city, and there set fire to the
houses, plunder the goods of the inhabitants, and divide the
spoil among themselves, and then exult and triumph; and
redemption itself by comparison with a just king, who
marches against them with his army, puts a part of them to
the sword, shuts a part up in work-houses, takes away their
spoil and restores it to his subjects, and afterward estab-
lishes order in the kingdom, and renders it secure from the
invasion of such ravagers. It may also be illustrated by com-
parison with a herd of wild beasts, bursting out from a forest,
and attacking flocks and herds, and also men; on account of
which, no man dares go out from the walls of his city to till
the ground, and the fields will be deserted, and the inhabi-
tants of the city perish by famine: while redemption may be
illustrated by the destruction and dispersion of those wild
beasts, and protection of the fields and plains from the further
invasion of such animals. It may also be illustrated by lo-
custs consuming every green thing on the face of the ground,
and by the means taken to prevent their further progress:
also, by the little worms in early summer, which strip the
trees of leaves, and thus also of fruits, so that they stand
naked as in the middle of winter; and by shaking them off,
and thus restoring the garden to the state of its bloom and
fruitfulness. So would it be similar with the church, unless
the Lord by redemption had separated the good from the
evil, and cast the evil into hell, and raised the good into
heaven. What would become of an empire or a kingdom,
if there were no justice nor judgment by which the evil might
be taken away from the midst of the good, and the good pro-
tected from violence, so that every one might live securely in
his own house, and, as is said in the Word, sit under his fig-
tree and his vine in tranquillity ?

1 18. II. Without that redemption , no man could have been
saved , nor could the angels have continued to exist in a state of
integrity . In the first place what redemption is shall be told.


No. 1 1 9]


•THE LORD THE REDEEMER


193


To redeem signifies to liberate from damnation, to deliver
from eternal death, to rescue from hell, and take away cap-
tives and prisoners out of the hand of the devil. This was
done by the Lord by subjugating the hells, and founding a
new heaven. Man could not otherwise have been saved,
because the spiritual world has such a connection with the
natural world that they cannot be separated. This connec-
tion is principally with the interiors of men, which are called
their souls and minds; those of the good with the souls and
minds of angels, and those of the evil with the souls and
minds of infernal spirits. They have such union that if they
were removed from man, he would fall down dead as a stock;
in like manner angels and spirits could not continue to exist,
if men were withdrawn from them. From this it is plain why
redemption was effected in the spiritual world, and why
heaven and hell were first to be set in order before the church
on earth could be established. That it is so, is very plain
from what is said in the Apocalypse, that after the new
heaven was made, the New Jerusalem, which is the New
Church, came down out of that heaven (xxi. 1,2).

1 19. The reason why the angels could not have continued
to exist in a state of integrity if redemption had not been
effected by the Lord, is that the whole angelic heaven to-
gether with the church on earth is before the Lord as one
man, whose internal is formed by the angelic heaven, and
its external by the church. More particularly, the highest
heaven constitutes the head; the second and the lowest con-
stitute the breast and the middle region of the body; and the
church on earth the loins and feet. The Lord Himself is
the soul and life of this whole man; and therefore unless
the Lord had wrought redemption, this man would have been
destroyed; as to the feet and loins, by the falling away of the
church on earth; as to the gastric region, by the falling away
of the lowest heaven; as to the chest, by the falling away of
the second heaven; and then the head, having no correspond-
ence with the body, falls into a swoon. But this shall be il-


194


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 19


lustrated by comparisons: it is as when mortification attacks
the feet, and in its ravages gradually ascends, and infects
first the loins, then the viscera of the abdomen, and at length
invades the neighborhood of the heart ; when as is known
man succumbs in death. It may also be illustrated by com-
parison with diseases of the viscera below the diaphragm,
that when the viscera have any rupture, the heart begins to
palpitate, and the lungs to pant heavily, and at length they
both cease. It may also be illustrated by comparison with
the internal and external man, that the internal man is well
as long as the external man obediently performs its functions;
but if the external does not obey, but resists the internal, and
still more if it assaults it, at length the internal is weakened
and finally carried away by the enjoyments of the external,
until it even favors and assents to it. It may also be illus-
trated by comparison with a man standing upon a mountain,
who sees below him the country inundated, and the waters
rising higher and higher; and when they reach the height on
which he stands, he also is engulfed, unless enabled to se-
cure his safety by a boat which comes to him through the
flood: in like manner if one from a mountain sees a dense
fog rising higher and higher above the earth, and hiding
the fields, villages, and cities; and afterward, when the fog
reaches even to him, he does not see any thing, not even
himself where he is. So it is with angels when the church
on earth perishes; then the lower heavens also pass away.
The reason is, that the heavens consist of men from the
earth; and when there no longer remains there any good of
the heart and truth of the Word, the heavens are inundated
by the evils which rise up, and are suffocated by them as
by Stygian waters; but still they are stored away by the
Lord somewhere, and are reserved to the day of the final
judgment, and are then raised up into a new heaven. These
are they who are meant in the Apocalypse in the following
passage: I saw under the altar the souls of them that had been
slain for the Word 0} God , and for the testimony which they


No. 1 20]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


I9S


held; and they cried with a loud voice , saying , How long, O
Lord, Holy and True , dost Thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth? And there was given
them a white robe , unto each one oj them; and it was said unto
them, that they should rest yet for a little time , until their fel-
low servants also , and their brethren , that should be killed as
they were , shoidd be fulfilled (vi. 9-1 1).

120. There are many reasons why, without redemption
by the Lord, iniquity and wickedness would spread through
the whole of Christendom, in both the natural and spiritual
worlds, among which is this, that every man after death
comes into the world of spirits, and then is wholly like him-
-self, as he was before; and at his entrance he cannot be re-
strained from conversing with deceased parents, brothers,
relatives, and friends; every husband then first seeks his
wife, and every wife her husband; and by these they are
introduced into various companies of such as outwardly ap-
pear like sheep, and inwardly are like wolves; and by these
even those are perverted who have been devoted to piety:
from this cause, and from abominable arts unknown in the
natural world, the world of spirits is as full of malicious spirits
as stagnant water is green with the spawn of frogs. That
intercourse with the wicked there also brings this about, may
be rendered clear from these, considerations, that whoever
associates with robbers or pirates at length becomes like
them; and whoever lives with adulterers and harlots at
length regards adulteries as nothing; and, also, whoever
mingles with rebels at length does not scruple to do violence
to any one. For all evils are contagious, and may be com-
pared to the plague, which is infectious by mere breath or
exhalation; and also to a cancer, or to gangrene which spreads
and corrupts the neighboring parts, and successively those
more distant, until the whole body perishes. The enjoy-
ments of evil, into which every one is born, cause wicked-
ness to be contagious. From these things it may now be evi-
dent that without redemption by the Lord no one could be


196


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 120


saved, nor could the angels continue to exist in a state of in-
tegrity. The only refuge, that one may not perish, is in the
Lord; for He says, Abide in Me, and I in yon. As the branch
cannot bear }ruit of itself , except it abide in the vine , no more
can ye except ye abide in Me. I am the Vine , ye are the
branches. He that abideth in Me, and I in him, the same
bringeth forth much fruit ; for without Me ye can do nothing.
If a man abide not in Me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is
withered, and is cast into the fire and burned (John xv. 4-6).

1 21. III. The Lord thus redeemed not only men, but also
angels. This follows from what was said in the preceding
article, that without redemption by the Lord, the angels could
not have continued to exist. To the reasons above men-
tioned, these may be added : — 1 . That at the time of the
first coming of the Lord, the hells had grown up to such a
height that they filled all the world of spirits, which is in the
midst between heaven and hell, and thus not only disordered
the heaven which is called the lowest, but also assaulted the
middle heaven,' which they infested in a thousand ways, and
which would have gone to destruction unless the Lord had
sustained it. Such inroad of the hells is meant by the tower
built in the land of Shinar, the head of which was to reach
even to heaven; but the design of the builders was frustrated
by the confusion of tongues, and they were dispersed, and
the city was called Babel (Gen. xi. 1-9). What is there
meant by the tower and by the confusion of languages is ex-
plained in the Heavenly Arcana, published at London. The
reason that the hells had grown up to such a height was, that
at the time when the Lord came into the world, the whole
world had entirely alienated itself from God by idolatries and
magic; and the church which had been among the sons of
Israel, and afterward among the Jews, was utterly destroyed
by falsification and adulteration of the Word; and both idola-
ters and Jews after death all flocked into the world of spirits,
where at length they were so increased and multiplied that


No. I2l]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


197


they could not be expelled except by the descent of God Him-
self, and then by the strength of His Divine arm. How this
work was accomplished is described in a little treatise con-
cerning the Final Judgment , published at London in the year
1758. The work was accomplished by the Lord when He
was in the world. A like work also has been wrought by the
Lord at this day, because, as was said above, at this day is
His second coming, which was everywhere predicted in the
Apocalypse, and also in Matthew (xxiv. 3, 30), Mark (xiii.
26), and Luke (xxi. 27), and in the Acts of the Apostles (i.
n), and in other places. The difference is that, at His first
coming, the hells had grown to such an extent from the mul-
titude of idolaters, magicians, and falsifiers of the Word; but
at this second coming, they had grown from Christians so
called, both such as are imbued with naturalism, and also
such as have falsified the Word by confirmations of their
fabulous faith regarding three Divine Persons from eternity,
and regarding the passion of the Lord, that it was redemp-
tion itself; for these are they who are meant by the dragon
and his two beasts in the Apocalypse (chap. xii. and xiii. 2).
The second reason why the Lord also redeemed angels, is
that not only every man, but also every angel, is withheld by
the Lord from evil and held in good; for no one, whether
angel or man, is in good from himself, but all good is from
the Lord. When, therefore, the footstool of the angels,
which is in the world of spirits, was taken away from them,
it was then with them as with one sitting upon a throne when
its supports are removed. That the angels are not pure in
the sight of God is evident from the prophetic parts of the
Word, and also from Job; and likewise from this, that there
is not any angel who had not first been a man. Hereby is
confirmed what was said in the Faith of the New Heaven and
the New Church in the universal and in the particular form,
prefixed to this work, namely, that the Lord came into the
world that He might remove hell from man, and that He did
remove it by means of combats against it and by victories


198 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 121

over it; thus He subjugated it, and reduced it to order and
under obedience to Himself. And also by these things there,
that Jehovah God descended and assumed the Human, to
the end that He might reduce to order all things which were
in heaven and all things which were in hell, and all things
which were in the church; because at that time the power
of the devil, that is, of hell, prevailed over the power of
heaven, and upon earth the power of evil over the power
of good, and hence a total damnation stood before the door
and threatened. This impending damnation Jehovah God
removed by means of His Human, and thus He redeemed
men and angels: from which it is manifest that without the
coming of the Lord no one could have been saved. It is sim-
ilar at this day; therefore, unless the Lord comes again into
the world, no one can be saved (see above, n. 2, 3).

122. That the Lord has delivered the spiritual world, and
through this spiritual world is about to deliver the church
from universal damnation, may be illustrated by compari-
son with a king, who, by victories over the enemy, liberates
the princes his sons, whom the enemy had taken, confined in
prisons, and bound with chains, and brings them back to his
palace; also by comparison with a shepherd, who, like Sam-
son and David, rescues his sheep from the jaws of the lion or
the bear, or drives away those wild beasts rushing forth from
the forest into the pastures, and pursues them even to the
utmost limits of the pastures, and at last forces them into
swamps or deserts, and then returns to the sheep, and feeds
them in safety, and gives them drink from fountains of pure
water. It may also be illustrated by comparison with one
who sees a serpent coiled up, lying in the way, and ready to
wound the heel of the traveller; and who seizes it by the
head, and, though it twists itself about his hand, carries it
home and cuts off its head and throws the rest into the fire.
It may also be illustrated by comparison with a bridegroom
or a husband, who, when he sees an adulterer attempting to
do violence to his bride or wife, attacks him, and either


No. 123]


THE LORD THE REDEE ME R


l 99


wounds his hand with a sword, or belays his legs and loins
with blows, or has him driven into the streets by his servants,
who pursue him with clubs even to his house; and so he leads
his wife now free into his chamber. By a bride and a wife
also in the Word is meant the Lord’s church; and by adul-
terers are meant its violators, who are those who adulterate
His Word; and because the Jews did this, they were called
by the Lord an adulterous generation.

123. IV. Redemption was a work purely Divine. He
who knows what hell is, and what were its height and inunda-
tion over the whole world of spirits at the time of the Lord’s
coming, and also with what power the Lord cast down and
dispersed hell, and afterward reduced it together with heaven
into order, cannot but be amazed and exclaim that all this
was a work purely Divine. First, as to what hell is: it con-
sists of myriads of myriads, since it is composed of all those
who from the creation of the world by evils of life and falsi-
ties of faith have alienated themselves from God. Second,
as to the height and inundation of hell over the whole. world
of spirits, at the time of the Lord’s coming, something has
been stated in the preceding articles. What it was at the
time of the first coming, was not made known to any one, for
it is not revealed in the literal sense of the Word. But what
it was at the time of His second coming, it was granted to see
with my eyes; from which conclusions may be drawn con-
cerning the former; and this second coming is described in
a little treatise concerning the Final Judgment , published at
London in the year 1758; as also with what power the Lord
cast down and dispersed that hell; but to transfer hither
what is described from personal observation in that little
work is needless, because that is extant, and there are yet
copies in abundance at the booksellers in London. Every
one who reads that treatise may clearly see that this was the
work of the omnipotent God. Third, how the Lord after-
ward reduced all things both in heaven and in hell, into


200


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 23


order, has not yet been described by me, since the establish-
ment of order in the heavens and the hells has continued in
progress from the day of the final judgment to the present
time, and still continues; but after this book is published,
if it be desired, it shall be given to the public. As to myself,
I have seen, and do see every day, the Divine omnipotence
of the Lord in this thing, as in full view. This last work is
properly the work of redemption, and the former properly
that of the final judgment; those who view these two things
distinctly may see many things which in the prophetic parts
of the Word are concealed under figures; and yet can see
them described when, by unfolding the correspondences, they
are brought forth into the light of the understanding. The
Divine work of judgment and that of redemption can be il-
lustrated only by comparisons, and so but imperfectly. They
may be illustrated by comparison with a battle against the
armies of all the nations in the whole world, armed with
spears, shields, swords, muskets, and cannon, having skilful
and cunning generals and other officers; and this because
many in hell are skilled in arts unknown in our world, in
which they practise together, how to attack, ensnare, beset,
and assault those who are from heaven. The combat of the
Lord with hell may also be compared, however imperfectly,
with a combat with the wild beasts of the whole world, and
with their slaughter and subjugation, until not one of them
dares to come forth and make an assault upon any man who
is in the Lord; whence, if any one shows a threatening look,
he suddenly shrinks back, as if he felt the vulture in his
bosom, endeavoring to eat through even to the heart. In-
fernal spirits are also described in the Word as wild beasts:
these, too, are meant in Mark (i. 13) by the wild beasts with
which the Lord was for forty days. Comparison may also
be made with resistance to the whole ocean, rushing with
its billows into countries and cities when the dikes are broken
through. The subjugation of hell by the Lord is also meant
by His calming the sea, when He said, Peace , be still (Mark


No. 124]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


201


iv. 38, 39: Matt. viii. 26: Luke viii. 23, 24). For by the sea
there, as in many other places, is signified hell. The Lord,
with similar Divine power, at this day fights against hell in
every man who is being regenerated; for hell assaults all such
with diabolical fury; and unless the Lord resisted and sub-
dued it, man could not but yield. For hell is as one mon-
strous man, and like a huge lion, with which also it is com-
pared in the Word. And therefore unless the Lord should
keep that lion or that monster bound with manacles and
fetters, it could not be otherwise than that a man, when res-
cued from one evil, would of himself fall into another, and
then into many more.

124. V. This redemption itself could not have been effected
but by God incarnate. In the preceding article it was shown
that redemption was a work purely Divine, consequently
that it could not have been performed but by an omnipotent
God. The reason that it could not have been performed
but by God incarnate, that is, made Man, is, that Jehovah
God, such as He is in His infinite essence, cannot draw near
to hell, much less enter into it; for He is in purest and first
things. And so Jehovah God, being in Himself such, if He
should only breathe upon those who are in hell, would kill
them in a moment; for He said to Moses, when he wished to
see Him, Thou canst not see My face , for there shall no man
see Me and live (Exod. xxxiii. 20). As, therefore, Moses
could not see Him and live, still less could those who are
in hell, where all are in the outmost and grossest things, and
so in those most remote; for they are the lowest natural.
Therefore, unless Jehovah God had assumed the Human,
and thus clothed Himself with a body which is in outmosts,
He might have undertaken any redemption in vain. For
who can attack any enemy, unless he approach him, and be
furnished with arms for the battle ? Or who can drive away
and destroy dragons, hydras, and basilisks in some desert,
unless he cover his body with a coat of mail and his head


202


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 124


with a helmet, and have a spear in his hand? Or who can
catch whales in the sea, without a ship and the proper imple-
ments for catching them? By these and similar things may
be illustrated, though not justly compared, the battle of the
omnipotent God with the hells, upon which battle He could
not have entered, unless He had first put on the Human.
But it should be known that the battle of the Lord with the
hells was not an oral battle, as between reasoners and wrang-
lers — such a battle effects nothing at all there — but it was
a spiritual battle, which is of Divine truth from Divine good,
the very vital essence of the Lord: the influx of this by way
of sight, no one in hell can resist. There is in it such power
that the infernal spirits flee away at the mere perception of
it, cast themselves down into the deep, and creep into cav-
erns to hide themselves. This is the same that is described
in Isaiah : They shall enter into the caverns of the rocks , and
into the fissures of the dust, for fear of Jehovah, when He shall
arise to terrify the earth (ii. 19) ; and in the Apocalypse : They
shall all hide themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the
mountains, and shall say to the mountains and rocks , Fall tipon
us, and hide as from the face of Him that sitteth upon the
throne , and from the wrath of the Lamb (vi. 15, 16). What
was the Lord’s power which He has from the Divine good,
while He executed the final judgment in the year 1757, may
be evident from what is described in the little treatise con-
cerning that judgment — as that He tore up from their
places the hills and mountains which the internals occupied
in the world of spirits, and scattered them far and wide, cau-
sing some to sink down out of sight; and that He deluged
their cities, villages, and fields with a flood, and overwhelmed
their lands from the deep, and cast them with their inhabi-
tants into whirlpools, bogs, and fens; besides many other
things, all of which were done by the Lord alone, through
the power of Divine truth from Divine good.

125. That Jehovah God could not have operated and
effected these things, except by His Human, may be illus-


No, 126]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


203


trated by various comparisons, as that one who is invisible
cannot join hands nor converse with one who is not visible to
him; not even an angel or a spirit with a man, though he
should stand close to his body and before his face. Neither
can one’s soul speak and act with any one, except through
his body. The sun cannot enter with its light and heat into
any man, beast, or tree, unless it first enter the air, and act
through this; so too it cannot enter into fishes, except through
the water; for it must act through the element in which the
subject is. No one can scale a fish without a knife, nor pluck
a crow without fingers, nor descend to the bottom of a lake
without a diving-bell. In a word, one thing must be accom-
modated to another, before any communication and opera-
tion against it or with it can be effected.

126. VI. The passion of the cross was the last temptation
which the Lord as the greatest prophet sustained , and was the
means of the glorification of His Human , that is, of union
with the Divine of His Father; but it was not redemption.
There are two things for which the Lord came into the world,
and by which He saved men and angels, namely, redemption
and the glorification of His Human. These two are distinct
from each other, but yet they make one for salvation. What
redemption is has been shown in the preceding articles,
namely, that it was battle with the hells, subjugation of them,
and afterward the establishment of order in the heavens.
But glorification is the uniting of the Human of the Lord
with the Divine of His Father. This was done successively,
and was fully completed by the passion of the cross; for every
man ought, on his part, to approach to God, and in propor-
tion as man approaches, God on His part enters. This is
the same as with a temple; it is first to be built, and this is
done by the hands of men; and afterward it is to be conse-
crated, and finally prayer offered that God may be present,
and unite Himself with the church there. The reason why
the union itself was fully effected by the passion of the cross,


204


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 126


is that this was the last temptation which the Lord under-
went in the world, and conjunction is effected by tempta-
tions; for in them man to appearance is left to himself alone,
though he has not been left alone, for God is then most really
present in his inmosts, and supports him; when thus one con-
quers in temptation, he is most intimately conjoined with
God; and the Lord then was most intimately united to God
His Father. That the Lord in the passion of the cross was
left to Himself, is evident from this His exclamation upon
the cross: My God y why hast Thou jorsaken Me? and also
from these words of the Lord: No one taketh life from Me y
but I lay it down of Myself; I have power to lay it down , and
I have power to take it again; this commandment have I re-
ceived of My Father (John x. 18). From these passages it
may now be evident that the Lord did not suffer as to the Di-
vine, but as to the Human ; and that then an inmost and thus
a complete union was effected. This may be illustrated by
the fact that while a man suffers as to the body, his soul does
not suffer, but only grieves; and God takes away this grief
after the victory, and wipes it away as one wipes tears from
the eyes.

127. These two things, redemption and the passion of the
cross, must be perceived distinctly, otherwise the human
mind, like a ship, falls into quicksands or upon rocks and is
lost with the pilot, master, and sailors; that is, it errs in all
those things which are of salvation by the Lord; for a man
without a distinct idea concerning those two things is as one
who dreams, and sees imaginary things, and draws conclu-
sions from those things which he thinks to be real, when yet
they are unreal; or he is as one who walks in the night, and,
while he takes hold of the leaves of some tree, thinks them to
be the hair of a man, and comes nearer, and entangles his
own hair in them. But though redemption and the passion
of the cross are two distinct things, yet they make one with
respect to salvation; since the Lord, by union with His
Father, which was completed by the passion of the cross,
became Redeemer to eternity.


No. 129] THE LORD THE REDEEMER 20 $

128. Concerning the glorification, by which is meant the
uniting of the Divine Human of the Lord with the Divine of
the Father, that it was fully completed by the passion of the
cross, the Lord Himself thus speaks in the Evangelists:
After Judas went out, Jesus said , Now is the Son 0} Man glo-
rified, and God is glorified in Him; if God is glorified in Him ,
God shall also glorify Him in Himself, and shall straight-
way glorify Him (John xlii. 31, 32). Here glorification is
said both of God the Father and of the Son, for it is said, God
is glorified in Him, and God will glorify Him in Himself:
that this is to be united is manifest. Father , the hour is
come; glorify Thy Son , that Thy Son also may glorify Thee
(xvii. 1, 5); it is so said because the uniting was reciprocal,
as is said, the Father in Him and He in the Father. Now
is My soul troubled; and He said, Father, glorify Thy name;
and there came a voice from heaven, I have both glorified, and
will glorify again (xii. 27, 28); this was said because the
uniting was effected successively. Ought not Christ to suffer
this, and enter into His glory? (Luke xxiv. 26.) Glory, in
the Word, when attributed to the Lord, signifies Divine truth
united to Divine good. From these passages it is very mani-
fest that the Human of the Lord is Divine.

129. The reason why the Lord was willing to be tempted
even to the passion of the cross was, that He was The Prophet;
and prophets formerly signified the doctrine of the church
from the Word, and hence they represented the state of the
church, what it was, by various things, and even by things
unjust, grievous, and abominable, which were enjoined on
them by God. But the Lord, because He was the Word
itself, as The Prophet represented by the passion of the cross
the Jewish Church, how it profanes the Word itself. To
this reason another may be added, that thus He might be
acknowledged in the heavens as the Saviour of both worlds;
for all the things of His passion signified such things as are of
the profanation of the Word, and the angels understand them
spiritually while the men of the church understand them nat-


206


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 129


urally. That the Lord was The Prophet, is evident from
these passages: The Lord said, A prophet is not without
honor save in his own country and in his own house (Matt,
xiii. 57: Mark vi. 4: Luke iv. 24). Jesus said , It is not meet
that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem (Luke xiii. 33). Fear
seized them all } praising God , and saying that a great prophet
was raised up among them (Luke vii. 16). They said con-
cerning Jesus, This is the prophet of Nazareth (Matt. xxi.
11 : John vii. 40, 41). And in Deuteronomy it was said that
a prophet should be raised up from the midst of the brethren,
whose words they should obey (xviii. 15-19).

130. That prophets represented the state of their church
as to doctrine from the Word, and life according to the doc-
trine, is evident from these passages: It was commanded the
prophet Isaiah, that he should loose the sackcloth from off
his loins, and the shoe from off his foot, and should go naked
and barefoot three years, for a sign and a wonder (Isa. xx.
2, 3). It was commanded the prophet Ezekiel, that he
should represent the state of the church by making vessels
for removing, and that he should remove to another place, in
the sight of the sons of Israel, and should bring forth the
vessels by day, and should go forth in the evening through
a hole dug in the wall, and should cover his face that he
might not see the ground, and that thus he should be a sign
to the house of Israel, and should say, Behold , I am your
sign; as I have done , so shall it be done to you (Ezek. xii. 3-7,
n). It was commanded the prophet Hosea that he should
represent the state of the church by taking to himself a harlot
to wife; and also he took her, and she brought forth to him
three sons, one of whom he called Jezreel, another Not-to-be-
pitied, and the third Not-my-people. And again it was com-
manded him that he should go and love a woman beloved
by her companion, and an adulteress, whom also he bought
for himself (Hos. i. 2-9; iii. 2, 3). It was also enjoined upon
a certain prophet that he should put ashes upon his eyes, and
suffer himself to be smitten and beaten (1 Kings xx. 35, 37).


No. 130]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


207


It was enjoined upon the prophet Ezekiel that he should rep-
resent the state of the church by taking a tile, and that he
should portray upon it Jerusalem, lay siege, and cast a ram-
part and a mound against it, should put a pan of iron be-
tween himself and the city, and should lie upon the left side
and upon the right side. Also, that he should take wheat,
barley, lentiles, millet, and fitches, and make bread of them,
and also a cake of barley with man’s dung; and because he
prayed that this might not be, it was permitted that he should
make it with cow’s dung. It was said to him, Lie thou upon
the left side , and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it:
the number of days that thou shalt lie upon it , thou shalt bear
their iniquity; for I will give thee the years of their iniquity
according to the number of the days , three hundred and ninety
daySj that thou mayest bear the iniquity of the house of Israel;
and when thou shalt have accomplished these , thou shalt lie
upon thy right side , that thou mayest bear the iniquity of the
house 0} Judah (Ezek. iv. 1-15). That the prophet by these
things bore the iniquities of the house of Israel, and of the
house of Judah, and did not take them away and thus expiate
them, but only represented and pointed them out, is manifest
from what follows there: And Jehovah saith y The sons of
Israel shall eat their bread unclean . . . behold , I will break
the staff of bread . . . that they may want bread and water ,
and be made desolate , a man and his brother , and consume
away because of their iniquity (iv. 13, 16, 17). The like is
therefore meant of the Lord, where it is said, He hath borne
our sicknesses and carried our sorrows . . . Jehovah hath laid
on Him the iniquities of us all. . . . By His knowledge hath
He justified many , because He hath borne their iniquities (Isa.
liii. 4, 6, 11); where in the whole chapter the subject is the
passion of the Lord. That the Lord, as The Prophet, rep-
resented the state of the Jewish Church, as to the Word, is
manifest from the particulars of His passion — as that He
was betrayed by Judas, that He was taken and condemned
by the chief priests and by the elders, that they buffeted Him,


208


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 130


that they smote His head with a reed, that they put on Him
a crown of thorns, that they divided His garments and cast
the lot for His vesture, that they crucified Him, that they gave
Him vinegar to drink, that they pierced His side, that He was
buried, and that on the third day He rose again. His being
betrayed by Judas signified that He was betrayed by the
Jewish nation, with whom the Word then was, since Judas
represented that nation; His being taken and condemned by
the chief priests and elders signified that He was so by all that
church; their buffeting Him, spitting in His face, scourging
Him, and smiting His head with a reed, signified that they did
in like manner to the Word as to its Divine truths; their put-
ting on Him a crown of thorns signified that they falsified
and adulterated those truths; their dividing His garments
and casting the lot upon His vesture signified that they dis-
persed all the truths of the Word, but not its spiritual sense,
which sense was signified by the Lord’s vesture; their cruci-
fying Him signified that they destroyed and profaned the
whole Word; their offering Him vinegar to drink signified
that the truths which they had were merely falsified truths,
therefore He did not drink it; their piercing His side signi-
fied that they totally extinguished all the truth of the Word
and all the good of it; His being buried signified the rejec-
tion of what remained from the mother; His rising again on
the third day signified His glorification, or the union of His
Human with the Divine of the Father. Hence it is now man-
ifest that to bear iniquities does not mean to take them away,
but to represent the profanation of the truths of the Word.

131. These things, also, may be illustrated by compari-
sons, which is done for the sake of simple minds, which see
better from comparisons than from deductions formed ana-
lytically from the Word and at the same time from reason.
Every citizen or subject is united to his king by doing his
commands and precepts, and more so if he suffers hardships
for him, and still more if he undergoes death for him, as in
combats and battles. In like manner, a friend is united to


No. 132]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


209


a friend, a son to his father, and a servant to his master, by
doing those things which are agreeable to their will, and
more so if they defend them against their enemies, and still
more if they fight for their honor. Who is not united to the
virgin whom he is courting for a bride, when he fights with
those who defame her, and contends with his rival even to
wounds? That they are united by such means, is accord-
ing to a law inscribed on nature. The Lord says, I am the
good Shepherd : the good Shepherd layeth down His life for
the sheep . . . therefore doth My Father love Me (John x.
II, 17).

132. VII. The belief that the passion of the cross was re-
demption itself is a fundamental error of the church; and that
error , together with the error concerning three Divine persons
from eternity , has perverted the whole church , so that nothing
spiritual is left in it . What at this day more fills and crams
the books of the orthodox, or what is more zealously taught
and inculcated in the schools, and more frequently preached
and proclaimed from the pulpits, than that God the Father,
being enraged against the human race, not only removed it
from Himself, but also sentenced it to universal damnation,
and thus excommunicated it; but, because He is gracious,
He persuaded or excited His Son to descend and take upon
Himself the determined damnation, and thus appease the
anger of His Father; and that thus and not otherwise He
could look upon man with some favor ? Then, that this was
also done by the Son, who in taking upon Himself the dam-
nation of the human race suffered Himself to be scourged by
the Jews, to be spit upon in the face, and then to be crucified
as the accursed of God (Deut. xxi. 23); and that the Father,
after this was done, became propitious, and from love toward
His Son retracted the sentence of damnation, but only for
those for whom the Son should intercede; and that the Son
thus became a Mediator in the presence of His Father for
ever. These and other like things at this day resound in the


210


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 132


temples, and are reverberated from the walls as an echo from
the woods, and fill the ears of all there. But cannot any one
whose reason is enlightened and made sound by the Word see
that God is mercy and pity itself, because He is love itself
and good itself, and that those are His essence? and that
hence it is a contradiction to say that mercy itself or good
itself can look upon man with anger, and decree his damna-
tion, and still continue to be His Divine essence? Such
things are scarcely ascribed to a good man, but to a wicked
man; nor to an angel of heaven, but to a spirit of hell; and
therefore it is abominable to ascribe them to God. But if
the cause of the error be sought, it is this, that they have
taken the passion of the cross to be redemption itself; and
from this have flowed those opinions, as from one falsity flow
falsities in a continued series, or as from a cask of vinegar
nothing flows but vinegar, or from an insane mind nothing
but what is insane; for from one conclusion made, theorems
of the same sort follow: they lie hidden within the conclu-
sion, and they come forth from it one after another. So
from this concerning the passion of the cross, that it is re-
demption, still many other things scandalous and dishonor-
able to God may come forth or be drawn, until it comes to
pass, as Isaiah says: The priest and the prophet err through
strong drink . . . they stumble in judgment; all tables are
full of vomit and filth (xxviii. 7, 8).

133. From this idea in regard to God and redemption, all
theology has from spiritual become in the lowest degree nat-
ural; which follows from merely natural properties being
attributed to God; and yet on the idea of God and on the
idea of redemption, which makes one with salvation, every
thing of the church depends. For that idea is like the head,
from which all things of the body proceed; and so, when
that is spiritual, all things of the church become spiritual,
and when that is natural all things of the church become
natural. Thus because the idea concerning God and re-
demption has become merely natural, that is, sensual and


No. 134]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


21 I


corporeal, therefore all things which the heads and mem-
bers of the church have taught and still teach in their dog-
matic theology are merely natural. The reason why noth-
ing but falsities can be produced therefrom, is that the
natural man continually acts against the spiritual, and hence
he regards spiritiual things as ghosts and phantoms in the
air. Thus it may be said that on account of that sensual
idea in regard to redemption, and hence in regard to God,
the ways to heaven, which are ways to the Lord God the
Saviour, have been beset by thieves and robbers (John x. 1,
8, 9); and that in the temples the doors have been thrown
down, so that dragons and owls, the tziim and the ijim, have
entered, and sing together in horrible discord. That this
idea regarding redemption and regarding God pervades the
faith of the present age, is known; for that faith is that men
should pray to God the Father that He would remit their
sins for the sake of the cross and blood of His Son; and to
God the Son, that He would pray and intercede for them;
and to God the Holy Spirit, that He would justify and sanc-
tify them. And what else is this than to make supplication
to three Gods in their order ? And how, then, is the thought
of the Divine government different from that of an aristo-
cratic or hierarchic government ? or from that of a Trium-
virate such as there was once at Rome? Instead of a Tri-
umvirate it may however be called a Tripersonate. And
what, then, is easier for the devil than, as is said, to divide
and rule? that is, to distract the minds of men, and excite
rebellious movements, now against one God, now against
another, as has been done from the time of Arius to the
present day; and thus to cast down from the throne the
Lord God the Saviour, who has all power in heaven and
earth (Matt, xxviii. 18), and set upon it some one of his
minions, and ascribe worship to him; or because it is taken
away from him, to take it away also from the Lord Himself?

134. To the above will be added these Relations. First:
I once went into a temple in the world of spirits, where many


212


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 134


were assembled; and, before the sermon, they reasoned
among themselves concerning Redemption. The temple
was square, and there were no windows in the walls, but a
large opening above in the middle of the roof, through which
light from heaven entered, and gave more light than if there
had been windows at the sides. And behold, suddenly,
while they were talking about redemption, a black cloud
coming from the north covered the opening, causing such
darkness that they could not see one another, and scarce
could one see the palm of his hand. While they stood
amazed on account of this, lo, that black cloud was cleft in
the middle, and through the cleft were seen angels sent down
from heaven, who dispersed the cloud on this side and on that,
so that it became again light in the temple. Then the angels
sent down one of their number into the temple, who in their
stead asked the congregation what they were contending
about, since so thick a cloud came over them and took away
the light and brought on darkness. They answered that it
was about redemption, and that this was wrought by the Son
of God by the passion of the cross, and that by this He made
expiation, and delivered the human race from damnation
and eternal death.

But to this the deputed angel said, “ What by the passion
of the cross? Explain, why by that.” And then a priest
came and said, “ I will set forth in order what we know and
believe, which is, that God the Father, being angry with the
human race, condemned it, and excluded it from His clem-
ency, and declared all accursed and reprobate, and doomed
them to hell; and that He wished His Son to take upon Him-
self that condemnation, and that the Son consented, and for
that purpose descended and assumed the Human, and suf-
fered Himself to be crucified, and thus the condemnation of
the human race to be transferred to Himself; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that hangeth on the wood 0} a cross; and
that the Son thus appeased the Father by interceding and
mediating; and that then the Father, from love toward His


No. 134]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


213


Son, and moved with the misery seen in Him upon the wood
of the cross, determined that He would forgive; ‘But only
those to whom I impute Thy righteousness; these I will
make, from sons of wrath and curse, sons of grace and bles-
sing, and will justify and save; but the rest may remain, as
was before determined, sons of wrath.’ This is our faith,
and these things are the righteousness which God the Father
introduces into our faith, which alone justifies and saves.”

The angel having heard these words was silent for a long
time, for he was fixed in astonishemnt; and then he broke
silence and spoke these words: “ Can the Christian world be
so insane, and wander from sound reason into such delirium
and conclude the fundamental article of salvation from such
paradoxes ? Who cannot see that those things are diamet-
rically contrary to the Divine essence, that is, contrary to the
Lord’s Divine love and His Divine wisdom, and, at the same
time, contrary to His omnipotence and omnipresence? No
good master can deal so with his servants and maids; nay,
a wild beast is not so cruel to its cubs, nor a bird of prey to its
young. It is unspeakable. Is it not contrary to His Divine
essence to annihilate the calling made for all and every one
of the human race ? Is it not contrary to the Divine essence
to change the order established from eternity, which is, that
every one should be judged according to his life ? Is it not
contrary to the Divine essence to withdraw love and mercy
from any man, and much more from the whole human race?
Is it not contrary to the Divine essence to be brought back to
mercy from the misery seen in the Son, and since mercy is
God’s very essence to be brought back to His own essence ?
It is abominable to think that He ever went out of it, for it is
Himself from eternity to eternity. And, is it not impossible
to introduce into any such thing as your faith is, the righteous-
ness of redemption, which in itself is of the Divine omnip-
otence, and to impute and ascribe it to man, and to declare
him righteous, pure, and holy without any other means ? Is
it not impossible to remit sins to any one, and to renew, re-


214


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 134


generate, and save any one by imputation alone, and thus to
turn unrighteousness into righteousness, and curse into bles-
sing ? If that were possible, would it not be possible to turn
hell into heaven and heaven into hell, or the dragon into
Michael and Michael into the dragon, and so to end the battle
between them ? What is necessary but to take away the im-
putation of your faith from one, and put it upon the other ?
So we who are in heaven would for ever be in trepidation.
Nor is it in accordance with justice and judgment that one
should take upon himself another’s wickedness, and the
wicked become innocent, and that wickedness should so he
washed away. Is not this contrary to justice, hoth Divine
and human? The Christian world as yet does not know
that order exists; and still less does it know what the order is
which God introduced, into the world at the time when He
created it; and that God cannot act contrary to it, for, if He
should, He would be acting contrary to Himself; for God is
order itself.”

The priest understood what was said by the angel, because
the angels who were above infused light from heaven; and
then he groaned, and said, “ What is to be done ? All at this
day so preach and pray and believe. This is in the mouth of
all, * Good Father, have mercy on us, and remit to us our sins
for the sake of Thy Son’s blood, which He shed for us on the
cross;’ and to Christ it is said, ‘Lord, intercede for us;’ to
which we priests add, ‘ Send to us the Holy Spirit.

And then the angel said, “ I have observed that the priests
prepare eye-salve from the Word not interiorly understood,
with which they anoint the eyes that are blinded by their
faith, or they make of it as it were a plaster for themselves,
which they put upon the wounds inflicted by their dogmas,
but still they do not heal them, because they are inveterate;
therefore go to him who stands there — and he pointed with
the finger to me — he will teach you from the Lord that the
passion of the cross was not redemption, but that it was the
uniting of the Human of the Lord with the Divine of the


No. 135] the lord the redeemer 215

Father, while redemption was the subjugation of the hells
and the establishing of order in the heavens; and that, un-
less those things had been performed by the Lord when He
was in the world, there would have been no salvation for any
on earth, nor for any in the heavens; and he will teach you
also the order introduced from the creation, according to
which men must live to be saved, and that they who do live
according to it are numbered among the redeemed, and are
called the elect.” When this was said, windows were made
in the temple at the sides, through which light flowed in
from the four quarters of the world, and cherubs appeared
flying in the splendor of light; and the angel was taken up
to his companions above the opening, and we retired full
of gladness.

135. Second Relation. One morning as I awaked from
sleep, the sun of the spiritual world appeared to me in its
splendor, and under it I saw the heavens, distant as the earth
from its sun; and then were heard from the heavens things
beyond expression in words, which yet being collected were
articulated into this expression, that there is one God, who
is Man, whose habitation is in that sun. This articulate
sentence fell through the intermediate heavens to the lowest,
and from this into the world of spirits, where I was; and I
perceived that the idea of one God, which the angels had,
was changed, according to the degrees of descent, into an
idea of three Gods. When I observed this, I began to speak
with those who thought of three Gods, saying, “ Oh, what an
enormity! Whence do you get that?” And they answered,
“We think of three, from our perceptive idea of the triune
God; but still this does not fall into our mouth; when we
speak, we always say roundly, that God is one; if in our
minds there is another idea, let it be, provided it do not flow
down and divide the unity of God in the mouth; but still
from time to time it does flow down, because it is within; and
then, if we should speak out, we should say three Gods; but
we are on our guard against this, lest we be exposed to the
ridicule of those who hear us.”


216


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 135


And then they spoke openly from their thought, saying,
“Are there not three Gods, because there are three Divine
Persons, each one of whom is God ? We cannot think other-
wise, since the leader of our church, from the depository of
his holy dogmas, ascribes creation to one, redemption to
another, ancf sanctification to the third; and, especially,
since he attributes to each of them His peculiar properties,
which, he asserts, are incommunicable, and which are not
only creation, redemption, and sanctification, but also im-
putation, mediation, and operation. Is there not, then, one
who created us, and he also imputes? another who redeemed
us, and he also mediates? and a third who operates the me-
diate imputation, and he also sanctifies? Who does not
know that the Son of God was sent by the Father into the
world to redeem the human race, and thus become Expiator,
Mediator, Propitiator, and Intercessor? And, because he
is one with the Son of God from eternity, are there not two
Persons distinct from each other ? and because these two are
in heaven, one sitting at the right hand of the other, must
there not be a third Person, who may execute in the world
what is decreed in heaven ?”

Having heard this, I was silent, but thought with myself,
Oh, what infatuation ! They do not know any thing at all of
what is meant in the Word by mediation. And then, by
command of the Lord, three angels descended from heaven
and were associated with me, in order that from interior per-
ception I might speak with those who had the idea of three
Gods; and particularly concerning mediation, intercession,
propitiation, and expiation, which are attributed by them to
the second Person, or the Son, but not until He had become
man, many ages after the creation, when those four means to
salvation were not yet in existence, and thus God the Father
was not propitiated, the human race not expiated, nor any
one sent from heaven, to intercede and mediate.

Then, from the inspiration brought me, I spoke with them,
saying, “ Come hither as many as can, and hear what is meant


No. 135]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


217


in the Word by mediation, intercession, expiation, and propi-
tiation. These four are predicated of the grace of the one
God in His Human. God the Father can never be ap-
proached, nor can He come to any man, because He is infi-
nite, and in His Esse , which is Jehovah; for, if He should
come to man from this, He would consume him, as fire con-
sumes wood and reduces it to ashes. This is plain from
these things in the Word : that He said to Moses who wished
to see Him, that no one can see Him and live (Exod. xxxiii.
20); and the Lord said, No one hath seen God at any time ,
save the Son , who is in the bosom of the Father (John i. 18:
Matt. xi. 27); also that No one hath heard the voice of the
Father , nor seen His shape (John v. 37). We read, indeed,
that Moses saw Jehovah face to face, and spoke with Him
mouth to mouth; but this was done through an angel; in
like manner with Abraham and Gideon. Now, because
God the Father in Himself is such, it pleased Him to assume
the Human, and in this to admit men to Himself, and thus to
hear them and to speak with them; and this Human is what
is called the Son of God; and this is what mediates, inter-
cedes, propitiates, and expiates. I will tell, therefore, what
those four things, predicated of the Human of God the
Father, signify.

“Mediation signifies that the Human is the medium be-
tween them, through which man may come to God the
Father, and God the Father may come to man, and so teach
and lead him that he may be saved; wherefore the Son of
God, by whom is meant the Human of God the Father, is
called Saviour; and in the world, Jesus, that is, Salvation.
Intercession signifies perpetual mediation; for love itself, of
which are mercy, clemency, and grace, perpetually inter-
cedes, that is, mediates, for those who do His command-
ments, whom He loves. Expiation signifies the removal of
sins, into which man would rush if Jehovah should be im-
mediately approached by him. Propitiation signifies the
operation of clemency and grace, lest man by sins should


2 1 8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 135


bring himself into condemnation; likewise protection, lest he
should profane holiness; this was signified by the propitia-
tory or mercy-seat over the ark in the tabernacle. It is known
that God spoke in the Word according to appearances,
as that He is angry, avenges, tempts, punishes, casts into hell,
condemns, yea, that He does evil; when yet He is angry with
no one, He does not avenge, tempt, punish, cast into hell, nor
condemn. These things are as far from God as heaven is
from hell, and infinitely farther; wherefore they are forms of
speech from appearance; such, also, in another sense, are
expiation, propitiation, intercession, and mediation, by which
are meant the ways and means of access to God and of re-
ceiving grace from God through His Human; which not
being understood, men have divided God into three, and
upon these three have founded all the doctrine of the church,
and so have falsified the Word: from this is the abomination
of desolation, foretold by the Lord in Daniel, and again in
Matthew (xxiv).” When I had said this, the company of
spirits retired from around me, and I observed that they who
actually had the thought of three Gods looked toward hell,
and those who had the thought of one God, in whom is the
Divine Trinity, and that this is in the Lord God the Saviour,
looked toward heaven; and to these appeared the sun of
heaven, in which Jehovah is in His Human.

136. Third Relation. I saw at a distance five academies,
each of them surrounded with light from heaven. The first
was surrounded with purple light, like that in the clouds in
the morning before sunrise on earth; the second was sur-
rounded with a yellow light, like that of the morning after
sunrise; the third was surrounded with a bright white light,
like that of noonday in the world; the fourth was surrounded
with a middle kind of light, such as there is when it begins to
be mingled with the shade of evening; and the fifth stood in
the very shade of evening. The academies in the world of
spirits are spacious halls, where the learned assemble, and
discuss various arcana, which serve to promote their knowl-


No. 136]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


219


edge, intelligence, and wisdom. On seeing them, I felt
a strong desire to go to one of them, and I went in the spirit
to that which was surrounded with a middle kind of light;
and I entered, and there was seen a company of learned men
assembled, who were discussing what is involved by that
which is said of the Lord, that, being taken up into heaven,
He sitteth at the right hand of God (Mark xvi. 19). Most of
the company assembled said that this should be understood
exactly according to the words, that the Son thus sits beside
the Father. But it was asked, “ Why so ? ” Some answered
that the Son was placed by the Father at the right hand, on
account of the redemption which He accomplished; some,
that He sits thus out of love; some, that it was in order that
He might be His Counsellor, and because He is so, that He
may receive honor from the angels ; and some that it was for
the reason that it was given Him by the Father to reign in His
stead, for we read that All power is given unto Him in heaven
and on earth; but a great part, that He may hear those on
the right hand, for whom He intercedes; for all in the church
at this day go to God the Father, and pray Him to have
mercy for the sake of the Son; and this causes the Father to
turn Himself to Him, that He may receive His mediation.
But some said that only the Son of God from eternity sits
at the right hand of the Father, that He may communicate
His Divinity with the Son of Man bom in the world.

On hearing these words, I wondered exceedingly that
learned men, though they had been living some time in the
spiritual world, should still be so ignorant of heavenly things;
but I perceived the cause, that by confidence in their own in-
telligence they did not suffer themselves to be instructed by
the wise. But that they might not continue any longer in
ignorance concerning the Son’s sitting on the right hand of
the Father, I raised my hand, begging that they would listen
to a few words which I wished to speak on the subject. And
as they assented, I said, “ Do you not know from the Word
that the Father and the Son are one, and that the Father is


220


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 136


in the Son and the Son in the Father ? This the Lord openly
says (John x. 30, and xiv. 10, 11). If you do not believe
these words, you divide God into two, which being done, you
cannot think otherwise than naturally, sensually, even ma-
terially, concerning God, which has also been done in the
world ever since the Nicene council, that introduced three
Divine Persons from eternity, and thereby turned the church
into a theatre, where hung a painted curtain, within which
the actors represented strange scenes. Who does not know
and acknowledge that God is one ? If you acknowledge this
in heart and spirit, all that you have said is dissipated of it-
self, and rebounds into the air, like idle words from the ear of
a wise man.”

At these words, many were enraged and longed to pull my
ears and command silence; but the president of the assem-
bly, in indignation, said, “The discussion here is not con-
cerning the unity and the plurality' of God, because we be-
lieve both; but concerning this: What is involved by the
Son’s sitting at the right hand of His Father? If you know
any thing about this, speak.” And I answered, “I will
speak; but, I beseech you, stop the noise.” And I said,
“By sitting on the right hand is not meant sitting on the
right hand, but the omnipotence of God by means of the
Human which He assumed in the wqrld; by this He is in
lasts as well as in firsts; by this He entered, destroyed, and
subjugated the hells; by this He established order in the
heavens; so by this He redeemed both angels and men, and
continues to redeem for ever. If you consult the Word, and
are such that you can be enlightened, you will perceive that
by the right hand there, is meant omnipotence — as in
Isaiah: My hand hath laid the foundation of the earth , and
My right hand hath spanned the heavens (xlviii. 13); Jeho-
vah hath sworn by His right hand , and by the arm of His
strength (lxii. 8). And in David: Thy right hand holdeth
me up (Ps. xviii. 35). Look to the Son , whom Thou madest
strong for Thyself . . . let Thy hand be for the man of the


No. 137]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


221


right hand , for the Son 0} Man whom Thou madest strong for
Thyself (lxxx. 15, 17). From this it is plain how this is to be
understood: Jehovah said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My
right hand , until I make Thine enemies a stool for Thy feet.
Jehovah shall send the sceptre of Thy strength out of Zion;
rule Thou in the midst 0} Thine enemies (Ps. cx. 1, 2). This
whole psalm describes the battle of the Lord with the hells,
and their subjugation. Since the right hand of God sig-
nifies omnipotence, therefore the Lord says that He is to sit
at the right hand of power (Matt. xxvi. 64), and at the right
hand of the power of God (Luke xxii. 69).”

But at these words the company became tumultuous; and
I said, “Take heed to yourselves; perchance a hand may
appear from heaven, which, when it appears, as it had ap-
peared to me, strikes an incredible terror of power, and has
been to me a confirmation that the right hand of God sig-
nifies omnipotence.” Scarce was this said when a hand
was stretched out under heaven, at the sight of which, so
great a terror seized them that they rushed in crowds to the
doors and some to the windows to cast themselves out, and
some losing their breath fainted away. But I remained not
terrified, and after them went slowly away; and at some dis-
tance I turned about and saw that academy covered with
a dark cloud; and it was told me from heaven that it was
so covered because they spoke from the belief of three Gods,
and that the former light would return when those of a
sounder mind should assemble there.

137. Fourth Relation. I heard that a council was con-
vened of those who were celebrated for their writings and
learning concerning the faith of the present time, and con-
cerning the justification of the elect thereby. This was in
the world of spirits; and it was given me to be present in the
spirit; and I saw those convened from the clergy, some
assenting and some dissenting. On the right stood those
who in the world were called Apostolic Fathers, and who
lived in the ages preceding the Nicene councilj and on the


222


1 RUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 137


left stood men renowned in succeeding ages for their books,
printed or written out by students. Many of the latter had
their faces shaved, and their heads covered with curled wigs
made of women’s hair, and some of them had collars of little
rolls, and some had collars with wings; but the former had
long beards and wore their natural hair. Before both parties
there stood a man, a judge and critic of the writings of this
age, with a staff in his hand, who struck the floor, and caused
pilence.

He ascended to the upper step of the pulpit, and breathed
out a groan ; and from that he wished to raise his voice aloud,
but the sighing gasp kept back his voice in the throat; till at
length, speaking, he said, “ Oh ! my brethren, what an age !
There has risen up one from the herd of the laity, having
neither gown, tiara, nor laurel, who has pulled down our
faith from heaven, and cast it into the Styx. Oh, the crime !
and yet that alone is our star, which shines like Orion in the
night, and like Lucifer in the morning. That man, though
advanced in years, is entirely blind in respect to the mys-
teries of our faith, because he has not opened it and seen in
it the righteousness of the Lord the Saviour, and His media-
tion and atonement; and since he has not seen these, neither
has he seen the wonders of His justification, which are the
remission of sins, regeneration, sanctification, and salva-
tion. This man, instead of our faith, which is in the highest
degree saving, because it is in the three Divine Persons, thus
in the whole Deity, has transferred faith to the second Per-
son; and not to Him, but to His Human, which indeed we
call Divine from the incarnation of the Son from eternity;
but who thinks of it as any thing more than merely human ?
And what else can thence result, but a faith from which natu-
ralism flows as from a fountain ? And such a faith, because
it is not spiritual, differs but little from faith in a pope or a
saint. You know what Calvin said in his time, of worship
from this faith; and I pray, tell me, one of you, whence is
faith? Is it not immediately from God, which thus has in it
all things of salvation?”


No. 137]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


223


At these words his companions on the left side, with a
shaven face and wig and collar as a crown around the neck,
clapped their hands, and exclaimed, “ You have spoken most
wisely! We know that we cannot take any thing which is
not given us from heaven. Let that prophet tell us whence
faith is, and what it is, if that be not faith. It is impossible
that there should be any other, or from any other source; and
to produce a faith which is faith, other than this, is as im-
possible as it is for a man to ride on horseback to a constella-
tion in heaven, and take thence a star, and put it in his pocket
and bring it down/’ This he said, that his companions
might laugh at every new faith.

On hearing these words, the men on the right, who had
long beards and wore their natural hair, were indignant; and
one of them, an old man, who yet seemed like a young man
afterward, for he was an angel from heaven, where every age
becomes youthful, rose up and spoke, saying, “I have heard
what your faith is, which the man in the pulpit has so mag-
nified. But what is that faith but the sepulchre of our Lord
after the resurrection, again closed by the soldiers of Pilate ?
I have opened it, and have seen nothing there but the jug-
gling rods with which the magicians in Egypt did miracles.
Truly your faith externally in your eyes is like a chest made
of gold and set with precious stones, which when it is opened
is empty, except perhaps in the corners of it there may be
dust from the relics of Roman Catholics; for these also have
the same faith, only at this day it is covered over by them
with external sanctities. It is also, to use comparisons, like
the vestal virgin among the ancients, buried under ground
because she let the sacred fire go out; and I can asseverate
that to my eyes it is like the golden calf, around which the
children of Israel danced, after Moses departed and ascended
into Mount Sinai to Jehovah. Do not wonder that I should
speak of your faith by such comparisons, because we speak
so of it in heaven. But our faith is, was, and will for ever be,
in the Lord God the Saviour, whose Human is Divine, and


224


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 137


whose Divine is Human, thus accommodated to reception,
and by means of which the spiritual Divine is united to the
natural of man, and there results a spiritual faith in the nat~
ural, whence the natural becomes as it were transparent,
from the spiritual light in which our faith is. The truths of
which it consists are as many as the verses in the sacred vol-
ume; those truths are all like stars which manifest and form
that faith by their lights. Man takes it from the Word by
means of his natural light, in which it is knowledge, thought,
and persuasion; but the Lord causes it to become, in such
as believe in Him, conviction, trust, and confidence; thus
natural faith becomes spiritual, and by means of charity it
becomes living. This faith with us is like a queen adorned
with as many precious stones as the wall of the holy Jeru-
salem (Apoc. xxi. 17-20). But lest you should suppose that
these things which I have said are only high-flown words,
and lest they should therefore be despised, I will read to you
some things from the holy Word, from which it will be plain
that our faith is not in a man, as you suppose, but in the true
God, in whom is all the Divine. John says, Jesus Christ is
the true God and eternal life (1 John v. 20); Paul, In Christ
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (Col. ii. 9); and
in the Acts of the Apostles it is said that he preached , both to
the Jews and to the Greeks , repentance toward God , and faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ (xx. 21); and the Lord Himself said
that all power is given to Him in heaven and in earth (Matt,
xxviii. 18); these are but few of what may be cited.”

After this the angel looked to me and said, “You know
what the so-called Evangelical believe, or are expected to
believe, concerning the Lord the Saviour; recite then some
things, that we may know whether they are in such fatuity as
to believe that His Human is merely human, or whether they
ascribe to it something of the Divine, or how they do believe.”
Then, in the presence of the assembly, I read the following
passages from those which I had collected from their book of
orthodoxy, called Formula Concordia , and printed at Leipsic


No. 137]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


22 5


in the year 1756: — In Christ the Divine and human natures
are so united that they make one person (pp. 606, 762).
Christ is truly God and Man , in an undivided person , and con-
tinues to be so for ever (pp. 609, 673, 762). In Christ God is
Man , and Man God (pp. 607, 765). The human nature of
Christ is exalted to all Divine majesty , this also from many
of the fathers (pp. 844-852, 860-865, 869-878). Christy as
to the human nature , is omnipresenty and fills all things (pp.
768, 783-785). Christ, as to the human nature , has all power
in heaven and in earth (pp. 775, 776, 780). Christ , as to the
human nature , sits at the right hand of the Father (pp. 608,
764). Christy as to the human nature y is to be invokedy con-
firmed by quotations from Scripture (p. 226). The Augs-
burg confession very highly approves of that worship (p. 19).”

After these passages were read, I turned myself to the pres-
ident, and said, “ I know that all here are consociated with
their like in the natural world; tell me, I pray, whether you
know with whom you are consociated.” He replied in a
grave tone, “I do know; I am consociated with a famous
man, a leader of illustrious bands from the army of the
church.” And as he answered in so grave a tone, I said,
“ Pardon me for asking whether you know where that famous
leader lives.” And he said, “I know; he lives not far from
Luther’s tomb.” At this I said smiling, “ Why do you speak
of his tomb ? Do you not know that Luther has risen again,
and that he has now renounced his erroneous opinions about
justification by faith in three Divine Persons from eternity,
and has therefore been transferred among the happy of the
new heaven, and that he sees and laughs at those who follow
him insanely?” And he rejoined, “I know it; but what is
that to me ? ” And then I addressed him in a tone similar to
his own, saying, “ Inspire the famous companion with whom
you are consociated with this — that I fear, contrary to the
orthodoxy of his church, he has robbed the Lord of His Di-
vinity, or suffered his pen to plough a furrow in which he has
unintentionally sowed naturalism, at the time when he wrote


226


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 137


against the worship of the Lord our Saviour.” To this he
answered, “ I cannot do this, because he and I as to this thing
make almost one mind; but he does not understand the things
that I say, while I understand clearly all that he says;” for
the spiritual world enters into the natural world, and per-
ceives the thoughts of men there; but not the reverse: this
is the condition of the consociation of spirits and men.

Now, because I had begun to speak with the president, I
said, “ I will ask, if you please, yet another question. Do
you know that the orthodoxy of the Evangelical, in the hand-
book of their church, called the Formula Concordia , teaches
that in Christ God is Man, and Man is God, and that His Di-
vine and Human are, and continue for ever to be, in an un-
divided person ? How then could he, and how can you, de-
file the worship of the Lord with naturalism ? ” To which
he answered, “ I know that, and yet I do not know it.” So
I continued, saying, “ I ask him, though he is absent, or you
in his stead, Whence was the soul of the Lord our Saviour ?
If you answer that it was from the mother, you talk insanely;
if from Joseph, you profane the Word; but if from the Holy
Spirit, you say rightly, if only you mean by the Holy Spirit
the Divine proceeding and operating, so that He is the Son of
Jehovah God. Again I ask, What is the hypostatic union?
If you answer that it is a union as between two, one above
and the other below, you talk insanely; for, in that case, you
might have made God the Saviour two, as you have made
God three; but if you say that it is a personal union like that
of the soul and body, you say rightly: this also is according
to your doctrine and also to that of the fathers. Consult the
Formula Concordia (pp. 765-768); also the creed of Athana-
sius where are these words: The right faith is, that we believe
and confess that our Lord Jesus Christ is God and Man; who ,
although He is God and Man , yet is not two , but one Christ:
one altogether , not by confusion 0} substance , but by unity of
person; for, as the rational soul and the flesh is one man, so
God and Man is one Christ. I ask further, WTiat else was


No. 137]


THE LORD THE REDEEMER


227


the damnable heresy of Arius, on account of whom the Ni-
cene council was convened by the emperor Constantine the
Great, than that he denied the Divinity of the Lord’s Hu-
man ? Again, tell me whom you understand by these words
in Jeremiah, Behold the days come , when I will raise up unto
David a righteous Branch who shall reign a King; and this
shall be His name , Jehovah our Righteousness (xxiii. 5, 6;
xxxiii. 15, 16). If you say, the Son from eternity, you talk
insanely; that was not the Redeemer; but if you say, the
Son born in time, who was the only-begotten Son of God
(John i. 18; iii. 16), you say rightly; He by redemption be-
came Righteousness, from which you make your faith. Read
also Isaiah (ix. 6); together with other passages in which it
is foretold that Jehovah Himself was about to come into the
world.” At these words the president was silent, and turned
himself away.

After this, the president wished to close the council with
prayer; but suddenly a man then started up from the com-
pany on the left, who had a tiara on his head, and a cap over
that; and he touched the cap with his finger, and spoke, say-
ing, “ I am also consociated with a man in your world, who
is there placed in high honor: this I know, because I speak
from him, as he does from me.” And I asked, “Where is
the abode of that eminent person?” He answered, “At
Gottenburg; and I once thought from him that your new
doctrine savored of Mohammedanism.” On hearing which,
I saw that all on the right hand, where the apostolic fathers
stood, were astonished and changed countenance; and I
heard exclamations coming from their minds, through the
mouth, “Oh, the sin! Oh, what an age!” But to calm
their just indignation, I put forth my hands, and requested
a hearing; which being granted, I said, “I know that a man
of that eminence wrote some such thing in a letter, which
was afterward printed; but if he had known at the time what
blasphemy that is, he surely would have torn it in pieces with
his fingers, or committed it to the flames. It is such con-


228


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 137


tumely as that which is meant by the words of the Lord to
the Jews who said that Christ did miracles by other power
than the Divine (Matt. xii. 22-32): and further He also says
in the same place, He that is not with Me , is against Me; and
he that gather eth not with Me, scatter eth abroad (v. 30).” At
these words, the consociated spirit hung down his head; but
presently he raised it up, and said, “I have heard severer
things from you than ever.” But I rejoined, “The two
charges of naturalism and Mohammedanism are the cause
of this, which are wicked lies invented by craft, and two
deadly stigmas designed to turn away men's wills and deter
them from the holy worship of the Lord.” And I turned
myself to the latter consociated spirit, and said, “Tell him
at Gottenburg, if you can, to read what is said by the Lord in
the Apocalypse (iii. 18; and also ii. 16).” At these words,
a noise was made, but it was stilled by light descending from
heaven; in consequence of which many of those on the left
side went over to those on the right, those only remaining
who think only vain things, and therefore depend on the
authority of some master, and also those who believe con-
cerning the Lord in the human only. From both of these
classes the light which descended from heaven seemed to be
thrown back, and to flow into those who had passed from the
left to the right side.


CHAPTER THIRD.


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND THE DIVINE OPERATION.

138. All of the sacred order who have entertained any
just idea concerning the Lord our Saviour, on their entrance
into the spiritual world, which is generally on the third day
after their decease, are first instructed concerning the Divine
Trinity; and particularly concerning the Holy Spirit, that it
is not a God by itself, but that by it in the Word is meant the
Divine operation, proceeding from the one omnipresent God.
The reason why they are particularly instructed concerning
the Holy Spirit, is that most enthusiasts after death fall into
the insane fantasy that they themselves are the Holy Spirit;
and also because many of the church, who in the world be-
lieved that the Holy Spirit spoke through them, terrify others
by the words of the Lord in Matthew, that to speak against
those things with which the Holy Spirit inspired them is the
unpardonable sin (xii. 31, 32). They who after instruction
recede from the faith that the Holy Spirit is a God by itself
are informed afterward concerning the unity of God, that it
is not divided into three Persons, each one of whom singly
is God and Lord, according to the Athanasian Creed; but
that the Divine Trinity is in the Lord the Saviour, as the
soul, the body, and the proceeding power with every man.
These are then prepared for receiving the faith of the new
heaven; and, after they are prepared, a way is opened for
them to a society in heaven where there is the same faith;
and a mansion is given them among their brethren, with
whom they will live in blessedness for ever. Now, because
we have treated concerning God the Creator, and concern-
ing the Lord the Redeemer, it is necessary that we should


230


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 138


also treat concerning the Holy Spirit; and this subject, like
the rest, is to be divided into its articles, which are the fol-
lowing: I. The Holy Spirit is the Divine truth , and also the
Divine power and operation , proceeding from the One God in
whom is the Divine Trinity , thus from the Lord God the Sav-
iour. II. The Divine power and operation which are meant
by the Holy Spirit are y in general , reformation and regenera-
tion y and , according to these , renovation , vivification , sanctifi-
cation y and justification; and y according to these y purification
from evils and remission of sins and finally salvation. III.
That Divine power and operation which is meant dy the send-
ing 0} the Holy Spirit , with the clergy especially , is enlighten-
ment and instruction. IV. The Lord operates those powers
in those who believe in Him. V. The Lord operates out of
Himself , from the Father , and not the reverse. VI. The
spirit of a man is his mind and whatsoever proceeds from it.

139. I. The Holy Spirit is the Divine truth , and also the
Divine power and operation y proceeding from the One God in
whom is the Divine T rinity y thus from the Lord God the Sav-
iour. By the Holy Spirit is properly signified the Divine
truth, thus also the Word, and in this sense the Lord Him-
self is also the Holy Spirit; but because in the church at this
day the Divine operation which is actual justification is de-
scribed by the Holy Spirit, therefore this is here assumed as
the Holy Spirit; and of this chiefly we speak for the reason
also that the Divine operation is effected by the Divine truth
which proceeds out of the Lord; and that which proceeds is
of one and the same essence with Him from whom it pro-
ceeds, like these three, the soul, the body, and the proceeding
power, which together make one essence — with man merely
human, but with the Lord Divine and Human also; these
after the glorification being united together as what is prior
with its posterior, and as essence with its form. Thus the
three essentials, which are called the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, in the Lord are one. That the Lord is Di-


No. 139]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


231


vine truth itself, or the Divine verity, was shown above; and
that the Holy Spirit is also this, is evident from these pas-
sages: And there shall come forth a Rod out of the stem of
Jesse . . . and the Spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon Him ,
the Spirit 0} wisdom and understanding , the Spirit of counsel
and might . . . He shall smite the earth with the rod of His
mouthy and with the breath of His lips shall He slay the
wicked; justice shall be the girdle of His loins , and truth the
girdle of His reins (Isa. xi. 1, 4, 5). When the adversary
shall come like a stream pent in , the Spirit of Jehovah shall
bear the standard against him; then the Redeemer shall come
to Zion (lix. 19, 20). The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah is upon
Me, Jehovah hath anointed Me, He hath sent Me to preach
good tidings to the poor (lxi. 1: Luke iv. 18). This is My
covenant; My Spirit that is upon thee, and My words shall
not depart out of thy mouth, from henceforth and for ever (Isa.
lix. 21). Since the Lord is the truth itself, therefore all that
which proceeds out of Him is truth; and this is meant by the
Comforter, which is also called the Spirit of Truth, and the
Holy Spirit — as is manifest from these passages : I tell you the
truth; it is expedient for you that I go away; for, if I go not
away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart,
I wiU send Him unto you (John xvi. 7). When the Spirit of
Truth is come, He shall lead you into all truth; He shall not
speak from Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall
He speak (xvi. 13). He shall glorify Me, for He shall re-
ceive 0} Mine, and shall show unto you: all things that the
Father hath, are Mine; therefore said I, that He shall take 0}
Mine, and shall show unto you (xvi. 14, 15). I will ask the
Father that He may give you another Comforter, the Spirit of
Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth Him
not, neither knoweth Him; but ye know Him, because He
dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you
orphans; I will come to you, and ye shall see Me (John xiv.
16-19). When the Comforter is come, whom I will send to
you from the Father, the Spirit of Truth, He shall testify of


232


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 139


Me (xv. 26). This is called the Holy Spirit (xiv. 26). That
the Lord meant Himself by the Comforter or the Holy Spirit,
is plain from these words of the Lord, that though the world
did not yet know Him, ye know Him; I will not leave yon
orphans ; I will come to you ; ye shall see Me. And in
another place, Lo , I am with you always , even to the con -
summation oj the age (Matt, xxviii. 20); also from these
words, He shall not speak jrom Himsdj , but shall receive oj
Mine (John xvi. 13).

140. Now because the Divine truth is meant by the Holy
Spirit, and this was in the Lord, and was the Lord Himself
(John xiv. 6), and so because it could not proceed from any
other source, therefore it is said, The Holy Spirit was not
yet , because Jesus was not yet glorified (vii. 39); and after the
glorification, He breathed upon the disciples , and said , Re-
ceive ye the Holy Spirit (xx. 22). The reason why the Lord
breathed upon the disciples, and said this, was because the
breathing upon them was an external representative sign of
Divine inspiration; and inspiration is insertion into angelic
societies. From these things the understanding may com-
prehend this which was said by the angel Gabriel of the con-
ception of the Lord: The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee y
and the Power oj the Highest shall overshadow thee; there-
fore the Holy Thing which is born oj thee shall be called the
Son oj God (Luke i. 35). Also, The angel of the Lord in a
dream said to Joseph , Fear not to take Mary for thy wife , for
that which is born in her is oj the Holy Spirit. And Joseph
knew her not till she had brought forth her first-born son (Matt,
i. 20, 25). The Holy Spirit there is the Divine truth pro-
ceeding from Jehovah the Father; and this proceeding is the
Power of the Highest, which then overshadowed the mother.
This, therefore, coincides with this in John: The Word was
with God , and the Word was God; and the Word became flesh
(i. 1, 14). That by the Word is there meant the Divine truth,
may be seen above in The Faith of the New Church (n. 3).

141. That the Divine Trinity is in the Lord was demon-


No. 142]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


233


strated above, and will be demonstrated more fully in the
sequel, when we come to treat professedly concerning it.
Here, only some absurdities following from that Trinity di-
vided into Persons will be considered. This would be as if
some minister of the church were to teach from the pulpit
what should be believed and what should be done, and beside
him another minister should stand and whisper in his ear,
“You say this rightly; add also something more; 5 ’ and they
should say to a third, standing on the steps, “ Go down into
the temple, and open their ears, and pour those things into
their hearts, and at the same time cause them to be purities,
sanctities, and pledges of righteousness.” A Divine Trinity
divided into Persons, each of whom singly is God and Lord,
is also similar to three suns in one world; one on high, near
the second, and the third beneath, which pours its rays around
angels and men and brings the heat and light of the other two
into their minds, hearts, and bodies, and subtilizes, clarifies,
and sublimates them, as fire does the material in retorts.
Who does not see that, if it were so, man would be burned
even to ashes? The government of three Divine Persons
in heaven, also, would be like the government of three kings
in one kingdom, or the command of three generals of equal
rank over one army; or rather the Roman government be-
fore the times of the Caesars, when there were a consul, a
senate, and a tribune of the people; among whom, indeed,
the power was divided, but still the sovereignty was in them
all together. Who does not see that it is absurd, ridiculous,
and delirious, to introduce such a government into heaven;
and it is introduced when a power like that of the chief consul
is ascribed to God the Father, a power like that of the senate
to the Son, and a power like that of the tribune of the people
to the Holy Spirit — as is done when a peculiar office is
ascribed to each one, especially if it is added that those prop-
erties are not communicable.

142. II. The Divine power and operation which are meant


234


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 142


by the Holy Spirit are , in general , reformation and regenera-
tion; and , according to these, renovation , vivification, sancti-
fication, and justification; and, according to these , purifica-
tion from evils and remission of sins and finally salvation.
These are, in their order, the powers which the Lord oper-
ates in those who believe in Him, and who accommodate and
dispose themselves for His reception and abode; and this is
done by means of Divine truth, and with Christians by means
of the Word; for this is the only medium through which man
draws near to the Lord, and into which the Lord enters; for,
as was said above, the Lord is the Divine truth itself, and
whatever proceeds from Him is Divine truth. But Divine
truth from good is to be understood, which is the same with
faith from charity; for faith is no other than truth, and char-
ity is no other than goodness. By means of Divine truth
from good, that is, by means of faith from charity, man is
reformed and regenerated; also renovated, vivified, sancti-
fied, justified; and, according to the progress and increase of
these, is purified from evils, and purification from evils is
remission of sins. But all these operations of the Lord can-
not be explained here, one by one, because each requires its
analysis confirmed from the Word and illustrated by reason,
which does not belong to this place; and therefore the reader
is referred to those subjects as they follow in order in this
work, namely, Charity, Faith, Free Will, Repentance, and
also Reformation and Regeneration. It should be known
that the Lord is continually operating those saving graces
with every man, for they are steps to heaven, since the Lord
wills the salvation of all, and therefore the salvation of all is
His end, and he who wills an end wills the means. His
coming, redemption, and the passion of the cross, were for
the sake of the salvation of men (Matt, xviii. n: Luke xix.
10); and, because the salvation of men was and for ever is
His end, it follows that the above mentioned operations are
mediate ends, and salvation the ultimate end.

143. The operation of these powers is the Holy Spirit that


No. 144]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


235


the Lord sends to those who believe in Him and who dis-
pose themselves to receive Him; and it is meant by the Spirit
in these passages: A new heart also will I give yon and a new
spirit; I will put My Spirit in the midst 0} you , and cause you
to walk in My statutes (Ezek. xxxvi. 26, 27; xi. 19). Create
in me a clean heart , O God, and renew a right spirit within
me. . . . Restore unto me the joy 0} Thy salvation , and let a
free spirit uphold me (Ps. li. 10, 12). Jehovah formeth the
spirit of man in the midst of him (Zech. xii. 1). With my
soul I have waited for Thee in the night , and with my spirit
in the midst of me have I waited for Thee in the morning (Isa.
xxvi. 9). Make you a new heart , and a new spirit: why 'will
ye die ? (Ezek. xviii. 31): besides other passages. In those
passages, by a new heart is meant the will of good, and by a
new spirit, the understanding of truth. That the Lord
operates these, in those who do what is good and believe what
is true, thus in those who are in the faith of charity, is very
plain from what is said, as that God gives a soul to those who
walk in His statutes; and also that it is called a free spirit;
and that man is to operate on His part is manifest from the
words, Make you a new heart , and a new spirit; why will ye
die , O house of Israel? '

144. We read that, when Jesus was baptized, the heavens
were opened, and John saw the Holy Spirit descending like a
dove (Matt. iii. 16: Mark i. 10: Luke iii. 21: John i. 32, 33).
This took place because baptism signifies regeneration and
purification, as also does the dove. Who cannot perceive
that the dove was not the Holy Spirit, and that the Holy
Spirit was not in the dove ? Doves often appear in heaven,
and whenever they appear, angels know that they are corre-
spondences of the affections and hence the thoughts, in rela-
tion to regeneration and purification, with some who are
near by; and accordingly, as soon as they come up to them
and speak with them of any thing else than what was in their
thoughts when the appearance was presented, the doves
instantly vanish. This is like many things which appeared


236 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 144

to the prophets — as that a Lamb appeared to John on
Mount Zion (Apoc. xiv. 1; and in other places). Who
does not know that the Lord was not that Lamb, nor in the
Lamb, but that the Lamb was a representation of His inno-
cence ? This shows clearly the error of those who deduce
the three Persons of the Trinity from the dove seen upon the
Lord when He was baptized, and from the voice then heard
from heaven, This is my beloved Son. That the Lord re-
generates man by faith and charity, is meant by what John
the Baptist said: I baptize you with water unto repentance ,
but He that cometh after Me will baptize with the Holy Spirit
and with fire (Matt. iii. 11: Mark i. 8: Luke iii. 16). To
baptize with the Holy Spirit and with fire is to regenerate
by the Divine truth which is of faith, and by the Divine good
which is of charity. The like is signified by these words of
the Lord: Except a man be born of water and of the spirit , he
cannot enter into the kingdom 0} God (John iii. 5). By water
here, as elsewhere in the Word, is signified truth in the natu-
ral or external man, and by the spirit, truth from good in the
spiritual or internal man.

145. Now because the Lord is Divine truth itself from
the Divine good, and this is His very essence, and every one
does what he does from his essence, it is evident that the
Lord continually wills, and can not otherwise than will, to
implant truth and good, or faith and charity, in every man.
This may be illustrated by many things in the world, as by
this, that every man wills and thinks and, as far as is allow-
able, speaks and acts from his essence. For example, a
faithful man thinks and intends faithful things, an honest,
upright, pious, and religious man, honest, upright, pious,
and religious things; and on the contrary a haughty, cun-
ning, treacherous, and covetous man, such things as make
one with his essence. A fortune-teller wishes only to tell
fortunes, and a fool only to prate against what is of wisdom;
in a word, an angel meditates and practises only heavenly
things, and a devil only infernal things. The case is similar


No. 146]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


237


with every subject of lower rank in the animal kingdom, as
with a bird, a beast, a fish, an insect, winged and not winged;
every one is known from its essence or nature, from which
and according to which is the instinct of each. In like man-
ner in the vegetable kingdom every tree, every shrub, and
every herb, is known from its fruit and seed, in which its
essence is innate; nor can any thing else be produced there-
from, but what is similar to itself and its own; even every
kind of ground, clay, and stone, noble and ignoble, and every
mineral and metal, is estimated from its essence, or elements.

146. III. That Divine power and operation which is
meant by the sending oj the Holy Spirit , with the clergy espe-
cially , is enlightenment and instruction . The Lord’s opera-
tions enumerated in the preceding article, reformation, regen-
eration, renovation, vivification, sanctification, justification,
purification, remission of sins, and finally salvation, flow in
from the Lord, as well with the clergy as with the laity, and
are received by those who are in the Lord, and the Lord in
them (John vi. 56; xiv. 20; xv. 4, 5). But the reasons why
enlightenment and instruction are for the clergy especially,
are that these belong to their office, and inauguration into the
ministry brings them with it; and also they believe that while
they are preaching from zeal they are inspired, like the dis-
ciples of the Lord on whom the Lord breathed, saying, Re-
ceive ye the Holy Spirit (John xx. 22; and also Mark xiii. 11).
Some also affirm that they have felt the influx. But they
should be very cautious lest they persuade themselves that
the zeal with which many are seized while they are speaking
in public, is the Divine operation in their hearts; for a sim-
ilar and even a warmer zeal is excited in enthusiasts, and also
in those who are in extreme falsities of doctrine; even in
those who set at nought the Word and worship nature in-
stead of God, and cast faith and charity as it were into a bag
behind the back; and while they are preaching and teach-
ing they hang it before them as a kind of ruminating stomach,


238 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 146

from which they press out and belch forth such things as they
know will serve for food to their hearers. For zeal viewed
in itself is a violent heat of the natural man ; if there is within
it the love of truth, then it is like the sacred fire which flowed
into the apostles, of which it is thus written in their Acts:
There appeared to them cloven tongues , as of fire , and sat upon
every one of them , whence they all were filled with the Holy
Spirit (ii. 3, 4). But if the love of falsity lies inwardly con-
cealed in that zeal or heat, it is then like fire imprisoned in
wood, which bursts forth and burns the house. You who
deny the sanctity of the Word and the Divinity of the Lord,
take off, I beseech you, your bag from your back, and open
it, as you do freely at home, and you will see. I know that
those who are meant by Lucifer in Isaiah, and who are of
Babel, when they enter the temple, and especially when they
ascend the pulpit, particularly those who call themselves of
the Society of Jesus, are hurried away by a' zeal which in
many cases is from infernal love; and hence they shout more
Vehemently, and fetch deeper sighs from their breasts, than
those who are in zeal from heavenly love. That there are
two other spiritual operations with the clergy, may be seen
below (n. 155).

147. The church is as yet mostly ignorant that in all man’s
will and thought, and hence in all his action and speech,
there is an internal and an external, and that man from in-
fancy is trained to speak from the external, however the in-
ternal dissents, from which proceed dissimulation, flattery,
and hypocrisy, consequently that he is double-minded; and
he only is single-minded whose external thinks and speaks
and wills and acts from the internal. These latter also are
meant by the simple or honest and single, in the Word (as*
Luke viii. 15; xi. 34; and in other places); though they are
wiser than the double-minded. That there is two-folding
and three-folding in every created thing is evident from these
things in the human body: every nerve in it consists of fibres,
and every fibre of fibrils; every muscle of little bundles of


No. 148]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


239


fibres, and these of moving fibres; every artery of coats in a
triple series. It is the same with the human mind, whose
spiritual organism is similar; this is according to what was
said above, that the human mind is distinguished into three
regions, the highest of which, being also the inmost, is called
celestial, the middle spiritual, and the lowest natural. The
minds of all men who deny the sanctity of the Word and the
Divinity of the Lord think in the lowest region; but because
from infancy they have learned also the spiritual things which
are of the church, and receive them, but put them below nat-
ural things, which are various scientific, political, and civil
moral things, and because these have a seat in the mind low-
est and nearest to the speech, they speak from these spiritual
things in temples and in assemblies; and what is wonderful,
they then know no otherwise than that they speak and teach
from belief in them; when yet as soon as they are in their
freedom, which is the case at home, the door is opened which
has closed the internal of their mind, and then sometimes
they laugh at those things which they have preached in pub-
lic, saying in heart that theological subjects are specious
snares for catching doves.

148. The internal and external of such persons may be
likened to poisons covered over with coatings of sugar; and
also to the wild gourds which the sons of the prophets gath-
ered and cast into the pottage, and while they were eating it,
they cried out, There is death in the pot (2 Kings iv. 38-43).
They may also be compared to the beast coming up out of the
earth, which had two horns as of a lamb, and spoke as a
dragon (Apoc. xiii. n); and which is afterward called the
false prophet. And they are like robbers in a city who while
tarrying as citizens act morally and speak rationally, but
when they return into the forests they are wild beasts; or
they are also like pirates, who upon the land are men, but at
sea crocodiles. While on land or in the city, these walk
about like panthers clothed with the skins of the sheep, or like
apes dressed in men's clothes, with masks of the human coun-


240


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 148


tenance covering their faces. They may also be likened to
a harlot, who anoints herself with balsam, and paints her face
with carmine, and clothes herself with white silk, with flowers
interwoven; but when she returns to her house bares herself
in the presence of her paramours, and infects them with her
disease. That those who in heart deny sanctity to the Word
and Divinity to the Lord are such, has been given me well to
know, by the experience of years in the spiritual world; for
there all are at first kept in their externals, but afterward
when these are removed, they are let into internals, and then
their comedy becomes tragedy.

149. IV. The Lord operates those powers in those who be-
lieve in Him. That the Lord operates those powers, which
are meant by the sending of the Holy Spirit, in those who be-
lieve in Him, that is, that He reforms, regenerates, renovates,
vivifies, sanctifies, justifies, purifies from evils, and finally
saves them, is evident from all the passages in the Word to
be seen adduced above (n. 107), which prove that those have
salvation and eternal life who believe in the Lord; and more-
over from this: Jesus said , Whosoever believeth in. Me, as
the Scripture saith , out 0} his belly shall flow rivers 0} living
water . This spake He oj the Spirit which they that believed
in Him were to receive (John vii. 38, 39); and also from this:
The testimony oj Jesus is the Spirit oj prophecy (Apoc. xix.
10). By the spirit of prophecy is meant the truth of doctrine
from the Word; prophecy signifies no other than doctrine,
and to prophesy, to teach it; and by the testimony of Jesus
is meant confession from faith in Him. The like is meant
by His testimony in this passage: The angels of Michael
overcame the dragon by the blood oj the Lamb , and by the word
of their testimony . . . and the dragon went to make war with
the remnant 0} her seed , who keep the commandments oj God ,
and have the testimony 0} Jesus Christ (Apoc. xii. 11,17).

150. The reason why those who believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ are to receive those spiritual virtues, is that He is sal-


No. 15 1 ] the holy spirit 241

vation, and eternal life; salvation because He is the Sav-
iour, as is also the meaning of His name Jesus; eternal life,
because those in whom He is, and who are in Him, have eter-
nal life; wherefore also He is called eternal life (1 John v. 20).
Now because He is salvation and eternal life, it follows that
He is all that by which salvation and eternal life are obtained;
consequently, that He is the all of reformation, regeneration,
renovation, vilification, sanctification, justification, purifica-
tion from evils, and at length is salvation. The Lord oper-
ates these in every man, that is, He strives to introduce them;
and when man accommodates and disposes himself to recep-
tion, He does introduce them. The activity of accommoda-
tion and disposition is also from the Lord; but if man does
not receive them with a free spirit, then He cannot go beyond
His continual effort to introduce them.

15 1. To believe in the Lord is not only to acknowledge
Him, but also to do His commandments; for merely to
acknowledge Him is only of the thought from some under-
standing, but to do His commandments is also of acknowl-
edgment from the will. Man’s mind consists of understand-
ing and will, and it is of the understanding to think, and of
the will to do; so while man only acknowledges from the
thought of the understanding, he goes to the Lord from half
of the mind only; but when he does His commandments,
then from the whole; and this is to believe. Otherwise, a
man may divide his heart, and compel its upper surface to
raise itself upward, while its flesh turns itself downward; and
thus he flies like an eagle between heaven and hell; and yet
man does not follow his sight, but the enjoyment of his flesh;
and because this is in hell, therefore he flies down thither;
and, after he has there sacrificed to his sensual pleasures,
and poured out libations of wine to demons, he puts on a
countenance of gayety, and causes his eyes to sparkle with
fire, and thus counterfeits an angel of light. They who ac-
knowledge the Lord but do not keep His commandments,
become such satans after death.


242 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 152

152. It was shown in a previous number that the salva-
tion and eternal life of men are the first and the last ends of
the Lord; and because the first and the last ends contain in
them the mediate ends, it follows that the above mentioned
spiritual powers are together in the Lord, and also from the
Lord in man,- but still they come forth successively; for the
mind of man grows like his body — the body in stature, and
the mind in wisdom. Thus also the latter is exalted from
region to region, that is, from the natural to the spiritual, and
from this to the celestial; and in the celestial region man is
called wise, in the spiritual intelligent, and in the natural
knowing; but this exaltation of the m,ind is not effected
except from time to time; and it is effected as man procures
for himself truths and conjoins them to good. As with one
who is building a house, he first procures for himself the
materials for it, bricks, tiles, beams, and rafters; and then
he lays the foundation, raises the walls, divides it into rooms,
makes doors for them, and windows in the walls, and stairs
from story to story; all these things are together in the end,
which is a commodious and respectable dwelling, which he
foresees and provides. It is the same with a temple when it
is being built; all things for its construction are in the end,
which is the worship of God. And it is the same with all
other things, as with gardens and fields, and also with offices
and employments, for which the end procures for itself the
requisite appliances.

153. V. The Lord operates out of Himself from the Father ,
and not the reverse. By operating is here meant the same
thing as by sending the Holy Spirit, since the above men-
tioned operations, which are, in general, reformation, re-
generation, renovation, vivification, sanctification, justifica-
tion, purification from evils, and remission of sins, and are
at this day attributed to the Holy Spirit as to a God by Him-
self, are the operations of the Lord. That these are out of
the Lord from the Father, and not the reverse, shall be first


No. 153]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


243


confirmed from the Word, and afterward illustrated by many
things of reason. From the Word by these: When the Com-
forter is come , whom 1 will send from the Father , the Spirit of
truth which proceedeth from the Father , He shall testify of Me
(John xv. 26). If I go not away , the Comforter will not come
to you; but if I depart, 1 will send Him unto you (xvi. 7). The
Comforter , the Spirit of truth . . . shall not speak from Him-
self . . . but He shall take of Mine, and shall show unto you .
All things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine; therefore
said 1 , that He shall take of Mine , and shall show unto you
(xv. 13-15). The Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was
not yet glorified (vii. 39). Jesus breathed on the disciples, and
said, Receive ye the Holy Spirit (xx. 22). Whatsoever ye
shall ask in My name , that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in My name,
I will do it (xiv\ 13, 14). From these passages it is very man-
ifest that the Lord sends the Holy Spirit, that is, operates
those things which at this day are ascribed to the Holy Spirit
as God by Himself; for He said that He would send Him
from the Father; that He would send Him to you; that the
Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified;
that after the glorification He breathed on the disciples, and
said, Receive ye the Holy Spirit ; and also that He said, What-
soever ye shall ask in My name, I will do; as also, The Com-
forter will take of Mine, what He will show. That the Com-
forter is the same as the Holy Spirit may be seen in John (xiv.
26). That God the Father does not operate those powers
out of Himself through the Son, but that the Son operates
them out of Himself from the Father, is evident from these
words: No one hath seen God at any time; the only-begotten
Son , who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath manifested
Him (John i. 18); and in another place, Ye have not heard
the voice of the Father at any time, nor seen His shape (v. 37).
From these, therefore, it follows that God the Father oper-
ates in the Son and into the Son, and not through the Son;
but that the Lord operates out of Himself from His Father;


244 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 153

for He says, All things of the Father are Mine (John xvi. 15);
the Father hath given all things into the hand of the Son (iii.
35); and also, As the Father hath life in Himself , so He hath
given to the Son to have life in Himself (v. 26); as also, The
words that I speak are spirit and life (vi. 63). The reason
why the Lord says that the Spirit of truth proceeds from the
Father (John xv. 26), is that it does proceed from God the
Father into the Son, and out of the Son from the Father;
therefore also He says, At that day ye shall know that the
Father is in Me . . . and I in the Father , and ye in Me y and
I in you (xiv. 11, 20). From these plain declarations of the
Lord, an error in the Christian world is very manifest, which
is, that God the Father sends the Holy Spirit to man; and
the error of the Greek church, that God the Father sends
the Holy Spirit immediately. That the Lord sends the Holy
Spirit out of Himself from God the Father, and not the
reverse, is from heaven; and the angels call it an arcanum,
because it has not yet been made known in the world.

154. These things may be illustrated by many things
which are of reason, as by these: It is known that the apos-
tles, after they had received the gift of the Holy Spirit from
the Lord, preached the Gospel through much of the world,
and that they promulgated it by speaking and writings; and
they did this out of themselves from the Lord; for Peter
taught and wrote in one manner, James in another, John in
another, and Paul in another, each according to his own in-
telligence. The Lord filled them all with His Spirit, but
each took of it a measure according to the quality of his per-
ception, and they exercised it according to the quality of
their ability. All the angels in the heavens are filled by the
Lord, for they are in the Lord and the Lord in them; but
still each speaks and acts according to the state of his mind,
some in simplicity, some in wisdom, so with an infinite va-
riety; and yet every one speaks out of himself from the Lord.
It is similar with every minister of the church, whether he be
in truths or in falsities; each has his own mouth and his own


No. 154]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


245


intelligence, and each speaks out of his own mind, that is,
out of his spirit which he possesses. While all Protestants,
whether Evangelical or Reformed, have been instructed in
the dogmas delivered by Luther, Melancthon, or Calvin,
these leaders or their dogmas do not speak out of themselves
through their followers, but their followers speak of them-
selves from them. Every single dogma also may be set forth
in a thousand ways, for each is like a cornucopia, from which
every one takes out what is favorable and adapted to his own
genius, and presents it according to his own talent. This
may be illustrated by the action of the heart in the lungs and
upon them, and by the reaction of the lungs of themselves
from the heart; these are two distinct things, but still recip-
rocally united; the lungs breathe of themselves from the
heart, not the heart through the lungs; if this were done, both
would stop. It is similar also with the heart’s action in the
viscera and upon the viscera of the whole body; the heart
sends forth the blood in all directions, but the viscera re-
ceive therefrom each its portion, according to the kind of use
which it performs, and each also acts according to this; thus
they act in various ways. The same may be illustrated by
these things also: Evil from parents, which is called heredi-
tary, acts in man and upon man, and in like manner, good
from the Lord; the latter acts above or within, the former
acts below or without. If evil should act through the man,
he would not be capable of being reformed, nor would he be
a subject of blame; in like manner, if good from the Lord
should act through the man, he would not be capable of being
reformed; but because each depends on the free choice of
man, he becomes guilty when he acts of himself from evil,
and guiltless when he acts of himself from good. Now be-
cause evil is the devil and good is the Lord, he becomes guilty
if he acts from the devil and guiltless if he acts from the Lord.
It is from this free choice which is given to every man that
man can be reformed. It is similar with all the internal and
external in man; these are two distinct things, but still recip-


246


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 154


rocally united; the internal acts in the external and upon it,
but does not act through the external; for the internal in-
volves a thousand things, of which the external takes only-
such as are accommodated to its use; there being in the in-
ternal of man, by which is meant his mind, voluntary and
perceptive, heaps of ideas in a whirl, which if they should
flow out through man’s mouth, would be like a blast from
bellows. The internal, because it involves universal, may
be compared to an ocean, a flower-bed, or a garden, from
which the external takes out as much as is sufficient for use.
The Word of the' Lord is like an ocean, a flower-bed, and a
garden, and when the Word is in any degree of fulness in a
man’s internal, then the man speaks and acts of himself from
the Word, and not the Word through him. So it is with the
Lord, because He is the Word, that is, the Divine truth and
the Divine good therein. The Lord acts out of Himself or
out of the Word, in man and upon him, but not through him;
for man acts and speaks freely from the Lord while he acts
and speaks from the Word. But this may be more famil-
iarly illustrated by the mutual intercourse between the soul
and the body, which are two distinct things, but reciprocally
united; the soul acts in the body and upon the body, yet not
through the body; but the body acts out of itself from the
soul. The soul does not act through the body, because they
do not consult and deliberate together; nor does the soul
command or request the body to do this or that, or to speak
out of its mouth; nor does the body require or ask the soul
to give or supply any thing, for every thing of the soul is
the body's mutually and interchangeably. It is similar with
the Divine and the Human of the Lord; for the Divine of
the Father is the soul of His Human, and the Human is His
body; and the Human does not ask from its Divine to tell
what it shall speak or do. Thus the Lord says, At that day
ye shall ask in My name , and I say not unto you that I will
pray the Father for you ; for the Father Himself loveth you ,
because ye have loved Me (John xvi. 26, 27). In that day, is


No. 156] THE HOLY SPIRIT 247

after the glorification, that is, after perfect and absolute union
with the Father. This arcanum is from the Lord Himself,
for those who will be of His New Church.

155. It was shown above, in the third article, that that
Divine virtue which is meant by the operation of the Holy
Spirit, with the clergy is especially enlightenment and in-
struction. But in addition to these two there are two inter-
mediate ones, which are perception and disposition; and
thus there are four, which with the clergy follow in order —
Enlightenment, Perception, Disposition, and Instruction.
Enlightenment is from the Lord. Perception is with the
man according to the state of his mind formed by doctrines;
if these are true the perception becomes clear from the light
which enlightens, but if they are false the perception be-
comes obscure, which may yet appear as if clear from con-
firmations; but this is from illusive light which to merely
natural sight is like clearness. Disposition , however, is
from the affection of the love of the will; the enjoyment from
this love disposes; if the enj'oyment is from the love of evil
and hence of falsity, it excites a zeal which outwardly is stern,
rough, burning, and flaming, while inwardly it is anger, rage,
and unmercifulness; but if it be from love of good and thence
of truth, it is outwardly mild, smooth, thundering, and flash-
ing, and inwardly it is charity, grace, and mercy. Instruc-
tion follows as an effect from the preceding as causes. Thus
the enlightenment which is from the Lord is turned into vari-
ous lights and into various heats with every one, according
to the state of his mind.

156. VI. Man’s spirit is his mind , and whatever pro-
ceeds from him . By the spirit of man, in the concrete, no
other is meant than his mind; for it is this which lives after
death, and then is called a spirit; if good, an angelic spirit,
and afterward an angel; if evil, a satanic spirit, and after-
ward a satan. The mind of every man is his internal man
which actually is the man, and is within the external man


248 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 156

which makes his body; when, therefore, the body is re-
jected, which is brought about by death, it is in full human
form. They are therefore in error who believe that man’s
mind is in the head only; it is there in beginnings only, from
which first goes forth every thing that man thinks from the
understanding and acts from the will; but it is in the body
in the derivatives formed for sensation and action; and be-
cause inwardly it adheres to the things of the body, it im-
parts to them sense and motion, and inspires a perception as
if the body thought and acted from itself, which however
every wise man knows to be a fallacy. Now because man’s
spirit thinks from the understanding and acts from the will,
and the body does not think and act from itself but from the
spirit, it follows that by man’s spirit is meant his intelligence
and affection of love, and whatever proceeds from them and
operates. That the spirit of man signifies such things as are
of the mind is evident from many passages in the Word,
which when only adduced may be seen by any one to mean
no other. Of the many these are a few: Bezaleel was filled
with the spirit of wisdom , intelligence , and knowledge (Exod.
xxxi. 3). Nebuchadnezzar said concerning Daniel, that an
excellent spirit of knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom was
in him (Dan. v. 12). Joshua was filled with the spirit of wis-
dom (Deut. xxxiv. 9). Make you a new heart and a new
spirit (Ezek. xviii. 31). Blessed are the poor in spirit , for of
such is the kingdom of heaven (Matt. v. 3). I dwell in the
contrite and humble spirit , to revive the spirit of the humble
(Isa. lvii. 15). The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit (Ps.
li. 17). I will give the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness (Isa. lxi. 3); besides other places. That spirit
signifies such things as are of a perverted and wicked mind,
is evident from these: He said to the foolish prophets that
follow their own spirit (Ezek. xiii. 3). Conceive chaff , bring
forth stubble; as to your spirit , fire shall devour you (Isa.
xxxiii. 11). A man who is a wanderer in spirit , and who
uttereth falsehood (Micah ii. 11). A generation whose spirit


No. 157] the holy spirit 249

was not steadfast with God (Ps. lxxviii. 8). The spirit of
whoredoms (Hosea v. 4; iv. 12). That every heart may melt,
and every spirit may faint (Ezek. xxi. 7). That which com-
eth into your spirit shall never be done (Ezek. xx. 32). In
whose spirit there is no guile (Ps. xxxii. 2). The spirit of
Pharaoh was troubled (Gen. xli. 8). In like manner of Ne-
buchadnezzar (Dan. ii. 3). From these and very many other
passages, it is fully manifest that spirit signifies the mind
of man and such things as are of the mind.

157. Since by the spirit of man is meant his mind, there-
fore by being in the spirit, which is sometimes said in the
Word, is meant a state of the mind separate from the body;
and because in that state the prophets saw such things as
exist in the spiritual world, it is called the vision of God.
They were then in a state such as spirits and angels them-
selves are, in that world. In that state, the spirit of man,
like his mind as to sight, may be transported from place to
place, the body remaining in its own. This is the state in
which I have now been for twenty-six years, with this dif-
ference, that I have been in the spirit and at the same time in
the body, and only at certain times out of the body. That
Ezekiel, Zechariah, Daniel, and John when he wrote the
Apocalypse, were in that state, is evident from the following
passages: Ezekiel says, The spirit took me up and brought
me back into Chaldea, to the captivity, in vision , in the spirit
of God ... so the vision which I saw went up from me (xi.
1, 24), and that the spirit took him up, and he heard behind
him an earthquake (iii. 12, 13). That the spirit lifted him
up between the earth and the heaven, and carried him away
to Jerusalem, and he saw abominations (viii. 3), et seq. That
he saw four animals, which were cherubs, and various things
with them (chap, i., x.); and also a new earth, and a new
temple, and an angel measuring them (xl.-xlviii.); and that
he was then in vision and in the spirit (xl. 2; xliii. 5). The
case was similar with Zechariah, in whom there was then
an angel, when he saw a man riding on a horse, among the


250


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 157


myrtle-trees (i. 8, et seq.); when he saw four horns, and a
man in whose hand was a measuring line (i. 18; ii. 1, et seq .);
Joshua, the high priest (iii. 1, et seq.); four chariots going
out between two mountains, and horses (vi. 1, et seq.). In a
similar state was Daniel, when he saw four beasts coming up
out of the sea, and many more things concerning them (vii.

1, et seq.); when he saw the battles of the ram and the he-
goat (viii. 1, et seq.). He saw those things in vision (vii. 1,

2, 7, 13; viii. 2; x. 1, 7, 8); the angel Gabriel appeared to
him in vision, and talked with him (ix. 21). So was it with
John when he wrote the Apocalypse, who says that he was
in the spirit on the Lord's day (Apoc. i. 10); that he was
carried in the spirit into the wilderness (xvii. 3); upon a high
mountain in the spirit (xxi. 10). It is said that he saw in
vision (ix. 17); and in other places, that he saw those things
which he described, as when he saw the Son of Man in the
midst of the seven candlesticks; a tabernacle, a temple, an
ark, and an altar, in heaven; the book sealed with seven
seals, and horses going out of it; the four animals around the
throne; the twelve thousand chosen out of each tribe; the
Lamb on Mount Zion; locusts ascending out of the abyss;
the dragon and his battle with Michael; a woman bringing
forth a male child, and fleeing into the wilderness on account
of the dragon; two beasts, one ascending out of the sea, and
the other out of the earth; a woman sitting upon a scarlet-
colored beast; the dragon cast into a lake of fire and brim-
stone; a white horse, and a great supper; the holy city Jeru-
salem coming down, described as to the gates, the wall, and
its foundations; the river of living water, and the trees of
life yielding fruit every month; besides many other things.
In a similar state were Peter, James, and John when they
saw Jesus transfigured; and Paul when he heard out of
heaven ineffable things.

158. A Corollary. Since the Holy Spirit has been treated
in this chapter, it ought by all means to be mentioned that in
the Word of the Old Testament the Holy Spirit is nowhere


No. 158] THE HOLY SPIRIT 25 1

named, but only the Spirit of Holiness, in three places: once
in David (Ps. li. 11), and twice in Isaiah (lxiii. 10, n). But
in the Word of the New Testament, both in the Evangelists
and in the Acts of the Apostles, and in their Epistles, it is
named frequently. The reason is that the Holy Spirit was
then for the first time when the Lord came into the world;
for the Holy Spirit proceeds out of Him from the Father; for
the Lord only is Holy (Apoc. xv. 4) ; therefore also it is said
by the angel Gabriel to Mary the mother, The Holy Thing
which shall be born 0} thee (Luke i. 35). The reason why it
was said, The Holy Spirit was not yet , because Jesus was not
yet glorified (John vii. 39), when yet it is said before that the
Holy Spirit filled Elizabeth (Luke i. 41), and Zechariah (i.
67), as also Simeon (ii. 25), was that the Spirit of Jehovah
the Father filled them, which was called the Holy Spirit on
account of the Lord who was already in the world. This is
the reason why in the Word of the Old Testament, it is no-
where said that the prophets spoke from the Holy Spirit, but
from Jehovah; for every where it is said, Jehovah spake to
me; The Word 0 / Jehovah came to me; Jehovah said; the
saying of Jehovah . That no one may doubt that it is so, I
will cite only from Jeremiah, where are these words (i. 4, 7,
n-14, 19; ii. 1-5, 9, 19, 22, 29, 31; iii. 1, 6, 10, 12, 14, 16;

iv. 1, 3, 9, 17, 27; v. 11, 14, 18, 22, 29; vi. 6, 9, 12, 15, 16,

21, 22; vii. 1, 3, 11, 13, 19-21; viii. 1, 3, 12, 13; ix. 3, 6, 9,

12, 13, 15, 20, 22, 23, x. 1, 2, 18, xi. 1, 3, b, 9, ^ 8 7

22; xii. 14, 17; xiii. 1, 6, 9, 11-15, 25; xiv. 1, 10, 14, 15; xv.
1-3, 6, 11, 19, 20; xvi. 1, 3, 5, 9, 14, 16; xvii. 5, 19-21, 24;
xviii. 1, 5, 6, 11, 13; xix, 1, 3, 6, 12, 15; xx. 4; xxi. 1, 4, 7> 8 ,
11, 12; xxii. 2, 5, 6, 11, 18, 24, 29, 30; xxiii. 2, 5, 7, 12, 15, 24,
29, 3L 3 8 ; xxiv. 3, 5, 8; xxv. 1, 3, 7-9, 15, 27-29, 32; xxvi.
i, 2, 18; xxvii. 1, 2, 4, 8, 11, 16, 19, 21, 22; xxviii. 2, 12, 14,
16; xxix. 4, 8, 9, 16, 19-21, 25, 30-32; xxx. 1-5, 8, 10-12, 17,
18; xxxi. 1, 2, 7, 10, 15-17, 23, 27, 28, 31-38; xxxii. 1, 6, 14,
15, 25, 26, 28, 30, 36, 42; xxxiii. 1, 2, 4, 10, 12, 13, 17, 19,
20, 23, 25; xxxiv. 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 13, 17, 22; xxxv. 1, 13, 17-


2$2


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 158


19; xxxvi. 1, 6, 27, 29, 30; xxxvii. 6, 7, 9; xxxviii. 2, 3, 17;
xxxix. 15-18; xl. 1; xlii. 7, 9, 15, 18, 19; xliii. 8, 10; xliv. 1,
2,7,11,24-26,30; xlv. 2, 5; xlvi. 1,23,25,28; xlvii. 1 ; xlviii.
1, 8, 12, 30, 35, 38, 40, 43, 44, 47; xlix. 2, 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 16,
18, 26, 28, 30, 32, 35, 37-39; 1. 1, 4, 10, 18, 20, 21, 30, 31,
33> 35 , 4o; H. 25, 33, 36, 39, 52, 58). These in Jeremiah
only: the like is said in all the other prophets, and not that
the Holy Spirit spoke, nor that Jehovah spoke to them by
the Holy Spirit.

159. To the above I will add these Relations . First:
once when I was in company with angels in heaven, I saw
at a distance below, a great smoke, and occasionally fire
bursting out of it; and then I said to the angels who were
talking with me, that few here knowithat the smoke seen in
the hells arises from falsities confirmed by reasonings, and
that the fire is anger kindling against those who contradict;
to which I added, that this is as unknown in this world as it
is in my world, where I live in the body, that flame is nothing
but smoke set on fire. That it is so, I have often proved by
experiment, for I have seen smoke rising from the wood on
the hearth, and when I applied fire to it by a lighted match,
I saw the smoke turned into flame, and this in the same form
as the smoke; for the particles of smoke become little sparks
which all blaze together, as is also the case with lighted gun-
powder. It is similar with this smoke which we see below;
this consists of so many falsities, and the fire bursting forth
as a flame there is the kindling of zeal in favor of them.

Then the angels said to me, “ Let us pray the Lord to be
allowed to descend and approach, so that we may perceive
what are the falsities which are with them thus smoking and
burning.” And it was granted; and lo, there appeared
around us a pillar of light extending continuously to the
place; and then we saw four companies of spirits who were
strenuously maintaining that God the Father, because He
is invisible, is to be approached and worshipped, and not
His Son born in the world, because He is a man and visible.


No. 159]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


253


When I looked to the sides, at the left appeared the learned
of the clergy, and behind them the unlearned; and at the
right the learned of the laity, and behind them the unlearned;
but between us and them there was a yawning interval, which
could not be passed. But we turned our eyes and ears to the
left, where were the learned of the clergy, and the unlearned
behind them, and we heard them reasoning about God after
this manner: — “We know from the doctrine of our church,
which respecting God is the same in the whole European
world, that God the Father, because He is invisible, is to be
approached, and at the same time God the Son and God the
Holy Spirit, who also are invisible, because coeternal with
the Father; and because God the Father is the Creator of
the universe and therefore is in the universe, wherever we
turn our eyes He is present; and when we pray to Him He
graciously hears; and after having accepted the Son’s media-
tion, He sends the Holy Spirit, who brings into our hearts the
glory of His Son’s righteousness and blesses us. Being ap-
pointed teachers of the church, while we have been preach-
ing we have felt the holy operation of that mission in our
breasts, and we have breathed our devotion from His pres-
ence in our minds. We are so affected because we direct all
our senses toward the invisible God, who operates not singly
in the sight of our understanding, but universally in the whole
system of our mind and body, by His emissary Spirit. Such
effects would not result from the worship of a visible God,
or of one conspicuous to our minds as a man.”

These words the unlearned of the clergy who stood behind,
applauded, and added this: “Whence is what is holy but
from the Divine, unseen, and imperceptible? At this, as
soon as it reaches our ears, our countenances expand, and
we are gladdened as by the sweetness of a fragrant aura, so
that we beat our breasts. It is otherwise with what is seen
and perceptible; this when it enters the ear becomes merely
natural and not Divine. For a similar reason the Roman
Catholics say their masses in Latin, and the Host, of which


2$4


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 159


they tell Divine mystical things, they take out from the re>
cesses of the altars and hold up to view; at which, as at the
most sacred mysteries, the people fall upon their knees, and
breathe out what is holy.” After this we turned toward the
right, where stood the learned and behind them the un-
learned of the laity; and from the learned I heard these
things: “We know that the wisest among the ancients wor-
shipped an invisible God, whom they called Jehovah; but
that after these, in the age which succeeded, they made for
themselves gods of deceased monarchs, among whom were
Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, Apollo, and also Minerva,
Diana, Venus, Themis, and built temples for them, and
offered Divine worship; from which worship, when in time
it degenerated, arose idolatry, which at length filled the whole
world with insanity. We therefore unanimously agree with
our priests and elders, that there were and are three Divine
Persons from eternity, each of whom is God; and it is enough
for us that they are invisible.” To this the unlearned be-
hind them added, “ We concur. Is not God God, and man
man? But we know that if any one should declare a God
Man, the common people, who have a sensual idea concern-
ing God, would accede to it.”

After these words their eyes were opened and they saw us
near them, and from indignation that we had heard them,
they became silent: but then the angels by power given them
closed the exterior or lower regions of their thoughts from
which they spoke, and opened the interior or higher regions,
and compelled them to speak concerning God from these;
and then they spoke and said, “What is God? We have
not seen His shape nor heard His voice. What then is God,
but nature in its firsts and its lasts ? This we have seen, for
it shines in our eyes; and this we have heard, for it sounds in
our ears.” On hearing these words, we said to them, “ Have
you ever seen Socinus, who acknowledged only God the
Father? or Arius, who denied the Divinity of the Lord the
Saviour? or any of their followers?” To which they an-


No. 160}


THE HOLY SPIRIT


255


swered, “We have not.” “They are,” we said, “in the
deep beneath you.” And presently some were called up
thence, and being questioned concerning God, they spoke
in like manner as those had before, and said moreover,
“ What is God ? We can make as many gods as we please.”

And then we said, “ It is in vain to talk with you about the
Son of God, bom in the world; but still we will say this:
Lest faith respecting God, in Him and from Him, albeit no
one had seen Him — and this faith in the first and the second
age was like a water bubble in the air with beautiful color —
should in the third and following age burst into nothing, it
pleased Jehovah God to descend and assume the Human,
and thus present Himself to view, and afford conviction that
God is not a thing of reasoning, but the Itself, which was,
is, and will be from eternity to eternity; and that God is not
a mere word of three letters, but that He is the all of reality
from Alpha to Omega; consequently, that He is the life and
.salvation of all who believe in Him as visible, and not of
those who say that they believe in an invisible God. For to
believe, to see, and to know, make one; wherefore the Lord
said to Philip, He that seeth and knoweth Me, seeth and
knoweth the Father; and, in other places He said that it is
the will of the Father that they should believe in the Son, and
that whosoever believeth in the Son hath eternal life, but he
who believeth not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath
of God abideth on him — all which things He says in John
(iii. 15, 16, 36; xiv. 6-15).” On hearing these things, many
of the four companies were so enraged that smoke and fire
came out of their nostrils; and so we went away, and the
angels, after they had accompanied me home, ascended into
their heaven.

160. Second Relation . Once, in company with angels, I
walked in the world of spirits, which is mediate between
heaven and hell, into which all men after death first come, and
are prepared, the good for heaven, and the bad for hell; and
I conversed with them of many things, among them also of


256


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 160


this, that in the world, where I am in the body, there appear
in the time of night innumerable stars, greater and smaller,
and that they are so many suns, which only transmit their
light into the world of our sun; “and when I saw that in
your world also stars are to be seen, I conjectured that these
may be as many as there are in the world where I am.” The
angels, pleased with this remark, said that perhaps there may
be as many, since every society of heaven, to those who are
under heaven, sometimes shines like a star; and the societies
of heaven are innumerable, all in order, according to the
varieties of affections of the love of good, which in God are
infinite, and hence from Him innumerable; and because
these were foreseen before the creation, I suppose that, ac-
cording to the number of them, there have been provided,
that is, created, as many stars in the world where men are,
who must be in a natural material body. When we were
thus talking together, I saw in the north a paved way, so
crowded with spirits that there was scarce room to step be-
tween two, and I said to the angels that I had also seen this
way before, and spirits like the troops of an army upon it,
and that I had heard that this was the way through which
all pass who depart from the natural world. The reason
why that way was covered with so great a number of spirits,
is that some myriads, of men die every week, and they all pass
into this world after death. To this the angels added, that
this way is terminated in this world of spirits in the midst of
it, where we now are; the reason why it is terminated in the
middle, is that on the side toward the east are the societies
which are in love to God and toward the neighbor; and to
the left, toward the west, the societies of those who are in
opposition to those loves; and forward, in the south, the
societies of those who are more intelligent than the rest.
Consequently new-comers from the natural world first come
hither. When they are here, they are then in the externals
in which they were last in the former world; and afterward
they are successively let into their internals, and are explored


No. 160] THE HOLY SPIRIT 257

as to their quality, and after exploration are carried, the good
to their places in heaven, and the evil to their places in hell.

We stopped in the middle, where the way terminated by
which they were flocking in, and said, “Let us stay here a
little while, and speak with some of the new comers.” And
we chose twelve from those flocking in; and because they
all had just come from the natural world, they knew not but
that they were still there; and we asked them what ideas
they had about heaven and hell, and what about a life after
death. To which one of them answered as follows: — “ Our
sacred order impressed upon me the belief that we shall live
after death, and that there is a heaven and a hell; and I have
therefore believed that all who live morally come into heaven,
and because all live morally, that no one goes to hell, and
thus that hell is a fable invented by the clergy, to deter people
from living wickedly. What matter is it, if I think about
God in this way or that ? Thought is only like chaff, or a
bubble upon the water which bursts and is gone.” Another
near him said, “ It is my belief that there is a heaven and a
hell, and that God rules heaven, and the devil hell; and be-
cause they are enemies and therefore opposed to each other,
one calls evil what the other calls good; and that the moral
man, who can dissemble, and cause evil to appear as good,
and good as evil, stands on the side of both. What then is
the difference, whether I am with the one or the other lord,
if he only favors me ? Evil and good give men equal enjoy-
ment.” A third at his side said, “ Of what consequence is
it to me to believe that there is a heaven and a hell, for who
has come thence and told ? If every man lived after death,
why should not one out of so great a multitude have re-
turned and told ? ” A fourth near him said, “ I will inform
you why no one has ever returned and told: the reason is,
that when man has breathed out his soul and has died, he
then either becomes a spectre and is dissipated, or is like the
breath of the mouth, which is only wind. How can such
a one return and speak with any one ? ” A fifth took up the


258


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 160


matter and said, “ My friends, wait till the day of the final
judgment, for all will then return into their own bodies, and
you will see them, and talk with them, and then they will tell
each other their lots.” A sixth, standing opposite and smi-
ling said, “How can a spirit, which is wind, return into a
body eaten up by worms, and also into its skeleton burnt up
by the sun and reduced to dust ? And how can any Egyp-
tian, who has been made a mummy, and has been mixed in
by a quack with his extracts and emulsions to be drunk or
eaten, return and tell any thing? Wherefore wait, if you
have faith, till that last day, but you may wait for ever and
ever in vain.” After him the seventh said, “If I believed
that there is a heaven and a hell, and thus a life after death,
I should also believe that birds and beasts would likewise
live. Are not some of them moral and rational equally with
men? It is denied that beasts live; and so I deny that men
live: the reason is equal, one follows from the other. What
is man but an animal ? ” An eighth, standing behind him,
came up and said, “ Believe there is a heaven if you will, but
I do not believe there is a hell. Is not God omnipotent?
and is He not able to save every one ? ” Then a ninth, clap-
ping his hands, said, “ God is not only omnipotent, but also
gracious, and cannot send any one into eternal fire; and if
any one is there, He cannot but take him out thence and lift
him up.” A tenth ran out of his place into the midst, and
said, “ Neither do I believe there is a hell. Did not God send
His Son, and did not He make an atonement, and take away
the sins of the whole world ? What then can the devil avail
against that ? And because he cannot prevail, what then is
hell ? ” An eleventh, who was a priest, on hearing this grew
warm and said, “ Do you not know that those who have ob-
tained the faith on which the merit of Christ is inscribed are
saved, and that those whom God elects obtain that faith?
Is not election according to the will of the Almighty? and
is it not His prerogative to judge who are worthy ? Who can
do any thing against His will and judgment ? ” The twelfth,


No. 160]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


259


who was a politician, was silent; but being asked to crown
the answers, he said, “ I shall not say any thing concerning
heaven, hell, and a life after death, since no one knows any
thing about them; but still allow the priests without rebuke
to preach those things; for so the minds of the common
people are held bound by an invisible bond to the laws and
the leaders: does not the public safety depend on this? ”

We were amazed at hearing such things, and said among
ourselves, “ These, though they are called Christians, are not
men nor beasts, but men beasts.” But in order to awaken
them out of sleep, we said, “There is a heaven and a hell,
and there is a life after death; you will be convinced that
there is, when we dispel your ignorance as to the state of life
in which you now are; for every one, in the first days after
death, knows not but that he still is living in the same world
in which he lived before; for the time elapsed is like a sleep
from which, when any one is awaked, he perceives not but
that he is where he was. It is so with you now; wherefore
you have spoken just as you thought in the former world.”
And the angels dispelled their ignorance, and then they saw
themselves in another world, and among those whom they
did not recognize; and then they exclaimed, “Oh! where
are we?” And we said, “You are no longer in the natural
world, but in the spiritual world, and we are angels.” Then,
after waking up, they said, “If you are angels, show us
heaven.” And we answered, “Wait here a little while, and
we will return.” And on our return, after half an hour, we
saw them awaiting us, and said, “Follow us into heaven.”
And they followed, and we ascended with them; and be-
cause we were with, them, the keepers opened the gate and
let us in. And we said to those who at the threshold receive
new-comers, “Examine these.” And they turned them
around and saw the hinder parts of their heads were very
hollow; and then they said, “Depart hence, because enjoy-
ment from the love of doing evil is yours, and therefore you
are not conjoined to heaven; for in your hearts you have


26 o


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 160.


denied God and despised religion.” And we then said to
them, “Do not delay, for if you do you will be cast out.”
And they hastened down and went away.

On the way home, we spoke of the cause why the back
parts of the head, with those who have enjoyment in doing
evil, are in this world hollow. And I said that this was the
cause, that man has two brains, one in the back part of the
head, which is called the cerebellum, and the other in the
fore part, which is called the cerebrum, and that in the cere-
bellum dwells the love of the will, and in the cerebrum the
thought of the understanding; and that when the thought
of the understanding does not lead, the love of man’s will,
the inmost parts of the cerebellum, which in themselves are
celestial, collapse and thence there is hollowness.

161. Third Relation . Once I heard in the spiritual world
a sound as of a mill; it was in the northern quarter. I won-
dered at first what this was; but I recollected that by a mill
and by grinding in a mill is meant to seek from the Word
what is serviceable for doctrine. So I went up to the place
where the sound was heard, and when I was near, the sound
died away; and then I saw a kind of arched roof above the
ground, the entrance to which was through a cave. Seeing
which, I descended and entered; and, behold, there was a
chamber, in which I saw an old man sitting among books,
holding before him the Word, and seeking therefrom what
was serviceable for his doctrine. Slips of paper lay around,
on which he wrote down what served him. There were
clerks in an adjoining room, who gathered up the slips, and
copied the things written on them upon a whole sheet. I
asked first about the books around him. He said that they
all treated of justifying faith; those which were from Swe-
den and Denmark profoundly, those which were from Ger-
many more profoundly, those which were from Britain more
profoundly still, and most profoundly those from Holland.
And he added that they differ in various things, but that in
the article on justification and salvation by faith alone, they


No. 161]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


26l


all agree. Afterward he said that he was now collecting
from the Word this first article of justifying faith, that God
the Father receded from grace toward the human race, on
account of their iniquities; and that therefore there was a
Divine necessity, for the saving of men, that satisfaction,
reconciliation, propitiation, and mediation should be made
by some one who should take upon himself the condemna-
tion of justice; and this could by no means be done but by
His only Son; and that after this was done, access to God
the Father was open for His sake; for we say, “Father, have
mercy on us for the sake of Thy Son.” And he said, “I see
and have seen that this is according to all reason and Scrip-
ture. How otherwise could God the Father have been ap-
proached, except through faith in the merit of the Son?”

I heard this, and was astonished that he should say that it
was according to reason and according to Scripture, when
yet it is contrary to reason and contrary to Scripture, which
I also told him plainly. He then rejoined, in the heat of his
zeal, “How can you say so?” So I opened my mind, say-
ing, “Is it not contrary to reason to think that God the
Father receded from grace toward the human race, and
rejected and excommunicated it? Is not the Divine grace
an attribute of the Divine essence? Therefore to recede
from grace would be to recede from the Divine essence; and
to recede from His Divine essence would be to be no longer
God. Can God be alienated from Himself? Believe me,
that grace, on the part of God, as it is infinite, is also eternal.
The grace of God may be lost on the part of man if he does,
not receive it. If grace were to depart from God there would
be an end of all heaven and all the human race, for which
reason grace on the part of God endures for ever, not only
toward angels and men, but also toward the devils in hell.
Since this is according to reason, why do you say that the
only access to God the Father is through faith in the merit
of the Son, when yet there is perpetual access through grace ?
But why do you say access to God the Father for the sake of


262


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 161


the Son, and not through the Son ? Is not the Son the Me-
diator and Saviour? Why do you not go to the Mediator
and Saviour Himself ? Is He not God and Man ? Who on
earth goes immediately to any emperor, king, or prince?
Must there not be some one to procure admission and intro-
duce him? Do you not know that the Lord came into the
world that He might introduce us to the Father? and that
access is not given except through Him ? and that this access
is perpetual, when you go immediately to the Lord Himself,
since He is in the Father and the Father in Him? Search
now in the Scripture, and you will see that this is according
to it, and that your way to the Father is as contrary to it, as
it is contrary to reason. I tell you, too, that it is presump-
tion to climb up to God the Father, and not through Him
who is in the bosom of the Father, and who alone is with
Him. Have you not read John xiv. 6?” Hearing these
things, the old man was so angry that he sprang from his
seat, and called to his clerks to cast me out. And when I
went out immediately of my own accord, he threw out of
doors after me the book which his hand happened to seize,
and that book was the Word.

162. Fourth Relation. There arose a question among
certain spirits, whether any one can see any doctrinal truth
of theology in the Word, except from the Lord. They all
agreed in this, that no one can, except from God, because a
man can receive nothing except it be given him from heaven
(John iii. 27); for which reason the dispute was whether any
one can, unless he goes immediately to the Lord. They
said, on the one side, that the Lord is to be approached
directly, because He is the Word; on the other side, that
doctrinal truth may also be seen when God the Father is
immediately approached. And so the dispute settled down
to this first point, whether it is lawful fpr any Christian to go
immediately to God the Father, and so to climb over the
Lord; and whether this is not insolence and audacity, both
indecent and rash; because the Lord says that no one com-


No. 162] THE HOLY SHIRIT - 1 263

eth to the Father but by Him (John xiv. 6 ). They left this
and said that a man can see doctrinal truth from the Word
by his own natural light; but this was rejected; and then
they insisted that it may be seen by those who pray to God
the Father. Something was now read to them from the
Word; and then they prayed upon their knees that God the
Father would enlighten them; and as to the words which
had been read to them from the Word, they said that this and
that was the truth therein; but it was false: and this re-
peatedly, to tediousness. At length they confessed that they
could not. But, on the other hand, they who went imme-
diately to the Lord saw truths and informed the others.

After this disputation was thus decided, there came up
some out of the abyss who appeared at first like locusts, and
afterward like dwarfs. They were those who in the world
prayed to God the Father, and confirmed themselves in jus-
tification by faith alone. They were the same who are
treated of in the Apocalypse (ix. 1-11). They said that they
saw the tenet, that man is justified by faith alone, without
the works of the law, in clear light, and also from the Word.
They were asked, “ By what faith ? ” They answered, “ In
God the Father.” But after they were examined, it was
said to them from heaven, that they did not know even one
doctrinal truth from the Word. But they rejoined, that they
still saw their truths in light. It was then said to them, that
they saw them in fatuous light. They asked, “What is
fatuous light?” They were informed that fatuous light is
the light of the confirmation of faslity; and that this light
corresponds to the light in which birds of night and bats are,
to which darkness is light, and light is darkness. This was
confirmed by the fact that when they looked upward to
heaven, where light itself is, they saw darkness; but when
they looked downward to the abyss whence they came, they
saw light. Being indignant at this confirmation, they said
that thus light and darkness are not any thing, but only the
state of the eye, according to which light is called light, and


264


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 162


darkness darkness. But it was shown that their light was
fatuous light, which is the light of the confirmation of fal-
sity; and that it was only the activity of their mind, arising
from the fire of lusts; not unlike the light of cats, whose eyes,
in consequence of their burning appetite for mice, appear
like candles in cellars in the night. On hearing this they
angrily replied that they were not cats, nor like cats; be-
cause they could see, if they wished. But because they were
afraid of being asked why they would not, they withdrew
and let themselves down into their abyss. They who are
there, and others 1 like them, are called by the angels birds of
night and bats, and also locusts.

When they came to their companions in the abyss, and
told that the angels said, “We do not know any doctrinal
truth, not even one, and they called us birds of night, bats,
and locusts/' a tumult was made there; and they said, “Let
us pray to God for permission to ascend, and we will show
clearly that we have many doctrinal truths, which the arch-
angels themselves will acknowledge.” And because they
prayed to God, leave was given; and they ascended to the
number of three hundred. And when they appeared above
the earth, they said, “ We were celebrated and renowned in
the world because we knew and taught the mysteries of jus-
tification by faith alone; and from confirmations w$ not
only saw the light, but saw it as a flashing radiance; as we
still do in our cells. And yet we have heard from our com-
panions who were with you, that that light is not light, but
darkness, because we have not, as you said, any doctrinal
truth form the Word. We know that every truth of the
Word shines; and we believe that our radiance is therefrom,
while we meditate profoundly on our mysteries. We will,
therefore, demonstrate that we have truths from the Word
in great abundance.” And they said, “Have we not this
truth, that there is a Trinity, God the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, and that we must believe in the Trinity?
Have we not this truth, that Christ is our Redeemer and


No. 162]


THE HOLY SPIRIT


265


Saviour ? Have we not this truth, that Christ alone is right-
eousness, and that He alone has merit; and that he is unjust
and impious who wishes to claim to himself any thing of His
merit and righteousness? Have we not this truth, that no
mortal can do any spiritual good from himself, but that all
good which is good in itself is from God? Have we not this
truth, that there is merit-seeking and hypocritical good, and
that these goods are evil? Have we not this truth, that still
good works are to be done ? Have we not this truth, that
there is faith, and that one must believe in God, and that
every one has life according to his belief? besides many
others from the Word ? Can any of you deny one of these ?
And yet you said that we have not any truth in our schools,
not even one. Have you not laid such things to our charge
ungraciously ?”

But they then received the answer: “All the things which
you have advanced are in themselves true, but with you they
are truths falsified, which are falsities, because they are
drawn from a false principle. That it is so, we will demon-
strate even to the eye. 'There is a place, not far from this,
into which light flows directly from heaven. In the midst
of it, there is a table. When any paper on which a truth
from the Word is written is laid upon it, that paper, from
the truth written on it, shines like a star. Write your truths,
therefore, on a paper, and let it be laid upon the table, and
you will see.” They did so, and gave it to the keeper, who
laid it upon the table, and then said to them, “ Draw back,
and look at the table.” And they drew back and looked;
and behold, the paper shone like a star. And then the
keeper said, “You see that the things which you wrote on
the paper are truths; but come nearer, and fix your gaze on
the paper.” And they did so, and then the light suddenly
disappeared, and the paper became black, as if coated with
the soot of a furnace. And the keeper said further, “ Touch
the paper with your hands, but be careful not to touch the
writing.” And when they did so, a flame burst forth and


266


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 162


consumed it. After these things were seen, it was said to
them, ‘ If you had touched the writing, you would have
heard an explosion, and would have burned your fingers.”
And it was then said to them, by those who stood back,
“You have now seen that the truths which you have abused
to confirm the mysteries of your justification, are truths in
themselves, but that in you they are truths falsified.” They
then looked upward, and heaven appeared to them as blood,
and afterward as thick darkness; and they seemed before
the eyes of angelic spirits, some like bats, some like owls, and
some like other birds of night; and they fled away into their
own darkness, which to their eyes shone fatuously.

The angelic spirits who were present wondered that they
had not before known any thing of that place and of the
table there. And then a voice came to them from the south-
ern quarter, saying, “ Come up hither, and you will see some-
thing still more wonderful.” And they drew near, and
entered into a chamber, whose walls gleamed as if of gold;
and they saw there also a table upon which lay the Word,
set around with precious stones in heavenly form. And
the angel keeper said, “When the Word is opened, there
beams forth from it a light of ineffable brightness; and at
the same time there is from the precious stones the appear-
ance as of a rainbow above and around the Word. When
any angel from the third heaven comes thither, there appears
above and around the Word a rainbow on a red ground.
When an angel from the second heaven comes thither and
looks, there appears a rainbow on a blue ground. When
an angel from the lowest heaven comes thither and looks,
there appears a rainbow on a white ground. When any
good spirit comes thither and looks, there appears a varying
light, as of marble.” That it is so, was also shown them
visibly.

The angel keeper further said, “ If any one comes up who
has falsified the Word, the splendor is then first dissipated;
and if he comes near, and fixes his eyes upon the Word, there


No. 162] the holy spirit 267

comes the appearance as of blood around; and he is then
warned to depart, because there is danger.” But a certain
one who in the world had been a great champion of the doc-
trine of justification by faith alone, came up boldly, and said,
“When I was in the world I did not faslify the Word; I
exalted charity together with faith, and taught that man in
the state of faith in which he does charity and its works, is
renewed, regenerated, and sanctified by the Holy Spirit; and
also that there is no faith solitary, that is, without good works;
as a good tree is not without fruit, the sun without light, and
fire without heat; and I also blamed those who said that
good works were not necessary, and who said, besides, that
I magnified the precepts of the Decalogue and repentance
also, and that so I applied all things of the Word to the article
concerning faith in a wonderful way, which I still set forth
and demonstrated to be alone saving.” In the confidence
of his assertion that he had not falsified the Word, he came
up to the table, and, contrary to the warning of the angel,
touched the Word. But then suddenly fire with smoke
issued from the Word, and an explosion took place with a
crash, by which he was thrown to a corner of the room, and
lay there as dead for half an hour. The angelic spirits won-
dered at this; but it was said to them that this prelate had
exalted the goods of charity as proceeding from faith, more
than others, but that still he meant no other than works of
policy, which are also called moral and civil, and are to be
done for the sake of the world and of prosperity therein, and
not at all for the sake of salvation; and also, that he sub-
stituted some hidden works of the Holy Spirit, concerning
which man knows nothing, which, in the state of faith, are
ingenerated in faith.

The angelic spirits then conversed together concerning
the falsification of the Word; and they agreed upon this,
that to falsify the Word is to take truths from it and apply
them to confirm falsities; which is to drag them forth, out-
side of the Word, and slay them; as for example, to apply


268


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 162


all those truths adduced above by those from the abyss, to
the faith of the day, and to explain them from it. That this
faith is impregnated with falsities will be demonstrated in
what follows. For another example, to take from the Word
this truth, that charity is to be exercised, and that good is to
be done to the neighbor; if any one then confirms this, that
it is to be done, but not for the sake of salvation, on the
ground that all the good from man is not good because it is
merit-seeking, he drags that truth of the Word out of the
Word, and destroys it; since the Lord in His Word enjoins
upon every man who wishes to be saved, to love the neigh-
bor, and from love to do him good. So in other cases.

THE DIVINE TRINITY.

163. We have treated of God the Creator, and at the same
time also of creation; then of the Lord the Redeemer, and
at the same time of redemption; and lastly of the Holy
Spirit, and at the same time of the Divine operation. And
having thus treated of the Triune God, it necessary to
treat also of the Divine Trinity, which is known in the Chris-
tian world, and yet is unknown. For by this alone can a
just idea of God be obtained; and a just idea of God is in
the church like the shrine and the altar in a temple, and like
a crown on the head and a sceptre in the hand of a king on
his throne; for on a just idea of God depends the whole
body of theology, as a chain depends on its first link. And,
if you will believe it, every one is allotted his place in the
heavens according to his idea of God; for that is, as it were,
the touchstone by which are tested the gold and the silver,
that is, good and truth, as to their quality with man: for
there is with him no saving good except from God, nor is
there any truth which does not derive its quality from the
good within it. But that it may be seen, with both eyes, what
the Divine Trinity is, the exposition of it shall be divided
into articles, as follows: — I. There is a Divine Trinity ,


No. 164]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


269,


which is the Father , the Son , and the Holy Spirit. II. These
three , the Father , the Son , ami Holy Spirit , are ^ree
essentials 0} one God , which make one , as saw/, 6ady, and a/>ar-
a/iaw mak awe iw maw. III. Before the world was created
there was not this Trinity; but after the world was created ,
when God became incarnate , i/ *zaas provided and made; and
then in the Lord God, the Redeemer and Saviour , Jesus Christ.
IV. A T rinity of Divine Persons from eternity , or before the
world was created , is, iw J/ze ideas 0} thought , a Trinity of
Gods; and this cannot be abolished by the oral confession of
one God. V. A Trinity of Persons was unknown in the
Apostolic Church , but was first brought forth by the Nicene
Council , and from that was introduced into the Roman-
Catholic Church , and from this into the Churches that were
separated from it. VI. From the Nicene Trinity and the
Athanasian together , a faith arose which had perverted the
whole Christian Church. VII. Thence is that abomina-
tion of desolation , and affliction such as has not been nor ever
shall be , which the Lord had foretold in Daniel, in the Evan-
gelists, and in the Apocalypse. VIII. And hence it is that
unless a New Heaven and a New Church are founded by the
Lord, no flesh would be saved. IX. From a Trinity 0} Per-
sons, each one of whom singly is God, according to the Atha-
nasian Creed, have come forth many discordant and hetero-
geneous ideas about God, which are fantasies and abortions .
These will now be unfolded one by one.

164. I. There is a Divine Trinity, which is the Father ,
the Son , and the Holy Spirit. That there is a Divine Trinity,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, is very evident
from the Word, and from these things there: — The angel
Gabriel said to Mary, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee,
and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; there-
fore also that Holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God (Luke i. 35). Here three are named,
the Highest, who is God the Father, the Holy Spirit, and the


270


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 164


Son of God. When Jesus was baptized, Lo , the heavens
were opened , and John saw the Spirit oj God descending like
a dove , and lighting upon Him: and lo , a voice jrom heaven ,
saying , This is My beloved Son , whom I am well pleased

(Matt. iii. 16, 17: Mark i. 10, 11: John I. 32). And still
more plainly is it seen from these words of the Lord to the
disciples: Go ye y make disciples oj all nations , baptizing them
into the name of the Father , and oj the Son , and of the Holy 1
Spirit (Matt, xxviii. 19); and moreover from these words in
the first Epistle of John (v. 7) — There are three that bear
record in heaven , the Father , the Word , and the Holy Spirit.
And further from this, that the Lord prayed to His Father,
and spoke of Him and with Him, and said that He would
send and also did send the Holy Spirit, Finally, the apostles
in their epistles frequently named the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Spirit. From these things it is plain that there
is a Divine Trinity, which is the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit.

165. But how this is to be understood, whether they are
three Gods who in essence and hence in name are one God,
or there are three objects of one subject, so that they are
merely qualities or attributes of one God which are so named,
or it is to be understood in some other way, unaided reason
can by no means see. What then is to be done ? There is
no other way than for man to go to the Lord God the Saviour,
and read the Word under His auspices, for He is the God of
the Word; and he will be enlightened and will see truths
which reason also will acknowledge. But if you do not go
to the Lord, though you read the Word a thousand times and
see therein a Divine Trinity and Unity also, you surely will
never understand but that there are three Divine Persons,
each one of whom singly is God, and thus that there are three
Gods. Yet because this is repugnant to the common per-
ception of all men in the whole world, therefore to avoid
reproach they have come to this, that, though there are in
truth three Gods, still faith requires that three shall not be


No. 165]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


271


named, but one; and furthermore, lest they should be over-
whelmed with censure, on this subject especially the under-
standing must be imprisoned, and held bound in obedience
to faith; and this must be the established law of Christian
order in the Christian Church evermore. Such a paralytic
birth resulted from their not reading the Word under the
auspices of the Lord; for every one who does not read the
Word under His auspices, reads it under the auspices of his
own intelligence, which is like an owl in respect to such
things as are in spiritual light, as are all the essentials of the
church. And while he reads such things in the Word as
concern the Trinity, and from them thinks that though there
are three still they are one, this appears to him like the an-
swer from an oracle, which, because he does not understand
it, he rolls it between his teeth; for if he were to put it before
his eyes, it would be an enigma, which the more he tries to
unfold, the more he involves himself in darkness, until he
begins to think of it without understanding, which is like
seeing without the eye. In short, to read the Word under
the auspices of one’s own intelligence, which is done by all
who do not acknowledge the Lord as the God of heaven and
earth, and who therefore do not approach and worship Him
alone, may he likened to children playing, who tie a hand-
kerchief over their eyes, and wish to walk in a straight line,
and also think that they are doing so, when yet, step by step,
they turn aside, and finally go on in the opposite direction,
strike against a stone, and fall. They are also like mariners
sailing without a compass, who run the vessel upon the rocks
and perish. And they are like one walking over a field in a
thick fog, who seeing a scorpion and believing it to be a bird,
wishes to seize it with his hand and take it up, and then is
struck with a deadly wound. One who so reads the Word
is also like a diver or a kite, which sees a small portion of the
back of a great fish above the water, and flies upon it, and
fixes its beak into it, and is drawn under by the fish and
drowned. He is also like one who enters a labyrinth without


272 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 165

a guide or a thread; and the further he goes in, the more is he
at a loss as to the way out. The man who reads the Word
not under the Lord’s auspices, but under the auspices of his
own intelligence, believes himself to be a lynx, and to have
more eyes than Argus, when yet he inwardly sees no truth
whatever, but only what is false; and when he has per-
suaded himself that this is true, it appears to him like the
polar star, toward which he directs all the sails of his thought;
and then he sees truths no more than a mole, or if he sees any,
he bends them to favor his own fantasy, and so perverts and
falsifies the holy things of the Word.

166. II. These three , the Father , the Son , and the Holy
Spirit , are the three essentials 0} one God , which make one ,
as the soul , body, and operation in man . There are general
and also particular essentials of a thing, and together these
make one essence. The general essentials of a man are his
soul, body, and operation. That these make one essence,
may be seen from this, that one is from another, and for the
sake of another, in continual series; for man begins from the
soul, which is the very essence of the seed: this not only
initiates but also produces in its order the things which are
of the body, and afterward the things which proceed from
them both, the soul and body together, which are called
operations: therefore, from the production of one from
another, and hence the insertion and conjunction, it is plain
that these three are of one essence, and they are therefore
called three essentials.

167. Every one acknowledges that these three essentials,
namely, soul, body, and operation, were and are in the Lord
God the Saviour. That His soul was from Jehovah the
Father, can be denied only by Antichrist, for in the Word of
both Testaments He is called the Son of Jehovah, the Son
of the Most High God, the only-begotten; the Divine of the
Father, like the soul in man, is therefore His first essential.
That the Son whom Mary brought forth, is the body of that


No. 1 68]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


273


Divine soul, follows from this, that in the womb of a mother
nothing is prepared but the body, conceived and derived
from the soul ; this, therefore, is the second essential. Opera-
tions make the third essential, because they proceed from
the soul and body together; and the things which proceed
are of the same essence with those which produce them.
That the three essentials, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, are one in the Lord, like the soul, body, and opera-
tion, in man, is very evident from the Lord’s words, that the
Father and He are one, and that the Father is in Him and
He in the Father; likewise, that He and the Holy Spirit are
one, .since the Holy Spirit is the Divine proceeding out of the
Lord from the Father, as fully demonstrated above from the
Word (n. 153, 154); therefore to demonstrate it again would
be superfluous, and like loading a table with food after
satiety.

168. When it is said that the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, are the three essentials of one God, like the soul,
body, and operation in man, it appears to the human mind
as if three Persons were the three essentials, which is not
possible; but when it is understood that the Divine of the
Father which makes the soul, and the Divine of the Son
which makes the body, and the Divine of the Holy Spirit,
or the Divine proceeding, which makes the operation, are
the three essentials of one God, this then falls within the
understanding. For God the Father is His Divine, the Son
from the Father is His Divine, and the Holy Spirit from both
is His Divine; and these, because they are of one essence
and unanimous, make one God. But if these three Divine
essentials are called Persons, and to each one is attributed
His own specialty, as to the Father imputation, to the Son
mediation, and to the Holy Spirit operation, then the Divine
essence becomes divided, which yet is one and indivisible;
so no one of the three is God in fulness, but each in the power
divided among three; and this, a sound understanding can-
not but reject.


274 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 169

169. Who, then, cannot have a perception of the Trinity
in the Lord from the trinity in every man ? In every man
there is soul, body, and operation; so, too, in the Lord, for
in the Lord dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily,
according to Paul (Col. ii. 9) ; therefore the Trinity in the
Lord is Divine, but in man it is human. Who does not see
that, in the mystical notion that there are three Divine Per-
sons, and yet one God, and that this God, though one, still
is not one Person, reason has no part; but that, lulled to
sleep, it still compels the mouth to speak as a parrot ? When
reason is lulled to sleep, what then is the speech of the mouth
but something inanimate? When the mouth utters that
from which reason dissents and turns away, what then is the
speech but folly? Human reason is at this day bound in
relation to the Divine Trinity, like a man manacled and fet-
tered in prison; and it may be compared to the vestal virgin
buried in the earth because she let the sacred fire go out;
when yet the Divine Trinity in the minds of men of the
church ought to shine like a lamp, since God, in His Trinity,
and in the unity of it, is All in all the sanctities of heaven and
the church. For what is making one God of the soul, an-
other of the body, and a third of the operation, but making
three parts distinct from one another out of these three essen-
tials in one man ? And what would that be but to cut him
in pieces and kill him?

170. III. Before the world was created , there was not this
Trinity; but after the world was created , when God became
incarnate , it was provided and made; and then in the Lord
God , the Redeemer and Saviour , Jesus Christ . In the Chris-
tian Church at the present day the Divine Trinity is recog-
nized as having been before the world was created, which is,,
that Jehovah God begat a Son from eternity, and that the
Holy Spirit then went forth from both, and that each of the
three is by Himself, or singly, God, because each is one per-
son subsisting of Himself. But this, because it does not fall


No. 171]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


275


within any reason, is called a mystery, which can only be en-
tered thus, that the three have one Divine essence, by which
is meant eternity, immeasurableness, omnipotence, and
thence equal Divinity, glory, and majesty. But that this is
a Trinity of three Gods, and therefore no Divine Trinity,
will be demonstrated in what follows. On the other hand,
that the Trinity, which is also of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, which was provided and made after God be-
came incarnate, thus after the world was created, is the Di-
vine Trinity, because it is of one God, is evident from all
that precedes. This Divine Trinity is in the Lord God the
Redeemer and Saviour, Jesus Christ, because the three essen-
tials of one God, which make one essence, are in Him. That
in Him is all the fulness of the Godhead, as Paul says, is evi-
dent also from the Lord’s own words, that all things of the
Father are His, and that the Holy Spirit does not speak from
Himself, but from Him; and further, that when He arose,
He took from the sepulchre His whole human body, both as
to the flesh and as to the bones (Matt, xxviii. 1-8: Mark xvi.
5, 6: Luke xxiv. 1-3: John xx. n-15), unlike every other
man. This also He attested to His disciples to the life, say-
ing, Behold My hands and My feet , that it is I Myself; handle
Me and see , for a Spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see Me
have (Luke xxiv. 39). From this every man may be con-
vinced, if he will, that the Human of the Lord is Divine;
consequently, that in Him God is Man, and Man God.

1 71. The Trinity which the present Christian Church has
embraced and introduced into its faith, is, that God the
Father begat a Son from eternity, that the Holy Spirit then
proceeded from them both, and that each one by Himself
is God. This Trinity can be conceived by human minds
only as a triarchy, and as a government of three kings in one
kingdom, or of three generals over one army, or of three
masters in one house, all having equal power. What but
destruction could come from this? And if any one wishes
to figure or shadow forth this triarchy to the sight of his


2 y 6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 171


mind, and at the same time the unity of those in it, he can
present it to his contemplation only as a man with three
heads on one body, or three bodies with one head. Such
a monstrous image of the Trinity must appear to those who
believe there are three Divine Persons, and that each by
Himself is God, and who join these together into one God,
and deny that because God is one He is one Person. That
a Son of God born from eternity descended and assumed
the Human, may be compared to the fables of the ancients,
that human souls were created from the beginning of the
world, and enter into bodies and become men; and also to
the absurd notions that the soul of one passes into another,
as many in the Jewish Church believed — as, that the soul
of Elijah passed into the body of John the Baptist; and that
David is to return into his own or another’s body, and to
reign over Israel and Judah, because it is said in Ezekiel,
I will set up one Shepherd over them , and He shall feed them ,
My servant David; He shall be their Shepherd , and I Jeho-
vah will be their God, and David a Prince among them (xxxiv*
23, 24, and in other places); not knowing that by David is
there meant the Lord.

172. IV. A Trinity of Divine Persons from eternity , or
before the world was created , is, in the ideas of thought, a
Trinity of Gods; and this cannot be abolished by the oral con-
fession 0} one God. That a Trinity of Divine Persons from
eternity is a Trinity of Gods, is very evident from the fol-
lowing passage in the Athanasian Creed: — “There is one
Person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the
Holy Spirit. The Father is God and Lord, the Son is God
and Lord, and the Holy Spirit is God and Lord; and yet
there are not three Gods and Lords, but one God and Lord;
for as we are compelled by Christian verity to confess each
Person singly to be God and Lord, so are we forbidden by
the Catholic religion to say three Gods or three Lords.’ 1
This creed is received as oecumenical or universal by the


No. 172]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


277


whole Christian Church; and from it is all that is at this day
known and acknowledged concerning God. That no other
Trinity than a Trinity of Gods was understood by those who
were in the Nicene Council, from which what is called the
Athanasian Creed came forth as a posthumous birth, any
one may see who but reads it with open eyes. That not only
was a Trinity of Gods understood by them, but also that no
other Trinity is understood in the Christian world, is the con-
sequence: all the knowledge concerning God is from that
creed, and every one abides in the belief of its words. That
no other Trinity than a Trinity of Gods is at this day under-
stood in the Christian world, I appeal to every one, to lay-
man and clergyman, to laurelled masters and doctors, and
to consecrated bishops and archbishops; also to cardinals in
their purple, and even to the Roman pontiff himself; let
every one take counsel with himself, and then speak out
from the ideas of his own mind. From the words of this
universally accepted doctrine concerning God, this is as
manifest and clear as water through a crystal cup, that there
are three Persons, and that each one of them is God and
Lord, and also that from Christian verity men ought to con-
fess or acknowledge each Person, singly, as God and Lord,
but that the Catholic or Christian religion or faith forbids
them to say or name three Gods and Lords; and thus that
verity and religion, or truth and faith, are not one thing, but
two things contrary to each other. It was however added
that there are not three Gods and Lords, but one God and
Lord, lest they should be exposed to ridicule before the
whole world; for who would not laugh at three Gods? Yet
who does not see a contradiction in this addition ? But if
they had said that the Father has the Divine essence, the
Son the Divine essence, and the Holy Spirit the Divine
essence, yet that there are not three Divine essences, but
that the essence is one and indivisible, then this mystery
would be explicable; that is, when by the Father is under-
stood the Divine from which are all things, by the Son the


278


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 172


Divine Human therefrom, and by the Holy Spirit the Di-
vine proceeding, which are the three essentials of one God;
or if by the Divine of the Father the like is understood as by
the soul in man, by the Divine Human the like as by the
body of that soul, and by the Holy Spirit the like as by the
operation which proceeds from both, then are understood
three essences which are of one and the same person, and so
together make a one and indivisible essence.

173. The idea of three Gods cannot be abolished by the
oral confession of one God, because it has been implanted
in the memory from childhood, and every man thinks from
the things which are there. The memory with men is like
the ruminating stomach in birds and beasts; into that
stomach they store the food from which they may gradually
have nourishment, and from time to time they draw it thence
and convey it to the true stomach, where it is digested, and
distributed for all the uses of the body. The human un-
derstanding is this true stomach, as the memory is the other.
Any one may see that the idea of three Divine Persons from
eternity, which is the same as an idea of three Gods, can-
not be abolished by the oral confession of one God, merely
from this, that it has not yet been abolished, and that there
are among the celebrated those who are not willing that it
should be abolished; for they insist that the three Divine
Persons are one God, while they obstinately deny that God
because He is one is also one Person. But what wise man
does not think with himself that by Person is certainly not
meant person, but the predication of some quality; but what
quality is not known, and because it is not known, that which
has been implanted in the memory from childhood remains,
like the root of a tree in the earth, from which a shoot still
grows if the tree itself is cut down. But, my friend, not only
cut down that tree, but also pull up its root, and then plant
in your garden trees of good fruit. Beware, therefore, lest
the idea of three Gods fix itself in your mind, and the mouth
sound one God, but with no idea. What then is the under*


No. 174] THE DIVINE TRINITY 279

standing above the memory, which thinks of three Gods, and
the understanding below it, from which the mouth at the
same time utters one God, but as a player on the stage who
can impersonate two characters by running from one side
to the other, on one side saying something, and on the other
saying the opposite, and by such contradiction calling him-
self here a wise man, and there a fool? What else results
from this, but that while he stands in the middle and looks
both ways, he thinks that neither one nor the other is any-
thing? and so, perhaps, that there is neither one God nor
three, and thus that there is none. The naturalism reign-
ing at this day is from no other origin. In heaven, no one
can say a Trinity of Persons, each one of whom singly is
God; for the heavenly aura, in which their thoughts, like
sounds in our air fly and undulate, resists it. A hypocrite
only can do it there; but the tone of his voice grates in the
heavenly aura, like tooth grinding against tooth; or it croaks
like a raven wishing to sing like a song bird. I have heard
also from heaven that to abolish the faith established in the
mind by confirmations in favor of a Trinity of Gods, by the
oral confession of one God, is as impossible as it is to draw
a tree through its seed, or a man’s chin through a hair of his
beard.

174. V. A Trinity 0} Persons was unknown in the Apos-
tolic Church; but was first brought forth by the Nicene Coun-
cil , and from that was introduced into the Roman-Catholic
Church , and from this into the Churches that were separated
from it. By the Apostolic Church is meant not only the
church which existed in various places in the time of the
apostles, but also in the two or three centuries after their
day. But at length they began to wrest from its hinges the
door of the temple, and like thieves to break into its shrine.
By the temple is meant the church, by the door the Lord
God the Redeemer, and by the shrine His Divinity; for
Jesus says, Verily I say unto you } he that enter eth not by the


280


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 174


door into the sheepfold , but climbeth up some other way , the
same is a thief and a robber . I am the door; by Me if any
man eyiter in, he shall be saved (John x. t, 9). This crime
was committed by Arius and his followers; and on that
account a council was called together by Constantine the
Great, at Nice, a city in Bithynia; and in order to cast out
the damnable heresy of Arius, it was devised, concluded, and
ratified, by those who were there convened, that there were
three Divine Persons from eternity, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, each of whom had personality, existence,
and subsistence by himself and in himself; and also that the
second Person, or the Son, descended and assumed the Hu-
man, and wrought redemption; and that thence there was
Divinity to His Human by hypostatic union, and that by
this union He had close relationship with God the Father.
From that time, heaps of abominable heresies, concerning
God and the person of Christ, began to spring out of the
earth, and Antichrists began to lift the head, and to divide
God into three, and the Lord the Saviour into two, and so to
destroy the temple built by the Lord through the apostles,
and this even till not one stone was left upon another which
was not thrown down, according to His own words in Mat-
thew (xxiv. 2), where by the temple is meant not only the
temple at Jerusalem, but also the church, the consummation
or end of which is treated of in the whole of that chapter.
But what else could have been expected from that council
and from those that followed, which in like manner divided
the Godhead into three, and placed the incarnate God
under them upon their footstool? For they separated the
Head of the church from its body by climbing up another
way; that is, they passed Him by, and climbed beyond to
God the Father as to another, with the mere mention of
Christ’s merit in the mouth, that the Father would have
mercy for the sake of that, and that thus might immediately
flow into them justification with all its train — remission of
sins, renewal, sanctification, regeneration, and salvation —
and these without the use of any means on the part of man.


No. 176]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


28l


175. That the Apostolic Church knew nothing whatever
of a trinity of Persons, or of three Divine Persons from eter-
nity, is very evident from the creed of that church, which is
called the Apostles’ Creed, in which are these words: I be-
lieve in God the Father Almighty , Creator of heaven and
earth; and in Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord , who was
conceived by the Holy Spirit^ born 0} the Virgin Mary: also
in the Holy Spirit. No mention is made there of any Son
from eternity, but of the Son conceived by the Holy Spirit
and bom of the Virgin Mary; they knowing from the apos-
tles that Jesus Christ was the true God (1 John v. 20); and
that in Him dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (Col.
ii. 9); that the apostles preached faith in Him (Acts xx. 21);
and that He had all power in heaven and in earth (Matt,
xxviii. 18).

176. What confidence is to be had in councils, while they
do not go immediately to the God of the church ? Is not the
church the Lord’s body, and He its Head ? What is a body
without a head? And what sort of a body is that on which
have been put three heads, under the auspices of which men
hold consultations and make decrees ? Does not enlighten-
ment, which from the Lord alone, who is the God of heaven
and the church and at the same time the God of the Word,
is spiritual, then become more and more natural, and at
length sensual? And then no genuine theological truth is
perceived in its internal form, without being immediately
cast out from the thought of the rational understanding, and
dispersed like chaff into the air before the winnower’s fan.
In this state fallacies then present themselves instead of
truths, and darkness instead of rays of light; and men stand,
as it were, in a cave, with spectacles on their noses and a
candle in their hand, and close their eyes to spiritual truths,
which are in the light of heaven, and open them to sensual
truths, which are in the delusive light of the senses of the
body. And so it is afterward, while the Word is read; the
mind is then asleep to truths, and awake to falsities, and be-


282


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 176


comes like the beast described as rising up out of the sea, as
to the mouth like a lion } in body like a leopard , and as to the
feet like a bear (Apoc. xiii. 2). It is said in heaven that,
when the Nicene Council was closed, these things were at
the same time accomplished which the Lord foretold to the
disciples: The sun shall be darkened , and the moon shall not
give her light , and the stars shall jail jrom heaven , and the
powers 0} the heavens shall be shaken (Matt. xxiv. 29). In-
deed the Apostolic Church was actually like a new star ap-
pearing in the starry heaven; but the church, after the two
Nicene councils, became like the same star afterward dark-
ened and lost to view, just as has sometimes happened in the
natural world, according to the observation of astronomers.
In the Word it is read that Jehovah God dwelleth in light
inaccessible: who then could go to Him, unless He were to
dwell in light accessible ? that is, if He did not descend and
assume the Human, and become in this the Light of the
world (John i. 9; xii. 46). Who cannot see that to go to
Jehovah the Father, in His light, is as impossible as for one
to take the wings of the morning, and by means of them fly
to the sun ? or as it is to feed on the sun’s rays, and not on
food of material elements ? or as for a bird to fly in ether, or
a stag to run in the air?

177. VI. From the Nicene Trinity and the Athanasian
together , a jaith arose which had perverted the whole Chris-
tian Church. That the Nicene Trinity together with the
Athanasian is a trinity of Gods, may be seen above, shown
from their creeds (n. 172). From these arose the faith of
the present church, which is in God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Spirit; in God the Father, that He
may impute the righteousness of His Son, the Saviour, and
ascribe it to man; in God the Son, that He may intercede
and covenant; in the Holy Spirit, that He may actually
inscribe the imputed righteousness of the Son, and seal it
when established, by justifying, sanctifying, and regenerating


No. 177] THE DIVINE TRINITY 283

man. This is the faith of the present time, which by itself
may attest that it is a trinity of Gods which is acknowledged
and worshipped. From the faith of every church arises
not only all its worship, but also all its doctrine; therefore
it may be said that such as the faith is, such is its doc-
trine. That this faith, because it is a faith in three Gods,
has perverted all things of the church, therefore follows;
for faith is the principle, and doctrines are derivatives; and
derivatives derive their essence from the principle. If one
submits the several doctrines to examination, as the doc-
trine concerning God, the Person of Christ, charity, repent-
ance, regeneration, free will, election, the use of the sacra-
ments, which are Baptism and the Holy Supper, he will
clearly see that a trinity of Gods is in every one of them; and
if it does not actually appear to be in them, still they flow
from it, as from their fountain. But as such an examina-
tion cannot be made here, and yet it is important that it
should be made in order to open the eyes, therefore an
Appendix will be added to this work, in which there will be
a demonstration of it. The faith of the church respecting
God is like the soul of the body, and doctrines are like its
members; and, moreover, faith in God is as a queen, and
dogmas are as the officers of her court; and just as these all
hang upon the word of the queen, so do dogmas upon the
utterance of faith. From that faith alone, it may be seen
how the Word is understood in the church where it is; for
a faith adapts and draws to itself, as it were by cords, what-
ever it can. If the faith is false, it plays the harlot with every
truth there, and perverts and falsifies it, and makes man
insane in spiritual things. But if the faith is true, then the
whole Word favors it, and the God of the Word, who is the
Lord God the Saviour, pours light upon it, breathes upon it
with His Divine assent, and makes man wise. That the
faith of the present time, which in the internal form is a faith
in three Gods, but in the external a faith in one God, has
extinguished the light in the Word, and removed the Lord


284


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 177


from the church, and has thus cast down its morning into
night, will be seen also in the Appendix. This was done by
heretical doctrines before the Nicene Council, and after-
ward by the heretical views that arose from that council,
and after it. But what confidence is to be placed in coun-
cils that do not enter through the door into the sheepfold,
but climb up some other way, according to the words of the
Lord in John? (x. 1, 9.) Their deliberation is not unlike
the walking of a blind man in the day, or of a man with eyes
in the night; neither of whom sees the pit before he has
fallen into it. What confidence, for example, can be placed
in the councils that established the vicarship of the pope,
the canonization of the dead, and the invocation of them as
deities, the worship of their images, authority to grant in-
dulgences, the division of the Eucharist, and so on? Or
what confidence ought we to place in the council which
established an abominahle predestination, and hung it up
before the temples of its church, as the palladium of re-
ligion? But, my friend, go to the God of the Word, and
so to the Word, and thus enter through the door into the
sheepfold, that is, into the church, and you will be en-
lightened; and then you will yourself see, as from a moun-
tain, not only the steps and wanderings of many others, but
your own former steps and wanderings in the dark forest
below.

178. The faith of every church is as seed from which all
its dogmas spring; and it may be compared to the seed of a
tree, from which grows every thing belonging to the tree,
even to the fruit; and also to the seed of man, from which
are begotten offspring and families in successive series.
When therefore the primary faith, which from its predomi-
nance is called saving, is known, there is knowledge of the
quality of that church. This may be illustrated by an ex-
ample. Let the faith be, that nature is the creator of the
universe; from this it follows that the universe is what is
called God; that nature is its essence; that the ether is the


No 178]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


285


supreme god, whom the ancients called Jupiter; the air the
goddess whom they called Juno, and whom they made the
wife of Jupiter; that the ocean is a god below them, that
may be called Neptune, after the manner of the ancients;
and because the divinity of nature reaches to the very centre
of the earth, that there is a god there also, who as with the
ancients may be called Pluto; that the sun is the court of all
the gods, where they meet whenever Jupiter summons a
council; and moreover that fire is life from God; and thus
that birds fly, beasts walk, and fishes swim in God; and fur-
ther, that thoughts are merely modifications of ether, as
words from them are only modulations of air; and that
love’s affections are occasional changes of state, from the
influx of the sun’s rays into them; moreover, that life after
death, together with heaven and hell, is a fable invented by
the clergy for acquiring honor and gain; but though a fable,
that still it is useful and ought not to be openly ridiculed, be-
cause it is serviceable to the public in keeping the minds of
the simple in the bonds of obedience to magistrates; and yet
that those who are inveigled into religion, are men of abstract
minds, their thoughts fantasms, their actions ludicrous, and
they the drudges of the priests, believing what they do not
see, and seeing what transcends the sphere of their minds.
These consequences, and many others like them, are in-
cluded within the faith that nature is the creator of the uni-
verse; and they proceed from it when it is opened. They
are presented that it may be known that within the faith of
the present church, which in its internal form is a faith in
three Gods, and in its external form in one, there are troops
of falsities; and that they may be drawn out of it, as many
as the little spiders in the little ball produced by a spider.
Any one whose mind has been made truly rational by light
from the Lord, may see this. But how is any one else to see
it, when the door to that faith and its offspring is shut and
barred by the statute that it is unlawful for reason to look
into its mysteries?


286


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 179


179. VII. Hence is that abomination 0} desolation and
the affliction such as has not been nor ever shall be } which
the Lord had foretold in Daniel , and the Evangelists , and in
the Apocalypse. In Daniel we read: At length upon the
bird of abominations there shall be desolation , and even to a
consummation and decree shall it drop upon the devastation
(ix. 27). In the Evangelist the Lord says: Many false
prophets shall rise , and shall deceive many; when ye , there-
fore, shall see the abomination of desolation , spoken of by
Daniel the prophet , stand in the holy place , whoso readeth let
him note it well (Matt. xxiv. 11, 15); and afterward in the
same chapter (verse 21): Then shall be great affliction , such
as has not been since the beginning of the world to this time ,
no , nor ever shall be. This affliction and that abomination
are treated of in seven chapters of the Apocalypse, and they
are what are meant by the black horse and the pale horse,
coming out of the book, the seal of which was opened by
the Lamb (Apoc. vi. 5-8); also by the beast coming up out
of the abyss, which made war with the two witnesses and
slew them (xi. 7, and following verses); as also by the dragon
which stood before the woman about to bring forth, that he
might devour her child, and who pursued her into the wilder-
ness, and there cast out of his mouth a flood of water ta
drown her (chap, xii.); and also by the beasts of the dragon,
o$e from the sea and the other from the earth (chap, xiii.);
also by the three spirits like frogs, which came out of the
mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast, and out
of the mouih of the false prophet (xvi. 13); and moreover
by this, that after the seven angels poured out the vials of
the wrath of God, in which were the seven last plagues, upon
the earth, the sea, the fountains and rivers, upon the sun,
the throne of the beast, the Euphrates, and finally upon the
air, there was a great earthquake, such as had not been since
men were made (chap. xvi.). An earthquake signifies an
inversion of the church, that is caused by falsities and fal-
sifications of the truth, which likewise is signified by the


No. 181]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


287


great affliction such as had not been since the beginning of
the world (Matt. xxiv. 21). Similar things are meant by
these words: The angel thrust in the sickle , and gathered the
vine 0 f the earth , and cast it into the great wine-press 0} the
wrath of God ; and the wine-press was trodden , and blood
came out even to the horses' bridles , for a thousand six hun-
dred furlongs (xiv. 19, 20) — the blood signifies truth falsified.
Besides other things contained in those seven chapters.

180. In the Evangelists (Matt, xxiv., Mark xiii., and
Luke xxi.) are described the successive states of the decline
and corruption of the Christian Church; and by the great
affliction such as had not been since the beginning of the
world, neither should be, is there meant, as everywhere else
in the Word, the infestation of truth by falsities, until there
remains no truth which is not falsified and consummated.
This also is there meant by the abomination of desolation,
and likewise by the desolation upon the bird of abomina-
tions, and by the consummation and decree in Daniel; and
this same thing is described in the Apocalypse by the pas-
sages adduced from it above. This came to pass because
the church has not acknowledged the unity of God in trinity
and His trinity in unity in one Person, but in three; and
therefore the church has been based in the mind on the idea
of three Gods, and in the mouth upon the confession of one
God; for thus men separated themselves from the Lord,
and at length so far as to have no idea left of Divinity in His
Human nature, when yet He is God the Father Himself in
the Human; therefore also He is called the Father of eter-
nity (Isa. ix. 6); and He says to Philip, He that seeth Me,
seeth the Father (John xiv. 7, 9).

1 81. But it is asked, Whence is the very vein of the foun-
tain, from which has flowed such abomination of desola-
tion as is described in Daniel (ix. 27), and such affliction as
never was nor ever will be (Matt. xxiv. 21)? The answer
is, From the faith which universally prevails in the Chris-
tian world, and from its influx, operation, and imputation,


288


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 181


according to traditions. It is wonderful that the doctrine
of justification by that faith alone — though it is not a faith,
but a chimera — carries every point in Christian churches;
that is, that it reigns there with the sacred order, almost as
the only thing in theology. It is that which all students in
theology eagerly study in the schools, drink in, and absorb;
and afterward, as if inspired with heavenly wisdom, teach
in the churches, and publish in books; by it also they seek
and obtain a name for superior erudition, fame, and glory;
for it also degrees, diplomas, and rewards are conferred.
And these things are done although by that faith alone the
sun is now darkened, the moon is deprived of her light, the
stars of the heavens are fallen, according to the words of the
Lord’s prediction in Matthew (xxiv. 29). That the doc-
trine of that faith has at this day blinded the minds of men
to such a degree that they will not, and therefore as it were
cannot, see any Divine truth interiorly, in the light of the sun
or in the light of the moon, but only exteriorly, as on some
rough surface, in the light of the hearth by night, has been
proved to me. And so I can venture to say that if Divine
truths concerning the genuine conjunction of charity and
faith, heaven and hell, the Lord, the life after death, and
eternal happiness, were let down from heaven written in
letters of silver, they would not be deemed worth reading by
those who justify and sanctify by faith alone; but, on the
other hand, if a paper concerning justification by faith alone
should be sent from the lower regions, this they would take
up, kiss, and carry home in their bosom.

182. VIII. Thence also it is that unless the New Heaven
and New Church are founded by the Lord , no -flesh would be
saved. We read in Matthew, Then shall be great affliction ,
such as was not from the beginning of the world to this time ,
no, nor ever shall be: and except those days should be short-
ened, there should no flesh be saved (xxiv. 21, 22). That
chapter treats of the consummation of the age, by which is


No. 182]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


289


meant the end of the church of the present day; therefore
by shortening those days is meant to end that church and to
establish a new one. Who does not know that, unless the
Lord had come into the world and wrought redemption, no
flesh could have been saved? To work redemption means
to found the New Heaven and New Church. That the
Lord would again come into the world, He foretold in the
Evangelists (Matt. xxiv. 30, 31: Mark xiii. 26: Luke xii.
40; xxi. 27); and in the Apocalypse, particularly in the last
chapter. That He is also working redemption at this day
by founding the New Heaven and establishing the New
Church, to the end that man may be saved, was shown above,
in the lemma concerning Redemption. The great arcanum,
that unless the New Church is established by the Lord no
flesh can be saved, is this: — So long as the dragon with his
horde remains in the world of spirits into which he has been
cast, no Divine truth united to Divine good can pass through
to men on earth, without heing perverted and falsified, or
without perishing. This is what is meant by this passage
in the Apocalypse: The dragon was cast out into the earthy
and his angels were cast out with him. Woe to the inhabi-
tants of the earth and 0} the sea , for the devil has come down to
them f having great wrath (xii. 9, 12). But after the dragon
was cast into hell (xx. 10), John saw a new heaven and a
new earth, and the New Jerusalem coming down from God
out of heaven (xxi. 1, 2). By the dragon are meant those
who are in the faith of the present church.

I have several times conversed in the spiritual world with
the justifiers of men by faith alone, and have said that their
doctrine is erroneous, and also inconsistent, and that it in-
duces the feeling of security, blindness, sleep, and night, in
spiritual things, and consequently death to the soul; and
I have exhorted them to desist from it. But I received for
answer, “Why desist? Is not the superiority of the learn-
ing of the clergy over that of the laity dependent on that doc-
trine alone ? ” But I replied that so they do not regard the


290


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 182


salvation of souls as any end, but the excellence of their own
reputation; and that because they have applied the truths
of the Word to their false principles, and so have adulterated
them, they are angels of the abyss, called Abaddons and
Apollyons (Apoc. ix. 11); by whom are signified the de-
stroyers of the church by the total falsification of the Word.
But they answered, “What is that? By our knowledge of
the mysteries of that faith, we are oracles; and from it as
from the shrine we give responses; wherefore we are not
Apollyons, but Apollos.” Indignant at this, I said, “If
you are Apollos, you are also Leviathans; the first of you
the crooked Leviathans, and the next the great Leviathans,
that God will visit with His hard and great sword ” (Isa.
xxvii. 1). But they laughed at these words.

183. IX. From a Trinity of Persons , each one of whom
singly is God , according to the Athanasian Creed , have come
forth many discordant and heterogeneous ideas about God ,
which are hallucinations and abortions. From the doctrine
of three Divine Persons from eternity, which is in itself the
head of all doctrines in Christian churches, have sprung many
ideas concerning God that are unbecoming and unworthy of
the Christian world, which yet ought to be and might be a
light to all peoples and nations in the four parts of the earth,
respecting God and His Unity. All who live outside of the
Christian Church, Mohammedans and Jews alike, and be-
sides these the Gentiles of every mode of worship, are averse
to Christianity solely on account of the faith in three Gods
therein. Its propagators know this, and they therefore are
very cautious not to teach openly the Trinity of Persons such
as it is in the Nicene and Athanasian creeds, for if this were
done, they would be shunned and ridiculed. The discord-
ant, ludicrous, and frivolous ideas, which have sprung from
the doctrine of three Divine Persons from eternity, and
which spring up with every one who remains in the belief
of the words of that doctrine, and from the ears and the eyes


No. 184]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


29I


rise up into the sight of the thought, are these: — That God
the Father sits on high above the head, the Son at His right
hand, and the Holy Spirit before them, listening, and in-
stantly running throughout all the world; and, according
to their decision, dispensing the gifts of justification and in-
scribing them, and making men from children of wrath to
be children of grace, and from being condemned to be elect.
I appeal to the learned of the clergy, and to the well in-
structed of the laity, whether in their minds they entertain
any other than this idea; for it flows in spontaneously from
the doctrine itself — see the Relation above (n. 16). There
also flows in a curiosity for conjecturing what they con-
versed about with each other before the world was created;
whether about the world which was to be created, or whether
also about those who were to be predestined and justified,
according to the Supralapsarians, or whether also about
redemption; and likewise what they have been conversing
about since the world was created, the Father from the
authority and power to impute, the Son from the power to
mediate; also imputation, which is election, being from the
mercy of the Son interceding for all, and for some indi-
vidually; and for them the Father having grace, being
moved by love to the Son, and by the agony seen in Him
when on the cross. But who cannot see that such things
are ravings of the mind concerning God ? And yet they are
in Christian churches the holy things which are to be kissed
with the lips, but not to be examined with the eye of the
mind, because they are things above reason, and if raised
from the memory into the understanding, man becomes in-
sane. Still this does not take away the idea of three Gods,
but induces a stupid faith, from which man thinks of God
as one while asleep thinks in a dream, walking in the dark-
ness of night, or as one blind from his birth walks in the light
of day.

184. That a trinity of Gods is fixed in the minds of Chris-
tians, though from shame they deny it, is very evident from


292


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 184


the ingenuity of many in demonstrating that three are one,
and one three, by various things in geometry, stereometry,
arithmetic, and physics, and likewise by folds of cloth and
paper; thus they play with the Divine Trinity as jugglers
play together. Their juggling concerning it may be com-
pared to the vision of those who in fever see one object, a
man, a table, or a candle, as three, or three as one. It may
also be compared with the mockery of those who handle soft
wax, and mould it into various forms, now making it tri-
angular to show the Trinity, and now spherical to show the
Unity, and saying, “Is it not still one and the same sub-
stance?” When yet the Divine Trinity is as a pearl of
greatest price; but, when divided into Persons, it is like a
pearl divided into three parts, whereby it is utterly and mani-
festly ruined.

185. To the above will be added these Relations. First:
— In the spiritual world there are climates and zones as in
the natural world; there is nothing in this world which is not
also in that; but they differ in origin. In the natural world
climates vary according to the distances of the sun from the
equator; in the spiritual world they vary according to the
distances of the affections of the will, and hence of the
thoughts of the understanding, from true love and true faith;
all things in that world are correspondences of these. In
the frigid zones of the spiritual world, appear things similar
to those in the frigid zones of the natural world; lands there
appear bound in ice, and likewise waters, and also snow
upon them. Those come thither and dwell there who in
the world lulled the understanding to sleep from indolence
in thinking of spiritual things, and who therefore were, at
the same time, indolent in doing any uses: they are called
boreal spirits.

I was once seized with a desire to see some region in the
frigid zone where those boreal spirits were; and therefore
I was led in the spirit to the north, even to a region where all
the land appeared covered with snow, and all the water


No. x8 5 ]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


293


bound in ice. It was the Sabbath day; and I saw men,
that is, spirits, of a stature like that of men of the world; but
on account of the cold their heads were clothed with lions’
skins, the mouth of the skin being fitted to their mouth; but
their bodies, before and behind as far down as the lpins,
were covered with the skins of leopards; and their feet with
the skins of bears. And I also saw many riding in chariots,
and some in chariots carved in the form of a dragon whose
horns projected forward. The chariots were drawn by
horses whose tails had been cut off ; they were running like
terrible wild beasts, and the driver holding the reins in his
hands was continually speeding and urging them on their
course. I saw at length that the crowds were flocking to a
temple, which had not been seen because covered with snow.
Eut those who had the care of the temple were removing the
snow, and, by digging, were preparing an entrance for the
coming worshippers who alighted and entered. It was
granted me also to see the inside of the temple. It was
lighted with torches and lamps in abundance; there was an
altar there of hewn stone, behind which hung a tablet, with
the inscription, The Divine Trinity , Father , Son, and Holy
Spirit , who essentially are one God , but personally three.

At length a priest, standing at the altar, after kneeling
three times before the tablet of the altar, ascended the pul-
pit with book in hand, and began a sermon on the Divine
Trinity. “ Oh, how great a mystery ! ” he exclaimed, “ that
God in the Highest begat a Son from eternity, and by Him
sent forth the Holy Spirit, the three joining themselves by
essence, but separating themselves by their properties,
which are imputation, redemption, and operation! But if
we look into these things by reason, the sight becomes dark-
ened, and a spot comes before it, as before the eye of him
who fixes his gaze upon the naked sun. Wherefore, my
hearers, in this let us keep the understanding under obe-
dience to faith.” After this, he exclaimed again, “Oh,
how great a mystery is our Holy Faith! which is this, that


294 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 185

God the Father imputes the righteousness of the Son, and
sends the Holy Spirit, who from that imputed righteousness
works out the pledges of justification, which in the sum are
the remission of sins, renewal, regeneration, and salvation;
concerning the influx of which, or the act, man knows no
more than the statue of salt into which Lot’s wife was turned;
and concerning the indwelling of which, or the state, he
knows no more than a fish in the sea. But, my friends, there
is hid in it a treasure, so hedged about and concealed that
not a particle of it appears. Therefore, in this also let us
keep the understanding under obedience to faith.”

After some sighs, he again exclaimed, “ Oh, how great a
mystery is Election! He becomes of the elect to whom God
imputes that faith which at His free pleasure, and out of
pure grace, He infuses into whom He will, and when He
will; and man is like a stock while it is infused, but he be-
comes like a tree when it has been infused. Fruits, which
are good works, hang indeed from that tree, which in a rep-
resentative sense is our faith; but still they do not cohere;
therefore the value of that tree is not from the fruit. But,
because this sounds like heterodoxy, and yet is a mystical
truth, let us, my brethren, keep the understanding under
obedience to faith in this.”

And then, after a pause, standing as if he would yet draw
something more from the memory, he continued: “From
the store of mysteries I will produce still another, which is,
that man, in spiritual things, has not a grain of free will;
for our rulers, the primates and prelates, in their theolog-
ical canons say that in things which pertain to faith and sal-
vation, which are specially called spiritual, man cannot will,
think, or understand any thing, nor can he even accommo-
date and apply himself to receive them; and* so from myself
I say that man of himself cannot think concerning those
things from reason, and talk about them from thought,
except like a parrot, a magpie, or a raven; so that man in
spiritual things is truly an ass, and only in natural things


No. 185]


THE DIVINE TRJNITY


295


a man. But, my companions, lest this should trouble your
reason, let us in this, as in the rest, keep the understanding
under obedience to faith. For our theology is an abyss
without a bottom; and if you let your understanding look
into it, you will sink and perish as by shipwreck. And yet
hear: we are in the very light of the gospel, which shines
high above our heads; but, alas! the hair of our heads and
the bones of our skulls stand in the way and oppose its pene-
trating the inner chamber of our understanding.”

Having said this, he descended; and after he had offered
his vows in prayer at the altar, and the service was ended,
I went up to some who were talking together, where also was
the priest; and those standing around him said: “We give
you everlasting thanks for a sermon so magnificent and rich
in wisdom.” But then I said to them, “Did you under-
stand any thing?” And they answered, “We took it all in
with full ears; but why do you ask whether we understood
it? Is not the understanding stupefied in the presence of
such things ? ” And the priest added this to what was said:
“ Because you have heard and have not understood, you are
blessed; for thence is salvation for you.” Afterward I
spoke with the priest, and asked him if he had a degree; and
he answered, “I am a laureate Master.” And then I said,
“Master, I have heard you preaching mysteries; if you
know them, and not any thing which they contain, you know
nothing; for they are just like caskets locked up with a
triple lock; and unless you open them and look inside, which
must be done by the understanding, you do not know
whether the things they contain are precious, or worthless,
or hurtful; they may be the eggs of the asp or the spider,
according to the description in Isaiah ” (lix. 5). As I spoke
these words, the priest looked at me with a stern counte-
nance, and the worshippers withdrew, and mounted their
chariots, intoxicated with paradoxes, infatuated with empty
words, and enveloped with darkness in all the things of faith
and the means of salvation.


296 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 186

186. Second Relation. I was once engaged in thinking
in what region of the mind matters of theology have their
seat with man, and at first I believed that they were in the
highest reigon, because they are spiritual and celestial; for
the human mind is divided into three distinct regions, as
a house is divided into three stories, and likewise as the
abodes of the angels into three heavens. And then an angel
stood before me, and said, “ Matters of theology, with those
who love truth because it is truth, rise up even into the high-
est region, because their heaven is there, and they are in the
light in which angels are; but morals, theoretically con-
templated and perceived, place themselves beneath these,
in the second region, because they communicate with spiri-
tual things; and political things have place under these, in
the first region; but matters of science, which are manifold,
and may be referred to general and particular classes, make
the door to those higher things. Those in whom spiritual,
moral, political, and scientific things are thus subordinated,
think what they think, and do what they do, from justice and
judgment. This is because the light of truth, which is also
the light of heaven, from the highest region illumines the
things which follow, as the light of the sun passing through
the ethers and the air successively illumines the vision of
men, beasts, and fishes. It is not so with what is of the-
ology in those who do not love truth because it is. truth, but
only for the glory of their reputation. With them matters
of theology have their seat in the lowest reigon, where are
matters of science, with which in some they mingle them-
selves, and in others they cannot mingle. Under these in
the same region are political things, and under these moral,
since with such persons the two higher regions are not
opened on the right side; and so they have no interior rea-
son of judgment, nor affection for justice, but only ingenu-
ity, from which they can speak upon every subject as from
intelligence, and confirm whatever presents itself as from
reason; but the objects of reason which they principally


No. 187]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


297


love are falsities, because these cohere with the fallacies of
the senses. This is why there are so many in the world who
see the truths of doctrine from the Word no more than those
born blind; and when they hear them, they close their nos-
trils, lest their odor should offend them and excite nausea;
but they open all their senses to falsities, and drink them in
as whales draw in water.”

187. Third Relation. Once, when I was meditating
about the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet, described
in the Apocalypse, an angelic spirit appeared to me and
asked, “What are you meditating upon?” I said that it
was upon the false prophet. Then he said, “I will lead you
to the place where they are who are meant by the false
prophet.” He said that they are the same as are meant
(Apoc. xiii.) by the beast out of the earth which had two
horns like a lamb, and spake like a dragon. I followed him,
and lo, I saw a crowd, in the midst of which were leaders of
the church, who taught that nothing saves man but faith in
the merit of Christ; and that works are good, but not for
salvation; and that still they are to be taught from the Word,
in order that the laity, especially the simple, may be held the
more strictly in bonds of obedience to the magistrates, and
as from religion, thus interiorly, may be compelled to exer-
cise moral charity.

And then one of them, seeing me, said, “ Do you wish to
see our temple, in which there is an image representative of
our faith?” I drew near and saw; and lo, it was magnifi-
cent, and in the midst of it was the image of a woman,
clothed in a scarlet dress, holding in her right hand a golden
coin, and in the left a chain of pearls. But both the image
and the temple were induced by fantasy; for infernal spirits
can by fantasies represent magnificent things, by closing up
the interiors of the mind and opening only its exteriors. But
when I noticed that they were such illusions, I prayed to the
Lord, and suddenly the interiors of my mind were opened;
and I then saw in place of the magnificent temple a house


298


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 187


full of cracks from top to bottom, in which nothing held to-
gether; and instead of the woman I saw hanging in that
house an image, the head of which was like a dragon, the
body like a leopard, the feet like those of a bear, and the
mouth like that of a lion; thus precisely like the beast out of
the sea (Apoc. xiii. 2); and in place of a floor, there was a
quagmire, in which was a multitude of frogs; and it was
told me that under the quagmire there was a great hewn
stone, under which lay the Word, deeply hidden.

On seeing these things, I said to the showman, “Is this
your temple?” And he said that it was. But then sud-
denly his interior sight also was opened, by which he saw
the same things that I did; on seeing which, with a great
cry, he said, “What is this? and whence is this?” And I
said, “It is from the light of heaven, which discloses the
quality of every form, and thus the quality of your faith
separated from spiritual charity.” And forthwith the east
wind blew, and carried away the temple, with the image,
and also dried up the quagmire, and thus laid bare the stone
under which lay the Word. And after this a warmth like
that of spring was breathed from heaven; and lo, then in the
same place there was seen a tent, simple in its outward form;
and the angels who were with me said, “ Behold the tent of
Abraham, such as it was when the three angels came to him
and foretold the birth of Isaac. This appears before the
eyes as simple, but it becomes more and more magnificent
according to the influx of light from heaven.”

And it was given them to open the heaven in which were
spiritual angels, who are in wisdom; and then, from the
light flowing in therefrom, that tent appeared like a temple
similar to that of Jerusalem. When I looked into it, I saw
the foundation stone, under which the Word was deposited,
set around with precious stones, from which were flashes
as of lightning upon the walls, on which were the forms of
cherubs, illuming them with a beautiful variety of colors.
When I had admired these things, the angels said, “You


No. 188]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


299


shall see something still more wonderful.” And it was
given them to open the third heaven, in which were celestial
angels, who are in love; and then, from the flamy light flow-
ing in therefrom, that whole temple vanished, and instead
of it was seen the Lord alone, standing upon the foundation
stone which was the Word, in appearance like that in which
He was seen by John (Apoc. chap. i.). But because the in-
teriors of the angels’ minds were then filled with a holiness
which impelled them to fall down upon their faces, the way
of the light from the third heaven was suddenly closed by the
Lord, and the way was opened for the light from the second
heaven; in consequence of which the former appearance of
the temple returned, and also of the tent or tabernacle, this
now being in the midst of the temple. By this was illustrated
what is meant by this passage : Behold the tabernacle of God
is with men, and He will dwell with them (Apoc., chap. xxi. 3) ;
and also by this: I saw no temple in the New Jerusalem; for
the Lord God Almighty is the temple of it, and the Lamb
(verse 22).

188. Fourth Relation. Since it has been given me by the
Lord to see wonderful things which are in the heavens and
beneath the heavens, I must by command relate what has
been seen. There was seen a magnificent palace, and in
its inmost a temple; in the midst of this was a table of gold,
upon which was the Word, near which stood two angels.
Around the table were seats in three rows; the seats of the
first row were covered with silken cloth of a purple color,
the seats of the second row with silken cloth of a blue color,
and the seats of the third row with white cloth. Under the
roof, high above the table, there appeared a wide canopy,
shining with precious stones, from the splendor of which
there was an effulgence as of a rainbow when the sky be-
comes serene after a shower. There then suddenly ap-
peared a number of clergymen sufficient to occupy all the
seats, all clothed in the garments of priestly service. At one
side was a wardrobe, where an angel keeper stood, and in it


300


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 88


lay splendid garments in beautiful order. It was a council
called together by the Lord; and I heard a voice from
heaven, saying, “Deliberate.” They asked, “Upon what
subject?” It was said, “ Concerning the Lord the Saviour,
and concerning the Holy Spirit.” But when they began to
think on these subjects, they were not in enlightenment ; and
therefore they made supplication. And then light flowed
down from heaven, which illumined first the back parts of
their heads, then their temples, and at last their faces; and
then they made a beginning; and, as was commanded, first
concerning the Lord the Saviour.

The first thing proposed and discussed was, “Who as-
sumed the Human in the Virgin Mary?” And an angel,
standing at the table, upon which was the Word, read before
them these words in Luke: The angel said to Mary , Behold ,
thou shall conceive in thy womb , and bring }orth a Son , and
shall call His name Jesus; He shall be great , and shall be
called the Son of the Highest . Then said Mary unto the
angel , How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the
angel answered and said, The Holy Spirit shall come upon
thee , and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee;
therefore, also, the Holy Thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God (i. 30-32, 34, 35). Then also
he read these words in Matthew: The angel said to Joseph
in a dream, Joseph, thou son of David , fear not to take unto
thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of
the Holy Spirit . And Joseph knew her not until she had
brought forth her first-born Son, and he called His name
Jesus (i. 20, 25). And besides these passages, he read many
more from the Evangelists (as Matt. iii. 17; xvii. 5: John
i. 18; iii. 16; xx. 31); and many others, where the Lord as
to His Human is called the Son of God, and where He from
His Human calls Jehovah His Father. He read also from
the Prophets, where it is foretold that Jehovah Himself
would come into the world; among others these two pas-
sages in Isaiah: It shall be said in that day, Lo , this is our


No. 1 88]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


301


God , whom we have waited for, that He may deliver us: this
is Jehovah , whom we have waited for; let us rejoice and be
glad in His salvation (xxv. 9). The voice of Him that crieth
in the wilderness , Prepare ye the way of Jehovah , make
straight in the desert a highway for our God; for the glory
of Jehovah shall be revealed; and all flesh shall see it together .
Behold , the Lord Jehovah cometh in strength. He shall feed
His flock like a shepherd (xl. 3, 5, 10, 11). And the angel
said, “Since Jehovah Himself came into the world, and
assumed the Human, and thereby saved and redeemed men,
therefore, in the Prophets, He is called the Saviour and the
Redeemer.” And then he read to them the following pas-
sages: Surely God is in thee , and there is no God besides:
verily Thou art a hidden God , O God pf Israel the Saviour
(Isa. xlv. 14, 15). Am not I Jehovah? and there is no God
else beside Me; a just God and a Saviour , there is none be-
side Me (xlv. 20). I am Jehovah , and beside Me there is no
Saviour (xliii. n). I Jehovah am thy God , and thou shall
acknowledge no God but Me, and there is no Saviour beside
Me (Hos. xiii. 4). That all flesh may know that I Jehovah
am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer (Isa. xlix. 26; lx. 16). As
for our Redeemer , Jehovah Zebaoth is His name (xlvii. 4).
Their Redeemer is strong; Jehovah Zebaoth is His name
(Jer. 1 . 34). O Jehovah, my Rock and my Redeemer (Ps.
xix. 14). Thus said Jehovah thy Redeemer, the Holy One
of Israel, I Jehovah am thy God (Isa. xlviii. 17; xliii. 14;
xlix. 7; liv. 8). Thou Jehovah art our Father, our Re-
deemer from everlasting is Thy name (Ixiii. 16). Thus said
Jehovah thy Redeemer, I am Jehovah that maketh all things,
and alone, of Myself (xliv. 24). Thus said Jehovah the King
of Israel , and His Redeemer, Jehovah Zebaoth, I am the First
and the Last, and beside Me there is no God (Isa. xliv. 6).
Jehovah Zebaoth is His name, and thy Redeemer, the Holy
One of Israel , the God of the whole earth shall He be called
(liv. 5). Behold the days come, that I will raise unto David
a righteous Branch, who shall reign King; and this is His


302


TRUK CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 88


name , Jehovah our justice (Jer. xxiii. 5, 6; xxxiii. 15, 16).
In that day Jehovah shall be King over all th^ earth; in that
day shall Jehovah be one , and His name one (Zech. xiv. 9).
Being confirmed from all these passages, those that sat upon
the seats said unanimously, that Jehovah Himself assumed
the Human to redeem and save men. But a voice was then
heard from the Roman Catholics, who had hid themselves
behind the altar, saying: “How can Jehovah God become
Man? Is He not the Creator of the universe ?” And one
of those who sat upon the seats of the second row, turned
himself about, and said, “Who then?” And he behind the
altar, now standing close to the altar, replied, “ The Son from
eternity.” But he received for answer, “ Is not the Son from
eternity, according to your confession, the Creator of the
universe also? And what is a Son and a God born from
eternity? And how can the Divine essence, which is one
and indivisible, be separated, and part of it descend, and not
the whole at once?”

The second discussion concerning the Lord was upon
this point: Are not the Father and He thus one, as soul and
body are one? They said that this is a consequence, be-
cause the soul is from the Father. Then one of those who
sat upon the seats in the third row read, from the general
creed which is called Athanasian, these words: — “ Although
our Lord Jesus Christ , the Son of God , is God and Man , still
they are not two y but one Christ; yea, He is altogether one ;
He is one Person : since , as the soul and the body make one
man, so God and Man are one Christ .” The reader said that
the creed in which are these words is received in the whole
Christian world, even by the Roman Catholics. And they
said, “What need is there of more? God the Father and
He are one, as the soul and the body are one.” And they
said: “As it is so, we see that the Lord's Human is Divine,
because it is the Human of Jehovah; and also that the Lord
as to the Divine Human is to be approached, and that so and
not otherwise can the Divine which is called the. Father be


No. 1 88]


THE DIVINE TRINITY


303


approached.” This conclusion of theirs the angel confirmed
by many more passages from the Word, among which were
these: Unto us a Child is born , unto us a Son is given, whose
name is Wonderful, Counsellor, God, the Mighty, the Father
0} Eternity , the Prince 0) Peace (Isa. ix, 6). Though Abra-
ham be ignorant of us and Israel acknowledge us not, Thou,
Jehovah, art our Father , our Redeemer from everlasting is
Thy Name (lxiii. 16); and in John: Jesus said, He that be-
lieveth in Me, believeth in Him that sent Me: and he that
seeth Me, seeth Him that sent Me (xii. 44, 45). Philip said
unto Jesus, Shew us the Father. Jesus saith unto him, He
that seeth Me, seeth the Father; how sayest thou then, Shew
us the Father? Believest thou not that I am in the Father,
and the Father in Me? Believe Me, that I am in the Father
and the Father in Me (xiv. 8-1 1). Jesus said, I and the
Father are one (x. 30); and also, All things that the Father
hath are Mine, and all Mine are the Father's (xvi. 15; xyii.
10). Lastly, Jesus said, I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life; no one cometh to the Father but by Me (xiv. 6). To
this the reader added that words like these here said by the
Lord concerning Himself and His Father may also be said
by man about himself and his soul. Having heard these
things, they all said, with one mouth and heart, that the
Lord’s Human is Divine, and this is to be approached that
the Father may be approached; since Jehovah God by it
sent Himself into the world, and made Himself visible to the
eyes of men, and thus accessible. He likewise made Him-
self visible and thus accessible in a human form to the an-
cients, but then through an angel; and because this form
was representative of the Lord who was to come, therefore all
things of the church with the ancients were representative.

After this followed a deliberation concerning the Holy
Spirit; and in the first place was disclosed the idea of many
concerning God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
which was, that God the Father was sitting on high, and the
Son at His right hand, and they were sending forth the Holy


304


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 1 88


Spirit from them to enlighten, teach, justify, and sanctify
men. But a voice was then heard from heaven, saying,
^ We cannot bear that idea of thought. Who does not know
that Jehovah God is omnipresent? Whoever knows and
acknowledges this, will also acknowledge that He Him-
self enlightens, teaches, justifies, and sanctifies, and that
there is not a mediate God distinct from Him, still less from
two, as one person from another. Therefore let the former
idea, which is vain, be removed; and let this, which is just,
be received; and then you will see this clearly.” But a
voice was then heard from the Roman Catholics, who were
standing by the altar of the temple, saying, “What then is the
Holy Spirit, who in the Word is named in the Evangelists,
and in Paul, by whom so many learned men of the clergy,
and especially of ours, say that they are led? Who in the
Christian world at this day denies the Holy Spirit and His
operations ? ” At these words one of those who were sitting
upon the seats of the second row turned round, and said,
“You say that the Holy Spirit is a person by Himself, and
a God by Himself; but what is a person going forth and pro-
ceeding from a person, but operation going forth and pro-
ceeding? One person cannot go forth and proceed from
another, but operation can go forth and proceed. Or what
is a God going forth and proceeding from God, but the Di-
vine going forth and proceeding? One God cannot go
forth and proceed from another through another, but the
Divine can go forth and proceed from the One God.” On
hearing these things, they who sat upon the seats concluded
unanimously, that the Holy Spirit is not a person by itself, so
not a God by itself; but that it is the Holy Divine, going
forth and proceeding from the only omnipresent God, who is
the Lord. To this the angels standing by the golden table
upon which was the Word, said:] “Well. It is nowhere
read in the Old Testament that the prophets spake the Word
from the Holy Spirit, but from Jehovah; and where the
Holy Spirit is mentioned in the New Testament, the Divine


No. 1 88] THE DIVINE TRINITY 305

proceeding is meant, which is the Divine enlightening, teach-
ing, vivifying, reforming, and regenerating.”

After this there followed another discussion concerning
the Holy Spirit, upon the quesiton, From whom does the
Divine which is meant by the Holy Spirit proceed? From
the Father? or from the Lord? And when they were dis-
cussing this the light shone in from heaven, from which they
saw that the Holy Divine, which is meant by the Holy Spirit,
does not proceed out of the Father through the Lord, but out
of the Lord from the Father; comparatively as with man,
whose activity does not proceed from the soul through the
body, but out of the body from the soul. This the angel
standing at the table confirmed by these things from the
Word: He whom the Father hath sent, speaketh the words of
God: He hath not given the Spirit by measure unto Him.
The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into His
hand (John iii. 34, 35). There shall come forth a rod out of
the stem of Jesse . . . the spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon
Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and might (Isa. xi. 1). That the spirit of Jehovah
was put upon Him, and was in Him (Isa. xlii. 1 ; lix. 20, 21 ;
lxi. 1: Luke iv. 18). When the Holy Spirit is come, that I
will send unto you from the Father (John xv. 26). He shall
glorify Me, for He shall receive of Mine , and shall show unto
you: all things that the Father hath are Mine; therefore said
I, that He shall take of Mine , and shall show unto you (xvi.
14, 15). If I depart, I will send the Comforter unto you (xvi.
7). That the Comforter is *the Holy Spirit (xiv. 26). The
Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified
(vii. 39). But after the glorification, Jesus breathed on the
disciples, and said unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit
(xx. 22). And in the Apocalypse, Who shall not glorify Thy
name, O Lord? for Thou alone art holy (xv. 4). Since the
Lord’s Divine operation, from His Divine omnipresence, is
meant by the Holy Spirit, therefore, when He spoke to the
disciples concerning the Holy Spirit, which He was about to


306


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 188


send from the Father, He also said, I will not leave you
orphans ; I go away , and come unto you; and in that day ye
shall know that I am in my Father , and ye in Me, and I in
you (xiv. 18, 20, 28). And just before His departure out of
the world, He said, Lo , I am with you all the days until the
consummation oj the age (Matt, xxviii. 20). Having read
these words to them, the angel said: “ From these and many
other passages in the Word, it is plain that the Divine which
is called the Holy Spirit proceeds out of the Lord, from the
Father.’ 7 To this they who sat upon the seats said: “This
is the Divine Truth.’ 7

At length this decision was made — that, “From the
deliberations in this council we have clearly seen, and there-
fore acknowledge as holy truth, that in the Lord God and
Saviour Jesus Christ there is the Divine Trinity, which is —
The Divine from which are ail things, which is called the
Father; the Divine Human, which is called the Son; and the
proceeding Divine, which is called the Holy Spirit.’ 7 And
together they exclaimed: “In Jesus Christ dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily (Col. ii. 9): thus there is one
God in the church.”. After these things were concluded in
that magnificent council, they rose up, and the angel keeper
of the wardrobe came and brought to each of those who sat
upon the seats splendid garments interwoven here and there
with threads of gold, and said, “Receive the wedding gar-
ments.” And they were conducted in glory into the new
Christian heaven, with which the Lord’s church on earth,
which is the New Jerusalem, will be conjoined.


CHAPTER FOURTH.


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE, OR THE WORD OF THE
l ORD.

I. The Sacred Scripture, or the Word, is Divine

TRUTH ITSELF.

189. It is on every one's lips that the Word is from God,
is divinely inspired, and consequently holy; but still it has
not hitherto been known where in the Word the Divine is.
For in the letter the Word appears like an ordinary writing,
in a foreign style, neither sublime nor lucid, as the writings
of the present age apparently are. Owing to this, a man
who worships nature for God, or more than God, and there-
fore thinks from ‘himself and his own life, and not from
heaven from the Lord, may easily fall into error respecting
the Word, and into contempt for it, saying within himself
when he is reading it, “What is this? What is that? Is
this Divine? Can God, who has infinite wisdom, speak so?
Where is its holiness? and whence, unless from some re-
ligious system, and its persuasion?"

190. But he who thinks in this manner does not consider
that Jehovah the Lord, who is the God of heaven and earth,
spake the Word through Moses and the Prophets, and that
it cannot therefore but be Divine truth itself; for that which
Jehovah Himself speaks can be nothing else. Nor does he
consider that the Lord the Saviour, who is the same with
Jehovah, spake the Word written in the Evangelists, many
things from His own mouth, and the rest from the breath
of His mouth, which is the Holy Spirit, through His twelve
apostles. From this it is, as He Himself says, that in His
words are spirit and life, and He Himself is the Light which


308 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION LNo. 190

enlightens, and is the truth, as is manifest from the following
passages — Jesus said, The words that I speak unto you are
spirit and are life (John vi. 63). Jesus said to the woman
at Jacob’s well, If thou knewest the gift of God , and who it
is that saith to thee , Give Me to drink } thou wouldst ask of
Him , and He would give thee living water. . . . Whosoever
drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst;
but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a fountain
of water, springing up into everlasting life (John iv. 10, 14).
By the fountain or well of Jacob is signified the Word (as
also in Deut. xxxiii. 28); therefore the Lord because He is
the Word, sat there, and talked with the woman; and by
living water, is signified the truth of the Word. Jesus said,
If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink. He that
beileveth in Me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water (John vii. 37, 38). Peter
said to Jesus, Thou hast the words of eternal life (John vi. 68).
Jesus said, Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words
shall not pass away (Mark xiii. 31). The Lord’s words are
truth and life, because He is the Truth and the Life, as He
teaches in John: I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life (xiv.
6). And in the same: In the beginning was the Word , and
the Word was with God , and the Word was God ... In Him
was life, and the life was the light of men (John i. 1, 4). By
the Word is meant the Lord as to Divine Truth, in whom
alone there is life and there is light. From this it is that the
Word, which is from the Lord and which is the Lord, is
called the fountain of living waters (Jer. ii. 13; xvii. 13;
xxxi. 9); the fountain of salvation (Isa. xii. 3); a fountain
(Zech. xiii. 1); and the river of the water of life (Apoc. xxii.
1), and it is said that The Lamb , who is in the midst of the
throne, shall feed them at living fountains of waters (Apoc.
vii. 17); besides other passages where the Word is also called
a Sanctuary and a Tabernacle in which the Lord dwells with
man.

191. But still the natural man cannot from this be per-


No. 192]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


309


suaded that the Word is the Divine truth itself, in which are
Divine wisdom and Divine life; for he looks at it from its
style, in which he does not see those things. Yet the style
of the Word is the Divine style itself, with which no other
can be compared, however sublime and excellent it may
seem. The style of the Word is such that the holiness is in
every sentence and in every word, even in some places in the
very letters. By this the Word conjoins man to the Lord,
and opens heaven. There are two things which proceed
from the Lord, Divine love and Divine wisdom, or, what is
the same, Divine good and Divine truth. The Word in its
essence is both of these; and because it conjoins man to the
Lord and opens heaven, as just said, therefore the Word
fills man with the goods of love and the truths of wisdom — -
his will with the goods of love, and his understanding with
the truths of wisdom: hence man has life through the Word.
But it should be well known that only those have life from
the Word, who read it for the purpose of drawing Divine
truths from it, as from their fountain, and at the same time
for the purpose of applying the Divine truths drawn from it
to the life; and that the contrary takes place with those who
read it only for the sake of acquiring honors and gaining the
world.

192. No person who is ignorant that there is some spiri-
tual sense in the Word, as the soul in the body, can judge in
any other way concerning the Word than from the sense of
its letter; when yet this is as a casket containing precious
things, which are its spiritual sense. When, therefore, this
internal sense is not known, one cannot judge of the Divine
sanctity of the Word otherwise than as he judges of a precious
stone from the matrix which envelopes it, and wLich some-
times appears as a common stone; or from the box, made of
jasper, lapis lazuli, amianthus, or agate, in which lie, in their
order, diamonds, rubies, the sardonyx, the oriental topaz,
and the like. While this is unknown, it is not to be won-
dered at if the box is esteemed only according to the value of


310 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 192

its material, which is seen by the eye. It is similar with the
Word as to the sense of its letter. Therefore lest man should
be in doubt as to whether the Word is Divine and most holy,
its internal sense has been revealed to me by the Lord, which
in its essence is spiritual, and is within the external sense,
which is natural, as the soul is in the body. That sense
is the spirit, which gives life to the letter; it can therefore
bear witness to the Divinity and sanctity of the Word, and
can convince even the natural man, if he is willing to be
convinced.

II. In the Word there is a Spiritual Sense, hitherto

UNKNOWN.

193. When it is said that the Word because it is Divine is
in its bosom spiritual, who does not acknowledge this and
give his assent ? But who as yet has known what the spiri-
tual is, and where in the Word it is hidden? But what the
spiritual is, will be shown in a Relation following this chap-
ter; and where it is concealed in the Word, in what now fol-
lows. The Word in its bosom is spiritual because it de-
scended from Jehovah the Lord, and passed through the
angelic heavens; and the Divine itself, which in itself is in-
effable and imperceptible, was in its descent adapted to the
perception of angels, and at last to the perception of men.
Hence the spiritual sense, which is inwardly in the natural,
is as the soul in man, the thought of the understanding in
speech, and the affection of the will in action; and if we may
compare it with such things as appear before the eyes in the
natural world, the spiritual sense is in the natural as the
whole brain is within its meninges or makes, or as the
branches of a tree are within their inner and outer barks;
yes, as all things needful for the production of the chick are
within the shell of the egg, and so on. But that there is such
a spiritual sense of the Word within its natural sense, no one
as yet has divined; it is therefore necessary that this area-


No. 195]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


311

num, which in itself stands pre-eminent above all other
arcana hitherto disclosed, should be opened to the under-
standing, as it will be when explained in the following order:
r. What the spiritual sense is. 2. This sense is in each
and every thing in the Word. 3. It is from it that the Word
is Divinely inspired , and holy in every word. 4. That sense
has been hitherto unknown. 5. It will not be given to any
one hereafter who is not in genuine truths from the Lord.
6. Wonder fid things concerning the Word , from its spiritual
sense. These things shall now be unfolded one by one.

194. (1.) What the spiritual sense is. The spiritual
sense is not that which shines forth from the sense of the
letter of the Word when any one is studying and explaining
the Word to confirm some dogma of the church. This sense
may be called the literal and ecclesiastical sense of the Word.
But the spiritual sense does not appear in the sense of the
letter: it is inwardly in it, as the soul in the body, as the
thought of the understanding in the eyes, and as the affec-
tion of love in the face. It is principally that sense which
makes the Word spiritual, not only for men, but also for
angels; and therefore the Word by that sense communi-
cates with the heavens. Since the Word is inwardly spiri-
tual, it is therefore written solely by correspondences; and
what is written by correspondences, is in the ultimate sense
written in a style such as is found in the Prophets, the Evan-
gelists, and the Apocalypse; which, though it seems com-
mon, still conceals within it Divine wisdom, and all angelic
wisdom. What correspondence is, may be seen in the work
concerning Heaven and Hell f published at London in 1758,
in the chapter on the Correspondence of all the things of
heaven with all the things of man (n. 87-102), and on the
Correspondence of all the things of heaven with all the things
of the earth (n. 103-115). And it will be seen more fully by
examples from the Word presented below.

195. From the Lord proceed the Divine celestial, the
Divine spiritual, and the Divine natural, one after another.


312


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 195


That is called the Divine celestial which proceeds from His
Divine Love, and all this is good; that is called the Divine
spiritual which proceeds from His Divine Wisdom, and all
this is truth. The Divine natural is from both, and is their
complex in the ultimate. The angels of the celestial king-
dom, of whom is the third or highest heaven, are in the Di-
vine which proceeds from the Lord that is called celestial;
for they are in the good of love from the Lord. The an-
gels of the Lord’s spiritual kingdom, of whom is the second
or middle heaven, are in the Divine which proceeds from
the Lord that is called spiritual; for they are in Divine wis-
dom from the Lord. The angels of the Lord’s natural king-
dom, of whom is the first or lowest heaven, are in the Di-
vine which proceeds from the Lord that is called the Divine
natural, and they are in the faith of charity from the Lord.
But the men of the church are in one of these kingdoms ac-
cording to their love, wisdom, and faith; and into that in
which they are, they also come after death. Such as heaven
is, such also is the Word of the Lord. In its ultimate sense
it is natural, in its interior sense it is spiritual, and in its in-
most sense it is celestial, and in each one of these senses it is
Divine; whereby it is accommodated to the angels of the
three heavens, and also to men.

196. (2.) The spiritual sense is in each and every thing
in the Word. This cannot be seen better than by exam-
ples, such as the following: John says, in the Apocalypse,
I saw heaven opened , and behold , a white horse; and He that
sat upon him was called Faithful and True , and in righteous-
ness He doth judge and make war. His eyes were as a flame
of fire , and on His head were many crowns; and He had a
name written , that no one knoweth but He Himself; and He
was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood; and His name is
called the Word of God. And the armies in heaven followed
Him upon white horses , clothed in fine linen , white and clean.
He hath upon His vesture and upon His thigh a name writ-
ten, King of kings, and Lord of lords. And I saw an


No. 196 ] THE SACRED SCRIPTURE 3 1 3

angel standing in the sun, and he cried with a loud voice ,
Come and gather yourselves together unto the great supper ,
that ye may eat the flesh 0} kings, and the flesh of captains,
and the flesh of the mighty , and the flesh of horses , and of them
that sit on them, and the flesh of all, free and bond, small and
great (xix. 11-18). What these things signify, no one can
see but from the spiritual sense of the Word; and no one
can see the spiritual sense except from a knowledge of cor-
respondences; for all the words are correspondences, and
no word is without meaning. The knowledge of corre-
spondences teaches what is signified by the white horse, what
by Him who sat upon him, what by the eyes which were as
a flame of fire, what by the crowns upon His head, what by
the vesture tinged with blood, what by the white fine linen,
in which they who were of His army in heaven were clothed,
what by the angel standing in the sun, what by the great sup-
per to which they were to come and be gathered together,
and also what by the flesh of kings and captains, and by many
other things which they should eat. But what each of those
expressions signifies in the spiritual sense, may be seen un-
folded in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 820-838); and also in
a little work concerning the White Horse ; so that it is unnec-
essary to explain them here. In these books it is shown that
the Lord is there described as to the Word; and that by His
eyes, which were as a flame of fire, is meant the Divine wis-
dom of His Divine love; and by the crowns which were upon
His head, and by the name which no one knoweth but Him-
self, are meant the Divine truths of the Word from Him; and
that what the Word is in its spiritual sense no one sees but
the Lord and he to whom He reveals it; also that by the ves-
ture dipped in blood is meant the natural sense of the Word,
which is the sense of its letter, to which violence has been
done. That it is the Word which is thus described, is very
manifest; for it is said, His name is called the Word of God.
That it is the Lord who is meant, is also very manifest; for
it is said that the name of Him who sat upon the white horse


314


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 196


was King of kings and Lord of lords; in like manner as
where it is said, And the Lamb shall overcome them , because
He is Lord of lords and King of kings (xvii. 14). That
the spiritual sense of the Word is to be opened at the end of
the church, is signified not only by those things which are
said concerning the white horse and Him who sat upon him,
but also by the great supper, to which the angel standing in
the sun invited all to come, and eat the flesh of kings, and of
captains; by which is signified the appropriation of all good
things from the Lord. All the expressions there would be
empty words, and without life and spirit, unless there was
a spiritual sense within them, as the soul in the body.

197. In the twenty-first chapter of the Apoclaypse the
New Jerusalem is thus described : Her light was like unto a
stone most precious , as it were a jasper stone, like unto a shi-
ning crystal: having a wall great and high; having twelve
gates, and twelve angels over the gates , and the names of the
twelve tribes of the sons of Israel written. ... The wall was
of a hundred and forty and four cubits , which is the measure
of a man , that is of an angel. And the building of the wall
was jasper . . . and its foundations of every precious stone ;
of jasper , sapphire , chalcedony, emerald, sardonyx, sardius,
chrysolite, beryl, topaz, chrysoprasus, jacinth, and amethyst.
And the gates were twelve pearls. ... The city itself was
pure gold, like pure glass. It was also four-square, the
length, the breadth, and the height equal, being twelve thou-
sand furlongs; besides many other particulars. That all
these things are to be understood spiritually may be evident
from this, that by the New Jerusalem is meant the New
Church, which is to be established by the Lord, as is shown
in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 880); and Decause by Jeru-
salem is there signified the church, it follows that all that is
said of it as a city — of its gates, of its wall, of the founda-
tions of the wall, and what is said of their measures — con-
tain a spiritual sense, since the things which are of the church
are spiritual; but what they signify has been shown in the


No. 198]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


315


Apocalypse Revealed (n. 896-92 5),* and so it would be super-
fluous to demonstrate them further. It is enough that it be
thereby known that there is a spiritual sense in the several
particulars of that description, as the soul in the body; and
that without that sense nothing of the church would be under-
stood in those things which are written there; as that the
city was of pure gold, its gates of pearls, the wall of jasper,
the foundations of the wall of precious stones; that the wall
was of a hundred and forty-four cubits, which is the measure
of a man, that is, of an angel; and that the city was in length,
breadth, and height, twelve thousand furlongs, and the rest.
But he who from a knowledge of correspondences knows
the spiritual sense, understands these things; as that the wall
and its foundations signify the doctrines of that church from
the sense of the letter of the Word; and that the numbers,
twelve, one hundred and forty-four, twelve thousand, signify
all things belonging to it, or its truths and goods in one
complex.

198. Where the Lord speaks to His disciples of the con-
summation of the age, which is the last time of the church,
at the end of the predictions concerning its successive changes,
He says, Immediately after the affliction of those days shall the
sun be darkened , and the moon shall not give her light , and the
stars shall fall from heaven , and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken; and then shall appear the sign of the Son of
Man in heaven; and then shall all the tribes of the earth
mourn y and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds
of heaven , with power and great glory. And He shall send
the angels , with a great sound 0} a trumpet , and they shall
gather together His elect from the four winds , from one end of
the heavens even to the other (Matt. xxiv. 29-31). By these
words in the spiritual sense is not meant that the sun and
moon would be darkened, that the stars would fall from
heaven, that the sign of the Lord would appear in the
heavens, that they would see Him in the clouds, and at the
same time the angels with trumpets; but by each word there


31 6 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 198

are meant spiritual things which are of the church, and are
said as to the state of the church at its end. For in the
spiritual sense by the sun which will be darkened, is meant
love to the Lord; by the moon which will not give her light,
is meant faith in Him; by the stars which will fall from
heaven, are meant knowledges of truth and good; by the
sign of the Son of Man in heaven, is meant the appearing of
Divine truth in the Word from Him; by the tribes of the
earth which shall mourn, is meant the want of all truth
which is of faith, and of all good which is of love; by the
coming of the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven .with
power and glory, is meant the Lord’s presence in the Word
and revelation ; by the clouds of heaven is signified the sense
of the letter of the Word, and by glory the spiritual sense of
the Word; by the angels with a great sound of a trumpet, is
meant heaven, whence is Divine truth; by gathering together
the elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to
the other, is meant the New Heaven and the New Church
of those who have faith in the Lord and live according to His
commandments. That the darkening of the sun and moon
and the falling of the stars to the earth are not meant, is
clearly evident from the Prophets, for in them similar things
are said concerning the state of the church, when the Lord
was about to come into the world; as in Isaiah: Behold , the
day of Jehovah will come , cruel both with wrath and heat of
anger: the stars of the heavens and the constellations thereof
shall not shine with their light; the sun shall be darkened in
his going forth , and the moon shall not cause her light to shine .
I will visit evil upon the world (xiii. 9-1 1; also xxiv. 19-23).
In Joel: The day of Jehovah cometh , a day of darkness and
thick darkness ... the sun and the moon shall be dark , and
the stars shall withdraw their shining (ii. 1, 2, 10; also iii. 15).
In Ezekiel: I will cover the heavens , and make the stars dark ;
I will cover the sun with a cloud , and the moon shall not cause
her light to shine . All the luminaries of light I will make
dark , and set darkness upon the earth (xxxii. 7, 8). By the


No. 199]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


317


day of Jehovah, is meant the coming of the Lord, which was
when there was no longer any good of love and truth of faith
remaining in the church, or any knowledge of the Lord;
therefore it is called a day of darkness and of thick darkness.

199. That the Lord when He was in the world spake by
correspondences, thus that when He spake naturally He also
spake spiritually, may be evident from His parables, in each
word of which there is a spiritual sense. Let the parable of
the ten virgins be an example: — He said, The kingdom 0}
the heavens is like ten virgins , who , taking their lamps , went
forth to meet the bridegroom ; five of them were wise , and five
were foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps , and
took no oil; but the wise took oil in their lamps . While the
bridegroom tarried , they all slumbered and slept. And at
midnight there was a cry made , Behold the bridegroom cometh;
go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose and
trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise ,
Give us 0} your oil , for our lamps are going out. But the wise
answered , saying , Lest perchance there be not enough for us
and you , go ye rather to them who sell, and buy for yourselves.
And while they went to buy , the bridegroom came, and they
that were ready went in with him to the marriage; and the
door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, say-
ing, Lord, Lord , open to us. But he answered and said, Verily
I say unto you, I know you not (Matt. xxv. 1-12). That in
all these words there is a spiritual sense, and hence a Di-
vine holiness, no one sees but he who knows that there is a
spiritual sense, and what its quality is. In the spiritual
sense by the kingdom of the heavens is meant heaven and
the church, by the bridegroom the Lord, by the wedding the
marriage of the Lord with them by the good of love and the
truth of faith, by virgins those who are of the church, by ten
all, by five some, by lamps the things which are of faith, by
oil the things which are of the good of love, by sleeping and
rising the life of man in the world which is natural and his
life after death which is spiritual, by buying to procure for


3 1 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 199

themselves, by going to them that sell and buying oil to pro-
cure for themselves the good of love from others after death;
and because then it is no longer procured, therefore, though
they came with lamps and the oil which they had bought to
the door where the wedding was, still it was said to them by
the bridegroom, I know you not. The reason is, that man
remains after the life in the world such as he had lived in
the world. From these examples it is plain that the Lord
spake solely by correspondences, and this because He spake
from the Divine which was in Him and was His. Because
virgins signify those who are of the church, therefore so often
in the prophetic Word it is said, the virgin and the daughter
of Zion, of Jerusalem, of Judah, of Israel. And because oil
signifies the good of love, therefore all the holy things of the
church were anointed with oil. It is similar in the rest of
the parables, and in all the words which the Lord spake.
Thence it is that the Lord says that His words are spirit and
are life (John vi. 63).

200. (3.) It is from the spiritual sense that the Word is
Divinely inspired , and holy in every word. It is said in the
church that the Word is holy, and this because Jehovah the
Lord spake it; but inasmuch as its holiness is not apparent
in the sense of the letter alone, one who for that reason once
has doubts of its holiness, when he afterward reads the Word,
confirms himself in them by many things therein; for he says
to himself, “Is this holy? Is this Divine?” Lest, there-
fore, such a thought should flow in with many, and after-
ward grow stronger, and the Word should therefore be re-
jected as a writing of little worth, and the conjunction of the
Lord with man by means of it should perish, it has pleased
the Lord now to reveal its spiritual sense, to the end that it
may be known where in the Word the Divine holiness is con-
cealed. But let examples illustrate this. The Word treats
now of Egypt, now of Assyria, now of Edom, of Moab, of the
sons of Ammon, of the Philistines, of Tyre and Sidon, and of
Gog. He who does not know that by their names are sig-


No. 200] the SACRED SCRIPTURE 319

nified things of heaven and the church may be led into the
error that the Word treats much of peoples and nations, and
but little of heaven and the church; thus much of worldly,
and little of heavenly things; but when he knows what is
signified by them, or by their names, he may be led back
from error into the truth. In like manner while he sees that
in the Word are so often mentioned gardens, groves, forests,
and their trees, as the olive, the vine, the cedar, the poplar,
and the oak; and so often the lamb, the sheep, the goat, the
calf, the ox; and also mountains, hills, valleys, and the foun-
tains, rivers, and waters in them, and many such things, if he
knows nothing of the spiritual sense of the Word, he cannot
but believe that only those things are meant. For he does
not know that by a garden, grove, and forest, are meant wis-
dom, intelligence, and knowledge; that by an olive, vine,
cedar, poplar, and oak, are meant the good and truth of the
church, celestial, spiritual, rational, natural, and sensual; that
by a lamb, a sheep, a goat, a calf, an ox, are meant innocence,
charity, and natural affection; that by mountains, hills, and
valleys, are meant the higher, the lower, and the lowest
things of the church; also that by Egypt is signified the
scientific, by Assyria the rational, by Edom the natural, by
Moab the adulteration of good, by the sons of Ammon the
adulteration of truth, by the Philistines faith without charity,
by Tyre and Sidon knowledges of good and truth, by Gog
external worship without internal. In general, by Jacob in
the Word is meant the natural church, by Israel the spiritual
church, and by Judah the celestial church. When a man
knows all these things, he is then able to think that the Word
treats only of heavenly things, and that those worldly things
are only the subjects in which the heavenly rest. But an
example from the Word may illustrate this also. We read
in Isaiah, In that day shall there be a highway from Egypt
into Assyria , that Assyria may come into Egypt , and Egypt
into Assyria; and that the Egyptians may serve with Assyria.
In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and Assyria ,


320


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 200


a blessing in the midst of the land; whom Jehovah Zebaoth
shall bless, saying, Blessed be My people Egypt , and Assyria
the work of My hands, and Israel Mine inheritance (xix. 23-
25). By these words in the spiritual sense is meant that at
the time of the coming of the Lord, the scientific, the rational,
and the spiritual will make one, and that then the scientific
will serve the rational, and they both will serve the spiritual;
for as above said by Egypt is signified the scientific, by Assy-
ria the rational, and by Israel the spiritual; by the day twice
mentioned is meant the first and the second coming of the
Lord.

201. (4.) The spiritual sense of the Word has been hitherto
unknown. That all things and each thing in nature corre-
spond to spiritual things, and in like manner all and each in
the human body, has been shown in the work concerning
Heaven and Hell (n. 87-105). But what correspondence is,
has been hitherto unknown, though in most ancient times it
was very well known; for to those who then lived, a knowl-
edge of correspondences was the knowledge of knowledges,
and was so universal that all their manuscripts and books
were written by correspondences. The book of Job, which
is a book of the Ancient Church, is full of correspondences.
The hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, and also the fabulous
stories of the earliest times, were correspondences. All the
Ancient Churches were churches representative of spiritual
things. Their rites, and also the statutes according to which
their worship was instituted, consisted solely of correspond-
ences; so did all things of the church with the sons of Israel.
The burnt offerings, sacrifices, bread offerings, and drink
offerings, with every thing pertaining to them, were cor-
respondences; likewise the tabernacle with all that was in it;
and also their feasts, as of unleavened bread, of tabernacles,
and of the first fruits; also the priesthood of Aaron and the
Levites, as also their garments of holiness; and what the
spiritual things were to which all these things corresponded
has been shown in the Heavenly Arcana, published at Lon-


No. 203]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


321


don. Besides these, all the statutes and judgments which
concerned their worship and life were also correspondences.
Now because Divine things present themselves in the world
in correspondences, therefore the Word was written solely
by correspondences; and so the Lord because He spake
from the Divine, spake by correspondences; for that which
is from the Divine falls into such things in nature as cor-
respond to Divine things, and which then store up in their
bosom Divine things that are called celestial and spiritual.

202. I have been instructed that the men of the Most
Ancient Church, which was before the flood, were of a gen-
ius so heavenly that they spoke with the angels of heaven,
and that they were able to speak with them by correspond-
ences. From this the state of their wisdom became such
that whatever they saw on earth they thought of it not only
naturally, but also spiritually at the same time; thus also
conjointly with the angels of heaven. Furthermore, I have
been informed that Enoch, of whom mention is made in
Genesis (v. 21-24), with his associates, collected correspond-
ences from the lips of those people, and transmitted the
knowledge of them to posterity; in consequence of which
the science of correspondences was not only known but also
cultivated in many kingdoms of Asia, especially in the land
of Canaan, Egypt, Assyria, Chaldea, Syria, Arabia, Tyre,
Sidon, and Nineveh, and was thence carried into Greece;
but there it was turned into fabulous tales, as may be evi-
dent from the writings of the most ancient authors there.

203. That it may be seen that the knowledge of corre-
spondences was long preserved among the nations of Asia,
but among those who were called diviners and sages, and, by
some, Magi, I will present one example, from the First Book
of Samuel (v. and vi.). It is there recorded that the ark, in
which were the two tables on which the Decalogue was writ-
ten, was captured by the Philistines, and placed in the tem-
ple of Dagon at Ashdod, and that Dagon fell to the ground
before it, and afterward his head and the palms of his hands,


322


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 203


severed from his body, lay upon the threshold of the temple;
and that on account of the ark, the men of Ashdod and
Ekron were smitten by thousands with emerods, and their
land laid waste by mice. The Philistines therefore called
together the princes and diviners, and in order to prevent
their destruction they determined to make five emerods and
five mice out of gold, also a new cart, and upon this to place
the ark, and near it the emerods and mice of gold; and, by
two cows which lowed in the way before the cart, to send
back the ark to the sons of Israel, by whom the cows and the
cart were offered in sacrifice, and so the God of Israel was
propitiated. That all these things, studied out by the di-
viners of the Philistines were correspondences, is evident
from their signification, which is as follows: The Philistines
themselves signified those who are in faith separate from
charity; Dagon represented that religion; the emerods with
which they were smitten signified natural loves, which sepa-
rate from spiritual love are unclean; and the mice signified
the devastation of the church by falsifications of truth; the
new cart signified natural doctrine of the church, doctrine
from spiritual truths being signified in the Word by a chariot;
the cows signified good natural affections; the emerods of
gold signified natural loves purified and made good; the
mice of gold signified the vastation of the church removed
by good, for gold in the Word signifies good; the lowing of
the cows in the way signified the difficult conversion of the
natural man’s lusts of evil into good affections; the offering
of the cows together with the cart for a whole burnt offering,
signified that thus the God of Israel was propitiated. All
these things, which the Philistines did by the persuasion of
their diviners, were correspondences; from which it is plain
that a knowledge of them was long preserved among the
nations.

204. Since the representative rites of the church, which
were correspondences, in the course of time began to be
turned into what was idolatrous and also into what was mag-


No. 205] the sacred scripture 323

ical, that knowledge by the Divine providence of the Lord
was then gradually lost, and with the nation of Israel and
Judah was totally obliterated. The worship of this nation
did indeed consist only of correspondences, and was there-
fore representative of heavenly things; but still they did not
know what any thing signified, for they were wholly natural
men, and consequently they would not and could not know
any thing about spiritual and celestial things; nor therefore
any thing about correspondences; for correspondences are
representations of spiritual and celestial things in natural.

205. The idolatries of nations in ancient times had their
origin from a knowledge of correspondences, because all
things which are seen upon the earth correspond, thus not
only trees, but also beasts and birds of every kind, also fishes
and all other things. The ancients who had a knowledge
of correspondences, made for themselves images which cor-
responded to heavenly things, and were delighted with them
because they signified such things as were of heaven and the
church; and therefore they placed them not only in their
temples but also in their homes, not to adore them, but
to call to mind the heavenly things which they signified.
Therefore in Egypt and elsewhere there were images of
calves, oxen, serpents, also of boys, old men, and maidens;
because calves and oxen signified the affections and powers
of the natural man, serpents the prudence and also the
cunning of the sensual man, boys innocence and charity,
old men wisdom, and maidens affections for truth, and so on.
But their posterity, when the knowledge of correspondences
was lost, began to worship as holy, and at length as deities,
the images and figures set up by the ancients, because they
were in and near their temples. For the same reason the
ancients had worship in gardens and groves, according to
the kinds of trees in them, and also on mountains and hills;
for gardens and groves signified wisdom and intelligence, and
each particular tree signified something pertaining to wis-
dom and intelligence. Thus the olive signified the good of


324 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 205

love, the vine truth from that good, the cedar rational good
and truth, a mountain the highest heaven, and a hill the
heaven next below. That the knowledge of correspondences
remained with many of the people of the east even to the
coming of the Lord, may also be evident from the wise men
from the east, who came to the Lord when He was bom; and
accordingly a star went before them, and they brought with
them gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh (Matt. ii. 1, 2, 9-
11); for the star which went before them signified knowl-
edge from heaven, the gold signified celestial good, the
frankincense spiritual good, and the myrrh natural good;
from these three is all worship. But still with the nation of
Israel and Judah there was no knowledge whatever of
correspondences, though every thing pertaining to their
worship, and all the statutes and judgments given them by
Moses, and all things of the Word, were nothing but cor-
respondences. This was because they were in heart idola-
ters, and therefore such that they were not even willing to
know that any thing in their worship signified what is
celestial and spiritual; for they believed all those to be holy
in themselves; if therefore heavenly and spiritual things had
been disclosed to them they would not only have rejected, but
would also have profaned them; and for this reason heaven
was so closed to them that they scarce knew that there was
any eternal life. That this is so is very manifest from the
fact that they did not acknowledge the Lord, though the
whole Sacred Scripture prophesied concerning Him, and
foretold His coming. They rejected Him for the sole reason
that He taught them of a heavenly and not of an earthly
kingdom; for they wished for a Messiah who would exalt
them above all the nations in the whole world, and not for
any Messiah who would provide for their eternal safety.

206. The knowledge of correspondences, through which
the spiritual sense of the Word is given, was not disclosed
after those times because the Christians of the primitive
church were so very simple that it could not be made known


No. 207]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


325


to them; for if disclosed it would have been of no use to
them, nor would it have been understood. After their
times, darkness spread over all the Christian world; first by
the heretical opinions of many that were scattered abroad,
and soon after by the deliberations and decrees of the Coun-
cil of Nice regarding three Divine Persons from eternity,
and concerning the Person of Christ as the Son of Mary and
not as the Son of Jehovah God. From this originated the
present faith of justification, in which three Gods are ap-
proached in their order; on which faith all things and each
of the church at this day depend, as the members of the
body depend on their head; and as all things of the Word
have been applied to confirm this erroneous faith, the
spiritual sense could not be disclosed; for, if it had been,
they would have applied this sense also to that faith, and
thereby would have profaned the very holiness of the Word;
and so they would have closed heaven altogether against
themselves, and would have removed the Lord from the
church.

207. The knowledge of correspondences through which
the spiritual sense of the Word is given, has been revealed at
this day, because now the Divine truths of the church are
coming forth into light, and of these the spiritual sense of
the Word consists; and while these are in man, the sense of
the letter of the Word cannot be perverted. For the sense
of the letter of the Word can be turned hither and thither;
but if it is turned to falsity, then its internal holiness perishes,
and with it the external; but if turned to what is true, its
holiness remains. Of this however more will be said in the
following pages. That the spiritual sense would be opened
at this time, is meant by John’s seeing heaven open, and
then seeing the white horse; and also by his seeing and hear-
ing that an angel standing in the sun called all together to a
great supper (Apoc. xix. 11-18). But that for a long time
it would not be acknowledged, is meant by the beast and
by the kings of the earth who were to make war with Him


326 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 207

who sat upon the white horse (Apoc. xix. 19); as also by the
dragon, that he persecuted the woman who brought forth
the son, even into the wilderness, and there cast forth from
his mouth waters as a flood that he might drown her (Apoc.
xiu 13-17).

208. (5.) The spiritual sense oj the Word will not be
given to any one hereafter who is not in genuine truths from
the Lord. The reason is that no one can see the spiritual
sense except from the Lord alone, and unless he is in Divine
truths from the Lord; for the spiritual sense of the Word
treats of the Lord alone and of His kingdom; and that is
the sense in which His angels in heaven are, for it is His
Divine truth there. A man can violate this if he has a
knowledge of correspondences, and wishes by it to investi-
gate the spiritual sense of the Word from His own intelli-
gence ; for by means of some correspondences known to him
he can pervert that sense, and force it to confirm even what
is false; and this would be doing violence to Divine truth,
and thus also to heaven in which it has its home. If there-
fore any one wishes from himself and not from the Lord to
open that sense, heaven is closed; and when it is closed
man either sees nothing of truth, or becomes spiritually
insane. The reason also is that the Lord teaches every one
by the Word, and He teaches him from the knowledges which
are with the man, and does not infuse new ones immediately.
So if man is not in Divine truths, or if he is in only a few
truths and at the same time in falsities, he may by these
falsify the truths, as is also done by every heretic with the
sense of the letter of the Word. Lest therefore any one
should enter into the spiritual sense, and should pervert the
genuine truth which is of that sense, guards are placed by
the Lord, which are meant in the Word by cherubim.

209. (6.) Wonderful things co?icerning the Word , from its
spiritual sense. In the natural world no wonderful things
exist from the Word, because the spiritual sense does not
there appear, nor is it inwardly received by man, such as


No. 209] THE SACRED SCRIPTURE 327

it is in itself; but in the spiritual world wonderful things
appear from the Word because all there are spiritual, and
spiritual things affect the spiritual man as natural things
the natural man. The wonderful things which come forth
in the spiritual world from the Word are many, a few of
which I will here mention. The Word itself in the shrines
of the temples there, shines before the eyes of angels like a
great star, and sometimes like the sun; and also from the
bright radiance round about it there appear as it were most
beautiful rainbows; this happens as soon as a shrine is
opened. That the truths of the Word each and all are shi-
ning, was made evident to me from this, that when any
single verse of the Word is written upon paper, and this is
thrown into the air, the paper itself shines in the form in
which it was cut; and thus spirits are able to produce by the
Word various shining forms, even those of birds and fishes.
And, what is still more wonderful, when any one strokes the
face, the hands, or the clothes which he has on, with the
open Word, touching them with its writing, the face itself, the
hands, and the clothes shine, as if he were standing in a star,
surrounded with its light. This I have often seen and
wondered at; from which it was plain to me whence it was
that the face of Moses shone when he brought the tables of
the covenant down from mount Sinai.

Besides these, there are many other wonderful things
there which are from the Word, as for instance, if any one
who is in falsities looks at the Word as it lies in the holy
place, thick darkness spreads before his eyes, and then the
Word appears to him black, and sometimes as if covered
over with soot; and if he also touches the Word, there comes
an explosion with a crash, and he is thrown to a comer of
the room, and for a brief hour he lies there as if dead. If
something from the Word is written on paper by one who
is in falsities, and the paper is thrown up toward heaven,
then in the air between his eye and heaven there comes a
similar explosion, and the paper is torn to atoms and van-


328


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 209


ishes. The same takes place if the paper is thrown toward
an angel who stands near: this I have often seen. From
this it was plain to me that those who are in falsities of doc-
trine have no communication with heaven by means of the
Word; but that th6ir reading is dispersed in the way, and
perishes like gunpowder enclosed in paper, when set on fire
and thrown into the air. The contrary happens with those
who are in truths of doctrine from the Lord through the
Word: their reading of the Word penetrates even into
heaven, and makes conjunction with angels there. Angels
themselves, when they descend from heaven to discharge any
duty below, appear encompassed with little stars, especially
about the head; which is a sign that Divine truths from the
Word are in them.

Furthermore, in the spiritual world there are things simi-
lar to those which are upon earth, but every thing there is
from a spiritual origin; so there are also gold and silver, and
precious stones of every kind, and their spiritual origin is
the sense of the letter of the Word. Therefore in the Apoc-
alypse the foundations of the wall of the New Jerusalem
are described by twelve precious stones; the reason being
that by the foundations of its wall are signified the doc-
trines of the New Church, from the sense of the letter of
the Word. For the same reason there were in Aaron’s
ephod twelve precious stones, called TJrim and Thummim ,
and by means of these answers were given from heaven.
Besides these, there are many other wonderful things from
the Word that concern the power of truth there, which is so
immense that if described it would surpass all belief. For
the power is such as to overturn mountains and hills there,
to remove them far away, and cast them into the sea; be-
side many other things. In short, the power of the Lord
from the Word is infinite.


No. 211]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


329


III. The sense of the letter op the Word is the basis,

THE CONTAIN ANT, AND THE SUPPORT OF ITS
SPIRITUAL AND CELESTIAL SENSES.

210. In every thing Divine there is a first, a mediate, and
an ultimate; and the first goes through the mediate to the
ultimate, and so exists and subsists: hence the ultimate is
the basis. The first is also in the mediate, and through
the mediate in the ultimate; thus the ultimate is the con-
tainant. And because the ultimate is the containant and the
basis, it is also the support. Learned men understand that
these three may be named end, cause, and effect; and also
esse to be, fieri to become, and existere to exist; and that
the end is the esse , the cause the fieri , and the effect the
existere ; consequently, that in every complete thing there
is a trine, which is called the first, the mediate, and the
ultimate; also end, cause, and effect. When these things
are comprehended, it is also comprehended that every
Divine work is complete and perfect in the ultimate; and,
likewise, that the all is in the ultimate, because in it the
first and the mediate are together.

21 1. It is from this, that by three, in the Word, in the
spiritual sense is understood what is complete and perfect,
and also all together; and because this is the signification of
that number, it is used in the Word whenever any such
thing is designated, as in these passages: Isaiah went
naked and barefoot three years (Isa. xx. 3). Jehovah called
Samuel three times , and Samuel ran three times to Eli, and
Eli the third time understood (1 Sam. iii. 1-8). Jonathan
told David to hide himself in the field three days , and Jona-
than afterwards shot three arrows on the side of a stone; and
David then bowed himself three times before Jonathan (xx.
5, 12-42). Elijah stretched himself three times upon the
widow’s son (1 Kings xvii. 21). Elijah commanded that
they should pour water upon the burnt-offering three times


330


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 211


(xviii. 34). Jesus said that the kingdom of the heavens
is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures 0} meal , till the whole was leavened (Matt. xiii. 33).
Jesus said to Peter, that he would deny Him three times
(xxvi. 34). Jesus said three times to Peter, Lovest thou Me ?
(John xxi. 15-17). Jonah was in the belly of a whale
three days and three nights (Jon. i. 17). Jesus said, Destroy
this Temple, and I will raise it up in three days (John ii. 19:
Matt. xxvi. 61). Jesus, in Gethsemane, prayed three times
(Matt. xxvi. 39-44). Jesus rose again the third day (Matt,
xxviii. 1): besides many other places where the number
three is used; and it is used where a work finished and per-
fect is treated of, because this is what is signified by that
number.

212. There are three heavens, highest, middle, and
lowest. The highest heaven makes the Lord’s celestial
kingdom, the middle His spiritual kingdom, and the lowest
His natural kingdom. Just as there are three heavens, so
there are three senses of the Word, the celestial, the spiritual,
and the natural; with which also those things agree which
were said above (n. 210), namely that the first is in the
mediate, and through the mediate in the ultimate; just as
the end is in the cause, and through the cause in the effect.
The nature of the Word is thus manifest, namely, that in the
sense of its letter, which is natural, there is an interior sense
which is spiritual, and in this an inmost sense which is celes-
tial; and thus that the ultimate sense, which is natural and
is called the sense of the letter, is the containant, and so the
basis and support, of the two interior senses.

213. From this it follows that the Word without the sense
of its letter would be like a palace without a foundation,
thus like a palace in the air and not upon the ground, which
would be only the shadow of a palace that would vanish
away; also that the Word without the sense of its letter
would be like a temple in which are many holy things, and
in the midst of it the shrine, but without roof or wall, which


No. 214]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


331


contain it; and if these were wanting, or if they were taken
away, its holy things would be plundered by thieves, and
violated by the beasts of the earth and the birds of heaven,
and thus they would be dissipated. It would also be like
the tabernacle of the children of Israel in the wilderness, in
the inmost part of which was the ark of the covenant, and in
the middle the golden candlestick, the golden altar, on which
was the incense, and also the table upon which the show
bread was placed — without its ultimates, which were the
curtains, veils, and pillars. Indeed the Word without the
sense of its letter would be like the human body without its
coverings which are called skins, and without its supports
which are called bones; without both of which all the inner
parts of it would fall asunder. It would also be like the
heart and the lungs in the thorax without their covering
which is called the pleura, and their supports which are called
ribs; or like the brain without its coverings which are called
the dura and pia mater, and without its general covering,
containant, and support, which is called the skull. So
would it be with the Word without the sense of its letter;
wherefore it is said in Isaiah that Jehovah creates upon all
the glory a covering (iv. 5).


IV. Divine truth, in the sense of the letter of the
Word, is in its fulness, in its holiness, and in

ITS POWER.

214. The Word in the sense of the letter is in its fulness,
in its holiness, and in its power, because the two prior or in-
terior senses, which are called the spiritual and the celestial,
are together in the natural sense, which is the sense of the
letter (as above, n. 210 and 212); but how they are to-
gether shall be further told. There are in heaven and in
the world successive order and simultaneous order. In
successive order one thing succeeds and follows another,
from highests even to lo wests; but in simultaneous order


33 2 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 214

one thing is next to another from the inmost even to the
outermost. Successive order is like a column, with steps
from the summit to the base; while simultaneous order is
like a work cohering within its circumferences, from the
centre even to the outermost surface. It shall now be told
how successive order becomes simultaneous order in the
ultimate, as follows: the highests of successive order become
the inmosts of simultaneous order, and the lowests of suc-
cessive order become the outmosts of simultaneous order;
by comparison, as a column of steps subsiding becomes a
body coherent in a plane. Thus from the successive is
formed the simultaneous, and this in all things and each of
the natural world, and in all things and each of the spiritual
world; for there are everywhere a first, a mediate, and an
ultimate; and the first tends and passes through the mediate
to its ultimate. But it must be well understood that there
are degrees of purity, according to which either order is
determined. Now for the Word: the celestial, the spiritual,
and the natural, proceed from the Lord in successive order;
and in the ultimate they are in simultaneous order; so then
the celestial and the spiritual senses of the Word are together
in its natural sense. When this is comprehended, it may be
seen how the natural sense of the Word is the containant,
the basis, and the support of its spiritual and celestial senses;
also how the Divine good and the Divine truth in the sense
of the letter of the Word are in their fulness, holiness, and
power. From all this it may be evident that the Word is
the Word itself in its sense of the letter; for inwardly in this
there is spirit and life. This is what the Lord says in John:
The words that I speak unto you they are spirit and they are
life (vi. 63); for the Lord spake His words in the natural
sense. The celestial and the spiritual senses without the
natural sense are not the Word, for they are like spirit and
life without a body; and they are (as above, n. 213) like a
palace without a foundation.

215. The truths of the sense of the letter of the Word


No. 215]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


333


are in part not naked truths, but appearances of truth, and
like similitudes and comparisons are taken from such things
as are in nature, and thus such as have been accommo-
dated and adapted to the apprehension of the simple and
also of children. But as they are at the same time corre-
spondences, they are the receptacles and abodes of genuine
truth; and they are the vessels which contain them, as a
crystal cup contains noble wine, and as a silver dish con-
tains wholesome food; and they are like garments used for
clothing, as swaddling-clothes wrap an infant, and as be-
coming dresses clothe a maiden; they are also like the knowl-
edges of the natural man, which comprise within them the
perceptions and affections of spiritual truth. The naked
truths themselves, which are enclosed, contained, clothed,
and comprised, are in the spiritual sense of the Word, and
the naked goods are in its celestial sense. But this may be
illustrated from the Word: Jesus said, Woe unto you , scribes
and Pharisees , because ye make clean the outside 0} the cup
and 0} the platter , but within they are full of extortion and
excess. Thou blind Pharisee , cleanse first the inside of the
cup and 0} the platter , that the outside of them may be clean
also (Matt, xxiii, 25, 26). Here the Lord spake by simili-
tudes and comparisons, which are at the same time cor-
respondences; and when He said cup and platter, by cup
is not only meant but is also signified the truth of the Word;
for by the cup is meant wine, and truth is signified by wine,
but by the platter is meant food, and good is signified by
food. Therefore to cleanse the inside of the cup and of the
platter signifies to purify the interiors of the mind, which are
of the will and the thought, by the Word; that the outside
may thus be clean signifies that the exteriors, which are
works and speech, are thus purified; for these derive their
essence from the will and the thought. Again: Jesus said,
There was a certain rich man , who was clothed in purple
and fine linen , and fared sumptuously every day; and there
was a certain poor man , named Lazarus , who was laid at his


334


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


fNo. 215


gate , full oj sores (Luke xvi. 19, 20). Here also the Lord
spake by similitudes and comparisons, which were corre-
spondences and contained spiritual things. By the rich
man is meant the Jewish nation, which is called rich be-
cause it had the Word, in which are spiritual riches. By the
purple and fine linen with which he was clothed, are signi-
fied the good and truth of the Word ■ — by the purple its
good and by the fine linen its truth. By faring sumptu-
ously every day is signified their delight in having the Word,
and in hearing from it many things in the temples and syna-
gogues. By the poor man Lazarus are meant the Gentiles,
because they had not the Word. That they were despised
and rejected by the Jews, is meant by his being laid at the
rich man’s gate. By his being full of sores, is signified that
the Gentiles from ignorance of the truth were in many falsi-
ties. The Gentiles are meant by Lazarus because the Gen-
tiles were loved by the Lord, as the Lazarus who was raised
from the dead was loved by Him (John xi. 3, 5, 36), and is
called His friend (xi. 11), and sat at table with the Lord
(xii. 2). From these two passages it is plain that the truths
and goods of the sense of the letter of the Word are as ves-
sels and as garments for the naked good and truth which lie
concealed in the spiritual and the celestial senses of the Word.
Since the Word is such in the sense of the letter, it follows
that they who are in Divine truths and in the belief that the
Word inwardly in its bosom is Divine holiness, and still more
they who are in the belief that the Word is such from its
spiritual and celestial senses, see Divine truths in natural
light, while reading the Word in enlightenment from the
Lord; for the light of heaven, in which the spiritual sense
of the Word is, flows into the natural light in which the sense
of the letter of the Word is, and illumines the intellectual of
man, which is called the rational, and makes him see and
acknowledge the Divine truths, both where they stand forth
and where they lie concealed. These flow in with the light
of heaven with some, even at times when they are uncon-
scious of it.


No. 217]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


335


216. Since the Word in its inmost bosom from its celes-

tial sense is like a gentle flame which enkindles, and in its
intermediate depth from its spiritual sense is like a light
which enlightens, therefore in its ultimate from its natural
sense the Word is like a transparent object receiving both,
from the flame glowing like crimson, and from the light being
white like snow. Thus it is comparatively like a ruby and
a diamond, like a ruby from the celestial flame, and like a
diamond from the spiritual light. Because the Word is
such in the sense of the letter, therefore the Word in this
sense is meant : — 1 . By the precious stones 0} which the foun-
dations of the New Jerusalem consisted. 2. Also by the Urim
and Thummim on the ephod of Aaron . 3. And also by the

precious stones in the garden of Eden , where the king of Tyre
is said to have been. 4. As also by the curtains , veils , and
pillars of the tabernacle. 5. In like manner by the externals
of the temple at Jerusalem. 6. The Word in its glory was
represented in the Lord when He was transfigured. 7. The
power of the Word in ultbnates was represented by the Nazi-
rites . 8. Of the ineffable power of the Word. But these are

to be illustrated separately.

217. (1.) The Truths 0} the letter 0} the Word are meant
by the precious stones of which the foundations of the New
Jerusalem consisted (Apoc. xxi. 17-21). It was mentioned
above (n. 209), that in the spiritual world there are precious
stones as well as in the natural world, and that their spiri-
tual origin is from the truths in the sense of the letter of the
Word; this appears incredible, but still it is the truth. From
this it is, that wherever precious stones are named in the
Word, in the spiritual sense truths are meant. That the
precious stones of which the foundations of the wall around
the city New Jerusalem are said to be constructed, signify
the truths of the doctrine of the New Church, follows from
this, because by the New Jerusalem is meant the New Church
as to doctrine from the Word; and so by its wall and the
foundations of the wall nothing else can be meant than the


336


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 217


external of the Word, which is the sense of its letter; for this
is the sense from which doctrine is, and by doctrine the
church; and it is like a wall with foundations, which en-
closes and protects a city. Of the New Jerusalem and its
foundations, we read: The angel measured the wall 0} the city
Jerusalem , a hundred forty and four cubits , which was the
measure of a man , that is , of an angel. And the wall had
twelve foundations , garnished with all manner 0} precious
stones . The first foundation was jasper ; the second sap-
phire; the third a chalcedony; the fourth an emerald; the
fifth sardonyx; the sixth sardius; the seventh chrysolite; the
eighth beryl ; the ninth a topaz; the tenth, a chrysoprasus;
the eleventh a jacinth; the twelfth an amethyst (Apoc. xxi,
17-20). That the foundations of the wall were twelve, and
of as many precious stones, was because the number twelve
signifies all the things of truth from good, here therefore all
things of doctrine. But these things, as also those which
precede and follow in that chapter, may be seen explained
as to particulars, and confirmed by parallel passages from
the Word, in our Apocalypse Revealed.

218. (2.) The goods and truths of the Word in the sense of
its letter are meant by the Urim and Thummim on the ephod
of Aaron. The Urim and Thummim were upon the ephod
of Aaron, whose priesthood represented the Lord, as to the
Divine good, and as to the work of salvation. The garments
of his priesthood, or his garments of holiness, represented
Divine truths from the Lord; the ephod represented Divine
truth in its ultimate, and thus the Word in the sense of the
letter, for this is Divine truth in its ultimate; the twelve
precious stones, with the names of the twelve tribes of Israel,
which were the Urim and Thummim, therefore represented
Divine truths from Divine good in their whole complex.
Concerning these things we read as follows in Moses: They
shall make the ephod 0} blue , and purple , scarlet double-dyed ,
and fine twined linen . . . afterward they shall make a breast-
plate of judgment , like the work of the ephod . . . and thou


No. 219]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


337


shall fill it with a filling 0} stone , four rows of stone; a ruby ,
a topaz , and an emerald the first row; a chrysoprasus, a
sapphire , and a diamond the second row; a jacinth , an agate ,
and an amethyst the third row; a beryl , a sardius y and a jasper
the fourth row . . . . These stones shall be according to the
names of the sons of Israel; there shall be the engravings of a
signet for the twelve tribes according to their name . . . and
Aaron shall bear upon the breastplate of judgment , the Urim
and Thummim; and let them be upon Aaron 3 s heart when he
goeth in before Jehovah (Exod. xxviii. 6, 15, 17-21, 29, 30).
What was represented by the garments of Aaron, his ephod,
robe, tunic, mitre, and girdle, is explained in the Heavenly
Arcana y published at London, where that chapter is un-
folded, and where it is shown that by the ephod was repre-
sented Divine truth in its ultimate, that by the precious
stones there were represented Divine truths translucent
from good, by twelve arranged by fours all those truths from
the first to the ultimate, by the twelve tribes all things of the
church, by the breastplate Divine truth from Divine good in
the universal sense, by the Urim and Thummim , the re-
splendence of Divine truth from Divine good in ultimates,
for Urim is shining fire and Thummim is resplendence in
angelic language, and integrity in the Hebrew; also that
answers were given by variegations of light, and at the same
time by tacit perception, or by a living voice; with much
more. From which it may be evident that by these stones
also were signified truths from good in the ultimate sense of
the' Word; nor are answers from heaven given by other
means, because in that sense the Divine proceeding is in its
fulness.

219. (3.) Similar things are meant by the precious stones
in the garden of Eden y where the King of Tyre is said to have
been. We read in Ezekiel, King of Tyre , thou sealest up the
sum , full of wisdom and perfect in beauty. Thou hast been
in Eden y the garden of God; every precious stone was thy
covering; the ruby y the topaz , and the diamond; the beryl y the


33 3


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 219


sardonyx , and the jasper; the sapphire , the chrysoprasus, and
the emerald , and gold (xxviii. 12, 13). By Tyre in the Word
is signified the church as to knowledges of good and truth,
by king is signified the truth of the church, by the garden of
Eden are signified wisdom and intelligence from the Word,
by precious stones are signified truths translucent from good,
such as are in the sense of the letter of the Word; and be-
cause these things are signified by those stones, therefore
they are called his covering. That the sense of the letter
covers the interiors of the Word may be seen above (n. 213).

220. (4.) Goods and truths , in the ultimates, such as they
are in the sense of the letter oj the Word , were represented by
the curtains , veils, and pillars of the tabernacle . By the tab-
ernacle built by Moses in the wilderness was represented
heaven and the church; wherefore the form of it was shown
by Jehovah on mount Sinai; consequently all the things
which were in that tabernacle — the candlestick, the golden
altar for incense, and the table upon which was the bread
of presence — represented and signified the holy things of
heaven and the church; and the holy of holies, where was
the ark of the covenant, represented and thence signified the
inmost of heaven and the church; and the Law itself, writ-
ten upon the two tables, signified the Word; and the cherubs
above it signified guards that the holy things of the Word
might not be violated. Now because externals derive their
essence from internals, and both of these derive theirs from
the inmost, which in that case was the Law, therefore the
holy things of the Word were represented and signified by all
things of the tabernacle. Thus it follows that by the out-
mosts of the tabernacle — the curtains, veils, and pillars —
which were coverings, containants, and supports, were sig-
nified the outmosts or ultimates of the Word, which are the
truths and goods of the sense of its letter. Because those
things were signified, therefore all the curtains and veils
were made of fine-twined linen, and blue, and purple, and
scarlet double-dyed, with cherubs (Exod. xxvi. 1, 31, 36).


No. 222]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


339


What was represented and signified by the tabernacle and
by all things in it, both generally and particularly, has been
explained in the Heavenly Arcana , under that chapter of
Exodus; and it is there shown that by the curtains and veils
were represented the externals of heaven and the church,
thus also the externals of the Word; that by the cotton or
fine linen was signified truth from a spiritual origin, by hya-
cinthine blue truth from a celestial origin, by purple celestial
good, by scarlet double-dyed spiritual good, and by cherubs
the guards of the interiors of the Word.

221. (5.) The same were represented by the externals of
the temple at Jerusalem. The reason is that by the temple,
as well as by the tabernacle, was represented heaven and the
church; but by the temple the heaven in which the spiritual
angels are, and by the tabernacle the heaven where the celes-
tial angels are. Spiritual angels are they who are in wis-
dom from the Word, but celestial angels are they who are in
love from the Word. That by the temple at Jerusalem, in
the highest sense, the Divine Human of the Lord was sig-
nified, He teaches in John: Destroy this temple , and in three
days I will raise it up . . . He spake of the temple of His
Body (ii. 19, 21); and where the Lord is meant, the Word
also is meant, because He is the Word. Now because the
interiors of the temple represented the interiors of heaven
and the church, thus also of the Word, therefore its exteriors
represented and signified the exteriors of heaven and the
church, thus also of the Word, which are of the sense of its
letter. Concerning the exteriors of the temple we read that
they were built of whole stone not hewn, and of cedar within;
and that all its walls were carved inside with cherubs, palm-
trees, and open flowers; and that the floor was overlaid with
gold (x Kings vi. 7, 29, 30); by all of which are also signi-
fied the externals of the Word, which are the holy things of
the sense of its letter.

222. (6.) The Word in its glory was represented in the
Lord when He was transfigured. Of the Lord when trans-


340


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[NO. 222


figured before Peter, James, and John, we read that His face
shone like the sun ; and His raiment became as the light; and
that Moses and Elias were seen talking with Him; and that
a bright cloud overshadowed the disciples; and that a voice
was heard from the cloud, saying, This is My beloved Son,
hear ye Him (Matt. xvii. 1-5). I have been instructed that
the Lord then represented the Word; by His face which
shone like the sun, was represented the Divine good of His
Divine Love; by the raiment which became like the light, j
the Divine truth of His Divine Wisdom; by Moses and Elias,
the historic and the prophetic Word — by Moses the Word
written through him, and the historic Word in general, and
by Elias, all the prophetic Word; by the bright cloud which
overshadowed the disciples, the Word in the sense of the
letter; wherefore from it a voice was heard, saying, This is
My beloved Son , hear ye Him; for no announcements and
answers from heaven are ever made except by ultimates,
such as are in the sense of the letter of the Word; for they
are made by the Lord in fulness.

223. (7.) The power of the Word in ultimates was repre-
sented by the Nazirites . In the book of the Judges we read
of Samson, that he was a Nazirite from his mother’s womb,
and that his power lay in his hair; moreover, Nazirite and
Naziriteship also signify hair. That his power lay in his
hair, he himself showed, when he said, There hath not come
a razor upon my head , for I have been a Nazirite from my
mother's womb; if I be shaven , then my strength will go from
me , and I shall become weak , and be like any other man
(Judges xvi. 17). It is not possible for any one to know
why Naziriteship, which signifies hair, was instituted, and
why Samson had strength from his locks, unless he knows
what is signified in the Word by the head. By the head is
signified the intelligence which angels and men have from
the Lord by Divine truth; consequently by hair is signified
intelligence in ultimates, or outmosts, from Divine truth.
Because this was signified by hair, is was therefore a statute


No. 224]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


341


for the Nazirites, that they should not shave the hair of their
head, because it was the Naziriteship of God upon their
head (Num. vi. 1-2 1); and therefore it was also a statute,
that the high priest and his sons should not shave their heads,
lest they should die, and lest wrath should come upon the
whole house of Israel (Lev. x. 6). Since the hair, on ac-
count of this signification from correspondence, was so holy,
therefore the Son of Man, who is the Lord as to the Word,
is described even as to the hair, that it was white like wool,
as white as snow (Rev. i. 14); and in like manner, the An-
cient of Days (Dan. vii. 9). Since hair signifies truth in ulti-
mates, and thus the sense of the letter of the Word, therefore
in the spiritual world they who despise the Word become
bald; and, on the other hand, they who have highly es-
teemed the Word and accounted it holy, appear with comely
hair. It was owing to this correspondence that the forty-
two boys were torn to pieces by two she-bears, because they
called Elisha bald head (2 Kings ii. 23, 24); for Elisha rep-
resented the church as to doctrine from the Word, and she-
bears signify the power of truth in ultimates. The power
of Divine truth, or of the Word, is in the sense of its letter
because the Word is there in its fulness, and the angels of
both of the Lord’s kingdoms and men are together in that
sense.

224. (8.) Concerning the ineffable power of the Word.
Scarce any one at this day knows that there is any power in
truths; for truth is supposed to be only a word spoken by
some one in authority, which ought therefore to be done;
consequently, to be like mere breath from the mouth, or
sound in the ear; when yet truth and good are the first prin-
ciples of all things in both worlds, the spiritual and the natu-
ral; and by means of them the universe was created, and by
means of them the universe is preserved, and also by means
of them man was made; wherefore those two are the all in
all. That the universe was created by the Divine truth, is
openly said in John: In the beginning was the Word , and the


342


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 224


Word was God ... all things that were made were made by
it . . . and the world was made by it (i. 1, 3, 10). And in
David, By the Word of Jehovah were the heavens made (Ps.
xxxiii. 6). By the Word in both of these places is meant the
Divine truth. Since the universe was created by this truth,
therefore it is also conserved by it; for, as subsistence is per-
petual existence, so conservation is perpetual creation. Man
was made by the Divine truth because all things in man refer
themselves to the understanding and the will; and the un-
derstanding is the receptacle of Divine truth, and the will of
Divine good; consequently the human mind, which con-
sists of those two principles, is no other than a form of Di-
vine truth and Divine good, spiritually and naturally organ-
ized. The human brain is that form. And because the
whole of man depends on his mind, all things in his body
are dependencies, which are actuated by those two prin-
ciples, and live from them. From what has been said it may
now be evident why God came into the world as the Word,
and became Man — that this was for the sake of redemp-
tion; for then God by the Human, which was Divine' truth,
put on all power and cast down the hells which had grown
up even to the heavens where the angels were, subjugated
them and reduced them to obedience to Himself; and this
not by a spoken word, but by the Divine Word, which is the
Divine truth: and afterward He opened a great gulf be-
tween the hells and the heavens, which no one from hell can
cross. If any one attempts it, at the first step he is tor-
tured like a serpent laid on sheets of hot iron, or on an ant-
hill; for devils and satans, as soon as they have a scent of
Divine truth, instantly precipitate themselves into the deep,
and cast themselves into caverns, stopping them up so closely
that not a crack may open. This is because their will is in
evils and their understanding in falsities, thus in what is
opposite to Divine good and Divine truth; and because the
whole man consists of those two first principles of life, as be-
fore said, therefore they are so grievously and wholly over-


No. 226]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


343


powered from head to foot, at the sense of what is opposite.
From this it may be seen that the power of Divine truth
is ineffable; and since the Word which is in the Christian
Church is the containant of Divine truth in the three de-
grees, it is plain that it is that which is meant in John (i. 3,
10). That its power is ineffable, I could confirm by many
proofs of experience in the spiritual world; but because they
exceed belief, or appear incredible, I refrain from adding
them; some however you may see recorded above (n. 209).
Of these things this may now be given as a reminder: — The
church which is in Divine truths from the Lord prevails over
the hells, and is that of which the Lord said to Peter, Upon
this rock I will build My church , and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it (Matt. xvi. 18). The Lord said this after
Peter had confessed that He was the Christ, the Son of the
living God (verse 16); this truth is there meant by the rock;
for by rock everywhere in the Word is meant the Lord as to
Divine truth.

V. The Doctrine of the Church is to be drawn
from the Sense of the Letter of the Word,

AND CONFIRMED BY IT.

225. It has been shown in the preceding articles that the
Word in the sense of the letter is in its fulness, in its holiness,
and in its power; and since the Lord is the Word, and is the
First and the Last, as He says in the Apocalypse (i. 17), it
follows that He is most fully present in that sense, and that
He teaches and enlightens man from it. But these things
shall be demonstrated in this order: — 1. Without doctrine
the Word is not understood. 2. Doctrine is to be drawn
from the sense of the letter 0} the Word and to be confirmed by
it. 3. But the Divine truth which is of doctrine appears to
none but those who are in enlightenment from the Lord.

226. (1.) Without doctrine the Word is not understood.
This is because the Word in the sense of the letter consists


344


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 226


solely of correspondences, in order that spiritual and celes-
tial things may be together therein, and every word may be
a containant and support for them. For this reason Di-
vine truths in the sense of the letter are rarely naked, but
clothed, and these are called appearances of truth ; and there
are many things accommodated to the apprehension of the
simple, who do not lift their thoughts above such things as
they see before their eyes; also some things which appear
like contradictions, when yet there is no contradiction in the
Word viewed in its own spiritual light; and furthermore,
in some passages in the prophets, there are brought together
names of places and persons from which no sense can be
elicited. Since, then, the Word is such in the sense of the
letter, it may be evident that it cannot be understood with-
out doctrine. But let examples illustrate this. It is said
that Jehovah repenteth (Exod. xxxii. 12, 14: Jon. iii. 9;
iv. 2); and it is also said that Jehovah doth not repent (Num.
xxiii. 19: 1 Sam. xv. 29). Without doctrine these state-
ments do not agree. It is said that Jehovah visiteth the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation (Num. xiv. 18); and it is also said that the
father shall not die for the son, nor the son for the father;
but every one in his own sin (Deut. xxiv. 16). By means of
doctrine, these statements do not conflict, but are in agree-
ment. Jesus says, Ask , and it shall be given you; seek , and
ye shall find; and to him that knocketh , it shall be opened
(Matt. vii. 7, 8; xxi. 21, 22). Without doctrine it might be
supposed that every one is to receive what he asks; but from
doctrine it is known that when man asks from the Lord,
whatever he asks is given. This also the Lord teaches: If
ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you , ye shall ask what
ye will, and it shall be done unto you (John xv. 7). The
Lord says: Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of
God (Luke vi. 20). Without doctrine it may be thought that
heaven is for the poor, and not for the rich; but doctrine
teaches that the poor in spirit are meant; for the Lord says:


No. 227]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


345


Blessed are the poor in spirit , jor theirs is the kingdom 0} the
heavens (Matt. v. 3). Again the Lord says, Judge not , that
ye be not judged: with what judgment ye judge , ye shall be
judged (Matt. vii. 1, 2: Luke vi. 37). Without doctrine any
one might be led to conclude that he ought not to judge con-
cerning a wicked man, that he is wicked; but according to
doctrine it is lawful to judge, but justly; for the Lord says,
Judge righteous judgment (John vii. 24). Jesus says: Be
not ye called teacher; jor One is your Teacher , even Christ.
Call no man your father upon the earth ; jor One is your
Father in the heavens . Neither be ye called masters ; jor
One is your Master , even the Christ (Matt, xxiii. 8-10).
Without doctrine this would be, that it is not lawful to call
any one teacher, father, or master; but from doctrine it is
known that it is lawful in a natural sense, though not in a
spiritual sense. Jesus said to the disciples, When the Son
of Man shall sit on the throne of His glory , ye also shall sit
upon twelve thrones , judging the twelve tribes oj Israel (Matt,
xix. 28). From these words it may be concluded that the
Lord’s disciples also are to judge, when yet they can judge
no one. Doctrine therefore will reveal this arcanum by
teaching that the Lord alone, who is omniscient and knows
all hearts, is to judge and is able to judge; and that by His
twelve disciples is meant the church as to all truths and
goods which it has from the Lord through the Word. From
which doctrine concludes that these are to judge every one —
according to the words of the Lord in John (iii. 17, 18; xii.
47, 48). There are many other such statements in the Word,
from which it is clearly manifest that the Word is not un-
derstood without doctrine.

227. The Word by doctrine is not only understood, but
it also shines in the understanding; for doctrine is like a
chandelier with lamps lighted; a man then sees more than
he had seen before, and also understands what he had
not understood before: what is obscure and discordant he
either passes by unseen, or he sees and explains so that it


346


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 227


may accord with doctrine. That the Word is seen from
doctrine, and is explained according to it, the experience of
the Christian world witnesses. All the Reformed see the
Word from their doctrine, and explain it according to their
doctrine; so also the Papists from theirs, according to it;
even the Jews from theirs, and according to it; consequently
they see falsities from false doctrine, and truths from true
doctrine. From this it is plain that true doctrine is like a
lamp in the dark, and like a guide-post on the highway.

228. From these things it may be evident that they who
read the Word without doctrine are in obscurity respecting
every truth, and that their mind is wandering and uncertain,
prone to errors, and also easily falling into heresies, which
they embrace if favor or authority supports them and their
reputation is not endangered; for to them the Word is like
a chandelier without light, and they see many things as in the
shade; and yet they see scarce any thing, for doctrine alone
is the lamp. I have seen such examined by angels, and it
was found that they could confirm from the Word whatever
they would, and that they confirm especially the things which
are of their love, and of the love of those whom they favor.
But I saw them stripped of their garments, a sign that they
were without truths: garments there are truths.

229. (2.) Doctrine is to be drawn from the sense 0} the let-
ter oj the Word y and to be confirmed by it . The reason is that
the Lord is there present, and teaches and enlightens; for
the Lord never operates except in fulness, and the Word is
in its fulness in the sense of the letter, as was shown above;
hence it is that doctrine should be drawn from the sense of
the letter. The doctrine of genuine truth may also be fully
drawn from the literal sense of the Word; for the Word in
that sense is like a man clothed, whose face is bare, and his
hands also bare. All the things which pertain to a man’s
faith and life, and thus to his salvation, are naked there, but
the rest are clothed; and in many places where they are
clothed, they shine through, as objects are seen by a woman


No. 231]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


347


through a thin veil of silk before her face. As truths of the
Word are multiplied from the love of them, and as by this
they are arranged in order, they also shine and appear more
and more clearly.

230. It may be believed that doctrine of genuine truth
can be gathered by means of the spiritual sense of the Word,
which is given through a knowledge of correspondences;
but doctrine is not gathered through that sense, but only
illustrated and corroborated; for, as was said before (n. 208),
by some correspondences that are known a man may falsify
the Word, in joining them together and applying them to
confirm that which inheres in his mind from some principle
that he has adopted. And besides, the spiritual sense is not
given to any one except by the Lord alone; and it is guarded
by Him as the angelic heaven is guarded, for heaven is in it.

231. (30 Genuine truth , which will be of doctrine , does
not appear in the sense of the letter of the Word to any but
those who are in enlightenment from the Lord. Enlighten-
ment is from the Lord alone, and is with those who love
truths because they are truths, and who make them uses of
the life; with others, enlightenment in the Word is not given.
Enlightenment is from the Lord alone because the Word is
from Him, and thus He is in the Word. They have en-
lightenment who love truths because they are truths, and
who make them uses of life, because they are in the Lord,
and the Lord in them; for the Lord is the Truth itself, as
was shown in the chapter concerning the Lord; and the
Lord is then loved, when man lives according to His Divine
truths, thus when uses are performed from them, according
to these words in John: At that day ye shall know that ye are
in Me, and I in you. He that hath My commandments and
keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me . . . and I will love him,
and will manifest Myself to him . . . and we will come to
him, and make an abode with him (xiv. 20, 21, 23). These
are they who are in enlightenment when they read the Word,
and with whom the Word gives light and is translucent. The


348


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 231


Word gives light and is translucent with them, because there
are the spiritual and the celestial senses in every thing of the
Word, and these senses are in the light of heaven; where-
fore through these senses and their light the Lord flows into
the natural sense of the Word, and into the light of it that is
with a man. Hence the man acknowledges the truth from
interior perception, and afterward sees it in his thought; and
this as often as he is in affection for truth for the sake of
truth; for from affection comes perception, from perception
thought, and thus the acknowledgment which is called faith
is effected.

232. The contrary is the case with those who read the
Word from the doctrine of a false religion, and still more
with those who confirm that doctrine from the Word, and
this with a view to their own glory and to the riches of the
world. With these the truths of the Word are as in the
shadow of night, and falsities as in the light of day; they
read truths but do not see them; and if they see their shadow
they falsify them. These are they of whom the Lord says,
that they have eyes and see not , and ears but do not under-
stand (Matt. xiii. 14, 15). Therefore their light in spiritual
things that are of the church becomes merely natural, and
the sight of their mind like that of one who sees spectres in
the bed while he is awaking, or like that of a sleep-walker
who believes himself to be awake when he is sleeping.

233. It has been given me to converse with many after
their death who believed that they should shine like stars in
heaven, because, as they said, they esteemed the Word holy,
often perused it, collected from it many things by which they
confirmed the dogmas of their faith, and therefore were
celebrated as learned men; from which they believed that
they should be Michaels and Raphaels. But many of them
were examined as to the love from which they studied the
Word; and it was found that some studied it from the love
of themselves, that they might be worshipped as leaders of
the church; and some from the love of the’ world, that they


No. 234]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


349


might gain riches; when these were also examined as to
what they knew from the Word, it was found that they knew
nothing of genuine truth from it, but only such as is called
truth falsified, which in itself is putrid falsity, for in heaven
it has a putrid smell; and it was said to them, that they had
this because they themselves and the world were their ends
when they read the Word, and not the truth of faith and the
good of life. And when one’s self and the world are ends,
then the mind in reading the Word sticks fast in self and the
world; and therefore men think continually from their self-
hood, and this is in thick darkness as to all things of heaven
and the church; in which state man cannot be lifted up by
the Lord and raised into the light of heaven; consequently
he cannot receive any influx from the Lord through heaven.
I have also seen these persons admitted into heaven, and
when they were there found to be without truths they were
cast down; but still there remained with them pride in their
own merit. It was otherwise with those who had studied
the Word from an affection for knowing truth because it is
truth and serves the uses of life, not only their own but also
their neighbor’s. I have seen these elevated into heaven,
and so into the light in which Divine truth is there, and
exalted at the same time into angelic wisdom and its hap-
piness, in which the angels of heaven are.

VI. By the sense of the letter of the Word, there

is conjunction with the Lord, and consociation

WITH THE ANGELS.

234. There is conjunction with the Lord by the Word
because He is the Word, that is, the Divine truth itself and
the Divine good therein. The conjunction is by the sense
of the letter because the Word in that sense is in its fulness,
in its holiness, and in its power, as was shown above under
that head. This conjunction does not appear to the man,
but it is in the affection for truth, and in the perception of it.


350 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 234

By the sense of the letter there is consociation with the an-
gels of heaven, because the spiritual sense and the celestial
sense are within that of the letter, and the angels are in those
senses — the angels of the Lord’s spiritual kingdom in the
spiritual sense of the Word, and the angels of His celestial
kingdom in its celestial sense. These two senses are evolved
from the natural sense of the Word while a man who regards
the Word as holy is reading it. The evolution is instan-
taneous, and so also is the consociation.

235. That the spiritual angels are in the spiritual sense
of the Word and the celestial angels in its celestial sense,
has been made manifest to me by much experience. It
has been given me to perceive that, while I have been read-
ing the Word in the sense of its letter, communication has
been made with the heavens, now with this society there,
now with that. What I have understood according to the
natural sense, spiritual angels have understood according to
the spiritual sense, and celestial angels according to the
celestial sense, and this instantly. And as this communica-
tion has been perceived some thousands of times, I have no
doubt left concerning it. There are also spirits who are be-
low the heavens and who abuse this communication, for they
recite some passages from the sense of the letter of the Word,
and immediately observe and note the society with which
communication is effected, as I have often seen and heard.
From these things it has been given me to know by living

f experience that the Word as to the sense of its letter is the
Divine medium of conjunction with the Lord, and of conso-
ciation with the angels of heaven.

236. But let examples illustrate how from the natural
sense the spiritual angels perceive their sense, and the celes-
tial angels theirs, when man is reading the Word. Let four
commandments of the Decalogue be examples: — The fifth
commandment, Thou shall not kill: by this a man under-
stands not only to kill, but also to cherish hatred and breathe
revenge even to the death : a spiritual angel for killing under-


No. 237]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


35 1

stands acting the devil and destroying a man’s soul; but a
celestial angel for killing understands hating the Lord and
the Word. The sixth commandment, Thou shall not com-
mit adultery: a man understands committing adultery to
mean com m itting whoredom, doing obscene things, speak-
ing lascivious words, and entertaining filthy thoughts; a
spiritual angel understands for co mmi tting adultery, adul-
terating the goods of the Word, and falsifying its truths; but
a celestial angel understands for committing adultery, deny-
ing the Lord’s Divinity and profaning the Word. The
seventh commandment, Thou shall not steal: by stealing, a
man understands stealing, defrauding, and taking away
from the neighbor his goods under any pretext; a spiritual
angel understands for stealing, depriving others of the truths
and goods of their faith by falsities and evils; but a celestial
angel understands for stealing, attributing to one’s self what
is the Lord’s, and claiming to one’s self His righteousness
and merit. The eighth commandment, Thou shall not bear
false witness: by bearing false witness a man understands
also lying and defaming; a spiritual angel understands for
bearing false witness, saying and persuading others to be-
lieve falsity to be truth and evil to be good, and the converse;
but a celestial angel understands for bearing false witness,
blaspheming the Lord and the Word. From these examples
it may be seen how the spiritual and the celestial senses are
unfolded and drawn out from the natural sense of the Word,
within which they are; and what is wonderful, the angels
draw forth what is for them without knowing what the man
is thinking. But still .the thoughts of angels and of men
make one by correspondence, as end, cause, and effect.
Ends are also actually in the celestial kingdom, causes in
the spiritual kingdom, and effects in the natural kingdom;
thus there is consociation of men with angels by means of
the Word.

237. From the sense of the letter of the Word the spiritual
angel draws out and calls forth what is spiritual, and the


352


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 237


celestial angel what is celestial, because they are agreeable
to their quality and are homogeneous. That this is so may
be illustrated by what is similar in the three kingdoms of
nature, the animal, the vegetable, and the mineral. In the
animal kingdom: from the food, when it has become chyle,
the vessels draw out and call forth their blood, the nervous
fibres their juice, and the substances which are the origins
of the fibres their spirit. In the vegetable kingdom: a tree,
with its trunk, branches, leaves, and fruit, stands on its root;
and out of the soil by means of the root it extracts and calls
forth a grosser juice for the trunk, branches, and leaves, a
purer one for the pulp of the fruit, and the purest for the
seeds within the fruit. In the mineral kingdom: in the
bosom of the earth in some places there are minerals im-
pregnated with gold, silver, copper, and iron; from the exhal-
ations and effluvia from rocks, the gold, the silver, the cop-
per, and the iron, respectively, derive their proper elements,
brought around by the watery element.

238. The Word in the letter is like a casket, in which lie in
order precious stones, pearls, and diadems; and when a man
esteems the Word holy and reads it for the sake of the uses of
life, the thoughts of hi*s mind are, by comparison, like one
who holds such a casket in his hand and sends it up to
heaven; and it is opened in its ascent, and the precious things
therein come to angels who are deeply delighted with seeing
and examining them. This delight of the angels is com-
municated to the man, and makes consociation, and also
a communication of perceptions. For the sake of this con-
sociation with angels, and at the same time conjunction with
the Lord, the Holy Supper was instituted, the bread of which
in heaven becomes Divine good, and the wine becomes Di-
vine truth, both from the Lord. Such correspondence is
from creation, to the end that the angelic heaven with the
church on earth, and in general the spiritual world with
the natural world, may make one, and that the Lord may
conjoin Himself with both at once.


No. 240] THE SACRED SCRIPTURE 353

239. The consociation of man with angels is effected by
the natural or literal sense of the Word, for the further rea-
son that there are in every man from creation three degrees
of life, the celestial, the spiritual, and the natural; but man is
in the natural as long as he is in the world, and is then so far
in the angelic spiritual as he is in genuine truths, and so far
in the celestial as he is in a life according to them; but still
he does not come into the spiritual itself and the celestial
itself, till after death, because these two are enclosed and
stored up within his natural ideas; and so when the natural
passes away by death, the spiritual and the celestial remain,
and the ideas of his thought then come from them. From
these things it may be evident that in the Word alone there
is spirit and life, as the Lord says, The words that I speak
unto you , they are spirit and they are life (John vi. 63). The
water that I shall give shall be a fountain of water , springing
up into everlasting life (iv. 14). Man doth not live by bread
alone y but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
God (Matt. iv. 4). Labor for the meat which endureth unto
everlasting life , which the Son of Man shall give unto you
(John vi. 27).

VII. The Word is in all the heavens, and from it is

THE WISDOM OF ANGELS.

240. That the Word is in the heavens has been hitherto
unknown; nor could it be made known so long as the church
did not know that angels and spirits are men, in face and
body altogether like men in our world; and that with them
are things similar in all respects to those which are with men,
with the sole difference that they are themselves spiritual,
and all things that are with them are from a spiritual origin;
while men in the world are natural, and all things with them
are from a natural origin. As long as this lay hidden, it
could not be known that the Word is also in the heavens, and
that it is read by the angels there, and also by the spirits who


354


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 240


are beneath the heavens. But that this might not be hid-
den for ever, it has been granted me to be in company with
angels and spirits, and to speak with them, and to see the
things that are with them, and afterward to relate much
which I have seen and heard; this has been done in the work
concerning Heaven and Hell, published at London in the
year 1758; from which it may be seen, that angels and spirits
are men, and that with them in abundance are all things that
are with men in the world. That angels and spirits are men,
may be seen in that work (n. 73-77, and n. 453-456); that
there are with them things similar to those with men in the
world (n. 1 70-190); and also that with them there is Di-
vine worship, and is preaching in their temples (n. 221-227);
and that they have writings and also books (n. 258-264),
and the Sacred Scripture or the Word (n. 259).

241. As regards the Word in heaven, it is written in a
spiritual style, which is wholly different from the natural
style. The spiritual style consists solely of letters, each of
which involves some meaning; and there are little lines,
curves, and dots over and between the letters and in them,
which exalt the sense. With the angels of the spiritual king-
dom the letters are similar to the type letters used in our
world; and with the angels of the celestial kingdom they are
with some similar to Arabic letters, and with some similar
to the old Hebrew letters, but curved above and below, with
marks over, between, and within, each of these also involving
an entire meaning. As their writing is such, therefore the
names of persons and places in the Word with them are in-
dicated with signs, from which the wise understand what
spiritual and celestial thing is signified by each name; as by
Moses, the Word of God written through him, and in a gen-
eral sense the historic Word; by Elias, the prophetic Word;
by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Lord as to the Divine
celestial, the Divine spiritual, and the Divine natural; by
Aaron the priesthood of the Lord, and by David His royalty;
by the names of the sons of Jacob, or of the twelve tribes of


No. 242] THE SACRED SCRIPTURE 35 S

Israel, the various things of heaven and the church, and simi-
lar by the names of the Lord’s twelve disciples; by Zion and
Jerusalem, the church as to doctrine from the Word; by the
land of Canaan, the church itself; by the places and cities
there, on this side and beyond the Jordan, various things
which pertain to the church and its doctrine. It is similar
with numbers: these are not in the copies of the Word in
heaven, but, instead, the things to which the numbers corre-
spond. From this it may be evident that the Word in heaven
is, as to the literal sense, similar to our Word, and at the
same time it corresponds to it, and that thus they are one.
This is wonderful, that the Word in the heavens is so writ-
ten that the simple understand it in simplicity, and the wise
in wisdom; for there are many curves and marks over the
letters, which, as before said, exalt the sense; the simple do
not give attention to these, nor have they a knowledge of
them, but the wise give attention to them, each according to
his wisdom, even to the highest. A copy of the Word, writ-
ten by angels inspired by the Lord, is kept with every larger
society in its sacred repository, lest the Word should be
changed anywhere as to even a point. The Word which is
in our world is similar to the Word in heaven in this, that the
simple understand it simply, and the wise wisely; but this
comes in another way.

242. That angels have all their wisdom through the Word,
they themselves acknowledge; for as far as they are in the
understanding of the Word, so far they are in light. The
light of heaven is Divine wisdom, which to their eyes is light.
In the sacred repository in which a copy of the Word is kept,
the light is flamy and bright, surpassing every degree of light
which is outside of it in the heaven. The wisdom of the
celestial angels surpasses that of the spiritual angels almost
as the wisdom of the spiritual angels surpasses the wisdom
of men; and this, because celestial angels are in the good of
love from the Lord, and spiritual angels are in truths of wis-
dom from the Lord; and where the good of love is, there wis-


356 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 242

dom dwells at the same time; but where there are truths,
there no more of wisdom dwells than there is of the good of
love at the same time. This is the reason why the Word in
the Lord’s celestial kingdom is written differently from the
Word in His spiritual kingdom; for, in the Word of the
celestial kingdom the goods of love are expressed, and the
marks are the affections of love; but in the Word of the
spiritual kingdom the truths of wisdom are expressed, and
the marks are interior perceptions of truth. From these
things it may be concluded what wisdom lies hidden in the
Word which is in the world, for in it lies hid all angelic wis-
dom, which is ineffable; and into which the man who is
made an angel by the Lord through the Word, comes after
death.

VIII. The church is from the Word, and it is such

WITH MAN AS IS HIS UNDERSTANDING OF THE WORD.

243. That the church is from the Word, is not a matter
of doubt; for it has been shown above, that the Word is Di-
vine truth (n. 189-192); that the doctrine of the church is
from the Word (n. 225-233); and that by the Word there is
conjunction with the Lord (n. 234-239); but that the under-
standing of the Word makes the church, may be called in
question, since there are those who believe that they are of
the church because they have the Word, read it, or hear it
from a preacher, and know something of the sense of its
letter; but how this and that in the Word is to be under-
stood, they do not know, and some do not regard it as im-
portant; therefore it will here be shown that not the Word,
but the understanding of it makes the church; and that the
church is such as is the understanding of the Word with
those who are in the church.

244. The church is according to the understanding of the
Word, because the church is according to the truths of faith
and the goods of charity, and these two are the universals,


No. 245]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


357


which are not only spread through all the literal sense of the
Word, but also lie hidden within, like precious things in a
treasury. The things which are in its literal sense are appar-
ent to every man, because they present themselves directly
to the eye; but the things which lie hid in the spiritual sense
are not apparent, except to those who love truths because
they are truths and do goods because they are goods; to
them the treasure is laid open, which the literal sense covers
and guards; and these are they which essentially make the
church.

245. That the church is according to its doctrine, and
that doctrine is from the Word, is known; but still doctrine
does not establish the church, but the soundness and purity
of the doctrine, consequently the understanding of the Word.
Nor does doctrine establish and make the special church
with the individual man, but faith and a life according to it.
So the Word does not establish and make the church in par-
ticular with a man, but a faith according to the truths, and
a life according to the goods, which he derives from the
Word and applies to himself. The Word is like a mine
which contains in its depths gold and silver in all abundance;
and like a mine in which lie hidden more and more interi-
orly stones more and more precious: these mines are opened
according to the understanding of the Word. Without the
understanding of the Word, as it is in itself, in its bosom and
in its depth, it would no more make the church with man,
than the mines in Asia would make a European rich; it
would be different if he were one of the owners and workers.
The Word with those who search for truths of faith and the
goods of life from it, is like the wealth of the king of Persia,
or of the emperor of the Moguls, or of China; and the men
of the church are like officers placed over them, to whom
permission is given to take for their use as much as they
please; but they who only possess the Word and read it,
and still do not seek genuine truths for faith and genuine
goods for life, are like those who know from hearsay that


358


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 245


there are such great treasures there, but do not receive from
them a single farthing. They who possess the Word, and
derive from it no understanding of genuine truth and no will
of genuine good, are like those who believe themselves to be
rich, from having borrowed money of others, or from having
in possession the farms, houses, and merchandize of others:
that this is mere fantasy, every one sees. They are also like
those who go dressed in fine clothes, and ride in gilded char-
iots, with attendants behind them and at the side, and cour-
iers ahead, while yet nothing of this is their own property.

246. Such was the Jewish nation; and so because it pos-
sessed the Word, that nation was likened by the Lord to a
rich man, who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared
sumptuously every day; and yet he had not derived from the
Word enough of good and truth to take pity on poor Laza-
rus, who lay at his door full of sores. That nation not only
did not appropriate to itself any truths from the Word, but it
appropriated falsities in such abundance that finally not any
truth appeared to them; for truths are not only covered over
by falsities, but they are also obliterated and rejected. It
was for this reason that the Jews did not acknowledge the
Messiah, though all the prophets had announced His
coming.

247. In many places in the prophets, the church with the
nation of Israel and Judah is describeb as utterly destroyed
and reduced to nothing by their having falsified the mean-
ing or understanding of the Word; for nothing else destroys
the church. The understanding of the Word, both true and
false, is described in the prophets by Ephraim, especially in
Hosea; for Ephraim in the Word signifies the understand-
ing of the Word in the church. Since the understanding of
the Word makes the church, therefore Ephraim is called
in the Word a dear son, and a pleasant child; also the first-
born (Jer. xxxi. 9, 20); the strength of the head of Jehovah
(Ps. lx. 7; cviii. 8); mighty (Zech. x. 7); filled with the bow
(ix. 13); and the sons of Ephraim are called armed, and


No. 247]


THE SACREB SCRIPTURE


359


shooters with the bow (Ps. lxxviii. 9); for by the bow is sig-
nified doctrine from the Word fighting against falsities.
Therefore, also, Ephraim was removed to the right hand of
Israel, and blessed; and also he was accepted in the place
of Reuben (Gen. xlviii. 5, 11, and the following verses).
And therefore Ephraim, with his brother Manasseh, in the
blessing of the sons of Israel by Moses, under the name of
their father Joseph, was exalted above them all (Deut. xxxiii.
13-17). What the church is, when the understanding of
the Word has been destroyed, is also described in the prophets
by Ephraim, especially in Hosea, as in these passages: Israel
and Ephraim shall fall. . . . Ephraim shall be desolate. . . .
Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment (Hos. v. 5, 9,
ir ; also 12-14). O Ephr aim, what shall 1 do unto thee? . . .
for thy goodness is as a morning cloud , and as the early dew it
goeth away (vi. 4). They shall not dwell in the land 0} Jeho-
vah; Ephraim shall return to Egypt , and they shall eat un-
clean things in Assyria (ix. 3). The land of Jehovah is the
church, Egypt is the knowledge of the natural man, Assyria
is reasoning therefrom, from which two together the Word
as to the interior understanding of it is falsified; therefore it
is said that Ephraim shall return to Egypt and shall eat un-
clean things in Assyria. Ephraim feedeth on wind , and fol-
loweth after the east wind. Every day he multiplieth lies and
desolation; he maketh a covenant with Assyria , and oil is
carried Mo Egypt (Hos. xii. 1). To feed upon the wind, to
follow after the east wind, and to multiply lies and desola-
tion, is to falsify truths and thus destroy the church. Simi-
lar also is the signification of Ephraim's whoredom; for
whoredom signifies the falsification of the understanding of
the Word, that is, of its genuine truth; as in these passages:
I know Ephraim ... he hath committed whoredom , and
Israel is defiled (Hos. v. 3). I have seen a horrible thing in
the house of Israel; there Ephraim committed whoredom , and
Israel is defiled (vi. 10). Israel is the church itself, and
Ephraim is the understanding of the Word, from which and


360 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 247

according to which the church is; wherefore it is said,
Ephraim committed whoredom, and Israel is defiled. Since
the church with the nation of Israel and Judah was utterly-
destroyed by falsifications of the Word, therefore it is said of
Ephraim, Shall I give thee up> Ephraim ? Shall I deliver
thee up , Israel? Shall I make thee as Admah? Shall I set
thee as Zeboim? (Hos. xi. 8.) Now because the prophecy
of Hosea, from the first chapter to the last, describes the fal-
sification of the genuine understanding of the Word and the
destruction of the church thereby, and because the falsifica-
tion of truth is there signified by whoredom, therefore that
prophet was commanded to represent that state of the church
by taking to himself a harlot to wife, and begetting children
by her (Hos. i.) ; and again he was commanded to take a
woman who was an adulteress (iii.). These passages have
been presented that it may be known and confirmed from the
Word that the church is such as is the understanding of the
Word in it; excellent and precious if the understanding is
from genuine truths out of the Word, but destroyed, yea,
filthy if from those that are falsified.

DC In everything in the Word there is the marriage
of the Lord and the church, and thence the

MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND TRUTH.

248. That there is the marriage of the Lord and the
church, and hence the marriage of good and truth in every-
thing of the Word, has not hitherto been seen; nor could it
be seen, because the spiritual sense of the Word has not be-
fore been disclosed, and the marriage cannot be seen except
by that sense. For there are two senses in the Word, lying
hid in the sense of its letter, the spiritual and the celestial.
In the spiritual sense the things which are in the Word have
relation chiefly to the church; and in the celestial chiefly to
the Lord. And in the spiritual sense they also have rela-
tion to Divine truth, and in the celestial sense to Divine


No. 249] the sacred scripture 36 r

good. Hence there is that marriage in the Word. But this
does not appear except to one who, from the spiritual and
celestial senses of the Word, knows the significations of the
words and names; for some words and names are predi-
cated of good, and some of truth, and some include both;
and therefore without this knowledge, that marriage in every
thing of the Word could not be seen. This is the reason why
this arcanum has not been disclosed before. Because there
is such a marriage in every thing of the Word, there are
often two expressions in the Word which appear like repeti-
tions of one thing. They are not repetitions, however, but
one has reference to good and the other to truth, and both
taken together make the conjunction of these, and thus one
thing. From this also is the Divine holiness of the Word;
for in every Divine work good is conjoined with truth, and r
truth conjoined with good.

249. It is said that in every thing of the Word there is the
marriage of the Lord and the church, and hence the mar-
riage of good and truth ; because, where the marriage of the
Lord and the church is, there also is the marriage of good and
truth; the one being from the other. For when the church
or the man of the church is in truths, then the Lord flows
into his truths with good, and gives them life; or what is the
same, when the man of the church is in the understanding of
truth, then the Lord by the good of charity flows into his
understanding, and so infuses life into it. In every man
there are two faculties of life, which are called the under-
standing and the will: the understanding is the receptacle
of truth and thence of wisdom, and the will is the receptacle
of good and thence of charity. These two faculties must
make one, that the man may be a man of the church; and
they do make one when the man forms his understanding
from genuine truths, which is done to appearance as by him-
self, and when his will is filled with the good of love, which is
done by the Lord. Hence man has the life of truth and the
life of good, the life of truth in the understanding and the


362


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 249


life of good in the will, which when united do not make two
lives, but one life. This is the marriage of the Lord and
the church, and also the marriage of good and truth in man.

250. That there are in the Word two expressions which
appear as repetitions of the same thing, may be seen by
readers who attend to it: as, brother and companion, poor
and needy, waste and wilderness, void and emptiness, foe
and enemy, sin and iniquity, anger and wrath, nation and
people, joy and gladness, mourning and weeping, justice and
judgment, and so on; which appear as synonymous, when
yet they are not so. For brother, poor, waste, void, foe, sin,
anger, nation, joy, mourning, and justice are predicated of
good, and in the opposite sense, of evil; but companion,
needy, wilderness, emptiness, enemy, iniquity, wrath, people,
gladness, weeping, and judgment are predicated of truth,
and in the opposite sense, of falsity. And yet to the reader
who does not know this arcanum, it appears as if poor and
needy, waste and wilderness, void and emptiness, and so on,
are one thing, and yet they are not one, but they become one
by conjunction. In the Word other things also are joined
together, as fire and flame, gold and silver, brass and iron,
wood and stone, bread and water, bread and wine, purple
and fine linen, and so on; and this because fire, gold, brass,
wood, bread, and purple are predicated of good; but flame,
silver, iron, stone, water, wine, and fine linen are predi-
cated of truth. So when it is said that they are to love God
with the whole heart and with the whole soul, and that God
is to create in man a new heart and a new spirit; for heart is
predicated of the good of love, and soul and spirit of the
truths of faith. There are also words, which because they
partake of both good and truth are used by themselves,
others not being joined with them. But these and many
other things are apparent only to the angels, and to those
who while in the natural sense are in the spiritual sense also.

251. It would be prolix to show from the Word that there
are such dual expressions in it, appearing like repetitions of


No. 251]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


363


the same thing; for it would take many pages to present
them. But to remove doubt, I will adduce passages where
nation and people, and where joy and gladness are men-
tioned together. Passages where nation and people are
named: Woe to the sinful nation , to the people laden with ini-
quity (Isa. i. 4). The people that walked in darkness have
seen a great light; Thou hast multiplied the nation (ix. 2, 3).
Ashur , the rod of Mine anger; I will send him against a hypo-
critical nation , against the people of My wrath will I give him
a charge (x. 5,6). It shall come to pass in that day , that the
nations shall seek the Root of Jesse, which standeth for an
ensign of the people (xi. 10). Jehovah , who smiteth the people
with a plague not curable , ruling the nations with anger (xiv.
6). In that day shall the present be brought unto Jehovah
Zebaoth, of a people scattered and peeled , and a nation meted
out and trodden under foot (xviii. 7). The strong people shall
honor Thee, the city of powerful nations shall fear Thee (xxv.
3). Jehovah will swallow up the covering over all people , and
the veil over all nations (xxv. 7). Come near, ye nations , and
hearken, ye people (xxxiv. 1). I have called thee for a cove-
nant of the people , and for a light of the nations (xlii. 6). Let
all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be as-
sembled (xliii. 9). Behold , I will lift up My hand to the na-
tions, and My standard to the people (xlix. 22). I have given
Him for a witness to the people , a Leader and a Lawgiver to
the people; behold thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest
not , and nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee (lv. 4,
5). Behold a people cometh from the north country , and a
great nation from the sides of the earth ( Jer. vi. 22, 23). I will
not cause thee to hear the calumny of the nations any more,
neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people any more
(Ezek. xxxvi. 15). AU people and nations shall worship
Him (Dan. vii. 14). Let not the nations make a by-word of
them, and say among the people, Where is their God? (Joel
ii. 17.) The remnant of My people shall spoil them, and the
residue of My nation shall inherit them (Zeph. ii. 9). Many


364 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 251

people and numerous nations shall come to seek Jehovah in
Jerusalem (Zech. viii. 22). Mine eyes have seen Thy salva-
tion, which Thou hast prepared bejore the face of all people ,
a light to enlighten the nations (Luke ii. 30-32). Thou hast
redeemed us by Thy blood, out of every people and nation
(Apoc. v. 9). Thou must prophesy again over people and
nations (x. 11). Thou shalt set me for the head 0} the na-
tions; a people whom I had not known shall serve me (Ps.
xviii. 43). Jehovah bringeth the counsel of the nations to
nought; He overthroweth the thoughts of the people (xxxiii.
10). Thou makest us a proverb among the nations, a shaking
of the head among the people (xliv. 14). Jehovah will sub-
due the people under us, and the nations under our feet . . .
Jehovah hath reigned over the nations ... the willing ones
of the people are gathered together (xlvii. 3, 8, 9). The people
shall confess Thee, and the nations shall be glad, for Thou
shalt judge the people righteously, and lead the nations on the
earth (lxvii. 3, 4). Remember me with the favor that Thou
bearest unto Thy people, that I may be glad in the joy of Thy
nation (cvi. 4, 5): so in other places. Nations and people
are mentioned together because by nations are meant those
who are in good, and in the opposite sense those who are in
evil; and by people those who are in truths, and in the oppo-
site sense those who are in falsities. For this reason they
who are of the Lord’s spiritual kingdom are called people,
and they who are of the Lord’s celestial kingdom are called
nations; for in the spiritual kingdom all are in truths and
thence in intelligence, but in the celestial kingdom all are in
goods and thence in wisdom.

252. It is the same with many other words, for example,
where joy is mentioned gladness also is mentioned as in the
following: Behold joy and gladness, slaying an ox (Isa. xxii.
13). They shall obtain joy and gladness, sorrow and sighing
shall flee away (xxxv. 10; li. 11). Gladness and joy are cut off
from the house 0} our God (Joel i. 16). The voice 0} joy shall
be taken away, and the voice of gladness (Jer. vii. 34; xxv. 10).


No. 253] the sacred scripture 365

The fast of the tenth shall be to the house of Judah joy and
gladness (Zech. viii. 19). Be glad in Jerusalem , and rejoice
in her (Isa. lxvi. 10). Rejoice and be glad , O daughter of
Edom (Lam. iv. 21). The heavens shall be glad, and the
earth shall rejoice (Ps. xcvi. 11). Make me to hear joy and
gladness (li. 8). Joy and gladness shall be found in Zion ,
confession and the voice of singing (Isa. li. 3). There shall
be gladness , and many shall rejoice at his birth (Luke i. 14).
I will cause to cease the voice of joy and the voice of gladness;
the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride (Jer. vii.
34; xvi. 9; xxv. 10). Again there shall be heard in this place
the voice of joy , and the voice 0} gladness , and the voice 0} the
bridegroom , and the voice of the bride (xxxiii. 10, 1 1) ; and
elsewhere. Both joy and gladness are named because joy is
predicated of good and gladness of truth, or joy of love and
gladness of wisdom; for joy is of the heart, and gladness of
the spirit; or joy is of the will, and gladness is of the under-
standing. That there is the marriage of the Lord and the
church in these words also, is plain from its being said, The
voice of joy and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bride-
groom and the voice of the bride (Jer. vii. 34; xvi. 9; xxv. 10;
xxxiii. 10, n): and the Lord is the bridegroom, and the
church is the bride — that the Lord is the bridegroom may
be seen in Matthew (ix. 15: Mark ii. 19, 20: Luke v. 34,
35); and that the church is the bride (Apoc. xxi. 2, 9; xxii.
17). Therefore John the Baptist said of Jesus, He that hath
the bride is the bridegroom (John iii. 29).

C 253. On account of the marriage of Divine good and Di-
vine truth in everything of the Word, in very many places
Jehovah God, also Jehovah and the Holy One of Israel are
said, as if they were two, when yet they are one; for by Jeho-
vah is meant the Lord as to the Divine good of Divine love,
and by God and by the Holy One of Israel is meant the
Lord as to the Divine truth of the Divine wisdom. That
Jehovah and God, and Jehovah and the Holy One of Israel,
are mentioned in very many places in the Word, and yet


366


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 253


One is meant, may be seen above in the Doctrine concerning
the Lord the Redeemer.

X. Heresies may be gathered from the sense of the

LETTER OF THE WORD, BUT IT IS HURTFUL TO
CONFIRM THEM.

254. It was shown above that the Word cannot be under-
stood without doctrine, and that doctrine is like a lamp, for
the seeing of genuine truths; and this, because the Word
was written solely by correspondences, whereby many things
therein are appearances of truth, and not naked truths; and
many things are written according to the capacity of the
merely natural man, and yet so that the simple may under-
stand them simply, the intelligent intelligently, and the wise
wisely. Now because the Word is so written, the appear-
ances of truth, which are truths clothed, may be taken for
naked truths, that when confirmed become fallacies, which
in themselves are falsities. From this, that appearances of
truth have been taken for genuine truths and confirmed,
have sprung all the heresies which have been and still are in
the Christian world. Heresies themselves do not condemn
men; but confirmations from the Word and by reasonings -
from the natural man, of the falsities in heresy, together with
an evil life, condemn. For one is bom into the religion of
his country or of his parents, is initiated into it from in-
fancy, and afterward retains it; nor can he withdraw him-
self from its falsities, on account both of affairs in the world,
and of the weakness of the understanding in investigating
truths of that kind; but to live wickedly, and to confirm fal-
sities even to the destruction of genuine truth, this con-
demns. For one who remains in his religion, and believes
in God, and if in Christendom believes in the Lord and
esteems the Word holy, and from religion lives according
to the commandments of the Decalogue, he does not swear
to what is false; and therefore when he hears truths and in


No. 256] the sacred scripture 367

his way has a perception of them, he can embrace them and
so be led out of falsities; but not he who had confirmed the
falsities of his religion, since confirmed falsity remains and
cannot be rooted out; for a falsity after confirmation is as if
one had sworn to it, especially if it coheres with the love of
self or with the pride of one’s own intelligence.

255. I have conversed with some in the spiritual world
who lived many ages ago and confirmed themselves in the
falsities of their religion, and I found that they still remained
persistent in the same. I have also conversed with some
there who were in the same religion, and thought as they did,
but did not confirm its falsities in themselves; and I found
that when instructed by the angels these rejected falsities
and received truths; and that these were saved, but not the
others. Every man after death is instructed by angels, and
they are received who see truths and from truths falsities;
but only those see truths who have not confirmed them-
selves in falsities, while they who have confirmed themselves
are not willing to see truths; and if they see them, they turn
themselves away, and then either ridicule or falsify them.
The real cause of this is, that confirmation enters the will,
and the will is the man himself, and it disposes the under-
standing to its pleasure; but bare knowledge only enters the
understanding, and this has no authority over the will, and
so is not in the man, except as one who stands in the hall, or
in the door-way, and not yet in the house.

256. But this may be illustrated by an example. In
many places in the Word anger, wrath, and vengeance are
attributed to God; and it is said that He punishes, casts
down into hell, tempts, and many such things. He who
believes this in childlike simplicity, and therefore fears God,
and is careful not to sin against Him, is not condemned for
that simple belief. But he is condemned who confirms in
himself those things so far as to believe that anger, wrath,
revenge, and thus such things as are of evil, are in God, and
that from anger, wrath, and revenge He punishes man and


368


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 256


casts into hell; because such a man has destroyed the gen-
uine truth, which is, that God is love itself, mercy itself, and
goodness itself; and being these, He cannot be angry, be-
come wrathful, and take vengeance. These things are
attributed to God, in the Word, because such is#the ap-
pearance; and such things are appearances of truth.

257. That many other things in the sense of the letter of
the Word are appearances of truth in which genuine truths
lie concealed, and that it is not hurtful to think in sim-
plicity and also to speak according to the appearances of
truth, but that it is hurtful to confirm them, since by con-
firmation the Divine truth lying within is destroyed, may
also be illustrated by an example in nature, which is pre-
sented because what is natural illustrates and teaches more
clearly than what is spiritual. To the eye, the sun appears
to revolve around the earth daily and also annually. The
sun is therefore said to rise and set, making morning, noon,
evening, and night; and also making the seasons of spring,
summer, autumn, and winter; and thus days and years:
when yet the sun stands motionless, for it is a fiery ocean,
and the earth is made to revolve every day, and is carried
round the sun every year. The man who from simplicity
and from ignorance thinks that the sun is borne around the
earth, does not destroy the natural truth, which is, that the
earth rotates on its axis, and every year is borne along the
ecliptic. But he who confirms the apparent motion of the
sun by reasonings from the natural man, and still more he
who does so by the Word because the sun is there said to
rise and set, weakens the truth and destroys it; and after-
ward he can scarce see it, even if it were shown to the eye
that the whole starry heaven is in like manner carried around
every day and every year to all appearance, and not even one
star is removed from its fixed place in relation to another.
That the sun is moved is an apparent truth, but that it is not
moved is the genuine truth; yet every one speaks according
to the apparent truth, saying that the sun rises and sets; and


No. 258]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


369


this is allowable, for he cannot do otherwise; but to think
according to that apparent truth from confirmation, blunts
and darkens the rational understanding.

258. It is hurtful to confirm the appearances of truth that
are in the Word, since thereby fallacy arises, and thus the
Divine truth lying within is destroyed, for the reason that
the things in the sense of the letter of the Word communi-
cate one and all with heaven. For, as was shown above,
in all things and in each of the sense of its letter there is a
spiritual sense, and this is opened while passing from man
to heaven; and all things of the spiritual sense are genuine
truths. When, therefore, man is in falsities and applies the
sense of the letter to them, then falsities are therein; and
when falsities enter, truths are dissipated, which is done on
the way from man to heaven. It is by comparisons as when
a sleek bladder filled with gall is thrown toward another,
which is burst in the air before it comes to him, and the gall
scattered about; whereupon the other, perceiving the air
infected with the gall, turns himself away, and shuts his
mouth, lest it should touch his tongue. It is also like a
bottle enclosed with wicker-work of cedar, in which there is
vinegar full of little worms; and the bottle is burst on the
way, and its stench is perceived by the other, who from
nausea then instantly fans it away, that it may not enter his
nostrils. It is also like an almond in the shell, within which
is a new-born worm instead of the kernel, and the shell is
broken, and the little worm appears to be carried by the wind
toward the eyes of another: that he turns himself away to
avoid it, is plain of itself. It is similar with the reading of
the Word by a man who is in falsities, and who applies to
his falsities something of the sense of the letter of the Word,
that it is then rejected on the way to heaven, lest any such
thing should flow in and infest the angels; for falsity when
it touches the truth, is like the point of a needle touching the
fibril of a nerve or the pupil of the eye; that the fibril of the
nerve instantly coils itself into a spiral and withdraws within


370


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 258


itself is known; as also that the eye at the first touch covers
itself with the lids. From this it is plain that truth falsified
takes away communication with heaven and closes it. This
is why it is hurtful to confirm any false heresy.

259. The Word is like a garden which may be called a
heavenly paradise, containing delicacies and delights of every
kind; delicacies in its fruits, and delights in its flowers; in
the middle of the garden are trees of life, and near them foun-
tains of living water, and round about the garden are forest
trees. The man who from doctrine is in Divine truths is in
the middle, where the trees of life are, and he is in the actual
enjoyment of its delicacies and delights; while the man who
is not in truths from doctrine, but only from the sense of the
letter, is in the circumference and sees only the trees of the
forest. But he who is in the doctrine of a false religion, and
has confirmed its falsity in himself, is not even in the forest,
but is beyond it, on a sandy plain where there is not even
grass. That such also is their state after death is shown in
the work concerning Heaven and Hell.

260. Moreover it is to be known that the sense of the let-
ter is a guard for the genuine truths which lie hidden within,
that they may not be injured; and it is a guard in this re-
spect, that this sense may be turned hither and thither, and
explained according to one’s apprehension, and yet without
hurt or violence to its internal. For that the sense of the
letter is understood in one way by one person and in a dif-
ferent way by another person, does no harm; but it does
harm if a man introduces falsities that are contrary to Di-
vine truths, which is done only by those who have confirmed
themselves in falsities; violence is done to the Word by this.
The sense of the letter guards against this being done, and it
does so with those who are in falsities from religion and do
not confirm its falsities. The sense of the letter of the Word
as a guard is signified and also described in the Word by
cherubs. This guard is signified by the cherubs which were
placed at the entrance of the garden of Eden after Adam and


No. 260]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


3 71


his wife were cast out — of which we read as follows: When
Jehovah God had driven out the man , He made cherubs to
dwell at the east of the garden of Eden , and the flame 0} a sword
turning itself hither and thither , to keep the way of the tree of
life (Gen. iii. 23, 24). What these words sighify, no one can
see unless he loiows what is signified by cherubs, and what
by the garden of Eden, and by the tree of life there: and then
what by the flame of a sword turning itself hither and thither.
These are severally explained in the Heavenly Arcana pub-
lished at London, where that chapter is unfolded. It is
there shown that by cherubs is signified a guard; by the way
of the tree of life is signified entrance to the Lord, which men
have through the truths of the spiritual sense of the Word;
by the flame of a sword turning itself is signified Divine
truth in ultimates, like the Word in the sense of the letter,
which can be so turned. Similar is the meaning of the
cherubs of gold placed upon the two ends of the mercy-seat,
which was upon the ark in the tabernacle (Exod. xxv. 18-
21). The ark signified the Word, because the Decalogue
in it was the very basis of the Word; the cherubs there sig-
nified a guard, and therefore the Lord spake with Moses
between them (Exod. xxv. 22; xxxvii. 9: Num. vii. 89);
and He spake in the natural sense; for He does not speak
with man, except in fulness, and Divine truth is in its ful-
ness in the sense of the letter (see above, n. 214-224). Nor
was any thing else signified by the cherubs upon the cur-
tains of the tabernacle, and upon the veil (Exod. xxvi. 1, 31);
for the curtains and veils of the tabernacle signified the ulti-
mates of heaven and the church, and so also of the Word, as
may be seen above (n. 220); in like manner by the cherubs
carved on the walls and doors of the temple of Jerusalem
(1 Kings vi. 29, 32, 35) (n. 221); and also by the cherubs in'
the new temple (Ezek. xli. 18-20). Since by cherubs was
signified a guard that the Lord, heaven, and the Divine
truth such as it is interiorly in the Word, may not be ap-
proached immediately, but mediately through ultimates,


3 7 2 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 260

therefore it is thus said concerning the king of Tyre: Thou
sealest up the sum, full 0} wisdom, and perfect in beauty ; thou
hast been in the garden of Eden , every preciom stone was thy
covering. . . . Thou , O cherub, art the outspreading of him
that covereth ... I have destroyed thee, O covering cherub,
in the midst of the stones of fire (Ezek. xxviii. 12-14, 16). By
Tyre is signified the church as to knowledges of truth and
good; and hence by the king of Tyre, the Word where and
whence those knowledges are. That the Word in its ulti-
mate is here signified by the king of Tyre, and a guard by
cherub, is manifest; for it is said, Thou sealest up the sum,
every precious stone was thy covering . . . thou, cherub, art
the outspreading of him that covereth; as also, O covering
cherub. By the precious stones, which are also named here,
are meant those things which are of the sense of the letter
(see above, n. 217, 218). Since by cherubs is signified the
Word in the ultimates, and also a guard, it is therefore said
in David, Jehovah bowed the heavens, and came down, and
rode upon a cherub (Ps. xviii. 9, 10). Shepherd of Israel , who
sittest upon the cherubim, shine forth (lxxx. 1). Jehovah
sitteth upon the cherubim (xcix. 1). To ride upon cherubs,
and to sit upon them, means upon the ultimate sense of the
Word. The Divine truth in the Word and its quality are
described by the four animals which are also called cherubim,
in Ezekiel (i., ix., and x.); and also by the four animals in the
midst of the throne, and near the throne (Apoc. iv. 6, and the
following). See the Apocalypse Revealed, published by me
at Amsterdam (n. 239, 275, 314).


XI. The Lord, in the world, fulfilled all the Word,

AND THEREBY BECAME THE WORD, THAT IS, THE

Divine truth, also in ultimates.

261. That the Lord in the world fulfilled all the Word,
and that He thereby became Divine truth or the Word also
in ultimates, is meant by these words in John : And the Word


No.- 262]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


373


became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw His glory , the
glory as of the only-begotten of the Father , full of grace and
truth (i. 14). To become flesh is to become the Word in
ultimates. What the Lord was, as the Word in ultimates,
He showed to the disciples when He was transfigured (Matt,
xvii. 2, and following: Mark ix. 2, and following: Luke ix.
28 and following) ; and it is there said that Moses and Elias
were seen in glory. By Moses is meant the Word which was
written by him, and the historic Word in general; and by
Elias the prophetic Word. The Lord as the Word in ulti-
mates was also represented before John (Apoc. i. 13-16);
where all things of the description of Him signify the ulti-
mates of Divine truth or of the Word. The Lord had in-
deed been the Word or the Divine truth before, but in first
principles; for it is said, In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and God was the Word (John i. 1, 2);
but when the Word became flesh, then the Lord became the
Word also in ultimates. It is from this that He is called the
First and the Last (Apoc. i. 8, 11, 17; ii. 8; xxi. 6; xxii. 13:
Isa. xliv. 6).

262. That the Lord fulfilled all things of the Word, is plain
from the passages where it is said that the Law and the Scrip-
ture were fulfilled by Him, and that all things were finished
as from these: Jesus said, Think not that I am come to de-
stroy the Law and the Prophets; I am not come to destroy , but
to fulfil (Matt. v. 17, 18). Jesus entered into the synagogue,
and stood up to read; and there was delivered unto Him the
book of the prophet Esaias ; and when He had opened the
book, He found the place where it was written, The Spirit of
Jehovah is upon Me, because He hath anointed Ale; He hath
sent Me to preach the gospel to the poor, to heal the broken-
hearted, to preach deliverance to the bound, and sight to the
blind; to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. Afterwards,
closing the book, He said, This day is this Scripture ful-
filled in your ears (Luke iv. 16-21). That the Scripture
might be fulfilled , he that eateth bread with Me, hath lifted up


374


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 262


his heel upon Me (John xiii. 18). And none of them is lost
but the son of perdition , that the Scripture might be fulfilled
(xvii. 1 2). That the Word might be fulfilled, which He spake ,
Of them whom Thou gavest Me , have I lost none (xviii. 9).
Jesus said to Peter, Put up thy sword into its place; how
then would the Scripture be fulfilled , that thus it must be?
But this was done , that the Scripture might be fulfilled (Matt,
xxvi. 52, 54, 56). The Son of Man goeth , as it is written of
Him , that the Scriptures might be fulfilled (Mark xiv. 21, 27,
49). So the Scripture was fulfilled which said, He was num-
bered with the transgressors (Mark xv. 28: Luke xxii. 37).
That the Scripture might be fid filled, which saith, They parted
among them My garments, and for My vesture they did cast
lots (John xix. 24). After this, Jesus knowing that all things
were now accomplished , that the Scripture might be fulfilled
(xix. 28). When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar ,
He said, It is finished, that is, It is fulfilled (xix. 30). These
things were done, that the Scripture should be fulfilled , A bone
in Him shall ye not break; and again another Scripture saith ,
They shall look on Him whom they have pierced (xix. 36, 37).
That the whole Word was written concerning Him, and that
He came into the world to fulfil it, He also taught the dis-
ciples before He went away, in these words which He spake
unto them: O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the
prophets have spoken; ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and to enter into glory? And beginning at Moses and
all the prophets, He expounded unto them in all the Scrip-
tures the things concerning Himself (Luke xxiv. 25-27).
Moreover, Jesus said that all things must be fid filled which
were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in
the Psalms concerning Him (xxiv. 44, 45). That the Lord
in the world fulfilled all the Word, even to its most minute
particulars, is manifest from these His words: Verily, I say
unto you , till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall
in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled (Matt. v. 18).
From these things it may now be clearly seen, that by the


No 263]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


375


Lord’s fulfilling all things of the *aw, is not meant that He
fulfilled all the precepts of the Decalogue, but all the Word.
That the law also means all the Word may be evident from
these passages: Jesus said , Is it not 'written in your law , I
said , Ye are gods? (John x. 34.) This is written in David
(Ps. lxxxii. 6). The people answered , We have heard out of
the law , that Christ abideth for ever (John xii. 34) : this also is
written in David (Ps. lxxxix. 29; cx. 4: Dan. vii. 14). That
the Word might be fulfilled that is written in their law y They
hated Me without a cause (John xv. 25): as also in David
(Ps. xxxv. 19). It is easier for heaven and earth to pass , than
one tittle of the law to fail (Luke xvi. 17). By the law there,
as frequently elsewhere, is meant the whole Sacred Scripture.

263. How the Lord is the Word is understood by few; for
it is thought that the Lord can enlighten and teach men by
the Word, and yet cannot therefore be called the Word. But
let it be known that every man is his will and his under-
standing, and so one is distinct from another; and since the
will is the receptacle of love and thus of all the goods which
are of that love, and the understanding is the receptacle of
wisdom and thus of all things of truth which are of that wis-
dom, it follows that every man is his love and his wisdom;
or, what is the same, his good and his truth. A man is not
man from any thing else, and nothing else in him is man.
With respect to the Lord, He is love itself and wisdom itself,
thus good itself and truth itself, which He became by fulfil-
ling all the good and all the truth which are in the Word.
For he who thinks and speaks nothing but truth, becomes
that truth; and he who wills and does nothing but good,
becomes that good; and the Lord, because He fulfilled all
the Divine truth and the Divine good which are in the Word,
both what is in its natural sense and what is in its spiritual
sense, became good itself and truth itself, and thus the Word.


376


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 264


XII. Before the Word which is in the world at this

DAY, THERE WAS A WORD WHICH IS LOST.

264. That before the Word was given to the Israelitish
nation through Moses and the prophets, worship by sacri-
fices was known, and they prophesied from the mouth of
Jehovah, may be evident from what is related in the books
of Moses. That worship by sacrifices was known, is evi-
dent from these things: — it was commanded that the sons
of Israel should overthrow the altars of the nations, and
break in pieces their images, and cut down their groves
(Exod. xxxiv. 13: Deut. vii. 5; xii. 3). Israel in Shittim be-
gan to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and
they called the people to the sacrifices of their gods, and the
people did eat (Num. xxv. 1-3). Balaam, who was from
Syria, made them build altars and sacrificed oxen and sheep
(xxii. 40; xxiii. 1, 2, 14, 29, 30). He also prophesied con-
cerning the Lord, saying, That a Star should rise out of
Jacob and a Sceptre out of Israel (xxiv. 17). And he prophe-
sied from the mouth of Jehovah (xxii. 13, 18; xxiii. 3, 5, 8,
16, 26; xxiv. 1, 13). From which it is plain that there was
among the nations Divine worship similar to the worship
instituted by Moses with the Israelitish nation. That it was
also before the time of Abraham, is clear from the words in
Moses (Deut. xxxii. 7, 8); but more manifestly from this,
that Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought out bread and
wine, and blessed Abram; and that Abram gave him tithes
of all (Gen. xiv. 18-20); and that Melchizedek represented
the Lord, for he is called priest of the Most High God (Gen.
xiv. 18); and it is said in David concerning the Lord, Thou
art a priest jor ever , after the order of Melchizedek (Ps. cx. 4).
Hence it was that Melchizedek brought out bread and wine,
as most holy things of the church, as they are the holy things
in the Holy Supper. These and many other things are
manifest proofs that before the Israelitish Word, there was a
Word from which such revelations were made.


No. 265]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


377


265. That there was a Word among the ancients, is evi-
dent from Moses, by whom it is mentioned and who took
something from it (Num. xxi. 14, 15, 27-30); and that the
historic parts of that Word were called the Wars 0} Jehovah ,
and its prophetic parts, the Enunciations . From the historic
parts of that Word this passage was taken by Moses: Where-
fore it is said in the book of the Wars of Jehovah , At Vaheb in
Suphah , and by the water-courses of Arnon , and by the ravines
of the water-courses which go down to the dwelling-places of
Ar and touch on the border of Moab (Num. xxi. 14, 15). By
the wars of Jehovah, in that Word as in ours, were meant
and described the combats of the Lord with the hells, and
His victories over them, when He should come into the world.
The same combats are also meant and described in many
places in the historic portions of our Word, as by the wars of
Joshua with the nations of the land of Canaan, and by the
wars of the judges and of the kings of Israel. From the
prophetic parts of that Word, these passages were taken:
Wherefore the Enunciators say , Come into Heshbon; let the
city of Sihon be built and strengthened ; for there is a fire gone
out of Heshbon , a flame from the city of Sihon; it hath con-
sumed Ar of Moab, and the lords 0} the high places of Arnon .
Woe to thee, Moab; thou hast perished, O people of Chemosh;
he hath given his sons that escaped, and his daughters , into
captivity unto Sihon , king of the Amorite . With weapons
have we destroyed them . Heshbon hath perished even unto
Dibon, and we have laid them waste even to Nophah, which
reacheth unto Medeba (Num. xxi. 27-30). Translators say,
“They that speak in proverbs,” but they should be called
Enunciators, or Prophetical Enunciations, as may be evi-
dent from the signification of the word m'shalim in the He-
brew tongue, which means not only proverbs, but also pro-
phetic enunciations: as in Numbers (xxiii. 7, 18; xxiv.3, 15),
where it is said that Balaam uttered his enunciation, which
was prophetic, and even concerning the Lord. His enuncia-
tion is called mashal in the singular. It may be added that


378 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 265

the things taken therefrom by Moses are not proverbs, but
prophecies. That that Word was likewise Divinely inspired,
is manifest from Jeremiah, where almost the same things are
said: A fire hath come forth out of Heshbon , and a flame from
the midst 0} Sihon , which hath devoured the corner of Moab }
and the crown of the head of the sons of tumult. Woe be unto
thee , O Moab; the people of Chemosh have perished; for thy
sons are taken captives , and thy daughters captives (xlviii. 45,
46). Besides these, a prophetic book of the ancient Word,
called the Book 0} Jasher , or the Book of the Upright, is men-
tioned by David and by Joshua; by David: David lamented
over Saul and over Jonathan , and made the inscription , To
teach the sons of Judah the bow; behold it is written in the
book of Jasher (2 Sam. i. 17, 18). And by Joshua: Joshua
said , Sun , rest in Gibeon , and Moon , in the valley of A jalon;
is not this written in the book of Jasher? (Josh. x. 12.)

266. From these things it may be evident that there was
an ancient Word in the world, particularly in Asia, before
the Israelitish Word. That this Word is preserved in
heaven with the angels who lived in those ages, and also that
at this day it is still among the nations in Great Tartary, may
be seen in the third Relation following this chapter concern-
ing the Sacred Scripture.

XIII. Those also who are out of the church, and

HAVE NOT THE WORD, HAVE LIGHT BY MEANS

of the Word.

267. Conjunction with heaven cannot be given unless
there is somewhere on earth a church where the Word is,
and the Lord is known by it; because the Lord is the God
of heaven and earth, and without the Lord there is no sal-
vation. That by the Word there is conjunction with the
Lord and consociation with the angels, may be seen above
(n. 234-239). It is enough that there be a church where
the Word is; though it consist of comparatively few, still


No. 269] the sacred scripture 379

by the Word the Lord is present in the whole world, for by
it heaven is conjoined with the human race.

26& But how the presence and conjunction of the Lord
and of heaven are given in all lands by means of the Word,
must be told. The whole angelic heaven before the Lord is
as one man, and so also is the church upon earth. That
they also actually appear as a man, may be seen in the work
concerning Heaven and Hell (n. 59-86). In that man, the
church where the Word is read and the Lord is known by
it, is as the heart and as the lungs; the Lord’s celestial king-
dom as the heart, and His spiritual kingdom as the lungs.
As from these two fountains of life in the human body, all
the other members, viscera, and organs subsist and live, so
also it is from the conjunction of the Lord and heaven with
the church by means of the Word, that all those subsist and
live in all the earth who have a religion, worship one God,
and live a good life, and who are thus in that man and have
reference to the members and viscera that are outside of the
thorax, in which are the heart and lungs. For the Word in
the Christian Church is life from the Lord through heaven
to all the rest, just as the life of the members and viscera of
the whole body is from the heart and lungs. There is also
similar communication. This also is the reason why the
Christians among whom the Word is read constitute the
breast of that man. They are also in the midst of all, and
around them are the Papists; around these are the Moham-
medans who acknowledge the Lord as the greatest prophet
and as the Son of God; after these are the Africans; and the
peoples and nations of Asia and the Indies make the outer-
most circumference.

269. That it is so in the whole heaven may be concluded
from what is similar in each society of heaven; for each so-
ciety is a heaven in a less form, which also is like a man.
That it is so, may be seen in the work concerning Heaven
and Hell (n. 41-87). In every society of heaven they who
are in the middle have reference in like manner to the heart


380


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 269


and lungs, and with them is the greatest light; the light
itself, and the perception of truth therefrom, extends itself
from this middle toward the circumferences in every direc-
tion, thus to all who are in the society, and makes their spiri-
tual life. It has been shown that when those who were in
the middle and constituted the province of the heart and
lungs, and with whom was the greatest light, were taken
away, they who were around were in the shade as to the un-
derstanding, and then in so little perception of truth that
they grieved; but as soon as the others returned, the light
was seen, and they had perception of truth as before. Com-
parison may be made with the heat and light from the sun
of the world, which give vegetation to trees and shrubs, even
to those which are out of its direct rays and in the shade,
provided the sun be risen. So with the light and heat of
heaven, from the Lord as the sun there; which light in its
essence is Divine truth, from which are all the intelligence
and wisdom of angels and men. Therefore it is said of the
Word, that it was with God and was God; that it enlight-
eneth every man that cometh into the world; and that the
light shineth also in darkness (John i. 1, 5, 9). By the Word
is there meant the Lord as to Divine truth.

270. From this it may be evident that the Word which is
with the Protestants and the Reformed, enlightens all nations
and peoples, by spiritual communication; also that it is pro-
vided by the Lord that there should always be on the earth
a church where the Word is read, and that by it the Lord
should be made known. When, therefore, the Word was al-
most rejected by the Papists, by the Lord’s Divine provi-
dence the Reformation took place, whereby the Word was
drawn from its concealment, as it were, and brought into use.
When also the Word with the Jewish nation was wholly fal-
sified and adulterated, and as it were made of no effect, then
it pleased the Lord to descend from heaven, and to come as
the Word, and to fulfil it, and thereby to restore and re-estab-
lish it, and again to give light to the inhabitants of the earth,


No. 272]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


381


according to the words of the Lord: The people which sat in
darkness saw great light; and to them which sat in the region
and shadow of death , light is sprung up (Isa. ix. 2: Matt,
iv. 16).

271. Since it was foretold that at the end of this church,
also, darkness would arise from not recognizing the Lord as
the God of heaven and earth, and from the separation of
faith from charity, lest the genuine understanding of the
Word should thereby perish, and thus the church, it has
therefore pleased the Lord now to reveal the spiritual sense
of the Word, and to make manifest that the Word in that
sense and from it in the natural sense contains things in-
numerable, by means of which the light of truth from the
Word almost extinguished may be restored. That at the
end of this church the light of truth would be almost ex-
tinguished, is foretold in many places in the Apocalypse,
and it is also meant by these words of the Lord: Imme-
diately after the affliction of those days , shall the sun be dark-
ened , , and the moon shall not give her light , and the stars shall
fall from heaven , and the powers 0} the heavens shall be
shaken ; and then they shall see the Son of Man coming in the
clouds of heaven , with glory and power (Matt. xxiv. 29, 30).
By sun here is meant the Lord as to love, by moon the Lord
as to faith, by stars as to knowledges of truth and good, by
the Son of Man the Lord as to the Word, by cloud the sense
of the letter of the Word, by glory the spiritual sense of the
Word and its transparence through the sense of its letter,
and by power its power.

272. It has been given me to know by much experience
that man has communication with heaven through the Word.
While I read the Word through, from the first chapter of
Isaiah to the last of Malachi, and the Psalms of David, and
kept my thought on their spiritual sense, it was given me to
perceive clearly that every verse communciated with some
society of heaven, and thus the whole Word with the uni-
versal heaven; from which it was manifest that, as the Lord


382 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 272

is the Word, heaven also is the Word, since heaven is heaven
from the Lord, and the Lord by the Word is the all in all of
heaven.

XIV. If there were not a Word, no one would have

A KNOWLEDGE OF GOD, OF HEAVEN AND HELL,

OF THE LIFE AFTER DEATH, AND STILL
LESS OF THE LORD.

273. Since they have also confirmed themselves in their
opinion who insist that without the Word man would be able
to know the existence of God, and also of heaven and hell,
and the other things taught by the Word, it is therefore not
allowable to argue with them from the Word, but from the
natural light of reason; for they do not believe in the Word,
but in themselves. From the light of reason then inquire,
and you will find that there are two faculties of life in man,
which are called the understanding and the will; and that
the understanding is subject to the will, and not the will to
the understanding; for the understanding merely teaches
and shows what is to be done from the will. Therefore
many who have acute genius and understand better than
others the morals of life, still do not live according to them.
It would not be so if they willed them. Inquire further and
you will find that the will of man is his selfhood, and that
this from nativity is evil, and that thence there is falsity in
the understanding. When you have found out these things,
you will see that man of himself does not wish to under-
stand any thing but what is from his self-will; and that unless
there be some other source whence he may know it, man
from his self-will would not wish to understand any thing but
what is of himself and the world. Whatever is above, is in
thick darkness to him. Thus when he sees the sun, moon,
and stars, if by chance he should then think of their origin,
he could not think otherwise than that they exist of them-
selves. Could he raise his thoughts higher than many
learned men in the world, who, though they know from the


No. 274]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


383


Word that God created all things, still acknowledge nature ?
What then would the same persons have thought if they had
known nothing from the Word? Do you believe that the
wise men of old, as Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, and others,
who wrote about God and about the immortality of the soul,
took it first from their own understanding? No, but from
others, by tradition from those who first gained their knowl-
edge from the ancient Word, of which we have spoken above.
Neither do writers on natural theology derive any such thing
from themselves; but they merely confirm by rational de-
ductions those things which they know from the church in
which the Word is; and there may be some among them who
confirm, and yet do not believe them.

274. It has been given me to see people who were born
in islands, and who were rational as to civil affairs, but who
knew nothing at all concerning God. In the spiritual world
they appear like apes. But as they were born men, and
thence in the capacity of receiving spiritual life, they are
instructed by angels; and are made alive by means of knowl-
edges concerning the Lord as Man. What man is of him-
self, appears evidently from those who are in hell, among,
whom are also some prelates and learned men who are not
willing even to hear of God, and therefore cannot speak His
name. I have seen them and conversed with them. And
I have also conversed with those who went into a fire of anger
and wrath when they heard any one speak of the Lord. Con-
sider then what a man would be who had heard nothing
about God, when such is the character of some who have
talked about God, written about God, and preached about
God. They are such from the will, which is evil; and this,
as said before, leads the understanding and takes away the
truth which is in it from the Word. If man had been able of
himself to know that there is a God and that there is a life
after death, why has he not known that man is man after
death ? Why does he believe that his soul or spirit is as the
wind or the ether, and that it does not see with eyes, nor hear


384


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 274


with ears, nor speak with a mouth, until it is conjoined and
reunited with its dead body and its skeleton ? Suppose then
a doctrine put forth from rational light alone, would it not be
that one’s self should be worshipped ? as was done for ages,
and also is done at this day by those who know from the
Word that God alone is to be worshipped. There can be
no other worship from man’s self, not even the worship of
the sun and moon.

275. That there has been religion from the most ancient
times, and that the inhabitants of the world everywhere have
known about God, and something about the life after death,
has not been from themselves, or from their own intelligence,
but from the ancient Word, of which we have spoken above
(n. 264-266) ; and at a later period from the Israelitish Word.
From these two Words religious systems emanated into the
Indies and their islands, through Egypt and Ethiopia into
the kingdoms of Africa, from the maritime parts of Asia into
Greece, and thence into Italy. But because the Word could
not be written otherwise than by representatives, which are
such things in the world as correspond to heavenly things and
thence signify them, therefore the religions of the gentile na-
tions were turned into idolatries, and in Greece into fable;
and the Divine attributes and properties into as many gods,
over whom they made one supreme, whom they called Jove,
perhaps from Jehovah. It is known that they had a knowl-
edge of paradise, of the deluge, of sacred fire, and of the four
ages, from the first or golden age to the last or iron age, as in
Daniel (ii. 31-35)-

276. They who believe themselves able, from their own
intelligence, to acquire knowledge of God, of heaven and
hell, and of the spiritual things which are of the church, do
not know that the natural man viewed in himself is opposed
to the spiritual, and therefore desires to extirpate the spiri-
tual things which enter, or to involve them in fallacies, which
are like worms that consume the roots of vegetables and the
growing corn. They may be likened to men who dream


No. 277]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


38s


that they are seated on eagles and borne up on high, or on
horses like Pegasus and flying over Mount Parnassus to
Helicon; and they are actually like the Lucifers in hell, who
still call themselves there sons of the morning (Isa. xiv. 12).
And they are like the men who in the valley of the land of
Sliinar undertook to build a tower, the head of which should
be in heaven (Gen. xi. 2-4); and they trust in themselves
like Goliath, not forseeing that like him they may be pros-
trated by a sling-stone buried in the forehead. I will tell
what lot awaits them after death: at first they become as
if drunk, then like fools, and at last they become stupid
and sit in darkness. Let them therefore beware of such
madness.

277. To this I will add the following Relations. First : —
One day in the spirit I wandered through various places in
the spiritual world, for the purpose of observing the repre-
sentations of heavenly things, which are there exhibited in
many places. And in a certain house where there were an-
gels, I saw great purses, in which silver was stored up in
great abundance; and as they were open, it seemed as if
every one might take from the silver there laid up, and even
carry it off. But near the purses sat two young men who
were guards. The place where the purses were stored ap-
peared like a manger in a stable. In the adjoining room
were seen modest maidens with a chaste wife ; and near that
room stood two little children, who it was said were not to be
played with childishly, but w T ere to be treated wisely. After-
ward appeared a harlot, then a horse lying dead. Having
seen these things, I was instructed that they represented the
natural sense of the Word, in which is the spiritual sense.
The great purses full of silver signified knowledges of truth
in great abundance. That they were open and yet guarded
by the young men, signified that every one could take there-
from knowledges of truth, but that care is taken lest any one
violate the spiritual sense, in which are pure truths. The
manger, as in a stable, signified spiritual nourishment for the


386


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 277


understanding; a manger has this signification, because a
horse, which eats from it, signifies the understanding. The
modest maidens who were seen in the adjoining room, sig-
nified affections for truth, and the chaste wife the conjunc-
tion of good and truth. The little children signified the
innocence of wisdom; for the angels of the highest heaven,
who are the wisest, appear at a distance like little children,
from innocence. The harlot with the dead horse signified
the falsification of truth by many at this day, by which all
understanding of truth perishes: a harlot signifies falsifica-
tion, and a dead horse no understanding of truth.

278. Second Relation. There was once sent down to me
from heaven a little paper inscribed with Hebrew letters, but
written as with the ancients, by whom those letters which at
this day are in some part of straight lines, were inflected with
little curves turning upward. And the angels who were then
with me said that they learned entire meanings from the let-
ters themselves, and that they knew them especially from
the bendings of the lines and of the terminations of the let-
ter; and they explained what they signified separately and
what conjointly; saying that the H, which was added to the
names of Abram and Sarai, signified the infinite and eternal.
They also explained to me the meaning of the Word in the
second verse of the thirty-second Psalm, from the letters or
syllables alone; and the meaning of them in sum was, that
the Lord is also mercijul to those who do evil. They informed
me that the writing in the third heaven consisted of letters
inflected and variously curved, each one of which contained
a certain meaning; and that the vowels there were for the
tone, which corresponds to affection; also that in that heaven
they could not utter the vowels i and e , but instead of them
y and eu ; and that the vowels e , 0, and u were in use with
them, because they have a full sound.* They also said that
they do not pronounce any consonants hard, but soft; and
that it is from this that certain Hebrew letters have a dot in
♦In continental, not English, usage.


No. 279] the sacred scripture 387

the centre to distinguish when hard and when soft; saying
that hardness in letters is in use in the spiritual heaven, be-
cause there they are in truths, and truth admits what is hard,
but not good, in which are the angels of the Lord’s celestial
kingdom, or of the third heaven. They also said that they
had among them the Word written with letters inflected with
little curves and terminations that were significative. From
this it was manifest what these words of the Lord signify:
One jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all be
fulfilled (Matt. v. 18); also these, It is easier for heaven and
earth to pass , than for one tittle of the law to fail (Luke xvi. 17).

279. Third Relation. Seven years ago, when I was col-
lecting the things which Moses wrote from the two books
called the Wars of Jehovah and the Enunciations (Num.
xxi.), certain angels were present, and said to me that those
books were the Ancient Word, the historic parts of which
were called the Wars of Jehovah, and the prophetic parts the
Enunciations; and they said that that Word was still pre-
served in heaven, and in use among the ancients there who
had that Word when they were in the world. The ancients
with whom that Word is still in use in heaven were in part
from the land of Canaan and the neighboring lands, as Syria,
Mesopotamia, Arabia, Chaldea, Assyria, Egypt, Sidon, Tyre,
and Nineveh; the inhabitants of all which kingdoms were
in representative worship, and consequently had a knowl-
edge of correspondences. The wisdom of that time was
from that knowledge, and by it men had interior perception,
and communication with the heavens. They who knew the
correspondences of that Word were called wise and intelli-
gent, and afterwards diviners and Magi. But because that
Word was full of such correspondences as signified celestial
and spiritual things remotely, and consequently began to be
falsified by many, by the Divine providence of the Lord in
course of time it disappeared, and another Word was given,
written by correspondences not so remote, and this through
the prophets among the children of Israel. In this Word


338


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 279


were retained many names of the places not only in the land
of Canaan but also round about in Asia, all of which signi-
fied things and states of the church; but the significations
were from the ancient Word. For this reason Abram was
commanded to go into that land, and his posterity through
Jacob were introduced into it.

Respecting that Ancient Word which was in Asia before
the Israelitish Word, it is permitted to relate this unknown
fact, that it is still preserved there among the people who live
in Great Tartary. I have conversed with spirits and angels
in the spiritual world who were from that country, who said
that they possess a Word, and have possessed it from ancient
times, and that they conduct their Divdne worship according
to this Word, and that it consists solely of correspondences.
They said that in it also is the book of Jasher, which is men-
tioned in Joshua (x. 12, 13), and in the second book of Sam-
uel (i. 17, 18); as also, that among them are the books called
the Wars of Jehovah, and the Enunciations, which are men-
tioned by Moses (Num. xxi. 14, 15, and 27-30); and when
I read in their presence the words which Moses had taken
therefrom, they searched to see if they were there and found
them. From this it was clear to me that the ancient Word
is still among them. While conversing with them they said
that they worship Jehovah, some as an invisible God, and
some as visible. They further told me that they do not suffer
foreigners to come among them, except the Chinese, with
whom they cultivate peace, because the emperor of China is
from their country; and also that their population is so great
that they do not believe any region in the whole world to be
more populous, which is also credible from the wall so many
miles in length, which the Chinese built long ago as a safe-
guard against invasion from them. I have further heard
from angels that the first chapters of Genesis, which treat of
creation, of Adam and Eve, of the garden of Eden, and of
their sons and posterity down to the flood, and also of Noah
and his sons, are also in that Word; and were so transcribed


No. 280] the sacred scripture 389

from it by Moses* The angels and spirits from Great Tar-
tary appear in the southern quarter, on its eastern side, and
are separated from others by dwelling in a higher expanse,
and by their not admitting any one to come to them from the
Christian world; and, if any ascend, by guarding them to
prevent their going away. The cause of this separation is,
that they possess another Word.

280. Fourth Relation. I once saw at a distance walks be-
tween rows of trees, and youths who had gathered there in
groups; so many little companies conversing on the things
of wisdom; this was in the spiritual world. I went toward
them, and when I drew near I saw one whom the rest vene-
rated as their primate, because he excelled them in wisdom.
When he saw me he said, “ I wondered when I saw you on
your way hither, that now you came in sight, and now you
dropped out of it, or that you were now seen by me and sud-
denly were not seen. Surely you are not in the same state
of life as our people.” Smiling at this, I answered, “I am
not an actor nor a Vertumnus, but alternately I am now in
your light and now in your shade; thus a stranger and also
a native here.” On this that wise one looked at me and said,
“You speak strange and unusual things; tell me who you
are.” And I said, “I am in the world in which you were,
and out of which you have come, which is called the natural
world; and I am also in the world in which you now are,
which is called the spiritual world. Consequently I am in
a natural state, and at the same time in a spiritual state; in a
natural state with men of the earth, and in a spiritual state
with you; and when I am in the natural state, I am not seen
by you; but when in the spiritual state, I am seen: that I
am such, has been given by the Lord. To you, enlightened
man, it is well known that a man of the natural world does
not see a man of the spiritual world, nor the reverse; and so
when I let my spirit into the body, I was not seen by you, but
when I raised it out of the body, I was seen; and this comes
from the distinction between the spiritual and the natural.”


390


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 280


When he heard the words, the distinction between the
spiritual and the natural, he said, “ What distinction ? Is it
not as between the purer and the less pure ? Thus, what is
the spiritual but a purer natural?” And I answered, “The
distinction is not of that kind; the natural can by no re-
fining approximate the spiritual, so as to become spiritual;
for the distinction is like that between prior and posterior,
between which there is no finite ratio; for the prior is in the
posterior, as cause in its effect; and the posterior is from the
prior, as effect from its cause. It is for this reason that the
one does not appear to the other.” To this the wise one said,
“I have meditated on this distinction, but hitherto in vain.
Would that I might perceive it.” And I said, “You shall
not only perceive the distinction between the spiritual and
the natural, but you shall also see it.” And I then said,
“You are in a spiritual state while with your associates, but
in a natural state with me; for with your associates you
speak in a spiritual language which is common to every
spirit and angel, but with me you speak in my native tongue:
for every spirit and angel, speaking with a man, speaks the
man’s own language; thus French with a Frenchman, Greek
with a Greek, Arabic with an Arab, and^so on. That you
may know, therefore, the distinction between the spiritual
and the natural as to languages, do this: Go to your com-
panions, and there say something; and retain the words in
memory, and come back, and utter them in my presence.”
He did so, and returned to me with the words in his mouth,
and uttered them; and they were words altogether strange
and foreign, which are not found in any language of the natu-
ral world. From this experiment several times repeated, it
was clearly manifest that all in the spiritual world have a
spiritual language which has nothing in common with any
natural language; and that every man comes of himself into
that language after death.

I once also learned by experience that the very sound of
spiritual language differed so much from the sound of natu-


No. 280] the sacred scripture 391

ral language, that even a loud spiritual sound could not be
heard at all by a natural man, nor a natural sound by a spiri-
tual man. Afterward I asked him and those standing
around him to go in among their companions, and write
some sentence upon paper, and then to come out to me with
the paper and read it. They did so, and returned with the
paper in the hand; but when they would read, they could
not, because the writing consisted only of some letters of the
alphabet with curves over them, each one of which was sig-
nificative of some meaning pertaining to the subject. Be-
cause every letter in the alphabet is there significative of
some meaning, it is manifest whence it is that the Lord is
called the Alpha and the Omega. Going in again and
again, writing and returning, they found that that writing
involved and comprehended innumerable things which no
natural writing could ever express; and it was said that this
is so because the thoughts of the spiritual man are incom-
prehensible and ineffable to the natural man, and cannot be
brought into other writing and into other language. Then
as the bystanders were not willing to comprehend that spiri-
tual thought so far exceeded natural thought as to be rela-
tively ineffable, I said to them, “ Make the experiment; enter
into your spiritual society, and think of some thing, and re-
tain it, and return and express it in my presence.” And they
entered, thought, retained, and came out; and when they
would express the thing thought of, they could not; for they
found no idea of natural thought adequate to any idea of
purely spiritual thought, and so no words expressing it; for
the ideas of thought become the words of speech. And
afterward they went in again, and returned, and proved to
themselves that spiritual ideas were supernatural, inex-
pressible, ineffable, and incomprehensible to the natural
man; and because they are so supereminent, they said that
spiritual ideas or thoughts, in comparison with natural, were
ideas of ideas, and thoughts of thoughts; and that by them
therefore were expressed qualities of qualities, and affec-


392


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 280


tions of affections; consequently that spiritual thoughts
were the beginnings and the origins of natural thoughts.
From this it was also manifest that spiritual wisdom is the.
wisdom of wisdom, thus inexpressible by any wise man in
the natural world. Then it was said from a higher heaven
that there is wisdom still more interior or higher, which is
called celestial, the relation of which to spiritual wisdom is
like the relation of this to natural wisdom; and that these
flow in, in order, according to the heavens, from the Lord’s
Divine wisdom which is infinite. Thereupon the man
speaking with me said, “This I see, because I have per-
ceived it, that one natural idea is the containant of many
spiritual ideas, and also that one spiritual idea is the con-
tainant of many celestial ideas. From this also follows the
consequence, that what is divided does not become more and
more simple, but more and more manifold, because it comes
nearer and nearer to the Infinite, in which are all things
infinitely.”

After this I said to those present, “You see from these
three experimental proofs what the distinction is between
spiritual and natural, and also the cause why the natural
man does not appear to the spiritual, nor the spiritual man
to the natural, though both are in perfect human form, and
from this form it seems to both as if they might see each
other; but the interior things which are of the mind are what
make that form, and the mind of spirits and angels is formed
from spiritual things, and the mind of men, as long as they
live in the world, from natural things.” After this, a voice
was heard from the higher heaven, saying to one who stood
by, “ Come up hither.” And he went up and returned and
said that the angels did not before know the differences be-
tween the spiritual and the natural, because there had not
before been given any means of comparison with a man who
was in both worlds at the same time; and the differences
cannot be known without comparing and referring one to
the other.


No. 280]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


393


Before we separated, we conversed again on this subject,
and I said, “ These distinctions exist only from this, that you
in the spiritual world are substantial and not material, and
substantial things are the beginnings of material things.
What is matter but a compounding of substances? You,
therefore, are in first principles, and thus in single particu-
lars; but we are in derivatives and in compounds; you are
in particulars, but we in generals; and as generals cannot
enter into particulars, so neither can natural things, which
are material, enter into spiritual things, which are sub-
stantial; just as a ship’s cable cannot enter or be drawn
through the eye of a sewing needle, or as a nerve cannot be
drawn into one of the fibres of which it consists. This now
is the cause that the natural man cannot think the things
which the spiritual man thinks, and therefore cannot speak
them. Paul therefore calls the things which he heard from
the third heaven ineffable. Add to this, that to think spiri-
tually is to think without time and space, and that to think
naturally is to think with time and space; for to every idea
of natural thought there adheres something from time and
space, but not to any spiritual idea. This is because the
spiritual world is not in space and time, as the natural world
is, but is in the appearance of these two; such difference is
there in the thoughts and perceptions. Therefore you can
think of the essence and omnipresence of God from eternity,
that is, concerning God before the creation of the world, be-
cause you think of the essence of God without time, and of
His omnipresence without space, and thus you comprehend
such things as transcend man’s natural ideas.”

I then related that I once thought about the essence and
omnipresence of God from eternity, that is, of God before
the creation of the world; and because I was not yet able to
remove spaces and times from the ideas of my thought, I be-
came anxious, for the idea of nature entered instead of God;
but it was said to me, “ Remove the ideas of space and time,
and you will see.” And it was given me to remove them,


394


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 280


and I saw; and from that time I could think of God from
eternity, but not at all of nature from eternity, because God
in all time is without time, and in all space is without space;
but nature in all time is in time, and in all space is in space;
and nature with its time and space could not but have a be-
ginning; not so God, who is without time and space; where-
fore nature is from God, not from eternity but in time, to-
gether with its time and space.

281. Fifth Relation. Since it has been granted me by
the Lord to be in the spiritual world and in the natural world
at the same time, and therefore to speak with angels as with
men, and thereby to have knowledge of the states of those
who after death pass into that hitherto unknown world, for
I have spoken with all my relations and friends, and like-
wise with kings and dukes, as also with learned men, who
have met their fate, and this now continually for twenty-
seven years, I am therefore able to describe from living ex-
perience the states of men after death, what they are with
those who have lived well, and what with those who have
lived wickedly. But here I shall only mention some things
about the state of those who have confirmed themselves
from the Word in falsities of doctrine, who are especially
those who have done so in favor of justification by faith
alone.

The successive states of these are as follows: — I. When
they have died, and are reviving as to the spirit, which takes
place generally on the third day after the heart has ceased to
beat, they appear to themselves to be in a body like that in
which they before were in the world, so much so that they do
not know that they are not still living in the former world.
Yet they are not in a material, but in a substantial body,
which to their senses appears as if material, though it is not.

II. After some days they see that they are in a world
where there are various societies formed, which world is
called the world of spirits, and is midway between heaven
and hell. All the societies there, which are innumerable, are


No. 281]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


39S


wonderfully arranged, according to their natural affections,
good and evil. The societies arranged according to good
natural affections communicate with heaven, and the societies
arranged according to evil affections communicate with hell.

III. The novitiate spirit, or the spiritual man, is con-
ducted and transferred into various societies, as well good
as evil, and is explored as to whether he is affected by goods
and truths, and how; or whether he is affected by evils and
falsities, and how.

IV. If he is affected by goods and truths, he is led away
from the evil societies and into good societies, and also into
various ones until he comes into a society corresponding to
his natural affection, and there he enjoys the good corre-
spondent to that affection; and this until he puts off natural
affection and puts on spiritual, and then he is taken up into
heaven. But this takes place with those who in the world
lived a life of charity and thus a life of faith also; which is,
that they believed in the Lord and shunned evils as sins.

V. But they who have confirmed themselves in falsities by
means of what is rational, especially by the Word, and so
have lived no other than a merely natural, and thus an evil
life, for evils accompany falsities and cling to them, these,
because they are not effected by goods and truths, but by
evils and falsities, are led away from the good societies, and
are led into evil societies, and into various ones also, until
they come into a society corresponding to the lusts of their
love.

VI. But because in the world they feigned good affections
in externals, though in their internals there were nothing but
evil affections or lusts, they are kept by turns in externals;
and they who in the world presided over large bodies, are
appointed over societies here and there in the world of spirits,
in offices general or limited according to the extent of the
offices which they filled in their former life. But because
they do not love what is true or what is just, and cannot be
so far enlightened as to know what truth and justice are,


396


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 281


they are therefore after some days deposed. I have seen
such transferred from one society to another, and an admin-
istration everywhere given them, but after a short time as
often deposed. *

VII. After frequent dismissions, some from weariness do
not wish, and some from fear of loss of reputation do not
dare, to seek for offices any more; they therefore withdraw
and sit in sadness, and then are led away into a desert where
are huts which they enter. There some work is given them
to do, and as they do it they receive food; and if they do not
do it, they are hungry and receive no food; and so necessity
compels them. The food there is similar to the food in our
world, but it is from a spiritual origin, and is given from
heaven by the Lord to all according to the uses which they
do; to the idle, because they are useless, none is given.

VIII. After a while they are disgusted with work, and
then they leave the huts; and if they were priests, they wish
to build. Then forthwith appear piles of cut stone, bricks,
beams, boards, and also heaps of reeds and rushes, of clay,
lime, and bitumen. When they see these, the lust of build-
ing is kindled, and they begin to construct a house, taking
now a stone, now a timber, now a reed, now mud; and they
put one upon another, without order, though in their view
with order. But what they build up during the day falls
down in the night; yet on the following day they gather
from the rubbish what has fallen and build again, and this
goes on till they are tired of building. This takes place
from correspondence, because they have heaped up texts
from the Word for confirming the falsities of faith, and their
falsities build up the church in no other manner.

IX. Afterward from weariness they go away, and sit soli-
tary and idle; and because food is not given from heaven to
the idle, as already said, they begin to be hungry, and to think
of nothing but how to get food and appease their hunger.
When they are in this state, there come to them some of
whom they ask alms; and these say, “Why do you thus sit


No. 281]


THE SACRED SCRIPTURE


397


idle? Come with us to our houses, and we will give you
work to do, and will feed you.” And then they rise up
gladly and go away with them to their houses; and there to
each one is given his work, and for the work food is given.
But because all those who have confirmed themselves in
falsities of faith are not able to do works of good use, but
only works of evil use, nor these faithfully but fraudulently
and also unwillingly, therefore they leave their works, and
only love to be in company, to talk, to walk about, and to
sleep; and then because they cannot any longer be induced
by their masters to work, they are therefore dismissed as
useless.

X. When they are dismissed, their eyes are opened and
they see a way leading to a certain cavern. When they come
to it, a door is opened and they enter and ask whether there
is food there; and when it is answered that there is, they
ask leave to remain there, and it is said that they may; and
they are let in and the door is shut after them. And then
the overseer of the cavern comes and says to them, “You
can go out no more; see your companions, they all labor,
and as they labor, food is given them from heaven; I tell
you this that you may know.” And their companions also
say, “ Our overseer knows what work each one is fit for, and
such he assigns to each one daily. Every day on which you
do the work, food is given you; and if it is not done, neither
food nor clothing is given. If any one does evil to another,
he is cast to a corner of the cavern into a bed of accursed
dust, where he is miserably tormented, and this until the
overseer sees in him some sign of penitence; and then he is
released and is ordered to do his work.” And it is also told
him, that every one is permitted after his work to walk, to
converse, and afterward to sleep. And he is conducted
further into the cavern, where there are harlots, of whom
each one is permitted to take one to himself, and to call her
his wife; but he is forbidden under a penalty to commit
promiscuous whoredom. Of such caverns, which are noth-


398 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION |No. 281

ing but eternal work-houses, hell consists. It has been
granted me to enter into some, and to see, in order that I
might make it known; and they all appeared vile; nor did
any one of them know who he was when in the world, or
in what employment he was. But the angel who was with
me told me that this one in the world was a servant, this a
soldier, this an officer, this a priest, this one in a station of
dignity, this one in opulence; and yet none of them know
that they were not as now slaves and boon companions: and
this for the reason that they had been interiorly alike, though
outwardly unlike; and the interiors consociate all in the
spiritual world.

As regards the hells in general: they consist solely of such
caverns or work-houses, but those where satans are differ
from those where devils are. They are called satans who
have been in falsities and hence in evils, and they are called
devils who have been in evils and hence in falsities. Satans
in the light of heaven seem livid like corpses, and some black
like mummies; but devils in the light of heaven seem dusky
and fiery, and some black like soot; while in face and bodily
form they all are monstrous. But in their own light, which
is like that from burning charcoal, they appear not as mon-
sters but as men. This is granted so that they may be in
company together.



CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY


3 1924 092 464 910


DATE DUE


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924092464910


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION

VOL. II


1907 3ftotrfj (Shilton

OF

SWEDENBORG’S WORKS

VOLS.

1-19 HEAVENLY ARCANA

20 INDEX ARCANA

21 HEAVEN AND HELL

22 MISCELLANEOUS WORKS

Final Judgment
White Horse
Earths in the Universe
Summary Exposition

23 FOUR DOCTRINES

New Jerusalem and its Heavenly
Doctrines

24 DIVINE LOVE AND WISDOM

Intercourse between the Soul
and the Body

25 DIVINE PROVIDENCE
26-28 APOCALYPSE REVEALED

29 MARRIAGE LOVE
30-32 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


THE


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION

CONTAINING

THE UNIVERSAL THEOLOGY

OF

THE NEW CHURCH

FORETOLD BY THE LORD IN DANIEL VII, 13, 14
AND IN THE APOCALYPSE XXI, 1, 2

BY

EMANUEL SWEDENBORG

SERVANT OF THE LORD JESUS CHRIST


First published in Latin^ Amsterdam , 1771


Kotcj) ©ttttion
VOL. II


BOSTON AND NEW YORK
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
Me Cambribfle

1907


/


^ r?


/


Daniel VII, 13, 14

I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of
Man came from the clouds of the heavens. And there was given
Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom ; and all people, na-
tions, and languages shall serve Him. His dominion is an ever-
lasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed.


Apocalypse XXI, 1, 2, 5, 9, 10

I John saw a new heaven and a new earth. And I saw the
holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And an
angel talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will show thee
The Bride , The Lamb's Wife. And he carried me away in the
spirit, upon a great and high mountain, and showed me that
great city, the Holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from
God.

He that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. And He said unto me, Write : for these words are true

and faithful. _ ^

Px>


CONTENTS


Contents of Volume Two.

CHAPTER V.

The Catechism or Decalogue Explained as to its External
and its Internal Senses, n. 283-331.

I. In the Israelitish Church the Decalogue was Holiness Itself:
the holiness of the ark, in which was the Law, n. 283-286.

II. In the sense of the letter the Decalogue contains general pre-
cepts of doctrine and life; but in the spiritual and celestial senses, all
universally, n. 287-290.

III. First : Thou shalt have no other God before My faces, n. 291-
296.

IV. Second: Thou shalt not take the name of Jehovah thy God
in vain; for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless, that taketh His name
in vain. u. 297-300.

V. Third: Remember the Sahhath day, to keep it holy; six days
thou shalt labor and do all thy work; but the seventh is a Sabbath to
Jehovah thy God. n. 301-304.

VI. Fourth: Honor thy father and mother, that thy days may he
prolonged, and it may be well with thee upon earth, n. 305-308.

VII. Fifth: Thou shalt not kill. n. 309-3 r 2.

VIII. Sixth: Thou shalt not commit adultery, n. 313, 316.

IX. Seventh: Thou shalt not steal, n. 317-320.

X. Eighth: Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor,
n. 321-324.

XI. Ninth and Tenth: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s house;
thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife, nor his man-servant, nor his
maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neigh-
bor’s. n. 325-328.

XII. The Ten Commandments contain all things which are of
love to God, and of love toward the neighbor, n. 329-331.


vi


CONTENTS


CHAPTER VI.

Faith, n. 336-384.

Faith is first in time, but charity is first in end. n. 336.

I. Saving faith is in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ since
it is in the visible God, in whom is the invisible, n. 337-339^

II. The sum of faith is, that he who lives well and believes aright
is saved by the Lord. n. 340-342.

The first of faith in Him is the acknowledgment that He is the Son
of God. n. 342.

III. Man obtains faith by going to the Lord, learning truths from
the Word, and living according to them. n. 343-348.

The Esse of Faith; the Essence of Faith; the State of Faith; the
Form of Faith, n. 344.

Merely natural faith is persuasion, counterfeiting faith, n. 345-
348 .

IV. An abundance of truths, coherent as if bound together, exalts
and perfects faith, n. 349-354.

(1.) The truths of faith may be multiplied to infinity, n. 350.

(2.) The arrangement of the truths of faith is into series, as into
fascicles, u. 35 r.

(3.) Faith is perfected according to the abundance and coherence
of truths, n. 352, 353.

(4.) The truths of faith, however numerous they are, and how-
ever diverse they appear, make one from the Lord. n. 354.

(5.) The Lord is the Word, the God of heaven and earth, the God
of all flesh, the God of the vineyard or church, the God of faith,
Light itself, the Truth, and Life eternal; shown from the Word,
n. 354-

V. Faith without charity is not faith, and charity without faith is
not charity; and neither lives except from the Lord. n. 355-361.

(r.) Man can obtain faith for himself, n. 356.

(2). Man can obtain charity for himself, n. 357.

(3.) Man can also obtain for himself the life of faith and charity.
n - 35 8 -

(4.) Yet nothing of faith, and of charity, and of the life of either,
is from man, but from the Lord alone, u. 359.


CONTENTS


vii

(5.) The distinction between natural and spiritual faith; the latter
is in the former from the Lord. n. 360, 361.

VI. The Lord, charity, and faith, make one, like life, will, and
understanding in man; and if they are divided, each perishes, like a
pearl reduced to powder, n. 362-367.

(1.) The Lord, with all His Love, with all His Wisdom, thus with
all His Life, flows in with every man. n. 364.

(2.) Therefore the Lord with all the essence of faith and charity
flows in with every man. n. 365.

(3.) Those things which flow in from the Lord, are received by
man according to his form. n. 366.

(4.) But the man who divides the Lord, charity, and faith, is not
a form receiving but a form destroying them. n. 367.

VII. The Lord is charity and faith in man, and man is charity and
faith in the Lord. n. 368-372.

(r.) It is by conjunction with God that man has salvation and
eternal life. n. 369.

(2.) Conjunction with God the Father is not possihle, hut with the
Lord, and through Him with God the Father, u. 370.

(3.) Conjunction with the Lord is reciprocal, that is, the Lord is
in man, and man in the Lord. n. 37r.

(4.) This reciprocal conjunction of the Lord and man is effected
by charity and faith, n. 372.

VIII. Charity and faith are together in good works, n. 373-377.

(1.) Charity is to will well, and good works are to do well from

willing well. n. 374.

(2.) Charity and faith are only mental and perishable things, unless
they are determined to works and coexist in them, when possible.
n - 375> 376.

(3.) Charity alone does not produce good works, still less faith
alone, hut charity and faith together, n. 377.

IX. There are true faith, spurious faith, and hypocritical faith,
n. 378-381.

The Christian Church began from the cradle to be infested and
divided by schisms and heresies, n. 378.

(1.) The true faith is the one only faith; it is faith in the Lord God
the Saviour Jesus Christ, and is with those who believe Him to he the
Son of God, the God of heaven and earth, and one with the Father,
n. 379-

(2.) Spurious faith is all faith that departs from the true, which is


viii


CONTENTS


the one only faith; and it is with those who climb up some other way,
and regard the Lord not as God but only as a man. n. 380.

(3.) Hypocritical faith is no faith, u. 3 8r.

X. There is no faith with the evil. n. 382-384.

(1.) The evil have no faith, because evil belongs to hell, and faith
belongs to heaven, n. 383.

(2.) All those in Christendom have no faith who reject the Lord
and the Word, although they live morally, and speak, teach, and
write rationally, even about faith, u. 384.


CHAPTER VII.

Charity, or Love Toward the Neighbor; and Good Works.
n. 394-458.

I. There are three universal loves, the love of heaven, the love of
the world, and the love of self. n. 394-396.

(1.) The Will and Understanding, n. 397.

(2.) Good and Truth, n. 398.

(3.) Love in general, n. 399.

(4.) The Love of Self and the Love of the World in particular,
n. 400.

(5.) The Internal and the External Man. n. 401.

(6.) The merely Natural and Sensual Man. n. 402.

II. These three loves, rightly subordinated, perfect man; but not
rightly subordinated, they pervert and invert him. n. 403-405.

III. Every man individually is to be loved, but according to the
quality of his good. u. 406-411.

IV. Man collectively, or a smaller and a greater society, and one’s
country, is the neighbor that is to be loved, n. 412-414.

V. The church is the neighbor to be loved in a higher degree, and
the Lord’s kingdom in the highest, n. 415, 416.

VI. To love the neighbor, viewed in itself, is not to love the person,
but the good in the person, n. 41 7-419.

VII. Charity and good works are two distinct things, like willing
well and doing well. n. 420, 421.

VIII. Charity itself is to act justly and faithfully in the office, busi-
ness, and work in which one is, and with whomsoever he has inter-
course. n. 224-424.


. CONTENTS


IX


IX. The Benefactions of Charity are, giving to the poor, and
relieving the needy; hut with prudence, n. 425-428.

X. There are Debts of Charity; public, domestic, and private,
n. 429-432.

XI. The Diversions of Charity are dinners, suppers, and social
gatherings, n. 433, 434.

XII. The first thing of charity is to put away evils, and the second
is to do goods which are of use to the neighbor, n. 435-438.

XIII. In the exercises of charity man does not place merit in
works while he believes that all good is from the Lord. n. 439-442.

XIV. Moral life when it is at the same time spiritual, is charity.
n * 443 - 445 *

XV. Friendship of love contracted with one without regard to his
quality as to the spirit, is detrimental after death, n. 446-449.

XVI. There are spurious charity, hypocritical charity, and dead
charity, n. 450-453*

XVII. The friendship of love among the evil is inward hatred.
n * 454 , 455 *

XVIII. The conjunction of love to God and love toward the neigh-
bor. n. 456-458.


CHAPTER VIII.

Free Will. n. 463-50 r.

I. The precepts and dogmas of the present church respecting free
will. n. 463-465.

II. Two trees placed in the garden of Eden, one of life, and the
other of the knowledge of good and evil, signifies that free will in
spiritual things was given to man. n. 466-469.

III. Man is not life, but is a receptacle of life from God. n. 470-
474 -

IV. As long as a man lives in the world, he is kept in the middle
between heaven and hell, and in spiritual equilibrium, which is free
will. n. 475-478.

V. From the permission of evil, in which every one’s internal man
is, it is manifest that man has free will in spiritual things, n. 479-
482.

VI. Without free will in spiritual things, the Word would be of
no use, and the church would be nothing, n. 483-485.


X


CONTENTS*


VII. Without free will in spiritual things there would be nothing
by which man could conjoin himself with the Lord; and consequently
no imputation, but predestination, n. 485.

Detestable things made known concerning predestination, n. 486-
488.

VIII. If there were no free will in spiritual things, God would be
the cause of evil, and so there would be no imputation, n. 489-492.

IX. Every spiritual thing of the church that enters and is received
trom freedom, remains; but not the reverse, n. 493-496.

X. Man’s will and understanding are in this freedom; but in both
Worlds, the spiritual and the natural, the doing of evil is restrained by
law, as otherwise society would perish on both sides, n. 497-499.

XI. If men had not free will in spiritual things, all in the whole
world might have been led in a single day to believe in the Lord; but
this cannot be done for the reason that what is not received by man
from free will does not remain. 11. 500-502.

Miracles are not now wrought, for they take away free will in spiri-
tual things, and compel, n. 501,


CHAPTER IX.

Repentance, u. 5 r 0-566.

I. Repentance is the first of the church with man. n. 510, 51 1.

II. The contrition which at this day is said to precede faith, and
to be followed by the consolation of the Gospel, is not repentance,
n. 512-5x5.

III. The mere oral confession that one is a sinner, is not repent-
ance. 11. 516-519.

TV. Man is bom to evils of every kind; and unless by repentance he
removes them in part, he remains in them; and he who remains in
them cannot be saved, n. 520-524.

The fulfilment of the Law. n. 523, 524.

V. Knowledge of sin, and examination of some sin in oneself,
begin repentance, n. 525-527.

VI. Actual repentance is to examine oneself, to recognize and ac-
knowledge one’s sins, to make supplication to the Lord, and begin
a new life, n, 528-531,


CONTENTS


XI


VTI. True repentance is, to examine not only the acts of one’s life,
but also the intentions of his will. n. 532-534.

VTII. They repent also, who do not examine themselves, but yet
desist from evils because they are sins; and they repent in this way who
from religion do the works of charity, n. 535-537.

IX. Confession should be made before the Lord God the Saviour,
and then supplication for aid and power to resist evils, n. 538-560.

X. Actual repentance is easy for those who have sometimes prac-
tised it; but it finds great resistance in those who have not. n. 561-
5 6 3 *

XI. One who has never practised repentance, or has not looked
into and searched himself, at length does not know what damnable
evil and saving good are. n. 564-5 66.


CHAPTER X.

Reformation and Regeneration, n. 572-620.

I. Unless a man is born again and created anew he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. n. 572-575.

II. The new birth or creation is effected by the Lord alone through
charity and faith as the two means, man cooperating, n. 576-578.

III. Because all have been redeemed, all can be regenerated, each
according to his state, n. 579-582.

IV. Regeneration is effected in a manner analogous to that in which
man is conceived, carried in the womb, bom, and educated, n. 583-
586.

V. The first act in the new birth is called reformation, which is of
the understanding; and the second is called regeneration, which is
of the will and hence of the understanding, n. 587-590.

VI. The internal man is to be reformed, and through this the ex-
ternal, and man is so regenerated, n. 591-595.

VII. While this is taking place, combat arises between the internal
and the external man, and the one that conquers rules over the other,
n. 596-600.

VIII. The regenerate mar has a new will and a new understand-
ing. n. 601-606.

IX. A regenerate man is in communion with angels of heaven,


Xll


CONTENTS


and an unregenerate man in communion with spirits of hell. n. 607-
610.

X. So far as man is regenerated sins are removed, and this removal
is the remission of sins. u. 611-614.

XI. Regeneration cannot take place without free will in S] .1
things, n. 615-617.

XII. Regeneration cannot take place without truths, by which
faith is formed, and with which charity conjoins itself, n. 618-620.

The masculine and the feminine in the vegetable kingdom, n. 585.


CHAPTER FIFTH.


THE CATECHISM OR DECALOGUE EXPLAINED AS TO
ITS EXTERNAL AND ITS INTERNAL SENSE.

282. There is no nation in the whole world which does
not know that it is evil to kill, to commit adultery, to steal,
and to bear false witness; and that if these evils were not
guarded against by laws, the kingdom, republic, and all
organized society would be at an end. Who, therefore, can
suppose that the Israelitish nation was so much more stupid
than others that it did not know that these were evils ? One
may therefore wonder that those laws, universally known in
the world, were promulgated from mount Sinai by Jehovah
Himself, with so great a miracle. But let him hear; — they
were promulgated with so great a miracle that men might
know that these were not only civil and moral, but also Di-
vine laws; and that to do contrary to them was not only to
do evil against the neighbor, that is, against a fellow-citizen
and society, but was also to sin against God. For this reason
these laws, by promulgation by Jehovah from mount Sinai,
were made laws of religion also. It is evident that what-
ever Jehovah commands, He commands that it be of relig-
ion, and thus that it is to be done for the sake of salvation.
But before the commandments are explained, something
must be premised concerning their holiness, that it may be
manifest that religion is in them.


402


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 283


In the Israelitish Church the Decalogue was
holiness Itself.

283. Because the commandments of the Decalogue were
the first fruits of the Word, and therefore the first fruits of
the church that was to be established with the Israelitish na-
tion, and because they were in brief summary an aggregate
of all things of religion, by which conjunction of God with
man and of man with God is given, therefore they were so
holy that there is nothing holier. That they were most
holy is very plain from what now follows. The Lord Jeho-
vah Himself descended upon mount Sinai in fire and with
angels, and promulgated them therefrom by the living voice,
and the mountain was hedged around lest any should come
near and die. Neither the priests nor the elders approached,
but Moses alone. These commandments were written upon
two tables of stone by the finger of God. When Moses
brought the tables down the second time, his face shone.
The tables were afterward deposited in the ark, the ark was
placed in the inmost of the tabernacle, over it was placed the
mercy-seat, over this were placed cherubs of gold, and this
inmost of the tabernacle containing the ark was called the
holy of holies. Without the veil within which was the ark,
other things were arranged which represented the holy things
of heaven and the church, the table overlaid with gold, on
which was the shew bread, the golden altar on which incense
was burned, and the golden candlestick with seven lamps;
also the curtains round about, of fine linen, purple, and
scarlet. The holiness of this whole tabernacle was from
nothing else than the law which was in the ark. On ac-
count of the holiness of the tabernacle, from the law in the
ark, all the people of Israel by command encamped around
it in order according to the tribes, and journeyed in order
after it; and then a cloud was over it by day, and a fire by
night. On account of the holiness of that law, and the


No. 284]


THE DECALOGUE


403


presence of Jehovah in it, Jehovah talked with Moses over
the mercy-seat between the cherubs, and the ark was called
Jehovah there. It was not lawful for Aaron to enter within
the veil, except with sacrifices and incense, lest he should
die. On account of the presence of Jehovah in and about
that law, miracles also were wrought by the ark which con-
tained the law: — the waters of the Jordan were divided;
and so long as the ark rested in the middle of it, the people
passed over on dry ground; the walls of Jericho fell by the
ark’s being carried around them; Dagon, the god of the
Philistines, fell on his face before it, and afterward lay upon
the threshold of the temple severed from his head and the
two palms of his hands; the Bethshemites w r ere smitten on
account of it to the number of several thousands; and Uzzah
died because he touched it. The ark was introduced by
David into Zion with sacrifice and rejoicing; and afterward
by Solomon into the temple at Jerusalem, where it made its
shrine. Other things are also recorded, from all of which it
is plain that the Decalogue was holiness itself in the Israeli-
tish Church.

284. The points presented above respecting the promul-
gation, holiness, and power of that law, are found in the fol-
lowing passages in the Word: Jehovah descended upon
mount Sinai in fire, and the mountain then smoked and
trembled, and there were thunderings, lightnings, a thick
cloud, and the voice of a trumpet (Exod. xix. 16-18: Deut.
iv. 11 ; v. 22, 23). Before the descent of Jehovah, the people
prepared and sanctified themselves for three days (Exod.
xix. 10, 11, 15). Bounds were set round about the moun-
tain, lest any one should approach and come near its base,
and should die; nor might the priests draw near, but Moses
alone (Exod. xix. 12, 13, 20-23; xxiv. 1, 2). The law was
promulgated from mount Sinai (Exod. xx. 2-17: Deut. v.
6-21). The law was written on two tables of stone, and
was written by the finger of God (Exod. xxxi. 18; xxxii. 15,
16: Deut. ix. 10). When Moses brought the tables down


404


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 284


from the mountain a second time, his face shone so that he
covered it with a veil while he talked with the people (Exod.
xxxiv. 29-35). The tables were deposited in the ark (Exod.
xxv. 16; xl. 20: Deut. x. 5: 1 Kings viii. 9). The mercy-
seat was laid over the ark, and above this were placed cherubs
of gold (Exod. xxv. 17-21). The ark with the mercy-seat
and the cherubs was put into the tabernacle, and was the
chief and thus the inmost thing thereof; and the table over-
laid with gold, upon which was the shew bread, and the
golden altar for incense, and the candlestick with the golden
lamps, made the external of the tabernacle; and the ten cur-
tains of fine linen, purple, and scarlet, its outermost (Exod.
xxv., xxvi., xl. 17-28). The place where the ark was, was
called the holy of holies (Exod. xxvi. 33). The whole people
of Israel encamped around the tabernacle, in order accord-
ing to the tribes, and marched in order after it (Num. ii)!
There was then a cloud over the tabernacle by day, and a
fire by night (Exod. xl. 38: Num. ix. 15-23; xiv. 14: Deut.
i. 33). Jehovah spake with Moses above the ark between
the cherubs (Exod. xxv. 22: Num. vii. 89). The ark, owing
to the law in it, was called Jehovah there; for when the ark
went forward, Moses said, Arise , Jehovah; and when it
rested, Return , Jehovah (Num. x. 35, 36: 2 Sam. vi. 2: Ps.
cxxxii. 7, 8). On account of the holiness of that law, Aaron
was not allowed to enter within the veil except with sacrifices
and incense (Lev. xvi. 2-14, and verses following). From
the presence of the Lord’s power in the law, which was
within the ark, the waters of the Jordan were divided; and
while the ark was resting in the midst of it, the people passed
over on dry ground (Josh. iii. 1-17; iv. 5-20). When the
ark was carried around them, the walls of Jericho fell (Josh,
vi. 1-20). Dagon, the god of the Philistines, fell to the
ground before the ark, and afterward lay upon the threshold
of the temple, the trunk being separated from the head, and
the palms of the hands being cut off (1 Sam. v.). That the
Bethshemites on account of the ark were smitten to the num-


No. 286]


THE DECALOGUE


405


ber of several thousands (1 Sam. v. and vi.). Uzzah died
because he touched the ark (2 Sam. vi. 7). The ark was
introduced into Zion by David, with sacrifices and jubilation
(2 Sam. vi. 1— 19). The ark was introduced by Solomon into
the temple of Jerusalem, where it made its shrine (1 Kings
vi. 19, and verses following; viii. 3-9).

285. Since by that law there is conjunction of the Lord
with man and of man with the Lord, it is called the Cove-
nant, and the Testimony; the Covenant because it con-
joins, and the Testimony because it confirms the articles of
the covenant; for covenant in the Word signifies conjunc-
tion, and testimony signifies the confirmation and witnessing
of its articles. For this reason there were two tables, one for
God and the other for man. Conjunction is effected by the
Lord, but only when man does the things written in his table;
for the Lord is continually present, and wishes to enter in, but
man, from the freedom which he has from the Lord, must
open to Him; for the Lord says, Behold I stand at the door and
knock; if any man hear My voice and open the door f I will
come in to him y and will sup with him , and he with Me (Apoc.
iii. 20). That the tables of stone on which the law was writ-
ten were called the tables of the covenant, and that the ark
was called from them the ark of the covenant, and the law
itself the covenant, may be seen (Num. x. 33: Deut. iv. 13,
23 J v. 2, 3; ix. 9: Josh. iii. 11: 1 Kings viii. 21: Apoc. xi.
19; and elsewhere). Since covenant signifies conjunction,
it is therefore said concerning the Lord that He shall be for
a covenant to the people (Isa. xlii. 6; xlix. 8); and He is
called the Messenger of the covenant (Mai. iii. x); and His
blood, the blood of the covenant (Matt. xxvi. 28: Zech. ix.
11 : Exod. xxiv. 4-10); and therefore the Word is called the
Old and the New Covenant; for covenants are made for the
sake of love, friendship, consociation, and conjunction.

286. So great holiness and so great power were in that
law, because it was the aggregate of all things of religion;
for it was written on two tables, one of which contains in the


406


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 286


a ggi-egate all things which regard God; and the other con-
tains in the aggregate all things which regard man. There-
fore the commandments of that law are called The Ten
Words (Exod. xxxiv. 28: Deut. iv. 13; x. 4). They were
so called because ten signifies all, and words signify truths;
for there were more than ten words. That ten signifies all,
and that tithes were instituted on account of that significa-
tion, may be seen in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 101); and
that that law is a complex of all things of religion, will be
seen in what follows.

In the Sense of the Letter the Decalogue contains

THE GENERAL PRECEPTS OF DOCTRINE AND LIFE; BUT
IN THE SPIRITUAL AND CELESTIAL SENSES, ALL
UNIVERSALLY.

287. It is known that in the Word the Decalogue is called
the law by way of eminence, as it contains all things which
pertain to doctrine and life; for it contains not only all things
which regard God, but also all which regard man. There-
fore that law was written on two tables, one of which treats
of God, the other of man. It is also known that all things
of doctrine and life have relation to love to God and love
toward the neighbor; all things belonging to these loves are
contained in the Decalogue. That the whole Word teaches
nothing else, is evident from these words of the Lord: Jesus
said , Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and
with all thy soul , and with all thy mind , and thy neighbor as
thyself . On these two commandments hang the law and the
prophets (Matt. xxii. 37, 39, 40). The law and the prophets
signify the whole Word. And again: A certain lawyer,
tempting Jesus, said, Master , what shall I do to inherit eternal
life? And Jesus said unto him , What is written in the law?
How readest thou? And he answering said , Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy soul , and
with all thy strength , and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor


No. 288;


THE DECALOGUE


407


as thyself. And Jesus said, This do, and thou shalt live
(Luke x. 25-28). Now because love to God and love toward
the neighbor are the all of the Word, and the Decalogue in
the first table 'contains in a summary all things of love to
God, and in the second table all things of love toward the
neighbor, it follows that the Decalogue contains all things
which are of doctrine and of life. From a view of the two
tables, it is manifest that they are so conjoined that God
from His table looks to man, and that man in his turn from
his table looks to God ; and thus that the looking is recipro- f
cal, which is such that God on His part never ceases to look
at man, and to put in operation such things as pertain to
his salvation; and if man receives and does the things which
are in his table, reciprocal conjunction is effected, and then
it comes to pass according to the words of the Lord to the
lawyer, This do, and thou shalt live.

288. The law is often mentioned in the Word; and it
shall be told what is meant by the law in a strict, in a broader,
and in the broadest sense. In a strict sense, by the law is
meant the Decalogue; in a broader sense, are meant the
statutes given by Moses to the children of Israel; and in the
broadest, is meant the whole Word. That the law in a strict
sense means the Decalogue, is known; but that the law in a
broader sense means the statutes given by Moses to the chil-
dren of Israel, is evident from the several statutes in Exodus,
which are called laws; as, This is the law of the sacrifice of
the trespass offering (Lev. vii. 1). This is the law of the sac-
rifice of peace offerings (vii. n). This is the law of the meat
offering (vi. 14, and verses following). This is the law of
the burnt offering, of the meat offering, of the sin offering, and
0 j the trespass offering, and of the consecrations (vii .37). This
is the law of the beast and of the jowl (xi. 46, and following
verses). This is the law for her' that beareth , for a son and a
daughter (xii. 7). This is the law of leprosy (xiii. 59; xiv. 2,
32, 54, 57). This is the law of him that hath an issue (xv.
32). This is the law of jealousy (Num. v. 29, 30). This is


408


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 288


the law oj the Nazarite (vi. 13, 21). The law 0} cleansing
(xix. 14). The law concerning the red heifer (xix. 2). The
law for the king (Deut. xvii. 15-19). Indeed the whole book
of Moses is called the law (Deut. xxxi. 9, 11, 12, 26; and also
in the New Testament, as Luke ii. 22; xxiv. 44: John i. 45;
vii. 23; viii. 5; and in other places). That by the works of
the law Paul means these statutes, where he says that man
is justified by faith without the deeds of the law (Rom. iii.
28), is plainly manifest from what there follows; and also
from his words to Peter, whom he censured for Judaizing,
where he says, three times in one verse, that no one is jus-
tified by the works of the law (Gal. ii. 14-16). That by the
law in the broadest sense is meant the whole Word, is mani-
fest from these passages: Jesus said. Is it not written in your
law } Ye are gods (John x. 34): this is written, Ps. lxxxii. 6.
The people answered , We have heard out of the law y that
Christ abideth for ever (John xii. 34): this is written, Ps.
lxxxix. 29; cx. 4: Dan. vii. 14. That the Word might be ful-
filled that is written in their law , They hated Me without a
cause (John xv. 25): this is written Ps. xxxv. 19. The Phar-
isees said , Have any of the rulers believed on Him? But the
multitude which knoweth not the law are cursed (John vii.
48, 49). It is easier for heaven and earth to pass y than for
one tittle of the law to fail (Luke xvi. 17). By the law there is
meant the whole Sacred Scripture; also in a thousand places
in David.

, 289. The Decalogue, in the spiritual and celestial senses,

contains universally all the precepts of doctrine and of life,
thus all of faith and charity, because the Word, in the sense
qf the letter, in all things and in each thing, or in general and
in every part of it, contains two interior senses, one which is
called spiritual, and another which is called celestial; and
because in these senses Divine truth is in its light, and Divine
goodness in its heat. Now because the Word is such in gen-
eral and in every part, it is necessary to explain the ten com-
mandments of the Decalogue according to the three senses


No. 290]


THE DECALOGUE


409


called natural, spiritual, and celestial. That the Word is
such, may be evident from what has been demonstrated
above, in the -chapter concerning the Sacred Scripture or the
Word (n. 193-208).

290. No one, unless he knows the nature of the Word, can
have any idea that there is infinity in every part of it, that is,
that it contains innumerable things which not even angels
can exhaust. Each thing therein may be likened to a seed,
which may grow up from the ground into a great tree, and
produce an abundance of seeds; from which again may be
similar trees, which together make a garden; and from the
seeds of this come other gardens; and so on to infinity.
Such is the Word of the Lord in all its particulars, and such
especially is the Decalogue; for this, because it teaches love
to God and love toward the neighbor, is a short summary of
the whole Word. That the Word is such, the Lord also de-
clares by a comparison, thus: The kingdom 0} God is like a
grain of mustard-seed , which a man took and sowed in his
’field; which is less than all seeds f but when it is grown it is
greater than the herbs , and becometh a tree , so that the birds of
the air come and lodge in the branches thereof (Matt. xiii. 31,
32: Mark iv. 31, 32: Luke xiii. 18, 19: compare also Ezek.
xvii. 2-8). That such is the infinity of spiritual seeds or
truths in the Word, may be evident from the wisdom of an-
gels, which is all from the Word and increases with them to
eternity; and the wiser they become, the more clearly they
see that wisdom is without end, and they perceive that they
are but in its entrance hall, and cannot in the smallest par-
ticular attain to the Divine wisdom of the Lord, which they
call a great deep. Now, since the Word is from this great
deep, because from the Lord, it is plain that there is a kind
of infinity in all parts of it.


4io


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 291


THE FIRST COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt have no other God bejore My face.

291. These are the words of the first commandment
(Exod. xx. 3 : Deut. v. 7). In the natural sense, which is the
sense of the letter, the meaning nearest the letter is that idols
must not be worshipped; for it follows, Thou shalt not make
unto thee any graven image , or any likeness of any thing that
is in the heavens above , or that is in the earth beneath , or that
is in the waters under the earth . Thou shalt not bow down
thyself to them nor serve them; for I Jehovah thy God am a
jealous God (Exod. xx. 3-5). The meaning of this com-
mandment which is nearest the letter is that idols must not
be worshipped, for the reason that before this time, and after
it even to the Lord’s coming, there was idolatrous worship
in a great part of Asia. The cause of this worship was that
all the churches before the Lord came into the world were
representative and typical; and the types and representa-
tions were such that Divine things were set forth under va-
rious figures and sculptured forms, which the common people
began to worship as gods when their significations .were lost.
The Israelitish nation also was in such worship when in
Egypt, as is evident from the golden calf which they wor-
shipped in the wilderness instead of Jehovah; and from
many passages in the Word, both historic and prophetic, it
is evident that they were not afterward alienated from that
worship.

292. This commandment, Thou shalt have no other God
before My face , also means in the natural sense that no man,
dead or living, may be worshipped as a god; which also was
done in Asia and in various neighboring regions. Many
gods of the Gentiles were no other than men; as Baal, Ash-
taroth, Chemosh, Milcom, Beelzebub; and at Athens and
Rome, Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, Apollo, Pallas, and


No. 294]


THE DECALOGUE


411

so forth; some of whom they worshipped first as saints, after-
ward as divinities, and lastly as gods. That they also wor-
shipped living men as gods, is evident from the edict of
Darius the Mede, that for thirty days no man should ask any
thing of God, but of the king only; if otherwise, he should
be cast into the den of lions (Dan. vi. 8 to the end).

293. In the natural sense, which is that of the letter, this
commandment also means that no one but God, and nothing
but that which proceeds from God, is to be loved above all
things; which is also according- to the Lord’s words (Matt,
xxii. 35-40: Luke x. 25-28). For to him who loves any per-
son or thing above all things, that person and that thing is
God and Divine. For example, to him who loves himself
above all things, or the world, himself or the world is his god.
It is for this reason that such do not in heart acknowledge
any God. They therefore are conjoined with their like in
hell, where all are gathered who love themselves and the
world above all things.

294. The spiritual sense of this commandment is, that no
other God than the Lord Jesus Christ is to be worshipped;
because He is Jehovah, who came into the world, and wrought
the redemption without which no man and no angel could
have been saved. That there is no God besides Him, is evi-
dent from these passages in the Word: It shall be said in that
day , Lo, this is our God ; we have waited jor Him to deliver us;
this is Jehovah , we have waited jor Him , let us rejoice and be
glad in His salvation (Isa. xxv. 9). The voice of him that
crieth in the wilderness , Prepare ye the way oj Jehovah , make
smooth in the desert a highway jor our God. For the glory of
Jehovah shall be revealed , and all flesh shall see it together.
Behold , the Lord Jehovih cometh in strength; He shall jeed
His flock like a shepherd (xl. 3, 5, 11). Surely God is in thee ,
and there is no God besides: verily thou art a God that hidesi
Thyself , O God 0} Israel, the Saviour (xlv. 14, 15). Am not
I Jehovah? and there is no God else beside Me; a just God
and a Saviour , there is none beside Me (xlv. 21, 22). I am


412


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 294


Jehovah, and besides Me there is no Saviour (xliii. 11: also
Hos. xiii. 4). That all flesh may know that I Jehovah am
thy Saviour and thy Redeemer (Isa. xlix. 26; also lx. 16). As
for our Redeemer, Jehovah Zebaoth is Mis name (xlvii. 4:
also Jer. 1 . 34). Jehovah, my Rock and my Redeemer (Ps.
xix. 14). Thus said Jehovah, thy Redeemer, the Holy One
of Israel, I am Jehovah thy God (Isa. xlviii. 17; also xliii. 14;
xlix. 7; liv. 8). Thus said Jehovah, thy Redeemer, I am
Jehovah, That maketh all things, and alone of Myself (xliv.
24). Thus said Jehovah, the King of Israel, and his Re-
deemer, Jehovah Zebaoth, I am the First and the Last, and be-
side Me there is no God (xliv. 6). Jehovah Zebaoth is His
name, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel , the God of
the whole earth shall He be called (liv. 5). Abraham hath not
known us, Israel doth not acknowledge us; Thou , Jehovah,
art our Father, our Redeemer from everlasting is Thy Name
(lxiii. 16). Unto us a Child is born , unto us a Son is given ,
and His Name shall be called Wonder fid, Counsellor, God,
Mighty, Father of Eternity, Prince of Peace (ix. 6). Behold,
the days come, that I will raise up unto David a righteous
Branch who shall reign King, and this is His name, Jehovah
our Justice (Jer. xxiii. 5, 6; also xxxiii. 15, 16). Philip said
to Jesus, Show us the Father . Jesus said to him, He that
seeth Me, seeth the Father . Believest thou not that I am in
the Father, and the Father in Me? (John xiv. 8-10.) In
Jesus Christ dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily
(Col. ii. 9). We are in the Truth, in Jesus Christ ; This is
the tru-e God and Eternal Life. Little children , keep your-
selves from idols (1 John v. 20, 21). From these passages it
is clearly manifest that the Lord our Saviour is Jehovah Him-
self, who is at once Creator, Redeemer, and Regenerator.
This is the spiritual sense of this commandment.

295. The celestial sense of this commandment is, that
Jehovah the Lord is infinite, immeasurable, and eternal;
that He is omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent; that
He is the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End;


No. 296]


THE DECALOGUE


413


who was, is, and will be; that He is love itself, and wisdom
itself, or good itself and truth itself; consequently, life it-
self; thus the only One, from whom are all things.

296. All who acknowledge and worship any other God
than the Lord the Saviour Jesus Christ, who is Himself Jeho-
vah God in human form, sin against this first command-
ment; so also do they who persuade themselves that three
Divine Persons have actually existed from eternity. These
as they confirm themselves in that error, become more and
more natural and corporeal, and then cannot interiorly com-
prehend any Divine truth; and if they hear and receive it,
still they defile and cover it up with fallacies.. They may
therefore be compared to those who live in the lowest story
or the basement of a house, and therefore do not hear any
thing that those who are in the second and third stories say to
each other, because the ceilings over their heads prevent the
sound from penetrating to them. The human mind is like
a house of three stories, in the lowest of which are they who
have confirmed themselves in favor of three Gods from eter-
nity; in the second and third stories are they who acknowl-
edge and believe in one God under a visible human form,
and that the Lord God the Saviour is He. The sensual and
corporeal man, because he is merely natural, viewed in him-
self is wholly animal, and only differs from a brute in being
able to speak and reason; he is therefore like one living in a
menagerie where are wild beasts of every kind, and there he
now acts the lion, now the bear, and now the tiger, the leop-
ard, or the wolf; and he can also act the sheep, but then he
laughs in his heart. The merely natural man does not
think of Divine truths except from the things of the world,
thus from the fallacies of the senses; for he cannot raise his
mind above them. The doctrine of his faith may therefore
be compared to pottage made of chaff, which he eats as a
dainty; or to what was commanded Ezekiel the prophet
that he should mix wheat, barley, beans, lentiles, and fitches,
with the dung of man or of a cow, and make for himself


414 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 296

bread and cakes, and thus represent the church such as it
was with the Israelitish nation (Ezek. iv. 9, and following).
So is it with the doctrine of the church which is founded and
built upon the faith in three Divine Persons from eternity,
each of whom singly is God. Who would not see the enor-
mity of that faith if it were exhibited as it is in itself in a pic-
ture before the eyes ? if for instance the three were to stand
in order near each other, the First distinguished by a sceptre
and crown; the Second holding in his right hand a book,
which is the Word, and in his left a golden cross sprinkled
with blood; and the Third equipped with wings, standing
upon one foot, in readiness to fly forth and operate; and
above them the inscription, These three Persons , being so
many Gods , are one God. What wise man seeing this picture
would not say to himself, Alas, what a fantasy! But he
would say otherwise if he should see the picture of one Di-
vine Person, with rays of heavenly light around the head,
with the superscription, This is our God , at once Creator ,
Redeemer , and Regenerator , thus the Saviour . Would not
that wise man kiss this picture, and carry it home in his
bosom, and by the sight of it gladden his own mind, and that
of his wife, and those of his children and servants?

THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain;
for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless , that taketh
His name in vain.

297. By the name of Jehovah God taken in vain in the
natural sense, which is the sense of the letter, is meant the
name itself, and the abuse of it in various ways of speaking,
especially in falsehoods or lies, and in oaths without cause,
and for the purpose of exculpation in evil intentions, such as
cursings, and in sorceries and enchantments. But to swear
by God and His Holiness, the Word, and the Gospel, in


No. 298}


THE DECALOGUE


415


coronations, in inaugurations into the priesthood and induc-
tions into offices of trust, is not to take the name of God in
vain, unless he who takes the oath afterward casts aside his
promises as vain. And the name of God, because it is the
holy itself, must continually be used in the holy things of the
church, as in prayers, psalms, and in all worship; and also
in preaching, and in writing on ecclesiastical matters. The
reason is that God is in all things of religion; and when He
is religiously invoked, He is present through His name and
hears: in these things the name of God is hallowed. That
the name of Jehovah God is in itself holy, is evident from
that name, in that the Jews from their earliest day have not
dared and do not dare, arid because of them the evangelists
and apostles did not wish, to say Jehovah, and therefore
instead of Jehovah they said Lord — as is evident from
various passages quoted from the Old Testament in the
New, where the name Lord is used instead of Jehovah (as
Matt. xxii. 37, and Luke x. 27, compared with Deut. vi. 5,
and other passages). That the name Jesus is in like manner
holy, is known from the saying of the apostle, that at that
name the knee is bent and is to be bent, in heaven and in
earth; and furthermore from this, that it can be named by
no devil in hell. There are many names of God which are
not to be taken in vain, as Jehovah, Jehovah God, Jehovah
Zebaoth, the Holy One of Israel, Jesus and Christ, the Holy
Spirit.

298. In the spiritual sense by the name of God is under-
stood all that the church teaches from the Word, and by
which the Lord is invoked and worshipped. All these things
in the complex are the name of God. Therefore by taking
the name of God in vain, is meant introducing any thing
therefrom in vain or false talk, in lying, imprecations, sor-
ceries, and enchantments; for this also is to abuse and blas-
pheme God, thus His name. That the Word, and what-
ever the church has from it, and thus all worship, is the name
of God, may be evident from these passages: From the rising


4i 6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 298


of the sun shall he call upon My name (Isa. xli. 25). From
the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same , My
name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place
incense shall be offered unto My name . Y e profane My name ,
in that ye say , The table of Jehovah is polluted; and ye snuff
at My name , in that ye bring that which was torn , the lame,
and the sick (Mai. i. 11— 13). All peoples walk in the name
of their God , a nd we will walk in the name of Jehovah our
God (Mic. iv. 5). They shall worship Jehovah in one place ,
where He shall place His name (Deut. xii. 5, 11, 13, 14, 18;
xvi. 2, 6, 11, 15, 16); that is, where He should set His wor-
ship. Jesus Said, Where two or three are gathered together in
My name , there am I in the midst of them (Matt, xviii. 20).
As many as received Him , to them gave He power to become
the sons of God , even to them that believe in His name (John
i. 12). He that believeth not , is judged already , because he
hath not believed in the name of the only-begotten Son of God
(iii. 18). Believing , they shall have life in His name (xx. 3 1 ) .
Jesus said, 1 have manifested Thy name to men; and l have
declared unto them Thy name (xvii. 6, 26). The Lord said, I
have a few names in Sardis (Apoc. iii. 4). There are also
many other passages in which, as in the foregoing, by the
name of God is meant the Divine which proceeds from God,
and by which He is worshipped. And by the name of Jesus
Christ is meant all of redemption, and all of His doctrine,
and thus all of salvation; by Jesus, the all of salvation
through redemption, and by Christ, the all of salvation
through His doctrine.

299. In the celestial sense, by taking the name of God in
vain is meant what the Lord said to the Pharisees, that all
sin and blasphemy shall be remitted unto man, but the blas-
phemy of the Spirit shall not be remitted (Matt. xii. 31, 32).
By blasphemy of the Spirit is meant blasphemy against the
Divinity of the Lord’s Human, and against the holiness of
the Word. That the Divine Human of the Lord is meant by
the name of Jehovah God in the celestial or highest sense,


No. 300]


THE DECALOGUE


417


is evident from these passages: Jesus said, Father , glorify
Thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven , saying,
I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again (John xii. 28)..
Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son ; if ye shall ask any thing
in My name, I will do it (xiv. 13, 14). In the Lord’s Prayer,
by TI allowed be Thy name, in the celestial sense, nothing
else is signified; so also by name in Exodus (xxiii. 21: Isa.
lxiii. 16). Since blasphemy of the Spirit is not remitted unto
man (according to the words in Matt. xii. 31, 32) and this is
meant in the celestial sense, there is therefore added to this
commandment, For Jehovah will not hold him guiltless who
taketh His name in vain.

300. That by the name of any one is meant not only his
name, but also his whole quality, is plain from names in the
spiritual world; no one there retains the name which he
received in baptism and which he had from his father or
ancestors, in the world; but every one there is named accord-
ing to his quality, and the angels are called according to their
moral and spiritual life; these latter also are meant by these
words of the Lord: Jesus said, I am the good Shepherd; the
sheep hear His voice, and He calleth His own sheep by name,
and leadetk them out (John x. ir, 3). And also by these: I
have a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their gar-
ments. Whosoever over cometh, I will write upon him the
name of the city, New Jerusalem, and My new name (Apoc.
iii. 4, r2). Gabriel and Michael are not the names of two
persons in heaven, but by those names are meant all in
heaven who are in wisdom concerning the Lord and wor- ;
ship Him. Also names of persons and places in the Word do
not mean persons and places, but things of the church. And
in the natural world, by name is not meant the name only,
but at the same time the quality of the person, because this
adheres to his name; for in common conversation it is cus-
tomary to say, He does this for the sake of his name, or for
the fame of his name; he has a great name: which means


41 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 300

that he is celebrated for such things as are in him, as for in-
genuity, erudition, merits, and so forth. Who does not know
that he who disparages and calumniates any one as to his
name, also disparages and calumniates the actions of his
life? They are conjoined in idea; therefore the fame of his
name perishes. So whoever utters the name of a king, a
duke, or any great man, with great disrespect, casts reproach
also upon the majesty or the dignity of the person. So also
he who utters the name of another in a tone of contempt, at
the same time shows light estimation of the acts of his life.
The case is similar with every person ; his name, that is, his
quality and consequent reputation, according to the laws of
all kingdoms, it is not allowable to blast and defame.

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT.

Remember the Sabbath day , to keep it holy; six days thou
shalt labor and do all thy work; but the seventh
day is a Sabbath to Jehovah thy God.

301. That this is the third commandment may be seen in
Exodus (xx. 8-10), and Deuteronomy (v. 12-14). In the
natural sense, which is that of the letter, this means that the
six days are for man and his labors, and the seventh for the
Lord, and for man’s rest from Him. Sabbath in the original
tongue signifies rest. The Sabbath among the children of
Israel was the sanctity of sanctities, because it represented
the Lord. The six days represented His labors and com-
bats with the hells, and the seventh day His victory over
them and thus rest. And because that day was representa-
tive of the close of the Lord’s whole work of redemption,
therefore it was holiness itself. But when the Lord came
into the world, and the representations of Him therefore
ceased, that day became a day of instruction in Divine things,
and thus also a day of rest from labors, and of meditation on
such things as relate to salvation and eternal life; as also a


No. 302]


THE DECALOGUE


419


day of love toward the neighbor. That it became a day of
instruction in Divine things is plain from this, that the Lord
on that day taught in the temple and in synagogues (Mark

vi. 2: Luke iv. 16, 31, 32; xiii. 10); and that He said to the
man who was healed, Take up thy bed and walk; and to the
Pharisees, that it was lawful for the disciples on the Sab-
bath day to gather the ears of com and eat (Matt. xii. 1-9:
Mark ii. 23-28: Luke vi. 1-6: John v. 9-19); by each of
which particulars in the spiritual sense is signified to be in-
structed in doctrinals. That that day became also a day
of love toward the neighhor, is evident from what the Lord
did and taught on the Sabhath day (Matt. xii. 10-14: Mark
iii. 1-9: Luke vi. 6-12; xiii. 10-18; xiv. 1-7: John v. 9-19;

vii. 22, 23; ix. 14, 16). From these and the former passages
it is plain why the Lord said that He is Lord also of the Sab-
bath (Matt. xii. 8: Mark ii. 28: Luke vi. 5); and because
He said this, it follows that that day was representative of
Him.

302. By this commandment in the spiritual sense is sig-
nified the reformation and regeneration of man by the Lord;
by the six days of labor the comhat against the flesh and its
lusts, and at the same time against the evils and falsities
which are in him from hell; and by the seventh day his con-
junction with the Lord, and regeneration therehy. That as
long as that combat continues man has spiritual labor, and
that when he is regenerated he has rest, will he evident from
what will he said hereafter, in the chapter concerning Refor-
mation and Regeneration, especially under the following
heads: I. Regeneration is effected in a manner analogous to
that in which man is conceived , carried in the womb, born , and
brought up. II. The first act of the new birth is called refor-
mation, which is of the understanding; and the second is
called regeneration, which is of the will, and thence of the un-
derstanding. III. The internal man is to be reformed first,
and through this the external. IV. Then arises a combat
between the internal and the external man, and the one that


420


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 302


conquers rules over the other. V. The regenerate man has a
new will and a new understanding: and so forth. The ref-
ormation and regeneration of man are signified by this com-
mandment in the spiritual sense, because they coincide with
the labors and combats of the Lord with the hells, and with
His victory over them, and then rest. For the Lord reforms
and regenerates man and renders him spiritual, in the same
manner in which He glorified His Human, and made it Di-
vine: this is what is meant by following Him. That the
Lord had combats, and that they are called labors, is mani-
fest in Isaiah (iii. and lxiii.); and also that the like are called
labors in relation to men (Isa. lxv. 23: Apoc. ii. 2, 3).

303. In the celestial sense by this commandment is meant
conjunction with the Lord, and then peace, because there is
protection from hell; for by Sabbath is signified rest, and in
this highest sense, peace, wherefore the Lord is called the
Prince of Peace, and also calls Himself Peace — as is evi-
dent from these passages: Unto us a Child is born , unto us a
Son is given , and the government shall be upon His shoulder ,
and His name shall be called Wonder fid, Counsellor , God,
Mighty , Father of Eternity, the Prince of Peace; 0} the in-
crease of His government and peace there shall be no end (Isa.
ix. 7 )* Jesus said, Peace I leave with you , My peace I give
unto you (John xiv. 27). Jesus said, These things I have
spoken , that in Me ye might have peace (xvi. 33). How
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him that bring-
eth good tidings, that publisheth peace, saying, Thy God reign -
eth (Isa. Iii. 7). Jehovah will redeem my soul in peace (Ps.
lv. 18). The work of righteousness is peace, the labor of
righteousness is rest and security for ever; that they may
dwell in the tabernacle of peace, and in the tents of security,
and in quiet resting-places (Isa. xxxii. 17, 18). Jesus said
to the seventy whom He sent forth, Into whatsoever house ye
enter , first say, Peace be to this house; and if the son of peace
be there, your peace shall rest upon it (Luke x. 5, 6: Matt. x.
12-14). Jehovah will speak peace to His people; righteous-


No. 304]


THE DECALOGUE


421


ness and peace shall kiss each other (Ps. lxxxv. 8, 10). When
the Lord Himself appeared to the disciples, He said, Peace be
with you (John xx. 19, 21, 26). Moreover the state of peace
into which men are to come, from the Lord, is treated of in
Isaiah (lxv. and lxvi., and elsewhere); and they will come
into it who are received into the New Church which the
Lord is establishing at this day. What in its essence is the
peace in which angels are, and those who are in the Lord,
may be seen in the work concerning Heaven and Hell (n.
284-290). From these things also it is plain, why the Lord
calls Himself the Lord of the Sabbath, that is, of rest and
peace.

304. Heavenly peace, in relation to the hells, so that evils
and falsities may not rise from them and make invasion, may
be compared with natural peace in many forms, as with
peace after war, when every one lives in security from ene-
mies, safe in his own city, in his own home, or in his own
fields and gardens. It is as the prophet said, speaking in
natural terms of heavenly peace: They shall sit every man
under his vine , and under his jig-tree, and none shall make
them afraid (Mic. iv. 4: Isa. lxv. 21-23). It may be com-
pared also to recreation of mind and to rest after severe
labor, and with the solace of mothers after child-birth, when
their parental love manifests its enjoyments. It may also
be compared with tranquillity after tempests, black clouds
and thunders; and likewise with spring after terrible winter
has passed, and then with the gladness that comes from the
new growths in the fields, and from the blossoming in the
gardens, meadows, and forests. It may be compared also
with the state of mind of those who, after storms and dangers
on the sea, reach the port, and set their feet on the desired
land.


422


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 305


THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT.

Honor thy father and thy mother , that thy days may be
prolonged , and that it may be well with thee upon
the earth .

305. This commandment is so read in Exodus (xx. 1^)
and Deuteronomy (v. 16). By honoring thy father and thy
mother in the natural sense, which is the sense of the letter,
is meant to honor parents, to obey them, to be attentive to
them, and to show gratitude to them for their benefits, which
are, that they feed and clothe their children, and introduce
them into the world that they may act in it as civil and moral
beings, and also into heaven by the precepts of religion; thus
they have a care for their temporal prosperity, and also for
their eternal happiness; and they do all these things from
the love in which they are from the Lord, in whose stead they
do them. In a relative sense is meant the honor that wards
should pay their guardians, if the parents are not living. In
a broader sense by this commandment is meant to honor the
king and magistrates, since they provide for all in general
the necessaries which parents provide in particular. In the
broadest sense by this commandment is meant that men
should love their country, because it supports and protects
them, and is therefore called fatherland [patria] from father
[ pater ]. But to their country, king, and magistrates honor
must be rendered by parents, and by them implanted in their
children.

5 306. In the spiritual sense to honor father and mother

means to reverence and love God and the church. In this
sense by father is meant God, who is the Father of all; and
by mother the church. In the heavens infants and angels
know no other father and no other mother, since there they
have been born anew of the Lord by the church. The Lord
therefore says, Call no man your father upon the earth; for


No. 307]


THE DECALOGUE


423


One is your Father , who is in the heavens (Matt, xxiii. 9).
These words were spoken for children and angels in heaven,
but not for children and men on earth. The Lord teaches
the same in the common prayer of Christian churches: Our
Father , who art in the heavens , hallowed be Thy name . The
church is meant by mother, in the spiritual sense, because as
a mother on earth feeds her children with natural food, so the
church feeds them with spiritual food; and for this reason;
the church is called mother in .the Word, throughout, as in Y
Hosea: Plead with your mother; she is not My wife, neither
am I her husband (ii. 2, 5). In Isaiah: Where is the bill of
your mother's divorcement , whom I have put away? (1. 1 : also
Ezek. xvi. 45; xix. 10.) And in the Evangelists: Jesus,
stretching out His hand to the disciples, said, My mother and
My brethren are those who hear the word 0} God and do it
(Matt. xii. 48, 49: Mark iii. 33-35: Luke viii. 21: John xix.
25-27).

307. In the celestial sense, by father is meant our Lord
Jesus Christ; and by mother, the communion of saints, that
is, His church, spread over all the world. That the Lord is
the Father, is evident from these passages: Unto us a Child
is born , unto us a Son is given, and His name is God, Mighty,
Father of Eternity, the Prince 0} Peace (Isa. ix. 6). Thou art
our Father; Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel doth not
acknowledge us: Thou art our Father, our Redeemer from
everlasting is Thy name (lxiii. 16). Philip saith, Shew us
the Father. Jesus saith to him , He that seeth Me, seeth the
Father; how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father? Believe
Me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me (John xiv.
8-1 1 ; also xii. 45). That by mother, in this sense, is meant
the Lord’s church, is evident from these passages: I saw the
holy city, New Jerusalem , prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband (Apoc. xxi. 2). The angel said to John, Come
hither , I will show thee the bride , the Lamb's wife. And he
showed the city, the holy Jerusalem (xxi. 9, 10). The mar-
riage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself


424 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 307

ready. Blessed are they who are called unto the marriage
supper 0} the Lamb (xix. 7, 9: see also Matt. ix. 15: Mark
ii. 19, 20: Luke v. 34, 35: John iii. 29; xix. 26, 27). That
by the New Jerusalem is meant the New Church which the
Lord is now establishing, may be seen in the Apocalypse
Revealed (n. 880, 881): this church, and not the former, is
the wife and the mother in this sense. The spiritual off-
spring, which are born from this marriage, are the goods of
charity and the truths of faith; and they who are in these
from the Lord, are called sons of the marriage, sons of God,
and born of Him.

308. It is to be kept in mind that there continually pro-
ceeds from the Lord a Divine celestial sphere of love toward
all who embrace the teaching of His church, and who obey
Him as little children in the world obey father and mother,
apply themselves to Him, and wish to be nourished, that is,
instructed by Him. From this heavenly sphere arises a nat-
ural sphere, which is one of love toward infants and children.
This is most universal, and affects not only men, but also
birds and beasts, even to serpents; nor animate things only,
but also inanimate. But that the Lord might operate into
these, even as into spiritual things, He created the sun, to be
in the natural world as a father, and the earth to be as a
mother. For the sun is as a common father, and the earth
as a common mother, from whose marriage arises all the ger-
mination that adorns the surface of our planet. From the
influx of that celestial sphere into the natural world arise the
wonderful progressions of vegetation, from seed to fruit and
to new seed. It is from this, also, that many kinds of plants
turn as it were their faces to the sun during the day, and turn
them away when the sun sets; it is from this also that there
are flowers which open at the rising of the sun, and close at
his setting; and from this it is that song birds carol sweetly
at early dawn, and likewise after they have been fed by their
mother earth. Thus do all these honor their father and their
mother. They all bear witness that through the sun and the


No. 309]


THE DECALOGUE


425


earth in the natural world, the Lord provides for all the
necessities of animate and inanimate things. Therefore it
is said in David, Praise ye Jehovah from the heavens; praise
ye Him , sun and moon . Praise Him from the earth , ye
whales and deeps; praise Him , fruitful trees and all cedars;
wild beast , and all cattle , creeping things and flying fowl , kings
of the earth , and all people , young men and maidens (Ps. cxlvii.
7-12). And in Job: Ask , I pray , awd they shall

teach thee; or the birds of heaven , and they shall tell thee; or
the shrub of the earth , and it shall teach thee; and the fishes 0}
the sea shall declare unto thee. Who knoweth not in all these y
that the hand of Jehovah hath wrought this? (xii. 7-9.) Ask
and they will teach signifies, observe, study, and judge from
these things, that the Lord Jehovih created them.

THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not kill.

309. This commandment, Thou shalt not kill, in the natu-
ral sense means not to kill a man, not to inflict on him any
wound of which he may die, and also not to mutilate his body;
and it means moreover, not to bring any deadly evil upon his
name and fame, since with many fame and life go hand in
hand. In a broader natural sense by murders are meant
enmity, hatred, and revenge, which breathe out destruction;
for murder lies concealed within them like fire in wood under
ashes. Infernal fire is nothing else; hence one is said to be
inflamed with hatred, and to bum with revenge. These are
murders in intention, but not in act; and if the fear of the
law, and of retaliation and revenge were taken away from
them, they would burst forth into act; especially if there be
treachery or ferocity in the intention. That hatred is mur-
der, is evident from these words of the Lord: Ye have heard ,
that it was said by them of old time , Thou shalt not kill; and
whosoever shall kill , shall be in danger of the judgment . But


426 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 309

I say unto you , that whosoever is angry with his brother rashly ,
shall be in danger 0} the judgment , and whosoever shall say ,
thou fool , shall be in danger of hell-fire (Matt. v. 21, 22). This
is because all that is of the intention is also of the will, and
thus in itself is of the deed.

310. In the spiritual sense by murders are meant all modes
of killing and destroying the souls of men, which are various
and manifold; as turning them away from God, religion, and
Divine worship by throwing out scandals against them, and
by persuading to such things as cause aversion and even ab-
horrence. Such things are done by all the devils and satans
in hell, with whom they in this world who violate and pros-
titute the holy things of the church are conjoined. Those
who destroy souls by falsities are meant by the king of the
abyss, who is called Abaddon or Apollyon, that is, the de-
stroyer (Apoc. ix. n); and in the prophetic Word they
whom they destroy are meant by the slain — as in these
passages: Jehovah God said, Feed the sheep of the slaughter ,
which their possessors have slain (Zech. xi. 4, 5, 7). We are
killed all the day long; we are counted as a flock for the slaugh-
ter (Ps. xliv. 22). Jacob shall cause them that come to take
root; is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are
slain of him? (Isa. xxvii. 6, 7.) The thief cometh not but to
steal and to kill the sheep; I am come that they may have life ,
and abundance (John x. 10: besides other places, as Isa. xiv.
21; xxvi. 21: Jer. iv. 31; xii. 3: Apoc. ix. 4; xi. 7). And
therefore the devil is called a murderer from the beginning
(John viii. 44).

3 1 1 . In the celestial sense, to kill means to be rashly angry
with the Lord, to hold Him in hatred, and to wish to blot out
His name. Of these it is said that they crucify Him; which
also they would do, as did the Jews, if He were to come into
the world as He did before. This is meant by the Lamb
standing as it had been slain (Apoc. v. 6; xiii. 8); and by the
crucified (Apoc. xi. 8: Heb. vi. 6: Gal. iii. 1).

312. The quality of man’s internal, when not reformed by


No. 312] THE DECALOGUE 427

the Lord, was made manifest to me from the devils and satans
in hell; for they have it constantly in mind to kill the Lord;
and because they cannot do this, they are in the endeavor to
kill those who are devoted to the Lord; but since they cannot
do this as men can in the world, they make every effort to de-
stroy their souls, that is, to destroy faith and charity in them.
Hatred and revenge with them show themselves like lurid
and glowing fires; hatred like lurid fires, and revenge like
glowing fires; yet these are not fires, but appearances. Their
cruelties of heart are sometimes seen in the air above them
like contests with angels, and their slaughter and destruction;
it is their anger and hatred against heaven from which such
direful mockeries arise. Moreover, in the distance these
same also appear like wild beasts of every kind, tigers, leop-
ards, wolves, foxes, dogs, crocodiles, and all kinds of ser-
pents; and when in representative forms they see gentle ani-
mals, they rush upon them in fantasy and endeavor to tear
them in pieces. They came into my sight like dragons stand-
ing near women who had infants with them, which they were
trying as it were to devour, according to the description in the
Apocalypse (xii.) ; which are nothing but representations of
hatred against the Lord and His New Church. That men
in the world who wish to destroy the Lord’s church are like
them, is not apparent to their companions; because their
bodies, by which they perform moral duties, absorb and con-
ceal these things. But still to the angels, who look not at
their bodies but at their spirits, they appear in forms like
those of the devils above described. Who could have known
such things had not the Lord opened the sight of some one
and enabled him to look inwardly into the spiritual world?
Otherwise, would not these, together with other most im-
portant matters, have lain concealed from men for ever ?


428


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 313


THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shall not commit adultery .

313. In the natural sense, by this commandment is meant
not only committing adultery, but also willing and doing
obscene things, and so thinking and speaking lascivious
things. That merely to lust is to commit adultery, is evi-
dent from these words of the Lord: Ye have heard that it was
said by them oj old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery. But
I say unto you , that whosoever looketh on another's woman to
lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his
heart (Matt. v. 27, 28). This is because lust becomes as
deed when it is in the will; for allurement enters merely into
the understanding, but intention enters into the will, and the
intention of lust is deed. But more may be seen concerning
these things in the work Marriage Love and Licentious Love ,
published at Amsterdam in the year 1768; which treats of
the opposition of marriage and licentious love (n. 423-443);
of fornication (n. 444-460) ; of adulteries and their kinds and
degrees (n. 478-499); of the lust of defloration (n. 501-505);
of the lust for Variety (n. 506-510); of the lust of violation
(n. 51 1, 512); of the lust of seducing innocences (n. 513,
514) ; of the imputation of each love, marriage and licentious
(n. 523-531). These all are meant by this commandment
in the natural sense.

314. In the spiritual sense, to commit adultery means to
adulterate the goods of the Word and falsify its truths. That
to commit adultery means this also, has been hitherto un-
known, because the spiritual sense of the Word has been
hitherto concealed. That no other is signified in the Word
by committing adultery and whoredom, is very manifest
from these passages: Run ye to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem , and seek if ye may find a man that executeth judg-
ment, that seeketh the truth. When I had fed them to the full,


No. 316]


THE DECALOGUE


429


they then committed whoredom (Jer. v. 1, 7). I have seen
also in the prophets 0} Jerusalem a horrible stubbornness , in
committing adultery and walking in lies (xxiii. 14). They
have done jolly in Israel , they have committed whoredom , and
have spoken My Word falsely (xxix. 23). They committed
whoredom because they have left Jehovah (Hos. iv. 10). The
soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits , and after
wizards , to go a whoring after them , I will cut him off (Lev.
xx. 6). A covenant shall not be made with the inhabitants of .
the land , lest they go a whoring after their gods (Exod. xxxiv . 1
15). Since Babylon adulterates and falsifies the Word more
than others, she is therefore called the great harlot, and these
things are said of her in the Apocalypse: Babylon hath made
all the nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication
(xiv. 8). The angel said, I will show thee the judgment of
the great whore, with whom the kings of the earth have com -
mitted whoredom (xvii. 1, 2). He hath judged the great
whore , who hath corrupted the earth with her whoredom (xix.
2). Since the Jewish nation had falsified the Word, it was
therefore called by the Lord an adulterous generation (Matt,
xii. 39; xvi. 4: Mark viii. 38); and in Isaiah, the seed of the
adulterer (lvii. 3). There are many other passages where
adulteries and whoredoms mean adulterations and falsifica-
tions of the Word (as Jer. iii. 6, 8; xiii. 27: Ezek. xvi. 15, 16,
26, 28, 29, 32, 33; xxiii. 3, 5, 7, 11, 14, 17-19: Hos. v. 3;
vi. 10: Nah. iii. 4).

315. In the celestial sense to commit adultery means to
deny the holiness of the Word and to profane it. That this
is meant in this sense follows from the former, the spiritual
sense, which is to adulterate its goods and falsify its truths.
They deny and profane the holiness of the Word who in heart
laugh at every thing of the church and religion; for all things
of the church and religion in the Christian world are from
the Word.

316. There are various causes which make a man seem
chaste, not only to others but also to himself, while yet he is


430


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 316


wholly unchaste; for he does not know that lust, when it is in
the will, is deed, and that it cannot be removed except by the
Lord after repentance. Abstinence from doing does not
make one chaste; but abstinence from willing because it is
sin, when doing is possible. Just so far as one abstains
from adulteries and fornication solely from fear of the civil
law and its penalties; from fear of loss of reputation and
therefore of honor; from fear of diseases from them; from
fear of upbraidings by the wife at home and thus intran-
quillity of life; from fear of the vengeance of the husband and
relations and being beaten by their servants; or from miser-
liness; from any infirmity, arising from disease, abuse, age,
or any other cause of impotence; or even if he abstains from
them for any natural or moral law, and not at the same time
for spiritual law, he is still inwardly an adulterer and forni-
cator; for he none the less believes that they are not sins, and
therefore does not in his spirit make them unlawful in the
sight of God. Thus in spirit he commits them, though not
before the world in the body; and therefore after death, when
he becomes a spirit, he speaks openly in favor of them. More-
over, adulterers may be compared to covenant breakers, who
violate compacts; and also to the satyrs and priapi of the
ancients, who roamed in the forests, crying out, “ Where are
there maidens, brides, and wives, with whom we may sport ?”
Moreover, adulterers in the spiritual world, actually appear
like satyrs and priapi. They may also be compared to rank
he-goats; and also to dogs that run through the streets, look-
ing about, and smelling for other dogs whom they lust after;
and so on. Their virile potency, when they become hus-
bands, may be compared to the blossoming of tulips in the
time of spring, which after a month lose their flowers and
wither away.


No. 318]


THE DECALOGUE


431


THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not steal .

317. In the natural sense, this commandment means ac-
cording to its letter, not to steal, rob, or commit piracy in
time of peace; and in general not to take from any one his
goods by stealth, or under any pretext. It also extends itself
to all imposture, illegitimate gain, usury, and exaction; and
also to fraudulent practices in paying duties and taxes, and
in discharging debts. Workmen offend against this com-
mandment who do their work unfaithfully and dishonestly;
merchants who deceive in merchandise, weight, measure, and
accounts; officers who deprive the soldiers of their wages;
judges who give judgment for friendship, bribes, relation-
ship, or other causes, by perverting the laws or litigation, and
who thus deprive others of their goods which they rightfully
possess.

318. In the spiritual sense, by stealing is meant depriving
others of the truths of their faith, which is done by falsities
and heresies. Priests who minister only for the sake of gain
or the attainment of worldly honor, and who teach such things
as they see or may see from the Word to be not true, are spiri-
tual thieves; since they deprive the people of the means of
salvation, which are the truths of faith. Such are also called
thieves in the Word in the following passages: He that enter -
eth not by the door into the sheepfold y but climbeth up some
other way , the same is a thief and a robber . The thief cometh
not but to steal , and to kitt y and to destroy (John x. 1, 10) . Lay
not up treasures upon earth , but in heaven , where thieves do
not come and steal (Matt. vi. 19, 20). If thieves come to thee ,
if robbers by night , how art thou cut off! Will they not steal
what is enough for them? (Obad. verse 5.) They shall run
to and fro in the city , they shall run on the wall , they shall
climb up upon the houses , they shall enter in at the windows


432


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


CNo. 318


like a thief (Joel ii. 9). They commit falsehood , and the thief
cometh in y and the troop of robbe/s spoileth without (Hos.
vii. 1).

319. In the celestial sense, by thieves are meant those
who take away Divine power from the Lord; and also those
who claim for themselves His merit and righteousness.
These, though they adore God, yet do not trust in Him, but
in themselves; and also they do not believe in God, but in
themselves,

320. They who teach what is false and heretical, and per-
suade the people that it is true and orthodox, though they
read the Word and from it may know what is false and what
is true, also they who by fallacies confirm the falsities of re-
ligion and seduce men by them, may be compared with im-
postors and their impostures of every kind; and because
these are in themselves thefts in the spiritual sense, they may
be compared with counterfeiters who make false coins, gild
them, or give them the color of gold, and pass them as gen-
uine; as also with those who know how to cut and polish
crystals skilfully, and harden them, and sell them for dia-
monds; or again with those who should carry apes or mon-
keys clothed like men and with their faces veiled, through
cities, on horses or mules, and proclaim that they are noble-
men of ancient stock. They are also like those who cover
the living and natural face with masks daubed with paints
of various colors, and so conceal its beauty. And they are
like men who show selenite and mica that shine as from gold
and silver, and cry them up as from veins of great value.
They may also be likened to those who by theatrical exhibi-
tions lead men away from true Divine worship, and from
temples to playhouses. They who confirm falsities of every
kind, regarding truths as of no moment, and who discharge
the office of the priesthood only for the sake of gain and to
attain honor, and who thus are spiritual thieves, may be
likened to those thieves who carry keys with which they can
open the door of any house; also to leopards and eagles that
with sharp eyes search for the richest prey.


No. 322]


THE DECALOGUE


433


THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor .

321. By bearing false witness against the neighbor, or tes-
tifying falsely, in the natural sense, nearest the letter, is meant
to be a false witness before a judge, or before others out of
court, against one who without cause is accused of any evil,
and to asseverate this by the name of God or by any thing
holy, or by one’s self and such things as make up one's repu-
tation. In a wider natural sense, by this commandment are
meant lies of every kind and hypocrisy in civil life, with an
evil end in view; and also traducing and defaming the neigh-
bor, so that his honor, name, and reputation, on which the
character of the whole man depends, are injured. In the
widest natural sense are meant plots, deceits, and evil designs
against any one from various causes as from enmity, hatred,
revenge, envy, rivalry, and the like; for these evils conceal
within them the testifying to what is false.

322. In the spiritual sense by bearing false witness is
meant persuading that falsity of faith is truth of faith, and
that evil of life is good of life, and the converse; but to do
these things from design and not from ignorance, thus to do
them after one knows what is true and good, and not before;
for the Lord says, If ye were blind , ye would not have sin ; but
now ye say , We see ; therefore your sin remaineth (John ix.
41). This falsity is meant in the Word by a lie, and the
design by deceit, in these passages: We have made a cove-
nant with death , and with hell have we made an agreement ,
we have made a lie our trust , and under falsehood have we hid
ourselves (Isa. xxviii. 15). They are a rebellious people , lying
sons y they will not hear the law of Jehovah (xxx. 9). From
the prophet even to the priest , every one doeth a lie (Jer. viii.
10). The inhabitants speak a lie } and their tongue is deceit-
ful in their mouth (Mic. vi. 12). Thou unit destroy them


434


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 322


that speak a lie; Jehovah abhorreth a man of deceit (Ps. v. 6).
They have taught their tongue to speak a lie; thine habita-
tion is in the midst of deceit (Jer. ix. 5, 6). Because a lie
means falsity, the Lord says that the devil speaketh a lie from
his own (John viii. 44). A lie signifies falsity and false
^speaking in other passages also (Jer. xxiii. 14, 32: Ezek.
xiii. 6-9, 19; xxi. 29: Hos. vii. 1; xii. 1: Nah. iii. 1: Ps. cxx.

3)*

323. In the celestial sense, to bear false witness means to
blaspheme the Lord and the Word, and so to banish truth
itself from the church; for the Lord is truth itself, and also
the Word. On the other hand, in this sense to bear witness
means to speak the truth, and testimony means the truth
itself. Hence the Decalogue is called the Testimony (Exod.
xxv. 16, 21, 22; xxxi. 7, 18; xxxii. 15; xl. 20: Lev. xvi. 13:
Num. xvii. 4, 7, 10). And because the Lord is the truth
itself, He says concerning Himself, that He bears witness.
That the Lord is truth itself, see John xiv. 6: Apoc. iii. 7;
and that He testifies and is witness of Himself, John iii. n;
viii. 13-19; xv. 26; xviii. 37.

324. Those who speak falsities from deceit or design, and
utter them in a tone feigning spiritual affection, and especially
if mingling with them truths from the Word which they thus
falsify, were called by the ancients enchanters (of whom, see
Apocalypse Revealed , n. 462); and also pythons and serpents
of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. These falsi-
fiers, liars, and deceivers, may be likened to those who talk
in a bland and friendly way with those to whom they bear
enmity, and while speaking hold behind them a dagger with
which they kill them. And they may be likened to those
who poison their swords, and with them attack their ene-
mies in battle; and to those who mingle wolf’s-bane with
water, and poison with wine and sweetmeats. They may
also be compared to fair and alluring harlots, infected with
malignant disease; and to stinging shrubs, which, when
brought near to the nostrils, hurt the olfactory fibrils; also


No. 326]


THE DECALOGUE


435


to sweetened poisons; and to dung, which when dried in
autumn emits a fragrant odor. Such are described in the
Word by leopards (see Apocalypse Revealed , n. 572).

THE NINTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house; thou shall not
covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his
maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any
thing that is thy neighbor's .

325. In the Catechism now in use, these words are sepa-
rated into two commandments; one making the ninth, which
is, Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house; and the other
making the tenth, Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's wife,
nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's. As these two com-
mandments make one thing, and both in Exodus (xx. 17)
an<} Deuteronomy (v. 21) one verse, I propose to treat of the
two together; not that I wish them to be joined together into
one commandment, but distinguished into two, as before;
since the commandments are called the ten words (Exod.
xxxiv. 28: Deut. iv. 13; x. 4).

326. These two commandments have respect to all those
that precede, and they teach and enjoin that evils must not
be done, and also that they must not be lusted after; conse-
quently that they are not of the external man only, but also
of the internal; for he who does not commit evils, and yet
lusts to do them, still does them. For the Lord says, that
whoso lusteth after the wife of another, hath already com-
mitted adultery with her in his heart (Matt. vi. 28); and the
external man does not become internal, or does not act as
one with the internal, until lusts have been removed. This
also the Lord teaches, saying, Woe unto you, scribes and
Pharisees, for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the
platter, but within they are full 9} extortion and excess. Thou


436


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 326


blind Pharisee , cleanse first the inside of the cup and platter ,
that the outside of them may be clean also (Matt, xxiii. 25, 26) ;
and the same throughout the chapter from beginning to end.
The internals which are pharisaical are lusts after those
things which men are commanded not to do, in the first,
second, fifth, sixth, seventh,, and eighth commandments.
It is known that the Lord in the world taught the internals
of the church, which are not to lust after evils; and He taught
thus in order that the internal and the external man may
make one. This is being born again, of which the Lord
spake to Nicodemus (John iii.); and no one can be bom
again, or be regenerated, consequently become internal,
except from the Lord. That these two commandments may
have respect to all which precede, so that what they pro-
hibit shall not be lusted after, therefore the house is first
named, afterward the wife, and then the man-servant, the
maid-servant, the ox, and the ass; and lastly, all that is the
neighbor’s; for the house involves all things that follow,
since in it are the husband, the wife, the man-servant, the
maid-servant, the ox, and the ass. The wife, who is after-
ward named, involves again the things which follow; for
she is mistress, as the husband is master in the house; the
servant and maid are under them, and the oxen and asses
under these; and last come all things which are below or
without, as it is said, any thing that is thy neighbor’s. From
this it is manifest that these two commandments, in general
and in particular, in a broad and in a restricted sense, have
respect to all the preceding.

327. In the spiritual sense these commandments pro-
hibit all lusts which are contrary to the spirit of the church,
thus which are contrary to its spiritual things which have
reference principally to faith and charity; since unless the
lusts were subdued, the flesh according to its freedom would
rush into all wickedness. For it is known from Paul that
the flesh lusteth against the spirit , and the spirit against the
flesh (Gal. v. 17); and from James that every one is tempted


No. 328]


THE DECALOGUE


437


of his own lust when he is enticed; then lust , after it hath con-
ceived, bringeth forth sin , and sin , when it is completed , bring-
eth forth death (James i. 14, 15); and also from Peter that
the Lord reserveth the unrighteous unto the day of judgment,
to be punished; but chiefly them that walk after the flesh in
lust (2 Epistle ii. 9, 10). In short, these two command-
ments, understood in the spiritual sense, regard all things
that have before been presented in the spiritual sense, and
forbid their being lusted after; and likewise all that have
before been presented in the celestial sense, to repeat which
is unnecessary.

328. The lusts of the flesh, eye, and other senses, sepa-
rate from the lusts, that is, the affections, desires, and enjoy-
ments of the spirit, are wholly like the lusts of beasts; and
are therefore in themselves animal. But the affections of
the spirit are such as angels have, and are therefore to be
called truly human. As far therefore as one indulges the
lusts of the flesh, he is a beast and wild beast; but as far as
he devotes himself to the desires of the spirit, so far he is a
man and an angel. The lusts of the flesh may be compared
with scorched and withered grapes, and with wild grapes;
but the affections of the spirit, with juicy and delicious
grapes, and also with the taste of the wine pressed out of
them. The lusts of the flesh may be compared with stables
in which are asses, goats, and swine; and the affections of
the spirit with stables in which are noble horses, and sheep,
and lambs. They differ also as an ass and a horse, a goat
and a sheep, and a hog and a lamb; in general, as dross and
gold, as limestone and silver, as coral and the ruby, and the
like. Lust and deed cohere as blood and flesh, or as flame
and oil; for the lust is in the deed, as the air from the lungs
in breathing is in the speech, and as the wind is in the sail
while sailing, and as water is in the wheel that gives motion
and action to machinery.


438


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 329


The Ten Commandments op the Decalogue contain all

THINGS WHICH ARE OF LOVE TO GOD, AND ALL THINGS
WHICH ARE OF LOVE TOWARD THE NEIGHBOR.

329. In eight precepts of the Decalogue, in the first, sec-
ond, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth, there is
nothing said of love to God and of love toward the neigh-
bor; for it is not said that God should be loved, nor that the
name of God should be hallowed, nor that the neighbor
should be loved, nor therefore that he should be dealt with
sincerely and uprightly; but only, Thou shalt have no other
God before My face; Thou shalt not take the name of God
in vain; Thou shalt not kill; Thou shalt not commit adul-
tery; Thou shalt not steal; Thou shalt not bear false witness;
Thou shalt not covet the things which are thy neighbor’s;
that is, in general, that evil is not to be willed, thought, or done
against God, or against the neighbor. But the reason why
such things as belong directly to love and charity are not com-
manded, but it is only commanded that such things as are
opposite to them should not be done, is that as far as man
shuns evils as sins, so far he wills the goods which are of love
and charity. That in love to God and in love toward the
neighbor the first thing is not to do evil, and the second is to
do good, will be seen in the chapter on Charity. There are
two opposite loves, the love of willing and doing good, and
the love of willing and doing evil; the latter lotfe in infernal,
and the former heavenly; for all hell is in the love of doing
evil, and all heaven in the love of doing good. Now, as man
was bom into evils of every kind, he therefore inclines from
birth to the things which are of hell; and as he cannot come
into heaven unless he is born again, that is, regenerated, it is
necessary that the evils which are of hell should first be re-
moved, before he can will the goods which are of heaven;
for no one can be adopted by the Lord before he is separated
from the devil. But how evils are removed, and man


No. 329]


THE DECALOGUE


439


brought to do goods, will be shown in the two chapters con-
cerning Repentance, and concerning Reformation and Re-
generation. That evils must be put away before the goods
which a man does become good in the sight of God, the
Lord teaches in Isaiah: Wash you , make you clean; put
away the evil of your doings from before Mine eyes; learn to
do good: then, though your sins have been as scarlet, they shall
be white as snow; though they have been red as purple, they
shall be as wool (i. 16-18). Like this is what is said in Jere-
miah: Stand in the gate of the house of Jehovah, and pro-<
claim there this word: Thus said Jehovah Zebaoth, the God
of Israel , Amend your ways and your doings; trust ye not in
lying words , saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of
Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah is here, that is, the church.
Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely,
and come and stand before Me in this house, which is called
by My name, and say, We are delivered, while ye do all these
abominations? Is this house become a den of robbers ? Be-
hold, even I have seen it, saith Jehovah (vii. 2-4, 9-1 1). That
before washing or purification from evils, prayers to God are
not heard, is also taught in Isaiah: Jehovah saith, Ah sinful
nation, a people laden with iniquity; they have gone away
backward. And when ye spread forth your hands, I hide
Mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I do
not hear (i. 2, 4, 15). That love and charity follow when
any one keeps the commandments of the Decalogue by shun-
ning evils, is evident from these words of the Lord in John:
Jesus said, He that hath My commandments, and keepeth
them, he it is that loveth Me, and he that loveth Me, shall be
loved of My Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
Myself to him; and We will make our abode with him (xiv.
21, 23). By commandments are there meant particularly
the commandments of the Decalogue, which are, that evils
must not be done or lusted after; and that so the love of man
to God and the love of God toward man may follow, as good
follows after evil has been removed.


440


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 330


330. It has been said that as far as man shuns evils, so far
he wills goods; this is because evils and goods are oppo-
sites, for evils are from hell, and goods from heaven. So far
therefore as hell, that is, evil is removed, heaven draws near,
and man looks to good. That it is so, is very manifest from
the eight commandments of the Decalogue, so viewed —
thus: I. As far as any one does not worship other gods, he
worships the true God. II. As far as any one does not take
the name of God in vain, he loves what is from God. III.
As far as any one does not will to kill and to act from hatred
and revenge, he wills well to the neighbor. IV. As far as
any one does not will to commit adultery, he wills to live
chastely with his wife. V. As far as any one does not will
to steal, he practises sincerity. VI. As far as any one does
not will to testify falsely, he wills to think and speak what is
true. VII. and VIII. As far as any one does not covet the
things which are the neighbor’s, he wishes the neighbor to
enjoy his own. Thus it is evident that the commandments
of the Decalogue contain all things which are of love to God,
and of love toward the neighbor. Therefore Paul says, He
that loveth another , hath fulfilled the law; for this , Thou shalt
not commit adultery , Thou shalt not kill , Thou shalt not steal ,
Thou shalt not bear false witness , Thou shalt not covet , and
if there be any other commandment , it is comprehended in this
saying , Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Love work -
eth no evil to the neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the
law (Rom. xiii. 8-10). To these are to be added two canons
for the service of the New Church: I. No one can shun evils
as sins, and do goods which are good in the sight of God,
from himself; but as far as any one shuns evils as sins, he
does good not from himself but from the Lord. II. Man
must shun evils as sins, and fight against them, as from
himself; and if one shuns evils from any other cause what-
ever than because they are sins, he does not shun them, but
he does this only that they may not appear before the world.

331. Evil and good cannot be together, and as far as


No. 331]


THE DECALOGUE


441


evil is removed, good is regarded and felt, because in the
spiritual world there exhales from every one the sphere of
his love, which spreads itself round about, and affects, and
causes sympathies and antipathies. By these spheres the
good are separated from the evil. That evil is to be re-
moved, before good is recognized, perceived, and loved, may
be compared with many things in the natural world — as
with these: No one can go to another who keeps a leopard
and a panther in his chamber and lives safe with them be-
cause he feeds them, unless he has first removed those wild
beasts. Who that has been invited to the table of a king and
queen, does not first wash his face and hands before coming?
And who after the wedding enters the marriage chamber with
his bride without having bathed and clothed himself with
wedding garment? Who does not purify the ores by fire,
and separate them from dross, before he obtains the pure
gold and silver ? Who does not separate the tares from the
wheat before bringing it into the bam? and thresh the
bearded chaff from his barley before gathering it into the
house ? Who does not prepare his meat by cooking before
it becomes eatable and is set upon the table ? Who does not
shake off the worms from the leaves of the trees in the gar-
den, that the leaves may not be devoured and the fruit thus
destroyed? Who does not dislike dirt in houses and halls,
and cleanse them, especially when a prince is expected, or a
bride, the daughter of a prince? Who loves and wishes to
marry a maiden who is full of disease, or covered with pim-
ples and blotches, and yet paints her face, dresses splend-
idly, and studies to infuse the enticements of love by bland-
ishing words ? Man ought to purify himself from evils, and
not wait for the Lord to do this immediately, like a servant
with face and clothes befouled with soot and dung, who
comes to his master and says, “ Wash me, my lord.” Would
not the master say to him, “ You foolish servant, what are
you saying? There are water, soap, and a towel; have you
not hands and power to use them? wash yourself.” And


442


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 331


the Lord God will say, “ The means of purification are from
Me, and your ability to will and to do are from Me; there-
fore use these My gifts and endowments as your own, and
you will be purified.” So in other cases. That the external
man is to be purged, but by means of the internal, the Lord
teaches in the twenty-third chapter of Matthew, from be-
ginning to end.

332. To the above shall be added Four Relations. First:
I once heard Voices which seemed to gurgle up through
waters from the lower regions, one toward the left, O how
just! another at the right, O how learned! and a third from
behind, O how wise! And as it came into my thought,
whether there are even in hell the just, the learned, and the
wise, I felt a desire to see whether there are such there.
And it was said to me from heaven, “ You shall see and hear.”
And I went out of the house in spirit, and saw before me an
opening. I drew near and looked down, and behold there
was a ladder, by which I descended. And when I was be-
low, I saw plains covered with shrubbery intermingled with
thorns and nettles. And I asked whether this was hell. It
was answered, “This is the lower earth, which is next above
hell.” And then I proceeded toward the shouts in their
order, first toward that of, O how just ! where I saw a com-
pany of those who in the world had been judges influenced
by friendship and bribes; then toward the second shout,
O how learned! where I saw a company of those who in the
world had been reasoners; and toward the third shout, O
how wise! where I saw a company of those who in the world
had been confirmers. But from these I turned back to the
first, where were the judges influenced by friendship and
bribes, and who were proclaimed just. And I saw at the
side as it were an amphitheatre, built of brick and roofed
with black tiles; and it was said to me, that there was their
tribunal. There were three entrances to it on the north
side, and three on the west, but none on the south and east,
an indication that their judgments were not judgments of


No. 332]


THE DECALOGUE


443


justice, but arbitrary. In the midst of the amphitheatre was
seen a hearth upon which servants in charge of the fire threw
pine torches dipped in sulphur and bitumen; the light from
which, flickering upon the plastered walls, presented images
of birds of evening and night. But the hearth and the flick-
ering of the light from it into the forms of those images, were
representations of their judgments, that they could color and
disguise the facts in any case, giving them an appearance
according to the side favored.

After a half hour, I saw old men and youths entering, in
robes and cloaks, who laying aside their caps took high seats
at the tables to sit in judgment. And I heard and per-
ceived how skilfully and ingeniously, out of regard for friend-
ship, they bent and turned their judgments to seeming jus-
tice, and so much so that they themselves did not see what
was unjust to be other than just, and on the other hand what
was just not to be unjust. Such persuasions as to their de-
cisions appeared in their faces, and were heard in the sound
of their voices. Enlightenment from heaven was then given
me whereby I had a perception of each thing whether it was
of right or not; and I saw how industriously they covered
over what was unjust, and induced upon it the appearance
of what was just; and from the laws they selected one which
favored them, to which they bent the thing in question, and
by skilful reasonings they put all others aside. After the
decisions, the judgments were carried out to their clients,
friends, and partisans; and these, to return the favor, for a
long way cried out, O how just! O how just!

After this I conversed with angels of heaven about them,
and told them some of the things that I had seen and heard.
And the angels said, “Such judges appear to others gifted
with the keenest vision in understanding, when yet they see
nothing whatever of what is just and equitable. If you take
away their friendship for any one, they sit in judgment like
statues, and only say, ‘I assent; I concur with this one, or
that/ This is because all their judgments are prejudices,


444


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 332


and prejudice with partiality follows the case from begin-
ning to end; consequently they see nothing but what is for
their friend; toward all that is against him they turn their
eyes sideways, and look out of their comers; and if they take
it up again, they involve it in reasonings, as a spider does its
captives in its threads, and consume it. Hence if they do
not follow the web of their prejudice, they see nothing of
right. They have been explored to ascertain whether they
were able to see, and they were found to be unable. The
inhabitants of your world will wonder that it is so; but tell
them that this is a truth which has been explored by angels
of heaven. Since they see nothing of what is just, we in
heaven do not regard them as men, but as monstrous images
of man, in which things of friendship make the heads, things
of injustice the breasts, things of confirmation the hands and
feet, and things of justice the soles of the feet; which, if they
do not favor their friend, they put beneath the feet and tram-
ple upon them. But you shall see what they are, viewed
in themselves, for their end is near.”

And, behold, the ground then suddenly opened, and tables
fell upon tables, and together with the whole ampitheatre the
men were swallowed up, cast into caverns, and imprisoned.
And then it was said to me, “Do you wish to see them
there?” And lo they were seen in face as of polished steel,
in body from the neck to the loins like sculptured images
clothed with the skins of the leopard, their feet like serpents.
And I saw the law books which they had lying on the tables,
now turned into playing cards; and instead of sitting as
judges, the employment was now given them of preparing
vermilion into paints for besmearing the faces of harlots, and
thus turning them into beauties. After these things were
seen, I wished to go to the two other companies, to the one
where were merely reasoners, and to the other where were
merely confirmers. But it was said to me, “Rest a little;
angels from the society next above them will be given you
as companions, by whom light will be given you from the
Lord, and you will see wonderful things.”


No. 333]


THE DECALOGUE


445


333. Second Relation. After some time, I heard again
from the lower earth the words I had heard before, O how
learned! O how learned! And I looked around to see who
were present, and saw angels who were in the heaven im-
mediately above those who were crying, O how learned!
And I spoke with them about the shouting, and they said:
“ Those learned ones are some who enly reason as to whether
a thing is or is not, and who rarely think that it is so: thus
they are as winds which blow and pass by; and like bark
around trees that have no heart; and like shells about al-
monds with no kernel; and like the rind around fruit with-
out pulp; for their minds are without interior judgment, and
only united with the senses of the body; and so if the senses
themselves do not judge, they are able to conclude nothing;
in a word, they are merely sensual, and by us they are called
Reasoners. We call them reason ers because they never con-
clude any thing, but take up whatever they hear, and dis-
pute whether it is so, continually contradicting. They love
nothing more than to attack truths, and thus to tear them to
pieces by bringing them into dispute. These are they who
believe themselves learned above all in the world.”

On hearing this I asked the angels to conduct me to them,
and they conducted me to a cave, from which steps led to the
lower earth; and we descended and followed the cry, O how
learned! and, behold, there were some hundreds standing
in one place, stamping the ground. Wondering at this, I
asked, “ Why do they stand so, and stamp the ground with
the soles of their feet?” and added, “They may thus beat
out the soil with their feet.” At this the angels smiled and
said, “ They appear to stand so, because on any subject they
never think that is so, but only whether it is so, and thus dis-
pute; and while the thought advances no further, they ap-
pear only to stamp and wear away one spot, and not to ad-
vance.” The angels also said: “They who flock from the
natural world into this, and hear that they are in another
world, gather themselves into companies in many places, and


446 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 333

ask, where is heaven, and where is hell? as also, where is
God? and after they have been instructed, they still begin
to reason, to dispute, and to wrangle, as to whether there be
a God. They do this because there are at this day so many
naturalists in the natural world, and these among themselves
and with others, when the conversation is about religion,
submit this to discussion; and this proposition and the de-
bate are seldom terminated in the affirmative of faith, that
there is a God; and afterward they consociate themselves
more and more with the wicked, and this because no one can
do any good from the love of good, except from God.”

I was afterward conducted to the assembly; and lo they
appeared to me men of not unhandsome face, and in hand-
some dress; and the angels said, “They appear thus in their
own light; but if light out of heaven flows in, the faces are
changed, and also the garments.” And the light of heaven
flowed in, and then they appeared with dusky faces, clothed
in black sackcloth; but this light being withdrawn, they
seemed as before. Then I spoke with some of the assembly,
and said: “I heard the shout of the throng about you, O how
learned! Let us therefore converse with you on things of
the highest learning.” And they answered, “ Say whatever
you please, and we will satisfy you.” And I asked, “Of
what quality must the religion be by means of- which man is
saved?” And they said, “We will divide this question into
several; and, until we have concluded on these, we cannot
give an answer. And the discussion shall be — 1. Whether
religion be any thing. 2. Whether there be salvation or
not. 3. Whether one religion effects more than another. 4.
Whether there be a heaven and a hell. 5. Whether there
be an eternal life after death — with other points besides.”
And I asked about the first point, whether religion be any
thing. And they began to discuss this with arguments in
abundance; and I begged that they would refer it to the
assembly; they did so, and the general response was, that
the proposition needed so much investigation that it could


No. 333]


THE DECALOGUE


447


not be finished in an evening. And I asked, “ Can you fin-
ish it within a year?” And one said, “It cannot be finished
in a hundred years.” And I said, “ Meanwhile you are with-
out religion; and because salvation depends on religion, you
are without any idea, faith, or hope of salvation.” And he
replied, “ Must it not first be demonstrated whether there is
religion, and what it is, and whether it is any thing? If it is,
it must also be for the wise; if not, it must be only for, the
ignorant. It is known that religion is called a bond; but
for whom is it a bond ? If for the ignorant only, it is not in
itself any thing; if also for the wise, it is something.”

Hearing this, I said: “You are any thing but learned, be-
cause you can think only whether it is, and turn this one way,
and then the other. Can any one be learned, unless he
knows something for certainty, and advances toward that as
a m an walks, step by step, and successively into wisdom?
Otherwise, you do not touch truths, even with the tip of the
finger; but you remove them more and more out of sight.
For to reason only whether a thing is, is to reason about the
fit of a cap which is never put on, or of a shoe which is not
tried on. What comes of this but that you know not whether
there is any thing given, or whether it is any thing but an
idea? thus whether there is any salvation, whether there is
an eternal life after death, whether one religion is better than
another, whether there are a heaven and a hell. On these
subjects you cannot think at all as long as you stick at the
first step and tread the sand there, and do not set one foot
before the other and go forward. Take heed to yourselves
lest your minds while they thus stand outside of all judg-
ment, grow hard within and become pillars of salt.” Hav-
ing said this I withdrew, while they in their indignation
threw stones after me; and then they appeared to me like
graven images, in which there is no human reason. I asked
the angels concerning their lot, and they said that the lowest
of them are let down into the deep, and into a desert, and are
compelled to carry packs; and then, as they are unable to


448


TEUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 333


bring forward any thing from reason, they prate and speak
vain words; and there in the distance they appear like asses
bearing burdens.

334. Third Relation. After this one of the angels said,
“Follow me to the place where they are shouting, O how
wise!” And he said, “You will see monsters of men; you
will see faces and bodies which are of man, and yet they are
not men.” And I said, “Are they beasts, then?” He re-
plied, “They are not beasts, but beast-men; for they are
those who are wholly unable to see whether truth is truth or
not; and yet they can make whatever they wish seem true:
with us such are called Confirmers.” And we followed the
shouting and came to the place, and behold an assembly of
men and around them a throng, and in this some of noble
lineage who, when they heard them proving every thing that
they themselves were saying, and favoring them with con-
currence so manifest, turned round and said, “ O how wise!”
But the angel said to me, “ Let us not go to them, but let us
call out one from the assembly”; and we called one out and
withdrew with him and talked of various things, and he
confirmed them one by one, even so that they appeared
altogether as true.

We asked him whether he could also confirm the oppo-
sites; and he said that he could as well as the former. Then
he said, openly and from the heart, “What is truth? Is
there any truth in the nature of things, but what man makes
true? Say what you please, and I will make it to be true.”
jAnd I said, “Make this true, that faith is the all of the
church.” And he did it so dexterously and skilfully that
learned persons who stood around admired and applauded
him. Afterward I asked him to make it true that charity is
the all of the church; and he did so; and then that charity
is nothing of the church. And he so clothed and decorated
both propositions with appearances, that the bystanders
looked at one another, and said, “Is he not wise?” I then
said, “ Do you not know that to live well is charity, and that


No. 334]


THE DECALOGUE


449


to believe well is faith? Does not he who lives well, also be-
lieve well ? And so do you not know that faith is of charity,
and charity of faith? Do you not see that this is true?”
He answered, “I will make it true, and shall see.” And he
did so, and said, “ I see it now.” But presently he made the
contrary true, and then he said, “ I see that this is true also.”
At this we smiled and said, “Are they not contraries? How
can two contraries be seen to be true?” Being indignant
at this, he answered, “You are wrong; they both are true,
since nothing is true but what man makes true.”

There was one standing near who in the world had been
a legate of the highest grade. He wondered at this, and
said, “ I acknowledge that there is something like this in the
world; but still you are insane. Make it true if you can,
that darkness is light, and light darkness.” And he an-
swered, “I shall easily do this: what are light and darkness,
but states of the eye ? Is not light changed into shade when
the eye comes from a sunny place, as also when a man fixes
his eye intently on the sun ? Who does not know that the
state of the eye is then changed, and that therefore light ap-
pears as shade ? and, on the other hand, that when the state
of the eye returns, that shade appears like light ? Does not
an owl see the darkness of night as the light of day, and the
light of day as the darkness of night, also the whole sun itself
as an opaque and dusky globe ? If any one had eyes like an
owl’s, what would he call light, and what darkness ? What
then is light but a state of the eye ? And if it is only a state
of the eye, is not light darkness, and darkness light ? Where-
fore both propositions are true.” But, because this con-
firmation confounded some, I said, “I perceive that that
confirmer does not know that there is given true light and
fatuous light; and that both those lights appear as if they
were lights, yet fatuous light in itself is not light, but in re-
spect to true light it is darkness. An owl is in fatuous light,
for there is within its eyes the desire for pursuing and de-
vouring birds; and this light makes its eyes see in time of


450


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 334


night, just as cats do, whose eyes in cellars appear like
lighted candles; it is the fatuous light within their eyes, ari-
sing from the desire for chasing and devouring mice, which
produces that appearance. It is thus plain that the light
of the sun is true light, and the light of desire is fatuous
light. 7 ’

After this, the legate requested the confirmer to make this
to be true, that a raven is white and not black. And he an-
swered, “ This also I shall easily do.” And he said, “ Take
a needle or a razor and open the quills and feathers of a
raven; then remove the quills and feathers and look at the
raven’s skin: is it not white? What is the black which is
around but shade? from which we should not judge of the
color of the raven. That black is only a shade, consult those
who are skilled in the science of optics, and they will tell; or
grind a black stone or glass into fine powder, and you will
see that the powder is white.” But the legate replied,
“Does not the raven appear black to the sight?” But the
confirmer answered, “Are you, who are a man, willing to
think anything from appearance? You may indeed say
from the appearance that a raven is black, but you cannot
think so. For example, speaking from the appearance, you
may say that the sun rises and sets; but because you are a
man you cannot think so, as the sun stands unmoved and
the earth moves on. It is similar with the raven. Appear-
ance is appearance. Say what you will, the whole raven is
white; it also grows white when it grows old; as I have
seen.” After this, the bystanders looked at me; whereupon
I said, that it is true that the quills and feathers of a raven
inwardly partake of whiteness, and its skin likewise; and
this is the case not only with ravens, but also with all the
birds in the universe; but every man distinguishes birds by
the appearance of their color; if this were not done, we might
say of every bird that it is white, which is absurd and ridicu-
lous. The legate then asked, “ Can you make it true that
you are insane?” And he said, “I can, but I do not wish


No. 334]


THE DECALOGUE


451


to do so; who is not insane?” Finally they asked him to
say from the heart whether he jested, or really believed that
there is nothing true but what man makes true. And he
answered, “I swear that I believe it.”

After this that universal confirmer was sent to the angels,
who explored him as to his quality; and after the explora-
tion they said that he did not possess a grain of understand-
ing, because all that which is above the rational was closed
with him; and only what is below the rational was open;
above the rational is spiritual light, and below the rational
is natural light, and this light with man is such that he can
confirm whatever he pleases; but if spiritual light does not
flow into natural light, man does not see whether any truth
is truth, and hence he does not see that any falsity is a falsity;
these both are to be seen from spiritual light in natural light,
and spiritual light is from the God of heaven, who is the
Lord; therefore that universal confirmer is neither man nor
beast, but a beast-man. I asked the angels as to the lot of
such, whether they can be together with the living, because
the life of man is from spiritual light, and from this is his
understanding. And they said that such when alone are not
able to think any thing, and thence to speak; but that they
stand dumb like automatons, and as it were in a deep sleep;
but that they awake as soon as they catch anything with the
ear. They added, “They become such who are inmostly
evil; into these spiritual light cannot flow in from above,
but only something spiritual through the world, whence they
have the faculty of confirming.”

These things being said, I heard a voice from the angels
who explored him, saying, “Form a universal conclusion
from what has been heard.” And I made this: Ability to
confirm whatever one pleases does not make the man of under-
standing; but ability to see that truth is truth , and that falsity
is falsity , and to confinn this. Afterward I looked at the
assembly where the confirmers were standing, and the crowd
around them were crying, “O how wisel” And lo! a dark


452


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 334


cloud covered them, and in the cloud owls and bats were
flying. And it was said to me, “The owls and bats, flying
in that cloud, are correspondences and thence appearances
of their thoughts; since confirmations of falsities, even till
they appear like truths, are represented in this world under
I the forms of birds of night, whose eyes are illumined within
by a fatuous light, from which they see objects in darkness
as in light: such fatuous spiritual light have those who con-
firm falsities until they are seen as truths, and afterward are
believed to be truths. All those are in backward, and not in
any forward sight.

335. Fourth Relation . Once when I awakened from
sleep in the twilight of the morning, I saw before my eyes,
as it were, spectres in various shapes; and afterward, when
it was morning, I saw fatuous lights in divers forms; some
like sheets of paper full of writing, which, being folded again
and again, at length appeared like falling stars, that in their
descent vanished in the air; and some like open books, of
which some shone like little moons, and some burned like
candles; among these were books which raised themselves
on high and were lost in the height, and others which fell
down to the earth and there crumbled into dust. From these
appearances I conjectured that below those meteors stood
some who were disputing about imaginary things, which they
esteemed of great moment; for in the spiritual world such
phenomena appear in the atmospheres, from the reasonings
of those standing below. And presently the sight of my
spirit was opened to me, and I observed a number of spirits,
whose heads were encircled with leaves of laurel, and who
were clothed in gowns adorned with flowers, which signified
that they were spirits who in the natural world had been re-
nowned with their reputation for erudition. As I was in the
spirit I came to them and mingled with the assembly.

I then heard them disputing sharply and warmly among
themselves concerning connate ideas, whether there were
any in men from birth, as in beasts. They who denied this


No. 335]


THE DECALOGUE


4S3


turned themselves away from those who affirmed it, and at
length they stood separated from each other, like the ranks
of two armies ready to fight with swords. But as they had
no swords, they fought with pointed words. But suddenly,
an angelic spirit stood in the midst of them, and speaking
with a loud voice said — “At a short distance from you I
heard you engaged in hot dispute on both sides about con-
nate ideas, whether there are any in men, as in beasts; but
I tell you, that men have no connate ideas, and that beasts
have no ideas; therefore, you are quarrelling about nothing,
or, as the saying is, about goat’s wool, or an eighteenth-cen-
tury beard.” On hearing these words, they were all very
angry, and cried: “Put him out; he talks contrary to com-
mon sense.” But when they tried to put him out, they saw
him encircled with heavenly light, which they could not hreak
through; for he was an angelic spirit. They, therefore,
drew back, and moved a little way from him. And after that
light was indrawn, he said to them: “Why are you angry?
First listen, and bring together the reasons which I shall
offer, and yourselves make a conclusion from them; and I
foresee that they who excel in judgment will concur, and will
calm the tempests which have risen in your minds.” To
this they said, yet with indignant tone: “Speak, then, and
we will hear.”

And then, beginning to speak, he said: “You believe that
beasts have connate ideas, and you have inferred it from this,
that their actions appear as if from thought; and yet they
have no thought at all, and ideas are predicable only of that;
and it is the characteristic of thought that they who think do
so and so for this or that cause. Consider therefore whether
the spider, which weaves its web most curiously, thinks in its
little head, 'I will stretch out the threads in this order, and
will bind them together with threads that run crosswise, so
that my work may not he torn asunder by the rude vibration
of the air; and at the beginnings of the threads, which shall
make the middle, I will prepare a seat for myself, where I


454


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 335


shall feel whatever falls in, and run at once to the spot; so
that if a fly gets in, it may be entangled, and I will quickly
rush upon it and bind it fast, ,and it shall serve me for food.’
Again; does the bee think in its little head, ‘ I will fly abroad;
I know where there are fields in flower; and there I will
gather wax from these flowers, and from those I will suck
the honey; and with the wax I will build little cells close to
each other in order, so that I and my companions may freely
go in and out as through streets; and afterward we will lay
up honey in them abundantly, so that there may be enough
also for the coming winter, that we may not die’? besides
other wonderful things in which they not only vie with, but
in some cases surpass, the political and economical prudence
of men (see above, n. 12). Moreover, does the hornet think
in its little head, ‘ I and my companions will build a little
house of thin paper, the walls of which we will wind in the
form of a labyrinth inside, and in the inmost we will prepare
a kind of forum, into which shall be the way of entrance, and
out of it the way of egress, and contrived with such art that
no living creature but those of our family shall find the way
to the inmost place where we assemble’? Again; does the
silk- worm while it is a grub, think in its little head, ‘ Now is
the time for me to prepare to spin silk, so that when it is spun
I may fly abroad in the air, into which I could not rise before,
may sport with my equals, and provide myself a posterity’?
Or do other worms so think when they creep about the walls
of houses, and become nymphs, aurelise, chrysalides, and
finally butterflies? Does a fly have an idea of its meeting
with another fly, that it happens here and not there ? It is
the same with larger animals as with these smaller ones; as
with birds and feathered creatures of all kinds, when they
pair, build their nests, lay their eggs in them, sit on them,
hatch their young, provide food for them, 'take care of them
until they can fly, and then drive them from their nests, as
if they were not their offspring; besides other things beyond
number. So is it also with the beasts of the earth, with ser-


No. 335] the decalogue 455

pents, and with fishes. What one of you cannot see from
what has now been said, that their spontaneous actions do
not flow from any thought, of which alone idea can be predi-
cated ? The error that beasts have ideas has come from no
other source than the persuasion that they think, equally
with men, and that speech alone makes the difference be-
tween them.”

After this the angelic spirit looked around, and as he saw
them still in doubt whether beasts have thought or not, he
continued the discourse and said: “I perceive that from
the actions of brute animals, similar to those of men, a vi-
sionary idea of their thinking still clings to you; therefore I
will tell whence their actions are: namely, every beast, bird,
fish, reptile, and insect, has its own natural, sensual, and
corporeal love, the dwelling-places of which are their heads,
and the brains therein; through these, the spiritual world
flows into the senses of their body immediately, and through
them determines their actions; which is the reason that the
senses of their body are much more exquisite than those of
men. This influx from the spiritual world is what is called
instinct, and it is called instinct because it arises without
intermediate thought; there are also from habit accessories
to instinct. But their love, through which the determina-
tion to actions comes from the spiritual world, is a love only
for nutrition and propagation, not for knowledge, intelli-
gence, and wisdom, by means of which love with men is
successively developed.

“That neither has man connate ideas may evidently ap-
pear from this, that he has no connate thought; and where
there is no thought, there is no idea; for they belong mu-
tually to each other. This may be concluded from new-
born infants, that they can do nothing but suck and breathe.
Their being able to suck is not from what is connate, but
from the continual suction in the mother’s womb; and they
are able to breathe because they live, for this is the whole of
life. The very senses of their body are in the greatest ob-


456


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 335


scurity, and from this they work their way out successively
by means of objects; so they gain powers of motion by ha-
bitual exercise. And as they learn successively to prattle
words, and to sound them at first without an idea, some-
thing obscure, belonging to fancy arises, and as this grows
clearer, something obscure of imagination arises, and hence
of thought. According to the formation of this state arise
ideas, which, as before said, make one with thought; and
thought, from being none, grows by instructions. There-
fore men have ideas, yet not connate, but formed; and from
them flow their speech and actions.” That nothing is con-
nate with man but the faculty for knowing, understanding,
and being wise, as also an inclination to love not only these
things but also the neighbor and God, may be seen in the
Relation above, n. 48, and also in one further on. After
this, I looked around, and saw near me Leibnitz and Wolfius,
who paid close attention to the reasons advanced by the
angelic spirit. Leibnitz then came forward and expressed
his assent; but Wolfius went away, both denying and affirm-
ing for he did not excel in interior judgment as Leibnitz did.


CHAPTER SIXTH.


FAITH.

336. From the wisdom of the ancients this dogma flowed
forth: that the universe and all things of it have reference
to good and truth; and thus all things of the church to love
or charity and faith, since all is called good which flows from
love or charity, and all is called truth which flows from faith.
Now because charity and faith are distinctly two, yet make
one in a man that he may be a man of the church, that is,
that the church may be in a man, it was a matter of con-
troversy and dispute among the ancients which of the two
must be first, and which therefore is to be called by right the
first-born. Some of them said truth, consequently faith,
and some said good, consequently charity. For they saw
that immediately after his birth man learns to talk and think,
and by means of speech and thought to be perfected in un-
derstanding, which is done by means of knowledges; and so
that to learn and understand what is true is first; and that
by these means he afterward learns and understands what is
good; consequently he first learns what faith is and after-
ward what charity is. They who so comprehended this
subject supposed that the truth of faith is the first-born, and
that the good of charity is bom afterward; therefore they also
attributed to faith the eminence and prerogative of primo-
geniture. But they overwhelmed their understanding with
so many arguments in favor of faith that they did not see that
faith is not faith unless joined with charity, and that charity
is not charity unless joined with faith, and thus that they
make one; and, if not, neither of them is any thing in the
church. That they truly make one will be made plain in


458


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 336


what follows. But in this preface I shall briefly show how
or by what course they make one; for this is important, so
that what follows may be in some light. Faith, by which is
also meant truth, is first in time; but charity, by which is
also meant good, is first in end; and that which is first in
end is actually the first, because it is primary, thus also first-
born; while that which is first in time is not the first actually,
but apparently. But that this may be comprehended, let
it be illustrated by comparisons with building a temple, and
a house, laying out a garden, and preparing a field. In
building a temple, the first thing in time is to lay the founda-
tion, to raise the walls, to put on the roof, and afterwards to
put in the altar and erect the pulpit; but in end the first
thing is the worship of God therein, for the sake of which
those things are done. In building a house, the first thing
in time is to build its external parts, and also to furnish it
with various articles which are of necessity; but the first
thing in end is a suitable dwelling for one’s self and for all
of the household. In laying out a garden, the first thing in
time is to level the ground, prepare the soil, and plant trees,
and sow such things as will serve for use; but in end the
first thing is the use of the fruits. In preparing a field, the
first thing in time is to clear the land, to plough, to harrow,
and then to sow the seed; but in end the first thing is the
harvest, thus again use. From these comparisons one may
conclude what is in itself first. Does not every one who
wishes to build a temple or a house, or to lay out a garden
and to cultivate a field, first intend the use, and constantly
keep and revolve this in his mind, while he is procuring
means to carry it into effect? We therefore conclude that
the truth of faith is first in time, but that the good of charity
is first in end; and that this latter, because it is primary, is
actually the first-born in the mind. But it is necessary to
know what faith is, and what charity is, each in its essence;
and this cannot be known unless they are divided into their
several articles, faith into its own, and charity into its own.


No. 337]


FAITH


459


The articles as to faith then are these: I. Saving faith is in
the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ . II. The sum of
faith is that he who lives well and believes aright is saved by
the Lord . III. Man obtains faith by going to the Lord , learn-
ing truths from the Word, and living according to them. IV.
Abundance of truths , coherent as if bound together , exalts and
perfects faith . V. Faith without charity is not faith , and
charity without faith is not charity; and neither is alive
except from the Lord. VI. The Lord , charity , and faith
make one , like life , will, and understanding in man; and if
they are divided , each perishes , like a pearl reduced to powder .
VII. The Lord is charity and faith in man , and man is
charity and faith in the Lord. VIII. Charity and faith are
together in good works. IX. There are true faith , spurious
faith , and hypocritical faith. X. There is no faith with the
evil. These are now to be explained one by one.

I. Saving faith is in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus
Christ.

337. Saving faith is in God the Saviour, because He is
God and Man, and He is in the Father and the Father in
Him, and thus They are one; therefore they who go to Him,
go at the same time to the Father, and thus to the one and
only God, and there is no saving faith in any other. That
belief or faith must be in the Son of God, the Redeemer and
Saviour, conceived of Jehovah and born of the Virgin Mary,
named Jesus Christ, is evident from the commands fre-
quently repeated by Him, and afterward by the apostles.
That faith in Him was commanded by Himself, is very mani-
fest from these passages: Jesus said, This is the will of the
Father that sent Me , that every one who seeth the Son and be-
lieveth in Him shall have everlasting life , and I will raise him
up at the last day (John vi. 40). He that believeth in the Son
hath everlasting life; but he that believeth not the Son shall not
see life , but the wrath of God abideth on him (iii. 36). That


460


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 337


whosoever believeth in the Son should not perish , but have
eternal life; for God so loved the world that He gave His only-
begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in Him should not per-
ish , but have everlasting life (iii. 15, 16). Jesus said, I am
the Resurrection and the Life; he that believeth in Me shall
never die (xi. 25, 26). Verily , verily , I say unto you , He that
believeth in Me hath everlasting life. I am the bread 0} life
(vi. 47, 48). I am the bread of life. He that cometh to Me
shall never hunger , and he that believeth in Me shall never
thirst (vi. 35). Jesus cried , saying , If any one thirst let him
come unto Me and drink; he that believeth in Me, as the Scrip-
ture hath said , out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water
(vii. 37, 38). They said to Jesus, What shall we do that we
might work the works of God? Jesus answered, This is the
work of God, that ye believe in Him whom the Father hath
sent (vi. 28, 29). While ye have light, believe in the light
that ye may be children 0} light (xii. 36). He that believeth in
the Son of God , is not judged; but he that believeth not , is
judged already because he hath not believed in the name of the
only-begotten Son of God (iii. 18). These things are written,
that ye may believe that Jesus is the Son of God; and that
believing, ye may have life in His name (xx. 31). For if ye
believe not that I am, ye shall die in your sins (viii. 24). Jesus
said that, when the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, is come,
He will reprove the world of sin , of righteousness , and 0} judg-
ment; of sin, because they believe not in Me (xvi. 8).

338. That the faith of the apostles was no other than faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, is evident from many passages in
their Epistles, of which I shall present only these: I live , no
more I, but Christ liveth in me; and what I now live in the
flesh, I live in the faith which is in the Son of God (Gal. ii.
20). Paul testified to the Jews and to the Greeks, repentance
toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ (Acts xx. 21).
He who brought out Paul said, What must I do to be saved?
He said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; thus thou shalt be
saved, and thy house (xvi. 30, 31). He that hath the Son hath


No. 338]


FAITH


461

life , but he that hath not the Son of God , hath not life . These
things have I written to you , /to ye toie??e iw Z&e of the

Son of God , /to ye may know that ye have eternal life , and
/to ye may believe in the name of the Son of God (1 John v. 12,
13). We who are Jews by nature , and not sinners of the Gen-
tiles , knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law , but by the faith of Jesus Christy we even have believed
in Jesus Christ (Gal. ii. 15, 16). Since their faith was in
Jesus Christ, which also is from Him, they called it the faith
of Jesus Christ, as just above (Gal. ii. 16), and in the follow-
ing passages: The righteousness of God , by the faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe , that He may
justify him who is 0} the faith 0} Jesus (Rom. iii. 22, 26).
Having the righteousness which is of the faith 0} Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith (Phil. iii. 9). That
keep the commandments of God , and the faith of Jesus (Apoc.
xiv. 12). Through the faith which is in Christ Jesus (2 Tim.
iii. 15). In Jesus Christ is the faith which worketh by char-
ity (Gal. v. 6). From these passages may be evident what
faith was meant by Paul in the saying common at this day
in the church, Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by
faith without the deeds of the law (Rom. iii. 28) ; that it was
not faith in God the Father, but in His Son; still less in three
Gods in order, in one from whom, in another for the sake of
whom, and in a third by whom, comes salvation. It is be-
lieved in the church that its tripersonal faith was meant by
Paul in that saying, for the reason that the church for four-
teen centuries, or ever since the Nicene Council, has acknowl-
edged no other faith, and hence has known no other, thus
believing it to be the only faith, and that there can be no
other. Therefore wherever faith is named in the Word of
the New Testament, it has been believed that that faith is
meant, and to it every thing there has been applied. Hence
the only saving faith, which is in God the Saviour, has per-
ished; hence, also, so many fallacies have crept into their
doctrines, and so many paradoxes adverse to sound reason.


462


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 338


For every doctrine of the church that will teach and point out
the way to heaven or to the state of salvation, depends on
faith; and because so many fallacies and paradoxes crept
in, as already said, it was necessary to proclaim the dogma
that the understanding must be kept under obedience to
faith. Now since faith, in that saying of Paul (Rom. iii. 28),
does not mean faith in God the Father, but in His Son, and
since the works of the law do not there mean the works of the
law of the decalogue, but the works of the Mosaic law for the
Jews (as is manifest from subsequent verses there, and also
from similar passages in the Epistle to the Galatians, ii. 14,
15), the foundation-stone of the faith of the present day falls,
and with it the temple built thereon, like a house sinking into
the earth and leaving only the highest part of its roof above
ground.

339. Men should believe, that is, have faith in God the
Saviour Jesus Christ, because this is faith in the visible
God, in whom is the invisible; and faith in the visible God,
who is Man and at the same time God, enters into man; for
faith in its essence is spiritual, but natural in its form; there-
fore with man this faith becomes spiritual natural; for every
spiritual thing is received in what is natural in order to be
any thing with man. The naked spiritual does indeed enter
into man, but it is not received; it is like the ether, which
flows in and out without affecting; for in order to affect, there
must be perception, and so reception, both in man’s mind;
and these are not with man except in his natural. But on
the other hand, merely natural faith, or faith destitute of
spiritual essence, is not faith, but only persuasion, or knowl-
edge. Persuasion emulates faith in externals, but because
there is nothing spiritual in its internals, there is therefore
nothing saving. Such faith is with all who deny the Divinity
of the Lord’s Human; such was the Arian faith, and such
also is the Socinian faith, because they both reject the Lord’s
Divinity. What is faith without that on which it is placed ?
Is it not like a look into the universe, which falls as it were


No. 339]


FAITH


463


into vacuity and is lost ? Or it is like a bird flying above the
atmosphere into the ether, where as in a vacuum it ceases to
breathe. The abiding of this faith in the mind of man may
be compared to the stay of the winds in the wings of ^Eolus,
and of light in a falling star. It rises like a comet with a long
tail, like it to pass by and disappear. In a word, faith in an
invisible God is actually blind, because the human mind does
not see its God; and the light of this faith, because it is not
spiritual natural, is a fatuous light; and this light is like that
of a glow-worm, and like that in swamps or over sulphurous
meadows in the night, and like the light in decaying wood.
From this light nothing arises but what is of fantasy, in which
the apparent is believed to be real when it is not. Faith in
an invisible God shines in no other light, especially when
God is thought to be a Spirit and the same is thought of
spirit as of ether. What follows but that man regards God
as he regards the ether ? And thus he seeks Him in the uni-
verse, and when he does not find Him there, he believes the
nature of the universe to be God. The naturalism reign-
ing at this day is from this origin. Did not the Lord say
that no one hath ever heard the voice 0} the Father , or seen His
shape? (John v. 37); and also that no one hath seen God at
any time , and that the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of
the Father hath revealed Him? (i. 18.) No one hath seen
the Father but He who is of God; He hath seen the Father (vi.
46). Also, that no one cometh to the Father but by Him (xiv.
6); and furthermore, that the man seeih and knoweth the
Father , who seeth and knoweth Him (xiv. 7-12). But faith
in the Lord God the Saviour is different; He being God and
Man, may both be approached and seen in thought; faith
in Him is not indeterminate, but it has its terminus, whence
it comes and whither it goes; and when once received, it
remains; as when one has seen an emperor or a king, as
often as he recollects this the image returns. The sight of
that faith is as of one who sees a bright cloud, and in the
midst of it an angel, who invites the man to him that he may


464


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 339


be elevated into heaven. So does the Lord appear to them
who have faith in Him; He draws near to every man as the
man knows and acknowledges Him. This is done as man
knows and keeps His commandments, which are to shun
evils and do goods; and at length the Lord comes into the
man’s house, and makes His abode with him, together with
the Father who is in Him, according to these words in John:
Jesus said, He that hath My commandments and keepeth
them , he it is that loveth Me; and he that loveth Me shall be
loved 0} My Father , and I will love him, and will manifest
Myself to him; and We will come unto him, and make an
abode with him (John xiv. 21, 23). These things have been
written in the presence of the Lord’s twelve apostles, who
were sent to me by the Lord while I was writing.

II. The sum of faith is, that he who lives well and

BELIEVES ARIGHT IS SAVED BY THE LORD.

340. That man was created for eternal life, and that every
man can inherit it, provided he lives according to the means
of salvation prescribed in the Word, is admitted by every
Christian, and by every heathen also, who has religion and
sound reason. The means of salvation, however, are mani-
fold; but they have reference, one and all, to living well and
believing aright, thus to charity and faith, for to live well is
charity and to believe rightly is faith. These two general
means of salvation are not only prescribed to man in the
Word, but they are also commanded; and because they are
commanded, it follows that by means of them man can pro-
vide for himself eternal life, from the power implanted in him
and given to him by God; and so far as man uses that power,
and at the same time looks to God, God gives it strength to
make all that which is of natural charity to be of spiritual
charity, and all that which is of natural faith to be of spiritual
faith; so God makes dead charity and faith to live, and at
the same time the man also. There are two things which


No. 341] FAITH 465

must be together, that man may be said to live well and be-
lieve aright; in the church those two are called the internal
and the external man. When the internal man wills well
and the external acts well, then the two make one, the exter-
nal from the internal, and the internal through the external;
and so man from God, and God through man. But on the
other hand, if the internal man wills evil and yet the external
man acts well, then none the less they both act from hell; for
his willing is from hell, and his doing is hypocritical; and in
all that is hypocritical, his willing which is infernal is in-
wardly concealed, as a snake in the grass, or a worm in a
flower. The man who not only knows that there is an inter-
nal and an external man, but also knows what they are, and
that they can act as one actually and can also act as one ap-
parently, and who knows moreover that the internal man
lives after death and the external is buried, possesses poten-
tially the arcana of heaven and also of the world in abund-
ance. And he who conjoins these two men in himself in
good, becomes happy to eternity, but he who divides them,
and still more he who conjoins them in evil, hecomes un-
happy to eternity.

341. To believe that the man who lives well and believes
aright is not saved, and that God can save and condemn
whom He will, freely and at pleasure, a man who perishes
may justly accuse God of unmercifulness and severity, and
even of cruelty; yes, he may deny that God is God. He
may make the further accusation that in His Word God has
spoken vain things, and commanded those which are of no
importance or are trifles; and again, if the man who lives
well and believes aright is not saved, he may also accuse God
of violating His covenant which He made upon mount Sinai
and wrote with His finger upon two tables. That God can-
not but save those who live according to His commandments
and have faith in Him, is evident from the words of the Lord
in John xiv. 21-24: and every one who has religion and
sound reason may confirm himself in this, when he reflects


466


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 341


that God, who is constantly with man and gives him life and
also the faculty of understanding and of loving, cannot but
love him who lives well and believes aright and by love con-
join Himself with him. Is not this written by God on every
man and every creature? Can a father and mother reject
their children, or a bird or a beast its young ? Even tigers,
panthers, and serpents cannot do so. For God to do other-
wise would be contrary to the order in which He is and accord-
ing to which He acts; and also contrary to the order into
which He created man. Now as it is impossible for God to
condemn one who lives well and believes aright, so on the
other hand it is impossible for God to save one who lives
wickedly and who therefore believes falsities. This latter
also is contrary to order, and hence contrary to His omnipo-
tence, which can proceed only by the way of justice; and
the laws of justice are truths, which cannot be changed: for
the Lord says, It is easier for heaven and earth to pass , than
for one tittle of the law to fail (Luke xvi. 17). Any one who
knows any thing of the Essence of God, and of man’s free-
will, can perceive this. For example: Adam was at liberty
to eat of the tree of life, and also of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil; if he had eaten of the tree or trees of life
only, would it have been possible for God to expel him from
the garden ? I believe not. But after he ate of the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, would it have been possible
for God to retain him in the garden? Again I believe not;
and so God cannot cast into hell an angel who has been re-
ceived into heaven, or introduce into heaven a devil who has
been judged. That He cannot do either, from His Divine
omnipotence, may be seen above in the section on the Di-
vine Omnipotence (n. 49-70).

342. In the preceding lemma (from n. 336-339) it was
shown that saving faith is faith in the Lord God the Saviour
Jesus Christ. But the question arises, What is the first of
faith in Him ? And the answer is, The acknowledgment that
He is the Son of God . This was the first of faith which the


No. 342]


FAITH


467


Lord revealed and announced when He came into the world.
For unless men had first acknowledged that He was the Son
of God, and thus God from God, in vain would He Him-
self and the apostles afterwards have preached faith in Him.
Now as it is somewhat similar at this day, but with those
who think from the selfhood, that is, from the external or
natural man only, saying to themselves, How can Jehovah
God conceive a Son, and how can man be God ? it is neces-
sary to confirm and establish from the Word this first of
faith; the following passages shall therefore be adduced:
The angel said to Mary, Thou shalt conceive in thy womb
and bring forth a Son , and shalt call His name Jesus. He
shall be great , the Son of the Highest . Then said Mary unto
the angel , How shall this be since I know not a man? The
angel answered , The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee , and
the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also
that Holy Thing that is born of thee shall be called the Son of
God (Luke i. 31-35). While Jesus was baptized, there came
a voice from heaven , saying , This is My beloved Son , in whom
I am well pleased (Matt. iii. 16, 17 : Mark i. 10, r 1 : Luke iii.
2T, 22). And again, when Jesus was transfigured, a voice
also came from heaven, saying, This is My beloved Son , in
whom I am well pleased; hear ye Him (Matt. xvii. 5: Mark
ix. 7: Luke ix. 35). Jesus asked His disciples , Who do men
say that 1 am? Peter answered , Thou art the Christ , the Son
of the living God . And Jesus said , Blessed art thou , Simon
Barjona , I say unto thee , Upon this rock I will build My
church (Matt. xvi. 13-18). The Lord said that He would
build His church upon this rock, namely, upon the truth and
confession that He is the Son of God; for rock signifies
truth, and also the Lord as to Divine truth; therefore the
church is not with one who does not confess this truth, that
He is the Son of God; and therefore it was said above that
this is the first of faith in Jesus Christ, and is thus faith in
its orig in - John the Baptist saw and bare record that this is
the Son of God (John i. 34). The disciple Nathanael said


468


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 342


to Jesus, Thou art the Son 0} God , Thou art the King of
Israel (John i. 49). The twelve disciples said, We have be-
lieved that Thou art the Christ , the Son of the living God (vi.
69). He is called the only-begotten Son 0} God , the only-
begotten of the Father , who is in the bosom of the Father (i. 14,
18; iii. 16). Jesus Himself confessed before the high priest,
that He was the Son of God (Matt. xxvi. 63, 64; xxvii. 43:
Mark xiv. 61, 62: Luke xxii. 70). They that were in the
ship came and worshipped Jesus , saying , Of a truth Thou art
the Son 0} God (Matt. xiv. 33). The eunuch who wished to
be baptized said to Philip, I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son 0} God (Acts viii. 37). Paul, when he was converted,
preached Christ , that He was the Son of God (ix. 20). Jesus
said, The hour is coming when the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God , and they that hear shall live (John v. 25).
He that believeth not is judged already , because he hath not be-
lieved in the name of the only-begotten Son of God (iii. 18).
These are written , that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ , the Son of God , and that believing ye might have life
in His name (xx. 31). These things have I written unto you
that believe in the name of the Son of God , that ye may know
that ye have eternal life; and that ye may believe in the name
of the Son of God (1 John v. 13). We know that the Son of
God is come , and hath given us an understanding that we may
know Him that is true; and we are in Him that is true } in
His Son Jesus Christ . This is the true God and eternal Life
(v. 20). Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of
God, God dwelleih in him, and he in God (iv. 15). And also
in other places (as Matt. viii. 29; xxvii. 40, 43, 54: Mark i.
1; iii. 11 ; xv. 39: Luke viii. 28: John ix. 35; x. 36; xi. 4,
27; xix. 7: Rom. i. 4; 2 Cor. i. 19: Gal. ii. 20: Eph. iv. 13:
Heb. iv. 14; vi. 6; vii. 3; x. 29: 1 John iii. 8; v. 10: Apoc.
ii. 18). There are also many passages in which He is called
by Jehovah Son, and where He Himself calls Jehovah God
His Father; as in this: Whatsoever the Father doeth , this doeth
the Son; as the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth


No. 342]


FAITH


469


them , even so doth the Son. As the Father hath life in Him-
self, so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself; all
men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father (John
v. 19-26). So in many other passages. And also in David:
I will declare the decree , Jehovah hath said unto Me, Thou
art My Son , this day have I begotten Thee. Kiss the Son, lest
He be angry, and ye perish in the way, when His wrath is
kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust
in Him (Ps. ii. 7, 12). From the foregoing now comes the
conclusion : That every one who wishes to be truly a Chris-
tian, and to be saved by Christ, must believe that Jesus is the
Son of the living God. He who does not believe this, but
only that He is the Son of Mary, implants in himself various
ideas of Him which are hurtful and destructive of that state
of salvation; of which see above, n. 90, 94, 102. Of such it
may be said, as of the Jews, that instead of a royal crown,
they put upon His head a crown of thorns, and give Him
vinegar to drink, and cry out, If thou be the Son of God, com-
mand that these stones be made bread; or, If thou be the Son of
God , cast thyself down (Matt. iv. 3, 6). Such profane His
church and His temple and make it a den of thieves. These
are they who make the worship of Him like the worship of
Mohammed, and do not distinguish between true Christianity
(which is the worship of the Lord) and naturalism. They
may be compared with those who are borne in a chariot or
coach over thin ice, and the ice breaks under them, and they
sink; and they, their horses, and chariot are covered by the
icy water. They may also be likened to those who make a
little boat of reeds and canes, and stick it with pitch that it
may cohere, and in it launch out into the deep; but there
the cohesiveness from the pitch is destroyed; and, choked
in the waters of the sea, they are swallowed up and buried
in its depths.


470


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 343


III. Man obtains faith by going to the Lord, learn-
ing TRUTHS FROM THE WORD, AND LIVING
ACCORDING TO THEM.

343. Before I proceed to prove the Origin 0} Faith, which
is that man must go to the Lord, learn truths from the Word,
and live according to them, it is necessary to set forth its
summaries, from which a general idea of faith may be had,
in the several parts; for thus may be more clearly compre-
hended not only what is said in this chapter concerning
Faith, but also what is said in chapters that follow as to
Charity, Free Will, Repentance, Reformation and Regen-
eration, and Imputation. For faith enters into the parts of
a system of theology, one and all, as blood enters into and
vivifies the members of the body. What the present church
teaches as to faith is known in the Christian world generally,
and particularly in the ecclesiastical order; for only the books
on faith and on faith alone fill the libraries of the doctors of
the church; for almost nothing beside this is regarded as
properly of theology at the present day. But before what
the present church teaches as to its faith is taken up, con-
sidered, and examined, which will be done in the Appendix,
the general teachings of the New Church as to its faith shall
be presented. These now follow.

344. The Esse of the Faith of the New Church is, 1. Con-
fidence in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ. 2. Trust
that he who lives well and believes aright is saved by Him.
The Essence of the Faith of the New Church is, Truth from
the Word. The Existence of the Faith of the New Church is,
1. Spiritual Sight. 2. Agreement of truths. 3. Convic-
tion. 4. Acknowledgment inscribed on the mind. The
States of Faith, as taught in the New Church, are, 1. In-
fant faith, adolescent faith, adult faith. 2. Faith in genu-
ine truth and faith in appearances of truth. 3. Faith of
memory, faith of reason, faith of light. 4. Natural faith,


No. 346]


FAITH


471


spiritual faith, celestial faith. 5. Living faith and miracu-
lous faith. 6. Free faith and forced faith. The Form
itself of the Faith of the New Church, in a universal and in
a particular view, may be seen above (n. 2 and 3).

345. Since what is of spiritual faith has been presented
in a summary, so also shall be presented what is of merely
natural faith, which in itself is a persuasion counterfeiting
faith, and a persuasion of falsity, and is called heretical
faith. Its denominations are these: 1. Spurious faith, in
which falsities are mingled with truths. 2. Meretricious
faith from truths falsified, and adulterous faith from goods
adulterated. 3. Closed or blind faith, which is faith in
mysteries, which are believed although it is not known
whether they are truths or falsities, or whether they are
above or contrary to reason. 4. Wandering faith, which is
in more Gods than one. 5. Purblind faith, which is in any
other than the true God, and with Christians in any but the
Lord God the Saviour. 6. Hypocritical or Pharisaic faith,
which is faith of mouth and not of heart. 7. Visionary and
preposterous faith, which is the appearance of falsity as
truth from ingenious confirmation.

346. It was stated above, that faith as to its existence
with man is spiritual sight. Now as spiritual sight which is
of the understanding and thus of the mind, and natural
sight which is the sight of the eye and thus of the body,
mutually correspond, therefore every state of faith may be
compared with some state of the eye and its sight; a state
of the faith of truth with normal states of eyesight, and a
state of the faith of falsity with perverted states of eyesight.
But we will compare the correspondences of these two kinds
of sight, mental and bodily, as to their perverted states.
Spurious faith, in which falsities are mingled with truths,
may be compared to the disease of the eye, and consequently
of the sight, called white speck on the cornea , which causes
dimness of sight. Meretricious faith, which is from falsi-
fied truths, and adulterous faith, which is from adulterated


472


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 346


goods, may be compared to the disease of the eye, and con-
sequently of the sight, called glaucoma* which is a drying
up and hardening of the crystalline humor. Closed or blind
faith, which is in mysteries, that are believed although it is
not known whether they are true or false, or whether they
are above or contrary to reason, may be compared to the
disease of the eye called gutta serena and amaurosis , which
is a loss of sight while the eye still looks as if it saw perfectly,
and which arises from an obstruction of the optic nerve.
Wandering faith, which is a faith in more Gods than one,
may be compared to the disease of the eye called cataract ,
which is a loss of sight arising from stoppage between the
sclerotic coat and the uvea. Purblind faith, which is a faith
in any other than the true God, and with Christians in any
but the Lord God the Saviour, may be compared to the fault
in the eye which is called strabismus. Hypocritical or
Pharisaic faith, which is a faith of mouth and not of heart,
may be compared with atrophy of the eye, and consequent
loss of sight. Visionary and preposterous faith, which is
the appearance of falsity as truth from ingenious confirma-
tion, may be compared to the disease of the eye called
nyctalopia , which is seeing in darkness ‘from fatuous light.

347. But as regards the Formation 0} Faith: Faith is
formed by man going to the Lord, learning truths from the
Word, and living according to them. First: Faith is formed
by man’s going to the Lord, because faith which is faith,
thus which is the faith of salvation, is from the Lord and in
the Lord. That it is from the Lord is evident from His
words to the disciples, Abide in M e , and I in you , jor without
Me ye can do nothing (John xv. 4, 5). That faith is in the
Lord is manifest from the passages presented in abundance
above (n. 337, 338), to the effect that men must believe in
the Son. Now since faith is from the Lord and in the Lord,
it may be said that the Lord is faith itself; for its life and
essence are in Him, and thus from Him. Secondly: Faith
*Thi9 term is now applied to a different condition.


No. 347]


FAITH


473


is formed by man learning truths from the Word, because
faith in its essence is truth; for all things that enter into faith
are truths; therefore faith is nothing but the aggregate of
truths shining in the mind of man; for truths teach not only
that man must believe, but also in whom he must believe,
and what he must believe. Truths are to be taken from the
Word, because all truths which conduce to salvation are
there, and there is efficacy in them because they have been
given by the Lord, and are therefore inscribed on the whole
angelic heaven; therefore when man learns truths from the
Word, he comes into communion and consociation with the
angels more than he knows. Faith without truths is like
seed destitute of inner substance, which when ground yields
nothing but bran; while faith from truths is like good grain,
which when ground yields flour. In a word, the essentials
of faith are truths; and if they are not in it and do not com-
pose it, faith is only like the shrill sound of a whistle; but
when they are in it and compose it, faith is as the voice of
glad tidings. Thirdly: Faith is formed by man living ac-
cording to truths, because spiritual life is a life according to
truths, and truths do not actually live until they are in deeds.
Truths abstracted from deeds are of the thought only, which,
if they do not become of the will also, are only in the en-
trance to the man, and so are not inwardly in him; for the
will is the man himself, and the thought is so far the man,
in quantity and quality, as it joins the will to itself. He who
learns truths and does not do them, is like one who scatters
seed in a field and does not harrow it in; and so the seeds
become swollen by rains and are spoiled; but he who learns
truths and does them, is like one who sows his seed and
covers it; and so the rain causes the seeds to grow, even to
the harvest, to be of use for food. The Lord says, If ye
know these things , happy are ye if ye do them (John xiii. 17);
and again, He that received seed into the good ground is he
that heareth the Word , and understandeth it , who al$o beareth
fruit and bringeth forth (Matt. xiii. 23); again, Whosoever


474


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 347


heareth My words and doeth them , I will liken unto a prudent
man who built his house upon a rock . And every one who
heareth My words but doeth them not, shall be likened unto a
foolish man who built his house upon the sand (Matt. vii. 24,
26). All the Lord’s words are truths.

348. From what is said above it is manifest that there are
three things by which faith is formed with man; first, going
to the Lord; secondly, learning truths from the Word; and
thirdly, living according to them. Now as these are three,
and one not the same as another, it follows that they can be
separated; for one can go to the Lord and know only his-
torical truths about God and the Lord; and one can also
know truths from the Word in abundance, and yet not live
according to them. But with the man in whom those three
are separated, that is, in whom one is without another, there
is no faith of salvation; but this faith arises when the three
are joined, and the faith is such as is the conjunction. Where
these three are separated, faith is like sterile seed, which
when dropped in the earth moulders into dust; but where
the three are conjoined, faith is like seed in the ground,
which grows up into a tree, the fruit of which is according
to the conjunction. Where those three are separated, faith
is like an egg which contains nothing prolific; but, where
they are conjoined, the faith is like an egg which produces
a beautiful bird. Faith, with those in whom the three are
separated, may be likened to the eye of a cooked fish or a
crab; but faith with those in whom the three are conjoined
may be likened to an eye translucent from the crystalline
humor even to and through the uvea of the iris. Faith sepa-
rated is like a picture drawn in dark colors on a black stone;
but faith conjoined is like a picture drawn in beautiful colors
on a transparent crystal. The light of faith separated may
be compared to that of a firebrand in the hand of a traveller
in the night ; while the light of faith conjoined may be com-
pared to that of a torch, which when waved about shows
plainly each step of the way. Faith without truths is like


No. 349]


FAITH


475


a vine bearing wild grapes; but faith from truths is like a
vine bearing clusters full of noble wine. Faith in the Lord
when destitute of truths may be compared to a new star
appearing in the expanse of heaven, which in time grows
dim; but faith in the Lord, together with truths, may be
compared to a fixed star which remains constant. Truth
is the essence of faith; therefore, such as the truth is, such
is the faith, which without truths is wandering, but with
them is fixed; moreover, the faith of truths shines in heaven
like a star.

IV. Abundance of truths, coherent as if bound

TOGETHER, EXALTS AND PERFECTS FAITH.

349. From the perception of faith which exists at this day,
it cannot be known that faith in its compass is an aggregate
of truths; and still less that man can contribute any thing
toward procuring faith for himself, when yet faith in its
essence is truth, for it is truth in its light; also as truth can
be procured, so too can faith. Who cannot go to the Lord
if he will? Who cannot collect truths from the Word if he
will? And every truth in the Word and from the Word
gives light, and truth in light is faith. The Lord who is
Light itself flows in with every man; and in him in whom
there are truths from the Word, He causes them to shine,
and so to become of faith; and this is what the Lord says
in John, that they should abide in the Lord, and His words
in them (xv. 7). The Lord’s words are truths. But that
abundance of truths, coherent as if bound together, exalts
and perfects faith, may be rightly comprehended, the com-
ment is to be divided under the following heads: 1. Truths
of faith may be multiplied to infinity . 2. Their disposition

is into series , thus as it were into fascicles . 3. Faith is per-

fected according to their abundance and coherence. 4. Truths ,
however numerous they are , and however diverse they appear ,
make one from the Lord , who is the W ord y the God of heaven


476


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 349


and earth, the God oj all flesh, the God o } the vineyard or
church , the God oj jaith, Light itself, the Truth, and Life
eternal .

350. (1.) The truths oj jaith may be multiplied to infin-
ity . This may be evident from the wisdom of the angels
of heaven, if we consider that it increases to eternity. The
angels also say that there is no end to wisdom; and more,
wisdom is from no other source than Divine truths, analyt-
ically arranged into forms, by means of the light flowing in
from the Lord. Human intelligence which is truly intel-
ligence is also from no other source. Divine truth may be
multiplied to infinity because the Lord is Divine Truth itself
or Truth in its infinity, and He draws all to Himself; but
angels and men, being finite, can follow the current of the
attraction only according to their measure, the effort of the
attraction still continuing to infinity. The Word of the
Lord is a great deep of truths, from which is all angelic wis-
dom; although to a man who knows nothing of its spiritual
and celestial sense, it appears no more than the water in a
pitcher. The multiplication of the truths of faith to infinity
may be compared to the seed of men, from one of whom
families may be propagated to ages of ages. The prolifica-
tion of the truths of faith may also be compared to the pro-
lification of the seeds in a field or a garden, which may be
propagated to myriads of myriads, and perpetually. Seed
in the Word means nothing but truth; a field means doc-
trine; and a garden, wisdom. The human mind is like soil,
in which spiritual and natural truths are implanted as seeds,
and may be multiplied without end. Man derives this from
the infinity of God, who with His light and His heat, and
with the faculty of generating, is perpetually in man.

351. (2 . ) The disposition oj the truths 0 } jaith is into series ,
thus as it were into fascicles. That this is so, is as yet un-
known; and it is unknown because the spiritual truths of
which the whole Word is composed, owing to the mystical
and enigmatical faith which makes every point of the theol-


No. 351]


FAITH


477


ogy of the day, could not appear; and therefore, like store-
houses, they have sunk into the earth. That what is meant
by series and fascicles may be known, it shall be explained.
The first chapter of this book, which treats of God the Crea-
tor, is divided into a series of sections; the first of these is on
the unity of God; the second, on the Esse of God, or Jeho-
vah; the third, on God’s Infinity; the fourth, on the Essence
of God, which is Divine Love and Wisdom; the fifth, on
God’s Omnipotence; and the sixth, on Creation. The
arrangement of each section into its articles makes a series,
binding what is therein as into bundles. These series, in
general and particular, thus jointly and severally, contain
truths, which according to their abundance and coherence
exalt and perfect faith. He who does not know that the
human mind is organized, or that it is a spiritual organism
terminating in a natural one, in which and according to
which the mind produces its ideas or thinks, cannot but sup-
pose that perceptions, thoughts, and ideas are nothing but
radiations and variations of light flowing into the head, and
exhibiting the forms which man sees and acknowledges as
reasons. But this is foolishness; for every one knows that
the head is full of brains, that the brains are organized, that
the mind dwells in them, and that its ideas are fixed therein
and remain as they have been accepted and confirmed.
The question then is, What is the nature of that organiza-
tion ? The answer is, It is the arrangement of all things in
series, as it were in bundles, and the truths which are of
faith are so disposed in the human mind. That it is so may
be illustrated by what now follows: The brain consists of
two substances, one of which is glandular and is called the
cortical and cineritious substance, and the other is fibrillous
and is called the medullary substance. The first, or the
glandular substance, is disposed into clusters like grapes on
a vine; those clusterings are its series. The other substance,
which is called medullary, consists of perpetual bundlings
of fibrils issuing from the glandules of the former substance;


478


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[NO. 351


these bundlings are its series. All the nerves which proceed
from it, and pass down into the body to perform various
functions, are only bundles and fascicles of fibres; and so
are all the muscles, and in general all the viscera and organs
of the body. All these are such because they correspond to
the series into which the mental organism is disposed. More-
over, there is nothing in all nature that is not fasciculated
into series; every tree, bush, shrub, and plant, yes, every
ear of com and blade of grass, is so in whole and in part.
The universal cause is that Divine truths have such a con-
formation; for we read that all things were created by means
of the Word, that is, by Divine Truth, and that the world also
was made by it (John i. x, and subsequent verses). From
all this it may be seen, that unless there were such an arrange-
ment of substances in the human mind, man would have no
power of rational analysis, which every one has according to
the arrangement, thus according to the abundance of truths
coherent as it were in the general bundle; and the arrange-
ment is according to the use of reason from freedom.

352. (3.) That faith is perfected according to the abun-
dance and coherence of truths , follows from what was said
above, and becomes manifest to every one who collects rea-
sons, and observes what multiplied series effect when they
cohere as one; for then one thing strengthens and confirms
another, and they make a form together, and, when this is
put into action, they exhibit one act. Now as faith in its
essence is truth, it follows that, according to the abundance
and coherence of truths, it becomes more and more per-
fectly spiritual, therefore less and less sensual-natural; for
it is exalted to a higher region of the mind, from which it
sees below it troops of confirmations of itself in the nature of
the world. True faith, by abundance of truths coherent
as it were in a bundle, also becomes more lustrous, per-
ceptible, evident and clear; it also becomes more capable
of conjunction with the goods of charity, and consequently
of being separated from evils; and successively more re-


No. 353]


FAITH


479


moved from the allurements of the eye and the lusts of the
flesh, therefore happier in itself. Especially it becomes
more powerful against evils and falsities, and consequently
more and more living and saving.

353. It was said above, that all truth in heaven shines,
and hence that truth shining is faith in essence; therefore
the beauty and comeliness of faith, coming from that en-
lightenment, when its truths are multiplied, may be com-
pared to various forms, objects, and pictures, produced
from different colors harmoniously combined; and so to
the precious stones of many colors in the breastplate of
Aaron, which together were called the Urim and Thum-
mim; also to the precious stones of which the foundations
of the wall of the New Jerusalem are to be built (see Apoc.
xxi.). It may also be compared with the precious stones of
many colors in the crown of a king. Precious stones also
signify truths of faith. Comparison may be made, also,
with the beauty of the rainbow, and with the beauty of a
flowery field and also of a garden blossoming in the early
spring. The light and glory of faith, from an abundance
of truths fitly entering into it, may be compared to the illumi-
nation of temples by numerous candelabra, of houses by
chandeliers, and of streets by lamps. The exaltation of
faith by abundance of truths, may be illustrated by com-
parison with the uplifting of sound and likewise with the
melody of many musical instruments played in concert; and
also with the increase of fragrance from a collection of sweet-
smelling flowers; and so on. The power of faith formed of
many truths, against evils and falsities, may be compared
with the firmness of a temple, in consequence of the stones
being well laid, with columns built into its wall, and under
its fretted ceiling; it may also be compared with a battalion
drawn up in square, where the soldiers stand side by side,
and so form and act as one force; it may also be compared
with the muscles woven about the whole body, which,
although numerous and situated in different places, still in
action make one power; and so on.


480


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 354


354. (4). The truths oj faith , however numerous they are,
and however diverse they appear , make one from the Lord ,
who is the Word , the God 0} heaven and earth , the God 0} all
flesh , the God of the vineyard or church , the God of faith , Light
itself , the Truth , and Life eternal. The truths of faith are
various, and to man they appear diverse. For example:
some are about God the Creator, some about the Lord the
Redeemer, some about the Holy Spirit and the Divine
Operation, some about Faith and Charity, and others about
Free Will, Repentance, Reformation and Regeneration,
Imputation, and so on. Still they make one in the Lord,
and with man from the Lord, like many branches in one
vine (John xv. 1, and following verses). For the Lord joins
scattered and divided truths together, as into one form, in
which they present one aspect and exhibit one action. This
may be illustrated by comparison with the members, viscera,
and organs in one body; although these are various and in
man’s sight diverse, nevertheless a man who is their general
form feels them only as one; and when he is acting from
them all, he acts as if from one. So it is with heaven, which,
though distinguished into innumerable societies, still ap-
pears before the Lord as one; that it appears as one man,
was shown above. This is as with a kingdom, which, though
divided into several departments and also into provinces and
cities, still makes one under a king who has justice and judg-
ment. It is from the Lord that it is so with the truths of
faith from which the church is the church, because the Lord
is the Word, the God of heaven and earth, the God of ail
flesh, the God of the vineyard or church, the God of faith,
Light itself, the Truth, and Life eternal. That the Lord is
the Word, and therefore all the truth of heaven and the
church, is evident in John: The Word was with God , and the
Word was God; and the Word became Flesh (i. 1, 14). That
the Lord is the God of heaven and earth, is evident in Mat-
thew: Jesus said, All power is given unto Me in heaven and
in earth (xxviii. 18). That the Lord is the God of all flesh,


NO. 354] FAITH 481

in John: The Father hath given to the Son power over all
flesh (xvii. 2). That the Lord is the God of the vineyard or
church, in Isaiah: My well-beloved had a vineyard (v. 1);
and in John: I am the Vine , ye are the branches (xv. 5).
That the Lord is the God of faith, in Paul: Having the
righteousness which is of the faith of Christ , of the God of
faith (Philip, iii. 9). That the Lord is Light itself, in John:
That was the true Light , which lighteth every man that cometh
into the world (i. 9); and in another place, Jesus said, I am
come a Light into the world , that whosoever believeth in Me
should not abide in darkness (xii. 46). That the Lord is the
Truth itself, in John: Jesus said, I am the Way , the Truth ,
and the Life (xiv. 6). That the Lord is Life eternal, in the
first Epistle of John: We know that the Son of God is come
into the world , that we may know the truth , and we are in the
truth in Jesus Christ; this is the true God and eternal Life
(v. 20, 21). To this it must be added, that man, owing to
worldly occupations, can procure for himself only few truths
of faith; but still, if he goes to the Lord and worships Him
alone, he comes into the power of recognizing all truths;
therefore every true worshipper of the Lord, as soon as he
hears any truth of faith with which he was not before ac-
quainted, sees, acknowledges, and receives it instantly.
This is because the Lord is in him, and he in the Lord; con-
sequently the light of truth is in him, and he in the light of
truth; for, as said above, the Lord is light itself and truth
itself. This may be confirmed by the following experience:
A spirit was seen by me, who in the company of some others
appeared simple, because he acknowledged the Lord alone as
the God of heaven and earth, and confirmed this his faith by
some truths from the Word. He was taken up into heaven,
among the wiser angels; and it was told me that there he
was as wise as they; yes, that he spoke truths in abundance,
of which he had before known nothing, and altogether as of
himself. The state of those who are to come into the Lord’s
New Church will be similar. The same state is described


482


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 354


in Jeremiah: This shall be the covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel , after these days; I mill put my law in the
midst of them, and write it in their hearts; and they shall
teach no more every man his fellow, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know Me, from the
least of them unto the greatest of them (xxxi. 33, 34). That
state will also be such as is described in Isaiah: There shall
come forth a Rod out 0} the stem of Jesse; truth shall be the
girdle of His loins . The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb,
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; the sucking child
shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall
put his hand on the cockatrice ’ den; for the earth shall be full
of the knowledge of Jehovah , as the waters cover the sea. In
that day the nations shall seek the Root of Jesse, and His rest
shall be glory (xi. 1, 5, 6, 8, 10).

V. Faith without charity is not faith, an d charity

WITHOUT FAITH IS NOT CHARITY; AND NEITHER LIVES
EXCEPT FROM THE LORD.

355. That the church of this day would separate faith
from charity, by saying that faith alone justifies and saves
without the works of the law, and thus that charity cannot be
joined with faith, since faith is from God and charity from
man so far as it is actual in works, never entered the mind
of any of the apostles, as is very manifest from their Epistles.
But this separation and division were introduced into the
Christian Church when they divided the one God into three
Persons and ascribed equal divinity to each. But that there
is no faith without charity, and no charity without faith, and
that neither has life except from the Lord, will be illustrated
in the following lemma; here, to prepare the way, it shall
be proved, 1. That man can obtain faith for himself . 2.

That he can obtain charity also. 3. And likewise the life of
both. 4. But yet that nothing 0} faith, nothing of charity,
and nothing 0} the life of either, is from man, but from the
Lord alone.


No. 356]


FAITH


483


356. (1.) Man can obtain faith for himself. This was
shown in the third lemma above (n. 343-348); and it was
shown in this way: That faith in its essence is truth, and
truths from the Word can be obtained by any one; and that
so far as any one obtains them for h ims elf and loves them, so
far he initiates in himself faith. To which shall be added,
that if man were not able to procure faith for himself, all
that is commanded in the Word as to faith would be useless;
for we read there that it is the will of the Father that men
should believe in the Son; and that whosoever believeth in
Him hath eternal life, and that he who believeth not shall
not see life. We read also that Jesus would send the Com-
forter who would convince the world of sin, because it be-
lieved not in Him: besides many other passages adduced
above (n. 337, 338). Moreover, all the apostles preached
faith, and this in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ.
What meaning would there be in all this if man were to
stand with his hands hanging down, like a sculptured statue
with movable joints, and wait for influx? the joints mean-
while being inwardly excited to something that is not of faith,
without being able to apply themselves to the reception of the
influx. For modem orthodoxy in the part of the Christian
world separate from the Roman Catholics, teaches thus:
That man is utterly corrupt and dead to good, so that since the
fall there does not remain or abide in man’s nature, before
regeneration, even a spark of spiritual strength by which he
is capable of becoming prepared for the grace of God or of
apprehending it when offered, or of retaining it, of and by
himself; nor can he of himself, in things spiritual, under-
stand, believe, embrace, think, will, begin, carry out, act,
operate, co-operate, or apply or accommodate himself to
grace, or do any thing toward conversion, wholly, or by
halves, or in the smallest measure. And that, in spiritual
things which respect the salvation of the soul, he is like the
statue of salt, Lot’s wife, and like a stock or a stone without
life, which has no use of eyes, mouth, or any of the senses.


484


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 356


That he has still the power of moving from place to place,
or can direct his external members, go to public meetings,
and hear the Word and the Gospel. This is in the book of
the church of the Evangelical, called Formula Concordia , in
the Leipsic edition of 1756, pages 656, 658, 661-663, 671-
673; to which book, and thus to which faith, the priests
make oath when they are inaugurated. The faith of the
Reformed is similar. But who that has reason and religion
would not hiss at those things as absurd and ridiculous?
Would he not say to himself, “If this were so, what would
the Word amount to, or religion, or the priesthood, or
preaching, but mere emptiness, or sound about nothing ?”
Tell some pagan who has any judgment and whom you wish
to convert, that he is such with regard to conversion and faith,
and would he not look upon Christianity as one looks on an
empty vessel? For take from man all power of believing
as of himself, and then what else is he ? But this will be
exhibited in clearer light in the chapter on Free Will.

357. (2.) Man can obtain charity for himself. The case
here is similar to that of faith; for what does the Word teach
but faith and charity because these are the two essentials
of salvation? For we read, Thou shall love the Lord y with
all thy heart y and with all thy soul; and thy neighbor as thy-
self (Matt. xxii. 34-39). And Jesus said, A new command-
ment I give unto you } That ye love one another; by this shall
ye be known that ye are My disciples , that ye love one another
(John xiii. 34, 35; see also xv. 9; xvi 27). Also, that men
ought to bear fruit like a good tree; and that he who does
good shall be rewarded at the resurrection; besides other
similar things. For what would all this be if man could not
of himself exercise charity, and in some measure procure it
for himself ? Can he not give alms, help the needy, and do
good in his house and in his employment ? Can he not live
according to the commandments of the Decalogue? Has
he not a soul from which he can do these things, and a ra-
tional mind from which he can lead himself to act for this or


No. 358]


FAITH


485


that end? Can he not think that he should do them be-
cause they are commanded in the Word, and thus by God?
This power is wanting to no man; and it is not wanting, be-
cause the Lord gives it to every one; and He gives it as some-
thing that is his own; for who while doing charity knows
otherwise than that he is doing it from himself?

358* (3.) Man can also obtain jor himself the life of faith
and charity > This is again similar; for man obtains this
life for himself when he goes to the Lord who is Life itself;
and access to Him is not foreclosed to any man, for the Lord
continually invites every one to come to Him; for He said,
He that cometh to Me shall never hunger , and he that believeth
in Me shall never thirst; and him that cometh to Me 9 I will
in no wise cast out (John vi. 35, 37). Jesus stood and cried.
If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink (vii. 37).
And in another place : The kingdom of heaven is like one who
made a marriage for his son , and sent forth his servants to call
them that were bidden. And at last he said, Go ye into the
highways, and as many as ye shall find , call to the marriage
(Matt. xxii. 2-9). Who does not know that the invitation
or call is universal, and also the grace of reception ? Man
obtains life by going to the Lord, because the Lord is Life
itself; not only the Life of faith, but also the Life of charity.
That the Lord is that Life, and that man has it from the
Lord, is evident from these passages: In the beginning was
the Word; in Him was life, and the life was the light of men
(John i. 1, 4). As the Father raiseth up the dead and quick-
eneth them , even so the Son quickeneth whom He will (v. 21).
As the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the
Son to have life in Himself (v. 26). The Bread of God is He
that cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world
(vi. 33). The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit
and they are life (vi. 63). Jesus said, He that followeth Me,
shall have the light of life (viii. 12). I am come that they may
have life , and may have abundance (x. 10). He who believeth
in Me, though he be dead yet shall he live (xi. 25). Lam the


486


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 358


Way , the Truth , and the Life (xiv. 6). Because I live , ye
shall live also (xiv. 9). These things are written that ye may
have life in His name (xx. 31). He is eternal life (1 John v.
20). By the life in faith and charity is meant spiritual life
which is given by the Lord to man in his natural life.

359. (4.) Yet nothing of faith , and nothing of charity , and
nothing of the life of either , is from man , but from the Lord
alone. For we read that A man can receive nothing except it
be given him from heaven (John iii. 27). And Jesus said,
He that abideth in Me and I in him y the same bringeth forth
much fruit; for without Me ye can do nothing (xv. 5). But
this is to be understood thus: that man of himself can pro-
cure for himself only natural faith, which is persuasion that
a thing is so because some man of authority has said so; nor
can he procure any but natural charity, which is a working
for favor, for the sake of some remuneration; in which faith
and charity there is man’s self-life, and not yet life from the
Lord. Still, man by both of these prepares himself to be a
receptacle of the Lord; and as he prepares himself, so the
Lord enters, and causes his natural faith to become spiri-
tual, also his charity, and so makes both to be alive; and
this is done when man goes to the Lord as the God of heaven
and earth. Because man was created an image of God, he
was created an abode of God. Therefore the Lord says,
He that hath My commandments and keepeth them , he it is
that loveth Me; and I will love him } and will come to him , and
make an abode with him (John xiv. 21, 23). And again:
Behold I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear My
voice , and open the door , I will come in to him , and will sup
with him , and he with Me (Apoc. iii. 20). Hence follows
the conclusion, that as man prepares himself naturally to
receive the Lord, so the Lord enters and makes all things
with him inwardly spiritual, and thus alive. But, on the
other hand, as far as man does not prepare himself, he re-
moves the Lord from him, and does all things from himself;
and what man does from himself has nothing of life in it.


No. 360] FAITH 487

But these things cannot yet be set forth to be seen in any
light, before Charity and Free Will have been treated of;
and they will be seen later, in the chapter on Reformation
and Regeneration.

360. It was stated above that faith in its beginning with
man is natural, and that as man draws near to the Lord it
becomes spiritual; so also with charity. But no one has yet
known the distinction between natural faith and charity and
spiritual. This great arcanum must therefore be disclosed.
There are two worlds, the natural and the spiritual; and in
each there is a sun, and from each sun proceed light and
heat: but the heat and light from the sun of the spiritual
world have life in them; their life is from the Lord, who is in
the midst of that sun; but the heat and light from the sun of
the natural world have no life in them, but they serve the
other heat and light as receptacles for conveying them to
man, as instrumental causes always serve their principals.
It must be known, therefore, that the heat and light from the
sun of the spiritual world are those from which are all spiri-
tual things; these also are themselves spiritual, because
spirit and life are in them; while the heat and light from the
sun of the natural world are those from which are all natural
things, which viewed in themselves are without spirit and
life. Now because faith is of light and charity is of heat, it
is manifest that so far as man is in the light and heat which
proceed from the sun of the spiritual world, he is in spiritual
faith and charity; while as far as he is imthe light and heat
which proceed from the sun of the natural world, he is in
natural faith and charity. Evidently, therefore, as spiritual
light is inwardly in natural light as in its receptacle or its
casket, and as spiritual heat is likewise inwardly in natural
heat, so also is spiritual faith inwardly in natural faith, and
spiritual charity inwardly in natural charity; and this is
effected in the degree in which man advances from the natu-
ral world into the spiritual world; and he does this as he
believes in the Lord, who is light itself, the Way, the Truth,


488


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 360


and the Life, as He Himself teaches. This being so, it is
manifest that when man is in spiritual faith he is also in
natural; for as was said, spiritual faith is inwardly in natu-
ral. Because faith is of light, it follows that by this inser-
tion man’s natural becomes as it were transparent, and,
according to the quality of its conjunction with charity,
beautifully colored. This is because charity has a ruddy
glow and faith has a white light. Charity is red from the
plane of spiritual fire, and faith is shining white from the
splendor of the light therefrom. The contrary happens if
the spiritual is not inwardly in the natural, but the natural
is inwardly in the spiritual; this is the case with men who
reject faith and charity. With these, the internal of their
mind, in which they are when left to their own thoughts, is
infernal; moreover they think from hell, though they do not
know it; but the external of their mind, from which they
speak with their associates in the world, is as it were spiri-
tual, but is filled with such unclean things as are in hell;
they are therefore in hell, for, compared with the former
class, they are in an inverted state.

361. When, therefore, it is known that the spiritual is
inwardly in the natural with those who are in faith in the
Lord and at the same time in charity towards the neighbor,
and that therefore the natural with them is transparent, it
follows that so far as this is so, man is wise in spiritual things
and consequently in natural things also; for whenever he
thinks or reads or hears any thing, inwardly in himself he
sees whether it is true or not. He perceives this from the
Lord, from whom spiritual light and heat flow into the higher
sphere of his understanding. As far as faith and charity
with man are made spiritual, he is withdrawn from self, and
looks not to himself, to reward and recompense, but only to
the enjoyment of perceiving truths of faith, and of doing
goods of love; and as far as this spirituality is increased,
that enjoyment becomes blessedness. From this is his sal-
vation, which is called eternal life. This state of man may


No. 362]


FAITH


489


be compared with the most beautiful and charming things
in the world, and it also is compared with them in the Word;
as with fruitful trees and the gardens in which they are, with
flowery fields, precious stones, delicacies, and nuptials, and
their festivities and rejoicings. But when the reverse is the
case, that is, when the natural is inwardly in the spiritual,
and hence the man in his internals is a devil and in his exter-
nals like an angel, he may then be compared to a dead body
in a coffin made of costly wood and gilded; he may also be
compared to a skeleton in full dress like a man, and borne
about in a magnificent chariot; and also to a corpse in a
sepulchre built like the temple of Diana; yes, his internal
may be imaged by a nest of serpents in a cavern, and his
external by butterflies whose wings are tinted with colors
of every kind, but which nevertheless stick their filthy eggs
upon the leaves of useful trees, from which their fruit is con-
sumed; yes, the internal of such may be compared with a
hawk, and their external with a dove, and the faith and char-
ity in it with the dove endeavoring to escape while the hawk
flies over it, which tires it out at last and then darts upon and
devours it.


VI. The Lord, charity, and faith, make one, like life,

WILL, AND UNDERSTANDING IN MAN; AND IF THEY ARE
DIVIDED, EACH PERISHES, LIKE A PEARL REDUCED
TO POWDER.

362. Some things heretofore unknown in the learned
world and so in the ecclesiastical order, as much so as things
buried in the ground, shall first be stated; when yet they are
treasures of wisdom; and unless they are dug up and given
to the public, in vain does man toil to come into any just
knowledge concerning God, faith, charity, and the state of
his life, how he should regulate and prepare it for the state
of eternal life. These things have been unknown : — that
man is a mere organ of life : that life with all belonging to it


490


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 362


flows in from the God of heaven who is the Lord : that there »
are two faculties of life in man, called the will and the under-
standing; and that the will is the receptacle of charity, and
the understanding the receptacle of faith: that all which
man wills, and all which he understands flow in from with-
out; the goods which are of love and charity, and the truths
which are of wisdom and faith, from the Lord; but all that
is contrary to them, from hell: that it has been provided by
the Lord that man should feel in himself as his those things
which flow in from without, and should therefore produce
them of himself as his own, though nothing of them is his:
that nevertheless those things are imputed to him as his, on
account of the freedom of choice in which are his willing and
thinking, and on account of the knowledges of good and
truth given him, from which he can freely choose whatever
conduces to his temporal and eternal life. A man who looks
askance at the things which have been advanced, or from
the corners of the eyes, may draw from them many insane
conclusions; but a man who looks at them directly, or with
the full pupil, may draw from them many conclusions which
are of wisdom; and that this may be done and not the other,
it was necessary first to put forth decisions and doctrines as
to God and the Divine Trinity, and afterward to establish
decisions and doctrines as to Faith and Charity, Free Will,
and Reformation and Regeneration, as also Imputation;
and likewise as to Repentance, Baptism, and the Holy Sup-
per, as means.

363. But that this article of faith which is that the Lord,
charity, and faith make one, like life, will, and understand-
ing in man, and that if they are divided each perishes like
a pearl reduced to powder, may be seen as a truth and
acknowledged, it is expedient to consider it in this order:

1. The Lord , with all His Divine Love , with all His Di-
vine Wisdom , thus with all His Divine Life , flows in with
every man . 2. Therejore with all the essence of faith and

charity. 3. But they are received by man according to his


No. 364 ] FAITH 491

form. 4. But the man who divides the Lord , charity , and
faith , is ra?/ a /arm receiving but a form destroying them .

364. (1.) T&e all His Divine Love , with all

His Divine Wisdom , thus with all His Divine Life , flows in
with every man. In the book of Creation we read, that man
was created an image of God; and that God breathed into
his nostrils the breath of lives (Gen. i. 27; ii. 7); which
describes man as an organ of life, and not Life. For God
could not create another like Himself; if He could have done
so, there would be as many gods as there are men. Neither
could He create life, just as light cannot be created; but He
could create man a form of life, as He created the eye a form
of light. Neither could God, nor can He, divide His essence;
for this is one and indivisible. Since, therefore, God alone
is Life, it follows indisputably that from His Life He vivifies
every man; and that man without that vivification would be
as to his flesh a mere sponge, and as to his bones a mere
skeleton, having no more life in him than a clock which is
set in motion by a pendulum with weight or spring. This
being so, it follows also that God flows in with every man
with all His Divine Life, that is, with all His Divine Love
and His Divine Wisdom; these two make His Divine Life,
as may be seen above (n. 39, 40); for the Divine cannot be
divided. But how God flows in with all His Divine Life
may be perceived by an idea somewhat like that by which
the sun of the world with all its essence, which is heat and
light, is perceived to flow into every tree and flower, and into
every stone common as well as precious, every object taking
its portion from this common influx, the sun not dividing
its light and its heat and dispensing a part to this object and
a part to that. It is similar with the sun of heaven, from
which the Divine love proceeds as heat and the Divine wis-
dom as light; these two flow into human v>, minds as the heat
and light of the sun of the world flow into men’s bodies, and
vivify them according to the quality of the form, each form
taking from the common influx what is necessary for itself.


49 2 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 364

To this what the Lord says is applicable: Your Father
maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good , and sendeth
rain on the just and on the unjust (Matt. v. 45). Moreover
the Lord is omnipresent; and where He is present, there He
is with His whole essence: and it is impossible for Him to
take some of it away, and thus to give a part to one and a part
to another; but He gives the whole, and gives man the oppor-
tunity to take little or much. He says, moreover, that He has
an abode with those who keep His commandments, also
that the faithful are in Him and He in them. In a word, all
things are full of God, and every one takes his portion from
that fulness. It is similar with every general thing, as with
atmospheres and oceans; the atmosphere in its least parts
is such as it is in the greatest; it does not apportion a part
of itself for man to breathe, and for the bird to fly in, or for
the sails of a ship, or for the fans of a wind-mill; but each of
these takes from it its portion, and applies to itself as much
as is sufficient. The case is also the same as with a store-
house full of grain; from it the possessor daily takes his
food, and the granary does not distribute it.

365. (2.) Therefore the Lord with all the essence of faith
and charity flows in with every man. This follows from the
former theorem, since the life of Divine wisdom is the essence
of faith, and the life of Divine love is the essence of charity;
therefore when the Lord is present with those things which
are properly His, which are Divine wisdom and Divine love,
He is also present with all the truths which are of faith
and with all the goods which are of charity; for by faith
is meant all the truth which man from the Lord perceives,
thinks, and speaks, and by charity is meant all the good
with which he is affected by the Lord, and which he hence
wills and does. It was said above that the Divine love
which proceeds frofn the Lord as a sun is perceived by the
angels as heat, and that the Divine wisdom from it is per-
ceived as light; but one who does not think beyond the ap-
pearance may imagine that that heat is mere heat, and that


)


No. 365]


FAITH


493


light mere light, such as are the heat and light proceeding
from the sun of our world. But the heat and light which
proceed from the Lord as a sun contain in their bosom all
the infinities that are in the Lord; the heat all the infinities
of His Love, and the light all the infinities of His Wisdom,
and thus also in infinity all the good which is of charity and
all the truth which is of faith. This is because that sun is
itself present everywhere in its heat and its light, and it is the
circle most closely encompassing the Lord, emanating from
His Divine Love and at the same time from His Divine Wis-
dom; for, as has been often stated above, the Lord is in the
midst of that sun. Hence it is now manifest that there can
be nothing lacking to preclude a man taking from the Lord,
because He is omnipresent, all the good which is of charity
and all the truth which is of faith. That there is no such
lack is evident from the love and wisdom which the angels of
heaven have from the Lord, in their being ineffable, and to
the natural man incomprehensible, and also capable of being
multiplied to eternity. That there are infinite things in the
light and heat which proceed from the Lord, although they
are perceived simply as heat and light, may be illustrated by
various things in the natural world; as by these: The sound
of a man’s voice and speech is heard only as simple sound,
and yet when the angels hear it they perceive in it all the
affections of his love, and they also show what and of what
quality they are. That these things are inwardly concealed
in the sound, a man can also perceive in some measure from
the tone of one speaking with him, as whether there is con-
tempt in it, or ridicule, or hatred; and also whether there is
charity, benevolence, gladness, or any other affection in it.
Similar things are concealed in the lighting of the eye when
it looks at one. It may also be illustrated by the fragrances
from a large garden or extensive fields of flowers; the fragrant
odor exhaled from them consists of thousands and myriads
of different odors, and still they are perceived as one. It is
similar with many other things, which although they appear


494


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 365


uniform outwardly, are yet inwardly manifold; sympathies
and antipathies are nothing else than exhalations of affec-
tions from the mind which affect another according to like-
ness, and cause aversion according to unlikeness. These,
although innumerable, and unperceived by any bodily sense,
are yet perceived by the sense of the soul as one; and all con-
junctions and consociations in the spiritual world are made
according to them. These things have been presented in
order to illustrate what was said above as to the spiritual
light which proceeds from the Lord, that in it are all things
of wisdom, and hence all things of faith; and that it is that
light from which the understanding analytically sees and
perceives rational things, as the eye sees and perceives natu-
ral things symmetrically.

366. (3.) Those things which flow in from the Lord , are
received by man according to his form. By form is here meant
a man’s state as to his love and wisdom together, and con-
sequently as to the affections of his goods of charity, and at
the same time as to the perceptions of his truths of faith.
That God is one, indivisible, and the same from eternity to
eternity, not the same simply but infinitely, and that all
variableness is in the subject in which He is, was shown
above. That the form or recipient state induces variations,
may be evident from the life of infants, children, youths,
adults, and aged persons. The same life, because the same
soul, is in each one from infancy to old age; but as his state
is varied according to age and what is suitable thereto, life
also is perceived accordingly. The life of God is in all ful-
ness not only with good and pious men, but also with the
wicked and impious; likewise both with the angels of heaven
and the spirits of hell. The difference is that the wicked
obstruct the way and shut the door, that God may not enter
into the lower regions of their mind; while the good clear
the way and open the door, and also invite God to enter the
lower parts of their mind as He dwells in its highest parts;
and so they form the state of the will for the influx of love


No. 367]


FAITH


495


and charity, and the state of the understanding for the influx
of wisdom and faith, consequently for the reception of God;
but the wicked obstruct that influx by various lusts of the
flesh and spiritual defilements, which strew the way and
hinder the passage; but still God resides in their highest
parts, with all His Divine essence, and gives them the fac-
ulty of willing good and of understanding truth; a faculty
that every man has, but which he would by no means have
if life from God were not in his souk That the wicked also
have this faculty, has been granted me to know from much
experience. That every one receives life from God accord-
ing to his form, may be illustrated by comparisons with
plants of every kind. Every tree, shrub, bush, and blade of
grass, receives the influx of heat and light according to its
form; and not only those which are of good use, but those
also which are of evil use; the sun with its heat does not
change their forms, but the forms change its effects in them-
selves. So with the subjects of the mineral kingdom; each
one of them, the valuable and the common alike, receives
influx according to the form of texture of the parts among
themselves, thus one stone differently from another, one
mineral differently from another, and one metal differently
from another. Some of them adorn themselves with most
beautiful variegated colors, some transmit the light without
variegation, and some confuse and suffocate it in them-
selves. From these few examples it may be evident, that as
the sun of the world with its heat and its light is equally
present in one object and another, but the recipient forms
vary its operations, so is the Lord present, from the sun of
heaven, in the midst of which He is, with its heat which in its
essence is love, and with its light which in its essence is wis-
dom; but that man's form, which is induced by the states
of his life, varies the operations; consequently that not the
Lord but the man himself is the cause that a man is not born
again and saved.

367. (4.) But the man who divides the Lord , charity , and


49 ^ TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 367

faith , is not a form receiving but a form destroying them.
For he who separates the Lord from charity and faith, sepa-
rates life from them, and when this is done, charity and faith
either do not arise or they are abortions. That the Lord is
Life itself, may be seen above (n. 358). He who acknowl-
edges the Lord and separates charity, acknowledges Him
with the lips only; his acknowledgment and confession are
only cold, in which is no faith; for they are destitute of
spiritual essence, as charity is the essence of faith. But he
who does charity but does not acknowledge the Lord as the
God of heaven and earth, one with the Father, as He Him-
self teaches, does no other charity than what is merely natu-
ral, in which there is no eternal life. The man of the church
knows that all good which in itself is good is from God, con-
sequently from the Lord, who is the true God and eternal Life
(1 John v. 20). So also with charity, because good and char-
ity are one. Faith separate from charity is not faith, be-
cause faith is the light of a man’s life, and charity is the heat
of it; therefore when charity is separated from faith, it is
as when heat is separated from light; a man’s state thus be-
comes like that of the world in winter, when all things on
earth die. That charity may be charity and faith may be
faith, they can no more be separated than the will and the
understanding; and if these are separated, the understand-
ing becomes nothing, and presently the will likewise. It is
similar with charity and faith, because charity resides in the
will, and faith in the understanding. Separating charity
from faith is like separating essence from form. It is known
in the learned world that essence without form, or form with-
out essence, is nothing; for essence has no quality except from
form, nor is form a subsisting entity except from essence;
consequently, nothing can be predicated of either when sepa-
rated from the other. Charity is also the essence of faith,
and faith is the form of charity; just as good, as stated above,
is the essence of truth, and truth is the form of good. These
two, namely good and truth, are in all things which essen-


No. 367]


FAITH


497


tially exist, and in each of them singly; therefore charity,
because it is of good, and faith, because it is of truth, may be
illustrated by comparisons with many things in the human
body and with many on the earth. Comparison with the
respiration of the lungs and the systolic motion of the heart,
is fitting; for charity can no more be separated from faith
than the heart from the lungs; for when the heart’s pulsa-
tion ceases, immediately the respiration of the lungs ceases;
and when the respiration of the lungs ceases, all the senses
faint, all the muscles are deprived of motion, and soon after-
wards the heart stops, and all the life is dissipated. This
comparison is fitting, for the heart corresponds to the will
and therefore to charity also, and the respiration of the lungs
to the understanding and therefore to faith also; for, as said
above, charity resides in the will, and faith in the under-
standing. Nor is anything else meant in the Word by heart
and spirit. The separation of charity and faith also coin-
cides with the separation of blood and flesh; for blood sepa-
rated from the flesh is gore, and becomes corruption; and
flesh separated from the blood gradually becomes putrid
and breeds worms. Blood also in the spiritual sense sig-
nifies the truth of wisdom and faith; and flesh, the good of
love and charity. That this is the signification of blood, is
shown in the Apocalypse Revealed , n. 379, and that flesh has
this signification, n. 832. Charity and faith, to be any thing,
can no more be separated than food and water, or than
bread and wine, with man; for food or bread taken without
water and wine merely distends the stomach, and as an
undigested mass destroys it, and becomes like putrid filth.
Water and wine without food or bread, also distend the
stomach and likewise the vessels and pores, which being
thus destitute of nutrition emaciate the body even to death.
This comparison is also just, since food and bread in the
spiritual sense signify the good of love and charity, and
water and wine signify the truth of wisdom and faith, as
may be seen in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 50, 316, 778, 932).


498 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 367

Charity conjoined with faith, and faith conjoined in its turn
with charity, may be likened to the face of a handsome virgin,
beautiful from the blending of red and white; which simili-
tude is also fitting, since love and hence charity in the spiri-
tual world are red from the fire of the sun there, and truth
and hence faith are white from the light of that sun. There-
fore charity separated from faith may be likened to a face
inflamed with pimples, and faith separated from charity may
be likened to the pallid face of a corpse. Faith separated
from charity may also be likened to paralysis of one side,
which is called hemiplegia , from which, when it increases,
the man dies. It may also be likened to St. Vitus’ dance, or
the dance of St. Guy, which comes from the bite of the taran-
tula. The rational faculty becomes like one so bitten; like
him it dances furiously; and it believes itself to be then alive,
when yet it can no more collect reasons into one, and think
about spiritual truths, than one lying in bed weighed down
with nightmare. These are sufficient for the demonstra-
tion of the two themes of this chapter: first, That faith with-
out charity is not faith, that charity without faith is not char-
ity, and that neither lives except from the Lord; and second,
That the Lord, charity, and faith make one, like life, will,
and understanding in man; and that if they are divided,
each perishes like a pearl reduced to powder.

VII. The Lord is charity and faith m man, and man

IS CHARITY AND FAITH IN THE LORD.

368. That the man of the church is in the Lord, and the
Lord in him, is evident from these passages in the Word:
Jesus said, Abide in Me and I in you; I am the Vine , ye are
the branches. He that abideth in Me and I in him , the same
bringeth forth much fruit (John xv. 4, 5). He that eateth
My flesh and drinketh My blood , dwelleth in Me and I in him
(vi. 56). At that day ye shall know that I am in My Father ,
and ye in Me y and I in you (xiv. 20). Whosoever confesseth


No. 369]


FAITH


499


that Jesus is the Son 0} God , God dwelleth in him and he in
God (1 John iv. 15). Yet the man himself cannot be in the
Lord, but the charity and faith which are with him from the
Lord, from which two man is essentially man. But in order
that this arcanum may appear in some light before the un-
derstanding, it is to be investigated in this series: 1. It is by
conjunction with God that man has salvation and eternal life.
2. Conjunction with God the Father is not possible , but with
the Lord , and through Him with God the Father. 3. Con-
junction with the Lord is reciprocal , that is , the Lord is in man ,
and man in the Lord. 4. This reciprocal conjunction is
effected by charity and faith. That these things are so will be
manifest from the explanation that follows.

369. (1 .) It is by conjunction with God that man has salva-
tion and eternal life. Man was created that he may be con-
joined with God; for he was created a native of heaven, and
also of the world; and as far as he is a native of heaven he
is spiritual, while as far as he is a native of the world he is
natural; and the spiritual man can think of God and per-
ceive such things as are of God, he can also love God, and
be affected with those things which are from God; from
which it follows that he can be conjoined with God. That
man can think of God and can perceive such things as are of
God, is beyond all doubt; for he can think of the unity of
God, the Esse of God which is Jehovah, of God’s Immeasu-
rableness and Eternity, the Divine Love and Wisdom which
make the essence of God, of God’s omnipotence, omniscience,
and omnipresence, of the Lord the Saviour His Son, and of
Redemption and Mediation, and also of the Holy Spirit, and
finally of the Divine Trinity; which all are of God, yes, are
God. Moreover, he can think of God’s operations, which
are principally faith and charity, and of other things also
which proceed from these two. That man can not only
think of God, but also love Him, is evident from the two
commandments of God Himself, which read thus: Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy


500


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 369


soul; this is the first and great commandment. The second is
like unto it: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself (Matt,
xxii. 37-39: Deut. vi. 5). That man can keep God’s com-
mandments, and that this is to love Him and to be loved by
Him, is evident from these words: Jesus said, He that hath
My commandments and keepeth them , he it is that loveth Me;
and he that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father , and I will
love him f and will manifest Myself unto him (John xiv. 21).
Besides, what is faith but conjunction with God by truths
which are of the understanding and hence of the thought?
And what is love but conjunction with God by goods which
are of the will and hence of the affection ? God’s conjunc-
tion with man is spiritual conjunction in the natural, and
man’s conjunction with God is natural conjunction from the
spiritual. For the sake of this conjunction as an end, man
was created a native of heaven and at the same time of the
world; as a native of heaven he is spiritual, and as a native
of the world he is natural. If therefore a man becomes
spiritual rational, and at the same spiritual moral, he is con-
joined with God, and by this conjunction he has salvation
and eternal life. But if man is merely natural rational and
also natural moral, there is indeed conjunction of God with
him, but not conjunction of him with God; from this he has
spiritual death, which viewed in itself is natural life without
spiritual; for with him the spiritual, in which is the life of
God, is extinct.

370. (2.) Conjunction with God the Father is not possible ,
but with the Lord , and through Him with God the Father.
This the Scripture teaches, and reason sees. The Scripture
teaches that God the Father has never been seen or heard,
and that He cannot be seen or heard; consequently that from
Himself, such as He is in His Esse and in His Essence, He
cannot operate any thing with man ; for the Lord says that
no one hath seen the' Father save He who is of God , He hath
seen the Father (John vi. 46). Neither knoweth any man
the Father save the Son , and he to whomsoever the Son will


No. 370] FAITH SOI

reveal him (Matt. xi. 27). Ye have neither heard the Father’s
voice , nor seen His shape (John v. 37). This is because He
is in the firsts and beginnings of all things, so most eminently
above all the sphere of the human mind; for He is in the
firsts and beginning of all things of wisdom and all things of
love, and with those man has no possible conjunction.
Therefore if He should come to man or man to Him, man
would be consumed and melt away like wood in the focus of
a large burning-glass; or rather, like an image thrown into
the sun itself. It was therefore said to Moses, who desired
to see God, that man cannot see Him and live (Exod. xxxiii.
20). But that God the Father is conjoined through the
Lord, is evident from the passages just adduced; that not
the Father, but the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom
of the Father and has seen the Father, has brought to view
and revealed the things which are of God and from God.
Furthermore, from these passages: At that day ye shall know
that I am in My Father , and ye in Me, and I in you (John
xiv. 20). And the glory which Thou gavest Me, I have given
them, that they may be one, even as We are one; 1 in them ,
and Thou in Me (xvii. 22, 23; also 26). Jesus said, I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man cometh unto the
Father but by Me. And then Philip wished to see the
Father, and the Lord answered him, He that seeth Me seeth
the Father also; He that knoweth Me knoweth the Father
also (xiv. 6, 7, and subsequent verses). And in another
place, He that seeth Me seeth Him That sent Me (xii. 45).
And He moreover says that He is the Door, and that whoso-
ever entereth through Him, is saved; while he that climbeth
tip some other way, is a thief and a robber (x. 1,9). And He
says also that he that abideth not in Him is cast out, and,
like a withered branch, is cast into the fire (xv. 6). This is
because the Lord our Saviour is Jehovah the Father Him-
self, in the human form; for Jehovah descended and be-
came Man, that He might be able to draw near to man and
man to Him, and so conjunction might be effected, and that


502 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 370

by conjunction man should have salvation and eternal life.
For when God became Man, and thus also became Man-
God, being then accommodated to man He could draw near
to him and be conjoined with him, as God-Man and Man-
God. There are three things which follow in order, accom-
modation, application, and conjunction. There must be
accommodation before there is application; and there must
be accommodation and application together, before there is
conjunction. The accommodation on God’s part was, that
He became Man; application on God’s part is perpetual
so far as man applies himself in his turn; and as this is done,
conjunction is effected also. These three follow one another
and proceed in their order, in all things which become one
and co-exist, and in them singly.

371. (3.) Conjunction with the Lord is reciprocal , that is y
the Lord is in man y and man in the Lord. That conjunction
is reciprocal, the Scripture teaches, and reason also sees.
Of His conjunction with the Father, the Lord teaches that
it is reciprocal; for He says to Philip, Believest thou not that
I am in the Father and the Father in Me? Believe Me that I
am in the Father and the Father in Me (John xiv. 10, 11).
That ye may know and believe that the Father is in Me y and
I in the Father (x. 38). Jesus said, Father , the hour is come;
glorify Thy Son , that Thy Son also may glorify Thee (xvii. 1).
Father , all Mine are Thine y and all Thine are Mine (xvii. 10).
The Lord says the same concerning His conjunction with
man, that is, that it is reciprocal; for He says, Abide in Me
and I in you; he that abideth in Me and I in him , the same
bringeth forth much fruit (John xv. 4, 5). He that eateth
My flesh and drinketh My blood dwelleth in Me, and I in
him (vi. 56). At that day ye shall know that I am in My
Father , and ye in Me, and I in you (xiv. 20). He that keep-
eth the commandments of Christ dwelleth in Him, and He in
him (1 John iii. 24; also iv. 13). Whosoever confesseth that
Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God
(iv. 15). If any man hear My voice , and open the door, I will


No. 371]


FAITH


503


come in to him , and I will sup with him and he with Me (Apoc.
iii. 20). From these plain declarations, it is evident that the
conjunction of the Lord and man is reciprocal; and because
it is reciprocal, it necessarily follows that man must conjoin
himself with the Lord, that the Lord may conjoin Himself
with man; and that otherwise, conjunction is not effected,
but withdrawal, and consequently separation, yet this not
on the Lord’s part but on man’s. That there may be this
reciprocal conjunction, free choice is given to man, from
which he can walk in the way to heaven or the way to hell.
From this freedom that is given to man, flows his power of
reciprocation, which enables him to conjoin himself with the
Lord or to conjoin himself with the devil. But this liberty,
its quality, and the purpose for which it is given to man, will
be illustrated in the following chapters, where we shall treat
of Free Will, of Repentance, of Reformation and Regenera-
tion, and of Imputation. It is to be lamented that the re-
ciprocal conjunction of the Lord and man, though it stands
out so clearly in the Word, is still unknown in the Christian
church. It is unknown because of certain hypotheses as
to faith and free-will. The hypothesis as to faith is, that
faith is bestowed upon man without his contributing any
thing to the acquisition of it, or fitting and applying himself
more than a stock to its reception. The hypothesis as to
free-will is, that man has not even a grain of free-will in
spiritual things. But that the reciprocal conjunction of the
Lord and man, on which the salvation of the human race
depends, may be no longer concealed and unknown, neces-
sity itself enjoins its disclosure, which cannot be better
effected than by examples, because they illustrate. There
are two kinds of reciprocation by which conjunction is
effected: one is alternate, and the other is mutual. The
alternate reciprocation by which conjunction is effected,
may be illustrated by the action of the lungs in breathing.
Man inhales the air, and thereby expands the chest; and
then he expels the air that was inhaled, and thereby con-


504 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 371

tracts the chest. This inhalation, and the consequent ex-
pansion, is effected by means of the pressure of the air pro-
portionate to its column; while this expulsion, and the con-
sequent contraction, is effected by means of the ribs, by the
force of the muscles. Such is the reciprocal conjunction of
the air and the lungs, on which depends the life of the senses
and of the motions of the whole body; for these grow faint
when respiration stops. The reciprocal conjunction which
is effected by alternations of action, may also be illustrated
by the conjunction of the heart with the lungs, and of the
lungs with the heart. The heart from its right chamber
pours the blood into the lungs, and the lungs pour it back
into the left chamber of the heart; thus is effected that recip-
rocal conjunction on which the life of the whole body is
wholly dependent. There is a similar conjunction of the
blood with the heart; the blood of all the body flows through
the veins into the heart, and from the heart it flows out
through the arteries into the whole body; action and re-
action make this conjunction. There is a similar action
and reaction, by which there is a constant conjunction, be-
tween the embryo and the mother’s womb. There is not,
however, such a reciprocal conjunction of the Lord and
man, but there is a mutual conjunction which is not effected
by action and reaction, but by cooperation ; for the Lord acts,
and man receives action from the Lord and operates as from
himself; yes, of himself, from the Lord. This operation of
man from the Lord is imputed to man as his, for he is con-
stantly kept in freedom of will by the Lord. The freedom
of will resulting from this is, that man has ability to will and
think from the Lord, that is, from the Word; and also ability
to will and think from the devil, that is, contrary to the Lord
and the Word. The Lord gives man this freedom, so that
he may be able to conjoin himseli reciprocally, and by con-
junction be gifted with eternal life and blessedness; for
this, without reciprocal conjunction, is not possible. This
reciprocal conjunction which is mutual, may also be illus-


No. 372]


FAITH


505


trated by various things in man and the world: such is the
conjunction of the soul and body in every man; such is the
conjunction of will and action, and also that of thought and
speech; such is the conjunction of the two eyes with each
other, the two ears with each other, and the two nostrils with
each other. That the conjunction of the two eyes is in its
way reciprocal, is manifest from the optic nerve, in which
fibres from both hemispheres of the cerebrum are folded with
each other, and thus folded together they extend to both the
eyes. It is similar with the ears and the nostrils. There
is a similar mutual reciprocal conjunction of light and the
eye, of sound and the ear, of odor and the nostril, of taste and
the tongue, of touch and the body; for the eye is in the light
and the light is in the eye, sound is in the ear and the ear is in
sound, odor is in the nostril and the nostril is in odor, taste
is in the tongue and the tongue is in taste, and touch is in the
body and the body is in touch. This reciprocal conjunction
may also be compared with the conjunction of a horse and
carriage, of an ox and plough, of a wheel and machinery,
of a sail and wind, of a musical pipe and air; in short, such
is the reciprocal conjunction of the end and the cause, and
such is that of the cause and the effect. But there is not
time to explain all these examples one by one, for that would
be a work of many pages.

372. (4.) This reciprocal conjunction of the Lord and man
is effected by charity and faith. It is known at this day that
the church constitutes the Body of Christ, and that every
one in whom the church is, is in some member of that Body,
according to Paul (Eph. i. 23 : I Cor. xii. 27 : Rom. xii. 4, 5).
But what is the Body of Christ, but Divine Good and Divine
Truth ? This is meant by the Lord’s words in John, He that
eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood , dwelleth in Me, and I
in him (vi. 56). By the Lord’s flesh, as also by bread, is
meant Divine Good; and by His blood, as also by wine, is
meant Divine Truth; that these are meant will be seen in the
chapter concerning the Holy Supper. From this it follows,


50 6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 372


that as far as man is in the goods of charity and in the truths
of faith, he is in the Lord and the Lord in him; for the con-
junction with the Lord is spiritual conjunction, and spiritual
conjunction is effected solely by charity and faith. That
there is conjunction of the Lord and the church, and con-
sequently of good and truth, in all things and in every single
thing of the Word, was shown in the chapter concerning the
Sacred Scripture (n. 248-253); and since charity is good and
faith is truth, there is everywhere in the Word a conjunction
of charity and faith. Hence now it follows, that the Lord is
charity and faith in man, and that man is charity and faith in
the Lord; for the Lord is spiritual charity and faith in the
natural charity and faith of man; and man is natural charity
and faith from the spiritual of the Lord; which, conjoined,
make spiritual natural charity and faith.

VIII. Charity and eaith are together in good works.

373. The whole man such as he is as to the mind, or such
as he is essentially, is in every work that proceeds from man.
By the mind is meant his love’s affection and the thought
from it ; these form his nature, and in general his life. If we
look upon works thus, they are as mirrors of the man. This
may be illustrated by what is similar in brute animals and
wild beasts; a brute is a brute and a wild beast is a wild
beast in all their actions. In all their actions a wolf is a
wolf, a tiger a tiger, a fox a fox, and a lion a lion; so, too,
with a sheep and a kid in all their actions. So, too, with
man; but he is such as he is in his internal man; if in this
he is like a wolf or fox, then all his work is internally wolfish
or fox-like, but the reverse if he is like a sheep or lamb.
But that he is such in all his works, is not manifest in his
external man, because this is changeable in its relation to
the internal; but still it is inwardly concealed in this. The
Lord says, A good man , out 0} the good treasure 0 f his heart ,
bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil man , out of the


No - 374] FAITH 507

evil treasure of his heart , bringeth forth that which is evil
(Luke vi. 45); and also, Every tree is known by its own fruit;
for of thorns men do not gather figs , nor of a bramble bush
gather they grapes (vi. 44). That in what proceeds from
him, one and all, the man is such as he is in his internal
man, is shown in him after death to the very life; since he
then lives an internal and no longer an external man. That
good is in man, and that every work which proceeds from
him is good, when the Lord, charity, and faith reside in his
internal man, will be demonstrated in this series: 1. Char -
ity is to will well y and good works are to do well from willing
well. 2. Charity and faith are only mental and perishable
things , unless they are fixed in works and coexist in them,
when possible. 3 . Charity alone does not produce good works ,
and still less faith alone , but charity and faith together . But
these will be considered one by one.

374. (1.) Charity is to will well , and good works are to
do well from willing well. Charity and works are distinct
from each other like will and action, and like the mind’s
affection and the body’s operation; consequently, also, like
the internal man and the external; and in relation to each
other these are like cause and effect, since the causes of all
things are formed in the internal man, and all effects are
produced from it in the external; therefore charity, because
k is of the internal man, is to will well; and the works, be-
cause they are of the external man, are to do well from willing
well. But still there is infinite diversity between the good
will of one and of others; for all that is done by any one in
favor of another is believed or appears to flow from good
will or benevolence; but still it is not known whether the
good deeds are from charity or not, still less whether they
are from genuine or spurious charity. This infinite diver-
sity between the good will of one and of others, originates
in the end, intention, and consequent purpose; these are
inwardly concealed in the will of performing good actions;
the quality of every one’s will is from them. And the will


508


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 374


searches the understanding for the means and modes of
arriving at its ends which are effects; and in the under-
standing it places itself in the light, that it may see not only
the reasons but also the occasions, when and how it is to
determine itself to acts, and thus produce its effects which
are works; and at the same time it brings itself in the un-
derstanding into the power of acting. From this it follows
that works are essentially of the will, formally of the under-
standing, and actually of the body. Thus charity comes
down into good works. This may be illustrated by com-
parison with a tree. Man himself, in all that belongs to
him, is like a tree. In the seed of the tree are concealed,
as it were, the end, intention and purpose of producing
fruits; in these the seed corresponds to the will with man, in
which are those three things, as stated above. Then the
seed from its interiors shoots up from the earth, clothes itself
with branches, twigs, and leaves, and so prepares for itself
means to the ends which are fruits; in these the tree corre-
sponds to the understanding in man. And finally, when the
time comes, and there is opportunity for reaching the use,
it bears blossoms, and yields fruits; in these the tree corre-
sponds to good works with man; and it is manifest that they
are essentially of the seed, formally of the twigs and leaves,
and actually of the wood of the tree. This may also be
illustrated by comparison with a temple. Man is a temple
of God according to Paul (i Cor. iii. 16, 17: 2 Cor. vi. 16:
Ephes. ii. 21, 22). As a temple of God, man has salvation
and eternal life for his end, intention, and purpose; in these
there is a correspondence with the will, in which these three
are. Afterwards he acquires doctrines of faith and charity
from parents, masters, and preachers, and, when he be-
comes capable of judging for himself, from the Word and
from doctrinal works; all of which are means to the end;
in these there is a correspondence with the understanding.
Finally a determination to uses takes place, according to the
doctrines as means; which is effected by acts of the body


No. 375]


FAITH


509


called good works. Thus the end, through mediate causes,
produces effects, which are essentially of the end, formally
of the doctrines of the church, and actually of uses. So man
becomes a temple of God.

375. (2 . ) Charity and faith are only mental and perishable ,
unlesss they are determined to works and coexist in them ,
when possible. Has not man a head and a body connected
by the neck? Is there not in the head a mind which wills
and thinks, and in the body power which performs and
executes? If therefore man were only to will well or were
to think from charity, and were not to do well and perform
uses from it, would he not be as a head only, and thus as a
mind only, which cannot subsist alone without a body?
Who does not see from this, that charity and faith are not
charity and faith while they are only in the head and its
mind and not in the body? For they are then like birds
flying in the air without any resting-place on the earth, and
also like birds ready to lay, but having no nests, in which
case the eggs would drop in the air or on the branch of some
tree, and would fall to the ground and be destroyed. There
is nothing in the mind to which something in the body does
not correspond; and that which corresponds may be called
its embodiment; therefore, while charity and faith are in the
mind only, they are not embodied in the man, and they may
be likened to the airy being called a spectre, such as Fame
was painted by the ancients, with a laurel around her head,
and in the hand a horn of plenty. Because they are such
spectres and still are able to think, there cannot but be with
such persons agitation by fantasies, which is also brought
about by reasonings from various kinds of sophistry, almost
as reeds of the marsh are shaken by the wind, beneath which
shells lie at the bottom, and frogs croak on the surface.
Who cannot see that such things take place when men merely
know some things from the Word about charity and faith,
and do not do them? Moreover the Lord says, Whosoever
heareth My words and doeth them , I will liken him unto a wise


510 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 375

man who built his house upon a rock . And every one that
heareth My words and doeth them not , shall be likened unto a
foolish man who built his house upon the sand , or upon the
ground without a foundation (Matt. vii. 24, 26: Luke vi. 47-
49). Charity and faith with their unreal ideas while man
does not practise them, may also be compared to butter-
flies in the air, upon which when seen the sparrow darts and
devours them. The Lord also says, A sower went forth to
sow ; and some fell upon the hard way , and the fowls came and
devoured them (Matt. xiii. 3, 4).

376. That charity and faith do not profit a man while
they inhere only in one hemisphere of his body, that is, in
his head, and are not grounded in works, is evident from a
thousand passages in the Word, of which I will adduce only
these: Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn
down and cast into the fire (Matt. vii. 19; also verses 20, 21).
He that received seed into the good ground , is he that heareth
the Word and attendeth , who also beareth fruit and bringeth
forth . When Jesus said these things He cried saying, Who
hath ears to hear let him hear (Matt. xiii. 23, 43). Jesus
said, My mother and My brethren are these who hear the Word
of God and do it (Luke viii. 21). We know that God heareth
not sinners , but if any man be a worshipper of God and doeth
His will , him He heareth (John ix. 31). If ye know these
things happy are ye if ye do them (xiii. 17). He that hath
My commandments and keepeth them , he it is that loveth Me,
and I will love him and will manifest Myself to him; and I
will come unto him and make an abode with him (xiv. 21, 23).
Herein is My Father glorified , that ye bear much fruit (xv. 8;
also verse 16). Not the hearers of the law are justified before
God , but the doers of the law (Rom. ii. 13: James i. 22).
God in the day of wrath and righteous judgment will render
to every man according to his deeds (Rom. ii. 5, 8). We must
all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ , that every one
may receive the things done in the body , according to that he
hath done , whether it be good or bad (2 Cor. v. 10). The Son


No. 377] FAITH 5 1 1

of Man shall come in the glory of His Father , and then He
shall reward every man according to his works (Matt. xvi. 27).
I heard a voice from heaven saying, Blessed are the dead who
die in the Lord from henceforth; yea , saith the Spirit , that they
may rest from their labors , and their works do follow them
(Apoc. xiii. 14). A book was opened, which is the Book 0}
Life; and the dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the book , all according to their works (xx. 12, 13).
Behold I come quickly, and My regard is with Me to give
every man according to his work (Apoc. xxii. 12). Jehovah,
whose eyes are open upon all the ways of men, to give every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings
(Jer. xxxii. 19). I will visit according to his ways , and 1 will
reward him his works (Hos. iv. 9). Jehovah dealeth with us
according to our ways, and according to our works (Zech. i. 6).
So in a thousand other passages. Hence it may be evident
that charity and faith are not charity and faith until they
are in works; and that if they are only in the expanse, above
works, or in mind, they are like images of a tabernacle or
temple in the air, which are nothing but a mirage, and vanish
of themselves; and are like pictures drawn on paper, which
moths consume; or like an abode on the housetop, where
there is no place to sleep, instead of in the house. From
this it may now be seen that charity and faith are perishable
while they are merely mental, unless they are determined
to works and coexist in them when this can be done.

377 * (3«) Charity alone does not produce good works, still
less faith alone, but charity and faith together. This is be-
cause charity without faith is not charity, and faith without
charity is not faith, as shown above (n. 355-358); therefore
there is no solitary charity or solitary faith; consequently it
cannot be said that charity by itself produces any good works,
or faith by itself. It is the same with them as with will and
understanding. There is no solitary will, and therefore it
does not produce any thing; nor is there a solitary under-
standing, nor does it produce any thing; but all production


512


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 377


is effected by both together, and it is effected by the under-
standing from the will. There is this similarity, because the
will is the abode of charity, and the understanding is the
abode of faith. Still less does faith alone produce good
works, it is said, because faith is truth, and its operation is
to make truths, and these illuminate charity and its exer-
cises. That truths illuminate, the Lord teaches by saying,
He that doeth truth cometh to the light , that his deeds may be
made manijest , since they are done in God (John iii. 21).
Therefore while man does good works according to truths,
he does them in light, that is, intelligently and wisely. The
conjunction of charity and faith is like the marriage of hus-
band and wife. All natural offspring are born from the hus-
band as father and from the wife as mother; so ail spiritual
offspring, which are knowledge of good and truth, are born
from charity as the father and from faith as the mother.
From this the generation of spiritual families may be known.
In the Word, also, husband and father in the sipritual sense
signify the good of charity, and wife and mother the truth of
faith. From this again it is manifest that neither charity
alone nor faith alone can produce good works, as neither a
husband alone nor a wife alone can produce offspring. # The
truths of faith not only illumine charity, but they also qualify
it, and moreover nourish it; therefore a man who has charity
but not truths of faith is like one walking in a garden by
night, who plucks fruits from the trees, not knowing whether
they are fruits of good or of evil use. Since truths of faith
not only illumine charity but also qualify it, as said before,
it follows that charity without truths of faith is like fruit
without juice, like a dried fig, and like a grape after the wine
has been pressed out of it. Since truths nourish faith, as
was also said, it follows that if charity is without truths of
faith it has no other nourishment than a man has from eating
burned bread, and at the same time drinking unclean water
from some stagnant pond.


No. 378]


FAITH


513 '


IX. There are true faith, spurious faith, and

HYPOCRITICAL FAITH.

378. The Christian Church began from the cradle to be
vexed and divided by schisms and heresies, and in course of
time to be tom and mutilated almost as we read of the man
who went down from Jerusalem to Jericho; he was sur-
rounded by robbers, who stripped him and beat him and
then left him half dead (Luke x. 30). Hence it has come to
pass as we read of that church in Daniel: At length upon the
bird of abominations there shall be desolation , and even to a
consummation and decree , shall it drop upon the devastation
(ix. 27). Also according to these words of the Lord: Then
shall the end come , when ye shall see the abomination of desola-
tion spoken of by Daniel the prophet (Matt. xxiv. 14, 15).
The lot of this church may be compared with that of a ship
laden with merchandise of the greatest value, which, as soon
as it left port, was driven about by storms; and soon after,
a wreck on the sea, it settles down, and its merchandise is in
part destroyed by the water, and partly scattered by the
fishes. That the Christian Church has been so vexed and
tom from its infancy is evident from ecclesiastical history,
which shows that this was done even in the time of the apos-
tles by Simon who was a Samaritan by birth, and in practice
a magician, of whom in the Acts of the Apostles (viii. 9-20);
and also by Hymeneus and Philetus, who are mentioned by
Paul in the second Epistle to Timothy; also by Nicholas,
from whose name the Nicolaitans were called, who are men-
tioned in the Apocalypse (ii. 6), and in the Acts (vi. 5); and
also by Cerinthus. After the times of the apostles, many
others arose, as the Marcionites, the Noetians, the Encratites,
the Cataphrygians, the Quarto-Decimans, the Alogians, the
Catharians, the Origenists or Adamites, the Sabellians, the
Samosatenes, the Manichaeans, the Meletians, and lastly
the Arians. After their times, also, whole battalions of


514 true CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 378

heresiarchs invaded the church, as Donatists, Photinians,
Acacians or Semiarians, Eunomians, Macedonians, Nestor-
ians, Predestinarians, Papists, Zwinglians, Anabaptists,
Schwenckfeldians, Synergists, Socinians, Antitrinitarians,
Quakers, Moravians, and many more. At last Luther,
Melancthon, and Calvin whose dogmas reign at this day
have prevailed over these. The causes of so many divisions
and separations in the church are principally three: First,
the Divine Trinity has not been understood; Second, there
has been no just acknowledgment of the Lord; Third, the
passion of the cross has been taken for redemption itself.
While there is ignorance about these three things, which yet
are the very essentials of faith from which the church has
being and is called a church, it cannot be but that all things
of the church should be drawn aside into a wrong and at
length into the opposite course, and when it is there, should
still believe that it is in true faith in God and in the faith of
all the truths of God. It is with them as with those who
bandage their eyes, and then fancy themselves walking in a
straight line, and yet step after step deviate from it, and at
length turn in the opposite direction where there is a hole
into which they fall. But the man of the church cannot
be led back from his wandering into the way of truth, except
by knowing what true faith is, what spurious faith, and what
hypocritical faith. It shall therefore be demonstrated, 1.
That the true faith is the one only faith , and that it is faith in
the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ , and is with those who
believe Him to be the Son of God , the God of heaven and earth
and one with the Father; 2. That spurious faith is all faith
that departs from the true , which is the one only faith , and that
it is with those who climb up some other way , and regard the
Lord not as God but only as a man; 3. That hypocritical
faith is no faith .

379. (1.) The true faith is the one only faith; it is faith
in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ , and is with those
who believe Him to be the Son of God , the God of heaven and


No. 379]


FAITH


515


earth y and one with the Father . The true faith is the only
one, because faith is truth; and truth cannot be broken or
cut in halves so that one part of it may look to the left and
another to the right, and still remain its own truth. Faith
in a general sense consists of innumerable truths, for it is
the aggregate of them; but those innumerable truths make
as it were one body, and in that body the truths make its
members; some make the members which depend on the
breast, as the arms and hands; some make those which
depend on the loins, as the feet and soles of the feet. But
interior truths make the head; and the truths directly pro-
ceeding from these, make the sensories which are in the face.
Interior truths make the head, because when interior is said,
higher is also meant; for in the spiritual world all interior
things are also higher; it is so with the three heavens there.
Of this body and of all its members, the Lord God the
Saviour is the life and soul; therefore Paul called the church
the Body of Christ; and the men of the church, according to
the states of charity and faith in them, make its members.
That the true faith is the one only faith, Paul also teaches
thus: There is one body and one spirit , one Lordy one faith ,
one baptism y one God. He gave the work of the ministry for
the edifying of the body of Christy till we all come into the unity
of the faith , and the knowledge of the Son of God , and into a
life perfected to the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ
(Ephes. iv. 4-6, 12, 13). That the true faith, which is the
one only faith, is in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ,
was fully shown above (n. 337-339). But the true faith is
with those who believe the Lord to be the Son of God, be-
cause they believe also that He is God; and faith is not faith
unless it is in God. That this element of faith is primary in
all the truths which enter into and form faith, is evident from
the words of the Lord to Peter when he said, Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God: Blessed art thoUy Simon.
I say unto thee y upon this Rock I will build My churchy and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it (Matt. xvi. 16, 17).


516


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 379


By Rock, here as elsewhere in the Word, the Lord is meant
as to Divine Truth; and also Divine truth from the Lord.
That this truth is the primary, and like a diadem upon the
head and a sceptre in the hand of the body of Christ, is evi-
dent from the Lord’s saying that upon that rock He would
build His church, and the gates of hell should not prevail
against it. That this primary of faith is such, is also evident
from these words in John: Whosoever shall confess that
Jesus is the Son of God , God dwelleth in him and he in God
(i Epistle iv. 15). Beside this characteristic of their being
in the true faith, which is the one only faith, there is also
another, which is that they believe the Lord to be the God of
heaven and earth. This follows from the former, that He
is the Son of God, and from the statements that in Him is all
the fulness of the Godhead (Col. ii. 9) : that He is the God
of heaven and earth (Matt, xxviii. 18): that all things of the
Father are His (John iii. 35; xvi. 15). A third sign that
they who believe in the Lord are inwardly in faith in Him,
thus in the true faith which is the only one, is that they be-
lieve the Lord to be one with the Father. That He is one
with God the Father, and that He is the Father Himself in
the Human, was fully shown in the chapter concerning the
Lord and Redemption, and is very evident from the words
of the Lord Himself, that the Father and He are one (John
x. 30) : that the Father is in Him, and He in the Father (x. 38;
xiv. 10, 11): that He said to the disciples, Henceforth ye
know the Father and have seen Him: also that He looked on
Philip and said, that he then saw and knew the Father
(John xiv. 7-10). These three are characteristic evidences
that men are in faith in the Lord, thus in the true which is
the only faith, because not all who go to the Lord are in faith
in Him; for true faith is internal, and at the same time ex-
ternal. Those who have these three precious characteris-
tics of faith are in both the internals of that faith and its ex-
ternals; thus it is not only a treasure in their heart, but also
a jewel in their mouth. It is otherwise with those who do


No. 380]


FAITH


517


not acknowledge the Lord as the God of heaven and earth,
and as one with the Father. They look inwardly to other
Gods who have like power; but they acknowledge that this
is to be exercised by the Son, either as vicar, or as one who
on account of redemption has deserved to reign over those
whom He has redeemed. But these break the true faith
in pieces by the division of the unity of God; and when this
has been done, there is faith no longer, but only the ghost of
it; which seen naturally appears like some image of it, but
seen spiritually it becomes a chimera. Who can deny
that the true faith is in one God who is the God of heaven
and earth, consequently faith in God the Father in the hu-
man form, thus in the Lord ? These three marks, evidences
and signs that faith in the Lord is faith itself, are like touch-
stones by which gold and silver are known. They are also
like stones by the wayside, or hands on the guide-posts,
pointing out the way to the temple where the one and true
God is worshipped. And they are like lights on rocks in the
sea, by which those who are sailing at night know where
they are, and whither to direct the ships. The first char-
acteristic of faith, which is, that the Lord is the Son of the
living God, is like the morning star to all who enter His
church.

380. (2.) Spurious faith is all faith that departs from the
true , which is the one only faith; and it is with those who
climb up some other way , and regard the Lord not as God but
only as a man . That spurious faith is all faith that departs
from the true, which is the only one, is self-evident; for since
one only is true, it follows that that which departs from it is
not true. All the good and truth of the church are propa-
gated from the marriage of the Lord and the church; thus
all that is essentially charity and essentially faith is from that
marriage; but on the other hand, all of charity and faith
not from that marriage, is not from legitimate but from
illegitimate nuptials; thus either from a couch or marriage
that is polygamous, or from adultery. Every faith which


5 18 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 380

acknowledges the Lord, but adopts the falsities of heresies,
is from polygamous marriage; and the faith which acknowl-
edges three Lords of one church is from adultery; for this
is either like a harlot, or like a woman who is married to one
man and consorts with two others, and when she lies with
them calls the one she chooses her husband. Such faith is
therefore called spurious. These in many places the Lord
calls adulterers; and He also means these in John, by
thieves and robbers: Verily I say unto you , he that entereth
not by the Door into the sheepfold , but climbeth up some other
way , the same is a thief and a robber. I am the Door; by
Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved (x. 1, 9). To enter
into the sheepfold is to enter into the church, and likewise
into heaven; it is into heaven also, because the church and
heaven make one, and nothing makes heaven but the church
in it; therefore, as the Lord is the Bridegroom and Husband
of the church, so also He is the Bridegroom and Husband of
heaven. Whether a faith is a legitimate or a spurious off-
spring may be tested and known by the three signs men-
tioned above, namely, the acknowledgment of the Lord as
the Son of God, the acknowledgment of Him as the God of
heaven and earth, and the acknowldegment that He is one
with the Father. So far, therefore, as faith departs from
these its essentials, it is spurious. Faith is spurious and at
the same time adulterous with those who regard the Lord
not as God, but only as man. That this is so, is very mani-
fest from the two abominable heresies, the Arian and the
Socinian, which have been anathematized in the Christian
Church, and excommunicated from it; and this, because
they deny the Lord’s Divinity, and climb up some other
way. But I fear that those abominations lie concealed at
this day in the general spirit of the men of the church. It is
remarkable that the more one deems himself superior to
others in learning and judgment, the more prone he is to
embrace and appropriate to himself ideas about the Lord
that He is a man and not God, and that because He is a


No. 380]


FAITH


519


man He cannot be God; and one who appropriates to him-
self these ideas, introduces himself into companionship with
the Arians and Socinians who are in the spiritual world in
hell. Such is the general spirit of the men of the church at
this day, because there is an associate spirit with every man ;
for man without this cannot think analytically, rationally,
and spiritually, and thus would not be a man but a brute;
and every man attaches to himself a spirit similar to the
affection of his will, and to the perception of his understand-
ing that comes from this. To the man who introduces him-
self into good affections by means of truths from the Word
and by life according to them, an angel from heaven is joined;
while to him who introduces himself into evil affections by
confirmations of falsities and by evil life, a spirit from hell
joins himself; and when the spirit is joined, man enters
more and more as it were into fraternity with satans, and
then confirms himself more and more in falsities contrary
to the truths of the Word, and in the Arian and the Socinian
abomination against the Lord. This is because no satan
can bear to hear any truth from the Word, or to have Jesus
named; or if they hear them, they become like furies, and
run hither and thither, and blaspheme. And then if light
from heaven flows in, they throw themselves headlong into
caverns and into their own darkness, in which there is light
to them as to birds of night in the dark, and such as cats have
in cellars when hunting for mice. All become such after
death who in heart and faith deny the Divinity of the Lord
and the holiness of the Word; their internal man is such,
however the external may mimic and counterfeit the Chris-
tian. I know that this is so, for I have seen and heard
it. The mouth of all who honor the Lord as Redeemer and
Saviour with the mouth and the lips only, while in heart and
spirit they look upon Him as a mere man, when they speak
of these things and teach them, is like a bag of honey, but
their heart is like a bag of gall; their words are like sweet
cakes, but their thoughts are like emulsions of monk’s-hood;


520


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 380


and they are like rolls of pastry containing serpents. If
such are priests, they are like pirates on the sea, who hang
out the flag of a kingdom at peace, but when a ship ap-
proaches and hails them as friends, they raise the pirates'
flag in place of the other, and capture the ship and carry
its crew into captivity. They are also like serpents of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil that approach like
angels of light, holding on the hand apples from that tree
painted with golden colors, as if plucked from the tree of
life; and they offer them and say, God doth know that in the
day ye eat thereof your eyes shall be opened , and ye shall be as
God , knowing good and evil (Gen. iii. 5). And when they
have eaten, they follow the serpent into the lower world,
and there they dwell together. The satans who have eaten
of the apples of Arius and of Socinus are round about that
world. They are meant also by him who came in to the
marriage not having on a wedding garment; who was cast
into outer darkness (Matt. xxii. 11-13). The wedding gar-
ment is faith in the Lord as the Son of God, the God of
heaven and earth, and one with the Father. They who
honor the Lord with the mouth and lips only, but in heart
and spirit look upon Him as a mere man, if they open their
thoughts and persuade others, are spiritual murderers, and
the worst of them are spiritual cannibals; for man has life
from love to the Lord and faith in Him; but if this essential
element of faith and love, that the Lord is God-Man and
Man-God, is taken away, a man's life becomes death; so,
therefore, the man is killed and devoured as a lamb by a
wolf.

381. (3.) Hypocritical faith is no faith . Man becomes
a hypocrite when he thinks much about himself, and places
himself before others; for so he directs the thoughts and
affections of his mind to his body, pours them into it, and
joins them with its senses. He thus becomes a natural,
sensual, and corporeal man; and then his mind cannot be
withdrawn from the flesh with which it coheres, cannot be


No. 381] FAITH 5 21

elevated to God, and cannot see any thing of God in the
light of heaven, that is, any thing spiritual; and because he
is carnal, the spiritual things which enter, entering the under-
standing through the hearing, seem to him only like spectres,
or like down floating in the air, yes, like flies about the head
of a running and sweating horse; therefore in heart he ridi-
cules them; for it is known that the natural man regards
what is of the spirit, or spiritual things, as foolishness.
Among natural men the hypocrite is the lowest natural, for
he is sensual, because his mind is closely bound to the senses
of his body, and therefore he does not love to see any thing
but what his senses suggest; and the senses, because they
are in nature, compel the mind to think from nature of every
thing, and so of all that pertains to faith. If this hypocrite
becomes a preacher, he retains in memory such things as
were said of faith, in his childhood and youth; but because
there is nothing spiritual, but only what is natural inwardly
in those things, when he brings them out before an assembly,
they are only soulless words; their sounding as if they were
animate comes from the enjoyments of the love of self and
the world; from these they ring out according to the elo-
quence of the speaker, and soothe the ear almost like the
harmony of song. When a hypocritical preacher returns
home after the sermon, he laughs at every thing as to faith
and at every thing from the Word which he advanced to the
congregation; and perhaps says to himself, “I cast a net
into the lake, and have caught flat-fish and shell-fish”; for
such all who are in true faith seem to his fancy. A hypo-
crite is like a sculptured image having a double head, one
within another; the inner head is connected with the trunk
or body; and the outer, which can rotate about the other,
is painted in front with appropriate colors, like a human
face, not unlike the heads of wood that are displayed at the
shops of hair-dressers. He is also like a boat which the
sailor, by a proper adjustment of the sail, can direct at pleas-
ure, either with or against the wind; his favoring every one


522 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 381

who gives him indulgence in the enjoyments of the flesh and
its senses, is his management of the sail. Ministers who are
hypocrites are perfect comedians, mimics, and players, who
can personate kings, dukes, primates, and bishops; and as
soon as they put off their theatrical robes, visit brothels and
consort with harlots. They are also like doors hung on a
round hinge, which can open either way; such is their mind,
for it can be opened toward hell and toward heaven, and
when opened to one it is closed to the other; for, what is
wonderful, when they minister in holy things and teach
from the Word, they know not but that they believe them,
for the door toward hell is then closed; but as soon as they
return home, they believe nothing, for the door toward
heaven is then shut. With consummate hypocrites there is
an intestine enmity against truly spiritual men, for it is like
that of satans against angels of heaven. They are not aware
of this while they live in the world, but it manifests itself
after death, when their external, by which they counter-
feited the spiritual man, has been taken away; for it is their
internal man which is such a satan. But I will tell how
spiritual hypocrites who are such as walk in sheep’s clothing,
but inwardly are ravening wolves, Matt. vii. 15, appear to
the angels of heaven; they appear like soothsayers walking
on the palms of their hands and praying; who with the
mouth and from the heart cry to demons and kiss them, but
they clap their shoes in the air, and so make sound to God.
But when they stand on thfir feet, their eyes look like those
of a leopard, they step like wolves, as to the mouth they are
like the fox, as to the teeth like crocodiles, and as to faith
like vultures.

X. There is no faith with the evil,

382. All who deny that the world was created by God,
and so deny God, are evil; for they are atheistic naturalists.
They are all evil, because all good which is good not only


No. 383]


FAITH


523


naturally but also spiritually is from God; therefore they
who deny God are not willing, and therefore are not able,
to receive good from any other source than from their self-
life, and man’s self is the lust of his flesh; and whatever pro-
ceeds from this is spiritually evil, however good it seems
naturally. Such persons are theoretically evil; but they are
practically evil who pay no regard to the Divine command-
ments, which are presented in sum in the Decalogue, and
live like outlaws. These also deny God in heart, though
many of them confess Him with the mouth, because God and
His commandments make one; the ten commandments of
the Decalogue were therefore called Jehovah there (Num.
x. 35 j 36: Ps. cxxxii. 7, 8). But to make it more manifest
that the evil have no faith, a conclusion will be made from
these two propositions: 1. The evil have no faith because
evil is 0} hell, and faith is of heaven . 2. All those in Christen-

dom have no faith who reject the Lord and the W or d y although
they live morally , and speak y teach , and write rationally , even
about faith. But of these separately.

383. (1.) The evil have no faith , because evil is of hell ,
and faith is of heaven. Evil is of hell, hecause all evil is from
hell; faith is of heaven, because all the truth which is of
faith is from heaven. As long as man lives in the world, he
is kept and he walks in the middle between heaven and hell,
and is there in spiritual equilibrium, which is his free-will.
Hell is under his feet, and heaven is above his head; and
whatever ascends from hell is evil and false, but whatever
comes down from heaven is good and true. Man being in
the middle between those two opposites, and at the same
time in spiritual equilibrium, can choose, adopt, and appro-
priate to himself either the one or the other, from freedom.
If he chooses the evil and false, he joins himself with hell;
if the good and true, he joins himself with heaven. It is
manifest from this not only that evil is of hell and faith of
heaven, but also that the two cannot be together in the same
suhiect or man. For if they were together, the man would


5^4 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 383

be drawn in two directions, as if two ropes were tied around
him and he were drawn upward by one and downward by
the other, and thus he would become as one suspended in
the air. And it would be as if he were to fly like a blackbird,
now upward and now downward; and when flying upward,
should adore God, and when downward, the devil. Every
one sees that this is profane. That no man can serve two
masters, but hates one and loves the other, the Lord teaches
in Matthew (vi. 24). That where evil is there is no faith,
may be illustrated by various comparisons, as by these:
Evil is like fire, infernal fire is nothing but the love of evil, and
it consumes faith like stubble, reducing it and all that belongs
to it to ashes. Evil dwells in darkness, and faith in light;
and evil by falsities extinguishes faith, as darkness extin-
guishes light. Evil is black like ink, and faith is white like
snow and like water; and evil blackens faith, as ink blackens
snow or water. Moreover, evil and the truth of faith cannot
be joined, except as stench with aroma, as urine with wine
of good flavor; and they cannot be together except as a noi-
some carcass in the same bed with a living man; and they
cannot dwell together any more than a wolf can dwell in a
sheepfold, a hawk in a dovecote, and a fox in a hencoop.

384. (2.) All those in Christendom have no faith who re-
fect the Lord and the Word , though they live morally , and
speak , teach , and write rationally , even about faith . This
follows as a conclusion from all that precedes; for it has
been shown that the true and only faith is in the Lord and
from the Lord, and that faith which is not in Him and from
Him is not spiritual but natural; and merely natural faith
has not the essence of faith in it. Moreover, faith is from
the Word; it is from no other source, because the Word
is from the Lord, and consequently the Lord Himself is in
the Word. He therefore says that He is the Word (John i.
1, 2). From this it follows that they who reject the Word
reject the Lord also, for these cohere as one; and further
that they who reject either the one or the other also reject the


No. 384]


FAITH


525


church, because the church is from the Lord through the
Word; furthermore, that they who reject the church are
out of heaven, for the church gives introduction into heaven;
and they who are out of heaven are among the condemned,
and these have no faith. They who reject the Lord and the
Word have no faith, though they live morally, and speak,
teach, and write rationally even about faith, because their
moral life is not spiritual but natural, and their rational
mind also is not spiritual but natural; and merely natural
morality and rationality are in themselves dead; therefore,
to them as dead there is no faith. A man who is merely
natural and dead as to faith, can indeed speak and teach
about faith, charity, and God, but not from faith, charity,
and God. That they alone have faith who believe in the
Lord, and that others have not faith, is evident from these
passages: He that believeth on the Son is not condemned , but
he that believeth not the Son is condemned already , because he
hath not believed in the name of the only-begotten Son of God
(John iii. 18). He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting
life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life: but
the wrath 0} God abideth on him (iii. .36). Jesus said that
when the Spirit of truth is come, it will reprove the world of
sin because they believe not on Me (xvi. 8, 9) ; and to the Jews
He said, If ye believe not that I am, ye shall die in your sins
(viii. 24). Therefore David says, I will declare the decree ;
Jehovah hath said, Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten
Thee. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and ye perish in the
way . Blessed are all they that put their trust in Him (Ps.
ii. 7, 12). That in the consummation of the age, which is
the last time of the church, there would be no faith, because
none in the Lord as the Son of God, the God of heaven and
earth, and one with the Father, the Lord foretells in the
Evangelists, saying that there would be the abomination of
desolation, and tribulation such as was not, nor ever shall
be. Also that the sun will be darkened, and the moon will
not give her light, and the stars will fall from heaven (Matt.


526


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 384


xxiv. 15, 2i t 29). And in the Apocalypse, that Satan, being
loosed from his prison, will go forth to deceive the nations
which are in the four corners of the earth, whose number is
as the sand of the sea (xx. 7, 8). And because the Lord
foresaw this, He also said, Nevertheless , when the Son of
Man cometh , shall He find faith on the earth? (Luke xviii. 8.)

385. To the above these Relations will be joined. First:
An angel once said to me, “If you wish to see clearly what
faith and charity are, and thus what faith separate from
charity is, and what faith joined with charity, I will show it
so that it shall be seen.” I answered, “Show it.” And he
said, “ Instead of faith and charity, think of light and heat,
and you will see clearly. Faith in its essence is truth which
is of wisdom; and charity in its essence is the affection of
love; and the truth of wisdom in heaven is light, and the
affection of love in heaven is heat. The light and heat in
which angels are, are nothing else essentially. From this
you can clearly see what are faith separate from charity,
and faith joined with charity. Faith separate from char-
ity is like light in winter, and faith joined with charity is
like light in spring. .Wintry light, which is light separated
from heat, because it is joined with cold, strips the trees
wholly of their leaves, kills the grass, hardens the earth, and
freezes the waters; but vernal light, which is light joined
with heat, quickens the trees to put forth, first leaves, then
blossoms, and finally fruits; it opens and softens the earth,
that it may produce grasses, herbs, flowers, and shrubs; it
also melts the ice, that waters may flow from springs. It is
wholly similar with faith and charity. Faith separated
from charity deadens all things, and faith joined with charity
quickens all things. This quickening and deadening may
be seen to the life in our spiritual world, because here faith
is light, and charity is heat; for where faith is joined with
charity, there are paradisal gardens, flower-beds, and grass-
plots, in their pleasantness according to the conjunction;
but where faith is separated from charity, there is not even


No. 385]


FAITH


527


grass; and where it is green, this is from briers and thorns.”
Not far from us at this time were some clergymen whom
the angel called justifiers and sanctifiers of men by faith
alone, and also men of mystery. We said these same things
to hem, and so proved them that they could see that it was
so; and when we asked, “Is it not so?” they turned them-
selves away and said, “We did not hear.” But we cried
out to them, saying, “Hear now, then.” But they then put
both hands over their ears, and shouted, “We do not wish
to hear.”

After hearing this, I talked with the angel about solitary
faith, and said that by living experience it was given me to
know that that faith is like the light of winter. And I told
him that for several years spirits with faith of various kinds
had passed by me, and that whenever those who separated
faith from charity came near, such coldness seized my feet
and afterward the loins, and at length my breast, that I
hardly knew but that all the vitality of my body was about
to become extinct, which would also have come to pass if the
Lord had not driven away those spirits and liberated me.
To me it seemed wonderful that those spirits in themselves
had no sense of cold; this they confessed. I therefore com-
pared them to fishes under ice, which also do not feel cold,
since their life, and hence their nature, is in itself cold. I
then perceived that this cold emanated from the fatuous
light of their faith; like what takes place in swampy and
sulphurous places in midwinter after sunset; this fatuous
and cold light is often seen by travellers. Such spirits may
be compared to icebergs tom from their places in northern
regions, which are carried about on the ocean; of which I
have heard it said, that when they come near a ship, all who
are on board begin to shiver with cold. Therefore com-
panies of those who are in faith separated from charity, may
be likened to those icebergs, and, if you please, they may also
be called so. It is known from the Word that faith without
charity is dead; but I will tell whence is its death. Its death


528


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 385


is from cold; from which that faith expires like a bird in a
severe winter; first it dies as to its power to see, then also
as to its power to fly, and at length as to power to breathe;
and then it falls headlong from the branch into the snow, and
is buried there.

386. Second Relation. One morning, awaking from
sleep, I saw two angels descending from heaven, one from
the southern part of heaven and one from the eastern part,
both in chariots, to which white horses were harnessed.
The chariot in which the angel from the south heaven was
borne, shone like silver; and the chariot that bore the angel
from the east, shone like gold: and the reins which they held
in their hands flashed as from the flamy light of dawn. So
those two angels appeared to me in the distance; but when
they came near they did not appear in chariots, but in angelic
form, which is the human. He who came from the east in
heaven was in a shining purple garment, and he who came
from the south in heaven in a garment of hycinthine blue.
When they were in the regions beneath the heavens, they
ran to meet each other, as if emulous as to which should be
first, and embraced and kissed each other. I heard that
these two angels, while they lived in the world, were joined
in interior friendship; but now one was in the eastern heaven,
and the other in the southern. In the eastern heaven are
they who are in love from the Lord, but in the southern
heaven they who are in wisdom from the Lord. When they
had conversed awhile concerning the magnificent things in
their heavens, this arose in their discourse, Whether heaven
in its essence is love or wisdom. They at once agreed that
the one is of the other, but questioned which is the original.
The angel who was from the heaven of wisdom asked the
other what is love; and he answered that love, having its
origin from the Lord as a sun, is the heat of the life of angels
and men, thus the esse of their life; and that the derivations
of love are called affections; and that by these, perceptions
are produced, and so thoughts; from which it flows that


No. 386]


FAITH


S29


wisdom in its origin is love; consequently that thought in its
origin is the affection of that love; and that it may be seen
from the derivations viewed in their order that thought is
nothing but the form of affection; and that this is not known,
because thoughts are in light, but affections in heat; and
that we therefore reflect upon thoughts, but not upon affec-
tions. That thought is nothing but the form of the affec-
tion of some love, may also be illustrated by speech, as this
is nothing but the form of sound. It is similar, also, because
sound corresponds to affection, and speech to thought; there-
fore affection makes sound, and thought speaks. This may
also be made quite clear if we say, Take sound away from
speech, and is there left any thing of speech? Likewise,
take away affection from thought, and is any thing of thought
left? From this it is now manifest that love is the all of
wisdom; consequently, that the essence of the heavens is
love, and their existence wisdom; or, what is the same, that
the heavens are from the Divine love, and that they exist
from the Divine love by the Divine wisdom; and therefore,
as said before, the one is of the other.

There was then with me a novitiate spirit, who, on hearing
this, inquired whether it was the same with charity and
faith, because charity is of affection and faith is of the
thought. And the angel replied, “It is altogether similar;
faith is nothing but the form of charity, just as speech is the
form of sound. Faith is also formed from charity, as speech
from sound. We also know the mode of the formation in
heaven, but there is not time to explain it here.” He added,
“ By faith, I mean spiritual faith, in which are life and spirit
solely from the Lord through charity; for charity is spiritual,
and through charity faith is so. Therefore faith without
charity is merely natural, and this faith is dead; it joins
itself also with merely natural affection, which is nothing but
lust.” The angels spoke of these things spiritually; and
spiritual speech embraces thousands of things which natural
speech cannot express, and what is wonderful, which can-


S3 0


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 386


not even fall into the ideas of natural thought. After this
conversation the angels departed; and as they withdrew,
each to his own heaven, stars appeared around their heads;
and when they were at a distance from me, they again ap-
peared in chariots as before.

387. Third Relation. After these two angels were out of
sight, I saw on the right a garden, in which were olive-trees,
fig-trees, laurels, and palms, arranged in order according to
correspondence. I looked thither, and among the trees
I saw angels and spirits walking and conversing. And then
in return one angelic spirit looked at me. They are called
angelic spirits who are preparing in the world of spirits for
heaven. That spirit came to me from the garden, and said,
“Will you come with me into our paradise? You shall
hear and see wonderful things. 55 And I went with him.
And he then said to me, “ These whom you see (for there
were many others) are all in the love of truth, and hence are
in the light of wisdom. There is also a palace here, which
we call the Temple of Wisdom; but no one can see it who
believes himself to be very wise, still less he who believes
himself to be wise enough, and less still he who believes him-
self to be wise from himself. This is because such are not
in the reception of the light of heaven from the love of gen-
uine wisdom. It is genuine wisdom for man to see from
the light of heaven that what he knows, understands, and
is wise in, is as little compared with what he does not know
and understand and in which he is not wise, as a drop to the
ocean; and so, almost nothing. Every one who is in this
paradisal garden, and acknowledges from perception and
sight in himself that he has comparatively so little wisdom,
sees that Temple of Wisdom; for interior light in a man 5 s
mind enables him to see it, but not exterior light without the
interior. 5,

Now as I have often thought this, and from knowledge,
and then from perception, and at last from interior light,
have acknowledged that man has so little wisdom, behold


No 387]


FAITH


S3i


it was granted me to see that temple. As to form it was
wonderful. It was raised high above the ground, quad-
rangular, the walls of crystal, the roof of translucent jasper
elegantly arched, the substructure of various precious stones.
There were steps of polished alabaster for ascent into it. At
the sides of the steps figures of lions with their whelps ap-
peared. And I then asked whether it was allowable to
enter, and was told that it was. I therefore ascended; and
as I entered, I saw as it were cherubs flying under the roof,
but soon vanishing. The floor on which we walked was of
cedar; and the whole temple, from the transparency of the
roof and walls, was built for a form of light.

The angelic spirit entered with me, to whom I related
what I heard from the two angels as to love and wisdom,
also as to charity and faith. And then he asked, “Did they
not also speak of a third ?” I said, “What third ?” He
replied, “There is the good of use. Love and wisdom
without the good of use are nothing; they are ideal entities
only, nor do they become real before they are in use; for
love, wisdom, and use are three things which cannot be
separated; if separated, no one of them is any thing. Love
is nothing without wisdom, but in wisdom it is formed for
something; this something for which it is formed, is use.
Therefore, when love through wisdom is in use, then it
really is, because it exists actually. They are wholly like
end, cause, and effect. The end is nothing, unless through
the cause it is in the effect. If one of the three is dissolved,
the whole is dissolved and becomes as nothing. It is similar
with charity, faith, and works. Charity without faith is
nothing, nor is faith without charity; nor are charity and
faith without works: but in works they are something, the
quality of which is according to the use of the works. It is
similar with affection, thought, and operation; and similar
also with will, understanding, and action; for will without
understanding is like the eye without sight; and the two
without action are like mind without body. That it is so,


532


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 387


may be clearly seen in this temple, because the light in which
we are here is a light that enlightens the mind's interiors.
Geometry also teaches that there is nothing complete and
perfect unless there is a trine, for a line is nothing unless it
becomes a surface, nor is a surface any thing unless it be-
comes a solid; therefore the one must be produced into
another that they may exist, and they co-exist in the third.
As in this, so is it also in all created things and in each one
singly; they are made finite in their third. Now it is from
this that three in the Word signifies complete, and wholly.
Since this is so, I could not but wonder, that some profess
faith alone, some charity alone, and some works alone:
when yet the one without a second, and two together without
the third, are nothing."

But then I asked, “ Cannot a man have charity and faith,
and still not have works? Cannot a man have a preference
for something, and be in thought about it, and yet not be
in the performance of it?" And the angel answered me,
“He cannot except ideally, not really; he must still be in the
endeavor or will to operate; and will or endeavor is in itself
act, because it is a continual effort to act, which becomes an
act in externals when the conclusion is reached. On this
account, endeavor and will, as an internal act, are accepted
by every wise man, because accepted by God, altogether as
an external act, provided it is not lacking when opportunity
is given.”

388. Fourth Relation. I have spoken with some who are
meant in the Apocalypse by the dragon, and one of them
said, “ Come with me, and I will show you the enjoyments
of our eyes and hearts.” And he led me through a dark
forest and upon a hill from which I could behold the enjoy-
ments of the dragons. And I saw an ampitheatre built in
the form of a circus, with benches around constructed on an
upward slant, upon which sat the spectators. They who
sat upon the lowest benches appeared to me at a distance like
satyrs and priapi, some with slight covering for their shame,


NO. 388]


FAITH


533


and some naked without any. On the benches above these
sat whoremongers and harlots; such they appeared to me
from their gestures. And the dragon then said to me,
“Now you will see our sport.” And I saw as it were bul-
locks, rams, sheep, kids, and lambs let into the area of the
circus; and after these were let in, a gate was opened, and
as it were young lions, panthers, tigers, and wolves rushed
in and attacked the flock with fury, and tore and slaughtered
them. But after that carnage, the satyrs scattered sand
over the place of the slaughter. Then the dragon said to
me, “ These are our sports which delight our minds.” And
I answered, “Away, demon; after a short time you will see
this amphitheatre converted into a lake of fire and brim-
stone.” At this he laughed and went away.

And afterward I was thinking to myself why such things
are permitted by the Lord; and I received the answer in my
heart, that they are permitted so long as they are in the world
of spirits; but after their time in that world has passed, such
theatrical scenes are turned into such as are direful and
infernal. All those things that were seen were induced by
the dragon by means of fantasies; so there were no bullocks,
rams, sheep, kids, and lambs; but they made the genuine
goods and truths of the church, which they hated, appear
so. The lions, panthers, tigers, and wolves, were appear-
ances of lusts in those who seemed like satyrs and priapi.
Those with no covering for their shame, were they who be-
lieve that evils do not appear before God, and those with
a covering were they who believed that they do appear, but
do not condemn, provided men are in faith. The whore-
mongers and harlots were falsifiers of the truths of the Word,
for whoredom signifies falsification of the truth. In the
spiritual world all things in the distance appear according
to correspondences; which, when they appear in forms, are
called representations of spiritual things in objects similar
to those that are natural.

Afterward I saw them going out of the forest; the dragon


534


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 388


in the midst of the satyrs and priapi, and waiters and scul-
lions, who were the whoremongers and harlots, behind them.
The company was increased on the way, and then I heard
what they were saying to each other. They said that they
saw a flock of sheep with lambs in a meadow, and that this
was a sign that one of the cities of Jerusalem was near, where
charity is the chief thing. And they said, “Let us go and
take that city, and cast out the inhabitants, and plunder
their goods.” They approached the city, but there was a
wall around it, and angel guards were upon the wall. And
then they said, “Let us take it by stratagem; let us send
some one expert in mumbling, who can make black white
and white black, and can color the truth of any matter.”
And one was found, skilled in metaphysical art, who could
change ideas of things into ideas of terms, and conceal the
things themselves under formulas, and so fly away like a
hawk with the prey beneath his wings. He was instructed
how he should speak with the citizens, that they were in
fellowship in religion, and were to be admitted.

Going up to the gate he knocked; and when it was opened,
he said that he wished to speak with the wisest man of the
city. And he entered, and was conducted to a certain one
whom he addressed as follows: “My brethren are outside
of the city, and beg to be received. They are in fellowship
with you in religion. With you we make faith and charity
the two essentials of religion; the only difference is that you
say that charity is the primary and that faith is from it,
while we say that faith is the primary and that charity is
from it. What matters it whether the one or the other is
called the primary, when both are believed?” The wise
man of the city answered, “Let us not talk about this by
ourselves, but in the presence of others who may be arbiters
and judges; otherwise, no decision is reached.” And some
were then sent for, to whom the dragonist addressed the
same words as before. And the wise man of the city then
answered, “You have said that it is the same thing whether


No. 388]


FAITH


535


charity or faith is taken as the primary of the church, pro-
vided it is agreed that both of them make the church and its
religion ; and yet there is a difference like that between prior
and posterior, between cause and effect, principal and instru-
mental, essential and formal. I say such things because I
perceive that you are expert in metaphysical art, which art
we call mumbling, and some call it incantation: but to
leave those terms, the difference is as between what is above
and what is beneath; yes, if you are willing to believe it,
the difference is like that between the minds of those who
dwell in the higher and of those who dwell in the lower parts
of this world; for what which is the primary makes the head
and the breast, and that which is from it makes the feet and
their soles. But let us first agree as to what charity and
faith are; that charity is the affection of the love of doing
good to the neighbor for the sake of God, salvation, and
eternal life; and that faith ss thought from trust, respecting
God, salvation, and eternal life.”

And the emissary said, “I grant that this is faith; and I
grant also that charity is that affection, for the sake of God,
because for the sake of His command, not, however, for the
sake of salvation and eternal life.” After this agreement
and disagreement, the wise man of the city said, “Is not
affection or loving primary? is not thought from it?” But
he received answer, “You cannot deny it. Does not a man
think from some love ? Take away love, can he think any
thing? It is precisely as if you should take away sound
from speech. If you were to take away sound, could you
speak any thing? Sound also is of the affection from some
love, and speech is of the thought ; for love gives sound, and
thought speaks. It is also like flame and light; if you take
away flame, does not light perish ? It is similar with charity
because this is of love, and with faith because this is of
thought. Can you not thus comprehend that the primary
is the all in the secondary, altogether as with flame and
light ? From which it is manifest, that if you do not make


536


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 388


that the primary which is primary, you are not in the other.
Therefore if you in the first place put faith, which is in the
second, you will appear in heaven only as an inverted man,
with his feet upward and head downward; or like a mounte-
bank, who, with body upside down, walks on the palms of
his hands. When you appear such in heaven, what then
are your good works, which are charity in act, but such as
that mountebank would do with his feet, because he cannot
do them with his hands ? Hence your charity is natural and
not spiritual, because it is inverted.”

The emissary understood this; for every devil can under-
stand what is true when he hears it, but he cannot retain it,
because when the affection of evil which in itself is the lust
of the flesh returns, it casts out the thought of truth. And
afterward the wise man of the city showed in many ways
what is the quality of faith when accepted as the primary,
that it is merely natural and is persuasion without spiritual
life; consequently, that it is not faith. And he added, “I
can almost say that in your faith there is no more that is
spiritual than in thought about the kingdom of the Mogul,
the diamond mine there, and of the treasure and court of
that emperor.” Hearing this the dragonist went away
angry, and reported to his companions outside of the city.
And when they heard that it was said that charity is the affec-
tion of the love of doing good to the neighbor for the sake of
salvation and eternal life, they all cried out, “ This is a lie!”
And the dragon himself exclaimed, “Alas, what wickedness!
Are not all the works which are of charity, when done for
the sake of salvation, full of merit?”

Then they said to one another, “ Let us call together still
more of our people, and besiege this city, and cast out those
charities.” But when they attempted this, lo, there ap-
peared as it were fire out of heaven which consumed them.
But the fire out of heaven was an appearance of their anger
and hatred against those who were in the city, because they
cast down faith from the first to the second place, yes, to the


No. 389]


FAITH


537


lowest beneath charity, because they said that it was not
faith. They appeared to be consumed as by fire, because
hell was opened under their feet, and they were swallowed
up. Similar things happened in many places in the day of
the final judgment, and this is meant by these words in the
Apocalypse: The dragon shall go out to seduce the nations
which are in the four corners 0} the earth , to gather them to-
gether to battle; and they went up on the face of the earth , and
encompassed the camp of the saints and the beloved city , but
fire came down from God out of heaven , and consumed them
(xx. 8, 9).

389. Fifth Relation . A paper was once seen, sent down
from heaven to a society in the world of spirits, where were
two prelates of the church, with canons and elders under
them. The paper contained an exhortation to acknowledge
the Lord Jesus Christ as the God of heaven and earth, as
He Himself taught (Matt, xxviii. 18); also to recede from
the doctrine of justifying faith without the works of the law,
because it is erroneous. This paper was read and copied
by many; and respecting its contents, many thought and
spoke from judgment. Yet after they received it, they said
among themselves, “Let us hear the prelates.” And they
were heard; but they spoke against it and disapproved.
For the prelates of that society were hard of heart, from the
falsities with which they had been imbued in the former
world. Therefore, after a short consultation among them-
selves, they sent the paper back to heaven whence it came.
This having been done, after some murmuring most of the
laity receded from their former assent, and then the light of
their judgment in spiritual things, which before shone bright,
was suddenly extinguished. After they had been admon-
ished again, but to no purpose, I saw that society sinking
down, but how deeply I did not see, and thus withdrawn
from the sight of those who worship the Lord only, and are
averse to justification by faith alone.

But after some days, I saw nearly a hundred ascending


533


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 389


from the lower earth which was the limit to which that little
society sunk down. They came up to me, and one of them
spoke and said, “ Listen to what is wonderful. When we
sunk down, the place appeared to us like a swamp, but
presently like dry land, and afterwards like a little city, in
which many had each his own house. After a day had
passed we consulted among ourselves at to what was to be
done. Many said that we must go to the two prelates of
the church and censure them mildly because they sent the
paper back to heaven from which it was sent down, on
account of which this had befallen us. They also chose
some who went to the prelates (and he who was speaking
with me said that he was one of them), and then one among
us who excelled in wisdom spoke to the prelates thus: ‘We
believed that the chinch and religion were with us above
others, because we have heard it said that we are in the
greatest gospel light; but enlightenment from heaven has
been given to some of us, and in the enlightenment a per-
ception that at this day there is no longer any church in the
Christian world, because there is no religion.’ The prelates
replied, ‘ What are you saying ? Is there not a church where
the Word is, where Christ the Saviour is known, and where
the sacraments are?’ To this our friend replied, ‘ Those
things belong to the church, for they make the church; but
they do not make it outside of man, but within him.’ And
he further said, ‘Can the church be where three Gods are
worshipped? Can the church be where its whole doctrine
is founded on a single saying of Paul falsely understood, and
consequently not upon the Word? Can the church be
while the Saviour of the world, who is the very God of the
church, is not approached? Who can deny that religion
is to shun evil and to do good ? Is there any religion where
it is taught that faith alone saves, and not charity at the
same time? Is there religion where it is taught that the
charity proceeding from a man is nothing but moral and
civil charity? Who does not see that in that charity there


No. 389]


FAITH


539


is nothing of religion ? Is there in faith alone any thing of
deed or work ? and yet religion consists in doing. Is there
found a nation in all the world, which excludes all saving
power from the goods of charity, which are good works?
when yet the all of religion consists in good, and the all of
the church in doctrine which teaches truths, and goods by
truths. What glory we should have had if we had accepted
those things which the paper that was sent down from
heaven carried in its bosom !’ Then the prelates said,
4 You speak too loftily. Is not faith in act, which is faith
fully justifying and saving, the church? And is not faith
in state, which is faith proceeding and perfecting, religion ?
Sons, lay hold on this.’

“But then our wise companion said, ‘Hear, Fathers:
Does not man according to your dogma, conceive faith in
act like a stock ? Can a stock be quickened into a church ?
And is not faith in state, according to your idea, the con-
tinuation and progression of faith in act? And since, ac-
cording to your dogma, every thing saving is in faith, and
not any thing in the good of charity from man, where then
is religion?* Then the leaders said, ‘You speak so, friend,
because you do not know the mysteries of justification by
faith alone; and he who does not know them does not in-
wardly know the way of salvation. Your way is external
and the way of common people. Go in that way if you will,
yet know only that all good is from God and nothing from
man, and so that in spiritual things man has no ability of
himself. How then can man do good that is spiritual good,
of himself?’ To this our spokesman, being very indignant,
replied, ‘I know your mysteries of justification better than
you do, and I tell you plainly that inwardly in your mysteries
I have seen nothing but spectres. Is it not religion to ac-
knowledge and love God, and to hate and shun the devil?
Is not God good itself, and the devil evil itself? Who in
the whole world that has any religion does not know this ?
And is not acknowledging and loving God this — to do good,


540


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 389


because it is God's and is from Him ? And is not shunning
and hating the devil this — not to do evil, because this is of
the- devil and is from him ? Or what is the same, does your
faith in act, which you call faith fully justifying and saving,
or what is again the same, your act of justification by faith
alone, teach the doing of any good which is of God and is
from Him? And does it teach the shunning of any evil
which is of the devil and from him? Not in the least; be-
cause you maintain that there is nothing of salvation in
either. What is your faith in state, which you have called
faith proceeding and perfecting, but the same with faith in
act ? How can this be perfected when you exclude all good
done by man as from himself? saying in your mysteries,
How can a man be saved by any good from himself, when
salvation is gratuitous? and what good comes from man
but what has merit? and yet all merit belongs to Christ.
Therefore to do good for the sake of salvation would be to
attribute to one's self what belongs to Christ alone; thus
also it would be to wish to justify and save one's self. Again,
how can any one work what is good, when the Holy Spirit
works all, without any help from man ? What need is there,
then, of any accessory good from man, when all the good
from man is in itself not good ? — besides other things. Are
not these your mysteries? But in my eyes they are mere
subtleties and artifices, contrived to set aside good works
which are the goods of charity, to establish your faith alone.
And because you do this, you look at man, with regard to
faith, and in general with regard to all spiritual things of the
church and religion, as a stock or a lifeless form, and not as
a man created in the image of God, to whom was given and
is continually given the faculty of understanding and willing,
of believing and loving, and of speaking and doing, alto-
gether as from himself; and especially in spiritual things,
because man is man from them. If man did not think and
operate as from himself in spiritual things, for what then
would be the Word? for what the church, and religion ? and


No. 390]


FAITH


541


for what, worship ? You know that to do good to the neigh-
bor from love is charity; and yet you do not know what char-
ity is, when yet charity is the soul and essence of faith. And
as charity is both of these, what then is faith when charity
is removed, but dead faith ? And dead faith is nothing but
a spectre. I call it a spectre, because James calls faith with-
out good works not only dead, but also diabolical.’ '

“Then one of these prelates, when he heard his faith
called dead, diabolical, and spectral, became so enraged,
that he snatched the mitre from his head, and threw it upon
the table, saying, ‘I will not resume it until I have taken
vengeance upon the enemies of the faith of our church’;
and he shook his head, muttering, and saying, ‘ That James,
that James! ’ On the front of the mitre there was a plate on
which was engraved, Faith alone justifying. And suddenly
appeared a monster rising out of the earth, with seven heads,
with feet like a bear’s, a body like a leopard’s, and a mouth
like a lion’s, altogether like the beast which is described in
the Apocalypse (xiii. 1,2), whose image was made and wor-
shipped (verses 14, 15). This spectre took the mitre from
the table, and stretched it wide at the bottom, and put it on
his seven heads; and then the earth opened under his feet,
and he sunk down. On seeing this, the prelate cried out,
‘ Violence! Violence!’ We then left them; and behold
there were steps before our eyes, by which we ascended and
returned upon the earth, and into the view of heaven, where
we were before.” These things were related to me by the
spirit who with a hundred others had ascended from the
lower earth.

390. Sixth Relation . In the northern quarter of the
spiritual world, I heard as it were the noise of waters; I
therefore went toward it; and when I was near, it ceased,
and I heard a sound like that from an assembled multitude.
And then a house full of holes was seen surrounded by a
rough wall, from which that sound was heard. I went to
it. A doorkeeper was there, and I asked him who were


542


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 390


there. He said, “The wisest of the wise, who determine
with each other supernatural things.” He spokg so from
his simple faith. And I asked whether it was allowable to
enter. He said that it was, “provided you do not say any
thing, for I have leave to admit gentiles, who stand with me
near the door.” I therefore entered; and behold there was
a circular hall, and in the middle a pulpit; and a company
of so-called wise men were discussing the mysteries of their
faith. The proposition then submitted for discussion was,
“ Whether the good which a man does in the state of justifica-
tion by faith, or in its progress after the act, is the good of
religion or not.” They said unanimously that by the good
of religion was meant good which contributes to salvation.
There was sharp discussion, but those prevailed who said
that the good deeds which a man does in the state or progress
of faith are only moral good, which conduce to prosperity
in the world, but contribute nothing to his being saved; to
this, only faith contributes. And they confirmed it thus:
“How can any voluntary good of man be joined with free
grace? And is not salvation of free grace? How can any
good from man be joined with Christ’s merit ? And is not
salvation by that alone? And how can man’s operation be
joined with the operation of the Holy Spirit? Does not this
do all, without man’s help ? Are not these three things alone
saving, in the act of justification by faith? and the same
three continue alone saving in its state or progress. There-
fore the accessory good from man can by no means be called
the good of religion, which, as was said, contributes to his
being saved; but if any one does it for the sake of being
saved, since the will of man is in it, and this cannot but re-
gard it as merit, it should rather be called the evil of religion.”

There were two gentiles standing near the doorkeeper in
the vestibule; and they heard these things, and said to each
other, “These people have no religion. Who does not see
that to do good to the neighbor for the sake of God, thus
with God and from God, is what is called religion?” And


No. 391]


FAITH


543


the other said, “Their faith has infatuated them. ,, And
they then asked the doorkeeper, “Who are they?” The
doorkeeper said, “They are wise Christians.” And they
replied, “Nonsense, you are feigning; they are actors; they
talk like them.” And I went away. It was of the Divine
auspices of the Lord that I came to that house, and that
they then deliberated on these subjects, and that all took
place as described.

391. Seventh Relation. What a desolation of truth and
poverty of theology there are at this day in the Christian
world, was brought to my knowledge from conversing with
many of the laity and clergy in the spiritual world. With
the latter there is such spiritual destitution that they scarcely
know any thing but that there is a Trinity, of Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit; and that faith alone saves; and of Christ
the Lord they know only the history of Him found in the
Evangelists. But all else which the Word of both Testa-
ments teaches of Him, as that the Father and He are one,
that He is in the Father and the Father in Him, that He has
all power in heaven and in earth, that it is the Father’s will
that they should believe in the Son, and that whosoever
believeth in Him has everlasting life, these and many other
things are as unknown to them and as remote as those that
lie at the bottom of the ocean, yes, as those which are at the
centre of the earth. And when such are brought forth from
the Word and read, they stand as if they heard and yet did
not hear; nor do they enter their ears more deeply than the
whispering of the wind or the beating of a drum. The
angels who are sometimes sent by the Lord to visit the Chris-
tian societies that are in the world of spirits, thus beneath
heaven, lament exceedingly, saying that there is a dulness
and consequent thick darkness among them in matters of
salvation, almost like that of a talking parrot. Their
learned also say that in spiritual and Divine things they un-
derstand no more than statues.

An angel once told me that he conversed with two of the


544


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 391


clergy, one of whom was in faith separate from charity
and the other in faith not separate. With the one who was
in faith separate from charity he spoke as follows: “Friend,
who are yon?” He replied, “I am a Reformed Christian.”
“What is your doctrine, and the religion from it?” He
answered, “It is faith.” The angel asked, “What is your
faith?” He replied, “My faith is, that God the Father,
sent the Son to take upon Himself the damnation of the
human race, and that we are saved thereby.” The angel
asked further, “What more do you know about salvation?”
He replied, “Salvation is effected by that faith alone.”
Again the angel asked, “ What do you know of redemption ? ”
He replied, “ It was accomplished by the passion of the cross,
and the merit of the Son is imputed through that faith.”
Again, “What do you know of regeneration?” He an-
swered, “It is effected by that faith.” “Tell what you
know about love and charity.” He replied, “They are that
faith.” “And what do you think of the commandments of
the Decalogue, and the others in the Word ? ” He replied,
“They are in that faith.” Then said the angel, “You will
therefore do nothing.” He replied, “ What am I to do ? I
cannot from myself do good that is good.” “ Can you have
faith from yourself?” asked the angel. He replied, “I do
not inquire into that; I must have faith.” At length he
said, “ Surely you know something more about the state of
salvation?” He replied, “What more, since the work of
salvation is by that faith alone?” But then the angel said,
“You answer like one who plays but one note on a flute;
I hear nothing but faith. If you know that and nothing
else, you know nothing. Go and see your companions.”
He went and found them in a desert, where there was no
grass. He asked why this was so; and it was said, “Be-
cause they have nothing of the church.”

With him who was in faith conjoined with charity, the
angel spoke as follows: “Friend, who are you?” He re-
plied, “I am a Reformed Christian.” “What is your doc-


No. 391]


FAITH


545


trine, and the religion from it?” He answered, “Faith and
charity.” “These are two,” said the angel. He replied,
“They cannot be separated.” The angel asked, “What is
faith?” He replied, “To believe what the Word teaches.”
“And what is charity?” He answered, “To do what the
Word teaches.” The angel said, “ Have you only believed
those things, or have you also done them?” He replied,
“ I have also done them.” The angel of heaven then looked
at him and said, “ My friend, come with me and dwell with
us.”


CHAPTER SEVENTH.


CHARITY, OR LOVE TOWARD THE NEIGHBOR, AND
GOOD WORKS.

392. Faith having been treated of, now follows Charity;
for faith and charity are joined like truth and good, and
these two like light and heat in spring. This is said because
spiritual light, the light that proceeds from the sun of the
spiritual world, is in its essence truth; therefore truth in
that world, wherever it appears, shines with splendor accord-
ing to its purity; and spiritual heat, which also proceeds
from that sun, is in its essence good. These things are said,
because it is the same with charity and faith as with good
and truth; for charity is the aggregate of all which a man
does to the neighbor which belongs to good, and faith is the
aggregate of all belonging to truth which a man thinks as to
God and Divine things. Since, therefore, the truth of faith
is spiritual light, and the good of charity is spiritual heat, it
follows that it is the same with these two as with the two so
named in the natural world; that is to say, from their con-
junction all things on earth flourish, and likewise from their
conjunction all things in the human mind; but with the
difference that natural heat and light cause things on the
earth to blossom, but spiritual heat and light cause things
to blossom in the human mind; and that the latter blossom-
ing, because it is spiritual, is wisdom and intelligence.
There is also a correspondence between them; and therefore
the human mind in which charity is joined with faith and
faith with charity, is in the Word likened to a garden, and
is also meant by the garden of Eden. This has been fully
shown in the Heavenly Arcana , published at London. It
must be known, moreover, that if charity were not treated


No. 393]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


547


of after faith, what faith is could not be comprehended;
since, as stated and shown in the preceding chapter, faith
without charity is not faith, and charity without faith is not
charity, and neither of them lives except from the Lord
( n * 355“36 i)- And also, the Lord, charity, and faith make
one, like life, will, and understanding; and if they are
divided, each perishes, like a pearl reduced to powder (n. 362
-367). And further, charity and faith are together in good
works (n. 373“37 8 )-

393. It is a constant truth that, in order that man may
have spiritual life and consequently be saved, charity and
faith cannot be separated. This is self-evident to the under-
standing of any man even if it is not cultivated by means of
talents and pounds of learning. Who does not see from
some interior perception, and therefore assent from the
understanding, when he hears one say that whoever lives
well and believes aright is saved? And who does not re-
ject it from the understanding, as he would a mote falling
into the eye, when he hears it said that whoever believes
aright and does not live well is also saved? because from
interior perception it then instantly comes into the thought,
How can any one believe aright when he does not live well ?
And what is believing then, but a painted figure of faith, and
not its living image ? So again, if one hears it said that who-
ever lives well is saved, though he does not believe, does not
the understanding while revolving or turning it over and
over, see, perceive, and think that this is without coherence,
for to live well is from God ? for all good, in itself good, is
from God. What then is it to live well and not believe, but
as clay in the hand of the potter which cannot be formed into
any vessel of use in the spiritual kingdom, but only in the
natural? Furthermore, who does not see contradiction in
the two statements, that he who believes but does not live
well is saved; and, that he is saved who lives well and does
not believe? Now because living well, which belongs to
charity, is at this day both known and not known — what it


.$ 4 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 393

is to live well naturally is known, but not what it is to live
well spiritually — this will therefore be treated of, for it be-
longs to charity. And this will be done distinctly in series
by articles.

I. There are three universal loves, love or heaven,

LOVE OE THE WORLD, AND LOVE OP SELF.

394. The beginning is made with these three loves, be-
cause they are universal and fundamental, and because
charity has something in common with each of them. For
by love of heaven is meant love to the Lord and also love
toward the neighbor; and because each of these regards use
as the end, it may be called the love of uses. Love of the
world is not merely the love of wealth and property, but also
of all that the world affords, and of all that delights the
senses of the body; as beauty delights the eyes, harmony the
ear, fragrance the nostrils, delicacies the tongue, softness the
skin; also becoming dress, convenient habitations, society,
thus all the enjoyments from these and many other things.
Love of self is not merely the love of honor, glory, fame, and
eminence, but also of meriting and soliciting office, and so
of reigning over others. Charity has something in com-
mon with each of these three, because, viewed in itself, it is
the love of uses; for charity wishes to do good to the neigh-
bor and good is the same as use, and from these loves every
one regards uses as his ends; the love of heaven regards
spiritual uses, the love of the world natural uses which may
be called civil, and the love of self corporeal uses which may
also be called domestic, done for one’s self and his own.

395. That these three loves are from creation and there-
fore from birth in every man, and that when rightly sub-
ordinated they perfect him, and when not rightly sub-
ordinated they pervert him, will be shown in the next article.
It may only be remarked here that these three loves are
rightly subordinated when love of heaven makes the head,


No. 395]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


549


love of the world the breast and abdomen, and love of self
the feet and their soles. The human mind is divided into
three distinct regions, as repeatedly stated above: from
the highest region man regards God, from the second or
middle region the world, and from the third or lowest him-
self. Because the mind is such, it can be raised and can
raise itself upward, because to God and heaven; it can be
spread and can spread itself to the sides in all directions, be-
cause into the world and its nature; and it can be let down- .
ward and can let itself downward, because to earth and hell. •
In these respects the sight of the body emulates that of the
mind; it too can look upward, round about, and downward.
The human mind is like a house of three stories commu-
nicating by stairs; in the highest of which dwell angels
from heaven, in the middle men from the world, and in the
lowest evil spirits. The man in whom these three loves are
rightly subordinated, can ascend and descend at pleasure;
and when he goes up to the highest, he is as an angel in com-
pany with angels; and when from this he goes down to the
middle, he is there in company with men as an angel-man;
and when from this he descends further, he is in company
with evil spirits as a man of the world, and instructs, re-
proves, and subdues them. In the man in whom these
three loves are rightly subordinated, they are also so co-
ordinated that the highest which is love of heaven is in-
wardly in the second which is love of the world, and by this
in the third or lowest which is love of self; and the love which
is within directs at its pleasure that which is without. There-
fore if the love of heaven is inwardly in love of the world, and
by this in love of self, the man does uses in each from the
God of heaven. In their operation, these three loves are
like will, understanding, and action. The will flows into
the understanding, and there provides itself with means to
produce action. But on these points more will be seen in
the next article, where it will be shown that the three loves,
rightly subordinated, perfect man; but if not rightly sub-
ordinated, they pervert and invert him.


550


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 396


396. But in order that what follows in this chapter and
in those succeeding, on Free Will, Reformation and Re-
generation, and so forth, may be presented in the light of
reason so as to be clearly seen, it is necessary to premise
something as to the will and the understanding, good and
truth, love in general, the love of the world and the love of
self in particular, the external and the internal man, and
the merely natural and sensual man. These will be laid
open, lest the rational sight of man in its perception of what
later follows, should be as in a thick fog, and so should run
through the streets of a city till it knows not the way home.
For what is theology without the understanding, and if the
understanding is not enlightened when the Word is read,
but as a lamp in the hand not lighted, such as were in the
hands of the five foolish virgins who had no oil ? Of each,
then, in its order.

397. I. The Will and the Understanding. 1. Man has
two faculties which make his life; one called the will, and
the other the understanding. These are distinct from each
other, but so created as to be one; and when they are one,
they are called the mind. Therefore they are the human
mind, and all a man’s life is therein in its principles, and
hence is in the body. 2. As all things in the universe which
are according to order have reference to good and truth, so
all things in man have reference to the will and understand-
ing, since good in man is of his will, and truth in him is of
his understanding; for these two faculties, or two lives of
man, are their receptacles and subjects, the will the re-
ceptacle and subject of all things of good, and the under-
standing the receptacle and subject of all things of truth.
Goods and truths with man are nowhere else. And be-
cause goods and truths with man are nowhere else, there-
fore love and faith are not elsewhere, since love is of good
and good is of love, but faith is of truth and truth is of faith.
3. The will and the understanding also make man’s spirit;
for in them reside his wisdom and intelligence, also his love


No. 398]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


551


and charity, and in general his life. The body is only obedi-
ence. 4. Nothing is more important to know than how the
will and understanding make one mind. They make one
mind as good and truth make one; for there is a marriage
between the will and the understanding like that between
good and truth. The quality of that marriage will be evi-
dent from what will presently be adduced as to good and
truth, namely, that as good is the very esse of a thing and
truth its existere from it, so the will with man is the very esse i
of his life, but the understanding is the existere of life from '
it; for good, which is of the will, forms itself in the under-
standing, and makes itself visible.

398. II. Good and Truth. 1. All things in the universe
that are in Divine order, have reference to good and truth.
Nothing exists in heaven and nothing in the world that does
not have reference to these two. This is because both of
them, good as well as truth, proceed from God from whom
all things are. 2. From this it is manifest, that it is neces-
sary for man to know what good and truth are, as also how
the one looks to the other, and how the one is joined with the
other. But this is most necessary for the man of the church;
for as all things of heaven have reference to good and truth,
so also have all things of the church, because the good and
truth of heaven are the good and truth of the church also.
3. It is according to Divine order for good and truth to be
joined and not separated, thus for them to be one and not
two; for they proceed from God joined, and in heaven they
are joined; and therefore they must be joined in the church.
The conjunction of good and truth in heaven is called the
heavenly marriage; for all who are there are in this mar- (
riage. For this reason heaven is compared in the Word to ;
marriage, and the Lord is called Bridegroom and Husband,
but heaven is called bride and wife, and the church the same.
Heaven and the church are so called because they who are
therein receive Divine goods in truths. 4. All the intelli-
gence and wisdom which the angels have are from that mar-


552


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 398


riage, and none from good separate from truth, nor from
truth separate from good. So is it with the men of the
church. 5. Since the conjunction of good and truth is
like marriage, it is manifest that good loves truth, and that
in return truth loves good, and that one desires to be joined
with the other. The man of the church who has not such
love and desire is not in the heavenly marriage, thus the
church is not yet in him; for the conjunction of good and
truth makes the church. 6. Goods are manifold: in gen-
eral there are spiritual good and natural good, and both
joined in genuine moral good. As with goods, so with
truths; because truths are of good and are the forms of good.
7. As it is with good and truth, so it is, on the contrary,
with evil and falsity; that is, as all things in the universe
which are according to Divine order have reference to
good and truth, so all things that are contrary to Divine
order have reference to evil and faslity; and as good loves to
be joined with truth and truth with good, so evil loves to be
joined with falsity and falsity with evil: and also, as all
intelligence and wisdom are born from the conjunction of
good and truth, so are all insanity and folly from the con-
junction of evil and falsity. The conjunction of evil and
falsity, viewed inwardly, is not marriage but adultery. 8.
Because evil and falsity are opposite to good and truth, it is
manifest that truth cannot be conjoined with evil, nor good
with the falsity of evil. If truth is adjoined to evil, it be-
comes no longer truth but falsity, because it is falsified; and
if good is adjoined to the falsity of evil, it becomes no longer
good but evil, because it is adulterated. Yet falsity which
is not of evil can be conjoined with good. 9. No one who
is in evil and henct in falsity from confirmation and the
life, can know what good and truth are; since he believes
his evil to be good, and from this he believes his falsity
to be truth; but every one who is in good and hence in
truth from confirmation and the life, can know what evil
and falsity are. This is because all good and its truth are


Mo. 399 ] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS # 553

heavenly in their essence, but all evil and the falsity from
it are infernal in their essence; and every thing heavenly
is in light, but every thing infernal in darkness.

399. III. Love in general . 1. A man’s very life is his

love; and such as the love is, such is the life, yes, such is the
whole man. But it is the dominant or reigning love which
makes the man. This love has many other loves subor-
dinate to it, which are derivations. They appear under
another aspect; but yet every one of them is in the dominant
love, and they make with it one kingdom. The dominant
love is as their king and head; it directs them; and through
them as through mediate ends it looks to and intends its
own end, which is the primary and the ultimate of all; and
this both directly and indirettly. 2. That which is of the
dominant love, is loved above all. What a man loves above
all is continually present in his thought, because it is in his
will and makes his veriest life. For example, one who loves
wealth whether money or possessions, above all things, is
continually considering in his mind how to procure it, re-
joices inmostly when he acquires it, grieves inmostly when
he loses it; his heart is in it. He who loves himself above
all is mindful of himself in every thing; he thinks of himself,
speaks of himself, acts for the sake of himself; for his life
is the life of self. 3. A man has for an end that which he
loves above all things; this he regards in all things and in
every thing. It is in his will like the unseen flow of a river
which sweeps along and bears him away even when he is
acting in some other way, for it is that which animates him.
Such is that which one man searches out in another, and
also sees; and by it he either leads him or acts with him.
4. A man is wholly such as the dominance of his life is; by
this he is distinguished from others; according to this his
heaven is made if he is good, and his hell if he is evil; it is
his very will, his selfhood, and his nature; for it is the very
esse of his life. This cannot be changed after death, be-
cause it is the man himself. 5. All that gives enjoyment,


554


„ TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 399


satisfaction, and happiness to any one, comes to him from
and according to his ruling love. For a man calls that which
he loves enjoyment, because he feels it; but that which he
thinks and does not love, he may also call enjoyment, but
it is not the enjoyment of his life. The love’s enjoyment is
what is good to a man, but the undelightful is what to him
is evil. 6. There are two loves from which, as from their
very fountains, all goods and truths arise; and there are
two loves from which all evils and falsities arise. The two
loves from which all goods and truths are, are love to the
Lord and love toward the neighbor; but the two loves from
which are all evils and falsities, are the love of self and the
love of the world. The two latter when they are dominant,
are wholly opposed to the former. 7. The two loves from
which are all goods and truths, which, as was said, are love
to the Lord and love toward the neighbor, make heaven with
man, for they reign in heaven; and because they make
heaven with man, they also make the church with him. The
two loves from which are all evils and falsities, which, as was
said, are the love of self and the love of the world, make hell
with man; for they reign in hell; consequently also they
destroy the church with him. 8. The two loves from which
are all goods and truths, which, as was said, are the loves
of heaven, open and form the internal spiritual man, for
they reside there ; but the two loves from which are all evils
and falsities, which, as was said, are the loves of hell, when
they are dominant, close and destroy the internal spiritual
man, and cause the man to be natural and sensual according
to the quantity and quality of their dominion.

400. IV. Love of Self and Love of the World in particular .
1. Love of self is to wish well to one’s self only, and not to
others except for the sake of self; not even to the church,
one’s country, human society, or a fellow-citizen; it is also to
do good to them only for the sake of one’s reputation, honor,
and glory; and unless these are seen in the good which is
done to others, it is said in the heart, “What matters it?


No. 400 ] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 555

Why should I do this ? What shall I gain by it ? ” And so
it is passed by. Hence it is manifest that he who is in love
of self does not love the church, or his country, or society,
or his fellow-citizen, or any thing truly good, but only him-
self and what is his. 2. A man is in the love of self when,
in what he thinks and does, he does not regard the neighbor,
and therefore not the public, still less the Lord, but only
himself and those who are his; consequently, when he does
every thing for the sake of himself and those belonging to
him; and if for the public, it is only for the appearance;
and if for the neighbor, it is that the neighbor may favor
him. 3. For the sake of himself and those who are his,
is said; for he who loves himself also loves his own, who
are especially his children and grandchildren, and in gen-
eral all who make one with him, whom he calls his own.
To love these two classes, is also to love himself, for he re-
gards them as it were in himself, and himself in them. All
who praise, honor, and pay court to him are likewise among
those whom he calls his; all others he indeed looks upon
with the bodily eyes as men, but with the eyes of his spirit he
scarcely views them otherwise than spectres. 4. A man is
in love of self who despises his neighbor in comparison
with himself, who holds him an enemy if he does not favor
him and if he does not venerate and pay court to him.
Still more in love of self is he who on that account hates
and persecutes his neighbor; and more still he who there-
fore bums with revenge against him and desires his de-
struction. Such at length love to be cruel. 5. What the love
of self is, may be evident from comparison with heavenly
love. Heavenly love is to love uses for the sake of the uses,
or goods for the sake of the goods, which a man performs
for the church, his country, human society, and the fellow-
citizen; but he who loves these things for his own sake,
loves them only as he loves servants of the household,
because they are serviceable to him. It follows hence that
he who is in love of self wishes the church, his country.


556


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 400


human society, and his fellow-citizens to serve him, and
not that he should serve them; he puts himself above, and
them beneath. 6. Moreover, so far as any one is in heav-
enly love, which is to love uses and goods and to have
heartfelt enjoyment in promoting them, he is led by the
Lord; because that is the love in which the Lord is, and
which is from Him. But so far as any one is in the love of
self, he is led by himself and his self-life, and man’s self-
life is nothing but evil; for it is his hereditary evil, which
is to love one’s self more than God, and the world more
than heaven. 7. Such also is love of self, that so far as
the reins are given to it, that is, so far as external bonds
are removed, which are fears of the law and its penalties,
and of the loss of reputation, honor, gain, office, and life, so
far it rushes on, even till it wishes to have command not only
over the whole world, but also over heaven, yes, over God
Himself. There is nowhere any limit or end to it. This
lurks in every one who is in love of self, although it is not
manifest before the world, where the reins and bonds which
have been named restrain him; and every such one, where
there is impossibility, makes his stand until the possibility
comes. It is owing to all these things, that the man who is
in such love does not know that an insane and unlimited
lust of this kind is concealed within bim. Nevertheless,
that it is so no one can help seeing in potentates and kings to
whom there are no such reins, bonds, and impossibilities;
they rush on and subdue provinces and kingdoms as far as
they have success, and aspire to power and glory beyond
bounds; and still more in those who extend their sovereignty
into heaven, and transfer all the Lord’s Divine power to
themselves. These continually desire more. 8. There are
two kinds of rule, one of love toward the neighbor, and
the other of love of self. These two kinds of rule are op-
posite. He who rules from love toward the neighbor wishes
good to all, and loves nothing more than to perform uses,
thus to serve others; to serve others is to do good to them


No. 400]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


557


from good will, and to perform uses; this is his love, and
the enjoyment of his heart. As far, too, as he is raised to
dignities he is also glad, not for the sake of the dignities, but
for the sake of the uses which he can then perform in more
abundance and to a greater degree. Such is rule in the
heavens. But he who rules from love of self wills good to
no one but himself and his. The uses which he performs
are for the sake of the honor and glory of himself, which
to him are the only uses; his end in serving others is that ■
he may be served and honored, and may rule. He solicits i
dignities, not for the sake of the good which he may do, but
that he may be in eminence and glory, and thereby in his
heart’s enjoyment. 9. Love of rule remains also with every
one after the life in the world; but to those who have ruled
from love toward the neighbor, dominion in the heavens is
also entrusted; and then they do not rule, but the uses and
goods which they love; and when uses and goods rule, the
Lord rules. But they who in the world ruled from love of
self, after the life in the world are made to abdicate and are
reduced to servitude. From these things it is now known
who are in the love of self. It matters not how they appear
in the external form, whether haughty or submissive; for
such things are in the internal man, and the internal man
is hidden by most people, and the external is trained to
counterfeit what belongs to love of the public and the
neighbor, thus opposites; and this also for the sake of self;
for they know that to love the public and the neighbor af-
fects all men inwardly, and that they themselves are
esteemed in the same measure. This love so affects men
because heaven flows into it. 10. The evils which are with
those who are in love of self are, in general, contempt of
others, envy, enmity against those who do not favor them,
consequent hostility, hatred of various kinds, revenge, cun-
ning, deceit, unmercifulness and cruelty. And where such
evils are there is also contempt of God and of Divine things
which are the truths and goods of the church; if they honor


558


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 400


these, it is only with the mouth, not with the heart. And be-
cause such evils are from this source, so are similar falsities;
for falsities are from evils. 11. But love of the world is to
wish to draw to one’s self by any art the wealth of others, and
to set the heart upon riches, and to suffer the world to with-
draw and lead one away from spiritual love which is love
toward the neighbor, and so from heaven. They are in the
love of the world who desire to draw to themselves the goods
of others by various arts, especially by cunning and deceit,
making nothing of the neighbor’s good. They who are in
that love covet the goods of others, and, so far as they do not
fear the laws and loss of reputation on account of gain, they
deprive them of their goods, yes, prey upon them. 12. But
love of the world is not opposed to heavenly love to such a
degree as love of self is, for not so great evils are concealed in
it. 13. This love is manifold: there is love of wealth, that
one may be raised to honors; there is love of honors and dig-
nities, that one may gain wealth; there is love of wealth for
the sake of various uses from which one has delight in the
world; there is love of wealth for its own sake only; such
love have the avaricious; and so on. The end for the sake
of which wealth is loved is called the use; and it is the end
or use from which a love derives its quality; for the love is
such as the end which it regards is; other things serve it as
means. 14. In a word, love of self and love of the world are
wholly opposite to love to the Lord and love toward the
neighbor. Therefore love of self and love of the world, such
as are described above, are infernal, reigning also in hell,
and likewise making hell with man. But love to the Lord
and love toward the neighbor are heavenly, reigning also in
heaven, and likewise making heaven with man.

401. V. The Internal and the External Man . 1. Man

has been so created that he is at the same time in the spiritual
world and in the natural world. The spiritual world is where
angels are, and the natural world is where men are. And
because man has been so created, an internal and an external


No. 401]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


559


have been given him; an internal by which he may be in the
spiritual world, and an external by which he may be in the
natural world. His internal is what is called the internal
man, and his external what is called the external man. 2.
Every man has an internal and an external, but with a dif-
ference between the good and the evil. With the good the
internal is in heaven and its light, and the external in the
world and its light; and this light with them is illumined by
the light of heaven; and so with them the internal and the
external make one, like cause and effect, or like prior and
posterior. But with the evil the internal is in hell and in its
light, which light, viewed in relation to the light of heaven,
is thick darkness; and their external may be in light similar
to that in which the good are. This therefore is the reverse
of the other. Hence it is that the evil, just like the good, can
speak and teach about faith, charity, and God; but not, like
the good, from faith, charity, and God. 3. It is the internal
man that is called the spiritual man, because it is in the light
of heaven, which light is spiritual; and it is the external that
is called the natural man, because it is in the light of the
world, which light is natural. The man whose internal is in
the light of heaven and his external in the light of the world,
is a spiritual man as to both, for spiritual light from within
illumines the natural light and makes it as its own; but with
the»evil the case is reversed. 4. The internal spiritual man
viewed in itself is an angel of heaven, and while living in the
body is also in society with angels without knowing it, and
after release from the body also comes among them. But
with the evil the internal man is a satan, and while living in
the body is also in society with satans, and after separation
from the body also comes among them. 5. With those who
are spiritual men, the interiors of the mind are actually
raised toward heaven, for they look primarily to that; but
with those who are merely natural, the interiors of the mind
are turned away from heaven, and turned to the world, be-
cause they look primarily to this. 6. They who hold only


560


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 401


a general idea of the internal and the external man, believe
that it is the internal man that thinks and wills, and the ex-
ternal that speaks and acts; for thinking and willing are
internal, and speaking and acting are external. But it is to
be known that when man thinks and wills well about the
Lord and what is of the Lord, and well about the neighbor
and what is of the neighbor, he then thinks and wills from
the spiritual internal, because from the faith of truth and
the love of good; but that when a man thinks ill about them
and wills ill to them, he then thinks and wills from the in-
fernal internal, because from the faith of falsity and the love
of evil. In a word, so far as a man is in love to the Lord and
in love toward the neighbor he is in the spiritual internal,
and thinks and wills from it, and also speaks and acts from
it; while so far as a man is in love of self and love of the
world he thinks and wills from hell, though he speaks and
acts otherwise. 7. It has thus been provided and arranged
by the Lord that the spiritual man should be opening and
forming so far as a man thinks and wills from heaven; the
opening is into heaven even to the Lord, and the formation
is to that which is of heaven. But on the other hand, so far
as a man thinks and wills not from heaven but from the
world, the internal spiritual man is closing, and the external
is opening and forming; the opening is into the world, and
the formation is to that which is of hell. 8. They with
whom the internal spiritual man is opened into heaven to
the Lord, are in the light of heaven and in enlightenment
from the Lord, and thereby in intelligence and wisdom;
they see truth from the light of truth, and perceive good
from the love of good. But they with whom the internal
spiritual man is closed, do not know what the internal man
is, neither do they believe in the Word, nor in a life after
death, nor in what is of heaven and the church: and because
they are in only natural light, they believe that nature is of
itself and not from God; they see falsity as truth, and per-
ceive evil as good. 9. The internal and external here are


No. 402] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 561

the internal and external of man’s spirit. His body is only
a superadded external, within which the others exist; for the
body acts in nothing from itself, but from the spirit which
is in it. It is to be known that the spirit of man after its
release from the body, equally thinks and wills, and speaks
and acts: thinking and willing are its internal, but speaking
and doing are then its external.

402. VI. The merely Natural and Sensual Man . Since
few know who are meant by sensual men, and of what quailty
they are, and yet it is important to know, therefore they shall
be described. 1. He is called a sensual man who judges of
all things by the senses of the body, and who believes nothing
but what he can see with the eyes and touch with the hands,
saying that such things are something, and rejecting all
others. The sensual man is therefore the lowest natural
man. 2. The interiors of his mind, which see from the
light of heaven, are closed, so that he there sees nothing of
the truth which pertains to heaven and the church, since he
thinks in outmosts and not inwardly from any spiritual light.
3. And since he is in gross natural light, he is inwardly op-
posed to what is of heaven and the church, and yet he can
outwardly and ardently speak in favor of them, according
to the dominion obtainable by means of them. 4. Sensual
men reason sharply and ingeniously, because their thought is
so near to speech, almost in it, and as it were in the lips; and
because they place all intelligence in speech from memory
alone. 5. Some of them can confirm any thing they wish
and falsities dexterously; and after confirming them, they
believe them to be truths; but they reason and confirm from
fallacies of the senses, by which common people are capti-
vated and persuaded. 6. Sensual men are shrewd and
crafty above all others. 7. The interiors of their minds are
foul and filthy, for they communicate through them with the
hells. 8. Those who are in the hells are sensual; and the
deeper they are the more sensual they are; also the sphere
of infernal spirits joins itself with man’s sensuals, from be-


5 62


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 402


hind. 9. As sensual men do not see any genuine truth in
light, but reason and dispute about everything as to whether
it is so, and as these disputes are heard at a distance from
them as the gnashing of teeth, which viewed in themselves
are collisions of falsities with each other, and also of the false
and the true, it is manifest what is signified in the Word by
gnashing of teeth. The reason is that reasoning from the
fallacies of the senses corresponds to the teeth. 10. Men
of science and learning who have deeply confirmed them-
selves in falsities, and still more they who have confirmed
themselves against the truths of the Word, are more sensual
than others, though they do not appear so to the world.
Heresies have flowed chiefly from such as were sensual.
11. The hypocritical, deceitful, voluptuous, adulterous, and
avaricious are for the most part sensual. 12. They who
reasoned from sensual things only, and against the genuine
truths of the Word and thus of the church, were called by
the ancients serpents of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil.

Since sensuals mean things presented to the senses of the
body, and imbibed through those senses, it follows: 13. By
sensuals man communicates with the world, and by the
rationals above them, with heaven. 14. Sensuals serve in
furnishing such things from the natural world as are of
service to the interiors of the mind in the spiritual world.
15. There are sensual things which minister to the under-
standing, and are the various things called physics; and
there are sensuals which minister to the will, and these are
the enjoyments of the senses and the body. 16. Unless the
thought is elevated above sensuals, man has little wisdom;
a wise man thinks above sensuals; and when the thought is
elevated above them it comes into clearer light, and at length
into the light of heaven; hence man has a perception of
truth which is properly intelligence. 17. The elevation of
the mind above sensuals and its withdrawal from them, was
known to the ancients. 18. If sensuals are in the last place,


No. 403] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 563

through them a way is opened for the understanding, and
truths are drawn out by a kind of extraction; but if sensuals
are in the first place, that way is closed by them, and man
does not see truths except as in a mist, or as in the night.
19. Sensual things with a wise man are in the last place,
and are subject to what is more internal; but with an unwise
man they are in the first place, and have dominion. Such
are they who are properly called sensual. 20. With man
there are sensuals which he has in common with beasts, and
there are sensuals not held in common with them. 21. So
far as one thinks above sensuals, he is a man; but no one can
think above sensuals and see the truths of the church, unless
he acknowledges God and lives according to His co mm and-
ments; for God elevates and enlightens.

II. These three loves, when rightly subordinated,

PEREECT MAN; BUT WHEN NOT RIGHTLY SUBORDINATED,
THEY PERVERT AND INVERT HIM.

403. Something shall first be said about the subordination
of the three universal loves, which are love of heaven, love
of the world, and love of self; and then about the influx and
insertion of one into another; and lastly, on man’s state ac-
cording to the subordination. These three loves are, to
each other, like the three regions of the body, the highest of
which is the head, the middle is the chest with the abdomen,
while the knees, the feet, and their soles make the third.
When love of heaven makes the head, love of the world the
chest and the abdomen, and love of self the feet with their
soles, then man is in a perfect state according to creation;
because the two lower loves then serve the highest, as the
body and all its parts serve the head. When, therefore,
love of heaven makes the head, it flows into the love of the
world which is chiefly love of riches, and by means of these
it performs uses; and through this love it flows mediately
into the love of self which is chiefly love of dignities, and it


564 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 403

performs uses by means of these. Thus those three loves
breathe out uses from the influx of one into another. Who
does not comprehend that when a man wishes to perform
uses from spiritual love, which is from the Lord and is
what is meant by love of heaven, his natural man performs
them by means of his riches and his other goods, and his
sensual man in its own function, and that it is his honor
to produce them ? Who also does not comprehend that all
the works which a man does with the body are done accord-
ing to the state of his mind in the head, and that if the
mind is in the love of uses, the body by means of its mem-
bers does them? And this is so because the will and under-
standing in their principles are in the head, and in their de-
rivatives in the body, as the will is in deeds, and the thought
in speech; and, comparatively, as the prolific principle of the
seed is in all things and in every thing pertaining to a tree,
by which it produces the fruits which are its uses. And it
is like fire and light within a crystalline vase, which thereby
becomes warm and shows the light through it. Moreover,
the spiritual sight in the mind, and at the same time the nat-
ural sight in the body, with him in whom those three Wes
are justly and rightly subordinated, from the light which
flows in through heaven from the Lord, may be likened to an
African apple which is transparent even to the centre, where
is the repository of the seeds. Something like this is meant
by these words of the Lord: The light of the body is the eye;
if the eye be single (that is, good) the whole body is full of light
(Matt. vi. 22: Luke xi. 34). No man of sound reason can
condemn riches, for they are in the general body like the
blood in man; nor can he condemn the honors attached to
office, for they are the hands of a king and the pillars of
society, provided the natural and sensual loves of them are
subordinated to spiritual love. There are also administra-
tive offices in heaven, and dignities attached to them; but
they who fill them love nothing more than to do uses, because
they are spiritual.


No. 405]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


565


404. But a man puts on an entirely different state if love
of the world or of riches makes the head, that is, if it is the
riegning love; for then love of heaven is exiled from the head
and betakes itself to the body. The man who is in this state
prefers the world to heaven; he worships God, indeed, but
from merely natural love which places merit in all worship;
he also does good to the neighbor, but for the sake of re-
wards. To them the things which are of heaven are as
coverings, in which they go shining before the eyes of men,
but dusky before the eyes of angels; for when love of the
world possesses the internal man, and love of heaven the
external, the former then obscures all things of the church,
and hides them as under a veil. But this love is in much
variety, worse as it verges toward avarice; in this, love of
heaven grows black; so, too, if it verges toward pride and
eminence over others from love of self. It is different if it
tends to prodigality; it is less hurtful if it has in view as an
end the splendors of the world, as palaces, decorations,
splendid clothing, servants, horses and chariots, with pom-
pous display, and so on. The quality of any love is named
according to the end which it regards and intends. This
love may be likened to a crystal of a black hue, which smoth-
ers the light, and variegates it only in dusky and fading colors.
And it is like the mist and cloud which take away the rays
of the sun. It is also like new, unfermented wine, which
tastes sweet, but troubles the stomach. Such a man viewed
from heaven appears like a hunchback walking with his head
down, looking to the earth; and when he raises it toward
heaven, he strains back the muscles, and then quickly re-
lapses into his stooping posture. By the ancients in the
church such were called Mammons; the Greeks called them
Plutos.

405. But if love of self or love of ruling makes the head,
then love of heaven passes through the body to the feet;
and so far as that love increases, love of heaven descends
through the ankles to the soles of the feet; and if it increases


5 66


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 405


still further, love of heaven passes beneath the shoes, and is
trampled under foot. There is love of ruling that comes
from love of the neighbor, and there is love of ruling from
love of self. They who are in love of ruling from love of the
neighbor, seek dominion to the end that they may perform
uses to the public and to individuals; and to them, there-
fore, dominion in the heavens is also entrusted. Emperors,
kings, and dukes, born and educated for positions of author-
ity, if they humble themselves before God are sometimes
less in that love than they who are of low origin but from
pride seek places of pre-eminence. But to those who are
in love of ruling from love of self, love of heaven is like a
bench on which, for the sake of the common people, they
plant their feet, which, however, when the people are out of
sight, they toss into a corner or out of doors. This is be-
cause they love themselves only, and consequently immerse
their wills and the thoughts of the mind in the self-life,
which viewed in itself is hereditary evil; and this is dia-
metrically opposed to love of heaven. The evils pertaining
to those who are in love of ruling from love of self are in gen-
eral these: Contempt of others, envy, enmity against those
who do not favor them, consequent hostility, hatred, re-
venge, unmercifulness, harshness, and cruelty; and where
there are such evils, there is also contempt of God and of
Divine things which are the truths and goods of the church;
if these are honored, it is only with the mouth, lest they be
denounced by the ecclesiastical order and censured by others.
But this love is one with the clergy, and another with the
laity. With the clergy, this love climbs upward, when reins
are given to it, until they wish to be gods; but with the laity
until they wish to be kings; the fantasy of that love carries
their minds away, even to this extent. Since love of heaven
holds the highest place with the perfect man, and makes as
it were the head of all the loves that follow, while love of the
world is below it and is like the chest which is beneath the
head, and love of self is below this like the feet, it follows


No. 406] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 567

that if love of self were to make the head, it would com-
pletely invert the man. He would then appear to angels
like one lying bent over, with head to the earth and back
toward heaven; and when at worship, he would appear
to be on his hands and feet, and to dance like a panther’s
cub; and moreover such would appear as beasts of various
form, with two heads, one above having the face of a wild
animal, another below having a human face, which would
be constantly thrust forward by the upper one and com-
pelled to kiss the earth. These all are sensual men, and
are such as were described above (n. 402).


III. Every man individually is the neighbor to be

LOVED, BUT ACCORDING TO THE QUALITY OF HIS GOOD.

406. Man is not bom for the sake of himself, but for the
sake of others; that is, he is born not to live for himself alone,
hut for others; otherwise there would be no coherent so-
ciety, and with some good in it. It is a common saying that
every one is neighbor to himself ; but the doctrine of charity
teaches how this is to be understood, which is thus: Every
one should provide for himself the necessaries of life, as
food, clothing, habitation, and other things necessarily re-
quired in the civil life in which he is; and this not only for
himself but also for his family, and not for the present time
only but also for the future; for unless he obtains for him-
self the necessaries of life, he is not in a state to exercise
charity, as he is in want of all things. But how every one
ought to be neighbor to himself, may be evident from a com-
parison: Every one ought to provide his body with food;
this must be first, but to the end that there may be a sound
mind in a sound body; and every one ought to provide the
mind with its food, namely, what is of intelligence and judg-
ment, but to the end that he may be thereby in a state to
serve his fellow-citizen, society, his country, the church, and
thus the Lord; he who does this, provides well for himself to


s 68 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 406

eternity. From this what is first in time and what is first
in end is plain, and that the first in end is that to which all
things look. This is also as with one who is building a
house: he first lays the foundation, but the foundation will
be for the house, and the house for a dwelling. He who be-
lieves that he is neighbor to himself in the first place or
primarily, is like one who regards the foundation and not
the dwelling as the. end; when yet dwelling is itself the first
and the last end, and the house with the foundation is only
the means to the end.

407. What it is to love the neighbor shall be told. To
love the neighbor is not merely to will and do good to the
relative, friend, and good man, but also to the stranger,
enemy, and bad man. But charity is exercised toward the
latter in one way, and toward the former in another; toward
a relative and friend by direct benefits; toward an enemy
and wicked man by indirect benefits conferred by exhorta-
tion, discipline, punishment, and so by correction. This
may be illustrated thus: The judge who punishes an evil-
doer according to law and justice, loves the neighbor; for
so he corrects him and consults the welfare of the citizens,
that he may not do them harm. Every one knows that a
father who chastises his children when they do wrong, loves
them; and on the other hand, that he who does not chastise
them therefor, loves their evils; and charity cannot be said
to belong to this. Further, if one repels an insulting enemy,
and in self-defence strikes him or delivers him to the judge,
so as to prevent injury to himself, yet with a disposition to
befriend the man, he acts in the course of charity. Wars
that have for their end the defence of one’s country and the
church, are not contrary to charity; the end in view shows
whether there is charity or not.

408. Since, therefore, charity in its origin is to have good
will, and as this has its seat in the internal man, it is mani-
fest that when one who has charity resists an enemy, pun-
ishes the guilty, or chastises the wicked, he does so by means


No. 410] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS $69

of the external man; therefore after he has done it, he re-
turns to the charity that is in the internal man; and then, as
far as he can, and it is useful, he wishes him well, and from
good will does good to him. They who have genuine char-
ity have zeal for what is good; and that zeal in the external
man may seem like anger and flaming fire, but its flame is
extinguished and it is quieted as soon as the adversary re-
turns to reason. It is otherwise with those who have no
charity: their zeal is anger and hatred; for from these their
internal is heated and inflamed. i

409. Before the Lord came into the world, scarcely any
one knew what the internal man was, or what charity was;
therefore in so many places He taught brotherly love, that
is, charity; and this makes the difference between the Old
Testament or Covenant and the New. That good must
be done, from charity, to the adversary and the enemy, the
Lord taught in Matthew: Ye have heard that it hath been
said to them 0} old time y Thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate
thine enemy . Bui I say unto you , Love your enemies , bless
them that curse you , do good to them that hate you y and pray
for them that injure and persecute you; that ye may be the chil-
dren of your Father who is in the heavens (v. 43-45). And
when Peter asked how often he should forgive one sinning
against him, whether until seven times, He answered, I say
not unto thee until seven tbnes y but until seventy times seven
(xvdii. 21, 22). And I have heard out of heaven that the
Lord forgives every one his sins, and never takes vengeance,
and does not even impute them, because He is Love itself
and Good itself; yet that sins are not thereby washed away,
for they are not washed away except by repentance; for,
when He said to Peter that he should forgive until seventy
times seven times, what will not the Lord do?

410. Since charity itself has its seat in the internal man,
where it is good will, and from that in the external man
where it is well-doing, it follows that the internal man is to
be loved, and from that the external; consequently, that a


570


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 410


man is to be loved according to the quality of the good in
him. Therefore good itself is essentially the neighbor.
This may be illustrated thus: When one selects for himself
among three or four a steward for his house, or a servant,
does he not search his internal man, and choose a sincere
and faithful person, and therefore love him? So, too, a
king or a magistrate from three or four persons would select
one qualified for an office, and reject one not competent,
whatever his looks might be, and though his words and
deeds might be in his favor. Since, therefore, every man is
the neighbor, and the variety of men is infinite, and every
one is to be loved as a neighbor according to his good, it is
manifest that there are genera and species, and also degrees,
of love toward the neighbor. Now as the Lord is to be
loved above all things, it follows that the degrees of love
toward the neighbor are to be measured by the love to Him,
thus by the measure in which another possesses the Lord in
himself, or has possession from the Lord; for so much good
he also possesses, because all good is from the Lord. But
as these degrees are in the internal man, and this rarely
manifests itself in the world, it is enough that the neighbor
be loved according to the degrees which one knows. But
after death those degrees are clearly perceived; for there,
the will’s affections and the thoughts of the understanding
which are from these, make a spiritual sphere around them,
which is felt in various ways; but in the world this spiritual
sphere is absorbed by the material body, and encloses itself
within the natural sphere, which then flows from man. That
there are degrees of love toward the neighbor, is evident
from the Lord’s parable of the Samaritan who showed mercy
to him who was wounded by thieves, whom the priest and
the Levite saw and passed by; and when the Lord asked
which of those three seemed to have been the neighbor, the
answer was, He who showed mercy (Luke x. 30-37).

41 1. We read, Thou shall love the Lord God above all
things , and the neighbor as thy set} (Luke x. 27). To love


Wo. 412]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


571


the neighbor as one’s self is not to despise him in comparison
with one’s self, to deal justly with him, and not to judge evil
of him. The law of charity laid down and given by the
Lord Himself is this: All things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you , do ye even so to them, jor this is the law
and the prophets (Matt. vii. 12: Luke vi. 31, 32). So they
love the neighbor who are in love of heaven; while they who
are in love of the world love the neighbor from the world and
for its sake; and they who are in love of self love the neighbor
from self and for the sake of self.


IV. Man collectively, a smaller and a greater society,

AND MAN IN THE AGGREGATE FROM THEM, OR ONE*S
COUNTRY, IS THE NEIGHBOR TO BE LOVED.

412. They who do not know what the neighbor is in the
genuine sense, suppose that only man individually is the
neighbor, and that to confer benefits on him is to love the
neighbor. But the neighbor and love to him extend further,
for they rise as men are multiplied. Who cannot under-
stand that to love many men in a body is to love the neighbor
more than to love one individual of the body? Therefore
a smaller or greater society is the neighbor because it is man
collectively. From this it follows that he who loves a society
loves those of whom the society consists; therefore he who
wishes and does good to a society, consults for the good of the
individuals. A society is like one man; and those who enter
into it compose as it were one body, and are distinct from
each other like members in one body. The Lord, and from
Him the angels, when they look down upon the earth, see an
entire society but as one man, and its form from the qualities
of those who are therein. It has also been granted me to
see a certain society in heaven altogether as one man, in
stature like that of a man in the world. That love to a
society is a fuller love to the neighbor than love to a sepa-
rate or individual man, shows itself in this, that dignities are


57 2 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 412

dispensed according to offices over societies, and honors are
attached to them according to the uses they perform. For
in the world there are higher and lower offices, subordinated
according to their more or less extended government over
societies; and the king is he whose government is the most
universal; and each one, according to the extent of his duties
and the goods of use which he promotes, has remuneration,
glory, and general love. But the rulers of the present age
can perform uses and consult for the good of society, and
yet not love the neighbor; like those who perform uses and
consult for the good of others for the sake of the world and
themselves, or of appearances, or that they may be thought
worthy to be raised to higher dignities. But such, though
not discerned in the world, are yet discerned in heaven;
therefore those who have promoted uses from love to the
neighbor, are also placed as rulers over a heavenly society,
and are in splendor and honor there; but yet they do not
set the heart on these, but on uses. The others, however,
who have done uses from the love of the world and self, are
rejected.

413. The difference between love toward the neighbor
and the exercise of it toward man individually, and man
collectively or a society, is like that between the respective
duties of citizen, magistrate, and duke; and like that be-
tween him who traded with two talents, and him who traded
with five (Matt. xxv. 14-31). The difference is also like
that between the value of a shekel and that of a talent; and
like that between the profit from the fruit of a vine and of a
vineyard, or of an olive-tree and of an olive-yard, or of a tree
and of an orchard. Moreover, love toward the neighbor
rises more and more interiorly with man; and as it rises he
loves a society more than an individual, and his country
more than a society. Now since charity consists in wishing
and so acting well, it follows that it is to be exercised toward
a society in almost the same manner as toward an individual;
but in one way to a society of good men, and in another to a


No. 415]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


573


society of wicked men. To the latter, charity is to be exer-
cised according to natural justice; to the former, according
to spiritual justice. But of these two kinds something will
be seen elsewhere.

414. One’s country is the neighbor more than a society,
because it consists of many societies, and consequently the
love toward it is broader and higher; and beside, to love one’s
country is to love the public welfare. A man’s country is
the neighbor, because it is like a parent; for there he was
bom; it has nourished and still nourishes him, it has pro-
tected and still protects him from injury. Men should do
good to their country from love, according to its necessities,
some of which are natural and some spiritual. Natural
necessities regard civil life and order, and spiritual necessi-
ties regard spiritual life and order. That one’s country is
to be loved, not as a man loves himself but more than him-
self, is a law inscribed on the human heart; hence what is
affirmed by every just man has been declared, that if ruin
threatens one’s country from an enemy or other source, it is
noble to die for it, and glorious for a soldier to shed his blood
for it. This is a common saying, because one’s country
should be loved so much. It is to be known that they who
love their country, and do good to it from good will, after
death love the Lord’s kingdom; for this is the country there;
and they who love the Lord’s kingdom love the Lord, be-
cause the Lord is the All in all of His kingdom.

V. The church is the neighbor to be loved in a

HIGHER DEGREE AND THE LORD’S KINGDOM IN THE
HIGHEST.

415. Since man was bom for eternal life, and is brought
into it by the church, therefore the church is to be loved as
the neighhor in a higher degree; for it teaches man the
means which lead to eternal life, and introduces him into
it, leading to it by truths of doctrine, and introducing by


574


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 415


goods of life. That the priesthood is to be loved in a higher
degree and from it the church, is not meant; but that the
good and truth of the church are to be loved, and the priest-
hood for their sake; this only serves, and as it serves is to be
honored. The church is the neighbor to be loved in a higher
degree, thus even above one’s country, for the further reason
that man is led by his country into civil life, but by the church
into spiritual life, and this life parts man from mere animal
life. Moreover, civil life is temporal, having an end, and
then it is as if it had not been; but spiritual life is eternal,
for it has no end; therefore of the latter being may be predi-
cated, but of the former, non-being. The distinction is like
that between finite and infinite, between which there is no
ratio; for the eternal is infinite as to time.

416. The Lord’s kingdom is the neighbor to be loved in
the highest degree, because by the Lord’s kingdom is meant
the church throughout the world, called the communion of
saints, and by it is also meant heaven. Therefore he who
loves the Lord’s kingdom, loves all in the whole world who
acknowledge the Lord and have faith in Him and charity
toward the neighbor, and he also loves all in heaven. They
who love the Lord’s kingdom love the Lord above all, and
hence are in love to God more than others; for the church in
the heavens and on earth is the body of the Lord, since they
are in the Lord and the Lord in them. Love toward the
Lord’s kingdom is therefore love toward the neighbor in its
fulness; for they who love the Lord’s kingdom not only love
the Lord above all, but they also love the neighbor as one’s
self; for love to the Lord is a universal love, and conse-
quently is in all things and everything of spiritual life, and
is also in everything of natural life; for this love has its seat
in the highests with man, and the highests flow into the
lower and vivify them, as the will flows into all of intention
and action from it, and the understanding into all things of
thought and the speech therefrom. Therefore the Lord says,
Seek ye first the kingdom oj the heavens and its righteousness ,


No. 418]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


575


then all things will be added unto you (Matt. vi. 33). That
the kingdom of the heavens is the Lord’s kingdom, is evident
from these words in Daniel: Behold He came as the Son 0}
Man , with the clouds 0} the heavens; and there was given Him
dominion , glory , and a kingdom ; and all peoples, nations, and
tongues shall worship Him . His dominion is an everlasting
dominion which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that
which shall nol be destroyed (vii. 13, 14).

VI. To LOVE THE NEIGHBOR, VIEWED IN ITSELF, IS NOT TO
LOVE THE PERSON, BUT THE GOOD IN THE PERSON.

417. Who does not know that man is not man from the
human face and body, but from the wisdom of understand-
ing and the goodness of will? The quality of these as it
rises makes him the more a man. When bom, a man is
more a brute than any animal, but he becomes man by in-
struction of various kinds, by the reception of which his
mind is formed; and from the mind and according to it,
man is man. There are beasts whose faces resemble man’s;
but they enjoy no faculty of understanding, or of doing any
thing from the understanding, but they act from the instinct
which their natural love excites. The distinction is that a
beast sounds the affections of its love, but a man speaks
them when brought into thought; again, a beast with its
face downward looks upon the ground, while man with the
face raised beholds the heaven around him. From which it
may be concluded that man is man so far as he speaks from
sound reason and looks to his abode in heaven; while he is
not man so far as he speaks from perverted reason, and
looks only to his abode in the world. Yet even such are
men; not actually, however, but potentially; for every man
enjoys the power of understanding truths and willing goods;
but so far as he does not will to do goods and understand
truths, he can counterfeit a man, and ape him in externals.

418. Good is the neighbor because it is of the will, and


576


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 418


the will is the esse of man's life. Truth of the understanding
is also the neighbor, but only so far as it proceeds from good
of the will; for good of the will forms itself in the under-
standing, and there presents itself to be seen in the light of
reason. That good is the neighbor is plain from all ex-
perience. Who loves a person except from the quality of his
will and understanding, that is, from what is good and just
in him? As for example, who loves a king, prince, duke,
governor, consul, magistrate, or judge, except for the justice
and judgment from which they act and speak ? Who loves
a primate, a minister of the church, or canon, except for
learning, integrity of life, and zeal for the salvation of souls ?
Who loves the general of an army or any officer under him,
except for bravery united with prudence? Who loves a
merchant except for honesty? Who loves a workman and
servant except for faithfulness? Yes, who loves a tree but
for fruit, the soil but for fertility, a stone but for precious-
ness? and so on. And what is remarkable, not only does
an upright man love what is good and just in another, but
a man who is not upright does so too, because with him he
is not in fear of losing reputation, honor, or wealth. But
love of good with one who is not upright, is not love of the
neighbor; for he does not love another inwardly except so
far as he is of service to him. But to love the good in another
from good in one’s self is genuine love toward the neighbor;
for then the goods kiss each other and unite.

419. He who loves good because it is good and truth be-
cause it is truth, eminently loves the neighbor, because he
loves the Lord who is Good itself and Truth itself. Love of
good and hence of truth, and so of the neighbor, is from no
other source. Thus love toward the neighbor is formed
from a heavenly origin. Whether use or good is said it is
the same; therefore, to perform uses is to do goods; and
according to the quantity and quality of the use in goods, so
far in quantity and quality the goods are goods.


No. 420]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


577


VII. Charity and good works are distinctly two, like

WILLING WELL AND DOING WELL.

420. There is an internal and an external with every man.
His internal is called the internal man, and his external the
external man. But he who knows not what the internal
man and the external are, may believe that it is the internal
man which thinks and wills, and the external which speaks
and acts. These latter indeed belong to the external man,
and the former to the internal; but yet they do not make the
external and internal man essentially. Ill common percep-
tion, indeed, man’s mind is the internal man; but the mind
is itself divided into two regions; one region which is higher
and more internal is spiritual, and the other which is lower
and more external is natural. The spiritual mind looks
principally to the spiritual world, and has for objects the
things there, whether they be such as are in heaven or as are
in hell; for both are in the spiritual world. But the natural
mind looks principally to the natural world, and has for
objects the things there, whether good or evil. All man’s
action and speech proceed directly from the lower region of
the mind, and indirectly from its higher region; because the
lower region of the mind is nearer the senses of the body, and
the higher region more remote from them. There is this
division of the mind with man, because he was so created
as to be spiritual and at the same time natural, and thus a
man and not a beast. Hence it is manifest that the man
who first regards the world and himself, is an external man,
because he is natural, not only in body but also in mind;
while the man who regards what is of heaven and the church
first, is an internal man, because he is spiritual both in mind
and body. He is spiritual in body also, because his actions
and words proceed from the higher mind which is spiritual,
through the lower which is natural. For it is known that
effects proceed from the body, and the causes which pro-


578


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 420


duce them from the mind; also that the cause is the all in the
effect. That the human mind is so divided is plainly mani-
fest from man being able to act the part of a dissembler,
flatterer, hypocrite, and player; and that he can assent to
what another says and yet laugh at it. This he does from
the higher mind, but that from the lower.

421. From this may be seen how it is to be understood
that charity and good works are distinct, like willing well and
doing well; that is to say, they are formally distinct like the
mind which thinks and wills and the body by which the mind
speaks and acts; while they are essentially distinct because
the mind itself is distinct, its inner region being spiritual and
the outer natural, as said above. Therefore if works pro-
ceed from the spiritual mind they proceed from its good will
which is charity; but if from the natural mind, they proceed
from a good will which is not charity; though it may appear
like charity in outward form, still it is not charity in the in-
ward form; and charity in only the outward form indeed
has the look of charity, but does not possess its essence.
This may be illustrated by comparison with seeds in the
ground. From every seed is brought forth a plant, useful
or useless according to the nature of the seed. So likewise
with spiritual seed, which is the truth of the church from the
Word. From this doctrine is formed, useful if from genuine
truths, useless if from truths falsified. So is it with charity
from good will, whether the good will is for the sake of self
and the world, or for the sake of the neighbor in a narrow
or a broad sense. If for the sake of self and the world, it is
spurious charity; but if for the sake of the neighbor, it is
genuine charity. But of this, more may be seen in the chap-
ter on Faith, especially in the article where it is shown, That
charity is to will well, and good works are to do well from
willing well (n. 374): and That charity and faith are only
mental and perishable unless they are determined to works
and co-exist in them, when possible (n. 375, 376).


No. 423]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


579


VIIL Charity itself is to act justly and faithfully in

THE OFFICE, BUSINESS, AND WORK IN WHICH ONE IS, AND
WITH WHOMSOEVER HE HAS ANY INTERCOURSE.

422. Charity itself is to act justly and faithfully in the
office, business, and work in which one is, because all things
which a man so does are of use to society; and use is good;
and good, in a sense apart from persons, is the neighbor.
That not only an individual man, but also a smaller society,
and one’s country itself, is the neighbor, was shown above.
For example: A king who sets his subjects an example of
well-doing, as he wishes them to live according to the laws
of righteousness, rewards those who do so, regards every one
according to his merit, defends them against injuries and
invasions, acts as father of the kingdom, and consults for the
general prosperity of his people; charity is in his heart, and
his deeds are good works. The priest who teaches truths
from the Word, and by them leads to good of life and so to
heaven, because he consults for the good of the souls of the
men of his church, is eminently in the exercise of charity.
The judge who judges according to justice and law, and not
for reward, friendship, and relationship, consults for the
good of society and of men individually; of society, because
it is thereby kept in obedience to law and in fear of trans-
gressing it; and of the individual, because justice triumphs
over injustice. The merchant, if he acts from sincerity and
not from fraud, consults for the good of the neighbor with
whom he has business. So, too, a workman and an artisan,
if he does his work uprightly and honestly, and not fraudu-
lently and deceitfully. It is the same with all others; as with
shipmasters and sailors, farmers and servants.

423. This is charity itself because charity may be defined
as doing good to the neighbor, daily and continually; and
not only to the neighbor individually, but also collectively;
and this can be done only by means of what is good and just


S8o TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 423

in the office, business, and work in which one is, and in his
relations with those with whom he has dealings; for this he
does daily; and when he is not doing it, it still continually
has place in his mind, and he has it in thought and intention.
The man who thus practises charity, becomes charity in form
more and more; for justice and faithfulness form his mind,
and their exercise forms his body; and little by little, from
his form, he wills and thinks only what is of charity. Such
become at length like those of whom it is said in the Word,
that they have the law written on their hearts. Moreover
they do not place merit in their works, because they do not
think of merit but of duty, that it becomes a citizen to do so.
But a man can by no means act from spiritual justice and
faithfulness from himself; for every man inherits from his
parents an inclination to do what is good and just for the
sake of self and the world, and no man an inclination to do
it for the sake of what is good and just. Therefore only he
who worships the Lord and acts from the Lord while acting
of himself, attains to spiritual charity, and becomes imbued
with it by its exercise.

424. There are many who act justly and faithfully in
their occupation, and, though they thus promote works of
charity, still do not possess any charity in themselves. But
these are they in whom love of self and the world dominates,
and not love of heaven; and if perchance this latter love is
present, it is beneath the former like a servant under his
master, and like a common soldier under his officer, and is
like a porter standing at the door.

EX. The benefactions of charity are giving to the

POOR AND RELIEVING THE NEEDY; BUT WITH PRUDENCE.

425. A distinction is to be made between the offices of
charity and its benefactions. By offices of charity are meant
the exercises of it which proceed immediately from charity
itself; and these, as has just been shown, belong primarily


fto. 426] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 581

to one’s occupation. But by benefactions are meant deeds
of help performed outside of one’s occupation. They are
called benefactions, because the doing of them is with man’s
liberty and at his pleasure; and when done, they are re-
garded by the recipient simply as benefactions; and they are
done according to the reasons and the intentions which the
benefactor has in mind. It is the common belief that charity
is only to give to the poor, relieve the needy, care for widows
and orphans, and contribute to the building of hospitals,
infirmaries, asylums, orphanages, and especially temples,
and to their decorations and revenues. But many of these
are not the proper deeds of charity, but extraneous to it.
They who place charity itself in these benefactions, cannot
but place merit in these works; and though they profess with
the mouth that they do not wish them to be regarded as of
merit, still belief in their merit lurks within. Then they tell
their works, and demand salvation as a reward. But inquiry
is then made as to the origin of the works, and thus as to
their quality; and if it is found that they proceed from pride,
or seeking after fame, from bare munificence, friendship,
merely natural inclination, or hypocrisy, they are then judged
from that origin; for the quality of the origin is in the works.
But genuine charity proceeds from those who are imbued
with it from justice and judgment in the works which they
do without expectation of reward as an end, according to the
Lord’s words in Luke (xiv. 12-14). They also call such
things as have been mentioned above benefactions, as also
debts, though they are of charity.

426. It is known that some who have performed those
beneficent acts which to the world show the image of charity,
have the opinion and belief that they have practised the
works of charity, and they regard them as many in papal
lands regard indulgences, that by means of them they are
purified from sins, and as regenerate are to have heaven
given to them; and yet they do not regard as sins, adultery,
hatred, revenge, fraud, and, in general, lusts of the flesh, in


582


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 426


which they indulge at pleasure. But what are then those
good works but painted pictures of angels in the company
of devils, or boxes made of lapis lazuli with hydras in them?
But it is wholly different if these benefactions are made by
those who shun the evils above mentioned as hateful to char-
ity. But in truth those benefactions are advantages in many
ways, especially giving to the poor and to beggars; for
thereby, boys and girls, servants and maids, and in general
all simple-minded persons, are initiated into charity, for
they are its externals, whereby such are trained to the duties
of charity; for they are the rudiments of it, and then are
like unripe fruits. But with those who are afterward per-
fected by just knowledge respecting charity and faith, they
become like ripe fruit; and then they regard those former
works done from simplicity of heart only as what was due
from them.

427. Such benefactions are at this day believed to be the
proper deeds of charity meant in the Word by good works,
because charity is often described in the Word as giving to
the poor, helping the needy, and caring for widows and
orphans. But it has been hitherto unknown that the Word
in the letter names only such things as are external, yes, such
as are the most external things of worship, and that spiritual
things which are internal are meant by them; as may be
seen above, in the chapter concerning the Sacred Scripture
(n. 193-209). From which it is manifest, that by those

» called poor, needy, widows, and orphans, these are not there
‘ meant, but they who are such spiritually. That by the poor
are meant those who are not in knowledge of truth and
good, may be seen in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 209); also
that widows mean those who are without truths and still
desire them (n. 764); and so on.

428. They who from birth are merciful, and do not make
their natural mercifulness spiritual by exercising it from
genuine charity, believe that it is charity to give to any poor
person, and to relieve any one who is in want; and they do


No. 429] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 583

not first make inquiry whether the poor and needy person is
good or had; for they say that this is not necessary, since
God looks only at the aid and the alms. But after death
these are well discerned, and are separated from those who
have done the benefactions of charity prudently; for they
who have performed them from that blind idea of charity,
then do good to bad and good alike ; and by means of what
is done for them the wicked do evils, and thereby injure the
good; therefore those benefactors also are a cause of injury
to the good. For to perform a beneficent act to an evil-doer,
is like giving bread to a devil, which he turns into poison; for
all bread is poison in the devil’s hand, or if it is not, he turns
it into poison, and this he does by using good deeds as allure-
ments to evil. And it is like handing to an enemy a sword
with which he may kill some one. And it is like giving a
shepherd’s crook to a man-wolf that he may lead the sheep
to pasture; when yet, after he has obtained it, he drives the
sheep from the pasture to a desert, and there slaughters
them. And it is like entrusting the government to a robber,
who studies and watches only for plunder; according to the
richness and abundance of which he makes the laws and
executes judgments.

X. There are debts oe charity; some public, some

DOMESTIC, AND SOME PRIVATE.

429. The benefactions and the debts of charity are dis-
tinct from each other, like things done from free-will and
those which are done from necessity. But still, by the debts
of charity is not here meant what is due from the offices in a
kingdom and republic, as from a minister that he should
minister, from a judge that he should judge, and so on, but
what is due from every one, in whatever office he is. Suet
duties have therefore a different origin and flow from another
will, and are therefore done from charity by those who are
in charity, and, on the other hand, from no charity by those
who are in no charity.


5^4 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 430

430. The public dues of charity are especially tribute and
taxes, which must not be confounded with what is due from
office. They who are spiritual pay these with one disposi-
tion of heart, and they who are merely natural with another.
The spiritual pay them from good will, because they are
collected for the preservation of their country, and for its
protection and that of the church, also for the administra-
tion of government by officials and rulers, to whom salaries
and stipends are to be paid from the public treasury. There-
fore they to whom their country and also the church are the
neighbor, pay them with a ready and favorable will, and
regard it as iniquitous to deceive and to prevent their collec-
tion. But they to whom their country and the church are
not the neighbor, pay them with a reluctant and repugnant
will, and at every opportunity they defraud and steal; for
with them their own house and their own flesh are the
neighbor.

431. The domestic dues of charity are those of husband
toward wife and of wife toward husband, of father and
mother toward children and of children toward father and
mother, also those of master and mistress toward servants
of either sex and of servants toward them. These debts
because they relate to bringing up and the management of
the household, are so numerous that if told they would fill
a volume. Every one is moved to meet these debts by a love
different from that which moves him to meet what is due
from his occupation; to those of husband toward wife and
of wife toward husband, they are moved by marriage love
and according to it; of father and mother toward children
by the love implanted in every one, called parental; and of
children toward parents, by and according to another love
which closely joins itself with obedience from its being due.
But what is due from master and mistress to servants, male
and female, is derived from the love of reigning, and this is
according to the state of each one’s mind. But marriage
love and love toward children, with what is due from them


No. 432]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


585


and its practice, do not produce love to the neighbor like
the practice of what is due in one’s employment, for the love
called parental exists equally with bad and good, and is
sometimes stronger with the wicked; and it also exists in
beasts and hirds, in which no charity can be formed. That
it is with bears, tigers, and serpents as much as with sheep
and goats, and with owls as much as with doves, is known.
As to what parents owe their children in particular: with
those who are in charity these are inwardly different from
what they are with those who are not in charity, but out-
wardly they appear alike. With those who are in charity,
that love is joined with love to the neighbor and to God;
for by them children are loved according to their morals,
virtues, endeavors, and qualifications for serving the public.
But with those who are not in charity, there is no conjunc-
tion of charity with the love called parental; so that many
of them can love wicked, immoral, and crafty children, more
than those who are good, moral, and prudent; thus those
who are useless to the public more than those who are useful.

432. The private dues of charity are also numerous, such
as payment of wages to workmen, payment of interest, fulfil-
ment of contracts, guarding of securities, and other like
things, some of which are debts by statute law, some by civil
common law, and some by moral law. These also are dis-
charged by those who are in charity with a different mind
from that with those who are not in charity. They who are
in charity do them justly and faithfully; for it is a precept
of charity that every one should act justly and faithfully
with all with whom he is in any business and intercourse, ;
of which above (n. 422-425). But the same things are per-
formed very differently by those who are not in charity. f


586


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 433


XI. The diversions of charity are dinners, suppers,

AND SOCIAL GATHERINGS.

433. It is known that dinners and suppers are everywhere
customary, and are given for various purposes; also that
with most people they are for the sake of friendship, relation-
ship, gladness, and for the sake of gain and recompense;
also that they are means of corrupting men and drawing
them over to a party, and that among the great they are also
for the sake of honor, and in kings* palaces for the sake of
splendor. But the dinners and suppers of charity are among
those only who are in mutual love from similar faith. With
the Christians of the primitive church, the dinners and sup-
pers were for no other end, and they were called love-feasts,
being instituted that they might be glad together from the
heart and be joined with one another. Suppers with them
signified consociations and conjunctions, in the first state
of the establishment of the church; for evening, when they
took place, signified this state : but dinners, the same in the
second state, when the church was established; for morning
and day signified this state. At table they conversed on
various subjects, both domestic and civil, but especially on
such as pertained to the church; and because they were
feasts of charity, on whatever subject they spoke, charity
with its joy and gladness was in their speech. The spiritual
, sphere which reigned in those feasts was one of love to the
Lord and of love toward the neighbor, which cheered the
mind of every one, softened the tone of every one’s words,
and carried festivity from the heart to all the senses. For
a spiritual sphere, which is of his love’s affection and the
thought therefrom, emanates from every man; and it in-
wardly affects his associates, especially at feasts; it ema-
nates through the face as well as by the breath. As such
consociations of minds were signified by dinners and sup-
pers, or by feasts, therefore they are mentioned in the Word;


No. 434] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 587

and nothing else is there meant by them in the spiritual
sense; also in the highest sense by the paschal supper of the
children of Israel, and also by the eating at other festivals;
as also by their eating the sacrifices together near the taber-
nacle. Conjunction itself was then represented by break-
ing the bread and distributing it, and by drinking from the
same cup and handing it to one another.

434. As to social gatherings in the primitive church,
they were among such as called themselves brethren in
Christ; they were therefore assemblies of charity, because
there was spiritual brotherhood. They were also a con-
solation in the sufferings of the church, seasons of rejoicing
in its increase, and also recreations of soul after study and
labor, and at the same time gave opportunity for conversa-
tion on various subjects; and because they flowed from spiri-
tual love as a fountain, they were rational and moral from
a spiritual origin. There are at this day assemblies of
friendship, which regard as their end enjoyments of socia-
bility, exhilaration of mind by conversation, and which are
therefore for the expansion of the mind, and the liberation
of imprisoned thoughts, and thus for warming the sensuals
of the body and perfecting their state. But there are as yet
no gatherings of charity; for the Lord says, In the consum-
mation of the age, that is, in the end of the church, iniquity
will be multiplied, and charity will grow cold (Matt. xxiv.
12). This is because the church had not yet acknowledged
the Lord God the Saviour as the God of heaven and earth,
and gone immediately to Him from whom alone genuine
charity proceeds and flows in. But the social gatherings
where friendship emulating charity does not join minds
together, are mere pretences of friendship, and deceptive
attestations of mutual love, seductive insinuations into
favor, and sacrifices offered to the delights of the body,
especially the sensual, whereby other people are carried
away like ships by sails and favoring currents, while syco-
phants and hypocrites stand at the stern and hold the helm.


588


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 435


XII. The first of charity is to put away evils, and

THE SECOND IS TO DO GOODS WHICH ARE OF USE TO THE
NEIGHBOR.

435. In the doctrine of charity this holds the primary
place, that the first thing of charity is not to do evil to the
neighbor; and to do good to him the second place. This
dogma is as a door to the doctrine of charity. It is known
that evil dwells in every man’s will from his birth; and as
all evil regards man, both far and near, and society also, and
one’s country, it follows that hereditary evil is evil against
the neighbor in every degree. A man may see from reason
itself, that as far as the evil abiding in the will is not re-
moved, the good which he does is impregnated with that
evil; for evil then is inwardly in the good, like a kernel in its
shell, and like marrow in the bone; therefore though the
good done by such a man appears good, still inwardly it is
not good; for it is like a fresh-looking shell containing a
worm-eaten kernel, and like a white almond rotten inside,
from which streaks of rottenness extend even to the surface.
To will evil and do good are in themselves opposites; for
evil is of hatred against the neighbor, and good is of love
toward the neighbor; or evil is the neighbor’s enemy, and
good is his friend. The two cannot exist in one mind, that
is, evil in the internal man and good in the external; if they
do, the good in the external man is like the superficial heal-
ing of a wound, within which is what is putrid. Man is
then like a tree with a decayed root, still producing fruit
which outwardly looks like well-flavored and useful, but is
inwardly offensive and useless. Such are also like scoriae
left in smelting ores, which being polished on the surface
and beautifully colored are sold as precious stones. In a
word, they are like the eggs of an owl, which one is made to
believe to be the eggs of a dove. Man should know that the
good which he does with the body proceeds from his spirit,


No. 436] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS $89

or from the internal man; the internal man is his spirit that
lives after death; therefore when the man casts off the body
which made his external man, then all that there is of him is
in evils and has enjoyment in them, and is averse to good as
hostile to his life. That a man cannot do good in itself
good before evil has been removed, the Lord teaches in
many places: Men do not gather grapes from thorns , or pigs
from thistles. Neither can a cor nipt tree bring forth good
fruit (Matt. vii. 16-18). Woe urtio you , scribes and Phari-
sees; ye make clean the outside of the cup and platter , but
inwardly they are full of extortion and excess. Thou blind
Pharisee , cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the plat-
ter , that the outside may be clean also (xxiii. 25, 26). And
in Isaiah: Wash you; put away the evil of your doings;
cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment. Then though
your sins have been as scarlet , they shall be white as snow;
though they have been red as crimson , they shall be as wool
(i. 16-18).

436. This may be further illustrated by comparisons:
No one can go to another who keeps a leopard and a panther
in his chamber, living safe with them because he feeds them,
unless he has first removed those wild beasts. Who that
has been invited to the table of a king and queen has not first
washed face and hands before coming near ? Who does not
purify ores by fire, and separate them from dross, before he
obtains pure gold and silver ? Who does not separate tares
from wheat before he takes it into the bam ? Who does not
prepare meat by cooking, before it becomes fit to eat and is
set upon the table? Who does not shake off worms from
the leaves of a tree in the garden, that the leaves may not be
devoured, and the fruit thus destroyed? Who loves and
intends marriage with a virgin who is full of disease and
covered with pimples and blotches, however she may paint
her face, dress splendidly, and study to induce the entice-
ments of love by the charms of her conversation? Man
must purify himself from evils and not wait for the Lord to


59 ° TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 436

do this immediately; otherwise he may be compared to a
servant with face and clothes fouled with soot and dung,
who comes up to his master and says, “Wash me, my lord.”
Would not the master say to him, “You foolish servant,
what are you saying? See; there are water, soap, and
towel. Have you not hands, and power in them? Wash
yourself.” And the Lord God will say, “The means of
purification are from Me; and from Me are your will and
ability; therefore use these My gifts and endowments as
your own, and you will be purified.”

437. It is believed at the present day that charity is simply
to do good, and that then one does not do evil; hence that
the first thing of charity is to do good, and the second not
to do evil; but this is wholly inverted; the first of charity is
to put away evil, and its second is to do good; for it is a uni-
versal law in the spiritual world, and from this in the natural
world also, that so far as one does not will evil he wills good;
thus so far as he turns away from hell, from which comes up
all evil, so far he turns toward heaven, from which comes
down all good; consequently also, that so far as one rejects
the devil, he is accepted by the Lord. One cannot stand
with his head ever turning between the two, and pray to both
at once; for of them the Lord says, I know thy works , that
thou art neither cold nor hot. I would that thou wert cold or
hot; but because thou art lukewarm , and neither cold nor hot ,
I will spew thee out 0} My mouth (Apoc. iii. 15, 16). Who
can run about with his troop between two armies and favor
them both? Who can be in evil against the neighbor and
in good toward him at the same time? Does not the evil
then hide itself in the good? Although the evil that hides
itself does not appear in the acts, it still manifests itself in
many things when rightly reflected upon. The Lord says,
No servant can serve two masters. Ye cannot serve God and
mammon (Luke xvi. 13).

438. But no one can purify himself from evils by his own
power and strength, and yet it cannot be done without the


No. 439] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 59 1

power and strength of man, as his own. If these were not
as his own, no one could fight against the flesh and its lusts,
which is nevertheless enjoined upon every one; yes, he
would not think of any combat, and so would let the mind
run into evils of every kind, and he would be restrained from
them in his deeds only by laws of justice established in the
world, and their penalties; and thus he would be inwardly
like a tiger, leopard, and serpent, that do not reflect upon the
cruel enjoyments of their loves. From this it is plain that
because man is rational above wild beasts, he must resist *
evils from the power and the strength given him by the Lord,
which in every sense appear to him as his own; and this
appearance has been given by the Lord to every man for the
sake of regeneration, imputation, conjunction, and salvation.


XIII. In the exercises of charity man does not place

MERIT IN WORKS WHILE HE BELIEVES THAT ALL GOOD IS

from the Lord.

439. It is hurtful to place merit in works done for the sake
of salvation; for in this evils of which he who does so knows
nothing are hidden; there are hidden denial of God’s influx
and operation with man; trust in one’s own power in matters
of salvation; faith in one’s self and not in God; justification
of one’s self; salvation by one’s own strength; making Di-
vine grace and mercy to be nought; rejection of reformation
and regeneration by Divine means; especially, taking from
the merit and righteousness of the Lord God the Saviour,
which such claim for themselves; beside continual looking
to reward, which they regard as the first and last end; sink-
ing and extinction of love to the Lord and love toward the
neighbor; total ignorance and incapacity for perceiving the
enjoyment of heavenly love, which enjoyment is without
merit, there being only a sense of the love of self. For they
who put reward first and salvation second, and thus seek the
latter for the sake of the former, invert order, and immerse


592


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 439


the interior desires of their mind in their self-life, and in the
body defile them with the evils of their flesh. It is from this
that the good of merit appears to the angels as rust, and good
that is not of merit as purple. That good is not to be done
for reward as the end is taught by the Lord in Luke: If ye
do good to them who do good to you , what thank have ye?
Rather , love ye your enemies , and do good , and lend , hoping
}or nothing again; then your reward shall be great , and ye
shall be sons of the Highest; for He is kind unto the unthank-
ful and the evil (vi. 33-35). And in John it is taught that
man cannot do good that is good in itself, except from the
Lord: Abide in Me and I in you. As the branch cannot bear
fruit of itself except it abide in the vine , no more can ye except
ye abide in Me; for without Me ye can do nothing (xv. 4, 5).
And elsewhere, A man can receive nothing , except it be given
him from heaven (iii. 27).

440. But to think that men come into heaven and that
good is therefore to be done, is not to regard reward as the
end, and to place merit in works; for they also think that,
who love the neighbor as themselves and God above all;
for they so think from faith in the Lord’s words, that their
reward shall be great in heaven (Matt. v. n, 12; vi. 1; xi 41,
42; Luke vi. 23, 35; xiv. 12-14; John iv. 36): That they
who have done good shall possess as an inheritance a king-
dom prepared from the foundation of the world (Matt. xxv.
34): That to every one it is given according to his works
(Matt. xvi. 27: John v. 29: Apoc. xiv. 13; xx. 12, 13: Jer.
xxv. 14; xxxii. 19: Hos. iv. 9: Zech. i. 6; and elsewhere).
These do not trust to reward on account of their merit,
but they are in the faith of the promise from grace. With
them the enjoyment in doing good to the neighbor is its
reward. The angels in heaven have this enjoyment, and
it is a spiritual enjoyment which is eternal, and immensely
exceeds every natural enjoyment. They who are in this
enjoyment do not wish to hear of merit, for they love to do
good and they perceive that they are favored in the doing;


No. 441]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


593


and they are sorry if it is believed that their doing is for the
sake of a return. They are like those who do good to friends
for the sake of friendship, to brother for the sake of brother-
hood, to wife and children for the sake of wife and children,
to their country for the country’s sake, thus from friendship
and love. They who do acts of kindness also say and urge
that they do them not for their own sake, but for theirs.

441. It is wholly different with those who in their works
regard reward as the end itself. Such are like those who
form friendships, also make presents, perform services,
profess love as from the heart, for the sake of profit; but
when they do not obtain what they have hoped for, they turn
away, renounce their friendship, and devote themselves to
the enemies of him for whom they professed love, and to
those who hate him. They are also like nurses who nurse
infants merely for wages, and kiss and fondle them in pres-
ence of parents, but as soon as they are not fed with delica-
cies and rewarded just as they wish, turn against the infants,
treat them harshly, and beat them, laughing at their cries.
They are also like those who regard their country from the
love of self and the world, and say that they are willing to
spend their property and lives for it, and yet if they do not
attain honors and riches as rewards, speak ill of their country
and join its enemies. They are also like shepherds who
feed the sheep merely for hire, and, if they do not receive it
when they choose, drive the sheep with their staff from the
pasture into the desert. Like these are priests who dis-
charge the duties of their ministry solely for the sake of the
emoluments attached to them; that they care little for the
salvation of the souls over whom they have been placed as
leaders, is plain. It is the same with magistrates who look
only to the dignity of their office and its fees; when they do
good it is not for the sake of the public good, but for the sake
of enjoyment from love of self and the world, which as the
only good is their breath. It is similar with all others; for
the end in view carries every point, and the mediate causes


594 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 441

of the function are renounced if they do not promote the end.
It is the same with those who demand reward because of
their merit in matters of salvation; after death they loftily
demand heaven, but after they are found to possess nothing
of love to God, and nothing of love toward the neighhor,
they are sent back to those who may instruct them about
charity and faith; if they repudiate their doctrines, they are
dismissed to their like, among whom are some who are angry
with God because they do not obtain rewards, and who call
faith a thing of reason. These are they who are meant in the
Word by hirelings, to whom were given services of the lowest
kind in the courts of the temple. At a distance they seem
to be splitting wood.

442. It is to be well known that charity and faith in the
Lord are closely conjoined; consequently, as is faith such is
charity. That the Lord, charity, and faith make one, like
life, will, and understanding, and that if they are divided
each perishes like a pearl reduced to powder, may be seen
above, n. 362, 363; and that charity and faith are together
in good works, n. 373-377. From which it follows that as
faith is, such is charity, and that works are such as faith and
charity are together. Now if there is faith that all the good
which a man does as from himself is of the Lord, man is
then the instrumental cause of the good, and the Lord the
principal cause; which two causes appear as one to man,
when yet the principal is the all in all of the instrumental.
It follows from this, that if a man believes that all good which
is in itself good is from the Lord, he does not place merit in
works; and in the degree in which this faith is becoming
perfect in man, the fantasy as to merit is taken away from
him by the Lord. In this state man fulfils the exercises of
charity abundantly, without fear for merit, and at length he
perceives the spiritual enjoyment in charity, and then he be-
gins to be averse to merit as harmful to his life. Merit is
easily washed away by the Lord with those who are imbued
with charity by acting justly and faithfully in the work, busi-


No. 443]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


595


ness, and office in which they are, and toward all with whom
they have any dealings, of whom see above (n. 422-424).
But merit is taken away with difficulty from those who be-
lieve that charity is gained by giving alms and relieving the
needy; for while they do these works, in the mind, at first
openly and afterward tacitly, they wish for reward and claim
merit.

XIV a Moral life, when at the same time spiritual, is

CHARITY.


443. Every man learns from parents and teachers to live
morally, that is, to fulfil the duties of citizenship and to per-
form the offices of honorable life, which have relation to the
various virtues, which are the essentials of honorable life,
and to produce them in formalities called proprieties; and as
he advances in years, he learns to add to these what belongs
to reason, and thereby to perfect the morals of life. For
moral life in boys even to early youth, is natural, and be-
comes more and more rational afterward. He who reflects
well can see that moral life is the same as the life of charity;
and that this is to act well with the neighbor, and so to regu-
late the life that it shall not be contaminated with evils, fol-
lows from what was shown above (n. 435-438). But yet in
life’s first period, moral life is the life of charity in outmosts;
that is is merely its outer and forward part, not the inner.
For there are four periods of life through which man passes
from infancy to old age; the first is that in which he acts
from others, according to instructions; the second is that in
which he acts from himself, while the understanding is the
leader; the third is that in which the will acts upon the un-
derstanding and the understanding modifies the will; the
fourth is that in which he acts from what has been confirmed
and from purpose. But these periods of life are the periods
of the life of man’s spirit, and not likewise of his body; for
the body can act morally and speak rationally, and his spirit


596 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 443

•

still will and think the contrary. That the natural man is
such is clearly manifest from pretenders, flatterers, liars, and
hypocrites; that they possess a double mind, or that their
mind is divided into two minds not in accord, is evident.
It is otherwise with those who will well and think rationally,
and hence act well and talk rationally. These are meant
in the Word by the single in spirit; they are called single,
because they are not double-minded. From this may be
seen what is properly meant by the external and the internal
man; also that no one, from morality of the external man
can form a conclusion as to morality of the internal, for this
may be turned the opposite way, and hide itself as a tortoise
hides its head within its shell, or as a serpent hides its head
in its coil. For such a so-called moral man is like a robber
in a city and in a forest, acting the moral man in the city,
but the plunderer in the forest. It is quite otherwise with
those who are inwardly moral or as to the spirit, which they
become through regeneration by the Lord. These are
meant by the spiritual moral.

444. Moral life, when at the same time spiritual, is the
life of charity, because the practices of moral life and of
charity are the same, for charity is to will well to the neigh-
bor, and from good will to act well with him; and this is of
moral life also. The spiritual law is this law of the Lord:
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you , do
ye even so to them; this is the law and the prophets (Matt,
vii. 12). This same law is the universal law of moral life.
But to tell all the works of charity and compare them with
those of moral life, would fill many pages; let but the six
precepts of the second table of the law of the Decalogue
serve for illustration. That these are precepts of moral life
is manifest to every one; and that they also comprise all that
pertains to love toward the neighbor, may be seen above
(n. 329-331). That charity fulfils them all, is evident from
the following in Paul: Love one another; for he that loveth
another hath fulfilled the law: for this , Thou shall not commit


- No. 446]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


597


adultery , thou shalt not kill y thou shalt not steals thou shall not
bear false witness , thou shalt not covet; and if there be any
other commandment it is comprehended in this sayings namely ,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Charity doeth no
evil to the neighbor; charity is the f ulfilling of the law (Rom.
xiii. 8-10). He who thinks from the external man only can-
not but wonder that the seven precepts of the second table
were promulgated by Jehovah on Mount Sinai with so great
a miracle, when yet these same precepts, in all kingdoms on
earth, hence also in Egypt whence the children of Israel
had lately come, were the precepts of the law of civil justice,
for no kingdom continues to exist without them. But they
were promulgated by Jehovah, and were moreover written
on tables of stone by His finger, that they might be not only
the precepts of civil society and thus of natural moral life,
but also the precepts of heavenly society and thus of spiri-
tual moral life; so that to do contrary to them was not merely
to act against men, but against God also.

445. Viewing moral life in its essence, it may be seen that it
is life according to human laws and at the same time accord-
ing to Divine laws; therefore he who lives according to those
two as one law, is a truly moral man, and his life is charity.
If he will, one can from external moral life comprehend the
quality of charity. Only transfer into the internal man ex-
ternal moral life such as is in civil association, so that in the
will and the thought of the internal man the life may he
similar and conformable to the acts in the external, and you
will see charity in its own type.


XV. Friendship of love contracted with a man without

REGARD TO HIS QUALITY AS TO THE SPIRIT, IS HARMFUL
AFTER DEATH.

446. By friendship of love is meant interior friendship,
which is such that not only the external man is loved, but
also his internal, and this without scrutiny into his quality


598


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 446


as to the internal or spirit, that is, as to the affections of the
mind, whether they are from love to the neighbor and to
God, and thus fitted for consociation with the angels of
heaven, or whether they are from a love opposed to the neigh-
bor and from a love opposed to God, and thus fitted for con-
sociation with devils. Such friendship is contracted by
many, from various causes and for various ends. It is dis-
tinct from external friendship, which is only of the person,
and which exists for the sake of various enjoyments of the
body and the senses, and of dealings of various kinds.
Friendship of this kind may be formed with any one, even
with the clown who jokes at the table of a duke. This is
called friendship, simply; but the former is called the friend-
ship of love, for friendship is natural conjunction, but love is
spiritual conjunction.

447. That the friendship of love is harmful after death,
may be evident from the state of heaven, of hell, and of man’s
spirit with relation to them. As to the state of heaven: it is
divided into innumerable societies according to all the va-
rieties of the affections of good; while hell, on the other
hand, is divided into societies according to all the varieties
of the affections of love of evil; and man after death, who is
then a spirit, is at once assigned according to his life in the
world to the society where his reiginng love is, to some heav-
enly society if love to God and toward the neighbor made
the chief of his loves, and to some infernal society if the love
of self and the world, made the chief of his loves. Imme-
diately after his entrance into the spiritual world, which
takes place by death and the rejection of the material body
to the sepulchre, man is for some time preparing for his so-
ciety to which he has been assigned; and the preparation is
made by rejection of the loves which are not in concord with
his principal love. Therefore one is then separated from
another, friend from friend, dependant from patron, also
parent from children, and brother from brother, and each
one is joined to his like, with whom he is to live a common


No. 448]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


599


and properly his own life, to eternity. But in the first part
of the time of preparation, they come together, and con-
verse in a friendly way as in the world, but they are gradu-
ally parted, and this is so done that they are not sensible
of it.

448. But those who in the world contracted with each
other friendships of love, cannot like others be separated
according to order, and assigned to the society correspondent
with their life; for they are bound together inwardly as to
the spirit, nor can they be severed, because they are like
branches grafted into branches. Therefore if one as to his
interiors is in heaven, and the other as to his in hell, they
remain fast to each other, much like a sheep tied to a wolf,
or a goose to a fox, or a dove to a hawk; and he whose in-
teriors are in hell inspires the infernal things belonging to
him into the one whose interiors are in heaven. For among
the things that are well known in heaven is also this, that
evils may be inspired into the good, but not goods into the
evil; this is because every one is by birth in evils. Conse-
quently when the good are thus joined fast to the evil their
interiors are closed, and both are thrust down into hell; and
one who is good suffers hard things there, but after a lapse
of time is taken out, and then first begins preparation for
heaven. It has been granted me to see cases of such bind-
ing, particularly between brothers and relatives, and also
between patrons and their dependants, and of many with
flatterers, these having contrary affections and diverse gen-
ius; and I have seen some like kids with leopards, kissing
each other, and swearing to their former friendship; and I
then perceived that the good were absorbing the enjoyments
of the evil, holding each other by the hand, and together
entering into caves where crowds of the wicked were seen in
their hideous forms, though to themselves, from the illusion
of fantasy, they seemed in lovely forms. But after a while
I heard from the good mournful cries of fear, as if on account
of snares, and from the wicked I heard rejoicings like those


6oo


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 448


of enemies over spoils; beside other sad scenes. I have
heard that the good, when taken out, were afterward pre-
pared for heaven by means of reformation, but with greater
difficulty than others.

449. It is wholly different with those who love the good
in another, that is, who love the justice, judgment, sincerity,
benevolence from charity, and especially with those who love
the faith and the love to the Lord. These, because they love
what is within a man apart from the things which are out-
side, if they do not observe the same things in the person
after death, immediately withdraw from the friendship, and
are associated by the Lord with those who are in like good.
It may be said that no one can explore the interiors of the
mind of those with whom he associates or deals. But this is
not necessary; only let him guard against a friendship of
love, with every one. External friendship for the sake of
various uses is harmless.

XVI. There are spurious charity, hypocritical charity,

AND DEAD CHARITY.

450. There is no genuine, that is, living charity, but that
which makes one with faith, and unless they both look to the
Lord conjointly; for these three, the Lord, charity, and faith
are the three essentials of salvation, and when they make one,
charity is charity and faith is faith; and the Lord is in them,

, and they are in the Lord, as may be seen above (n. 363-
1367, and n. 368-372). But, however, when these three are
. not joined, charity is either spurious, or hypocritical, or
■dead. There have been different heresies in Christendom
since the foundation of the Christian Church, and there are
also such at the present day, in each of which these three
essentials, which are, God, charity, and faith, have been and
are acknowledged; for without these three there is no re-
ligion. In regard to charity in particular, it may be ad-
joined to any heretical faith, as that of Socinians, Enthu-


No. 452] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 601

siasts, of Jews, yes, of idolaters; and they may all believe
it to be charity, since it appears like it in the external form;
but still charity changes its quality according to the faith to
which or with which it is joined, as may be seen in the chap-
ter concerning Faith.

451. All charity not joined with faith in one God in whom
is the Divine Trinity, is, spurious; as the charity of the
church of the present day, the faith of which is in three Per-
sons of the same Divinity in successive order, in the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and because in three Persons
each of whom is a God subsisting by himself, it is therefore
a faith in three Gods; to which faith charity may be ad-
joined, as has also been done by the supporters of that faith,
but it can never be conjoined with it ; and the charity that is
merely adjoined to faith is simply natural, not spiritual,
therefore it is spurious charity. So also with the charity of
many other heresies, as that of those who deny the Divine
Trinity, and so approach the Father alone, or the Holy
Spirit alone, or both, passing by God the Saviour; with their
faith charity cannot be conjoined; and if conjoined or ad-
joined, it is spurious. It is called spurious, because it is like
the offspring of an illegitimate union, or as the son of Hagar
by Abraham who was cast out of the house (Gen. xxi. 10).
Such charity is like fruit on a tree where it has not grown but
has heen sowed on; and it is like a carriage to which the
horses are fastened only by the reins in the driver’s hands,
and when they run they drag the driver from the seat and
leave the carriage behind.

452. But hypocritical charity is with those who in temples
and in dwellings humble themselves almost to the dust be-
fore God, devoutly pour forth long prayers, present a holy
expression of countenance, kiss images of the cross and
bones of the dead, now bend the knee at sepulchres, and
there with the mouth mutter words of holy veneration for
God, and yet in heart think of being worshipped themselves
and look forward to being adored as divinities. Such are


6 02


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 452


like those whom the Lord describes in these words: When
thou doest alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the
hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets , that they
may have glory of men. And when thou prayest, thou shall
not be as the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in
the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may
be seen of men (Matt. vi. 2, 5). Woe unto you, scribes and
Pharisees , hypocrites l for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven
against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye
them that are entering to go in. Woe unto you, hypocrites!
for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and when
he is made, ye make him twofold more the child 0} hell than
yourselves . Woe unto you, hypocrites! for ye make clean the
outside of the ctip and of the platter, but within they are full of
extortion and excess (Matt, xxiii. 13, 15, 25). Well hath
Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This
people honor eth Me with their lips, but their heart is far from
Me (Mark vii. 6). Woe unto you, hypocrites ! for ye are as
graves which appear not, so that the men that walk over them
are not aware of them (Luke xi. 44); and elsewhere. They
are like flesh without blood, like ravens and parrots taught to
say words from a psalm, and like birds taught to sing the
tune of a sacred hymn; and the sound of their speech is like
that of a bird-catcher’s whistle.

453. But dead charity is with those who have dead faith,
since the charity is such as the faith is; that they make one
was shown in the chapter concerning Faith. That faith
is dead with those who are without works, is evident from
the Epistle of James (ii. 17, 20). Moreover, they have dead
faith who do not believe in God, but in men living and dead,
and who worship idols as in themselves holy, as the gentiles
formerly did. The offerings of those who are in this faith,
which for the sake of salvation they make to miraculous
images as they call them, and count among the works of
charity, are quite like the gold and silver placed in the urns
and monuments of the dead, yes, like the bits of meat given


NO. 455]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


603


to Cerberus, and the fee paid to Charon for ferriage over to
the Elysian fields. But the charity of those who believe
that there is no God, out instead of Him nature, is neither
spurious, hypocritical, nor dead, but is no charity at all, be-
cause it is not joined to any faith; for it cannot be called
charity, since the quality of the charity is named from the
faith. Their charity when viewed from heaven, is like bread
of ashes, or cake of fish-scales, and fruit of wax.

XVII. Friendship of love among the evil is inward

HATRED OF EACH OTHER.

454. It was shown above that every man has an internal
and an external, and that his internal is called the internal
man, and his external the external man. To which it must
be added, that the internal man is in the spiritual world,
and the external in the natural world. Man was so created
that he might be associated with spirits and angels in their
world, and thereby think analytically, and after death be
transferred from his own world to the other. By the spiri-
tual world both heaven and hell are meant. Since the inter-
nal man is in company with spirits and angels in their world,
and the external man with men, it is manifest that man can
be consociated with spirits of hell, and also with angels of
heaven. By this faculty and power man is distinguished
from beasts. Man is in himself such as he is as to his inter-
nal man, but not such as he is as to the external; for the inter-
nal man is his spirit which acts by the external. The ma-
terial body, with which his spirit is clothed in the natural
world, is an accessory because of the processes of procreation
and of the formation of the internal man; for this latter is
formed in the natural body, as a tree in the ground, and as
seed in fruit. More concerning the internal and the external
man may be seen above (n. 401).

455. But what a wicked man is as to his internal man, and
what a good man is as to his, may be seen from the following


604 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 455

brief description of hell and heaven; for with the wicked the
internal is joined with devils in hell, and with the good it is
joined with angels in heaven. Hell from its loves is in the
enjoyments of all evils; that is, in the enjoyments from
hatred, revenge, and murder, from plundering and theft,
from railing and blasphemy, from the denial of God and the
profanation of the Word. Those enjoyments lurk in the
lusts, upon which man does not reflect; these blaze in the
enjoyments, like lighted torches; the enjoyments are what
are meant in the Word by infernal fire. But the enjoyments
of heaven are those of love toward the neighbor and of love
to God. Since the enjoyments of hell are opposite to the
enjoyments of heaven, there is a great interval between them,
into which flow delights of heaven from above and those of
hell from beneath. Man is in the middle of this space while
he lives in the world, in order that he may be in equilibrium,
and so in a free state to turn to heaven or to hell. It is this
that is meant by the great gulf fixed between those who are
in heaven and those who are in hell (Luke xvi. 26). From
this the quality of the friendship of love among the wicked
may be evident, — that as to the external man it is full of
gesture, affected, and putting on the semblance of morality,
to the end of spreading its nets and searching for opportunity
to gratify the enjoyments of its loves, from which their in-
ternal man is on fire. Nothing but fear of the law, and con-
sequently for their reputation and life, withholds them and
prevents their acts. Their friendship is therefore like a
spider in sugar, a viper in bread, a young crocodile in a cake
of honey, and a snake in the grass. Such is the friendship
of the wicked for any one; but among those confirmed in
evil, such as thieves, robbers, and pirates, it is of a familiar
character so long as they are with one mind bent on plunder;
for then they embrace as brothers, enjoy themselves with
feasting, singing, and dancing, and conspire for the destruc-
tion of others; yet each within himself regards his com-
panion as one enemy regards another; this, too, the cunning


No. 456]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


60S


robber sees in his fellow, and fears it. It is plain from this
that among such there is no friendship, but inward hatred.

45 Any man who has not openly connected himself
with malefactors and committed robberies, but has led a
civil moral life for the sake of various uses as ends, and yet
has not curbed the lusts residing in the internal man, may
helieve that his friendship is not like this; but, from many
examples in the spiritual world, it has been given me to
know with certainty that it is such in various degrees, with .
all who have rejected faith, and scorned the holy things of *
the church, regarding them as nothing to them but only for
the co mm on herd. With some of them the enjoyments of
infernal love have lain hidden like fire in heated logs covered
with bark; with some like coals under ashes; with some like
torches of wax, that hlaze as soon as fire is applied to them;
and with others in other ways. Such is every man who has
rejected from his heart what is of religion. Their internal
man is in hell; and as long as they live in the world, and
then they are ignorant of this because of the semblance of
morality in their externals, they do not acknowledge as neigh-
bor any but themselves and their children; they regard
others either from contempt, and then they are like cats
lying in wait for birds in their nests, or from hatred, and
then they are like wolves when they see dogs that they may
devour. These things have been presented that the quality
of charity may be known from seeing its opposite.

XVIII. The conjunction of love to God and love

TOWARD THE NEIGHBOR.

456. It is known that the law promulgated from Mount
Sinai was written upon two tables; that one of these con-
cerns God, and the other men; that in the hand of Moses
they were one tahle, on the right side of which was written
what concerns God, and on the left side what concerns men;
and that when so presented to the eyes of men, the writing


6o 6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 456


of both parts was seen at once; thus one part was in view
of the other, like Jehovah speaking with Moses and Moses
with Jehovah, face to face, as it is written. This was done
in order that the tables so united should represent the con-
junction of God with men, and the reciprocal conjunction
of men with God; for which reason the law written on
them was called the Covenant and the Testimony, covenant
signifying conjunction, and testimony a life according to the
compact. From these two tables thus united the conjunc-
tion of love to God and love toward the neighbor may be
seen. The first table involves all that pertains to love to
God, which are, primarily, that man should acknowledge
one God, the Divinity of His Human, and the holiness of
the Word, and that He is to be worshipped by means of holy
things that proceed from Him. That this table involves
these things is evident from the commentary, in the fifth
chapter, on the commandments of the Decalogue. The
second table involves all things of love toward the neighbor;
its first five commandments, all that pertains to the deed,
which are called works; and the last two, all that belongs
to the will, thus to charity in its origin; for in these it is said,
Thou shall not covet ; and when a man does not covet what is
the neighbor’s, then he wishes well to him. That the Ten
Commandments contain all things which are of love to God
and toward the neighbor, may be seen above (n. 329-331);
where it is also shown that with those who are in charity
there is conjunction of the two tables.

457. It is otherwise with those who are only in the wor-
ship of God and not at the same time in good works from
charity; such are like those who break a covenant. Again
it is different with those who divide God into three, and
worship each one separately. And again it is different with
those who do not go to God in His Human; these are they
who do not enter by the Door, but climb up some other way
(John x. 1, 9). It is still different with those who from con-
firmation deny the Lord’s Divinity. With those of these


No. 457] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 607

classes there is no conjunction with God, and consequently
there is no salvation; their charity is nothing but spurious
charity; and this does not join together by the face, but by
the side, or the back. How conjunction is effected shall
also be told in a few words. With every man, God flows
in with an acknowledgment of Himself, into the knowledge
of Him; and at the same time He flows in with His love
toward men. The man who receives the former only and
not the latter, receives that influx in the understanding and
not in the will; and he remains in knowledge with no in-
ward acknowledgment of God, and his state is like that of a
garden in winter. But the man who receives both the
former and the latter, receives the influx in the will, and
from the will in the understanding, thus in the whole mind;
and he has an inward acknowledgment of God, which vivifies
in him the knowledge of God; his state. is like that of a gar-
den in the spring. Conjunction is effected by charity be-
cause God loves every man; and because He cannot do
good to him immediately, but mediately by men, He there-
fore inspires them with His own love, as He inspires parents
with love for their children; and the man who receives it is
conjoined with God, and loves the neighbor from the love of
God; with him the love of God is inwardly in the love toward
the neighbor, and it produces in him the will and power.
And as man does nothing good without the appearance to
him that the ability, will, and doing are of himself, this there-
fore has been given him; and when he does good from free-
dom as of himself, it is imputed to him, and is accepted as
something reciprocal, by which conjunction is effected.
This is like the active and the passive, and the cooperation
of the latter, which is effected from the active in the passive;
it is also like will in act, and like thought in speech, and the
operation of the soul from the inmost into both; it is also like
effort in motion; and also like what is prolific in seed, which
from within acts in the juices by which the tree grows even
to fruit, and by fruit produces new seed; and it is like light


6o8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 457


in precious stones, which is reflected according to the texture
of the parts; whence come various colors as if they belonged
to the stones, whereas they are of the light.

458. From this it is manifest whence comes the conjunc-
tion of love to God and love toward the neighbor, and of
what quality it is, that there is an influx of God’s love toward
men, and that the reception of this by man and cooperation
in him is love toward the neighbor. In brief, there is con-
junction according to this Word of the Lord: At that day ye
shall know that I am in My Father , and ye in Me, and I in
yon (John xiv. 20). Also according to this: He that hath
My commandments and keepeth them , he it is that loveth Me ,
and I will love him , and will manifest Myself unto him; and
will make an abode with him (John xiv. 21-23). The Lord’s
commandments all relate to love to the neighbor, being in
sum not to do evil to him, but to do him good. That they
who do so, love God, and that God loves them, is in
accordance with those words of the Lord. As those two
loves are so conjoined, John says, He that keepeth the com-
mandments of Jesus Christ , abideth in Him , and He in him .
Also: If a man say , I love God , but hateth his brother , he is a
liar; for he that loveth not his brother whom h& seeth , how can
he love God whom he hath not seen? And this command-
ment have we from Him , That he who loveth God loveth
his brother also (1 John iii. 24; iv. 20, 21).

459. To this these Relations will be added: First: I saw
at a distance five academies, each surrounded by a different
light, the first by a flamy light, the second by a yellow, the
third by a clear-white light, the fourth by a light intermediate
between that of noon and evening; the fifth was indistinct,
for it stood as it were in the evening shadow. And on the
roads I saw some on horses, some in carriages, and some
walking, also some running and hastening toward the first
academy which was covered with flamy light. When I saw
this I was seized with a strong desire that impelled me to go
thither and hear what was there under discussion; I there-


No. 459] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 609

fore quickly got ready, joined company with those hastening
to the first academy, and entered it with them. And lo,
there was a large assembly, part of which moved off to the
right and part £0 the left, to take seats on benches near the
walls. Before me I saw a low pulpit in which stood one
who filled the office of president; he had a staff in his hand,
a cap on his head, and a robe tinted with the flamy light of the
academy.

After the people had here assembled, he raised his voice
and said, “Brethren, you will to-day discuss the question,
What is charity? Each one of you may know that in its
essence charity is spiritual, and in its exercise natural.”
Then one from the first bench on the left, on which sat those
who were reputed wise, arose, and beginning to speak, he
said, “It is my opinion that morality inspired by faith is
charity.” And he confirmed it in this way: “Who does not
know that charity follows faith as a maid follows the steps
of her mistress ? and that the man who has faith acts accord-
ing to law, and thus exercises charity, so spontaneously that
he does not know that it is the law and charity according to
which he is living; for if he were to do so knowingly, and at
the same time were to think of being saved on account of so
doing, he would pollute holy faith with his self-life, and so
would impair its efficacy. Is not this according to the dogma
of those with whom we are connected?” And he looked at
those who were seated beside him, among whom there were
canons, and they expressed their assent. “But what is
spontaneous charity, but morality, into which every one is
initiated from infancy, which is therefore in itself natural,
but becomes spiritual when inspired by faith ? Who knows
from the moral life of men which of them have faith, or do
not have it? for every one lives morally. But God alone
who gives faith and seals it, knows and distinguishes. I
therefore assert that charity is morally inspired by faith; and
that this morality, owing to the faith in its bosom, is saving,
while all other morality brings no salvation, because it is of


6 io


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 459


merit. Thus all those who mingle charity and faith, that is
to say, who conjoin them from within instead of adjoining
them from without, lose their oil; for to commingle and con-
join them would be like putting into the carriage with a
primate the servant that stands behind, or like introducing
the porter into the dining-hall to sit at table with a noble-
man. ^

After this one rose up from the first bench on the right, and
spoke as follows: “My opinion is that piety inspired by
piteousness is charity, and I confirm it by this, that nothing
else can propitiate God more than piety out of a humble
heart; and piety prays continually that God may give faith
and charity; and the Lord says, Ask , and it shall be given
you (Matt. vii. 7); and because both these are given, they
both are in it. I say that piety inspired by piteousness is
charity, as all devout piety is piteous; for piety moves man’s
heart so that he groans, and what is this but piteousness?
This does indeed retire after prayer, but still it comes back
with the return of prayer; and when it comes again piety is
in it, and is thus in charity. Our priests ascribe all things
that promote salvation to faith, and nothing to charity.
What then remains but piety praying piteously for both?
When I read the Word, I was not able to see but that faith
and charity were the two means of salvation; but when I
consulted the ministers of the church, I heard that faith was
the only means, and that charity was nothing. And then
it seemed to me that I was on the sea, in a ship drifting be-
tween two rocks; and when I feared that it would be broken
to pieces, I betook myself to a boat and set sail. My boat is
piety. And, moreover, piety is profitable for all things.”

After him one arose from the second bench on the right,
and spoke as follows: “It is my opinion that charity is to do
good to every one, virtuous and vicious alike; and I con-
firm it in this way: What is charity but goodness of heart ?
and a good heart wishes good to all, alike to virtuous and
vicious. And the Lord has said that good is to be done eVen


No. 459] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 6ll

to enemies. If, therefore, you withhold charity from any
one, does not charity on that side become null, and so like
a man who has lost one foot, and goes hopping on the other?
A vicious man is a man equally with a virtuous one; and
charity regards a man as a man; if he is vicious, what is that
to me? It is with charity as with the heat of the sun; this
vivifies beasts, both fierce and gentle, wolves as well as sheep;
and it causes trees to grow, both bad and good, the thorn as
well as the vine.” Having said this, he took in his hand a
fresh grape and added, “ It is with charity as with this grape;
if you divide it, all that is within runs out.” He divided it,
and the contents ran out.

After this address another arose from the second bench on
the left, and said: “It is my opinion that charity is in every
way to serve one’s relatives and friends, which I confirm thus:
Who does not know that charity begins with one’s self? for
every one is neighbor to himself. Therefore charity passes
from one’s self through degrees of nearness, first to brothers
and sisters, and from them to kinsmen and connections; and
so the progression of charity is self-limited. They who are
beyond its limits are strangers, and strangers are not in-
wardly acknowledged; thus they are separated by the in-
ternal man. But nature joins these together who are related
by blood and birth; and habit, which is second nature, con-
joins friends; and so they become the neighbor. Charity
also unites another to itself from within, and so from with-
out; and they who are not united from within should be
called companions only. Do not all birds recognize their
own kindred, not by the plumage but by the sounds they
make, and when they are near by the sphere of life exhaled
from their bodies ? This affection of relationship, and con-
junction from it, in the birds is called instinct; but in men
there is the same which, since it is for those of their family
and those that are their own, is truly an instinct 'of human
nature. What but blood gives homogeneity? A man’s
mind which is also his spirit feels, and as it were smells it.


6 12


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 459


In this homogeneity and its sympathy consists the essence
of charity. But heterogeneity, on the contrary, from which
also comes antipathy, is, as it were, not blood, and there-
fore not charity. And as habit is second nature, and this
also makes homogeneity, it follows that it is also charity to
do good to friends. One coming from the sea into some
port, and finding himself in a foreign land, the language and
customs of whose inhabitants he does not know, is out of
himself, as it were, and feels none of the enjoyment of love
towards them. But if he finds himself in his own native
land, the language and customs of whose inhabitants he
knows, he is within himself, as it were, and then feels enjoy-
ment from love, which is also the enjoyment of charity.”

Then from the third bench on the right another one arose,
and speaking with a loud voice said, “ It is my opinion that
charity is giving alms to the poor, and rendering assistance
to the needy. This is certainly charity, for the Divine Word
so teaches, and its dictate admits no contradiction. What
is giving to the rich and the possessors of abundance but
vain-glory, in which there is no charity, but the looking to a
gift in return; and in this there can be no genuine affection
of love toward the neighbor, but a spurious affection, which
avails on earth but not in the heavens. Therefore want and
indigence must be relieved, because into this the idea of re-
payment does not come. In the city where I dwelt, and
where I knew who were virtuous and who were not, I ob-
served that all the virtuous, seeing a poor person in the street,
would stop and give alms; while all the vicious, seeing a poor
man at their side, would pass him by as if they were blind to
the sight of him and deaf to his voice. And who does not
know that the virtuous have charity and that the vicious
have not ? He who gives to the poor and relieves the needy
is like a shepherd who leads hungry and thirsty sheep to
pasture and to water; while he who gives only to those who
are rich and in abundance, is like one who takes care of
those who share the Divine power, or presses food and drink


No. 459] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 613

on those who are intoxicated.” After him another arose
from the third bench on the left, and said: “It is my opinion
that charity is to build hospitals, infirmaries, orphanages,
and asylums, and to support them by gifts. I confirm it by
this, that such benefactions and such helps are public, and
are far beyond private aid; thereby charity becomes richer,
and replete with goods, the goods being manifold in number;
and the reward that is hoped for, from the promises of the
Word, becomes more abounding; for as one ploughs the
ground and sows, so he reaps. Is not this giving to the’
poor and relieving the needy in eminent degree ? Who does
not therefrom obtain glory from the world, and at the same
time praises in the humble Voice of gratitude from those
whom he has helped? Does not this lift up the heart, and
with it the affection called charity, even to its highest reach ?
The rich, who do not walk the streets but ride, cannot ob-
serve those who sit at the sides of the streets by the walls
of the houses, and give them pennies; but they make their
contributions to such things as are of service to many at once.
But let those do otherwise who are less great than they, and
who walk the streets, without such wealth.”

Hearing this, another one on the same bench suddenly
drowned the voice of the speaker with his louder tones, and
said: “Let not the rich, however, prefer the excellence and
munificence of their charity to the pittance which one poor
man gives to another; for we know that every one in what
he does, does what befits the dignity of his position; a king,
governor, captain, and yeoman of the guard, each what is
worthy of his own position. For charity, viewed in itself,
is not estimated by the excellence of the person and conse-
quently of the gift, but by the fulness of the affection which
makes it; so that the menial giving one penny may give
from a larger charity than the great man who gives or be-
queaths a large fund; which is also according to these words:
Jesus saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury;
He saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites;


6 14 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 459

and He said, Of a truth I say unto you that this poor widow
hath cast in more than they all (Luke xxi. 1-3).”

After these arose one from the fourth bench on the left,
and said: “ It is my opinion that charity is to endow temples,
and to do good to their ministers; which I confirm by this,
that he who does such things is turning over in his mind what
is holy, and acts from holiness in the mind, and further, that
this sanctifies his gifts. Charity demands this, because it in
itself is holy. Is not all worship in churches holy ? For the
Lord says, Where two or three are gathered together in My
name, there am I in the midst of them; and the priests, His
servants, minister in the worship. I therefore conclude that
the gifts which are bestowed upon ministers and temples
are superior to those made to other people and for other pur-
poses. And beside, to the minister is given the power to
bless, whereby he also sanctifies the gifts; and afterward
nothing expands and gladdens the mind more than to see
one’s gifts as so many sanctuaries.”

Afterward one arose from the fourth bench on the right,
and spoke as follows: “It is my opinion that the old Chris-
tian brotherhood is charity; and I confirm it by this, that
every church which worships the true God begins from char-
ity, as did the Christian church of old. Because charity
unites mind and makes one of many, those belonging to it
called themselves brethren, but brethren in Jesus Christ
their God. But because they were then surrounded by
barbarous nations whom they feared, they made community
of property: in which, being together and of one mind, they
were glad; and in their assemblies, every day, they dis-
coursed about the Lord God their Saviour Jesus Christ, and
at their dinners and suppers about charity: hence their
brotherhood. But after their times, when schisms began
to spring up, and at last the abominable Arian heresy, which
with many took away the idea of the Divinity of the Lord’s
Human, charity decayed and the brotherhood was dissolved.
It is true that ail who worship the Lord in truth, and keep


No - 459] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 615

His precepts, are brethren (Matt, xxiii. 8), but brethren in
spirit. But since at this day no one is known as to his quality
in the spirit, it is unnecessary for men to call each other
brethren. The brotherhood of faith alone, and still less that
of faith in any other God than the Lord God the Saviour, is
not brotherhood, because the charity which makes brother-
hood is not in it. I therefore conclude that the old Chris-
tian brotherhood was charity. But that was, and is not;
yet I prophesy that it will come.” When he said this, a
flamy light made its appearance through the window on the
east, and tinged his cheeks; at the sight of which the assem-
bly were amazed.

. At last one arose from the fifth bench on the left, and
asked permission to add his contribution to the remarks of
the last speaker; and when leave was given, he said, “It is
my opinion that charity is to forgive every one his trespasses.
This opinion I have drawn from a common remark of those
who approach the Holy Supper, for some then say to then-
friends, Forgive me what I have done amiss; thinking that
so they have fulfilled all the duties of charity. But I have
thought within myself that this is but a painted picture of
charity, and not the real form of its essence; for both those
who do not forgive, and those who do not follow charity with
any care, say this; and such are not among those of the
prayer which the Lord Himself taught, Father , forgive us
our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.
For trespasses are like ulcers, within which, if they are not
opened and healed, matter collects, which infects the neigh-
boring parts, and creeping about like a serpent turns the
blood everywhere into foulness. It is similar with trespasses ;
against the neighbor; unless they are removed by repentance
and a life according to the Lord’s precepts, they remain and
are fed; and those who without repentance merely pray to
God to forgive their sins, are like the inhabitants of a city,
who, being infected with contagious disease, go to the chief
magistrate and say, ‘ Sir, heal us.’ To whom the magistrate


6i6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 459


would say, * How can I heal you ? Go to a physician, find
out what medicines you need, get them from an apothecary
and take them, and your health will be restored. 9 And the
Lord will say to those who make supplication for the for-
giveness of sins without actual repentance , 1 Open the Word
and read that which I have spoken in Isaiah: Ah, sinful
nation , laden with iniquity; wherefore when ye spread forth
your hands , I hide Mine eyes from you ; yea, when ye make
many prayers, I do not hear. Wash you; put away the evil
of your doings from before Mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn
to do well; and then shall your sins be removed and for-
given (i. 4, 15-18).’”

After all this was finished, I raised my hand, and asked
that I might be permitted, though a stranger, to present my
opinion also. The president proposed my request; and
when consent was given, I spoke as follows : “ It is my opin-
ion that charity is to act from the love of justice with judg-
ment, in every work and office, but from love from no other
source than the Lord God the Saviour. All that I have
heard from those sitting upon the benches, on both the right
and the left, are eminent examples of charity; but as the
president of this assembly remarked at first, charity is spiri-
tual in its origin, and natural as it turns into its channels;
and natural charity, if it is inwardly spiritual, appears to the
angels transparent like a diamond; but if it is not inwardly
spiritual, and therefore is merely natural, it appears to the
angels like a pearl that looks like the eye of a cooked fish.
It is not for me to say whether the eminent examples of char-
ity which you have presented in order are inspired by spiri-
tual charity or not; but it is for me to say here what the
spiritual must be, which must be in them, that they may be
natural forms of spiritual charity. The spiritual itself, be-
longing to them, is that they be done from the love of justice,
with judgment; that is to say, that in the exercise of charity
man should see clearly whether he acts from justice, and he
sees this from judgment. For a man may do evil by deeds


No. 459] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 617

of beneficence; and by what seem like evil deeds he may do
good. For example: he who gives a needy robber money
to buy himself a sword, does evil by the benefaction, although
the robber does not say what he will do when begging for the
money; or if he rescues the robber from prison, and shows
him the way to the forest, and says within himself, * It is not
my fault that he commits robbery; I have given succor to
the man . 5 Take also as another example, one who feeds
an idler, and keeps him from being driven to labor, and says
to him, ‘ Go to a chamber in my house, and lie in bed; why
should you weary yourself ? 5 Such a one favors laziness.
And again, take one who promotes relatives and friends of
dishonest inclinations, to offices in which they can plot many
kinds of mischief. Who cannot see that such works of char-
ity are not from a love of 'justice together with judgment?
On the other hand also, a man by what seem like evil deeds
may do good. To illustrate, take a judge who acquits a
criminal because he sheds tears, and pours out words of
piety, and prays that he will forgive him because he is his
neighbor; now the judge performs a work of charity when
he decrees the man’s punishment according to law; for in
this way he guards against his doing furdier evil and being
a pest to society, which is the neighbor in a higher degree,
and against the scandal of an unjust judgment. Who does
not know also that it results in good to servants if they are
corrected by masters, and to children when corrected by
parents, on account of wrong-doing ? It is similar with those
in hell, all of whom have the love of doing evil; for they are
kept shut up in prison, and are punished when they do evil,
which the Lord permits for the sake of amendment. This
is so because the Lord is justice itself, and does whatever
He does from judgment itself. From these examples it may
be clearly seen whence it is, that, as before stated, spiritual
charity is carried into effect from the love of justice w r ith
judgment, but from love from no other source than the Lord
God the Saviour. This is because all the good of charity is


6i8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 459


from the Lord; for He says, He that abideth in Me , and I in
him , the same bringeth forth ifinch fruit; for without Ale ye
can do nothing (John xv. 5); also that He hath all power
in heaven and in earth (Matt, xxviii. 18). And all love of
justice, with judgment, is from no other source than the
God of heaven, who is justice itself, and from whom man
has all his judgment (Jer. xxiii. 5; xxxiii. 15). From which
comes the conclusion that all that has been said concerning
charity, from the benches on the right and the left, as being
morality inspired by faith, piety inspired by piteousness,
doing good alike to the virtuous and the vicious, serving one’s
relatives and friends in every way, giving to the poor and
rendering assistance to the needy, building infirmaries and
supporting them by gifts, endowing temples and doing good
to their ministers, being the old Christian brotherhood, and
forgiving every one his trespasses; all these are excellent
examples of charity when they are done from the love of
justice, with judgment; otherwise, they are not charity, but
are merely like brooks separated from the fountain, and like
branches torn from the tree; because genuine charity is to
believe in the Lord, and to act justly and rightly in every
work and office. He, therefore, who from the Lord loves
justice, and practises it with judgment, is charity in its image
and likeness.”

After these remarks there was silence, such as there is with
those who from their internal man, but not as yet in the ex-
ternal, see and acknowledge that something is true; I ob-
served this from their faces. But I was then suddenly with-
drawn from their sight, for from the spirit I re-entered my
material body; for the natural man, because he is clothed
with a material body, does not appear to any spiritual man,
that is, to a spirit or an angel, nor do they appear to him.

460. Second Relation. Once when I looked around in
the spiritual world, I heard something like gnashing of teeth,
and also a kind of knocking, and mingled with them some-
thing grating; and I asked what they were. The angels


No. 460] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 6 1 9

who were with me said, “ They are schools, which are called
by us debating clubs, where disputations are carried on.
They are heard thus at a distance, but when near, they are
only heard as disputations.” I drew near, and saw small
houses constructed of reeds plastered together with mud.
I wanted to look in through a window, for there was no
admittance by the door, because light would thus flow in
from heaven and cause confusion, but there was no window.
However, one was made suddenly just then on the right side,
and then I heard them complaining that they were in dark-
ness. But presently a window was made on the left side,
that on the right being closed up ; and then the darkness was
gradually dissipated, and they seemed to themselves to be
in their own light : and after this it was granted me to enter
by the door, and to hear.

There was a table in the midst, and benches round about;
yet to me they all seemed to be standing upon the benches,
and to be disputing sharply with one another about faith and
charity, on the one part, that faith was the essential of the
chinch, on the other, charity. They who made faith the
essential said, “Do we not act with God by faith, and by
charity with man? Is not faith therefore heavenly, and
charity earthly ? Are we not saved by heavenly, and not by
earthly things ? Again, cannot God give faith out of heaven
because it is heavenly? and is not man to gain charity for
himself, because it is Earthly? And what a man gains for
himself is not of the church, and therefore does not save.
And so can one be justified before God by the works which
are called of charity? Believe us that we are not only justi-
fied but also sanctified by faith alone, if the faith is not de-
filed by the things of merit which are from the works of
charity.”

But they who made charity the essential of the church,
sharply refuted these things; saying that “Charity saves,
and not faith. Does not God hold all men dear, and will
good to all? How can God do this good, except through


620


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 460


men ? Does God give us only to speak with men what is of
faith, and does He not give us to do to men what is of charity ?
Do you not see that you said absurdly of charity that it is
earthly? Charity is heavenly; and, because you do not do
the good of charity, your faith is earthly. How do you re-
ceive your faith, except as a stock or a stone ? You say, By
the hearing of the Word. But how can the Word operate
when merely heard? and how upon a stock or stone ? You,
perchance, are quickened, yourselves being wholly uncon-
scious of it. But what is the quickening, except that you
are able to say that faith alone justifies and saves? Yet
what is faith, and what saving faith, you do not know.”

But one then arose, who was called a Syncretist by the
angel who was speaking with me. He took off his square
cap, and laid it on the table; but hastily put it on again, be-
cause he was bald. He said, “Hearken: you are all in
error. It is true that faith is spiritual, and charity moral;
but still they are conjoined; and they are conjoined by the
Word, and then by the Holy Spirit, and by the effect which
indeed may be called obedience, but in this obedience man
has no part; because when faith is brought in, man knows
no more than a statue. I have long meditated upon these
things, and I have at length found that a man may receive
from God a faith which is spiritual, but that he cannot be
moved by God to a charity which is spiritual any more than
a stock.”

At these remarks they who were in faith alone applauded,
but they who were in charity hissed- And from their indig-
nation these latter said, “Listen, friend: you do not know
that there is a moral life which is spiritual, and that there is
a moral life merely natural, a moral life which is spiritual
with those who do good from God and still as of themselves,
and a moral life merely natural with those who do good from
hell and still as of themselves.”

It was said that the disputation was heard as gnashing of
teeth, and as knocking, with which was mingled something


No. 461 ] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 621

grating. The disputation that sounded like the gnashing
of teeth was from those who made faith the one only essen-
tial of the church; the knocking was from those who made
charity the one only essential of the church; and the grating
intermixed was from the Syncretist. Their tones sounded
so at a distance, because they were all given to disputation
in the world, and did not shun any evil, and therefore did no
good that was from a spiritual source. And they were wholly
ignorant, also, that the all of faith is truth, and the all of
charity, good; and that truth without good is not truth in ■
spirit, and that good without truth is not good in spirit ; and
that so the one makes the other.

461. Third Relation. I was once carried away in spirit
to the southern quarter of the spiritual world, and into a cer-
tain paradise there; and I saw that this paradise excelled
all that I had before seen. This was because a garden sig-
nifies intelligence, and all who are strong in intelligence be-
yond others are conveyed to the south. The garden of
Eden in which was Adam with his wife, signifies only this;
that they were expelled from it therefore signifies that they
were driven from intelligence, and thus also from integrity
of life. While I was walking in this southern paradise, I
saw some persons sitting under a laurel, eating figs. I went
to them and asked them for some figs, which they gave me;
and lo, in my hand the figs became grapes! As I marvelled
at this, an angelic spirit who stood near me said, “ The figs
became grapes in your hand, for figs from correspondence
signify the goods of charity and hence of faith in the natural
or external man, while grapes signify the goods of charity
and hence of faith in the spiritual or internal man; and be-
cause you love spiritual things, this has happened to you.
For in our world all things come to pass, and arise, and are
changed also, according to correspondences.”

Then instantly came over me the desire to know how man
can do good from God, and yet altogether as from himself.

I therefore asked those who were eating figs how they com-


622


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 461


prehended this. They said that they could comprehend
it only in this way, that God works this inwardly in man and
through him when man does not know it, since if man were
conscious of it, and so should do, he would do only apparent
good which inwardly is evil. “For all that proceeds from
man proceeds from his self-life, and this by birth is evil;
then how can good from God and evil from man be con-
joined and so go forth jointly into act? And man's self in
what pertains to salvation is continually thinking about merit;
and so far as it does this, it takes from the Lord His merit,
which is the height of injustice and impiety. In a word, if
the good which God works in man were to flow into man’s
willing and thence into his doing, the good would assuredly
be defiled and also profaned, which, however, God in no wise
permits. Man can indeed think that the good which he
does is from God, and may call it God’s through him, but
still we do not comprehend that it is so.”

But I then opened my mind and said: “You do not com-
prehend, because you think from appearance; and thought
from confirmed appearance is fallacy. You have the ap-
pearance, and fallacy from it, because you believe that all
things which a man wills and thinks, and which he hence
does and says, are in himself and consequently from him-
self, when yet there is nothing of them in him except the
state for receiving what flows in. Man is not life in himself,
but an organ receptive of life. The Lord is Life in Himself,
as He also says in John: As the Father hath lije in Himself ,
so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself (v. 26;
besides other passages, as John xi. 25; xiv. 6, 19). There
are two things which make life, namely, love and wisdom;
or what is the same, the good of love and the truth of wis-
dom. These flow in from God, and are received by man as
if they were his; and because they are felt thus, they also
proceed from man as his. That they are thus felt by man,
is of the Lord’s gift, that that which flows in may affect man,
and so be received and remain. But as all evil flows in also,


No. 461] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 623

not from God but from hell, and as this is received with en-
joyment because man has been born such an organ, therefore
good is received from God only in proportion as evil is re-
moved by man as by himself, which is done by repentance
and at the same time by faith in the Lord. That love and
wisdom, charity and faith, or, speaking more generally, the
good of love and of charity and the truth of wisdom and of
faith, flow in, and that the things which flow in appear in
man altogether as his, and therefore proceed from him as
his, is very evident from sight, hearing, smell, taste, and
touch; all things which are felt in the organs of those senses
flow in from without, and are felt in them. It is the same
in the organs of the internal senses, with the sole difference
that spiritual things which are not apparent flow into these,
but natural things which are apparent flow into the former.
In a word, man is an organ receptive of life from God; con-
sequently he is a recipient of good so far as he desists from
evil. The Lord gives to every man the power to desist from
evil, because He gives him to will and to understand; and
whatever man does from the will according to the under-
standing, or, what is the same thing, from freedom of will
according to the reason of the understanding, is permanent;
through it the Lord induces on man a state of conjunction
with Himself, and in this state He reforms, regenerates, and
saves him. The life which flows in is life proceeding from
the Lord, which life is also called the Spirit of God, and in
the Word the Holy Spirit, of which also it is said that it en-
lightens and vivifies man, and also that it operates in him.
But this life is varied and modified according to the organ-
ized form induced by love. You may also know that all the
good of love and charity and all the truth of wisdom and faith
flow in, and are not in the man, from this, that whoever
thinks that there is any such thing in man from creation,
cannot but think at last that God infused Himself into man,
and so that men were partly gods; and yet they who think
so from faith, become devils, and to us smell like corpses.


624


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 461


Moreover, what is man’s action, but the mind acting? For
what the mind wills and thinks, this it does and says by its
organ the body; therefore, when the mind is led by the
Lord, action and speech are also led by Him; and these are
led by Him when man believes in Him. If this were not so,
tell, if you can, why the Lord in thousands of places in His
Word has commanded that a man must love his neighbor,
work out the goods of charity, bear fruit like a tree, and do
His commandments, and all this that he may be saved; also
why He said that man would be judged according to his
deeds or works, he who does good to heaven and life, and
he who does evil to hell and death. How could the Lord
say such things if every thing that proceeds from man were
of merit and thence evil? You may know therefore that if
the mind is charity, the action is charity also; but if the
mind is faith alone, which is also faith separated from
spiritual charity, the action also is that faith.”

Hearing this, they who sat under the laurel said, “We
comprehend that you have spoken justly; but still we do
not comprehend.” I answered them, “That I have spoken
justly, you comprehend from the general perception which
a man has from the influx of light from heaven when he
hears any truth; but you do not comprehend from your own
perception, which is what a man has from the influx of light
from the world. These two perceptions, namely, the inter-
nal and the external, or the spiritual and .the natural, make
one with the wise. You also can make them one, if you look
to the Lord and remove evils.” As they understood these
things also, I plucked some twigs from a vine, and handed
them to them, saying, “ Do you believe that this is of me or
of the Lord ? ” And they said that it was from me but of the
Lord. And lo, those branches put forth grapes in their
hands! But as I withdrew, I saw a cedar table, upon which
was a book, under a green olive-tree whose trunk was en-
twined with a vine. I looked, and behold, it was a book
written by me, called Heavenly Arcana. And I said that it


No. 462] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 625

was fully shown in that book that man is an organ recipient
of life, and that he is not life; also that life cannot be created,
and so created be in man, any more than light can be created
and be in the eye.

46a. Fourth Relation . I looked forth to the seashore in
the spiritual world, and saw a magnificent dock. I drew
near, and looked into it, and behold vessels were there large
and small, and merchandise in them of every kind; and sit-
ting on the benches were boys and girls, distributing it to
those who wished. And they said, “ We are waiting to see
our beautiful tortoises which very soon will rise up out of the
sea to us.” And behold, I saw tortoises great and small,
on the shells and scales of which young tortoises were sitting,
looking toward the islands around. The parent tortoises
had two heads; a large one covered over with a shell similar
to the shell of their body, whence they had a reddish glow;
and a small one, such as tortoises have, which they were able
to draw back into the forepart of their bodies, and also to
insert in some unseen way in the larger head. But I kept
my eyes on the great reddish head, and I saw that it had a
face like a man, and talked with the boys and girls on the
seats, and licked their hands. And the boys and girls then
patted them, and gave them food and dainties, and also
costly things, as silk for garments, thyine wood for tablets,
purple for decorations, and scarlet for paints.

Seeing these things, I desired to know what they repre-
sented, as I knew that all things that appear in the spiritual
world are correspondences, and represent the spiritual
things which are of affection and hence of thought. And
they then spoke with me out of heaven and said, “ You know
yourself what the dock represents, also what the vessels,
and the boys and girls that are on them. But you do not
know what the tortoises represent.” And they said, “ The
tortoises represent those of the clergy there who altogether
separate faith from charity and its good works, affirming in
themselves that there is evidently no conjunction between


6z6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 462


them, but that the Holy Spirit, through faith in God the
Father for the sake of the Son’s merit, enters into man, and
purifies his interiors even to his own will, out of which they
make a sort of oval plane; and they say that when the opera-
tion of the Holy Spirit approaches this plane, it turns itself
around, on the left of it, and does not touch it at all; and
thus that the interior or higher part of a man’s nature is for
God, and the exterior or lower for man; and that so nothing
which the man does, whether good or evil, appears before
God: not the good, because this is of merit; and not the
evil, because this is evil; since if they were to appear before
God, the man would perish by either of them. And this
being so, they say that man is at liberty to will, think, speak,
and do whatever he pleases, provided he is careful before
the world.”

I inquired whether they also assert that it is allowable to
think of God as not omnipotent and omniscient. It was
answered from heaven that this also is allowable for them;
because God, in him who has obtained faith and been puri-
fied and justified through it, does not look at any thing of
his thought and will; and that he still retains in the inner
bosom or higher region of his mind or nature, the faith which
he had received in its act, it being sometimes possible for the
act of faith to return, man knowing nothing of it. “ These
are the things represented by the small head, which they
draw into the forepart of the body, and also insert in the
great head when they talk with the laity. For they do not
speak with them from the small head, but the large one,
which in front appears as if provided with a human face;
and they speak with them from the Word, about love, char-
ity, good works, the precepts of the Decalogue, repentance;
and they select from the Word almost all that is there on
these subjects. But they then insert the small head into the
large one, and from it they understand inwardly in them-
selves that all those things are not to be done for the sake of
God and salvation, but only for the sake of public and private


No. 462] CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS 627

good. But as they speak of these things from the Word,
especially of the Gospel, the operation of the Holy Spirit,
and salvation, in a pleasing and elegant manner, they there-
fore appear before their hearers as handsome men, and the
wisest in all the world. And you saw that costly and precious
things were therefore given them by the boys and girls that
sat upon the benches in the vessels. These, therefore, are
they whom you saw represented as tortoises. In your world
they are little distinguished from others, only by this, that
they believe themselves to be wiser than all, and laugh at
others, even at those who are in similar doctrine as to faith,
but who are not in those secrets. They carry with them on
their clothing a certain little mark by which they make them-
selves recognized by others.”

He who was talking to me said, “ I shall not tell you what
their sentiments are as to other matters of faith, such as elec-
tion, free will, baptism, the Holy Supper, which are such that
they do not divulge them; but we in heaven know. But as
they are such in the world, and as one is not at liberty after
death to speak otherwise than as he thinks, therefore be-
cause they cannot then do otherwise than speak from the
insanity of their thoughts, they are regarded as insane, and
are cast out of the societies, and are at length let down into
the pit of the abyss spoken of in the Apocalypse (ix. 2), and
become corporeal spirits, and appear like the mummies of
the Egyptians. For a hardness is induced on the interiors
of their minds, because in the world also they interposed a
barrier. The infernal society made up of them borders on
the infernal society from the Machiavelians, and they pass
everywhere from one to the other, and call themselves com-
panions; but they go back, because there is a separating
difference in this, that there was with them some religious
system as to the act of justification through faith, but none
among the Machiavelians.”

After I saw them cast out of the societies, and gathered
together to be cast down, I saw a vessel in the air flying with


628


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 462


seven sails, and therein officers and sailors clothed in purple
dress, having magnificent laurels upon their hats, crying,
“Lo, we are in heaven; we are the purple-robed doctors,
and crowned above all, because we are the chief of the wise
from all the clergy in Europe.” I wondered what this was,
and was told that these were images of the pride, and the
ideal thoughts called fantasies, from those who were before
seen as tortoises, and now as insane persons cast out of the
societies and gathered together into one body; and they were
standing together in one place. And I was then desirous
of speaking with them, and I came to the place where they
were standing, and saluted them, and said, “You are they
who have separated men’s internals from their externals,
and the operation of the Holy Spirit as in faith from its
cooperation with man outside of faith, and so you have
separated God from man. Have you not thus removed
not only charity itself and its works, from faith, like many
other doctors of the clergy, but also faith itself as to its mani-
festation before God, from man? But tell me, I pray,
whether you wish that I should speak with you- on this mat-
ter from reason or from the Sacred Scripture.” They said,
“ Speak first from reason.”

And I spoke as follows: “How can the internal and the
external in a man be separated? Who does not see, or
cannot see, from common perception that all of man’s in-
teriors go forth and are continued into his exteriors, and even
into the outmosts, in order to work out their effects and
accomplish their works? Are not internals for the sake of
externals, that they may terminate and subsist in them, and
so exist, hardly otherwise than as a column does upon its
base? You can see that if there were no continuation, and
so conjunction,' the outmosts would be dissolved, and would
pass away like bubbles in the air. Who can deny that the
interior operations of God with man are myriads of myriads,
of which man knows nothing? And what matters it for
him to know them, provided he knows the outmosts, in


No. 462]


CHARITY AND GOOD WORKS


629


which, with his thought and his will; he is together with
God? But this shall be illustrated by an example. Does
a man know the interior operations of his speech? as how
the lungs draw in the air, and with it fill the vesicles, the
bronchial tuhes, and the lohes? how they send out the air
into the trachea, and there turn it into sound? how that
sound is modified in the glottis with the aid of the larynx?
and how the tongue then articulates, and the lips complete
the articulation, so that it may become speech ? Are not all
those interior operations, of which man knows nothing, for
the sake of the outmost, that man may be able to speak?
Remove or separate one of those internals from continuity
with the outmosts, and could man speak more than a stock ?
Take another example: The two hands are the ultimates of
man. Are there not interiors, which are continued thither?
They are from the head through the neck, also through the
breast, shoulders, arms, and forearms; and there are in-
numerable muscular textures, unnumbered battalions of
moving fibres, numherless companies of nerves and blood-
vessels, and many hinge-like joints of the bones, together
with their ligaments and memhranes. Does man know any
thing of these? And yet the working of his hands is from
them, one and all. Suppose that those interiors were to
turn back near the elbow, to the left or the right, and did not
enter the hand by a continuous course, would not the hand
decay from the fore-arm, and rot like something torn off and
without life? Indeed, if you are willing to believe it, it
would be with the hand as with the body if the man were
beheaded. It would be wholly like this with the human
mind and with its two lives, the will and the understanding,
if the Divine operations which are of faith and charity were
to stop in the midst of the way, and not pass by a continual
course even to man. Clearly man would then be not merely
a brute, but a rotten stick. All this is according to reason.
Now if you are willing to hear it, the same things are also
according to tjie Sacred Scripture. Does not the Lord say,


63O TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 462

Abide in Me, and I in you ; I am the Vine, ye are the branches.
He that abideth in Me and I in him, the same bringeth forth
much fruit? (John xv. 4, 5.) Are not fruits the good works
which the Lord does by the man, and which the man does
out of himself from the Lord ? The Lord also says that He
stands at the door and knocks, and that He enters to him
that opens, and sups with him, and he with Him (Apoc. iii.
20). Does not the Lord give the pounds and the talents,
that man may trade with them, and get gain ; and as he gains,
give him eternal life? (Matt. xxv. 14-34: Luke xix. 13-26.)
Does He not say also that He gives reward to jevery one ac-
cording to his labor in His vineyard? (Matt. xx. 1-17.)
These are but a few passages, however; pages might be
filled from the Word as to this, that man must bear fruit
as a tree, do according to the commandments, love God and
the neighbor, and so forth. But I know that your own intel-
ligence cannot have this truth, such as it is in itself, in com-
mon with what is from the Word; for though you say such
things, still your ideas pervert them. And you cannot do
otherwise, because you remove from man all that is of God
as regards communication and hence conjunction; what
then remains, unless indeed the things of worship?”

They were afterwards seen by me in the light of heaven,
which discloses and makes manifest what is the quality of
each one; and then they were not seen as before in a ship in
the air as it .were in heaven, and clothed therein in purple,
their heads crowned with laurel; but in a sandy place, in
garments of rags, and girt about the loins with netting, as it
were with fishers’ nets, through which their nakedness ap-
peared. And they were then sent down into the society
bordering on the Machiavelians.


CHAPTER EIGHTH.


FREE WILL.

463. Before I come prepared to deliver the doctrine of
the New Church as to Free Will, it is necessary to premise
what the present church gives, forth regarding it in its dog-
mas; for if this is not done, one of sound sense and religion
may believe that it is not worth the labor to write any thing
new about it. For he would say to himself, “Who does not
know that man has free will in spiritual things? Other-
wise, why should priests preach for men to believe in God,
to turn themselves to live according to the precepts in the
Woj-d, to fight against the lusts of their flesh, and to make
themselves new creatures?” and so on. So that he cannot
but think in himself that all this would be but empty words
if there were no free will in matters of salvation, and that to
deny it would be madness, because contrary to common
sense. But yet that the present church goes the contrary
way, and banishes it from its temples, may be seen from the
hook called the Formula Concordia , to which the Evangelical
swear, from things therein which now follow. That there
is similar doctrine and hence faith respecting free will, with
the Reformed, thus the same throughout the whole Christian
world, and so in Germany, Sweden, Denmark, England, and
Holland, is evident from their dogmas following. The ex-
tracts, then, are from the Formula Concordia , the Leipsic
edition of 1756.

464. I. “ The doctors of the Augsburg Confession assert
that owing to the fall of our first parents, man is so thoroughly
corrupt that in spiritual matters, which regard our conver-
sion and salvation, he is blind by nature, that he neither does
nor can understand the Word of Go 4 when preached, but


632


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 464


esteems it as a foolish thing, and never of himself draws nigh
unto God; but rather is an enemy of God, and so remains
until, by the power of the Holy Spirit through the Word
preached and heard, out of pure grace, without any coopera-
tion of his own, he is converted, endowed with faith, re-
generated, and renewed.” (p. 656.)

II. “ We believe that in what is spiritual and Divine, the
understanding, heart, and will of the man who has not been
born again, are wholly unable, by his own natural powers,
to understand, believe, embrace, think, will, begin, finish,
act, operate, and cooperate; but as to good, man is alto-
gether corrupt and dead, so that in his nature since the fall,
before regeneration, there remains not even a spark of spiri-
tual power by which he could prepare himself for the grace
of God, or grasp it when offered, or adapt himself to it, and
by himself be capable of holding it; nor can he by his own
powers contribute any thing to his own conversion, not all,
nor half, nor the smallest part; nor act, operate, or cooperate
from himself, or as if from himself; but he is the servant of
sin and the slave of Satan, by whom he is moved. So, con-
sequently, his natural free will, by reason of his powers cor-
rupted and his nature depraved, is active and effective only
for what is displeasing to God and opposed to Him.” (p.
656.)

III. “In civil and natural affairs man is industrious and
ingenious, but in things spiritual and Divine, which regard
the souPs salvation, he is like a stock or stone, or the pillar
of salt into which Lot’s wife was turned, which have not the
use of eyes or mouth or any of the senses.” (p. 661 .)

IV. “ Man, however, has power of locomotion which he
can exercise over his external members, he can hear the
Gospel, and in some measure can meditate thereon ; but yet .
in his secret thoughts he despises it as foolish, nor can he
believe; and in this respect he is worse than a stock, unless
the Holy Spirit is efficacious in him, kindling and operating
in him faith and other virtues approved of God, and also
obedience.” (p. 662 ! )


No. 464]


FREE WILL


633


V. “ In a certain sense it may be said that a man is not
a stone or stock. A stone and stock do not resist, and they
do not understand or feel what is done with them, as man
by his will resists God until he has been converted to Him;
it still is true that before conversion man is a rational creature
having understanding, but not in Divine things, and a will,
but not such as to will any saving good: still, however, he
cannot contribute any thing to his conversion, and in this
respect he is worse than a stock or stone.” (pp. 672, 673.)

VI. “ The whole of conversion is the operation, gift, and
work of the Holy Spirit alone, who effects and operates it
with His own virtue and power, through the Word, in the
understanding, heart and will of man as in a passive 'sub-
ject; where the man does not act, but is passive only. Nev-
ertheless that this does not take place as a statue is formed
from stone, or as a seal is impressed upon wax, for the wax
has neither knowledge nor will.” (p. 681.)

VII. “According to the sayings of some of the fathers and
of doctors of later days, ‘ God draws only the willing/ and so
in conversion man’s will does something; but these are not
like sound words, for they confirm a false opinion as to the
powers of human will in conversion.” (p. 582.)

VIII. “In external matters of the world, which are sub-
ject to reason, there is still left to man some portion of under-
standing, powers, and faculties; although these wretched
remnants are exceedingly feeble; and insignificant as they
are, even these are so poisoned arid contaminated by heredi-
tary disease that in the sight of God they are worthless.”
(p. 641.)

IX. “ In conversion, whereby from being a child of wrath
man becomes a child of grace, he does not cooperate with
the Holy Spirit, since man’s conversion is the work of the
Holy Spirit solely and exclusively” (pp. 219, 579 and fol-
lowing, 663 and following; Appendix, p. 143). “Never-
theless the man who is born anew, through the power of the
Holy Spirit, can cooperate, although much infirmity still


634


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 464


accompanies; and he works well so far and so long as he is
led, ruled, and guided by the Holy Spirit; but yet he does
not work together with the Holy Spirit as two horses to-
gether draw a carriage.” (p. 674.)

X. “ Original sin is not some wrong which is perpetrated
in act, but it is inmostly inherent, fixed in man’s nature, sub-
stance, and essence; it is the fountain of all actual sins, such
as depraved thoughts, conversation, and evil works” (p. 577).
“ This hereditary disease, by which the whole nature has
been corrupted, is a horrible sin, and is indeed the beginning
and head of all sins, from which as a root and a fountain all
transgressions proceed.” (p. 640.)

“ By this sin, as if by a spiritual leprosy, even throughout
the inmost organism and the heart’s deepest recesses, all of
man’s nature in the sight of God is infected and corrupted;
and on account of this corruption man’s person is by God’s
law accused and condemned; so that we are by nature chil-
dren of wrath, slaves of death and damnation, unless by the
benefit of Christ’s merit we are delivered and preserved from
these evils” (p. 639). “Hence there is a total want or
deprivation of the original righteousness created with man in
Paradise, or of the image of God, and hence are the impo-
tence, inaptitude, and stupidity, by which man has been
wholly unfitted for all Divine or spiritual things. In the
place of the lost image of God in man, there is an inmost,
most wicked, deepest, inscrutable, and inexpressible cor-
ruption of his whole nature, and of all his powers, especially
of the higher and chief faculties of the soul, in mind, under-
standing, heart, and will.” (p. 640.)

465. These are the precepts, dogmas, and decrees of the
present church as to man’s free will in spiritual and in natural
things, as also respecting original sin. They have been pre-
sented to the end that the precepts, dogmas, and decrees of
the New Church on these subjects may be seen more clearly;
for from the two formulas so placed side by side, the truth
appears in the light: as in pictures, in which an ugly face


No. 467]


FREE WILL


635


is placed beside a handsome one; both being seen at once,
the beauty of the one and the ugliness of the other stand out
clearly before the eye. The decrees of the New Church are
these which follow.


I. Two TREES PLACED IN THE GARDEN OF EDEN, ONE OF
LIFE, AND THE OTHER OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD
AND EVIL, SIGNIFY FREE WILL IN SPIRITUAL
THINGS GIVEN TO MAN.

466. It has been believed by many that by Adam and
Eve, in the book of Moses, the first created human beings
are not meant, and in proof they have brought forward
arguments as to Pre-adamites drawn from the computa-
tions and chronologies in some Gentile lands; and also from
the saying of Cain, Adam’s first-born, to Jehovah: I shall be
a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth , and it shall come to
pass that every one that findeth me shall slay me. Therefore
Jehovah set a mark upon Cain , lest 'any finding him should
kill him (Gen. iv. 14, 15); and he afterward went out from
the face of Jehovah , and dwelt in the land of Nod , and he
builded a city (iv. 16, 17). From this they argue that the
earth was inhabited before the time of Adam. But that
Adam and his wife mean the Most Ancient Church on this
planet has been proved by many things in the Heavenly Ar-
cana, published by me at London; and in the same work it
is also shown that the garden of Eden means the wisdom of
the men of that church; the tree of life, the Lord in man
and man in the Lord; the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, man not in the Lord but in his selfhood, as he is who
believes that he does all things, even good, from himself;
and eating from that tree means the appropriation of evil.

467. By the garden of Eden in the Word is not meant any
garden, but intelligence; and by the tree is not meant any
tree, but man. That the garden of Eden signifies intelli-
gence and wisdom, may be evident from the following pas-


636 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 467

sages: In thine intelligence and thy wisdom thou hadst gotten
thee riches; also (which follows in the same chapter), Full of
wisdom , thou hast been in Eden , the garden of God ; every pre-
cious stone was thy covering (Ezek. xxviii. 4, 12, 13). This
is said of the prince and king of Tyre, of whom wisdom is
predicated, because Tyre in the Word signifies the church
as to knowledges of truth and good, by which is wisdom; the
precious stones which were his covering, also signify knowl-
edges of truth and good; for the prince and the king of Tyre
were not in the garden of Eden. And in another passage in
Ezekiel: Ashur is a cedar in Lebanon ; the cedars in the gar-
den 0} God did not hide it; nor was any tree in the garden of
God equal to it in beauty; all the trees of Eden in the garden
of God emulated it (xxxi. 3, 8, 9). And again: To whom art
thou thus become like in glory and in greatness among the trees
0} Eden? (verse 18.) This is said of Ashur, because by
Ashur in the Word rationality and intelligence therefrom is
signified. In Isaiah: Jehovah shall comfort Zion; He will
turn her desert into Eden, and her wilderness into the garden
of Jehovah (li. 3). Here Zion is the church, while Eden and
the garden of Jehovah are wisdom and intelligence. In the
Apocalypse: To him that over cometh will I give to eat of the
tree of life , which is in the midst of the paradise 0} God (ii. 7).
In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river,
will be the tree of life (xxii. 2). From these passages it is
clearly manifest that the garden of Eden, in which Adam
is said to have been placed, means intelligence and wisdom,
because the like is said as to Tyre, Ashur, and Zion. Also,
by a garden is signified intelligence elsewhere in the Word,
as in Isaiah (viii. 11; lxi. 11), Jeremiah (xxxi. 12), Amos
(ix. 14), and Numbers (xxiv. 6). This spiritual meaning of
garden is because of representations in the spiritual world;
paradises appear there, where the angels are in intelligence
and wisdom; the intelligence and wisdom themselves which
they have from the Lord, present such things around them;
and this comes from correspondence, for all things existing
in the spiritual world are correspondences.


No. 469]


FREE WILL


637


468. That a tree signifies man, is evident from the follow-
ing passages in the Word: All the trees of the field shall know
that I , Jehovah , will humble the high tree , will exalt the low
tree , and will dry up the green tree , and will make the dry tree
to flourish (Ezek. xvii. 24). Blessed is the man whose de-
light is in the law; he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers
of waters , that bringeth forth his fruit in his season (Ps. i. 1-
3 : Jer. xvii. 8). Praise Jehovah , ye fruitful trees (Ps. cxlviii.
9). The trees of Jehovah are fidl (Ps. civ. 16). The axe
lieth at the root of the tree; every tree that beareth not good
fruit shall be cut down (Matt. iii. 10; vii. 16-21). Either
make the tree good and its fruit good , or make the tree corrupt
and its fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by its fruit (Matt,
xii. 33; Luke vi. 43, 44). I will kindle a fire , which shall
devour every green tree and every dry tree (Ezek. xx. 47).
Because a tree signifies man, it was a law that the fruit of a
tree serviceable for food in the land of Canaan should be
counted as uncircumcised for three years (Lev. xix. 23).
Because an olive-tree signifies the man of the celestial church,
it is said of the two witnesses who prophesied that they were
two olive-trees, standing before the Lord of the whole earth
(Apoc. xi. 4; so too, Zech. iv. 3, n-14). And in David:
I am a green olive-tree in the house of God (Ps. Iii. 8). And
in Jeremiah: Jehovah called thy name a green olive-tree , fair y
with fruit (xi. 16); beside other passages, not here presented
because of their great number.

469. At this day one who is interiorly wise may perceive
or divine that what is written of Adam and his wife involves
spiritual things, which no one has heretofore known because
the spiritual sense of the Word has not been unfolded until
now. Who cannot see, without close examination, that
Jehovah had not placed two trees in the garden, and one of
them for a stumbling-block, but for the sake of some spiri-
tual representation? And that they were cursed because
they both ate of a tree, and that the curse clings to every
man coming after them, and thus that the whole human race


638 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 469

was condemned for the fault of one man, in which there was
no evil of the lusts of the flesh, and no iniquity of heart —
does this square with Divine justice ? And, first of all, why
did not Jehovah withhold him from eating? as He was
present and saw it. And why did He not cast the serpent
down into the lower world before he persuaded them ? But,
my friend, God did not do this, because He would thus have
deprived man of free will, from which, nevertheless, man is
man, and not a beast. When this is known, it is Very evi-
dent that by those two trees, one for life and the other for
death, man’s free will in spiritual things was represented.
Moreover hereditary evil is not from that, but from parents,
by whom an inclination towards the evil in which they them-
selves have been is transmitted to their children. That this
is so, is seen clearly by any one who carefully studies the man-
ners, dispositions, and faces of the children, yes, of families,
from a common father. But yet it depends on each one of a
family to choose whether he will accede or recede; for every
one is left to his own free will. But the special signification
of the tree of life, and of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, was fully explained in a Relation which may be seen
above (n. 48).

II. Man is not life, but is a receptacle op lire prom
God.

470. It is commonly believed that life is his own in man,
so that he is not merely a receptacle of life, but is also life.
This is the common belief from the appearance; for man
lives, that is, feels, thinks, speaks, and acts, altogether as
from hims.elf. Therefore the statement that man is a re-
ceptacle of life, and is not life, cannot but seem as something
unheard of, or a paradox, being opposed to sensual thought
because contrary to appearance. The cause of this fallacious
belief that man is also life, consequently that life was created
in man and for him, and afterward generated in him by an


No. 470I


FREE WILL


639


offshoot, I have deduced from appearance; but the cause of
fallacy from appearance is, that most men are at the present
day natural, and but few spiritual, and the natural man
judges from appearances and the fallacies therefrom, which
are diametrically opposed to this truth, that man is merely
a receptacle of life, not life. That man is not life, but a
receptacle of life from God, is evident from these obvious
proofs, that all created things are in themselves finite, and
that man because he is finite could not have been created
except from finite things. Therefore it is said in the book
of creation, that Adam was made from the earth and its
dust, from which he was also named, for Adam signifies the
earth’s soil; and every man actually consists only of what is
in the earth, and from the earth in the atmospheres. What
is in the atmospheres from the earth, man absorbs by the
lungs and the pores of the whole body, and the grosser con-
stituents he absorbs by means of food made up of earthly
substances. But as regards man’s spirit, that also is created
from finite things. What is man’s spirit but a receptacle of
the life of the mind ? The finites of which it is, are spiritual
substances, which are in the spiritual world, and also are
brought together into our earth and stored therein. Unless
they were there together with material things, no seed could
be impregnated from the inmosts, and then in a wonderful
manner grow up, with no departure from the right way,
from the first shoot even to fruit and to new seed; nor could
worms be procreated from the effluvia from the earth and
the exhalations from vegetable matter, with which the at-
mospheres are impregnated. Who with reason can think
that the Infinite can create any thing but what is finite? and
that man, being finite, is any thing but a form which the
Infinite can vivify from the life in itself ? And this is meant
by these words: Jehovah God formed man , the dust of the
earth , and breathed into his nostrils the breath of lives (Gen.
ii. 7). God, because He is infinite, is life in Himself; this
He cannot create, and so transfer to man, for that would be


640


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 470


to make him God. To hold that this was done, was the
madness of the serpent or the devil, and from him of Eve
and of Adam; for the serpent said, In the day ye eat thereof,
your eyes shall be opened , and ye shall be as God (Gen. iii. 5).
That this dire persuasion that God transfused and tran-
scribed Himself into man, was held by the men of the Most
Ancient Church at its end, when it was consummated, I have
heard from their own mouth; and they, on account of that
horrible belief that so they were gods, lie deeply hidden in a
cavern, near to which no one can approach without being
seized by an inward dizziness causing him to fall. That by
Adam and his wife the Most Ancient Church is meant and
described, was made known in the preceding article.

471. Who that can think from reason raised above the
sensuals of the body, cannot see that life is not creatable?
For what is life but the inmost activity of the love and wis-
dom which are in God and are God, which life may also be
called living force itself ? He who sees this can also see that
this life cannot be transferred into any man, except together
with love and wisdom. Who denies, or who can deny, that
all the good of love and all the truth of wisdom are solely
from God? and that so far as a man receives them from
God he lives from God, and is said to be born of God, that
is, regenerated ? And on the other hand, that so far as one
does not receive love and wisdom, or what is the same, char-
ity and faith, he does not receive life which in itself is life,
from God, but from hell ? and this is no other than inverted
life which is called spiritual death.

472. From the foregoing it may be perceived and con-
cluded that the following are not creatable, namely: 1. The
infinite is not creatable: 2. Nor are love and wisdom: 3.
And therefore life is not: 4. Nor are heat and light: 5. Nor
indeed is activity itself, viewed in itself. But it may be per-
ceived and concluded that organs receptive of these are cre-
atable and have been created. This may be illustrated by
the following comparisons: Light is not creatable, but its


No. 473]


FREE WILL


64I


organ, the eye; sound, which is the activity of the atmos-
phere, is not creatable, but its organ, the ear; neither is heat,
which is the primary active, for the reception of winch all
things in the three kingdoms of nature have been created,
which according to reception do not act but are acted upon.
It is according to creation that where there are actives there
are also passives, and that the two join themselves together
as in one. If actives were creatable, as passives are, there
would have been no need of the sun and heat and light from
it, but all created things would subsist without them; whereas
if they were removed, the created universe would lapse into
chaos. The sun of this world consists of created substances,
the activity of which produces fire. This is presented for the
sake of illustration. It would be the same with man, if
spiritual light which in its essence is wisdom, and spiritual
heat which in its essence is love, did not flow into him and
were not received by him. The whole man is nothing but
a form organized to receive light and heat, as well from the
natural world as from the spiritual, for they correspond to
each other. If it were denied that man is a form receptive
of love and wisdom from God, influx would also be denied,
and so that all good is from God; conjunction with God
would also be denied, 'and consequently, that man can be an
abode and temple of God.

473. But that man does not know this from any light of
reason is because fallacies from the credited appearances to
the external senses of the body cast a shade on that light.
Man feels no otherwise than that he lives from his life, be-
cause an instrumental feels the principal as its own, and
therefore cannot distinguish between them; for the principal
and the instrumental causes act together as one cause, ac-
cording to a proposition known in the learned world. The
principal cause is life, and the instrumental cause is man’s
mind. It seems as if beasts, too, possess life created in
them, but this is a like fallacy; for they are organs created
to receive light and heat from the natural world and at the


642


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[NO. 473


same time from the spiritual world; for every species is a
form of some natural love, and receives light and heat from
the spiritual world mediately, through heaven and hell,
the gentle through heaven, and the fierce through hell. Man
alone receives light and heat, that is, wisdom and love, im-
mediately from the Lord. This is the difference.

474. That the Lord is life in Himself, thus life itself, He
teaches in John: The Word was with God y and the Word was
God ; in Him was life, and the lije was the light of men (i. 1,
4). Again: As the Father hath lije in Himself , so hath He
given to the Son to have lije in Himselj (v. 26). And again:
I am the way , the truth , and the life (xiv. 6). And again:
He that jolloweth Me shall have the light 0} lije (viii. 12).

III. SO LONG AS MAN LIVES IN THE WORLD, HE IS KEPT IN
THE MIDDLE BETWEEN HEAVEN AND HELL, AND IN
SPIRITUAL EQUILIBRIUM THERE, WHICH IS
FREE WILL.

475. That what free will is may be known, and its quality,
it is necessary to know whence it is. From a knowledge of
its origin, especially, it becomes well known not only that it
is, but also of what quality it is. Its origin is from the spiri-
tual world, where man’s mind is kept by the Lord. The
mind of man is his spirit which lives after death; and man’s
spirit is constantly in company with its like in the spiritual
world, and by means of the material body with which it is
compassed it is with men in the natural world. The
reason why man does not know that he is in the midst of
spirits as to his mind, is that the spirits with whom he is in
company in the spiritual world think and speak spiritually;
but man’s spirit, so long as he is in the material body, thinks
and speaks naturally; and spiritual thought and speech
can be neither understood nor perceived by a natural man,
nor the reverse; and it is from this that they cannot be seen.
But when a man’s spirit is in society with spirits in their


No. 476]


FREE WILL


643


world, he is then also in spiritual thought and speech with
them, because his mind is inwardly spiritual but outwardly
natural, and he therefore communicates with spirits by his
interiors, but with men by his exteriors. By that com-
munication man perceives, and thinks analytically; without
it he would not think more or otherwise than a beast, as he
would also die instantly if all relations with spirits were cut
off. But to make comprehensible how man can be kept
in the middle between heaven and hell, and thereby in spiri-
tual equilibrium, from which he has free will, a few words
shall be said. The spiritual world consists of heaven and
hell; heaven is over head, and hell is there beneath the feet,
not, however, in the centre of the planet inhabited by men,
but under the earths of the spiritual world, which also are of
spiritual origin, and therefore not in extension but in its
appearance. Between heaven and hell there is a great
interval, which to those who are there seems like a complete
world. Into this interspace, from hell exhales evil in all
abundance; and from heaven, on the other hand, good flows
in thither, also in all abundance. It was this space of which
Abraham said to the rich man in hell, Between us and you
there is a great gulf fixed , so that they who would pass from
hence to you cannot , neither can they pass to us that would
come from thence (Luke xvi. 26). In the midst of this space
every man is as to his spirit, and solely for this, that he may
be in free will. This space, because it is so vast, and to those
who are there appears as a great orb, is called the World of
Spirits. It is also full of spirits, because every man after
death first comes to it, and is there prepared either for heaven
or for hell. There he is among spirits, in company with
them, as he was among men in the former world; nor is
there a purgatory there; that is a fable invented by the
Roman Catholics. But that world has been specially treated
of in the work on Heaven and Hettj published at London in
1758 (n. 421 - 535 )-

476. Every man, from infancy even to old age, is changing


644


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 476


his locality or situation in that world. While an infant, he
is kept in the eastern quarter, toward its north part; in boy-
hood, as he learns the first lessons of religion, he gradually
leaves the north for the south; in youth, as he begins to
think from his own mind, he is borne southward; and after-
ward, when he judges for himself and becomes his own mas-
ter, according to the increase of that which interiorly regards
God and love toward the neighbor, he is borne into the south
and to the east. But if he favors evil and imbibes it, he
keeps on toward the west. For in the spiritual world all
have their dwelling according to the quarters; in the east
dwell those who are in good from the Lord, for the sun is
there, in the midst of which the Lord is; in the north dwell
those who are in ignorance; in the south, those who are in
intelligence; and in the west, those who are in evil. Man
himself is not kept in that space or middle region as to the
body, but as to the spirit; and as the spirit changes its state,
by drawing near to good or to evil, so he is transferred to
localities or situations in this quarter or that, and there
comes into company with those who dwell there. But it is
to be known that the Lord does not transfer man hither or
thither, but man transfers himself in different ways. If he
chooses good, he then together with the Lord, or rather the
Lord together with him, transfers his spirit toward the east.
But if man chooses evil, then in unity with the devil, or rather
the devil in unity with him, he transfers his spirit toward the
west. It is to be observed that where heaven is here said,
the Lord also is meant, because the Lord is the All in all of
heaven; and where the devil is said, hell is meant, because
all who are there are devils.

477. Man is kept in this great interspace, and there con-
tinually in the midst of it, solely for this, that he may be in
free will in spiritual things; for this equilibrium is spiritual,
because it is between heaven and hell, thus between good
and evil. All who are in that great space are, as to their
interiors, joined with either angels of heaven or devils of


No. 478]


FREE WILL


645


hell, but at this day with either the angels of Michael or the
angels of the dragon. After death every man betakes him-
self to his own in that space, and associates himself with
those who are in similar love; for love there joins every one
with his like, causes him freely to breathe the breath of his
life and to be in the state of his previous life. But the ex-
ternals that do not make one with internals are then suc-
cessively put off; which being done, the good man is raised
to heaven, and the wicked man betakes himself to hell, each
to those with whom he makes one as to the reigning love.

478. But this spiritual equilibrium, which is free will, may
be illustrated by examples of natural equilibrium. It is like
the equilibrium of a man bound about the body or at the
arms, between two men of equal strength, one of whom
draws the man between them to the right, and the other to
the left: then the man in the middle can freely turn this
way or that, as if not acted upon by any force; and if he
turns toward the right, he draws the one on his left forcibly
toward him, even so that the man falls to the ground. It
would be the same if any man, however peaceable, were
bound between three men on his right and the same number
on his left, of equal power; it would be the same if he were
bound between camels or horses. Spiritual equilibrium,
which is free will, may be compared to a balance, in each
scale of which are placed equal weights; if but a little be
added to the scale of one side, the tongue at the axis above
begins to vibrate. It is similar with a lever, or with a great
beam on its supporting roller. The things which are within
man are one and all in such equilibrium — as the heart,
lungs, stomach, liver, pancreas, spleen, intestines, and all
others; hence it is that each one can discharge its functions
in perfect quiet. So with all the muscles: without such an
equilibrium with them, all action and reaction would cease,
and man would no longer act as man. Since, therefore, all
things in the body are in such equilibrium, all things in the
brain also are so too, consequently all things in the mind


646


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 478


there, which have reference to the will and understanding.
Beasts, birds, fishes, and insects also have freedom, but they
are carried along by the senses of their body, appetite and
pleasure prompting them. Man would not be unlike them
if he had freedom in doing, like his freedom in thinking; he
would also be carried along only by the senses of the body,
lust and pleasure prompting him. It is otherwise with him
who takes in the spiritual things of the church, and curbs his
free will by their means. He is then led by the Lord away
from lusts and evil pleasures and the inborn desire for them,
and has affection for good, and is averse to evil. He is then
transferred by the Lord nearer to the east and at the same
time to the south in the spiritual world, and is admitted into
heavenly freedom, which is freedom indeed.


IV. From permission of evil, in which permission is

EVERY one’s INTERNAL MAN, IT IS CLEARLY MANIFEST
THAT MAN HAS FREE WILL IN SPIRITUAL THINGS.

479. That man has free will in spiritual things is to be con-
firmed first from generals and afterward by particulars which
every one will acknowledge at the first hearing. The gen-
erals are: 1. That the wisest of mankind, Adam and his
wife, suffered themselves to be seduced by a serpent. 2.
And their first son Cain killed his brother Abel, and Jehovah
God did not withhold them by speaking with them, but only
after the deeds by cursing them. 3. That the Israelitish
nation worshipped a golden calf in the desert, when yet
Jehovah saw this from Mount Sinai and did not take pre-
cautions against it. 4. That David numbered the people,
and therefore a plague was sent upon them, by which so
many thousands of men perished; and that God, not before
but after the deed, sent Gad the prophet to him and declared
punishment. 5. That Solomon was permitted to establish
idolatrous worship. 6. And many kings after him were
permitted to profane the temple and the holy things of the


No. 480]


FREE WILL


647


church; and finally, that nation was permitted to crucify
the Lord. 7. That Mohammed was permitted to estab-
lish a religion in many respects not conformable to the Sacred
Scripture. 8. That the Christian religion is divided into
many sects, and each into heresies. 9. That there are in
Christendom so many impious persons, even glorying in
their impieties, as also plots and craft, even against the pious,
just, and sincere. 10. That injustice sometimes triumphs
over justice in courts and in business. 11. That even im-
pious persons are exalted to honors, and become great men
and leaders. 12. That wars are permitted, and in them
the slaughter of so many men, and the plundering of so many
cities, nations, and families. And so on. Can any one
deduce such from any other source than the free will with
every man? The permission known in all the world, has
no other origin. That the laws of permission are also laws
of the Divine Providence, may be seen in the work the Di-
vine Providence , printed at Amsterdam in 1764 (n. 234-
274), where what has been introduced above is also ex-
plained.

480. The particulars which show that there is free will in
spiritual things as much as in natural, are innumerable. Let
one take counsel of himself, if he chooses, whether he cannot
seventy times a day, or three hundred times a week, think of
God, the Lord, the Holy Spirit, and the Divine things which
are called the spiritual things of the church; whether he has
then a sense of any thing as forced, if he is moved to this
from any pleasure, or indeed from any lust, and this whether
he has faith or does not have it. Examine also, in whatever
state you may be, whether you can think any thing without
free will, in your conversation, in your prayers to God, in
preaching, and even in listening. Does not free will carry
every point in all these ? Yes, see that without free will, and
this in every and in the most minute particular, you would
no more breathe than a statue; for breathing follows thought,
and hence speech, in every step. I say, no more than a


648


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 480


statue, and not no more than a beast; for a beast breathes
from natural free will, but man from free will in natural
and at the same time in spiritual things; for man is not born
like a beast; a beast is born, with all the ideas that wait on
its natural love at every step, into those that pertain to nutri-
tion and prolification; but a man is born destitute of connate
ideas, and only into the faculty for knowing, understanding,
and being wise, and into the inclination to love himself and
the world, and also the neighbor and God; it is therefore
said that if he were deprived of free will in all that he wills
and thinks, he would no more breathe than a statue, and it
is not said that he would no more breathe than a beast.

48 r. That man has free will in natural things is not denied,
but this he has from his free will in spiritual things; for the
Lord flows in with every man from above or within, with Di-
vine good and Divine truth, as before shown; and thereby
breathes into man life distinct from that of beasts; and it is
His gift that man is able and willing to receive the Divine
good and truth and to act from them, and this He never
takes away from any one. Hence it follows that it is the
Lord’s constant will that man should receive truth and do
good, and so become spiritual, for which he was born; and
to become spiritual without free will in spiritual things is as
impossible as it is to thrust a camel through the eye of a
needle, or to touch a star in the heavens with the hand.
That ability to understand truth and will it is given to every
man, and to the devils also, and is in no wise taken away,
has been shown me by living experience. One of those who
were in hell was once brought up into the world of spirits;
and being there questioned by angels from heaven as to
whether he could understand the things which they were
speaking with him, Divine spiritual things, he replied that
he did understand; and having been asked why he did not
receive such things, he said that he did not love them, and
was therefore not willing. Again he was told that he could
be willing. He wondered at this, and said that he could not.


No. 482]


FREE WILL


649


Therefore the angels inspired his understanding with the
glory of fame with its pleasantness; receiving which, he also
willed those things and even loved them. But presently
he was sent back into the former state, in which he was a
plunderer, an adulterer, and an abuser of the neighbor; and
then because he did not will, he no longer understood them.
From this it is manifest that man is man from having free
will in spiritual things, and that without it man would be a
stock, a stone, or the statue Lot’s wife.

482. That man would have no free will in civil, moral,
and natural things, if he had none in spiritual things, is evi-
dent from this, that spiritual things, which are called theo-
logical, have their seat in the highest region of man’s mind,
like the soul in the body. They have their seat there, be-
cause the door by which the Lord enters to man is there.
Beneath them are civil, moral, and natural things, which
in man receive all their life from the spiritual things seated
above them. And since life flows in from the Lord from
the highest, and man’s life is to be able to think, to will,
and hence to speak and to do, freely, it follows that free will
in political and natural things is from this and no other
origin. From this spiritual freedom, man has a perception
of what is good and true, just and right, in civil matters,
which perception is understanding itself in its essence.
Man’s free will in spiritual things is comparatively like the
air in the lungs, which is inhaled, retained, and expelled, in
accordance with all the changes of his thought; and without
it he would be in a worse condition than one laboring under
nightmare, angina, or asthma. And it is like the blood in
the heart, at the first deficiency of which, the heart would
first palpitate, and then after convulsive action cease to beat
at all. It also might be likened to a body in motion, which is
borne along while there is effort remaining, and effort and
motion cease at one and the same time. So also is it with the
freedom of determination in which is man’s will; both to-
gether, the freedom of determination and tne will, in man


6$o


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 482


may be called living effort; for when will ceases, action
ceases, and when freedom of determination ceases, will
ceases. If man were deprived of spiritual freedom, it would
be comparatively as if the wheels were taken from machinery,
fans from windmills, or sails from ships. Yes, it would be as
with one who breathes his last in dying; for the life of man’s
■ spirit consists in his free will in spiritual things. The angels
' lament when they but hear it said that at this day many
ministers of the church deny that there is this free will; and
they call the denial of it double madness.

V Without free will in spiritual things, the Word

WOULD BE OF NO USE, AND CONSEQUENTLY THE
CHURCH WOULD BE NOTHING.

483. It is known throughout the Christian world that the
Word is in a broad sense the law, or the book of the laws ac-
cording to which man must live to obtain eternal life; and
what is more frequently stated there than that man must do
good and not evil, and that he must believe in God and not in
idols ? And it is full of commands and exhortations to those
things, of blessings and promises of reward for those who do
them, and of curses and threats for those who do them not.
For what would all this be, if man had no free will in spiri-
tual things, that is, in such as concern salvation and eternal
life? Would they not be vain words, and serve no use?
And if a man should persist in the idea that he has no power
and liberty in spiritual things, and thus apart from any
power of the will in them, would the Sacred Scripture then
appear to him otherwise than as blank paper without a
syllable upon it, or as paper on which a whole inkstand
has been emptied, or as strokes or points merely, without
letters, and thus as an empty volume ? There would be no
need of confirming this from the Word; but as the churches
have now spent, themselves on the emptiness of the mind in
spiritual things, and to prove it have brought forward from


No. 483] FREEWILL 651

the Word some passages to which they have given a false
interpretation, it is right to present some that command man
to do and to believe. Such are the following: The kingdom
0} God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof (Matt. xxi. 43). Bring forth therefore
fruits worthy of repentance; now also the axe is laid unto the
root of the tree; every tree therefore which bringeth not forth
good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire (Luke iii. 8, 9).
Jesus said, Why call ye Me Lord , Lord, and do not the things
which I say? Whosoever cometh to Me, and heareth My say-
ings and doeth them, is like a ?nan who built a house upon a
rock; but he that heareth and doeth not, is like a man that with-
out a foundation built a house upon the sand (vi. 46-49).
Jesus said, My mother and My brethren are these who hear
the Word of God and do it (viii. 21). We know that God hear-
eth not sinners , but if any one worshippeth God, and doeth His
will, him He heareth (John ix. 31). If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them (xiii. 17). He that hath My com-
mandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me; and I
will love him (xiv. 21). Herein is My Father glorified, that
ye bear much fruit (xv. 8). Ye are My friends if ye do what-
soever I command you. I have chosen you, that ye should
bring forth fruit and that your fruit should remain (xv. 14, 16).
Make the tree good; the tree is known by the fruit (Matt. xii.
33). Bring forth fruits worthy 0} repentance (iii. 8). He
that received seed into the good ground is he that heareth the
Word and beareth fruit (xiii. 23). He that reapeth receiveth
wages, and gather eth fruit unto life eternal (John iv. 36).
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings,
learn to do good (Isa. i. 16, 17). The Son of Man shall come
in the glory of His Father, and then He shall reward every
one according to his deeds (Matt. xvi. 27). And shall come
forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life
(John v. 29). Their works do follow them (Apoc. xiv. 13).
Behold I come quickly; and My reward is with Me, to give
to every one according to his work (Apoc. xxii. 12). Whose


652


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[NO. 483


eyes are open t to give every one according to his ways [Jer.
xxxii. 19], according to our doings hath He dealt with us
(Zech. i. 6). The Lord also teaches the same in the parables,
many of which imply that they who do good are accepted and
they who do evil are rejected; as in the parable of the la-
borers in the vineyard (Matt. xxi. 33-44); of the talents and
the pounds with which they were to trade (Matt. xxv. 14-
; 30: Luke xix. 13-25). So, too, of Faith: Jesus said, Who-
soever believeth in Me shall never die; yet shall he live (John
xi. 25, 26). This is the Father’s will , that every one who be-
lieveth in the Son may have eternal life (vi. 40; also verse 47).
He that believeth in the Son hath eternal life; but he that be-
lieveth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God
abideth on him (iii. 36). God so loved the world that He gave
His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should
not perish , but have everlasting life (iii. 15,16). And further:
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy hearty and all
thy souly and all thy mind; and thou shall love the neighbor
as thyself. On these two commandments hang the Law and
the Prophets (xxii. 37-40). But these are a very few of such
passages from the Word, and as a few cups of water from
the sea.

484. Who does not see the emptiness, I will not say the
folly, in the passages quoted above (n. 464), from the eccle-
siastical work entitled Formula Concordia, after reading
them and then reading passages from various parts of the
Word? Would he not think to himself, If it were as is there
taught, that man has no free will in spiritual things, what
would religion be, which is to do good, but an idle word?
And what is the church without religion but as bark about
wood, which is fit for no other use than to be burned? And
furthermore, he would think, If there is no church, because
there is no religion, then what are heaven and hell but fables
of the ministers and prelates of the church to catch people,
and raise themselves to higher honors? Hence that de-
testable saying, on the lips of many, Who can do good of


No. 485] FREE WILL 653

himself? and, who can gain faith of himself? And so they
neglect those things, and live like pagans.

But, my friend, shun evil, and do good, and believe in the
Lord with all your heart and all your soul, and the Lord will
love you, and will give love to do with and faith to believe
with; and then from love you will do good, and from faith,
which is trust, you will believe; and if you persevere in this
way, a reciprocal conjunction will take place, and this per-
petual, which is salvation itself and eternal life. If man,
from the strength given him, were not to do good, and from
his mind were not to believe in the Lord, what would he be
but a wilderness and a desert, and wholly like dry ground
which receives no rain, but repels it? or like a sandy plain
where there are sheep without pasture? And he would be
like a dry fountain, or like stagnant water therein, the outlet
being obstructed; or like a mansion where there is neither
harvest nor water; where, unless one fled from the place
immediately, and sought elsewhere a habitable abode, he
would perish with hunger and thirst.


VI. Without free will in spiritual things there would

BE NOTHING IN MAN BY WHICH IN TURN HE COULD
CONJOIN HIMSELF WITH THE LORD; AND CON-
SEQUENTLY THERE WOULD BE NO IMPU-
TATION, BUT MERE PREDESTI-
NATION, WHICH IS
DETESTABLE.

485. That without free will in spiritual things there would
be neither charity nor faith with any man, still less a con-
junction of the two, was fully shown in the chapter on Faith.
From this it follows that without free will in spiritual things
there would be nothing in man by which the Lord could con-
join Himself with him: and yet, without reciprocal conjunc-
tion there can be no reformation and regeneration, and con-
sequently no salvation. That without reciprocal conjunction


654


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 485


of man with the Lord and of the Lord with man there would
be no imputation, is an unavoidable consequence. The re-
sults from confirming the belief that there is no imputation
of good and evil, on the ground that man is without free will
in spiritual things, are numerous; and those enormities are
to be laid open in the last part of this work, where it will treat
of the heresies, paradoxes, and contradictions flowing from
the faith of the present day as to the imputation of the merit
and righteousness of the Lord God the Saviour.

486. Predestination is an offspring of the faith of the pres-
ent church, for it is born of belief in man’s absolute impo-
tence and his having no power of determination in spiritual
things, from believing this, and also that man’s conversion
is a turning without life, that he is like a stock, and that
afterward he has no conscious knowledge whether he is a
stock vivified by grace or not; for it is said that election is of
the mere grace of God, to the exclusion of man’s action from
the powers either of his nature or of reason ; and that it takes
place where and when God wills, thus from His pleasure-
The works which follow faith as evidences, to the reflective
eye are similar to the works of the flesh, and the Spirit which
operates them does not manifest their origin, but makes
them to be of grace or good pleasure, like faith itself. From
this it is plain that the dogma of the present church respect-
ing predestination sprang from that faith as a shoot from its
seed; and I may say that it has flowed out of it as an almost
inevitable result; this was done first among the Predes-
tinarians, then by Godoschalcus, afterward by Calvin and
his followers, and at length was firmly established by the
Synod of Dort, and thence carried forth into their church
as the palladium of religion, or rather as the head of Gorgo
or Medusa graven on the shield of Pallas — by the Supra- and
Infra-Lapsarians* But what more pernicious could have
been devised, or what could have been believed more cruel
about God than that some of the human race have been
condemned by predestination? For it would be a cruel


No. 487]


FREE WILL


655


creed, that the Lord, who is Love itself and Mercy itself,
wills that a multitude of men should be born for hell, or
that myriads of myriads should be bom doomed, that is,
bom devils and satans; and that from His Divine Wisdom,
which is infinite, He did not and does not provide that those
who live well and acknowledge God should not be cast into
eternal fire and torment. He is still the Lord, the Creator
and Saviour of all, and He alone leads all and wills the death
of none. What, therefore, can be believed or thought more
shocking than that whole nations and peoples should be
handed over, under His auspices and oversight, to the devil,
by predestination, to glut his appetite ? But this is the off-
spring of the faith of the present church, but the faith of the
New Church abhors it as monstrous.

487. Because I thought that such madness could never
have been sanctioned by any Christian, still less declared and
publicly proclaimed, which nevertheless was done by so
many chosen from among the clergy at the Synod of Dort,
in Holland, and it was afterward elegantly written out and
given to the public, therefore, to prevent my doubting, some
who took part in the decrees of that Synod were called to
me. When they were seen standing near, I said, “Who
from any sound reasoning can come to the conclusion that
there is predestination? Must not cruel ideas of God, and
shameful ideas concerning religion necessarily flow from it?
When one has written predestination on his heart by con-
firmations, must he not necesasrily think of all things of the
church as vain, and so too of the Word? Must he not think
of God as a tryant, for having predestined to hell so many
myriads of men?” At these remarks they looked at me
with a satanic expression, and said, “ We were among those
chosen to form the Synod of Dort, and we then confirmed
ourselves, and have since done so still more, in many things
as to God, the Word, and religion, which we have not dared
to make public; but when we have spoken and taught about
it, we have woven and twisted a web of threads of various


656 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 487

colors, and over it we have strewed feathers borrowed from
the wings of peacocks.’ 7 But as they now wished to do the
same, the angels, by power given them by the Lord, closed
the externals of the mind, and opened its internals with them,
and they were compelled to speak from the internals. And
then they said, “ Our faith, which we have formed from con-
clusions following one from another, has been and still is
this: r. There is no Word of Jehovah God, but something
of wind breathed out of the mouths of the prophets. This
has been our thought because the Word predestines all to
heaven, and teaches that only man is in fault if he does not
walk in the ways that lead to it. 2. There is religion, be-
cause it is necessary; but it is like a strong wind that brings
a fragrant odor to the common herd; it must therefore be
taught by ministers small and great, and this from the Word,
because the Word has been received. This has been our
thought, because where there is predestination, there re-
ligion is nothing. 3. The civil laws of justice are religion;
but predestination is not according to life from these laws,
but purely from the pleasure of God, as with a king whose
power is absolute at mere sight of a face. 4. All things
taught by the church are to be exploded as vanity, and re-
jected as rubbish, except that God is. 5. The spiritual
things, which are praised, are no more than ethereal under
the sun, which if they penetrate deeply into a man, bring upon
him vertigo and stupor, and make him a hateful monster in
the sight of God.” 6. Being asked about faith, from which
they deduced predestination, as to whether they believed it
to be spiritual, they said that it was effected according to
predestination; but that while it is given, men are like stocks;
that they are indeed vivified from being such, but not spiri-
tually. After these horrible sayings, they wished to go away.
But I said to them, “ Stay a little longer, and I will read to
you from Isaiah”; and I read as follows: Rejoice not thou ,
whole Philistia, because the rod that smote thee is broken; for
out 0} the serpenVs root hath gone forth a basilisk , whose fruit


No. 488]


FREE WILL


657


shall be a fiery flying serpent (xiv. 29). And I explained it by
the spiritual sense; that Philistia means the church sepa-
rate from charity; that the basilisk which went forth out of
the serpent’s root, means its doctrine of three gods, and of
imputative faith applied to each singly; and that its fruit,
which is a fiery flying serpent, means no imputation of good
and evil, but immediate mercy whether man has lived well
or ill. Having heard this they said, “This may be so; but
from that volume which you call the Holy Word, select some-
thing on predestination.” And I opened it, and in the same
prophet I met with this passage which was appropriate:
They laid asp's eggs, and wove the spider's web ; he that eateth
of their eggs dieth , and when one presseth it out, a viper is
hatched (lix. 5). When they heard this they did not bear the
explanation: but some of those who had been called to me
(there were five) hurried away into a cave, round about which
appeared a dusky burning; a sign that they had neither faith
nor charity. It is manifest from this that the decree of that
synod respecting predestination is not only an insane but also
a cruel heresy; it is therefore to be rooted out of the brain, so
that not even one stroke of it shall be left.

488. The horrible creed that God predestines men to hell,
may be compared to the horrible cruelty of fathers among
certain barbarous nations, who throw their sucklings and
infants into the streets; and to that of some in war, who cast
those who are slain into the forests to be devoured by brutes.
It may also be compared to the cruelty of a tryant who di-
vides the people subject to him into companies, and gives
some of the companies to the executioner, some he casts into
the depths of the sea, and some into the fire. It may also
be compared to the madness’ of some wild beasts which de-
vour their own young; also to the mad fury of dogs which
fly at their own likenesses seen in a mirror.


6J8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 489


VII. It there were no tree will in spiritual things,
God would be the cause ot evil, and so there

WOULD BE NO IMPUTATION.

489. That God is the cause of evil follows from the pres-
ent faith first hatched by those who held council in the city
of Nice. The still persistent heresy, that there have been
three Divine Persons from eternity, and each one a God by
himself was there devised and given out. This egg being
hatched, the followers of this faith could not but approach
each Person separately as God. They seized upon faith as
imputing the merit or righteousness of the Lord God the
Saviour; and that no man might share merit with the Lord,
they took away from man all free will in spiritual things, and
they gave him absolute impotence as to that faith. And as
they deduced every thing spiritual of the church from that
faith, they asserted that there was similar impotence as to
every thing that the church teaches about salvation. Hence
dreadful heresies one after another sprung up, based on that
faith and man’s impotence in spiritual things, and also that
most harmful heresy of predestination, treated of in the pre-
ceding article; all of which imply that God is the cause of
evil, or that God created both good and evil. But, my friend,
put faith in no council, but in the Lord’s Word which is above
councils. What have not Roman Catholic councils brought
forth ? or that of Dort, whence that terrible viper, predestina-
tion, was published? It may be thought that the free will
given to man in spiritual things was the mediate cause of evil;
consequently, that if such free will had not been given him,
he could not have transgressed. But, my friend, pause here
and consider whether any man could have been created so as
to be a man without free will in spiritual things; if he were
deprived of that, he would be no longer a man but only a
statue. What is free will but that he can will and do and
think and speak to all appearance as of himself? Since this


No. 490]


FREE WILL


659


was given to man that he might live a man, therefore two
trees were placed in the garden of Eden, the tree of life and
the tree of the knowldege of good and evil; and this signifies
that from the freedom given him man can eat of the fruit of
the tree of life, or of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil.

490. That every thing which God created was good, is
manifest from the first chapter of Genesis, where it is said
(verses 10, 12, 18, 21, and 25), God saw that it was good; and
finally (in verse 31), that God saw every thing that He had
made , and behold it was very good; also from man’s primitive
state in paradise. But that evil had its rise from man is plain
from Adam’s state according to or after the fall, that he was
expelled from paradise. It is evident from this that unless
free will in spiritual things had been given to man, God Him-
self, and not man, would have been the cause of evil, and
thus that God must have created both good and evil; but to
think that He created evil also, is a horrible thought. That
God did not create evil because He gave man free will in
spiritual things, and that He in no wise inspires any evil into
man, is because He is Good itself, and in good God is omni-
present, continually urging and importuning to be received;
and if He is not received still He does not withdraw, for if He
were to withdraw, man would instantly die, yes, would lapse
into nothing; for man has life from God, and the existence
of all that of which he consists is from God. God did not
create evil, but it was introduced by man, because man turns
into evil the good which is continually flowing in from God,
by turning himself away from God and toward himself;
and when this is done, the enjoyment of good remains, and
then becomes the enjoyment of evil; for without the enjoy-
ment remaining, as the same, man would not live, for enjoy-
ment makes the life of his love. But still these enjoyments
are diametrically opposite to each other; however, man does
not know this so long as he lives in the world; but after death
he will know it, and will also perceive it manifestly; for then


66o


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 490


enjoyment of the love of good is turned into heavenly blessed-
ness, while enjoyment of the love of evil is turned into in-
fernal horror. From what has been said it is evident that
every man has been predestined to heaven, and no one to
hell, but that a man gives himself over to hell by the abuse
of his free will in spiritual things, whereby he embraces what
exhales from hell. For, as before said, every man is kept in
the midst, between heaven and hell, so as to be in equilibrium
between good and evil, and consequently in free will in spiri-
tual things.

491. That God has imparted freedom not only to man but
also to every beast, yes, and an analogue of it to things inani-
mate, enabling each to receive it according to its nature, as
also that He provides good for them all, but that the objects
turn it into evil, may be illustrated by comparisons: The
atmosphere gives to every man means of breathing, in like
manner to every beast, tame or wild, also to every bird, to owl
and dove alike; and it also gives means for flying; and yet
the atmosphere is not the cause that what it gives is received
by creatures of contrary genius and nature. The ocean gives
in itself an abode, and also offers food to every fish; but it is
not the cause that one devours another there, and that the
crocodile turns its food into poison with which it kills man.
The sun provides heat and light for all things; but objects,
which are the various vegetable productions of the earth,
receive them diversely, a good tree and a good shrub in one
way and the thorn and thistle in another, or the harmless
herb in one way and the poisonous in another. The rain
falls from the higher region of the atmosphere upon all parts
of the earth, and the earth supplies water therefrom to every
shrub, herb, and grass, and each one of them takes to itself
according to its need. This is what is called the analogue
of free will, because they freely drink in those things by their
little mouths, pores, and ducts, which stand open in the warm
season; the earth merely supplies fluids and elementary sub-
stances, and the shrubs appropriate them with something


No. 493]


FREE WILL


66l

like thirst and hunger. It is similar with men, that with
every one the Lord flows in with spiritual heat which in its
essence is the good of love, and with spiritual light which in
its essence is the truth of wisdom; but man receives them
according to the way in which he turns, whether toward God
or toward himself. Therefore where the Lord teaches con-
cerning love toward the neighbor, He says, That ye may be
the children of your Father , who maketh the sun to rise on the
evil and on the good , and sendeth rain on the just and on the
unjust (Matt. v. 45); and elsewhere He says that He willeth
the salvation of all.

492. I will add this Relation: I have several times heard
words sent down from heaven as to the good of charity,
which passed through the world of spirits and penetrated
into hell, even to its depths; and those words in their prog-
ress were turned into such things as were clearly opposed to
the good of charity, and at length into those of hatred toward
the neighbor; indicating that every thing which proceeds
from the Lord is good, and is turned into evil by the spirits
in hell. The same was done with certain truths of faith,
which in their progress were turned into falsities opposite
to truths. For the recipient form itself turns what enters
into it into what agrees with itself.

VIII. Every spiritual thing of the church that enters

in freedom, and is received from freedom, remains;

BUT NOT THE REVERSE.

493. That which is received by man from freedom re-
mains with him, because freedom is of his will; and because
it is of the will it is also of his love; for it has been shown else-
where that the will is the receptacle of love. That all which
is of the love is free, and that it also is of the will, every one
understands when it is said, I will this because I love it; and
also the converse, Because I love this I also will it. But
man’s will is two-fold, inward and outward, or of the internal


662


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 493


and of the external man; therefore a knave may act and
talk before the world in one way, and in another with his
familiar friends; before the world he acts and talks from
the will of his external man, and with his familiar friends
from the will of the internal; but the will of the internal,
where is one’s reigning love, is the will that is here meant.
From these few facts it is evident that the inner will is the
man himself, for the being and the essence of his life are
there; the understanding is its form, by which the will renders
its love visible. All that a man loves and wills from love is
free; for whatever proceeds from the love of the internal will
is his life’s enjoyment; and because the same is the being of
his life, it is also his selfhood; and therefore, whatever is
received from the freedom of this will remains, for it adds
itself to the self-life. It is the contrary if any thing is brought
in non-freedom; this is not thus received. But of this in
what follows.

494. But it must be well known that the spiritual things
of the Word and the church, which a man imbibes from love
and which his understanding confirms, remain in him, but
not so what is civil and political; because spiritual things
ascend into the highest region of the mind and take form
there. This is because the Lord’s entrance into man with
Divine goods and truths is there, and this region is as a
temple in which He is. But things civil and political, be-
cause they are of the world, occupy lower regions of the
mind, and some of them are there like little buildings outside
of the temple, and some like porches through which is en-
trance. Another reason why the spiritual things of the
church dwell in the highest region of the mind, is because
they are proper to the soul and regard its eternal life, and
the soul is in highests, and its nourishment is from no other
food than spiritual. Therefore the Lord calls Himself
bread, for He says, I am the living bread which came down
from heaven; if any man eat of this bread , he shall live for
ever (John vi. 51). In that region also resides man’s love


No. 495]


FREE WILL


663


which makes his blessedness after death; his free will in
spiritual things also has its chief seat there, and from this
descends all the freedom that man has in natural things;
and because the origin of this is there, this is shared with all
forms of free will in natural things; and by means of those,
the love reigning in highests takes whatever conduces to its
ends. The communication is like that between the fountain
and the waters that flow from it, and like that between the
prolific principle itself of a seed with the parts of a tree, one
and all, especially with the fruit, in which it renews itself.
But if one denies that there is free will in spiritual things,
and therefore rejects that, he makes another fountain for
himself, and there opens the stream, and changes spiritual
freedom into merely natural and at length into infernal
freedom. This freedom, too, becomes like the prolific prin-
ciple of a seed, passing freely through trunk and branches
into fruits, which owing to their origin are inwardly rotten.

495. All the freedom that is from the Lord is freedom
indeed, but that which is from hell and hence is with man, is
bondage. Yet spiritual freedom necessarily seems like
bondage to him who is in infernal freedom, because they are
opposites. Nevertheless, all who are in spiritual freedom
not only know but also perceive that infernal freedom is
bondage; the angels therefore turn with aversion from it as
a putrid stench, while the infemals draw it in like aroma.
It is known from the Lord’s Word that worship from free-
dom is truly worship, and that what is free is pleasing to the
Lord, therefore it is said in David, I will freely sacrifice to
God (Ps. liv. 6). Again, The willing ones of the people are
gathered together , the people of the God of Abraham (xlvii. 9).
Therefore there were among the children of Israel free-will
offerings; their sacred worship consisted chiefly in sacrifices;
and because of God’s being well pleased with what is free,
it was commanded that every man whose heart impelled
him, and every one whose willing spirit moved him, should
bring an offering to Jehovah for the work of the tabernacle


664


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 495


(Exod. xxv. 5, 21, 29). And the Lord says, If ye continue in
My Word , then are ye My disciples indeed; and ye shall know
the truth , and the truth shall make you free, Ij the Son there-
fore shall make you free , ye shall be free indeed; but whoso-
ever committeth sin is the servant of sin (John viii. 31-36).

496. That which a man receives from freedom remains,
because his will takes it to itself and appropriates it, and be-
cause it enters into his love, and love acknowledges it as its
own, and forms itself by means of it. But this shall be
illustrated by comparisons; but as these are taken from
natural things, heat will stand in place of love. It is well
known that by means of heat, and according to its degree the
ways of entrance in every plant are opened, and that as they
are opened the plant inwardly returns into the form of its
nature, freely receives its nutriment and retains what is fit
and grows. It is similar with a beast; all that is chosen and
eaten from the love of nutrition called appetite, adds itself
to its body, and so remains. What is suitable continually
adds itself to the body, because all things that compose it are
perpetually renewed. This is known to be so, but by few.
And with beasts, too, heat opens all things of the body, and
causes their natural love to act freely. It is from this that in
spring and summer they enter and return into the instinct
of prolification and of rearing their young, which is done
from the utmost freedom, because this belongs to the reign-
ing love implanted in them by creation for the sake of pre-
serving the universe in the created state. The freedom of
love may be illustrated by the freedom induced by heat, be-
cause love produces heat, as is evident from its effects, as
that man is enkindled, grows warm, and is inflamed, as love
is exalted to zeal or to a blaze of anger. The heat of the
blood or the vital heat of men, and in general of animals, is
from no other source. It is from this correspondence that
the bodily parts are adapted by heat to receive freely that to
which the love aspires. In such equilibrium and consequent
freedom are all things within man. In such freedom the


No. 497]


FREE WILL


665


heart propels its blood upward and downward alike, the
mesentery gives forth its chyle, the liver does its work for
the blood, the kidneys their work of secretion, the glands
theirs in straining, and so on; if its equilibrium were to
suffer, the member would sicken, and would labor under
paralysis or loss of strength; equilibrium and freedom here
are one. There is in the created universe no substance
which does not tend to equilibrium, in order that it may be
in freedom.


LX. Man’s will and understanding are in this free
will; but in both worlds, the spiritual and the
natural, doing evil is restrained by laws, for
otherwise society in both would perish.

497. Every one may know that he has frefc will in spiritual
things from mere observation of his own thought. Cannot
any one think from freedom of God, the Trinity, charity and
the neighbor, faith and its operation, of the Word and all
that is from it, and, after he has studied theology, of the
particulars of it? And who cannot think, and even draw
conclusions, teach, and write, in accordance with them and
against them? If man were deprived of this freedom for
a single moment, would not his thinking cease, his tongue
become dumb, and his hand powerless? Therefore, my
friend, if you choose you can from merely observing your
own thought reject and execrate that absurd and hurtful
heresy, which at this day in Christendom has induced a
lethargy upon heavenly teaching about charity and faith and
salvation therefrom, and about eternal life. The reasons
why this free will resides in man’s will and understanding
are the following: 1. Those two faculties must first be in-
structed and reformed, and by means of them the two facul-
ties of the external man which make him speak and act.
2. Those two faculties of the internal man make his spirit
which lives after death, and which is under no other than


666


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 497


Divine law; and of this the first thing is that man should
think of the law, do it, and obey it, from himself though
from the Lord. 3. Man as to his spirit is in the midst be-
tween heaven and hell, thus between good and evil, and
hence in equilibrium; from this he has free will in spiritual
; things; of which equilibrium see above (n. 475 and follow-
\ ing) ; but as long as he lives in the world he is as to his spirit
j in equilibrium between heaven and the world, and then he
hardly knows that so far as he withdraws from heaven and
draws near to the world he draws near to hell; man knows
and yet does not know this in order that in this, too, he may
be in freedom and may be reformed. 4. These two, the
will and understanding, are the two receptacles of the Lord,
the will of love and charity, the understanding of wisdom
and faith; and each of these is wrought by the Lord while
man is in full freedom, that there may be mutual and recip-
rocal conjunction, through which is salvation. 5. All the
judgment wrought with man after death is effected accord-
ing to the use that he has made of free will in spiritual things.

498. Hence it comes that free will itself, in spiritual things,
resides in man’s soul in all perfection; and from that, as the
vein of the spring opens into a fountain, it flows into his
mind, into its two parts which are the will and understand-
ing, and through these into the senses of the body, and into
speech and action. For in man there are three degrees of
life, the soul, mind, and sensual body; all that is higher, is
in perfection above that which is lower. It is this freedom
of man, through, in, and with which the Lord is present in
him; and He urges the reception of Himself without ceasing;
but He in no wise removes and takes away freedom, since,
as said above, all that is done by man in spiritual things
which is not from freedom is not permanent; and it may
therefore be said that it is this freedom of man in which the
Lord dwells with him, in his soul. But that the doing of evil
in both the spiritual and the natural world, is restrained by
laws, since otherwise society would nowhere continue to


No. 499]


FREE WILL


667


exist, is manifest without explanation. But yet it shall be
illustrated that without those external bonds not only would
society cease to exist, but the whole human race also would
perish. For man is as a prey to two loves, the love of ruling
over all and the love of possessing the wealth of all. These
loves, if uncurbed, rush onward to infinity. The hereditary
evils into which man is bom have arisen principally from
these two loves; nor was that of Adam any other than his
desire to become as God, which evil the serpent infused into
him, as we read; therefore in the curse pronounced upon him
it is said, that the earth would bring forth the thorn and the
thistle to him (Gen. iii. 5, 18), by which are meant all evil
and the falsity from it. Every one who has given himself
up to those loves, regards himself alone as the only one in
whom and for whom all others have their being. Such have
no pity, no fear of God, no love of the neighbor; and hence
there are in them unmercifulness, inhumanity, arid cruelty,
and an infernal lust and greed for plundering and robbing,
and craft and cunning in working out their purposes. Such
things are not innate in the beasts of the earth; they do not
slaughter and devour each other from other love than to sat-
isfy their hunger and to defend themselves; therefore a
wicked man, viewed with reference to those loves, is more
inhuman, fierce, and vile than any beast. That man is such
inwardly, is manifest in riots where the bonds of law have
been loosed; and also in massacres and pillaging, when the
signal is given of freedom to turn their fury on the van-
quished and besieged; scarcely one desists until the drum
is heard as a signal that they must stop. From this it is
plain that if no fear of legal penalties restrained men, not
only society but the whole human race would be destroyed.
But all these evils are removed solely by the true use of free
will in spiritual things, which is, to direct the mind to thought
on the state of life after death.

499. But this shall be further illustrated by comparisons,
as follows: Without some sort of free will in all created


668


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 499


things, both animate and inanimate, no creation could have
been accomplished. For without free will in natural things,
in case of beasts, there would be no choice of food condu-
cive to nourishment, and no propagation and preservation
of offspring; thus there would be no beast. If the fishes of
the sea and the shell-fish at its bottom had not such free-
dom, there would be no fish and no shell-fish. So unless
such freedom were in every little insect, there would be no
silk-worm to yield silk, no bee to furnish honey and wax, no
butterfly to sport with its consort in the air, to feed on the
juices of flowers, and to represent the happy state of man in
the heavenly aura after he has shed his covering, like the
worm. Unless there were some analogue of free will in the
soil of the earth, in the seed sown in it, in all parts of the
tree that has grown out of it, and in its fruit, and again in the
new seed, there would be nothing of the vegetable kingdom.
If there were not some analogue of free will in every metal,
and in every stone both precious and common, there would
be no metal, stone, or even a grain of sand; for this freely
absorbs the ether, exhales what is natural to itself, throws off
what is worn out, and restores itself with what is new, hence
there is a magnetic sphere about the magnet, an iron sphere
about iron, copper about copper, silver about silver, golden
about gold, stony about stone, nitrous about nitre, sulphu-
rous about sulphur, and a different sphere about every par-
ticle of the dust of the earth. And from this sphere the in-
most of every seed is impregnated, and what is prolific
vegetates; for without such exhalation from every little
particle of dust of the earth, there would be no beginning of
germination, and hence no continuance of it. How could
the earth, except by what is exhaled from it, penetrate with
dust and water to the inmost centre of a grain sown in it, as
into a grain of mustard seed , which is less than all seeds , but
when it is grown is greater than the herbs , and becometh a
great tree? (Matt. xiii. 32: Mark iv. 30-32.) Since freedom
has been thus implanted in all created subjects, in each ac-


No. 500]


FREE WILL


669


cording to its nature, why should not free will have been
implanted in man according to his nature, which is, for him
to be spiritual ? Hence it is that free will in spiritual things
is given him from birth even to the close of his life in the
world, and afterward to eternity.


X. If men had not free will in spiritual things, all

IN THE UNIVERSE MIGHT HAVE BEEN LED IN A SINGLE
DAY TO BELIEVE IN THE LORD; BUT THIS CANNOT BE
DONE BECAUSE WHAT IS NOT RECEIVED BY MAN
FROM FREE WILL DOES NOT REMAIN.

500. That God, apart from the free will given to man in
spiritual things, could in a single day lead all to believe in
Him, follows as a truth from the Divine omnipotence when
not understood. They who do not understand the Divine
omnipotence, may suppose either that there is no order, or
that God can act contrary to order as well as according to
it; when yet without order no creation was possible. The
primary thing of order is for man to be an image of God,
consequently, for him to be perfecting in love and wisdom,
and so to become that image more and more. God is con-
tinually working this in man; but in the absence of free will
in spiritual things by which man can turn to God and con-
join himself with Him in his turn, this would be in vain, be-
cause it would be an impossibility. For there is order, from
and according to which the whole world has been created,
with what belongs to it, one and all; and because all the
work of creation has been done from this, therefore God is
called order itself; and so it is the same whether you say, to
do contrary to Divine order, or to do contrary to God. In-
deed, God Himself cannot act contrary to His own Divine
order, for this would be to do contrary to Himself. There-
fore He leads every man according to that which is Himself,
the wandering and the backsliding into it, and the resisting
to it. If man could have been created without free will in


6 jO TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 500

spiritual things, then what would be more easy for an om-
nipotent God than to lead all in the whole world to believe
in the Lord ? Could He not have brought about this faith
with every one, both immediately and mediately? immedi-
ately by His absolute power, and its irresistible operation,
which is continual for man’s salvation; or mediately, by
means of torments brought upon his conscience, by mortal
convulsions of the body, and grievous threats of death, if he
did not receive it? and moreover, by the opening of hell,
and thus by the presence of devils holding frightful torches
in their hands; or by calling forth from it the dead whorq
they had known, in the form of fearful spectres? But to
this the reply is in the words of Abraham to the rich man in
hell: If they hear not Moses and the prophets , neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead (Luke xvi. 31).

501. It is asked at the present day, why miracles do not
take place as formerly; for it is believed that if they were to
take place, every one would make hearty acknowledgment.
For miracles are not now wrought as formerly, because they
compel, and take away free will in spiritual things, and from
being spiritual make man natural. Every one in the Chris-
tian world, since the coming of the Lord, may become spiri-
tual, and he becomes spiritual solely from the Lord through
the Word; and the capacity for this would perish if man were
led to believe through miracles; since they, as before said, are
compulsory and deprive him of free will in spiritual things;
and every thing compelled in such matters betakes itself
into the natural man, and shuts up the spiritual as with a
door, the spiritual being truly the internal man, and deprives
this of all power to see any truth in light; therefore he would
afterwards reason about spiritual things from the natural
man alone, seeing every thing truly spiritual inversely. But
miracles were wrought before the coming of the Lord, be-
cause they of the church were then natural men to whom the
spiritual things of the internal church could not be opened;
for if opened, they would have profaned them. And all


No. 502]


FREE WILL


671


their worship therefore consisted in rituals which repre-
sented and signified internals of the church; and they could
not be brought to observe those rituals properly except by
miracles. And that even by miracles they could not, be-
cause there was a spiritual internal in those representatives,
is manifest from the children of Israel in the desert, who,
though they saw so many miracles in Egypt, and afterward
that greatest of miracles upon Mount Sinai, still after Moses
had been absent a month, danced around the golden calf,
and shouted that it had led them out of Egpyt. Similar
things were done by them in the land of Canaan, although
they saw the great miracles wrought by Elijah and Elisha,
and at last the truly Divine miracles wrought by the Lord.
Miracles are not now wrought especially because the church
has taken from man all free will; and it has done this by
decreeing that man can contribute nothing toward gaining
faith, or to conversion, or in general to salvation, as may be
seen above (n. 464). Man believing this becomes more and
more natural; and the natural man, as said above, looks at
every thing spiritual inversely, and hence thinks against it.
The higher region of the man’s mind, where free will in
spiritual things primarily resides, would be closed up; and
the spiritual things which have been as it were confirmed by
miracles, would occupy the lower region of the mind, which
is merely natural, while falsities as to faith, conversion, and
salvation would thus remain above this region. Hence it
would come to pass that satans would dwell above, and
angels below, like vultures over hens. Consequently after
a little while the satans would break down the barrier, and
rush forth with fury upon the spiritual things which hold
place below them, and would not only deny them, but would
also blaspheme and profane them. The latter state of the
man would thereby become far worse than the former.

502. The man who through falsities as to the spiritual
things of the church has become natural, cannot think of the
Divine omnipotence but as being above order, and thus as


672


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 502


apart from order; from which he would fall into the follow-
ing ravings: Why the coming of the Lord into the world, and
why redemption in that way, when God from His omnip-
otence could have done the same from heaven as was done
on earth? Why might He not by redemption have saved
the whole race without exception ? And why has the devil
since been able to prevail over the Redeemer in man ? Why
is there a hell? Could not God blot it out, and cannot He
blot it out, by His omnipotence, or deliver all from it and
make them angels of heaven? Why a final judgment?
Cannot God transfer all the goats from His left to the right,
and make them sheep ? Why did He cast down the angels
of the dragon and the dragon himself from heaven, and not
change them into angels of Michael? Why does He not
give faith to all of these, and impute His Son’s righteousness,
and so remit their sins, justify, and sanctify them? Why
does He not cause the beasts of the earth, the birds of the air,
and the fishes of the sea to talk, give them intelligence, and
introduce them into heaven together with men ? Why had
He not made, or why does He not yet make the whole world
a paradise, with no tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
and with no serpent, and where all the hills would flow with
generous wine and produce both native gold and silver, so
that all might live there with jubilee and song, and thus in
perpetual festivity and joy, as images of God ? Would not
these things be worthy of an omnipotent God? And other
things like these. But, my friend, this is all idle talk. The
Divine omnipotence is not without order; God Himself is
order; and all things were created from order, in order, and
for order, because they were created from God. There is
an order into which man was made, and this is that his bless-
ing or his curse depend on his free will in spiritual things.
For, as said above, a man without free will could not be
created, nor even the beast, bird, and fish. But beasts are
in natural free will only; while man is in natural and at the
same time in spiritual free will.


No. 503]


FREE WILL


673


503. To the foregoing these Relations shall be added.
First: I heard that an assembly was called together, in which
they were to deliberate on man’s free will in spiritual things.
This was in the spiritual world. There were present learned
men from every quarter, who had thought on that subject
in the world in which they lived before; and many of those
who had been members of general and smaller councils,
before that of Nice and later. They were assembled in a
certain round temple, similar to that at Rome called the
Pantheon, which had formerly been consecrated to the wor-
ship of all the gods, and was afterward dedicated by the
Pope to the worship of all the holy martyrs. In this temple
near its walls, were also what seemed like altars; but there
were low benches near each of them, upon which those who
were assembled took their places, resting their elbows on the
altars, as upon so many tables. No president was appointed
to act as chief among them; but each one, as the desire
seized him, rushed forth into their midst, poured out what
he had at heart, and made public his opinion; and, what I
wondered at, all who were in the assembly were loaded with
proofs of man’s utter impotence in spiritual things; so they
ridiculed the idea of free will in them.

When they were assembled, behold, suddenly one rushed
forth into the midst, and with a loud voice poured forth this:
“Man has no more free will in spiritual things than Lot’s
wife had after she was turned to a pillar of salt; for if man
had any more free will than that, it is plain that he might of
himself lay claim to that faith which our church holds, and
which teaches that God the Father freely bestows it, of
entire freedom and pleasure, to whom He will and when
He will. This pleasure and free giving God would by no
means have, if man from any freedom or pleasure could also
claim faith for himself; and so our faith, which is a star that
shines before us day and night, would be dissipated like a
meteor to air.”

After him another rushed from his bench and said, “ Man


674


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 503


has no more free will in spiritual things than a beast, nay,
than a dog; for if he had, he would do good of himself, when
yet all good is from God, and man cannot take to himself
any thing that is not given him from heaven.” After him
one sprang from his seat, and in the middle space he raised
his voice and said, “Man has no more free will in spiritual
things, even in discerning them, than a bird of night has in
the daytime, nay, than a chick still hidden in the shell; he
is in all that as blind as a mole; for if he had been lynx-eyed
in his quick sight into what is of faith, salvation, and eternal
life, he would have believed that he could regenerate and
save himself, and he would also endeavor to do so, and thus
would profane his thoughts and deeds with merit on merit/’
Again another ran out into the middle space, and made his
speech: “The man who imagines that he, living after the
fall of Adam, has ability to will and understand any thing in
spiritual matters is insane, and becomes a maniac, because
he would then believe himself to be a subordinate deity or
divinity, possessing a share of the Divine power in his own
right/’

After him another hastened panting to the centre, carrying
under his arm a book called Formula Concordia , to the ortho-
doxy of which as he called it the Evangelical now swear. He
opened the book and read from it the following: “ That man
is utterly corrupt and dead to good, so that since the fall
there does not remain or abide in man’s nature, before re-
generation, even a spark of spiritual strength by which he is
capable of becoming prepared for the grace of God or of
taking it when offered, or of retaining it, from and by him-
self; nor can he from himself, in things spiritual, under-
stand, believe, embrace, think, will, begin, carry out, act,
operate, cooperate, or apply or accommodate himself to
grace, or do any thing towards conversion, wholly, or by
halves, or in the least degree. And in spiritual things which
look to the salvation of the soul, he is like the statue of salt,
Lot’s wife, and like a stock or a stone without life, which


No. 503]


FREE WILL


675


has no use of eyes, mouth, or any of the senses. Still he has
the power of moving from place to place, or can direct his
external members, go to public meetings, and hear the Word
and the Gospel.” (In my edition this is found on pp. 656,
658, 661-663, 671-673.) After this they all crowded to-
gether and exclaimed at once, “ This is truly orthodox.”

I stood near and listened intently to all that was said.
And because I grew warm in spirit, I asked with a loud voice,
“If you make man in spiritual things a pillar of salt, a beast,
blind, and insane, what then of your theology ? Are not its
parts one and all spiritual?” To this, after some silence
they replied, “ In our whole system of theology there is noth-
ing spiritual whatever which reason comprehends. Only
our faith is spiritual there; but we keep that strictly shut up,
that no one may look into it; and we have taken care that
no spiritual ray should go forth from it and appear to the
understanding; and besides, man does not contribute a
particle to it from any will of his own. Charity also we have
removed from all that is spiritual, and have made it merely
moral; so also the Decalogue. As to justification, remission
of sins, regeneration, and hence salvation, we give forth
nothing spiritual; we say that they are wrought by faith, but
how we are wholly ignorant. Instead of repentance, we
have taken contrition; and lest this should be believed to be
spiritual, we have removed it from faith, even as to any
contact with it. As to redemption we have adopted none
but purely natural ideas, which are, that God the Father
included the whole human race in a sentence of damnation,
and that His Son took the damnation on Himself, suffered
Himself to be hanged on a cross, and so He moved His
Father to compassion; besides other like things, in which *
you will find nothing spiritual, but what is merely natural.”

But then with the warmth previously excited, I went on to
say, “ If man had no free will in spiritual things, what would
he then be but a brute ? Is he not above brute beasts by
virtue of it? Without it, what is the church but the black


676 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION LNo. 503

face of the beetle in whose eyes is a white spot ? What is the
Word without it but an unmeaning volume ? What is more
frequently declared and commanded there, than that man
should love God, and love the neighbor, and also that he
should believe, and again, that he has life and salvation ac-
cording to the degree in which he loves and believes? Is
there any man who has not power to understand and do
what is commanded in the Word and the Decalogue ? How
could God have given such precepts and commandments to
man, unless that power were given him? Tell any rustic,
the way to whose mind has not been blocked by fallacies
in what is of theology, that he has no more power than a
stock or a stone to understand and will in matters of faith
and charity and hence of salvation, and that he cannot even
apply and adapt himself to receive them, would he not laugh
heartily, and say, ‘What can be more irrational? What
then have I to do with priest and preaching? What then
is the temple more than a stable? And what is worship
more than following the plough? What madness to speak
so ! It is folly upon folly. Who denies that all good is from
God ? Has it not been given to man to do good of himself
from God? And so it is with believing.’” Hearing this
they all cried out, “ We have spoken from what is orthodox,
in an orthodox way; but you, from what is rustic, in a rus-
tic way.” But then suddenly lightning came down from
heaven; and lest .it should consume them, they rushed out
in troops, and fled away, each to his home.

504. Second Relation. I was in interior spiritual sight in
which angels of the higher heaven are; but I was then in the
world of spirits. And I saw two spirits not far from me, but
standing apart from each other; and I perceived that one of
them loved good and truth and was thereby joined with
heaven, and that the other loved evil and falsity and was
thereby joined with hell. I approached, and called them;
and from their tones and replies I gathered that one could
perceive truths like the other, could acknowledge them when


No. 504]


FREE WILL


677


perceived, could thus think from the understanding, could
also determine things of the understanding as he pleased,
and of the will as he chose ; consequently that the two were
in like free will as to rationals. I ohserved also that from
that freedom in their minds, a light appeared, from the first
sight which was of perception to the ultimate sight which
was of the eye. But when he who loved evil and falsity was
in thought left to himself, I noticed that smoke, as it were,
arose from hell, and extinguished the light which was ahove
the memory, so that thick darkness was there in him, like
that of midnight; and also that the smoke being ignited
burned like a flame which lighted the region of the mind
below the memory, and consequently he thought great falsi-
ties from evils of the love of self. But with the other, who
loved good and truth, when left to himself, I saw, as it were,
a gentle flame flowing down from heaven, which lighted the
region of his mind above the memory, and also that helow
it even to the eye; also that the light from that flame shone
more and more according to perception and thought of truth
from love of good. Seeing this it was manifest to me that
every man, evil as well as good, has spiritual free will, but
that hell sometimes destroys it with the wicked, and that
heaven exalts and vivifies it with the good.

I afterward conversed with both of them, first with him
who loved evil and falsity; and when, after a few words as
to his lot, I mentioned free will, he grew warm and said, “Ah,
what madness it is to believe that man has free will in spiri-
tual things! What man can take faith to himself and do
good from himself? Do not the priesthood teach from the
Word at the present day that no one can receive any thing
unless it he given him from hea/en? And the Lord Christ
said to His disciples, Without Me ye can do nothing. And
I add to this that no one can move foot or hand to do any
good, or tongue to speak any truth from good. Therefore
by her wise men the church has concluded that man can no
more will, understand, and think any thing spiritual, or even


678 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 504

adapt himself to the willing, understanding, and thinking,
than a statue, stock, and stone; and that therefore faith is
inspired by God, who alone has most free and unlimited
power, and of His pleasure ; and this faith, without labor or
power of ours, under the operation of the Holy Spirit, pro-
duces all that the unlearned ascribe to man.”

I then conversed with the other, who loved good and
truth; and when, after a few words as to his lot, I mentioned
free will, he said, “ What madness it is to deny man’s free
will in spiritual things? Who cannot will and do good and
think and speak truth of himself from the Word, thus from
the Lord who is the Word? For He said, Make the fruit
good , and Believe in the Light , and also Love one another , and
Love God; and again, Whosoever heareth My precepts and
doeth them loveth Me , and I will love him; beside thousands
of like things, throughout the Word. What then would be
the use of the Word, if man had no power to will and think,
and hence to do and say what is there commanded ? With-
out that power in man, what would religion and the church
be but like a wrecked vessel lying at the bottom of the sea,
the master standing on the very top of the mast, and crying,
‘I cannot do any thing,’ while he sees the other sailors in
the boats, going away with sails spread? Was there not
given to Adam freedom to eat of the tree of life, and freedom
to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil ? And
because from his freedom he ate of the latter, smoke from
the serpent, that is from hell, entered his mind, on account of
which he was banished from paradise and cursed. And yet
he did not lose free will; for we read that the way to the tree
of life was guarded by a cherub; for unless this had been
done, he would have been able still to wish to eat of it.”

At this the other, who loved evil, and falsity, said, “What
I have heard, I leave; what I advanced, I still hold. But
who does not know that only God is alive and thus active,
and that man of himself is dead and thus merely passive?
How can one who is such, in himself dead and merely pas-


No. 504] FREE WILL 679

sive, take to himself any thing alive and active ?” To which
I replied,. “Man is an organ of life, and God alone is life;
and God pours His life into the organ and every thing thereof,
as the sun pours its heat into the tree and every part of it.
It is also God’s gift that man should feel that life in him as
his; and God wills that man should feel it so, in order that
he may as of himself live according to the laws of order,
which are just as many as the truths in the Word, and may
dispose himself to receive God’s love. But still God per-
petually holds with His finger the perpendicular above the
scales, and moderates the free will of man, but never violates
it by compulsion. A tree cannot receive any thing which
the heat of the sun brings to it through its roots, unless it
grows warm and heated as to each of its fibres; nor can the
elements rise up through the root, unless its several fibres
give out heat from that which has been received, and so con-
tribute to the passage. Man does likewise, from the heat
of life received from God. But unlike a tree, he feels the
heat as his although it is not his; and so far as he believes
it to be his and not God’s, he receives the light of life, yet
not the heat of love from God, but the heat of love from hell;
and this, being gross, obstructs and closes the purer little
tubes of the organ, as impure blood does with the capillaries
of the body. Thus man from being spiritual makes him-
self merely natural. Man’s free will is from this, that he
feels life in himself as his, and that God leaves him so to feel
in order that conjunction may take place, which cannot be
unless it be reciprocal; and reciprocal conjunction takes
place when man from freedom acts altogether as of himself.
If God had not left this to man, he would not be man, neither
would he have eternal life; for reciprocal conjunction with
God makes man to be man and not a beast, and also causes
him to live for ever. Free will in spiritual things effects
this.”

Hearing this, that evil spirit removed to a distance; and
then I saw on a certain tree a flying serpent, such as is called


68 o


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 504


the fiery serpent, which held out fruit from the tree to some
one. And then in the spirit I drew near to the place, and
there, instead of the serpent, was seen a monstrous man, his
face so covered with beard that nothing but his nose was
visible; and instead of the tree there was a burning brand,
near which he stood whose mind the smoke had entered be-
fore, and who afterward rejected free will in spiritual things.
And suddenly similar smoke came out of the brand and en-
veloped them both; and as they were thus taken out of my
sight, I went away. But the other, who loved good and
truth, and asserted that man has free will in spiritual things,
accompanied me home.

505. Third Relation. I once heard a grating sound like
that of two millstones grinding on each other. I went in the
direction of the sound, and it died away; and I saw a narrow
gate leading obliquely downwards to a kind of vaulted build-
ing, in which were several chambers containing cells, in each
of which two were sitting, collecting from the Word passages
confirming justification by faith alone. The one was col-
lecting, and the other was writing, and this by turns. I went
up to one cell, which was near the door, and asked, “ What
are you collecting and writing?” They said, “Concerning
the Act of Justification, or Faith in act; which is faith itself
justifying, vivifying, and saving, and is the chief doctrine of
the church in our part of Christendom.” And I then said to
him, “Tell me some sign of the act, when that faith is brought
into the heart and into the soul of a man.” He answered,
“ The sign of the act is in the moment when the man is over-
come with distress that he is condemned, and, while in that
state of contrition, thinks of Christ as having taken away
the condemnation of the law, and lays hold of this merit of
His with confidence; and with this in thought goes to God
the Father, and prays.”

Then I said, “ Thus does the act take place, and this is the
moment;” and I asked, “How shall I comprehend what is
said of this act, that nothing of the man concurs in it, any


No. 506] FREE WILL 68 1

more than if he were a post or stone? and that man, as to
that act, cannot begin, will, understand, think, operate, co-
operate, apply and adapt himself thereto ? Tell me how this
agrees with what you have said, that the act takes place when
the man thinks of the rightful power of the law, of his con-
demnation as taken away by Christ, of the confidence with
which he lays hold of that merit of His, and when in thought
on this goes to God the Father and prays: are not all these
things done by man?” But he said, “They are not done
actively by the man, but passively.” And I replied, “ How
can one think, have confidence, and pray, passively? Take
away activity and cooperation from man at that time, and
do you not take away receptivity also? thus every thing, and
with every thing the act itself? What does your act then
become but a purely ideal thing, which is called an entity of
reason ? I hope that you do not believe with some that such
act is only with the predestined, who know nothing whatever
of the infusion of faith with themselves. These can cast the
dice, and determine in that way whether faith has been in-
fused into them or not. For which reason, my friend, be-
lieve that as to faith and charity man operates of himself
from the Lord, and that without this operation your act of
faith which you have called the chief of the doctrines of the
church in Christendom is nothing but the statue, Lot’s wife,
tinkling as from mere salt, when scratched by the scribe’s
pen or his finger-nail (Luke xvii. 32). I have said this, be-
cause as to that act you make yourselves like statues.” When
I said this he seized the candlestick with a strong grasp to
throw it in my face; but the light being then suddenly ex-
tinguished, he threw it against the forehead of his com-
panion; and I went away amused.

506. Fourth Relation. Two flocks were seen in the spiri-
tual world, one of goats, and the other of sheep. I won-
dered who they were; since I well knew that the animals
seen in the spiritual world are not animals, but correspond-
ences of the affections and hence of the thoughts of those


632


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 506


who are there. For this reason I drew nearer; and as I ap-
proached these likenesses of animals disappeared, and in
place of them men were seen ; and it was made manifest that
they who made the flock of goats were those who confirmed
themselves in the doctrine of justification by faith alone, and
that they who made the flock of sheep were those who be-
lieved that charity and faith are one, as good and truth are
one. And I then spoke with those who were seen as goats,
and said, “ Why are you thus gathered together ? ” The most
of them were of the clergy, who gloried in their reputation
for learning, because they knew the arcana of justification by
faith alone. They said that they were assembled to sit as a
council, because they had heard that some were teaching that
Paul’s saying (Rom. iii. 28) that a man is justified by faith
without the deeds of the law, was not rightly understood,
because by faith there he did not mean the faith of the pres-
ent church, which is faith in three Divine Persons from eter-
nity, but faith in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ;
also by the deeds of the law he did not mean those of the law
of the Decalogue, but the works of the Mosaic law which were
for the Jews; and that thus from these few words, by wrong
interpretation, two enormous falsities had been drawn as
conclusions, namely, that Paul meant the faith of the present
church and the works of the law of the Decalogue: saying
also that it is clearly evident that Paul did not mean the works
of the law of the Decalogue, but those of the Mosaic law,
from his own words to Peter, whom he blamed for Judaizing
while he knew that no man is justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ (Gal. ii. 14-16). By
the faith of Jesus Christ, is by faith in Him and from Him,
as may be seen above, n. 338. Also, because by the works
of the law Paul meant those of the Mosaic law, he therefore
distinguished between the law of faith and that of works, and
between the Jews and the Gentiles, or the circumcision and
the uncircumcision, circumcision signifying Judaism, as it
does everywhere; and moreover he closes the subject with


No. 506]


FREE WILL


683


these words: Do we then make void the law through faith?
Not so: but we establish the law . All these things he says
in one connection (Rom. iii. 27-31): and in the chapter
which precedes, he also says, Not the hearers of the law shall
be justified by God, but the doers of the law shall be justified
(Rom. ii. 13): also that God will render to every man accord-
ing to his deeds (Rom. ii. 6) : and further, We must all appear
before the judgment-seat of Christ , that every one may receive
the things done in the body , whether good or bad (2 Cor. V.
10): beside more in his writings. From which it is manifest
that Paul rejected faith without good works as much as
James did (Epistle, chap. ii. 17-26).

That Paul meant the works of the Mosaic law which was
for the Jews, we are further confirmed, (they say,) by this,
that all the statutes for the Jews are called the law in Moses,
thus the works of the law 4 as we see from these passages:
This is the law of the meat-offering (Lev. vi. 14). This is the
law for the btirnt-offering , for the meat-offering, for the sacri-
fice for sin and guilt , for the consecrations (Lev. vii. 37). This
is the law of the beast and 0} the bird (Lev. xi. 46, 47). This
is the law of her that bringeih forth , for a son or a daughter
(Lev. xii. 7). This is the law of leprosy (Lev. xiii. 59; xiv.
2, 32, 54, 57). This is the law of him that hath an issue
(Lev. xv. 32). This is the law of jealousy (Num. v. 29, 30).
This is the law 0} the Nazarite (Num. vi. 13, 21). This is
the law 0} cleansing (Num. xix. 14). This is the law con-
cerning the red heifer (Num. xix. 2). The law for the king
(Deut. xvii. 15-19). Indeed the whole book of Moses is
called the Book of the Law (Deut. xxxi. 9, 11, 12, 26; also in
Luke ii. 22; xxiv. 44: John i. 45; vii. 22, 23; viii. 5). To
this they have also added that they saw in Paul that the law
of the Decalogue is to be lived, and that it is fulfilled by
charity (Rom. xiii. 8-1 1); and that he also says there are the
three, faith, hope, and charity, and that the greatest of these
is charity (1 Cor. xiii. 13); not faith, therefore. They said
that because of this they were called together. But lest I
should disturb them, I withdrew.


684


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 506


And then they were again seen in the distance as goats,
and sometimes as lying down and sometimes as standing;
but they turned away from the flock of sheep. They ap-
peared to be lying down while deliberating, and standing
while drawing conclusions. But I kept my sight fixed on
their horns, and wondered that the horns on their foreheads
now appeared to be extended forward and upward, now
curved backward toward their bodies, and at length wholly
thrown back. And then they all suddenly turned toward
the flock of sheep, but they still appeared as goats. I there-
fore approached them again, and asked, “What now?”
They said that they had concluded that faith alone produces
the goods of charity as a tree produces fruit. But thunder
was then heard and lightning was seen overhead; and very
soon an angel appeared, standing between the two flocks;
and he cried out to the flock of sheep, “ Do not listen to them;
they have not receded from their former faith, which is, that
faith alone justifies and saves, and that actual charity does
not at all. Neither is faith a tree, but man is the tree. But
repent, and look to the Lord, and you will have faith. Be-
fore this is done, the faith is not faith in which there is any
life.” Then the goats, their horns turned back, wished to
approach the sheep. But the angel standing between them
divided the sheep into two flocks; and he said to those on the
left, “ Join the goats, but I tell you that a wolf is coming who
will carry them off, and you with them.”

But after the two flocks of sheep were separated, and they
on the left heard the threatening words of the angels, they
looked at each other and said, “Let us converse with our
former associates.” And then the flock on the left spoke to
the right, saying, “Why did you withdraw from our shep-
herds? Are not faith and charity one, as a tree and its
fruit are one? for the tree is continued into the fruit by the
branches. Tear from the branch that through which the
tree by continuity flows into the fruit, and will not the fruit
perish, and together with it all the seed of any tree that would


No. 506]


FREE WILL


685


have sprung up anew ? Ask our priests whether it is not so.”
And then they asked, and the priests looked around, toward
the others, who were winking for them to say that they spoke
well. And then they answered, “Yon have spoken well;
but in relation to the continuation of faith into good works,
like that of a tree into the fruit, we know many secrets, but
this is not the place to publish them; in the chain or thread
of faith and charity there are many knots, which we priests
only are able to untie.” And then one of the priests, who
was among the sheep on the right, arose and said, “They
have answered you that it is so, but they have answered their
own that it is not so; for they think differently.” There-
fore they asked, “ How then do they think ? Do they think
as they teach?” He said, a No; they think that every good
of charity which is called a good work, which is done by a
man for the sake of salvation and eternal life is not good in its
smallest part, for the reason that the man wishes to save him-
self by work that is from himself, claiming to himself the
righteousness and merit of the one Saviour; and they think
that it is so with every good work in which a man is sensible
of his own will. They therefore assert that there is no con-
junction whatever between faith and charity, and they do
not even assert that faith is retained and preserved by good
works.”

But they of the left flock said, “You speak lies against
them. Do they not openly preach charity to us, and the
works of charity which they call works of faith?” He re-
plied, “You do not understand their preaching. A clergy-
man only, being present, attends and understands. They
think of moral charity only, and its civil and political goods,
and they call them of faith, but they are not so at all; for an
atheist can do them in like manner and form. They there-
fore say unanimously, that no one is saved by works, but by
faith alone. But let this be illustrated by comparisons. An
apple-tree produces apples; but if a man does goods for the
sake of salvation as that tree bears apples by continuity,


686


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 506


then those apples are inwardly rotten and full of worms.
They say also that a vine produces grapes; but if a man were
to do spiritual goods as the vine bears grapes, he would pro-
duce wild grapes.” But they then asked, “What kind of
goods of charity or works have they, which are the fruits of
faith?” He answered that “they are perhaps not con-
spicuous, being somewhere near faith; to which, however,
they do not cohere, being like the shadow which follows after
a man when he faces the sun, which shadow he does not
notice unless he turns around: indeed I may say that they
are like horses’ tails, which in many places are at this day
cut off, for people say, ‘ What is the use of them ? They are
good for nothing; if they are kept on the horse they easily
become dirty.’”

Hearing this, one of the flock of sheep on the left said indig-
nantly, “There is certainly some conjunction; otherwise,
how can they be called the works of faith ? Perhaps goods
of charity are implanted by God in man’s voluntary works
by some influx, as by some affection, aspiration, inspiration,
incitation, and excitation of the will, by tacit perception in
the thought, and hence exhortation, by contrition and thus
conscience, and hence urging, and by obedience to the Deca-
logue and the Word as if he were a little child, or as if he
were a wise man, or by something like these acting as a
medium . O therwise, how can they be called fruits of faith ?’ ’
To this the priest replied, “Not so; and if they say that it
takes place by any such means, in their sermons they over-
whelm it with words, from which comes the conclusion that
it is not from faith. Still, some put forth such things, but as
the signs of faith, not however as its bonds with charity,
Some, however, have thought out a conjunction by means
of the Word.” And then they said, “Is there not a con-
junction in this way, that a man does Voluntarily according
to the Word?” But he answered, “They do not think this,
but that it is only by the hearing of the Word; for they assert
that all that is rational and voluntary with man in matters


No. 506]


FREE WILL


687


of faith is impure and seeks merit, because man in spiritual
things can no more understand, will, operate, and cooperate,
than a post.”

But one, when he heard that man is believed to be such in
all things of faith and salvation, said: “I heard a certain one
say, ‘I have planted a vineyard; now I will drink wine till
I am drunk.’ But another asked him, ‘Will you drink the
wine from your own cup, by your own right hand?’ And
he said, ‘ No, but from an unseen cup, by an unseen hand.’
And the other answered, ‘You certainly will not get drunk,
then.’ ” Presently the same man said, “ But hear me, I pray:
I say to you, Drink wine from the Word understood. Do
you not know that the Lord is the Word ? Is not the Word
from the Lord ? Is He not thus in it ? If then you do good
from the Word, do you not do it from the Lord? from His
mouth and will ? And if you then look to the Lord, He will
also lead and teach you, and you will do the good of your-
selves from the Lord. Who that does any thing from a king,
at his word and command', can say, This I do from my own
word or command, and from my own will ? ” After this he
turned to the clergy, and said, “ Ministers of God, do not
mislead the flock.”

On hearing these things, the greater part of the flock on
the left withdrew, and united with the flock on the right.
Then some of the clergy said, “We have heard what we
never heard before. We are shepherds; we will not leave
the sheep.” And they withdrew together with them; and
they said, “This man spoke a true word; who that acts from
the Word, and thus from the Lord, His mouth and will, can
say, ‘I do this from myself’? Who that acts from a king,
from his mouth and will, says, ‘This I do from myself’?
Now we see the Divine Providence, why a conjunction of
faith and good works that has been acknowledged by the
ecclesiastical society has not been found. It could not be
found, because it could not be given, for there has been no
faith in the Lord who is the Word, and consequently neither


688 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 506

has there been faith from the Word ” But the other priests,
who were of the flock of goats, went away, waving their hats
and shouting, “ Faith alone, Faith alone, it will still live.”

507. Fifth Relation. I was in conversation with angels,
and finally spoke of the lust of evil in which every man is
from birth. One said, referring to the world where he then
was, “ They who are in lust seem to us angels like the foolish;
but those very ones seem to themselves like those who are in
the highest degree wise. Therefore, that they may be drawn
forth from their folly, they are let alternately into it and into
the rationality which with them is in externals; and in this
latter state they see, acknowledge, and confess their insanity;
but still they long to return from their rational into their
insane state, and they also lead themselves into it, as from
compulsion and non-enjoyment into freedom and enjoy-
ment. Thus lust and not intelligence is inwardly agreeable
to them. There are three universal loves of which every
man is formed by creation; love of the neighbor, which is
also love of doing uses, this love is spiritual; love of the
world, which is also love of possessing wealth, this love is
material; and love of self, which is also love of ruling over
others, and this love is corporeal. Man is truly man while
love of the neighbor or love of doing uses makes the head,
and love of the world or love of possessing wealth makes the
chest and abdomen, and love of self or love of ruling makes
the feet and soles of the feet. But if love of the world makes
the head, the man is man but as one who is hunchbacked;
but if love of self makes the head, he is not like a man stand-
ing on his feet, but like one standing on the palms of his
hands with head down and back parts up. When love of
doing uses makes the head, and the two other loves make the
body and feet in their order, the man appears in heaven with
angelic face and a beautiful rainbow about his head; but
if love of the world or of wealth makes the head, he appears
from heaven with face pale like that of a dead person, with
a yellow circle about the head; but if love of self or of ruling


No. 507]


FREE WILL


689


over others makes the head, he appears from heaven with
face of a fiery duskiness, with a white circle about the head.”
On this I asked, “ What do the circles about the head rep-
resent?” They answered, “They represent intelligence.
The white circles about the head with the face of fiery duski-
ness, represents that the intelligence of that one is in ex-
ternals or about him, while insanity is in the internals or in
him; and further, the* man who is such, is wise when in the
body, but insane while in the spirit; and no man is wise in
the spirit except from the Lord, which is when he is gener-
ated and created anew by Him.”

After this was said, the earth was opened toward the left,
and through the opening I saw a devil rising up, with face of
a fiery duskiness, and a white circle about the head. I asked,
“ Who are you ? ” He said, “ I am Lucifer, son of the morn-
ing; and because I made myself like the Most High, I was
cast down, as described in the fourteenth chapter of Isaiah.”
He was not that Lucifer, however, but he believed that he
was. And I said, “ Since you were cast down, how can you
rise again out of hell?” And he answered, “I am a devil
there, but here I am an angel of light. Do you not see my
head girt around with a white circle ? You shall also see if
you wish, that I am moral among the moral, and rational
among the rational, yes, spiritual among the spiritual. I
have also been able to preach.” I asked, “How did you
preach?” He said, “Against defrauders, adulterers, and all
infernal loves; yes, then I called myself who am Lucifer, a
devil; and I made false oath against myself as such; and
for so doing I was borne up to heaven with praises. It is
from this that I have been called the son of the morning.
And, what was astonishing to myself, when I was in the pul-
pit I had no thought that I was not speaking rightly and
properly. But the cause of this was disclosed to me, which
was this: I was in externals, and these were then separated
from my internals. But although this was disclosed to me,
still I could not change, because I exalted myself above the


690


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 507


Most High and set myself against Him.” At last I asked,
“ How were you able to speak thus, when you yourself are a
defrauder and an adulterer?” He replied, “I am one per-
son while I am in externals or in the body, and another while
I am in internals or in the spirit. In the body I am an an-
gel, but in the spirit a devil; for in the body I am in the
understanding, but in the spirit I am in the will; and the
understanding carries me upward, but the will carries me
downward. And while I am in the understanding, a white
circle encompasses my head; but while the understanding
wholly gives itself up as a slave to the will, and becomes of
the will, which is our lot ultimately, then the circle grows
black and disappears; and when this is the case, I am able
no longer to ascend into this light.” But suddenly, when he
saw the angels with me, he became excited in face and voice,
and he became black even as to the circle that was about
the head, and he slipped down into hell through the opening
by which he rose up.

From what they had seen and heard, they who stood near
came to this conclusion, that a man is such as his will is,
and not such as his understanding is, for the will easily car-
ries over the understanding to its side, and enslaves it. I
then asked the angels, “Whence have devils rationality?”
And they said, “ It is from the glory of love of self, for love of
self is encompassed with glory; for this is the resplendence
of its fire; and this glory uplifts the understanding almost
into the light of heaven; for the understanding in every
man is capable of elevation according to knowledges, but
not the will except by life according to the truths of the church
and of reaCson. Hence it is that atheists themselves who are
in the glory of fame from self-love, and thence in the pride
of their own intelligence, enjoy a loftier rationality than many
others, but at the very time when they are in the thought of
the understanding; not however when they are in the love
of the will; and the love of the will has possession of the in-
ternal man, but the thought of the understanding possesses


No. 508]


FREE WILL


69I


the external. The angel furthermore told the cause of man
being formed of the three loves, namely, love of use, love of
the world, and love of self; it is, that he may think from
God, though altogether as of himself. He said that the
highests in man's mind are turned upward toward God;
the mediate there outward toward the world; and the lowests
there downward into the body; and because these last are
turned downward, a man thinks wholly as of himself, when
yet he thinks from God.

508. Sixth Relation . One day a magnificent temple,
square in form, the roof crown-shaped, arched above, and
raised round about appeared to me. Its walls were con-
tinuous windows of crystal, its gate of pearly substance.
Within, on the south and near the west side, was a pulpit, on
which at the right lay the open Word, enveloped with a
sphere of light, the splendor of which surrounded and illumi-
nated the whole pulpit. In the centre of the temple was a
shrine, before which was a veil, but lifted now, where stood
a cherub of gold with a sword turning hither and thither in
hand. While I viewed these things, what they each signi-
fied flowed into my meditation: That temple signified the
New Church; the gate, of pearly substance, entrance into it;
the windows of crystal, the truths which enlightened it; the
pulpit, the priesthood and preaching; the Word open upon
the pulpit and illuminating its upper part, signified the in-
ternal sense of the Word which is spiritually revealed; the
shrine in the centre of the temple, signified the conjunction
of that church with the angelic heaven; the cherub of gold
therein, the Word in the sense of the letter; the sword waving
in his hand signified that this sense can be turned hither and
thither, provided this is done in application to some truth;
the veil lifted before the cherub signified the Word was laid
open. Afterward, when I drew nearer, I saw above the gate
this writing, Nunc licet , which signified that “it is now law-
ful" to enter with the understanding into the arcana of faith.
Seeing this writing, it came into my thought that it is very


692


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 508


harmful to enter with the understanding into dogmas of faith
from one’s own intelligence and thus from falsities, and still
more to confirm them from the Word; the understanding is
thereby closed above, and gradually below also, to such an
extent that theological matters not only cause disgust, but
are also obliterated as writing on paper by worms, and the
wool of a cloth by moths; the understanding abiding only
in political matters which regard a man’s life in the dominion
where he is, in the civil matters of his employment, and the
domestic affairs belonging to his house. And in all these
he constantly kisses nature, and from the allurements of her
pleasures loves her as an idolater loves the golden image in
his bosom. Now as the dogmas of the present Christian
churches were not composed from the Word, but from men’s
own intelligence and thus from falsities, and as they were
also confirmed by some things from the Word, the Word by
the Lord’s Divine Providence was taken from the laity among
the Roman Catholics, and was opened but still was closed
among the Protestants by their common declaration that the
understanding must be kept under obedience to faith.

But the contrary is the case in the New Church; in this
church it is allowable to enter with the understanding and
penetrate into all its secrets, and also to confirm them by the
Word. This is because, its doctrines are continuous truths,
laid open by the Lord through the Word; and confirmations
of those truths by means of nationals cause the understand-
ing to be opened above more and more, and thus to be
raised into the light in which are the angels* of heaven; and
that light in its essence is truth, and in this light the acknowl-
edgment of the Lord as the God of heaven and earth shines
in its glory. This is meant by the writing over the door of
the temple, Nunc licet; and also by the veil of the shrine
before the cherub being lifted. For it is a canon of the New
Church that falsities close the understanding, and that truths
open it.

After this, I saw overhead one like an infant, holding a


No. 508]


FREE WILL


693


paper in his hand. As he drew near me, he increased to
the stature of an average man. He was an angel from the
third heaven, where at a distance all look like infants. When
he was with me, he handed me the paper; but as it was writ-
ten with rounded letters, such as are in that heaven, I re-
turned the paper, and begged that they would themselves
explain the meaning of the words there, in terms adapted
to the ideas of my thought. And he replied, “This is there
written: Enter hereafter into the mysteries of the Word
heretofore closed; for its several truths are so many mirrors
of the Lord.”


CHAPTER NINTH.


REPENTANCE.

509. After the chapters on Faith, Charity, and Free
Will, Repentance comes next in the series, since true faith
and genuine charity cannot be given without repentance,
and no one can repent without free will. Repentance is
here treated of because also Regeneration follows next, and
no one can be regenerated before the more grievous evils
which render man detestable in the sight of God, are re-
moved, and these are removed by. repentance. What is an
unregenerate man but an impenitent one ? And what is an
impenitent man, but like one who is in a lethargy, and knows
nothing of sin, and therefore cherishes it in his bosom, and
kisses it every day, as an adulterer the harlot in his bed ? But
that it may be known what Repentance is, and what it effects,
the treatise upon it is to be divided into articles.

I. Repentance is the first of the church with man.

510. The communion called the church consists of all
those in whom the church is; and the church with man en-
ters him while regenerating, and every one is regenerated
by abstaining from the evils of sin, and shunning them as
one avoids infernal hordes, who sees them with torches in
hand making ready to spring upon him and cast him upon
a burning pile. There are many things which prepare one
for the church, as he advances in the first stages, and which
introduce him into it; but acts of repentance are what make
the church to be in the man. Acts of repentance are all
such as cause one not to will and hence not to do evils which


No. 511]


REPENTANCE


695


are sins against God; for before this is done, the man stands
outside of regeneration; and. then, if a thought respecting
eternal salvation creeps in, he turns toward it, but presently
turns from it; for it enters into the man no further than the
ideas of his thought, and it goes forth thence into the words
of his speech, and also, it may be, into some gestures appro-
priate to the speech. But when such thought enters the
will, it is then in the man; for the will is the man himself,
because his love has its dwelling there, while thought is out-
side of the man, unless it proceeds from his will; if this is
done, then will and thought act as one, and together make
the man. From this it follows that, for repentance to be
repentance and to be effective in man, it is necessary for it
to be of the will and hence of the thought, and not of th,e
thought alone, consequently for it to be actual and not of the
lips merely. That repentance is the first of the church is
very manifest from the Word. John the Baptist, who was
sent before to prepare men for the church which the Lord
was about to establish, when he baptized, at the same time
preached repentance; therefore his baptism was called the
baptism of repentance, because by baptism is signified spiri-
tual washing, which is a cleansing from sins. John did this
in the Jordan, because the Jordan signified introduction to
the church, for it was the first boundary of the land of
Canaan where the church was. The Lord Himself also
preached repentance for the remission of sins; whereby He
taught that repentance is the first of the church, that so far
as man repents sins are removed with him, and that so far as
they are removed they are remitted. And furthermore, the
Lord commanded the twelve apostles, and also the seventy
whom He sent forth, to preach repentance. From which it
is plain that, repentance is the first of the church.

51 1. That, the church is not in man until after sins with
him are removed, one can conclude from reason, and it may
be illustrated by the following comparisons: Who can in-
troduce sheep, kids, and lambs into fields or woods where


696


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 511


there are all kinds of wild beasts, before he has driven these
out ? And who can make a garden of a piece of ground that
is overgrown with thorns, briers, and nettles, before he has
rooted out those weeds? Who can introduce a 'form of
administering justice from judgment into a city held by
hostile forces, and establish citizenship, before he has ex-
pelled the enemy? It is the same with the evils in man;
they are like wild beasts, briers, and thorns, and hostile
forces; and with these the church cannot have abode any
more than a man can dwell in a cage where there are tigers
and leopards; or lie in a bed with poisonous herbs strewed
upon it and stuffed into the pillows; or sleep at night in a
temple, beneath the floor of which are sepulchres containing
dead bodies. Would not ghosts infest him there like furies ?

II. Contrition which at this day is said to precede

FAITH, AND TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE CONSOLATION
OF THE GOSPEL, IS NOT REPENTANCE.

512. In the Reformed Christian world they tell of a kind
of anxiety, grief, and terror, which they call Contrition, and
which, with those who are to be regenerated, precedes their
faith and is followed by the consolation of the gospel. They
say that this contrition arises in them from a fear of the just
wrath of God, and hence of eternal damnation, which inheres
in every man owing to Adam's sin and the consequent pro-
clivity of man to evils; also that without that contrition, the
faith that imputes to man the merit and righteousness of the
Lord the Saviour, is not granted: and that they who have
obtained this faith receive the consolation of the gospel,
which is, that they are justified, that is, that they are re-
newed, regenerated, and sanctified, without any cooperation
of their own; and that thus they are transferred from damna-
tion to eternal blessedness, which is life eternal. But re-
specting this contrition these questions are to be considered:
1. Is it repentance? 2. Is it of any moment? 3. Is it
possible ?


No. 514]


REPENTANCE


697


513. Whether that contrition is repentance or not, may
be concluded from the description of repentance given here-
after, where it is shown that repentance cannot exist unless
man, not only in generals but also in particulars, knows that
he is a sinner; which no one can know' unless he examines
himself, and sees the evils that are in him, and condemns
himself on account of them. But that contrition which is
declared necessary to faith, has nothing in common with
these things ; for it is merely thought, and hence confession,
that he was bom into Adam’s sin and into a proclivity to the
evils springing therefrom; and that therefore the wrath of
God is upon him, and therefore merited damnation, doom,
and eternal death. From which it is plain that this contri-
tion is not repentance.

514. The next point is, Since that contrition is not re-
pentance, is it of any moment? It is said to contribute to
faith, as an antecedent to a consequent, but yet that it does
not enter into it and join itself with it by mingling with it.
But what is the faith which follows, but that God the Father
imputes to man the righteousness of His Son, and then de-
clares him, while not conscious of any sin, righteous, re-
newed, and holy, and thus clothes him in a robe washed and
made white in the blood of the Lamb? And when man
walks in this robe, what then are the evils of his life, but like
sulphurous stones thrown into the depths of the sea ? And
what is then the sin of Adam but something covered over, or
removed, or carried away by the imputed righteousness of
Christ ? When man, from that faith, walks in the righteous-
ness and at the same time in the innocence of God the Saviour,
of what service is that contrition but to make him confident
that he is in Abraham’s bosom, and hence to look upon
those who have not had this contrition before faith as miser-
able in hell, or as dead? For it is said that those who lack
contrition have not a living faith. It may therefore be said
that if they who have had such contrition have sunk or are
now sinking in damnable evils, they pay no more attention


698


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 514


to them, and are no more sensible of them, than pigs lying
in the mud in the gutters are sensible of the stench. It is
manifest from this that contrition, not being repentance, is
not any thing.

515. The third point to be considered is, Whether there
is any such contrition without repentance. In the spiritual
world I have asked many who have confirmed in themselves
the faith imputative of the merit of Christ, whether they had
any contrition, and they have answered, Why contrition,
when from childhood we have believed as a certainty that
Christ by His passion took away all our sins? Contrition
does not square with this belief; for it is contrition for men
to cast themselves into hell, and to torture the conscience,
when yet they know that they have been redeemed and so
delivered from hell, and are consequently secure. To this
they added that this statute of contrition was wholly fictitious,
held in the place of the repentance so often mentioned in the
Word, and also enjoined. They said that with the simple,
who know but little about the Gospel, there is, perhaps,
some emotion of mind when they hear or think about the
torments in hell. They also said that the consolation of the
gospel, impressed upon them from earliest youth, so ban-
ished contrition that in heart they laughed at it when men-
tioned; and that hell could not strike them with terror any
more than the fires of Vesuvius and ^Etna could terrify
those who dwell at Warsaw and Vienna, or than the basilisks
and vipers in the deserts of Arabia, or the tigers and lions in
the forests of Tart ary, could terrify those who live in safety,
peace, and quiet in some city of Europe. They also said
that the wrath of God excited in them no more terror and
contrition, than the wrath of the king of Persia could excite
in those who live in Pennsylvania. From these things, and
also from rational inferences from their declarations, I am
convinced that contrition, unless it is such repentance as is
described in the following pages, is nothing but a freak of
the fancy. The Reformed supported contrition instead of


No. 517]


REPENTANCE


699


repentance, in order to sever themselves from the Roman
Catholics, who insist upon repentance and at the same time
charity; and when they afterward confirmed justification
by faith alone, they alleged as their reason, that by re-
pentance, as by charity, something of the man, savoring of
merit, entered into his faith and blackened it.


III. Mere oral confession that one is a sinner, is not

REPENTANCE.

516. As to this oral confession, the Reformed who adhere
to the Augsburg Confession teach as follows: “No man can
ever know his sins; therefore they cannot be enumerated;
they are, moreover, interior and hidden, and the confession
would therefore be false, uncertain, incomplete, and defi-
cient; but he who confesses himself to be all mere sin, in-
cludes all sins, excludes none, and forgets none. But still
the enumeration of sins, although not necessary, for the
sake of tender and timid consciences is not to be done away
with; but this is only a childish and common form of con-
fession for the simpler and ruder people ” {Formula Con-
cordia, pp. 327, 331, 380). But this confession was held
by the Reformed instead of actual repentance, after they
had separated from the Roman Catholics, because it is based
upon their imputative faith, which alone, without charity
and so too without repentance, works the remission of sins
and regenerates man; and also upon this, which is an in-
separable appendage to that faith, that there is no coopera-
tion on man’s part with the Holy Spirit in the act of justifica-
tion; also upon this, that no man has free will in spiritual
things; and again upon this, that all things are of immediate
mercy, and nothing whatever of mediate mercy by man and
through him.

517. Among many reasons why the confession of the lips
that one is a sinner is not repentance, is this, that every man,
an impious one and even a devil, may so cry out, and this


700 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 5 17

with external devoutness, when he thinks of torments in hell
impending or through which he is then passing. But who
does not see that this is not from any internal devotion, and
hence that it is imaginary and therefore of the lungs, but not
voluntary from within, and therefore not of the heart ? For
an impious man and a devil still burn inwardly with the lusts
of the love of doing evil, from which they are borne on like
windmills driven by strong winds; and therefore such an
exclamation is nothing but a contrivance to cheat God, or to
deceive the simple, and for the sake of deliverance. For
what is easier than to compel the lips to give forth the cry,
and the breath of the mouth to adapt itself to it, to turn the
eyes upward, and raise the hands ? This is what the Lord
says in Mark, Well hath Esaias prophesied oj you , hypocrites ,
This people honor eth Me with their lips , but their heart is jar
from Me (vii. 6); and in Matthew, Woe unto you , Scribes and
Pharisees , for ye make clean the outside oj the cup and the
platter , but within they are jull oj extortion and excess. Thou
blind Pharisee , cleanse first the inside oj the cup and the platter ,
that the outside also may be made clean (xxiii. 25, 26); and
more in the same chapter.

518. In like hypocritical worship are they who have con-
firmed in themselves the faith of the present day, that the
Lord by the passion of the cross took away all the sins of
the world, meaning by this the sins of every one, provided
men only pray according to the formulas about propitiation
and mediation. Some of them with loud voice and ap-
parently burning zeal can pour forth from the pulpit many
holy things about repentance and charity, while they deem
each of these useless for salvation; for they mean no other
repentance than confession with the lips, and no other char-
ity than that which is public; but this they do for the favor
of the people. These are they who are meant by these
words of the Lord: Many will say to Me in that day, Lord ,
Lord , have we not prophesied by Thy name? and in Thy
name done many wonderful works? And then will I pro jess


No. 519]


REPENTANCE


701


unto them , I ktiow you not; depart from Me, ye that work
iniquity (Matt. vii. 22, 23). In the spiritual world I once
heard one praying in this way: “lam full of sores, leprous,
unclean from my mother’s womb. There is nothing in me
sound, from my head to the sole of my foot; I am not worthy
to lift up my eyes to God; I deserve death and eternal dam-
nation. Have mercy upon me for the sake of Thy Son;
purify me in His blood. The salvation of all Is in Thy good
pleasure. I implore Thy mercy.” His words were heard
by some standing near, and they asked him, “ How do you
know that you are such?” He replied, “I know it, because
I have heard so.” But he was then sent to angels who were
examiners, before whom he spoke in the same way; and
they, after examination, reported that he had spoken true
things about himself, but still without knowing a single evil
in himself, because he hadmever examined himself, and had
believed that after oral confession evils were no longer evils
in the sight of God, both because God turns His eyes away
from them, and because He has been propitiated; and that
therefore he did not come to a sense of any evil and turn from
it, though he was an adulterer from purpose, a thief, a crafty
detractor, and burning with revenge; and that he was such
in will and heart, and would therefore be the same in word
and deed if fear of the law and of the loss of reputation did
not restrain him. After he was found to be such, he was
judged, and sent to the hypocrites in hell.

519. The quality of such may be illustrated by compari-
sons. They are like temples where only the spirits of the
dragon, and those who are meant in the Apocalypse by the
locusts, are congregated; and they are like the pulpits there,
where the Word is not, because it is put beneath the feet.
They are like plastered walls, the plaster beautifully colored;
within which, as the windows are open, owls and direful birds
of the night fly about. They are like whitened sepulchres,
that contain dead men’s bones. They are like coins made
of oil-dregs or dried dung, and overlaid with gold. They are


702


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 519


like the bark and the wood that surround the rotten heart,
and like the garments of Aaron's sons on a leprous body;
yes, like ulcers containing foul matter, but covered over with
a thin skin and supposed to be healed. Who does not know
that a holy external and a profane internal do not accord ?
Such also fear more than others to examine themselves;
they are therefore no more sensible of what is vicious within
them, than of the pungent and ill-smelling substances in
their stomachs and bowels before they are cast out into the
draught. But it is to be kept in mind that those who have
been hitherto spoken of, are not to be confounded with those
who do well and believe well, nor with those who repent
of some sins, and who, while in worship and still more while
in spiritual temptation, speak within themselves or pray
from an oral confession like that of the others. For that
general confession both precedes and follows reformation
and regeneration.


IV. Man is born to evils of every kind; and unless by

REPENTANCE HE REMOVES THEM IN PART, HE REMAINS
IN THEM; AND HE WHO REMAINS IN THEM CANNOT
BE SAVED.

520. That every man is bom to evils, so that he is noth-
ing but evil from his mother's womb, is known in the church,
and it has become known because it has been handed down
by the councils and by the prelates of the churches that the
sin of Adam was transmitted to all his posterity; and that
for this alone, every man after him was damned together
with him; and that it is this which is inherent in every man
from birth. On this assertion, moreover, are based other
things which the churches teach, as that the washing of
regeneration, which is called baptism, was instituted by the
Lord for the removal of this sin; also that it was the cause
of the Lord’s coming, and that faith in His merit is the means
whereby it is removed; besides other things which the


No. 521]


REPENTANCE


703


churches have founded upon this assertion. But that there
is no hereditary evil from that origin, may be evident from
what was shown above (n. 466 and following), that Adam
was not the first of mankind, but that by Adam and his wife
is representatively described the first church on this earth,
and by the garden of Eden its wisdom, by the tree of life its
looking to the Lord who was to come, and by the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil its looking to self and not to the
Lord. That this church is representatively described by the
first chapters of Genesis, has been proved from many parallel
passages from the Word, in the Heavenly Arcana, published
at London. When these things are understood and ac-
cepted, the opinion hitherto entertained, that the evil innate
in man from his parents is from that source, falls to the
ground; for it has its origin not from this but from another
source. That the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil are with every man, and that they are said
to be placed in a garden, signified man’s free will in turning
to the Lord and in turning from Him, as has been fully
shown in the chapter concerning Free Will.

521. But, my friend, hereditary evil is from no other
source than parents; not indeed the evil itself which a man
actually commits, but the inclination to it. Every one will
acknowledge that it is so, if he joins reason to experience.
Who does not know that children are born with a general
resemblance to their parents in face, manner, and mind?
and even grandchildren and great-grandchildren with a re-
semblance to grand-parents and great-grandparents? Also
that families are thus known apart by many, and nations
also; as Africans from Europeans, Neapolitans from Ger-
mans, Englishmen from Frenchmen, and so on ? Who does
not recognize a Jew by his face, eyes, speech, and gestures?
And if you were able to feel the sphere of life flowing out
from the native genius of every one, you might in like man-
ner be convinced of the resemblance of minds. From this
it follows that man is not born into evils themselves, but only


704 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 521

into an inclination to evils; having, however, a greater or
less proclivity for particular ones; therefore after death no
man is judged from any hereditary evil, but from the actual
evils which he has himself committed. This is also evident
from the following statute of the Lord: The Father shall not
die because 0} the son , and the son shall not die because of the
father ; every one shall die for his own sin (Deut. xxiv. 16).
This was made certain to me in the spiritual world, from
those who die in infancy, by their having only an inclina-
tion to evils and thus willing them, but still not doing them;
for they are brought up under the Lord’s auspices, and saved.
The inclination and proclivity to evils that have been men-
tioned, transmitted from parents to their children and pos-
terity, are broken only by the new birth from the Lord,
which is called regeneration. Without this, that inclination
not only remains unchecked, but also increases from parents
succeeding each other, and becomes more prone to evils,
and at length to evils of every kind. It is from this that the
Jews are still images of their father Judah, who begat three
'branches of them, having taken a Canaanitish woman to
wife, and committing adultery with Tamar his daughter-in-
law. Therefore this hereditary disposition, in process of
time, has increased in them even so that they are not able
to embrace the Christian religion from faith at heart. It
is said that they are not able to do so, because the interior
will of their mind is adverse to it, and this will causes the
• inability.

1 522. That every evil, unless removed, remains with man,

and that man cannot be saved if he remains in his evils, fol-
lows of itself. That no evil can be removed except by the
Lord, and with those who believe in Him and love the neigh-
bor, may be very evident from what has been already con-
sidered, especially from these in the chapter on Faith: The
Lord, charity, and faith make one, like life, will, and under-
standing; and if they are divided, each perishes like a pearl
reduced to powder; and further, The Lord is charity and


No. 523]


REPENTANCE


705


faith in man, and man is charity and faith in the Lord. But
it is asked, How can man enter into this union ? The reply
is, that he cannot unless by repentance he removes his evils
in part. It is said that man must remove them, because the
Lord without man’s cooperation does not do that imme-
diately; which is also fully shown in the same chapter, and
in the later one on Free Will.

523. It is objected, that no man can fulfil the law, and
that he has the less ability to do so, since he who trespasses
against one precept of the Decalogue trespasses against all.
But this saying does not mean as it sounds; for it is to be
understood in this manner, that he who from purpose and
determination acts contrary to one precept, acts contrary to
the rest; because to act from purpose and determination,
is wholly to deny that it is sin, and if it is said to be sin, to
throw that aside as of no consequence; and he who denies
and rejects sin in this way, thinks nothing of all that is called
sin. They who do not wish to hear any thing about re-
pentance become fixed in purpose of this kind; but on the
other hand, they who by repentance have removed some
evils that are sins come into the purpose of believing in the
Lord and loving the neighbor; these latter are kept by the
Lord in the purpose to abstain from other evils; therefore,* if
they co m mit sin from ignorance or some overpowering lust,
this is not imputed to them, because they did not intend it,
nor do they confirm it in themselves. This may be con-
firmed by what follows: In the spiritual world I have met
with many who in the natural world lived like others, dress-
ing finely, feasting delicately, having money like others from
trading, witnessing plays, joking about lovers as if from
licentiousness, and doing other such things; and yet the
angels charged some with these things as evils of sin, and
others they did not charge with them as evils, declaring
the latter innocent, but the former guilty. To the question,
“Why is this, when they all did alike ?” they replied that
they view all from their purpose, intention, and end, and


70 6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 523


distinguish accordingly; and that therefore they excuse or
condemn those whom the end excuses or condemns, since
good is the end with all in heaven, and evil is the end with
all in hell.

524. But these things shall be illustrated by comparisons.
The sins retained in an impenitent man may be compared
to various diseases in him; unless medicines are brought
to bear on them, and malignities removed thereby, the man
dies. They may be compared especially with the disease
called gangrene, which, unless healed in time, spreads, and
causes inevitable death. In like manner to imposthumes
and abscesses, where they are not reached and opened; for
from them collections of pus will diffuse themselves into the
neighboring parts, from these into adjoining viscera, and
finally into the heart, whence comes death. There may also
be comparison with tigers, leopards, lions, wolves, and foxes,
which, unless kept in dens or bound with chains or ropes,
would attack the flock and herd, the fox attacking poultry,
and kill them; also with venomous serpents, which unless
held tight with sticks, or deprived of their teeth, would in-
flict deadly wounds on man. A whole flock would perish
if left in fields where there are poisonous herbs, instead of
being led by the shepherd to pastures where there is nothing
hurtful. The silk worm also would perish, and thus all the
silk, unless other worms were shaken from the leaves of its
tree. Comparison may also be made with corn in granaries
or houses, which would be rendered musty and offensive
and thus useless, if the air were not permitted to pass freely
through it and remove every thing that would do harm.
If a fire were not extinguished at the very outset, it might
lay waste a whole city or forest. Brambles, thistles, and
briers, if not routed out, would take full possession of a gar*
den. Gardeners know that a tree, bad from seed and root,
brings its bad juices into the wood that comes from a good
tree budded or engrafted upon it, and that the bad juices
coming up are turned into good, and produce- useful fruit.


No. 526]


REPENTANCE


707


And so with man by the removal of evil by means of re-
pentance; for man is thereby set in the Lord, as a branch
in the vine, and bears good fruit (John xv. 4 -6).

V. Knowledge of sin, and the examination of some sin
in one’s self, begin repentance.

525. Knowledge of sin can be wanting to no one in the
Christian world; for there every one is from infancy taught
what evil is, and from childhood what the evil of sin is. All
youths learn this from parents and teachers, and also from
the Decalogue, this being the first book that is put into the
hands of all in Christendom; and in their subsequent prog-
ress by preaching in the temples and instruction at home,
and in fulness from the Word; and furthermore from civil
laws of justice, which teach things like those taught by the
Decalogue and the other parts of the Word. For the evil of
sin is no other than evil against the neighbor; and evil
against the neighbor is also evil against God, which is sin.
But the knowledge of sin effects nothing unless a man ex-
amines the acts of his life, and sees whether secretly or
openly he has committed any such thing. Before this is
done, that is all merely knowledge; and then what the
preacher presents is mere sound going in at the left ear and
passing out at the right, and finally it becomes a mere mat-
ter of thought, and something devout in the breathing, and
with many imaginative and chimerical. But it is wholly
different if man, according to his knowledge of what sin is,
examines himself, finds something in himself, and says to
himself, “This evil is a sin,” and abstains from it for fear
of eternal punishment. Then first what is said in the
temples by preachers, in instruction and prayer, is received
by both ears, is introduced into the heart, and from a pagan
the man becomes a Christian.

526. Can there be any thing better known in the Chris-
tian world, than that a man must examine himself? For


708


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 526


everywhere, in the empires and kingdoms adhering to the
Roman Catholic religion and in those adhering to the Evan-
gelical, before approaching the Holy Supper they are taught
and admonished that a man must examine himself, recog-
nize and acknowledge his sins, and live a new and different
life. In the English dominions this is accompanied with
fearful threatenings, where in the address that precedes the
Communion the following is read and proclaimed by the
priest from the altar: “The way and means” to become a
worthy partaker of the Holy Supper, “is first to examine
your lives and conversations by the rule of God’s com-
mandments; and whereinsoever ye shall perceive yourselves
to have offended, either by will, word, or deed, there to be-
wail your own sinfulness, and to confess yourselves to
Almighty God, with full purpose of amendment of life. And
if ye shall perceive your offences to be such as are not only
against God but also against your neighbor, then ye shall
reconcile yourselves unto him, being ready to make restitu-
tion and satisfaction, according to the uttermost of your
powers, for all injuries and wrongs done by you to any other,
and being likewise ready to forgive others that have offended
you, as ye would have forgiveness of your offences at God’s
hand; for otherwise the receiving of the holy communion
does nothing else but increase your damnation. Therefore
if any of you be a blasphemer of God, a hinderer or slanderer
of His Word, an adulterer, or be in malice or envy, or in any
other grievous crime, repent ye of your sins, or else come not
to that holy table, lest after the taking of that holy sacrament,
the devil enter into you as he entered into Judas, and fill
you full of all iniquity, and bring you to destruction both of
body and soul.”

527. And yet there are some who cannot examine them-
selves, such as infants, boys and girls before they arrive at
the age when they become capable of looking into them-
selves; also the simple-minded who are not capable of re-
flection; and again, all those who have no fear of God; and


No. 527]


REPENTANCE


709


beside these, some who are sick in mind and body; and
furthermore, those who, being confirmed from the doctrine
of justification by faith alone as imputative of Christ’s merit,
have persuaded themselves that by examination and hence
repentance something of the man would enter, which would
ruin faith, and so would cast out and banish salvation from
its one and only home. Mere confession with the lips serves
all these; and that this is not repentance has been already
shown in this chapter. But they who know what sin is,
and still more they who know many other things from the
Word and teach, them, and who do not examine themselves
and consequently see no sin in themselves, may be likened
to those who scrape up wealth and lay it up in chests and
coffers, making no further use of it than to look at it and
count it; also to those who gather into their treasuries jewels
of gold and silver and shut them up in vaults, solely for the
sake of being opulent; such are like the trader that hid his
talent in the earth, and like him who hid his pound in a nap-
kin (Matt. xxv. 25: Luke xix. 20). They are also like the
hard ways and stony places upon which the seed fell (Matt,
xiii. 4, 5); also like fig-trees full of leaves but bearing no
fruit (Mark xi. 13). They are the hearts of adamant, that
do not become hearts of flesh (Zech vii. 12). They are like
the partridges which gather and bring not forth; they get
riches but not with judgment; they leave them in the midst of
their days , and at their end become fools (Jer. xvii. 11). They
are like the five virgins who had lamps but no oil (Matt. xxv.
1-12). They who acquire from the Word much about char-
ity and repentance, and who know its precepts in abundance,
and do not live according to them, may be compared to
gluttons who stuff bits of food into their mouths, and swal-
low it without chewing into the stomach, where it stays un-
digested, and when it has been passed onward it vitiates the
chyle, and brings on lingering diseases, from which they die
at last a miserable death. Such persons being without
spiritual heat, however much light they may be in, may be


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 527


710

called winters, frozen grounds, arctic climates, yes, fields of
snow and ice.


VI. Actual repentance is to examine one’s self, to

know and acknowledge one’s sins, to make suppli-
cation to the Lord, and begin a new life.

528. That man is by all means to repent, and that his
salvation depends upon it, is evident from many passages
and plain sayings of the Lord in the Word, from which the
following shall at present be adduced: John preached the
baptism of repentance and said, Bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance (Luke iii. 3, 8: Mark i. 4). Jesus began to preach
and to say , Repent (Matt. iv. 17). And He said, because The
kingdom 0} God is at hand , Repent ye (Mark i. 15). Again:
Except ye repent , ye will all perish (Luke xiii. 5). Jesus
commanded His disciples that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in His name to all nations (Luke
xxiv. 47: Mark vi. 12). Therefore Peter preached repent-
ance and baptism in the name of Jesus Christ for the remis-
sion of sins (Acts ii. 38); and he also said, Repent ye there-
fore, and turn , that your sins may be blotted out (iii. 19). Paul
preached to all men everywhere to repent (xvii. 30); he also
declared first unto them of Damascus , and at Jerusalem , and
throughout all the region of Judea , and then to the Gentiles,
that they should repent and turn to God , and do works meet
for repentance (xxvi. 20). Again, he testified to the Jews and
to the Greeks , repentance toward God and faith toward the
Lord Jesus Christ (xx. 21). The Lord said to the church
at Ephesus, I have somewhat against thee , that thou hast left
thy first charity . Repent , or else I will remove thy candle-
stick out of its place , except thou repent (Apoc. ii. 2, 4, 5).
To the church at Pergamos, I know thy works , repent (ii. 13,
16). To the church in Thyatira, I will cast her irtto afflic-
tion, if she does not repent of her works (Apoc. ii. 22). To
the church of the Laodiceans, 1 know thy works, be zealous ,


No. 530]


REPENTANCE


7H


therefore , and repent (Apoc. iii. 15, 19). There is joy in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth (Luke xv. 7); beside
other passages. From which it is manifest that man is by
all means to repent; but the quality and the mode of re-
pentance will be shown in what follows.

529. Who cannot understand, from the reason given him,
that it is not repentance for one merely to confess with the
mouth that he is a sinner, and to recount many things re-
specting it, as the hypocrite did who was mentioned above?
(n. 518.) For what is easier for a man when he is in dis-
tress and agony, than to pour out the breath, and to utter
sighs and groans from the lungs by the lips, and also to beat
the breast and make himself guilty of all sins, when yet he is
not conscious of a single sin in himself? Do the legion of
devils, which are in his loves, go out together with the sighs ?
Do they not rather hiss at those things, and remain in him as
before, as in their own house ? It is manifest from this that
?uch repentance is not meant in the Word, but repentance
from evil works, as it also says.

530. The question is, therefore, How ought man to re-
pent? The reply is, Actually; and this is, for one to ex-
amine himself, know and acknowledge his sins, make sup-
plication to the Lord, and begin a new life. That there can
be no repentance without examination was shown in the
preceding article. But for what purpose is examination,
but that one may know his own sins ? And for what is this
knowledge, but that he may acknowledge that they are in
nim ? And for what are the three, but that he may confess
them before the Lord, seek aid, and then begin a new life,
which is the end to be attained ? This is actual repentance.
That man ought so to proceed and do, every one may know,
after he has passed the first peripd of life and comes under
his own control and to the exercise of his own reason, from
Baptism, the washing of which means regeneration; for in
Baptism his sponsors have promised for him that he will
reject the devil and all his works; likewise from the Holy


712


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 530


Supper, for all are warned to repent of their sins, to turn to
God, and to enter upon a new life, before they can come to it
worthily; and moreover ^ from the Decalogue or catechism
which is in the hands of all Christians, where in six of its
precepts nothing is commanded but that they should not do
evil. And unless these are removed by repentance, man
cannot love the neighbor, and still less God; when never-
theless on those two commandments hang the law and the
prophets, that is, the Word, and hence salvation. Actual
repentance, if performed at recurring seasons, as often, for
instance, as a man prepares for the communion of the Holy
Supper, if he afterwards abstains from one sin or another
that he then discovers in himself, is sufficient to initiate him
into its reality; and when he is in this, he is on the way to
heaven, for from being natural he then begins to become
spiritual, and to be born anew from the Lord.

531. This may be illustrated by the following compari-
sons. Man before repentance is like a desert where there
are terrible wild beasts, dragons, owls of various kinds,
vipers, and poisonous serpents, where in the thickets are
the ochim and tziim , and where satyrs dance. But after
these have been banished by the industry and labor of man,
the desert may be ploughed and brought into fields that may
be planted; and these may be sowed first with oats, beans,
and flax, and afterward with barley and wheat. It may also
be compared to the wickedness which reigns in full force
among men; if the wicked were not corrected according to
law, and punished by stripes or death, no city or kingdom
could stand. Man is as it were a society in miniature. If
he did not deal with himself spiritually as the wicked in a
great society are dealt with naturally, he would be chastised
and punished after death, and this even till he does not do
evil for fear of the penalty, though he can never be brought
to do good from the love of good,.


No. 532]


REPENTANCE


713


VII. True repentance is to examine not only the acts

OF ONE'S LIFE, BUT ALSO THE INTENTIONS OF ONE’S WILL.

532. To examine not only the acts of the life, but also the
intentions of the will, is true repentance, because the under-
standing and will make the acts; for man speaks from
thought, and acts from will; therefore speech is thought
speaking, and action is will acting. And because the words
and acts are from them, it follows indisputably that will and
thought are the two that sin when the body sins. And
further, a man can repent of evils which he has done with
the body, and still think and will evil; but this is like cutting
off the trunk of a bad tree and leaving its root in the ground,
from which the same bad tree grows up again and spreads
itself around. But when the root is torn up also, it is dif-
ferent; and this is done in man when he at the same time
examines the intentions of his will and removes the evils by
repentance. A man examines the intentions of his will
when he examines his thoughts, for in these the intentions
make themselves manifest, to find how far, while thinking
of them, he wills and intends revenge, adulteries, thefts,
false witness, and the desires for them, and also blasphemy
against God, the holy Word, and the church, and so on. If
he still directs his attention to this, and searches to find
whether he would do such things if fear of the law and for
reputation did not hinder, then after such scrutiny he who
thinks that he will not because they are sins, repents truly
and inwardly; and still more when he is in enjoyment from
those evils and is at the same time in freedom to do them,
and then resists and abstains. He who practises this re-
peatedly, perceives the enjoyments of the evils when they
return as not enjoyable, and at last he condemns them to
hell. This is what is meant by these words of the Lord:
He that willeth to find his life shall lose it; and he that loseth
his lije for My sake , shall find it (Matt. x. 39). He who by


714 V TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 532

this repentance removes the evils of his will, is like one who
in time pulls up the tares sown in his field by the devil, so
that the seeds implanted by the Lord God the Saviour find
a clear soil, and grow to harvest (Matt. xiii. 25-30).

533. There are two loves which have long been rooted in
the human race, the love of ruling over all and the love of
possessing the goods of all. The .former love, if free rein
is given it, rushes on until it wishes to be the God of heaven;
and the latter, if free rein is given it, rushes on until it
wishes to be the God of the world. To these two all other
evil loves, of which there are hosts, are subordinated; but to
examine these two is exceedingly difficult, because they re-
side most deeply within, and hide themselves; for they are
like vipers concealed in a rock full of holes; these* retain
their poison, so that when one lies down on the rock they
give their deadly stroke, and then draw back. They are
also like the sirens of the ancients, who allured men by their
song, and by that means killed them. These two loves also
array themselves in shining robes and undergarments, as a
devil by magical fantasy does among his own, or among
those whom he wishes to delude. But it is to be well known
that these two loves may rule with those in humble life more
than with the great, with the poor more than with the rich,
with subjects more than with kings; for kings are born to
dominion and wealth, which they at length regard only as
others regard their households and possessions, as one in
civil office, a director, a shipmaster, or even a poor farmer
regards his. It is different with kings who aspire to do-
minion over the kingdoms of others. The intentions of the
will are to be examined, because the love has its seat in the
will, for the will is its receptacle, as shown above. Thence
every love breathes out its enjoyments into the perceptions
and thoughts of the understanding, for these latter do not
act at all from themselves but from the will, for they favor
it, consenting to and confirming every thing of its lo ve. The
will is therefore the very house in which the man dwells, and


No. 534]


REPENTANCE


715


the understanding is the hall through which he goes out and
in. For this reason it has been said that the intentions of
the will are to be examined; and when they have been ex-
amined and removed, man is lifted out of the natural will,
in which hereditary and actual evils have their seat, into the
spiritual will, through which the Lord reforms and regen-
erates the natural, and by means of this what is sensual and
voluntary of the body, thus the whole man.

534. They who do not examine themselves, by compari-
son are like invalids whose blood is vitiated from the closing
of the smallest vessels, which causes atrophy, numbness of
limbs, and painful chronic diseases arising from a thickening,
tenacity, acridness, and acidity of the humors, and hence of
the blood. But, on the other hand, they who include the
intentions of the will in their examination of themselves, by
comparison are like those who have been cured of these
diseases, and who return to the life they were in while young.
They who examine themselves aright, are like ships from
Ophir laden with gold, silver, and precious things; but be-
fore they have examined themselves, they are like ships
loaded with filth, such as are used to carry away mud and
ordure of streets. They who examine themselves inwardly,
become like mines, all the walls of which gleam with ores of
precious metal; but before, like foul bogs in which are
snakes and venomous serpents with glittering scales, and
noxious insects with shining wings. They who do not
examine themselves are like the dry bones in the valley;
but after they have examined themselves, they are like the
same bones on which the Lord Jehovih laid sinews, caused
flesh to come, covered them with skin, and put breath in
them, and they lived (Ezek. xxxvii. 1-14).


716


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 535


VIII. They repent also, who do not examine them-
selves, YET DESIST FROM EVILS BECAUSE THEY ARE SINS;

AND THEY REPENT IN THIS WAY WHO FROM RELIGION
DO THE WORKS OF CHARITY.

535. Since actual repentance, which is to examine one’s
self, to know and acknowledge one’s sins, to make supplica-
tion to the Lord, and begin a new life, is in the Reformed
Christian world exceedingly difficult, for many reasons that
will be given in the last article of this chapter, therefore an
easier kind of repentance will be here presented, which is,
that when one is considering evil with the mind, and is in-
tending it, he should say to himself, “ I am thinking of this
and intending it; but because it is sin, I will not do it.” By
this means the temptation injected from hell is checked, and
its further entrance prevented. It is wonderful that one can
find fault with another who is intending evil, and say, “Do
not do that, because it is sin,” and yet it is hard for him to
say so to himself; this is because the latter moves the will,
but the other only the thought nearest to the hearing. In-
quiry was made in the spiritual world who could practise
this second kind of repentance; and they were found as rare
as doves in a vast desert; and some said that they could in-
deed do this, but that they were not able to examine them-
selves and confess their sins before God. But still, all they
who do good from religion avoid actual evils; and yet how
Tr ery rarely do they reflect upon the interiors, which are of
the will, in the belief that they are not in evils because they
are in good, yes, that the good covers the evil. But, my
friend, the first of charity is to shun evils; the Word teaches
this, the Decalogue, Baptism, the Holy Supper, and also
reason; for how can any one flee from evils and banish them
without some self-inspection? and how can good become
good unless it has been inwardly purified ? I know that all
pious men, and also all who have sound reason will assent


No. 536] REPENTANCE 7 1 7

to this while they read it, and will see that it is genuine truth;
but still that few will act accordingly.

536. But yet, all who do good from religion, not Chris-
tians only but also pagans, are acceptable to the Lord, and
after death are adopted; for the Lord said, I was an hun-
gered , and ye gave Me meat; I was thirsty and ye gave Me
drink; I was a stranger , and ye took Me in; naked , and ye
clothed Me; I was sick , and ye visited Me; I was in prison,
and ye came unto Me: and He said, Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of My least brethren , ye have done it unto Me .
Come , ye blessed , inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
thz foundation of the world (Matt. xxv. 31, and subsequent
verses). To which I will add this, which is new: All who
do good from religion, after death reject the doctrine of the
present church as to three Divine Persons from eternity, and
also its faith applied to the three in order, and they turn to
the Lord God the Saviour, and accept with pleasure what
is of the New Church. But the others, who have not prac-
tised charity from religion, are hearts as hard as adamant.
They first resort to three Gods, afterward to the Father only,
and at last to none; they look upon the Lord God the Saviour
as only Mary’s son, bom of marriage with Joseph, and not
as the Son of God; then they discard all the goods and truths
of the New Church, and presently join the spirits of the
dragon, and with them are driven away into deserts or
caverns on the furthest borders of what is called the Chris-
tian world; and after a time, because they are separate from
the New Heaven, they rush into crime, and are therefore
sent into hell. Such is the lot of those who do not do works
of charity from religion, from the belief that no one can do
good from himself, except what is of merit; and hence they
omit those works, and associate themselves with the goats,
the condemned, and are cast into the eternal fire prepared
for the devil and his angels, because they have not done what
was done by the sheep (Matt. xxv. 41-46). It is not there
said that they did evils, but that they did not do goods; and


718


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 536


they who do not do goods from religion do evils, since No
man can serve two masters , for either he will hate the one and
love the other , or else he will hold to the one and despise the
other (Matt. vi. 24). Jehovah says by Isaiah, Wash you ,
tmke you clean , put away the evil 0} your doings from before
Mine eyes; cease to do evil , learn to do well; and then , though
your sins have been as scarlet , they shall be white as snow;
though they have been red as crimson , they shall be as wool
(i. 16-18): and to Jeremiah, Stand in the gate 0} the house of
Jehovah , and proclaim there this word: Thus said Jehovah
Zebaoth, the God of Israel , Amend your ways and your doings;
trust ye not in lying words , saying , The temple 0} Jehovah ,
the temple of Jehovah , the temple 0} Jehovah is here (that is,
the church). Will ye steal , murder , and swear falsely , and
come and stand before Me in this house , which is called by
My Name , and say , We are delivered , while ye do all these
abominations? Is this house become a den of robbers? Be-
hold, even I have seen it, saith Jehovah (vii. 2-4, 9-1 1).

537. It is to be known that they who do good from nat-
ural goodness only, and not from religion at the same time,
are not accepted after death, because there is only natural
good in their charity, and not at the same time spiritual
good; and it is the spiritual which conjoins the Lord with
man, not the natural without this. Natural goodness is of
the flesh alone, born of parents; but spiritual goodness is of
the spirit, bom anew from the Lord. They who do the
good works of charity from religion, and who hence do not
do evils, before they have accepted the doctrine of the New
Church as to the Lord, may be likened to trees that bear
good fruit, though but little, and also to trees that bear
excellent small fruit, which are none the less cared for in
gardens; and they may also be likened to olive-trees and
fig-trees in the woods; and again to fragrant herbs and
balsamic shrubs on the hills. They are like little chapels
or houses of God, where pious worship is held; for they
are sheep on the right hand, and rams that the goats assault,


No. 538]


REPENTANCE


719


according to Daniel (viii. 2-14). In heaven they have been
clothed with garments of red; and after initiation into the
goods of the New Church, they are clothed with garments of
purple, which acquire a beautiful yellow glow as they re-
ceive truths also.


IX. Confession must be made before the Lord God the

Saviour, and then supplication for aid and power
to resist evils.

538. The Lord God the Saviour must be approached,
because He is the God of heaven and earth, the Redeemer
and Saviour, to whom belong omnipotence, omniscience,
omnipresence, mercy itself and at the same time justice;
also because man is His creature, and the church His fold;
add, also, that many times in the New Testament He has
commanded men to come to Him and worship and adore
Him. He has given the injunction that He only must be
approached by these words in John: Verily , verily , I say unto
you y he that entereth not by the door into the sheep fold, but
climbeth up some other way , the same is a thief and a robber;
But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
I am the door; by Ale if any man enter in , he shall be saved ,
and shall find pasture ; the thief comeih not but for to steal , and
to kill , and to destroy ; I am come that they may have life and
abundance of it; I am the Good Shepherd (x. 1, 2, 9-1 1).
That man must not climb up some other way, means not to
God the Father, because He is invisible and therefore un-
approachable, with whom there cannot be conjunction; for
which reason He Himself came into the world, and made
Himself visible and approachable, with whom there can be
conjunction; which was solely for the end that man might be
saved. For unless in thought God is approached as Man,
every idea of God perishes, falling like sight directed out
upon the universe, that is, into empty nothingness, or into
nature, or to what is met within nature. That God Him-


720


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 538


self, who from eternity is one, came into the world, is clearly
evident from the nativity of the Lord the Saviour, in that He
was conceived from the power of the Highest through the
Holy Spirit, and that His Human was born from it, of the
virgin Mary; from which it follows that His soul was the
Divine itself which is called the Father, for God is indivisible;
and that the Human born from it is the Human of God the
Father, which is called the Son of God (Luke i. 32, 34, 35);
from which it again follows that when the Lord God the
Saviour is approached, God the Father is approached also;
therefore to Philip asking Flim to show them the Father,
He replied, He that seeth Me seeth the Father; and how say -
esi thou then , Show us the Father? Believest thou not that
I am in the Father , and the Father in Me? Believe Me that
I am in the Father , and the Father in Me? (John xiv. 6-1 1.)
But of this more may be seen in the chapters on God, the
Lord, the Holy Spirit, and the Trinity.

539. There are two duties incumbent on man, to be done
after examination; these are supplication and confession.
The supplication will be that the Lord be merciful, give
power to resist the evils of which he has repented, and supply
inclination and affection for doing good, since man without
the Lord can do nothing (John xv. 5). The confession will
be, that he sees, knows, and acknowledges his evils, and finds
himself a miserable sinner. There is no need of enumera-
ting sins before the Lord, nor of supplicating for their re-
mission. The enumeration of sins is unnecessary because
the man has searched them out and seen them in himself,
and hence they are present to the Lord because they are
present to the man. Moreover the Lord led him in the
examination, and laid them open, and inspired sorrow, and
together with this the effort to desist from them and begin
a new life. It is not a duty to make supplication before the
Lord for the remission of sins, for the following reasons:
First, because sins are not abolished, but removed; and they
are removed as the man afterward desists from them and


No. 560]


REPENTANCE


721


goes on in the new life; for there are innumerable lusts
inherent, rolled up as it were, in every evil, and they cannot
be moved in a moment, but successively, as the man suffers
himself to be reformed and regenerated. The second rea-
son is that the Lord, because He is Mercy itself, remits their
sins to all, nor does hie impute them to any one; for He says,
They know not what they do; but still, the sins have not
therefore been taken away. For to Peter asking how often
he should forgive his brother his trespasses, whether seven
times, the Lord said, I say not unto thee until seven times ,
but until seventy times seven (Matt, xviii. 21, 22). What
will the Lord not do ? But still it does no harm for one
burdened in conscience to enumerate his sins in the presence
of a minister of the church, for the sake of absolution, that
his burden may be lightened; because he is thus led into the
habit of examining himself, and of reflecting upon the evils
of each day. But this confession is natural; but that de-
scribed above is spiritual.

560. To adore some vicar on earth, or to invoke some
saint, as God, is of no more avail in heaven than to make
supplication to the sun, moon, and stars, or to ask a response
of a diviner and believe what he gives forth, which is vain.
This would also be like adoring a temple and not God in the
temple; it would be like supplicating a king’s servant who
carries the sceptre and the crown in his hand, for the honors
of glory, and not the king himself; and this would be to as
little purpose as kissing the splendor of purple, glory, light,
the sun’s golden rays, and a mere name, apart from their
subjects. For those who do such things are these words in
John: We abide in the truth , in Jesus Christ. This is the
true God and Eternal Life. Little children , keep yourselves
from idols (1 Epistle v. 20, 21).


722


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 561


X. Actual repentance is easy for those who have

SOMETIMES PRACTISED IT, BUT VERY DIFFICULT OF
EXECUTION IN THOSE WHO HAVE NOT.

561. Actual repentance is to examine one’s self, to know
one’s sins, to confess before the Lord, and so to begin a new
life; this accords with the preceding description of it. In
the Reformed Christian world, meaning by this all who are
separate from the Roman Catholic church and also all at-
tached to this church who have not practised any actual
repentance, with both of these classes, it is very difficult of
execution. This is because some will not and some dare
not practise it; and this disuse makes a man confirmed,
induces unwillingness, and at length gains the consent of
the reasoning intellect, but with some it induces instead
sadness, dread, and terror. Actual repentance is very diffi-
cult in the Reformed Christian world, first because of their
belief that repentance and charity contribute nothing to
salvation, but faith alone, from the imputation of which
follow remission of sins, justification, renewal, regenera-
tion, sanctification, and eternal salvation, — without man’s
cooperating from himself or as from himself, which their
dogmatists call useless, and an obstacle to Christ’s merit,
and repugnant and injurious to it. And this is implanted
in the minds of the people, though they are ignorant of the
mysteries of that faith, by these sayings alone, that faith alone
saves, and “who can do good of himself?” Hence re-
pentance with the Reformed is like a nest of young birds
deprived of the parents caught and killed by the fowler.
To this another cause is added, that one so-called Reformed
is, as to his spirit, among no others in the spiritual world
than those like him, who induce such things upon the ideas
of his thoughts, and seduce him from a step toward self-
inspection and examination.

562. I have asked many of the Reformed in the spiritual


No. 562]


REPENTANCE


723


world why they did not practise actual repentance, when
it was enjoined upon them both in the Word and at Bap-
tism, as also before the Holy Communion in all their churches.
They made various replies. Some said, that contrition with
oral confession that one is a sinner is enough. Some said
that such repentance, taking place while man is operating
from his own will, does not accord with the faith universally
accepted. Some said, “ Who can examine himself when he
knows that he is mere sin? This would be like casting a
net into a lake full from bottom to top of mud containing
noxious worms.” Some said, “ Who can inspect himself so
deeply as to see in himself Adam’s sin, from which all his
actual evils have sprung ? Are not these as well as it washed
away by the waters of Baptism, and wiped off and covered
by the merit of Christ ? What is repentance, therefore, but
an imposition, which sadly disturbs the conscientious?
Are we not by the Gospel under grace, and not under the
hard law of that repentance?” And so on. Some said
that whenever they intend to examine themselves, dread
and terror seize them, as if they saw a monster near the bed
in the morning twilight. From these things the reasons are
made plain, why actual repentance in the Reformed Chris-
tian world has, as it were, been stopped and discarded. In
the absence of these persons I also asked some attached to
the Roman Catholic religion about their actual confession
before their ministers, whether it was difficult. And they
replied that after they were initiated into it, they did not
fear to tell their trespasses to a confessor who was not severe,
and that with a kind of pleasure they gathered them, telling
the lighter ones cheerfully, but the more serious somewhat
timidly; also that according to custom they freely returned
every year to their appointed confession, and, after receiving
absolution, to festivity; moreover, that they look upon all
as impure who are not willing to uncover the defilements of
their hearts. Hearing this, the Reformed who were present
hastened away, some deriding and laughing, some astounded


72 4 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 562

and yet commending. Afterward some drew near who be-
longed to that same church, but who lived in countries where
the Reformed were; and who, from the usage there estab-
lished, did not make a special confession, like their brethren
elsewhere, but only a general confession before one who held
the keys. They said that they were wholly unable to search
themselves, to trace out and set forth their actual evils and
the secrets of their thoughts; and that they thus felt this to
be as repugnant and terrible, as if they would cross a ditch
to a rampart where an armed soldier stands and cries, Keep
back. Hence it is now evident that actual repentance is
easy to those who have sometimes practised it, but it is very
difficult of execution in those who have not.

563. It is well known that habit makes second nature,
and that therefore what is difficult for one is easy for another;
and so it is with examining one’s self and confessing the re-
sults of examination. What is easier for a hired laborer,
porter, or farmer, than to work with his hands from morning
till evening ? while on the other hand a genteel and delicate
man could not do the same for half an hour without fatigue
and sweat. It is easy for a footman, with staff and easy
shoes, to work his way on for miles, while one accustomed t?
ride can hardly run slowly from one street to another. Every
mechanic devoted to his work goes through it easily and will-
ingly, and when he leaves it, longs to return; while another
acquainted with the same trade, but indolent, can scarcely
be driven to it. So with every one who is in any employ-
ment or pursuit. To one diligent in piety, what is easier
than to pray to God ? and to one who is a slave to impiety,
what it more difficult ? and vice versa. What priest preach-
ing before a king for the first time is not timid ? while after
he has become established in the office, he goes on boldly.
What is easier for a man angel than to raise the eyes to
heaven ? and for a man devil than to cast them down toward
hell? But if the latter becomes a hypocrite, he too can look
up to heaven, but with the heart turned away. Every one
is imbued with the end in view, and the habit therefrom.


No. 564]


REPENTANCE


725


XI. One who has never practised repentance, or has

NOT LOOKED INTO AND SEARCHED HIMSELF, AT LENGTH
DOES NOT KNOW WHAT DAMNING EVIL AND SAVING
GOOD ARE.

564. Because few in the Reformed Christian world prac-
tise repentance, it is here added, that he who has not looked
into and searched himself, at length does not know what
damning evil and saving good are; for he has no religion
from which to know it: for the evil which a man does not
see, know, and acknowledge, remains; and that which re-
mains becomes more and more rooted, until it closes the
interiors of his mind; hence man becomes first natural, then
sensual, and at last corporeal, and neither the sensual nor
the corporeal man knows any damning evil, or any saving
good. He becomes like a tree growing on a hard rock,
which spreads its roots within the crevices, and finally withers
away from lack of moisture. Every man rightly educated
is rational and moral; but there are two ways to rationality,
one from the world, the other from heaven. He who has
become rational and moral from the world, but not from
heaven also, is rational and moral in word and gesture only,
but is inwardly a beast, yes, a wild beast, because he acts
as one with those who are in hell where all are such. But
he who is rational and moral from heaven also, is truly ra-
tional and moral, because he is so at once in spirit, word,
and body; the spiritual is inwardly in the two latter, like a
soul, and it actuates the natural, sensual, and corporeal;
he also acts as one with those who are in heaven. There-
fore there is the spiritual rational and moral man, and also
the merely natural rational and moral man; and the one is
not known from the other in the world, especially if one by
practice is imbued with hypocrisy; but they are known apart
by the angels in heaven as doves from owls, and as sheep
from tigers. The merely natural man can see evils and goods


726 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 564

in others, and can also rebuke others; but because he has
not looked into and searched himself, he sees no evil in him-
self; and if any is uncovered by another, he cloaks it by his
rationality as a serpent hides its head in the dust, and sinks
himself in it as a hornet in dung. The enjoyment of evil
effects this, which encompasses him as a fog does a marsh,
absorbing and smothering the rays of light. Enjoyment in
hell is no different. This is exhaled thence, and flows into
every man, but into the soles of the feet and into his back
and his occiput. But if it is received by the head in the fore-
head, and by the body in the breast, the man is made a slave
to hell. This is because the human cerebrum is devoted
to the understanding and wisdom there, but the cerebellum
to the will and its love: and from this there are two brains.
But that infernal enjoyment is amended, reformed, and
inverted solely by the rational and moral that are spiritual.

565. Now follows a brief description of the merely natu-
ral rational and moral man, who viewed in himself is sen-
sual, and if he goes on, becomes corporeal or fleshly; but the
description shall be given in a sketch with divisions. The
sensual is the ultimate of the life of man’s mind, adherent to
and coherent with the five senses of his body. He is called
a sensual man who judges of all things from the senses of the
body, and believes nothing but what he can see with the
eyes and touch with the hands, saying that this is something,
and rejecting every thing else. The interiors of his mind,
which see from the light of heaven, are closed so that he sees
nothing of the truth of heaven and the church. Such a man
thinks in outmosts, and not interiorly from any spiritual
light, because he is in gross natural light. Hence he is in-
wardly opposed to what is of heaven and the church, though
able to speak in favor of them outwardly and earnestly, in
proportion to his hope of having power and wealth by means
of them. Men of learning and erudition, who have con-
firmed themselves deeply in falsities, and still more they who
have confirmed themselves against the truths of the Word,


No. 565]


REPENTANCE


727


are more sensual than others. Sensual men reason acutely
and skilfully, because their thought is so near to speech as to
be almost in it, and, as it were in the lips, and because they
place all intelligence in the speech that is merely from mem-
ory; moreover they can dexterously confirm falsities, and
after confirming them they believe them to be true; but they
reason and confirm from fallacies of the senses, which cap-
tivate and persuade the people. Sensual men are more cun-
ning and malicious than others. The avaricious, adulterous,
and crafty, are especially sensual; though to the world they
seem to be men of talent. The interiors of their minds are
foul and filthy; they communicate by them with the hells;
in the Word they are called the dead. They who are in the
hells are sensual, and the more so, the deeper they are in
them; the sphere of infernal spirits joins itself with man’s
sensual, behind; in the light of heaven, their occiput seems
hollow. They who reasoned from sensual things only, were
called by the ancients serpents of the tree of knowledge.
Sensuals must be in the last place, and not the first; and
with a wise and intelligent man they are in the last place,
and are made subject to interior things; but in one who is
not wise, they are in the first place and are dominant. When
sensuals are in the last place, a way is opened through them
to the understanding; and truths are refined by the mode of
drawing them forth. Those sensuals stand out nearest to
the world, admit what comes to them from the world, and
as it were sift them. By means of sensuals, man commu-
nicates with the world; and by means of rationals with
heaven. Sensuals supply what serves the interiors of the
mind. There are sensuals which supply the intellectual,
and those which supply the voluntary part. Unless the
thought is raised above sensuals, man has little wisdom;
when man’s thought is raised above sensuals he comes into
clearer light, and at length into heavenly light; and then he
perceives what flows down from heaven. The ultimate of
the understanding is natural knowledge; the ultimate of the
will is sensual enjoyment.


728


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 566


566. Man, as to the natural man, is like a beast; he adopts
a beasts image by the life. Therefore in the spiritual world
beasts of every kind, which are correspondences, appear about
such men; for man’s natural viewed in itself is merely ani-
mal, but because the spiritual has been added, he can be-
come a man; and if he doe^ not become a man from the
faculty which enables him to do so, he can counterfeit one,
but yet he is a talking beast; for he talks from the natural
rational, but he thinks from spiritual madness, and he acts
from the natural moral, but he loves from spiritual lust.
His acts, viewed by a spiritual rational man, differ little from
the dance of one bitten by a tarantula, and called St. Vitus’s
dance or the dance of St. Guy. Who does not know that a
hypocrite can talk about God, a robber about sincerity, an
adulterer about chastity? and so on. But unless man had
the gift to close and to open the door between his thoughts
and his words, and between his intentions and his acts, and
if prudence or cunning were not the doorkeeper, he would
rush into abominations and cruelties more fiercely than any
wild beast. But that door is opened in every man after
death, and then he appears such as he has been; but he is
kept under restraint by punishments and custody in hell.
Therefore, kind reader, inspect yourself, and find out one or
another evil in you, and from religion turn it away; if you
do so from any other purpose or end, you only turn evils
away that they may not appear to the world.

567. To the foregoing will be added the following Rela-
tions. First: I was suddenly seized with almost deadly dis-
ease; my whole head was weighed down; a pestilential
smoke was let in from the Jerusalem called Sodom and
Egypt (Apoc. xi. 8); I was half dead with severe pain; I
expected the end. I lay in my bed thus for three days and
a half; my spirit was in that condition, and from it my body.
And then I heard about me voices of some who said, “Be-
hold he who preached, repentance for the remission of sins,
and the man Christ only, lies dead in the street of our city.”


No. 567]


REPENTANCE


729


And they asked some of the clergy whether he was worthy
of burial, and they said “No, let him lie and be looked at”;
and they were going, coming and mocking. Of a truth this
happened to me while the eleventh chapter of the Apocalypse
was explained. Harsh speeches were then heard from the
scoffers, especially these: “How can repentance be done
without faith ? How can the man Christ, be adored as God ?
When we are saved of free grace, without any merit of our
own, what need we then but faith alone that God the Father
sent the Son to take away the condemnation of the law, im-
pute to us His merit, and so justify us before Him and give
us absolution from our sins, the priest proclaiming it, and
then give the Holy Spirit to work all good in us? Is not
this according to Scripture, and also reason?” The crowd
that stood by applauded this.

I heard all this, but could make no answer, because I lay
almost dead. But after three days and a half my spirit
revived; and as to the spirit I went forth from the street into
the city, and said again, “Repent, and believe in Christ,
and your sins will be remitted, and you will- be saved; and
if not, you will perish. Did not the Lord Himself preach
repentance for remission of sins, and that they should be-
lieve in Him ? Did He not command the disciples to preach
the same? Does not full security of life follow the dogma
of your faith ? ” But they said, “ What nonsense you talk ?
Has not the Son made satisfaction? Does not the Father
impute it, and justify us who have believed this ? So we are
led by the spirit of grace. What then is sin in us? What
then is death with us? Proclaimer of sin and repentance,
do you accept this Gospel?” But then a voice came forth
out of heaven, saying, “ What is the faith of one not penitent
but dead ? The end has come, the end has come upon you,
secure, blameless in your own eyes, justified in your own
belief, Satins I” And then suddenly a cleft was opened in
the midst of the city; and it widened, and house after house
fell, and they were swallowed up; and presently water boiled
up from the broad gulf, and overflowed the waste.


730


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 567


When they had thus sunk down, and seemed to be over-
flowed, I desired to know their lot in the deep, and it was
said to me from heaven, “You shall see and hear.” And
then the waters disappeared from before my eyes, with which
they seemed to be overflowed, because waters in the spiritual
world are correspondences, and hence appear around those
who are in falsities. And then they were seen by me in a
sandy bottom, where heaps of stones were piled, among
which they were running, and lamenting that they had been
cast out of their great city, and they were shouting and cry-
ing out, “ Why have we this ? Are we not, through our faith,
clean,. pure, just, and holy? Are we not cleansed, purified,
justified, and sanctified through our faith?” And others
exclaimed, “Are we not, through our faith, made such as to
appear, be seen, and reputed before God the Father, and be
declared before the angels, as clean, pure, just, and holy?
Are we not reconciled, propitiated, expiated, and so absolved,
washed, and cleansed from sins? Has not the condemna-
tion of the law been taken away by Christ ? Why then have
we been cast hither as condemned? In our great city we
heard an audacious proclaimer of sin cry, £ Believe in Christ,
and repent/ Have we not believed in Christ, since we have
believed in His merit ? And have we not repented, since we
have confessed that we are sinners? Why then has this
befallen us?” But a voice was then heard speaking to
them from one side, “ Do you know any sin in which you are ?
Have you ever examined yourselves? Have you therefore
shunned any evil as sin against God? and he who does not
shun it is in it. Is not sin the devil? Therefore you are
they of whom the Lord says, Then shall ye begin to say , We
have eaten and drank in Thy presence , and Thou hast taught
in our streets. But He shall say , I tell you , I know you not
whence ye are; depart from Me, all ye workers oj iniquity
(Luke xiii. 26, 27; also in Matt. vii. 22, 23). Go, there-
fore, each to his place. You see openings into caverns;
enter into them, and to each of you his work to do will be


No. 567] REPENTANCE 73 1

given; and then food, in proportion to the work. If you
do not, hunger will yet compel you to go in.”

Afterward a voice from heaven came to certain ones on
the earth outside of that great city, who are also spoken of in
the Apoc. xi. 13, saying loudly, “Beware, beware of con-
sociation with such. Cannot you understand that the evils
called sins and iniquities render man unclean and impure?
How can man be cleansed and purified from them but by
actual repentance and by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ?
Actual repentance is to examine one’s self, know and ac-
knowledge his sins, to hold one’s self guilty, to confess them
before the Lord, to implore aid and power to resist them,
and so to desist from them and lead a new life; and all this
you must do as of yourselves. Do so once or twice a year,
when you come to the Holy Communion; and afterward,
when the sins of which you convicted yourselves recur, then
say to yourselves, ‘ We do not will these, because they are sins
against God.’ This is actual repentance. Who cannot
understand that he who does not examine and see his sins,
remains in them? For every evil has enjoyment in it from
birth; for there is enjoyment in revenge, whoredom, de-
frauding, blasphemy, and especially in ruling from love of
self. Does not the enjoyment prevent your seeing them?
And if perchance it is said that they are sins, from enjoy-
ment in them do you not excuse them ? yes, by falsities you
confirm they are not sins? and so remain in them, and do
them more afterward than before; and this even until you
do not know what sin is, yes, whether there is any. It is
otherwise with one who actually repents. The evils which
he knows and acknowledges, he calls sins, and therefore
begins to shun and turn away from them, and at length to
feel their enjoyment as undelightful. And so far as this
he sees and loves goods, and at length feels the enjoyment of
them, which is the enjoyment of the angels of heaven. In a
word, so far as one puts the devil behind him, he is adopted
by the Lord; and is taught, led, withheld from evils, and


73 2 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 567

kept in goods by Him. This and no other is the way from
hell to heaven.”

It is wonderful that with the Reformed there is a certain
rooted objection, repugnance, and aversion to actual re-
pentance, so great that they cannot compel themselves to
examine themselves, and see their sins, and confess them
before God. It is as if horror comes over them when they
propose it. I have asked very many in the spiritual world
about this, and they all said that it is beyond their power.
When they have heard that still the Papists do it, that is,
examine themselves, and openly confess their sins before a
monk, they have wondered greatly; and they said further
that the Reformed cannot do it in secret before God, though
it is equally enjoined upon them before coming to the Holy
Supper. And some there inquired why this was so; and
they found that faith alone induced such a state of impeni-
tence and such a heart. And it was then given them to see
that those of the Papists who worship Christ and do not in-
voke saints, are saved.

After this, as it were thunder was heard, and a voice speak-
ing from heaven, saying, “We are astonished! Say to the
assembly of the Reformed, ‘Believe in Christ and repent,
and ye shall be saved. 5 55 And I said so; and I added further,
“Is not Baptism a sacrament of repentance, and thus an
introduction to the church ? What else do sponsors promise
for the one to be baptized, but that he shall renounce the
devil and his works ? Is not the Holy Supper a sacrament
of repentance, and thus introduction to heaven? Are not
communicants told this, without fail to repent before coming ?
Is not the Catechism, the doctrine of the universal Christian
church, a teacher of repentance ? Is it not there said, in the
six precepts of the second table, Thou shalt not do this or
that evil, and not, Thou shalt do this or that good? From
this you may know, that as far as one renounces evil and is
averse to it, he aims at good and loves it; and that before
this he does not know what is good; nor indeed does he
know what is evil. 55


No. 568]


REPENTANCE


733


568. Second Relation. What pious and wise man does
not wish to know his lot after death ? I will therefore pre-
sent general truths, that he may know. Every man after
death, when he feels that he still lives and that he is in another
world, and hears that heaven is above him, where there are
eternal joys, and that hell is beneath him, where there are
eternal sorrows, is at first let into his externals, in which he
was in the former world; and he then believes that he is
certainly going to heaven, and talks intelligently and acts
prudently. And some say, “We have lived morally, our
pursuits have been honest, we have not done evil purposely.”
And others say, “We have frequented churches, heard
masses, kissed sacred images, and poured out prayers upon
our knees.” Others again, “We have given to the poor,
aided the needy, read pious books and the Word also”;
with many such things.

But after they have spoken thus, angels stand near and
say, “All that you have told, you have done in externals, but
you do not yet know what you are in internals. You are
now spirits, in a substantial body, and the spirit is your
internal man; it is this in you which thinks what it wills,
and wills what it loves, and this is its life’s enjoyment. Every
man from infancy begins life from externals, and learns to
act morally and talk intelligently, and when he first gets an
idea of heaven and the happiness there, he begins to pray,
to frequent churches, to observe solemnities of worship; and
still, when evils spring from their native fountain, he begins
to hide them in the bosom of his mind, and also ingeniously
to veil them with reasonings from fallacies, so that he does
not even know that evil is evil. And then, because the evils
are veiled, and covered as it were with dust, he thinks no
more about them than merely to guard against their ap-
pearing to the world. Thus he only studies to lead a moral
life in externals, and so becomes a double man, a sheep in
externals and a wolf in internals; and he is like a golden box
containing poison, like a man with foul breath holding


734


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 568


something aromatic in his mouth to prevent those near from
perceiving it; and he is like the skin of a mouse that smells
of balsam. You said that you had lived morally, and had
followed pious pursuits; but, tell me, have you ever ex-
amined your internal man, and perceived any lusts for taking
revenge even to the death, for living lustfully even to adul-
tery, for defrauding even to theft, for lying even to false
witness? In four precepts of the Decalogue it is said, Thou
shalt not do these things; and in the two last, Thou shalt
not covet them. Do you believe that in these things your
internal man has been like your external ? If you do, per-
haps you are deceived.”

But to this they replied, “ What is the internal man ? Are
not the internal and the external one and the same? We
have heard from our ministers that the internal man is noth-
ing but faith, and that piety of the lips and morality of life
are signs of it, because they are its operation.” To which
the angels answered, “Saving faith is in the internal man,
and likewise charity; and Christian faithfulness and moral-
ity in the external man are from them. But if these lusts
remain in the internal man, and thus in the will and from it
in the thought, hence if you love them inwardly and yet act
and speak otherwise in externals, then evil with you is above
good, and good is below evil; therefore, however you talk
as if from the understanding, and act from love, evil is within,
and thus it is veiled; and then you are like cunning apes,
which perform acts like those of men, but the heart of men
is wholly wanting. But what your internal man is of which
you know nothing, because you have not examined your-
selves and after examination repented, you will see after
awhile, when your external man is put off and you are sent
into the internal; and when this is done, you will no longer
be recognized by your companions, nor by yourselves. I
have seen wicked men, who were moral, like wild beasts
then, looking fiercely at the neighbor, burning with deadly
hatred, and blaspheming God, whom in the external man


No. 569J


REPENTANCE


735


they adored.” Hearing this they withdrew, while the an-
gels were saying, “ You will see your life’s lot hereafter, for
your external man will soon be taken from you, and you will
enter into the internal which is now your spirit.”

569. Third Relation. Every love in man breathes out
enjoyment, by which it makes itself felt; it breathes it first
into the spirit, and thence into the body; and enjoyment of
love, together with pleasantness of thought, makes his life.
Those enjoyments, and this pleasantness, are but dimly
seen while man lives in the natural body, because this ab-
sorbs and blunts them; but after death, when the material
body is taken away, and thus the covering or clothing of the
spirit is removed, the enjoyments of love and the pleasant-
ness of thought are fully felt and perceived; and, what is
wonderful, sometimes as odors. It results from this, that
all in the spiritual world are consociated according to their
loves, those in heaven according to theirs, and those in hell
according to theirs. The odors into which the enjoyments
of the loves are turned in heaven, are all perceived like the
fragrances, sweet smells, pleasant exhalations, and delightful
perceptions, which arise from gardens, flower-beds, fields,
and forests, in the spring mornings. But the odors into
which the enjoyments of the loves of those in hell are turned,
are perceived like the pungent, fetid, and rotten smells, that
arise from cesspools, dead bodies, and stagnant waters filled
with rubbish and ordure; and, what is wonderful, the devils
and satans there perceive them as balsams, aromatics, and
frankincense, refreshing nostrils and hearts. In the natural
world it is also given to beasts, birds, and worms to be con-
sociated according tp odors, but not to men until they have
laid aside their bodies as worn out coverings. It results
that heaven is arranged with most minute distinctions, ac-
cording to all the varieties of love of good; and hell, as its
opposite, according to ail the varieties of love of evil. It is
due to this opposition that there is a gulf between heaven and
hell, which cannot be passed; for they who are in heaven


7 3<5


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 569


cannot endure any odor from hell, for it excites nausea and
vomiting, and threatens them with swooning if they receive
it. The result is the same with those in hell if they pass the
middle of that gulf.

Once I saw a devil appearing in the distance like a leopard,
who a few days before was seen among the angels of the ulti-
mate heaven, and who possessed the art of making himself
an angel of light, passing beyond the middle and standing
between two olive-trees, and not perceiving any odor offen-
sive to his life. The reason was that no angels were present.
But, however, as soon as they were, he was seized with con-
vulsions, and fell down with all his limbs drawn up; and
then he appeared like a great serpent drawing himself into
folds, and at length rolling down through the gulf; and he
was taken out by his companions and carried away into a
cavern, where by the rank odor belonging to his own en-
joyment he revived. At one time also I saw a satan pun-
ished by his own companions. I asked the cause, and was
told that with his nostrils stopped up he had gone near to
those who were in the odor of heaven, and had returned and
brought that odor with him on his clothing. It has often
happened that a putrid odor like that from a corpse, from
some open cavern of hell, has reached my nostrils and brought
on vomiting. It may be evident trom this why the sense of
smell in the Word signifies perception; for it is often said
that Jehovah smelled a sweet savor from burnt-offerings;
also that the anointing oil and the incense were made of fra-
grant things ; and, on the other hand, that the children of
Israel were commanded to carry out from their camps what
was unclean, and to dig and bury the excrements (Deut.
xxiii. 12, 13). This was because the camp of Israel rep-
resented heaven, and the desert without the camp repre-
sented hell.

570. Fourth Relation . I once spoke with a novitiate
spirit, who, while he was in the world, thought much upon
heaven and hell. By novitiate spirits are meant men who


No. 570]


REPENTANCE


737


have lately died, and who, because they are then spiritual,
are called spirits. This spirit, as soon as he entered the
spiritual world, began to meditate in the same way about
heaven and hell, and he seemed to himself to be in a state of
gladness when meditating about heaven, and of sadness
when meditating about hell. As soon as he observed that
he was in the spiritual world he asked where heaven and
hell were; also what and of what quality was each of them.
And they answered, “Heaven is over your head, and hell
beneath your feet; for you are now in the world of spirits,
which is intermediate between heaven and hell; but what
each of them is, and what its quality, we cannot describe
in few words.” And then because he burned with the
desire of knowing, he threw himself upon his knees and
devoutly prayed to God to be instructed. And behold, an
angel appeared at his right hand and raised him up, and
said, “You have prayed to be instructed as to heaven and
hell. Inquire and learn what enjoyment is, and you will
know.” And the angel, after these words, was taken up.
The novitiate spirit then said to himself, “What is this?
Inquire and learn what enjoyment is, and you will know
what and of what quality heaven and hell are.”

Soon leaving that place, he wandered around; and, ad-
dressing those he met, he said, “ Pray tell me, if you please,
what enjoyment is.” And some said, “ What sort of a ques-
tion is that? Who does not know what enjoyment is? Is
it not joy and gladness? And so enjoyment is- enjoyment.
The one is the same as the other. We know no difference.”
Others said that enjoyment was laughter of mind; for while
the mind laughs, the face is merry, the speech is jocular,
the gestures are playful, and the whole man is in enjoy-
ment. But some said, “ Enjoyment is nothing but feasting
and eating dainties, and drinking and being drunk with
generous wine, and then chatting about various things, es-
pecially sports of Venus and Cupid.” Hearing these things,
the novitiate spirit being indignant said to himself, “ These


738


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 570 (


answers are rude, not cultured. These enjoyments are not
heaven, nor are they hell. Would that I could meet the
wise.” And he went away from these persons and sought
for the wise.

He was then seen by an angelic spirit, who said, “I per-
ceive that you are ardently desirous to know what is the
universal of heaven and of hell, and because this is en-
joyment, I will lead you up the hill where there is a daily
assembly of those who search into effects, investigate causes,
and examine ends. They there who search into effects, are
called spirits of knowledge, abstractly, knowledges; they
who investigate causes are called spirits of intelligence, ab-
stractly, intelligences; and they who examine ends are
called spirits of wisdom, abstractly, wisdoms. Directly
above them in heaven are angels who from ends see causes,
and from causes see effects; from these angels the three com-
panies have enlightenment.” Then taking the novitiate
spirit by the hand, he led him up the hill, and to the as-
sembly composed of those who examine ends, and who are
called wisdoms. To these he said, “ Pardon my coming up
to you. I came because from my childhood I have medi-
tated about heaven and hell; I lately came into this world,
and some who were then associated with me said that heaven
is here above my head, and hell beneath my feet; but they
did not say what each of them is, and of what quality it is;
therefore, becoming anxious from constantly thinking about
them, I prayed to God, and then an angel stood near and
said, ‘ Inquire and learn what enjoyment is, and you will
know.’ I have inquired, but so far in vain. I therefore
beg that you will teach me, if you please, what enjoyment is.”

To this the wisdoms replied: “Enjoyment is the all of
life, to all in heaven, and to all in hell. They who are in
heaven have enjoyment in good and truth, but they who are
in hell have enjoyment in evil and falsity; for all enjoyment
is of love, and love is the being of man’s life. Therefore as
man is man according to the quality of his love, so he is man


No. 570]


REPENTANCE


739


according to the quality of his enjoyment. The activity
of love makes the sense of enjoyment; its activity in heaven
is with wisdom, and its activity in hell is with insanity; the
activity in both cases yielding enjoyment in its subjects.
The heavens and the hells, however, are in opposite enjoy-
ments; the heavens in love of good and thence in enjoyment
of doing good, but the hells in love of evil and thence in en-
joyment of doing evil. If, therefore, you know what en-
joyment is, you will know what and of what quality heaven
is, and hell. But inquire and learn still further what enjoy-
ment is, from those who investigate causes, and who are
called intelligences; they are off to the right.”

And he left them and drew near to the other assembly,
and told the cause of his coming, and begged that they would
instruct him as to what enjoyment is. And rejoicing at the
question they said, “ It is true that he who knows enjoyment , L -
knows what heaven and hell are, and of what quality. The
will, from which man is man, is not moved in the least, ex-
cept by enjoyment; for the will, viewed in itself, is nothing
but the affection of some love, thus for enjoyment; for it is
something pleasant, and the state of pleasure from it, that
causes the willing. And because the will moves the under-
standing to think, there is not the least thought but from the
inflowing enjoyment of the will. This is so because the
Lord by influx from Himself actuates all things of the soul
and of the mind, with angels, spirits, and men; and He
actuates them by influx of love and wisdom; and this in-
flux is the activity itself from which is all the enjoyment
which in its origin is called blessed, satisfactory, and happy;
and in its derivation, enjoyable, pleasant, and pleasurable;
and in the universal sense, good. But the spirits of hell
invert all things in themselves, thus good into evil, and truth
into falsity, the enjoyment remaining without check, for
without permanence of enjoyment they would not have will
or sensation, thus they would not have life. It is manifest
from this, what, of what quality, and whence is the enjoy-


740


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 570


men! in hell; also what, of what quality, and whence is the
enjoyment in heaven.”

Having heard this, he was led to the third assembly, where
those were who search into effects, and who are called knowl-
edges. And these said, “Descend to the lower earth, and
ascend to the higher; in them you will perceive and feel
what give the enjoyments of both heaven and hell.” But be-
hold at that moment the earth at a distance from them,
opened; and through the opening, three devils came up,
apparently on fire with their love’s enjoyment; and as the
angels consociated with the novitiate spirit perceived that
those three came up from hell providentially, they called out
to the devils, “ Come no nearer, but from where you are tell
something about your enjoyments.” And they replied,
“ Know this, that every one, whether called good or bad, is
in his enjoyment, the so-called good man in his, and the so-
called evil man in his.” And they asked, “What is your
enjoyment ? ” They said that it was the enjoyment in whore-
dom, revenge, defrauding, blasphemy. And again they
asked, “Of what quality are those enjoyments with you?”
They said that they were perceived by others like the fetid
smell from excrement, the putrid smell from dead bodies,
and the pungent odor from stagnant urine. And they
asked, “Are those things enjoyable to you?” They an-
swered, “Exceedingly so.” And they said, “Then you are
like the unclean beasts that live in such things.” They re-
plied, “ If we are, we are, but such things are delights to our
nostrils.” And they asked, “What more?” They said,
“ Every one is allowed to be in his own enjoyment, even the
most unclean, as they call it, provided he does not attack
good spirits and angels; but as from our enjoyment we
could not do otherwise than attack, we were cast into work-
houses where we suffer hard things; restraint and repulse
of our enjoyments, are what is called the torment of hell;
it is also inward pain.” And they asked, “Why did you
attack the good?” They said that they could not do other-


No. 570]


REPENTANCE


741


wise; “ it is as if fury comes upon us, when we see any angel,
and feel the Lord’s Divine sphere about him.” To this we
said, “Then you are also like wild beasts.” And then,
when they saw the novitiate spirit with the angels, a fury
came over the devils, which seemed like the fire of hatred;
and lest they should do harm, they were rejected to hell.

After this appeared angels who from ends saw causes, and
through causes effects, and who were in the heaven above
those three assemblies. And these were seen in shining
white light; which, streaming down through spiral turnings,
brought with it a wreath of flowers, and placed it upon the
head of the novitiate spirit; and then a voice came thence to
him, “ This laurel wreath is given you, because from child-
hood you have meditated upon heaven and hell.”


CHAPTER TENTH.


REFORMATION AND REGENERATION.

571. Repentance having been treated of, Reformation
and Regeneration are next in order, because they follow
repentance, and must advance by means of it. There are
two states which man enters and passes through while from
natural he is becoming spiritual. The first state is called
Reformation, and the second Regeneration. In the first,
man looks from his natural state toward a spiritual one, and
desires it; in the second state he becomes spiritual-natural.
The first state is formed by means of truths which must be
of faith, and by means of which he looks to charity; the
second is formed by means of the goods of charity, and from
these he enters into truths of faith. Or what is the same,
the first is a state of thought from the understanding, but
the second a state of love from the will. When this latter
state begins and is progressing, a change takes place in the
mind; there is a reversal; because then the love of the will
flows into the understanding, and acts upon it and leads it
to think in concord and agreement with its love. There-
fore so far as the good of love then acts the first part, and the
truths of faith the second, the man is spiritual and is a new
creature. And then he acts from charity and speaks from
faith, and feels the good of charity and perceives the truth
of faith; and he is then in the Lord, and in peace, and thus
regenerate. One who has begun upon the first state in the
world, can after death be led into the second; but he who
has not entered into the first state in the world, cannot be
led into the second after death, thus cannot be regenerated.
These two states may be compared with the progression of
light and heat in the spring days; the first with the morning


No- 572 ] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 743

twilight or the time of cock-crowing, the second with the
morning and sunrise; and the progress of this latter state
may be compared with that of the day to noon, and thus into
light and heat. It may also be compared with the grain,
which is first in the blade, then grows into the ear or head,
and afterward in these becomes the corn. It may also be
compared to a tree, which first grows out of the ground from
a seed, then becomes a stem from which branches go out,
which are adorned with leaves, at length blossoms, and from
the inmost of the blossoms begins the fruits, which as they
mature produce new seeds, like a new generation. The first
state, which is that of reformation, may also be compared
with the state of a silk-worm when it draws out and evolves
from itself filaments of silk, and after its industrious labor
flies forth into the air, nourishing itself not from leaves as
before, but from the juices in flowers.

I. Unless man is born again, and, as it were, created

ANEW, HE CANNOT ENTER INTO THE KINGDOM OE GOD.

572. That unless a man is born again he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God, is the Lord’s teaching in John, where
are these words: Jesus said to Nicodemus, Verily , verily I
say unto thee , Except a man be born again , he cannot see the
kingdom 0} God; and again, Verily, verily I say unto thee ,
Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit , he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God; that which is born of the flesh is
flesh , and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit (iii. 3, 5,
6). Both heaven and the church, are meant by the king-
dom of God, for the church is God’s kingdom on earth.
So in other places where the kingdom of God is mentioned
(as Matt. xi. 11; xii. 28; xxi. 43: Luke iv. 43; vi. 20; viii.
1, 10; ix. 11, 60, 62; xvii. 21; and elsewhere). To be
born of water and the spirit, signifies to be born by means of
truths of faith and a life according to them. That water
signifies truths, may be seen in the Apocalypse Revealed


744


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 572


(n. 50, 614, 615, 685, 932); that spirit signifies a life accord-
ing to Divine truths, is manifest from the Lord’s words in
John vi. 63; verily, verily ( amen , amen), signifies that it is
truth; and because the Lord was the truth itself, He often so
spoke. He is also Himself called the Amen (Apoc. iii. 14).
In the Word the regenerate are called sons of God, and born
of God; and regeneration is described by a new heart and
a new spirit.

573. Because to be created also signifies to be regenerated,
Unless one is born again, and, as it were, created anew, is
said. That to be created has this signification in the Word,
is evident from the following passages: Create in me a clean
heart , O God, and renew a right spirit within me (Ps. li. 10).
Thou 0 penes t Thy hand, they are filled with good; Thou
sendest forth Thy Spirit, they are created (civ. 28, 30). The
people that shall be created , shall praise Jah (cii. 18). Be-
hold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing (Isa. lxv. 18). Thus said
Jehovah, thy Creator, O Jacob, thy Former, O Israel ; I have
redeemed thee; every one called by My name, I have created
him into My glory (xliii. 1,7). That they may see , and know,
and consider, and understand together, that the Holy One of
Israel hath created it (xli. 20), and elsewhere; also where
the Lord is called Creator, Former, and Maker. Hence
what is meant by these words of the Lord to the disciples
becomes plain: Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gos-
pel to every creature (Mark xvi. 15). By creatures are meant
all who can be regenerated. So too, Apoc. iii. 14: 2 Cor.
v. 17.

574. It is evident from all reason that man must be re-
generated; for he is born from parents into evils of every
kind, and these have place in his natural man, which of it-
self is diametrically opposed to the spiritual man; and yet
he was born for heaven, and he does not come to it unless he
becomes spiritual, and this he does by regeneration solely.
From this it follows of necessity that the natural man with
its lusts must be subdued, subjugated, and inverted, and


No. 575 ] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 745

that otherwise man cannot approach a step toward heaven,
but lowers himself more and more into hell. Who does not
see this, who believes that he was born into evils of every
kind, and acknowledges that there are good and evil, and
that the one is contrary to the other, and believes in a life
after death, in hell and heaven, that evils make hell and
goods make heaven? The natural man viewed in himself,
does not differ at all in his nature from beasts; like them he
is wild, but he is such as to will; he differs from them, how-
ever, as to understanding. The understanding can be raised
above the lusts of the will, and not only see but also re-
strain them. Consequently man can think from the under-
standing and speak from the thought, which beasts cannot
do. What man is from birth, and what' he would be if he
were not regenerated, may be seen from fierce animals of
every kind; he would be a tiger, panther, leopard, wild boar,
scorpion, tarantula, viper, crocodile, and so on. Therefore
if he were not changed by regeneration into a sheep, what
would he be but a devil among devils in hell ? Then if such
were not restrained by the laws of the kingdom, would they
not from innate ferocity rush one on another, and slaughter
each other, or strip each other even of necessary clothing?
How many of the human race are there who were not born
satyrs, and priapi, or four-footed lizards ? And who, among
them all, does not without regeneration become an ape?
External morality, which is learned for the sake of covering
up internals, makes this to be so.

575. The quality of man when not regenerated, may be
still further described by the following comparisons and
similitudes in Isaiah: The pelican and the bittern shall pos-
sess it, the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it; and he
shall stretch out over it the line of emptiness , and the plumb-
lines of the waste. And thorns shall come up in her palaces ,
the thistle and the thorn-bush in her fortresses; and it shall
be a habitation of dragons, a court for the daughters of the
owl; And tziim shall meet ifim, and the satyr shall come upon


746 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 575

his fellow: the lilith also shall rest there. There the arrow-
snake shall make her nest ) and lay , and hatch , and cherish
under her shadow. There shall the kites also he gathered
every one with her mate (xxxiv. 11, 13-15).


II. The new berth or creation is effected by the Lord

ALONE THROUGH CHARITY AND FAITH AS THE TWO
MEANS, MAN COOPERATING.

576. That regeneration is effected by the Lord through
charity and faith, follows from what was demonstrated in
the chapters on Charity and Faith, especially from this there,
that the Lord, charity, and faith make one, like life, will, and
understanding in man, and that if they are divided each one
of them perishes, like a pearl reduced to powder. These
two, charity and faith, are called the means, because they
conjoin man with the Lord, and cause charity to be charity
and faith to be faith, which cannot be done unless man has
part in regeneration; therefore man cooperating is said.
In preceding chapters of this work, man’s cooperation with
the Lord has been several times treated of; but as the hu-
man mind is such as not to perceive but that man does this
from his own power, it shall be illustrated again. In all
motion, and consequently in all action, there is activity and
passivity; that is to say, the active acts, and the passive acts
from the active; hence one action results from the two; com-
paratively as a mill from its wheel, a carriage from the horse,
motion from effort, effect from cause, dead force from living
force, and in general, the instrumental from the principal.
Every one knows that these two together make one act. As
to charity and faith, the Lord acts, and man acts from the
Lord; for in man’s passive there is the Lord’s active; there-
fore the power to act right is from the Lord, and the will to
act from this is as it were man’s; for he is in freedom of
will, from which he can act together with the Lord and thus
conjoin himself, and can act from the power of hell, which is


No. 577] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION


747


without, and so separate himself. Man’s action, concordant
with the Lord’s action, is here meant by cooperation. That
this may be perceived more clearly, it will be further illus-
trated by comparisons which follow.

577. From this it is that the Lord is constantly in the act
of regenerating man, because He is constantly in the act of
saving him, and no one can be saved unless he is regenerated,
according to the Lord’s own words in John: Except a man be
born again , he cannot see the kingdoni oj God (iii. 3). Regen-
eration, therefore, is the means of salvation, and charity and
faith are the means of regeneration. To say that regenera-
tion follows the faith of the present church, which leaves out
man’s cooperation, is vanity of vanities. Action and coop-
eration, such as have been described, can be seen in every
thing which is in any activity and mobility. Such are the
action and cooperation of the heart and of every artery
connected with it; the heart acts, and the artery by its
sheaths or coats cooperates; hence is circulation. It is
similar with the lungs; the air by pressure according to the
height of its atmosphere acts, and the ribs first cooperate
with the lungs, and immediately after, the lungs with the
ribs; hence is respiration of every membrane in the body.
Thus the meninges of the brain, pleura, peritonaeum, dia-
phragm, and other membranes which cover the viscera
and which enter into their composition, act and are acted
upon, and thus cooperate; for they are elastic: hence their
existence and subsistence. It is similar in every fibre and
nerve, in every muscle, and even cartilage; it is known
that there are action and cooperation in every one of these.
There is such cooperation also in every sense; for the sen-
sories of the body, like its motor parts, consist of fibres, mem-
branes, and muscles; but to describe the cooperation on the
part of each one, is needless; for it is known that light acts
upon the eye, sound upon the ear, odor upon the nostril, and
taste upon the tongue, and that the organs adapt themselves
thereto; whence is sensation. Who cannot perceive from


748 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 577

this, that if there were not such action and cooperation with
the influent life in the spiritual organism of the brain, thought
and will could not exist ? For life flows from the Lord into
that organism; and because tliis cooperates, there is per-
ception of what is thought, and in like manner of what is
there considered, concluded, and determined into act. If life
were to act alone, and man were not to cooperate as from
himself, he could no more think than a stock, or than a tem-
ple while the minister is preaching. He may indeed, owing
to the reverberation of the sound from its doors, as it were,
feel the echo, but nothing of speech. Such would man be
in respect to charity and faith if he did not cooperate with the
Lord.

578. What man would be if he did not cooperate with
the Lord, may also be illustrated by comparisons. When
he has a perception and sense of anything spiritual of heaven
and the church, it would be as if something distasteful or
discordant flowed in, and would be like an offensive smell
entering the nose, an inharmonious sound the ear, a mon-
strous sight the eye, and a foul taste the tongue. If the en-
joyment in charity and the pleasantness of faith were to
flow into the spiritual organism of the mind of those who are
in the enjoyment from evil and falsity, if such enjoyments
and pleasantness were to be forced upon them, they would
be in anguish and torture, and would finally fall into a
swoon. Because that organism consists of perpetual helices,
it would with such persons here coil itself up in spirals, and
writhe like a serpent upon an ant-hill. It has been proved
to me by much experience in the spiritual world that this is
so.


No. 579] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION


749


III. Because all have been redeemed, all can be re-
generated, EACH ACCORDING TO HIS STATE.

579. That this may be understood, something must be
premised as to Redemption. The Lord came into the world
chiefly for these two things, to remove hell from angel and
from man, and to glorify His Human. For before the Lord’s
Advent, hell had grown up so far as to attack the angels of
heaven, and also by interposing between heaven and the
world, to cut off the Lord’s communication with men on
earth, so that no Divine truth and good could pass through,
from the Lord to men. Consequently total condemnation
threatened the whole human race; and further, the angels
of heaven could not have long continued to exist in their
integrity. And therefore, in order that hell might be re-
moved, and this impending condemnation thereby taken
away, the Lord came into the world, removed hell, subju-
gated it, and thus opened heaven; so that He could after-
ward be present with the men of the earth, and save those
who should live according to His precepts, consequently
regenerate and save them, for those who are regenerated are
saved. This is what is meant when it is said, that, because
all have been redeemed, all can be regenerated; and, be-
cause regeneration and salvation make one, that all can be
saved. Therefore, what the church teaches, that without
the Lord’s Coming no one could have been saved, is to be
understood in this way, that without the Lord’s Coming no
one could have been regenerated. As to the other end for
the sake of which the Lord came into the world, namely,
to glorify His Human, this was because He thereby became
the Redeemer, Regenerator, and Saviour for ever. For it is
not to be believed that, by the Redemption once wrought
in the world, all men have been redeemed by that, but that
the Lord is perpetually redeeming those who believe in Him
and keep His words. But on these points more may be
seen in the chapter on Redemption.


7 SO TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 580

580. Every man may be regenerated, each according to
his state, because the simple and the learned are regenerated
differently; as are those engaged in different pursuits, and
those also who are in different offices; those who search
into the externals of the Word, and those who search into
its internals; those who are in natural good from their par-
ents, and those who are in natural evil; those who have from
their infancy entered into the vanities of the world, and those
who earlier or later have withdrawn from them, in a word
those who constitute the Lord’s external church are regen-
erated differently from those who constitute His internal
church; and this variety is infinite like that of men’s faces
and minds; but still every one, according to his state, can be
regenerated and saved. That this is so, may be evident from
the heavens into which all the regenerate come, in their
being three, highest, middle, and lowest; and they come into
the highest who by regeneration receive love to the Lord; into
the middle, they who receive love toward the neighbor; into
the lowest, they who practise only external charity, and at
the same time acknowledge the Lord as God the Redeemer
and Saviour. All these are saved, but differently. All can
be regenerated and thus saved, because the Lord with His
Divine Good and Truth is present with every man; from
this comes the life of every one, from this the faculty of
understanding and willing, and with these free-will in spiri-
tual things; these are wanting to no man. And also means
are given; to Christians in the Word, and to the Gentiles in
the religion of each, teaching that there is a God, and giv-
ing precepts concerning good and evil. From all this it fol-
lows that every one can be saved; consequently that the
Lord is not to blame if man is not saved, but man himself;
and man is in fault in not cooperating.

581. That redemption and the passion of the cross are
distinctly two and not at all to be confounded, and that by
means of both the Lord took to Himself the power of re-
generating and saving men, has been shown in the chapter


No. 582] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION


751


on Redemption. From the accepted faith of the present
church respecting the passion of the cross, as being redemp-
tion itself, have sprung close bands of horrible falsities re-
specting God, faith, charity, and all that in a continuous
chain depends on them; respecting God, for example, that
He determined upon the damnation of the human race, that
He was willing to be brought back to mercy by the imposi-
tion of the damnation upon His Son, or by the Son’s taking
it upon Himself, and that only those are saved who by fore-
knowledge or by predestination have Christ’s merit given to
them. From this fallacy has come forth another part of
that faith, namely, that they who have been gifted with that
faith were at the same time regenerated without any co-
operation on their part; yes, that they were thus absolved
from the condemnation of the law, and are no longer under
the law, but under grace, and this although the Lord has
said that He did not take away even a tittle of the law (Matt,
v. 18, 19: Luke xvi. 17), and also commanded His disciples
to preach repentance for the remission of sins (Luke xxiv.
47: Mark vi. 12); and He also said, The kingdom of God is
at hand; repent ye , and believe the Gospel (Mark i. 15). By
the Gospel is meant, that they can be regenerated and thus
saved, which could not have been unless the Lord had
wrought redemption, that is, had deprived hell of its power
by combats against it and victories over it, and unless He
had glorified His Human, that is, had made it Divine.

582. Say from rational thought what the entire human
race would be, if the faith of the present church were to con-
tinue; this faith being, that men were redeemed by the pas-
sion of the cross alone, and that they who have been gifted
with that merit of the Lord are not under the condemna-
tion of the law; and again, that that faith, and man does not
know at all whether it is in him, remits sins and regenerates,
and that man’s cooperation in the act thereof, that is, while
it is given and entering, would ruin it, and with it would take
away salvation, because he would mingle his own merit with


752


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 582


that of Christ. Tell me from rational thought, I say: Would
not the whole Word have been thus rejected, the primary
teaching of which is regeneration by means of spiritual wash-
ing from evils and by exercises of charity ? What would the
Decalogue, first in reformation, then be, more than the paper
that is sold in the low shops, and used to wrap up spices?
What would religion then be, but a kind of lamentation that
one is a sinner, and supplication for God the Father to be
merciful on account of the passion of His Son ? thus a thing
of the mouth and lungs only, but not done from the heart.
What would redemption then be but a papal indulgence, or
more than the flagellation of one monk for the whole com-
pany, as is sometimes done ? If that faith alone regenerated
man, repentance and charity having no part, what then
would the internal man, and this is his spirit that lives after
death, be like, but a burnt city, the ruins of which make the
external man ? or a field or plain laid waste by worms and
locusts? Such a man appears to the angels just like one
who cherishes a serpent in his bosom, and tries to hide it
with his clothing; or like one who sleeps as a sheep with a
wolf; or like one who lies down, with a beautiful bedquilt
over him, in a night-dress made of spiders’ webs. And
what is then the life after death, when all are distinguished,
in heaven according to the differences of their regeneration,
and in hell according to the differences in their rejection of
it, but a life of the flesh, and so like the life of a fish or a
1 crab ?

1

■ IV. Regeneration is effected in a way analogous t<?

THAT IN WHICH MAN IS CONCEIVED, CARRIED IN THE
WOMB, BORN, AND EDUCATED.

583. In man there is a perpetual correspondence between
those things which take place naturally and those which take
place spiritually, or between what takes place in the body
and what takes place in the spirit. This is because man is
born spiritual as to his soul, and is clothed with what is


No. 583] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION


753


natural, which forms his material body. When this body,
therefore, is laid aside, his soul comes clothed with a spiritual
body into a world where all things are spiritual, and is there
associated with his like. Now since the spiritual body must
be formed in the material, and is formed by means of truths
and goods which flow in from the Lord through the spiritual
world and which are received by man inwardly in such things
in him as are from the natural world, which are called civil
and moral, the character of the formation which takes place
is manifest. And since, as before said, there is in man a per-
petual correspondence between what takes place naturally
and what takes place spiritually, it follows that this forma-
tion is like conception, gestation, birth, and education. It is
for this reason that natural births in the Word mean spiri-
tual births, which are of good and truth; for whatever is
presented in the sense of the letter of the Word, which is nat-
ural, involves and signifies what is spiritual. That there is
a spiritual sense in the things of the sense of the letter of the
Word, one and all, is fully shown in the chapter on the Sacred
Scripture. That natural births mentioned in the Word
involve spiritual births, is clearly manifest from the follow-
ing passages: We have conceived , we have been in travail , we
have as it were brought forth , we have not wrought any de-
liverance (Isa. xxvi. 18). At the presence of the Lord the
earth travaileth (Ps. cxiv. 7). Hath the earth borne in one
day? Shall I make the breach , and not cause to bring forth ?
shall I cause to bring forth , and shut the womb? (Isa. lxvi. 8,
9.) Sin shall travail , and No shall be at the breaking forth
(Ezek. xxx. 16). The sorrows of a travailing woman shall
come upon Ephraim , he is an unwise son , for he doth not stay
the time in the womb of sons (Hos. xiii. 13); so also in many
other places. Since in the Word natural generations signify
spiritual generations, and these are from the Lord, He is
called the Former and He that taketh from the womb; as is
evident from the following: Jehovah that made thee and
formed thee from the womb (Isa. xliv. 2). He that took me


754


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 583


out of the womb (Ps. xxii. 10). I have been laid upon Thee
from the womb; Thou art He that took me out of my mother's
bowels (Ps. lxxi. 6). Hearken unto Me, ye that are borne
from the womb , carried from the belly (Isa. xlvi. 3); besides
other passages. The Lord is therefore called Father (as in
Isa. ix. 6; lxiii. 16: John x. 30; xiv. 8, 9); and they who are
in goods and truths from Him, are called sons of God and
born of God, and brethren to one another (Matt, xxiii. 8);
and also the church is called Mother (Hos. ii. 2, 5: Ezek.
xvi. 45).

584. It is now evident from this, that there is a corre-
spondence between the processes of natural generation and
of spiritual; and because there is correspondence, it follows
that not only may conception, gestation, birth, and educa-
tion be predicated of the new birth, but also that they actually
are. But what these are in their nature, is being presented
in their order in this chapter concerning Regeneration.
Here it is only to be said that man’s seed is conceived in-
teriorly in the understanding, and is formed in the will, and
is transferred therefrom to the testicle where it clothes itself
with a natural covering; and is thus conducted into the
womb, and enters the world. Moreover, there is a corre-
spondence of man’s regeneration with all things in the vege-
table kingdom; therefore, also, man is described in the Word
by a tree, his truth by seed, and his good by fruit. That an
evil tree may be born anew, as it were, and afterward bear
good fruit and good seed, is evident from grafting and bud-
ding; for though the same sap ascends from the root through
the trunk to the graft or bud, still it is changed into good sap,
and makes a good tree. It is similar in the church with those
who are engrafted in the Lord, as He teaches in these words :
I am the Vine , ye are the branches; he that abideth in Me and
I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; if a man abide
not in Me, he is cast forth as a branch , and being dried is cast
into the fire (John xv. 5, 6).

585. It has been taught by many of the learned, that the


No. 585 ] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 755

processes of vegetation, not only of trees but also of all
shrubs, correspond to those of human prolification. I will
therefore add something on this subject, by way of appendix.
In trees and in all other subjects of the vegetable kingdom,
there are not two sexes, masculine and feminine, but every
one of them is masculine; the earth alone, or the soil, is the
common mother, thus as the woman; for it receives the
seeds of all plants, opens them, carries them as it were in the
womb, and then nourishes them, and it brings them forth,
that is, ushers them into the day, and afterward clothes and
sustains them. When the earth first opens a seed, it is with
the root, which is a kind of heart; from this it emits and
transmits sap, like blood, and so makes as it were a body pro-
vided with limbs; its body is the stem itself, and the branches
and their twigs are its limbs. The leaves which it puts forth
immediately after birth, are for lungs; for as the heart with-
out the lungs does not produce motion and sensation, and by
these vivify the man, so without leaves the root does not
cause a tree or a shrub to vegetate. The blossoms which
precede the fruit are means for straining the sap, which is its
blood, and of separating its grosser from its purer parts;
for forming in their own bosom, for the influx of these parts,
a new little stem, by which the strained sap may flow in, and
so initiate and by successive steps form fruit, which may be
compared to the testicle, in which the seeds are perfected.
The vegetative soul, which governs inmostly in every par-
ticle of sap, or its prolific essence, is from no other source
than from the heat of the spiritual world; which heat, be-
cause it is from the spiritual sun there, aspires to nothing but
generation, and through it to a continuance of creation; and
because it essentially aspires to the generation of man, it
therefore induces upon whatever it generates a certain re-
semblance to man. Lest any one should wonder at the
statement that the subjects of the vegetable kingdom are
masculine only, and that the earth alone or the soil is as the
common mother, or as the woman, this shall be illustrated


756


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 585


by something similar among bees: they, according to the
observation of Swammerdam, reported in his Books of
Nature, have only one common mother, and from her the
offspring of the whole hive are produced. Since there is but
one common mother for these little members of the animal
kingdom, why not so with all plants ? That the earth is the
common mother may also be spiritually illustrated; and it
is illustrated by this, that in the Word the earth signifies the
church, and the church is the common mother, as she is also
called in the Word. As to the earth’s signifying the church,
consult the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 285, 902), where it is
shown. The earth or ground can enter into the inmost of
the seed, even to the prolific in it, and call this forth and
bring it into circulation, because every particle of dust, or
powder even, exhales from its essence a subtle something,
as an effluvium, which penetrates. This results from the
active force of the heat from the spiritual world.

586. That man can be regenerated only by successive
steps, may be illustrated by the things existing in the natural
world, one and all. A tree cannot reach its growth as a tree
in a day; but first there is growth from the seed, next from
the root, and afterward from the shoot, from which is formed
the stem; and from this proceed branches with leaves, and
at last blossoms and fruits. Wheat and barley do not spring
up and become ready for the harvest in a day. A house is
not built in a day, nor does a man attain to his full stature
in a day, still less to wisdom. The church is not estab-
lished and perfected in a day; nor is there any progression
to an end except from a beginning. They who have a dif-
ferent conception of regeneration know nothing of charity
and faith, and of the growth of each according to man’s
cooperation with the Lord. It is evident from all this that
regeneration is effected in a way analogous to that in which
man is conceived, carried in the womb, born, and educated.


No. 587 ] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 757


V. The first act in the new birth is called Reforma-
tion, WHICH IS OF THE UNDERSTANDING; AND THE
SECOND IS CALLED REGENERATION, WHICH IS OF
THE WILL AND THENCE OF THE UNDERSTANDING.

587. Because Reformation and Regeneration are treated
of here and in what follows, and reformation is ascribed to
the understanding and regeneration to the will, it is neces-
sary that the distinctions between the understanding and the
will should be known, and they were described above (n.
397); it is advisable, therefore, to read first about them, and
afterward in this article. It was also shown above, in the
same connection, that the evils into which man is born are
in the will of the natural man by generation, and that the will
makes the understanding favor it by thinking in agreement
with it; therefore, that man may be regenerated, it is neces-
sary for this to be done by means of the understanding as a
mediate cause; and it is done through the information which
the understanding receives, given first by parents and
teachers, afterward from reading the Word, from preaching,
books, and conversation. The things which the under-
standing receives from these sources, are called truths; it is
the same, therefore, whether reformation is said to be effected
by means of the understanding, or by means of the truths
which the understanding receives. For truths teach man in
whom and in what he should believe, also what he should do,
thus what he should will; for whatever one does, he does
from the will according to the understanding. Since, there-
fore, man’s will is itself evil from birth, and as the under-
standing teaches what good and evil are, and he can will the
one and not will the other, it follows that he must be re-
formed by means of the understanding. But as long as any
one sees and acknowledges in mind that evil is evil, and that
good is good, and thinks that good should be chosen, the
state is called that of reformation; but when his will is to
shun evil and do good, the state of regeneration begins.


758


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 588


588. For the sake of this end, the faculty has been given
to man of elevating the understanding almost into the light
in which the angels of heaven are, that he may see what it is
necessary for him to will and thence to do, that he may be
prosperous in the world for a time, and blessed after death
for ever. He becomes prosperous and blessed if he acquires
wisdom and keeps his will in obedience to it; but he be-
comes unprosperous and unhappy if he puts his understand-
ing under obedience to the will. This is because the will
inclines from birth to evils, even to enormities; therefore if
it were not held in check by means of the understanding,
man left to the freedom of will would rush into abomina-
tions; and from the ferine nature inherent in him, he would
plunder and slaughter, for the sake of himself, all who do
not favor him and indulge his cupidities. Moreover, unless
the understanding could have been perfected separately,
and the will by means of it, man would not be man but a
beast; for without that separation, and without the ascent
of the understanding above the will, he would not have been
able to think, and from thought to speak, but only to sound
his affection; nor would he have been able to act from rea-
son, but from instinct; still less would he have been able
to have knowledge of the things which are of God, and
thereby of God Himself, and so to be conjoined with Him
and live for ever. For man thinks and wills as of himself;
and this as of himself is the reciprocal in conjunction; for
conjunction is not possible without reciprocation, as there
can be no conjunction of an active with a passive without
adaptation or application. God alone acts; and man
suffers himself to be acted upon, and cooperates to all ap-
pearance as of himself, though inwardly from God. But
from a right perception of these things, it may be seen what is
the love of man’s will, if raised by means of the understand-
ing; and also what when not raised; thus, what man is.

589. It is to be known that the faculty of raising the un-
derstanding even to the intelligence in which the angels of


No. 590] reformation and regeneration 759

heaven are, is by creation inherent in every man, bad as well
as good, yes, also in every devil in hell, for all who are in hell
have been men. This has been frequently shown me by
living experience. But they are not in intelligence but in
insanity in spiritual things, for the reason that they do not
will good but evil; hence they are averse to knowing and
understanding truths, for truths favor good and oppose
evil. From this also it is evident that the first of the new
birth is the reception of truths in the understanding; and
the second is willing to do according to truths, and at length
doing them. No one, however, can be said to be reformed
by mere knowledge of truths; for man can apprehend them,
and also talk about, teach, and preach them, from the fac-
ulty of elevating the understanding above the wilPs love.
But he is reformed who is in the affection of truth for the
sake of truth; for this affection conjoins itself with the will,
and, if it advances, conjoins the will with the understanding,
and then regeneration begins. But how regeneration after-
ward progresses and is perfected, will be told in what follows.

590. But what the man is whose understanding has been
elevated, but not the wilPs love by means of it, will be illus-
trated by comparisons. He is like an eagle flying on high,
but as soon as he sees food below, as hens, young swans, or
lambs even, he darts down in a moment and devours them.
He is also like an adulterer who hides a harlot in a lowest
room; and'Vho now goes up to the upper story of the house,
and in his wife’s presence talks wisely with those staying
there about chastity; and now he steals away from their
company, and satiates his lust with the harlot below. He
is also like the flies of the marsh, which fly swarming about
the head of a horse at full speed, but when the horse stops
they settle down and bury themselves in their marsh. Such
is the man who is in a state of elevation as to the under-
standing, while the will’s love remains down at the foot,
immersed in all the uncleanness of nature and the lusts of
the senses. But because they shine as to the understanding,


760 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 590

as if from wisdom, while the will is opposed to wisdom, they
may be likened also to serpents with shining skins, and to the
Spanish flies that glitter as if they were of gold; as also to
the ignis fatnus in swamps, to shining rotten wood and phos-
phorescent substances. There are those among them who
can counterfeit angels of light, both among men in the world
and after death among angels of heaven; but after a brief
examination these are deprived of their clothing, and cast
down naked. This cannot be done in the world, how-
ever, because there the spirit is not open, but covered over
by a mask like that used by actors on the stage. They are
able to counterfeit angels of light in face and with the lips,
because they can raise the understanding almost to angelic
wisdom, above the will’s love, as before said; and their
ability to counterfeit, is a proof that they can so raise the
understanding. Now, since man’s internal and his external
can thus run counter to each other, and since the body is laid
aside while the spirit remains, it is obvious that a dusky
spirit may dwell beneath a bright white face, and a fiery one
behind a bland mouth. Therefore, my friend, know a man
not from his mouth but from his heart, that is, not from his
words but from his deeds; for the Lord says, Beware of false
prophets who come to you in sheep's clothing , but inwardly
they are ravening wolves . Know them by their fruits (Matt,
vii. 15, 16).

VI. The internal man is to be reformed, and through

THIS THE EXTERNAL, AND SO MAN IS REGENERATED

591. That the internal man must first be regenerated,
and through it the external, is commonly said in the church
at this day; but from the term internal man, nothing comes
into the thought but faith, which faith is, that God the
Father imputes to men the merit and righteousness of His
Son, and sends the Holy Spirit. They believe that this faith
makes the internal man, and that from the internal flows


No. 592] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 76 1


forth the external, which is the moral natural man, this being
an appendage to the former, comparatively like the tail of
a horse or a cow, or like that of a peacock or a bird of para-
dise, which is continued to the soles of its feet without co-
hering; for it is said that charity follows that faith, but that
the faith perishes if charity comes in from man’s will. But
because no other internal man than this is acknowledged in
the present church, there is no internal man; for no one
knows whether that faith has been bestowed on him or not;
moreover, that it cannot be given, and is therefore imaginary,
was shown above. From which it follows, that at the present
day, among those who have confirmed themselves in that
faith, there is no other internal man than that natural man
which from birth overflows with evils in all abundance. It
is added, that regeneration and sanctification follow that
faith of themselves, and that man’s cooperation, and only by
means of this is salvation effected, must be excluded. It
results from this, that in the present church there can be no
knowledge of regeneration, when yet the Lord says that he
who is not born again cannot see the kingdom of God.

592. But the internal and external man of the New
Church are altogether different. The internal man is of
the will, from which man thinks when left to himself, as at
home; but the external man is his action and speech, such
as proceed from the man when he is in company, thus abroad;
consequently the internal man is charity because this is of
the will, and at the same time faith which is of the thought.
Before regeneration the two make the natural man, which
is thus divided into internal and external; this is manifest
from its not being allowable for man to act and speak in com-
pany, or abroad, as he does when left to himself, or at home.
The cause of this division is, that civil laws prescribe punish-
ments for those who act wickedly, and rewards for those who
do well; and so men compel themselves to separate the ex-
ternal man from the internal; for no one wishes to be pun-
ished, and every one wishes to be rewarded, which is done


762


TRITE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 593


by riches and honors; for man does not attain either ol
these without living according to those laws. It results
from this that morality and benevolence have place in ex-
ternals, even with those who do not have them in inter-
nals. From this origin come all hypocrisy, flattery, and
dissimulation.

593. As to the division of the natural man into two forms,
it is an actual division both of will and of thought therein;
for every action of man starts from his will, and all speech
from the thought; therefore another will has been formed
by the man beneath the former, and likewise another thought;
but still they both constitute the natural man. This will,
which is formed by the man, may be called corporeal, be-
cause it actuates the body to regulate itself morally; and
this thought may be called pulmonary, because it actuates
the tongue and lips to say what is of the understanding.
This thought and will together may be compared to the
inner bark adhering to the outer bark of a tree, or to the
membrane adhering to the shell of an egg, the internal natu-
ral man being within them. And if this is evil it may be
compared to the wood of a rotten tree, around which the
outer bark, with its inner bark, seems sound; also to a rotten
egg within a white shell. But what is the internal natural
man from birth, shall be told. Its will inclines to evils
of every kind; and the thought from it inclines to falsities,
also of every kind; this therefore is the internal man that is
to be regenerated; for unless this is regenerated, it is nothing
but hatred against all things of charity, and hence fiery zeal
against all things of faith. It follows from this that the in-
ternal man of the natural must be first regenerated, and by
means of it the external, for this is according to order, while
to regenerate the internal by means of the external is con-
trary to order; for the internal is as a soul in the external,
not only .generally but also in every particular, consequently
in the least things that he speaks, without the man knowing
it. It is from this that the angels, from a single act of a man,


No. 595] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 763


perceive the quality of his will, and from a single word, the
quality of his thought, whether infernal or heavenly. Thus
they know the whole man; from a tone they perceive the
affection of his thought; and from a gesture, or the form of
his action, they perceive the love of his will; they perceive
them, however he may counterfeit the Christian and the
moral citizen.

594. Man's regeneration is described in Ezekiel by the
dry bones which were clothed with sinews, then with flesh
and skin, and at last breath was breathed into them, whereby
they lived again (xxxvii. 1-14). That regeneration was rep-
resented by those things, is clearly manifest from what is
there said, These bones are the whole house oj Israel (verse 1 1).
A comparison is also made there with sepulchres, for we read,
that Jehovah God would open their graves, and cause them to
come up out oj their graves , and put His Spirit upon them ,
and bring them into the land of Israel (verses 12-14). The
land of Israel here and elsewhere means the church. A rep-
resentation of regeneration was made by bones and graves,
because the unregenerate man is called dead, and the re-
generate alive; for in the latter there is spiritual life, but in
the former spiritual death.

595. In every created thing in the world, whether living
or dead, there is an internal and an external; one of these is
not given without the other, as there is no effect without a
cause; and every created thing is esteemed according to its
internal goodness, and is regarded as without worth from its
internal baseness, as is the external goodness within which
there is internal baseness. Every wise man in the world and
every angel in heaven so judges. But the quality of the un-
regenerate man and that of the regenerate, may be illustrated
by comparisons. The unregenerate man who counterfeits
the moral citizen and the Christian, may be compared to a
corpse wrapped in aromatics, which nevertheless gives forth
a foul odor that infects the aromatics, enters into the nos-
trils, and injures the brain. He may also be compared to a


764


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 595


mummy, gilded or placed in a silver coffin; and when this is
examined within, a hideously black body comes to view.
He may be compared to bones or skeletons in a sepulchre
built of lapis lazuli, and adorned with other precious things;
and also to the rich man who was clothed in purple and fine
linen, but whose internal was nevertheless infernal (Luke
xvi. 19). He may be compared, further, to poison of a taste
like that of sugar, to the poison-hemlock in flower, to fruit
with shining surface whose inner substance has been con-
sumed by worms; and also to an ulcer dressed first with a
plaster and afterward covered with a thin skin, but which
has nothing but foul matter within. The internal may be
estimated from the external in the world, but only by those
who have not internal good, and who therefore judge accord-
ing to appearance; but it is otherwise in heaven. For when
the body, changeable about the spirit and capable of being
bent from evil to good, is separated by death, the internal
then remains, for this makes man’s spirit; and then in the
distance he looks like a serpent that has shed its skin, or like
rotten wood stripped of the bark or rind in which it looked
bright. But it is otherwise with the regenerate man; his in-
ternal is good, and his external similar to the external of the
other; but his external differs from that of the unregenerate
man as heaven differs from hell, for the soul of good is in it;
and it matters not to him whether he is a noble, dwells in a
palace, and goes surrounded by attendants, or lives in a cot-
tage and is waited upon by a boy; yes, whether he is a pri-
mate, clad in a purple robe and wearing the official mitre, or
a shepherd of a few sheep, covered with a loose rustic frock,
and wearing a little cap on his head. Gold is still gold,
whether it flashes when brought near the fire, or has its sur-
face blackened when held over the smoke; also, whether it
has been melted into a beautiful form as of an infant, or into
an ugly one as of a mouse; the mice that were made of gold,
and placed near the ark, also were accepted and made propiti-
atory (1 Sam. vi. 3-5, and following); for gold signifies in-


No. 596] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 765

ternal good. The diamond and the ruby obtained from
whatever matrix, of lime or of clay, are likewise esteemed
according to their internal goodness, the same as those in the
necklace of a queen; and so on. From which it is manifest
that the external is estimated from the internal, and not the
reverse.


VII. While this takes place, combat arises between

THE INTERNAL AND THE EXTERNAL MAN, AND THE ONE
THAT CONQUERS RULES OVER THE OTHER.

596. A combat then arises because the internal man has
been reformed by means of truths, and from these it sees
what is evil and false, and these still are in the external or
natural man. Therefore first dissension springs up be-
tween the new will which is above, and the old will which is
below; and because this dissension is between these wills,
it is also between their delights; for it is well known that the
flesh is opposed to the spirit, and the spirit to the flesh, and
that the. flesh with its lusts must be subdued before the spirit
can act and become a new man. After this dissension of the
wills, a combat arises which is what is called spiritual tempta-
tion; but this temptation or combat does not take place be-
tween goods and evils, but between the truths of good and
the falsities of evil; for good cannot fight from itself, but
fights by truths; nor can evil fight from itself, but fights by
its falsities; just as the will cannot fight from itself, but by
the understanding where its truths are. Man has no sense
of that combat except as in himself, and as remorse of con-
science; nevertheless it is the Lord and the devil, that is,
hell, that fight in man, and they fight for dominion over him,
or as to who shall possess him. The devil or hell attacks
man and calls out his evils, and the Lord protects him and
calls out his goods. But although that combat takes place
in the spiritual world, still it takes place in man, between
the truths of good and the falsities of evil in him; man is


766


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 596


therefore to fight wholly as of himself, for he has free will
to act for the Lord, and also to act for the devil: he is for
the Lord if he abides in truths from good, and for the devil
if he abides in falsities from evil: It follows from all this
that whichever conquers, whether the internal man or the
external, rules over the other; just like two hostile powers
contending as to which shall be master of the other’s king-
dom; the conqueror takes the kingdom, and places all
therein under obedience to himself. Here therefore, if the
internal man conquers, it obtains the empire, and subju-
gates all the evils of the external man, and regeneration is
then continued; while if the external man conquers, it ob-
tains the empire, and dissipates all the goods of the internal
man, and then regeneration perishes.

597. It is known, indeed, at this day, that there are temp-
tations; but hardly any one knows whence they are, and their
quality, and what good they yield. Whence they are, and
their quality, was shown just above, and also what good
they yield; namely, that when the internal man conquers,
the external is subjugated; and that when this is subjugated,
lusts are dispersed, and affections of good and truth are im-
planted in place of them; and these are so arranged that
man may do the goods and truths which he wills and thinks,
and may speak them from the heart. Besides this, by vic-
tory over the external man a man becomes spiritual, and he
then is consociated by the Lord with the angels of heaven,
who all are spiritual. Temptations have not heretofore
been well known, and scarcely any one has had knowledge of
their origin and quality and the good which they yield, be-
cause heretofore the church has not been in truths. No one
is in truths but he who goes to the Lord immediately, rejects
the former faith, and embraces the new; hence no one has
been admitted into any spiritual temptation in all the ages
reckoned from that when the Nicene Council introduced the
faith of three Gods; for if any one had been admitted, he
would have yielded immediately, and so would have cast


No - 599] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 767

himself more deeply into hell. The contrition which is
held to precede the present faith, is not temptation; I have
questioned very many about it, and they have said that it is
a word and nothing more, except that perhaps there may be
some timorous thought among the simple about hell fire.

598. After temptation has passed, man is in heaven as to
the internal man, and in the world by the external; there-
fore a conjunction of heaven and the world is effected with
man by means of temptations, and then the Lord with him
rules this world from heaven according to order. The con-
trary takes place if man remains natural; he desires to rule
heaven from the world; such does every one become who is
in the love of bearing rule from the love of self; if he is
examined within, he does not believe in a God, but in him-
self, and after death he believes him to be God who is strong
in power over others. Such insanity there is in hell, which
has proceeded to such a length that some call themselves
God the Father, some God the Son, and some God the Holy
Spirit, and among the Jews some call themselves the Mes-
siah. It is manifest from this what man becomes after
death, if the natural man is not regenerated, consequently
what he would become in his fantasy, if a New Church, in
which genuine truths are taught, were not established by
the Lord. Such is the meaning of these words of the Lord:
In the consummation of the age, that is, at the end of the
present church, there shall be affliction , such as was not since
the beginning of the world , nor shall be, wherefore except those
days should be shortened , there should no flesh be saved (Matt,
xxiv. 21, 22).

599. In the combats or temptations of men the Lord
works a particular redemption, as He wrought redemption
of the whole when in the world. The Lord in the world, by
means of combats and temptations, glorified His Human,
that is, made it Divine; so now, with a man individually,
while he is in temptations; in these the Lord fights for him,
and conquers the evil spirits who are infesting him; and after


768


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 599


temptation glorifies him, that is, renders him spiritual.
After His universal redemption, the Lord reduced to order
all things in heaven and in hell; with man after temptation
He does the same, that is to say, He reduces to order all
things that are of heaven and the church with the man.
After redemption the Lord established a New Church; so
also He established those things which are of the church
with the man, and makes him to be a church in particular.
After redemption the Lord endowed those who believed in
Him with peace; for He said, Peace I leave with you , My
peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth , give I unto
you (John xiv. 27) ; so likewise He gives to man after tempta'
tion to feel peace, that is, gladness of mind and consolation.
From which it is manifest that the Lord is the Redeemer for
ever.

600. A regenerated internal man, and no regenerated
external man with it, may be compared to a bird flying in the
air without a resting place on dry land, but in a swamp only,
where it is attacked by serpents and frogs, so that it flies
away and dies. It may be compared also to a swan swim-
ming in mid ocean, which cannot reach the shore and make
her nest; so the eggs she lays she lets sink in the water,
where they are eaten by fishes. It may be compared also
to a soldier on a wall, who falls down when this is under-
mined beneath his feet, and dies amid the ruins. And it
may be compared to a beautiful tree transplanted into filthy
ground, where troops of worms eat up its root, so that it
withers and dies. And again it may be compared to a house
without a foundation, and to a column without a pedestal.
Such is the internal man when reformed alone, and not the
external with it; for it has no means of directing itself to do
good.


No. 602] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 769


VIII. The regenerate man has a new will and a new

UNDERSTANDING.

601. That a regenerate man is a renewed or new man,
the present church knows, both from the Word and from
reason; from the Word, by the following passages-: Make
you a new heart and a new spirit ; jor why will ye die , O house
0} Israel? (Ezek. xviii. 31.) A new heart also will I give
you , and a new spirit in the midst oj you ; and I will take
away the stony heart out oj your flesh , and will give you a
heart oj flesh , and I will give My spirit in the midst oj you
(Ezek. xxxvi. 26, 27). Wherejore hence jorth know we no
man ajter the flesh ; therefore ij any man be in Christy he is a
new creature (2 Cor. v. 16, 17). A new heart here means a
new will, and a new spirit mea-ns a new understanding; for
heart in the Word signifies the will, and spirit when joined
with heart signifies the understanding. It knows from
reason that a regenerate man has a new will and a new un-
derstanding, because these two faculties make the man, and
they are what are regenerated. Therefore every man is
such as he is as to those faculties, he being evil who has an
evil will, and still more so he whose understanding favors it;
while he is good who has a good will, and still more so he
whose understanding favors it. Religion alone renews and
regenerates man. Religion occupies the highest seat in the
human mind, and views under itself the civil matters of the
world; it also passes through these as the pure sap passes
through the tree to its very top, and from that height it sur-
veys what is natural, as from a tower or a mountain one
surveys the plains below.

602. But it must be known that man can rise as to the
understanding almost into the light in which the angels of
heaven are, but that if he does not rise as to the will also, he
is still the old and not the new man. But how the under-
standing elevates the will more and more to a height with


77 O TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 602

itself, was shown before. Therefore regeneration is predi-
cated primarily of the will, and secondarily of the under-
standing. For the understanding in man is like light in the
world, and the will is like heat there; that light without heat
does not vivify and promote vegetation, but light joined with
heat, is well known. Moreover the understanding, as to the
lower region in the mind, is actually in the light of the world,
and in the light of heaven as to the higher region; and there-
fore if the will is not raised out of the lower region into the
higher, and there joined with the understanding, it remains
in the world; and then the understanding flies upward and
downward, but every night it flies to the will below, and there
it has its bed, and they join themselves like a man and a
harlot, and produce two-headed offspring. It is also mani-
fest from this, that unless a man has a new will and a new
understanding, he is not regenerate.

603. The human mind is divided into three distinct re-
gions; the lowest is called the natural, the middle the spiri-
tual, and the highest the celestial; by regeneration man is
raised from the lowest region which is the natural, into the
higher which is the spiritual, and through this into the celes-
tial. That there are three regions of the mind will be shown
in the next article. For this reason the unregenerate man
is called natural, and the regenerate man spiritual. It is
therefore manifest that the mind of a regenerate man has
been raised into the spiritual region, and there it sees from
the higher what takes place in the lower or natural mind.
That there is a lower and a higher region in the human mind,
every one may see and acknowledge by a slight attention to
his thoughts; for he sees what he thinks; therefore he says
that he thought and that he thinks this and that; this could
not be so unless there were an interior thought called per-
ception, which looks into the lower called thought. A judge,
when he has heard or read the evidence in a case, brought
together in a long series by an advocate, collects it into one
view in the higher region of his mind, thus into a universal


No. 605] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 77 1

idea; and from this he afterward looks down into the lower
region, which is that of natural thought, and there disposes
the arguments in order, and following the higher, presents
his opinion and pronounces judgment. Who does not know
that a man can in a moment or two think and conclude what
he cannot by the lower thought express in an hour? These
things have heen brought forward, that it may be known
that the human mind is divided into distinct regions, lower
and higher.

604. As to the new will, it is ahove the old, in the spiritual
region; so is the new understanding; this is with that, and
that with this. In that region they conjoin themselves, and
conjointly they look into the old or the natural, and dispose
all things therein so as to moderate them. Who cannot see
that if there were in the human mind hut one region, and if
evils and goods, falsities and truths, were put together and
mingled there, a conflict would take place ? as if wolves and
lamhs, tigers and calves, hawks and doves were put together
in one enclosure. What would then result but a cruel
slaughter there ? Would not the savage heasts tear in pieces
the tame ones? It has therefore been provided that goods
with their truths should be gathered into the higher region,
that they may stand in safety and debar assault, and also hy
chains and other means may subjugate and afterward dis-
perse evils with their falsities. This then is what was said
in the preceding article, that, with the regenerate man the
Lord through heaven rules what is of the world. The higher
or spiritual region of the human mind also is a heaven in
miniature, while the lower or natural region is a world in
miniature. Therefore by the ancients man was called a
microcosm; and he may also be called a little heaven.

605. That the regenerate man, that is, the man renewed
as to will and understanding, is in the heat of heaven, that
is, in its love, and at the same time in the light of heaven,
that is, in its wisdom, and on the other hand, that the un-
regenerate man is in the heat of hell, that is, in its love, and


77 2 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 605

at the same in the darkness of hell, that is, in its insanities,
is at this day known and still unknown. This is because
the church existing at the present day makes regeneration
an appendage to its faith, and into faith they suffer no reason
to be admitted, and hence reason is not to be admitted into
any thing which belongs to its appendage; and, as before
said, regeneration and renovation are such. These latter,
together with that faith itself, are to those of the present
church like a house, the doors and windows of which are
closed, so that it is not known what is within, whether it is
empty, or full of spirits from hell, or of angels from heaven.
An added reason is,' that this confusion has been brought
about by the fallacy from this that man can ascend with the
understanding almost into the light of heaven, and hence
from intelligence can think and speak of spiritual things,
whatever his will’s love may be. Out of ignorance of this
truth has also come ignorance of all that concerns regenera-
tion and renovation.

606. From this it may be concluded, that an unregenerate
man is like one who sees phantoms at night and believes
them men; and afterward, while becoming regenerate, he
is like the same man at the earliest dawn seeing those things
to be but delusions seen in the night; and still later, when
he is regenerated and is in the day, he sees them as the
offspring of delirium. The unregenerate man is like one
dreaming, and the regenerate like one awake; in the Word,
moreover, natural life is likened to sleep, and spiritual life
to wakefulness. The unregenerate man is meant by the
foolish virgins who had lamps but no oil, and the regenerate
man by the prudent virgins that had both lamps and oil.
By lamps are meant things of the understanding, and by oil
those of love. The regenerate are like the lamps of the
candle-stick in the tabernacle; they are like the shew-bread
there with the frankincense on it; and they are those who
shall shine as the brightness of the firmanent, and as the
stars for ever and ever (Dan. xii. 3). The unregenerate man


No. 607] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION


773


is like one who is in the garden of Eden and eats of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, and is therefore driven out
of the garden; yes, he is that very tree. But the regenerate
man is like one who is in that garden and eats of the tree of
life. That it is given to eat of it, is evident from these words
in the Apocalypse: To him that overcometh will I give to eat
of the tree of life , which is in the midst of the paradise of God
(ii. 7). The garden of Eden means intelligence in spiritual
things, from the love of truth, as may be seen in the A poc -
alypse Revealed (n. go). In a word, an unregenerate man
is a son of the wicked one, and a regenerate man is a son of
the kingdom (Mat t. xiii. 38); a son of the wicked one here
is a son of the devil, and a son of the kingdom is here a son
of the Lord.


IX. A REGENERATE MAN IS IN COMMUNION WITH ANGELS OF
HEAVEN, AND AN UNREGENERATE MAN IN COMMUNION
WITH SPIRITS OF HELL.

607. Every man is in communion, that is, in consociation
with angels of heaven, or with spirits of hell, because he was
born to become spiritual; and this is not possible unless he
is born to be in some conjunction with those who are spiri-
tual. That man as to his mind is in both worlds, the natu-
ral and the spiritual, has been shown in the work concerning
Heaven and Hell. But man knows not of this conjunc-
tion, and an angel and a spirit know not of it, for the rea-
son that man while he lives in the world is in a natural
state, and the angel and the spirit are in a spiritual state;
and because of the distinction between the natural and the
spiritual, the one does not appear to the other. This dis-
tinction has been described as to its nature in the work on
Marriage Love } in the Relation, n. 326-329, which may be
seen above, n. 280. From which it is manifest that they
are not conjoined as to thoughts, but as to affections, and
scarcely any one reflects upon these, because they are not in


774


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 607


the light in which the understanding is, and hence its thought,
but in the heat in which the will is, and hence its love’s affec- '
tion. The conjunction between men and angels by means
of the love’s affections is so close that if it were severed, and
they were thereby separated, men would fall instantly into
a swoon; and if it were not restored and the conjunction
renewed, men would die. It has been said that man be-
comes spiritual by means of regeneration; but this does not
mean that he becomes spiritual such as an angel is in him-
self, but that he becomes spiritual natural, that is to say,
that the spiritual is inwardly in his natural, like thought in
speech, and like will in action, for when one of these ceases
the other ceases. So man’s spirit is in every single thing
that takes place in the body, and it is this which moves the
natural to do whatever it does. The natural viewed in itself
is passive or is a dead force, but the spiritual is active or fs
a living force; the passive or the dead force cannot act from
itself, but must be actuated by the active or the living force.
Since man lives continually in communion with the inhabi-
tants of the spiritual world, when he leaves the natural world
he is introduced immediately among such as are like those
with whom he had been associated in the world. There-
fore, after death, every one seems to himself to be still living
in the world; for he then comes into the company of those
who are like him as to his will’s affections, and whom he then
acknowledges, as kinsmen and relations acknowledge their
own in the world; and this is what is meant when it is said
in the Word of those who die, that they are brought together
and gathered to their own. It is now evident from this, that
a regenerate man is in communion with angels of heaven,
and an unregenerate man in communion with spirits of hell.

608. It must be known that there are three heavens, and
these distinct from each other according to three degrees of
love and wisdom, and that man is in communion with angels
from those three heavens according to his regeneration; and
as this is so, that the human mind is divided into three dis-


No. 609] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION


775


tinct degrees or regions according to the heavens. But as to
these three heavens and their distinction according to three
degrees of love and wisdom, see the work on Heaven and
Hell (n. 29, and following), as also the pamphlet on the
Intercourse between the Soul and the Body (n. 16, 17). We
will here only illustrate hy a simile what those three degrees
are, according to which those heavens are distinguished:
they are like head, body, and feet in man; the highest
heaven makes the head, the middle the body, and the lowest
the feet; for the universal heaven is before the Lord as one
man. That it is so has been disclosed to me by my own
observation; for it was granted me to see one society of
heaven which consisted of ten thousand, all together as one
man. Why should not the universal heaven so appear be-
fore the Lord? Respecting this living experience, see the
work on Heaven and Hell (n. 59, and following). Hence
also it is manifest how this, which is well known in the Chris-
tian world, is understood, that the church makes the hody
of Christ, and that Christ is the life of this body. And that
the Lord is the All in all of heaven, may also be illustrated
by this; for He is the life in that hody. In like manner the
Lord is the Church with those who acknowledge Him alone
as the God of heaven and earth, and believe in Him. That
He is the God of heaven and earth, He teaches in Matthew
(xxviii. 18); and that men must helieve in Him, He teaches
in John (iii. 15, 16, 36; vi. 40; xi. 25, 26).

609. Those three degrees in which the heavens are, and
in which the human mind consequently is, may also he illus-
trated to some extent by comparisons with material things in
the w r orld. Those three degrees are as gold, silver, and cop-
per are in relative nohility, with which metals they are also
compared in Nebuchadnezzar’s statue (Dan. ii. 31-35).
Those three degrees are also distinct from each other as are
the ruby, the sapphire, and the agate in relative purity and
goodness; and also as an olive-tree, a vine, and a fig-tree;
and so on. Moreover, gold, the ruby, and the olive in the


776


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 609


Word signify celestial . good, which is that of the highest
heaven; silver, the sapphire, and the vine signify spiritual
good, which is that of the middle heaven; and copper, the
agate, and the fig signify natural good, which is that of the
lowest heaven. That there are three degrees, the celestial,
the spiritual, and the natural, has been stated above.

610. This shall be added to what has been said already:
Man’s regeneration is not effected in a moment, but succes-
sively, from the beginning to the end of his life in the world,
and it is continued and perfected afterward. And because
man is reformed by combats, and victories over the evils of
his flesh, the Son of Man therefore says to each one of the
seven churches, that He will give gifts to him that over-
cometh; as, to the church of Ephesus, To him that over-
cometh will I give to eat of the tree of life (Apoc. ii. 7); to the
church of Smyrna, He that over cometh shall not be hurt of
the second death (verse 11); to the church in Pergamos, To
him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna
(verse 17); to the church in Thyatira, And he that over-
cometh , to him will I give power over the nations (verse 26);
to the church in Sardis, He that overcometh , the same shall be
clothed in white raiment (iii. 5); to the church in Philadel-
phia, Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple
of My God (verse 12); and to the church of the Laodiceans,
To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My
throne (verse 21). Finally it will be added, that so far as
man is regenerated, or so far as regeneration is perfected in
him, so far he attributes nothing of good and truth, that is,
of charity and faith, to himself, but to the Lord; for the
truths which he successively receives, manifestly teach this.


No. 6ll] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION


777


X. So FAR AS MAN IS REGENERATED SINS ARE REMOVED,
AND THIS REMOVAL IS REMISSION OF SINS.

6n. Sins are removed so far as man is regenerated, be-
cause regeneration is restraining the flesh that it may not
rule, and subjugating the old man with its lusts that it may
not rise up and destroy the understanding, for when this is
destroyed man is no longer capable of reformation; for
reformation cannot be effected unless man’s spirit, which is
above the flesh, be instructed and perfected. Who that yet
has sound understanding, cannot conclude from this that
such things cannot be done in a moment, but successively,
as a man is. conceived, carried in the womb, born, and edu-
cated, according to what was shown above ? For the things
of the flesh or the old man are inherent in him from birth,
and they build the first habitation of his mind, in which
lusts abide like wild beasts in their dens, and they dwell
first in the outer courts, and by turns they steal as it were
into the lower rooms of that house, and afterward they make
their way up by ladders, and form chambers for themselves;
and this is done successively, as an infant grows, reaches
childhood, then youth, and then begins to think from his
own understanding, and to act from his own will. Who
does not see that this house which has been thus far built in
the mind, in which lusts dance with joined hands, like the
ochim, ziim, and satyrs, cannot be destroyed in a moment,
and a new house built in place of it? Must not the lusts,
holding each other by the hand and so sporting, be them-
selves first removed, and new desires which are of good and
truth be introduced in the place of the lusts of evil and fal-
sity ? That these things cannot be done in a moment every
wise man sees from this alone, that every evil is composed of
innumerable lusts, and that it is like fruit which beneath the
surface is full of worms with white bodies and black heads;
and, moreover, that evils are numerous and joined together


77 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 6u

like the progeny of a spider when first hatched; therefore
unless one evil is brought out after another, and this until
their connection is broken up, man cannot be made new.
These things have been presented that it may be known that
so far as any one is regenerated, sins are removed.

612. Man inclines by birth to all kinds of evils, and from
inclination lusts after them, and so far as he is in freedom
he also does them; for by birth he lusts after dominion over
others, and to possess the goods of others, which two lusts
cut off love toward the neighbor, and then man holds in
hatred every one who opposes him, and from hatred he
breathes revenge, which inwardly cherishes murder. Hence
also it is that he makes nothing of adulteries, of depreda-
tions that are secret theft, and of blasphemy which is also
false witness; and he who makes nothing of all these, is also
in heart an atheist. Such is man by birth, from which it is
manifest that he is from birth hell in miniature. Now be-
cause man as to the interiors of his mind has been bom
spiritual, and not as the beasts, consequently born for
heaven, while yet his natural or external man is, as before
said, hell in miniature, it follows that heaven cannot be
implanted in hell unless this be removed.

613. He who knows the relation in which heaven and
hell are to each other, and who knows how the one is re-
moved from the other, may know how man is regenerated, as
also what the regenerate man is. That this may be under-
stood, it shall be set forth in brief that all who are in heaven
look to the Lord with the face toward Him, while all who
are in hell turn the face away from the Lord; therefore when
hell is looked at from heaven, only the occiput and the back
appear; yes, they who are therein also seem to be inverted, as
antipodes, feet upward and heads down, and this although
they walk upon their feet and turn their faces around; for it is
the contrary direction of their minds’ interiors which pro-
duces that appearance. I relate these wonders from the
sight. They disclosed to me how regeneration is effected.


No. 614] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 779

namely, just as hell is removed and thus separated from
heaven; for, as stated above, man as to that first nature which
he takes from birth is hell in miniature, and as to that other
nature which he takes from the second birth he is heaven in
miniature. From this it follows that evils with man are re-
moved and separated, like heaven and hell in their larger
form, and that evils, as they are removed, avert themselves
from the Lord, and successively invert themselves, and that
this takes place in the same degree in which heaven is im-
planted, that is, as man is made new To which shall be
added, for illustration, that every evil with man has conjunc-
tion with such in hell as are in similar evil, and on the other
hand that every good with man has conjunction with such in
heaven as are in similar good.

614. From what has been presented it may be evident that
remission of sins is not extirpation and washing-away of
them, but the removal of them, and thus their separation;
also that every evil which man has actually appropriated to
himself remains. And since remission of sins is removal and
separation of them, it follows that man is withheld from evil
by the Lord and kept in good, and that this is given to man
by regeneration. I once heard a certain person in the lowest
heaven say that he was free from sins because they were
washed away, by the blood of Christ, he added. But because
he was within heaven, and was in that error from ignorance,
he was let into his own peculiar sins, and as they returned he
acknowledged them; whereby he acquired a new belief,
which was, that every man, as well as every angel, is withheld
of the Lord from evils and held in goods. What the remis-
sion of sins is, is manifest from this that it is not instantane-
ous, but follows regeneration according to the progress of it.
The removal of sins which is called their remission, may be
compared to the casting forth of filth from the camp of the
children of Israel into the desert which was round about
them; for their camp represented heaven, and the desert hell.
It may be compared also to the removal of the nations from


780


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 614


the children of Israel in the land of Canaan, and of the Jebu-
sites from Jerusalem; these were not cast out, but separated.
It may be compared to what took place with Dagon, the god
of the Philistines; that when the ark was brought in, he first
lay upon his face on the ground, and afterward, with his head
and the palms of his hands cut off, he lay upon the threshold;
thus he was not cast out, but removed. It may also be con-
pared to the demons sent by the Lord into the swine, that
afterwards rushed into the sea; the sea here and in other pas-
sages of the Word signifies hell. It may also be compared to
the throng that followed the dragon, which, being separated
from heaven, first invaded the earth, and was afterward cast
down into hell. It may be compared also to a forest where
there are wild beasts of many kinds; this being cut down, the
wild beasts flee to the thickets round about, and then the
land being levelled in the midst is brought by cultivation into
a field.

XI. Regeneration cannot take place without free will

IN SPIRITUAL THINGS.

615. Who but a stupid person cannot see that without free
will in spiritual things man cannot be regenerated ? Can he
without this go to the Lord, and acknowledge Him Redeemer
and Saviour, and as God of heaven and earth, as He teaches?
(Matt, xxviii. 18.) Who without that free will can believe,
that is, from faith look to Him and worship Him, and apply
himself to receive the means and benefits of salvation from
Him, and from Him cooperate in the reception of them?
Who without free will can do any good to the neighbor, ex-
ercise charity, also bring into his thought and will other
things which are of faith and charity, take them, and send
them forth into act ? Otherwise, what is regeneration but a
mere word dropped from the lips of the Lord (John iii.),
which either remains in the ear, or, as it passes from the
thought that is nearest to speech, becomes in the mouth an


No. 616] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 78 1

articulated sound of so many letters ? which sound cannot hy
any sense be raised into some higher region of the mind, but
falls upon the air and is dissipated there.

616. Say, if you are able, whether there can ever be a
blinder stupidity about regeneration than such as there is
with those who confirm themselves in the present faith, which
is, that faith is infused into man while he is like a stock or
stone, and that then, when it has been infused, it is followed
by justification, which is remission of sins, regeneration, and
other gifts beside? Also, that man’s work must be wholly
excluded, that it may do no violence to Christ’s merit. In
order that this dogma might he still more firmly established,
they have deprived man of all free will in spiritual things, hy
introducing his utter helplessness in them. It is, then, as if
God alone were to operate on His part, and no power were
given man to cooperate on his, and thus to conjoin himself.
What then is man in respect to regeneration, but as one
bound hand and foot, like the prisoners in the vessels called
galleys ? and who, if he were to free himself from his manacles
and fetters would be punished and condemned to death, as
would be done with them if they were to free themselves
from theirs; that is, if he were from free will to do good to the
neighbor, and of himself were to believe in God for the sake
of salvation. What would a man be, -when confirmed in such
opinions, and who yet has a pious desire for heaven, but like
a spectre standing to see whether that faith has been already
infused with its benefits; and if not, whether it is heing in-
fused; and so, whether God the Father has taken pity, or
whether His Son has interceded, or whether the Holy Spirit
is inoperative because employed elsewhere ? And yet, owing
to his utter ignorance of the matter, the man may go away
and console himself by saying, “ Perhaps that grace is in the
morality of my life, in which I am and remain as heretofore;
and in me, therefore, this may he holy, while in those who
have not attained that faith, it is profane. Therefore, in
order that holiness may remain in my morality, I will be care-


782


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[NO. 616


ful hereafter not to work faith or charity of myself;” and so
on. Such a spectre, or if you choose, such a statue of salt,
does every one become who thinks of regeneration apart
from free will in spiritual things.

617. The man who believes that regeneration takes place
without any free will in spiritual things, thus without coop-
eration, becomes as cold as a stone in regard to all the truths
of the church; or if warm, he is like a brand burning on the
hearth, that blazes from combustible elements in it, for his
warmth is from lusts. He becomes comparatively like a pal-
ace sinking into the ground even to its roof, and overflowed
with muddy waters; and afterward he dwells upon the bare
roof, making a tent-like covering for himself of marsh rushes;
but at last the roof sinks also, and he is drowned. He is also
like a ship laden with all kinds of precious merchandise taken
from the Word as a treasury; but these are gnawed by mice
and moth-eaten, or are thrown by the sailors into the sea, and
so the merchants are defrauded of their goods. Those who
are learned or rich in the arcana of that faith, are like the
venders in shops who sell statues for idols, fruits and flowers
of wax, shells, vipers in bottles, and other like things. They
who do not wish to look upward, as there is no power adapted
to man and given to him by the Lord, are actually like beasts
which look with the head downward, and which seek for
nothing but food in the forests; and if they come into orchards
they are like worms that consume the foliage of the trees, and
if they see the fruits with their eyes, or still more if they feel
them with their hands, they fill them with worms. And
finally they become like scaly serpents, their fallacies sound-
ing and glittering like the scales of a serpent. And so on.


No. 6 1 8] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 783


XII. Regeneration cannot take place without truths,

BY WHICH FAITH IS FORMED, AND WITH WHICH
CHARITY CONJOINS ITSELF.

618. There are three agents whereby man is regenerated,
— the Lord, faith, and charity; these three would lie hidden,
like precious things of the highest value buried in the earth,
if Divine truths from the Word did not reveal them; yes, they
would be hidden to those who deny man’s cooperation, if
they were to read the Word a hundred or a thousand times,
though they stand forth there in clear light. As concerns the
Lord: who that is confirmed in the faith of the day, sees there
with open eyes that He and the Father are one, that He is the
God of heaven and earth, that it is the will of the Father that
men should believe in the Son, besides innumerable state-
ments of the same kind respecting the Lord in both Testa-
ments ? They do not see, because they are not in truths, and
hence not in the light from which things of this kind can be
seen; and if light were given, still falsities would extinguish
it, and then those things would be passed over like something
blotted out, or like underground drains trodden upon and
passed over. These statements are made that it may be
known that without truths this primary agent in regeneration
cannot be seen. As regards faith: Neither can this be given
without truths, for faith and truth make one; for the good of
faith is as a soul, and truths make its body. To say, there-
fore, that a man believes or has faith, while he knows no
truths thereof, is like taking the soul out of the body, and
talking with it when thus invisible. Moreover, all the truths
that make the body of faith, emit light and enlighten and
present the face of faith to be seen. It is similar with charity :
this sends out heat from itself, with which the light of truth
conjoins itself, as heat does with light in the world in the
spring time, from the conjunction of which the things of the
earth’s animal and vegetable kingdoms return to their pro-


78 4


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 61S


lific powers. It is similar with spiritual heat and light;
these in like manner conjoin themselves in man while he is in
the truths of faith and at the same time in the goods of char-
ity; for, as was said above in the chapter on Faith, from every
single truth of faith flows out light which enlightens, and
from every single good of charity flows out heat which en-
kindles; and it is also there stated that spiritual light in its
essence is intelligence, and that spiritual heat in its essence is
love, and that the Lord alone conjoins these two in man when
He regenerates him. For the Lord said, The words that 1
speak unto you , they are spirit , and they are lije (John vi. 63).
Believe in the light , that ye may be sons of light; I am come a
Light into the world (xii. 36, 46). The Lord is the sun in the
spiritual world; all spiritual light and heat are from this; that
light enlightens, and that heat enkindles; and by the conjunc-
tion of the two, the Lord vivifies and regenerates man.

619. From all this it may be evident, that without truths
there is no knowledge of the Lord; also that without truths
there is no faith, and so there is no charity; consequently that
without truths there is no theology; and where this is not,
there is no church. Such is the condition at this day of the
people who call themselves Christians, and say that they are
in the light of the Gospel, when yet they are in thick darkness
itself; for truths lie hidden beneath falsities, like gold, silver,
and precious stones buried among the bones in the valley of
Hinnom. That it is so, was clearly manifest to me from the
spheres in the spiritual world which flow forth and extend
themselves from the Christendom of to-day. One sphere is
that respecting the Lord; this exhales and extends itself from
the southern quarter, where are the learned of the clergy, and
laymen of erudition; wherever it goes, it enters the ideas
secretly, and with many takes away faith in the Divinity of
the Lord’s Human, with many weakens it, and makes it as
foolishness with many; this is because it brings in at the same
time the faith of three Gods, and so there is confusion. An-
other sphere which takes away faith, is like a black cloud in


No. 620] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 785

winter, which brings on darkness, turns rain into snow, strips
the trees bare, freezes the waters, and takes all pasture away
from the sheep; this sphere, in conjunction with the former,
infuses as it were a lethargy as to the one God, regeneration,
and the means of salvation. A third sphere belongs to the
conjunction of faith and charity; this is so strong as to be irre-
sistible; but at the present day it is abotninable, and like a
pestilence it infects every one on whom it breathes, and it
tears asunder every tie between those two means of salvation
established from the creation of the world, and restored anew
by the Lord. This sphere also invades men in the natural
world, and extinguishes the marriage torches between truths
and goods. I have felt this sphere, and then, when I have
thought of the conjunction of faith and charity, it has inter-
posed between them and violently endeavored to separate
them. The angels complain greatly of these spheres, and
pray to the Lord that they be dissipated; but they have re-
ceived response, that they cannot be dissipated so long as the
dragon is on the earth, since that sphere is from the dragon-
ists; for it is said of the dragon that he was cast unto the earth,
and then it is said, There} ore rejoice , ye heavens , and woe to
the inhabiters 0 / the earth (Apoc. xii. 12, 13). These three
spheres are like tempest-driven atmospheres, arising from the
breathing holes of the dragons; and because they are spiri-
tual, they invade minds and force them. The spheres of
spiritual truths there are as yet few, only in the new heaven,
and with those beneath heaven who are separated from the
dragonists. For this reason those truths are so little seen
among men in the world at this day ; just as ships in the eastern
ocean are invisible to captains and ship-masters sailing in
the western ocean.

620. That regeneration cannot take place without truths
by which faith is formed, may be illustrated by the following
comparisons: It is no more possible than the human mind
without the understanding; for the understanding is formed
by means of truths, and it therefore teaches what must be be-


786


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 620


lieved, what must be done, what regeneration is, and how it
is effected. , There can no more be regeneration without
truths, than there can be vivification in animals and vegeta-
tion in trees without light from the sun; for if the sun did not
give light at the same time with heat, it would become like
sackcloth of hair, as described in the Apocalypse (vi. 12),
and darkened as described in Joel (ii. 10, 31), and thus mere
darkness would be upon the earth (Joel iii. 15). It would
be similar with man without truths which send out light from
themselves; for the sun from which the lights of truths flow
forth is the Lord in the spiritual world; if spiritual light did
not flow from it into human minds, the church would be in
mere darkness, or in shadow from a perpetual eclipse. Re-
generation, which, is effected by means of faith and charity,
without truths that teach and lead, would be like navigation
on the great ocean without a rudder, or without a mariner’s
compass and charts; and it would be like riding in a dark
forest by night. The mind’s internal sight with those who
are not in truths, but in falsities which they* believe to be
truths, may be compared to the sight of those with whom
the optic nerves are obstructed, the eye still appearing sound
and capable of sight, although it sees nothing, which kind of
blindness is called by physicians amaurosis and gutta serena;
for with them the rational or intellectual is closed above and
opened only below; and owing to this, rational light becomes
like the light of the eye; and hence all their judgments are
but imaginary, and fashioned from mere fallacies. And so
men would stand like astrologers in market-places with their
long telescopes, and uttering their vain prophecies. Such
would all students of theology become, unless genuine truths
from the Word were opened by the Lord.

621 . To this the following Relations will be added. First:
I saw an assembly of spirits, all upon their knees, praying to
God to send angels to them, with whom they might speak
face to face, and to whom they might open the thoughts of
their hearts; and when they rose up, there were seen three


No. 621] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 787

angels in fine linen standing in their presence. And these
said, “The Lord Jesus Christ has heard your prayers, and
has therefore sent us to you. Open to us the thoughts of
your hearts.” And they answered, “The priests have told
us that in theological matters it is not the understanding but
faith that avails, and that intellectual faith does not profit in
those things, because it springs from the man and savors of
him, and is not of God. We are Englishmen, and we have
heard many other things from our holy ministry which we
believed; but when we have spoken with others, who also
called themselves Reformed, and with some who called
themselves Roman Catholics, and again with those of vari-
ous sects, they all seemed learned, and yet in many things no
one agreed with another; and still they all said, Believe us;
and some, We are ministers of God, and we know. But as
we knew that the Divine truths which are called truths of
faith, and are of the church, are not any man’s by birthright
alone, nor from inheritance, but are out of heaven from God,
and as they show the way to heaven, and enter the life to-
gether with the good of charity, and thus lead to eternal life,
we became anxious, and on our knees prayed to God.”
Then the angels answered, “ Read the Word and believe in
the Lord, and you will see the truths which must be of your
faith and life. All in the Christian world draw their doc-
trines from the Word as the one only fountain.” But two of
the assembly said, “ We have read, but have not understood.”
And the angels answered, “You did not go to the Lord, who
is the Word, and you had also first confirmed yourselves in
falsities.”

The angels said further, “What is faith without light?
And what is thinking without understanding ? It is not hu-
man; ravens and magpies, also, can learn to speak without
understanding. We can assure you that every man whose
soul desires it, can see the truths of the Word in light. There
is no animal found that does not know the food of its life
when it sees it; and man is a rational and spiritual animal; he


788


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 621


sees the food of his life, not of the body but the soul, which is
the truth of faith, if he hungers for it and seeks it from the
Lord. Moreover, whatever is not received by the under-
standing, does not abide in the memory as to the thing itself,
but only as to the words; and therefore when we have looked
down from heaven into the world, we have not seen any
thing, but have only heard sounds, for the most part harsh.
But we will tell some things which the learned of the clergy
have removed from the understanding, not knowing that
there are two ways to the understanding, one from the world
and the other from heaven, and that the Lord withdraws the
understanding from the world while He enlightens it. But
if the understanding is closed by religion, the way from
heaven is closed to it, and then the man sees no more in the
Word than a blind man; we have seen many such that had
fallen into pits out of which they did not rise. Let examples
serve for illustration: Can you not understand what charity
is, and what faith is ? that charity is to act well with the neigh-
bor, and that faith is to think right about God and the essen-
tials of the church? and hence that he who acts well and
thinks right, that is, who lives well and believes right, is
saved ?” To these things they said that they understood
them.

The angels said further, that man must repent of his sins
in order to be saved, and that unless he repents he remains in
the sins into which he was born ; and that to repent is not to
will evils because they are against God, and to search one’s
self once or twice a year, to see one’s evils, to confess them be-
fore the Lord, to implore help, to desist from them, and to
enter upon a new life; and so far as he does this, and believes
in the Lord, his sins are remitted. They then said, from the
assembly, “ We understand this, and so too what the remis-
sion of sins is.” And then they asked the angels to inform
them further; and now, indeed, about God, the immortality
of the soul, regeneration, and baptism. To this the angels
replied, “ We will not say any thing that you do not under-


No. 621] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 789


stand: otherwise our discourse falls like rain upon the sand
and upon seeds therein, which, however watered from heaven,
still wither and perish.” And of God they said: “All who
come into heaven are allotted a place there, and thence eter-
nal joy, according to their idea of God; because this idea
reigns universally in all the things of worship. The idea of
God as a Spirit, when spirit is believed to be like ether or
wind, is an empty idea; but the idea of God as Man is the just
idea; for God is Divine Love and Divine Wisdom with every
quality of them; and the subject of these is Man, not ether or
wind. In heaven the idea of God is the idea of the Lord the
Saviour. He is the God of heaven and earth, as He Himself
taught. Let your idea of God be like ours, and we shall be
consociated.” When they said these things the faces of the
others shone.

Concerning the Immortality of the Soul they said: “Man
lives for ever, because he is capable of being conjoined with
God by love and faith; every one is capable of this. That
this ability makes the immortality of the soul, you can under-
stand if you think somewhat more deeply concerning it.” Of
Regeneration they said : “ Who does not see that every man
has freedom to think of God, and not to think of Him, pro-
vided he has been instructed that there is a God? Thus
every one has freedom in spiritual things as much as in civil
and natural things. The Lord gives this to all continually;
therefore man is in fault if he does not think. A man is a
man from this ability; while a beast is a beast from not having
it. A man can therefore reform and regenerate himself as of
himself, provided he acknowledges in heart that it is from the
Lord. Every one who repents and believes in the Lord is be-
coming reformed and regenerate. A man must do both as
from himself; but as from himself is from the Lord. It is
true that a man cannot contribute any thing to this, nothing
whatever, out of himself; but yet you were not created statues,
but men, that you may do this from the Lord as from your-
selves. This one and only return, of love and of faith, is


790


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 621


what the Lord ever wishes man to make to Him. In a word,
do from yourselves, and believe that you do from the Lord;
thus you do as from yourselves.”

But then they asked whether it was implanted in man from
creation to do as from himself. An angel answered, “ It was
not implanted in him, because to do from Himself belongs to
God alone; but it is continually given, that is, adjoined con-
tinually; and then so far as man does good and believes truth
as from himself, he is an angel of heaven ; but so far as he does
evil and thence believes falsity, and this also is as from him-
self, he is a spirit of hell. You wonder that this, too, is as
from himself; but still you see it when you pray to be guarded
from the devil lest he seduce you, enter into you as he did into
Judas, fill you with all iniquity, and destroy both soul and
body. But every one becomes guilty who believes that he
does from himself, whether he does good or evil; but he does
not become guilty who believes that he does as from himself;
for if he believes that the good is from himself, he claims for
himself that which is God’s; and if he believes that the evil is
from himself, he attributes to himself that which is the
devil’s.”

Concerning Baptism they said, that it is spiritual washing,
which is reformation and regeneration; and that “ an infant is
reformed and regenerated, while, having become an adult, he
does the things which the sponsors promised for him, which
are two, repentance and faith in God. For they promise,
first, that he shall reject the devil and all his works; and sec-
ond, that he shall believe in God. All infants in heaven are
initiated into these two ; but to them the devil is hell, and God
is the Lord. Besides, baptism is a sign before the angels that
a man is of the church.”

Having heard this, they said from the* assembly, “We
understand these things.” But a voice was then heard from
the side, crying, “*We do not understand;” and another
voice, “We do not wish to understand.” And it was asked,
from whom those voices came; and it was found that they


No. 621 ] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 79 1

were from those who confirmed in themselves falsities of
faith, and who wished to be believed as oracles, and so to be
adored. The angels said, “Do not be surprised; there are
very many such at this day; they appear to us from heaven
like images constructed with such art that they can move the
lips, and make sounds like organs; and they do not know
whether the breath by which they make the sound is from
hell or from heaven, because they do not know whether a
thing is false or true; they reason and reason, and they con-
firm and confirm, nor in regard to any thing do they see
whether it is so. But know this, that human ingenuity can
confirm whatever it wishes, even till it appears as if it were so;
and therefore heretics can do so, the impious can do so, yes,
atheists can prove that there is no God, but nature only.”

After this, that assembly of Englishmen, ardently desirous
of being wise, said to the angels, “ They speak such various
things concerning the Holy Supper; tell us what the truth is.”
The angels replied, “ The truth is, that the man who looks to
the Lord and repents, is by that most holy thing conjoined
with the Lord and introduced into heaven.” But they said
from the assembly, “ This is a mystery.” And the angels an-
swered, “ It is a mystery, but yet such as can be understood.
The bread and wine do not effect this; there is nothing holy
from them; but material bread and spiritual bread corre-
spond to each other, and material wine and spiritual wine;
and spiritual bread is the holy of love, and spiritual wine is
the holy of faith, both of them from the Lord; and both, the
Lord: hence is conjunction of the Lord with man, and of
man with the Lord; not with the bread and the wine, but
with the love and faith of the man who has repented; and
conjunction with the Lord is also introduction to heaven.”
And after the angels had taught them something concerning
correspondence, they said from the assembly, “ Now for the
first time we can understand this also.” And when they said
this, behold a flame descending from heaven with light con-
sociated them with the angels, and they loved one another.


792


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 622


622. Second Relation. All who are prepared for heaven,
which is done in the world of spirits midway between heaven
and hell, after the time is fulfilled, desire heaven with a kind
of longing; and soon their eyes are opened, and they see a
way which leads to some society in heaven. This way they
enter, and ascend; and in the ascent there is a gate, and a
keeper there. He opens the gate, and so they enter. Then
an examiner meets them, who tells them from the president
to enter in further, to look and see whether there are houses
anywhere which they recognize as theirs, for there is a new
house for every novitiate angel. And if they find them, they
so report, and remain there; but if they do not find them,
they return and say that they have not seen any. And then
an examination is made by some wise one there, to see
whether the light that is in them agrees with that in the soci-
ety, and especially whether the heat does; for the light of
heaven in its essence is Divine Truth, and the heat of heaven
in its essence is Divine Good, both proceeding from the Lord
as the sun there. If the light and heat in them are differ-
ent from those of that society, that is, different truth and
different good, they are not received. They therefore go
away, and pass on through ways opened between societies in
heaven; and this until they find a society wholly in agreement
with their affections; and there is their home for ever. For
there they are among their own, just as if among relatives and
friends, whom they love from the heart because they are in
similar affection; and there they are in what favors their
own life, and in what rejoices the whole breast from peace of
soul; for in the heat and light of heaven there is ineffable de-
light, which is communicated. Such is the case with those
who are becoming angels.

But they who are in evils and falsities may ascend into
heaven with leave; but when they enter, they begin to catch
the breath and to have labored respiration; and presently
their sight grows dim, the understanding is darkened, they
cease to think, oblivion as it were hovers before their eyes,


No. 623] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 793

and so they stand like stocks; and then the heart begins to
throb, the breast to be straightened, and the mind to be seized
with anguish and to be tortured more and more; and in this
state they writhe like serpents brought near fire; they there-
fore roll themselves away, and by a steep way which then
appears they cast themselves down, nor do they rest until
they are in hell among their like, where they can draw breath,
and where their hearts beat freely. They afterwards hate
heaven, reject truth, and blaspheme the Lord in heart, be-
lieving that their tortures and torments while in heaven were
from Him. From these few things it can be seen what is
their lot who lightly esteem truths of faith, which nevertheless
make the light in which the angels of heaven are, and who
lightly esteem goods of love and charity, which nevertheless
make the heat of life in which the angels of heaven are. It
can also be seen from this, how great is their error who be-
lieve that every one can enjoy heavenly blessedness provided
he is admitted into heaven. For it is the belief of the present
day, that to be received into heaven is of mercy alone, and
that reception into heaven is like that of one coming into a
house at a wedding in the world, and then at the same time
into the joys and gladness there. But let it be known that in
the spiritual world there is communication of the affections of
love, and the thoughts therefrom, for man is then a spirit, and
the life of a spirit is affection of the love and thought there-
from; also that homogeneous affection conjoins, and hetero-
geneous affection separates; and again that the heterogeneity
torments a devil in heaven, and an angel in hell. They are
exactly separated therefore according to the diversities, vari-
eties, and differences of the affections of the love.

623. Third Relation. It was once given me to see three
hundred of the clergy and laity together, all learned and eru-
dite, because they knew how to confirm faith alone even to
justification, and some still further. And because they had
the belief that heaven is only admission from grace, leave
was given them to ascend to a society of heaven, which how-


794


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 623


ever was not among the higher ones. And when they as-
cended, then in the distance they were seen as calves. And
when they were entering heaven, they were received civilly by
the angels; but while they were conversing, a tremor seized
them, afterward horror, and at length torture like that of
death; and they then cast themselves down headlong, and in
their fall were seen as dead horses. They seemed like calves
in their ascent, because the leaping natural affection for see-
ing and knowing appears from correspondence like a calf.
And they seemed like dead horses in their fall, because the
understanding of truth appears from correspondence like a
horse, and no understanding of the truth of the church ap-
pears like a dead horse.

There were boys below, who saw them descending, and
seen in their descent as dead horses. And they then turned
their faces away, and said to their teacher who was with them,
“What ill omen is this? We saw men, and now instead we
see dead horses; and because we could not look at them we
turned away our faces. Teacher, let us not stay in this place,
but let us go away.” And they went away. And then the
teacher, on the way, instructed them as to the signification of
a dead horse; saying, “A horse signifies the understanding
of truth from the Word; all the horses which you have seen
have had that signification ; for when a man goes along medi-
tating upon the Word, his meditation then appears in the dis-
tance like a horse, noble and lively as he meditates spiritually,
but, on the other hand, poor and lifeless as he meditates ma-
terially.” The boys then asked, “What is it to meditate
spiritually and to meditate materially upon the Word?”
Their teacher answered, “I will illustrate it by examples:
who, while reading the Word in a holy way, does not think in-
teriorly within himself of God, the neighbor, and heaven?
Every one who thinks of God from person only, and not from
essence, thinks materially; and every one who thinks of the
neighbor from outward form only, and not from quality,
thinks materially; and every one who thinks of heaven from


No. 623] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION. 795

place only, and not from the love and wisdom from which
heaven is heaven, also thinks materially.”

But the boys said, “ We have thought of God from person,
of the neighbor from form as being a man, and of heaven
from place as being above us; have we, therefore, when read-
ing the Word, then appeared to any one like dead horses?”
The teacher said, “No, you are yet boys, and cannot do
otherwise; but I have perceived in you an affection for know-
ing and understanding; and as this is spiritual, you have also
thought spiritually; for there is some spiritual thought latent
within your material thought, and this you do not yet know.
But I will return to what I said before, that he who thinks
materially when reading the Word, or is in meditation from
the Word, appears in the distance like a dead horse; while he
who thinks spiritually appears like a living horse; and that he
thinks materially of God who thinks of Him from person only
and not from essence. For the attributes of the Divine es-
sence are many; as omnipotence, omniscience, omnipresence,
eternity, love, wisdom, mercy, and grace, and others. And
there are attributes that proceed from the Divine essence,
which are creation and preservation, redemption and salva-
tion, enlightenment and instruction. Every one who thinks
of God from person only makes three Gods, saying that the
Creator and Preserver is one God, the Redeemer and Saviour
another, and the Enlightener and Instructor a third; while
every one who thinks of God from essence makes God one,
saying , 4 God created and has preserved us, and the same has
redeemed us and saves us, and He also enlightens and in-
structs.’ This is the reason that they who think concerning
the trinity of God from person, and thus materially, cannot,
from the ideas of their thought which is material, do other-
wise than from one God make three. But still, contrary to
their thought, they are compelled to say that there is a union
of those three by the essence, because they have thought in-
directly of . God from essence. Therefore, my scholars,
think from the essence, and from this of the person; for to


796


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 623


think of the essence, but from the person, is to think mater-
ially of the essence also; while to think of the person, but
from the essence, is to think spiritually of the person also.
The ancient gentiles, because they thought materially of God,
and so of God’s attributes also, not only made three gods but
more, even as many as a hundred; for they madp a god of
every attribute. You must know that the material does not
enter into the spiritual, but the spiritual into the material. It
is similar with thought as to the neighbor from the outward
form and not from his quality; as also with thought about
heaven from place, and not from the love and wisdom from
which heaven is. It is similar with one and all things that
are in the Word; he, therefore, who cherishes a material idea
of God, and likewise of the neighbor and of heaven, cannot
understand any thing in the Word; it is a dead letter to him;
and while reading it, or in meditation from it, he appears in
the distance like a dead horse. Those whom you saw in
their descent from heaven, having become to your eyes like
dead horses, were such as have closed up the rational sight,
as to the theological or spiritual matters of the church, in
themselves and others, by their peculiar dogma that the un-
derstanding must be kept in obedience to faith; not having
it in thought that the understanding closed by religion is as
blind as a mole, with nothing but thick darkness in it, and
such thick darkness as rejects from itself all spiritual light,
shuts out the influx of it from the Lord and from heaven, and
places before it a barrier in the corporeal sensual, far below
the rational in matters of faith; that is, puts it close to the
nose, and fixes it in its cartilage; for which reason, it cannot
afterward even have the sc.ent of spiritual things; whence
some have become such that when they are sensible of the
odor from spiritual things, they fall in a swoon; by scent I
mean perception. These are they who make God three.
They say indeed, from essence, that God is one; but still,
when they pray according to their faith, which is, for God the
Father to have mercy for the Son’s sake, and to send the Holy


No. 624] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION


797


Spirit, they manifestly make three Gods. They cannot do
otherwise; for they pray to one to have mercy for the sake of
another, and to send a third.” And then their teacher
taught them about the Lord, that He is the One God, in
whom is the Divine Trinity.

624. Fourth Relation . Having awaked from sleep at mid-
night, I saw at some height toward the east an angel hold-
ing in his right hand a paper which appeared from the sun,
of lustrous brightness, and in the centre there was a writing
In golden letters; and I saw written The Marriage of Good
and Truth. From the writing flashed a splendor which
spread into a wide circle around the paper; the circle or bor-
der appeared, therefore, like 4he dawn of day in spring.
After this I saw the angel with the paper in his hand descend-
ing; and as he descended the paper appeared less and less
bright, and that writing which was The Marriage of Good
and Truth, seemed changed from a golden to a silver color,
then to that of copper, then to that of iron, and at length to
the color of iron and copper rust; and at last the angel seemed
to pass into a dark cloud, and through it to the earth; and
there the paper, though still retained in his hand, was not
seen.

This was in the world of spirits, into which all men first
gather after death. The angel then spoke to me, saying,
“Ask those coming hither whether they see me or any thing
in my hand.” There came a multitude, one body from the
east, one from the south, one from the west, and one from the
north. And I asked those coming from the east and the
south, who were such as in the world were devoted to learn-
ing, whether they saw any one present with me, or any thing
in his hand. They all said that they saw nothing whatever.
Then I asked those who came from the west and the north,
who were such as in the world had believed in the words of
the learned; these said that they, too, did not see any thing.
But yet the last of them, who in the world had been in simple
faith from charity, or in some truth from good, after the for-


798


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 624


mer had gone away, said that they saw a man with a paper,
a man well dressed, and a paper upon which letters were
traced; and when they looked at it more closely, they said
that they read the words, The Marriage of Good and Truth.

And these spoke to the angel, and asked him to tell them
what it was. And he said, that all things in the whole heaven,
and all things in the whole world, are from creation, noth-
ing but the marriage of good and truth; “ because they one
and all, those which are living and have animation and those
which are not living and do not have animation, were created
from and into the marriage of good and truth. Nothing has
been created into truth alone, or into good alone; either of
these alone is nothing; but by marriage they go forth and be-
come something, in quality according to the marriage. In
the Lord God the Creator Divine Good and Divine Truth
are in their very substance; Divine Good is the esse of His
substance, and Divine Truth is the existere of His substance;
and they are also in their very oneness, for in Him they make
one infinitely. Since these two are one in God the Creator
Himself, therefore they are also one in all things and every
thing created by Him; by this, also, the Creator is conjoined
in an eternal covenant like that of marriage with all things
created by Him.”

The angel said further, that the Sacred Scripture, which
was dictated by the Lord, is in general and in particular a
marriage of good and truth (see above, n. 248-253); and be-
cause the church which is formed by means of the truths of
doctrine, and religion which is formed by means of the goods
of life according to truths of doctrine, are with Christians
solely from the Sacred Scripture, it may be evident that the
church also in general and in particular is the marriage of
good and truth. The same that was said above of the mar-
riage of good and truth has also been said concerning the
Marriage of Charity and Faith, since good is of charity and
truth is of faith. After this was said, the angel raised him-
self from the earth and borne through the cloud he ascended


No. 625] REFORMATION AND REGENERATION 799

into heaven; and then the paper shone as before, according to
the degrees of ascent; and lo, the circle which before appeared
like the dawn of day, then settled down and dispelled the
cloud which brought darkness upon the earth, and it became
sunny.

625. Fifth Relation. Once when I was meditating on the
Lord’s Second Coming, a flash of light suddenly appeared,
coming forcibly upon my eyes. I therefore looked up, and
lo, the whole heaven above me appeared luminous, and there
in a long series a glorification was heard. And an angel
stood near, who said, “ That is a glorification of the Lord on
account of His Coming, which is made by the angels of the
eastern and the western heavens.” From the southern and
the northern heavens only a gentle murmur was heard. And
because the angel heard all, he first said to me that glorifica-
tions and celebrations of the Lord are made from the Word;
and presently he said, “ Now, in particular, they are glorify-
ing and celebrating the Lord by these words which were
spoken by the prophet Daniel: Thou sawest iron mixed with
miry clay, but they shall not cohere; and in those days shall the
God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall not perish for ages:
it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, but it
shall stand for ages ” (ii. 43, 44) . After this I heard as it were
the voice of singing, and more deeply in the east I saw a flash-
ing of light, more brilliant than the former; and I asked the
angel what they were glorifying there. He said, “ By these
words in Daniel: I saw in the night visions, and behold the
Son 0} Man was coming with the clouds of heaven; and there
was given Him dominion and a kingdom; and all peoples and
nations shall worship Him; His dominion is the dominion of
an age which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that
which shall not perish (vii. 13, 14). In addition they are
celebrating the Lord from these in the Apocalypse: To Jesus
Christ be glory and strength; behold He cometh with clouds;
He is the Alpha and the Omega , the Beginning and the End,
ihe First and the Last, who is, who was, and who is to come ,


8oo


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 625


the Almighty; I John heard this from the Son of Man out of
the midst of the seven candlesticks” (Apoc. i. 5-8, 11-13; xxii.
13; also Matt. xxiv. 30, 31).

I looked again into the eastern heaven, and it gave forth
light on the right side, and the illumination extended into the
southern expanse, and I heard a sweet sound. I asked the
angel, “ What of the Lord are they glorifying there ? ” He
said, “ By these words in the Apocalypse : I saw a new heaven
and a new earth; and I saw the holy city } new Jerusalem , com-
ing down from God out 0} heaven , prepared as a Bride for her
Husband. And I heard a great voice from heaven , saying ,
Behold the tabernacle of God is with men , and He will dwell
with them. And the angel spake with me and said , Come, I
will show thee the Bride , the Lamb’s Wife. And he carried
me away in the spirit upon a great and high mountain , and
showed me the holy city Jerusalem (Apoc. xxi. 1-3, 9, 10).
Also by these words: I Jesus am the bright and morning Star;
and the Spirit and the Bride say , Come; and He said , I come
quickly; amen , even so , come , Lord Jesus” (xxii. 16, 17, 20).
After this and more, a general glorification was heard from
the east to the west of heaven, and also from the south to the
north; and I asked the angel, “What now?” He said
“These words from the prophets: And all flesh shall know
that I Jehovah am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer (Isa. xlix.
26). Thus said Jehovah , the King of Israel , and his Re-
deemer Jehovah Zebaoth y I am the First and the Last , and be-
side Me there is no God (xliv. 6). It shall be said in that day ,
LOy this is our God; we have waited for Him that He may save
us; This is Jehovah; we have waited for Him (xxv. 9). The
voice of him that crieth in the wilderness , Prepare ye the way
of Jehovah. Behold the Lord Jehovih cometh in strength;
He shall feed His flock like a Shepherd (xl. 3, 10, n). Unto
us a Child is born; unto us a Son is given; and His name shall
be called Wonderful y Counsellor , God , Mighty , Father of Eter-
nity , the Prince of Peace (ix. 6). Behold , the days are coming ,
when I will raise up unto David a righteous Branch , who


No. 625] reformation and regeneration 801

shall reign King , and this is His name , Jehovah our Right-
eousness ( Jer. xxiii. 5, 6; xxxiii. 15, 16). Jehovah Zebaoth
is his name , and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel , the God
of the whole earth shall He be called (Isa. liv. 5). In that
day Jevohah shall be King over all the earth. In that day
Jehovah shall be one , and His name one ” (Zech. xiv. 9).

From hearing and understanding these things, my heart
was moved, and I went home rejoicing, and there returned
from the state of the spirit into that of the body, in which I
have written what was seen and heard.



mm


msm


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


LX
H 11


A-
; 7

l ,


oi

'X 7


...CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY


Cornell University
Library


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924092464928


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION

VOL. Ill


1907 ftotrfj Litton

OF

SWEDENBORG’S WORKS

VOLS.

1-19 HEAVENLY ARCANA

20 INDEX ARCANA

21 HEAVEN AND HELL

22 MISCELLANEOUS WORKS

Final Judgment
White Horse
Earths in the Universe
Summary Exposition

23 FOUR DOCTRINES

New Jerusalem and its Heavenly
Doctrines

24 DIVINE LOVE AND WISDOM

Intercourse between the Soul
and the Body

25 DIVINE PROVIDENCE
26-28 APOCALYPSE REVEALED

29 MARRIAGE LOVE
30-32 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


THE


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION

CONTAINING

THE UNIVERSAL THEOLOGY

OF

THE NEW CHURCH


FORETOLD BY THE LORD IN DANIEL VII, 13, 14
AND IN THE APOCALYPSE XXI, 1, 2


BY

EMANUEL SWEDENBORG

SERVANT OF THE LORD JESUS CHRIST


First published in Latin , Amsterdam , 1771


Botcfc ©ttttton
VOL. Ill


BOSTON AND NEW YORK
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
tltarjSide pres#, ^Tambridoe
i9°7

L <*


/j 7 oJf^S'6

Daniel VII, 13, 14

I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of
Man came from the clouds of the heavens. And there was given
Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom ; and all people, na-
tions, and languages shall serve Him. His dominion is an ever-
lasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed.

Apocalypse XXI, 1, 2, 5, 9, 10

I John saw a new heaven and a new earth. And I saw the
holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And an
angel talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will show thee
The Bride , The Lamb's Wife. And he carried me away in the
spirit, upon a great and high mountain, and showed me that
great city, the Hply Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from
God.

He that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. And He said unto me, Write: for these words are true
and faithful. -n p*


CONTENTS


Contents of Volume Three.

CHAPTER XI.

Imputation, n. 626-660.

I. The faith of the present church, which is said alone to justify,
and imputation make one. n. 626, 627.

II. The imputation which belongs to the faith of the present day
is twofold, the imputation of Christ’s merit, and the imputation of
salvation therefrom, n. 628-631.

III. The faith imputative of the merit and righteousness of Christ
the Redeemer, first arose from the decrees of the Council of Nice,
concerning three Divine Persons from eternity, which faith has been
received by the whole Christian world from that time to the present,
n. 632-635.

IV. The faith imputative of Christ's merit was unknown in the
Apostolic Church, which existed earlier, and it is nowhere meant in
the Word. n. 636-639.

V. The imputation of Christ’s merit and righteousness is im-
possible. n. 640-6452 .

VI. There is an imputation, but it is that of good and evil, and at
the same time of faith, n. 643-646.

VII. The faith and imputation of the New Church cannot be
together with the faith and imputation of the former church; and if
they are together, such collision and conflict result, that every thing
of the church with man perishes, n. 647-649.

VIII. The Lord imputes good to every man, and hell imputes evil,
n. 650-653.

IX. The faith with that to which it conjoins itself, makes the
sentence. If true faith conjoins itself with good, sentence is made
for eternal life; but if the faith conjoins itself with evil, sentence is
made for eternal death, n. 654-657.

X. Thought is not imputed to any one, but will. n. 658-660.


vi


CONTENTS


CHAPTER XII.

Baptism, n. 667-69 r.

I. Without knowledge of the spiritual sense of the Word, no one
can know what the two sacraments, Baptism and the Holy Supper,
involve and effect, n. 667-669.

II. By the washing called Baptism is meant spiritual washing,
which is purification from evils and falsities, and thus regeneration,
n. 670-673.

III. Baptism was instituted in the place of circumcision, because
the circumcision of the heart was represented by that of the foreskin,
in order that an internal church might succeed the external church
which in all things figured the internal church, n. 674-676.

IV. The first use of Baptism is introduction into the Christian
Church, and at the same time insertion among Christians in the spiri-
tual world, n. 677-680.

V. The second use of Baptism, is that the Christian may know
and acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ, the Redeemer and Savioui,
and follow Him. n. 681-683.

VI. The third use of Baptism, which is the final use, is that man
may be regenerated, n. 684-687.

VII. By the Baptism of John a way was prepared, so that Jehovah
the Lord could descend into the world and work out redemption,
n. 688-690.


CHAPTER XIIL
The Holy Supper, n. 698-730.

I. Without knowing the correspondence of natural with spiritual
things, no one can know the uses and benefits of the Holy Supper,
n. 698-701.

II. From correspondence it is known what is meant by the Lord’s
flesh and blood, and that the bread and wine have a similar meaning;
that by the Lord’s flesh and by the bread is meant the Good of His
Love, also all the good of charity; and by the Lord’s blood and by the
wine is meant the Truth of His Wisdom, also all the truth of faith; and
by eating is meant appropriation, n. 702-710.


CONTENTS


vii

What is meant by flesh, shown from the Word, n. 704, 705; by
blood, n. 706; by bread, n. 707 ; by wine, n. 708.

III. From understanding what has been shown, it may he under-
stood that the Holy Supper contains all things of the church and of
heaven, universally and severally, n. 711-715.

IV. The Lord is in the Holy Supper in His fulness, with His whole
redemption, n. 716-718.

V. The Lord is present and opens heaven to those who approach
the Holy Supper worthily; and He is also present with those who ap-
proach unworthily, but does not open heaven to them; consequently,
as Baptism is an introduction into the church, so the Holy Supper is
an introduction into heaven, n. 7 19-721.

VI. They approach the Holy Supper worthily, who have faith in
the Lord and are in charity toward the neighbor, thus who are re-
generate. n. 722-724.

VII. They who approach the Holy Supper worthily are in the Lord
and the Lord is in them; consequently conjunction with the Lord is
effected by the Holy Supper, n. 725-727.

VIII. The Holy Supper, to those who approach it worthily, is like
a seal that they are sons of God. n. 728-730.


CHAPTER XIV.

The Consummation of the Age; the Coming of the Lord;
and the New Heaven and New Church, n. 753-791.

I. The consummation of the age is the end of the church, n. 753-
756.

II. The present is the last time of the Christian Church, which was
foretold and described by the Lord in the Evangelists and the Apoc-
alypse. n. 757 - 759 -

III. This last time of the Christian Church is the night into which
former churches have gone down. n. 760-763.

IV. After this night follows morning, and the Coming of the Lord
is the morning, n. 764-767.

V. The Coming of the Lord is not His coming to destroy the visible
heaven and the habitable earth, and to create a new heaven and a
new earth, as many, from not understanding the spiritual sense of
the Word, have supposed, n. 768-771.


via


CONTENTS


VI. This Coming of the Lord, which is the second, takes place in
order that the evil may be separated from the good, that those may-
be saved who have believed and do believe in Him, and that a New
Angelic Heaven may be formed from them, and a New Church on
earth; and without this no flesh could be saved, n. 772-775.

VII. This Second Coming of the Lord is not in person, but is in
the Word, which is from Him and is Himself, n. 776-778.

VIII. This Second Coming of the Lord takes place by means of
a man before whom He has manifested Himself in person, and whom
He has filled with His Spirit, to teach the doctrines of the New Church
through the Word from Him. n. 779, 780.

IX. This is meant by the New Heaven and the New Jerusalem,
n. 781-785.

X. This New Church is the crown of all the churches that have
hitherto existed on earth, n. 786-791.


SUPPLEMENT.

1. The spiritual world; its quality n. 792-795

2. Luther in the spiritual world n. 796

3. Melancthon in the spiritual world n. 797

4. Calvin in the spiritual world n. 798, 799

5. The Dutch in the spiritual world n. 800-805

6. The English in the spiritual world n. 806-812

7. The Germans in the spiritual world n. 813-816

8. The Catholics in the spiritual world n. 817-821

9. The Catholic Saints in the spiritual world n. 822-827

10. The Mohammedans in the spiritual world n. 828-834

ix. The Africans in the spiritual world; and also the

Gentiles n. 835-840

12. The Jews in the spiritual world n. 841-845


CHAPTER ELEVENTH.


IMPUTATION.

I. The faith of the present church (which is said

ALONE TO JUSTIFY) AND IMPUTATION MAKE ONE.

626. The faith of the present church, which is said alone
to justify, is imputation; or, faith and imputation make one
in the present church, because each is of the other, or each
runs into the other, and this mutually and interchangeably,
and gives it being. For if faith is mentioned and imputa-
tion is not added, it is mere sound; and if imputation is
mentioned without the addition of faith, it is also mere
sound; but if the two are named jointly, there is something
articulate, but still without meaning; therefore in order that
the understanding may perceive something, a third term,
which is Christ’s merit, must of necessity be added. And
thus comes a sense which a man may express with some
reason. For it is the faith of the present church that God
the Father imputes His Son’s righteousness, and sends the
Holy Spirit to work out its effects.

627. These three, therefore, faith, imputation, and Christ’s
merit, are one in the present church, and may be called a
trine; for if one of the three were now taken away, the present
theology would become nothing, for this depends on the
three perceived as one, as a long chain on a fixed hook; so if
either faith, or imputation, or Christ’s merit were taken
away, all things that are said of justification, the remission of
sins, vivification, renewal, regeneration, sanctification, and of
the Gospel, free will, charity, and good works, yes, of life
eternal, would become like desolate cities, or ruins of a
temple, and faith itself which leads would be nothing, and so


804 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 627

the whole church would be a desert and a desolation. Hence
it is manifest upon what a pillar the house of God is at this
day based. If this were torn away, the house would fall,
like that in which the lords of the Philistines and three thou-
sand people were at sport; the two pillars of which Samson
pulled down at once, and all then died and were slain (Judges
xvi. 29). This is said because it has already been shown, and
will be shown in the Appendix, that this faith is not Chris-
tian, because it departs from the Word, and that the impu-
tation of this faith is vain, because the merit of Christ cannot
be imputed.

H. The imputation of the faith of the present day is

TWOFOLD, THE IMPUTATION OF CHRIST’S MERIT, AND
THE IMPUTATION OF SALVATION FROM IT.

628. Throughout the Christian Church it is taught that
justification, and hence salvation, is effected by God the
Father through the imputation of the merit of Christ His
Son, and that the imputation is made from grace, when and
where He wills, thus arbitrarily; also that they to whom
Christ’s merit is imputed, are adopted into the number of the
sons of God. And because the leaders of the church have
not advanced beyond that imputation, or raised the mind
above it, from its having been decreed that God’s election is
arbitrary, they have fallen into great and fanatical errors, and
at length into the detestable one of predestination, and fur-
ther into the abominable error that God does not heed the
deeds of man’s life, but only the faith written upon the in-
teriors of the mind. Therefore unless the error respecting
imputation were now abolished, atheism would overrun all
Christendom, and then the king of the abyss, whose name
in Hebrew is Abaddon and in Greek Apollyon, would reign
over it (Apoc. ix. 11). Abaddon or Apollyon signifies de-
stroyer of the church by falsities, and the abyss signifies the
abode of those falsities; see the Apocalypse Revealed , n. 421,


No. 630]


IMPUTATION


805

440, 442; from which it is manifest that that falsity and those
following from it are in a long series, and that that destroyer
reigns over them ; for, as said above, the whole system of the
present theology depends on this imputation, as a long chain
on a fixed hook, and as man with all his members depends on
the head. And because that imputation reigns everywhere,
it is as Isaiah says: The Lord will cut off from Israel head and
tail; the honorable, he is the head ; and the teacher of falsehood ,
he is the tail (ix. 14, 15).

629. The imputation which belongs to the present faith
is said to be twofold; but it is not twofold like God and mercy
toward all, but like God and mercy toward some; or not like
a parent and his love toward all his children, but like a par-
ent and his love toward one or other of them; or not like the
Divine law and its command to all, but the Divine law and
its command to a few. Therefore one kind of doubleness
is extended and undivided, but the other is restricted and
divided; and the latter is doubleness, but the other is oneness.
For it is taught that imputation of Christ’s merit is from ar-
bitrary election, and that those elected have an imputation
of salvation, thus that some are adopted and the rest re-
jected; which would be as if God were to lift some up into
Abraham’s bosom, and give others over as food to the devil;
when yet the truth is, that the Lord rejects and gives up no
one, but that man himself does this.

630. It may be added that the imputation of the day de-
prives man of all power from any free will in spiritual things,
and does not leave him enough to enable him to brush fire
from his clothing and keep his body from harm, or to put out
the fire by pouring on water when his house is burning, and
thus save his family; when yet the Word teaches from begin-
ning to end that every one should shun evils because they are
of and from the devil, and do goods because they are of God
and from God, and teaches that he is to do this of himself, the
Lord working. But the imputation of the day denounces the
power to do this as destructive to faith and hence to salvation,


8o6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 630


so that nothing of man may enter the imputation and so the
merit of Christ; from which established has flowed forth this
satanic one, that man is absolutely without power in spiritual
things, which is like saying, “ Go along, although you have
no feet, not even one; wash yourself, and yet both your hands
are cut off;” or, “Do good, but sleep;” or, “Feed yourself,
but you have no tongue; ” and it is also as if will which is not
will were given. Can he not then say, “ I am no more able
than Lot’s wife as a pillar of salt, or than Dagon the god of
the Philistines when the ark of God was introduced into his
house; I am afraid that my head may be torn off as his was,
and the palms of my hands thrown upon the threshold
(1 Sam. v. 4); nor have I any more power than Baal-Zebub,
the god of Ekron, who, according to the signification of his
name, can only drive away flies.” That at this day such im-
potency in spiritual things is believed, may be seen above
(n. 464) from the extracts respecting free will.

631. As to the first part of the doubleness of that imputa-
tion respecting the saving of men, which is, the arbitrary
imputation of Christ’s merit, and the imputation of salvation
thereby, dogmatists differ; some teaching that the imputation
is absolute from free power, and is made to those whose ex-
ternal or internal form is well pleasing; and some, that im-
putation is made from foreknowledge to those in whom grace
has been infused, and to whom this faith can be applied.
But still these two opinions aim at one goal, and they are
like two eyes which have one stone for their object, or two
ears that have as their object one song. At first view it
seems as if they depart from each other, but still in the end
they join and act together. For since complete impotence
in spiritual things is taught on both sides, and every thing of
man is excluded from faith, it follows that this grace which
is receptive of faith, whether infused arbitrarily or infused
from foreknowledge, is alike election; for if that which is
called preceding grace were universal, application on man’s
part from some power of his own would come in, which.


No. 632]


IMPUTATION


807


nevertheless, is reacted as leprous. Hence it is that no one
knows any more than a stock or a stone, such as he was when
it was infused, whether he has from grace been endowed with
that faith or not - for there is no sign attesting it, when charity,
piety, desire of a new life,. and free faculty of doing good as he
does evil, are denied to man. The signs that are brought
forward as attesting that this faith is in man, are all absurd,
and not unlike the auguries of the ancients, from the flight
of birds, or the determination of differences by the astrolo-
gers from the stars, or by players from dice. Such things,
and others still more absurd, follow from the Lord’s imputed
righteousness, which together with faith, which is called that
righteousness, is communicated to the elected man.

III. The faith imputative of the merit and righteous-
ness of Christ the Redeemer, first arose from the
decrees of the Council of Nice, as to three
Divine Persons from eternity, which faith
has been received by the whole
Christian world from that
time to the present.

632. As to the Nicene Council itself it was convoked by
the emperor Constantine the Great, by the advice of Alexan-
der, bishop of Alexandria, all the bishops in Asia, Africa, and
Europe being summoned to compose it; and was held in his
palace at Nice, a city in Bithynia. Its object was to over-
throw and condemn, from the sacred writings, the heresy of
Arius, a presbyter of Alexandria, who denied the Divinity of
Jesus Christ. This tt)ok place in the year of Christ 325.
The members of that council decided that there were three
Divine Persons from eternity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit;
as is evident especially from the two creeds called the Nicene
and the Athanasian. In the Nicene creed we read; “ I be-
lieve in one God the Father, omnipotent, maker of heaven
and earth; and in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the
only begotten of the Father, bom before all ages, God from


8 o8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 63a


God, consubstantial with the Father, who descended from
the heavens and was incarnated by the Holy Spirit from the
virgin Mary; and in the Holy Spirit, Lord and vivifier, who
proceeds from the Father and the Son, and who together
with the Father and the Son is adored and glorified.” In
the Athanasian creed is the following: “ The Catholic faith
is this, that we worship one God in Trinity, and the Trinity
in Unity, neither confounding the person nor separating the
substance. But as we are compelled by Christian verity to
confess each person separately, God and Lord, so are we for-
bidden by the Catholic religion to say three Gods or three
Lords.” That is, men may confess, but not say, three Gods
and Lords; may not say so because religion forbids, but may
confess them because the truth so dictates. This Athanasian
creed was written out immediately after the holding of the
Nicene Council, by one or more of those who had been pres-
ent, and it was also accepted as oecumenical or catholic. It
is manifest from this that it was then decreed that three Di-
vine Persons from eternity should be acknowledged; and that
although each Person singly by himself was God, still they
ought not to be called three Gods and Lords, but one.

633. That the faith of three Divine Persons has been re-
ceived from that time, and has been confirmed and preached
by all bishops, hierarchs, church rulers, and presbyters, to
the present, is well known in the Christian world; and be-
cause a mental persuasion of three Gods has emanated from
it, no other faith could be devised than one applied to those
three in their order; which is, that God the Father must be
approached and implored to impute His Son’s righteousness,
or to show mercy on account of His Son’s passion on the
cross, and to send the Holy Spirit to work the mediate and
the final effects of salvation. This faith is a birth from those
two creeds; but when the swaddling clothes are removed, not
one but three come to view, at first joined together as it were
in an embrace, but presently separated; for it is declared that
essence joins them together, but peculiar properties, which


No. 634]


IMPUTATION


809


are creation, redemption, operation or imputation, imputed
righteousness, and making this effectual, separate them.
And therefore, though they have composed one God out of
three, yet still they have not made one out of the three Per-
sons; for the reason that the idea of three Gods was not to be
obliterated; for it is not obliterated while each Person singly
is believed to be God* as stated in the creed; if then* as a con-
sequence, the three Persons were made one, the whole house
built upon the three as columns would .fall into a heap. The
reason why that council introduced three Divine Persons
from eternity, was they that did not rightly search the Word,
and therefore they found no other refuge from the Arians.
That they afterward combined into one those three Persons,
each one of whom is God by himself, was from a fear lest
they be fegarded as guilty of belief in three Gods, and re-
proached for it by every rational religious person in the three
divisions of the globe. They taught a faith applied to the
three in their order, because no other faith flows from that
principle; to which it is to be added, if one of the three were
passed by, the third would not be sent, and so every oper-
ation of Divine grace would come to nought.

634. But the truth must be told. When a belief in three
Gods was introduced into the Christian churches, which was
done at the time of the Nicene Council, they banished all good
of charity and all truth of faith, for these two are wholly in-
consistent with mental worship of three Gods and oral wor-
ship at the same time of one God; for the mind denies what
the mouth says, and the mouth denies what the mind thinks;
the result is that there is no belief either in three Gods or in
one. From this it is manifest that from that time the Chris-
tian temple has not only cracked, but has fallen to ruins; and
that from that time the pit of the abyss has been open, from
which has ascended smoke like that of a great furnace,
and the sun and the air have been darkened thereby, and
from it locusts have gone forth on the earth (Apoc. ix. 2, 3).
See the explanation in the Apocalypse Revealed . Yes, from


8io


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 634


that time the desolation foretold by Daniel has begun and
increased (Matt. xxiv. 15), and to that faith and the impu-
tation thereof the eagles have gathered together (verse 28
of the same chapter) ; eagles there mean lynx-eyed leaders of
the church. It may be said that the council in which so
many bishops and honored men sat together passed its decree
by unanimous vote; but what confidence can be placed in
councils, when Roman Catholic councils, also by unanimous
vote, established vicarship of the pope, invocation of saints,
worship of images and bones, division of the holy eucharist,
purgatory, indulgences, and so on? And what confidence
can be placed in councils, when that of Dort, also by unani-
mous vote, decreed detestable predestination, and exalted it
as the palladium of religion ? But, my reader, believe not in
councils, but in the holy Word, and go to the Lord* and you
will be enlightened; for He is the Word, that is, the Divine
truth there.

635. Finally, this arcanum shall be disclosed: in seven
chapters in the Apocalypse the ending of the present church
is described, much as the devastation of Egypt is described;
and both are described by similar plagues, each one of which
spiritually signifies some falsity which continued its devasta-
tion even to destruction; therefore also the present church
which at this day has been destroyed, is called Egypt, spiritu-
ally understood (Apoc. xi. 8). The plagues of Egypt were
the following: the waters were turned into blood, so that every
fish died, and the river stank (Exod. vii.) ; a similar statement
is made in the Apocalypse (viii. 8; xvi. 3); the blood signifies
Divine truth falsified, see Apocalypse Revealed (n. 379, 404,
681, 687, 688); and the fishes which then died signify the
truths in the natural man, likewise falsified (n. 290, 405).
Frogs were brought upon the land of Egypt (Exod. viii.);
something is also said of frogs in the Apocalypse (xvi. 13);
frogs signify reasonings from the desire of falsifying truths,
see Apocalypse Revealed (n. 702). In Egypt noisome sores
were brought upon both man and beast (Exod. ix.); the


No. 636]


IMPUTATION


8ll


same is said in the Apocalypse (xvi. 2); sores signify interior
evils and falsities destroying good and truth in the church,
see Apocalypse Revealed (n. 678). In Egypt there was hail
mingled with fire (Exod. ix.); the same is spoken of in the
Apocalypse (viii. 7; xvi. 21); hail signifies inf ernal falsity, see
Apocalypse Revealed (n. 399, 7 1 4). The locust was sent upon
Egpyt (Exod. x.) ; the same is spoken of in the Apocalypse
(ix. 1-11); locusts signify falsities in outermosts, see Apoca-
lypse Revealed (n. 424, 430). Great darkness was brought
upon Egypt (Exod. x.); so in the Apocalypse (viii. 12); dark-
ness signifies falsities arising either from ignorance, or from
falsities of religion, or from evils of life, see Apocalypse Re-
vealed (n. no, 413, 695). Finally, the Egyptians perished
in the Red Sea (Exod. xiv.); but in the Apocalypse (xix. 20;
xx. 10), the dragon and the false prophet were cast into the
lake of fire and brimstone; both the Red Sea and that lake
signify hell. Similar things are said of Egypt and of the
church whose consummation and end are described in the
Apocalypse, because Egypt means a church which in its be-
ginning was pre-eminent; wherefore Egypt, before its church
was devastated, is compared to the garden of Eden and the
garden of Jehovah (Gen. xiii. 10: Ezek. xxxi. 8); and is also
called the corner-stone of the tribes, the son of the wise, and
of the kings of old (Isa. xix. n, 13). More respecting Egypt
in its primeval and its devastated state may be seen in Apoca-
lypse Revealed (n. 503).


IV. Faith imputative of Christ’s merit was unknown
in the Apostolic Church, which existed earlier,

AND IS NOWHERE MEANT IN THE WORD.

636. The church which existed before the Nicene Council
has been called Apostolic. That it was extensive, and was
spread over three parts of the globe, Asia, Africa, and Eu-
rope, is evident from this, that the emperor Constantine the
Great was a Christian and a zealot for religion, and his do-


8 12


TRUE CHRISTIAN. RELIGION


[No. 636


minion extended not only over many kingdoms of Europe
that were afterwards separated, but also over the neighboring
countries outside of Europe; therefore as before stated, he
assembled bishops from Asia, Africa, and. Europe, in his
palace at Nice, a city of Bithynia, that he might banish from
his empire the scandalous dogmas of Arius. This was done
of the Lord’s Divine Providence, since if the Divinity is de-
nied, the Christian Church is left without life, and becomes
like a sepulchre adorned with the epitaph, “ Here lies.” The
church existing before this time has been called Apostolic,
and its distinguished writers have been called the Fathers;
and the true Christians called one another brethren. That
this church did not acknowledge three Divine Persons, and
therefore acknowledged no Son of God bom from eternity,
but only the Son of God bom in time, is evident from their
creed, which from their church has been called the Apostles’,
where the following words are read: “I believe in God the
Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth; and in Jesus
Christ His only Son our Lord, who was conceived of the Holy
Spirit, bom of the virgin Mary. I believe in the Holy Spirit,
the holy catholic church, the communion of saints.” It is
manifest from this that they acknowledge no other Son of
God than the One conceived of the Holy Spirit and born of
the virgin Mary, and by no means a Son of God born from
eternity. This creed, like the two others, has been acknowl-
edged as purely catholic by the whole Christian Church, to
the present day.

637. That in that primeval time all in what was then the
Christian world acknowledged that the Lord Jesus Christ
was God, to whom was given all power in heaven and earth,
and power over all flesh, according to His own express words
(Matt, xxviii. 18: John xvii 2); and that they believed in Him
according to His commandment from God the Father (John
iii. 15, 16, 36; vi. 40; xi. 25, 26) — this is also very evident from
the convoking of all the bishops by the emperor Constantine
the Great, in order that they might from the sacred writings


No. 638]


IMPUTATION


813


convict and condemn Arms and his followers, who denied
the Divinity of the Lord the Saviour born of the virgin Mary.
This indeed they did, but trying to escape the wolf they came
upon the lion, or, according to the proverb, in their desire to
avoid Charybdis they ran upon Scylla; they did so by the fig-
ment of a Son of God from eternity, who descended and as-
sumed Humanity; believing that they thus vindicated the
Lord’s Divinity and restored it to Him, and not knowing that
God Himself, the Creator of the universe, descended in order
to become the Redeemer, and thus Creator anew, according
to these plain declarations in the Old Testament: Isa. xxv. 9;
xi. 3, 5, 10, 11 ; xliii. 14; xliv. 6, 24; xlvii. 4; xlviii. 17; xlix. 7,
26; lx. 16; lxiii. 16: Jer. 1 . 34: Hos. xiii. 4: Ps. xix. 14; to which
add John i. 14.

638. That Apostolic church which worshipped the Lord
God Jesus Christ, and at the same time God the Father in
Him, may be likened to the garden of God, and Arius who
then arose to the serpent sent from hell, and the Nicene Coun-
cil to Adam’s wife who offered the fruit to her husband and
persuaded him to .eat it, and after eating it they appeared to
themselves naked, and covered their nakedness with fig-
leaves. By their nakedness is meant the innocence in which
they were before; and by fig-leaves, truths of the natural man
which were falsified in succession. That primitive church
may also be compared to the dawn and morning, from which
the day advanced to the tenth hour; but then a dense cloud
intervened, under which the day went on to evening, and
afterward to night, in which the moon arose for some; there
were those who by its light saw something from the Word,
but the others went on into the thick darkness of night so far
that they saw nothing of Divinity in the Lord’s Humanity,
although Paul says that in Jesus Christ dwelleth all the ful-
ness of the Godhead ( or Divinity) bodily (Coloss. ii. 9), and
John, that the Son of God sent into the world is the true God
and eternal Life (1 John v. 2c, 21). The primitive or Apos-
tolic church never could have divined that a church was to


8 14


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 638


follow which would worship more Gods than one in heart,
and one with the lips; which would separate charity from
faith, remission of sins from repentance and the pursuit of a
new life; which would introduce utter impotence in spiritual
things; and, least of all, that Arius would lift up his head, and
when dead would rise again, and secretly rule even to the end.

639. That no faith imputative of Christ’s merit was meant
in the Word, is clearly manifest from this, — that this faith
was not known in the church till after the Nicene Council in-
troduced the three Divine Persons from eternity. And when
this faith was introduced, and pervaded the whole Christian
world, all other faith was cast into the shade; therefore, who-
ever then reads the Word, and sees faith, imputation, and
Christ’s merit, falls of himself into that which he has believed
to be the one only thing; like one who sees what is written on
a single page, and stops there, not turning the leaf and seeing
something else. Or as one who persuades himself that a cer~
tain thing though false is true, and who confirms that only,
then sees falsity as truth and truth as falsity; he would after-
ward set the teeth and hiss at every one opposing it, and say,
“ You do not understand.” The whole mind is in it, covered
with a thickened skin that rejects as heterodox every thing
not consonant with so-called orthodoxy; for man’s memory is
like a tablet upon which is written this one thing that rules in
theology; if any thing else enters there is no room for its in-
sertion, and he therefore ejects it as the mouth does froth.
For example, say to a confirmed naturalist, who believes that
nature created itself, or that God came into existence after
nature, or that nature and God are one, that the very reverse
is true, and would he not look upon you as deluded by the
fables of the presbyters, or simple, or stupid, or deranged?
It is the same with all things that are fixed by persuasion and
confirmation; they appear at last like tapestry fastened with
many nails to a wall laid with crumbling stones.


No. 640]


IMPUTATION


815


V. Imputation op Christ’s merit and righteousness ,is

IMPOSSIBLE.

640. That it may be known that the imputation of the
merit and righteousness of Jesus Christ is impossible, it is
necessary to know what His merit and righteousness are.
The merit of the Lord our Saviour is redemption, the nature
of which may be seen in its chapter above (n. 1 14-133), where
it is described as the subjugation of the hells, the arrange-
ment of the heavens, and the subsequent establishment of a
church, and thus as being a purely Divine work. It is also
shown there that the Lord by redemption entered into the
power of regenerating and saving those who believe in Him
and do His precepts, and that without this redemption no
flesh could have been saved. Now since redemption was a
work purely Divine, and of the Lord alone, and since this is
His merit, it follows that His merit cannot be applied, as-
cribed and imputed to man, any more than the creation and
preservation of the universe. Redemption also was a kind of
new creation of the angelic heaven, and likewise of the
church. That the present church attributes that merit of the
Lord the Redeemer to those who from grace obtain faith, is
manifest from their dogmas, among which this is chief. For
it is said by the hierarchs of this church and by their subor-
dinates, both in the Roman Catholic and the Reformed
churches, that by the imputation of Christ’s merit they who
have obtained faith are not only reputed just and holy, but
that they also are such; and that their sins are not sins in
God’s sight, because they are remitted, ‘and they themselves
are justified, that is, reconciled, renewed, regenerated, sanc-
tified, and enrolled for heaven. That the whole Christian
Church teaches these same things to-day, is clearly evident
from the Council of Trent, the Augustan or Augsburg con-
fessions, and from the comments appended and received with
the same. From what has been said above, when transferred


8i 6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 640


to that faith, what follows but that the possession of this faith
is that merit and that righteousness of the Lord, consequently
that its possessor is Christ in another person? for it is said
that Christ Himself is Righteousness, and that that faith is
righteousness, and that imputation, by which is also meant
ascription and application, causes men not only to be reputed
just and holy, but to be so. To imputation, application,
and ascription, only add transcription, and you will be a
vicarious pope.

641. Since, therefore, the Lord's merit and righteousness
are purely Divine, and as purely Divine are such that if they
were applied and ascribed man would instantly die, and like
a log of wood cast into the naked sun would be so consumed
that hardly a particle of ashes would be left of him, therefore
the Lord approaches angels and men with His Divine by
means of light tempered and moderated to the capacity and
the quality of each one, thus through what is made adequate
and accommodated; and likewise by heat. In the#spiritual
world there is a sun, in the midst of which is the Lord. From
that sun He inflows by light and heat into the whole spiritual
world and into all who are there; all the light and all the heat
there are from this source. From that sun, and with the
same light and the same heat, the Lord also inflows into the
souls and the minds of men. That heat in its essence is His
Divine Love, and that light in its essence is His Divine Wis-
dom. The Lord adapts this light and that heat to the capac-
ity and the quality of the recipient angel and man, which is
done by means of spiritual auras or atmospheres that convey
and transfer them. The Divine itself immediately encom-
passing the Lord makes that sun. This sun is distant from
the angels as the sun of the natural world is from men, so that
it may not touch them without a covering, and thus immedi-
ately; for otherwise they would be consumed, like a log of
wood cast into the naked sun, as said before. It may be evi-
dent from this that the Lord's merit and righteousness, be-
cause they are purely Divine, cannot possibly be brought by


No. 642]


IMPUTATION


817


imputation into any angel or man; yes, if any thing proceed-
ing from them and not thus moderated, as was said, were to
touch them, they would forthwith writhe as if struggling with
death, with cramp in feet, with staring of eyes, and would be-
come lifeless. In the Israelitish church this was made known
by their being told that no one can see God and live. More-
over the sun of the spiritual world, such as it is since Jehovah
God assumed the Human and joined to it Redemption and a
new Righteousness, is described by these words in Isaiah:
The light oj the sun shall be sevenfold , as the light of seven
days , in the day in which Jehovah shall bind up the breach of
His people (xxx. 26). This chapter from beginning to end
treats of the Lord’s Coming. What would take place if the
Lord were to come down and draw near to any impious per-
son, is also described by the following in the Apocalypse:
They hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks 0} the moun -
tains , and said to the mountains and rocks , Hide us from the
face oj Him that sitteth on the throne y and from the wrath of
the Lamb (vi. 15, 16). The wrath of the Lamb is said be-
cause their terror and torment when the Lord draws near so
appear to them. The same again may be clearly inferred
from this, that if any wicked person is admitted into heaven
where charity and faith in the Lord reign, thick darkness
comes upon his eyes, giddiness and madness upon his mind,
pain and torment upon his body, and he becomes as if with-
out life. What then if the Lord Himself, with His Divine
merit which is redemption and with His Divine righteousness,
were to enter into man ? The apostle John himself could not
bear the presence of the Lord, for we read that when he saw
the Son of Man in the midst of the seven candlesticks, he
fell at his feet as one dead (Apoc. i. 17).

642. In the decrees of Councils and in the articles of Con-
fessions to which the Reformed make oath, it is said that God
justifies the wicked man by means of the merit of Christ in-
fused into him; when yet the good of any angel even cannot
be communicated to any wicked man, still less conjoined


8 1 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 642

with him, without being thrown back and rebounding like an
elastic ball thrown against a wall, or swallowed up like a dia-
mond put in a marsh; yes, if any thing truly good were
pressed upon him, it would be as if a pearl were fastened to a
swine’s snout. For who does not know that mercy cannot be
introduced into unmercifulness, innocence into vindictive-
ness, love into hatred, or concord into discord, which would
be like mingling heaven and hell? The man who has not
been bom again is as to his spirit like a panther or an owl, and
may be likened to a thorn -bush and a nettle; while the man
who has been born again is like a sheep or a dove, and may be
likened to an olive-tree or a vine. Consider, I pray, if you
will, how a man-panther can be converted into a sheep or an
owl into a dove, or a thorn-bush into an olive-tree, or a nettle
into a vine, by any imputation, ascription, or application of
the Divine righteousness, which would condemn rather than
justify him. In order that the conversion may take place,
must not the ferine nature of the panther and the owl, or the
noxious quality of the thorn-bush and the nettle, first be
taken away, and what is truly human and harmless implanted
instead? How this is effected the Lord also teaches in John
(xv. 1-7).


VI. There is imputation, but it is that of good and

EVIL, AND AT THE SAME TIME OF FAITH.

643. That there is imputation of good and evil, which is
meant where imputation is named in the Word, is evident
from innumerable passages therein, which indeed have in
part been adduced before; but that every one may be made
certain that there is no other imputation, some passages from
the Word shall be presented here also as follows : The Son of
Man shall come , and then He shall reward every one according
to his deeds (Matt. xvi. 27). They shall come forth , they that
have done good unto the resurrection of life , and they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation (John v. 29). A


No. 643]


IMPUTATION


819


book was opened , which is the book 0} lije, and they were
judged every man according to their works (Apoc. xx. 12, 13).
Behold , I come quickly and My reward is with Me , to give
every man according to his word (Apoc. xxii. 12). I will visit
according to his ways , and I will reward him his works (Hos.
iv. 9: Zech. 1, 6: Jer. xxv. 14; xxxii. 19). In the day of wrath
and of his righteous judgment, God will render to every man
according to his deeds (Rom. ii. 5, 6). We must all appear be-
fore the judgment-seat oj Christ , that every one may receive the
things done in his body, according to that he hath done , whether
it be good or bad (2 Cor. v. 10). There was no other law of
imputation in the beginning of the church, nor will there be
any other at its end. That there was no other at the begin-
ning, is manifest from the case of Adam and his wife, that
they were condemned because they did evil in eating of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil (Gen. ii. iii.); and that
there will be no other at the end of the church, is manifest
from these words of the Lord: When the Son of Man shall
come in the glory of His Father, then shall He sit upon the
throne of His glory; and He shall say to the sheep on His
right hand, Come, ye blessed, inherit the kmgdo?n prepared for
you from the foundation of the world; for I was ahnngered and
ye gave Me meat; I was thirsty and ye gave Me drink; I was
a stranger and ye took Me in; naked and ye clothed Me; I was
sick and ye visited Me; I was in prison and ye came unto Me.
But to the goats on His left, because they had not done good,
He said, Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, pre-
pared for the devil and his angels (Matt. xxv. 31-41). From
these passages any one with his eyes open may see that there
is imputation of good and evil. There is imputation of faith
also, because charity which is of good and faith which is of
truth are together in good words; and that unless they are
together the works are not good, may be seen above (n. 373-
377). Therefore James says: Was not Abraham our father
justified by works, when he offered his son upon the altar?
Seest thou how faith wrought with the works, and from wo, ks


820


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 643


was faith known as perfect? And the Scripture was fulfilled
which saithj Abraham believed God , and it was imputed unto
him for righteousness (Epistle, ii. 21-23).

644. The reason why the prelates of the Christian
churches, and hence their subordinates, by imputation in the
Word have understood the imputation of faith on which the
righteousness and merit of Christ have been inscribed, and
thus ascribed to man. is that for fourteen centuries, that is
since the time of the Nicene Council, they have not wished to
know of any other faith. Therefore this alone has had its
seat in their memory and consequently in their minds, as if
organized there; and from that time this has supplied a light,
like that of a fire in the night time, from which the* faith has
been seen as if it were true theology itself, on which all other
things are dependent in a linked series, and these would fall
asunder if that head or pillar were removed. Therefore if
they were to think of any other than this imputative faith
while reading the Word, that light would be extinguished,
together with all their theology, and a darkness from which
the whole Christian Church would vanish, would arise. It
has therefore been left to them like the stump of roots in the
earth, the tree being hewn down and destroyed, left until
seven times pass over (Dan. iv. 23). Who among the con-
firmed leaders of the church at this day does not, when that
faith is attacked, close his ears as with cotton so as to hear
nothing against it? But, my reader, open your ears, and
read the Word, and you will have clear perception of a
faith and an imputation other than those of which you have
hitherto persuaded yourself.

645. It is wonderful, that although the Word from begin-
ning to end is full of testimonies and proofs that to every man
his own good or evil is imputed, still the dogmatic teachers of
the Christian religion have so closed their ears as if with wax,
and have 'so smeared their eyes as if with eye-salve, that they
have not heard or seen, and do not now hear or see, any im-
putation but that of their own above-named faith. And yet


No. 646]


IMPUTATION


821


this faith may be justly compared to the disease of the eye
called gutta serena , indeed this faith deserves to be so named,
which is absolute blindness of the eye, arising from an ob-
struction of the optic nerve, while yet the eye appears as if
its sight were perfect. So also those who are in that faith
walk as if with open eyes, and seem to others to see all things,
when yet they see nothing; sjnce the man knows nothing
about this faith while it is entering him, for he is then like a
stock; neither does he know afterward whether it is in him,
nor does he know whether there is any thing in it. And
afterward they see, and this too as with clear eyes, this
faith in travail and bringing forth the noble offspring of
justification, that is to say, forgiveness of sins, vivification,
renewal, regeneration, and sanctification; when yet they
have not seen and cannot see a sign of any of them.

646. That the good which is charity, and the evil which is
sin, are imputed after death, has been proved to me by all my
experience as to the lot of those who pass from this to the
other world. After he has waited there for some days, every
one is examined to ascertain his quality, thus what he was as
to religion in the former world; when this has been done, the
examiners carry back their report to heaven, and then he is
transferred to those who are like him, and thus to his own;
imputation is thus made. That there is imputation of good
to all who are in heaven, and of evil to all who are in hell,
was made manifest to me from the arrangement of both by
the Lord. All heaven is arranged in societies according to
all varieties of the love of good, and all hell according to all
varieties of the love of evil. The church on earth is so ar-
ranged by the Lord, for it corresponds to heaven; its religion
is the good. Moreover ask any one you please who is en-
dowed with religion and at the same time with reason,
whether from this or one of .the other two divisions of the
globe, who he believes will go to heaven and who to hell,
and the unanimous answer will be, that they who do good
will go to heaven, they who do evil to hell. Furthermore,


822


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 646


who does not know that every true man loves a man, a
company of many men, a state, and kingdom, from their
good ? yes, not only men, but also beasts, and even inanimate
things, such as houses, possessions, fields, gardens, trees, for-
ests, lands, metals even, and stones, for their goodness and
use; good and use are one. Why should not the Lord love
man and the church from good ?

VII. The faith and imputation of the New Church can

BY NO MEANS BE WITH THE FAITH AND IMPUTATION OF
THE FORMER CHURCH; AND IF THEY ARE TOGETHER,

SUCH COLLISION AND CONFLICT RESULT, THAT
EVERY THING OF THE CHURCH WITH
MAN PERISHES.

647. The faith and imputation of the New Church cannot
be together with the faith and imputation of the former
church, or that which still remains, because they do not agree
in a third or even a tenth part. For the faith of the former
church teaches that three Divine Persons have existed from
eternity, each of them singly or by Himself being God, and so
many Creators also: but the faith of the New Church is, that
there has been but one Divine Person, thus one God, from
eternity, and that there is no other God beside Him. Thus
the faith of the former church has taught a Divine Trinity
divided into three Persons, while that of the New Church
teaches the Divine Trinity united in one Person. The faith
of the former church has been in an invisible God, inacces-
sible, and incapable of conjunction, and of whom the idea
has been like that of spirit, which is like that of ether or
wind: but the faith of the New Church is in a visible God, ac-
cessible, and capable of conjunction, in whom, as the soul in
the body, is the God invisible, inaccessible, and incapable of
conjunction; the idea of whom is that of Man, because the
one God who was from eternity became Man in time. The
faith of the former church attributes all power to the invisible


No. 647]


IMPUTATION


823


God, and denies it to the visible; for it teaches that God the
Father imputes faith, and through it bestows eternal life; and
that the visible God only intercedes; and that both give, or,
according to the Greek church, God the Father gives, to the
Holy Spirit, who is by Himself the third God in order, all
power to work out the effects of that faith: but the faith of the
New Church attributes to the visible God in whom is the in-
visible all power to impute, and also to work out the effects of
salvation. The faith of the former church is in God the
Creator primarily, and not at the same time in Him as Re-
deemer and Saviour: while the faith of the New Church is in
one God who is at once Creator, Redeemer, and Saviour.
The faith of the former church is, that repentance, remission
of sins, renewal, regeneration, sanctification, and salvation,
follow of themselves the faith that is given and imputed, with-
out any thing of man being mingled or joined with them: but
the faith of the New Church teaches repentance, reformation,
regeneration, and thus remission of sins, with man’s cooper-
ation. The faith of the former church teaches the imputa-
tion of Christ’s merit, and the imputation embraced in the
faith that is given: but the faith of the New Church teaches
the imputation of good and evil, and at the same time of
faith, and that this imputation is according to the Sacred
Scripture, while the other is contrary to it. The former
church teaches that faith in which is the merit of Christ is
bestowed while man is like a stock and a stone; and it also
teaches man’s utter impotence in spiritual things: but the
New Church teaches a wholly different faith, which is not
faith in the merit of Christ, but in Jesus Christ Himself,
God, Redeemer, and Saviour, and free will on man’s part
to apply himself for both reception and cooperation. The
former church joins charity as an appendage to its faith,
but not as saving, and so it makes religion: the New Church,
however, conjoins faith in the Lord and charity toward the
neighbor as two inseparable things, and so it makes re-
ligion. They disagree in many other things.


824


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 648


648. From this brief review of the points of the discord-
ances or disagreements, it is manifest that the faith and impu-
tation of the New Church cannot by any means be together
with the faith and imputation of the former church, or that
which still remains; and because there is such discord and

j disagreement between the faith and imputation of one church
and those of the other, they are totally heterogeneous; there-
fore if they were together in a man’s mind, such collision and
conflict would result that every thing of the church would per-
ish, and in spiritual things the man would fall into a delirium
or a swoon, so that he would not know what the church is, or
whether there is a church. Would he then know any thing
of God, any thing of faith, and any thing of charity ? The
faith of the former church, because it excludes all light com-
ing from reason, may be likened to an owl; while the faith of
the New Church may be likened to a dove which flies by day
and sees by the light of heaven. Their conjunction in one
mind would therefore be like the meeting of owl and dove in
the same nest, where the owl would lay her eggs and the dove
hers, and after incubation the young birds would be hatched,
and then the owl would tear the young of the dove to pieces
and give them for food to her own young; for the owl is a vo-
racious bird. As the faith of the former church is described
in the Apocalypse (ch. xii.) by a dragon, and that of the New
Church by a woman encompassed by the sun, upon whose
head was a crown of twelve stars, it may be inferred from the
comparison what the state of a man’s mind would be if the
two were together in one abode; namely, that the dragon
would stand near the woman when she was about to bring
forth, with intent to devour her offspring; and that after she
fled into the wilderness he would follow her, and would cast
out water like a flood upon her, that she might be swallowed
U P-

649. The result would be similar if one were to embrace
the faith of the New Church, and retain that of the former
church, as to the imputation of the Lord’s merit and right-


No. 650]


IMPUTATION


825


eousness; for from this as a root have sprung up all the dog-
mas of the former church as offshoots. If this were to take
place, it would be comparatively as if one should free himself
from five of the dragon’s horns, and let himself be caught by
the other five ; or as if one should escape from a wolf and fall
upon' a tiger; or as if one, coming out of a pit with no water in
it, should fall into one with water, where he would be
drowned. For so he would easily return into all things of the
former faith, and what these are has been shown above; and
then he would come into the damnable falsity that he imputed
and applied to himself the Divine things of the Lord them-
selves, which are redemption and righteousness, and which
may be adored but not applied. For if a man were to impute
and apply those to himself, he would be consumed as if he
were cast into the naked sun; but he sees and lives with the
body from the light and the heat of this sun. That the
Lord’s merit is redemption, and that His redemption and
His righteousness are two Divine things which cannot be con-
joined with man, was shown above. Let every one beware,
therefore, of the transcription of the imputation of the for-
mer church upon that of the new, because baneful results,
which would be obstacles to salvation, would arise from it.

VII. The Lord imputes good to every man, and hell

IMPUTES EVIL.

650. That the Lord imputes good to man and not evil, and
that the devil, by whom is meant hell, imputes evil to man
and not good, is new in the church; it is new because it is fre-
quently read in the Word that God is angry, takes vengeance,
hates, condemns, punishes, casts into hell, and tempts; all of
which are of evil and hence are evils. But that the sense of
the letter of the Word is composed of things called appear-
ances and correspondences, in order that there may be a con-
junction of the external church with the internal, thus of the
world with heaven, has been shown in the chapter concerning


826


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 650


the Sacred Scripture; and it is there shown also that when
such things in the Word are read, the appearances of truth
while they pass from man to heaven are themselves turned
into genuine truths, which are, that the Lord is never angry,
never takes vengeance, hates, condemns, punishes, casts into
hell or tempts, consequently does evil to no man. I have
often observed this change and turning in the spiritual
world.

651. Reason itself assents to this, that the Lord cannot do
evil to any man, hence cannot impute it to him, for He is love
itself, mercy itself, thus good itself, and these are of His Di-
vine essence; therefore to attribute evil or any thing of evil to
the Lord, would be contrary to His Divine essence, and thus
a contradiction; and this would be as inexpressibly wicked as
to conjoin the Lord and the devil or heaven and hell, when
yet there is a great gulf fixed between them, so that they who
wish to pass from the latter to the former cannot, nor can they
pass from the former to the latter (Luke xvi. 26). An angel
of heaven even, cannot do evil to any one, because the essence
of good is in him from the Lord; and on the other hand, a
spirit of hell cannot but do evil to another, because the nature
of evil is in him from the devil. The essence or nature which
any one made his own in the world cannot be changed after
death. Think, I pray, what the Lord would be if He were to
look upon the wicked from anger, and upon the good from
mercy, the evil numbering myriads of myriads, and the good
likewise, and if from grace He were to save the good, and con-
demn the evil from vengeance, and were to look on them
with eye so different, gentle and stern, or mild and severe.
What would the Lord God be then ? Who that has been in-
structed by preaching in temples, does not know that all good
in itself good is from God, and on the other hand, that all evil
in itself evil is from the devil ? If any man, therefore, were to
receive both good and evil, good from the Lord and evil from
the devil, both of them with the will, would he not become
neither cold nor hot, but lukewarm, and therefore be spewed


No * 6 S 2 ] IMPUTATION 827

out, according to the Lord J s words in the Apocalypse? (iii.

*5, 16.)

652. That the Lord imputes good to every man and evil to
.none, hence that he does not judge any one to hell, but so far
as man follows raises all to heaven, is evident from His words:
Jesus said, When I am lifted up from the earth , I will draw all
men unto Myself (John xii. 32.) God sent not His Son into
the world to judge the world , but that the world through Him
might be saved . He that believeth on Him is not judged , but
he that believeth not is judged already (iii. 17, 18). If any
man hath heard My words and yet hath not believed , I judge
him not ; for I came not to judge the world , but to save the
world. He that despiseth Me and receiveth not My words ,
hath one that judgeth him; the Word that I have spoken , the
same shall judge him in the last day (xii. 47, 48). Jesus said,
I judge no man (viii. 15). By judgment here and elsewhere
in the Word is meant judgment to hell, which is damnation;
while of salvation judgment is not predicated, but resurrection
to life (John v. 24, 29; iii. 18). By the Word that shall judge,
is meant truth, and the truth is that all evil is from hell, and
thus that they are one; therefore when a wicked man is raised
by the Lord toward heaven, his evil draws him down, and be-
cause he loves evil he follows of his own will. It is also a
truth in the Word that good is heaven; therefore when a good
man is raised by the Lord toward heaven, he ascends as of his
own will, and is introduced. Such are said to be written in
the book of life (Dan. xii. 1: Apoc. xiii. 8; xvii. 8; xxi. 27).
There is actually a sphere elevating all to heaven, that pro-
ceeds continually from the Lord and fills the whole natural
world and the whole spiritual world; it is like a strong current
in the ocean, which draws the ship in a hidden way. All
those who believe in the Lord and live according to His pre-
cepts, enter that sphere or current and are lifted; but they
who do not believe are unwilling to enter, but remove to the
sides, and are there carried away by a stream that sets toward
hell.


828


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 653


653. Who does not know that a lamb can act only as a
lamb, and a sheep as a sheep ? and, on the other hand, that a
wolf can act only as a wolf, and a tiger as a tiger ? If those
beasts were put together, would not the wolf devour the lamb,
and the tiger the sheep? Therefore there are shepherds to
guard them. Who does not know that a spring of sweet
water cannot from its vein send forth bitter waters, and that
a good tree cannot yield evil fruit, that a vine cannot prick
like a thorn, a lily cause burning like a brier, or a hyacinth
repel with its sting like a thistle ? or the reverse. Those evil
plants' are therefore rooted out of fields, vineyards, and gar-
dens, and being gathered into heaps are cast into the fire.
So is it done with the wicked flocking into the spiritual world
according to the Lord’s words (Matt: xiii. 30: John xv. 6).
The Lord also said to. the Jews, O generation 0} vipers , how
can ye being evil speak good things? A good man out oj the
good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things; and an
evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth fortih evil things
(Matt. xii. 34, 35).


IX. Faith with that to which it conjoins itself, makes
the sentence: if true faith conjoins itself with

GOOD, SENTENCE IS FOR ETERNAL LIFE; BUT IF
THE FAITH CONJOINS ITSELF WITH EVIL,

SENTENCE IS FOR ETERNAL DEATH.

654. The works of charity performed by a Christian and
those done by a heathen, in outward form appear alike, for
one like the other does good deeds of civility and morality to-
ward his fellow, which are in part similar to those of love to-
ward the neighbor; yes, both may give to the poor, aid the
needy, listen to the preaching in temples. But who can
thereby decide whether or not those external goods are alike
in their internal form, or whether the natural are spiritual
also? About this there can be no conclusion except from
faith, for faith gives them quality; for it causes God to be in


No. 656]


IMPUTATION


829


them, and conjoins them with itself in the internal man;
thereby natural good works become inwardly spiritual.
That this is so may be seen more fully from what has been
said in the chapter on Faith, where the following are estab-
lished: That faith is not living before it is conjoined with
charity; That charity becomes spiritual from faith, and faith
from charity; That faith without charity, because it is not
spiritual, is not faith; and that charity without faith, because
it is not living, is not charity; That faith and charity apply
and conjoin themselves to each other mutually and inter-
changeably; That the Lord, charity, and faith make one like
life, will, and understanding; but if they are divided, each
perishes like a pearl reduced to powder.

655. From what has been presented it may be seen that
faith in the one and true God causes good to be good in inter-
nal form also; and on the other hand, that faith in a false god
causes good to be good in outward form only, which is not
good in itself; as was formerly the faith of the gentiles in Jove,
Juno, and Apollo; of the Philistines in Dagon, of others in
Baal and Baalpeor, and of Balaam the magician in his god,
and of the Egyptians in others. It is wholly different with
faith in the Lord, who is the true God and eternal life, accord-
ing to John (1 Epistle, v. 20), and in whom dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily, according to Paul (Col. ii. 9).
What is faith in God but the looking to Him, and hence His
presence, and at the same time confidence that He gives aid ?
And what is true faith but this, and at the same time con-
fidence that all good is from Him, and that He makes His
good to be saving? Therefore if this faith conjoins itself
with good, sentence is made for eternal life; wholly otherwise
if it does not conjoin itself with good, and especially if it con-
joins itself wnth evil.

656. What the conjunction of charity and faith is with
those who believe in three Gods and yet say that they believe
in one, was shown above; namely that charity conjoins itself
with faith in the external natural man only. This is because


830 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 656

the mind is in the idea of three Gods, and the mouth makes
confession of one; therefore if the mind at that moment were
to pour itself forth in confession of the lips, it would prevent
the announcement of one God, but would open the lips and
proclaim its three Gods.

657. That evil and faith in the one and true God cannot
be together, one may see from reason; for evil is against God,
and faith is for Him; and evil is of the will, and faith is of the
thought, and the will flows into the understanding and makes
it think, not the understanding into the will; the understand-
ing merely teaches what is to be willed and done. Therefore
the good that is done by a man who has evil in the will, is in
itself evil; it is like a polished bone, the marrow of which is
rotten; it is like a player on the stage who personates a great
man; it is like the painted face of an outworn harlot; it is like
a butterfly that flying about with its silver wings deposits its
little eggs on the leaves of a good tree, whereby all its fruit is
destroyed; it is like a fragrant smoke from a poisonous herb;
yes, it is like a moral robber and a pious sycophant. There-
fore his good which in itself is evil is in the chamber within,
while his faith, walking in the vestibule and reasoning, is a
mere chimera, spectre, and bubble. From this the truth of
the proposition is manifest, that faith makes sentence as to
the good and the evil which is conjoined with it.

X. Thought is not imputed to any one, but will.

658. Every man of learning knows that there are two fac-
ulties or parts of the mind, the will and the understanding;
but few know how to distinguish them justly, examine their
properties separately, and afterward to conjoin them. They
who cannot do this, can form for themselves only the most
obscure idea as to the mind; therefore unless the properties of
each by itself are first described, it is not comprehended that
thought is not imputed to any one, but will. The properties
of both are in brief the following: 1. Love itself and the


No - 6 59] IMPUTATION 83 1

things of it reside in the will ; and knowledge, intelligence, and
wisdom, in the understanding; the will inspires these with
its love, and works out favor and assent; hence it is that the
man is such as are the love and the intelligence from it. 2.
From this it also follows that all good, and likewise all evil, is
of the will; for whatever proceeds from love is called good,
even if it be evil; for enjoyment, which makes the life of love,
produces this; by this enjoyment the will enters the under-
standing and produces consent. 3. The will is therefore the
esse or the essence of man’s life; the understanding, however,
is the existere or the existence therefrom. And as essence is
nothing unless in some form, so the will is nothing unless in
the understanding; therefore the will forms itself in the un-
derstanding, and so goes forth into the light. 4. Love in the
will is the end, and in the understanding it seeks and finds
causes, by means of which it may move on to the effect. And
because the end is the purpose and this has intention, purpose
is also of the will, and it enters the understanding by the in-
tention, and prompts it to occupy itself with and to consider
means, and to conclude such as tend to effects. 5. All
man’s selfhood is in the will, and this is evil from the first
birth, but becomes good by the second. The first birth is
from parents, but the second from the Lord. From these
few statements it may be seen that the properties of the will
and of the understanding are not the same, and that from
creation they are conjoined like esse and existere; hence that
man is man primarily from the will, and secondarily from the
understanding. Hence it is that will is imputed to man, but
not thought; consequently, evil and good, because these, as
before said, reside in the will and thence in the thought of the
understanding.

659. No evil that a man thinks, is imputed to him, be-
cause man has been so created that he can understand and
hence think good or evil, good from the Lord and evil from
hell; for he is on middle ground, and from free will in spiri-
tual things he has the faculty of choosing one or the other.


832


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 659


This free will has been treated in its own chapter. And be-
cause man has the faculty of choosing from freedom, he can
will and not will; and what he wishes is received by the will
and is made his own, while what he does not wish is not re-
ceived and so is not made his own. All the evils to which
man inclines by birth are written on the will of his natural
man; these inflow, so far as the man takes from them, into
the thoughts; so goods with truths flow from above from the
Lord into the thoughts; and there they are balanced like
weights in a balance. If the man then adopts the evils, they
are received by the old will and add themselves to those there-
in; but if he adopts the goods with the truths, a new will is
formed and a new understanding above the old, and there the
Lord successively implants new goods by means of truths,
and by means of these He subjugates the evils below, and re-
moves them, and arranges all things in order. From this it is
also manifest that thought is the seat of purification and ex-
cretion of the evils residing in man from parents; therefore
if the evils that a man thinks of, were imputed, reformation
and regeneration could not be effected.

660. Since good is of the will and truth is of the under-
standing, and many things in the world correspond to good,
such as fruit and use, while imputation itself corresponds to
the estimation and price, it follows that what has here been
said of imputation may be compared with all created things;
for as before shown in various places, all things in the uni-
verse have relation to good and truth, and on the contrary to
evil and falsity. A comparison may therefore be made with
the church, that its value is reckoned from charity and faith
and not from the rituals which are joined. A comparison
may also be made with the minister of the church, that his
worth is estimated from his will and love and at the same
time from his understanding in spiritual things, and not from
his manners and dress. There is also comparison with wor-
ship and the temple in which it is offered; worship itself takes
place in the will, and in the understanding as in its temple;


No. 661]


IMPUTATION


833


and this temple is called holy not from itself but from the Di-
vine that is there taught. And there is also comparison with
a government where good reigns together with truth, which
government is beloved; but not where truth reigns, and not
good. Who judges of a king by his attendants, horses, and
carriages, and not by the royalty which they know to be in
him ? The royalty is of the love and prudence in governing.
In a triumph who does not regard the victor and from him the
pomp, and not the victor from the pomp ? consequently the
formal from the essential, and not the reverse ? The will is
the essential, and the thought is the formal; and no one can
impute to the formal any thing but what it draws from the
essential; thus imputation is to the latter, not to the former.

661. To this I will add these Relations. First: In the
higher northern quarter near the east in the spiritual world,
are places of instruction for boys, youths, men, and also for
old men. All who died infants, and are being brought up in
heaven, are sent to these places; so, too, all who are new com-
ers from the world, and desire knowledge of heaven and hell.
That district is near the east, so that all may be instructed by
influx from the Lord; for the Lord is the east, because He is
in the sun there, which from Him is pure love; therefore the
heat from that sun in its essence is love, and the light from it
in essence is wisdom. These are inspired into them by the
Lord from that sun, and are inspired according to reception,
and reception is according to the love of being wise. After
periods of instruction, they who have become intelligent are
sent out thence, and these are called disciples of the Lord.
They are sent out first to the west, and those who do not re-
main there to the south, and some through the south to the
east, and are introduced to the societies where their abodes
will be.

Once, when meditating on heaven and hell, I began to de-
sire a universal knowledge of the state of each, knowing that
he who knows universal can afterward comprehend particu-
lars, because these are in them as parts in the whole. With


834


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 66 1


this desire I looked toward that district in the northern quar-
ter near the east, where the places of instruction were, and by
a way then opened to me I went thither, and entered into a
college where young men were. And there I went to the
head teachers who gave instruction, and asked them whether
they knew the universal as to heaven and hell; and they re-
plied that they had some little knowledge of them; “but,”
said they, “ if we look toward the east to the Lord, we shall be
enlightened and shall know.” They did so, and said, “The
universals of hell are three; but these are diametrically op-
posite to the universals of heaven. The universals of hell,
are these three loves: love of ruling from love of self, love of
possessing others’ goods from love of the world, and licentious
love. The universals of heaven opposite to those are these
three loves: love of ruling from love of use, love of possessing
the goods of the world from love of performing uses by means
of them, and true marriage love.” When this was said, after
wishing them peace, I left them and returned home. When
I was at home it was said to me out of heaven, “Explore
those three universals, above and below, and afterward we
shall see them in your hand.” In the hand was said, because
all that a man surveys with the understanding appears to the
angels as if written on the hands. Therefore it is said in the
Apocalypse that they received a mark on the forehead and in
the hand (xiii. 16; xiv. 9; xx. 4).

After this I explored the first universal love of hell, which
was love of ruling from love of self, and afterward the univer-
sal corresponding love of heaven which was love of ruling
from love of uses; for I was not allowed to explore one love
without the other, because the understanding does not per-
ceive one without the other, for they are opposites; therefore,
in order that both may be perceived, they must be placed in
contrast one against the other; for a beautiful and well-
formed face is brought out clearly when an ugly and ill-
formed face is set in contrast. While considering the love of
ruling from love of self, it was given me to perceive that this


No. 661]


IMPUTATION


835


love was supremely infernal, and hence was with those who
are in the deepest hell; and that love of ruling from love of
uses was supremely heavenly, and hence with those who are
in the highest heaven. Love of ruling from love of self is su-
premely infernal, because to rule from love of self is to rule
from self, and man’s self is by birth evil itself, and evil itself
is directly contrary to the Lord; therefore, the more men ad-
vance in that evil the more they deny God and the holy things
of the church, and adore themselves and nature; let those, I
pray, who are in that evil examine it in themselves, and they
will see. This love is also such that so far as rein is given it,
which is done when impossibility does not impede, it rushes
on from step to step, and even to the highest; neither does it
stop there, but if a higher step does not offer, it grieves and
groans. With politicians this love goes higher and higher,
even so that they wish to be kings and emperors, and if pos-
sible to rule over all things in the world and be called kings of
kings and emperors of emperors; while among ecclesiastics
the same love goes higher and higher, even so that they wish
to be gods, and so far as possible to rule over all things of
heaven and be called gods of gods. That these do not in
heart acknowledge any God, will be seen in what follows.
But, on the other hand, they who wish to rule from love of
uses do not wish to rule from themselves, but from the Lord,
since love of uses is from the Lord and is the Lord Himself.
Such regard dignities only as means to perform uses, which
they place far above dignities, while the others place dignities
far above uses.

While meditating on these things it was said to me through
an angel from the Lord, “ Now you shall see, and from seeing
you will be informed, as to the quality of that infernal love.”
Then the earth suddenly opened on the left, and I saw a devil
coming up out of hell, having on his head a square cap
pressed down over his forehead even to the eyes, a face cov-
ered with pustules like those of burning fever, his eyes fierce,
the breast swelling out in a curve; from his mouth he


836 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 661

belched smoke like a furnace, his loins were all on fire, in-
stead of having feet the extremities were bony and without
flesh; and from his body a foul-smelling and unclean heat ex-
haled. I was terrified at the sight of him, and cried out to
him, “ Do not come here; tell me from whence you are.”
He answered hoarsely, “I am from the lower regions, where
I live in a society of two hundred, which is pre-eminent over
all other societies. All of us there are emperors of emperors,
kings of kings, dukes of dukes, and princes of princes; there
is no one there who is merely an emperor, king, duke, or
prince; we there sit on thrones of thrones, and send forth
mandates into all the world, and beyond.”

I then said to him, “Do you not see that you are insane
from the fantasy of pre-eminence ? ” And he replied, “ How
can you talk so? for to ourselves we wholly seem to be such,
and also are acknowledged as such by our companions.”
On hearing this, I did not wish to say again, “You are in-
sane,” because he was so from fantasy; and it was given me
to know that that devil, when he lived in the world, was
merely the steward of some house; and that then he was so
lifted up in spirit, that he despised the whole human race in
comparison with himself, and indulged the fantasy that he
was more worthy than a king, or an emperor even. From
this pride, he had denied God, and had accounted all holy
things of the church as of no concern for him, but as some-
thing for the stupid people. At length I asked him, “How
long do you two hundred there thus glory among your-
selves?” He said, “For ever; but those among us who tor-
ture others for denying their pre-eminence sink down; for
we are allowed to glory, but not to bring evil on any one.”
Again I asked, “Do you know the lot of those who sink
down?” He said, “They sink down into a certain prison,
where they are called viler than the vile, or the vilest, and
where they labor.” I then said to this devil, “ Do you take
heed, then, lest you too sink down.”

After this the earth again opened, but at the right; and I


No. 661J


IMPUTATION


837


saw another devil rising, upon whose head was something
resembling a mitre, with a coil wound round it, like a snake,
the head of which stood out from the crown; his face was
leprous from the forehead to the chin, as were both of his
hands also; the loins were bare and black as soot, while
through the blackness fire like that of a hearth showed dusk-
ily; and the feet were like two vipers. When he was seen,
the former devil threw himself on his knees and worshipped
him. I asked him why he did so. He answered, “ He is god
of heaven and earth, and has all power . 55 I then asked the
other, “ What do you say to this ? 55 He replied, “ What shall
I say? I have all power over heaven and hell; the lot of all
souls is in my hand . 55 Again I asked, “How can he who is
emperor of emperors humble himself so ? and how can you
receive his worship ? 55 His answer was, “ He is still my ser-
vant ; what is an emperor in the sight of God ? The thunder-
bolt of excommunication is in my right hand . 55 And then I
said to him, “ How can you be so insane ? In the world you
were only an ecclesiastic; and because you labored under the
fantasy that you had the keys, and thus the power to bind and
loose, you have worked up your spirit to such a height of mad-
ness that you now believe that you are God Himself . 55 An-
gry at this, he swore that he was; and that the Lord had no
power in heaven “because 55 said he, “He has transferred it
all to us; we need but to command, and heaven and hell rev-
erently obey; if we send any one to hell, the devils at once re-
ceive him; as do the angels him whom we send to heaven . 55
I- asked him further, “How many are you, in your society ? 55
He said, “ Three hundred; and all of us there are gods, but I
am the god of gods . 55

After this the earth opened beneath the feet of them both,
and they sunk down deep into their hells. And it was given
me to see that beneath their hells were workhouses, into
which those would fall who did harm to others. For his own
fantasy is left to every one in hell, and also freedom to glory
in it; but he is not allowed to do evil to another. They are


838


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 66 1


such there, because man is then in his spirit, and after the
spirit is separated from the body it comes into full liberty to
act according to its affections and the thoughts therefrom.
It was afterward given me to look into their hells; and the
hell where the emperors of emperors and kings of kings were,
was full of all uncleanness, and they seemed like wild beasts
of various kinds, with fierce eyes: so too in the other hell,
where the gods and the god of gods were; and in this there
appeared direful birds of night, called ochim and ijim, fly-
ing round them. So did the images of their fantasy appear
to me. It was manifest from this, what is political love of
self, and what is ecclesiastical love of self, that the latter is
that they wish to be gods, but the former, that they wish
to be emperors; and that they wish and long for this, so far
as rein is given to those loves.

After I had seen these sad and dreadful things, I looked
round and saw two angels standing not far from me, and con-
versing; one was clad in a woollen robe brilliant from a
flamy purple glow, and a tunic of shining linen under it; the
other in similar garments of a scarlet color, with a mitre, on
the right side of which were set some sparkling stones. I
went toward them, and, with a salutation of peace, I rever-
ently asked, “ Why are you here below ? ” And they replied,
“ We have come down hither from heaven at the Lord’s com-
mand, to speak with you of the blessed lot of those who desire
to rule from love of uses. We are worshippers of the Lord;
I am the prince of a society, this one is the high priest there.”
The prince also said that he was servant of his society, be-
cause he served it by performing uses; and the other said
that he was minister of the church there, because in serving
them he ministered holy things for the uses of their souls:
also, that they both are in perpetual joy from the eternal hap-
piness which is in them from the Lord; and that all things
in that society are splendid and magnificent, splendid from
gold and precious stones, and magnificent from palaces and
paradises. It was also said, “This is because our love of


No. 661]


IMPUTATION


839


ruling is not from love of self, but from love of uses; and be-
cause love of uses is from the Lord, all good uses in the
heavens are splendid and brilliant; and because in our so-
ciety we are all in this love, the atmosphere appears golden,
from the light there which is from the flame of the sun, and
this corresponds to that love.”

At these words a similar sphere appeared also to me, en-
circling them, and there was a sense of something aromatic
from it, as I also told them, and begged them to add some-
thing more to what they had said about love of use. And
they continued thus: “ The dignities in which we are, we in-
deed sought, but only for the end that we might more fully
perform uses, and extend them more widely. Honor also is
poured upon us, and we accept it, not for our own sake, but
for the good of the society; for our brethren and companions
there, who are of the people, hardly know but that the honors
of our dignities are in us, and thus that the uses we perform
are from us. But we feel it to be otherwise; we feel that the
honors of the dignities are outside of us, and are like garments
with which we are clothed; but that the uses which we fulfil
are from the love of them that is within us from the Lord;
and this love finds its blessedness from communication with
others by means of uses. And we know by experience that,
so far as we perform uses from love of them, that love in-
creases, and with it the wisdom from which communication
is effected; but that so far as we hold the uses in ourselves
and do not communicate them, the blessedness perishes; and
then use becomes like food retained in the stomach, not like
food which being diffused nourishes the body and its parts,
but like that which remains undigested and causes nausea.
In a word, all heaven is nothing but a containant of use, from
firsts to lasts. What is use but actual love of the neighbor ?
And what keeps the heavens together but this love?”

When I heard this I asked, “ How can one know whether
he does uses from love of self, or from love of uses ? Every
man, both good and bad, performs uses, and performs them


840


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 66 1


from some love. Let it be supposed that there is in the
world a society composed of devils only, also a society com-
posed of angels only; and I think that the devils in their
society, from the fire of love of self and from splendor of
their own glory, would perform as many uses as the angels in
theirs. Who can know, therefore, from what love and origin
uses are?” To this the two angels made answer: “ Devils
perform uses for the sake of themselves and of fame, that they
may be exalted to honors, or may gain wealth; but angels
perform uses not for the sake of those things, but for the sake
of the uses from love of them. Man cannot distinguish these
uses, but the Lord distinguishes them. Every one who be-
lieves in the Lord and shuns evils as sins, performs uses from
the Lord; but every one who does not believe in the Lord and
does not shun evils as sins, performs uses from himself and
for his own sake. This is the distinction between uses per-
formed by devils and those performed by angels.” After
this had been said the two angels went away, and in the dis-
tance they seemed to be borne in a chariot of fire like Elijah,
and were taken up into their heaven.

662. Second Relation. After some time I entered a cer-
tain grove, and walked about there, meditating on those who
are in the lust, and hence in the fantasy, of possessing the
things of the world; and then I saw at some distance from me
two angels conversing together, and looking at me in return.
I therefore drew nearer, and addressing me as I approached
they said, “ We perceive in ourselves that you are meditating
on what we are talking about, or that we are talking of what
you are meditating upon, which is owing to the reciprocal
communication of affections.” I therefore asked of what
they were talking; and they said, “ Of fantasy, lust, and in-
telligence; and just now, of those who take delight in seeing
and imagining themselves in possession of all things of the
world.” And I then asked them to express their mind re-
specting the three, lust, fantasy, and intelligence.

And beginning their discourse, they said that every one


No. 662]


IMPUTATION


841


from birth is inwardly in lust, but from education outwardly
in intelligence; and that no one is inwardly in intelligence,
still less in wisdom, thus as to the spirit, except from the Lord.
“ For,” said they, “every one is withheld from the lust of
evil, and kept in intelligence, according to his looking to the
Lord, and at the same time according to conjunction with
Him; without this, man is nothing but lust; but still, in
externals or as to the body he is in intelligence from educa-
tion. For man lusts after honors and wealth, or eminence
and opulence, and these two he does not reach unless he
appears moral and spiritual, thus intelligent and wise; and
from infancy he learns to appear so. This is why he inverts
his spirit as soon as he comes among men or into company,
removing it from lust, and speaking and acting from what is
becoming -and honorable which he has learned from infancy
and retains in the memory of the body; and he is especially
on his guard, that nothing from the madness of lust in which
his spirit is should show itself. Hence every man not in-
wardly led by the Lord, is a pretender, sycophant, hypocrite,
thus appearing as man, and yet not a man; of whom it may
be said, that his shell or body is wise, but his kernel or spirit
is insane; also that his external is human, but his internal
ferine. Such persons look with the occiput upward, but
downward with the forehead; thus they walk as if overcome
with heaviness, the head hanging down, with the face turned
to the earth. When they put off the body and become
spirits, and are then set free, they become the madnesses of
their lust. For they who are in love of self desire to rule over
the universe, yes, to enlarge its borders that they may extend
their dominion thither; they nowhere see an end. They
who are in love of the world desire to possess all things of it,
and they grieve and covet if any treasures are hidden from
them, laid up in others’ stores. Therefore, lest such should
become mere lusts, and so not men, it is granted them in the
spiritual world to think from fear of the loss of reputation,
and thus of honor and gain, as also from fear of the law and


842


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 662


its penalty; and it is also granted them to apply the mind to
some study or work, whereby they are kept in externals, and
so in a state of intelligence, however delirious and insane they
inwardly may be.”

After this I asked whether all those who are in lust are also
in its fantasy. They answered that those are in the fantasy
of their lust who think inwardly in themselves, and indulge
the imagination excessively by talking to themselves; for
these almost separate the spirit from connection with the
body, and from vision they overwhelm the understanding,
and foolishly delight themselves as from universal possession.
Into this delirium the man is let after death who has ab-
stracted his spirit from the body, and has been unwilling to
recede from the delight of the delirium, by taking any thought
from religion as to evils and falsities, and still less as to un-
bridled love of self as destructive of love to the Lord, and un-
bridled love of the world as destructive of love toward the
neighbor.

After this over the two angels and myself also came a de-
sire to see those who from love of the world are in the vision-
ary lust or fantasy of possessing all wealth; and we per-
ceived that we were inspired with this desire in order that
they might be known. Their places of abode were under the
ground on which we stood, but above hell. We therefore
looked at each other and said, “ Let us go.” And an opening
was seen, and a ladder there; by this we descended, and we
were told that they must be approached from the east, that
we might not enter the mist of their fantasy, and have the
understanding beclouded, and at the same time the sight.
And lo, a house was seen, built of reeds, thus full of chinks,
standing in the mist, which like smoke continually poured
through the chinks in three of the walls. We entered, and
there were seen fifty here and fifty there sitting on benches,
and being turned from the east and the south they were look-
ing out toward the west and the north. Before each was a
table, and upon the table were purses filled full, and around


No. 662]


IMPUTATION


843


the purses an abundance of gold coin. And we asked, “ Is
that the wealth of all in the world ? ” They said, “ Not of all
in the world, but of all in the kingdom.” Their speech had a
hissing sound, and they were seen to have round faces having
a ruddy glow like a cockle-shell, and the pupil of the eye
flashed as it were in a field of green, which was from the light
of fantasy. We stood in their midst and said, “You believe
that you possess all the wealth of the kingdom.” And they
answered, “We do possess it.” “Which of you?” we then
asked. They said, “Each one of us.” And we asked,
“How each one of you? You are many.” They said,
“ Each one of us knows, ‘All his things are mine . 5 It is not
lawful for any one to think, still less to say, ‘ My things are
not yours ; 5 but it is lawful to think and say, ‘ Your things are
mine . 555

The coin on the tables appeared as pure gold even in our
sight; but when we let in light from the east they were gran-
ules of gold, which by their common united fantasy they thus
magnified. They said that every one who comes in is obliged
to bring with him some gold which they cut into little pieces,
and these into granules, and by force of fantasy from their
unanimity they enlarge these into coins of larger form. And
we then said, “ Were you not born men of reason ? Whence
has this visionary folly come upon you ? 55 They said, “We
know that it is an imaginary vanity, but because it gives en-
joyment to the interiors of our minds, we enter this place and
are delighted as from the possession of all things; but we
stay here a few hours only; when these have passed we go
out, and as often as we do so a sound mind comes back to us;
but still our visionary diversion comes upon us in its turn, and
this causes us to re-enter and to go out again, by turns; so
we are alternately wise and insane. Besides, we know that a
hard lot awaits those who craftily deprive others of their
goods . 55 We asked, “ What lot ? 55 They replied, “ They are
swallowed up, and are thrust naked into some infernal prison,
where they are kept at work for clothing and food, and after-


844


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 662


ward for a few bits of money, which they collect, and in
which they place the joy of their hearts; but if they do evil
to their companions, they must give up part of their little
coins as a fine.”

663. Third Relation . I was once in the midst of angels
and heard their discourse. It was about intelligence and
wisdom, that man has no sense or perception but that both
are in himself, and so that whatever he wills and thinks is
from himself, when yet no part of them whatever is from
man, except the faculty of receiving them. Among many
other things that they said was also this : that the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil in the garden of Eden signified
the belief that intelligence and wisdom were from man, and
that the tree of life signified that intelligence and wisdom
were from God; and because Adam by persuasion of the ser-
pent ate of the former tree, thus believing that he was or was
becoming like God, he was therefore driven out of the garden
and condemned. While the angels were engaged in this dis-
course, there came two priests, together with a man who in
the world had been the ambassador of a kingdom, and I re-
lated to them what I had heard from the angels about intel-
ligence and wisdom; hearing which, the three began to dis-
pute about them both, and also about prudence, whether
they are from God or from man. The dispute was warm.
The three believed alike, that they are from man, because
sensation itself and hence perception prove it; but the priests,
who were then in their theological zeal, insisted that nothing
of intelligence and wisdom, and so nothing of prudence, is
from man, and they confirmed this by the following from the
Word: A man can receive nothing except it be given him from
heaven (John iii. 27); and from what Jesus said to the dis-
ciples, Without Me ye can do nothing (xv. 5).

But then, because the angels perceived that though the
priests spoke in this way, still in heart they believed the same
as the ambassador, they said to them, “ Lay aside your vest-
ments, and put on the garments of ministers of state, and be-


No. 664]


IMPUTATION


845


lieve yourselves to be such.” And they did so; and then
they thought from the inner self, and spoke from those argu-
ments that they cherished inwardly, which were, that all in-
telligence and wisdom dwell in the man, and are his; for they
said, “Who has ever felt that they flowed in from God?”
And they looked at one another, and confirmed themselves in
this. It is peculiar in the spiritual world that a spirit thinks
himself to be such as his dress is; this is because the under-
standing clothes every one there. At that moment a tree ap-
peared near them, and they were told, “ That is the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil; be careful not to eat of it.”
But still, infatuated with their own intelligence, they burned
with the desire to eat of it and said one to another, “Why
not ? Is it not good fruit ? ” And they drew near and ate of
it. When the ambassador observed this, they came together
and became cordial friends; and holding each other by the
hand, together they went the way of their own intelligence
which tended to hell. But still I saw them conducted back,
because as yet they were not prepared.

664. Fourth Relation . Once I looked into the spiritual
world, toward the right, and observed some of the “elect”
conversing together. I approached them and said, “I saw
you at a distance, and round about you a sphere of heavenly
light, from which I knew you to be of those who in the Word
are called the elect. I therefore drew near to hear on what
heavenly theme you are conversing.” They replied, “Why
do you call us the elect?” I answered, “Because in the
world, where I am in the body, they do not know but that the
elect in the Word mean those elected and predestined to
heaven by God, either before they were born or after their
birth, and that faith, as a token of election, is given to them
alone; that the rest are held as reprobates, and are left to
themselves so that they may go to hell by any way they
please; when yet I know that no election is made either before
or after birth, but that all are elected and predestined to
heaven, because all are called; also that the Lord after their


846


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 664


death elects those who have lived well and believed aright,
and this after they have been examined. That it is so, it has
been given me to know by much experience. And because I
saw your heads encircled with a sphere of heavenly light, I
have perceived that you are of the elect who are preparing for
heaven.” To this they replied: “You relate things never
heard before. Who does not know that there is no man born
who is not called to heaven, and that from those they are
chosen who have believed in the Lord and lived according to
His precepts; and that to acknowledge any other election is to
accuse the Lord Himself, not merely of being impotent to
save, but also of injustice ?”

665. After this a voice was heard out of heaven from the
angels who were directly above us, saying, “ Come up hither,
and we will ask the one of you who is still in the natural
world in body, what they know there about conscience.”
And we went up; and after we had entered, some wise men
came to meet us and asked me, “ What do they know in your
world about conscience ? ” And I replied, “ Let us descend,
if you please, and call together, from both laity and clergy,
a number of those who are believed to be wise, and we will
stand in a direct line beneath you, and will question them;
and so you shall hear with your own ears what they will
answer.”

This was so done. And one of the elect took a trumpet,
and sounded it south, north, east, and west; and then after
a short hour so many were present that they almost filled a
square furlong. But angels from above arranged them all
into four companies, one of politicians, another of scholars, a
third of physicians, and a fourth of clergymen. When thus
arranged we said to them, “Pardon us for calling you to-
gether; we have called you because the angels who are di-
rectly above us ardently desire to know what you thought, in
the world in which you formerly were, about conscience, and
thus what you still think about it, as you yet retain your for-
mer ideas on such subjects; for it has been reported to the an-


No. 665] IMPUTATION 847

gels that knowledge of conscience is among those knowledges
that in the world have been lost.”

After these remarks we began; and first we turned to the
company of politicians; and we asked them to tell us from
the heart, if they pleased, what they had thought, and thus
what they still thought, about conscience. To this they re-
plied, one after another. The sum of their answers was, that
they know only that it is knowing within one’s self, thus being
conscious of what one has intended, thought, done, and
spoken. But we said to them, “ We did not ask about the
etymology of the word, but about conscience.” And the re-
ply was, “ What is it but discomfort from apprehensive fear
of danger to one’s honor or wealth, and also to reputation on
account of them ? but that discomfort is dispelled by feasts
and cups of generous wine, also by talk about the sports of
Venus and her boy.” To this we said, “ You are jesting; tell
us, if you please, whether any of you has had some sense of
anxiety from another source?” They answered, “What
other source ? Is not the whole world like a stage on which
every man acts his part, like actors on theirs ? We play our
game and gain our ends with every person whatever by his
own lust, with some by jests, with some hy flattery, by cun-
ning, by pretended friendship, by feigned sincerity, and hy
various political arts and allurements. From this we feel no
mental discomfort, hut, on the contrary, cheerfulness and
gladness, which with expanded chest we quietly but fully
breathe forth. We have heard, indeed, from some of our
craft, that an anxiety and a sense of constriction as it were
of the heart and chest have at times come over them, and
hence a sort of contraction of the mind; but when they
asked the apothecaries about these things, they were in-
formed that they came from a black humor, from undigested
suh stances in the stomach, or from a disordered state of the
spleen; but with regard to some of these, we have heard
that they were restored to their former cheerfulness by
means of medicines.”


848


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 665


After hearing this, we turned to the company of scholars,
among whom were also several skilful naturalists, and ad-
dressing them we said: “ You, who have studied the sciences,
and therefore are believed to be oracles of wisdom, tell us, if
you please, what conscience is.” And they answered,
“What kind of a subject is this? We have heard, indeed,
that with some there is a sadness, gloom, and anxiety, which
attack not only the gastric region of the body, but also the
dwelling-place of the mind; for we believe that the two brains
are those dwelling-places, and because these consist of con-
taining fibers, that there is some acrid humor which irritates,
gnaws, and consumes them, and thus compresses the sphere
of the mind’s thoughts, so that it cannot pour itself forth into
any of the enjoyments arising from variety; hence it comes
that the man fixes his attention on one thing only, owing to
which the tension and elasticity of these fibres are destroyed,
whence they become unyielding and rigid; from these arises
irregular motion of the animal spirits, which by physicians is
called ataxy, and also a defect in their functions which is
called lipothymia. In a word, the mind then sits as if it were
beset with hostile forces, nor can it turn itself in any direction
more than a wheel fastened with nails, or a ship stuck fast in
quicksands. Such constriction of mind and consequently of
the chest comes upon those with whom the reigning love suf-
fers loss; for if this is assaulted, the fibres of the brain con-
tract, and this contraction prevents the mind from going out
freely and partaking of delights in various forms. Fantasies
of various kinds, madness, and delirium, attack such persons
while this crisis is upon them, each according to his tempera-
ment, and some are attacked by brain sickness in religion,
which they call remorse of conscience.”

After this we turned to the third company, which was of
physicians, among whom there were also some surgeons and
apothecaries. And we said to them, “Perhaps you know
what conscience is. Is it a grievous pain which seizes both
the head and the parenchyma of the heart, extending to the


No. 665]


IMPUTATION


849


subjacent regions, the epigastric and hypogastric? or is it
something else ?” And these replied: “ Conscience is noth-
ing but such pain; we understand its origin better than
others; for diseases occur that affect the organic parts of the
body and also those of the head, consequently the mind also,
since this has its seat in the organs of the brain like a spider in
the midst of the threads of its web, by means of which it runs
out and about in a like way; these diseases we call organic,
and such as return at intervals we call chronic. But the pain
described by the sick as a paiin of conscience, is nothing but
hypochondria, which primarily affects the spleen, and then
the pancreas and mesentery, depriving them of their proper
functions; hence are diseases of the stomach from which
comes deterioration of the juices; for a compression about
the orifice of the stomach, which is called cardialgia, takes
place; from these diseases arise humors impregnated with
black, yellow, or green bile, by which the smallest blood-ves-
sels, which are called capillaries, are obstructed; whence
come cachexy, atrophy, and symphysia, also pneumonia aris-
ing from sluggish pituitous matter, and ichorous and corrod-
ing lymph throughout the whole mass of the blood. Similar
consequences arise when pus finds its way into the blood and
its serum during the softening process in empyema, and from
abscesses and imposthumes in the body. This blood, as it
ascends through the carotids to the head, frets, corrodes, and
destroys the medullary and cortical substances and the me-
ninges of the brain, thus exciting the pains that are called the
pangs of conscience.”

Hearing this we said to them, “You talk the language of
Hippocrates and Galen; those things are Greek to us; we do
not understand them. We did not ask you about these dis-
eases, but about conscience which pertains to the mind only.”
They said, “ The diseases of the mind and of the head are
identical, and those of the head ascend from the body; for
there is a connection like that of the two stories of one house,
between which Is a stairway by which one can ascend and


S50


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 665


descend. We therefore well know that the state of the mind
is inseparably dependent on that of the body; but we have
cured that heaviness of the head or those headaches, which
we take it are what you mean by conscience; some cases by
plasters and blisters, some by infusions and emulsions, and
some by stimulants and anodynes.”

Since what we heard from them was still of the same kind,
we turned from them toward the clergy, saying, “You know
what conscience is; tell us therefore, and instruct those who
are present.” And they replied, “What conscience is, we
know and we do not know. We have believed it to be the
contrition that precedes election, that is, the moment when
man is endowed with faith through which a new heart and
spirit are made for him and he is regenerated. But we per-
ceived that that contrition came upon few; fear and thus anxi-
ety about hell fire came upon some only; and upon scarcely
any one, about his sins and hence the just anger of God.
But we confessors have cured those by the gospel that Christ
took away damnation by the passion of the cross, and so ex-
tinguished hell fire, and opened heaven to those who are
blessed with the faith on which is written the imputation of
the merit of the Son of God. Moreover, there are conscien-
tious persons of different religions, both true and fanatical,
who make for themselves scruples about matters of salvation,
not only in essential matters but also in formal, and even in
what is indifferent. Therefore, as we have said before, we
know that there is conscience, but what and of what quality
true conscience is, which must by all means be spiritual, we
do not know.”

666. All these declarations made by the four assemblies
were heard by the angels who were above them; and they
said to each other, “We perceive that no one in Christendom
knows what conscience is; we will therefore send down from
us one who will give instruction.” And then immediately an
angel in white clothing, stood in their midst, around whose
head appeared a bright band in which were little stars. And


No. 66,6] IMPUTATION 8$ I

addressing the four companies, he said: “We have heard in
heaven that you have presented in succession your opinions
about conscience, and that you all have regarded it as some
pain of mind which attacks the head with heaviness, and
hence the body, or the body and hence the head. But con-
science viewed in itself is not a pain, but a spiritual willing-
ness to do according to what is of religion and of faith.
Hence it is that they who enjoy conscience are in tranquillity
of peace and in internal blessedness when they do according
to conscience, and in a certain disquietude when doing con-
contrary to it. But the pain of mind which you have be-
lieved to be conscience is not conscience but temptation,
which is a conflict of the spirit and the flesh; and this, when
it is spiritual draws from the spring of conscience, but if it is
natural merely, it- originates from those diseases which the
physicians just named. But what conscience is may be illus-
trated by examples: A priest who has spiritual willingness to
teach truths for the end that his flock may be saved, has con-
science; but he who teaches for the sake of any thing else as
an end, has no conscience. A judge who regards justice and
it alone, and executes it with judgment, has conscience; but
he who primarily regards reward, friendship, or favor, has no
conscience. Again, one who has in his possession another’s
goods, the other not knowing it, and so is able to appro-
priate them without fear of the law and the loss of honor
and reputation, but yet restores them to the other because
they are not his own, has conscience, for he does what is just
for the sake of what is just. So again, he who can attain an
office, but, knowing that another who also seeks it is more
useful to society, gives place to him for the sake of the good of
society, has a good conscience. So, too, in other things. All
who have conscience say what they say from the heart, and do
what they do from the heart; for they have a mind that is not
divided, for they say and do according to what they under-
stand and believe to be true and good. It follows from this
that a more perfect conscience can be with those who are in


8 52 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 666

the truths of faith more than others, and who are in a clearer
perception than others, than with those who are less enlight-
ened and are in obscure perception. Man’s spiritual life
is in true conscience, for there his faith is conjoined with
charity; to such, therefore, acting from conscience is acting
from their spiritual life, and acting contrary to conscience is
acting contrary to that life. Furthermore, who does not
know from common conversation what conscience is? As
when it is said of any one, He has conscience, is it not then
meant also that he is just ? But on the other hand, when it is
said of any one, He has no conscience, does not this also
mean that he is unjust?” When the angel had said this, he
was suddenly taken up into his heaven; and the four com-
panies came together in one; and after they had conversed
awhile about the remarks of the angel, behold they were again
divided into four, but not the same as before; one, where
those were who comprehended the words of the angel and as-
sented to them; a second, where those were who did not com-
prehend but still favored them; a third, where those were
who did not wish to comprehend them, saying, “What have
we to do with conscience ? ” and a fourth, where those were
who laughed at what was said, saying, “ What is conscience
but wind?” And I saw them separating from one another,
the two former companies then going to the right, and the
two latter to the left; these downward, but those upward.


CHAPTER TWELFTH.


BAPTISM.

I. Without a knowledge of the spiritual sense of th

Word, no one can know what the two sacraments.
Baptism and the Holy Supper, involve and effect.

667. That there is a spiritual sense in the whole an
everything of the Word, that this sense has been heretofoi
unknown, and that it is at this day opened for the sak
of the New Church to be established by the Lord, has bee
shown in the chapter on the Sacred Scripture. What the
sense is, may be seen not only there but also in the chapter o
the Decalogue, which also is explained according to it. 1
that sense were not opened, who would think of those two sa(
raments, Baptism and the Holy Supper, except according t
the natural sense, which is that of the letter ? saying therefor*
or muttering to himself, “ What is Baptism but pouring wate
on an infant’s head ? and what does this do toward salvation ?
Also, “ What is the Holy Supper but partaking of bread an
wine? and what does this do toward salvation?” And b<
side, “ Where is the holiness in them except from their havin
been received and enjoined by the ecclesiastical order as hoi
and Divine ? ” adding that in themselves they are nothing bx.
ceremonies, that are said by the churches to become sacra
ments when the Word of God comes to those elements. I ap
peal to the laity, and also to the clergy, whether in spirit an
heart they have had any other perception of these two sacra
ments, and whether they have not held them as Divine fc
various causes and reasons; when yet those two sacrament*
viewed in the spiritual sense, are the holiest things of worship
that they are such will be evident from what is to follov


854 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 667

where their uses will be made known,, But since the uses
of these sacraments cannot possibly enter the mind, unless
the spiritual sense uncovers and unfolds them, it follows
that without that sense no one can know otherwise than that
they were ceremonies which are holy because instituted by
commandment.

668. That baptism was commanded, is clearly manifest
from John’s baptizing in the Jordan, to which Jerusalem and
all Judea went out (Matt. iii. 5, 6: Mark i. 4, 5); again from
this, that the Lord our Saviour was Himself baptized by John
(Matt. iii. 13-17); and furthermore, that He commanded the
disciples to baptize all nations (Matt, xxviii. 19). Who that
is willing does not see that in the institution there Is some-
thing Divine hitherto concealed ? and this because the spiri-
tual sense of the Word has not before been revealed. And
this has now been revealed, because the Christian Church, as
it is in itself, is now first beginning; the former church was
Christian in name only, but not in reality and in essence.

669. The two sacraments, Baptism and the Holy Supper,
are in the Christian Church like two jewels in the sceptre of a
king, which, if their uses are unknown, are no more than two
figures of ebony on a staff. These two sacraments in the
Christian Church may also be compared with two rubies or
carbuncles in the robe of an emperor, which, if their uses are
unknown, are like two carnelians or crystals in any cloak.
Without the uses of those two sacraments being revealed by
means of the spiritual sens?, only conjectures about them
would be spread abroad, as of those who practise divination
by the stars, yes, such as there were of old with those who
drew auguries from flying of birds or inspection of entrails.
The uses of these two sacraments may be compared to a
temple, which by reason of its antiquity had sunk into the

. ground, and which now lies buried even to the roof in the sur-
rounding ruins; and over it the old and the young walk, and
ride in carriages or on horses, not knowing that such a temple
is beneath their feet and hidden, in which are altars of gold,


No. 670]


BAPTISM


855


walls of silver within, and decorations of precious stone; and
these cannot be dug up and brought forth into the light except
by means of the spiritual sense which has been now disclosed
for the New Church, for use in the worship of the Lord.
These sacraments may also be compared to a double temple,
one below, and another above; and in the lower one the gos-
pel as to the Lord’s new Coming, and also regeneration and
thence salvation by Him, is preached. From this temple,
near the altar, there is ascent into the upper temple where the
Holy Supper is celebrated; and hence is passage to heaven,
where the Lord receives them. They may also be compared
to the tabernacle, in which, on entering, appears the tahle on
which the shew-bread is arranged in order, also the golden
altar for incense, and in the midst the candlestick with lighted
lamps by which all these come into view; and at length for
those who suffer themselves to be illumined, the veil is opened
to the holy of holies, where instead of the ark, in which was
once the Decalogue, the Word has its place, over which is the
mercy-seat with cherubs of gold. These are representations
of those two sacraments with their uses.


II. By the washing called Baptism spiritual washing

IS MEANT, WHICH IS PURIFICATION FROM EVTLS AND
FALSITIES, AND THUS REGENERATION.

670. That washings were commanded the children of Is-
rael is known from the statutes given through Moses, as that
Aaron should wash himself before putting on the garments of
ministry (Lev. xvi. 4, 24) ; and before approaching the altar
to minister (Exod. xxx. 18-21 ; xl. 30-32); so also the Levites
(Num. viii. 6, 7); and likewise others who became unclean
through sins, and they are said to be sanctified by washings
(Exod. xix. 10; xl. 12: Lev. viii. 6). Therefore in order that
they might wash, the brazen sea and many lavers were placed
near the temple (1 Kings vii. 23-29); yes, we read that they
washed vessels and utensils, such as tables, seats, beds, plat-


Ss6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 670


ters, and cups (Lev. xi. 32; xiv. 8, 9; xv. 5-12; xvii. 15, 16:
Matt, xxiii. 25, 26). But washings and many similar things
were enjoined and commanded upon the children of Israel,
because the church instituted among them was a representa-
tive church, and this was such as to prefigure the Christian
Church to come. Therefore when the Lord came into the
world, He put aside the representatives which were all ex-
ternal, and instituted a church of which all things were to be
internal; thus the Lord dispersed figures and revealed the
very forms, as one withdraws a veil or opens a door, and
causes the interiors not only to be seen but also to be ap-
proached. Of them all the Lord retained but two, to con-
tain all things of the internal church in one aggregate; these
two are Baptism in place of washings, and the Holy Supper in
place of the lamb, of which the sacrifice was daily, and fully
at the feast of the passover.

671. That the washings above mentioned figured and
shadowed forth, that is, represented spiritual washings,
which are purifications from evils and falsities, is clearly
evident from the following passages: When the Lord shall
have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion , and shall
have purged the blood of Jerusalem , in the spirit of judgment
and in the spirit of burning (Isa. iv. 4) . For though thou wash
thee with nitre , and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity will
retain the spots (Jer. ii. 22. See also Job ix. 30, 31). Wash
me from mine iniquity , and I shall be whiter than snow,(Ps. li.
2, 7). O Jerusalem s wash thine heart from wickedness 3 that
thou mayest be saved (Jer. iv. 14). Wash you , make you
clean , put away the evil 0} your doings from before Mine
eyes; cease to do evil (Isa. i. 16). That washing of spirit was
meant by that of the body, and that the internals of the church
were represented by such externals as were in the Israelitish
Church, is clearly manifest from these words of the Lord : The
Pharisees and Scribes seeing that His disciples ate bread with
unwashen hands, found fault; for the Pharisees and all the
Jews, except they wash their hands to the elbow, eat not; and


No. 673]


BAPTISM


357


many other things there be which they have received to hold,
as the washing of cups, and pots, brazen vessels, and of beds.
To them and to the people the Lord said, Hear Me , every one
of you, and understand: There is nothing from without a man,
that entering into him can defile him ; but the things which
come out of him, those are they that defile the man (Mark vi i.
1-4, 14, 15: Matt. xv. 2, 11, 17-20); and from other passages,
as this: Woe unto you , Scribes and Pharisees, for ye make
clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they
are full 0} extortion and excess; thou blind Pharisee, cleanse
first the inside of the cup and platter , that the outside may be
made clean also (Matt, xxiii. 25, 26). From all this it is evi-
dent that by the washing called Baptism spiritual washing is
meant, which is purification from evils and falsities.

672. What man of sound reason cannot see that washing
the face, hands and feet, and all the limbs, yes, the whole
body in a bath, does nothing more than wash away the dirt,
so that they who are washed appear clean in the human form
before men ? And who cannot understand that no washing
enters into man's spirit and renders that equally clean ? For
any villain, plunderer, or robber may wash himself till the
skin shines; but is the disposition to villany, plundering, and
robbery thus washed away ? Does not the internal flow into
the external, and work the effects of its will and understand-
ing, but not the external into the internal? For the latter is
contrary to nature, because contrary to order; but the for-
mer is according to nature, because according to order.

673. From all this it follows that washings and baptisms
also, unless man's internal is purified from evils and falsities,
effect no more than the cups and platters made clean by the
Jews, or, as follows also in the same passage, than the sep-
ulchres which appear beautiful without, but within are full of
dead men’s bones and all uncleanness (Matt, xxiii. 25-28);
which is further manifest from the hells being full of satans
who have been men baptized as well as unbaptized. But the
advantage of Baptism will be seen in what follows. There-


8$8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


LNo. 673


fore without its uses and fruits it contributes no more to salva-
tion than the triple mitre on the pope’s head and the sign of
the cross upon his shoes contribute to his pontifical superem-
inence; and no more than the purple robe upon a cardinal
contributes to his dignity, or the mantle upon a bishop to the
true discharge of his ministry; and no more than the throne,
crown, sceptre, and robe of a king to his regal power; or the
silken cap on the head of a laurelled doctor to his intelligence;
or the standards borne before bodies of cavalry to their bra-
very in war; yes, it may be said still further that Baptism does
not purify man any more than the washing of a sheep or a
lamb before shearing; for the natural man separate from the
spiritual, is merely animal, and indeed, as before shown, is
more a wild beast than those of the forest; so that if you
are washed with the water of the rain, of dew, of most excel-
lent fountains, or, as the prophets say, if you are daily
cleansed with nitre, hyssop, or soap, still you cannot be puri-
fied from iniquities except by the means of regeneration
treated of in the chapters on Repentance, and on Reforma-
tion and Regeneration.


III. Baptism was instituted in place of circumcision,

BECAUSE CIRCUMCISION OF THE HEART WAS REPRESENTED
BY THAT OF THE FORESKIN, IN ORDER THAT THE
INTERNAL CHURCH MIGHT SUCCEED THE
EXTERNAL WHICH IN ALL THINGS
FIGURED THE INTERNAL.

674. It is known in the Christian world that there is an in-
ternal and an external man; also that the external is the
same as the natural, and that the internal is the same as the
spiritual because man’s spirit is in it; and also, as the church
consists of men, that there is the internal and the external
church. And if the churches are viewed in their order, from
ancient times to the present, it will be seen that the former
churches were external, that is, that their worship consisted in


No. 675] BAPTISM 859

externals which represented the internals of the Christian
Church founded by the Lord when He was in the world, and
now first being built by Him. That which primarily dis-
tinguished the Israelitish Church from the others in the Asi-
atic world, and afterward from the Christian Church, was
circumcision. And because, as before said, all things in the
Israelitish Church, which were external, figured all things of
the Christian Church, which are internal, the primary sign of
that church was inwardly similar to the sign of the Christian
Church; for circumcision signified rejection of the lusts of the
flesh, and thus purification from evils, and Baptism also has a
similar signification. ■ From which it is manifest that Bap-
tism was commanded in place of circumcision, in order both
that the Christian Church might be distinguished from the
Jewish, and that the internal church might thus be better
known; and there is this knowledge from the uses of Bap-
tism, of which presently.

675. That circumcision was instituted for a sign that the
men of the Israelitish Church were of the posterity of Abra-
ham, Isaac, and Jacob, is evident from what follows: God
said unto Abraham , This is the covenant with Me, which ye
shall keep between Me and you and thy seed after thee: Every
male among you shall be circumcised. And ye shall circum-
cise the flesh 0} your foreskin, that it may be for a sign of the
covenant between Me and you (Gen. xvii. 9—11). This cove-
nant or its sign was afterward confirmed through Moses
(Lev. xii. 1-3). And as that church was distinguished from
the others by that sign, therefore before the children of Israel
passed over Jordan, the commandment was given them to be
circumcised again (Josh. v.). This was because the land of
Canaan represented the church, and the river Jordan intro-
duction into it. And, furthermore, in order that they might
remember that sign in the land of Canaan itself, it was com-
manded them, When ye shall have come into the land, and
shall have planted all manner 0} trees for food, then ye shall
count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised; three years shall it be


86o


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 675


as uncircumcised unto you; it shall not be eaten of (Lev. xix.
23). That circumcision represented and hence signified re-
jection of the lusts of the flesh, and thus purification from
evils, the same as Baptism, is manifest from passages in the
Word where they are told to circumcise the heart, as in the
following: Moses said, Circumcise the foreskin 0} your heart ,
harden not your neck (Deut. x. 16). Jehovah God will cir-
cumcise thine heart , and the heart 0} thy seed , to love Jehovah
thy God from thy whole heart and from thy whole soul , that
thou mayest live (xxx. 6). And in Jeremiah: Circumcise
yourselves to Jehovah , that He may take away the foreskins of
your heart , thou man 0} Judah and ye inhabitants of Jerusa-
lem , lest Mine anger go forth like fire because of the evil of your
doings (iv. 4). And in Paul: In Jesus Christ neither circum--
cision availeth any thing , nor uncircumcision , but faith which
worketh by charity; also, a new creature (Gal. v. 6; vi. 15).
From these passages it is now plain that Baptism was insti-
tuted in place of circumcision, because by circumcision of the
flesh was represented circumcision of the heart, which also
signifies purification from evils; for all kinds of evil arise
from the flesh, and the foreskin signifies its filthy loves. Be-
cause circumcision and the washing of Baptism have similar
signification, it is said in Jeremiah, Circumcise yourselves
to Jehovah, and take away the foreskins of your heart (iv. 4);
and a little after, O Jerusalem , wash thine heart from wicked-
ness that thou mayest be saved (verse 14), What is circum-
cision and washing of the heart, the Lord teaches in Matthew
(xv. 18, 19).

676. There were many among the children of Israel who
believed that they were elected in preference to all others, and
many among the Jews now believe the same in regard to
themselves, from their having been circumcised; and among
Christians many have had the same bnlief as to themselves,
because they have been baptized; when yet both circumcision
and baptizing were given only as a sign and a memorial that
they should be purified from evils and so become elect.


No. 677]


BAPTISM


86l

What is the external in man without the internal, but like a
temple without worship, which is of no use except perhaps as
a stable ? And further, what is the external without the in-
ternal, but like a field full of reeds and rushes, with no grain ?
Or a vineyard merely of vines and leaves, without grapes ?
Or the fig-tree without its fruit, which the Lord cursed (Matt,
xxi. 19)? Or the lamps in the hands of the foolish virgins
who had no oil (Matt. xxv. 3)? Yes, what is it but like a
dwelling in a mausoleum where there are dead bodies under
foot, bones around the walls, and spectres of the night flying
beneath the roof? Or like a carriage drawn by leopards,
having a wolf as driver, and a fool riding in it ? For the ex-
ternal man is not the man, but only the figure of a man; for
the internal, which is to be wise from God, makes man. So
with one circumcised and baptized, if he does not circumcise
or wash his heart.

IV. The first use of Baptism is introduction into the

Christian Church, and at the same time insertion
among Christians in the spiritual world.

677. That Baptism is introduction into the Christian
Church, is evident from many things, such as these: 1. Bap-
tism was instituted in place of circumcision; and as circum-
cision was the sign that they who received it were of the Is-
raelitish Church, so Baptism is the sign that they who receive
it are of the Christian Church, as shown in the preceding ar-
ticle; and the sign does nothing more than cause them to be
known, as swaddling clothes of different colors are put on the
infants of two mothers so that they may be known apart and
not exchanged. 2. That it is only a sign of introduction
into the church is clearly evident from the baptizing of infants,
who have no part whatever in any reason, and who as yet are
no more fitted for receiving any faith than the young branches
of a tree. 3. Not only are infants baptized, but also all for-
eign proselytes converted to the Christian religion, both


862


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 677


small and great, and this before they have been instructed,
from mere confession of their wish to embrace Christianity,
into which they are inaugurated by Baptism. The same was
also done by the apostles, according to the Lord’s words that
they should make disciples of all nations, and baptize them
(Matt, xxviii. 19). 4. John baptized in the Jordan all who

came to him from Judea and Jerusalem (Matt. iii. 5, 6: Mark
i. 5). He baptized in the Jordan, because entrance into the
land of Canaan was through that river; and the land of Ca-
naan signified the church because it was there, and hence the
Jordan signified introduction to it. That that land signified
the church, and the Jordan introduction to it, may be seen in
the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 285). But this is done on earth.
In the heavens, however, infants are introduced by Baptism
into the Christian heaven, and angels are there assigned them
by the Lord, to take care of them. Therefore, as soon as in-
fants have been baptized, angels are appointed over them, by
whom they are kept in a state to receive faith in the Lord; but
as they grow up, and come into their own control and the ex-
ercise of their reason, the guardian angels leave them, and
they associate themselves with such spirits as make one
with their life and faith. From which it is manifest that
Baptism is also insertion among Christians in the spiritual
world.

678. Not infants only, but also all others, are by Baptism
inserted among Christians in the spiritual world, because
peoples and nations in that world are distinct according
to their religions. Christians are in the centre, Mohamme-
dans are round about them, after them come idolaters of va-
rious kinds, and the Jews are at the sides. Moreover, all
who are of the same religion are arranged in societies; in
heaven, according to affections of love to God and toward the
neighbor; and in hell, into congregations according to affec-
tions opposed to those two loves, and so according to lusts of
evil. In the spiritual world, by which we mean both heaven
and hell, all things both in the whole and in every part, or in


N°. 679]


BAPTISM


863


general and in every particular, are most distinctly arranged;
upon distinct arrangement there the preservation of the
whole universe depends; and this distinction cannot be car-
ried out, unless every one after he is bom is known by some
sign as to what religious community he belongs. For with-
out the Christian sign, which is Baptism, some Mohammedan
spirit, or one from among idolaters, might apply himself to
new-born Christian infants, and to children also, and breathe
into them an inclination for his religion, and so distract their
minds and estrange them from Christianity, which would be
to distort and destroy spiritual order.

679. Every one who traces effects even to their causes,
may know that the consistence of all things depends on order,
and that orders are manifold, general, and particular; and
that there is one which is the most universal of all, and on
which the general and the particular in series depend; also
that the most universal enters into them all, as the essence it-
self into forms, and that thus and thus only do they make one.
It is this unity that effects the preservation of the whole,
which would otherwise fall asunder, and relapse not only to
primal chaos, but to nothing. How would it be with man if
the things in his body, one and all, were not most distinctly
arranged, and if their common life were not dependent on
one heart and one pair of lungs? Otherwise, what would
there be but confusion ? Could the stomach then perform
its functions, the liver and pancreas theirs, the mesentery
and mesocolon theirs, the kidneys and intestines theirs ? It
is from the order in and among them, that all and each of
them appear to man as one. Without distinct order in
man’s mind or spirit, unless its common life were dependent
on the will and understanding, what would there be but
what is confused and indigested? Without that order,
would man be more able to think and will than his picture
on a tablet, or his statue in the house ? What would man
be without a most perfectly arranged influx from heaven,
and the reception of it? And what is this influx without


864


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 679


that which is most universal, on which depends the govern-
ment of the whole and all its parts ? thus unless it be de-
pendent on God, and unless all things have their being, live
and move in Him and from Him ? This may be illustrated
to the natural man by innumerable things, such as these:
Without order, what would an empire or a kingdom be,
but a gang of robbers, many of whom being gathered to-
gether would slay thousands, a few at last slaying these
many ? What is a city without order, yes, what is a house
without order? And what is a kingdom, a city, or a house,
without some one acting the highest part in each ?

680. Furthermore, what is order without distinction ? and
what is distinction without evidences? and what are evi-
dences without signs by which qualities are known? For
without knowledge of qualities, order is not known as order.
In empires and kingdoms the signs or marks are titles of rank,
and the administrative rights attached; hence subordina-
tions, by means of which all are coordinated as into one. So
the king exercises his royal power, distributed according to
order among many; and from this the kingdom becomes a
kingdom. It is similar in very many other things, as for ex-
ample in armies: what strength would they have if they were
not distinctly organized into regiments, these into battalions,
and these again into companies, with subordinate officers
over each, and over all one commander? And what would
these several organizations amount to without the signs
called standards, which are to show in what position every
one should be? By such means all act in battle as one,
while without them they would rush upon the enemy merely
like a pack of hounds with open mouths, with howling, and
vain fury; and then they all, their courage gone, would be
cut to pieces by the enemy formed in well-ordered ranks; for
what can those who are divided do against those who are
united ? By this the first use of Baptism is illustrated, which
is, that it is a sign in the spiritual world that one is of the
Christians; where every one is inserted into societies and con-


No. 682] BAPTISM 865

gregations there, according to the quality of the Christianity
in him or around him.

V. The second use of Baptism is, that the Christian

MAY KNOW AND ACKNOWLEDGE T HE LORD JESUS CHRIST,

the Redeemer and Saviour, and follow Him.

681. This second use of Baptism, which is that the Lord,
the Redeemer and Saviour Jesus Christ may be known, in-
separably follows the first, which is introduction into the
Christian Church, and insertion among Christians in the
spiritual world. And what is this first use without the second
following it, but a mere name? And yet it is really like a
subject that gives his allegiance to a king, and nevertheless
repudiates his laws or those of his country, and yields allegi-
ance to a foreign king and serves him; or like a servant who
binds himself to some master, and accepts his livery as a
token thereof, and then runs away and serves another master
in the livery of the first; or like a standard-bearer who goes
off with the standard and cuts it to pieces, throwing the pieces
into the air, or else throws the standard beneath the feet of
the soldiers to he trodden upon. In a word, the name of a
Christian, that is, that one is of Christ, without acknowl-
edging Him and following Him, that is, living according to
His commandments, is a thing as empty as a shadow, as
smoke, and as a hlackened picture; for the Lord says, Why
call ye Me Lord , and do not the things which I say? (Luke
vi. 46, and the subsequent verses.) Many will say to Me in
that day , Lord , Lord; but then will I profess unto them , 7
nerver knew you (Matt. vii. 22, 23).

682. By the name of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Word
nothing else is meant than acknowledgment of Him, and
life according to His commandments. Why His name has
this signification, you may see in the explanation of the sec-
ond commandment of the Decalogue, Thou shalt not take the
name of God in vain. Nothing else is meant by the name of


866


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 682


the Lord in the following passages: Jesus said, Ye shall be
hated oj all nations for My name's sake (Matt. x. 22; xxiv. 9).
Where two or three are gathered together in My name , there am
I in the midst of them (xviii. 20). As many as received Him ,
to them gave He power to become the sons of God , even to them
that believe on His name (John i. 12). Many believed in His
name (ii. 23). He that believeth not is already judged , be-
cause he hath not believed in the name of the only-begotten
Son of God (iii. 18). Believing , ye shall have life in His
name (xx. 31). For My name's sake thou hast labored , and
hast not failed (Apoc. ii. 3); and elsewhere. Who cannot
see that the name of the Lord in these passages does not
mean His name only, but the acknowledgment of Him as the
Redeemer and Saviour, together with obedience, and finally
faith in Him ? For in Baptism the infant receives the sign of
the cross upon the forehead and breast, which is a sign of in-
auguration into the acknowledgment and worship of the
Lord. The name also means the quality of any one, for the
reason that in the spiritual world every one is named accord-
ing to his quality; therefore the name that one is a Christian
means his quality, that he has faith in Christ, and that he has
charity toward the neighbor, from Christ. This is meant by
name in the Apocalypse: The Son of Man said, Thou host a
few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their gar-
ments , and they shall walk with Me in white , for they are
worthy (iii. 4). Walking with the Son of Man in white
signifies following the Lord and living according to the
truths of His Word. The meaning of name is similar in
John: Jesus said, The sheep hear My voice , and I call Mine
own sheep by name , and lead them out. I go before them , and
the sheep follow Me, for they know My voice; but a stranger do
they not follow , for they know not the voice of strangers (x. 3-5).
By name, is by quality, that they are Christians; and to fol-
low Him, is to hear His voice, that is, to obey His commands.
All receive this name in Baptism, for it is in the sign.

683. What is a name without the reality but a vain thing,


No. 684]


BAPTISM


867


or a sound like the echo given back by trees of the forest or
from vaulted ceilings? or like the almost lifeless tone of
dreamers, the noise of the wind, the sea, or machinery, in
which there is no use? Yes, what is the name of king, duke,
consul, bishop, abbot, or monk, without the office attached to
the name, but vanity? So what is the name of Christian
while the man lives like a barbarian and contrary to the pre-
cepts of Christ, but like looking to Satan’s sign instead of the
sign of Christ, whose name nevertheless was wrought in
golden threads at Baptism? What are they who, after they
have received the sign of Christ, deride His worship, mock
His name, and profess Him not as the Son of God but as
the son of Joseph, but rebels and regicides? And what are
their words but blasphemies against the Holy Spirit, which
cannot be forgiven in this world or the next ? These bite at
the Word like dogs with open jaws, and tear it to pieces
with their teeth; with them, against Christ and His worship,
all tables are jull of vomit and -filthiness (Isa. xxviii. 8: Jer.
xlviii. 26). When yet the Lord Jesus Christ is the Son of
the Most High God (Luke i. 32, 35); the only-begotten
(John i. 18; iii. 16); the true God and Eternal Life (1 John
v. 20); in whom dwelleth all the fulness of Divinity bodily
(Col. ii. 9). And that He is not the son of Joseph, see Matt,
i. 25; besides thousands of other passages.

VL The third use of Baptism, which is the final use,

IS THAT MAN MAY EE REGENERATED.

684. This is the very use for which Baptism was instituted,
and thus the final one. This is because one who is truly
Christian knows and acknowledges the Lord the Redeemer,
Jesus Christ; who, because He is the Redeemer is also the
Regenerator; that redemption and regeneration make one
may be seen in the chapter on Reformation and Regenera-
tion, article iii. ; also because a Christian possesses the Word,
in which the means of regeneration are manifestly described,


868


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 684


they being faith in the Lord and charity toward the neighbor.
This is the same with what is said of the Lord, that He bap-
tizeth with the Holy Spirit and with fire (Matt. iii. 1 1 : Mark
i. 8— x 1 : Luke iii. 16: John i. 33). The Holy Spirit means
the Divine truth of faith, and fire the Divine good of love or
charity, both proceeding from the Lord. That the Holy
Spirit means the Divine fruth of faith may be seen in the
chapter on the Holy Spirit; and that fire means the Divine
good of love may be seen in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 395,
468); and by means of these two, all regeneration is effected
by the Lord. The reason why the Lord Himself was bap-
tized by John (Matt. iii. 13-17: Mark i. 9: Luke iii. 21, 22),
was not merely that He might institute Baptism for the future,
and might go before as an example, but also because He glo-
rified His Human and made it Divine as He regenerates man
and makes him spiritual.

685. From what has been said now and heretofore, it may
be seen that the three uses of Baptism cohere as one, just as a
primary cause which is the efficient, and an ultimate cause
which is the effect, and as the end itself for the sake of which
the former exist; for the first use is that one may be named a
Christian; the second, following from this, is that he may
know and acknowledge the Lord the Redeemer, Regenerator,
and Saviour; and the third, that he may be regenerated by
Him; and when this is done, he is redeemed and saved.
Since these three uses follow in order, and join in the last, and
hence cohere as a one in the idea of the angels, therefore when
Baptism is performed, read in the Word, and named, the an-
gels who are present do not understand Baptism, but regen-
eration. Therefore by these words of the Lord, He that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved , but he that believeth
not shall be condemned (Mark xvi. 16), the angels in heaven
understand that he who acknowledges the Lord and is be-
coming regenerate will be saved. From this also it is, that by
Christian churches on earth Baptism is called the washing of
regeneration. Let the Christian know, therefore, that he


No. 686]


BAPTISM


869


who does not believe in the Lord cannot be regenerated,
though be has been baptized; and that baptizing without
faith in the Lord effects nothing whatever, may be seen above
in the fourth paragraph of the second article of this chapter
(n. 673). That Baptism involves purification from evils, and
thus regeneration, may be well known to every Christian; for
when one is baptized as an infant, the priest with his finger
makes the sign of the cross, as a memorial of the Lord, on his
forehead and over the breast, and afterward turns to the
sponsers and asks whether he renounces the devil and all his
works, and whether he receives the faith; to which the spon-
sors reply in the infant’s stead, “ Yes.” The renunciation of
the devil, that is, of evils which are from hell, and faith in the
Lord, perfect regeneration.

686. It is said in the Word that the Lord God our Re-
deemer baptizes with the Holy Spirit and with fire, which
means that the Lord regenerates man by the Divine truth of
faith and the Divine good of love or charity, as may be seen
above in the first paragraph of this article (n. 684). They
who have been regenerated by the Holy Spirit, that is, by the
Divine truth of faith, are distinguished in the heavens from
those who have been regenerated by fire, that is, by the Di-
vine good of love. They who have been regenerated by the
Divine truth of faith, walk in heaven, in white raiment of
linen, and are called spiritual angels; but they who have been
regenerated by the Divine good of love, walk in purple rai-
ment, and are called celestial angels. They who go clothed
in white raiment are meant in the following passages: They
follow the Lamb, clothed in fine linen white and clean (Apoc.
xix. 14). They shall walk with Me in white (iii. 4; see also
vii. 14). The angels in the Lord’s sepulchre seen in white
and shining garments (Matt, xxviii. 3: Luke xxiv. 4) were of
this class; for fine linen signifies the righteousness of the
saints, as in Apoc. xix. 8, where this is plainly stated. That
garments in the Word signify truths, and that garments of
white and fine linen signify Divine truths, may be seen in the


870


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 686


Apocalypse Revealed (n.379), where this is shown. They
who have also been regenerated by the Divine good of love
are in purple garments, because purple is the color of love,
which it derives from the fire of the sun and its redness, which
fire signifies love, as may be seen in the Apocalypse Revealed
(n. 468, 725). Because garments signify truths, he who was
found among those called to the wedding, not clothed with
wedding garments, was cast out into outer darkness (Matt,
xxii. 11-13).

687. Moreover Baptism as regeneration is represented
both in heaven and the world by many things: in heaven, as
just stated, by white and purple clothing; also by the mar-
riage of the church with the Lord; and also by the new
heaven and the new earth, and the New Jerusalem descend-
ing therefrom, of which He who sat upon the throne said,
Behold } I make all things new (Apoc. xxi. 1-5); and by the
river of living water, proceeding out of the throne of God and
the Lamb (xxii. 1) ; and again by the five prudent virgins who
had lamps and oil, and entered in with the bridegroom to the
marriage (Matt. xxv. 1, 2, 10). One who is baptized, that is,
regenerated, is meant by creature (Mark xvi. 15: Rom. viii.
19-21); and by a new creature (2 Cor. v. 17: Gal. vi. 15);
for he is called a creature from being created, which also sig-
nifies being regenerated, as may be seen in the Apocalypse
Revealed (n. 254). In the world regeneration is represented
variously, as by the blossoming of all things on earth in the
springtime, and by the gradual development of the blossoms,
even to fruiting; by the growth of every tree, shrub, and
flower, from the first month of the warm season to its last; it
is also represented by the progress of all fruits toward ma-
turity, from the earliest germ to their perfection; then again
by morning and evening showers, and by dews, for the com-
ing of which the flowers open, while they close themselves
against the darkness of night; by the fragrance from gardens
and fields; by the rainbow in the cloud (Gen. ix. 14-17); by
the splendid colors of the dawn; and in general by the con-


No. 6SS]


BAPTISM


8/1


tinual renewal of every thing in the body by means of the
chyle and the animal spirit, and lienee by the blood, the puri-
fication of which from substances no longer of use, and its re-
newal and regeneration are, as it were, perpetual. If atten-
tion is given to the most insignificant things on earth, an
image of regeneration is presented in the wonderful change of
silk and other worms into nymphs and butterflies, and of
other kinds which after a time are endowed with wings; to
which may be added what is less important still, that it is
shown in the desire of certain birds to plunge into water for
the sake of washing and cleansing themselves, after which
they return as warblers, to their songs. In a word, the whole
world, from first to last in it, is full of representations and
types of regeneration.


VII. By the BAPTrsM oe John a way was prepared, so
that Jehovah the Lord could descend into the

WORLD AND WORK OUT REDEMPTION.

688. We read in Malachi, Behold I send Mine angel , and
he shall prepare the way before Me, and the Lord whom ye seek
shall suddenly come to His temple, and the Angel of the cove-
nant whom ye desire . Who will abide the day of His coming ,
and who shall stand when He appear eth? (iii. 1, 2.) And
again, Behold I will send you Elijah the prophet , before the
coming of the great and dreadful day of Jehovah; lest I come
and smite the earth with a curse (iv. 5,6). And Zacharias the
father, prophesying of his son John, says, Thou, child, shalt
be called the prophet of the Highest ; thou shalt go before the
face of the Lord, to prepare His ways (Luke i. 76). And the
Lord Himself says concerning the same John, This is he of
whom it is written, Behold I send Mine angel before Thy face ,
who shall prepare Thy way before Thee (vii. 27).. From these
passages it is evident that this John was the prophet sent to
prepare the way for Jehovah God, that He might descend
into the world and work out redemption, and that he pre-


872


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 688


pared that way by Baptism, and by then announcing the com-
ing of the Lord; and that without this preparation all there
would have been smitten with a curse and would have
perished.

689. A way was prepared by the Baptism of John, because
through it, as shown above, men were introduced to the
future church of the Lord, and inserted in heaven among
those there who expected and desired the Messiah; and so
they were guarded by angels, that devils might not break
forth from hell and destroy them. Therefore it is said in
Malachi, Who will abide the day of His Coming? also, Lest
Jehovah come and smite the earth with a curse (iii. 2; iv. 6).
So too in Isaiah, Behold the day of Jehovah cometh, cruel , and
of indignation , and of wrath , and of anger. I will shake the
heaven , and the earth shall tremble out of her place , in the day
of His -jierce anger (xiii. 9, 13; see also verses 6, 22; xxii. 5,
12). Again, in Jeremiah that day is called a day of wasting ,
vengeance , and destruction (iv. 9; vii. 32; xlvi. 10, 21; xlvii.
4; xlix. 8, 26); in Ezekiel, a day of wrath , cloud , and thick
darkness (xiii. 5; xxx. 2, 3, 9; xxxiv. n, 12; xxxviii. 14, 16,
18, 19); as also in Amos (v. 13, 18, 20; viii. 3, 9, 13). In
Joel it is said, The day of the Lord is great and terrible , and
who can abide it? (ii. 1, 2, n, 29, 31.) And in Zephaniah,/?z
that day there shall be the noise of a cry , that the great day of
Jehovah is near; that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble
and distress , a day of wasting and desolation; in the day 0}
Jehovah 7 s wrath the whole land shall be devoured , and He
will make a consummation with all them that dwell in the land
(i. 7-18); besides other passages. From all of which it is
manifest that unless a way had been prepared for Jehovah
descending into the world, by means of Baptism, the effect of
which was in heaven, so that the hells should be closed and
the Jews guarded against total destruction, all on earth must
have perished. Jehovah also says to Moses, In one moment,
if I should come up into the midst of thee, I should consume the
people (Exod. xxxiii. 5). That it is so, is clearly manifest


No. 691]


BAPTISM


873


from the words of John to the multitudes going out to be bap-
tized by him : O generation of vipers , who hath warned yon to
flee from the wrath to co?ne ? (Matt. iii. 7: Luke iii. 7.) That
John also taught Christ and His Coming when he baptized,
may be seen in Luke (iii. 16) and in John (i. 25, 26, 31-33;
iii. 26). It is plain from this how John prepared the way.

690. As to the Baptism of John: that represented cleans-
ing the external man, but the Baptism now with Christians
represents cleansing the internal man, which is regeneration.
We therefore read that John baptized with water, but that the
Lord baptizes with the Holy Spirit and with fire; and the
Baptism of John is therefore called the Baptism of repent-
ance (Matt. iii. 11: Mark i. 4, 5: Luke iii. 3, 16: John i. 25,
26, 33: Acts i. 22; x. 37; xviii. 25). The Jews who were
baptized were merely external men, and the external man
without faith in Christ cannot become internal. That they
who were baptized with John’s Baptism became internal men
when they received faith in Christ, and were then baptized in
the name of Jesus, may be seen in the Acts of the Apostles
(xix. 3-6).

691. Moses said to Jehovah, Show me Thy glory. Je-
hovah said to him, Thou canst not see My face , for there shall
no man see Me and live. And He said, Behold there is a
place where thou shalt stand upon a rock; and I will put thee in
a cleft of the rock , and will cover thee with My hand while I
pass by; and when I shall have removed My hand, thou shalt
see My back, but My face shall not be seen (Exod. xxxiii. 18-23).
The reason why man cannot see God and live, is that God is
love itself, and love itself or Divine love in the spiritual world
appears to the angels as a sun, distant from them as the sun of
our world is distant from men; therefore, if God, who is in
the midst of that sun, were to come near to the angels, they
would perish, as men would if the sun of the world were to
come near to them; for it is equally burning. For this rea-
son there are perpetual tempering media which modify and
moderate the heat of that love, so that it may not flow into


874


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 691


heaven as it is in itself; for the angels would thus be con-
sumed. Therefore when the Lord shows Himself more fully
present in heaven, the impious who are beneath heaven begin
to lament, to be tortured, and to become lifeless; they there-
fore flee into caves and clefts of the mountains, crying, Fall on
us, and hide us from the face of Him that silteth on the
throne (Apoc. vi. 16: Isa. ii. 19, 21). The Lord Himself
does not descend, but an angel with a sphere of love from the
Lord about him. I have several times seen the impious ter-
rified by that descent, as if they saw death itself before their
eyes, some casting themselves deeper and deeper into hell,
and some driven to fury. It was for this reason that the
children of Israel prepared themselves for three days before
the descent of the Lord Jehovah upon Mount Sinai, and that
the mount was fenced about, lest any one should come near
and die (Exod. xix.). It was similar with the holiness of the
Lord Jehovah in the Decalogue then promulgated, and writ-
ten on two tables by the finger of God, and afterward placed
in the ark, upon which in the tabernacle was placed the
mercy-seat, and upon this the cherubs, that no one might
touch that holy thing immediately with hand or eye; and
neither could Aaron come near it but once a year, after hav-
ing made expiation for himself by sacrifices and offerings of
incetise. Hence, also, many thousands of the people of Ek-
ron and Bethshemesh died, merely because they looked into
the ark (x Sam. v. 11, 12; vi. 19); and Uzzah also, because
he touched it (2 Sam. vi. 6, 7). These few things illustrate
with what curse and destruction the Jews would have been
smitten, if they had not been prepared by John’s Baptism to
receive the Messiah who was Jehovah God in the human
form, and unless He had assumed the Human, and so re-
vealed Himself; also that they were prepared by this, that in
heaven they were enrolled and numbered with those who in
heart expected and desired the Messiah, and owing to this
angels were then sent and made their guardians.

692. To this I will add these Relations. First: While re-


No. 692]


BAPTISM


875


turning home from a school of wisdom, I saw on the way an
angel in violet clothing. He joined me at my side, and said,
“I see that you have come from a school of wisdom, and that
you have been made glad by what you heard there; and as I
perceive that you are not fully in this world, because you are
at the same time in the natural world, and do not therefore
know of our Olympic academies where the old Sophi meet,
and learn from those who have lately come from your world
what changes and successions wisdom has undergone and is
still undergoing, if you wish, I will conduct you to a place
where dwell many of the ancient Sophi and their sons, that is,
their disciples.” And he conducted me to the border be-
tween the north and the east; and when I looked forward to
it from a height, lo ! a city appeared, and at one side of it two
hills, the one nearer the city being the lower. And the angel
said to me, “ That city is called Athenaeum, the lower Parnas-
sium, and the higher Heliconeum. They are so named be-
cause in and around the city dwell the old sages of Greece,
such as Pythagoras, Socrates, Aristippus, and Xenophon, to-
gether with their disciples and scholars.” I asked about
Plato and Aristotle; and he said that they and their followers
dwell in another region, because they taught rational things
which belong to the understanding, but the others morals
which relate to the life. He said that studious persons are
frequently sent from the city Athenaeum to the learned of the
Christians, that they may be told what they think at this day
of God, the creation of the universe, immortality, the state of
man compared with beasts,, and other matters of interior wis-
dom. He said also that a herald had this day proclaimed a
meeting, a sign that those who had been sent out had met
with new comers from the earth, from whom they heard curi-
ous things. And we saw many going out of the city and
neighboring parts, some with laurels on their heads, some
with palms in their hands, some with books under their arms,
and some with pens under the hair of the left temple.

We mingled with them and ascended in their company;


876


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 692


and lo ! on the hill an octagonal palace which they called the
Palladium; and we went in. And behold, there were eight
hexagonal rooms there, in each one of which was a library,
and also a table at which sat those with the laurel, and in the
Palladium itself seats cut in stone were seen, upon which the
others sat down. And then a door opened at the left,
through which two visitors were ushered, lately come from
the earth; and after salutations, one of those who wore the
laurel asked them, “ What news from earth ? ” And they re-
plied, “ The news is that human beings like beasts have been
found in the forest, or beasts like human beings, but that
from the face and body they were known as having been born
human, but left or lost in the forest when two or three years
old. It was said that they could not express by sound any
thought, nor could they learn to articulate any word; also
that they did not, like beasts, know the food suited to them-
selves, but put into their mouths things both clean and un-
clean found in the forest. And many such things are told of
them; from which some learned men among us have con-
jectured and some have concluded many things of the state
of men compared with beasts.”

Hearing this, some of the ancient Sophi asked, “ What do
they conjecture and conclude from those facts?” And the
two visitors answered, “Many things; which, however, may
be referred to these: 1. That man from nature, and also
from birth, is more stupid and thus vile than any beast ; and
that he goes on so, if not instructed. 2. That he can be in-
structed, because he has learned to make articulate sounds,
and hence to speak; and that by this he began to express his
thoughts, and this successievly more and more, until he be-
came able to draw out the laws of society, many of which
however are impressed upon beasts from birth. 3. That
rationality belongs as well to beasts as to men. 4. There-
fore if beasts had been able to speak, they would reason on
any subject as skilfully as men; a proof of which is, that they
think from reason and prudence as much as men. 5. That


No. 692] BAPTISM 877

understanding is a mere modification of light from the sun,
heat cooperating, and the ether being the medium; so that it
is merely an activity of the inner nature, and that this can be
exalted even so far as to appear like wisdom. 6. That it is
therefore vain to believe that man lives after death any more
than the beast, except, perhaps, that for some days after
death, from the exhalation of the life of the body, he may ap-
pear as a mist in the form of a ghost, before he is dissipated
into nature; almost as a shrub raised from the ashes appears
in the likeness of its own form. 7. Consequently that relig-
ion, which teaches a life after death, is an invention to hold
the simple in bonds by its laws, from within, as they are held
from without by the laws of the state.” To this they added
that the merely ingenious so reason, but not the intelligent.
And they were asked, “ What do the intelligent say ? ” They
answered that they had not heard, but that they so supposed.

Hearing this, all who were sitting at the tables exclaimed,
“ Oh what times are now on earth! Alas, what changes wis-
dom has undergone! Is it not turned into a foolish ingenu-
ity ? The sun has gone down, and is beneath the earth, di-
rectly opposite to its noonday height. Who may not know
from the evidence presented in those left in the forest and
found again that man is such, if not instructed ? Is he not
what instruction makes him ? Is he not bom more ignorant
than beasts ? Must he not leam to walk and talk ? If he did
not leam to walk, would he raise himself upon his feet ? And
without learning to talk, would he mutter any thought ? Is
not every man what instruction makes him, insane from fal-
sities, and wise from truths ? And is not one who is insane
from falsities in the full fantasy of being wiser than he who is
wise from truths ? Are there not fools and madmen who are
no more men than those found in the forest ? Are not those
who are wholly destitute of memory like them? From all
this we have concluded that man without instruction is not
man nor beast, but a form capable of receiving into itself that
which makes the man, and so that he is not bom a man, but


878


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 692


becomes a man; also that man is born such a form as to be an
organ recipient of life from God, to the end that he may be a
subject to which God may bring every good, and make
blessed for ever by union with Himself. We perceive from
your remarks that wisdom is at this day so far extinguished or
stultified, that nothing whatever is known of the state of the
life of men compared with beasts; hence they do not know
the state of man’s life after death; but they who can know
this, and yet do not wish to know, and hence deny it, as many
of your Christians do, we may liken to those found in the for-
est; not that they have become thus stupid from lack of in-
struction, but they have made themselves so by fallacies of
the senses, which are the darkness of truths.”

But just then some one standing in the middle of the Palla-
dium, holding a palm in his hand, said, “ Unfold, I pray, this
secret; how man, having been created a form of God, could
be changed into a form of the devil. I know that the angels
of heaven are forms of God, and that the angels of hell are
forms of the devil; and the two forms are opposite to each
other, the latter being forms of insanity, the others of wis-
dom. Tell me, therefore, how man, created a form of God,
could pass from day into such a night as to be able to deny
God and eternal life.” To this the teachers made answer in
order, first the Pythagoreans, next the disciples of Socrates,
and afterward the others. But there was among them a cer-
tain Platonist, who spoke last, and his opinion prevailed.
This was, that men of the Saturnian or golden age knew and
acknowledged themselves to be forms recipient of life from
God, and that wisdom was therefore written on their souls
and hearts, and hence that they saw truth from the light of
truth, and by means of truths had perception of good from the
enjoyment of the love of it. But as the race in succeeding
ages had receded from the acknowledgment that all the truth
of wisdom and hence the good of love with them, continually
flowed from God, they ceased to be dwelling-places of God,
and discourse with God and consociation with angels then


No. 692]


BAPTISM


879


ceased. For the interiors of their minds were bent from
their direction which had been upraised to God by God, into
a direction more and more oblique, outward into the world,
and so to God by God through the world; and at length they
were inverted to the opposite direction, which is downward to
self. And as the man who is inwardly inverted and thus
turned away, cannot look to God, men separated themselves
from Him, and became forms of hell and so of the devil.
From this it follows that in the first ages they acknowledged
in heart and soul, that they had all the good of love, and hence
all the truth of wisdom, from God, and also that these were of
God in them; thus that they were only receptacles of life
from God, and were therefore called images of God, sons of
God, and born of God; but that in succeeding ages they ac-
knowledged this not with heart and soul, but with a certain
persuasive faith, afterward with a historic faith, and finally
with the lips only; and to acknowledge a thing like this
with the lips only, is not to acknowledge, yes, it is to deny it
in heart. From this it may be seen what is the wisdom
now on earth and among Christians, though they can be
inspired by God from a written revelation, while they know
not the distinction between man and beast. And there-
fore many believe thaj; if man lives after death, a beast will
live also; or, that as a beast does not live after death,
neither will man live. Has not our spiritual light, which
illumines the sight of the mind, become darkness with them ?
and has not their natural light, which only illumines the
sight of the body, become brightness to them?

After this they all turned to the two visitors, and thanked
them for their company and for what they had told them;
they also begged them to report to their brethren what they
had heard. The visitors answered that it was for them to
confirm their brethren in this truth, that so far as they attrib-
ute all the good of charity and the truth of faith to the Lord
and not to themselves, so far they are men, and become an-
gels of heaven.


88o


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 693


693. Second Relation . Some weeks after this I heard a
voice from heaven saying, “ Lo ! there is again a meeting on
Parnassium; come, we will show you the way.” I went, and
when I was near I saw one standing on Heliconeum with a
trumpet, with which he proclaimed and summoned the meet-
ing. And I saw them as before going up from the city Athe-
naeum and its borders, and in their midst three novitiates
from the world. These three were from among Christians;
one was a priest, another a politician, and the third a philoso-
pher. They were entertaining them on the way with varied
conversation, especially about the ancient wise men whom
they named. The novitiates asked whether they should see
them. They were told that they would, and that they might
salute them if they wished, as they were affable. They asked
about Demosthenes, Diogenes, and Epicurus; it was an-
swered, “ Demosthenes is not here, but with Plato; Diogenes
with his scholars sojourns at the foot of Heliconeum, because
he accounts worldly things as of no moment, and revolves in
his mind heavenly things only; Epicurus dwells on the bor-
der toward the west, and does not come among us because we
distinguish between good affections and evil affections, and
say that good affections are at one with wisdom and that evil
affections are against wisdom.”

When they ascended the hill Parnassium, some guards
brought water from a fountain there in crystal cups, saying,
“This is water from the fountain which, according to the
fable of the ancients, was broken through by the hoof of the
horse Pegasus, and afterward consecrated to the nine virgins;
but by the winged horse Pegasus they understood the under-
standing of truth, by means of which is wisdom; by his hoofs
they understood the experiences through which is natural in-
telligence; and by the nine virgins, knowledges of every kind.
These things are now called fables; but they were correspond-
ences, from which the men of the earliest age spoke.”
Their companions then said to the three visitors, “Be not
surprised; the guards have been instructed to speak so; and


No. 693]


BAPTISM


88 1


drinking water from the fountain, we understand as meaning
to be instructed as to truths, and, by means of truths, as to
goods, and so to be wise.”

After this they entered the Palladium, and with them the
three novitiates from the world, priest, politician, and philos-
opher. Then those wearing the laurel, who were sitting at
the tables, asked, “What news from earth?” And they re-
plied, “ This is new, that a certain man professes to talk with
angels, and to have his sight open into the spiritual world as
fully as into the natural; and from that world he brings
these new things: That man lives a man after death, as he
before lived in the world; that he sees, hears, and speaks as
he did before in the world; that he is clothed and adorned as
before in the world; that he hungers and thirsts, eats and
drinks, as before in the world; that he enjoys marriage de-
light as before in the world; that he sleeps and wakes as be-
fore in the world; that there are lands and lakes, mountains
and hills, plains and valleys, springs and rivers, gardens and
groves; also palaces and houses there, and cities and villages,
as in the natural world; and again writings and books, em-
ployments and business, also precious stones, gold and silver;
in a word, that the things one and all which are on earth, are
there, those in the heavens infinitely more perfect, with the
sole difference that all things in the spiritual world are of
spiritual origin and are therefore spiritual, because they are
from the sun there which is pure love; and that all things in
the natural world are of natural origin, and are therefore nat-
ural and material, because the/ are from the sun there which
is pure fire. In a word, he says that man after death is per-
fectly a man, yes, more perfectly than before in the world;
for before, in the world, he was in a material body, but in
this he is in a spiritual body.”

When this was said, the ancient wise men asked, “ What do
they think of those things on earth?” The three replied,
“ We ourselves know that they are true, because we are here,
and have examined and explored them all; and we shall


882


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 693


therefore tell what they said and reasoned about them on
earth.” And then the priest said, “ Those of our order, when
they first heard those things, called them visions, then fic-
tions; afterward they said that the man saw spectres, and at
last they hesitated, and said, Relieve, if you will; we have
hitherto taught that man is not to be in a body after death un-
til the day of the last judgment.*” It was then asked, “Are
there not some intelligent among them, who are able to dem-
onstrate and convince them of the truth that man lives a man
after death?** The priest said, “There are some who dem-
onstrate it, but they do not convince. They who demon-
strate it say that it is contrary to sound reason to believe that
a man does not live a man until the day of the last judgment,
and that meanwhile he is a soul without a body. What is the
soul, and where is it meanwhile ? Is it breath, or something
like wind, floating in the air, or an entity hidden in the midst
of the earth ? Show us its whereabouts. Have the souls of
Adam and Eve, and of all who have lived since, for these six
thousand years or sixty centuries, still been flying about the
universe, or are they kept shut up in the very centre of the
earth, awaiting the last judgment? What could be more
anxious and wretched than such a waiting? May not their
lot be compared to that of men bound with chains and fetters
in prisons ? If such were the lot of man after death, would it
not be better to be born an ass than a man ? Moreover, is it
not contrary to reason to believe that the soul can be re-
clothed with its body? Is not the body eaten by worms,
mice, and fishes ? Can the skeleton, burnt by the sun or fal-
len into powder, be covered with that new body? How
will those cadaverous and noisome things be collected and
united to the souls? But when they hear such arguments,
they do not answer them with any thing from reason, but
cling to their faith, saying, ‘ We hold reason under obedience
to faith.* As to the gathering of all from the graves at the
day of the last judgment, they say, ‘This is the work of
omnipotence.* And when they name omnipotence and


No - 693] BAPTISM 883

faith, reason is exiled, and I may say that sound reason is
then as naught, or with some is like a spectre; yes, they can
say to sound reason, ‘You are crazy.’”

Having heard this, the wise men of Greece said, “Are not
those paradoxes dissipated of themselves, as contradictions?
and yet in the world at this day even sound reason cannot dis-
sipate them. What greater paradox can be believed than
that which is told of the last judgment, that the universe is
then to pass away, and that the stars of heaven will then fall
to the earth which is smaller than they ? and that the bodies
of men, either carcasses then, or mummies consumed by
men, or mere atoms, are to unite again with their souls?
When we were in the world, we believed in the immortality of
souls from the inferences which reason afforded us, and we
also designated places for the blessed which we called the
Elysian fields; and we believed that souls were human ef-
figies or shapes, but subtile because spiritual.”

After these remarks, they turned to the second visitor, who
in the world had been a politician. He confessed that he had
not believed in a life after death, and that he had thought of
the new things that he had heard about it as fictions and in-
ventions: — “ Meditating upon that life, I said, How can souls
be bodies ? Does not all of the man lie dead in the sepul-
chre ? Is not the eye there ? How can he see ? Is not the
ear there ? How can he hear ? Whence has he a mouth to
speak with ? If any thing of the man w r ere to live after death,
would it be other than a spectre ? and how can a spectre eat
and drink, and how can it enjoy marriage delight ? Whence
does it have clothing, house, food, and other things? And
spectres, which are airy images, seem to be, and yet are not.
These and similar thoughts I had in the world concerning the
life of man after death. But now, since I have seen and
touched every thing with my hands, I am convinced by the
very senses that I am a man as in the world, even so that I
know no other than that I live as I formerly lived, with the
difference that my reason is now more sound. I have more


884


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 693


than once been ashamed of my former thoughts.” The phi-
losopher told similar things of himself, with this difference,
however, that the new things that he had heard respecting
life after death, he classed among the opinions and hypoth-
eses which he had collected from both ancients and moderns.

When they heard these things the Sophi were astounded;
and those who were of the Socratic school said that they per-
ceived by this news from earth that the interiors of human
minds were gradually closed, and that faith in falsity now
shines in the world like truth, and foolish ingenuity like wis-
dom, and that the light of wisdom since their times has low-
ered itself from the interiors of the brain to the mouth be-
neath the nose, where it appears before the eyes as brightness
of the lip, and the speech of the mouth thence appeared like
wisdom. Having heard these things one of the tyros there
said, “And how stupid are the minds of those who now dwell
on earth! Would that the disciples of Democritus and Her-
aclitus were here, those who laugh at every thing and those
who weep at every thing, and we should hear great laughter
and great weeping.” After the business of the meeting was
finished, they gave to the three novitiates from earth badges
of their authority, which were thin plates of copper on which
some hieroglyphics were engraved, with which they departed. .

694. Third Relation. Some time afterward I looked to-
ward the city Athenasum, of which something was said in a
former Relation, and I heard an unusual clamor from it;
there was in it something of laughter, in this something of in-
dignation, and in this something of sadness; but yet that
clamor was not therefore discordant, but there was concord-
ance of sound, because one did not coexist with another, but
one was within another. In the spiritual world variety and
mingling of affections are perceived distinctly in a sound.
At a distance I asked what was the matter. And they said,
“A messenger has arrived from the place where newcomers
from the Christian world first appear, who says that he has
heard from three persons there, that in the world from which


No. 694]


BAPTISM


885


they come they believed with the others there that after death
the blessed and happy would have perfect rest from labors;
and that because administrations, offices, and work are
labors, there would be rest from them. And as those three
have now been brought hither by the messenger whom we
sent, and stand waiting at the door, a clamor has arisen; and
after consultation it was decided that they should not be in-
troduced into the Palladium on Pamassium like the former
visitors, but into the great hall there, that they might tell their
news from the Christian world; and some have been dele-
gated to introduce them formally.”

As I was in the spirit, and to spirits distances are according
to states of affections, and as I then had an affection for seeing
and hearing them, I seemed to myself to be there present;
and I saw them introduced and heard them speak. In the
hall the seniors or wiser ones sat at the sides, and the others
in the middle, and in front of these latter was a raised floor.
Hither the three visitors, together with the messenger, were
conducted through the middle of the hall by the younger ones
in formal attendance. And when silence was obtained, they
were saluted by a certain elder there, and were asked, “ What
news from earth?” And they said, “There are many new
things; but pray tell us to what subject your inquiry refers.”
The elder replied, “What news from earth respecting our
world and heaven?” They answered: “When we first
came into this world, we heard that in it and in heaven there
are administrations, ministries, employments, business, pur-
suits of all kinds of learning, and wonderful works; and yet
our belief was that after migration or transfer from the natu-
ral into this spiritual world, we were to come into eternal rest
from labors; and what are employments but labors?” To
this the elder replied: “By eternal rest from labors did you
understand eternal idleness, in which you would constantly
sit and lie, inhaling delights with the breast, and drinking in
joys with the mouth?”

To this the three visitors, smiling pleasantly, said that they


886


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 694


had some such opinion. And then they were answered:
‘‘What have joys, and delights, and thence happiness, in com-
mon with idleness? From idleness the mind collapses, and
is not expanded; or the man is deadened and not vivified.
Suppose some one sitting in utter idleness, his hands hanging
down, his eyes cast down or withdrawn, and suppose him at
the same time surrounded by a sphere of gladness; would
not lethargy seize both head and body, and the vital expan-
sion of his face contract, and would not he at last with re-
laxed fibres nod and nod until he fell to the ground? What
keeps the whole bodily system expanded and tense but the
tension of the mind ? And whence comes the mind’s tension
but from labors in administration and work, when these are
performed from enjoyment in them? I will therefore tell
you news from heaven, that there are administrations, min-
istries, judicial tribunals greater and less, as also mechanical
arts, and trades.”

The three visitors, when they heard that there were greater
and lesser judicial tribunals in heaven, said, “Why those?
Are not all in heaven inspired and led by God, and do they
not therefore know what is just and right ? What need then
of judges?” And the elder replied, “In this world we are
instructed, and we learn the good and true, also the just and
equitable much as in the natural world; and we learn these
not immediately from God, but mediately through others;
and every angel, like every man, thinks truth and does good
as from himself, and this, according to the state of the angel,
is mixed and not pure: and further, among the angels there
are simple and wise; and the wise must judge, when the
simple from simplicity and from ignorance doubt about
what is just or depart from it. But as you are yet new in
this world, follow me into our city, if it be your good pleasure,
and we will show you all things.” And they left the hall,
and some of the seniors also accompanied them.

And first they entered a large library, which was divided
into smaller collections according to different branches of


No. 694]


BAPTISM


887


knowledge. The three visitors seeing so many books were
amazed, and said, “There are books, too, in this world!
Whence come the parchment and paper? whence the pens
and ink?” The seniors replied, “We perceive that in the
former world you believed this world to be empty because it
is spiritual; and this you believed because you cherished an
idea of the spiritual abstracted from the material; and what
is abstracted from the material appeared to you like nothing,
thus a vacuum; when nevertheless here is fulness of all things;
all things here are substantial, not material; and material
things originate from substantial. We who are here are
spiritual men, because we are substantial and not material.
Hence all things which exist in the natural world are found
here in their perfection, even books and writings, and many
things besides.”

When the three visitors heard the word substantial men-
tioned, they thought that this was so, because they saw the
written books and because they heard the statement that
matter is by origin from substance. That they might be
still further convinced of these things, they were taken to the
abodes of the writers who were copying those things that had
been written by the wise men of the city; and they examined
the writings, and wondered that they were so neat and fin-
ished. After this they were conducted to the museums,
academies, and colleges, and the places where their schools
were held, some of which were called the schools of the Hel-
iconides, some of the Pamassides, some of the Athenseides,
and some of the Virgins of the fountain. They said that the
latter were so named, because virgins signify affections for
knowledges, and according to the affection for knowledges
every one has intelligence. The schools, so called, were
spiritual exercises and trials of skill. They were afterward
conducted about the city to the rulers, administrators, and
their subordinate officers, and by the latter to view the won-
derful works which their artificers execute in a spiritual
way.


888


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 694


After these things had been seen, the elder spoke with
them again about the eternal rest from labors into which the
blessed and happy come after death, and said : “ Eternal rest
is not idleness, for idleness produces languor, torpor, stupor,
and drowsiness of the mind and hence of the whole body, and
these are not life but death, still less is it the eternal life in
which are the angels of heaven. Eternal rest is therefore a
rest that dispels those conditions, and causes man to live;
and this is nothing else than what elevates the mind;
it is therefore some pursuit and work by which the mind
is aroused, enlivened, and delighted; and this is done accord-
ing to the use from, in, and for which it works. Hence the
universal heaven is regarded by the Lord as containing uses,
and every angel is an angel according to use. The enjoy-
ment in use bears him on, as a favoring current does a ship,
causing him to be in eternal peace and the rest of peace.
Eternal rest from labors is thus understood. That an angel
lives according to the application of the mind from use is
clearly manifest from this, that every one has marriage love
with its manhood, potency, and delights, according to his
application to the genuine use in which he is.” After those
three visitors were confirmed in this, that eternal rest is not
idleness but the enjoyment in some work for use, some virgins
came with their handiwork, embroidered and woven, and
presented these to them. And while these novitiate spirits
were going away, the virgins sang an ode, in which with
angelic melody they expressed the affection for works of use
with its charms.

695. Fourth Relation. Most of those who now believe in
a life after death, also believe that in heaven their thoughts
will be only devotions, and their words prayers; and that all
these, together with expressions of the face and actions of the
body, will be simply glorifications of God; and their houses,
so many houses of worship or sacred buildings; and thus that
all will be priests of God. But I can affirm that the holy
things of the church do not there occupy their minds and


No. 695]


BAPTISM


889


homes any more than in the world where the worship of God
is celebrated, though they occupy them more purely and in-
teriorly; but that there, in their excellency, are various things
of civil prudence and rational erudition. One day I was
taken up into heaven, and was conducted to a society there in
which were the Sophi who in ancient times excelled in learn-
ing, from their study and meditation upon such things as be-
longed at once to reason and to use, and who were now in
heaven because they believed in God and now in the Lord,
and loved the neighbor as themselves. And afterward I was
introduced into an assembly of them, and was there asked
whence I came; I told them that in body I was in the natural
world, but in spirit in their spiritual world. Hearing this,
those angels were made glad, and inquired, “ What do they
know and understand about influx in the world where you
are in body ? ” And then, having collected what I had gath-
ered on that subject from discourses and writings of cele-
brated men, I replied that they did not yet know of any in-
flux from the spiritual into the natural world, but of the influx
of nature into nature’s things, as of the sun’s heat and light
into animate bodies, as also into trees and shrubs, which are
thereby all made to live; and, on the other hand, of the influx
of cold into the same, whereby they are made to die; and fur-
thermore, of the influx of light into the eye, whence comes
sight, of sound into the ear, whence hearing, of odor into the
nostrils, whence smell; and so on. In addition to this, the
learned of this age reason diversely as to the influx of the soul
into the body and of the body into the soul, and about this
they divide into three parties, as to whether the influx is of
the soul into the body, which they call occasional, from the
occasion presented by things falling on the senses of the body,
or whether there is an influx of the body into the soul, which
they call physical, because objects fall upon the senses, and
from them upon the soul, or whether there is a simultaneous
and instantaneous influx into the body and at the same time
into the soul, which they term pre-established harmony.


890


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 695


Nevertheless each thinks that the influx to which he holds is
within nature. Some believe the soul to be a particle or drop
of ether, some that it is a little ball or spark of light, and
others that it is some entity hiding itself in the brain. They
indeed call this or that spiritual which is to them the soul, but
by spiritual they mean purer natural; for they do not know
any thing of the spiritual world and of its influx into the natu-
ral world and they therefore remain within the sphere of na-
ture; in this they go up and down, and into it they raise
themselves as eagles into the air; and those who stay in na-
ture are like the nations of some island in the sea who do not
know that there is land beyond them, and they are like fishes
in a stream which do not know that there is air above their
water. Therefore, when a world distinct from their own is
named to them, where angels and spirits dwell, and they are
told that all influx into men is from that world, and also the
influx inwardly into trees, they stand amazed as if listening to
some visionary tales about ghosts, or to the nonsense of as-
trologers. Excepting the philosophers, in the world where I
am in body, our people do not think and speak of any influx
but that of wine into cups, of food and drink into the stom-
ach, of taste into the tongue, and also, it may be, of the influx
of air into the lungs, and so on ; and if they hear any thing said
about an influx of the spiritual world into the natural, they
say, “If it flows in, let it flow; what is the profit or use of
knowing it?” And they go away; and when talking after-
ward about what they have heard of that influx, they play
with it as some play with pebbles between their fingers.

I afterward talked with the angels about the wonders that
arise from the influx of the spiritual world into the natural;
as about grubs which become butterflies, also about bees and
drones, and the wonders respecting silk-worms, and also
about spiders; that the inhabitants of the earth ascribe those
things to the light and heat of the sun, and thus to nature;
and what I have often wondered at, by means of them they
confirm themselves in favor of nature; and by confirmations


No. 696]


BAPTISM


891


in favor of nature they bring sleep and death upon their
minds and hecome atheists. I then related wonderful things
about plants; as that they all progress in proper order from
seed even to new seeds; just as if the earth knew how to fit
and adapt its elements to the prolific part of a seed, to hring
out the germ from it, to expand it into a stem, from this to
send out branches and clothe them with leaves, then to make
them heautiful with flowers, from the interiors of the flowers
to form the rudiments of fruits and develop them, and by
them produce seeds like offspring, in order to he horn again.
But these things, because they have become familiar, usual,
and common, hy being seen continually and by their yearly
recurrence, are not looked upon as wonderful, but as mere
effects of nature; and they have this opinion solely because
they are ignorant that there is a spiritual world, and that
from within this operates upon and actuates the things that
exist and are formed in the world of nature and upon earth,
one and all, and it operates as the human mind operates upon
the senses and motions of the body, and that the particulars
of nature are like tunics, sheaths, and clothing which en-
velop spiritual things, and proximately produce effects cor-
responding to the end designed by God the Creator.

696. Fifth Relation. I once prayed to the Lord that I
might speak with disciples of Aristotle, and at the same time
with those of Descartes and of Leibnitz, in order that I
might obtain their views of the intercourse between the soul
and the body. After I had prayed, nine men presented
themselves, three of them disciples of Aristotle, three of Des
cartes, and three of Leibnitz; and they stood around me, the
adorers of Aristotle on the left, the followers of Descartes on
the right, and the favorers of Leibnitz behind. Far in the
distance, and at some distance from each, three persons were
seen, appearing crowned with laurel; and from perception
which flowed from heaven, I knew them as those leaders or
great teachers themselves. A man stood hehind Leibnitz,
holding the skirt of his garment, who was said to be Wolf.


892


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 696


When the nine men saw each other, they at first saluted and
addressed each other in courteous tones. But just then a
spirit with a torch in his right hand rose up from the lower
regions, and waved the torch before their faces. Thereupon
they became enemies, three parties of them, and looked at
each other with fierce countenances; for the lust of alterca-
tion and dispute seized them.

The Aristotelians, who were also schoolmen, then began,
by saying, “ Who does not see that objects flow through the
senses into the soul, as one passes through a door into a cham-
ber, and that the soul thinks according to the influx ? When
a lover sees the beautiful virgin or bride, does not his eye
sparkle, and bear the love of her to the soul ? When a miser
sees bags of money, is there not burning for them in every
sense, and does not this introduce itself into the soul, and ex-
cite the desire to possess them? When a proud man hears
another praising him, does he not prick up his ears, and do
not these transmit praises to the soul ? Are not the senses of
the body like entrance halls, through which alone is ingress to
the soul ? From these examples and innumerable others
like them, who can draw any other conclusion than that influx
is from nature, or is physical ?”

The followers of Descartes, holding their fingers beneath
the forehead at these remarks, and now withdrawing them,
replied by saying, “Alas, you speak from appearance. Do
you not know that it is not the eye that loves the virgin or
bride, but the soul ? And that the sense of the body does not
of itself desire the money in the purse, but from the soul?
And again, that in no other way do the ears take in the praises
of flatterers? Is it not perception that causes sensation?
and perception is of the soul, not the organ. Tell, if you can,
what causes the tongue and lips to speak but thought ? and
what causes the hands to work but will? and thought and
will are of the soul. Thus what but the soul causes the eye to
see, the ears to hear, and the other organs to feel, to attend to
objects and turn toward them? From these examples and


No. 697] BAPTISM 893

innumerable others like them, one who is wise above the sen-
suals of the body concludes that there is no influx of the hody
into the soul, but of the soul into the body. This is called by
us occasional and also spiritual influx.”

When this was heard, the three who stood behind the for-
mer triads and who favored Leibnitz, raised the voice and
said, “ We have heard the arguments on both sides, and have
compared them, and have perceived that in many respects
the first are the stronger, while in many the last are the
stronger. We therefore, if permitted, will settle the dispute.”
Being asked how they would do this, they said: “ There is no
influx of the soul into the hody, and none of the body into the
soul; but there is a unanimous and instantaneous operation
of both together, which a celebrated author has designated
by a beautiful term, calling it pre-established harmony.”
After this the spirit appeared again with the torch in his hand,
but this time in his left, and waved it at the hacks of their
heads, whereby the ideas of all of them became confused, and
they cried out together, “Neither our souls nor our bodies
know what side we are to take; therefore let us decide this
dispute by lot; we will favor what comes out first by lot.”
And they took three slips of paper, on one df them they wrote
Physical Influx, on a second Spiritual Influx, and on the
third Pre-established Harmony. They put the three papers
into a cap, and chose one of their number to draw; he put his
hand into the cap and drew out the paper on which was
written Spiritual Influx. When they saw this and read it,
they all said, some, however, speaking in a clear and flowing
and some in a faint and restrained tone, “ We favor that, be-
cause it came out first.” But then an angel suddenly stood
near and said, “ Do not believe that the little paper in favor of
Spiritual Influx came out by chance, it came providentially;
for you, because you are in confused ideas, do not see its
truth; but the paper offered itself to the hand, that you may
favor it.”

697. Sixth Relation. I once saw not far from me a mete-


894


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 697


oric display: I saw a cloud divided into little clouds, some of
which were blue, and some dark; and I saw them dashing
against each other, as it were; rays of light glittered in streaks
across them, which now seemed sharp like pointed swords,
now blunt like broken swords; those streaks now ran out
toward each other, and now drew back into themselves, just
like combatants. In this way those little clouds of different
colors seemed as it were to be fighting with each other, but
they were playing. And as this meteoric display did not
seem to be far from me, I raised my eyes and looked at it in-
tently; and I saw boys, young men, and old men entering
into a house built of marble, with a substructure of porphyry.
That phenomenon was over this house. And then addressing
one of those who were entering, I asked him what was there.
He replied, “ That is an academy where young men are in-
itiated into various things of wisdom.” Hearing this, I en-
tered with them; I was in the spirit, that is, in a state like
that of men of the spiritual world, who are called spirits and
angels.

And behold, in that academy a desk was seen in front, in
the centre were benches, round about the sides were seats,
and over the entrance was a platform. The desk was for the
young men who were to give answer to the problem to be pro-
posed at that time, the benches were for the hearers, the seats
at the sides for those who had answered wisely on former oc-
casions, and the platform for the seniors who were to be ar-
biters and judges. In the middle of the platform was a pul-
pit, where sat a wise man whom they called the head teacher;
and he proposed the problems to which the young men were
to answer from the desk. And after they were assembled,
the man arose from the pulpit and said: “ Make answer now,
I pray, to this problem, and solve it if you can : What is the
soul, and what its quality?” All were amazed when this
was heard, and murmured; and some of the assembly seated
on the benches exclaimed, “ What man even from the Satur-
nian age to our own, has by any rational thought been


N°. 697]


BAPTISM


895


able to see and conclude what the soul is? Still less
has any one been able to see and conclude what its quality is.
Is not this above the sphere of the understanding of any?”
But to this it was replied from the platform, “This is not
above the understanding, but in it, and before it; only an-
swer.” And the young men arose who were chosen that day
to go up to the desk and make answer to the problem. There
were five who had been examined by the seniors and found
to possess much sagacity, and who then were sitting beside
the desk on sofas; and afterward these went up in the order
in which they sat. Each one, when he was to go up, put on a
silk tunic of an opaline color, and over it a gown of soft wool
inwoven with flowers, and also a cap, on the top of which
was a rosette encircled by small sapphires.

And I saw the first one so clothed, as he went up, and he
said: “ What the soul is, and what its quality is, has been re-
vealed to no man since the day of creation; it is a secret
among the treasures of God alone. But this much has been
discovered, that the soul has her abode in man like a queen;
where her court is, learned masters indeed have guessed;
some, that it is in the little tubercle between the cerebrum
and the cerebellum, called the pineal gland; they have de-
vised a seat for the soul in this, because the whole man is
governed from those two brains, and that tubercle regulates
them; therefore this, which regulates the brains at its will,
also regulates the entire man from head to foot.” He also
said, “ This, therefore, seemed like the truth or to be probable
to many in the world; but after their time it was rejected as
fiction.”

After he had said this he put off the gown, tunic, and cap,
which the second of those chosen then put on and entered
the desk. What he delivered concerning the soul was, that
throughout all heaven and all the world none knows what
the soul is, and what its quality is. “ This is known,” he
said, “ that there is a soul, and that it is in man, but where,
is a matter of conjecture; this much is certain, that it is in


896 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 697

the head, for there the understanding thinks, and there the
will intends, and in the fore part of the head, that is, in the
face, are man’s five sensories; to all of these life is given only
by the soul which dwells within the head. But where its
court is there, I dare not say; but I have agreed, now with
those who have assigned it a seat in the three ventricles of the
brain, now with those who have assigned it in the striated
bodies, now with those who fix it in the medullary substance
of either .brain, now with those who seat it in the cortical sub-
stance, now with those who give it a seat in the dura mater .
For there have not been wanting votes, on the ground of evi-
dence, in favor of each one of these as the seat : in favor of the
three ventricles in the brain, on the ground that they are the
receptacles of the animal spirits, and of the lymph of every
variety belonging to the brain; in favor of the striated bodies,
because they form the marrow through which the nerves go
forth, and through which both brains are continued into the
spinal column, and from this column and that substance
emanate the fibres from which the whole body is woven; in
favor of the medullary substance of both brains, since that is
a collection in mass of all the fibres that are the rudiments of
the whole man; in favor of the cortical substance, on the
ground that the first and last ends are there, and hence the
principles of all the fibres, and thus of the senses and mo-
tions; in favor of the dura mater , because that is the general
covering of both brains, and extends itself from them by a
kind of continuity over the heart and the viscera of the body.
As for myself, I do not decide in favor of one more than an-
other. Do you decide, I beg of you, and choose what you
prefer.”

Having said this, he descended from the desk, and handed
the tunic, gown, and cap to the third, who stepping up to the
desk spoke as follows : “ What have I, a young man, to do
with a question so sublime? I appeal to the learned men
sitting here beside me; I appeal to you wise men on the plat-
form; yes, I appeal to the angels of the highest heaven,


No. 697]


BAPTISM


897


whether any one from his own rational light can acquire for
himself any idea respecting the soul. But as to its seat in
man, like other seers I can speak, and speaking so I say that
it is in the heart and thence in the blood; and I divine that
this is so, because the heart by its blood rules both the body
and the head, for it sends forth the great vessel called the
aorta throughout the whole body, and the vessels called the
carotid arteries into all parts of the head. It is therefore
universally agreed that the soul, from the heart through the
blood, sustains, nourishes, and vivifies the whole organic sys-
tem of both the body and the head. It adds faith to this as-
sertion, that soul and heart are so often mentioned together
in the Sacred Scripture, as that thou shalt love God from the
whole soul and from the whole heart; and that God creates in
man a new soul and a new heart (Deut. vi. 5; x. 12; xi. 13;
xxvi. 16: Jer. xxxii. 41: Matt. xxii. 37: Mark xii. 30, 33:
Luke x. 27; and elsewhere); it is also openly stated that the
blood is the soul of the flesh (Lev. xvii. it, 14).” On hearing
this, some, who were of the canons, cried out, “Learned,
learned!’ 5

After this, the fourth, having put on the vestments of the
other and entered the desk, said: “ I, too, suspect that no one
is of a genius so subtile and refined that he can see clearly
what the soul is and its quality; I am therefore of the opinion
that, with him who wishes to pry into it, subtilty is wasted on
what yields no return. But still, from my boyhood I have
continued to credit the opinion of the ancients, that man’s
soul is in the whole of him and in every part, and thus that it
is both in the head and every part of it, and in the body and
every part of it; and that it was an idle invention of the mod-
ems to designate for it a seat in any one place, and not every-
where. Moreover, the soul is a spiritual substance, of which
neither extension nor place is predicated, but habitation and
fulness. Furthermore, who does not mean life when he
names the soul ? Is not life in the whole and in every part ? ”
Many of the audience favored these remarks.


898 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 697

After him arose the fifth, and arrayed in the same distin-
guishing dress, he spoke from the desk as follows : “ I do not
stop to say, Where is the soul, whether in any one part or in
the whole; but from my own store, I. will open my mind on
the question, What is the soul and what its quality ? The
soul is not thought of by any one except as a pure something
which may be likened to ether, or air, or wind, in which is vi-
tality from the rationality which man has above the beasts.
This opinion I have based upon this, that when man expires
he is said to breathe out or give up the soul or spirit. Hence
also the soul as it lives after death is believed to be such a
breath, in which is cogitative life which is called the soul.
What else can the soul be ? But as I heard those who said
from the platform that the problem respecting the soul, what
it is and what its quality, is not above the understanding, but
in it and before it, I ask and beg that you yourselves will open
this eternal arcanum.”

The seniors on the platform looked at the head teacher
who had proposed that problem, and he understood from
their nods that they wished him to descend and teach. And
forthwith he descended from the pulpit, crossed the audi-
torium, and entered the desk; and there stretching forth the
hand he said, “Listen, I pray. Who does not believe the
soul to be man’s inmost and most subtile essence? Yet
what is essence without form but a mere thing of reasoning?
The soul, therefore, is a form; but what kind of form shall be
told. It is a form of all things of love and all of wisdom; all
things of love are called affections, and all of wisdom are
called perceptions. These perceptions from the affections
and thus with them, make one form, in which are innumer-
able things in such order, series, and coherence, that they
may be called a one; and they may be called a one, because
nothing can be taken from this one or added to it, and it be
such a form. What is the human soul but such a form?
Are not all things of love and of wisdom the essentials of that
form ? and these in man are in the soul, and from the soul in


No. 697]


SAPTISM


899


the head and body. You are called spirits and angels; and
in the world you believed that spirits and angels were like
wind or ether, and thus minds; but now you see clearly that
you are truly, really, and actually men who in the world lived
and thought in a material body; and you know that the ma-
terial body did not live and think, but the spiritual substance
in that body, and you called this the soul, of the form of
which you had no knowledge, and yet you have now seen and
still see it. You all are the souls as to whose immortality you
have heard, thought, said, and written so much; and because
you are forms of love and wisdom from God, you can never
die. The soul therefore is a human form, from which noth-
ing whatever can be taken away, and to which nothing what-
ever can be added; and it is the inmost of all the forms of the
whole body. And since the forms which are without receive
from the inmost both essence and form, therefore you, even
as you appear to yourselves and to us, are souls. In a word,
the soul is the man himself, because it is the inmost man;
therefore its form is fully and perfectly the human form.
Yet it is not life, but it is the nearest receptacle of life from
God, and thus God’s dwelling-place.” Many applauded
these remarks, but some said, “We will think about it.” I
then went home. And lo! in place of the former meteoric
display, there appeared over that academy a bright cloud,
without contending streaks or rays.' This cloud passing
through the roof brightened the walls; and I heard that they
saw writings, and among others this, Jehovah God breathed
into man's nostrils the soul of lives , and man became a living
soul (Gen. ii. 7).


CHAPTER THIRTEENTH.


THE HOLY SUPPER.

I. Without knowing the correspondences oe natural

WITH SPIRITUAL THINGS, NO ONE CAN KNOW THE
USES AND BENEFITS OF THE HOLY SUPPER.

698. This was partly explained in the chapter on Baptism,
where it was shbwn that, without a knowledge of the spiritual
sense of the Word no one can know what the two sacraments,
Baptism and the Holy Supper, involve and effect (see n. 667-
669). Without knowing the correspondences of natural
with spiritual things, is now said* which is the same thing,
because by correspondences the natural sense of the Word is
turned into the spiritual in heaven; and because of this,
those two senses correspond t6 each other; therefore he who
knows correspondences can know the spiritual sense. But
what correspondences are, and their quality, may be seen in
the chapter on the Sacred Scripture from beginning to end;
also in the explanation of the Decalogue, from the first to
the last commandment; and as to particulars, in the Apoca-
lypse Revealed .

699. Who that is truly Christian does not acknowledge
that these two sacraments are holy, and indeed that they are
the holiest things of worship in Christendom? But who
knows where their holiness resides, or whence it is ? In the
institution of the Holy Supper, nothing more is known from
the natural sense than that the flesh of Christ is given to eat,
and His blood to drink, and that bread and wine are in place
of these. Who can from this think otherwise than that it is
holy solely because of the commandment from the Lord?
Therefore the most sagacious men of the church have taught


No. 700]


THE HOLY SUPPER


901


that when the Word is added to the element, it becomes a sac-
rament. But because the origin of the holiness of this sacra-
ment so stated does not fall within the understanding, and
does not show itself in its elements or symbols, but merely
falls into the memory, therefore some observe it trusting that
sins are remitted by its means, some because they believe that
it sanctifies, some because it strengthens faith and thus also
promotes salvation. But those who think lightly of it, attend
to its observance only from being accustomed to do so from
childhood; and some, because they see no reason in it, neglect
it. But the impious turn away from it, saying to themselves,
“What is it but a ceremony stamped with holiness by the
clergy? For what is there in it but bread and wine? And
what is it but a fiction that the body of Christ which hung
upon the cross and His blood which was then poured out,
are distributed to the communicants with the bread and
wine?” And so on.

700. Such ideas as to this most holy sacrament are now
cherished throughout all Christendom, solely because they
agree with the sense of the letter of the Word; and the spiri-
tual sense, in which alone the use and benefit of the Holy
Supper are displayed in their truth, has been hitherto hidden,
not having been disclosed till now. This sense is now first
disclosed, because hitherto Christianity has been only in
name, and with some a shadow of it; for men have not hereto-
fore approached and worshipped the Saviour Himself imme-
diately as the one only God in whom is the Divine Trinity,
but only mediately; which is not to approach and worship,
but merely to venerate Him as the cause for the sake of which
man has salvation; and this is not the essential but the me-
diate cause, which is beneath and exterior to the essential.
But, however, because real Christianity is now beginning to
dawn, and the Lord is now establishing the New Church
meant by the New Jerusalem in the Apocalypse, wherein God
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are acknowledged as
one because in one Person, it has pleased the Lord to reveal


902 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 700

the spiritual sense of the Word in order that this church may
come into the very use and benefit of the sacraments, Bap-
tism and the Holy Supper; and this is done when men see
with the eyes of their spirit, that is, with the understanding,
the holiness concealed therein, and apply it to themselves by
the means which the Lord has taught in His Word.

701. The holiness of the sacrament here treated of, with-
out the opening of the spiritual sense of the Word, or what is
the same, without a revelation of the correspondences of natu-
ral with spiritual things, can no more be spiritually acknowl-
edged than a treasure hid in a field. The field is not valued
more highly than a common one; but when it is discovered
that there is treasure in it, the field is valued at a great price,
and then the purchaser gathers to himself wealth from it; still
more so when it is ascertained that there is treasure in it
more precious than all gold. Without the spiritual sense
this sacrament is like a closed house full of jewels and
treasures, which is passed by like any other house on the
street; though because the clergy built its walls of marble
and covered its roof with plates of gold, it attracts the gaze
of the passers-by, to view, praise, and estimate its value.
It is different when that house has been opened and leave
is given to every one to enter, and the custodian supplies
some with a loan from it, and to others presents a gift from it,
to each according to his rank. A gift from it is said; because
the precious things therein are inexhaustible and are contin-
ually supplied. So it is with the Word as to its spiritual,
and with the sacraments as to their celestial things. The
sacrament here treated of, without a revelation of its holiness
which lies within, appears like the sand of a river which con-
tains in great abundance little grains of gold scarcely visible;
but when its holiness has been revealed, it is like the gold
collected from it, melted in a mass, and fashioned into
beautiful forms. This sacrament, when its holiness is not
disclosed and seen, is like a box or casket made of beech or
poplar, in which diamonds, rubies, and many other precious


No. 701]


THE HOLY SUPPER


903


stones are arranged in order in little compartments. Who
does not value that box or casket if he knows that such things
are concealed within it, and still more when he sees them, and
when they are also freely distributed ? This sacrament with-
out a revelation of its correspondences with heaven, and so
when the heavenly things to which it corresponds are not
seen, is like an angel appearing in the world in common
clothing, and honored only according to the clothing; but it
is altogether different when he is known to be an angel, and
what is angelic is heard from his lips, and marvellous things
are seen in his deeds. The difference between a holiness that
is merely attributed and a holiness which is seen, may be
illustrated by this example seen and heard in the spiritual
world: An epistle was read written by Paul while he dwelt
in the world, but not published, without any one’s knowing
that it was by Paul. The hearers first regarded it as of little
moment; but when it was discovered to be one of Paul’s
epistles, it was received with joy, and one and all the things
therein were adored. It was manifest from this, that merely
attributing holiness to the Word and the sacraments, when
made by the primates of the clerical order, does indeed give
the stamp of holiness; but it is otherwise when the holiness
itself is disclosed and presented so as to be seen before the
eyes, which is done by a revelation of the spiritual sense; by
this means external holiness becomes internal, and attribu-
tion of holiness becomes acknowledgment of it. So with the
holiness of the sacrament of the Supper.


904


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 702


II. From known correspondences what is meant by the

Lord’s flesh and blood is known, and that bread and

WINE HAVE A SIMILAR MEANING; THAT BY THE LORD’S FLESH
AND BY THE BREAD THE DIVINE GOOD OF HIS LOVE IS
MEANT, ALSO ALL THE GOOD OF CHARITY; AND BY THE

Lord’s blood and by the wine the divine

TRUTH OF HIS WISDOM IS MEANT, ALSO ALL
THE TRUTH OF FAITH; AND BY THE
EATING IS MEANT APPROPRIATION.

702. Since the spiritual sense of the Word is now disclosed,
and with it correspondences because they are means, some
passages from the Word will therefore only be presented,
from which may be clearly seen what is meant by flesh and
blood, also by bread and wine, in the Holy Supper. But
these shall be preceded by what is said of the institution of
this sacrament by the Lord, and by His teaching as to His
flesh and blood, and the bread and wine.

703. Institution oj the Holy Supper by the Lord: Jesus
kept the passover with His disciples; and when evening had
come He sat down with them. A nd as they were eating , Jesus
took bread , and blessed , and brake , and gave to the disciples , and
said , Take , eat, this is My body. And He took the cup and
gave thanks , and gave to them , saying , Drink ye all 0 f it, for
this is My blood of the New Testament which is shed for
many (Matt. xxvi. 26-28: Mark xiv. 22-24: Luke xxii. 19,
20).

The Lord's teaching as to His flesh and blood , and the
bread and wine: Labor not for the ?neat which perisheth , but
for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life , which the
Son oj Man shall give unto you. Verily , verily , I say unto
you , Moses gave you. not the bread from heaven , but My Father
giveth you the true bread from heaven; for the bread oj God is
He that cometli down from heaven, and giveth life unto the
world. I am the bread of life; he that cometh to me shall
never hunger , and he that believeth on Me shall never thirst.


No. 705]


THE HOLY SUPPER


905


I am the bread which came down from heaven. Verily , verily ,
I say unto you, He that believeth on Me hath everlasting life.
I am that bread of life. Your fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness and are dead. This is the bread which cometh
down from heaven , that a man may eat thereof and not die. I
am the living bread which came down from heaven; if any
man eat of this bread , he shall live for ever; and the bread that
I will give is My flesh , which I will give for the life of the
world. Verily, verily, I say unto you , Except ye eat the flesh
0) the Son of Man, and drink His blood , ye have no life in you.
Whoso eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood, hath eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day; for My flesh is
meat indeed, and My blood is drink indeed. He that eateth
My flesh and drinketh My blood, dwelleth in Me and I in him
(John vi. 27, 32, 33, 35, 41, 47-51, 53-56).

704. One enlightened from heaven may perceive in him-
self that flesh and blood in these passages do not mean flesh
and blood, but that in the natural sense they both mean the
passion of the cross, which they were to keep in remem-
brance. Therefore when the Lord instituted this Supper of
the last Jewish and first Christian passover, He said, This do
in remembrance of Me (Luke xxii. 19: 1 Cor. xi. 24, 25). So
it may be seen that the bread and wine do not mean bread
and wine, but in the natural sense the same as flesh and
blood, that is, the passion gf His cross; for we read, Jesus
brake the bread, and gave to the disciples, and said, This is My
body; and He took the cup , and gave to them, spying, This is
my blood (Matt. xxvi. : Mark xiv. : Luke xxii.). Therefore also
He called the passion of the cross a cup (Matt. xxvi. 39, 42:
Mark xiv. 36: John xviii. 11).

705. That these four, flesh, blood, bread, and wine, mean
the spiritual and celestial things which correspond to them,
may be evident from passages in the Word where they are
mentioned. That flesh in the Word means what is spiri-
tual and celestial, may be evident from the following pas-
sages: Come and gather yourselves together unto the supper


906


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 705


0} the great God; that ye may eat the flesh oj kings , and the
flesh oj captains , and the flesh oj mighty men , and the flesh oj
horses , and 0} them that sit on them , and the flesh of all men ,
both free and bond, both small and great (Apoc. xix. 17, 18).
And in Ezekiel : Gather yourselves on every side to My sacri-
fice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the
mountains oj Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink blood .
Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood oj
the princes oj the earth; and ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and
drink blood till ye be drunken, of My sacrifice; and ye shall be
filled at My table with horses and chariots, with mighty men
and with all men of war; so I will set My glory among the
nations (xxxix. 17-21). Who does not see that in these pas-
sages flesh does not mean flesh, and blood does not mean
blood, but the spiritual and celestial things corresponding to
them ? Otherwise, what would they be but unmeaning and
strange expressions, that they should eat the flesh of kings,
captains, mighty men, horses and them that sat on them, and
that they should be filled at the table with horses, chariots,
mighty men, and all men of war? also that they should
drink the blood of the princes of the earth, and should drink
blood till they were drunken ? That these things were said
concerning the Holy Supper of the Lord* is clearly manifest;
for the supper of the great God is mentioned, and also a
great sacrifice. Since all spiritual and celestial things re-
late solely to good and truth, it follows that flesh means the
good of charity, and blood the truth of faith, and in the
highest sense, the Lord as to the Divine good of love and the
Divine truth of wisdom. Spiritual good is also meant by
flesh in the following passage in Ezekiel : I will give them one
heart, and I will put a new spirit within you ; and I will take
away the heart 0} stone, and will give them a heart oj flesh
(xi. 19; see also xxxvi. 26). By heart in the Word is signi-
fied love; therefore a heart of flesh signifies the love of good.
Furthermore, that by flesh and blood are meant good and
truth, both spiritual, is still more evident from the significa-


No. 706]


THE HOLY SUPPER


907


tion of bread and wine in what now follows; for the Lord
says that His flesh is bread, and His blood the wine which
was drunk from the cup.

706. By the Lord’s blood is meant the Divine truth of the
Lord and the Word, because His flesh spiritually means the
Divine good of love; and these two are united in Him. It
is well known that the Lord is the Word; and there are two
to which all things of the Word have relation — Divine good
and Divine truth; therefore if for the Lord we take the
Word, it is plain that those two are meant by His flesh and
blood. That blood means the Divine truth of the Lord or
of the Word, is evident from many other passages, as, for
example, that blood was called blood of the covenant, cove-
nant being conjunction; and conjunction is effected by
means of His Divine truth; as in Zechariah: By the blood
of thy covenant I will send jorth the bound out 0} the pit (ix.
n). And in Moses: After Moses had read the book of the
law in the ears of the people, he sprinkled half of the blood
upon the people, and said, Behold the blood oj the covenant
which Jehovah hath made with you concerning all these
words (Exod. xxiv. 3-8). And Jesus took the cup , and gave
to them, saying, This is My blood , of the New Covenant
(Matt. xxvi. 27, 28: Mark xiv. 24: Luke xxii. 20). The
Blood of the New Covenant or Testament signifies nothing
else than the Word, which is called a Covenant and Testa-
ment, Old and New, thus the Divine truth therein. Since
this is signified by blood, therefore the Lord gave His dis-
ciples the wine, saying, This is My blood ; and wine signifies
Divine truth; therefore it is also called the blood of grapes
(Gen. xlix. n : Deut. xxxii. 14). This is still more manifest
from the Lord’s words: Verily , verily , I say unto you , Ex-
cept ye eat the flesh 0} the Son of Man , and drink His blood ,
ye have no life in you ; for My flesh is meat indeed , and My
blood is drink indeed. He that eateth My flesh and drinheth
My blood , dwelleth in Me and I in him (John vi. 53-58).
That blood here means the Divine Truth of the Word is


90 8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 706


very manifest, for it is said, that he who drinketh it hath life
in him, and dwelleth in the Lord and the Lord in him; that
this is done by Divine truth and a life according to it, and
that the Holy Supper confirms it, may be known in the
church. Since blood signified the Lord’s Divine truth,
which is also the Divine truth of the Word, and this is the
real Covenant and Testament, Old and New, therefore
blood was the holiest representative in the church among
the children of Israel, in which all things together and singly
were correspondences of natural with spiritual things. For
example : They were to take of the paschal blood, and strike
it on the side-posts and on the upp*er door-posts of the
houses, lest the plague should come upon them (Exod. xii.
7, 13, 22); and the blood of the burnt-offering was to be
sprinkled upon the altar at its foundations, on Aaron and
his sons, and on their garments (xxix. 12, 16, 20, 21: Lev. i.
5, 11, 15; iii. 2, 8, 13; iv. 25, 30, 34; viii. 15, 24; xvii. 6: Num.
xviii. 17: Deut. xii. 27); also on the veil over the ark, on the
mercy-seat thereon, and on the horns of the altar of incense
(Lev. iv. 6, 7, 17, 18; xvi. 12-15). The blood of the Lamb, in
the Apocalypse, has a similar signification: These have washed
their robes , and made them white in the blood of the Lamb (vii.
14). Also in the following passages: There was war inheaven;
Michael and his angels fought against the dragon y and they
overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the Word of
their testimony (xii. 7, 11). For it cannot be thought that
Michael and his angels overcame the dragon by any thing
else than the Lord’s Divine truth in the Word; for the angels
in heaven cannot think of blood, nor can they think of the
Lord’s passion, but of Divine truth and of His resurrection.
Therefore when man thinks of the Lord’s blood, the angels
have perception of the Divine truth of His Word; and when
men think of the Lord’s passion, they have perception only
of His glorification, and then of His resurrection. It has
been given me to know that this is so, by much experience.
That blood signifies Divine truth is manifest also from the


No. 707]


THE HOLY SUPPER


909


following passages in David: God shall save the souls 0} the
needy; precious shall their blood be in His sight; and they
shall live , and He will give them 0} the gold 0} Sheba (Ps.
lxxii. 13-15); the blood precious in the sight of God, means
the Divine truth with them; the gold of Sheba, is the wis-
dom from it. And in Ezekiel: Gather yourselves to the great
sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel , that ye may eat flesh
and drink blood; ye shall drink the blood 0} the princes of the
earth , and ye shall drink blood till ye be drunken; and I will
set My glory among the nations (xxxix. 17-21). This treats
of the church which the Lord was to establish among the na-
tions. That blood cannot here mean blood, but truth from
the Word with them, may be seen above.

707. That bread has a similar meaning with flesh, is
clearly evident from the Lord’s words: Jesus took bread , and
brake , and gave it, saying, This is My body (Matt, xxvi.:
Mark xiv.: Luke xxii.). And again: The bread that I will
give is My flesh, which I will give for the life of the world
(John vi. 51). And He also says that He is the bread of life
and that if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever (vi.
48, 51, 58). This bread also is meant by the sacrifices
called bread in the following passages: The priest shall burn
it upon the altar; it is the bread of the offering made by fire
unto Jehovah (Lev. iii. 11; also verse 16). The sons of
Aaron shall be holy unto their God, and not profane the name
of their God , for the offerings of Jehovah made by fire, the
bread of their God , they do offer. Thou shalt sanctify him,
for he offereth the bread of thy God. No man that hath a
blemish, of the seed of Aaron , shall come nigh to offer the bread
of his God (xxi. 6, 8, 17, 21). Command the children of
Israel, and say unto them, My offering, My bread, for offer-
ings made by fire for an odor of rest, shall ye observe to offer
unto Me in their due season (Num. xxviii. 2). Whoever
hath touched an unclean thing shall not eat of the holy things,
but shall wash his flesh with water, and shall afterward eat of
the holy things, because it is his bread (Lev. xxii. 6, 7). To


910 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 707

eat of the holy things, was to eat the flesh of the sacrifices,
also here called bread, as also in Malachi (i. 7). The meat-
offerings in the sacrifices which were of fine wheaten flour,
and therefore bread, had no other signification (Lev. ii. 1-
11 ; vi. 14-18; vii. 9-13; and elsewhere); nor had the bread
on the table in the tabernacle, which was called the shew-
bread (of which in Exod. xxv. 30; xl. 23: Lev. xxiv. 5-9).
That by bread is not meant natural but heavenly bread, is
manifest from the following passages: Man doth not live by
bread only , but by every thing that proceedeth out of the mouth
of Jehovah doth man live (Deut. viii. 3). I will send a fam-
ine in the land , not a famine of bread , nor a thirst for water ,
but of hearing the words of Jehovah (Amos viii. 11). More-
over, bread means all food (Lev. xxiv. 5-9: Exod. xxv. 30;
xl. 23: Num. iv. 7: 1 Kings vii. 48). That it also means
spiritual food is plain from these words of the Lord: Labor
not for the meat which perisheth , but for that meat which en-
dureth unto everlasting life , which the Son of Man shall give
unto you (John vi. 27).

708. That wine has a similar meaning with blood, is
clearly manifest from the Lord’s words: Jesus taking the
cup said, This is My blood (Matt, xxvi.: Mark xiv.: Luke
xxii.). Also from the following: He washeth His garment
in wine , and His covering in the blood 0} grapes (Gen. xlix.
11); this refers to the Lord. Jehovah Zebaoth shall make
unto all people a feast of fat things , a feast of wines on the lees ,
or of sweet wine (Isa. xxv. 6); this refers to the sacrament of
the Holy Supper to be instituted by the Lord. And in
Isaiah again: Hoi every one that thirsteth, come ye to the
waters , and he that hath no money , come ye , buy and eat; yea y
come , buy wine (lv. 1). The fruit of the vine which they
were to drink new in the heavenly kingdom (Matt. xxvi. 29:
Mark xiv. 25: Luke xxii. 18), means nothing else than the
truth of the New Church and of heaven. Therefore the
church in many places in the Word also is called a vineyard
(as in Isa. v. 1-4: Matt. xx. 1-8); and the Lord calls Him-


No. 710]


THE HOLY SUPPER


9 11

self the true vine, and men who are grafted into Him, the
branches (John xv. 1-6; besides many other passages).

709. From this what is meant by the Lord’s flesh and
blood may now be evident, also by bread and wine, in the
threefold sense, natural, spiritual, and celestial. Every
man imbued with religion in Christendom may know, and
if he does not, may learn, that there is natural and spiritual
nourishment, and that natural is for the body, but spiritual
for the soul; for the Lord Jehovah says in Moses, Man doth
not live by bread only , but by every word that proceedeth out of
the mouth of Jehovah doth man live (Deut. viii. 3). Now
because the body dies, and the soul lives after death, it fol-
lows that spiritual nourishment is for eternal salvation.
Who cannot see from this, that these two kinds of nourish-
ment are in no way to be confounded ? and that if any one
confounds them, he cannot but acquire to himself natural
and sensual ideas, which are material, corporeal, and carnal,
as to the Lord’s flesh and blood and the bread and wine,
which ideas choke spiritual ideas of this most holy sacra-
ment? If, however, one is so simple that he cannot think
from the understanding any thing but what he sees with the
eye, I advise him when he takes the bread and the wine, and
then hears them called the Lord’s flesh and blood, to think
within himself of the Holy Supper as the holiest of worship,
and to keep in remembrance Christ’s passion, and His love
for man’s salvation; for He says, This do in remembrance of
Me (Luke xxii. 19); and The Son of Man came to give His
life a ransom for many (Matt. xx. 28: Mark x. 45); I lay
down My life for the sheep (John x. 15, 17; xv. 13).

710. This may also be illustrated by comparisons. Who
does not remember and love him, who from zeal of love for
country fights with the enemy even unto death, that he may
thereby free her from the yoke of servitude? And who
does not remember and love him, who, when he sees his
fellow-citizens in extreme want, with death from grievous
famine before their eyes, then out of pity brings forth all his


912


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 710


silver and gold from his house, and distributes it freely?
And who does not remember and love him, who out of love
and friendship takes the only lamb he possesses, kills it, and
sets it before his guests ? and so on.

III. From understanding these things one may compre-
hend THAT THE HOLY SUPPER CONTAINS ALL THINGS OF
THE CHURCH AND OF HEAVEN, UNIVERSALLY
AND SEVERALLY.

71 1. It was shown in the preceding article that the Lord
Himself is in the Holy Supper, that flesh and bread are the
Lord as to the Divine good of love, and that blood and wine
are the Lord as to the Divine truth of wisdom : therefore the
Holy Supper involves three, namely, the Lord, His Divine
good, and His Divine truth. Since, therefore, the Holy
Supper includes and contains these three, it follows that it
also includes and contains the universals of heaven and the
church. And as all particulars depend on universals, as
contents on their containers, it also follows that the Holy
Supper includes and contains all the particulars of heaven
and the church. From this it is first manifest that as by the
Lord’s flesh and blood, and so by the bread and wine, are
meant Divine good and Divine truth, both from the Lord and
both being the Lord, the Holy Supper contains all things of
heaven and the church universally and severally.

712. It is also known that the essentials of the church are
three, namely, God, charity, and faith, and that all things in
the church have reference to those three as universals.
These are the same as those named above; for God is in the
Holy Supper the Lord, charity is the Divine good, and faith
the Divine truth. What is charity but the good that man
does from the Lord? and what is faith but the truth that
man believes from the Lord? Hence there are three in
man as to his internal, namely, the soul or mind, the will,
and the understanding; these three are the receptacles of


No. 714]


THE HOLY SUPPER


913


those three; the soul itself or the mind is the receptacle of
the Lord, for hence it lives; the will is the receptacle of love
or good; and the understanding is the receptacle of wisdom
or truth. Therefore in the soul or mind all things and every
thing not only have reference to those universals of heaven
and the church, but also proceed from them. Name any
thing that proceeds from man in which there are not mind,
will, and understanding; if any one of these were taken
away, would the man be more than inanimate? So there
are three in man as to his external, to which again all things
and everything have relation, namely, the body, the heart,
and the lungs. These three of the body also correspond to
the three of the mind, the heart corresponding to the will,
and the lungs or respiration to the understanding. That
there is such correspondence has been fully shown in former
treatises. Thus now, all things and everything in man
have been formed, both universally and severally, as re-
ceptacles of those three universals of heaven and the church.
This is because man has been created an image and likeness
of God, hence that he may be in the Lord and the Lord in
him.

713. On the other hand, there are three opposite to the
universals described; these are the devil, evil, and falsity.
The devil (by this is meant hell) is directly opposite to the
Lord, evil is directly opposite to good, and falsity to truth;
these three make one, for where the devil is, evil and the
falsity from it are there also. These three also contain all
things of hell and also all things of the world, universally
and severally, being contrary to heaven and the church.
But as they are opposites, they are therefore entirely sepa-
rate, but yet are held in connection by a wonderful sub-
jection of all hell to heaven, of evil to good, and of falsity to
truth; which subjection is treated of in the work on Heaven
and Hell .

714. That the particulars may be held in their order and
connection, it is necessary that there should be universals


9 H


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 714


from which and in which they exist and subsist; and it is
also necessary that the particulars should in a certain image
answer to their universals; otherwise the whole would per-
ish with the parts. It is owing to this relationship that all
things of the universe have been preserved in their integrity
from the first day of creation until now, and will still be.
That all things in the universe have reference to good and
truth, is known; they have this relation because all things
were created by God from the Divine good of love by means
of the Divine truth of wisdom. Take any thing you please,
animal, shrub, or stone; those three most universal things are
written in some relation upon them all.

715. Since Divine good and Divine truth are the most
universal of all things of heaven and the church, therefore
Melchizedek, who represented the Lord, brought forth
bread and wine to Abram and blessed him. Of him we
thus read: Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and
wine to Abram, and he was the priest of the most high God ,
and he blessed him (Gen. xiv. 18, 19). That Melchizedek
represented the Lord, is evident from these words in David:
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek (Ps.
cx. 4). That this refers to the Lord may be seen in He-
brews (v. 6, 10; vi. 20; vii. 1, 10, 11, 15, 17, 21). He brought
forth bread and wine, because those two included all things
of heaven and the church, thus all things of blessing, like
the bread and wine in the Holy Supper.

IV. The Lord is wholly in the Holy Supper and so is
His WHOLE redemption.

716. That the Lord is wholly in the Holy Supper, both as
to the glorified Human and as to the Divine from which the
Human came, is evident from His own very words. That
His Human is present in the Holy Supper, is evident from
the following: Jesus took bread and brake , and gave to the
disciples , and said , This is My body; and He took the cup ,


No. 717]


THE HOLY SUPPER


915


and gave to them , saying , This is My blood (Matt, xxvi.:
Mark xiv.: Luke xxii.). And in John: I am the bread of
life: if any one eat of this bread he shall live for ever: the bread
that I will give is My flesh . Verily , verily , I say unto you ,
Whoso eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood hath eternal
life , and dwelleth in Me and I in him (vi.). From these
words it is clearly evident that the Lord is in the Holy Supper
as to His glorified Human. That the Lord is wholly present
in the Holy Supper, as to His Divine also, from which was
the Human, is evident from this, that He is the bread which
came down from heaven (John vi.). He came down from
heaven with the Divine; for it is said, The Word was with
God , and the Word was God ; all things were made by Him;
and the Word was made flesh (John i. 1, 3, 14), and further,
that He and the Father are one (John x. 30), that all things
0} the Father are His (iii. 35; xvi. 15), that He is in the
Father and the Father in Him (xiv. 10, 11); and so forth.
Moreover His Divine can no more be separated from His
Human than the soul from the body; therefore when it is
said that the Lord is wholly present in the Holy Supper as ‘
to His Human, it follows that His Divine from which was
the Human, is also there at the same time. Now since His
flesh signifies the Divine good of His love, and His blood the
Divine truth of His wisdom, it is manifest that the Lord,
both as to the Divine and the glorified Human, is wholly
omnipresent in the Holy Supper; consequently, that there
is a spiritual eating.

717. That the whole of the Lord’s redemption is in the
Holy Supper, follows from what has just been said, for where
the Lord is wholly there also is His whole redemption; for [
as to the Human He is the Redeemer, and consequently is '
redemption itself; no part of redemption can be absent
where He is in fulness; therefore all who go to the Holy
Communion worthily become His redeemed. And since
redemption means deliverance from hell, conjunction with
the Lord, and salvation, of which hereafter in this chapter,


916 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 717

and. more fully in the chapter on Redemption, therefore
these fruits are ascribed to man; not indeed, so far as the
Lord wills, because from His Divine love He wishes to as-
scribe all things to man, blit so far as man receives; and he
who receives is redeemed in the degree in which he re-
ceives. From which it is evident that the effects and fruits
of the Lord’s redemption return to those who approach
worthily.

718. In every man of sound mind there is a faculty of re-
ceiving wisdom from the Lord, that is, of multiplying the
truths from which it is, to eternity; also a faculty of re-
ceiving love, that is, of yielding an increase of the goods
from which it is, likewise to eternity. There is this perpetual
increase of good and hence of love, and that perpetual mul-
tiplication of truth and hence of wisdom, with the angels,
and also with men who are becoming angels; and as the
Lord is love itself and wisdom itself, it follows that man has
the faculty of conjoining himself with the Lord and the
Lord with himself for ever. But still, as man is finite, the
Lord’s Divine itself cannot be conjoined to him, but only
adjoined; as, for the sake of illustration, the light of the
sun cannot be conjoined to the eye, or the sound of the air
to the ear, but only adjoined to them, and thus give the
ability to see and hear. For man is not life in himself, as
the Lord is even as to the Human (John v. 26), but is a re-
ceptacle of life; and it is life itself which is adjoined to man,
but not conjoined. This has been added in order that it
may be understood in what way the Lord with His whole re-
demption is wholly present in the Holy Supper.


No. 719]


THE HOLY SUPPER


917


V. The Lord is present and opens heaven to those

WHO APPROACH THE HOLY SUPPER WORTHILY; AND He
IS ALSO PRESENT WITH THOSE WHO APPROACH UN-
WORTHILY, BUT DOES NOT OPEN HEAVEN TO
THEM; CONSEQUENTLY, AS BAPTISM IS AN
INTRODUCTION INTO THE CHURCH, SO

the Holy Supper is an intro-
duction INTO HEAVEN.

719. Who they are that approach the Holy Supper wor-
thily, will be shown in the two following articles, which at
the same time will tell of those who approach it unworthily;
for from what is affirmed of the one class, there is knowledge
of the other from their being opposite. The Lord is present
with both the worthy and the unworthy, from His being
omnipresent both in heaven and in hell, and also in the world,
hence with evil as well as with good. But with the good,
that is, the regenerate, He is present both universally and
individually; for He is in them and they in Him, and where
the Lord is there is heaven. Heaven, moreover, constitutes
the Lord’s body; therefore to be in His body is to be at the
same time in heaven. But the Lord’s presence with those
who approach the Holy Supper unworthily, is His universal
but not individual presence, or, what is the same, it is ex-
ternal and not at the same time internal presence. And His
universal or external presence causes man to live as man, to
enjoy the faculty of knowing, understanding, and speaking
rationally from the understanding; for man is born for
heaven, and therefore also spiritual, and not like the beast
only natural. He also enjoys the faculty of willing and
doing those things which his understanding can know, un-
derstand, and hence speak rationally; But if the will refuse
the truly rational things of the understanding, which are also
inwardly spiritual, the man then becomes external; therefore
with those who only understand what truth and good are,
the Lord’s presence is universal or external, while with those


91 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 719

who also will and do the truth and good, the Lord’s presence
is both universal and individual, or both internal and ex-
ternal. They who merely understand and talk about truths
and goods, are like the foolish virgins who had lamps but no
oil; while they who not only understand and talk about
them but also will and do them, are the wise virgins who
were admitted to the wedding; the former stood at the door
and knocked, but were not admitted (Matt. xxv. 1-12).
From this it is evident that the Lord is present and opens
heaven to those who approach the Holy Supper worthily,
and that He is also present with those who approach un-
worthily, but does not open heaven with them.

720. But still it is not to be believed that the Lord shuts
heaven to those who approach unworthily; this He does to
no man, even to the end of his life in the world; but it is to
be believed that man shuts it against himself, which he does
by rejection of faith and by evil of life. But still man is
being kept continually in a state in which repentance and
conversion are possible, for the Lord is constantly present
and urging to be received; for He says, I stand at the door
and knock; if any man hear My voice and open the door , I
will come in to him , and will sup with him and he with Me
(Apoc. iii. 20). Therefore the man himself who does not
open the door, is in fault. It is otherwise after death; then
heaven is shut, and can not be opened to those who, to the
end of life, have approached the Holy Supper unworthily;
for the interiors of their minds have then been fixed and
established.

721. That Baptism is an introduction into the church has
been shown in the chapter on Baptism; but that the Holy
Supper is an introduction into heaven, is evident from what
is said above, and to perception. These two sacraments,
Baptism and the Holy Supper, are like two gates to eternal
life. By Baptism, the first gate, every Christian is intro-
mitted and introduced to what the church teaches from the
Word about the other life; all of which serves as means by


No. 722]


THE HOLY SUPPER


919


which man may be prepared for and led to heaven. The
other gate is the Holy Supper; through this, every man who
has suffered himself to be prepared and led by the Lord is
intromitted and introduced to heaven. There are no other
universal gates. These two sacraments may be compared
with a prince bom heir to the throne: first he is introduced
into a knowledge of governing; then follow his coronation
and government. They may also be compared with a son
bom to a great inheritance: first he must learn and be im-
bued with what pertains to proper management of posses-
sions and wealth; then come possession and control. They
may also be compared to the building of a house, and the
living in it; also to the course of a man’s instruction from
infancy even to the age when he comes under his own con-
trol and judgment, and his subsequent rational and spiritual
life: one period must necessarily precede in order that the
other may be attained, for the latter cannot be without the
former. These things illustrate that Baptism and the Holy
Supper are like two gates through which man is introduced
to eternal life; beyond the first gate is a plain which he must
pass over; and the second is the goal where lies the prize to
which he has directed his course. For the palm is not given
until after combat, nor the reward until a contest is decided.


VI. They apppoach the Holy Supper worthily, who have

FAITH IN THE LORD AND ARE IN CHARITY TOWARD
THE NEIGHBOR, THUS WHO ARE REGENERATE.

722. That God, charity, and faith are the three universals
of the church, because they are the universal means of salva-
tion, is known, acknowledged, and perceived by every
Christian who studies the Word. That God must be ac-
knowledged in order that one may have religion, and any
thing of the church may be in him, reason itself, if there is
any thing spiritual in it, dictates. Therefore he who ap-
proaches the Holy Supper and does not acknowledge God,


920


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 722


profanes it; for he sees the bread and wine with the eye and
tastes them with the tongue, but the thought of his mind is,
“What is this but mere ceremony? and wherein do these
differ from similar things on my own tahle? But I do this,
lest I should be charged by the priesthood, and hence by
common people, with the infamy of an atheist.” That after
the acknowledgment of God, charity is the second means
which fits one to approach the Holy Supper worthily, is evi-
dent both from the Word and the exhortations read through-
out the Christian world before coming to the Supper. It
appears from the Word in this, that the first commandment
and precept is that men should love God above all things,
and the neighbor as themselves (Matt. xxii. 34-39: Luke
x. 25-28). Again, in Paul it is said that there are three
things which contribute to salvation, and that the greatest of
these is charity (1 Cor. xiii. 13). Also from these passages:
We know that God heareth not sinners , but ij any man is a
worshipper oj God and doeth His will , him He heareth (John
ix. 31). Every tree that bringelh not jorth good fruit is hewn
down and cast into the fire (Matt. vii. 19, 20: Luke iii. 8, 9).
It appears also from exhortations read throughout the whole
Christian world before coming to the Holy Supper; every-
where men are thereby earnestly admonished to be in charity
by reconciliation and repentance. Of these I will here quote
only the following passage from the exhortation read to com-
municants in England: “The way and means ” to become
worthy partakers of the Holy Supper “is, first to examine
your lives and conversations by the rule of God’s command-
ments; and whereinsoever ye shall perceive yourselves to
have offended, either by will, word, or deed, there to bewail
your own sinfulness, and to confess yourselves to Almighty
God, with full purpose of amendment of life. And if ye
shall perceive your offences to be such as are not only against
God but also against your neighbors, then ye shall reconcile
yourselves unto them, being ready to make restitution and
satisfaction, according to the uttermost of your powers, for


No. 723]


THE HOLY SUPPER


921


all injuries and wrongs done by you to any other; and being
likewise ready to forgive others that have offended you, as
ye would have forgiveness of your offences at God’s hand;
for otherwise the receiving of the Holy Communion doth
nothing else but increase your damnation. Therefore if
any of you be a blasphemer of God, a hinderer or slanderer
of His Word, an adulterer, or be in malice or envy, or in any
other grievous crime, repent ye of your sins, or else come not
to that holy table, lest, after the taking of that holy sacra-
ment, the devil enter into you as he entered into Judas, and
fill you full of all iniquities, and bring you to destruction
both of body and soul.” Faith in the Lord is the third
means of worthily enjoying the Holy Supper, because charity
and faith make one, like heat and light in spring, from which
two in conjunction every tree is bom anew; so from spiritual
heat, which is charity, and from spiritual light, which is the
truth of faith, every man lives. That faith in the Lord does
this, is evident from the following passages: He that be -
lieveih in Me shall never die , but shall live (John xi. 25, 26).
This is the will 0} the Father , That every one that believeth
on the Son should have eternal life (vi. 40). God so loved the
world that He gave His only-begotten Son , that whosoever
believeth in Him should have eternal life (iii. 16). He that
believeth on the Son hath eternal life , and he that believeth not
the Son shall not see life , but the wrath 0} God abideth on him
(iii. 36). We are in the truth , in the Son of God , Jesus
ChHst : this is the true God and eternal life (1 John v. 20).

723. That man is regenerated by these three, the Lord,
charity, and faith, as one, and that unless one is becoming
regenerate he cannot come into heaven, was shown in the
chapter on Reformation and Regeneration; therefore the
Lord cannot open heaven to any but the regenerate, and
after natural death introduction to heaven is given to no
others. By the regenerate who approach the Holy Supper
worthily, are meant those who are inwardly in those three
essentials of the church and heaven, but not those who are


922


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 723


so only outwardly; for these confess the Lord not with the
soul but with the tongue only, and exercise charity toward
the neighbor not with the heart but only with the body.
Such are all who work iniquity, according to these words of
the Lord: Then shall ye begin to say } Lord , We have eaten
and drunk in Thy presence; but I shall say unto you , I know
you not whence ye are; depart from Me> all ye workers 0}
iniquity (Luke xiii. 26, 27).

724. These like the former may be illustrated by various
things which accord with them, and which also correspond,
as for example the following: None are admitted to the
table of an emperor or king, but those who are in high office
and rank; and even these, before they go, clothe themselves
in becoming garments, and appear with the proper decora-
tions, so as to be received and favored at their coming.
What should not be done for the table of the Lord, of Him
who is lord of lords, and king of kings (Apoc. xvii. 14), to
which table all are called and invited ? But only those who
are spiritually worthy, and are clothed in honorable apparel,
after they rise from the table are admitted within the palaces
of heaven and to the joys there, and are honored as princes
because they are sons of the Great King, and afterward sit
down daily with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Matt. viii. 11),
by whom is meant the Lord as to the Divine celestial, the
Divine spiritual, and the Divine natural. The same things
may also be compared to weddings on earth, to which only
the relatives, connections, and friends of the bridegroom and
bride are invited; if any other person enters, he is admitted
indeed, but as he has no place at the table he withdraws.
So it is with those who have been called to the marriage
of the Lord as the bridegroom with the church as the bride;
and among them are connections, kindred, and friends,
those who have common origin from the Lord by regenera-
tion. Furthermore, who is initiated into another’s friend-
ship in the world, but he who is faithful to him with sincere
heart, and does his will? Such a one, and no others, he
numbers among his friends, and trusts him with his goods.


No. 726]


THE HOLY SUPPER


923


VII. They who approach the Holy Supper worthily,

ARE IN THE LORD AND THE LORD IS IN THEM; HENCE
CONJUNCTION WITH THE LORD IS MADE BY

the Holy Supper.

725. That they approach the Holy Supper worthily who
have faith in the Lord and are in charity toward the neigh-
bor, and that the truths of faith establish the Lord's pres-
ence, and the goods of charity together with faith establish
conjunction, has been shown above in several chapters.
Whence it follows that they who approach the Holy Supper
worthily, are conjoined with the Lord; and they who are
conjoined with Him are in Him and He in them. That
this takes place with those who approach worthily, the Lord
Himself declares in John, as follows: He that eateth My
flesh and drinketh My blood , dwelleth in Me and I in him
(vi. 56). That this is conjunction with the Lord, He also
teaches elsewhere in John: Abide in Me> and I in you. He
that abideth in Me , and I in him , the same bringeth forth
much fruit (xv. 4, 5; also Apoc. iii. 20). What is conjunc-
tion with the Lord but being among those who are in His
body? and they who helieve in Him and do His will make
His body. His will is the exercise of charity according to
truths of faith.

726. Eternal life and salvation cannot be given without
conjunction with the Lord, because He is hoth of these.
That He is eternal life is clearly evident from passages in
the Word; also from the following in John: Jesus Christ
is the true God and eternal life (1 John v. 20). He is also sal-
vation, because this and eternal life are one. His name
Jesus also signifies Salvation, and from this He is called
Saviour throughout the whole Christian world. But still
none approach the Holy Supper worthily but those who are
inwardly conjoined with the Lord, and they are inwardly
conjoined with Him who are regenerate; but who the re-


924 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 726

generate are, has been shown in the chapter on Reforma-
tion and Regeneration. Moreover, there are many who
confess the Lord and who do good to the neighbor; but
unless they do so from love toward the neighbor and faith
in the Lord, they are not regenerate; for they do good to
the neighbor only for reasons that regard the world and
themselves, but not the neighbor as the neighbor. Their
works are merely natural, which do not inwardly store
within them any thing spiritual; for such persons confess
tl^e Lord with the mouth and lips only, from which the
heart is far away. Love toward the neighbor and faith are
themselves from the Lord alone, and both are given to man
when he from his free will does good to the neighbor natu-
rally, believes truths rationally, and looks to the Lord, doing
these three because of the commandments in the Word.
Then the Lord implants charity and faith in the midst of
him, and makes both spiritual. Thus the Lord conjoins
man to Himself, and man conjoins himself to the Lord;
for there is no conjunction unless it is made reciprocally.
But all this has been fully shown in the chapters on Charity,
Faith, Free Will, and Regeneration.

727. It is known that conjunctions and consociations
are brought about in the world by invitations to the table
and by feasts; for one who gives an invitation, thereby in-
tends something promoting some end looking to agreement
or friendship. Much more so the invitations which have
spiritual things for their end. The feasts in the ancient
churches were feasts of charity, as also in the primitive
Christian Church; at these feasts they strengthened one
another to abide in the worship of the Lord from sincere
hearts. That the children of Israel ate together of the sac-
rifices near the tabernacle, signified nothing else than una-
nimity in the worship of Jehovah; therefore the flesh that
they ate was called holy (Jer. xi. 15: Hag. ii. 12; and fre-
quently so elsewhere), because it was part of the sacrifice.
Why not, then, the bread and the wine, and the paschal


No. 727] THE HOLY SUPPER 925

flesh at the Supper of the Lord, who offered Himself a sac-
rifice for the sins of all the world? Moreover, conjunction
with the Lord by means of the Holy Supper may be illus-
trated by the conjunction of families descended from a
common father; from him descend those who are related
by blood, kindred and connections in their order, and they
all draw something from the first stock; they do not, how-
ever, thus take the flesh and the blood; but they draw from
the flesh and blood, thus a soul, and hence an inclination
to like things whereby they are conjoined. Also the con-
junction is itself apparent in a general way in their faces
and manners, and they are therefore called one flesh (as in
Gen. xxix. 14; xxxvii. 27: 2 Sam. v. 1; xix. 12, 13; and
elsewhere). It is similar as to conjunction with the Lord,
who is the father of all the faithful and blessed; conjunc-
tion with Him is made by love and faith; and by these two
they are called one flesh. Therefore the Lord said, He that
eateth My 'flesh and drinketh My bloody dwelleth in Me and
I in him (John vi. 56). Who does not see that the bread
and wine do not effect this, but the good of love meant by
the bread, and the truth of faith meant by the wine, and
which are the Lord’s own, and proceed and are communi-
cated from Him only? Moreover, all conjunction is made
by love, and love is not love without trust. Let those who
believe that the bread is the flesh and that the wine, is the
blood, and who are unable to raise their thought further,
remain in their belief, yet not without this view, that what
is most holy, and which makes conjunction with the Lord,
is what is attributed and appropriated to man as his, although
it remains continually the Lord’s.


926


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No, 728


VIII. The Holy Supper, to those who approach* it

WORTHILY, IS LIKE A SIGN AND SEAL THAT THEY

are sons of God.

728. The Holy Supper, to those who approach it worthily,
is like a sign and seal that they are sons of God, because,
as before said, the Lord is then present and admits into
heaven those who have been born of Him, that is, the re-
generate. The Holy Supper does this because the Lord
is then present even as to His Human, for it was shown
above that the Lord is wholly present in the Holy Supper,
and with His whole redemption; for He says of the bread,
This is My body, and of the wine, This is My blood ; hence
He then admits them into His body, and the church and
heaven constitute His body. While man is regenerated the
Lord is indeed present, and by His Divine operation pre-
pares man for heaven; but in order that he may actually
enter he must actually present himself to the Lord; and
because the Lord actually presents Himself to man, man
must actually receive Him, not, however, as He hung upon
the cross, but as He is in His glorified Human, in which He
is present: and the body of this is Divine good, and the
blood is Divine truth; these are given to man, and by means
of them man is regenerated, and is in the Lord and the Lord
in him; for as shown above, the eating which is seen in the
Holy Supper, is spiritual. From this rightly understood,
it is evident that the Holy Supper is like a sign and seal that
they who approach it worthily are sons of God.

729. But those who die in infancy or childhood, and so
do not attain such an age that they can worthily approach
the Holy Supper, are introduced by the Lord through Bap-
tism; for, as was shown in the chapter on Baptism, Bap-
tism is introduction into the Christian Church, and at the
same time insertion among Christians in the spiritual world;
and the church and heaven are one there; therefore to those


No. 730]


THE HOLY SUPPER


927


who are there, introduction to the church is also introduction
to heaven; and they, because they are brought up under
the auspices of the Lord, are regenerated more and more,
and become His children; for they know no other father.
But infants and children born outside of the Christian
Church are introduced by other means than Baptism, into
the heaven assigned to their religion after they have received
faith in the Lord, but they are not mingled with those who
are in the Christian heaven. For there is no nation in all
the world which cannot be saved if they acknowledge God
and live well; for the Lord has redeemed all these, and man
is bom spiritual, whereby he has the faculty of receiving the
gift of redemption. They who receive the Lord, that is,
who have faith in Him and are not in evils of life, are called
sons of God , and born of God (John i. 12, 13; xi. 52); also
sons of the kingdom (Matt. xiii. 38); and again heirs (xix.
29; xxv. 34); the Lord’s disciples are also called sons (John
xiii- 33) j an d so are a ll the angels (Job i. 6; ii. 1).

730. It is with the Holy Supper as with a covenant, which,
after the articles are settled, is agreed to, and finally signed
and sealed. That the Lord’s blood is a covenant, He Him-
self teaches; for when He took the cup and gave it, He said,
Drink ye all of it: this is My blood , that of the New Testament
(Matt. xxvi. 28: Mark xiv. 24: Luke xxii. 20). The New
Testament is the new covenant; therefore the word written
by the prophets before the coming of the Lord is called the
Old Testament and Covenant, while that written after His
coming by the evangelists and apostles, is called the New
Testament or Covenant. That the Divine truth of the
Word is meant by blood and likewise by the wine in the Holy
Supper, may be seen above (n. 7°6> 7 °^)> an< ^ the Word is
the covenant itself which the Lord made with man and man
with the Lord; for the Lord descended as the Word, that
is, as Divine truth; and as this is His blood, therefore in the
Israelitish Church which was representative of the Chris-
tian Church, blood was called the blood of the covenant


928


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 730


(Exod. xxiv. 8: Zech. ix. 11); and the Lord, the covenant of
the people (Isa. xlii. 6; xlix. 8: see also Jer. xxxi. 31-34:
Ps. cxi. 9). That there must by all means be a signing in
order that there may be certainty, and that this follows after
the matter has been fully considered, is also in accordance
with order in the world. What is a commission or a will
without signature? What is judging in law, without a
decree signed to ratify the judgment ? What is a high office
in a kingdom without a warrant? What is promotion to
any office without confirmation ? What is the possession of
a house without purchase or agreement with the owner?
What is the progression to any end, or the running to any
goal, and thus for a reward, if there is no end or goal where
the reward is to be obtained, or if the proper officer has not
in some manner made his promise sure? But these last
have been added merely for illustration, in order that even
the simple may perceive that the Holy Supper is like a sign,
a seal, a pledge, and evidence of commission, even to the
angels, that they are sons of God; and, moreover, it is like
a key to the house in heaven where they will dwell for ever.

731. A Relation. An angel was once seen by me flying
beneath the eastern heaven, holding a trumpet in his hand
and to his mouth, and sounding it toward the north, west,
and south. He was clad in a robe flowing behind him as
he flew, and he was girded with a belt, blazing as it were,
and shining with carbuncles and sapphires. He flew down-
ward, and alighted gently upon the earth not far from me..
As he touched the ground he walked hither and thither erect
upon his feet, and then, seeing me, directed his steps toward
me. I was in the spirit, and in it was standing on a hill in
the southern quarter; and when he came near, I addressed
him and inquired, “ What now ? I heard the sound of your
trumpet, and saw your descent through the air.” The
angel replied, “I am sent to convoke, from among those in
this land who are from the kingdoms of the Christian world,
such men as are most celebrated for learning, most acute


No. 732]


THE HOLY SUPPER


929


in genius, and most eminent in reputation for wisdom, that
they may come together on this hill where you are, and freely
express their minds, and tell what thought, understanding,
and wisdom they had in the world about Heavenly Joy and
Eternal Happiness. The cause of my being sent was this:
Some new-comers from the world having been admitted to
our heavenly society in the east, related that not even one
person in the whole Christian world knows what heavenly
joy and eternal happiness are, and so what heaven is. At
this my brethren and companions were much astonished,
and said to me, * Go down, make proclamation, and call to-
gether the wisest men in the world of spirits into which all
mortals are first gathered after their departure from the natu-
ral world, in order that we may know with certainty from
the mouths of many whether it is the truth that such thick
darkness or clouded ignorance prevails among Christians
as to the future life/” The angel then said, “Wait a little,
and you will see companies of wise ones flocking hither;
the Lord will prepare for them a house to meet in.” I
waited, and behold, after half an hour I saw two troops
coming from the north, two from the west, and two from the
south; and as they arrived they were introduced by the an-
gel with the trumpet into the house prepared for them, and
there they occupied places assigned them according to the
quarters. There were six troops or companies; and there
was a seventh from the east, which on account of the light
was not seen by the others. After they had assembled, the
angel made known the reason of their convocation, and
asked that the companies in order would set forth their wis-
dom as to heavenly joy and eternal happiness. Each com-
pany then formed a circle, standing face to face, that they
might recall the subject from the ideas gained in the former
world, might then examine it, and after consultation present
the result.

732. After consultation, the first company from the north
said: “Heavenly joy and eternal happiness are one with


930


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 732


the very life of heaven; therefore one who enters heaven,
enters as to the life into its festivities, as one who goes to a
wedding enters into its festivities. Is not heaven before our
sight, above us, and so in a place? and there, and only there,
are good fortune on good fortune and pleasures on pleasures.
A man is admitted into these as to every perception of the
mind and sensation of the body, from the fulness of the
joys of that place, when he is admitted into heaven. There-
fore heavenly happiness, which is also eternal, is nothing
but admission into heaven, and that from Divine Grace.”
When they had ended, the. second company from the north
from their wisdom expressed this opinion: “Heavenly joy
and eternal happiness are nothing but most gladsome com-
panionship with angels, and the sweetest conversations with
them, whereby the countenance is continually expanded in
gladness, and the faces of the whole company are kept
sweetly smiling from gentle discourse and pleasantry. What
are heavenly joys but the variations of such pleasures to
eternity?”

The third company, the first of the wise from the west,
uttered this from the thoughts of their affections: “What
are heavenly joy and eternal happiness but feasting with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? on whose tables there will be
delicate and costly food, with generous and noble wines;
and the feasts will be followed by sports and dances of vir-
gins and young men to the music of symphonies and flutes,
and in the intervals the sweetest songs will be sung. And
then in the evening there will be dramatic exhibitions, after
these feasting again, and so every day for ever.” When
they had ended, the fourth company, the sedond from the
west, thus declared their opinion: “We have entertained
many ideas of heavenly joy and eternal happiness; we have
also examined various joys, comparing them with one
another; and we have come to the conclusion that heavenly
joys are those of paradise. What is heaven but a paradise,
reaching from the east to the west and from the south to the


No. 732]


THE HOLY SUPPER


931


north, and containing fruit trees and delightful flowers?
And in the midst of these is the magnificent tree of life,
round which the blessed will sit, eating delicious fruit and
adorned with garlands of sweetest flowers. And these,
under the breath of perpetual spring, are produced and
come forth anew daily with infinite variety; and the minds
of those there, being continually renewed by this perpetual
growth and flower, and also from the ever vernal tempera-
ture, cannot but draw in and breathe out new joys daily;
and be restored thereby to the bloom of life, and through
this to the primitive state into which Adam and his wife
were created, and so be readmitted into their paradise, trans-
ferred from earth to heaven.”

The fifth company, the first of the gifted ones from the
south, spoke as follows: “Heavenly joys and eternal hap-
piness are nothing but supereminent dominion, boundless
wealth, and hence more than royal magnificence and most
dazzling splendor. That these are the joys of heaven, and
their continual fruition, which is eternal happiness, we clearly
saw from those in the former world who possessed them;
and, moreover, from this, that the happy will reign in heaven
with the Lord, and be kings and princes, because they are
the sons of Him who is King of kings and Lord of lords;
and that they will sit on thrones, and angels will serve them.
The magnificence of heaven we clearly saw from this, that
the New Jerusalem, by which the glory of heaven is de-
scribed, will have gates each of one pearl, and streets of pure
gold, and a wall with foundations of precious stones; hence
that every one who is received into heaven has his palace glit-
tering with gold and precious things, and dominion following
in order from one to another. And because we know that
joys are innate in such things, that happiness is inherent
in them, and that God’s promises cannot fail, we could not
deduce the most happy state of heavenly life from any other
source.” After this the sixth company, the second from
the south raised its voice and said: “The joy of heaven and


932


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 732


its eternal happiness are nothing but the perpetual glorifica-
tion of God, a never ceasing festival, and most blessed wor-
ship with songs and jubilees; thus constant lifting of the
heart to God, with full trust in His acceptance of prayers
and praises because of the Divine munificence in their
blessedness.” Some of the company added that this glori-
fication would be with magnificent illuminations, most fra-
grant incense, and grand processions, headed by the chief
priest with a great trumpet, who would be followed by
primates and keepers of the keys, great and small, and that
after these would follow men bearing palms, and women
with golden images in their hands.

733. The seventh company, not seen by the others on
account of the light, was from the east in heaven. They
were angels from the same society from which the angel
with the trumpet was sent. When they heard in heaven
that not a single person in the Christian world knew what
the joy of heaven and eternal happiness were, they said one
to another, “Surely this cannot be true; there cannot be
such thick darkness and stupor of mind with Christians;
let us also go down and hear whether it is true; and if it is
indeed true, it certainly is a wonder.” Then they said to
the angel with the trumpet, “ You know that every man who
before his death had desired heaven and had had any certain
thought of the joys there, is afterward introduced to the joys
of his imagination; and that after such have found by trial
the quality of those joys, that they are according to vain ideas
of the mind and delusions of their fantasy, they are then led
out of them and instructed; this takes place in the world of
spirits with many who in the former life meditated about
heaven, and formed some conclusions about the joys there
so far as to desire them.” On hearing this, the angel with
the trumpet said to the six companies called from the wise
of the Christian world, “Follow me, and I will introduce
you to your joys, and thus to heaven.”

734. When the angel had thus spoken, he led the way;


No. 734]


THE HOLY SUPPER


933


and the first company that followed was of those who had
persuaded themselves that heavenly joys were only most
gladsome companionship with angels, and sweetest con-
versations. These the angels introduced to an assembly
in the north, who in the former world had held the joys of
heaven to be nothing else. There was a spacious house,
in which such were gathered; more than fifty rooms were
in the house, distinct according to various kinds of con-
versation. In these rooms they spoke of what they had seen
and heard in the forum and the streets; in some they spoke
agreeahly ahout the fair sex, with occasional pleasantry,
more and more until every face in the company expanded
with merry laughter. In other rooms they talked about
the news of courts, public ministers, state policy, and va-
rious things that had transpired from privy councils, with
reasonings and conjectures about events; in other rooms
they talked of business; in others on literary subjects; in
others on matters of civil prudence and moral life; in others
of church matters, the sects, and so on.

It was granted me to look into that house, and I saw
people running from room to room, seeking companionship
in affection and hence in joy; and among those companions
I saw three classes, some as it were panting to speak, some
eager to question, and some greedy to hear. There were
four doors, one for each quarter; and I observed that many
released themselves from the companies and hastened out.
I followed some to the east door, and saw some sitting near
it with sad faces. I went near, and asked why they sat so
sad. They answered, “The doors of this house are kept
shut to those who would go out; it is now the third day since
we entered, and we have exhausted the life of our desire in
company and conversation, and have become so weary with
continual talk that we can hardly bear to hear the murmur
of voices of those whom we have left. Therefore, from
weariness, we came to this door and knocked, but were
answered that the doors of this house are not opened to


934


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 734


people going out, but coming in, and we are told to stay and
enjoy the joys of heaven. From this reply we have con-
cluded that we are to remain here for ever; therefore sad-
ness has seized our minds, and our breasts begin to be op-
pressed and anxiety is coming on us.”

Then the angel addressed them and said: “This state
is the death of your joys which you believed to be the only
heavenly ones, whereas they are but accessories of heavenly
joys.” And they asked the angel, “What then is heavenly
joy?” The angel answered briefly, “It is enjoyment in
doing something useful to one’s self and others; and the
enjoyment in use draws its essence from love and its exist-
ence from wisdom. Enjoyment in use arising from love
through wisdom is the soul and life of all heavenly joys.
There are most gladsome companionships in the heavens,
which exhilarate the minds of angels, cheer their spirits, fill
their bosoms with enjoyment, and refresh their bodies; but
they have these after they have fulfilled uses in their func-
tions and their work; the soul and life in all their gladness
and their pleasures are from these. But if you take away
that soul or life, the accessory joys gradually become no joys;
first they become indifferent, then worthless, and finally sad
and anxious.” After these words the door was opened, and
those who sat near sprang out, and fled to their homes, each
to his function and his work, and were warmed to new life.

735. After this the angel addressed those who had em-
braced the idea as to the joys of heaven and eternal happi-
ness, that they were feasts with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
followed by sports and exhibitions, and then feasting again,
and so on eternally. And he said to them, “Follow me,
and I will introduce you to the felicity of your joys.” And
he led them through grove and meadow to a smooth plain,
with posts, on which were set tables, fifteen on either side.
They asked why so many tables; and the angel replied,
“ The first table i-s Abraham’s, the second Isaac’s, the third
Jacob’s, and near them in order are the tables of the twelve


No. 735]


THE HOLY SUPPER


935


apostles; on the other side are as many tables for their wives;
the three first of these are for Sarah Abraham’s wife, Re-
becca Isaac’s wife, and Leah and Rachel Jacob’s wives;
the other twelve are for the wives of the twelve apostles.”
After a little delay, all the tables appeared loaded with dishes,
while the spaces between them were decorated with pyra-
mids of sweetmeats. The guests stood round the tables,
waiting to see those who were to preside. After they had
waited a little while, they saw them enter in procession, froin
Abraham to the last of the apostles; and each of these
going at once to his own table, took his place upon the couch
at the head of it; and from their places they said to those
standing around, “Take your places also with us.” And
the men took places with those fathers, and the women with
their wives, and ate and drank in gladness and with venera-
tion. After the repast the fathers went out; and then sports
were introduced, dances of maidens and young men, and
then exhibitions. When these were ended, they were again
invited to the feasting, but with the rule that on the first day
they should eat with Abraham, on the second with Isaac, on
the third with Jacob, on the fourth with Peter, on the fifth
with James, on the sixth with John, on the seventh with
Paul, and with the others in order to the fifteenth day, when
they were to renew the feasting again in the same order,
changing seats, and so on to eternity. After this the angel
called together the men of his company, and said to them;
“All those whom you saw at the tables had been in similar
imagination with yourselves as to the joys of heaven and
eternal happiness from it; and in order that they may see
the vanity of their ideas and be led out of them, these seem-
ing feasts were instituted, and were permitted by the Lord.
Those chief men whom you saw at the head of the tables
merely personated old men; most of them were rustics,
having their beards, and puffed up by some little wealth,
upon whom the fantasy has been induced that they were
those ancient fathers. But follow me to the ways that lead


936


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 735


from this school of practice.” They followed him; and
they saw fifty here and fifty there who had loaded their
stomachs with food until they were nauseated, and longed
to return to the familiar scenes of their own homes, some to
offices, some to business, and some to trades. But many
were detained by keepers of the grove, and questioned as
to the days of their feasting, and whether they had yet eaten
at the tables with Peter and Paul; and they were told that
it would bring disgrace on them to go away before eating
with them, as it would be unbecoming. But most of them
answered, “We are surfeited with our joys, food has lost its
relish, our palate too is parched, the stomach revolts, we
cannot bear those drinks; we have spent several days and
nights in that luxury, and we earnestly beg to be let out.”
And being dismissed, with panting breath and hurried steps
they fled home.

Then the angel called the men of his company, and on
the way he taught them this about heaven: “In heaven as in
the world there are food and drink, eating together and con-
vivial times; on the tables of the chief one there, are choicest
food, rarities, and delicacies, whereby their minds are ex-
hilarated and refreshed; there are also sports and exhibi-
tions; and also music, instrumental and vocal; and all in
the highest perfection. Such things are also joys to those
there, but not happiness; happiness must be in joys, and
hence from joys. Happiness in joys makes them joys,
enriches and sustains them so that they do not become
worthless and loathsome; and this happiness each one has
from use in his employment. There is a sort of latent current
in the affection of every angel’s will, that draws his mind to
doing something, whereby it is tranquillized and finds satis-
faction. This satisfaction and tranquillity form a state of
mind capable of receiving from the Lord the love of use;
heavenly happiness is from the reception of this love, which
is the life of those joys. Heavenly food in its essence is no
other than love, wisdom, and use together; that is, use from


No. 736]


THE HOLY SUPPER


937


love by wisdom. For this reason, food for the body is given
to every one in heaven according to the use that he promotes;
most excellent to those who are in eminent use; of less excel-
lent quality but of exquisite relish to those who are in use of
a middle grade; inferior to those who are in low use; but
none to the indolent.”

736. The angel afterward called to him that company of
so-called wise men who had placed heavenly joy and its
eternal happiness in exalted dominion, with most abundant
treasure, also in more than royal magnificence and most
dazzling splendor; because it is said in the Word that they
should be kings and princes, should reign for ever with
Christ, and be served by the angels; with many other things.
To them the angel said, “Follow me, and I will introduce
you to your joys.” Then he led them to a portico con-
structed of columns and pryamids. In front was a porch,
through which lay the entrance to the portico. Through
this porch he introduced them. And lo! there were twenty
persons seen there; and they were waiting. And then sud-
denly one was present who personated an angel; and he
said to them, “The way to heaven is through this portico.
Wait awhile, and make yourselves ready; for the elder
among you are to be kings, and the younger princes.” When
he had said this, there appeared near each column a throne,
and on this a robe of silk, and on the robe a sceptre and
crown; and near each pyramid appeared a seat raised three
cubits from the ground, and on the seat a chain made of
small links of gold, and ensigns of an order of knighthood
fastened at the ends with rings of diamonds. It was. then
proclaimed, “ Go now and robe yourselves, take your seats,
and wait.” And forthwith the older ones ran to the thrones,
and the younger to the seats, robed themselves, and sat
down. And then as it were a mist appeared, coming from
the lower regions; and when this was drawn to those who
sat upon the thrones and seats, their faces began to swell
and their breasts to rise up, and they began to be filled with


93 8 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 73 6

confidence that they were now kings and princes. The
mist was an air of the fantasy that inspired them. And
suddenly young men flew to them as if from heaven, and
stood two behind each throne, and one behind each seat, to
minister. And then proclamation was made, in turn, by
a herald, “Ye kings and princes, wait yet a little; your
palaces in heaven are now being made ready; very soon the
courtiers will come with the guards, and introduce you.”
They waited and waited until their spirits panted and they
grew weary with desire.

After three hours the heaven above their heads was
opened, and the angels looked down, and pitying them said,
“Why do you sit there so foolish and assume characters?
They have played tricks on you, and have changed you from
men into idols, because you have fixed in your hearts that
you are to reign with Christ as kings and princes, and that
angels are then to serve you. Have you forgotten the
Lord’s words, that he who would be great in heaven must
be a servant ? Therefore learn what is meant by kings and
princes and reigning with Christ, that it is to be wise and
do uses; for the kingdom of Christ, which is heaven, is a
kingdom of uses; for the Lord loves all, and thence wills
good to all, and good is use. And because the Lord does
goods or uses mediately by the angels, and in the world by
men, to those who do uses faithfully He therefore gives the
love of use and its reward, which is internal blessedness,
and this is eternal happiness. In the heavens as on earth
there are exalted dominion and abundant treasures; for
there are governments, and forms of government, and thus
there are powers and dignities, greater and less; and those
who are in the highest stations have palaces and courts,
which surpass those of emperors and kings on earth in mag-
nificence and splendor; and honor and glory surround them
from the number of courtiers, ministers, and attendants,
and the splendid vestments in which these are clad. But
those who are highest are chosen from among those whose


No. 737]


THE HOLY SUPPER


939


hearts are in the puhlic welfare, while only the senses of the
body are in the grandeur of magnificence for the sake of
ohedience. And because it is for the public welfare that
every one should be of some use in society as in a common
body, and because all use is from the Lord and is done
through angels and through men as if by them, it is mani-
fest that this is to reign with the Lord.” When this was
heard from heaven, those who had personated kings and
princes descended from the thrones and seats, and threw
away the sceptres, crowns, and robes; and the mist in
which was the air of fantasy receded from them, and a
bright cloud encompassed them, in which was the air of
wisdom, from which sanity returned to their minds.

737. After this the angel returned to the house where
the wise from the Christian world were assembled, and
called to him those who had embraced the belief that the
joys of heaven and eternal happiness were delights of para-
dise. He said to them, “Follow me, and I will introduce
you to paradise, your heaven, that you may enter on the
blessings of your eternal happiness.” And he conducted
them through a lofty gate-way, formed of interwoven
branches and twigs of noble trees; after they had entered
he led them about through winding paths from place to
place. It was actually a paradise at the first entrance to
heaven, into which they are sent who in the world had be-
lieved all heaven to he one paradise, because it is called
paradise, and had impressed upon themselves the idea that
after death there is complete rest from labor, and that this
rest is nothing but hreathing the very soul of delights, walk-
ing upon roses, being gladdened by the most delicate juice
of the grape, and banqueting; and that this life is to be
found only in a heavenly paradise. As they followed the
angel they saw a great multitude of men old and young, also
of boys, and also of women and girls, sitting in groups of
three and ten on flower-beds, where they wreathed garlands
to decorate the heads of the old men and the arms of the


940


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 737


young, and to encircle the bosoms of the children; others
were pressing juice from grapes, cherries, and mulberries,
into cups, and drinking it cheerfully; others were inhaling
the fragrance breathed forth and diffused from flowers,
fruit, and odorous leaves; others were singing sweet songs
that soothed the ears of listeners; others sat at fountains,
turning the waters of the gushing stream into various forms;
some were walking, talking together, and scattering their
pleasantry; some entered into little garden houses, to re-
cline on couches; and they saw many other paradisal forms
of gladness.

After they had seen these things, the angel led his com-
panions here and there by circuitous routes, and at last to
some persons seated on a most beautiful flower-bed, which
was surrounded by olive, orange, and citron trees; they sat
swaying themselves to and fro, their faces resting on their
hands, wailing and weeping. The companions of tlje angel
addressed them and asked, “Why do you sit so?” They
replied, “ It is now seven days since we came into this para-
dise. When we entered, our minds seemed to be as if
raised into heaven, and introduced to the inmost favors of
its joys; but after three days those favors began to grow
dim, to fade from our minds, to become imperceptible, and
so to become naught. And when our imaginary joys thus
expired, we feared the loss of all that makes life enjoyable,
and began to doubt about eternal happiness, even whether
there be any. And afterward we wandered through paths
and plots in search of the gate by which we entered. But
we wandered through winding paths, round and round,
making enquiries of those we met. Some of them said that
the gate is not found because this paradisal garden is a vast
labyrinth, which is such that one wishing to go out enters
in more deeply; and they added, ‘You must therefore nec-
essarily remain here to eternity; you are now in the midst
of the paradise, where all delights centre/” They further
said to the companions of the angel: “We have now sat


No. 737]


THE HOLY SUPPER


941


here for a day and a half; and as we are now without hope
of finding the way out, we have been resting ourselves on
this flower-bed, and we look around us upon olives, grapes,
oranges, and citrons in abundance. But* the more we look
at them the more is our sight wearied with seeing, our smell
with smelling, and our taste with tasting. This is the cause
of the sadness in which you find us, and of our wailing and
weeping.”

On hearing this, the angel of the company said to them,
“This paradisal labyrinth is really an entrance to heaven.
I know the way out, and will lead you forth.” At these
words those who were seated arose and embraced the angel,
and went with him joining his company. And on their
way the angel taught them what heavenly joy and its eternal
happiness are, that they are not external paradisal delights,
unless internal paradisal delights are together with these.
“External paradisal delights,” said he, “are only delights
of the senses of the body, but internal paradisal delights are
those of the soul’s affections; unless these are in the others,
there is no heavenly life in them, because there is no soul
in them; and every delight without its correspondent soul,
languishes continually and becomes torpid, and wearies
the mind more than labor. There are paradisal gardens
everywhere in heaven, and the angels also have joys from
them; and so far as the soul’s delight is within these, the
joys are joys to them.” Hearing this they all asked, “What
is the soul’s delight, and whence comes it?” The angel re-
plied, “ The soul’s delight is from love and wisdom from the
Lord; and because love is effective, and is effective through
wisdom, they both have their seat in the effect, and the effect
is use. This delight flows into the soul from the Lord,
descends through the higher and lower regions of the mind
into all the senses of the body, and makes itself full in them;
hence joy becomes joy, and it becomes eternal from the
Eternal from whom it is. You have seen paradisal scenes;
and I declare to you that there is not one thing there, not


942


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 738


even a little leaf, that is not from the marriage of love and
wisdom in use. Therefore if man is in this marriage he is
in a heavenly paradise, and so in heaven.”

738. After this the angel guide returned to the house, to
those who had firmly persuaded themselves that heavenly
joy and eternal happiness were perpetual glorification of
God and an endless festival; and this, because they had
believed when in the world that they should then see God,
and because the life of heaven from the worship of God is
called a perpetual sabbath. To them the angel said, “Fol-
low me, and I will introduce you to your joy.” And he intro-
duced them into a small city, in the midst of which was a
temple, and where all the houses were called sacred. In
this city they saw a gathering of the people from every comer
of the surrounding land, and among them a number of
priests who received them as they came, saluted them, and
taking them by the hand led them to the gates of the temple,
and from them to some sacred buildings round about the
temple, and initiated them into the perpetual worship of
God; saying, “This city is the court to heaven, and the
temple of this city is the entrance to a magnificent and most
spacious temple which is in heaven, where God is glorified
by angels with praises and prayers for ever. It is ordered
both here and there that those who come are first to enter
the temple and remain there for three days and nights, and
after this initiation are to enter the houses of this city which
are so many buildings consecrated by us, and going from
one sacred house to another, in communion with those
assembled there, shall pray, and sing praise, and repeat
what has been preached. Be very careful to think of
nothing within yourselves, and to speak of nothing with
your companions, but what is holy, pious, and religious.”

After this the angel introduced his company into the
temple, which was full and crowded with many who had
enjoyed high dignity in the world, and also with many com-
mon people; and guards were stationed at the gates, to pre-


No. 738]


THE HOLY SUPPER


943


vent one from going out before he had stayed three days.
And the angel said, “ This is the second day since those now
here came in; observe them, and you will see their glorifica-
tion of God.” And they looked at them; and they saw
most of them asleep, and those who were awake continually
yawning; some, from continual elevation of their thoughts
to God, without allowing them to come down at all into the
body, seemed like faces apart from the body, for so they ap-
peared to themselves, and therefore to others also; some
with wild eyes from being constantly turned away; in a word,
the breasts of all were oppressed, and they were weary in
spirit; they turned away from the pulpit and cried out,
“Stop preaching, our ears are stunned; we no longer hear
a word, the very sound of your voices begins to be weari-
some.” And then they arose, rushed in a mass to the gates,
broke them open, pressed upon the guards, and drove them
away.

Seeing this the priests followed, keeping close to them,
teaching and teaching, praying, sighing, and saying, “ Cele-
brate the festival, glorify God, sanctify yourselves; in this
court of heaven we will inaugurate you into eternal glorifica-
tion of God in a magnificent and most spacious temple that
is in heaven, and so into the enjoyment of eternal happiness.”
These words, however, were not understood, and were
scarcely heard by them, owing to the dulness of their minds
from two days’ suspension and detention from ordinary
business within and outside of their houses. But when they
endeavored to tear themselves away from the priests, the
priests caught them by the arms and clothing, urging them
to the houses where they were to preach; but in vain; they
cried out, “Leave us; we feel as if we should faint.” At
these words, lo, there appeared four men in white garments,
and with mitres. One of them had been an archbishop in
the world, and the other three had been bishops; they had
now become angels. They called the priests together, and
addressing them said, “ We saw you from heaven with these


944


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 738


sheep, and saw how you feed them. You feed them even to
madness. You do not know what glorification of God
means. It means to bring forth fruits of love, that is, to
discharge faithfully, sincerely, and diligently the work of
one’s calling, for this is of the love of God and the love of
the neighbor; and it is the bond of society, and its good.
By this God is glorified, and then by worship at stated times.
Have you not read these words of the Lord, Herein is My
Father glorified , that ye bear much fruit: so shall ye be My
disciples (John xv. 8)? You priests are able to be in the
glorification of worship, because to be so is your office, and
you have honor, glory, and recompense from it; but still
you could be in that glorification no more than they, unless
honor, glory, and recompense were united with your office.”
Having so said, the bishops charged the keepers of the gate
to admit all, and to let all pass out: “for,” said they, “there
are very many who have not been able to think of any other
heavenly joy than the perpetual worship of God, because
they have known nothing of the state of heaven.”

739. After this the angel returned with his companions
to the place of meeting, from which the companies of wise
men had not yet gone; and there he called to him those who
believed heavenly joy and eternal happiness to be merely
admittance into heaven, and who believed that admittance
is from Divine grace, and that those who are admitted have
joy at once, like those who in the world enter the palaces of
kings on days of festivity, or come by invitation to a mar-
riage. To them the angel said, “Wait here awhile; I will
sound my trumpet, and those who have high reputation for
wisdom in the spiritual things of the church will come
hither.” After some hours nine men presented themselves,
each wearing a laurel wreath to mark his fame. These
were introduced by the angel into the house of assembly
where all those who were convoked before were waiting.
In the presence of these the angel addressed the nine wear-
ing the laurel wreaths, and said : “ I know that in accordance


No. 739]


THE HOLY S UPPER


945


with your wish, and following out your ideas, it was granted
you to ascend into heaven; and that you have returned to
this lower or sub-celestial earth with full knowledge of the
state of heaven; tell us therefore how heaven appeared to
you.” And they replied in order.

The first said: “My idea of heaven, from earliest boy-
hood even to the end of my life in the world, was that it was
a place of all blessings and favors, of all that promotes en-
joyment and is charming, and of all pleasures; and that if
I were admitted there, I should be surrounded with an air
of such felicities, inhaling them with full breast as sur-
rounds a bridegroom when he celebrates his marriage and
when he enters the marriage-chamber with his bride. With
this idea I ascended to heaven; I passed the first guards,
and the second also; but when I came to the third, the
officer of the guard addressed me and said, ‘Who are you,
friend ? ’ I answered, ‘ Is not this heaven ? I have ascended
hither at my earnest wish; admit me, I entreat you.’ And
he admitted me. And I saw angels in white garments, who
walked around me, and looked at me, and murmured,
‘Here is a new guest who is not clothed with the raiment of
heaven.’ I heard these words, and thought, ‘This seems
to me to be as it was with him of whom the Lord says that
he came to the wedding not having a wedding-garment.’
And I said, ‘Give me such garments;’ but they laughed.
And then one came running from the court with the order,
‘Strip him naked, cast him out, and throw his clothes after
him; ’ and so I was cast out.”

The second in order then said: “My belief also like his
was, that if I were only admitted into heaven which was
above my head, joys would flow round me, and that I should
breathe them for ever. I also obtained my wish. But
when the angels saw me they fled, and said to one another,
‘What portent is this? How did this bird of night come
hither?’ And I actually felt myself changed from being a
man, although I was not changed. This happened to me


946


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 739


from inhaling the heavenly atmosphere. But presently
one ran from the court, with the order that two servants
should lead me out, and conduct me back by the way I
ascended even to my own house. And when I was at home
I appeared to myself and to others as a man.”

The third said: “My idea of heaven was always from
place, and not from love; so when I came into this world,
I longed for heaven with a great desire; and seeing some
ascending, I followed them and was admitted, but only a
few steps. But when I wished to gladden my mind by the
idea of the joys and blessings there, owing to the light of
heaven, which was white like snow, and the essence of which
is said to be wisdom, stupor seized my mind, and from it
thick darkness came over my eyes, and I began to be in-
sane; and presently, from the heat of heaven, which corre-
sponded to the brightness of that light, and the essence of
which is said to be love, my heart palpitated, anxiety took
possession of me, I was tortured with inward pain, and
threw myself on the ground there upon my back; and while
I lay there, an attendant came from the court with an order
to carry me carefully into my own light and heat; and when
I came into them, my breath and heart returned to me.”

The fourth said that he also had been in the idea of place,
and not in the idea of, love in respect to heaven. He said
further: “As soon as I came into the spiritual world I asked
wise men whether it was allowable to ascend into heaven.
They said that one was at liberty to ascend, but that those
who go up must be careful lest they be cast down again.
I laughed at this, and went up, believing like others that
all in the whole world were capable of receiving the joys of
heaven in their fulness. But truly, as soon as I was within,
I became almost dead; and from the pain and its torture
in my head and body, I prostrated myself on the ground,
writhed like a serpent near the fire, crawled even to the
brink, and in that way threw myself down. I was after^
ward taken up by some who stood below, and carried to an
inn, where I became well again.”


No. 739]


THE HOLY SUPPER


947


The other five also gave wonderful accounts of their
ascents to heaven; and they compared the changes in the
states of their life with the state of fishes when lifted from the
water into the air, and that of birds when in the ether. And
they said that after those hard experiences, they no longer
had desire for heaven, but only for life in company with their
like wherever they were; and that they know that in the
world of spirits, where we then were, all first undergo prepa*
ration, the good for heaven and the evil for hell, and that
when prepared they see ways opened for them to societies of
those like themselves, with whom they will remain for ever;
also that they then enter these ways with enjoyment because
they are the ways of their love. When they of the first
assembly heard these things, they all confessed that they,
too, had entertained no other idea of heaven than as of a
place where with full mouth they should for ever drink in
the joys flowing round them. The angel with the trumpet
then said to them: “You now see that the joys of heaven
and eternal happiness are not of place, but of the state of
man’s life; and the state of heavenly life is from love and
wisdom; and as use is the containant of these two, the state
of heavenly life is from the conjunction of love and wisdom
in use. It is the same if we say charity, faith, and good
work; for charity is love, faith is truth from which comes
wisdom, and good work is use. Moreover, in our spiritual
world there are places as in the natural world; otherwise
there would not be places to live in, and distinct mansions;
but still place in this world is not place, but an appearance
of place according to the state of love and wisdom or charity
and faith. Every one who becomes an angel carries his
heaven within him, because he carries the love of his heaven;
for man from creation is the least effigy, image, and type of
the great heaven; the human form is nothing else; therefore
every one comes into that society in heaven of which he is a
form in his individual effigy. Therefore when he enters into
that society, he enters into the form corresponding with him-


948


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 739


self: thus as of himself he enters into that self, and as from
this he enters into it in himself; and he draws in its life as
his life, and his life as its. Every society is as what is gen-
eral, and the angels there are as similar parts from which the
general co-exists. From this it now follows that they who
are in evils and hence in falsities, have formed in themselves
an effigy of hell; and this suffers torment in heaven from the
influx and violence of activity of one opposite to another;
for infernal love is opposite to heavenly love, and conse-
quently the enjoyments of those two loves come into collision
with each other like hostile forces, and destroy each other
when they meet.”

740. After this a voice was heard from heaven saying to
the angel with the trumpet, “ Select ten out of the whole, and
introduce them to us; we have heard from the Lord that He
will prepare them so that the heat and light, or the love and
wisdom, of our heaven do them no injury for three days.”
Then ten were chosen, who followed the angel. And they
ascended by a steep path to a certain hill, and from this to
a mountain on which the heaven of those angels was, which
had before appeared to them at a distance like an expanse
in the clouds. The gates were opened for them; and after
they had passed the third, the introducing angel ran to the
prince of that society or heaven and announced their arrival.
And the prince said in reply, “Take some of my attendants,
and carry word to them that their arrival is pleasing to me,
and introduce them into my court, and give each his own
room with his bed-chamber; and take some of my courtiers,
and servants also, to wait on them and render them all the
service they desire.” And it was done. But when they
were brought in by the angel, they asked whether it was
allowable to go and see the prince; and the angel answered
them, “It is now morning, and he cannot be seen before
noon; until that time all are engaged in their own offices and
work. But you are invited to dinner; and then you will sit
at table with our prince. Meanwhile I will introduce you


No. 741]


THE HOLY SUPPER


949

to his palace, where you will see magnificent and splendid
things.”

When they came to the palace, they first viewed it from
without. It was spacious, built of porphyry, with the sub-
structure of jasper; and six lofty columns of lapis lazuli
were before the gate, the roof was of plates of gold, the high
windows were of the clearest crystal, and their frames also of
gold. They were afterward introduced to the interior of
the palace, and conducted from room to room; and they saw
ornaments of inexpressible beauty, and on the ceilings deco-
rations of inimitable sculpture; placed against the walls
they saw tables of silver fused with gold, on which were
various utensils of precious stones, and of entire gems in
heavenly forms. And they saw many other things which no
eye on earth had ever seen; and no one therefore had been
able to believe that there are such things in heaven. While
they were amazed at the sight of such magnificence, the
angel said: “Do not wonder; the things which you see were
not fashioned and wrought by any angelic hand, but were
formed by the Builder of the universe, and presented to our
prince; therefore here we have architectural art in its own
perfection, and from it are all the rules of that art in the
world.” The angel said further: “You may imagine that
such things fascinate our eyes, and so far infatuate them,
that we believe them to be the joys of our heaven; but be-
cause our hearts are not in them, they are only accessory to
the joys of our hearts; therefore so far as we contemplate
them as accessory, and as the workmanship of God, we con-
template in them the Divine omnipotence and clemency.”

741. Alter this the angel said to them, “ It is not yet noon;
come with me into the garden of our prince, which adjoins
this palace.” They went, and at the entrance the angel
said, “ Behold the most magnificent garden in this heavenly
society.” But they replied, “WBat do you say? There is
no garden here; we see only one tree, and on its branches
and top what seem like fruits of gold, and leaves of silver


950


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 741


with their edges adorned with emeralds; and under the tree
little children with their nurses.” To this the angel with in-
spired voice replied: “This tree is in the midst of the gar-
den, and is called by us the tree of our heaven, and by some
the tree of life. But proceed and draw nearer, and your
eyes will be opened and you Will see the garden.” And they
did so, and their eyes were opened, and they saw trees laden
with delicious fruit, with vines entwining their tendrils about
them, and their tops bending with the fruit toward the tree of
life in the centre. These trees were planted in a continued
series which came and went in endless circles or curves like
those of a perpetual spiral; it was a perfect spiral of trees, in
which one species followed another continually, according to
the excellence of their fruit. A broad space lay between the
beginning of the spiral and the tree in the midst; and this
space gleamed with beaming light that made the trees of the
spiral glow with a radiance which was graduated and un-
broken from the first to the last. The first trees were the
noblest of all, luxuriant with the rarest fruit; these were
called trees of paradise, being nowhere seen in any land of
the natural world, for they do not and cannot exist there.
After these followed olive-trees, then those that yielded wine,
then trees yielding fragrance, and last of all those useful to
workmen for wood. Here and there in this coil of trees, or
this spiral, were seats formed of branches of trees behind
them drawn forward and interlaced, and enriched and
adorned with their fruits. In that perpetual circle of trees
were passages which opened into flower-plots, and from these
into lawns laid out in areas and beds. Seeing these things,
the companions of the angel exclaimed, “ Behold heaven in
form! Wherever we turn our eyes, some thing of heaven
and paradise meets them, which is inexpressible.” The
angel rejoiced on hearing this, and said: “All the gardens
of our heaven are representative forms or types of heavenly
beatitudes in their origin; and because the influx of these
beatitudes elevated your minds, you exclaimed, ‘Behold


No. 742]


THE HOLY SUPPER


951


heaven in form.’ But they who do not receive that influx,
look on these things of paradise only as they look on those of
a forest. All those receive the influx who are in the love of
use; while they do not receive it who are in the love of glory,
and not from use.” He afterward explained and taught
what each thing in the garden represented and signified.

742. While they were thus engaged, a messenger came
from the prince, who invited them to eat bread with him;
and at the same time two attendants of the court brought
garments of fine linen, and said, “ Put these on, for no one is
admitted to the prince’s table unless clothed with the gar-
ments of heaven.” And they made themselves ready, and
accompanied their angel. They were introduced into a
corridor, the walk of the palace, and waited for the prince.
And there the angel introduced them to companionship with
great men and rulers who also were waiting for the prince.
And behold, in less than an hour the doors were opened, and
through one wider than the rest, on the west, they saw him
enter in the order and pomp of procession. Before him
came his privy counsellors, after these the chamberlains, and
after these the chief officers of his court; the prince was in
the midst of the latter; after him came courtiers of various
rank, and last of all the guards. In all, they numbered one
hundred and twenty. The angel standing in front of the ten
new-comers, who from their dress now appeared inmates of
the place, advanced with them to the prince, and reverently
presented them; and the prince, without stopping the pro-
cession, said to them, “Come with me to eat bread.” And
they followed him into the dining-hall, where they saw a
table magnificently prepared. In the centre of it was a high
pyramid of gold, having on its forms in triple order a hun-
dred dishes containing sweet bread, new witie solidified,
with other delicacies made of bread and wine together.
And through the middle of the pyramid welled up, as it were,
a fountain streaming with wine like nectar, the flow of which
parted at the top of the pyramid and supplied the cups.


952


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 742


Various heavenly forms of gold were at the sides of this high
pyramid, on which were dishes and plates loaded with all
kinds of food. The heavenly forms on which were the
dishes and plates, were forms of art from wisdom, such as
cannot be portrayed in the world by any art, or described
by any language. The dishes and plates were of silver, en-
graved around with forms similar to those on their supports;
the cups were of pellucid gems. So was the table furnished.

743. But the dress of the prince and his ministers was
this: The prince was clad in a long purple robe, decorated
with silver stars of needlework; under the robe he wore a
tunic of shining violet silk. This was open at the breast,
where was seen the front part of a belt, bearing the ensign of
his society; this was an eagle brooding her young at the top
of a tree; it was of shining gold set round with diamonds.
The privy counsellors were clad in a somewhat similar way,
but without the ensign; instead of it they had carved sap-
phires hanging from their necks by golden chains. The
courtiers wore gowns of a brown,, color, in which were inter-
woven flowers encircling young eagles; the tunics under
these were of silk of opal color, as were their breeches and
stockings. Such was their clothing.

744. The privy counsellors, chamberlains, and rulers
stood around the table; and at the order of the prince they
clasped their hands, and uttered softly together a prayer of
praise to the Lord; and then at a nod from the prince, they
took their places on the cushioned seats at the table. And
the prince said to the ten strangers, “ Sit down also with me;
your seats are there.” And they sat down. The court-
attendants before sent by the prince to wait upon them stood
behind them. The prince then said to them, “Take, each
one of you, a plate from its stand, and then a little dish from
the pyramid.” They did so; and lo, there instantly ap-
peared new plates and little dishes in the place of those taken
away. Their cups were filled with wine from the fountains
streaming from the great pyramid, and they ate together.


No. 744]


THE HOLY SUPPER


953


When they were moderately satisfied, the prince addressed
the ten guests and said: “I have heard that you were called
' together on the earth beneath this heaven, to disclose your
thoughts about the joys of heaven and the eternal happiness
from it; and that you expressed your views variously, each
according to the enjoyments of the senses of his body. But
what are the enjoyments of the senses of the body without
those of the soul? It is the soul that makes them to be en-
joyments. The enjoyments of the soul are in themselves
imperceptible beatitudes; but they become more and more
perceptible as they descend into the thoughts of the mind,
and from these into the sensations of the body. In the
thoughts of the mind they are perceived as a sense of being
favored, in the sensations of the body in a sense of enjoy-
ment, and in the body itself as pleasures. From these when
all together, comes eternal happiness; but from the latter
alone, the happiness is not eternal but temporal, which
comes to an end and passes away, and sometimes becomes
unhappiness. You have now seen that all your joys are
also joys of heaven, and more excellent than you have ever
been able to conceive; but yet these do not affect our minds
inwardly. Three things flow as one from the Lord into our
souls; these three as one, or this trine, are love, wisdom, and
use: but love and wisdom do not exist except ideally, be-
cause only in the affection and thought of the mind; but
they exist in use really, because simultaneously in the act and
work of the body; and where they exist really, there they
also abide. And as love and wisdom exist and abide in use,
it is use which affects us; and use is, discharging the works
of one’s function faithfully, sincerely, and diligently. Love
of use, and consequent earnest application in use, holds the
mind together, and prevents its dissipating itself, and wander-
ing about, and drinking in all the cupidities which with their
allurements flow through the senses from the body and from
the world, and from which the truths of religion and the
truths of morality with their goods are scattered to every


954


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 744


wind. But earnest application of the mind in use, holds and
binds these together, and arranges the mind into a form re-
ceptive of wisdom from these truths, and then it banishes to
ihe sides the illusions and mockeries both of falsities and
vanities. But on this subject you will hear more from the
wise men of our society, whom I will send to you this after-
noon.” So saying the prince arose, and with him his guests;
and wishing them peace, he directed the angel who had them
in charge to lead them back to their rooms, and to show
them all honors of civility; and also to invite courteous and
affable men to entertain them with conversation about the
various joys of the society.

745. When they returned to their rooms all this was done.
Men invited from the city came to entertain them with con-
versation on the various joys of the society; and after saluta-
tions, conversed with them as they walked, very pleasantly.
But their angel-guide said, “These ten men were invited to
this heaven to see its joys, and thus to receive a new idea of
eternal happiness. Tell therefore some of its joys which
affect the senses of the body; some wise men will come after-
ward who will relate some things that render those joys satis-
factory and happy.” Hearing this, the men invited from
the city. related the following: “1. There are here days of
festivity appointed by the prince, that the mind by relaxa-
tion may recover from the weariness which the zeal of emula-
tion may have brought upon some. On these days there are
concerts of instrumental and vocal music in places of public
resort, and outside of the city games and shows. At such
times orchestras are raised in the places of public resort,
surrounded by lattice-work of interwoven vines, from which
hang clusters of grapes; within the lattices, in three rows one
above another, sit the musicians with stringed and wind in-
struments, high-toned and low-toned, some powerful and
some sweet; singers of both sexes are at the sides; and they
delight the citizens with the sweetest jubilees and songs,
choruses and solos, varied at intervals. On these days


No. 745]


THE HOLY SUPPER


955


of festivity this is continued from morning until noon, and
then again till evening. 2. Moreover, every morning the
sweetest songs of virgins and young girls are heard from the
houses around the public places, with which the whole city
resounds. There is some one affection of spiritual love
that is sung every morning, sounded forth by modifications
or modulations of the musical voice; and that affection is
perceived in the singing, as if this were the affection itself.
It flows into the souls of the hearers, and excites them to
correspondence. Such is heavenly song. These singers
say that the sound of their singing draws as it were inspira-
tion and animation from within, and exalts itself joyously,
according to its reception by the hearers. When the singing
ceases, the windows of the houses on a public square are
closed, and at the same time those of the houses on the streets,
and the doors also, and then the whole city is still; there is
no noise anywhere, nor are any wandering idlers seen, but
all, girt for their work, enter upon the duties of their em-
ployments. 3. But at noon the doors are opened, and in
the afternoon in some places the windows also, and boys and
girls are seen playing in the streets, while their nurses and
their teachers sit in the porches of the houses, overseeing
them. 4. In the outskirts of the city, there are various
games of boys and young men, foot-races, and games of ball,
and a game in which the ball is struck back and forth, called
tennis. There are trials of skill among the boys, to deter-
mine who is quick and who is slow in speaking, acting, and
perceiving; and to the quick, some laurel leaves are given as
a reward; and there are many other ways of calling forth
the latent abilities of the boys. 5. Moreover, there are
theatrical exhibitions outside of the city, where players rep-
resent the various proprieties and virtues of moral life;
among them are also players of lower parts, for the sake of
comparisons.” And one of the ten asked, “How for the
sake of comparisons?” They replied: “No virtue can be
presented to the life, with what is honorable and becoming


956


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 745


in it, except by means of comparisons, from the greatest to
the least of them. The players of the lower parts repre-
sent the virtues, and the honorable and becoming things of
them as they are when least, even till they become none;
but it is decreed by law that nothing opposite, which is called
dishonorable and unbecoming, shall be exhibited except fig-
uratively and as it were remotely. It is so provided, be-
cause nothing honorable and good in any virtue passes by
successive steps to what is dishonorable and evil, but to the
very least of it even till it perishes; and when it perishes, the
opposite begins. Therefore heaven, where all things are
honorable and good, has nothing in common with hell,
where all things are dishonorable and evil.”

746. While they were talking, a servant ran to them and
announced that eight wise men had come by the order of the
prince, and wished to enter; hearing this, the angel went and
received and introduced them. And the wise men, as soon
as the usual and proper forms of introduction were over,
first spoke with them about the beginnings and growth of
wisdom, mingling with their conversation various remarks
as to its progress, showing that wisdom with the angels
never ends and ceases, but grows and is increased to eter-
nity. Hearing this, the angel of the company said to the
wise men, “ Our prince spoke at table with these men about
the seat of wisdom, as being in use. Do you also, if you
please, talk with them on the same subject.” And they
said: “Man as first created was imbued with wisdom and
its love, not for the sake of himself, but of its communica-
tion with others from himself; hence it is written in the wis-
dom of the wise, that no one should be wise and live for him-
self alone but for others at the same time; hence is society,
which otherwise would not exist. To live for others is to
do uses. Uses are the bonds of society; there are just as
many of these bonds as there are good uses, and these are
infinite. There are spiritual uses, which are of love to God
and toward the neighbor; there are moral and civil uses,


No. 746]


THE HOLY SUPPER


957


which are of the love of the society and state in which a man
is, and of the companions and citizens with whom he is;
there are natural uses, which are of the love of the world and
its necessities; and there are bodily uses, which are of the
love of self-preservation for the sake of higher uses. All
these uses are written on man, and follow in order one after
another; and when they exist simultaneously, one is within
another. They who are in the first uses, which are spiri-
tual, are also in those that follow, and they are wise; but
they who are not in the first, and yet are in the second and
hence in those that follow, are not so wise, but only appear
so owing to external morality and orderly civil life; they who
are not in the first and second but the third and fourth, are
any thing but wise, for they are satans, as they love the world
only, and themselves from the world; but they who are in
the fourth only, are the least wise of all, for they are devils
because they live for themselves alone, or if for others it is
solely for the sake of self. And further: every love has its
own enjoyment, for by this the love lives; and the enjoy-
ment in the love of uses is a heavenly enjoyment which
enters succeeding enjoyments in order, and according to-
their order of succession exalts them and makes them
eternal.” They afterward enumerated heavenly delights
proceeding from the love of use, and said that there are
myriads of myriads of them, and that they who enter into
heaven enter into them. And moreover, in discourses of
wisdom on the love of use, they passed the day with them
even till evening.

But toward evening a footman came clothed in linen to
the ten visitors, companions of the angel, and invited them
to a wedding to be celebrated the next day. The visitors
were very glad that they would also see a wedding in heaven.
After this they were conducted to one of the privy counsel-
lors, and supped with him; and after supper they returned
and separated from one another, and retired each to his own
bed-chamber, and slept till morning. And then, having


958


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 746


wakened they heard the song of virgins and young girls
from the houses round the place of public assembly men-
tioned above. The affection of marriage love was sung at
that time; deeply affected and moved by the sweetness of
which, they perceived a blessed charm implanted in their
joys, which exalted and renewed them. When the time
came, the angel said, “Make yourselves ready, putting on
the garments of heaven which our prince sent to you;” and
they put them on; and behold their garments shone as from
flamy light. And they asked the angel, “Whence is this?”
He replied, “It is because you are going to a wedding; gar-
ments with us then shine and become wedding garments.”

747. After this the angel led them to the house of the
wedding, and the porter opened the door. They were
received near the threshold and saluted by an angel sent by
the bridegroom, conducted in, and taken to seats set for
them; and soon after they were invited into the ante-room
of the bridal party; in the centre of this they saw a table on
which a magnificent candlestick with seven branches and
bowls of gold was placed; on the walls hung lamps of silver;
when these were lighted, the atmosphere had a golden ap-
pearance. And they saw two tables, at the sides of the
candlestick, on which were loaves in triple order; and in
the four comers of the room, tables upon which were crystal
cups. While they were examining these things, behold a
door was opened from an apartment next the bridal room,
and they saw six virgins come out, and after them the bride-
groom and bride holding each other by the hand, and lead-
ing each other to their seat which had been placed directly
opposite the candlestick; they took their seats, the bride-
groom on the left and the bride on his right, and the six vir-
gins stood beside the seat near the bride. The bridegroom
was dressed in a robe of glowing purple and a coat of shining
linen, with an ephod on which was a golden plate set round
with diamonds; a young eagle, the nuptial badge of this
society of heaven, was engraved on the plate; on his head


No. 748]


THE HOLY SUPPER*


959


he wore a mitre. But the bride was dressed in a scarlet
mantle, and under it an embroidered dress reaching from
neck to feet; beneath her bosom was a golden girdle, and
upon her head a crown of gold set with rubies.

While they thus sat together, the bridegroom turned to the
bride, and placed on her finger a golden ring; and he drew
forth bracelets and a necklace of great pearls, fastening the
bracelets on her wrists, and the necklace about her neck,
and saying, “Accept these pledges.” And while she took
them, he kissed her, and said, “ Now you are mine,” and he
called her his wife. When this had been done, the guests
cried out, “Blessing on you!” First each one said this by
himself, and then all together; one sent by the prince in his
stead, joined in the cry; and at that moment the ante-room
was filled with aromatic smoke, which was a sign of blessing
from heaven. And then the servants in waiting took loaves
from the two tables near the candlestick, and cups, now
filled with wine, from the tables in the comers of the room,
and gave to each of the guests his bread and his cup, and
they ate and drank. After this the husband and his wife
arose, the six virgins following them to the threshold with
the now lighted silver lamps in their hands; and the partners
entered the room; and the door was shut.

748. The angel guide afterward talked with the guests
about his ten companions, saying that he had introduced
them by command, had shown them the magnificent things
of the prince’s palace and the wonders it contained, that
they had dined with him, and had afterward conversed with
the wise of the society. And he asked, “May they con-
verse a little with yourselves also?” And they approached,
and entered into conversation. And one wise man of the
wedding guests said to them, “Do you understand what is
signified by what you have seen ? ” They replied that they
understood a little. And then they asked him, “Why was
the bridegroom, now the husband, so clothed?” He
answered, “ The bridegroom, now the husband, represented


960


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 74S


the Lord; and the bride, now the wife, represented the
church; because a wedding in heaven represents the Lord’s
marriage with the church. For this reason the bridegroom
had a mitre on his head, and was clad in a robe, coat, and
ephod, like Aaron; and the bride, now the wife, had a
crown on her head, and was dressed with a mantle like a
queen. But to-morrow they will be clothed differently,
because this representation lasts only to-day.” Again they
asked, “ Since he represented the Lord, and she the church,
why did she sit at his right?” The wise man replied: “ Be-
cause two things make the marriage of the Lord and the
church, love and wisdom, and the Lord is love, and the
church is wisdom; and wisdom is at the right of love; for
the man of the church is wise as of himself, and as he be-
comes wise he receives love from the Lord. The right
hand also signifies power, and love has power through wis-
dom. But as before said, after the marriage the representa-
tion is changed; for the husband then represents wisdom,
and the wife the love of his wisdom. This latter love, how-
ever, is not the prior, but the secondary love which the wife
has from the Lord through the wisdom of the husband; the
love of the Lord which is prior, is the love of becoming wise,
with the husband: therefore, after the marriage, both to-
gether, the husband and wife, represent the church.”

Again they asked, “Why did not you men stand beside
the bridegroom, now the husband, as the six virgins stood
beside the bride, now the wife?” The wise man replied:
“Because to-day we ourselves are counted among the vir-
gins, and the number six signifies all and complete.” But
they said, “How is that?” He replied: “Virgins signify
the church; and the church is of both sexes; therefore we,
too, are virgins in relation to the church; that this is so is
evident from these words in the Apocalypse, These are they
who were not defiled with women , for they are virgins; and
they follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth (xiv. 4). And
because virgins signify the church, the Lord likened it to


No. 750] THE HOLY SUPPER * 961

ten virgins invited to a marriage (Matt. xxv. 1-13). And
because Israel, Zion, and Jerusalem signify the church, so
often in the Word the virgin and daughter of Israel, Zion,
and Jerusalem are named. The Lord also describes His
marriage with the church by these words in David: Upon
Thy right hand did stand the queen in jine gold of Ophir; her
clothing is of wrought gold; she shall be brought unto the
King in raiment of needle-work; the virgins her companions
that follow her shall come into the King’s palace ” (Ps. xlv.
9-14). Afterward they said, “Is it not proper that a priest
should be present and minister ?” The wise man an-
swered, “This is proper on earth, but not in the heavens,
because of the representation of the Lord Himself and the
church. On earth they do not know this. Yet with us a
priest ministers at betrothment, and hears, receives, con-
firms, and consecrates the consent. Consent is the essen-
tial of marriage, and succeeding ceremonies are its for-
malities.”

749. After this the angel guide went to the six virgins, and
told them also of his companions, and requested that they
would honor them with their company. And they ap-
proached, but when near they suddenly went back and
entered the women’s apartment, where their virgin friends
also were. On seeing this, the angel guide followed them
and asked why they had withdrawn so suddenly without
speaking. They replied, “We could not go near them.”
He said, “Why so?” And they answered, “We do not
know; but we perceived something that repelled and drove
us back; they must excuse us.” And the angel returned
to his companions, and told them this answer, and added,
“I suspect that your love of the sex is not chaste; in heaven
we love virgins for their beauty and elegance of manners,
and we love them dearly, but chastely.” At this his com-
panions smiled and said, “Your suspicion is correct; who
can see such beauties near, and not feel some desire?”

750. After this social festivity, all those invited to the


962 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 750

wedding departed, and also the ten men in company with
their angel. The evening was advanced, and they went
to bed. At dawn they heard it proclaimed, “To-day is the
sabbath;” and they arose, and asked the angel what it
meant. He replied, “It is a call to the worship of God,
which returns at stated times, and is proclaimed by the
priests; it is celebrated in our temples, and lasts about two
hours. Come with me, therefore, if you like, and I will in-
troduce you.” They made themselves ready, accompanied
the angel, and entered the temple. And behold, the temple
was large, capable of seating about three thousand, semi-
circular in form, with seats extending continuously around,
following the figure of the temple. The pulpit in front of
the seats was drawn back a little from the centre; the door
was back of the pulpit, at the left. The ten strangers
entered with their angel guide, and he told them where they
were to sit, saying, “ Every one who enters the temple knows
his place; he knows it from something within, nor can he
sit anywhere else; if he sits elsewhere, he hears nothing and
perceives nothing, and also disturbs the order; and when
this is done, the priest is not inspired.”

751. When the congregation had assembled, the priest
ascended the pulpit, and preached a sermon full of the spirit
of wisdom. The sermon was as to the holiness of the Sacred
Scripture, and conjunction of the Lord by it with both
worlds, the spiritual and the natural. In the enlightenment
in which he was, he fully proved that that holy book was
dictated by Jehovah the Lord, and that consequently He is
in it, even so that He is the wisdom there; but that the wisdom
which is Himself therein, lies concealed under the sense of
the letter, and is opened to none but those who are in truths
of doctrine and at the same time in goods of life, and who
thus are in the Lord and have the Lord in them. To the
sermon he subjoined a prayer, and descended. As the con-
gregation was leaving, the angel asked the priest to speak
a few words of peace to his ten companions; and he came to


No. 752]


THE HOLY SUPPER


963


them, and they conversed together for half an hour, and he
spoke of the Divine Trinity as being in Jesus Christ, in
whom dwelleth ail the fulness of the Godhead bodily, ac-
cording to the saying of the Apostle Paul; and he afterward
spoke of the union of charity and faith, but he said the union
of charity and truth, because faith is truth.

752. After giving thanks, they went home. And the
angel said to them, “This is the third day since you came
to this heavenly society, and you were prepared by the Lord
to remain here three days; the time has therefore come for
us to part. So put off the clothes sent you by the prince,
and put on your own.” And as soon as they were in their
own clothes, they were inspired with desire to depart; and
they departed, and descended, the angel accompanying
them all the way to the place of the assembly. And there
they gave thanks to the Lord for having deigned to bless
them with knowledge and its intelligence respecting heavenly
joys and eternal happiness.


CHAPTER FOURTEENTH.


THE CONSUMMATION OF THE AGE; THE COMING OF
THE LORD J AND THE NEW HEAVEN
AND NEW CHURCH.

I. The Consummation of the Age is the last time or

END OF THE CHURCH.

753. There have been several churches on this earth,
and in course of time they have all been brought to an end,
and after their ending new churches have arisen; and so it
has been to the present time. The ending of a church takes
place when no Divine truth remains except what is falsified
or rejected; and while there is no genuine truth there can be
no genuine good, because all the quality of good is formed
by truths; for good is the essence of truth, and truth is the
form of good, and without form there is no quality. Good
and truth can no more be separated than the will and un-
derstanding, or, what is the same, than love’s affection and
the thought from it. Therefore when truth is ended in a
church, good is also ended there; and when this is done, the
church then has an end, that is, then is its consummation.

754. A church is brought to an end by various means,
especially by such as cause falsity to appear as truth; and
when falsity appears to be truth, then the good which in it-
self is good and is called spiritual, is found no more. The
good which is then believed to be good, is only natural, which
a moral life produces. The reason that truth and together
with it good are brought to an end, is chiefly in the two natu-
ral loves that are diametrically opposed to the two spiritual,
and are called love of self and love of the world. Love of
self when it reigns, is opposed to love to God, and love of


No. 755] THE CONSUMMATION OF THE AGE 965

the world when it reigns is opposed to love toward the
neighbor. Love of self is to wish well to one’s self alone, and
not to another but for the sake of self; the same may be said
of the love of the world; and these loves, where they have
been fed, spread like gangrene through the body, and suc-
cessively consume all things thereof. That such love has
invaded the churches, is clearly manifest from Babylon and
the description of it (Gen. xi. 1-9: Isa. xiii.; xiv.; xlvii:
Jer. 1 .; also Dan. ii. 31-47; iii. 1-7, and following; v.;
vi. 8-28; vii. 1-14; and in the Apoc. xvii. and xviii., in
both from beginning to end); for Babylon has at last so
exalted itself as not only to have transferred the Lord’s
Divine power to itself, but also to be striving with the ut-
most zeal to grasp all the riches of the world. That similar
loves would break forth from many leaders of the churches
outside of Babylon, if their power were not limited and thus
curbed, may be inferred from signs and appearances not
without meaning. What else follows, then, but that such
a man regards himself as God, and the world as heaven,
and perverts all truth of the church ? for that truth which in
itself is truth cannot be known and acknowledged by a
merely natural man, nor can it be given him by God be-
cause it falls into the inverse, and becomes falsity. Beside
these two loves there are still other causes of the ending of
truth and good, and hence of the church, but these are
secondary and subordinate to those two.

755. That the consummation of the age is the last time
of the church, is evident from passages in the Word where
it is mentioned; as in the following: I have heard from Jeho-
vah a consummation and decision upon the whole earth (Isa.
xxviii. 22 ). The consummation is decreed , overflowing with
righteousness , for the Lord Jehovih Zebaoth shall make a con-
summation and decision in the whole land (x. 22 , 23 ). The
whole land shall be devoured in the fire of the zeal of Jehovah ,
for He shall make a speedy consummation with all them that
dwell in the land (Zeph. i. 18). By earth or land in these


966


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 755


passages is signified the church, because the land of Canaan
where the church was is meant. That the earth or land sig-
nifies the church, may be seen confirmed by many passages
from the Word in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 285, 902).
At length upon the bird of abominations there shall be desola-
tion , and even to a consummation and decision shall it drop
upon the devastation (Dan. ix. 27). That these words were
spoken by Daniel of the end of the present Christian Church,
may be seen in Matthew (xxiv. 15). The whole earth shall
be a waste, yet will I not make a consummation (Jer. iv. 27).
The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet consummated (Gen. xv.
16). Jehovah said , I will go down and see whether they
have made a consummation , altogether according to the cry
which is come unto Me (xviii. 21); spoken of Sodom. The
last time of the present Christian Church is also meant by
the Lord by the consummation of the age in the following:
The disciples asked Jesus, What shall be the sign of Thy
coming , and 0} the consummation of the age? (Matt. xxiv.
3.) In the time of harvest I will say to the reapers , Gather
ye together first the tares to burn them; gather the wheat into
my barn. So shall it be in the consummation of the age
(Matt. xiii. 30, 40). In the consummation of the age the
angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the
just (xiii. 49). Jesus said to His disciples, Lo , I am with you
even to the consummation of the age (xxviii. 20). It is to be
known that devastation, desolation, and decision signify the
same as consummation; but desolation signifies the con-
summation of truth, devastation that of good, and decision
the full ending of both; and that the fulness of time, in
which the Lord came into the world, and in which He is to
come, is also the ending.

756. The consummation of the age may be illustrated by
various things in the natural world; for here the things upon
earth one and all grow old and are consumed, but by alter-
nate changes called circles of things. Times, in general and
particular, run through these circles. In general, the year


No. 757] THE CONSUMMATION OF THE AGE 967

passes from spring to summer, through this to autumn,
then ends in winter, and from this returns to spring again;
this is the circle of heat: in particular, the day passes from
morning to noon, through this to evening, ends in night, and
from this returns again to morning; this is the circle of light.
Every man also runs through the circle of nature; he begins
life in infancy, from that advances to youth and manhood,
from this to old age, and dies. So likewise every bird of
the air and beast of the earth. Every tree also begins with
the germ, goes on to full stature, and gradually declines,
even till it falls. So it is with every bush and twig, yes, with
every leaf and flower, and even with the soil itself, which in
time becomes barren; so it is also with all still water, which
gradually becomes foul. All these are alternate endings
natural and temporal, but still periodical; for when one
thing has passed from origin to end, another like it arises;
thus every thing is bom and dies, and is born again, that
creation may be continued. What is similar takes place
with the church, because man is a church, and man in gen-
eral makes the church; and one generation follows another,
and there is variety of all minds; and iniquity once rooted
is transmitted to posterity so far as to give an inclination
thereto, and is uprooted only by regeneration which is
effected by the Lord alone.

II. The present is the last time of the Christian
Church, foretold and described by the Lord
in the Gospels and the Apocalypse.

757. That the consummation of the age signifies the last
time of the church was shown in the preceding article; from
which is manifest what is meant by the ending of the age of
which the Lord spoke in the Gospels (Matt, xxiv.: Mark
xiii.: Luke xxi.). For we read that as Jesus sat upon the
Mount of Olives, the disciples came unto Him privately,
saying, What shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the


968


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 757


consummation of the age? (Matt. xxiv. 3.) And the Lord
beginning then, foretold and described the ending, what it
would be successively even to His coming; and that He then
would come in the clouds of heaven with power and glory,
and would gather together His elect, beside many other
things (verses 30, 31) which by no means occurred at the
destruction of Jerusalem. These things the Lord described
there in prophetic speech, in which every word has full
weight. What each involves, has been explained in the
Heavenly Arcana (n. 33S3-335 6 , 3486-3489, 3650-3655*
3751-3757* 3898-3901, 4057-4060, 4229-4231, 433 2 -4335»
4422-4424).

758. That all these words which the Lord spake with
the disciples were said of the last time of the Christian
Church, is very manifest from the Apocalypse in which
there are similar predictions of the ending of the age and
His coming; all of which are particularly explained in the
Apocalypse Revealed , published in the year 1766. Now,
since what the Lord said in presence of His disciples as to
the ending of the age and His coming coincides with what
He afterward revealed through John in the Apocalypse con-
cerning the same, it is very clear that He meant no other
consummation than that of the present Christian Church.
Moreover, there is also a prophecy in Daniel respecting the
end of this church; therefore the Lord says, When ye there-
fore shall see the abomination of desolation , spoken 0} by Dan-
iel the prophet , stand in the holy place , whoso readeth let him
note well (Matt. xxiv. 15: Dan. ix. 27; and what is similar
is in the other prophets). That such abomination of deso-
lation exists to-day in the Christian Church will be still more
manifest from the Appendix; in which it will be seen that
there is no single genuine truth remaining in the church, and
also that unless a new church be raised up in place of the
present, no flesh can be saved , according to the Lord’s words
in Matthew (xxiv. 22). That the Christian Church as it is
to-day is so far brought to an end and devastated, cannot be


No- 759] THE CONSUMMATION OF THE AGE 969

seen by those on earth who have confirmed themselves in
its falsities; this is because confirmation of falsity is denial
of truth; it therefore veils, as it were, the understanding,
and thereby guards against the secret entrance of any thing
else to pull up its cords and stakes, by which it has builded
and fashioned its system like a strong tent. Add to this, that
the natural rational can confirm whatever it likes, thus falsity
equally as well as truth; and when it is confirmed, both ap-
pear in similar light, nor is it known whether the light is
false like that in a dream, or true like that of day. But the
spiritual rational, in which they are who look to the Lord and
from Him are in the love of truth, is wholly different.

759. It is from this that every church built up of those
who see by confirmations, appears as if it alone were in light,
and all others which dissent from it in darkness. For they
who see by confirmations are not unlike owls, which see
light in the shade of night, and by day see the sun and its rays
as thick darkness. Such has been and also such is every
church in falsities, when once founded by leaders who seem
to themselves lynx-eyed, who have made for themselves a
morning light from their own intelligence and an evening
light from the Word. Did not the Jewish Church when
wholly devastated, which was when our Lord came into the
world, cry aloud by its scribes and legalists, that because it
had the Word it alone was in heavenly light, when yet they
crucified the Messiah or Christ who was the Word itself and
the All in all thereof? What is the cry of the church meant
by Babylon in the prophets and in the Apocalypse, but that
she is the queen and mother of all churches, and that those
churches which withdraw from her are spurious offspring
that must be excommunicated? and this although she has
thrust the Lord the Saviour from the throne and altar, and
placed herself thereon. Does not every church, even the
most heretical, when once received, fill country and town
with the cry that it alone is orthodox and catholic, and that
it has the gospel which the angel flying in the midst of


9;o


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 759


heaven announced? (Apoc. xiv. 6.) And who does not
hear an echo from the crowd, that this is so ? Did the whole
Synod of Dort view predestination otherwise than as a star
descending from heaven above their heads, and did they not
kiss that dogma as the Philistines kissed the image of Dagon
in the temple at Ashdod, and as the Greeks kissed the Palla-
dium in the temple of Minerva? For they called that the
palladium of religion, not knowing that the falling star is a
meteor from false light, which, when it falls upon the brain
can confirm every falsity, which is done by fallacies, until it
is believed to be the true light, and decreed to be a fixed star,
and finally sworn to be the star of stars. Who speaks more
persuasively of the certain* truth of his fantasy than the
atheistic naturalist? Does he not laugh most heartily at
the Divine things of God, the celestial of heaven, and the
spiritual of the church ? What lunatic does not believe his
folly to be wisdom, and wisdom to be folly ? Who by sight
of the eye distinguishes the illusive light of decaying wood
from the light of the moon? Who that loathes balsamic
odors, as those do who are affected with uterine disease, does
not repel them from the nostrils and prefer ill smelling odors
to them? And so on. These things have been presented
for the sake of illustration, that it may be known that by
natural light alone it is not known that the church is con-
summated, that is, that it is in mere falsities, until truth from
heaven beams forth in its own light. For falsity does not see
truth, but truth sees falsity; and every man is such that he
can see and comprehend truth while he hears it ; but a man
confirmed in falsities cannot bring truth into the under-
standing to remain, since it finds no room; and if it hap-
pens to enter, the assembled troop of falsities ejects it as
heterogeneous.


No. 761] THE CONSUMMATION OF THE AGE


971


III. This last time oe the Christian Church is the

VERY NIGHT INTO WHICH FORMER CHURCHES
HAVE GONE DOWN.

760. That there have been in general four churches on
this earth since creation, one succeeding another, may be
evident from both the historical and the prophetical Word,
especially in Daniel, where the four churches are described
by the statue which Nebuchadnezzar saw in a dream (chap,
ii.), and afterward by the four beasts coming up out of the
sea (chap. vii.). The first, which is to be called the Most
Ancient, existed before the flood; its consummation or end
is described by the flood. The second, which is to be called
the Ancient, existed in Asia, and part of it in Africa; it was
brought to an end and perished by idolatries. The third
was the Tsraelitish, beginning with the promulgation of the
Decalogue upon Mount Sinai, continued through the Word
written by Moses and the prophets, and consummated or
ended by the profanation of the Word which was full at the
time of the Lord’s coming into the world; therefore they
crucified Him who was the Word. The fourth is the Chris-
tian, established by the Lord through the evangelists and
apostles. There have been two epochs of this church, one
from the time of the Lord to the Council of Nice, and the
other from that Council to the present day. As it has gone
on, however, this church has been divided into three, the
Greek, Roman Catholic, and Reformed; but still, all these
have been called Christian. Moreover, there have been
several particular ones within each general church, which
though seceding have still retained the name from the gen-
eral one, as the heresies in the Christian Church.

761. That the last time of the Christian Church is the
very night into which the former churches went down, is
evident from the Lord’s prediction respecting it in the
Evangelists and in Daniel: in the Evangelists from the fob


972


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 761


lowing: They would see the abomination of desolation; also,
Then shall be great affliction , such as was not since the be-
ginning of the world to this time , no , nor ever shall be; also,
Except those days should be shortened , there should no flesh be
saved; and finally, The sun shall be darkened , and the moon
shall not give her light , and the stars shall fall from heaven
(Matt. xxiv. 15, 21, 22, 29). In other places in the Evan-
gelists, that time is also called night; as in Luke: In that'
night there shall be two men in one bed; the one shall be taken
and the other left (xvii. 34). And in John: I must work the
works of Him That sent Me; the night cometh when no man
can work (ix. 4). Since all light departs at midnight, and
the Lord is the true light (John i. 4-9; viii. 12; xii. 35, 36,
46), therefore when the Lord ascended to heaven He said to
the disciples, I am with you even to the consummation of the
age (Matt, xxviii. 20); and then He departs from them to
the New Church. That this last time of the church is the
very night into which the former churches went down, is
evident also from the following passages in Daniel: At
length upon the bird of abominations there shall be desolation ,
and even to a consummation and decision shall it drop upon
the devastation (ix. 27); that this is a prediction of the end
of the Christian Church is clearly manifest from the Lord’s
words in Matthew (xxiv. 15). The same is also evident
from what is said in Daniel of the fourth kingdom or fourth
church represented by Nebuchadnezzar’s statue: And
whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay , they shall
mingle themselves with the seed 0} man , but they shall not
cohere the one with the other , even as iron is not mixed with
clay (ii. 43); the seed of man is the truth of the Word. And
again, from the following respecting the fourth church rep-
resented by the fourth beast coming up out of the sea: I
saw in the night visions , and behold a fourth beast , dreadful
and terrible; it shall devour the whole earth , and shall tread it
down, and break it in pieces (vii. 7, 23); this means that it
will bring to an end ail truth of the church, and then it will


No. 762] THE CONSUMMATION OF THE AGE


973


be night because the truth of the church is light. Many
other similar predictions are made of this church in the Apoc-
alypse, especially in the sixteenth chapter which treats of the
vials of the wrath of God poured out upon the earth; and
by these are signified the falsities whi were then to inun-
date and destroy the church. So likewise in many places
in the prophets, as in the following: Shall not the day oj Je-
hovah be darkness and not light? even very dark and no bright-
ness in it? (Amos v. 18, 20: Zeph. i. 15.) Again: In that
day Jehovah will look down upon the earth , which , behold , is
darkness , and the light shall grow dark in its ruins (Isa. v. 30;
see also viii. 22). The day of Jehovah is the day of the
Lord’s coming.

762. That four churches have existed on this earth since
the creation of the world, is according to Divine order;
which is, that there is a beginning and its end before a new
beginning has its rise. Hence every day begins with morn-
ing, progresses, and ends in night, and after this is a new
beginning; also every year begins with spring, progresses
through summer to autumn, ends in winter, and after this is
a new beginning. In order that these changes may take
place, the sun rises in the east, progresses from it through
the south to the west, and finishes its course in the north,
from which it rises again. It is so with churches: the first
of these, the Most Ancient, was as morning, spring, and east;
the second or Ancient was as day, summer, and south; the
third was as evening, autumn, and west; and the fourth, as
night, winter, and north. From these progressions accord-
ing to order, the wise men of ancient times inferred four ages
of the world, the first of which they called golden, the second
silver, the third copper, and the fourth iron; by which
metals also the churches themselves were represented in
Nebuchadnezzar’s statue. Furthermore, the church ap-
pears before the Lord as one man; and this greatest man
must pass through his several ages like an individual, that
is to say, from infancy to youth, from this to manhood, and


974 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 762

at length to old age, and then,' when he dies, he will rise
again. The Lord says: Except a grain of wheat fall into
the ground and die , it abideth alone; but if it die , it bringeth
forth much fruit (John xii. 24).

763. It is according to order that the first proceeds to its
last, both in general and in particular, in order that variety
may exist in all things, and by means of varieties every qual-
ity; for quality is perfected by relative differences more and
less opposite. Who cannot see that truth gets its quality
by there being falsity, and good likewise bv there being evil,'
as light gets quality by there being thick darkness,' and heat
by there being cold? What would color be if 'there; were
white only, and not black ? The quality of the intermediate
colors is but imperfect without it. What is sensation without
relativity? And what is this except to opposites? Is not
the eyesight darkened by white alone, and quickened by a
color that inwardly takes something from black, such as’
green? Is not the ear deafened from one tone continually
striking its organs, and excited by modulation ; varied by
relations? What is the beautiful without relation Jo the un-
beautiful? Therefore in order to present vividly the beauty
of a virgin, an ugly image is placed at the side in some pic-
tures. What are enjoyment and good fortune ; without re-
lation to the unenjoyable and the unfavorable? Who does
not become mad if he dwells on one idea only, with no re-
lief from the variety that comes from such things as tend to
the opposite ? It is so with the spiritual things of the church,
the opposites of which relate to evil and falsity, which never-
theless are not from the Lord but from man who has free
will which he can turn to good or evil use; comparatively
as it is with darkness and cold, which are not from the sun
but from the earth, which by its revolutions successively
withdraws and turns itself; and yet without its turning and
withdrawal there would be neither day nor year, conse-
quently no person and thing on the earth. I have heard
that churches which are in different goods and truths, pro-


No. 764]


THE COMING OF THE LORD


975


vided their goods have reference to love to the Lord and
their truths to faith in Him, are like so many jewels in the
king’s crown.


IV. After this night follows morning, and that is the

COMING OF THE LORD.

764. Since the successive states of the church in general
and particular are described in the Word by the four seasons
of the year, spring, summer, autumn, and winter, and by
the four divisions of the day, morning, noon, evening, and
night, and because the present church of Christendom is
the night, it follows that the morning, that is, the first of a
new church, is now at hand. That the successive states of
the church are described in the Word by the four states of
the light of day, is evident from the following: Until the
evening and the morning two thousand three hundred , then
shall the Holy be justified; the vision of the evening and the
morning , it is truth (Dan. viii. 14, 26). He calleth to me out
of Seir , Watchman , watchman , what of the night? The
watchman said , The morning cometh and also the night (Isa.
xxi. 11, 12). An end is come , the morning is come unto thee,
O thou that dwellest in the land; behold the dayds come , the
morning is gone forth (Ezek. vii. 6, 7, 10). Jehovah in the
morning , in the morning will He bring His judgment to light ,
He faileth not (Zeph. iii. 5). God is in the midst of her , God
shall help her when the morning appeareth (Ps. xlvi. 5). I
have waited for Jehovah: my soul waiteth for the Lord more
than they that watch for the morning , that watch for the morn-
ing; for with Him is plenteous redemption , and He will re-
deem Israel (Ps. cxxx. 5-8). In these passages evening and
night mean the last time of the church, and morning the
first. The Lord Himself is also called the morning in the
following passages: The God 0} Israel said , the Rock of
Israel spake to me , He shall be as the light of the morning ,
a morning without clouds (2 Sam. xxiii. 3, 4). I am the


976


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 764


Root and the Offspring of David , and the bright and morning
Star (Apoc. xxii. 16). From the womb of the morning thou
hast the dew of thy youth (Ps. cx. 3). These passages are
concerning the Lord. Because the Lord is the morning,
He arose from the sepulchre early in the morning, to begin a
new church (Mark xvi. 2, 9). That the coming of the Lord
is to be expected, is clearly manifest from His prediction of
it in Matthew: And as He sat upon the Mount of Olives , the
disciples came unto Him , saying , Tell us what shall be the
Sign of Thy comings and 0} the consummation of the age
(xxiv. 3). After the affliction of those days shall the sun be
darkened , and the moon shall not give her light , and the stars
shall fall from heaven , and the powers 0} the heavens shall be
shaken; and then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man;
and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds 0}
heaven with power and glory (xxiv. 29, 30: Mark xiii. 26:
Luke xxi. 27). As the days of Noe were , so shall also the
coming of the Son of Man be; therefore be ye also ready , for
in such an hour as ye think not , the Son of Man will come
(verses 37, 44). In Luke: When the Son of Man cometh ,
shall He find faith on the earth? (xviii. 8.) In John: Jesus
said of John, If I will that he tarry till I come (xxi. 22). In
the Acts of the Apostles: While they saw Jesus taken up
into heaven, Behold two men stood by them in white apparel ,
who also said , Jesus , who is taken up from ycm into heaven ,
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into
heaven (i. 10, 11). In the Apocalypse: The Lord God of
the holy prophets sent His angel to show unto His servants the
things which must shortly be done. Behold I come; blessed
is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book .
And behold I come: and My reward is with Me, to give every
man according as his work shall be (xxii. 6, 7, 12). And
again: I Jesus have sent Mine angel to testify unto you these
things in the churches. I am the Root and the Offspring of
David , and the bright and morning Star . The Spirit and
the bride say , Come; and let him that heareth say, Come;


No. 767]


THE COMING OF THE LORD


977


and let him that thirsteth come , and whosoever will , let him
take the water 0} life freely (xxii. 16, 17). And still further:
He who testifieth these things saith , surely I come . Amen;
even so come , Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen (verses 20, 21).

766. The Lord is present »with every man, urging and
pressing to be received; and when a man receives Him,
which he does when he acknowledges Him as his God,
Creator, Redeemer, and Saviour, then is His first coming
which is called the dawn. From this time the man begins
to be enlightened, as to the understanding, in spiritual
things, and to advance into more and more interior wisdom;
and as he receives this wisdom from the Lord, so he ad-
vances through morning into day, and this day lasts with him
into old age, even to death; and after death he passes into
heaven, to the Lord Himself, and there, although he died an
old man, he is restored to the morning of his life, and de-
velops to eternity the beginning of the wisdom implanted in
the natural world.

767. A man who is in faith in the Lord and charity toward
the neighbor is a church in particular; the church in general
is composed of such. It is wonderful that every angel, in
whatever direction he turns his body and face, looks to the
Lord before him; for the Lord is the sun of the angelic
heaven; this appears before their eyes when they are in
spiritual meditation. What is similar takes place with man
in the world in whom the church is, as to the sight of his
spirit; but this state of his spirit is not known, because the
sight of the spirit is veiled by the natural sight, to which the
other senses add allurements, and the objects of these senses
are such as are of the body and the world. This aspect of
the Lord, whatever the direction may be, has its origin from
this, that all truth from which are wisdom and faith and all
good through which are love and charity are from the Lord,
and are the Lord’s in man; and hence every truth of wisdom
is like a mirror in which the Lord is seen, and every good of


978


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 767


love is an image of the Lord. Hence this wonderful thing.
But an evil spirit perpetually turns away from the Lord, and
looks continually to his own love, and this also in whatever
direction he turns his body and face; the cause is the same,
but reversed; for every evil is in a certain form an image of
his reigning love, and falsity from it presents that image as
in a mirror. That something like this is also implanted in
nature may be inferred from certain plants that grow amid
herbage, in their shooting up high above it, that they may
look to the sun; also from some of them turning to the sun,
from his rising to the end of day, that so they may ripen
under his auspices. Nor do I doubt that there is a similar
endeavor and effort in all the twigs and branches of every
tree; but because they have not elasticity to bend and turn,
the act is checked. Moreover it is obvious to the observer
that all whirlpools and ocean sandbanks spontaneously fol-
low in their motion the general course of the sun. Why
should not man, who was created in the image of God,
unless by his gift of free will he turn that endeavor and
effort implanted by the Creator in another direction ? This
may also be likened to a bride constantly carrying some-
thing of the image of the bridegroom in the sight of her
spirit, and seeing him in his gifts as in mirrors, longing for
his coming, and when he comes receiving him with the joy
in which the love of her bosom exults.

V. The coming op the Lord is not His coming to destroy

THE VISIBLE HEAVEN AND HABITABLE EARTH, AND TO
CREATE A NEW HEAVEN AND EARTH, AS MANY, PROM
NOT UNDERSTANDING THE SPIRITUAL SENSE OF

the Word, have hitherto supposed.

768. The opinion at this day prevailing in the churches
is, that when the Lord comes to the final judgment, He will
appear in the clouds of heaven with angels and the sound of
trumpets; that He will gather together all who still dwell
on the earth, together with all who have died; will separate


No. 769]


THE COMING OF THE LORD


979


the wicked from the good, as a shepherd separates goats
from sheep; will then cast the wicked or the goats into hell,
and raise the good or the sheep into heaven; will create at
the same time a new visible heaven and a new habitable
earth, and upon this latter will send down the city called
the New Jerusalem, the structure of which will be accord-
ing to the description in the tw r enty-first chapter of the
Apocalypse, that is to say, it will be of jasper and gold, and
the foundations of its wall of every precious stone, while its
height, breadth, and length will be equal, each twelve thou-
sand furlongs; into this city all the elect will be gathered,
both those who are living and those who have died since
the beginning of the world; these will return into their
bodies, and in that magnificent city, as in their heaven, will
enjoy eternal blessedness. This is the opinion at this day
reigning in the Christian churches as to the coming of the
Lord and the final judgment.

769. As to the state of souls after death, the churches at
this day believe universally, but each in its own way as fol-
lows: human souls after death are ghosts of which they
entertain an idea as of a breath of wind, and because they
are such they are reserved till the day of the final judgment,
it may be in the centre of the earth, where some fix the
abode of departed spirits, or it may be in the limbus of the
fathers. But on these points they differ: some are of the
opinion that souls are ethereal or aerial forms, and so are as
phantoms and spectres, and that some of these dwell in the
air, some in the forests, and some in the waters; but others
think that the souls of the dead are transferred to the planets
or stars, and have habitations given them there; and some
that after thousands of years they return into bodies; but
the greater part think that they are reserved for the time
when the whole firmament together with the terraqueous
globe will perish, which will take place by fire that will either
break forth from the centre of the earth, or be hurled down
like universal lightning from heaven; and that the graves


gSo


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 769


will then be opened, the reserved souls clothed again with
their own bodies, and transferred to that holy city Jerusa-
lem, and so will dwell together on another earth in lustrous
bodies, some lower down in that city, some higher up, for
its height, like its length and breadth, is to be twelve thou-
sand furlongs (Apoc. xxi. 16).

770. When the clergy and laity are asked whether they
firmly believe all this, as that the antediluvians together
with Adam and Eve, and the postdiluvians together with
Noah and his sons, also Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to-
gether with all the prophets and the apostles, as well as the
souls of all other men, are still reserved in the middle of the
earth, or are flying about in the ether or the air; as also
whether they believe that souls will again- put on their bodies
and unite with them, which yet are eaten by worms and
mice and fishes, or Egyptian mummies which have been
consumed by men, and others mere skeletons dried by the
sun and crumbled to dust; also whether they believe that
the stars of heaven will then fall upon the earth, which yet
is smaller than a single one of them; and whether such
things are not paradoxes which reason itself dissipates, as
it does contradictory things; to this some make no reply;
some answer, “ These things are matters of faith, to which
we keep the understanding in obedience;” some, that not
only these but many more beside which are above reason,
arc of the Divine omnipotence. And when they name faith
and omnipotence, reason is exiled, and then sound reason
either disappears and becomes as nothing, or becomes as a
spectre, and is called insanity. They add, “Are not those
things according to the Word? Is not one to think and
speak from that?”

771. That the Word in the letter is written by appear-
ances and correspondences, and that there is therefore in
all its particulars a spiritual sense in which the truth is in
its light, while the sense of the letter is in the shade, was
shown in the chapter on the Sacred Scripture. Lest the


No. 771]


THE COMING OF THE LORD


981'


maa of the New Church, therefore, like the man of the old,
should wander in the shade in which is the sense of the letter
of the Word, especially as to heaven and hell, and his life
after death, and here as to the coming of the Lord, it has
pleased the Lord to open the sight of my spirit, and so to
admit me into the spiritual world, and not only to give me to
speak with spirits and angels, with relatives and friends, and
also with kings and princes, who have run their course in
the natural world, but also to see the wonders of heaven and
the miseries of hell, and thus to see that man does not abide
in some unknown part of the earth, nor fly about blind and
dumb in the air or in empty space, but that he lives a man
in a substantial body, in a much more perfect state, if he
comes among the blessed, than that in which he formerly
lived when in the material hody. And therefore, lest from
ignorance man should sink himself deeper in this opinion
of the destruction of the visible heaven and the habitable
earth, and thus as to the spiritual world, and lest from it
naturalism together with atheism, which among the learned
has at this day begun to take root in the interior rational
mind, should spread still further, like mortification in the
flesh, even into his external mind from which he speaks, it
has been enjoined upon me hy the Lord to make public
various things from what I have seen and heard, both ahout
Heaven and Hell , and the Final Judgment , and also to
explain the Apocalypse in which the coming of the Lord, the
former heaven, the new heaven, and the holy Jerusalem are
treated of. From these when read and understood, one
may see what is meant there by the coming of the Lord, the
new heaven, and the New Jerusalem.


982


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 772


VI. This coming of the Lord, which is the second, takes

PLACE IN ORDER THAT THE EVIL MAY BE SEPARATED FROM
THE GOOD, ALSO THAT THOSE MAY BE SAVED WHO HAVE
BELIEVED AND DO BELIEVE IN HlM, AND ALSO THAT
A NEW ANGELIC HEAVEN MAY BE FORMED FROM
THEM, AND A NEW CHURCH ON EARTH; AND
WITHOUT THIS NO FLESH COULD *BE

saved (Matt. xxiv. 22).

772. That this second coming of the Lord does not take
place for the purpose of destroying the visible heaven and
habitable earth, was shown in the preceding article. That
it is not to destroy any thing but to build up, consequently
not to condemn, but to save those who since His first coming
have believed in Him and who shall hereafter believe, is
evident from these words of the Lord : God sent not His Son
into the world to judge the world , but that the world through
Him might be saved: he that believeth on Him is not judged ,
but he that believeth not is judged already , because he hath
not believed in the name 0} the only-begotten Son 0} God
(John iii. 17, 18). And elsewhere: 1 } any man hear My
words and believe not , I judge him not; for I came not to judge
the world but to save the world; he that despiseth Me and re-
ceiveth not My words hath one that judgeth him; the Word
that I have spoken , the same shall judge him (xii. 47, 48).
That the final judgment took place in the spiritual world in
the year 1757, is shown in the little work on the Final Judg-
ment, , published at London in 1758; and further in the
Continuation about the Final Judgment , published at
Amsterdam in 1763; which I attest because I saw it with
my own eyes in full wakefulness.

773. The coming of the Lord is for the purpose of form-
ing a new heaven of those who have believed in Him, and
of establishing a new church of those who believe in Him
hereafter, because these two are the ends for which He came.
The very end for which the universe was created was no


No. 774]


THE COMING OF THE LORD


983


other than that an angelic heaven should be formed from
men, where all who believe in God shall live in eternal bless-
edness; for Divine love which is in God and essentially is
God cannot intend any thing else, and Divine wisdom which
is also in God and is God cannot produce any thing else.
Since the creation of the universe had for its end an angelic
heaven from the human race, and at the same time a church
on earth, for man is to pass through the church into heaven,
and since the salvation of men, accomplished among those
to be born in the world, is thus a continuation of creation,
therefore use is made throughout the Word of the term
create , and its meaning is to form for heaven; as in the fol-
lowing passages: Create in me a clean heart , O God , and
renew a right spirit within me (Ps. li. 10). Thou openest
Thine hand , they are filled with good; Thou sendest forth
Thy Spirit , they are created (civ. 28, 30). The people which
shall he created shall praise Jah (cii. 18). Thus said Jeho-
vah That created thee , O Jacob , and He That formed thee ,
O Israel; I have redeemed thee , I have called thee by thy name;
every one that is called by My name , I have created him unto
My glory (Isa. xliii. 1, 7). They were prepared in thee in the
day that thou wast created; thou wast perfect in thy ways in
the day that thou wast created , till perversity was found in
thee (Ezek. xxviii. 13, 15); this is said of the king of Tyre.
That they may see , and know , and consider , and understand
together , that the hand of Jehovah hath done this , and the
Holy One 0} Israel hath created it (Isa. xli. 20). From this
what is meant by create in the following may be evident:
Jehovah , creating the heavens , spreading forth the earth ,
giving breath unto the people upon it , and spirit to them
that walk therein (xlii. 5; see also xlv. 12, 18). Behold I
create a new heaven and a new earth; be ye glad for ever in
that which I create; behold I shall create Jerusalem a re-
joicing (lxv. 17, 18).

774. The Lord’s presence is perpetual with every man,
both evil and good, for without His presence no man lives;


984


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 774


but His coming is only with those who receive Him, and
these are they who believe in Him and do His command-
ments. The Lord’s perpetual presence causes man to be-
come rational, and renders him able to become spiritual;
this is done by the light which proceeds from the Lord as the
sun in the spiritual world, and which man receives in his
understanding; that light is truth, and by this he has ration-
ality. But the coming of the Lord takes place with him
who conjoins heat with that light, that is, love with truth;
for the heat proceeding from that same sun is love to God
and toward the neighbor. The mere presence of the Lord,
and the enlightenment of the understanding thereby, may
be compared to the presence of solar light in the world;
unless this light is conjoined with heat, all things on earth
become desolate. But the coming of the Lord may be com-
pared to the coming of heat, which takes place in spring;
and because the heat then conjoins itself with light, the
earth is softened, seeds sprout and bear fruit. Such is the
parallelism between the spiritual things in which is man’s
spirit and the natural things in which is his body.

775. It is the same with the man of the church viewed
collectively or in the composite, as with an individual or
man in particular. Man viewed collectively or in the com-
posite is the church among many; while man as an individual
or particularly, is the church in each one among those many.
It is according to Divine order that there should be generals
and particulars, and that both should be together in every
single thing, and that otherwise particulars do not exist and
abide; just as there are no particulars within man without
generals to surround them. The particulars in man are the
viscera and their parts; and the generals are the coverings
which not only surround the whole man, but also the viscera
severally and every single part of them. So it is in every
beast, bird, and worm; also in every tree, shrub, and seed;
nor is it possible for a tone to be produced, from strings or
by the breath, without there being what is most general


No. 776] THE COMING OF THE LORD 985

from which the particulars that enter into the modulation
derive their general, that they may have existence. And so
it is with every sense of the body, as with sight, hearing,
smell, taste, and touch; and so it is also with all the internal
senses of the mind. These things have been presented by
way of illustration, so that it may be known that also in the
church there are generals and particulars, and also things
most general; and that it is from this that four churches
have gone before in order, from which progression what is
most general in the church has had its rise, and in succession
the general and the particular of each of the churches. In
man also there are two most general things from which all
the generals and the several particulars in him draw their
existence; in the body the two most general things are the
heart and lungs; in his spirit, they are the will and under-
standing; on these and the other two all things of his life
depend, both in general and particular; without them they
would fall asunder and die. And so it would be with the
whole angelic heaven and the whole human race, yes, with
the whole created universe, if all things in general and every-
thing in particular did not depend on God, His love and
wisdom.


VII. This second coming of the Lord is not in person,
but is in the Word, which is from Him and is
Himself.

776. We read in many places that the Lord will come in
the clouds of heaven (as in Matt. xxiv. 30; xxvi. 64: Mark
xiv. 62: Luke xxi. 27: Apoc. i. 7; xiv. 14: Dan. vii. 13:
see also Matt. xvii. 5: Luke ix. 34, 35). But hitherto no
one has known what was meant by the clouds of heaven;
they have believed that He is to appear in them in person.
But that by the clouds of heaven the Word in the sense of
the letter is meant, and by the glory and power in which also
He is then to come (Matt. xxiv. 30) the spiritual sense of the


986


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 776


Word is meant, has been heretofore concealed, because
hitherto no one has even by conjecture reached the conclu-
sion that there is a spiritual sense in the Word such as this
sense is in itself. Now because the Lord has opened to me
the spiritual sense of the Word, and it has been granted me
to be together with angels and spirits in their world as one
of them, it has been disclosed that by the clouds of heaven is
meant the Word in the natural sense, and by glory the Word
in the spiritual sense, and by power the Lord’s power through
the Word. That this is the signification of the clouds of
heaven, may be seen from the following passages in the
Word: There is none like unto the God 0} Jeshurun who
rideth in the heaven , and in magnificence upon the clouds
(Deut. xxxiii. 26). Sing unto God , sing praises to His
name , extol Him That rideth upon the clouds (Ps. lxviii. 4).
Jehovah riding upon a swift cloud (Isa. xix. 1). To ride
signifies to instruct in Divine truths from the Word, for a
horse signifies the understanding of the Word (see Apoc-
alypse Revealed , n. 298). Who does not see that God does
not ride upon the clouds ? Again : God rode upon the cherubs
and put for His tent the clouds 0} the heavens (Ps. xviii. 10,
11). Cherubs also signify the Word, as may be seen in the
Apocalypse Revealed (n. 239, 672). Jehovah bindeth up the
waters in His clouds , and He spreadeth out His cloud over
the throne (Job xxvi. 8, 9). Ascribe ye strength unto God;
His strength is in the clouds (Ps. lxviii. 34). Jehovah
created over every dwelling-place 0} Zion a cloud by day , for
upon all the glory shall be a covering (Isa. iv. 5). The Word
in the sense of the letter was also represented by the cloud
in which Jehovah descended upon Mount Sinai, when He
promulgated the law: the things of the law then promul-
gated were the first fruits of the Word. In confirmation the
following may also be added: There are clouds in the spiri-
tual world as well as in the natural, but from a different
origin. In the spiritual world there are sometimes bright
clouds over the angelic heavens, but dusky clouds over the


No. 777 1


THE COMING OF THE LORD


987


hells. Bright clouds over the angelic heavens signify ob-
scurity there, from the literal sense of the Word; but when
those clouds are dispersed, this signifies that they are in its
clear light from the spiritual sense: but dusky clouds over
the hells signify the falsification and profanation of the
Word. The origin of this signification of the clouds in the
spiritual world is that the light which proceeds from the
Lord as the sun there, signifies Divine truth; therefore He
is called the Light (John i. 9; xii. 35). It is owing to this
that the Word itself, which is kept in the shrines of the tem-
ples, appears encompassed with clear white light; and its
obscurity is induced by clouds.

777. That the Lord is the Word, is clearly evident from
the following in John: In the beginning was the Wordy and
the Word was with God , and the Word was God y and the Word
was made flesh (John i. 1, 14). The Word here means Di-
vine Truth because Christians have Divine truth from no
other source than the Word, which is the fountain from
which all churches named from Christ draw living waters
in their own fulness, though a church in which the sense of
the Word is natural is as in a cloud, while one in which is its
spiritual and its celestial sense, is in glory and power. That
there are three senses in the Word, natural, spiritual, and
celestial, one more interior than another, was shown in the
chapter on the Sacred Scripture, and in that on the Deca-
logue or Catechism. It is manifest from this that by the
Word in John is meant Divine truth. John also bears wit-
ness to this in his first Epistle: We know that the Son 0} God
is comey and hath given us an understanding that we may
know Him that is truey and we are in Him that is truey even
in His Son Jesus Christ (v. 20). And therefore the Lord so
often said Amen (or Verily) I say unto you; and amen in the
Hebrew language means truth; and that He is the Amen
may be seen in the Apocalypse (iii. 14); and that He is
the Truth, in John (xiv. 6). When also the learned of the
present age are asked what they understand by the Word in


g88


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 777


John i. i, they say that they understand the Word in its
pre-eminence; and what is the Word in its pre-eminence but
Divine Truth? From all this it is manifest that the Lord
will appear in the Word now also. He is not to appear in
person, because since He ascended into heaven He is in the
glorified Humanity, and in this He cannot appear to any
man unless He first opens the eyes of his spirit, and this can-
not be done with any one who is in evils and hence in falsi-
ties, thus not with any of the goats whom He sets on His
left. Therefore when He manifested Himself to His dis-
ciples, He first opened their eyes; for we read, And their
eyes were opened , and they knew Him , and He vanished out
of their sight (Luke xxiv. 31). The same took place with
the women at the sepulchre after the resurrection, who
therefore then saw angels sitting in the sepulchre and talking
with them; and no one can see angels with the material
eye. That neither did the apostles see the Lord in the
glorified Human before His resurrection with the eyes of
the body, but in spirit, which appears, after returning to
wakefulness, as if in sleep, is evident from His transfigura-
tion before Peter, James, and John, for it is said that they
were then heavy with sleep (Luke ix. 32). It is therefore
vain to believe that the Lord will appear in a cloud of heaven
in person; but He will appear in the Word, which is from
Him and thus is Himself.

778. Every man is his own love and his own intelligence,
and whatever proceeds from him derives its essence from
those two essentials or properties of his life. Therefore
angels know what a man is essentially from brief intercourse
with him; knowledge of his love from the sound of his voice,
and of his intelligence from his speech. This is because
there are two universal of every man’s life, the will and the
understanding; and the will is the receptacle and abode of
his love, and the understanding the receptacle and abode of
his intelligence. Therefore all things that proceed from
man, whether action or speech, make the man and are the


No. 780]


THE COMING OF THE LORD


989


man himself. In the same way, but in a supereminent de-
gree, the Lord is Divine love and Divine wisdom, or what
is the same, Divine good and Divine truth; for His will is of
the Divine love, and Divine love is of His will; and His un-
derstanding is of the Divine wisdom, and Divine wisdom is
of His understanding; the Human form is their containant.
From this how the Lord is the Word can be thought out.
But on the contrary, he who is opposed to the Word, that is,
to the Divine truth therein, hence to the Lord and His church,
is his own evil and his own falsity, both as to the mind and
as to its effects proceeding from the body, which refer them-
selves to actions and words.

VHI. This second coming of the Lord takes place by

MEANS OF A MAN BEFORE WHOM He HAS MANIFESTED

Himself in person, and whom He has filled
with His spirit, to teach the doctrines of
the New Church through the
Word, from Him.

779. Since the Lord cannot manifest Himself in person,
as just shown above, and nevertheless has foretold that He
will come and found the New Church which is the New Jeru-
salem, it follows that He will do this by means of a man who
can not only receive the doctrines of this church with the
understanding but can also publish them by the press. That
the Lord manifested Himself before me His servant, and
sent me to this office, and that He afterward opened the
sight of my spirit, and so has admitted me into the spiritual
world, and has granted to me to see the heavens and the
hells, also to converse with angels and spirits, and this now
continuously for many years, I testify in truth; likewise,
that from the first day of that call I have not received any
thing which pertains to the doctrines of that church from
any angel, but from the Lord alone while I read the Word.

780. For the sake of the end that the Lord might be con-
stantly present, He has disclosed to me the spiritual sense


990


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 780


of His Word, in which Divine truth is in its light, and in this
light He is continually present. For His presence in the
Word comes only by the spiritual sense; through the light
of this, He passes into the shade in which is the sense of the
letter; comparatively, as it is with the light of the sun in the
day time, passing through a cloud that is interposed. That
the sense of the letter of the Word is as a cloud, while the
spiritual sense is the glory, and the Lord Himself is the sun
from which the light comes, and that so the Lord is the Word,
was shown above. That the glory in which He is to come
(Matt. xxiv. 30) signifies Divine truth in its light, in which
the spiritual sense of the Word is, is clearly evident from
these passages: The voice oj him that crieth in the wilder-
ness , Prepare ye the way 0 f Jehovah: the glory 0} Jehovah
shall be revealed , and all flesh shall see it together (Isa. xl. 3,
5). Arise, shine , for thy light is come , and the glory of Jeho-
vah is risen upon thee (lx. 1 to the end). I will give Thee for
a covenant 0} the people , for a light of the Gentiles , and My
glory will I not give to another (xiii. 6, 8; see also xlviii. 11).
Thy light shall break forth as the morning , % glory of Jeho-
vah shall gather thee (lviii. 8). All the earth shall be filled
with the glory 0} Jehovah (Num. xiv. 21: Isa. vi. 1-3; lxvi.
18). In the beginning was the Word; in Him was life , and
the life was the light of men. That was the true light. And
the Word was made flesh , and we beheld His glory , the glory
as of the only-begotten of the Father (John i. 1, 4, 9, 14). The
heavens will declare the glory of God (Ps. xix. 1). The glory
of God will enlighten the holy Jerusalem , and the Lamb is the
light thereof; and the nations that are saved shall walk in the
light of it (Apoc. xxi. 23, 24). So in many other places.
Glory signifies Divine truth in its fulness, because all that is
magnificent in heaven is from the light proceeding from the
Lord, and the light proceeding from Him as the sun there is
in its essence Divine truth.


No. 782] THE NEW HEAVEN AND CHURCH


991


IX. This is meant in the Apocalypse by the New Heaven
and the New Earth, and the New Jerusalem

DESCENDING FROM IT.

781. We read in the Apocalypse: I saw a new heaven and
a new earth , for the first heaven and the first earth were passed
away. And I John saw the holy city New Jerusalem coming
down from God out of heaven , prepared as a bride adorned
for her husband (xxi. 1, 2). So, too, we read in Isaiah: Be-
hold , I create a new heaven and a new earth; be ye glad and
rejoice for ever: for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and
her people a joy (lxv. 17, 18). That the Lord is at this day
forming a new heaven from Christians who acknowledged
in the world, and after their departure out of it could ac-
knowledge, that He is the God of heaven and earth accord-
ing to His words in Matthew (xxviii. 18), has been disclosed
above in this chapter.

782. The New Church is meant by the New Jerusalem
coming down from God out of heaven (Apoc. xxi.), because
Jerusalem was the metropolis in the land of Canaan and the
temple and altar were there, the sacrifices were offered there,
and thus the Divine worship itself, to which every male of
the whole land was commanded to come three times a year;
and further, because the Lord was in Jerusalem, and taught
in His temple, and afterward glorified His Human there.
It is from this that Jerusalem signifies the church. That
Jerusalem means the church, is clearly evident from the
prophecies in the Old Testament as to the new church to be
established by the Lord, as this is there called Jerusalem.
Only those passages shall be adduced from which one en-
dowed with interior reason can see that Jerusalem there
means the church. Let only these be cited: Behold I create
a new heaven and a new earth; the former shall not be remem-
bered; behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people
a joy , that I may rejoice in Jerusalem and joy in My people.


992


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 782


Then the wolf and the lamb shall feed together; they shall not
hurt in all My holy mountain (Isa. lxv. 17-19, 25). For
Zion's sake will I not hold my peace , and for Jerusalem's sake
I will not rest , until the righteousness thereof go forth as bright-
ness, and the salvation thereof as a la?np that bnrneth. Then
the gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory,
and thou shall be called by a new name which the mouth of
Jehovah shall name. Thou shall also be a crown of glory
in the hand of Jehovah, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy
God. Jehovah shall delight in thee, and thy land shall be
married. Behold thy Salvation cometh; behold His reward
is with Him; and they shall call them the people of holiness ,
the redeemed 0} Jehovah: and thou shalt be called a city sought
out, and not forsaken (Isa. lxii. 1-4, 11, 12). Awake, awake:
put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments,
O Jerusalem, the holy city; for henceforth there shall no more
come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. Shake
thyself from the dust; arise and sit down, O Jerusalem. My
people shall know My name in that day; for I am He that doth
speak, behold, it is I. Jehovah hath comforted His people ,
He hath redeemed Jerusalem (lii. 1, 2, 6 , 9). Shout, O
daughter of Zion; be glad with all the heart, O daughter of-
Jerusalem; the King of Israel is in the midst 0} thee; fear not
evil any more; He will rejoice over thee with joy, He shall
rest in thy love; He will joy over thee with shouting; I will
make you a name and a praise to all the people of the earth
(Zeph. iii. 14-17, 20). Thus saith Jehovah thy Redeemer ,
That saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited (Isa. xliv.
24, 26). Thus said Jehovah, I will return unto Zion, and
will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; whence Jerusalem shall
be called the city of truth, and the mountain of Jehovah
Zebaoth, the mountain of holiness (Zech. viii. 3; see also
verses 20-23). Then shall ye know that I am Jehovah your
God, dwelling in Zion the mountain 0} holiness ; then shall
Jerusalem be holiness; and it shall come to pass in that day
that the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills


No. 782] the new heaven and church


993


shall flow with milk; and Jerusalem shall dwell to generation
and generation (Joel iii. 17, 18, 20). In that day shall the
branch of Jehovah be beautiful and glorious; and it shall
come to pass that he that is left in Zion and he that remaineth
in Jerusalem shall be called holy , every one that is written for
life in Jerusalem (Isa. iv. 2, 3). In the last days shall the
mountain of the house 0} Jehovah be established at the top of
the mountains , for out of Zion shall go forth the law , and the
Word of Jehovah from Jerusalem (Mich. iv. 1, 2; see also
verse 8). At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of
Jehovah , and all nations shall be gathered together at Jerusa-
lem to the name of Jehovah , neither shall they walk any more
after the imagination of their evil heart (Jer. iii. 17). Look
upon Zion , the city of our solemnities; thine eyes shall see Jeru-
salem a quiet habitation , a tabernacle that shall not be taken
down; the stakes thereof shall never be removed , neither shall
the cords thereof be broken (Isa. xxxiii. 20). So also else-
where (as in Isa. xxiv. 23; xxxvii. 32; lxvi. 10-14: Zech. xii.
3,6-10; xiv. 8, 11, 12, 21: Mai. iii. 4: Ps. cxxii. 1-7; cxxxvii.
5-7). That Jerusalem here means the church to be estab-
lished by the Lord, and not the Jerusalem inhabited by the
Jews, is manifest from the particulars of its description in the
passages quoted: as that Jehovah God would create a new
heaven and a new earth, and would then also create Jerusa-
lem; this would be a crown of glory and a royal diadem; it
was to be called holy, the city of truth, Jehovah’s throne, a
quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down;
there the wolf and the lamb will feed together; also the
mountains there will drop new wine, and the hills flow with
milk, and Jerusalem shall abide from generation to genera-
tion; and other things besides said of the people there, that
it is a holy people, that every one is written for life, that they
are to be called the redeemed of Jehovah. Moreover, in all
these passages the coming of the Lord is treated of, especially
His second coming, when Jerusalem is to be such as is there
described, for before His coming she was not married, that


994


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


r [No. 782


is, made the bride and wife of the Lamb, as the New Jerusa-
lem is said to be in the Apocalypse. The former or present
church is meant by Jerusalem in Daniel; and its beginning
is there described as follows: Know therefore and under-
stand that from the going forth of the word to restore and build
Jerusalem , unto the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks;
after threescore and two weeks the street shall be built again and
the wall , but in troublous times (ix. 25). At length upon the
bird of abominations there shall be desolation , and even to a
consummation and decision shall it drop upon the devasta-
tion (ix. 27). This last is referred to by these words of the
Lord in Matthew: When ye shall see the abomination 0} deso-
lation foretold by Daniel the prophet stand in the holy place ,
whoso readeth let him note it well (xxiv. 15). That by Jeru-
salem in the passages quoted is not meant that inhabited by
the Jews, may be evident from those passages in the Word,
where this is said to be utterly lost, and to be destroyed (as
in Jer. v. 1; vi. 6, 7; vii. 17-34; viii. 6-22; ix. 10-22; xiii. 9,
10, 14; xiv. 16: Lam. i. 8, 9, 17: Ezek. iv. ; v. 9-17; xii. 18, 19;
xv. 6-8; xvi.; xxiii. : Matt, xxiii. 37, 38: Luke xix. 41-44; xxi.
20-22; xxiii. 28-30; besides many other passages); and also
where it is called Sodom (Isa. iii. 9: Jer. xxiii. 14: Ezek. xvi.
46, 48; and elsewhere).

783. That the church is the Lord’s, and that from the
spiritual marriage, which is of good and truth, the Lord is
called the Bridegroom and Husband, and the church the
bride and wife, is well known- to Christians from the Word,
especially from these things therein: John said concerning
the Lord, He that hath the bride is the Bridegroom , but the
friend of the Bridegroom , who standeth and heareth Him , re-
joiceth greatly because of the Bridegroom's voice (John iii. 29).
Jesus said, The children of the bridechamber cannot mourn as
long as the Bridegroom is with them (Matt. Lx. 15: Mark ii.
19, 20: Luke v. 34, 35). I saw the holy city , New Jerusa-
lem , coming down from God out 0} heaven , prepared as a
bride adorned for her Husband (Apoc. xxi. 2). The angel


No. 784] THE NEW HEAVEN AND CHURCH


995


said to John, Come hither ; I will show thee the bride , the
Lamb’s wife; and from a mountain He showed him the holy
city Jerusalem (xxi. 9, 10). The marriage 0} the Lamb is
come , and His wife hath made herself ready; blessed are they
who are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb (xix. 7,
9). I am the Root and the Offspring of David , the bright and
morning Star ; and the Spirit and the bride say , Come; and
let him that is athirst come; and whosoever will y let him take
the water of life freely (xxii. 16, 17).

784. It is in accordance with Divine order that the new
heaven should be formed before the new church on earth;
for the church is internal and external, and the internal
church makes one with the church in heaven, and thus with
heaven; and the internal must be formed before the external,
and the external must afterward be formed by means of the
internal; that this is so is known among the clergy in the
world. Just so far as this new heaven, which constitutes the
internal of the church with man, grows, so far does the New
Jerusalem, that is, the New Church come down from that
heaven. This, therefore, cannot take place in a moment,
but it takes place as the falsities of the former church are
removed; for what is new cannot enter where falsities have
been previously implanted, unless these are uprooted, which
will take place with the clergy, and so with the laity; for the
Lord said, No one putteth new wine into old bottles; else the
bottles break and the wine runneth out; but they put new wine
\ into new bottles , and both are preserved (Matt. ix. 17: Mark
; ii. 22: Luke v. 37, 38). That these things take place only in
the ending of the age, by which is meant the end of the
church, is evident from these words of the Lord: Jesus said,
The kingdom of the heavens is likened unto a man who sowed
good seed in his field ; but while men slept y his enemy came
and sowed tares , and went away ; but when the blade was
sprung up y then appeared the tares also. The servants came
and said unto him y Wilt thou that we go and gather them up?
But he said y Nay , lest while ye gather up the tares ye root up


99 ^ TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 784

also the wheat with them; let both grow together until the har-
vest; and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers ,
Gather ye together first the tares , and bind them in bundles to
burn; but gather the wheat into my barn. The harvest is the
consummation of the age; as therefore the tares are gathered
and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the consummation of the
age (Matt. xiii. 24-30, 39, 40). Wheat here means the
truths and goods of the new, and tares the falsities and evils
of the former church. That the consummation of the age
means the end of the church, may be seen in the first article
of this chapter.

785. That there is an internal and an external in every
thing, and that the external depends on the internal as the
body on its soul, is evident from everything in the world
when rightly considered. In man this is manifest; his
whole body is from his mind, and consequently in each thing
proceeding from man there is an internal and an external;
in every action of his, there is the will, and in all that he says
is the understanding; so, too, in each of his senses. In
every bird and beast, yes, in every insect and worm, there is
an internal and an external; and again in every tree, plant,
and germ, and even in every stone and particle of ground.
A few things relating to the silkworm, bee, and dust, are
sufficient to illustrate this. The internal of the silkworm
is that whereby its external is moved to weave its cocoon,
and afterward to fly forth as a butterfly. The internal of the
bee is that whereby its external is moved to suck honey from
flowers, and to build its cells in wonderful forms. The
internal of a particle of soil, whereby its external is moved,
is its endeavor to fecundate seeds; it exhales from its little
bosom something which introduces itself into the inmosts of
a seed and produces this effect; and that internal follows its
vegetation even to new seed. The same takes place in things
of opposite kind, in which also there is an internal and an
external; as in the spider, whose internal, whereby its ex-
ternal is moved, is the faculty and consequent inclination


No. 786] the new heaven and church


997


to make its ingenious web, at the centre of which it lies in
wait for the flies that come into it, which it eats. This is
equally so with every noxious worm, every serpent, and
every wild beast of the forest; as also in every impious,
crafty, and deceitful man.

X This New Church is the crown of all the churches

WHICH HAVE HITHERTO EXISTED ON EARTH.

786. That four churches in general have existed on this
earth from the beginning, one before the flood, another after
it, the Israelitish Church third, and that called Christian
fourth, was shown above; and as all churches depend on the
knowledge and acknowledgment of one God with whom the
man of the church may be conjoined, and as all the four
churches have not been in that truth, it follows that a church
is to succeed the four which will be in the knowledge and
acknowledgment of one God. God’s Divine love had no
other end when He created the world, than to conjoin man
to Himself and Himself to man, and so to dwell with man.
The former churches were not in this truth; because the
Most Ancient, which was before the flood, worshipped the
invisible God, with whom there can be no conjunction; so,
also did the Ancient, which existed after the flood; the
Israelitish worshipped Jehovah, who in Himself is the in-
visible God (Exod. xxxiii. 18-23), but under a human form
which Jehovah God put on by means of an angel, and in
which He appeared to Moses, Abraham, Sarah, Hagar,
Gideon, Joshua, and sometimes to prophets. And this
human form was representative of the Lord who was to
come; and because this was representative, therefore one
and all things of their church were made representative.
That the sacrifices and all else of their worship represented
the Lord who was to come, and that when He came they
were put aside, is well known. The fourth church, how-
ever, called the Christian, acknowledged one God indeed


998


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 786


with the mouth, but in three Persons, each one of whom
singly or by himself was God; and so, a divided Trinity, and
not a Trinity united in one Person. Hence the idea of three
Gods adhered to the mind, although the expression “One
God” was on the lips. Furthermore, the teachers of the
church from that doctrine of theirs which they framed after
the Nicene Council, teach that men must believe in God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, all invisible,
because existent in like Divine essence before the world was,
and yet, as said above, with an invisible God there can be no
conjunction; not knowing as yet, that the one God who is
invisible came into the world and assumed the Human, not
only that He might redeem men, but also that He might be-
come visible, and thus capable of conjunction. For we
read. The Word was with God and the Word was Gody and
the Word was made flesh (John i. 1, 14); and in Isaiah,
Unto us a Child is born , unto us a Son is given , and His name
shall be called God , the Mighty, Father oj Eternity (ix. 6) ; it
is also frequently stated in the prophets that Jehovah Him-
self would come into the world and would be the Redeemer,
which He also became in the Human which He assumed.

787. This New Church is the crown of all the churches
which have hitherto existed on earth, because it will worship
one visible God in whom is the invisible, like the soul in the
body. Thus and not otherwise can there be conjunction of
God with man, because man is natural and hence thinks
naturally, and the conjunction must be in his thought and
thus in his love’s affection, which is the case when he thinks
of God as man. Conjunction with an invisible God is like
that of the eye’s vision with the expanse of the universe, of
which it sees no end; it is also like vision in mid ocean, which
falls upon air and sea and is lost. But conjunction with a
visible God, on the other hand, is like seeing a man in the air
on the sea, spreading forth his hands and inviting to his arms.
For all conjunction of God with man must also be recipro-
cally of man with God, and there cannot be this reciproca-


No. 738 ] THE NEW HEAVEN AND CHURCH


999


tion on the other part except with a visible God. That God
was not vkihle before the assumption of the Human, the
Lord Himself also teaches in John: Ye have neither heard
the Father’s voice at any time , nor seen His shape (v. 37);
and in Moses it is said that no one can see God and live (Exod.
xxxiii. 20). But that He is seen through His Human is
taught in John: No one hath seen God at any time, the only-
begotten Son who is in the bosom 0} the Father , He hath de-
clared Him (i. 18). And in the same: Jesus said , I am the
Way , the Truth , and the Life. No one cometh to the Father
but by Me. He that knoweth Me knoweth the Father , and he
that seeth Me seeth the Father (xiv. 6, 7, 9). That there is
conjunction with the invisible God through Himself visihle,
that is, through the Lord, He Himself teaches in these pas-
sages: Jesus said, Abide in Me and I in you; he that abideth
in Me and I in him , the same bringeth forth much fruit (xv.
4, 5). At that day ye shall know that I am in My Father , and
ye in Me, and I in you (xiv. 20). And the glory which Thou
gavest Me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as
we are one; I in them, and Thou in Me; that the love where-
with Thou hast loved Me may be in them , and I in them (xvii.
22, 23, 26; see also vi. 56). Moreover, it is taught that He
and the Father are one, and that in order to have eternal life
one must believe in Him. That salvation depends on con-
junction with God, has heen frequently shown ahove.

788. That this church will succeed those which have
existed from the beginning of the world, that it will endure
for ages of ages, and thus be the crown of all the churches
that have gone before it, was prophesied hy Daniel; first
when he narrated and explained to Nebuchadnezzar his
dream of the four kingdoms, which mean the four churches
represented by the statue that he saw, saying: In the days of
these the God of the heavens shall cause a kingdom to arise
which shall not perish for ages; it shall consume all these king-
doms, but it shall stand for ages (ii. 44); and it is said that
this should be done hy a stone becoming a great rock and


IOOO


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 788


filling all the earth (verse 35). By a rock in the Word is
meant the Lord as to Divine truth. And the same prophet
says in another place: I saw in the visions oj the night , and
behold , there was one like the Son oj Man coming with the
clouds oj heaven; and to Him was given dominion , and glory ,
and kingdom; and all peoples , nations , and tongues shall wor-
ship Him; His dominion is the dominion oj an age which
shall not pass away , and His kingdom that which shall not
perish (vii. 13, 14). And this he says after seeing the four
great beasts coming up out of the sea (verse 3), which beasts
also represented the four former churches. That these
things were said by Daniel prophetically as to this time, is
evident from his words in chapter xii. 4, as also from the
Lord’s words in Matt. xxiv. 15, 30. Like things are said
in the Apocalypse: The seventh angel sounded; then there
were great voices out oj heaven saying , The kingdoms oj the
world are become the kingdoms oj our Lord and oj His Christy
and He shall reign for ages oj ages (xi. 15).

789. Furthermore, other prophets made predictions in
many passages about this church, and its character; from
which these few will be adduced. In Zechariah: It shall be
one day , which shall be known to Jehovah , not day nor night ,
for at evening-time it shall be light. And it shall be in that
day that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem ; and Jeho-
vah shall be King over all the earth; in that day shall Jehovah
be one , and His name one (xiv. 7-9). In Joel: It shall come
to pass in that day that the mountains shall drop down new
wine , and the hills shall flow with milk ; and Jerusalem shall
abide from generation to generation (iii. 18, 20). In Jere-
miah: At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne 0}
J ehovah, and all nations shall be gathered together at Jerusa-
lem to the name oj Jehovah , neither shall they walk any more
ajter the imagination oj their evil heart (iii. 17; see also Apoc.
xxi. 24, 26). In Isaiah: Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet habitation , a tabernacle that shall not be taken down;
the stakes thereoj shall never be removed , neither shall the


No. 789] the new heaven and church


IOOI


cords thereof be broken (xxxiii. 20). In these passages Jeru-
salem means the holy New Jerusalem described in the Apoc-
alypse (xxi.), by which is meant the New Church. Again
in Isaiah: There shall come forth a Rod out 0} the stem 0} Jesse ,
and righteousness shall be the girdle of His loins, and truth
the girdle of His thighs; wherefore the wolf shall dwell with
the lambj and the leopard shall lie down with the kid , the calf
and the young lion and the falling together , and a little child
shall lead them; the cow and the bear shall feed , their young
ones shall lie down together; and the sucking child shall play
on the hole of the asp , and the weaned child shall pui his hand
on the cockatrice ’ den; they shall not do evil nor corrupt them-
selves in all the mountain of My holiness ; for the earth shall
be full of the knowledge 0} Jehovah. And it shall come to
pass in that day that the nations shall seek the Root of Jesse,
which standeth for an ensign of the people , and His rest shall
be glory (xi. 1, 5-10). That such things have not had ex-
istence in the churches, least of all in the last, is known. In
Jeremiah: Behold the days come in which I will make a new
covenant; and this shall be the covenant , I will put My law
in the midst of them and write it upon the heart , and will be
their God , and they shall be My people; they shall all know
Me , from the least of them unto the greatest of them (xxxi. 31-
34: Apoc. xxi. 3). That these things have not hitherto
been in the churches, is also known. This is because men
have not approached the visible God whom all must know,
and because He is the Word or the Law which He will put
in the midst of them and write upon the heart. In Isaiah:
For Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until the righteousness
thereof go forth as brightness , and the salvation thereof as a
lamp that burneth; and thou shalt be called by a new name
which the mouth of Jehovah shall name. Thou shalt also be
a crown of glory , and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God;
Jehovah shall delight in thee , and thy land shall be married .
Behold thy Salvation cometh , behold His reward is with Him;
and they shall call them the people of holiness , the redeemed of


1002


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 789


Jehovah ; and thou shall be called a city sought out , and not
forsaken (Ixii. 1-4, 11, 12).

790. What will be the quality of this church, is fully de-
scribed in the Apocalypse, where the end of the former church
and the rise of the new are treated of. This New Church is
described by the New Jerusalem, by its magnificent things,
and that it is to be the bride and wife of the Lamb (xix. 7;
xxi. 2, 9) In addition I take from the Apocalypse only the
following. WTien the New Jerusalem was seen to descend
from heaven, it is said: Behold the tabernacle of God is with
men , and He will dwell with them, and they shall be His
people , and God Himself shall be with them , their God. And
the nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it,
and there shall be no night there. I Jesus have sent Mine
angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. I am
the Root and the Offspring 0} David , the bright and morning
Star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come; and let him
that heareth say , Come; and let him that is athirst come; and
whosoever will , let him take the water of life freely. Even so,
come , Lord Jesus. Amen . (xxi. 3, 24, 25; xxii, 16, 17, 20.)

Memorandum.

791. After this work was finished the Lord called to-
gether His twelve disciples who followed Him in the world;
and the next day He sent them all forth into the whole spiri-
tual world to preach the Gospel that the Lord God Jesus
Christ reigns, whose kingdom shall be for ages of ages, ac-
cording to the prediction by Daniel (vii. 13, 14), and in the
Apocalypse (xi. 15); and that Blessed are they who come to
the marriage supper of the Lamb (Apoc. xix. 9). This took
place on the nineteenth day of June, in the year 1770. This
is meant by these words of the Lord: He will send His
angels , and they shall gather together His elect from one end
of the heavens even to the other (Matt. xxiv. 31).


SUPPLEMENT.


THE SPIRITUAL WORLD.

79 2 . The spiritual world has been treated of in a special
work on Heaven and Hell , in which many things of that
world are described; and because every man enters that
world after death, the state of men there is also described.
Who does not know, or may not know, that man lives after
death, because he is born a man, created an image of God,
and because the Lord teaches it in His Word? But what
his life will be, has been hitherto unknown. It has been be-
lieved that he would then be a soul; and of this men have
entertained no other idea that that of ether or air, regarding
it thus as breath, such as man breathes from his mouth when
he dies, in which, however, his vitality resides; but without
sight like that of the eye, hearing like that of the ear, and
speech like that of the mouth; ^when yet, man after death is
none the less a man, and such a man as not to know that he
is not still in the former world; he sees, hears, and speaks as
in the former world; he walks, runs, and sits as in the
former world; he lies down, sleeps, and wakes as in the
former world; he eats and drinks as in the former world; he
enjoys marriage delight as in the former world; in a word,
he is a man in all things and every particular. From which
it is manifest that death is not the extinction of life, but its
continuation, and that it is only a passage.

793. That man is as much a man after death as before,
though he does not then appear to the eyes of the material
body, may be evident from the angels seen by Abraham,
Hagar, Gideon, Daniel, and some of the prophets, from the
angels seen in the Lord’s sepulchre, and many times after-
ward by John, concerning whom in the Apocalypse, and


1004 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 793

especially from the Lord Himself, who showed by touch and
by eating that He was a Man, and yet became invisible to
the eyes of His disciples. Who can be so crazy as not to
acknowledge that although invisible He was just as much a
Man? He was seen because the eyes of the spirit were
opened with them who saw Him; and when these are opened,
the things in the spiritual world appear as clearly as those in
the natural world. The difference between man in the natu-
ral world and in the spiritual is, that the latter is clothed
with a substantial body, but the former with a material
body, in which inwardly is his substantial body; and the
substantial man sees the substantial man just as clearly as
the material man sees the material. But the substantial
man cannot see the material man, nor the material man the
substantial, from the difference between what is material
and what is substantial, the nature of which difference may
be described, but not in few words.

794. From what I have seen for so many years I can re-
late the following: There are lands in the spiritual world
just as in the natural, and plains and valleys, mountains and
hills, as also springs and rivers; paradises, gardens, groves,
and forests-; cities, with palaces and houses in them; writings
and books; employments and business; gold, silver, and
precious stones; in a word, all things whatever that are in
the natural world; but those in heaven are beyond measure
more perfect. But the difference is, that all things seen in
the spiritual world are instantaneously created by the Lord,
as houses, paradises, food, and the rest; and they are created
in correspondence with the interiors of angels and spirits,
which are their affections and the consequent thoughts;
while all things seen in the natural world arise and grow
from seed.

795. This being so, and as I have spoken there with
nations and peoples of this world, thus not only with those
in Europe, but also with those in Asia and Africa, thus with
those of different religions, as a conclusion to this work I


No. 796]


LUTHER


IOOS


will add a brief description of the state of some of them. It
must be kept in mind that in the spiritual world the state of
every nation and people in general, as well as of individuals
severally, is according to their acknowledgment of God and
their worship of Him; and that all who in heart acknowl-
edge God, and henceforth all who acknowledge the Lord
Jesus Christ as God, Redeemer and Saviour, are in heaven;
that they who do not acknowledge Him, are beneath heaven,
and are there instructed; that they who receive are raised
up into heaven, and that they who do not are cast down into
hell. Among the latter come those also who, like the Socin-
ians, have approached God the Father only, and who, like
the Arians, have denied the Divinity of the Lord’s Human.
For the Lord said, I am the Way , the Truth , and the Life; no
man cometh unto the Father but by Me: and to Philip who
wished to see the Father, He said that he who seeth and
knoweth Him seeth and knoweth the Father (John xiv. 6-9)^

I. Luther, Melancthon, and Calvin in the spiritual
world.

796. I have frequently spoken with these three cham-
pions, Reformers of the Christian Church, and have thus
been instructed as to what was the state of their life, from
the beginning to the present time. As regards Luther:
From the time when he first entered the spiritual world, he
was a most vehement propagator and defender of his dog-
mas, and his zeal for them grew as the multitude increased
of those coming from the earth who agreed with and favored
him. A house was given him there, such as he had had
in the life of the body at Eisleben; and in its midst there he
erected a sort of throne somewhat elevated, where he sat. He
admitted hearers through the open door, and arranged them
in classes; to the class nearest himself he invited those who
were the more favorable, behind those he placed those less
favorable, and then he spoke right on, occasionally per-


ioo 6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 796


mitting questions, in order that he might take up the thread
of the discourse that was ended from some new point.
From this general favor, he at length became imbued with
the power of persuasion, which is so effective in the spiritual
world that no one can resist it or speak against what is said.
But as this was a kind of incantation used by the ancients,
he was strictly forbidden to speak from that persuasive
power any more; and thereafter, as before, he taught from
the memory and the understanding together. This per-
suasion, which is a kind of incantation, springs from love of
self; and from this it at length becomes such that when any
one contradicts, it not only attacks the question that is made,
but the person making it. This was the state of Luther’s
life up to the time of the final judgment, which took place in
the spiritual world in the year 1757; but a year after that, he
was brought from his first house to another, and then at the
same time into a different state. And because he heard here
that I, who am in the natural world, spoke with those in the
spiritual world, he among others came to me; and after
some inquiries and answers, he perceived that there is at
this day the end of the former church and the beginning of
the New Church, of which Daniel prophesied, and which the
Lord Himself foretold in the Gospel; he also perceived that
this New Church is meant by the New Jerusalem in the Apoc-
alypse, and by the everlasting gospel which the angel flying
in the midst of heaven preached unto them that dwell on the
earth (Apoc. xiv. 6). He became exceedingly indignant and
scolded. But as he perceived that the New Heaven was
being established, which was formed and is still forming of
those who acknowledge the Lord alone as the God of heaven
and earth, according to His words in Matthew, xxviii. 18,
and as he observed that the number of those who resorted to
him daily diminished, his scolding stopped; and then he
came nearer to me, and began to talk with me more famil-
iarly. And when he was convinced that he had not taken
his principal dogma of justification by faith alone from the


No. 796]


LUTHER


1007


Word, but from his own intelligence, he suffered himself to
be instructed as to the Lord, charity, true faith, free will,
and redemption also, and this solely from the Word. At
length, after being convinced, he began to favor more and
more those truths from which the New Church is established,
and afterward to confirm himself in them more and more.
At this time he was with me daily; and then, as often as he
gathered these truths together, he began to laugh at his
former dogmas as diametrically opposed to the Word. And
I heard him say, “Do not wonder that I seized upon faith
alone as justifying, excluding charity from its spiritual es-
sence, also taking away from men all free will in things
spiritual, and holding many other things that depned on
faith alone once accepted, as links on a chain, because my
end was to break away from the Roman Catholics, and this
end I could not otherwise follow and attain. I therefore
do not wonder that I erred, but I do wonder that one crazy
man could make so many others crazy (and he looked at
some dogmatic writers at his side, men of ‘celebrity in his
time, faithful followers of his doctrine) because they did not
see in the Sacred Scripture what is on the other side, which
nevertheless is very manifest.” It was told me by the
examining angels that this leader was in a state of conver-
sion above many others who confirmed themselves in justifi-
cation by faith alone, because in his childhood, before he en-
tered on the Reformation, he was imbued with the dogma of
the pre-eminence of charity; for which reason also, both in
writings and in discourses, he taught so excellently of char-
ity; and it resulted that the faith of justification with him
was implanted in his external natural man, but not rooted in
his internal spiritual man. It is different, however, with
those who in childhood confirm themselves against the spiri-
tuality of charity, which is also done of itself while by con-
firmations they establish justification by faith alone. I have
conversed with the prince of Saxony with whom Luther had
been associated in the world; he told me that he often re-


ioo8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 796


proved Luther, especially for separating charity from faith,
and declaring faith to be saving and not charity, when, never-
theless, not only does the Sacred Scripture join together
those two universal means of salvation, but Paul even sets
charity above faith when he says that there are three, faith,
hope, and charity, and that the greatest of these is charity
(1 Cor. xiii. 13); but he added that Luther as often replied
that he could not do otherwise because of the Roman Cath-
olics. This prince is among the happy.

797. As regards Melancthon: As to his lot, what it was
when he first entered the spiritual world, and what was its
character afterward, it has been granted me to know much,
not only from the angels but also from himself; for I have
conversed with him several times, but not so often and in-
timately as with Luther. I have not conversed with him so
often or intimately, because he could not approach me as
Luther did, because he so fully spent his study on justifica-
tion by faith alone, and not on charity; and I was sur-
rounded by angelic spirits who are in charity, and they were
in the way of his approach to me. I have heard that when
he first entered the spiritual world, a house was prepared
for him like that in which he had lived in the world. This
also is done with most new-comers, from which they do not
know that they are not still in the natural world, and the
time which has passed since their death seems to them merely
as sleep. The things in his room, also, were all like those
he had before, a similar table, a desk with compartments,
and also a library; so that as soon as he came to it, as if
just awakened from sleep, he seated himself at the table and
continued his writing, and this on the subject of justification
by faith alone, and so on for several days, and writing nothing
whatever about charity. As the angels perceived this, he
was asked through messengers why he did not write about
charity also. He replied that there was nothing of the
church in charity, for if that were to be received as in any
way an essential attribute of the church, man would also


No. 797]


MELANCTHON


IOO9


ascribe to himself the merit of justification and hence of sal-
vation, and so also he would rob faith of its spiritual essence.
When the angels over his head perceived this, and when the
angels associated with him while he was outside of his house
heard it, they withdrew; for angels are associated with every
new-comer at the beginning. A few weeks after this, the
things which he used in his room began to be obscured, and
at length to disappear, until at last there was nothing left
there but the table, paper, and inkstand; and, moreover, the
walls of his room seemed to be plastered with lime, and the
floor to be covered with yellow, bricklike material, and he
himself seemed more coarsely clad. When he wondered at
this, and inquired of those around him why it was, he was
answered that it was because he removed from the church
charity, which was nevertheless its heart. But as he so
often contradicted this, and continued to write about faith
as the one only essential of the church, and the means of sal-
vation, and to remove charity more and more, he suddenly
seemed to himself to be underground in a sort of work-house,
where were others like him. And when he wished to go out
he was detained, and it was announced to him that no other
lot awaits those who thrust charity and good works outside
the doors of the church. But because he was one of the
reformers of the church, by command of the Lord he was
taken out, and sent back to his former chamber, where
there was nothing but the table, paper, and inkstand. But
still, owing to his confirmed ideas, he daubed the paper with
the same error, so that he could not be kept from being alter-
nately let down to his captive fellows and sent back again.
When sent back, he appeared clad in hairy skin, because
faith without charity is cold. He told me himself that there
was another room adjoining his in the rear, in which were
three tables, at which sat men like himself, who also cast
charity into exile, and that a fourth table also sometimes
appeared there, on which were seen monstrous things in
various forms, by which, however, they were not frightened


IOIO


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 797


from their work. He said that he conversed with them, and
was confirmed by them day by day. But after some time,
smitten with fear, he began to write something about charity;
but what he wrote on the paper one day, he did not see the
next; for this happens to every one there when he commits
any thing to paper from the external man only, and not at
the same time from the internal, thus from compulsion and
not from freedom; it is erased of itself. But after the new
heaven began to be established by the Lord, from the light
out of this heaven he began to think that perhaps he might
be in error; therefore from anxiety on account of his lot, he
felt impressed upon him some interior ideas as to charity.
In this state he consulted the Word, and then his eyes were
opened, and he saw that it was all filled with love to God and
love toward the neighbor, so that it was as the Lord says,
that on these two commandments hang the law and the
prophets, that is, the whole Word. From this time he was
transferred interiorly into the south, towards the west, and
so to another house, from which he conversed with me, say-
ing that now his writing on charity did not vanish as before,
but appeared obscurely the next day. I have wondered at
this, that when he walks his steps have a thumping sound,
like steps of those who walk with iron heels on a stone pave-
ment. To this must be added that when any novitiates
from the world entered his room to talk with him and see
him, he called one of the spirits given to magic, who by fan-
tasy could produce various beautiful shapes, and who then
adorned his room with ornaments and flowered tapestry,
and also with what seemed a library in the centre. But as
soon as the visitors were gone, these shapes vanished, and
the former plastering and emptiness returned, but this was
when he was in the former state.

798- Of Calvin I have heard the following: 1. When
he first entered the spiritual world, he fully believed that he
was still in the world where he was born; and although he
heard from the angels who were associated with him at the


No. 798]


CALVIN


IOI I


beginning that he was now in their world and not in his
former world, he said, “I have the same body, hands, and
senses.” But the angels instructed him that he was now in
a substantial body, and that before he was not only in this but
also in a material body which clothed the substantial; and
that the material body had been cast off, while the sub-
stantial, from which man is man, still remained. At first
he understood this; but the next day he returned to his
former belief, that he was still in the world where he was
born. This was because he was sensual, believing nothing
that he could not draw from the objects of the senses of the
body; it resulted from this that he drew all the dogmas of his
faith as conclusions from his own intelligence and not from
the Word. His quoting the Word was for the purpose of
winning the assent of the people. 2. After this first period,
having left the angels he wandered about inquiring for those
who in ancient times believed in predestination: and he
was told that they were removed from that place, and shut
up, and covered over; and that there was no way open to
them except on the back side underground; but yet that the
disciples of Godoschalcus still go about freely, and some-
times congregate in a place called in spiritual language,
Pyris. And as he desired their company, he was led to an
assembly where some of them were standing; and when he
came among them he was in his heart’s enjoyment, and
bound himself to them in interior friendship. 3. But after
the followers of Godoschalcus were led away to their breth-
ren in the cavern, he became weary; he therefore sought
here and there for an asylum, and was at last received into a
certain society where they were merely simple-minded, with
some among them who were also religious; and when he saw
that they knew nothing about predestination, and could not
understand any thing about it, he betook himself to one
corner of the society, and there concealed himself for a long
time; nor did he open his mouth on any thing of the church.
This was provided, so that he might recede from his error


1012


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 798


as to predestination, and that the ranks of those who after
the Synod of Dort adhered to that detestable heresy, might
be filled; and these were all sent in their order into the cav-
ern, to their fellows. 4. At length when it was asked by the
modern Predestinarians, “Where is Calvin ?” after search
for him, he was found on the confines of a society consisting
merely of the simple-minded. He was therefore called forth
from it, and led to a certain governor who had swallowed
similar dregs. This governor therefore received him into
his house and guarded him, and this until the new heaven
began to be established by the Lord; and then, as his guar-
dian governor together with his band was cast out, Calvin
betook himself to a certain house of ill-repute, and stayed
there for some time. 5. And as he then enjoyed the liberty
of wandering about, and also of coming nearer to the place
where I was stopping, it was granted me to converse with
him; and to speak first of the new heaven which at this day
is forming of those who acknowledge the Lord alone as the
God of heaven and earth, according to His words in Mat-
thew (xxviii. 18); and to say that these believe that He and
the Father are one (John x. 30), that He is in the Father and
the Father in Him, and that he that seeth and knoweth Him,
seeth and knoweth the Father (xiv. 6-1 1), and thus that
there is one God in the church as in heaven. At first when
I said this, he was silent, as usual; but after half an hour he
broke the silence and said: “Was not Christ a man, the son
of Mary who was married to Joseph? How can a man be
adored as God?” And I said, “Is not Jesus Christ, our
Redeemer and Saviour, God and Man ? ” To which he re-
plied, “He is God and man; nevertheless the Divinity is not
His, but the Father’s.” I asked, “Where then is Christ?*”
He answered, “In the lowest parts of heaven;” and he con-
firmed this by His humiliation before the Father, and by His
suffering Himself to be crucified. To this he added some
jibes upon His worship, that stole from the world into his
memoiy, the sum of which was, that the worship of Him was


No. 798]


CALVIN


IOI3


nothing but idolatry, and he wished to add things unfit to be
spoken about that worship; but the angels with me shut his
lips. But from zeal to convert him, I said that the Lord our
Saviour is not only God and Man, but that in Him, more-
over, God is Man and Man is God. And I confirmed this
by Paul’s saying that in Him dwelieth all the fulness of the
Godhead (or Divinity) bodily (Col. ii. 9); and also from
John, that He is the true God and eternal life (1 Epistle, v.
20) ; and also from these words of the Lord Himself, that it is
the will of the Father that whosoever believeth on the Son
hath eternal life, and that he who believeth not shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abideth on him (John iii. 36; vi.
40); and furthermore by the declaration in the confession
of faith called Athanasian, that in Christ, God and Man are
not two but one, and are in one Person, like the soul and the
body in man. Hearing this, he replied: “What are all
those things which you have brought forward from the Word
but empty sounds? Is not the Word the book of all here-
sies, and so like the weather-cocks on houses and ships,
which turn every way according to the wind? It is pre-
destination alone that determines all things of religion; this
is their habitation and their tabernacle of congregation; and
faith, through which justification and salvation are effected,
is the shrine and sanctuary there. Has any man free will
in spiritual things? Are not all things of salvation a free
gift ? Arguments therefore in opposition to these things, and
so against predestination, I listen to and regard only as I do
eructations from the stomach or rumbling of the bowels.
And as all this is so, I have thought to myself that a temple
where they teach about any thing else, and from the Word,
with the crowd there congregated, is like a pen of beasts con-
taining both sheep and wolves together, but the wolves are
muzzled by civil laws of justice lest they should attack the
sheep; by the sheep I mean the predestined; and I have
thought that the preaching there is then only so much hic-
coughing. But I will give my confession of faith; it is this:


ioi4


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 798


There is a God, and He is omnipotent; and there is no salva-
tion for any but those who have been elected and predestined
to it by God the Father; and every one else is written down
for his own lot, that is, for his fate.” On hearing this, in
great heat I rejoined, “ You say things too bad to be spoken.
Begone, wicked spirit! Since you are in the spiritual world,
do you not know that there is a heaven and a hell, and that
predestination involves that some have been enrolled for
heaven and some for hell? Can you then form to yourself
any other idea of God than as of a tyrant, who admits those
whom He favors into the city, and sends the rest to the place
where criminals are tortured? Shame on you!” After
this I read to him what is written in the Evangelical dog-
matic work, called Formula Concordia , about the erroneous
doctrine of the Calvinists respecting the worship of the
Lord, and predestination; respecting the worship of the
Lord, as follows: “That it is damnable idolatry, if the trust
and faith of the heart be placed in Christ not only according
to His Divine but alio according to His Human nature, and
the honor of adoration be directed to both;” and respecting
predestination, as follows: “That Christ did not die for all
men, but only for the elect. That God created the greater
part of men for eternal damnation, and is unwilling that
the greater part should be converted and live. That the
elect and born again cannot lose faith and the Holy Spirit,
though they should commit all kinds of great sins and
crimes. But that those who are not elected are necessarily
damned, and cannot attain to salvation even if they were to
be baptized a thousand times, go to the eucharist every
day, and besides lead as holy and blameless lives as it is
ever possible to live:” from the Leipsic edition of 1756, pp.
83 7 ) 838. After reading this, I asked him whether these
things written in that book were from his teaching or not;
and he answered that they were from his teaching, but
that he did not remember whether those very words had
flowed from his pen, though they had from his lips. On


No. 800]


THE DUTCH


IOI5


hearing this, all the servants of the Lord withdrew from
him, and he betook himself hastily to a way leading to the
cave where they were who have confirmed in themselves the
execrable dogma of predestination. I afterwards conversed
with some of those imprisoned in that cave, and inquired
into their lot. They said that they were compelled to labor
for food, that all were enemies of each other, that each
sought occasion to do evil to another, and that they also did
it whenever they found any trifling cause, and that this
was the enjoyment of their lives. On predestination and
the Predestinarians, see also what is said above (n. 485-488).

799. I have also conversed with many others, both fol-
lowers of those three leaders and heretics; and of all of them
it was given me to conclude, that whoever among them have
lived a life of charity, and still more who have loved truth
because it is truth, in the spiritual world suffer themselves to
be instructed, and accept the doctrines of the New Church;
while on the other hand those who have confirmed them-
selves in falsities of religion, and also have lived an evil life,
do not suffer themselves to be instructed; and that these
latter remove step by step from the New Heaven, and asso-
ciate themselves with their like in hell, where more and more
they confirm themselves against the worship of the Lord and
become obstinately set against it, even so that they cannot
bear to hear the name of Jesus. But it is the reverse in
heaven, where all with one accord acknowledge the Lord as
the God of heaven.

n. The Dutch in the Spiritual World.

800. In the work on Heaven and Hell it is related that
Christians among whom the Word is read and there is a
knowledge and acknowledgment of the Lord the Redeemer
and Saviour, are in the middle of the nations and peoples of
the whole spiritual world, because the greatest spiritual light
is with them; and the light is shed from this as a centre in all


ioi6


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 800


directions even to the most remote circumference, accord-
ing to what is shown in the chapter on the Sacred Scripture
(see above, n. 267-272). In this Christian centre the Re-
formed have places allotted to them according to their re-
ception of spiritual light from the Lord; and because the
Dutch possess that light more deeply and more fully joined
with their natural light than others, and from this are more
receptive of such things as are of reason, therefore in that
Christian centre they have obtained abodes in the east and
south, in the east from the faculty of receiving spiritual heat,
and in the south from that of receiving spiritual light. That
the quarters in the spiritual world are not like those in the
natural world, and that abodes according to the quarters are
according to the reception of faith and love, and that they
who excel in love are in the east, and they who excel in intel-
ligence in the south, may be seen in the work on Heaven and
Hell (n. 141-153). f

801. The Dutch occupy those quarters of the Christian
centre for the further reason that traffic is their final love, and
money is a mediate love subservient to this, and that love is
spiritual; but where money is the final love, and traffic is a
mediate love subservient to it, as with the Jews, that love is
natural, and it partakes of avarice. That the love of trading
when final is spiritual, is from its use, in being serviceable to
the general good; and with this the man’s own good indeed
coheres, and this is more apparent than the general good be-
cause he thinks from his natural man ; but yet when traffic is
the end it is also the final love, and every one is regarded in
heaven according to that love. For the final love is like the
ruler of a kingdom or the master of a house, while the other
loves are as subjects or servants of it; the final love also has
its seat in the highest and inmost regions of the mind, while
mediate loves are below and outside, and serve it at its nod.
The Dutch are in this spiritual love more than others; while
the Jews are in the love inverted, so that their love of trading
is merely natural, in which nothing is inwardly latent from
the general good, but only from their own.


No. 802]


THE DUTCH


IOI7


802. The Dutch are fixed in the principles of their religion
more firmly than others, and they are not parted from them;
even if they are convinced that this or that does not accord,
still they do not assent, but turn back and remain unmoved;
thus they also remove themselves from the inward intuition
of truth, for they keep their rational close under obedience.
Since they are such, after death when they come into the
spiritual world they are prepared in a peculiar manner to
receive the spiritual things of heaven, which are Divine
truths. They are not taught, because they do not receive;
but heaven is described to them as to its quality, and after-
ward it is granted them to ascend thither and see it; and then
whatever accords with their genius is infused into them; and
so being set down, they return to their companions with full
desire for heaven. If they do not then receive this truth,
that God is one in person and essence, and that the Lord the
Redeemer and Saviour is this God, and that the Divine
Trinity is in Him; also this truth, that faith and charity in
one’s knowledge and discourse amount to nothing without
their life, and that they are given by the Lord when men
after self-examination repent; if they turn away from these
truths when they are taught, and still think of God as being
in three Persons, and of religion merely in acknowledging its
existence, they are reduced to a miserable condition, and
their trade is taken away from them, even until they find
themselves reduced to extremities. They are then led to
those who, because they are in Divine truths, abound in all
things, and with whom trade flourishes; and there the
thought is inspired into them from heaven, Why is it that
these are so prosperous? And at the same time they are
brought to reflect upon their faith and life, that they are
averse to evils as sins. They also make some little inquiry,
and perceive a harmony with their own thought and reflec-
tion. This is done repeatedly, at intervals. At length, of
themselves, they think that, in order to be freed from their
misery, they must believe and live in the same way; and


ioi8


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 802


then, as they receive that faith and live that life of charity,
wealth is given them, and they are highly favored in their
lives. In this manner those who led any life of charity in
the world, are amended of themselves, and prepared for
heaven. These afterward become more constant than
others, so that they may well be called constancies; they do
not suffer themselves to be led away by any reasoning, fal-
lacy, obscurity induced by sophistry, or mere confirmations
from some preposterous view; for they become more clear
sighted than before.

803. The teachers who instruct in their lyceums, study
the mysteries of the present faith very attentively, especially
those there called Cocceians; and because the dogma of pre-
destination springs inevitably from those mysteries, and this
moreover was established by the Synod of Dort, it also is
sown and implanted, as seed from the fruit of any tree is
sown or planted in a field. Hence the laity talk much
among themselves about predestination, but in different
ways; some grasp it with both hands, some with one hand
only and laugh at it, and some cast it from them as a snaky
lizard, for they know nothing of the mysteries of faith, from
which that viper was hatched. They are ignorant of these
mysteries because they are intent upon their business, and
the mysteries of that faith indeed touch their understanding,
but do not penetrate it. Therefore the dogma of predestina-
tion with the laity, and even with the clergy, is like an image
in the human form placed on a rock in the sea, with a great
shell shining like gold in its hand; at the sight of which some
captains as they sail by, lower the sail as a mark of honor and
veneration, some only wink and salute it, while some hiss at
it as an object of ridicule. It is also like an unknown bird
from India placed on a high tower, which some swear is a
turtle-dove, some guess is a cock, while others exclaim with
an oath, “It surely is an owl.”

804. The Dutch are readily distinguished from others in
the spiritual world, because they appear in clothing like


No. 805]


THE DUTCH


IOI9


that worn by them in the natural world, with the difference
that they who have received faith and spiritual life are more
finely clad. They appear in like clothing because they re-
main steadfast in the principles of their religion, and in the
spiritual world all are clothed according to those principles.
Therefore those who are in Divine truths there have white
garments, and of fine linen.

805. The cities in which the Dutch dwell, are guarded
in a peculiar manner. All their streets are roofed, and have
gates in them, that they may not be looked at from rocks and
hills round about. This is done on account of their innate
prudence in concealing designs and not divulging intentions;
for in the spiritual world such things are drawn out by in-
spection. When one comes with a mind to examine into
their state, he is led on his departure to gates of the streets
which are shut; and so he is led back, and conducted to
others, and this till he is most thoroughly annoyed; and then
he is let out; this is done that he may not come again. Wives
who aim at authority over their husbands dwell at one side
of the city, and do not meet their husbands except when they
are invited, which is done in a civil manner. The husbands
then take them to houses where married pairs live without
exercising authority over each other, and show them how
beautiful and clean their houses are, and what enjoyment
they have in life, and that they have all this from their mutual
and marriage love. Those wives who attend to these things
and are affected by them, cease from their dominion and
live together with their husbands; and then they obtain a
habitation nearer the centre, and are called angels. The
reason is, that true marriage love is heavenly love, which is
free from dominion.


1020


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 806


III. The English in the Spiritual World.

806. There are two states of thought in man, external
and internal; man is in the external state in the natural
world; he is in the internal state in the spiritual world.
These states make one with the good, but not with the
wicked. What a man is as to his internal, is rarely mani-
fest in the world, because from infancy he has learned to be
moral and rational, and loves to appear so. But in the spiri-
tual world what he is clearly appears; for man is then a
spirit, and the spirit is the internal man. Now as it has
been granted me to be in that world, and to see there the
quality of the internal men from different kingdoms, I
ought, because it is important, to make it known.

807. As regards the English nation: the better ones
among them are in the centre of all Christians, because they
have inward intellectual light; this light is not apparent to
any one in the natural world, but conspicuous in the spiri-
tual world; they get it from their freedom to speak and
write, and thus to think. With others, who are not in such
liberty, that light is wasted, because it has no outlet. This
light, however, is not active of itself, but is rendered active
by others, especially by men of reputation and authority;
as soon as any thing is said by them, that light shines forth.
For this reason governors are appointed over them in the
spiritual world and priests of celebrity and eminent talent
are given to them, in whose decisions, from this disposition
of theirs, they acquiesce.

808. There is a similarity of minds among them, from
which they become familiarly attached to friends who are
their own countrymen, but rarely to others; they also aid
each other, and love sincerity; they are lovers of their coun-
try, and zealous for its glory; and they regard foreigners
much as one from the roof of his palace looks with a glass
on persons dwelling or wandering about outside of the city.


No. 809]


THE ENGLISH


1021


The political affairs of their kingdom occupy their minds
and possess their hearts, sometimes so far as to withdraw
their minds from the studies of loftier judgment, by which
higher intelligence is gained. These studies are indeed
pursued eagerly in youth, by those who give their attention
to such things in the public seminaries; but they pass away,
like the phenomena of nature; but still their rationality is
quickened from these studies, and sparkles with light from
which they form beautiful images, as a crystal prism turned
toward the sun shows the rainbow, and paints with glowing
colors the surface ready to receive them.

809. There are two great cities like London, into which
most of the English pass after death. I have been per-
mitted to see the chief city, and to walk through it. Where
in London is the merchants’ place of meeting called the
Exchange, there is the centre of this city; here the governors
dwell. Above this centre is the east, below is the west, on
the right the south, and on the left the north. In the east
those dwell who more than the others have lived a life of
charity; here are magnificent palaces. In the south dwell
the wise, among whom are many splendid things. In the
north those dwell who more than others have loved freedom
to speak and write. In the west those dwell who cry up
justification by faith alone. On the right in this latter
quarter is the entrance to the city, also the exit; they who
live wickedly are sent out here. The elders who are in the
west and teach that faith alone, dare not enter the city by
great streets, but through narrow alleys, because none but
those who are in the faith of charity are tolerated in the city
itself. I have heard them complaining of the preachers
from the west, that they compose their sermons with so much
art and eloquence, secretly weaving into them the doctrine
of justification by faith, that they do not know whether good
should be done or not. They preach faith as intrinsic good,
and they separate this from the good of charity which they
call of merit, and therefore not acceptable to God. But


1022


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 809


when those who dwell in the east and south of the city hear
such sermons they leave the churches, and the preachers are
afterward deprived of priestly office.

810. I afterward heard many reasons why those preachers
were deprived of office. I was told that the chief reason was
that they did not frame their sermons from the Word and
thus from the Spirit of God, but from their own rational
light, and thus from their own spirit. They do indeed take
texts from the Word, as a prelude, but they merely touch
these with their lips and then abandon them as tasteless; and
presently they select something savory from their own intelli-
gence, which they roll about in the mouth and turn over upon
the tongue as something delicious; and in this way they
teach. It was said that therefore no more spirituality is in
their sermons than in the songs of warblers; and that they
were merely allegorical adornments, much like wigs beauti-
fully curled and powdered, on bald heads. The mysteries
of their discourses on justification by faith alone they com-
pared to the quails brought up from the sea and cast upon
the camp of the children of Israel, from which some thou-
sands died (Num. xi.); but the theology of charity and faith
together, they compared to the manna from heaven. I once
heard their elders talking together about faith alone; and I
saw a kind of image formed by them which represented their
faith alone; in their light which was fantastic, this appeared
like a great giant; but when light from heaven was let in, it
looked like a monster above and a serpent below. Seeing
this they withdrew, and the bystanders threw the image into
a pool.

81 1. The other great city, also called London, is not in
the Christian centre, but at some distance to the north.
Those pass into it after death who are inwardly evil. In its
middle there is an open communication with hell, by which
also at times they are swallowed up.

812. From those in the spiritual world who are of Eng-
land, it was perceived that they have a double theology, one


No. 813]


THE GERMANS


1023


from their doctrine of faith, and another from the doctrine
of charity; the former held by those who are initiated into the
priesthood, and the latter by the laity, especially those who
dwell in Scotland and on its borders. With these the be-
lievers in faith alone are afraid to engage in argument, be-
cause they combat them both from the Word and from rea-
son. This doctrine of charity is set forth in the exhortation
always read in the churches on the sabbath day to those who
approach the sacrament of the Holy Supper, before they
come; it is openly declared in that exhortation that if they
are not in charity, and do not shim evils as sins, they cast
themselves into eternal damnation; and that if they should
come to the Holy Communion when not in charity and with-
out shunning evils as sins, the devil would enter into them as
he did into Judas.

IV. The Germans in the Spiritual World.

813. It is known that the inhabitants of every kingdom
divided into several provinces are not alike in genius, and
that they differ from each other in particular ways, as those
who dwell in the several climates of the globe differ from
each other in a universal way; and yet that a common genius
reigns among those who are under one king, and thus under
the same law. As regards Germany, it is divided more than
the surrounding kingdoms into separate governments.
There is an imperial government, under the universal author-
ity of which they all are; but yet the prince of each division
enjoys power in his dominions; for there are greater and
lesser dukedoms, and each duke is like a monarch in his own
state. Furthermore, religion is divided there; in some
dukedoms are the Evangelical, so called; in some, the Re-
formed; and in some, Papists. With such diversity of both
government and religion, the minds, inclinations, and lives
of the Germans, from those seen in the spiritual world, are
more difficult to describe than those of other nations and


1024


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 813


peoples. But still, as a common genius reigns everywhere
among peoples speaking the same language, it may be in
some measure seen and described from ideas collected into
one.

814. Because the Germans are under despotic government
in each dukedom, they have not freedom of speech and
writing, as the Hollanders and the British have; and when
this freedom is restrained, freedom of thought also, that is,
of investigating matters in full, is kept in restraint at the
same time. It is then as if high walls were built as the sides
of the basin of a fountain, so that the water within the basin
rises even to the level of the source of the salient stream, and
therefore the stream itself no longer forms a jet. Thought
is like the stream, and speech therefrom is like the basin.
In a word, influx adapts itself to efflux; and so the under-
standing from above adapts itself to its measure of freedom
to utter and express the thoughts. For this reason that noble
nation devotes itself little to matters of judgment, but rather
to those of memory. It is for this reason that they apply
themselves especially to the history of letters, and in their
books they trust men of reputation and learning among
them, quoting their opinions abundantly, and supporting
some one. This state is represented in the spiritual world
by a man carrying books under his arm, and when one dis-
putes about any matter of judgment, he says, “I will give
you an answer,” and immediately he draws a book from
under his arm and begins to read.

815. From this state proceed many things, and among
them this, that they keep the spiritual things of the church
inscribed upon the memory, and seldom raise them into the
higher understanding, but only admit them to the lower,
from which they reason about them; thus they do altogether
differently from free nations. These latter, in relation to
the spiritual things of the church, called theological, are like
eagles which rise to whatever height they please, while na-
tions not free are like swans in a river. And free nations are


No. 8 1 6] THE GERMANS 1 02 5

like large deer with lofty horns, that roam the fields, groves,
and forests in full freedom; while nations not free are like
deer kept in parks for the use of a prince. Moreover, free
peoples are like winged horses, such as the ancients called
Pegasus, that fly not only over seas, but also over hills that
they call Parnassian, and also over the seats of the Muses
beneath them; while peoples that have not been freed are
like noble horses beautifully caparisoned in kings’ stables.
There are similar differences between the judgment of one
and of the other in the mysteries of theology. The clergy
in Germany, while students, write out from the lips of the
teachers in the seminaries their dicta, and these they guard
as the tokens of learning; and when inaugurated into the
priesthood, or appointed lecturers in the schools, they draw
their official discourses, whether in the desk or in the pulpit,
for the most part from those dicta. Such of their priests as
do not teach from what is orthodox, usually preach about
the Holy Spirit and His wonderful work and exciting holi-
ness in the heart. But those who from the orthodoxy teach
about faith, seem to the angels as if decorated with wreaths
formed from oak leaves; while they who teach from the
Word concerning charity and its works, appear to the angels
as if adorned with wreaths woven of odoriferous laurel
leaves. The Evangelical there, in their disputes with the
Reformed about truths, appear to be tearing garments, be-
cause garments signify truths.

816. I asked where the people of Hamburg are found in
the spiritual world, and was told that they do not appear any-
where assembled in one society, still less in a civil com-
munity, but are scattered about and mingled with the Ger-
mans in various quarters. And when the reason was asked,
it was said to be from this, that their minds are continually
looking abroad and travelling, as it were, outside of their
city, and very little within it; for as the state of man’s mind
is in the natural world, such is it in the spiritual world; for
man’s mind is his spirit, or the man that lives after his de-
parture from the material body.


1026


q:RUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 817


V. The Catholics in the Spiritual World.

817. The Catholics in the spiritual world appear around
and beneath the Protestants, and they are separated from
them by spaces which they are forbidden to pass. But yet
the monks by clandestine arts procure communication for
themselves, and also send out emissaries by unknown paths
to make converts; but they are traced, and after being pun-
ished are either sent back to their companions or cast down.

818. Since the final judgment, which took place in the
spiritual world in the year 1757, the state of all, and there-
fore of the Catholics, is so changed that they are not allowed
to band into companies as formerly; but for every love,
good and evil, ways have been appointed, which they who
come from the world immediately enter, and pass to socie-
ties corresponding to their loves. Thus the wicked are borne
toward societies in hell, and the good toward societies in
heaven. So care is taken that they shall not form for them-
selves artificial heavens, as formerly. Such societies in the
world of spirits, which is midway between heaven and hell,
are very numerous, for they are as many as the genera and
species of the affections of the love of good and of evil; and
meanwhile, before they are raised to heaven or cast down to
hell, they are in spiritual conjunction with men of the world,
because men too are in the midst between heaven and hell.

819. The Catholics have a place of council in the south,
toward the east, where their chiefs assemble and consult on
the various matters of their religion, especially how to keep
the people in blind obedience and how to enlarge their do-
minion. No one, however, is admitted thereto who was a
pope in the world, because a semblance of Divine authority
abides in the mind of such a one, from having claimed to
himself the Lord’s power in the world. Neither are cardi-
nals permitted to enter that place of council, and this on
account of their pre-eminence. Nevertheless these latter


No, 820]


THE CATHOLICS


1027


assemble together in a spacious conclave beneath the others,
but after staying there a few days they are taken away;
whither, it was not given me to know. There is also another
place of meeting in the south, but toward the west; the busi-
ness there is to let the credulous people into heaven. Here
they arrange about themselves several societies in various
external enjoyments; in some there are dances, in some con-
certs of music, in some processions, in some theatres and
scenic exhibitions; in some there are persons who by fan-
tasies induce various forms of magnificence; in some they
merely act like clowns and jest; in some they talk together
in a friendly way, here about religious, there about civil mat-
ters, and elsewhere even lasciviously, and so on. Into some
one of these societies they introduce the credulous, each ac-
cording to his peculiar pleasure, calling it heaven. But
after they have been there a day or two they all become weary
and go away, because those enjoyments are external and not
internal. In this way also many are led away from the folly
of their belief about the powder to admit into heaven. As re-
gards their worship specially: it is almost like their wor-
ship in the world; it consists in like manner of masses which
are celebrated not in the common language of spfrits, but in
a language made up of sounding words which inspire exter-
nal sanctity and trembling, but which they do not at all
understand.

820. All who come from the earth into the spiritual world
are kept at first in the confession of faith and religion of their
country; so also are the Catholics; therefore they always
have some representative pontiff set over them, whom they
also adore with similar ceremony as in the world. It rarely
happens that one who has been a pope in the world is placed
over them, after he leaves the world; yet he who filled the
pontifical chair thirty or forty years ago was placed over
them, because he cherished in his heart the idea that the
Word was holier than it is believed to be, and that the Lord
should be worshipped. It was granted me to speak with


1028 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No, 820

him, and he said that he adored the Lord alone, because He
is God, who has all power in heaven and earth, according to
His words (Matt, xxviii. 18). He said also that invocation
of saints was absurd; also that he had intended to restore
that church when in the world, but could not for reasons
that he stated. When the great northern city, which con-
tained Catholics and Reformed together, was destroyed in
the day of the last judgment, I saw him carried out in a litter
and transferred to a place of safety. On the borders of the
great society in which he acts as pontiff, schools have been
instituted, to which those go who are in doubt respecting
religion; and there are converted monks who teach them as
to God the Saviour Christ, and also the holiness of the Word;
and the monks leave it to their option to turn away their
minds from the modes of sanctification introduced into the
Roman Catholic Church. They who receive instruction
are introduced to a large society of those who have with-
drawn from the worship of the pope and saints; and when
they come into that society they are like those who having
been roused from sleep are fully awake, and like those who
come from the discomforts of winter into the pleasantness
of early spring, and like a sailor when he reaches port; and
then they are invited by those there to feasts, and noble wine
is given them to drink from crystal cups. I have also heard
that angels send down from heaven to their host a plate con-
taining manna, in form and taste like that sent down upon
the camp of the children of Israel in the desert, and this
plate is carried around to the guests, and to every one is given
liberty to taste.

821. All those of the Catholic religion who in the former
world thought more of God than of the papacy, and from a
simple heart did works of charity, when they find them-
selves living after death, and have been instructed that the
Lord Himself the Saviour of the world reigns here, are
easily led away from the superstitions of that religion. To
them the transition from popery to Christianity is as easy


No. 822]


THE CATHOLIC SAINTS


IO29


as to pass through open doors into a temple, or to pass the
guards in the entrance-hall and enter the court when the
king so commands, or to raise the countenance and look up
to heaven when voices are thence heard. But on the other
hand, to lead away from the superstitions of that religion
those who during the course of their life in the world rarely
if ever thought of God, and valued that worship merely for
its festivities, is as difficult as to enter a temple through
closed doors, or to pass the guards in the entrance-hall into
the court when the king forbids, or for a snake in the grass
to raise its eyes to heaven. It is wonderful that none who
pass into the spiritual world out of that Catholic religion,
see there the heaven where the angels are; there is as it were
a dark cloud over them which bounds the sight; as soon,
however, as any convert comes among the converted, heaven
is opened; and sometimes they see angels there in white
garments, and are also taken up to them after having com-
pleted the period of preparation.

VI. The Catholic Saints in the Spiritual World.

822. It is known that man has in him from his parents
inherent or hereditary evil, but it is known to few where that
evil dwells in its fulness; it has its dwelling in the love of
possessing the goods of all others, and in the love of ex-
ercising dominion, for this latter love is such that, so far as
reins are given to it, it rushes on until it bums with the de-
sire of exercising dominion over all, and finally wishes to be
invoked and worshipped as God. This love is the serpent
that deceived Eve and Adam ; for it said to the woman, God
doth know that in the day ye eat of that tree , your eyes will be
opened, and ye will then be as God (Gen. iii. 5)* So far, there-
fore, as man rushes into this love without restraint, he turns
away from God and to himself, and becomes an adorer of
himself; and then he can call upon God with lips fervent
from love of self, but with the heart cold from contempt of


1030


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 822


God. And then also the Divine things of the church may
serve him as means; but because dominion is his end, he
has the means at heart only so far as they serve that end.
Such a man, if exalted to the highest honors, is in his own
imagination like Atlas carrying the terraqueous globe on his
shoulders, and like Phoebus with his horses bearing the sun
around the world.

823. Since man is such from inheritance, therefore all
who have been made saints by papal bulls are removed in
the spiritual world from the sight of others and concealed,
and they are deprived of all intercourse with their worship-
pers, lest that worst root of evils should be quickened in
them, and they should be carried away into such delusions
of fantasy as are with demons. They come into such delu-
sions, who while they live in the world earnestly aspire to be
made saints after death, that they may be invoked.

824. Many from the papal jurisdiction, especially monks,
when they enter the spiritual world, search for the saints,
especially the saint of their order, but they do not find them.
They are surprised at this, but they are afterwards in-
structed that these saints are mingled either with those who
are in heaven or with those who are in the lower earth, and
that in either case they know nothing of the worship and
invocations offered them; also that those who do know, and
who wish to be invoked, fall into delusions and talk like
fools. The worship of saints is such an abomination in
heaven, that when merely heard of it excites horror, since so
far as worship is yielded to any man it is denied to the Lord;
for in that case He cannot be worshipped alone; and if the
Lord is not worshipped alone, there is a division made,
which destroys communion and the happiness of life that
flows from it. That I might learn the quality of the saints,
so that I might make it known, there were brought out from
the lower earth as many as a hundred, who knew that they
had been made saints. They ascended behind me, only a
few before the face, and I spoke with one of thjem who they


No. 827]


THE CATHOLIC SAINTS


IO31


said was Xavier. While he was talking with me, he was
like a fool; nevertheless he could tell that in his own place,
where he was shut up with others, he was not a fool, but that
he becomes a fool as often as he thinks himself a saint and
wishes to be invoked. I heard the same thing murmured
by those who were behind. With those called saints, who
are in heaven, the case is different; they know nothing at all
of what is done on earth, nor is it given them to converse
with any from the papal jurisdiction who are in that super-
stition, lest some idea of that thing should enter into them.

825. From this state of the saints one may conclude that
the invocation of them is mere mockery; and furthermore
I can affirm that they no more hear the invocations addressed
to them on earth than their images by the wayside, or than
the walls of a temple, or than the birds that build nests in
the towers. It is said by those who pay them service on
earth, that the saints reign in heaven together with the Lord
Jesus Christ; but this is a fiction and falsehood, for they no
more reign with the Lord than a groom with his king, or a
porter with a nobleman, or a courier with a primate. For
John the Baptist said of the Lord, The latchet of His shoes
I am not worthy to unloose (Mark i. 7: John i. 27); what then
are such as these?

826. There appears sometimes to the Parisians who in
the spiritual world are in a society, at a middle altitude, a
certain woman in shining raiment and with a face that seems
holy, and she has said that she is Genevieve. But when
some of them begin to adore her, her face and also her
clothing change instantly, and she becomes like an ordinary
woman, and rebukes them for desiring to adore a woman
who among her companions is no more esteemed than a
servant, wondering that men of the world are duped by such
nonsense.

827. To this I will add the following which is most worthy
of note: Mary the mother of the Lord once passed by, and
appeared overhead, in white raiment; and then pausing a


1032


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 827


little she said that she had been the mother of the Lord, and
that He was indeed born of her; but that being made God,
He put off all the human from her, and that therefore she
now worships Him as her God, and is unwilling that any one
should acknowledge Him as her son, for in Him all is Divine.

VII. The Mohammedans in the Spiritual World.

828. The Mohammedans in the spiritual world appear
behind the Papists in the west, and form as it were a border
around them. They appear next behind Christians be-
cause they acknowledge our Lord as a very great prophet,
the wisest of all, who was sent into the world to teach men,
and also as Son of God. In that world every one dwells at
a distance from the central region where the Christians are,
according to his confession of the Lord and the one God;
for that confession conjoins minds with heaven, and makes
the distance from the east, above which is the Lord.

829. Since religion dwells in what is highest in man, and
as his lower things have life and light from the highest, and
because Mohammed is associated with religion in the minds
of Mohammedans, some Mohammed is always placed within
their sight; and that they may turn their faces toward the
east, over which is the Lord, he is placed beneath the Chris-
tian centre. This is not the Mohammed who wrote the
Koran, but another who fills his office; nor is there always
the same person, but he is changed. He who formerly filled
this place was one from Saxony, who having been taken pris-
oner by the Algerines, became a Mohammedan. This per-
son, because he had also been a Christian, was sometimes
moved to speak with them about the Lord, and to say that
He was not Joseph’s son, but the Son of God Himself.
Other Mohammeds afterward succeeded this one. In the
place where that representative Mohammed has his station,
a fire appears as of a torch to distinguish him; but that fire is
not visible to any but Mohammedans.


No. 832]


THE MOHAMMEDANS


1033


830. Mohammed who wrote the Koran is not seen at the
present day. I was told that at first he presided over them,
but that because he wished to rule as God over all things of
their religion, he was ejected from his seat, which he had
under the Papists, and sent down to the right side near the
south. A certain society of Mohammedans was once in-
cited by some malicious spirits to acknowledge Mohammed
as God. To quiet the disturbance, Mohammed was brought
up from the earth below and shown to them; and I also saw
him at that time. He appeared like corporeal spirits, who
have no inward perception; his face inclined to black. And
I heard him utter these words: “I am your Mohammed;”
and presently he seemed to sink down.

831. Mohammedans are hostile to Christians chiefly on
account of the belief in three Divine Persons, and the conse-
quent worship of three Gods, so many Creators; and to the
Roman Catholics, still further, on account of their kneeling
before images. Therefore they call these latter idolaters,
and the others fanatics, saying that they make a three-
headed God, also that they say one and mutter three; hence
that they part omnipotence, and from and of the one omnip-
otence make three; and that thus they are like fauns with
three horns, one for each God, and at the same time three
for one; and that so they pray, sing, and preach.

832. Mohammedans, like all nations who acknowledge
one God, and who love justice, and do good from religion,
have their own heaven, but it is outside of the Christian.
The Mohammedan heaven, however, is divided into two.
In the lower they live honorably, with more than one wife;
but none are raised from this into the higher heaven except
those who give up their concubines, and acknowledge the
Lord our Saviour, and at the same time His dominion over
heaven and hell. I have heard that it is impossible for them
to think that God the Father and our Lord are one, but that
it is possible for them to believe that the Lord rules over the
heavens and hells because He is the Son of God the Father.


1034


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 832


It is through this belief with them, that it is given them by
the Lord to ascend into the higher heaven.

833. That the Mohammedan religion is received by more
kingdoms than the Christian, may be a stumbling-block to
those who think about the Divine Providence, and at the
same time believe that no one can be saved except those who
are born Christians. But the Mohammedan religion is not
a stumbling-block to those who believe that all things are of
the Divine Providence; they ask in what this is, and they also
find out; it is in this, that the Mohammedan religion ac-
knowledges the Lord as a very great prophet, the wisest of all,
and also as Son of God. But as they have made the Koran
the only book of their religion, and consequently Mohammed
who wrote it has held his seat in their thoughts, and they fol-
low him with some worship, they therefore think but little
about our Lord. That it may be fully known that that
religion was raised up from the Lord’s Divine Providence,
to destroy the idolatries of many nations, it shall be told in
some order. First, then, of the origin of idolatries. Pre-
vious to that religion, idolatrous worship was spread through
very many kingdoms of the world. This was because the
churches before the coming of the Lord were all representa-
tive churches. Such, too, was the Israelitish; in it the taber-
nacle, Aaron’s garments, the sacrifices, all things of the
temple at Jerusalem, and the statutes also, were representa-
tive. And there was knowledge of correspondences among
the ancients, which is also a knowledge of representations,
the very knowledge of knowledges, which was especially
cultivated by the Egyptians; hence their hieroglyphics.
From their knowledge of correspondences, they knew the
signification of animals of every kind, also of all kinds of
trees, and of mountains, hills, rivers, fountains, and of the
sun, moon, and stars. By this knowledge they also had
knowledge of spiritual things, because the things repre-
sented, which were such as are of spiritual wisdom among
the angels in heaven, were the origins of the representatives.


No. 833]


THE MOHAMMEDANS


1035


Now as all their worship was representative, consisting only
of correspondences, therefore they worshipped on moun-
tains and hills, and also in groves and gardens; and there-
fore they consecrated fountains, and moreover they made
sculptured horses, oxen, calves, lambs, birds too, and fishes,
also serpents, and placed them near the temples, and in their
courts, and also at their homes, in an order according to the
spiritual things of the church to which they corresponded,
or which they represented, and therefore signified. After a
time, when the knowledge of correspondences was oblit-
erated, their posterity began to worship the sculptures them-
selves, as holy in themselves, not knowing that their fathers
of ancient time did not see any holiness in them, but only that
according to correspondences they represented what was
holy. Hence arose the idolatries which filled so many king-
doms of the world. For the extirpating these idolatries, it
was brought about from the Lord’s Divine Providence, that
a new religion accommodated to the genius of the people of
the East should auspiciously begin; in which there should
be something from the Word of both Testaments, and
which should teach that the Lord came into the world, and
that He was a very great prophet, the wisest of all, the Son
of God. This was done through Mohammed, from whom
that religion was named. It is manifest from this that
that religion was raised up, from the Lord’s Divine Prov-
idence, and accommodated to the genius of the people of
the East, as already said, to the end that it might blot out
the idolatries of so many nations, and give them some knowl-
edge of the Lord before they should come into the spiritual
world, which they do after death. And this religion would
not have been received by so many kingdoms, and had such
power to extirpate idolatries, if it had not been conformed
to the ideas of their thoughts, and especially if polygamy
had not been permitted, because the Orientals without that
permission would have burned for filthy adulteries more than
Europeans, and would have perished.


IO36 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 834

834. It was once given me to perceive what is the heat of
their polygamous love. I conversed with one who occupied
the place of Mohammed; and this substitute, after some con-
versation with him at a distance, sent to me an ebony spoon
and some other things, which were tokens that they came
from him; and at the same time a communication was opened
from various places for the heat of their polygamous love,
which was felt from some places like heat in baths after
washing; from some like heat in kitchens, where meats are
boiling; from some like heat in eating-houses where smelling
eatables stand for sale; from some like heat in apothecaries’
cellars, where emulsions and such things are prepared; from
some like heat in stews and brothels; and from others like
heat in shops where skins, leather, and shoes are sold. There
was also something rank, harsh, and burning in the heat,
arising from jealousy. But the heat in the Christian heavens
when the enjoyment from their love is perceived as odor, is
fragrant like the odor in gardens and vineyards, and like that
in rosaries, and in some places like that where spices are
sold, and in others like those in wine-presses and wine-cel-
lars. That the enjoyments from loves in the spiritual world
are often perceived as odors, has been shown everywhere in
my Relations, which follow the chapters.

VIII. The Africans in the Spiritual World; and also

SOMETHING AS TO GENTILES.

835. Gentiles who have known nothing of the Lord, ap-
pear in the spiritual world outside of those who have known
Him, even so that the outmost circumference is formed by
those only who are thoroughly idolaters, and in the former
world worshipped the sun and moon. But those who ac-
knowledge one God, and make such precepts as are in the
Decalogue precepts of religion and so of the life, communi-
cate more directly with the Christians in the central region;
for so the communication is not intercepted by the Moham-


No. 837]


THE AFRICANS


io 37


medans and Papists. The Gentiles are also distinguished
according to their genius and their faculty for receiving
light through the heavens from the Lord, for some among
them are interior and some exterior, and this comes partly
from climate, partly from the parent stock, partly from edu-
cation, and partly from religion. Africans are more interior
than the others.

836. All who acknowledge and worship one God, the
Creator of the universe, entertain the idea of God as a Man;
they say that no one can have any other idea of Him. When
they hear that many entertain an idea of God as of ether or a
cloud, they inquire where such people are; and when they are
told that they are among the Christians, they deny that it is
possible. But it is answered that they have such an idea
from this, that God is called a spirit in the Word, and of
spirit they have no other thought than of ethereal substance
or of some form of cloud, not knowing that every spirit and
angel is a human being. Further examination has been
made, however, to ascertain whether their spiritual idea is
similar to their natural; and it has been found that it is not
similar with those who inwardly acknowledge the Lord the
Saviour as the God of heaven and earth. I heard a certain
elder saying that no one can have an idea of the Divine Hu-
man; and I saw him conveyed to various classes of Gentiles,
to the more and more interior, and also to their heavens, and
at last to the Christian heaven; and everywhere a com-
munication of their interior perception respecting God was
given; and he observed that they had no other idea of God
than that of a Divine Man; and that man, who is an image
and likeness of Him, could not have been created by any
other.

837. As Africans surpass the others in interior judgment,
I have had conversation with them on matters of loftier
inquiry, and lately about God, the Lord the Redeemer, and
the interior and exterior man. And as they were delighted
with this conversation, I will present some of the things


1038


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 837


which they perceived from interior sight on these three sub-
jects. Of God they said, that He certainly did descend and
present ftimself to be seen by men, because He is their Cre-
ator, Guardian, and Guide, and because the human race is
His; also that He sees, surveys, and provides the things, one
and all, that are in the heavens "and on earth, their goods as
in Himself, and Himself in them; this, because He is the
sun of the angelic heaven, which is seen as high above the
spiritual world as the sun of the earth is above the natural;
and He who is the sun, sees, surveys, and provides all things
and everything below. And because it is His Divine love
which appears as a sun, it follows that He provides for the
greatest and the least such things as are of life, and for men
such things as are of love and wisdom, those which are of
love by heat from that sun and those which are of wisdom by
the light from it. If, therefore, you form to yourselves an
idea of God as being the sun of the universe, you will surely
from that idea see and acknowledge His omnipresence,
omniscience, and omnipotence.

838. And further, I conversed with them as to the Lord
the Saviour. It was said that God in His essence is Divine
love, and that Divine love is as purest fire; and as love
viewed in itself can purpose only to become one with another
whom it loves, and Divine love to unite itself to man and
man to itself so that it may be in man and man in it, and be-
cause the Divine love is as purest fire, it is manifest that God
being such could not possibly be in man and cause man to be
in Him; for He would thus reduce the whole man to thinnest
vapor. Yet as God from His essence burned with the love
of uniting Himself with man, it was necessary that He should
veil Himself over with a body adapted to reception and con-
junction. Therefore He descended and assumed the Hu-
man according to the order established from Himself from
the creation of the world; which order was, that, by the
power propagated from Himself, the Human should be con-
ceived, carried in the womb, and bom, and then should


No. S39]


THE AFRICANS


IO39


grow in wisdom and love, and so draw near to union with
the Divine origin thereof, and that thus God became Man,
and Man God. That this is so, the Scripture about Him,
which exists among Christians and is called the Word, mani-
festly teaches and testifies; and God Himself, who in His
Human is called Jesus Christ, says that the Father is in Him
and He in the Father, and that he that seeth Him seeth the
Father; besides other things to the same purport. That
God, whose love is as purest fire, could not otherwise unite
Himself to man and man to Himself, reason also sees. Can
the sun’s fire as it is in itself touch man, still less enter into
him, unless it veil its rays with atmospheres, and so by tem-
pered heat present itself accommodated? Can pure ether
envelop man, still less enter his bronchial tubes, unless it
become more dense with air and thus adapt itself ? A fish
cannot even draw the breath of life in the air, but in an ele-
ment suited to its life; nor yet can a king on earth, in his own
person or immediately, administer the affairs of his king-
dom, one and all, except by higher and lower officers who
together constitute his royal body. Nor can a man’s soul
render itself visible to another, enter into companionship
with him, and communicate proofs of its love, except through
a body. How then could God do so, except through a Hu-
manity of His own ? Africans more than the others had a
perceptioif of these things when they heard them, because
they are more interiorly rational; and each favored them ac-
cording to his perception.

839. Lastly we conversed respecting the interior and
exterior man. And it was said that men who perceive
things inwardly are in light of truth, which is the light of
heaven, and that those who perceive things exteriorly are in
no light of truth, because they are in the light of the world
only; that thus interior men are in intelligence and wisdom,
but exterior men are in insanity and in distorted vision (see
n. 345); that interior men are spiritual, because they think
from the spirit raised above the body, and therefore see


1040


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 839


truths in light, hut that exterior men are sensual natural,
because they think from fallacies of the senses of the body;
therefore they see truths as in a thick cloud, and when they
revolve them in their minds they see falsities as truths; that
internal men are like those who stand on a mountain in a
plain, or on a tower in a city, or on a lighthouse in the sea;
while external men are like those who stand in a valley at
the foot of the mountain, or in a vault beneath the tower,
or in a boat under the lighthouse, and who see only what is
nearest them. Moreover, internal men are like those who
live in the second or third story of a house or palace, the
walls of which are continuous windows of clearest glass, who
look round about upon the city in its whole extent, and
know every cottage in it; while external men are like those
who live in the lowest story, the windows of which are of
parchment, who cannot even see a single street outside of
the house, but only what is within it, and this only by the
light of a candle or the fire. Furthermore, internal men are
like eagles soaring on high, which see all things spread out
beneath them; while external men, on the other hand, are
like cocks that stand on a post and crow aloud before the
hens walking on the ground. And, moreover, internal men
perceive that what they know compared with what they do
not know is as the water in a pitcher compared to that in a
lake; while external men do not perceive but that they know
all things. The Africans were delighted with what was
said, because from the interior sight in which they excel
they acknowledged that it was so.

840. The Africans being such, revelation is therefore
made among them at this day, which is spreading round
about from the place where it began, but has not yet reached
the coasts. They despise strangers coming from Europe,
who believe that man is saved by faith alone, and thus by
mere thinking and speaking, and not at the same time by
willing and doing; they say that there is no man with any
worship who does not live according to his religion, and that


No. 841]


THE JEWS


IO41


if one does not, he cannot but become stupid and wicked, be-
cause he receives nothing from heaven. Ingenious wicked-
ness they also call stupidity, because not life but death is in
it. I have several times conversed with Augustine, who
was bishop of Hippo in Africa in the third century. He
said that he is there at the present day, and is inspiring
them with the worship of the Lord, and that there is hope
of the propagation of this new gospel to the surrounding
regions. I have heard the angels rejoicing over that revela-
tion, because there is opening by it to them communication
with the human rational, hitherto closed up by the univer-
sal dogma that the understanding is to be under obedience
to the faith of the ecclesiastics.

IX. The Jews in the Spiritual World.

841. Previous to the final judgment, which took place in
the year 1757, the Jews appeared in a valley at the left side
of the Christian centre; after that they were transferred
northward, and intercourse with Christians, except with
those wandering outside of the cities, was forbidden them.
There are in that quarter two great cities into which the
Jews are transferred after death, each of which before the
judgment they called Jerusalem, but afterward by another
name; because since the judgment Jerusalem means the
church in which the Lord alone is worshipped, as to its doc-
trine. Converted Jews are placed over them in their cities,
who warn them not to speak contemptuously of Christ, and
punish those who persist in doing so. The streets of their
cities are filled with deep mud, and the houses with un-
cleanness, from which they smell so abominably that they
cannot be approached. I afterward noticed that many
others of that nation also obtained a place of abode in the
south; and when I asked who they were, I was told that they
were those who made light of the worship of the others, and
who still questioned in their own minds whether the Messiah


1042 TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION [No. 841

would ever come, and those who in the world thought from
reason about various matters, and lived according to it.
Those called the Portuguese Jews constitute the greater part
of this class.

842. An angel with a staff in his hand sometimes appears
to the Jews, above, at middle altitude, and gives them to be-
lieve that he is Moses. He exhorts them to desist from their
senseless expectation of the Messiah even there, because the
Messiah is Christ, who rules them and all men; that he
knows this, and that he also knew about Him while in the
world. When they hear this they go away. The greater
part of them forget it, but a few keep it in mind. These
few are sent to synagogues composed of converted Jews, and
are instructed; and after they have been instructed, new
clothes are given them instead of their tattered ones; and
the Word, neatly written, is given to them; also a dwelling
in the city, not inelegant. But they who do not receive are
cast down, many of them into forests and deserts, where they
steal from each other.

843. In that world as in the former the Jews traffic in
various articles, especially in precious stones, which they
obtain in unknown ways from heaven, where there are
precious stones in abundance. They traffic in precious
stones because they read the Word in the original, and hold
the sense of its letter holy; and precious stones correspond
to that sense. That the spiritual origin of those stones is
the sense of the letter of the Word, and that from this arises
their correspondence, may be seen above in the chapter on
the Sacred Scripture (n. 217, 218). They can also make
artificial stones that look like them, and induce the fantasy
that they are genuine; but those who do so are heavily fined
by their rulers.

844. The Jews are more ignorant than others that they
are in the spiritual world, but believe that they are still in
the natural world. This is because they are wholly external,
and think nothing about religion from the interior. There-


No. 845]


THE JEWS


1043


fore they also talk about the Messiah as formerly, and some
say that He will come with David, and glittering with dia-
dems will go before them and introduce them to the land of
Canaan; that on the way He will dry up the rivers they are
to cross by raising His rod, and that Christians, whom
among themselves they also call Gentiles, will then take hold
of the skirts of their garments, suppliantly beseeching to
accompany them; that they shall receive the rich according
to their abundance, and that these also will serve them. In
all this they confirm themselves by what is read in Zechariah
(viii. 23) and in Isaiah (lxvi. 20); also by what is said of
David, that he is to come and be their king and shepherd
(Jer. xxx. 9: Ezek. xxxiv. 23-25; xxxvii. 23-26). They are
utterly unwilling to hear that our Lord Jesus Christ is meant
by David there, and that by Jews those who will be of His
church are there meant.

845. When asked whether they firmly believe that they
all will come into the land of Canaan, they say that all are
then to come, and that the Jews who are dead will then rise
again, and from their sepulchres enter that land. When it
is said in return that they cannot possibly come out of sepul-
chres, because they themselves were living after death, they
reply that they are then to descend and enter their own
bodies and so live. When it is said that that land cannot
hold them all, they answer that it will then be enlarged.
When told that the kingdom of the Messiah, because He is the
Son of God, will not be on earth but in heaven, they reply
that the land of Canaan will be heaven then. When told
that they do not know where Bethlehem Ephratah is, where
the Messiah will be bom according to the prediction in
Micah (v. 2), and in David (Ps. cxxxii. 6), they answer that
still the mother of the Messiah will give birth there; and some
say that where she brings forth, there is Bethlehem. When
they are asked how the Messiah can dwell with such wicked
people, and it is proved by many passages from Jeremiah,
and especially by the song of Moses (Deut. xxxii.), that they


1044


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 845


are the worst, they answer that there are good among the
Jews as well as bad, and that the bad are meant there. When
they are told that they sprung from a Canaan itish woman
and from Judah’s whoredom with his daughter-in-law (Gen.
xxxviii.), they answer that there was no whoredom. But
when the rejoinder is made that still Judah commanded that
she should be brought and burned for whoredom, they go
away to consult about it, and after consultation they say that
he only performed the part of the husband’s brother, an
office which neither his second son Onan nor his third son
Shelah fulfilled. And to this they add that very many of
them are of the tribe of Levi who held the priesthood; and
they add, “It is enough that we are all from the loins of
Abraham.” When they are told that inwardly in the Word
there is a spiritual sense in which the Christ or Messiah is
much treated of, they answer that this is not so; and some of
them say that inwardly in the Word, or in its depths, there
is nothing but gold; and they say other like things.

846. A Relation. I was once taken up as to my spirit
into the angelic heaven, and into one of its societies. And
then some of the wise ones there came to me and said, “ What
news from earth?” I answered, “This is new, that the
Lord has revealed arcana which in excellence surpass those
revealed from the beginning of the church even until now.”
They asked, “ What are they ? ” I replied, “They are these:

1. In the whole Word and in every particular of it there is
a spiritual sense corresponding to the natural sense; by
means of that sense the Word is a conjunction of the men
of the church with the Lord, and also a consociation with
angels; and the holiness of the Word resides in that sense.

2. The correspondences of which the spiritual sense con-
sists are disclosed.” The angels asked, “ Did not the in-
habitants of the earth know correspondences before?” I
answered, that they knew nothing whatever; and that these
have been hidden now for thousands of years, that is, even
from the time of Job; but that with those who lived at that


No. 846]


THE NEW REVELATION


IO45


time and before it, the knowledge of correspondences was
the knowledge of knowledges, from which they had wisdom,
because by it they had a knowledge of spiritual things of
heaven and the church; but that as that knowledge was
turned into idolatrous knowledge, by the Lord’s Divine
Providence it was so obliterated and lost that no one has
seen any sign of it; but that yet it is now disclosed by the
Lord, that a conjunction of the men of the church with
Himself and a consociation with the angels may be made,
and this is done by means of the Word in which all things
and everything are correspondences. The angels rejoiced
exceedingly that it had pleased the Lord to reveal this great
arcanum, so deeply hidden for thousands of years; and they
said that this was done in order that the Christian Church,
which is founded on the Word, and which is now at its end,
may again revive and draw breath through heaven from the
Lord. They asked whether, by knowledge of correspond-
ences, what is signified by Baptism, and what by the Holy
Supper has at this day been disclosed, about which there
have hitherto been such various views. And I replied that
it has been. 3. I said further that the Lord has at this day
made a revelation as to life of men after death. The angel
said, “ Why about the life after death ? Who does not know
that man lives after death?” I replied, “They know and
do not know. They say that after death the man does not
live, but his soul, and that this lives as a spirit; and they
entertain an idea of spirit as of wind or ether; and they
say that one does not live as a man until after the day of
the last judgment, when the corporeal elements left in the
world, though eaten by worms, mice, and fishes, will be col-
lected together again, and again formed into a body, and
that in this way men are to rise again.” The angels said,
“ How is this ? Who does not know that man lives a man
after death, with the sole difference that he then lives a sub-
stantial man, not material as before, and that the substantial
man sees the substantial man as much as the material man


1046


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 846


sees the material, and that they know not a single differ-
ence except that they are in a more perfect state ?” 4. The

angels asked, “What do they know of our world, and of
heaven and hell ? 55 I answered that they have known
nothing, but at this day the nature of the world in which
angels and spirits live has been disclosed by the Lord, thus
the nature of heaven and hell; as also that angels and spirits
are in conjunction with men, besides many wonderful things
respecting them. The angels rejoiced that it has pleased
the Lord to disclose such things, so that man may no longer
from ignorance be in doubt as to his immortality. 5. I said
further, “ It has at this day been revealed by the Lord, that
there is in your world a different sun from that of our world;
that the sun of your world is pure love, and that of ours pure
fire; that therefore all that proceeds from your sun, because
it is pure love, partakes of life, while all that proceeds from
our sun, because it is pure fire, partakes not at all of life; and
that from this comes the distinction between the spiritual
and the natural, which distinction, hitherto unknown, has
also been disclosed. And from this has been made known
whence comes the light which illumines the human under-
standing with wisdom, and whence the heat which kindles
the human will with love. 6. Moreover it has been dis-
closed that there are three degrees of life, and hence three
heavens; that the mind of man is divided into those de-
grees, and that man therefore corresponds to the three
heavens.” The angels asked, “ Did they not know this be-
fore?” I answered that they knew of degrees between
more and less, but nothing of degrees between prior and
posterior. 7. The angels asked whether any thing else has
been revealed. I answered that many other things have
been revealed about the final judgment: the Lord as the
God of heaven and earth; that God is one in person and
essence, in whom is the Divine Trinity, and that the Lord is
this God; also about the New Church to be established by
Him, and the doctrine of this church; about the holiness


No. 848]


THE NEW REVELATION


IO47


of the Sacred Scripture; that the Apocalypse also has been
revealed; and further, many things about the inhabitants
of the planets, and the earths in the universe; besides
many memorable and wonderful things from the spiritual
world, by which much that is of wisdom has been disclosed
from heaven.

I 847. After this, speaking with the angels, I told them that
something more has been revealed in the world by the Lord.
They asked what. I said, “ Of true marriage love, and its
spiritual delights. ,, And the angels said, “Who does not
know that the delights of marriage love surpass those of all
loves? And who cannot conceive that into some one love,
since it corresponds to the love of the Lord and the; church,
are brought together all varieties of blessedness, satisfac-
tion, and enjoyment that can ever be brought together by
the Lord? also that true marriage love is their receptacle,
which can receive and perceive them even to full sensation ?”
I replied that men do not know this, because they have not
approached the Lord, and therefore have not shunned the
lusts of the flesh, and so could not be regenerated; and true
marriage love is solely from the Lord, and is given to those
who are being regenerated by Him; and these, too, are they
who are received into the Lord’s New Church which is meant
in the Apocalypse by the New Jerusalem. To this I added
that I doubt whether they are willing to believe at this day
in the world that this love is in itself spiritual, and therefore
from religion, because they cherish a mere corporeal idea of
it; and so, because it is according to religion, it is spiritual
with the spiritual, natural with the natural, and merely
carnal with adulterers.

848. The angels rejoiced exceedingly in what had been
said nowand before; but they perceived sadness in me, and
asked, “Whence is your sadness?” I told them that these
arcana revealed by the Lord at this day, though in excel-
lence and dignity surpassing all knowledge hitherto divulged,
still are regarded on earth as of no value. The angels won-


1048


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 848


dered at this, and besought the Lord that it might be allowed
them to look down upon the world; and they looked down,
and lo! mere darkness was there. And they were told that
these arcana should he written on paper, and the paper be
let down to the earth, and they would see a miracle. This
was done; and behold, the paper on which these arcana were
written was let down from heaven, and in its progress while
yet in the spiritual world it shone as a star, but when it de-
scended into the natural world the light waned, and in propor-
tion as it fell it was darkened. And when it was let down by
the angels into assemblies where men of learning and erudi-
tion were from among the clergy and laity, a murmur was
heard from many, in which were the words, “ What is this ?
Is it any thing? What matters it whether we know these
things or not? Are they not the offspring of the brain ?”
And it seemed as if some persons took the paper, and folded
it, and rolled and unrolled it with their fingers, and as if
others tore it in pieces and wished to trample it under foot.
But they were withheld by the Lord from that outrage; and
the angels were directed to withdraw the paper and guard it.
And because the angels were made sad, and thought, “How
long will this be?” it was said, “For a time , and times , and
half a time” (Apoc. xii. 14).

849. After this I heard a hostile murmur from below, and
at the same time these words: “Work miracles and we will
believe.” And I replied, “Are not those things miracles?”
It was answered, “They are not.” And I asked, “What
miracles, then ? ” They said, “ Manifest and reveal future
events, and we will have faith.” But I answered, “Such
things are not granted by the Lord, because so far as man
knows future events, his reason and understanding with
his prudence and wisdom sink into inactivity, become tor-
pid and fall.” And again I asked, “What other miracles
shall I work?” Then arose the cry, “Such as Moses
wrought in Egypt.” And I replied, “Perhaps you would
harden your hearts to them, as did Pharaoh and the Egyp-


No. 851]


THE NEW REVELATION


IO49


tians.” And they answered that they would not. And
again I said, “Assure me that you will not dance around a
golden calf and adore it, as did the posterity of Jacob a
single month after they saw all Mount Sinai burning, and
heard Jehovah Himself speaking out of the fire, thus after
a miracle which was the greatest of all;” a golden calf in the
spiritual sense is the pleasure of the flesh. And it was an-
swered from the lower regions, “We will not be like the
posterity of Jacob.” But at that moment I heard it said
to them from heaven, “If you believe not Moses and the
prophets, that is, the Word of the Lord, you will not believe
on account of miracles any more than the posterity of Jacob
did in the desert; or than they believed when with their own
eyes they saw the miracles wrought by the Lord Himself,
when He was in the world.”

850. After this I saw some persons ascending from below,
whence those things were heard, who addressing me in a
grave tone said, “Why has your Lord revealed the arcana
that you have just enumerated in a long list, to you who are
a layman, and not to some one of the clergy ? ” To which I
replied: “Such is the good pleasure of the Lord, who has
prepared me for this office from earliest youth. Neverthe-
less, I will ask you in return, Why did the Lord when in the
world choose fishermen for His disciples, and not some of the
lawyers, scribes, priests, or rabbis? Discuss this among
yourselves, conclude from judgment, and you will discover
the cause.” When they heard this, a murmur arose among
them; and after this there was silence.

851. I foresee that many who read the Relations annexed
to the chapters will believe that they are inventions of imag-
ination. But I assert in truth that they are not inventions,
but were truly seen and heard; not seen and heard in any
state of sleep, but in full wakefulness. For it has pleased
the Lord to manifest Himself to me, and to send me to teach
those things which will be of His New Church, which is
meant by the New Jerusalem in the Apoclaypse. For this


1050


TRUE CHRISTIAN RELIGION


[No. 802


purpose he has opened the interiors of my mind or spirit,
whereby it has been given me to be in the spiritual world with
angels, and at the same time in the natural world with men,
and this now for twenty-seven years. Who in the Christian
world would have known any thing of heaven and hell, if
it had not pleased the Lord to open in some one the sight of
his spirit, and to show and teach ? That such things as are
described in the Relations do appear, is manifest from simi-
lar things seen by John and described in the Apocalypse, as
also in the Word of the Old Testament by the prophets. In
the Apocalypse are these: John saw the Son of Man in the
midst of the seven candlesticks; saw the tabernacle, the
temple, the ark, and the altar, in heaven; saw a book sealed
with seven seals, saw it opened, and horses going out of it;
four animals round about the throne; twelve thousand chosen
from each tribe; locusts ascending out of the pit; a woman
bringing forth a man-child, and fleeing into the desert on
account of the dragon; two beasts, one coming out of the sea,
and the other out of the earth; an angel flying in the midst of
heaven, having the everlasting Gospel; a sea of glass mingled
with fire; seven angels having the seven last plagues; vials
poured out by them on the earth, the sea, the rivers, the sun,
the throne of the beast, the Euphrates, and the air; the
woman sitting on a scarlet beast; the dragon cast into a lake
of fire and brimstone; the white horse; the great supper; the
new heaven and new earth; the holy Jerusalem descending
out of heaven, which is described as to gates, wall, and
foundations; also the river of water of life, and trees of life
bearing fruit every month; besides other things, all seen by
John, and seen when as to his spirit he was in the spiritual
world and heaven. Add what was seen by the apostles after
the Lord’s resurrection, also what was seen later by Peter
(Acts, xi.), and seen and heard by Paul. Add to this what
was seen by the prophets of the Old Testament, as by Eze-
kiel who saw four animals which were cherubs (i. and ix.);
a new temple and a new earth, and an angel measuring them


No. 800]


THE NEW REVELATION


IOSI


(xl.-xlviii.); he was carried away to Jerusalem and saw
abominations there, and also into Chaldea (viii. and xi.).
What was similar took place with Zechariah: he saw a man
riding among myrtle trees (i. 8-1 1); four horns, and after-
ward a man with a measuring-line in his hand (i. and ii.) ;
a flying roll and an ephah (v. 1, 6); four chariots between
two mountains, also horses (vi. 1-8). So likewise with
Daniel: he saw four beasts coming up out of the sea,(vii. 1-
8); the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven, whose
dominion shall not pass away, and whose kingdom shall not
be destroyed (vii. 13, 14); the conflict between the ram and
the he-goat (viii. 1-27); he saw the angel Gabriel, and talked
with him (ix.). The servant of Elisha saw horses and char-
iots of fire round about Elisha, and this when his eyes were
opened (2 Kings vi. 17). From these and many other pas-
sages in the Word, it is evident that the things existing in the
spiritual world have appeared to many both before and
since the coming of the Lord. What marvel, then, that
they should be seen now also, when the New Church is
commencing, or the New Jerusalem is descending from
heaven?


THE AUTHOR’S INDEX TO THE RELATIONS.


I.

I heard newcomers in the spiritual world talking about three Di-
vine Persons from eternity; and then one who in the world had been
a primate opened the ideas of his thought on that mystery, saying that
it had been and still was his opinion that the three sit upon thrones in
heaven; God the Father upon a throne of finest gold, with a sceptre in
His hand; God the Son at His right hand, upon a throne of purest sil-
ver with a crown on His head ; and God the Holy Spirit upon a throne
of shining crystal, holding in His hand the dove, in which He ap-
peared when Christ was baptized; and that lamps, hanging about
them in triple order, glittered with precious stones; and that at a dis-
tance innumerable angels stand in a circle, adoring and singing praises.
He also spoke of the Holy Spirit, how He introduces faith, purifies, and
justifies. He said that many of his order favored his ideas, and he
trusted that I also as a layman gave them credit. But as an oppor-
tunity to speak was then given, I said that from childhood I cherished
the idea that God is one; I therefore explained to him what the Trinity
involves, and what is signified hy throne, sceptre, and crown, where in
the Word these are spoken of God. To which I added, that all who
believe in three Divine Persons from eternity must necessarily believe
in three Gods. And, furthermore, that the Divine essence cannot be
parted (n. 16).

II.

A discourse of angels about God, that His Divine is Divine esse in
and not from itself; and that it is One, the Same, Itself, and Indi-
visible; also that God is not in place, but with those who are in place;
and that His Divine love appears to the angels as a sun, and that the
heat from it in essence is love, and the light in essence is wisdom (n. 25).

That the proceeding Divine attributes, creation, redemption, and
regeneration, are attributes of one God, and not of three (n. 26),


1054


INDEX TO RELATIONS


III.

Since I perceived that a multitude of men are in the persuasion that
all things are of nature, and hence that nature created the universe,
in a certain academy where there were some of this kind I spoke with
a gifted one on these three things: i. Whether nature is of life, or
life of nature; 2. Whether the centre is of the expanse, or the ex-
panse of the centre; 3. As to the centre and expanse of nature and
life; that the centre of nature is the sun of the natural world, and the
expanse of this centre is the world of that sun; and that the centre of
life is the sun of the spiritual world, and the expanse of this centre is
the world of that sun. These propositions were discussed on hoth
sides, and lastly the truth was shown (n. 35).

IV.

I was led to a theatre of wisdom where angelic spirits from the four
quarters were assembled with an injunction from heaven to discuss
three arcana: 1. What is the image, and what the likeness of God.
2. Why man is not horn into the knowledge of any love, when yet the
beasts and birds are born into the knowledge of all their loves. 3.
What is signified by the tree of life and the tree of knowledge of good
and evil. And they were to join the three into one opinion, and refer
this to angels of heaven; this was done, the opinion was referred, and
was accepted by the angels (n. 48).


V.

From evil spirits just ahove hell a sound was heard like the roar of
the sea; which was from a tumult that arose among them from hearing
it said ahove them that the Almighty God hound Himself to order.
Certain ones ascending thence, addressed me sharply, saying that
since God is omnipotent He is not tied to order. And heing ques-
tioned about order, I said: 1. God is Order itself. 2. He created
man from, in, and for order. 3. He created man’s mind according
to the order of the spiritual world, and hody according to the order of
the natural world. 4. Hence it is a law of order that man from his
little heaven or spiritual world should govern his microcosm or natu-
ral world, as God from His great heaven or the spiritual world governs


dJdex to relations


loss


His macrocosm or the natural world. 5. Many other laws of order
flow from these, some of which are recited. What afterward befell
those spirits (n. 71).


VI.

On a reasoning between Hollanders and Englishmen in the spiri-
tual world on imputation and predestination. On one side, why God,
because omnipotent, does not impute the righteousness of His Son to
all, and thus make them redeemed, when yet, because He is omnip-
otent, He is able to make all satans of hell angels of heaven; yes, if
it be His pleasure, He can make Lucifer, the dragon, and all the goats,
archangels; and what is needed for this but a word ? On the other
side, that God is order itself, and that He can do nothing contrary to
the laws of His order, because to act contrary to them would be to act
contrary to Himself. Also much beside, with which they contended
on this subject (n. 72).

VTI.

I afterward spoke with others in the faith of predestination, de-
ducing it from God’s absolute power; saying that otherwise the power
of God would be less than that of a king in the world who is sole ruler,
and who can turn laws of justice as he turns his hands, and can act
absolutely, like Octavius Augustus and Nero. To which it was an-
swered, that God created the world and the things thereof, from Him-
self as order, and thus stamped order on them; also that the laws of
His order are as many as are the truths in the Word. Some of the
laws of order are then recited, what they are, and of what quality, on
God’s part, and also what on man’s part. These cannot be changed,
because God is order itself; man, too, was created an image of His
order (n. 73).

VTII.

I spoke with clergy and laymen who had gathered together, on the
Divine Omnipotence. They said that omnipotence is unlimited, and
that limited omnipotence is a contradiction. To which it was an-
swered, that there is no contradiction in acting omnipotently according
to laws of justice with judgment; and that there is no contradiction in
acting omnipotently according to laws of love from wisdom. But there
is a contradiction in God being able to act contrary to laws of justice


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IOS6

and love; and this would be to act from what is not judgment and wis-
dom; and such contradiction is involved in the faith of the present
church, that God can make what is unjust just, and glorify the impious
with all gifts of salvation and rewards of life. With much more on
this faith and omnipotence (n. 74).


IX.

While once meditating on the creation of the universe by God, I was
led in spirit to certain wise ones who at first complained of ideas ac-
quired in the world, as to the creation of the universe out of chaos, and
creation out of nothing; because these ideas obscure meditation on
the creation of the universe by God, and degrade and pervert it.
Therefore being questioned as to my opinion, I replied that it is use-
less to try to form any but a speculative conclusion about the creation
of the universe, unless it be known that there are two worlds, spiritual
and natural, and that in each of these is a sun; also that the sun of the
spiritual world, in the midst of which is God, is pure love, and that
from it are all spiritual things, which in themselves are substantial;
while the sun of the natural world is pure fire, and from it are all natu-
ral things, which in themselves are material. From knowledge of
these things one can conclude as to the creation of the universe, that it
is from God, and how. This is also slightly outlined (n. 76).

X.

Satans of hell desired to speak with angels of heaven, to convince
them that all things are from nature, and that God is but a word unless
nature be meant. They were permitted to ascend. And then angels
descended from heaven into the world of spirits to hear them. The
satans. when they saw the angels, ran to them furiously and said,
“You are called angels because you believe that there is a God, and
that nature comparatively is nothing; and yet you believe this though
it is contrary to every sense; for which of your five senses has sensation
of any thing but nature?” After these and other bitter words, the
angels reminded them that they were then living after death, and that
formerly they had not believed that they should do so; and then they
made them see the beautiful and splendid things of heaven, and told
them that these were there because all there believe in God; and after-
ward they made them see the vile and filthy things of hell, and told


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO57


them that these were there hecause they believe in nature. From
seeing these things, ^the satans were at first convinced that there is a
God and that Recreated nature; but as they descended, the love of
evil returned and closed their understanding from above; and when
this was closed they believed as before, that all things are nature’s,
and nothing God’s (n. 77).


XL

A type of the creation of the universe was shown me, to the life, by
angels. I was conducted to heaven; and it was given me to see there
all things of the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdom, similar to
the objects of those kingdoms in the natural world. And then they
said, “All these things are created in a moment by God; and they con-
tinue to exist as long as the angels are, interiorly as to thought, in the
state of love and faith;” also that this instantaneous creation evidently
testifies the creation of similar things, yes, and similar creation, in the
natural world, with the sole difference that natural things clothe spiri-
tual, and that this clothing was provided by God for the sake of the
generative processes by which creation is perpetuated. Hence, that
the creation of the universe was effected in a manner like that in which
it is effected every moment in heaven. But, however, all noxious and
hideous things in the three kingdoms of nature, and these are enu-
merated, were not created by God, but had their rise with hell (n. 78).


XII.

In a conversation about the creation of the universe, with some who
in the world were celebrated for erudition, speaking from the same
ideas which they before cherished, one of them said that nature created
itself; another, that nature gathered its elements into vortexes, and that
by the collision of these the earth was formed; and a third, that the
origin of all things was chaos, which in extent had equalled a great
part of the universe; and that first there hurst forth from it the purest
things, of which the sun and stars were formed; and afterwards those
less pure, from which originated the atmospheres; and at last the
grosser matters, from which originated the terraqueous globe. To
the question, “Whence come human souls?” they answered, that the
ether gathered itself into little individual spheres, and that these in-
fuse themselves into those about to be bom, and make their souls; and


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO58

that after death these fly away to their former company in the ether,
and afterward return into others according to the doctrine of metem-
psychosis of the ancients. After this a certain priest, by solid argu-
ments in favor of the creation of the universe by God, showed all the
things which they had said to be an absurd medley, and put them to
shame. But still they held to their delusions (n. 79).

XIII.

A conversation with a satan about God, the angelic heaven, and
religion; who, not knowing that he was not still in the former world,
said that God is the universe, and that the angelic heaven is the atmos-
pheric firmament, and that religion is but a charm for the people, be-
sides other follies. But when it was brought to his remembrance that
he was then living after death, and that he formerly did not believe in
that life, for the moment he confessed that he was insane; but as soon
as he turned and went away, he was as before (n. 80).


XIV.

I saw by night an ignis fatuus , often called a dragon, falling to the
earth. I observed the place where it fell; the ground there was sul-
phurous, mixed with iron dust. And looking there in the morning, I
saw two tents; and just then a spirit falling from heaven. I went to
him and asked why he fell from heaven. He replied that he was cast
down by the angels of Michael, for saying that God the Father and
His Son are two, and not one. He also said that the whole angelic
heaven believes that God the Father and His Son are one, as soul and
body are, and that they confirm this by many things from the Word
and moreover from reason, urging that the soul of a son is from the
father only, and that this is a likeness of the father, and that from it is
likeness in the body. And he added, that he indeed confessed in
heaven, as before on earth, that God is one; but because the confession
of the mouth and the thought of the mind disagreed as to this, they
said in heaven that he did not believe in any God, because the con-
fession and thought dissipate each other; and he said that this was the
cause of his being cast down. Returning the next day to the same
place, I saw two statues composed of the same powder, which was a
mixture of sulphur and iron, in place of the two tents. One of these
represented the faith and the other the charity of the present church,


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IOS9


both beautifully clothed; but the garments were induced by fantasies.
And because they were of that powder, when rain descended from
heaven, both began to bubhle and burn (n. no).


XV.

In the spiritual world it is not lawful for one to speak except what
he thinks; if he does, the hypocrisy is distinctly manifest. In hell,
therefore, no one can name Jesus , because Jesus signifies salvation.
In this way there was a trial to ascertain how many in the Christian
world now believe that Christ as to His Human is God. When, there-
fore, many clergy and laymen assembled, it was proposed to them to
say Divine Human; but hardly any were able to draw forth from
thought these two words at once, and so utter them. It was proved
in their presence by many things out of the Word, that the Lord even
as to His Human was God (as by those found in Matt, xxviii. r8:
John i. r, 2, 14; xvii. 2: Col. ii. 9: 1 John v. 20; and in other places
also); still they were not able to enunciate the words Divine Human;
and, what seemed surprising, neither were the Evangelical able to do
this, although orthodoxy teaches that in Christ God is Man and Man
is God; and still more, neither could the monks, though they most de-
voutly adore the body of Christ in the Eucharist. It was ascertained
from this, that Christians at present for the most part are inwardly
either Arians or Socinians; and that these, if they adore Christ as God,
are hypocrites (n. in).


XVI.

An altercation concerning the little hook entitled, A Brief Exposi-
tion of the Doctrine of the New Church , published by me at Amster-
dam; and especially as to this therein, that not God the Father, but the
Lord God the Redeemer is to be approached and adored. It was
argued that still it is said in the Lord’s Prayer, Our Father , who art in
the heavens , hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come; and that con-
sequently God the Father is to be approached. I was summoned to
end this strife; and I then proved that God the Father cannot be ap-
proached in His Divine, but in His Human; and since the Divine and
Human are in Him one Person, that the Lord is that Father; this was
confirmed from the Word; both from the Word of the Old Testament,
where the Son of God is called Father of Eternity, and in many places


io6o


INDEX TO RELATIONS


called Jehovah the Redeemer, Jehovah our Righteousness, and the
God of Israel, and from many passages of the Word of the New Testa-
ment; and thus that when the Lord the Redeemer is approached, the
Father is approached; and that then His name is hallowed, and His
kingdom comes. With much beside (n. 112).


XVII.

I saw an army on red and black horses, with the faces of the riders
turned to the horses 1 tails, and with the hinder part of the head turned
to the horses’ heads; they were crying out for battle against those who
rode on white horses. This army was from the place called Armaged-
don (Apoc. xvi. 16), and consisted of those who in youth had become
imbued with dogmas relating to justification by faith alone, and who
afterwards, being promoted to eminent offices, rejected all things of
faith and religion from the internals of their minds to the externals of
their bodies, where at last they disappeared. A description of those
seen in Armageddon. It was heard that they desired to contend with
the angels of Michael; this was permitted, but at some distance. The
disputation was concerning the meaning of the words in the Lord’s
Prayer: Our Father , who art in heaven , hallowed be Thy name; Thy
kingdom come. It was then said by the angels of Michael that the
Lord the Redeemer and Saviour is Father to all in the heavens; since
He taught, that the Father and He are one; that the Father is in Him,
and He in the Father; and that he that seeth Him seeth the Father;
that all things of the Father are in Him; also, that it is the will of the
Father that they should believe in the Son, and that those who believe
not the Son shall not see life, but that the wrath of God will abide on
them; also, that He has all power in heaven and earth; and that He
has power over all flesh; and moreover, that no one has seen or can
see God the Father, except the Son who is in the bosom of the Father;
and more besides. After this combat, some of the vanquished Arma-
geddons were cast into the abyss mentioned (Apoc. ix.), and some of
them were sent forth into a desert (n. 113).

XVIII.

I was in a temple, in which were no windows, but a large opening in
the roof, and those assembled there conversed together about Redemp-
tion, saying that redemption was made by the passion of the cross.


INDEX TO RELATIONS


1061


But when they were engaged in conversation, a black cloud covered
the opening in the roof, whence it became dark in the temple; but
afterward that cloud was dispersed by angels descending from heaven,
who then sent down one of their number into the temple to instruct
them ahout redemption. He said that the passion of the cross was
not redemption, but that redemption was the suhjugation of the hells,
the establishment of order in the heavens, and thus the restitution of
all things which were in disorder both in the spiritual and in the natu-
ral world; and that without it no flesh could have been saved. And
of the passion of the cross he said, that hy it the inmost unition with
the Father was completed, and that when it is taken for redemption,
many things unworthy of God, yes, unfit to be spoken, follow as con-
sequences; as that He passed sentence of condemnation upon the
whole human race, and that the Son took it on Himself, and thus pro-
pitiated the Father, and by intercession brought Him back to His Di-
vine essence, which is love and mercy; besides many other things,
which it is scandalous to attribute to God (n. 134)


XIX.

The sun of the spiritual world was seen, in which Jehovah God is
in His Human : and then this was heard from heaven, that God is One.
But when this descended into the world of spirits it was turned accord-
ing to the forms of the minds there, and at length into three Gods;
which also one there confirmed by this reasoning: That there is one
who created all things, another who redeemed all, and a third who
operates all; also that there is one who imputes, another who mediates,
and a third who inscrihes, and thus plants faith in man, by which he
justifies him. But because the faith of three Gods had perverted the
whole Christian Church, from perception given, I disclosed to them
what with one God is meant by Mediation, Intercession, Propitiation,
and Expiation; namely, that these four are attributes of the Human
of Jehovah God; that because Jehovah God without the Human can-
not approach man, nor be approached by man, Mediation signifies
that the Human is the intermediate; that Intercession signifies that it
mediates perpetually; that Propitiation signifies that an approach is
opened for every man to God; and that Expiation signifies that this
is also for sinners; and all these through the Human (n. 135).


1062


INDEX TO RELATIONS


XX.

I entered into an academy, where the question was discussed how
that is to be understood which is said of the Son of God, that He sits at
the right hand of the Father. As to this there were various opinions;
yet it was the opinion of all that the Son sits thus; but they were de-
bating why it was so. Then some supposed that it was done on ac-
count of redemption; some that it was from love; some, that He might
be a counsellor; some, that He, might have honor from angels; some,
because it was given Him to reign instead of the Father; some, that
His right ear may hear those for whom He intercedes. They further
debated whether the Son of God from eternity sits thus, or the Son of
God bom in the world. Having heard these things, I raised my hand,
requesting that I might be permitted to speak, and to tell what is meant
by sitting at the right hand of God. And I said that the omnipotence
of God, by the Human which He assumed, is meant; for by means of
this He wrought redemption, subjugated the hells, created a new
angelic heaven, and established a new church. That this is meant by
sitting at the right hand, I confirmed from the Word, in which power
is signified by the right hand; and afterward it was confirmed from
heaven, by the appearance of a right hand, from the power of which
and the terror of it, they became almost lifeless (n. 136).

XXI.

I was conducted in the spiritual world to a council at which were
assembled celebrated persons who lived before the Nicene council,
and were called Apostolic Fathers; also men renowned in the ages
after that council; and I saw that some of the latter appeared with
beardless chin, and in curled wigs of women’s hair; but all the former
with bearded chin, and in natural hair. Before them stood a man, the
judge and critic of the writings of this age, who commenced by a
lamentation, saying, “A man from the laity has risen up, who has
dragged down our faith out of its sanctuary, which yet is a star shining
day and night before us; but this is done because that man is blind in
the mysteries of that faith, and does not see in it the righteousness of
Christ, and thus not the wonders of its justification; when yet that
faith is in three Divine Persons, and thus in the whole God; and be-
cause he has transferred his faith to the second Person, and not to this,


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO63


but to His Human, it cannot be otherwise than that naturalism should
spring from it.” Those who lived after the Nicene council favored his
speech, saying, that it is impossible that there should be any other
faith from any other source. But the Apostolic Fathers, who lived
before that age, being indignant, related many things said in heaven
of the Nicene and Athanasian faith, which may be seen. But be-
cause the president of the council was consociated as to the spirit with
the writer in Leipsic, I addressed him, and demonstrated from the
Word that Christ, as to the Human, is God; and also from the book
of the Evangelical called Formula Concordias . , That in Christ God is
Man, and Man God; as also that the Augsburg Confession highly
approves of the worship of Him; besides other things; at which he was
silent, and turned away. Afterward I spoke with a spirit who was
consociated with an eminent man in Gottenburg, who defiled the wor-
ship of the Lord with still greater reproach. But at length both of
the scandals were declared to be lies craftily invented to turn away
men’s wills, and deter them from the worship of the Lord (n. 137).

XXII.

Smoke appeared ascending from the lower earth, and it was said
that smokes are nothing but falsities collected together. And then
some angels had a desire of exploring the falsities, which thus smoked;
and they descended, and found four companies of spirits, two of which
were of the learned and unlearned of the clergy, and two of the learned
and unlearned of the laity, who all were proving to each other that the
invisible God is to be worshipped, and that worshippers then have
holiness and are heard; otherwise if a visible God be worshipped.
Holiness and a hearing by an invisible God they confirmed by various
things; and it was made known that therefore they acknowledge three
Gods from eternity, who are invisible. But it was shown, that the
worship of an invisible God, and still more of three invisible ones, is no
worship. To confirm this, Socinus and Arius with their followers,
who had all worshipped an invisible Divinity, were brought forth
from below; who, when they spoke from the natural or external mind,
said that there is a God, though He is invisible; but when their external
mind was shut and the internal was opened, and they were forced to
make their confession about God, from this they said, “ What is God ?
We have not seen His shape, nor heard His voice. What then is God,
but a thing of reasoning, or nature?” But they were instructed that


1064


INDEX TO RELATIONS


it had pleased God to descend and assume the Human, that they
might see His shape, and hear His voice. But this was said tc them
in vain (n. 159).

XXIII.

First concerning the stars in the natural world; that perhaps they
were of the same number as the angelic societies in heaven, since every
society there sometimes shines as a star. Afterwards, I spoke with
the angels about a certain way, which appears crowded with innumer-
able spirits, and that it is the way by which all who depart out of
the natural world pass into the spiritual. To that way I went with
angels; and we called from that way twelve men, and asked what they
believed as to heaven and hell, and life after death; and because they
were recently from the world, and did not know that they were not
still in the natural world, they answered from the idea which they
brought with them. The First, That all who live morally come to
heaven; and that no one comes to hell, because all live morally. The
Second, That God governs heaven, and the devil hell; and because
they are opposite, one calls good what the other calls evil; and that the
man who is a dissembler, because he stands on the side of both, can
live equally under the dominion of one and the other. The Third,
That there is no heaven and hell. Who has come thence and told?
The Fourth, That no one could return and tell, because man when he
dies is a spectre or wind. The Fifth, That we must wait till the day
of the last judgment, and then they will tell, and you will know all
about it. But when he said this, he laughed in his heart. The Sixth,
“How can the soul of man, which is only wind, re-enter its body eaten
by worms, and be clothed with a skeleton either burnt or reduced to
dust ?” The Seventh, That men no more live after death than beasts
and birds. Are not these equally rational? The Eighth, “I believe
there is a heaven, but I do not believe there is a hell, because God is
almighty and able to save all.” The Ninth, That God, because He is
gracious, cannot send any one to eternal fire. The Tenth, That no
one can come into hell, because God sent His Son, who has made
expiation for all, and taken away the sins of all. What can the devil
do against that? The Eleventh, who was a priest, That those only
are saved, who have obtained faith, and that election is according to
the will of the Almighty. The Twelfth, who was a politician, “ I do
not say any thing about heaven and hell; but let the priests preach
about them, that the minds of the people may be kept bound by an


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO65


invisible bond to the laws and rulers.” On hearing these things, the
angels were astonished; but they waked them by instructing them that
they were now living after death; and they introduced them into
heaven, but they did not stay there long, because it was found that
they were merely natural, and that from this the hinder part of their
heads was hollow; of which hollowness and its cause, something is
said (n. 160).

XXIV.

A sound as of a mill was heard, and following the sound, I saw a
house full of cracks, into which was an entrance opening under ground,
and in it a man collecting from the Word and hooks many things on
Justification by faith alone; and scribes at his. side were writing his
collections upon paper; and to the question what he was now collect-
ing, he said, “This, that God the Father receded from grace toward
the human race, and He therefore sent the Son to make expiation and
propitiation.” To which I answered, that this is contrary to Scrip-
ture and to reason, that God could recede from grace; thus He would
also recede from His essence, and thus would not be God. And when
I proved this even to conviction, he grew warm, and commanded the
scribes to cast me out. But when I went out of my own accord, he
threw after me the book which his hand happened to seize; and that
book was the Word (n. 161).


XXV.

It was disputed among spirits whether any one can see any genuine
truth in the Word unless he goes immediately to the Lord who is the
Word itself. But because there were those who contradicted, an
experiment was made; and then those who went to God the Father,
did not see any truth; but all who went to the Lord saw. During
this disputation, some spirits ascended from the abyss, of which Apoc.
ix., where they discuss the mysteries of justification by faith alone,
saying that they go to God the Father and see mysteries in clear light.
But it was answered that they see them in false light, and that they
have not a single truth; at which being indignant, they brought from
the Word many things which were true; but it was said to them that
they were true in themselves, but falsified in them. That it was so
was proved by their being led to a house where was a table upon which
light from heaven flowed directly; and it was said to them that they


io 66


INDEX TO RELATIONS


should write those truths which they brought forth from the Word
upon paper, and lay it upon that table; which being done, that paper
on which the truths were written shone like a star; but when they
came up and fixed their eyes upon it, the paper appeared blackened as
by soot. And afterwards they were led to another similar table, upon
which lay the Word encircled with a rainbow; and when a champion
of the doctrine of faith alone touched this with his hand, an explosion
was made as from a gun, and he was cast into a corner of the room, and
lay as dead for half an hour. From these things they were convinced
that all the truths which were with them from the Word, were true in
themselves, but falsified in them (n. 162).


XXVI.

There are climates in the spiritual world, as in the natural; thus also
there are north zones where are snow and ice. Once hrought thither
in spirit, I entered a temple covered over with snow, illuminated within
by lamps, where behind the altar was seen a table, upon which was
written this, The Divine Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, essen-
tially one, but personally three. And I heard a priest preaching about
four mysteries of faith, as to which the understanding is to be kept
under the ohedience of faith. After the discourse, the hearers thanked
the priest for his sermon so full of wisdom. But when I asked them
whether they understood any thing, they answered, “We took it all in
with full ears; why ask whether we understood? Is not the under-
standing stupefied in such things?” To this the priest who was pres-
ent added, “Because you have heard and have not understood, you
are blessed, since thence is salvation,” etc. (n. 185).

XXVII.

The human mind is distinguished into three regions, like the heaven
of angels; and what is of theology with those who love truths because
they are truths resides in the highest region of the mind; and under
them, in the middle region, morals; but under these, politics; and the
various sciences make the door. But matters of theology with those
who do not love truths reside in the lowest region, and mingle there
with what is man’s own, and thus with fallacies of the senses; and hence
some cannot perceive theological things (n. 186).


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO67


xxvni.

I was brought to a place where were those meant by the false prophet
in the Apocalypse; and I was invited by those there to see their temple.
I followed and saw in it the image of a woman clothed in a scarlet
robe, holding in her right hand a golden coin, and in her left a chain
of pearls; but these things were induced by fantasy. But when the
interiors of the mind were opened by the Lord, instead of the temple
a house full of cracks was seen; and instead of the woman a beast was
seen, such as is described, Apoc. xiii. 2; and under the floor was a
quagmire, in which lay the Word, deeply concealed. But presently
the east wind blew, the temple was carried away, and the quagmire
dried up, and the Word appeared; and then, by the light from heaven,
there appeared a tabernacle like that of Abraham when the three an-
gels came and told him ahout Isaac, who would he horn; and after-
ward, light being sent forth from the second heaven, instead of the
tahemacle a temple appeared similar to that of Jerusalem; and after
this a light shone upon it from the third heaven, and then the temple
disappeared, and there was seen the Lord alone, standing upon the
foundation stone where the Word was. But because overpowering
sanctity then filled their minds, this light was withdrawn, and instead
of it, light from the second heaven was let in, from which the view of
the temple returned, and within it that of the tabernacle (n. 187).


XXIX.

A magnificent palace was seen, in which was a temple, and in this
seats were placed in three rows. To this a council was convoked by
the Lord, in which they were to deliberate about the Lord the Saviour,
and the Holy Spirit. When as many of the clergy were present as
there were seats, they opened the council. And because they were
consulting as to the Lord, the first proposition was, Who assumed the
human in the virgin Mary ? And then the angel standing at the table
read before them what the angel Gabriel said to Mary: The Holy
Spirit shall come upon thee , and the power of the Highest shall over-
shadow thee; and the Holy Thing which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God , Luke i. 35; and also from Matt. i. 20, 25. And
moreover many things from the prophets, that Jehovah Himself would
come into the world, and that Jehovah Himself is called Saviour, Re-


io 68


INDEX TO RELATIONS


deemer and Righteousness; from which it was concluded that Jeho-
vah Himself assumed the Human. Another deliberation about the
Lord, was, whether the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ are not thus
one, as soul and body are one; and this was confirmed from passages
in the Word, and from the general creed of the church; from which it
was concluded that the soul of the Lord was from God the Father, and
hence that His Human is Divine; and that this is to be approached that
the Father may be approached, since Jehovah God by it sent Himself
into the world, and made Himself visible to the eyes of men, and thus
also accessible. The third deliberation followed, which was on the
Holy Spirit; and then first the idea as to three divine Persons from eter-
nity was shaken off, and it was proved from the Word, that the Holy
Divine, which is called the Holy Spirit, proceeds out of the Lord from
the Father. At length, from what was deliberated in this council,
this conclusion was made: That in the Lord the Saviour is the Divine
Trinity, which is, the Divine from which are all things called the
Father, the Divine Human called the Son, and the proceeding Divine
called the Holy Spirit; and that thus there is one God in the church,
After the council was ended, splendid garments were given to those
who sat in it, and they were conducted to the new heaven (n. r88).

XXX.

I saw in a stable great purses, in which was silver in great abund-
ance, and young men as guards; in the next room, modest virgins with
a chaste wife; and in another room, two children; at last a harlot and
dead horses. And afterward I was instructed what each thing sig-
nified; and that by them the Word, as it is in itself, and as it is at this
day was represented and described (n. 277).


XXXI.

Writing was seen, such as is in the third heaven, which consisted of
inflected letters with curves turning upward; and it was said that the
letters in most ancient time were similar to them, when they were more
inflected than at this day; and that the letter h y added to the names of
Abram and Sarai, signifies infinite and eternal. They explained be-
fore me the sense of some words in Ps. xxxii. 2, from the letters only or
syllables there, which is. That the Lord is merciful also to those who
do evil (n. 278).


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO69


XXXII.

Before the Israelitish there was a Word, the prophetical hooks of
which were called Enunciations, and the historical, the Wars of Jeho-
vah; and besides these, one called the Book of Jasher; which three are
named in our Word: and that ancient Word was in the land of Canaan,
Syria, Mesopotamia, Arabia, Assyria, Chaldea, Egypt, Tyre, Sidon,
and Nineveh; but because it was full of such correspondences as sig-
nify celestial and spiritual things remotely, which gave rise to idolatries,
of the Divine Providence this disappeared. I heard that Moses copied
out of that Word what he related about the Creation, Adam and Eve,
the Flood, and Noah, and his three sons, but no further. That that
same Word is still reserved in Great Tartary, and they draw from it
the precepts of their faith and life, was related to me by the angels
therefrom (n. 279).

XXXIII.

Those in the spiritual world cannot appear to those in the natural
world, nor conversely; spirits and angels cannot appear to men, nor
men to spirits and angels, on account of the distinction hetween spiri-
tual and natural; or between substantial and material. It is from
this that spirits and angels have altogether different language, writing,
and thought, from men. That it is so, was manifest by living expe-
rience, which was done hy their entering to their companions, and re-
turning to me, and thus comparing. It was discovered, that there is
not one word of spiritual language similar to a word of natural; and
that their writing consists of syllables, each of which involves a mean-
ing; and that the ideas of their thought do not fall into ideas of natural
thought. The cause of these distinctions is, that spirits and angels
are in principles, but men in derivatives; or that the former are in
priors from which as causes are posteriors, and men in posteriors from
them. It was said that there is a similar distinction hetween the
language, writing, and thought, of angels of the third heaven and
those of angels of the second (n. 280).


XXXIV.

The state of men after death, in general, and the state of those who
have confirmed themselves in falsities, in particular. As to all these
the following were ohserved: x. Men are most commonly raised the


1070


INDEX TO RELATIONS


third day after death, and then do not know that they are not still in
the former world. 2. All flock into the world in the middle between
heaven and hell, called the world of spirits. 3. There they are trans-
ferred into societies, and thus are examined. 4. There the good and
believing are prepared for heaven, and the evil and unbelieving for
hell. 5. After preparation, which lasts some years, a way is opened
for the good to some society in heaven where they will live for ever, but
a way for the evil to hell; besides more things. Afterwards hell is de-
scribed; and it is stated that there those are called satans who are in
falsities from confirmation, and those devils who are in evils of life
(n. 2S1).

XXXV.

From the lower earth, next above hell, I heard shouts, O how just I
O how learned! O how wise! and because I wondered that there
should be there any just, learned, and wise, I descended, and first went
to the place where they were crying, O how just! and I saw there a
tribunal, and in it unjust judges who could dexterously pervert laws,
and turn judgments to the favor of any one; and thus their judgments
were only arbitrary; and when the sentences were carried out to the
clients, then they cried, O how just! Of these the angels afterwards
said, that such cannot see any just thing at all. After a while those
judges were cast into hell, and their books were turned to playing-
cards, and instead of judging, the office of preparing paint was given
to them, with which they daubed the faces of harlots, and turned them
into beauties (n. 332).

XXXVI.

Afterward, I went to the place where the cry was, O how learned!
and I saw those who reasoned whether a thing is or is not, and did not
think that it is so; and hence they stopped at the first step as to any
subject; thus they only touched it from without, and did not enter:
thus also they argue about God, whether there is a God. That I
might know whether they were such, I proposed to them the question,
What*must the religion be by which man is saved? They replied,
1. It is to be discussed whether religion is any thing. 2. Whether
one religion effects more than another. 3. Whether there is any eter-
nal life, and thus whether there is any salvation. 4. Whether there
are heaven and hell. And then they began to discuss the first, Whether
religion is any thing. And they said that that needed so much inves-


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO71


tigation that it could not he finished in a year; and one among them
said, that it could not in a hundred years; to which I replied that in the
mean time they were without religion. But still they discussed this
first point so artfully that the company standing hy cried, O how
learned! It was said by the angels, that such appear like images; and
that afterwards they are sent out into deserts, where among them-
selves they prate only vain things (n. 333).

XXXVIL

I went to the third company, where I heard the cry, O how wise!
and I found there assembled those who cannot see whether truth is
truth, but still can make what they please appear as truth, and hence
are called Confirmers. That they were such, I observed from va-
rious answers, as that they could make it true that faith is the all of
the church, and afterwards that charity is the all of the church, and
also that faith and charity together are the all of the church; and be-
cause they confirmed which of them they liked, and adorned them with
appearances, so that they shone like truths, therefore the bystanders
cried, O how wise! Afterward some ludicrous things were proposed,
that they might make them true; for they say that there is nothing
true, except what man makes true. The things were these: that light
is darkness, and darkness light; and that a crow is white, and not
black; which two they made appear as true; the confirmations may
be seen in the text. It was told me by angels that such do not possess
a grain of understanding, since all above the rational with them is shut
up, while all below is open; and this can confirm what it likes, but can-
not see any truth; therefore, this is not the part of an intelligent man;
but to be able to see that truth is truth and that falsity is falsity, and
to confirm it, is the part of an intelligent man (n. 334).

XXXVIII.

I spoke with spirits, who, in the natural world, were renowned from
their erudition, who among themselves disputed about connate ideas,
whether men have any, as beasts have; and then an angelic spirit
thrust himself in and said, “You are disputing about goat’s wool.
Men have no connate ideas, neither have beasts.” At which words
all grew warm. But afterwards, opportunity being given, he spoke
first concerning beasts, that they have no connate ideas: “the reason is.


1072


INDEX TO RELATIONS


that they do not think, but operate from instinct, which they have
from natural love, which makes something analogous to will with them,
flows immediately into the senses of the body, and excites that which
agrees with and favors the love; and yet ideas are predicable only of
thought.” That beasts have sensation and no thought, he confirmed
by various things, especially by the wonders which are known of
spiders, bees, and silk- worms, saying, “Does a spider think in its
head, when it forms its web, that it is to be so woven for the sake of
these uses or those ? Does a bee think in its head, From these flowers I
will suck honey, and from these I will gather wax; of this I will build
cells close to each other in the row, and in these I will put honey in
abundance that it may be sufficient for the winter? besides other
things. Does the silk-worm think in its head, Now I will betake my-
self to spinning silk, and when I have spun, then I shall fly off and
sport with my companions, and provide for myself a posterity ?” be-
sides similar things with beasts and birds. Of men he said, that every
mother and nurse, and father also, knows that infants have no connate
ideas, and that they have not ideas before they have learned to think,
and that then ideas rise and are produced according to the thought
which they imbibed by instruction; and that this is so because man
has nothing else born with him but the faculty for knowing, under-
standing, and being wise, and an inclination for loving not only him-
self and the world, but also the neighbor and God. These things
Leibnitz and Wolfius heard at a distance; and Leibnitz favored, but
Wolfius did not (n. 335).


XXXIX.

Once an angelic spirit illustrated what faith and charity are, and
what their conjunction effects. He illustrated it by comparison with
light and heat, which meet together in a third; because the light in
heaven in its essence is the truth of faith, and the heat there in its
essence is the good of charity; therefore as light without heat, such as
is in the time of winter, strips the trees of leaves and fruits, so is faith
without charity; and as light joined to heat, such as is in the time of
spring, vivifies all things, so is faith joined with charity (n. 385).

XL.

Two angels descended, one from the east where they are in love, and
the other from the south where they are in wisdom, and spoke of the


INDEX TO RELATIONS IO73

essence of the heavens, whether it is love or wisdom; and they agreed
that it is love and hence wisdom; consequently, that the heavens were
created by God, from love by wisdom (n. 386).


XLI.

After that, I entered a garden, where I was led round by a spirit,
and at length to a palace called the Temple of Wisdom. This was
square, the walls of crystal, the roof of jasper, the substructure of
precious stones. And he said that no one could enter it who did not
believe that what he knows, understands, and is wise in, compared
with that which he does not know and understand and is not wise in,
is relatively so little that it is scarcely any thing. And because I be-
lieved this, it was given me to enter; and it was seen that the whole of
it was constructed for a form of light. In that temple I related what
I had heard from the two angels as to love and wisdom; and they
asked, “Did they not also* speak of the third, which is use?” And
they said that love and wisdom without use, are only ideal entities, but
that in use they become real, and it is similar with charity, faith, and
good works (n. 387).


XLII.

One of the spirits of the dragon invited me to see the enjoyments of
his love; and he led me to an amphitheatre, upon the benches of which
sat satyrs and harlots. And he said, “Now you will see our sport.”
And he opened a door, and let in, as it were, bullocks, rams, kids, and
lambs; and presently through another door he let in lions, panthers,
tigers, and wolves, which rushed upon the flock and tore and slaugh-
tered them. But all those things were induced by fantasies. Having
seen this I said to the dragon, “After a while you will see this theatre
turned into a lake of fire and brimstone.” The sport being finished,
the dragon went out, attended by his satyrs and harlots, and saw a
flock of sheep; from which he inferred that a city of the Jerusalemites
was near; on seeing which, he was seized with the desire of taking it,
and casting out the inhabitants; but because it was surrounded with
a wall, he planned to take it by stratagem. And then he sent one
skilled in incantation, who being admitted spoke craftily with the citi-
zens about faith and charity; especially as to which of them is primary,
and whether charity contributes any thing to salvation. But the
dragon, enraged at the answer, went out and gathered together many


1074


INDEX TO RELATIONS


of his crew, and began to besiege the city; but when he was endeavoring
to reach and invade it, fire from heaven consumed them, according to
what was foretold in the Apoclaypse (xx. 8, 9) (n. 388).

XLIIL

Once a paper was sent down from heaven, in which was an exhorta-
tion to acknowledge the Lord the Saviour as the God of heaven and
earth, according to His words (Matt, xxviii. 18). But two bishops
were consulted what should be done. They said that they should
send the paper back to heaven; and when this was done, that society
sunk down, but not deep. The next day some ascended from it and
told what lot they met with there, and also that they went there to the
bishops and reproved them for their advice, and that they spoke many
things ahout the state of the church, and found fault with their doc-
trine of the Trinity, justifying faith, charity, and other things which
were of the orthodoxy of the bishops, and requested that they would
desist from them, because contrary to the Word; but to no purpose.
And because they called their faith dead and diabolical, according to
James in his Epistle, one of the bishops took off the mitre from his
head, and laid it down upon the table, saying that he would not take
it again before he was avenged upon the scoffing of his faith. But
then appeared a monster coming from below, similar to the beast de-
scribed in the Apocalypse (xiii. 1, 2), which toolothe mitre and carried
it away (n. 389).

XLIV.

I went to a house where those who were assembled were arguing,
whether the good which a man does in the state of justification by
faith is of religion or not. There was agreement that by the good
of religion is meant good which contributes to salvation. But their
opinion prevailed who said that all the' good that man does, contributes
nothing to salvation; since no voluntary good of man can be joined
with what is of free grace, because salvation is bestowed freely; that
neither can good from man be joined with Christ’s merit by which
alone salvation is given; that neither can the operation of man be
joined with the operation of the Holy Spirit, that does all things with-
out the help of man. From which it was concluded that good works,
even in the state of justification by faitb, contribute nothing to salva-
tion; but faith alone. On hearing these things, two gentiles who


INDEX TO RELATIONS


T075


stood at the door said to each other, “ These people have no religion.
Who does not know that to do good to the neighbor for God’s sake,
thus from and with God, is religion?” (n. 390).

XLV.

I heard angels lamenting that there was such spiritual destitution
in the church that they know nothing more than that there are three
Divine Persons from eternity, and that faith alone saves; and concern-
ing the Lord, only historical things; and that they are deeply ignorant
of what is related in the Word about the Lord, His unity with the
Father, His divinity and power. And they said that an angel was
sent down to see whether there was such destitution among Christians;
and that he asked one what his religion was. He answered, that it was
faith. And that then he asked him ahout redemption, regeneration,
and salvation. He answered that they all were of faith; and also of
charity that it is in faith; also, who can do good from himself ? To
whom afterward the angel said, “You answer like one who plays
one tone of a pipe: I hear only faith; but if you know nothing but that,
you know nothing.” And then he led him to his companions in a
desert, where there was not even grass. Besides more (n. 391).


XL VI.

I saw five academies surrounded with various light, and with many
others I entered the first, which was seen in flame-like light. Many
were assembled, and the president proposed that they should declare
their opinions concerning Charity: and after they had begun, the first
said that his opinion was that charity was morality inspired by faith.
The second, that it was piety inspired by piteousness. The third, that
it was to do good to every one, good and bad. The fourth, that it was
in every way to serve one’s relatives and friends. The fifth, that it
was to give alms to the poor and help the needy. The sixth, that it
was to build hospitals, infirmaries, and orphans’ homes. The seventh,
that it was to endow temples and do good to ministers. The eighth,
that it was the old Christian brotherhood. The ninth, that if was to
forgive every one his trespasses. Each of them advanced ample con-
firmations of his opinion. After this there was given an opportunity
of expressing my opinion; and I said that charity was to act from love
of justice with judgment, in every work and office, but from love from


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO76

no other source than the Lord the Saviour; and after this was shown,
I added that all those things said before by the nine celebrated men
about charity, were excellent examples of charity when done from
justice with judgment; and because justice and judgment are from
no other source than the Lord the Saviour, they are to be done by
man from Him. This was approved by most of them in the internal
man, but not as yet in the external (n. 459).

XL VII.

At a distance something like the gnashing of teeth was heard, and
with this a knocking; and I went toward the sound, and saw a small
house built of reeds plastered together; and instead of the gnashing of
teeth, and the knocking, I heard within, altercations about faith and
charity, which was the essential of the church. And those who were
for faith brought forward their arguments, saying that faith was spiri-
tual because from God, but charity natural because from man. On
the other hand, those who were for charity said that charity was spiri-
tual, and faith was natural unless joined to charity. To these things
a certain syncretist wishing to settle the dispute offered an addition,
confirming that faith was spiritual and charity only natural. But it
was said that moral life was of two kinds, spiritual and natural, and
that in the man who lives from the Lord it is spiritual moral, but in the
man who does not live from the Lord it is natural moral, such as is
with the evil and sometimes with spirits in hell (n. 460).

XL VIII.

In spirit I was brought into a garden in the south, and saw some
sitting under a laurel, eating figs. I asked them how they under-
stood that man can do good from God, and still as from himself.
And they answered that God works good inwardly in man ; but if man
does it from his own will and understanding, he defiles it so that it is no
longer good. But to this I said that man is only an organ of life, and
that if he believes in the Lord, he may do good of himself from Him;
but if he does not believe in the Lord, and still more, if he does not
believe in any God, he may do good of himself from hell; and further,
that the Lord has given to man free-will in doing from the one or the
other. That the Lord has given this freedom was confirmed from the
Word, in that' He commanded man to love God and the neighbor, to


INDEX TO RELATIONS


1077


produce the goods of charity as a tree produces fruits, and to do His
commandments that he may be saved, and that every one would be
judged according to his deeds; and that all these would not have been
commanded if man could not do good of himself from God. After
these things were said, I gave them branchlets from a vine, and the
shoots in their hands put forth grapes. And more beside (n. 461).

XLIX.

I saw a magnificent dock, and in it vessels large and small, and upon
the decks, boys and girls, waiting for tortoises to rise out of the sea;
and when they emerged, I saw that they had two heads : one, which at
pleasure they drew back into the shell of the body, and another which
appeared in form as a man, and from this they spoke with the hoys and
girls; and these on account of their elegant discourses caressed them
and gave them presents. When these had been seen, what they signi-
fied was explained by an angel; namely, that there are men in the
world, and hence spirits after death, who say that God does not see
any thing thought and done by those who have acquired faith, but
only looks at the faith, which He has hid in the interiors of their minds;
and that those same persons, before the congregations in temples,
bring forth holy things from the Word as others, hut these from the
greater head which appears as a man, in which they then insert the
little one, or draw it into the body. The same persons afterward were
seen in the air in a vessel flying with seven sails, and those in it in
laurels and purple garments, crying that they were the chief of the wise
of the clergy; but the things seen were images of pride flowing from
the ideas of their mind. And when they were on the earth I spoke
with them, first from reason and afterward from the Sacred Scripture;
and by many things I showed that their doctrine was unsound, and,
because contrary to the Sacred Scripture, from hell. Also, that after-
ward they were seen in a sandy place, in rags, and girt about the loins
with fishers' nets, through which their nakedness appeared; and at
last they were sent down to a society bordering on the Machiavelians
(n. 462).

L.

An assembly was called which sat in a round temple. There were
altars at the sides, by which the members sat, but there was no primate
there; therefore each one rushed forth into the midst, and spoke out


1078


INDEX TO RELATIONS


the feelings of his mind. And there was begun a discourse about
free will in spiritual things. And the first, cried that man had no
more free will in those things than Lot’s wife when turned into a
statue of salt. The second, that he had no more than a heast or dog.
The third, that he had no more than a mole, or a bird of night in the
daytime. The fourth, that if man had free will in spiritual things, he
would become a maniac and believe himself to he as God who can re-
generate and save himself. The fifth read from the book of the
Evangelical, called Formula Concordia , that man has no more free
will in spiritual things than a stock or stone, and that he has no ahility,
to understand, think, will, and not even to apply and accommodate
himself to receive what is spiritual; besides other things, of which
above (n. 464). After these things were said, there was also given me
opportunity of speaking; and I said, “What else is man, without free
wall in spiritual things, than a brute ? And without it, to what purpose
is all theology?” But they replied, “Read our theology, and you
will not find therein any thing spiritual, and you will find that this is so
concealed within that not a shadow of it appears. Therefore, read
what our theology teaches on justification, that is, on remission of sins,
regeneration, sanctification, and salvation; you will not see there any
thing spiritual because they flow in through faith, without conscious-
ness on man’s part. It has also removed charity far from what is
spiritual, and repentance also from contact with it. And besides, as
to redemption, it attributes to God purely natural human properties,
as that He included the race under universal damnation; that the Son
took that upon Himself, and thus propitiated the Father; and what
else are intercession and mediation with the Father? From these
things it is evident that there is nothing spiritual in all our theology,
and not even what is rational, but merely what is natural below them.”
But then suddenly a thunderbolt was heard from heaven, and the
members of the assembly being terrified, rushed forth, and each fled
home (n. 503).

LI.

I spoke with two spirits, one of whom loved what is good and true,
and the other what is evil and false; and I found that hoth enjoyed a
similar faculty of thinking rationally. But when he who loved what
is evil and false was left to himself, I saw smoke that ascended from
hell and extinguished the light which was above his memory; but when
he who loved what is good and true was left to himself, I saw that a


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO79


gentle flame descended from heaven and illumined the region of his
mind ahove the memory, and hence also the things below it. After-
wards I spoke with him who loved what is evil and false concerning
free will in spiritual things; and at the mention of it he grew warm,
and cried that no one can move foot or hand to do spiritual good, or
tongue and mouth to speak spiritual truth, and thus that he cannot
apply and accommodate himself to receive any such thing. “Is not
man in such things dead, and merely passive ? How can what is dead
and merely passive do good and speak truth of itself ? Does not our
church say so?” But the other, who loved what is good and true,
spoke thus of free will in spiritual things: “What would the whole
Word he without it? And what the church, religion, the worship of
God, thus the ministry, without it ? And from the light of my under-
standing, I know that man without spiritual freedom would not he
man but beast; for that he is man, and not beast, is from that freedom;
and moreover, that man without free will in spiritual things would not
have life after death, thus not eternal life, because no conjunction with
God; therefore, to deny it is the part of those who are insane in spiri-
tual things.” Afterward there was seen a fiery serpent upon a tree,
which reached fruit therefrom to him who denied free will in spiritual
things; which being eaten, there appeared smoke ascending from hell,
which extinguished the higher part of his rational mind as to light
(n. 504).

LII.

A grating noise was heard as of two mill-stones grinding each other,
and I went to where the sound began and saw a house in which were
many cells, in which the learned of this age were sitting and confirming
justification by faith alone; and going to one, I asked what he was now
studying. He answered, “The Act of Justification which is the head
of all things of doctrine in orthodoxy.” And I asked whether be knew
any sign to tell when justifying faith enters, and when it has entered.
And he said, that this was done passively, and not actively. To
which I replied, “If you take away what is active in it, you also take
away receptivity; and thus that act would be only something ideal,
called a thing of reasoning, and thus nothing more than the statue, Lot’s
wife, tinkling from salt when scratched with a scribe’s pen or his finger
nail.” The man growing warm took a candlestick, to throw at me;
but the light being extinguished he threw it at his companion (n. 505).


io8o


INDEX TO RELATIONS


LIII.

Two flocks were seen, one of goats and the other of sheep; but when
they were viewed closely, instead of goats and sheep, men were seen;
and it was perceived that the flock of goats consisted of those who
make faith alone saving, and the flock of sheep, of those who make
charity and at the same time faith. To the inquiry why they were
there, those who were seen as goats said that they were sitting as a
council, since it was disclosed to them that the saying of Paul, that
man is justified by faith without the works of the law (Rom. iii. 28)
is not rightly understood; since by faith there, is not meant the faith
of this day, but faith in the Lord the Saviour; and hy the works of the
law are not meant the works of the law of the Decalogue, hut the works
of the Mosaic law which were rituals; which also was shown. And
they said that they concluded that faith produces good works as a tree
produces fruit. Those who constituted the sheep favored them; hut
then an angel, standing between the two flocks, cried to the flock of
sheep, “Do not listen, because they have not receded from their
former faith.” And he divided the flock of sheep into two, and said
to those on the left hand, “Join yourselves to the goats; but I tell you
beforehand that a wolf is about to come which will seize them and you
with them.” But then inquiry was made how they understood that
faith produces good works as a tree produces fruit; and it was found
that their perception as to the conjunction of faith and charity was
different from that comparison, and thus that it was fallacious speak-
ing. When these things were understood, the flocks of sheep reunited
themselves into one, to which some of the goats joined themselves,
confessing that charity is the essence of faith, and that thus faith sepa-
rate from it is only natural, but conjoined it becomes spiritual (n. 506).

LIV.

A discourse with angels concerning the three loves, which are uni
versal, and thence with every man; which are love of the neighbor, or
love of uses, which in itself is spiritual; love of the world, or love of
possessing wealth, which in itself is material; and love of self, or love
of ruling over others, which in itself is corporeal; and that when those
three are rightly subordinated with man, he is truly man; and that they
are rightly subordinated when love of the neighbor makes the head,


INDEX TO RELATIONS


1081


love of the world the body, and love of self the feet: it is otherwise
when their seat with man is contrary to order. And it was ^hown
what man is when love of the world makes the head, and what he is
when love of self makes it; then he is an inverted man; as to the interiors
of his mind a wild beast, and as to its exteriors of the body, a stage-
player. After this a certain devil was seen ascending from helow,
having a dark face with a white circle round the head; and he said that
he was Lucifer, though he was not; and that, in his internals, he was a
devil, but in his externals an angel of light: and he told that in ex-
ternals he was moral among the moral, rational among the rational,
yes, spiritual among the spiritual; and that when he was in the world
he preached; and that then he uttered imprecations against evil doers,
and that hence he was called Son of the Morning; and, what he him-
self wondered at, that when he was in the pulpit he perceived no other-
wise than that it was as he spoke; but otherwise when he was out of
the temple. He said the reason was, that in the temple he was in his
externals and then in the understanding only, but out of the temple in
his internals and then in the will; and thus that the understanding
raised him into he.aven, but the will drew him down into hell; but that
the will prevails over the understanding, because the former disposes
the latter at its beck and nod. After this the devil who pretended to
be Lucifer slipped into hell (n. 507).


LV.

There was seen a square temple, the roof of which was crown-
shaped, the walls continuous windows of crystal, the gate of pearly
substance: in it there was a pulpit, on which was the Word encom-
passed with a sphere of light. In the middle of the temple was the
shrine, before which was a veil, but lifted now, where stood a cherub
with a sword vibrating in his hand. After these things were seen, it
was explained what they each signified. Above the gate was this
writing, Now it is lawful; which signified, that now it is lawful to enter
under standingly into the mysteries of faith; and it was given me to
perceive that it was dangerous to enter with the understanding into
dogmas of faith which are from one’s own intelligence and hence in
falsities, and still more to confirm them from the- Word; and that,
therefore, by the Divine Providence the Word was taken from the
Roman Catholics, and that with Protestants it is shut up by their
dogma that the understanding is to be kept under obedience to their


1082


INDEX TO RELATIONS


faith. But because the doctrines which are of the New Church are all
from the Word, that into them it is lawful to enter with the understand-
ing, because they are continuous truths from the Word, which also
shine before the understanding. This was what is meant by the
writing above the gate, Now it is lawful, and by the veil of the shrine
being lifted, within which stood a cherub. After this there was
brought to me a paper from an infant who was an angel in the third
heaven, on which was written, Enter hereafter into the mysteries of
the Word which has been heretofore shut up; for its several truths are
so many mirrors of the Lord (n. 508).


LVI.

I was seized with a grievous disease, from the smoke which came
in from the Jerusalem called Sodom and Egypt (Apoc. xi. 8); and I
was seen by those in that city as dead; and they said one to another
that I was not worthy of burial, just as it is said of the two witnesses
in the same chapter in the Apocalypse; and meanwhile I heard blas-
phemies in abundance from the citizens, on account of my having
preached repentance, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. But be-
cause judgment came upon them, I saw that that whole city fell and
was overflowed with waters; and afterward that they were running
about among heaps of stones, and lamenting their lot; when yet they
believed that, by the faith of their church, they were born again and
thus righteous. But it was said to them that they were any thing but
such, since they had never performed actual repentance; and that
therefore they did not know one damnable evil with them. After-
ward it was said to them from heaven, that faith in the Lord and re-
pentance are the two means of regeneration and salvation; and that
this was well known from the Word, and moreover, from the Deca-
logue, Baptism, and the Holy Supper (n. 567).

LVII.

All who after death come into the spiritual world, at first are kept
in externals, in which they were in the natural; and because most
while in externals live morally, frequent temples, and pray to God,
they helieve that they shall certainly come into heaven; but they are
instructed that every man after death puts off the external man, and
the internal man is opened, and then the man is known, as he is in


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO83


himself, since man is man from the will and understanding, and not
merely from action and speech; and that hence it is that man can in
externals appear as a sheep, although in internals he is a wolf; and
that he is such in his internal man, unless he explores the evils of his
will and hence of the intention, and repents of them; besides more
(n. 568).


Lvni.

Every love breathes forth enjoyment, but enjoyments from loves are
but little felt in the natural world, but manifestly in the spiritual; and
in this they are sometimes turned into odors; then it is perceived what
the enjoyments are, and of what love; and enjoyments from the love
of good, such as are in heaven, are perceived as fragrances in gardens
and flower beds; and on the other hand, enjoyments from the love of
evil, such as are in hell, as fetid smells from stagnant waters and cess-
pools; and hecause they are so opposite, the devils are tortured when
they perceive any sweet odor from heaven, and on the other hand the
angels are tortured when perceiving any ill-smelling odors from hell.
That it is so, was confirmed by examples. This is why the oil of
anointing was prepared from fragrant things, and why it is said of
Jehovah that He smelled a sweet savor from burnt-offerings; and on the
other hand, why it was commanded the sons of Israel that they should
carry unclean things out of their camp, and that they should bury their
excrements, for the camp represented heaven, and the desert outside
represented hell (n. 569).


LDC.

A novitiate spirit, who in the world meditated much on heaven and
hell, desired to know the quality of the one and the other, and it was
said to him from heaven, Inquire what enjoyment is, and you will know.
Therefore going away he inquired, but among spirits merely natural
in vain. But he was led to three companies in order; to one where
they explored ends, and hence were called wisdoms; to another where
they investigated causes, and hence were called intelligences; and to a
third where they examined effects, and hence were called knowledges;
and by them he was instructed that every angel, spirit, and man has
life from the enjoyment of his love; and that the will and thought can-
not move at all, except from the enjoyment in some love; and that this
is to every one that which is good. And, that the enjoyment of heaven


1084


INDEX TO RELATIONS


is the enjoyment of doing good, and that the enjoyment of hell is the
enjoyment of doing evil. That he might he further instructed, a
devil ascended, and in his presence described the enjoyments of hell,
that they were the enjoyments of revenging, committing whoredom,
defrauding, and blaspheming; and that those things when perceived
there as odors, are perceived as balsams; whence he called them the de-
lights of their nostrils (n. 570).


LX.

A company of spirits was seen praying to God that He would send
angels to instruct them about various things of faith, hecause in most
things they hesitated, since churches so differ one from another, and
all their ministers say, “Believe us; we are the ministers of God, and we
know.” And angels appeared, whom they questioned respecting char-
ity and faith, repentance, regeneration, God, the immortality of the
soul, and Baptism and the Holy Supper; to each of which the angels
gave such answers that they fell into their understanding; saying
further that all that which does not fall into the understanding is like
what is sown in sand, which, however watered by rain, still withers;
and that the understanding, closed from religion, no longer sees any-
thing in the Word from the light which is from the Lord; yes, that if
one reads it he hecomes more and more blind in what is of faith and
salvation (n. 621).

LXI.

How man, when prepared for heaven, enters it; namely, that after
preparation he sees a way which leads to the society in heaven in which
he is to live to eternity; and that near the society there is a gate which
is opened; and that after entrance it is inquired whether there are in
him similar light and heat, that is, similar good and truth, to those in
that society. When this is ascertained he goes about and inquires
where his house is; for there is for every novitiate a new house; when
this is found, he is received and numbered as one among them. But
those in whom there is not the light and heat, that is, the good and
truth of heaven, have this hard lot, that when they enter they are
miserably tortured, and from torture cast themselves down headlong.
This happens to them from the sphere of the light and heat of heaven,
in the opposite of which they are; and they afterwards no longer desire
heaven, hut are consociated with their like in hell. Hence it is mani-


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO85

fest that it is vain to think that heaven is only admission from favor,
and that those who are admitted come into the joys there, like those in
the world who enter into a house where there is a wedding (n. 622).

LXII.

Many who believed that heaven was only admission from favor, and
after admission eternal joy, by permission ascended into heaven; but
because they could not bear the light and heat, that is, the faith and
love there, they cast themselves down headlong; and then they were
seen by those who stood below as dead horses. Among those who
stood helow and saw them thus, were hoys with their master; and he
instructed them what appearing as dead horses signified, and then
who at a distance so appear; saying that they are those who when they
read the Word think materially and not spiritually of God, the neigh-
bor, and heaven; and that those think materially of God who think
from person as to essence; in regard to the neighbor, from the face and
speech as to quality; and in regard to heaven, from place as to the
state of love there; but that those think spiritually who think of God
from essence, and thence of person; of the neighbor from quality, and
hence of the face and speech; and of heaven from the state of love
there, and hence of place. And afterward he taught them that a
horse signifies the understanding of the Word; and because the Word
with those who think spiritually when they read it, is living, that there-
fore those appear at a distance as live horses; and on the other hand,
because the Word with those who think materially when they read it,
is dead, that these at a distance appear as dead horses (n. 623).

LXIII.

An angel was seen with a paper in his hand, on which was written
the Marriage of Good and Truth, descending from heaven into the
world; and it was seen that that paper shone in heaven, but in its
descent gradually less and less, until neither the paper nor the angel
appeared, except only before some unlearned ones of simple heart:
before these the angel explained what the marriage of good and truth
involves, namely, that all things in the whole heaven and the whole
world contain them both at the same time, because good and truth in
the Lord God the Creator make one; and that therefore there is no-
where any thing which by itself is good, nor any thing which by itself


io 86


INDEX TO RELATIONS


is true; consequently that in every thing is a marriage of good and
truth, and in the church a marriage of charity and faith, since charity
is of good and faith is of truth (n. 624).

LXIV.

When in profound thought on the second coming of the Lord, I saw
heaven from the east to the west luminous, and heard from the angels
a glorification and celebration of the Lord, but from the Word, as well
the prophetic Word of the Old Testament, as the apostolic of the
New. The passages themselves by which the glorifications were
made (n. 625).

LXV.

In the northeast are places of instruction; and those who receive
instructions interiorly are there called disciples of the Lord. Once
when in the spirit, I asked the teachers whether they knew the uni-
versals of heaven and of hell; and they answered that the universals of
heaven were three loves, which are love of uses, love of possessing the
goods of the world from the love of doing uses, and true marriage love;
and that the universals of hell were three loves opposite to those three,
which are love of ruling from love of self, love of possessing the goods
of others from love of the world, and licentious love. It is described
what the first infernal love is, which is love of ruling from love of self;
that it is such with the laity that, when reins are given to it, they wish
to rule over all things of the world, and with the clergy, that they wish
to rule over all things of heaven. That there is such fantasy with
those in that love, was confirmed by the like in hell, where such are in
a certain valley, who find enjoyment for their minds in the fantasies
that they are emperors of emperors, or kings of kings; and elsewhere
that they are gods: and it was seen that at the sight of these latter, the
former who were of so lofty a mind fell on their knees and adored.
Afterward I spoke with two, one of whom was the prince of a certain
society in heaven, and the other was the high priest there; who said
that with those in that society there are magnificent and splendid
things, because their love of ruling is not from love of self, but from
love of uses; and that they are surrounded with honors and accept
them not for the sake of themselves but for the sake of the good of
obedience. I then asked them, “How can any one know whether he
does uses from love of self, or of the world, or from love of uses, since


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO87


all the three do uses ? Let it be supposed that there is a society com-
posed only of satans, and a society composed only of angels, and I can
imagine that the satans, from love of self and the world, would do as
many uses in their society as the angels would in theirs; who, then, can
know from which love the uses are?” To this the prince and priest
replied, “Satans do uses for the sake of fame, that they may be raised
to honors and gain wealth, but angels do uses for the sake of uses; but
these are discriminated from those by this, that every one who believes
in the Lord and shuns evils as sins does uses from the Lord, and thus
from love of uses; but that every one who does not believe in the Lord
and does not shun evils as sins does uses from himself and for the sake
of himselr, thus from love of self or of the world” (n. 66 r).

LX VI.

I entered a grove and saw two angels conversing. I went to them,
and they were speaking of the lust of possessing all things of the world;
and it was said that many who in actions appear moral, and in con-
versation rational, are in the madness of that lust, and that that lust is
turned into fantasies with those who indulge ideas of it. And be-
cause every one is permitted to delight in his fantasy in the spiritual
world, provided he does no evil to another, there are congregations of
such in the lower earth; and because it was known where they were,
we descended and went to them; and we saw that they were sitting at
tables, upon which was a great plenty of gold coin, and it was said that
this was the wealth of all in the kingdom; but it was only an imaginary
vision, called fantasy, by which they made that appearance. But
when it was said to them that they were insane, when turned away
from the tables they confessed that it was so; but because that vision
delighted them, they could not but go in by turns, and favor the allure-
ments of the senses. To this they added, that if one steals from an-
other his goods, or does other evil, he falls down into some prison under
them, and is kept there to labor for food, clothing, and little pieces of
money; and if they do evil there, they are deprived of those things and
punished (n. 662).

LX VII.

A dispute was heard between an ambassador and two priests,
whether intelligence and wisdom, and thus prudence, were from God
or from man. The ambassador insisted that they were from man,


io88


INDEX TO RELATIONS


but the priests that they were from God. But it was perceived by
angels that the priests inwardly believed the same as the ambassador,
namely, that intelligence and wisdom, and hence prudence, were from
man; therefore that it might be manifest, the ambassador was re-
quested to take off the garments of his office, and put on the garments
of the priesthood; when this was done the ambassador began to con-
firm by many things that all intelligence and prudence is from God.
And afterward the priests also were requested to take off their gar-
ments, and put on the garments of ministers of state; and when this
was done the priests spoke from the interior self, saying that all intel-
ligence and prudence is from man. The cause of their speaking so
was, that a spirit thinks himself such as the garment is. After this
the three became friends; and as they conversed together they went the
way downwards; but afterward I saw them returning (n. 663).

LXVIII

The subject is of those who in the Word are called the elect; and it is
shown that they are those who, after death, are found to have lived a
life of charity, and are separated from those who have not lived that
life; and thus by the elect are meant those who are then elected and
prepared for heaven. Therefore to believe that only some, before
birth or after it, are elected and predestined to heaven, and not all
because all are called, would be to accuse God of inability to save, and
of injustice (n. 664).

LXIX.

It was said in heaven by a newcomer, that no one in the Christian
world knows what conscience is; and because angels did not believe
this, they said to a spirit that he might with a trumpet call together
the intelligent, and ask them whether they know what conscience is.
And so it was done; and they came, and among them were politicians,
scholars, physicians, and priests. And then first the politicians were
asked what conscience was. They answered that it was pain from
fear in the apprehended or actual loss of honor or wealth; or that it
was from a hypochondriacal humor from undigested substance in the
stomach; and more besides. Afterward, they asked the scholars what
they knew about conscience. They answered that it was sadness and
anxiety infesting the body and hence the head, or the head and hence
the body, from various causes, especially from applying the mind to


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO89


one thing, which is especially when the reigning love suffers; whence
sometimes are fantasies and deliriums, and with some hrain-sick
scruples in religious matters, called remorse of conscience. Next the
physicians were asked what conscience was. And they said that it
was only pain arising from diseases, which they enumerated in abund-
ance; also that they had cured many by drugs. The diseases from
which the pains called those of conscience spring may he seen enum-
erated. At last the priests were asked what conscience was. They
said that it was the same with the contrition which precedes faith, and
that they had cured it by the gospel; and, moreover, that there are
conscientious persons of every religion, true as well as fanatical, who
make scruples in matters of salvation, also in matters of no conse-
quence. The angels from hearing these things perceived that it was
true that no one knew what conscience was; therefore they sent down
one from themselves to teach. He standing in the midst said that
conscience is not a pain, as all imagined, hut a life according to re-
ligion; and that that life is especially with those who are in the faith of
charity; and that those who have conscience speak from the heart
what they speak, and do from the heart what they do, which he illus-
trated by examples. Therefore, when it is said of any one that he has
a conscience, it is meant that he is just; and conversely. These things
being said, those called together divided into four hodies: those who
understood and favored the words of the angel passed into one; those
who did not understand hut still favored, into another; those who
would not understand, saying to each other, “What have we to do
with conscience ? ” into a third; and those who scoffed, saying, “What
is conscience but flatulence?” into the fourth. After this, the two
latter hodies were seen to go to the left, and the two former to the right
(n. 665, 666).


LXX.

I was led to the place where resided the sophi who were once in
Greece, which place they called Parnassium; and it was said to me
that they send out some to call newcomers from the world and in-
quire something ahout wisdom, how it is at this day on earth. And
then two Christians were found and brought, who were asked, “What
news from earth?” And they answered that this was new; that they
had found human beings in the woods, perhaps left there in childhood;
and that they appeared from the face as human, hut that still they were


1090


INDEX TO RELATIONS


not; and that from them they concluded in the world, that man was no
more than a beast, only that he could articulate sound, and thus speak;
and that a beast could become wise if endued with the faculty of ex-
pressing articulate sounds; besides more. The sophi hearing these
things drew many conclusions respecting wisdom, what changes it had
undergone since their times; especially from this, that they do not now
know the distinction between man and beast, nor even that man is
bom only the form of man, and that he becomes man by instructions,
and according to the instructions he receives; that he becomes wise
from truths, insane from falsities, and inwardly a beast from evils;
and that he is only born a faculty for knowing, understanding, and
becoming wise, that he might be a suhject into which God might in-
spire wisdom, from the first degree of it to the highest; saying further,
that from the newcomers they comprehended that wisdom which in
their time was in its rise, is at this day setting. Afterward they in-
structed the newcomers whence it is that man, created a form of God,
could be turned into the form of the devil (n. 692).

LXXI.

A meeting was again appointed in the place where the sophi were,
since they heard from those sent by them that they had found three
newcomers from the earth, one a priest, another a politician, and a
third a philosopher; these were brought and were presently asked.
What news from earth? And they replied, “This is new, that a cer-
tain man says that he speaks with angels and spirits; and he relates
many things about their state, and among them that man lives a man
after death as before, only with the difference that he is then clothed
with a spiritual body, but before with a material body.” On hearing
which they asked the priest what he had thought about those things on
earth. He replied that because he had helieved that man was not to
live before the day of judgment, he with the rest of his order sup-
posed the man’s relations to have been visions, and afterward fictions,
and that at last he was in doubt. Then he was asked whether the
inhabitants of the earth could not see from reason that man lives a
man after death, and thus dissipate paradoxical notions about the
state of souls in the mean time, which are, that souls meanwhile fly
about like winds in the universe, and continually expect the judgment
that they may coalesce with their hodies, which lot would be worse
than the lot of a heast. To which the priest replied that they talk,


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO91


but do not convince; and that they ascrihe the reunion of souls with
their bodies and skeletons in the sepulchre to the omnipotence of God;
and when they name omnipotence, and also faith, all reason is ban-
ished. Afterward the politician being questioned, replied that in the
world he could not believe that man would live after death, since all of
man lies dead in the sepulchre, and thus he thought that that man saw
spectres and believed that they were angels and spirits; but that now
for the first time he was convinced, by the senses themselves, that he
lives a man as before, and that he was ashamed of his former thoughts.
The philosopher related similar things of himself, and some of his
school; and moreover that he referred those things which he had
heard respecting the things seen and heard by that man, to a place
among the opinions and hypotheses which he had collected from
ancients and modems. On hearing these things the sophi were
astonished, especially that Christians, who are in light above others
from revelation, should he in such darkness respecting the life after
death; when yet they and the wise men of their time knew and be-
lieved in that life; saying further that they observed that the light
of wisdom since that age had lowered itself from the interiors of the
brain to the mouth under the nose, where it appears as brightness
of the lip, and the speech of the mouth appeared as wisdom. To
this a tyro added, “How stupid are the minds of those who dwell on
the earth! Would that the disciples of Democritus who laughed at
every thing and the disciples of Heraclitus who wept at every thing
were here, and we should hear much laughing and weeping.” Cop-
per plates on which hieroglyphics were engraved were given to the
newcomers, and they departed (n. 693).

LXXII.

Newcomers were found, and were brought to the city under Par-
nassium, and were asked, What news from earth? And they an-
swered that in the world they had believed that after death there would
he entire rest from labors, and yet they heard, when they were coming
hither, that there are here administrations, offices and employments,
as in the former world, and thus that there is no rest. To this the
wise ones replied, “Thus you believed that now you are to live in
mere idleness, when yet from idleness come languor, torpor, stupor,
and sleep of the mind, and thence of the whole body, which are death
and not life.” And then they were led around in the city, and to ad-


1092


INDEX TO RELATIONS


ministrators and workmen; on seeing which, they wondered that there
should he such things, as they had also believed that there would be
some empty place in which souls were to live before the new heaven
and earth arise. And they were instructed that all things which here
appear hefore the eyes are substantial and are called spiritual, and that
all things in the former world are material and are called natural; and
that there is this distinction because they are from different origins;
namely, that all things in this world exist and subsist from a sun which
is pure love, and all things in that world from a sun which is pure fire.
And, moreover, they were instructed that in this world there are not
only administrations, hut also pursuits of every kind, and also writings
and books. The newcomers were gratified by these instructions; and
when they were going away, some virgins came with pieces of em-
broidery and netting, their handiwork, and gave to them; and they
sung before them an ode which expressed with angelic melody the
affection for works of use with its charms (n. 694).

LXXIII.

I was introduced into an assembly where some ancient philosophers
were present, and was asked what they in' my world knew of influx.
To which I answered, that they knew of no other than of an influx
of the light and heat of the sun into the things of nature, as well into
the animate as into inanimate, and that they did not know any thing
of the influx of the spiritual world into the natural, when yet from that
influx are all the wonderful things beheld, hoth in the animal kingdom,
and also in the vegetable kingdom, and hecause they do not know this
influx, they confirm themselves in favor of nature, and become natu-
ralists, and at length atheists (n. 695).


LXXIV.

I spoke with followers of Aristotle, Descartes, and Leibnitz, of
physical influx, occasional influx, and pre-established harmony, and
heard how each confirmed his hypothesis; and since they were not able
to look into that subject with the understanding above confirmations,
but only below them, they ended the dispute by lot, which came out in
favor of spiritual influx, which to some extent coincides with occa-
sional influx (n. 696).


INDEX TO RELATIONS


1093


LXXV.

I was brought into a certain academy in which the young were ini-
tiated into various things of wisdom, which was by the discussion of
some subject proposed by the president there; and the subject then
under discussion was. What is the soul, and of what quality ? There
was a desk into which those ascended who were to answer. And
presently one ascended, who said that no one since the creation of the
world had been able to find out what the soul is, and of what quailty:
but because they knew that the soul was in man, it was inquired where
it was; that there was one who thought that it has its seat in a little
gland called the pineal gland, and situated between the two brains;
and that he believed this at first; but because it was rejected by many,
he also afterward receded. After this the second ascended, and said
that he believed the seat of the soul to be in the head, since the under-
standing is there; but because he could not divine where it resided, he
acceded now to the opinion of those who said that its seat was in the
ventricles of the brain; now to that of those who said it was in the
striated bodies; now to that of those who said that it was in the medul-
lary or cortical substance; and now to that of those who said that it
was in the dura mater; to which he added that he left it to every one to
think what he likes. The third said that the seat of the soul was in
the heart and thence in the blood; and this he confirmed from the
Word, where it is said, heart and soul. The fourth said that from
his childhood he had believed with the ancients that the soul was not
in one part but in the whole, because it is a spiritual substance, of
which place cannot be predicated, but fulness; and further because by
soul is also meant life, and the life is in the whole. The fifth said that
he believed the soul to be something pure, like air or ether, and that he
believed this because it was supposed that the soul would be such after
it is separated from the body. But because the wise ones on the plat-
form perceived that none of them knew what the soul was, they re-
quested the president, who proposed that problem, to descend and
teach. He therefore descending, said: ‘‘The soul is the very essence
of man; and because essence without form is nothing, the soul is the
form of man's forms; this form is the truly human form, in which wis-
dom with its perceptions and love with its affections universally reside;
and because you believed in the world that you would be souls after
death, you are now yourselves the souls;" besides more. And this


1094


INDEX TO RELATIONS


was confirmed by this declaration in the Book of Creation: Jehovah
God breathed into the nostrils of Adam the soul 0} lives, and man was
made a living soul (Gen. ii. 7) (n. 697).

LXXVI.

An angel with a trumpet was seen, with which he called together
those celebrated for learning among Christians, that they might tell
what they had believed concerning the joys of heaven, and eternal hap-
piness. This was done because it was told in heaven that no one in
the Christian world knew any thing about them. After about an hour
there were seen six companies from the learned Christians, who were
asked what they had known about the joys of heaven and eternal hap-
piness. The first company said that they had believed there would
be only admission into heaven, and then into its joys, as one is ad-
mitted into the house of a wedding and its festivities. The second
company said that they had believed there would be most pleasant
intercourse and agreeable conversations with angels. The third com-
pany said that they had believed there would be feasts with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. The fourth company said that they had believed
them to be paradisal delights. The fifth company, that there would
be supereminent dominions, most abundant riches, and more than
royal magnificence. The sixth company, that there would be glorifi-
cation of God and a festival for ever. That these learned ones might
know whether those things which they had believed to be the joys of
heaven were so, it was granted them to enter into their joys, each com-
pany by itself, in order that they might learn by experience whether
the joys were imaginary or real. This takes place with most who
come from the natural world into the spiritual (n. 731-733).

And then the company that had supposed the joys of heaven to be
most pleasant intercourse and agreeable conversations with angels,
were let into the joys of their imagination; but because they were ex-
ternal joys and not internal, after some days they were affected with
weariness and departed (n. 734).

Afterward those who had believed that the joys of heaven were
feasts with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,* were let into things similar;
but because they perceived that those joys were only external and not
internal, they became weary and went away (n. 735).

The like was done with those who had believed the joys of heaven
and eternal happiness to consist in supereminent dominions, most
abundant riches, and more than royal magnificence (n. 736) .


INDEX TO RELATIONS


IO95


Likewise with those who had believed heavenly joys, and hence eter-
nal happiness, to be paradisal delights (n. 737).

Likewise with those who had believed heavenly joys and eternal
happiness to be perpetual glorification of God, and a festival for ever.
These at length were instructed what is meant in the Word by glori-
fication of God (n. 738).

Finally, the like was done with those who had believed that they
should come into heavenly joys and eternal happiness if only ad-
mitted into heaven; and that they should then have joys as those who
enter the house of a wedding, and at the same time into festivities. But
because it was shown to them by living experience that in heaven there
are no joys except for those who have lived the life of heaven, that is,
the life of charity and faith, and that on the other hand heaven is
torture to those who have led an opposite life, they withdrew and
consociated with their like (n. 739).

Since it was perceived by the angels that as yet none in the natural
world knew what the joys of heaven are, and thus what eternal happi-
ness is, it was said to the angel of the trumpet that he should choose
ten from those who had heen called, and introduce them to a society
of heaven, that they might see with their eyes and perceive with their
minds what heaven is and what the joys there are; and so it was done.
And after admission, it was first granted them to see the palace of the
prince (n. 740). Then the paradise near (n. 741). Afterward, the
prince himself and his great men in splendid garments (n. 742).
Then, being invited to the table of the prince, they saw such an enter-
tainment as no eye ever had seen on earth; and at the table they heard
the prince give instruction concerning heavenly joys and eternal hap-
piness, that they essentially consist in internal blessedness, and from
this in external enjoyments; and that internal blessedness gets its
essence from the affection for use (n. 743, 744). After dinner, by com-
mand of the prince some wise ones of the society were sent, who fully
instructed them what and whence internal hlessedness is, which is
eternal happiness; and that this causes external enjoyments to he joys;
besides more (n. 745, 746). After these things, it was given them to
see a wedding in that heaven (n. 747-749). And finally, to hear
preaching (n. 750, 751). When they had seen and heard all this, full
of knowledge concerning heaven and joyful in heart they descended

(n. 752)-


1096


INDEX TO RELATIONS


LXXVTI.

Revelation is here treated of. It has pleased the Lord to manifest
Himself to me, and to open the interiors of my mind, and thus to givei
me to see the things in heaven and hell; and thus He has disclosed
arcana which in excellence and dignity exceed all hitherto disclosed;
which are, I. That in every thing of the Word, there is a spiritual
sense, which does not appear in the letter; and that therefore the Word
was written by correspondences of spiritual things with natural.
II. The correspondences themselves, such as they are, have been
manifested. IH. And there is also revelation concerning the life
of men after death. IV. Also concerning heaven and hell, what
the one is, and the other; and also concerning Baptism and the Holy
Supper. V. Of the sun in the spiritual world, that it is pure love
from the Lord who is in the midst of it. from which the proceeding
light is wisdom, and the proceeding heat is love; and thus that faith
and charity are from it; and that all things which proceed are spiritual
and thus alive; and that the sun of the natural world is pure fire, and
therefore that all things from this sun are natural, and thus dead.
VI. That there are three degrees hitherto unknown. VII. And,
moreover, concerning the last judgment: that the Lord the Saviour
is the God of heaven and earth: of the New Church and its doctrine:
of the inhabitants of the planets, and the earths in the universe
(n. 846). VIII. Moreover, concerning marriage love; and that it is
spiritual with the spiritual, natural with the natural, and carnal with
adulterers (n. 847). IX. The angels found, as they looked on me,
that though those arcana are more excellent than those hitherto dis-
closed, still by many at this day they are regarded as trifles (n. 848).

X. A murmur was heard from some in the lower earth that they would
not helieve those things unless miracles were done; but they received
answer, that from miracles they would not helieve any more than
Pharaoh and the Egyptians; or than the posterity of Jacob when they
danced round the golden calf in the desert; or than the Jews them-
selves when they saw the miracles done by the Lord Himself (n. 849).

XI. Finally, why the Lord revealed those arcana to me, and not to
some one of the ecclesiastical order (n. 850).

The things contained in the Relations after the chapters are true;
and similar things were seen and heard by the prophets hefore the
coming of the Lord, and similar things hy the apostles after his coming,


INDEX TO RELATIONS IO97

as by Peter, Paul, and especially by John in the Apocalypse; which
things are recounted (n. 851).


A THEOREM PROPOSED BY A CERTAIN DUKE, AN ELECTOR IN GER-
MANY, WHO ALSO HAD VERY HIGH ECCLESIASTICAL DIGNITY.

I once saw in the spiritual world a certain duke, an elector of Ger-
many, who also had very high ecclesiastical dignity, and near him two
bishops and also two ministers, and from a distance I heard their con-
versation. The duke asked the four bystanders whether they knew
what made the head of religion in Christendom. The bishops re-
plied, “ The head of religion in Christendom is, faith alone justifying
and saving.” Again he asked, “ Do you know what lies inwardly con-
cealed in that faith ? Open it, look into it, and tell me.” They re-
plied that there is nothing inwardly concealed in it but the merit and
righteousness of the Lord the Saviour. To this the duke said, “Is
there not concealed in it, then, the Lord the Saviour in His Human, in
which He is called J esus Christ, because He alone in His Human was
righteousness?” To this they replied, “This certainly and insep-
arably follows.” The duke persisted, saying, “ Open that faith, look
into it further, search well, and see whether there is any thing else in
it.” And the ministers said, “The grace of God the Father is also
concealed in it.” To this the electoral duke said, “Get a right con-
ception and perception, and you will see that it is the Son’s grace with
the Father, for the Son begs and intercedes. Therefore I say to you,
since you confess, venerate, and kiss your faith alone, by all means
you ought to confess, venerate, and kiss the Lord the Saviour alone in
His Human; for, as already said, He in His Human was and is right-
eousness. That in this Human He is also Jehovah and God, I have
seen in the Sacred Writings from these passages: Behold , the days
come when I will raise up unto David a righteous Branch , who shall
reign King and prosper; and this is His name whereby He shall be
called , Jehovah our Righteousness (Jer. xxxiii. 15, 16). In Paul: In
Jesus Christ dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (Col. ii. 9).
And in John: Jesus Christ is the true God and eternal Life (1 Epistle,
v. 20). Therefore He is also called the God of Faith (Phil. iii. 9).”


INDEX


A. Vowel a in use in third heaven,
because it has full sound, 278.

Abaddon or Apollyon, king of the
abyss, signifies destroyer of the church
by falsities, 628. The Abaddons sig-
nify destroyers of the church, by total
falsification of the Word, 182. Those
who destroy souls by falsities are meant,
310 -

Abomination of Desolation means
infestation of truth by falsities, until no
truth remains not falsified and con-
summated, rSo. Men have divided God
into three, and on these have founded all
doctrine of the church, and so have falsi-
fied the Word; hence the abomination
of desolation, 135, 180. The faith which
prevails in the Christian world is the vein
of the fountain from which flowed such
abomination of desolation, 181.

Abuse, To. Truths abused to con-
firm justification by faith alone, 162.
Spirits abuse communication with the
heavens by the reading of the Word, 235.

Abyss, The, signifies abode of falsities,
628.

Access of man to the Lord perpetual
when he goes to the Lord Himself, since
He is in the Father and the Father in
Him, 161.

Accommodation. Must be accom-
modation before application; and accom-
modation and application together be-
fore conjunction, 370.

Acknowledgment inward, is the es-
sence of the faith of the New Church,
344. Knowledge of God, and acknowl-
edgment, not attainable without revela-
tion, 11. How acknowledgment called
faith is effected, 231. Acknowledgment
that the Lord is Son of God is the first
element of faith, 342. In spiritual world
the state of every nation in general, and
of individuals severally, is according to
acknowledgment of God and worship of
Him, 795. The state of man who is in
knowledge with no interior acknowledg-
ment of God, 457. He who loves him-
self above all, or the world above all,
does not in heart acknowledge God, 293.
They who acknowledge the Lord but do
not keep His commandments become
sataus, 15 1«


Act. Will or endeavor is in itself act
because^ it is continual effort to act, which
becomes act in externals when the con-
clusion is reached, 387. Acts of re-
demption, 95. Act of justification, or
faith in act, 505- Acts of repentance are
' all such as cause man not to will and not
: to do evils which are sins against God,
510.

! Action. Every action of man starts
from will, and all speech from thought,
593. Action and speech proceed from
lower region of_ the mind directly, and
indirectly from its higher region, for the
lower region of the mind is nearer the
senses of body, and the higher region
more remote, 420. All things that pro-
ceed from man, whether action or speech,
make the man and are the man himself,
7 78. In all motion and consequently
in all action there are activity and pas-
sivity; an active acts, and a passive acts
from the active; hence one action re-
sults from two, 576. Action and re-
action, 371. Action and cooperation,
576 .

Active. The Lord alone is active
with every man, and man of himself is
merely passive; but by influx of life from
the Lord he is also active, no. Accord-
ing to creation where there are actives
there are also passives, and the two join
together as in one, 472, 576.

Active and Passive. See Action.

Activity. Man’s activity does not pro-
ceed from the soul through the body, but
out of the body from the soul, 188. Ac-
tivity of love makes sense of enjoyment,
570. Life is the inmost activity of love
and wisdom, 471. The interior activity
of nature, 35.

Actually. 89, 316, 374.

Adam and his wife mean the most an-
cient church on this planet, 466-470, 520.

Administration. There are admin-
istrative offices in heaven, and dignities
attached to them; but they who fill them
love nothing more than to do uses, be-
cause they are spiritual, 403, 694.

Adolescence. As man begins to
think from his own mind in adolescence,
he is borne south in the world of spirits,
476 .


I IOO


INDEX


Adultery. So far as one abstains
from adulteries solely from fear of civil
law, or from natural or moral law, and
not at the same time from spiritual law,
he is still inwardly an adulterer, 316.
By adulterers in the Word are meant
violators of the Church, who are those
who adulterate the Word of the Lord,
122. In the spiritual sense, to commit
adultery means to adulterate the goods of
the Word and to falsify its truths; in the
celestial sense, to deny the Lord’s Di-
vinity, and to profane the Word, 236, 314,

vent. See Coming 0} the Lord .

Affection. All things of love are
called affections, 6g7. The derivations
of love are called affections, 386, 697.
Thought is the form of affection, 386.
Affection makes sound, and thought
speaks, 386. Affection without thought
is nothing; and affection and thought
without operation are nothing; but in
operation they are something, 387. Af-
fection is in space without space, and in
time without time, 64. Homogeneous
affection conioins and heterogeneous
affection separates, 622. The affection
of love in heaven is heat, 385. Merely
natural affection is nothing hut lust, 386.

Africans. The Africans are more in-
terior than other Gentiles, 835. All who
acknowledge and worship one God the
Creator of the universe, entertain the
idea of God as Man; they say that no one
can have any other idea of Him, 836.
The Africans excel in interior sight, 839.
A revelation is made among Africans at
this day, which is spreading round from
the place where it began, but has not yet
reached the coasts, 840. Africans say
that there is no man with any worship
who does not live according to his re-
ligion, and that if one does not, he can-
not hut hecome stupid and wicked, be-
cause he receives nothing from heaven,
840.

Agate signifies natural good, 609.

Age. Four ages of the world, 762.
From what the wise men of ancient times
Inferred four ages of the world, 762.
Four ages of man, 443.

Air. No quality of air can be ele-
vated to quality of ether, 32. See Ether .

Alpha and Omega. Why the Lord
is so called, 19, 84, 280.

Alphabet. In the spiritual world
every letter is significative, 280.

Amaurosis. Closed or hlind faith
compared to amaurosis, 346, 620.

Ambassador. One who in the world
had been ambassador, 663.

Ammon. The sons of Ammon signify
adulterations of truth, 200.

Amphitheatre converted into lake of
fire and brimstone, 388.

Anatomical Details, 60.


ANcrEtfT of Da'Sts. Why (in Dan.
vii. 9) He is described as to the hair, 223.

Ancients. The most ancient and the
ancient people worshipped one God,
called Jenovah, 9. The Lord Himself
was seen among the ancients, but was rep-
resented only, by means of angels, 109.
The science of correspondences well
known in most ancient times, 201. The
men of the Most Ancient Church, before
the flood, were of a genius so heavenly
that they spoke with angels of heaven by
correspondences, 202. From the wisdom
of the ancients flowed this dogma, that
the universe and the things thereof bave
relation to good and truth, 336. The
dire persuasion that God transfused and
transcribed Himself into man was held
hy men of the Most Ancient Church, at its
end, 470.

Ancient Word. Before the Word
which is in the world, there was a Word
which is lost, 264-266, 275. The his-
toricals of this Word were called Wars of
Jehovah, and the propheticals were called
Enunciations, 279. It is still preserved
in heaven, and is in use among ancients
who had that Word when in the world,
279. It is still preserved among the
people in Great Tartary; they do not
suffer foreigners to come among them ex-
cept Chinese, with whom they cultivate
eace, 279. In this Word is also the
00k of Jasher, 279.

Angels are substantial men and live
together, like men of the natural world,
upon spaces and in times, determined
according to states of minds, 29, 240.
There is no angel who has not previously
been a man,_ 12 1. The angels are not
pure in the sight of God, 121. The an-
gels could not have continued to exist in
integrity unless redemption had been per-
formed by the Lord, 119. All angels in
the heavens are filled by the Lord, for
they are in the Lord and the Lord in them;
but still each speaks and acts according
to his state of mind, 154. If angels ana
spirits were removed from man, he would
fall down dead; so angels and spirits
could not exist, if man were withdrawn
from them, 118. Spiritual angels are
in wisdom from the Word, but celestial
angels are in love from the Word,
221. They are called angelic spirits
who are preparing for heaven, in world
of spirits, 387. By the sense of the letter
of the Word is conjunction with the Lord,
and consociation with the angels, 234.
How spiritual angels perceive their sense,
and the celestial angels theirs, when man
is reading the Word, 236. Angels, from
a single action of man, perceive the quality
of his will, and from a single expression,
the quality of his thought, whether in-
fernal or heavenly. Thus they know the
whole man, 593, 778. Angels of heaven


INDEX


I IOI


can see whatever is done in hell and
monsters there; but spirits of hell can-
not see any thing that is done in heaven,
6 1. Angels cannot open their lips to
pronounce Gods; for the heavenly aura
in which they live, opposes, 6, 8, 25, 173.
Angels said that they could not even utter,
“three equal Divinities,” 23. An angel
may in a moment become present to
another, provided he comes into a sim-
ilar affection of love, and thence into
thought, 64. Every angel, in whatever
direction he turns body and face, looks
to the Lord hefore him, 767.

Anger. Why attributed to God, 256.
The Lord does not regard any with anger,
650. Why “the wrath of the Lamh” is
said in the Apocalypse, 641.

Animals. How animals of every kind
were produced hy God, 78. Wonderful
things in the production of animals , 12.
The natural man separate from the spiri-
tual, is merely animal, 673, 566. The
sensual and corporeal man in himself is
wholly animal, and differs from a brute
only in being ahle to speak and reason,
296. The animals seen in the spiritual
world are not animals, but correspond-
ences of the affections and thence of the
thoughts of those there, 506. Animals
which appear in the spiritual world are
likenesses of the affections of the angels,
66. See Beasts.

Answers from Heaven are given only
by truths from good in the ultimate sense
of the Word, 218-222. How given by
the Urim and Thummim, 218.

Antichrists began early to lift the
head, and to divide God into three, and
the Lord the Saviour into two, 174.

Antipathies. Sympathies and antip-
athies are nothing but exhalations of
affections from the mind, which affect
according to similitudes, and cause aver-
sion according to dissimilitudes, 365.

Antiquity. Earliest antiquity saw
that love and wisdom are the two essen-
tials, to which all the infinite things which
are in God and which proceed from Him
refer, 37.

Ape. Those who appear in the spiri-
tual world like apes, 274.

Apocalypse, The, was written through-
out only by correspondences, 116. It is
described, from beginning to end, what
the Christian Church is at this day; and it
is told that the Lord is about to come, and
subjugate the hells, and make a new
angelic heaven, and then to estahlish a
New Church, 116. Why all things pre-
dicted have not been uncovered till the
present, 116.

Apollo, 17, 58, 159. 2 9 2 » 655.

Apollyon or Abaddon, king of the
abyss, signifies destroyer of the church
by falsities, 628. Apollyons are de-
stroyers of the church by total falsifica-


tion of the Word, 182. Apollyon means
those who destroy souls by falsities, 310.

Apostles. The Lord called together
His twelve apostles, and sent them all
into the whole Spiritual. World to preach
the Gospel, on the nineteenth day of
June, in the year 1770, 4, 108, 791.
Every apostle had his province assigned;
they are executing with all zeal and in-
dustry what was commanded, 108. The
apostles were sent to Swedenborg by the
Lord while he was writing, 339. The
apostles taught and wrote, each accord-
ing to his intelligence; the Lord filled all
with His Spirit, hut each took of it ac-
cording to his perception, and exercised
it according to ahility, 154. The faith
of the apostles was faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ, 338.

.Apostles’ Creed, The, does not ad-
mit three Divine Persons from eternity,
175; and acknowledges no Son horn
from eternity, hut only the Son horn in
time, 636.

Apostolic Church. See Church {the
Apostolic).

Apostolic Fathers, 137, 636.

Appearances of space and time in the
spiritual world, 29. Those appearances
are real, because constant according to
the states of spirits and angels. 29. In
the spiritual world there are places as in
the natural world; otherwise there would
not he places to live, and mansions; but
still place is not place, hut an appearance
of place according to state of love and
wisdom, or charity and faith, 739. All
the things that appear in the spiritual
world are correspondences, and repre-
sent spiritual things of affection and of
thought, 462. Appearances of truth in
the literal sense of the Word are accom-
modated to the capacity of the simple,
who do not lift their thoughts above such
things as they see before their eyes, 226,
254, 257, 650. The appearances of truth,
which are truths clothed, may he taken
for naked truths, which when confirmed
hecome fallacies, which in themselves are
falsities, 254, 256. Fallacies arising

from appearances, 470, 473.

Appendix to the True Christian
Religion. Proposed, and contents indi-
cated, is, 177, 343, 4S5, 627 758.

Application. There must he accom-
modation before application; and there
must he accommodation and application
together before conjunction, 370. Appli-
cation on God’s part is perpetual so far
as man applies himself in turn, 370.

Approach or Accede, To. So far as
man accede? to the Lord, the Lord ac-
cedes to man, 100. Every man ought on
his part to approach to God-, and in pro-
portion as man approaches, God on His
part enters. 126.

Arcana or Secrets. The angels call


1102


INDEX


that an arcaaum which has not yet been
made known in the world, 153. Ar-
canum concerning the soul, 103. As to
sending the Holy Spirit, 153, 154. As to
the consummation of the present church,
182. The great arcanum, that unless a
new church is established by the Lord no
flesh can he saved, 182. An arcanum in
regard to the distinction that is hetween
natural faith and charity and spiritual,
360. An arcanum from the Lord Him-
self for those who will he of His New
Church, 154. Arcana revealed by the
Lord regarded on earth as of no value,
848; their excellence, 846.

Architecture. In heaven architec-
tural art is in its perfection, and from it
are all rules of that art in the world, 740.

Arianism. Whence it proceeds, 94.
Wherein it consisted, 137, 339, 380, 795.

Aristippus, 692.

Aristotle, 9, 692, 696.

Aristotelians, 696.

Arius, 137, 159. i74. 380, 632, 638.

Armageddon signifies the state of
fighting from falsified truths, from love
of command and super-eminence, 113.

Arrangement or Establishment of
Order in heaven and hell by the Lord;
all heaven is arranged into societies ac-
cording to all varieties of love of good,
and all hell according to all varieties of
love of evil, 354, 646, 678. Upon arrange-
ment in the spiritual world depends the
preservation of the universe, 678. The
arrangement in order of the heavens and
the hells has continued from the day of
the last judgment to the present, and still
continues, 123. In the world of spirits,
all the societies, which are innumerable,
are wonderfully arranged, according to
the natural affections, good and evil, 281.
Establishment of order in the heavens
follows suhjugation of the hells, and pre-
cedes the institution of New Church, 115,
1 17. The arrangement of substances in
the human mind is according to the use
of reason from freedom, 351.

Artery. Its composition, 147. The
cooperation of an artery with the heart,
577-

Arts in the spiritual world, 694.

As of or from himself. Man can
reform and regenerate himself as of him-
self, provided he acknowledges in heart
that it is from the Lord; man must do
hath as from himself; hut as from him-
self is from the Lord, 621. To do from
Himself helongs to God alone, 621. It is
continually given, that is, adjoined to
man, to do as from himself, 621.

Ashur or Assyria signifies the ra-
tional, 200. Ashur in the Word signifies
rationality and intelligence, 467.

Ashtaroth, 292.

Aspect. Every angel in whatever
direction he turns his hody and face,


looks to the Lord before him; origin of
this, 767.

Assurance or Trust. The trust
that he who lives well and believes aright
is saved by the Lord God the Saviour is
the Esse of the faith of the New Church,
344. See Confidence.

Ataxy, 665.

Athanasian Creed. How far it
agrees with the Word, 98, 101. It teaches
that the Father and Son are one as soul
and hody in man, 112, 136, 137, 188. A
Trinity of Divine Persons from eternity,
taught in this creed, is in the ideas of
thought a Trinity of Gods, 172, 632, 633.
From this Trinity arose a faith which has
perverted the whole Church, 177, 634.

Athanasius, 26.

Atheist. He who makes nothing of
adulteries and depredations, and of
hlasphemy, is also in heart an atheist,
612. Atheists who are in the glory of
fame from self-love, and thence in the
pride of intelligence, enjoy loftier ration-
ality than maay others, 507. See also
695 *

Athenaeum, 692-694.

Atmospheres. There are three de-
grees of atmospheres, the highest the
aura, under this the ether, and below this
the air; no quality of the air can be ele-
vated to any quality of the ether, nor any
of this to any quality of the aura, 32. See
Degrees . There are also three spiritual
atmospheres, themselves substantial, and
in the order of the degrees; created hy
the light and heat of the sun of the spiri-
tual world, as the natural atmospheres
have been created by means of light and
heat of the sun of the natural world, 76,
641. See also 364.

Atrophy. Hypocritical or Pharisaic
faith may be compared with atrophy of
the eye, 346. See also 665.

Attraction. Current of attraction,
350, 652.

Attributes. See Divine Attributes.

Augustine of Hippo, 840.

Aura. No quality of the ether can be
elevated to any quality of the aura, 32.
See Atmospheres.

Aurora, 112.

Baal, 292, 655.

Baal-Zebub, God of Ekron, 630.

Babylon. The church which in the
Prophets and the Apocalypse is meant by
Babylon, 754, 759.

Bad. See Wicked.

Bald. In the spiritual world they who
despise the Word become hald, 223.

Baldness signifies dulness, 74.

Banquets or Feasts. That the chil-
dren of Israel ate together of the sacri-
fices near the tabernacle, signified una-
nimity in worship of Jehovah, 727.

Baptism signifies regeneration and puri-


INDEX


1103


fication, 144, 530, 670-673. Baptizing
was. given as a sign and memorial for
Christians to be purified from evils, 675.
Baptism is a sign of introduction into the
Christian Church, 677. Baptism is a
sign before the angels that a man is of
the church, 621. Baptism is a sacra-
ment of repentance, 567. By the wash-
ing called Baptism is meant spiritual
washing, which is purification from evils
and falsities, and thus regeneration, 670-
673. 5Jo> 621. Why Baptism was insti-
tuted in place of circumcision, 674, 675.
By Baptism, which is the first gate, every
Christian is introduced into what the
church teaches from the Word respecting
the other life, 721. Baptism and the
Holy Supper are like two gates through
which man is introduced to eternal life,
721. There is something Divine in the
institution of Baptism which has been
concealed, because the spiritual sense of
the Word has not heen revealed, 668.
The first use of Baptism is introduction
into the Christian Church, and at the
same time insertion among Christians in
the spiritual world, 677-680. As soon
as infants have been baptized angels are
appointed over them, hy whom they are
kept in the state of receiving faith in the
Lord; but as they grow up, and come
under their own control and the exercise
of reason, the guardian angels leave
them, and they associate with themselves
such spirits as make one with their life
and faith, 677. Without the Christian
sign, which is Baptism, some Moham-
medan spirit, or one from among the
idolaters, might apply himself to new-
born Christian infants, and to children
also, and breathe into them an inclina-
tion for his religion, 678. Not infants
only, but also all others, are by Baptism
inserted among Christians in the spiri-
tual world, 678. The second use of Bap-
tism is, that the Christian may know and
acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Redeemer and Saviour, and follow Him,
681, 683. The third use of Baptism, the
final use, is that man may be regenerated,
684-687. The three uses of Baptism
follow in order and join in the last, 685.
He who does not believe in the Lord can-
not be regenerated, although haptized;
baptizing without faith in the Lord
effects nothing, 685. By the Baptism of
John a way was prepared so that Jeho-
vah the Lord could descend into the world
and work out redemption, 688-691. The
Baptism of John represented the cleansing
of the external man, but the Baptism at
this day with Christians represents the
cleansing of the internal man, 690. Ef-
fects of the Baptism of John, 691. The
Baptism of John was called the Baptism
of repentance; why, 510. Why the Lord
Hims elf was baptized hy John, 684.


Baptize, To, with the Holy Spirit and
fire is to regenerate hy the Divine truth of
faith, and by the Divine good of charity,
144, 684. Why John baptized in the
Jordan, 686.

Battle, The, of the omnipotent God
with the hells, 124. The battle of the
Lord with the hells was not an oral bat-
tle, as between reasoners and wranglers;
but a spiritual battle, which is of Divine
truth from Divine good, which was the
vital principle of the Lord, 124. The in-
flux of this through the medium of sight,
no one in hell can resist, 124. Why the
Lord fought this battle from the Humaa,
124. See Combat.

Bears. The she-hears (2 Kings ii.
23, 24), signify the power of truth in ulti-
mates, 223.

Beast. Beasts are organs created to
receive light and heat from the natural
world and at the same time from the spiri-
tual, 473. Every species is a form of
some natural love, and receives light and
heat from the spiritual world mediately,
through heaven and hell, the gentle ones
through heaven, and the fierce through
hell, 473. Man alone receives light and
heat, that is, wisdom and love, imme-
diately from the Lord; this is the differ-
ence, 473. Every beast, every bird, every
fish, reptile, and insect, has its own natu-
ral, sensual and corporeal love, the places '
of which are their heads and the hrains
therein; through these, the spiritual
world flows into the senses of their hody
immediately, and through them deter-
mines the actions, 335. Beasts are born
into knowledges of all their loves, 48.
The error that beasts have ideas has come
from no other source than the persuasion
that they think, equally with men, and
that speech alone makes the difference
between them, 335. Why in the time of
spring heasts return into the instinct of
prohfication, 496. The animals in the
spiritual world are likenesses of the affec-
tions of love and hence of the thoughts
of angels, 66. The beasts in hell are
forms representative of anger and hatred
of infernal spirits, 312. Infernal spirits
described in the Word as wild beasts, 123.
See Animals.

Bed. To take up the bed and walk
(Matt. ix. 6), signifies to be instructed in
doctrine, 30 r.

Beelzebub, 292. See Baal-Zebub.

Bees. Remarkable things about them,
X2> 335-

Beginnings. The, of space and time
come from God, 31.

Believe, To, in the Lord is not only to
acknowledge Him, but also to do His
commandments, 151. To believe in Him
is to have confidence that He saves; and
because no one can have this confidence
but he that lives well, therefore this also


H04


INDEX


is meant by believing in Him, a. He who
believes in the Son believes in the Father,
107. To believe, see, and know make
one, 159.

Beneficent Acts. The benefactions
of charity are, giving to poor and re-
lieving needy; but with prudence, 425,
427. By benefactions are meant deeds
of help performed outside of one’s occu-
pation, 425. Charity is exercised hoth
by direct and indirect benefits, 407.

Birds, Singing, represent those who
do not perceive truth, but conclude it
from confirmations by appearances, 42.

Birth. Man inclines by birth to all
kinds of evils, and from inclination he
lusts after them, 612. Man as to the
first nature from birth is hell in minia-
ture, and as to the other nature from the
second birth is heaven in miniature, 613.
Natural hirths in the Word mean spiri-
tual births, which are of good and truth,
583-

Blaspheme, To, the Lord and the
Word is to banish the Truth from the
church, 323.

Blasphemy. By blasphemy of the
Spirit (Matt. xii. 31, 32), is meant hlas-
phemy against the Divinity of the Lord’s
Human, and the holiness of the Word,
290.

Blood in the spiritual sense signifies
the truth of wisdom and faith, 367, 705.
By the Lord’s Blood is meant the Divine
Truth of the Lord and the Word, 706.
When man thinks of the Lord’s Blood,
the angels have perception of the Di-
vine Truth of His Word, 706. The
Blood of the Covenant signifies the Di-
vine Truth by which conjunction is ef-
fected, 706, 730. Blood, on account of
its signification, was the holiest repre-
sentative in the church among the chil-
dren of Israel, 706. The Blood of the
Lamb (Apoc. vii. 14; xii. 7, 14) signifies
the Divine Truth, 706. The blood of
gTapes (Gen. xlix. n: Deut. xxxii. 14)
signifies Divine Truth, 706.

Blossom, To. Spiritual heat and
light cause things to hlossom in the hu-
man mind; this blossoming is wisdom
and intelligence, 392.

Blossoms. See Flowers.

Body, The, is an organ of life, 35.
The soul from the father is the man him-
self, the body from the mother is not the
man in itself, hut is from him; the body
is only a covering of the soul, composed
of such things as are of the natural world,
103. How the body is formed in the
womb, and why it may be made either to
the likeness of the father, or of the mother,
103. The child has soul and life from
the father, and the body is from the soul,
82. Because the whole man depends on
his mind, all things in his hody are ap-
pendages, which are actuated by the


understanding and will, and live hom
them, 224. The material body, with
which the spirit is clothed in the natural
world, is for the sake of the processes of
procreation and of the formation of the
internal man; for this latter is formed
in the natural body, as a tree in the ground
and as seed in fruit, 454. Of the en-
joyments of his love, with the pleasant-
ness of thought, man is but dimly sensible
1 while in the natural hody, because this
body absorhs and hlunts them; but after
death (when the material body is taken
away) they are fully felt and perceived,
569. The body does not act and think
from itself, but from the spirit, 156. The
spiritual body must be formed in the ma-
terial body, and is formed hy means of
truths and goods, 583. Substantial body
of spirits and angels, 771, 793, 798. The
church constitutes the Body of Christ,
372, 416, 608, 728; wh.% 370. To be in
the Lord’s Body is to be at the same time
in heaven, 719.

Book. The Lamb’s Book of Life
means the Word which is from the Lord
and concerning Him, 107. The books of
the ancients were all written by corre-
spondences, 201. There are books in
the spiritual world, 794.

Border. Every man after death puts
off the natural from the mother, ana re-
tains the spiritual from the father, with
a kind of border from the purest things
of nature, around it, 103.

Boreal Spirits, 185.

Born, To de, of water and the Spirit,
signifies to be horn by truths of faith and
life according to them, 572.

Born of God. In die Word the re-
generate are called sons of God, and horn
of God, 572. They who are in goods and
truths from the Lord are called sons of
God and horn of God, 583, 692, 729.

Bottles. Comparisons with bottles,
113, no, 258.

Bow siguifies doctrine from the Word
fighting against falsities, 247; also sig-
nifies truth which fights, 86.

Brain, Human. The human brain
is a form of Divine truth and good, spiri-
tually and naturally organized, 224. The
hrains are organized, the mind dwells in
them, 351. Organization of the brain,
351, 697. If there were not action and
cooperation with the influent life in the
spiritual organism of the brain, thought
and will could not exist, 577. The spiri-
tual organism of the mind consists of
perpetual helices, 578. Man has two
hrains, one in the back part of the head,
called the cerebellum, and the other in the
fore part, called the cerebrum; in the
cerehellum dwells the love of the will;
and in the cerehrum, the thought of the
understanding, 160. The human cere-
brum is devoted to the understanding


INDEX


IIO5


and wisdom there, but the cerebellum to
the will and its love, 564.

Bread. By the Lord's flesh and by
the bread, in the Holy Supper, is meant
the Divine good of His love, also the good
of charity, 702, 707.

Breast. The Christians with whom
the Word is read, constitute the breast
of the Man which is heaven, 268.

Breast-plate op Judgment repre-
sented Divine truth from Divine good, in
the universal sense, 218.

Brethren. There were social gather-
ings in the primitive church among such
as called themselves hrethren in Christ,
434. In the Apostolic Church the true
Christians called one another brethren,
636.

Bridegroom. In the Word, the Lord
is the Bridegroom, and the church is the
Bride, 122, 252, 747. A bride con-
stantly carries something of the image
of the bridegroom in the sight of her
spirit, 747.

Brotherhood. The old Christian
brotherhood, 459. . Spiritual brother-
hood, 434. Fraternity with satans, 380.

Brotherly Love is charity, 409.

Bundles. In the mind evils are
bound into bundles by falsities, and goods
by truths, 38.

Burial of the Lord signified rejec-
tion of what remained from the mother,

iso-

Burning Property of Fire. From
the burning property of fire proceeds
heat, and from its shining property light,
39. The burning property of fire corre-
sponds to love, most interiorly affecting
the will of man, 39.

Butterflies. Comparisons with but-
terflies, 106, 361, 375*

Calf signifies natural affection, 200,
205. The natural affection for seeing
and knowing, exultant, appears from cor-
respondence like a calf, 623. A golden
calf in the spiritual sense is the pleasure
of the flesh, 849.

Calvin, 137, 154, 486, 798.

Calvinism. Whence its rise, 94.

Camp of the children of Israel repre-
sented heaven, 614-

Canaan signified the church, 675, 677.

Cannibals, Spiritual, 380.

Canon. A general canon in heaven
that God is in every man, evil as well as
ood, but that man is not in God unless
e lives according to order, 70. Two
canons for the New Church: 1. No one
can shun evils as sins, and do goods which
are good in the sight of God, from him-
self; but as far as one shuns evils as sins,
he does good not from himself but from
the Lord. 2. Man must shun evils as
sins and fight against them, as from him
self; and if one shuns evils from any other
cause than because they are sins he does


not shun them, but does this only that
they may not appear before the world,
330. It is a canon of the New Church
that falsities close the understanding
and truths open it, 508.

Carcass. When God is denied, man
becomes a spiritual carcass, 34.

Carotid Arteries, 697.

Cart, The New (i and 2 Sam. vi.),
signified natural doctrine, 203.

Cataract. Wandering faith, a faith
in more Gods than one, compared to
disease of the eye called cataract, 346.

Catechism or Decalogue explained
as to its external and internal sense, 282,
330. S67, 568.

Catholics, Roman. Papists in the
spiritual world appear about and be-
neath Protestants, 817. All of the Catho-
lic religion who in the world thought
more of God than of the papacy, and
from a simple heart did works of charity,
are easily led from the superstitions of
that religion, 821. They who while in
the world earnestly aspire to be made
saints after death, that they may be in-
voked, come into delusions of fantasy,
823. The worship of saints is such an
abomination in heaven, that when merely
heard of it excites horror, since so far as
worship is yielded to man it is denied to
the Lord, 824.

Cats. Their eyes in consequence of
their appetite for mice appear Like candles
in cellars in the night, 162, 334.

Cause. The cause is the all in the
effect, 420. The principal and the in-
strumental cause appear as one, 442.
The principal cause is the all in all of the
instrumental cause, 442. The causes of
all things are formed in the internal man,
and all effects are produced in the ex-
ternal, 374. Ends are celestial in the
kingdom, causes in the spiritual, and
effects in the natural, 236. The cause of
the creation of the universe, and of its
preservation, 46. Causes of divisions
and separations in the church, 378. See
End and Effect.

Caverns in hell, 281. Who profane
the Lord’s temple and make it a den of
thieves, 342.

Cedar, The, means rational good and
truth of the church, 200, 205.

Centre, Whether the centre is of the
expanse, or whether the expanse of the
centre, 35. The centre and the expanse
of nature and life, 35.

Cerebellum. See Brain. The in-
most parts of the cerebellum are heavenly,
160.

Ceremonies, The, are the dress, 55.
Baptism and the Holy Supper as cere-
monies, 667.

Changes of locality in the spiritual
world, 476. They axe changes of the
state of mind, 77.

Chaos. With the idea of chaos, it is


i io 6


INDEX


impossible to conclude as to the creation
of the universe, 76, 79.

Chariot, in the Word, signifies doc-
trine from spiritual truths, 203. Chariots
in form of a dragon, 1S5. Chariot of
fire, 661.

Charity is no other than goodness,
38, see also 459. Before the Lord came
into the world, scarcely any one knew
what charity was, 409. Charity consists
in wishing well and thence acting well,
413, 374. 4?8, 444- Charity is the affec-
tion for doing good to the neighbor for
the sake of God, salvation, and eternal
life, 388. Charity is all the good with
which man is affected hy the Lord, and
which he then wills and does, 365. Char-
ity is the heat of man’s life, 367. Charity
itself is to act justly and faithfully in the
office, business, and work in which one is,
and with whomsoever he has intercourse,
422-425. The man who practises char-
ity becomes charity in form more and
more; for justice and faithfulness form his
mind, and their exercises form his body;
and little hy little, from his form, he wills
and thinks only such things as are of
charity, 423. The end in view shows
whether there is charity or not, 407.
How you can see charity in its type, 454.
Charity is spiritual in its essence and natu-
ral in its exercises, 459. Charity has its
seat in the internal man, and from that in
the external, 410. Charity is not charity
unless joined with faith, 336, 355, ^67,
377. 387- Truths of faith not only illu-
minate charity, but they qualify it, and
nourish it, 377. Charity and works are
distinct like will and action, 374, 420,
422. Toward wicked men charity is
to he exercised according to natural
equity; toward good men according to
spiritual equity, 413. The first of char-
ity is to put away evils, and the second is
to do goods of use to the neighhor, 435,
535. They who have genuine charity have
zeal for good; and that zeal in the ex-
ternal man may seem like anger and fire,
hut its flame is extinguished and quieted
as soon as the adversary returns to rea-
son, 408. Benefactions of charity are
giving to the poor and relieving the needy;
hut with prudence, 425, 429. Benefac-
tions and debts of charity are distinct,
like things done from free will and those
done from necessity, 429. The public
dues of charity arc trihute and taxes; the
spiritual pay these with one disposition,
and the merely natural with another,
429. The household dues of charity are
of hush and toward wife and of wife to-
ward husband, of father and mdther to-
ward children and of children toward
father and mother, also those of master
and mistress toward servants, and of ser-
vants toward them, 431- As to what par-
ents owe their children; with those in char-


ity these are different from what they are
with those who are not in charity, hut out-
wardly they appear alike, 432. The pri-
vate dues of charity are numerous, such as
payment of wages to workmen, payment
of interest, fulfilment of contracts, etc.
These are discharged hy those in charity
with a different mind from that with those
who are not in charity, 432. The diver-
sions of charity are dinners, suppers, and
social gatherings, 433, 434. The din-
ners and suppers of charity are among
those only who are in mutual love from
similar faith, 433. Spurious charity,
hypocritical charity, and dead charity,
45 &- 453* All charity that is not joined
with faith in one God is spurious, 451,
Hypocritical charity is with those who
apparently worship God with veneration,
yet in heart think of being worshipped
themselves, 452. Dead charity is with
those who have a dead faith, 453. The
charity of those who believe that there is
no God, but instead of Him Nature, is
no charity, 453.

. Charity and Faith are the two essen-
tials of the church, 38. All goods of the
church are of charity, and are called char-
ity; and all truths are of faith, and are
called faith, 38. Charity is of affection,
and faith of thought, 386. Faith is noth-
ing hut the form of charity, as speech is
of sound, 386. Charity and faith are
two distinctly, yet make one in a man
that he may he of the church, that is, that
the church may be in the man, 336.
Faith is first in time; but charity is first
in end, . 33d. Separating charity from
faith is like separating essence from form,
377. Charity and faith are together in
good works, 373, 387, 442. 643* Charity
and faith are only mental and perishable
unless determined to works, when pos-
sible, 375, 376, 387. Charity alone does
not produce good works, still less faith
alone, but charity and faith together, 377.
Charity is the complex of all good things
which a man does to the neighbor, and
faith of all things of truth which a man
thinks concerning God and Divine things,
392 .

Chaste. Abstinence from doing does
not make one chaste; hut abstinence from
willing because it is sin, and when doing
is possible, does make one chaste, 3x6.

Chemosh, 292.

Cherubs. Lest one should enter into
the spiritual sense, and pervert the gen-
uine truth, guards are placed hy the Lord,
meant in the Word by cherubs, 208, 220,
260. The sense of the letter of the Word
as a guard, is signified hy cherubs, 260,
508, 776.

Chest, 371.

Chimeras in the church; whence they
come, 57. The doctrine of justification
by faith alone is a chimera, 181, 279.


INDEX


1107


Chinese, 279. Emperor of China,
245.

Christ. See Jesus.

Christendom. The spheres in the
spiritual world which flow from Christen-
dom, 619.

Christian. The name that one is a
Christian means his quality, that he has
faith in Christ, and charity toward die
neighhor from Christ, 682. The name
of a Christian, that is, that one is of
Christ, without acknowledging Him,
that is, living according to His command-
ments, is as empty as a shadow, smoke,
amd a blackened picture, 681. Primi-
tive Christians, or Christians hefore the
Nicene Council, 636-640. Christians
since this Council, 206. Christians of
the present day, 619.

Christian Church, The, hegan from
the cradle to be infested and divided hy
schisms and heresies, 378. The present
is the last time of the Christian Church,
757, 762-

Christianity is now beginning to
dawn; hitherto Christianity has heen only
in name, and with some a shadow of it,
700.

Chrysalis, 12.

Church. The church is from the
Word, and is such with man as his under-
standing of the Word, 243-247. On the
idea of God, and of redemption, which
makes one with salvation, every thing of
the church depends, 133. The essentials
of the church are three, God, charity and
faith, 712. A just idea of God is like
the shrine and altar in a temple, 163.
Conjunction of good and truth makes the
church, 398. The things hid in the spiri-
tual sense essentially make the church,
244. The communion called the church
consists of all in whom the church is;
and the church with man enters him
while regenerating, 510. A man who is
in faith in the Lord and in charity toward
the neighhor is a church in particular;
the church in general is of such, 767.
Understanding and will must make one,
that the man may he of the church, 249.
The church teaches man the means which
lead to eternal life, and introduces him,

415. Without free will in spiritual things,
the church would be nothing, 483. Re-
pentance is the first of the church with
man, 510. See Repentance. Man is
introduced into spiritual life hy the
church, 415. The church appears be-
fore the Lord as one man, 762. The
church constitutes the Body of Christ,
and every one in whom the church is, is
in some member of that Body, 372, 379,

416, 608. The church where the Word
is read and the Lord is known by it is as
the heart and lungs of the Man which is
heaven, 268. The church in Divine
truths from the Lord prevails over the


hells, 224. The faith of every church
is as seed from which its dogmas spring.
When the primary faith is known, there
is knowledge of the quality of that church,
178. The church is internal and ex-
ternal, and the internal church makes
one with the church in heaven, and thus
with heaven, 784. The Christian Church
was founded solely upon the worship of
Jehovah in the Human, consequently
upon God- Man, 94. This church passed
through the stages from infancy to old
age, 4. In the Evangelists are de-
scribed the successive states of the de-
cline and corruption of the church, 180,
378. The Christian Church which was
founded by the Lord when in the world,
and which is now first being built by Him,
674. The Christian Church such as it
is in itself is now first beginning, the
former church was Christian in name
only, but not in reality and essence, 668,
700. The Lord is establishing a New
Church, in which will be the worship of
the Lord alone, as in heaven, 113, 182,
786, 787. This church, meant in the
Apocalypse by the New Jerusalem, will
descend out of heaven from the Lord,
107, 1 1 3. This New Church is to endure
for ages, and to be the crown of all the
churches that have gone hefore, 788, 787.
It is provided hy the Lord that there
should always he on the earth a church,
where the Word is read, and that hy it the
Lord should be known, 270. The church
is called mother, hecause as a mother on
earth feeds her children with natural
food, so the church feeds them with
spiritual food, 306. The Lord God to
restore the worship of one God insti-
tuted a church among the posterity of
Jacob, 9.

Church, Apostolic. That the Apos-
tolic Church knew nothing of a trinity of
Persons, or of three Persons from eternity,
is evident from the Apostles’ Creed, 174,
i75» 637. The faith imputative of

Christ's merit was unknown in the Apos-
tolic Church, 636-640. In that primeval
time all in the then Christian world ac-
knowledged that the Lord Jesus Christ
was God, 637. This church was like
a new star appearing in heaven, 176.
See Son of God. The Apostolic Church
worshipped the Lord God Jesus Christ,
and God the Father in Him, 638.

Church, The Greek. The error of
this church is, that God the Father sends
the Holy Spirit immediately. That the
Lord sends the Holy Spirit out of Him-
self from God the Father and not the
reverse — this is from heaven, and the
angels call it an arcanum, hecause not
yet made known, 153, 647.

Churches. All the churches hefore
the Coming of the Lord were representa-
tive, which could see Divine truths only


1 108


INDEX


as in shade, 100, 786. Before the Coming
of the Lord all things of the church were
representative, because the Lord then
was represented only, which was by
means of angels, 109. There have been
four churches in general since creation,
one succeeding another; the Most An-
cient before the flood, the Ancient, the
Israelitish, the Christian, 760, 762, 786.
The last time of the Christian Church is
the very night to which former churches
have gone down, 760. The successive
states of the church in general and par-
ticular are descrihed in the Word by the
seasons of the year, and by the divisions
of the day, 764. Why there were four
churches 775, 786. As all churches de-
pend on knowledge and acknowledgment
of one God with whom the man of the
church may be conjoined, and as all the
four churches have not been in that truth,
it follows- that a church is to succeed the
four which will be in the knowledge and
acknowledgment of one God, 786. The
Most Ancient Church before the flood
worshipped the invisible God, with
whom can be no conjunction; so did the
Ancient, 786. The Israelitish worshipped
Jehovah, who in Himself is invisihle, but
under a human form which Jehovah put
on by an angel, 786. The Christian
Church acknowledged one God with the
mouth, hut < in three Persons, each of
whom by bimself was God; and so a
divided Trinity and not a Trinity united
in one Person, 786.

Chyle, 237.

Cicero, 273.

Cdsteritious substance of the brain,
351-

Circles of things, 756. The sun of
the spiritual world is the circle most
closely encompassing the Lord, 365.
Circles about the head, 507.

Circulation of the Blood, 577.

Circumcision of flesh represented
circumcision of heart, 675; it signified
rejection of the lusts of the flesh, and
thus purification from evils, 674. This
sign of the Israelitish Church was in-
teriorly similar to haptism, 674.

Circumference in the spiritual world,
269.

Cities in the spiritual world, 388. Of
Dutch, 805. Of English, 809. Of Jews,
841.

Clergy. Enlightenment and instruc-
tion are for the dergy specially, because
these belong to their office, and inaugura-
tion into the ministry brings them with
it, 146. In addition to these are what
arc intermediate, perception and dis-
position; there are four, which follow in
order — Enlightenment, Perception, Dis-
position, and Instruction, 155. With the
clergy love of ruling from love of self
climbs upward, when reins are given to


it, until they wish to be gods, 405. See
Priests.

Climates in the spiritual world, 185.
Action of the climate on man, 835.

Climb. Not to climb up some other
way (John x.) means not to approach
God the Father because He is mvisihle
and unapproachable, with whom there
cannot he conjunction, 538.

Clouds. By the clouds of heaven is
meant the Word in the letter, 776. By
the doud which overshadowed the dis-
dples, the Word in the letter is meant,
222. It is vain to believe that the Lord
will appear in a doud of heaven in Per-
son, but He is to appear in the Word,
777. In the spiritual world there are
bright clouds over the heavens, but dusky
clouds over the hells. Bright clouds
signify obscurity there, from the literal
sense of the Word; hut when these douds
are dispersed, this signifies that they are
in its clear light from the spiritual sense;
hut dusky clouds over the hells signify
falsification and profanation of the Word,
776.

CoCCELANS, 803.

Cognition. See Knowledge .

Coins of gold and silver in heaven, 78.

Collision between faith of the former
church and of the New, 647.

Combat. The Lord’s combat against
the hells, 116. The six days of lahor
represented the Lord’s labors and com-
hats with the hells, 301. The six days of
labor signify man’s combat against evils
and falsities in him from hell, 302. Com-
hat he tween the internal and external
man, 596-599. See Battle.

Comforter, The, also called Spirit
of Truth, and Holy Spirit, 139.

Coming of the Lord. Before the
Lord came into the world, scarcely one
knew the internal man, or charity, 409.
Without the Coming of the Lord into the
world, no one could have been saved, 3.
How this is to be understood, 579. Un-
less the Lord comes again into the world,
in Divine Truth, no one can be saved, 3.
The Second Coming of the Lord is at
present; and a New Church is to be insti-
tuted, 1 15. The Cipming of the Lord is
not to destroy the visible heaven and the
hahitable earth, 768-771. The Coming
of the Lord is to form a new heaven of
those who have hclieved in Him, and a
new church of those who believe in Him
hereafter; these are the ends for which He
came, 773. Without the second Coming
of the Lord no flesh could be saved, 772-
774-, The second Coming of the Lord is
not in Person, but in the Word, which is
from and is Himself, 776-779. The
Lord docs not appear in Person but in the
Word, because since He ascended He is
in the glorified Humanity, and in this He
cannot appear to man unless He first


INDEX


IXO9


opens the eyes of his spirit, and this can-
not be done with one who is in evils and
falsities, 777. The second Coming of the
Lord takes place by means of a man be-
fore whom He has manifested Himself in
Person, and whom He has filled with His
Spirit, to teach the doctrines of the New
Church through the Word from Him,
779* 851. The second Coming of the
Lord is meant in the Apocalypse hy the
new heaven and the new earth, and the
New Jerusalem descending, 781. What
is the first Coming of the Lord with man,
767 -

Commandments, The Ten. See Deca-
logue. The law from Mount Sinai was
written on two tables. The first table
involves love to God. The second table
involves love toward the neighbor; its
first five commandments, all things per-
taining to works; and the last two, all
things tfiat belong to the will, thus to
charity in its origin, 456. See Tables of
the Law. The First Commandment:
The spiritual sense of this command-
ment is, that no other God than the Lord
Jesus Christ is to be worshipped; be-
cause He is Jehovah, who came into the
world, and wrought redemption without
which no man and angel could have been
saved, 294. The celestial sense: That
Jehovah is Infinite, Immeasurable, and
Eternal; Love itself and Wisdom itself;
thus the Only One, from whom all things
are, 295. The Second Commandment .
The spiritual sense: The name of God
means all that the church teaches from
the Word, and by which the Lord is wor-
shipped, 298. The celestial sense: By
the name of Jehovah God is meant the
Divine Human of the Lord, 299. The
Third Commandment. The spiritual
sense: This signifies the reformation and
regeneration of man by the Lord, 302.
The celestial sense: This means conjunc-
tion with the Lord, and then peace, be-
cause there is protection from hell, 294.
The Fourth Commandment. The spiri-
tual sense: By Father is meant God, the
Father of all; and by Mother, the church,
305. The celestial sense: By Father is
meant our Lord Jesus Christ; and by
Mother His Church over all the world,
307. Fifth Commandment . The spiri-
tual sense: Murder means all modes of
killin g the souls of men. 310, 236. The
celestial sense: To kill means to be angry
with the Lord, to hate, and wish to hlot
out His name, 31 1, 236. The Sixth
Commandment. The spiritual sense: To
commit adultery means to adulterate the
goods of the Word and to falsify its
tru ths, 314, 236. The celestial sense:
This means to deny the holiness of the
Word, and to profane it, 315* 236- The
Seventh Commandment. The spiritual
sense: To steal means to deprive others


of the truths of faith, which is done by
falsities, 318, 236. The celestial sense:
By thieves are meant those who take
away Divine power from the Lord; and
also those who claim for themselves His
merit and righteousness, 319, 236. The
Eighth Commandment. The spiritual
sense: To bear false witness means to
persuade that falsity is truth, and that
evil is good, and the reverse — and to do
these things from design and not from
ignorance, 322, 236. The celestial sense:
This means to hlaspheme the Lord and
the Word, and so to banish the truth
from the church, 323, 236. The Ninth
and Tenth Commandments. These two
commandments have respect to all the
preceding, and teach that evils must not
be done, and that they must not be lusted
after, 326. In the spiritual sense, these
commandments prohihit all lusts con-
trary to the spirit of the church, thus con-
trary to its spiritual things which relate
primarily to faith and charity, 327. These
two co mm andments understood in the
spiritual sense, regard all things before
presented in the spiritual sense, and like-
wise all before presented in the celestial
sense, 327. The Lord’s commandments
all relate to love to the neighhor, heing in
sum not to do evil to him, but to do him
good, 458. Love and charity are not
commanded, hut only that things oppo-
site to them should not he done, because
so far as man shuns evils as sins, he wills
the goods of love and charity, 329.
Eight commandments presented to show
that as hell, that is, evil, is removed,
heaven draws near, and man looks to
good, 330. To do contrary to the com-
mandments is not to act against men,
hut against God, 444.

Communication. By reading the
Word in the letter, communication is
made with the heavens, 235, 258, 272.
Man communicates with spirits hy his
interiors, hut with men by his exteriors.
By that communication man perceives,
and thinks analytically, 475. Reciprocal
communication of affections, 662. Be-
fore the Lord's Advent hell had grown up
so as to infest the angels of heaven, and
also hy interposing hetween heaven and
the world to cut off the Lord’s communi-
cation with men, 579.

Communion. What it is to be in the
communion of saints on earth and of
angels in heaven, 15, 347. The church
throughout the world is called the com-
munion of saints, 416. A regenerate
man is in communion with angels of
heaven, and an unregenerate man with
spirits of hell, 607, 608.

Comparisons. The following sub-
jects are illustrated by comparisons: — •
Baptism as regeneration, 687; baptism
without its uses and fruits, 673; the first


I I IO


INDEX


use of baptism, 680. Beneficent acts
when imprudent, 428. Conversion of
the Roman Catholics in the spiritual
world, 821. Charity and faith mental
and perishable unless determined to
works, 37S, 3?b; spurious charity, 451;
hypocritical, 452; dead, 453; none at all,
453. The four churches which have
existed on earth, 762; the Apostolic
Church, 638; the church is not m man
until sins are removed, 511. The com-
bat of the Lord against the hells, 123.
Conjunction with the Lord is reciprocal,
371; conjunction with the Lord hy means
of the Holy Supper, 727; conjunction
with the invisible God, 786. Coopera-
tion of man and conjunction with the
Lord, 457, 617. Consummation of the
age, 756. Contrition without repentance,
51 5. Creaiable things, and things not
creatable, 472. The passion < of the
cross, 126. The three degrees in which
the heavens are, and in which the human
mind is, 609. Deliverance of the spiri-
tual world from a universal damnation,
122. Points of discordance between the
New and former churches, 648, 649.
The Divine Good and Truth, 86. The
division of the natural man into two,
593. The first and last ends, 152. Spiri-
tual equilibrium, 478. Evil unless re-
moved remains, 522; evil, and true faith
cannot he together, 383, 657. The faith
of the church, 177, 178, 346; faith in the
Lord not as God but only as man, 380;
the faith in a trinity of Divine Persons
from eternity, 116, 333, 141, 165, 171,
173; faith separate from charity, and
faith joined with charity, 348; heauty of
faith, 377, 353; living and dead faith,
385; testimonies and signs of true faith,
379. Reception according to forms, 366.
That which man receives from freedom
remains, 496; freedom of speech and of
writing, 814, 815. Free will, 482, 491,
498; in spiritual things, 480, 617; the
Word, if man had not free will in spiri-
tual things, 483. The friendship of love,
448. The good which man does before
removing evil from his will, 435, 436;
meriting good, 442. The subjugation
of the hells, orderly arrangement of the
heavens, and afterwards establishment
of a church, 117, 123. Union of the
Human with the Divine, 130. The
hypocrite , 381; hypocrites who make con-
fession with lips only, 518. Imputation,
660. The ingenuity of many in demon-
strating that three are one, 184. The
Lord operates out of Himself from the
Father, and not the reverse, 154; the
Lord continually wills to implant truth
and good, 145. The friendship of love ,
448; love among the wicked, 435, 455;
love of self, 405; love of the world, 404,
5 33 - Man, hy birth, 574, 575; interior
and exterior, 839; when not regenerate,


S95, 642; before and after repentance,
531; moral externally, 443* 662 '* believing
that regeneration takes place without
free will in spiritual things, thus without
cooperation, 617; the man whose under-
standing has been elevated, but not the
will’s love hy means of it, 590; men who
know many things about doctrine, and
yet do not examine themselves, 527, 534;
attached to present faith, 484, 582; men
who do good from religion before they
have accepted the doctrine of the New
Church, 537; the man who elevates his
mind to God and acknowledges that all
the truth of wisdom is from Him, and the
man who confirms in himself tbe idea
that all the truth of wisdom is from the
natural light in him, thus from himself,
69; a regenerated internal man and a
regenerated external, 600; men who ap-
proach the Holy Supper worthily, 724;
the regenerate man, 603. The human
mind, 350. The Lord operates out of
Himself from the Father, and not the
reverse, 153. Order , most universal,
679, 680. Heavenly peace , 304. Re-
ception according to form, 366. Re-
demption, 83, 1 19, 126. The two states
of reformation and regeneration, 105;
regeneration cannot take place without
truths, 620. Remission of sins, 614.
Habit of repentance, 563. The two Sac-
raments, Baptism and the Holy Supper,
669; signature or seal of tbe Holy Supper,
730. The letter of the Word, 192; the
Word without the sense of the letter, 213;
the spiritual sense of the Word, 192, 193;
the Word, if man had not free will, 483.

Comparisons in the Word are also
correspondences, 215.

Conception of man; how effected,
584.

Condemn, To. To live wickedly,
and confirm falsities to the destruction
of genuine truth, condemns, 254.

Condition. Lot of man’s life after
death, 564. Condition of those who
believe themselves able from their in-
telligence to acquire knowledge of God,
heaven and hell, and spiritual things, 276.

Confession is, that man sees, recog-
nizes, and acknowledges his evils, and
finds himself a sinner, 539. Mere oral
confession that one is a sinner is not
repentance, 516-519. A general con-
fession of sins, without enumeration, was
accepted by the Reformed who adhere
to the Augsburg Confession, instead of
actual repentance, 516. Confession to
be made hefore tbe Lord God the Sa-
viour, and then supplication for aid and
power to resist evils, 538. See Supplica-
tion. No need of enumerating sins be-
fore the Lord, because the man has
searched and seen them in himself, more-
over the Lord led him in the examina-
tion and laid them open, and inspired


INDEX


1 1 1 I


sorrow, and with this the effort to desist
from them and begin a new life, 559.
It does no harm for one burdened in con-
science to enumerate his sins in the pres-
ence of a minister, for the sake of absolu-
tion, that his burden may be lightened,
because he is thus introduced into the
babit of ex amining himself, anH of re-
flecting upon the evils of each day. But
this confession is natural; that hefore the
Lord is spiritual, 559. The confession
of the Lord and of one God conjoins
m i n ds with heaven, 828. The idea of
three Gods cannot he blotted out by
oral confession of one God, 173. Gen-
eral confession of the Christian Faith, 9.

Confidence in the Lord God the
Saviour Jesus Christ is the Esse of the
faith of the New Church, 344.

_ Confirm. Every man may co nfir m
himself in favor of the Divine, from
things visihle in nature, 12. Those who
confirm themselves in favor of the Di-
vine operation in nature, attend to the
wonderful things seen in the productions
of plants as well as of animals, 12. With
those who from things visihle in the
world, confirmed themselves in favor of
nature to such a degree that they hecame
atheists, their understanding in spiritual
light appeared open helow and closed
ahove, 12. Human ingenuity can con-
firm whatever it wishes, 621. The natu-
ral rational can confirm whatever it likes,
thus falsity as well as truth; and when it
is confirmed, hoth appear in similar light,
758. Confirmed falsity remains and can-
not be uprooted, 254. It is dangerous
to enter with the understanding into dog-
mas of faith from one’s intelligence and
thus from falsities, and still more to con-
firm them from the Word, 508. Some in
the spiritual world who lived many years
ago and confirmed themselves in falsities,

Onfirmation. Confirmation of fal-
sity is denial of truth, 758. After one
has left the world, he cannot believe any
thin g but what he had hy confirmation
impressed on himself; this remains fixed
in him, especially that which one has
confirmed m himself concerning God,
no. The cause of this is, that confirma-
tion enters the will, and the will is the
man, and it disposes the understanding
at its pleasure; hut hare knowledge only
enters the understanding, and this has no
authority over the will, 255. . No one
who is in evil and falsity from confirma-
tion and life, can know good and truth;
since he helieves his evil to be good, and
his falsity to be truth; hut every one who
is in good and truth from confirmation
and life, can know evil and falsity, 398.

Confirmers. Those wholly unable
to see whether truth is truth or not, and
yet can make whatever they wish seem
true, are called confirmers, 334.


Conjugial. See Marriage.

Conjunction. By conjunction with
God man has salvation and eternal life,
369, 726. There can be no conjunction
with an invisible God, 786. Conjunc-
tion with God is given to man solely hy
the union of the Divine and Human in the
Lord, 98, 369. No conjunction hetween
two is given, unless they accede one to the
other, pg. There cannot be conjunction
unless it be reciprocal; it becomes re-
ciprocal while man acts from freedom,
and yet attributes all activity to the Lord,
no. Reciprocal conjunction, 99, 126,
371, ^ 485, 508. The reciprocal con-

junction, hy which man has salvation and
eternal fife, is perpetual, 484. The con-
junction of the Lord and man is recipro-
cal; and because reciprocal it follows that
man must conjoin himself with the Lord
that the Lord may conjoin Himself with
man, 371, 484, 787. God’s conjunction
with man is spiritual in the natural, and
man's conjunction with God is natural
from the spiritual. For the sake of this
conjunction as an end, man was created a
native of heaven and at the same time of
the world; as a native of heaven he is
spiritual, and as a native of the world he
is natural, 369. The conjunction of the
Lord and man is effected hy charity and
faith, 372. Goods should he done hy
man as from himself; but it should be
believed that they are from the Lord,
with and through man; this is the con-
junction of charity and faith, thus of the
Lord and man, 3. Conjunction with the
Lord, effected hy charity and faith is
spiritual conjunction, 373. Conjunction
with the Lord hy the Word; this dpes not
appear to man, but is in the affection for
truth and the perception of it, 234. Con-
junction is effected hy temptations, 188.
Conjunction is effected by the Lord only
when man does the things written in his
tahle, 285. Conjunction with the Lord
is effected by the Holy Supper, 725, 727.
Conjunction with heaven cannot he given
unless there is somewhere on earth a
church where the Word is, and the Lord
is known, 267. Conjunction of good and
truth, of charity and faith, and of the in-
ternal and external man, 105, 442, 654.
In heaven the conjunction of good and
truth is called the heavenly marriage,
398. The conjunction between men and
angels by means of the love’s affections
is so close that if it were severed men
would die, 607. Conjunction was rep-
resented hy hreaking hread and dis-
tributing it, and hy drinking from the
same cup and handing it to one another,
433. Friendship is natural, hut love is
spiritual conjunction, 446.

Conscience viewed in itself is not pain,
but a spiritual willingness to do according
to religion and faith, 666. The pain of
mind believed to be conscience is not con-


I 1 1 2


INDEX


sdence but temptation, which is conflict ences of the affections of evil and falsity,
of spirit and flesh; and this when spiritual 77, 78. Correspondences are receptacles
draws from the spring of conscience, hut and abodes of genuine truth, 215. Cnr-
if it is natural merely, it originates from respondences mediate hctween the senses
diseases, 666. All who have conscience of the Word, 702. Because Divine things
say from the heart, and do from the heart, present themselves in the world in corre-
666. See 665. spondences, therefore the Word was

Consistence depends on order, 679. written by correspondences, 201. What
Consociation. Every man is in com- is written hy correspondences, is written
munion, that is, consociation with angels in a style found in the Prophets, Evan-
of heaven, or with spirits Df hell, 607. gelists, and Apocalypse; which though it
Consociation of man with angels is ef~ seems common, still conceals within it
fected hy the natural or literal sense of Divine angelic wisdom, 194. The Lord
the Word, 239. Every man, as to his when in the world spake hy correspond-
spirit, is consociated with his like in the ences, thus when naturally He also spake
spiritual world, and is one with them, spiritually, 199, 201. In man there is
14, 137. Conjunctions and consocia- perpetual correspondence between what
tions in the spiritual warld are effected takes place naturally and what takes
according to sympathathies and anti- place spiritually, or between what takes
pathies, 365. place in the hody and what takes place

Consonants. In the third heaven in the spirit, 583. There is correspond-
they do not pronounce consonants hard, ence between the angelic heaven and
but soft, 278. man, 65. There is perpetual corre-

C on st antine the Great, 632, 636, spondence Df all things Df the mind with
637. all things of the body, 38. Correspond-

Consummation. Sec Ending . ences, 201-207; of the heart and of the

Contradiction. It is not a contra- lungs, 37; between spiritual and natural
diction to act omnipotently according to sight, 346. Between effects and uses
the laws of justice with judgment, or ac- from the sun of the spiritual world and
cording to the laws of love from wisdom; effects and uses from the sun of the natu-
but it is a contradiction that God can act ral world, 70; of the tree with man, 374,
contrary to the laws of His justice and 584, s8s. Correspondences, knowledge
love, 74. Contradictory propositions, 172, of, 201-207, 833. To the ancients, the
393. science Df correspondences was the

Contrition. The contrition at this science of sciences, and so universal that
day said to precede faith, and to be fol- all their manuscripts were written by
lowed hy consolation of the Gospel, is correspondences, 201, 279, 833, 846.
not repentance, 512, sis. 665; it is of no Since representative rites of the church,
moment, 514. Contrition held to pre- which were correspondences, in time
cede the present faith is not temptation, began to he turned into idolatries and
S97. The Reformed supported contri- magic, that knowledge, hy the Providence
tion instead of repentance, in order to of the Lord, was lost, and with the nation
sever themselves from the Catholics who of Israel was totally obliterated, 204.
insist upon repentance and charity, sis* The knowledge of correspondences re-
Conversion. Man is kept continually mained with many people of the East
in a state in which repentance and con- even to the Coming Df the Lord, 204.
version are possible, 720. In order that The science of correspondences was not
conversion may take place, must not the disclosed, hecause Christians of the primi-
nature Df the panther and owl, or the tive church were sn simple that it could
quality of the thorn hush and nettle, not be disclosed to them; for if disclosed,
first he taken away, and what is truly it would have heen of no use, nor would
human and harmless implanted? 642. it have heen understood, 206. It has
Cooperation of active and passive, been revealed, because now the Divine
457- Cooperation of man with the Lord truths of the church are coming forth into
in regeneration, 371, 576, 581. Illus- the light, 207.

trated by examples, S77“S7 8 - Man's Cortical substance of the brain, 351,
action, concordant with the Lord's ac- 697.

tion, is meant hy cooperation, 576. Councils, 172, 174-176. No confi-

Cdrrespondences are representations dence to be put in councils, 634. See 174,
Df spiritual and heavenly things in natu- 176, 188. Council Df Nice, 94, 136, 172,
ral, 204. The correspondence hetween 174, 176, 177, 206, 338, 632. Council
the things in the spiritual world, and the called together by the Lord, in the spiri-
things in the natural world, 75. The tual world, 188.

magnificent and splendid things in the Country. Men should love their
heavens axe correspondences of the affec- country, because it supports and pro-
tons of good and truth; hut the vile and tects them, 305. One’s country is to be
filthy things in the hells are correspond- loved not as man loves himself, but more


INDEX


1 1 13


than himself, 414. To love one’s country
is to love the public welfare, 414; it is
nohle to (he for it, and glorious for a
soldier to sbed his blood for it, 414. They
who love their country, and do good to it
from good will, after death love the Lord’s
Kingdom, for this is tbeir country, 414.

Covenant. Why the Decalogue is
called a covenant, 285. The old cove-
nant; the new covenant; the hlood of the
new covenant, 706, 730. The covenant
of the people, 730. Covenant in the
Word signifies conjunction, 285.

Covering. There is a general cover-
ing about every member, and this inserts
itself into every part, so that they make
one in use, 60. Covering (Isa. iv. 5:
Ezek. xxviii. 12, 13), signifies the letter
which covers the interiors of the Word,
213, 220.

Cows signify natural affections, 203.

Creatable. Wisdom is not creatahle;
neither is faith, truth, love, charity, good;
but forms receiving them have heen cre-
ated, 40, 364, 472. It is according to
creation that where there are actives
there are also passives, and that the two
join themselves, 472, 576. If actives
were creatahle as passives are, there
would have been no need of the sun, and
heat and light from it, 472.

Create. To create means to form for
heaven, 773. To be created signifies to
be regenerated, 573.

Creation. An idea of creation, 33,
34. One thing was formed from another,
33. A sketch of creation, 76. The
whole creation seen in particular as a
type, 78. God created the universe
with every thing of it, from love by wis-
dom, 37. God in creating the universe
had one end in view, an angelic heaven
from the human race, 13, 773. The
three essentials of the Divine Love were
the cause of the creation of the universe,
and of its preservation, 46. See Love.
No one can obtain a just idea of creation,
unless some universal knowledge, pre-
viously acquired, put the understanding
in a state of perception, 75. God did not
create the universe out of nothing, he-
cause nothing is made out of nothing; but
by means of the sun of the angeilc heaven,
76. This done according to laws of
correspondence, 78. No creation pos-
sible without order, 500. All things in
the spiritual world are created hy God
instantaneously, according to correspond-
ence with affections of the angels; while
all those things that are in the natural
world exist and grow from seeds, 78, 704.
Creation in the natural world was similar
to creation in the spiritual, while the uni-
verse was created by God, 78. Obnox-
ious animals and productions bave not
been created by God, for all things that
God created and creates were and are
good; but such things upon the earth


arose with hell, which existed from men,
78. Natural things were created that
they might clotbe spiritual, 78. Because
man is the principal end of creation it
follows that every thing has been created
for the sake of man, and that every thing
of order has been brought into and con-
centrated in him, that God may do uses
through him, 67. As subsistence is per-
petual existence, so preservation is per-
petual creation, 224. See Creatable;
also Sun.

Creature. The spiritual man is a
new creature, 571. Every creature (Mark
xvi. 15) means all who can he regen-
erated, 573. By a new creature is meant
one who is regenerated, 687.

Crocodiles represent the lusts of dia-
bolical love, 45-

Cross. In Baptism the infant receives
the sign of the cross upon the forehead
and breast, which is a sign of inauguration
into the acknowledgment and worship of
the Lord, 682.

Crown of Thorns, The, put on the
Lord, signified that they falsified and
adulterated the Word as to its Divine
truths, 130.

Crucifixion, The, of the Lord sig-
nified that they destroyed and profaned
the whole Word, 130.

Crucify, To, the Lord is to be angry
with the Lord, to hate Him, and wish to
blot out His name, 31 1.

Cup signifies the truth of the Word,
215. The Lord called the passion of the
cross a cup (Matt xxvi. 39, 42; Mark xiv.
36: John xviii. 11), 704.

Current of Attraction from the
Lord, 350, 652. There is a sort of latent
current in the affection of every angel’s
will, that draws his mind to something,
735 -

Curtains of the Tabernacle, The,
signify goods and truths, in the ultimates,
such as are in the letter, 220. They
signify the ultimates of heaven and the
church, and also of the Word, 260.

Dagon represented the religion of
those who are in faith separate from char-
ity, 203. See also 71, 283, 614.

Damnation. The damnation which
threatened the human race, because the
power of evil prevailed over good, was
removed by means of the Lord’s Human,
3, 12 1, 579. The Lord has delivered
the spiritual world, and hy means of it is
about to deliver the church from uni-
versal damnation, 122.

Daphne, 58.^

Darkness signifies falsities from ig-
norance or falsities of religion, or from
evils of life, 635. That at the end of the
Christian Church the light of truth would
be almost extinguished, is foretold in
many places in the Apocalypse, 271.


1 1 14


INDEX


David. ' By David is meant the Lord,
171 -

Day, The, of Jehovah means the
Coining of the Lord, 198, 761. The
Coming of the Lord is the morning, 764.

Death is not extinction of life, but its
continuation, and only a passage, 792.
Entrance into the spiritual world is gen-
erally on the third day, 138, 281. Man
after death is none the less a man, and
such a man as not to know that he is not
still in the world, 792. Spiritual death
is natural life without spiritual, 369.
Immediately after entrance into the
spiritual world man is preparing for his
society to which he has been assigned,
447, 568. See World of Spirits .

Debts of Charity, 429, 431. Where-
in they consist, 429; some are public, 430;
some domestic, 431; and some private,
432. These are discharged by those in
charity with a different mind from that
with those not in charity, 432. See
Charity.

Decalogue. The Decalogue was holi-
ness itself in the Israelitish Church, 283,
286. In the letter the Decalogue con-
tains, general precepts of doctrine and life;
but in the spiritual and celestial senses,
all universally, 287, 290. The ten com-
mandments of the Decalogue contain all
things of love to God, and all of love to the
neighbor, 329, 456. The laws of the
Decalogue, universally known, were pro-
mulgated from Mount Sinai hy Jehovah
Himself with so great a miracle, that men
might know that these were not only civil
and moral, but also Divine laws, 282, 444.
The commandments of the Decalogue
were the first fruits of the Word, 283.
They were in brief summary a complex
of all things of religion, by which con-
junction of God with m?n and of man
with God is given, 283. Since by that
law there is conjunction of the Lord with
man and of man with the Lord, it is
called a covenant and testimony, 285, 456.
It was written on two tables, ode of which
contains all things which regard God; and
the other all things which regarc^man, 286,
456. See Commandments.

Decision in the Word signifies full
consummation of both truth and good,
755- See Consummation.

Degrees. In each world, the spiri-
tual and natural, there are three degrees,
called degrees of height, 75. These three
degrees are similar to end, cause, and
effect, 32. Between the three degrees
of height, there is progress to infinity,
in that the first degree, called natural, can-
not be perfected and elevated to the per-
fection of the second, which is called spiri-
tual, nor this to the perfection of the
third called celestial, 32. The three
heavens were made from the three de-
grees of spiritual atmospheres, 76; they


are distinct according to the three de-
grees of love and wisdom, 608, 609. By
means of degrees, God made the world
finite more and more, 33. There are
three degrees of love and wisdom, and
thence of life, 42. There are in every
man from creation three degrees, 239.
Man is in the natural degree as long as
in the world, and is then so far in the
angelic spiritual as he is in geniune truths,
and so far in the celestial as he is in life
according to them; he does not come into
the spiritual and celestial itself till after
death, because these two are enclosed
within his natural ideas, 239. Effects of
opening and shutting degrees of the mind,
34 -

Delight. In the heat and light of
heaven there is ineffable delight, which
is communicated, 622. The soul’s de-
light is from Love and Wisdom from the
Lord; this flows into the soul from the
Lord, descends through, the . higher and
lower regions of the mind into all the
senses of the body and fills itself full in
them, 737. See Enjoyment.

Democritus, 693.

Demosthenes, 693;

! Denmark, 161.

^Depose. Those deposed, who pre-
sided over large bodies, because they do
not love what is true or just, 281.

, Descartes, 696.

Desolation in the Word signifies the
consummation of truth, 755, 180. See
Consummation.

Deucalion and Pyrrha, 58.

Devastation of the present church
even to destruction, 635. Devastation in
the Word signifies consummation of good,
755. See Consummation.

Devils. They are called devils who
have been in evils and thence in falsities,
281. They are called devils who have
confirmed evils in themselves by the life,
80. Devils; those who have lived wick-
edly, and have thus rejected from their
hearts all acknowledgment of God, 35.
Devils in their essence are no other than
evils and falsities, 87. A devil medi-
tates and practises only infernal things,
145. Every devil can understand what
is true when he hears it, but he cannot
retain it, because when the affection for
evil returns, it casts out the thought for
truth, 388, 481. Devils have rationality
from the glory of the love of self, 507. The
name Jesus can he spoken by no devil,
297. Every one is allowed to be in his
own enjoyment, even the most unclean,
provided he does not infest good spirits
and angels; but as from their enjoyment
evil spirits cannot do otherwise than in-
fest them, they are cast into work-houses,
570, 661. See Salans, Hell, 661.

Diana, 17, 58, 159.

Die. Man can never die, 697.


INDEX


IIIS


Difference between man In the natu-
ral world, and in the spiritual, 793, 417,
473; between man and beast, 574; be-
tween natural and spiritual faith and
charity, 460, 461; between things seen in
the natural world and things seen in the
spiritual, 793.

Dignities. . Love of self is chiefly
love of dignities, 403.

Dinners and suppers of charity are
among those only who are in mutual love
from similar faith, 433.

Diogenes, 693.

Direction. Contrary direction of the
mind’s interiors; what it produces, 613,
692.

Disciples. The twelve disciples in
the spiritual world, 791, 4, ro8. See
Apostles.

Diseases, 665. Lingering diseases,
527; chronic diseases, 534.

Disposition is from affection of love
in the will; the enjoyment coming from
this love disposes, 155. As the disposi-
tion is, such is the reception, 8. The
disposition of the truths of faith is into
senes, 351. Divine order is that man
should dispose himself for the reception
of God, 105.

Dissimulation. Origin of all dis-
simulation, 592, hi.

Distinction between the spiritual and
natural, 280, 607, 846.

Divide. Every thing which is di-
vided, unless it depend on one, would of
itself fall to pieces, 10. Every thing is
divisible to infinity, 33. What is di-
vided does not become more and more
simple, but more and more manifold,
because it comes nearer and nearer to
tile Infinite, in which are all things in-
finitely, 280. A man may divide his
beart, and compel its surface to raise
itself upwards, while its flesh turns itself
downwards, 151.

Divine. What is from God is not
called God, hut Divine, 25. The Di-
vine which proceeds immediately from
God is not in space, although He is omni-
present, 30. From the Lord proceeds
the Celestial Divine, the Spiritual Di-
vine, and the Natural Divine, 195. That
is called the Celestial Divine which pro-
ceeds from His Divine Love; that is called
the Spiritual Divine which proceeds from
His Divine Wisdom; the Natural Divine
is from both, and is their complex in the
ultimate, 195. In every Divine there is
first, mediate, and ultimate; and the first
passes through the mediate to the ulti-
mate, 210. Divine things present them-
selves in the world in correspondences,
2or.

Divine Attributes, 26, 623. Changed
by gentile nations into gods, 17, 275, 623.

Divine Esse, The, is Jehovah, r8-
24. It is Esse, and, at the same time,


Existere, 21, 22. The Divine Esse and
Existere cannot produce another Divine
that is Esse ana Existere^ in itself, 23.
A plurality of gods, in ancient and mod-
em times, originated from not under-
standing the Divine Esse, 24. The Di-
vine Esse is One, Same, Itself, Indi-
visible, 25. See Esse .

Divine Esse and Essence. As in-
finity, immeasurableness, and eternity
pertain to Divine Esse, so omnipotence,
omniscience, and omnipresence pertain
to Divine Essence, 49. It appears as if
the two were one and the same; hut still
esse is more universal than essence, for
essence supposes esse, and from esse
essence is derived, 18 , 36. Not that the
Esse of God existed before, but because
it enters into the Essence, as an adjunct,
cohering with, determi n ing, forming, and
elevating it, 36.

Divine Essence, The, is made of the
Divine Love and Wisdom; or of Divine
Good and Truth, 37. God neither could
nor can divide His Essence, for this is one
and indivisihle, 364. Where the Lord is
present, there He is with His whole Es-
sence: and it is impossible for Him to
take some away, and thus give a part to
one and a part to another; but He gives
the whole, and gives man the opportu-
nity to take little or much, 364. Be-
cause God cannot he received as He is in
Himself, He appears as He is in His Es-
sence as a sun ahove the angelic heavens,
25. See Essence.

Divine Good and Truth are the
Essence of God, 85. In the Word by
Jehovah is meant the Divine Love, Good;
and by God, the Divine Wisdom, Truth,
85. Nor is any other than the Divine
Truth meant by the Messiah or Christ,
the Son of Man, the Comforter, the Holy
Spirit, 85. Jehovah God descended as
Divine Truth that He might do the work
of redemption, 86. Although God de-
scended as Divine Truth, still He did not
separate Divine Good, 88. He did the
work of redemption by Divine Truth
from Divine Good, 86.

Divine Human, The. See Human .

Divine Itself, The, 23. The Di-
vine, in itself ineffable and impercep-
tible, was in its descent adapted to the per-
ception of angels, and men, 193.

Divine Love and Wisdom. These
are two which proceed from the Lord,
igi. The universe was created by Jeho-
vah God from Love by Wisdom, 76. Di-
vine Love, with the Wisdom, is in all
created subjects, 37. God in His Es-
sence is Divine Love, 838. Divine Love
forms life, as fire forms light, 39. Di-
vine Wisdom is life, and life is the tight
which proceeds from the sun of the spiri-
tual world, in the midst of which is Jeho-
vah God, 39. Divine Love can purpose


1 1 1 6


INDEX


only to unite itself to man and man to
itself, 838. The whole angelic heaven
is arranged into its form and preserved
in it from Divine Love by Divine Wis-
dom, 37.

Divine Order. Righteousness is Di-
vine order itself, 95. _ Divine order is un-
changeable, 105. Divine order is, that
man should dispose himself for the re-
ception of God, and prepare himself as a
habitation into which God may enter,
and dwell there as in His temple, 105.
Divine order fills all things, even to each
minutest particular, 106. Man was cre-
ated a form of Divine order, 65. Man is
so far in power against evil and falsity,
as he lives according to Divine order, 68.
It is the same whether you say, to do con-
trary to Divine order, or contrary to God,
500. According to Divine order there
should be generals and particulars, and
both should he together in every thing,
and otherwise particulars do not exist,
77 5 - '

Divinities. Angels said that they
could not utter “three equal Divinities,” j
23 '

Do from Himself, To, belongs to
God alone, 621.

Doctrine, The, of the church is to be
drawn from the letter of the Word and
confirmed by it, 225-230. The doc-
trine of genuine truth may be fully drawn
from the literal sense of the Word; for the
Word in that sense is like a man clothed,
whose face and hands are bare. All that
pertains to man’s faith and life, and thus
to his salvation, are naked there, hut the
rest are clothed, 230. The Word is not
understood without doctrine, 228. The
Word by doctrine is not only understood,
but also shines in the understanding, 227.
True doctrine is like a lamp in the dark,
and a guide-post on the way, 227. They
who read the Word without doctrine are
in ohscurity respecting every truth, and
their mind is uncertain, prone to error,
and easily foiling into heresies, 228. The
most essential thing of the church is,
that Jehovah God descended and as-
sumed the Human, 98. Doctrine is not
gathered hy means of the spiritual sense
of the Word, but only illustrated and
corroborated, 230. Genuine truth of
doctrine does not appear in the letter of
Ihe Word to any but those who are in
enlightenment from the Lord, 231. Doc-
trine does not estahlish and make the
special church with the individual man,
but faith and life according to it, 245.
All things pertaining to doctrine and life
have relation to love to God and the neigh-
bor, 287.

Doctrines, The, of the New Church
are continuous truths, laid open hy the
Lord by the Word; and confirmations of
those truths by what is rational cause the


understanding to be opened above more
and more, and thus to be elevated into
the light in which angels of heaven are
508. Faith is the principle, and doctrines
are derivations, 177-

Dogmas. It is dangerous to enter
with the understanding into dogmas of
faith from one’s intelligence and thus
from falsities, and still more to confirm
them from the Word, 508. But in the
New Church it is allowable to enter with
the understanding and penetrate into all
its secrets, and also to confirm them by
the Word, 508.

Dominant Love, The. Man’s very
life is his love, and such as the love is
such is the life, 399. This love has many
other loves subordinate to it, which are
derivations, and with it make one king-
dom, 399. That which is of the dominant
love, is loved above all things; this is con-
, tinually present in man’s thought, be-
cause it is in his will and veriest life, 399.
A man is wholly such as the dominant
love of his life is; hy this he is distinguished
from others; according to this his heaven
is made if he is good, and his hell if he is
evil. After death this cannot be changed,
because it is the man himself, 390.

Door, The, signifies the Lord God the
Redeemer, 174.

Dort, Synod of, 486, 487, 759.

Double. Man is double-minded, 147.
Pretenders, flatterers, bars, and hypo-
crites possess a douhle mind, 443.

Dove, The, signifies regeneration and
purification, 144. The doves in heaven
are correspondences of the affections and
thoughts in relation to regeneration and
purification, 144.

Dragon. By dragon, in the Apoc-
alypse, are meant those in the faith of the
present church, 182, 649. By the dragon’s
persecuting the woman who hrought forth
the son, is meant that for a long time the
spiritual sense would not be acknowl-
edged, 207. Spheres in the spiritual
world which flow from the Christendom
of to-day are like stormy atmospheres,
arising from breathing holes of the drag-
ons, 619. See also 312, 388.

Drink. Drinking water means to be
instructed concerning truths, 693. Con-
junction was represented by drinking
from the same cup and handing it to one
another, 433.

Dura Mater and Pia Mater, 213.

Dutch. Traffic is the final love of the
Dutch, and money is a^ love subservient
to this; and that love is spiritual, 801.
The Dutch are fixed in the principles of
their religion more firmly than others, and
they are not parted from them, 802.
Those who led a life of charity in the
world, are amended and prepared for
heaven; these become more constant than
others, 802.


INDEX


1 1 1 7


E. In the third heaven they cannot
utter the vowel e, but instead of it eu, 278.

Eagles in the spiritual world represent
those who, as soon as they hear the truth,
perceive that it is truth, 42. By eagles
(Matt. xnv. 28) are meant lynx-eyed
leaders, 634.

Ears. To gather the ears of com and
eat (Matt. xii. 1-9) in the spiritual sense
signifies to be instructed, 301.

Earth, The, is as a common mother,
308, 585. In the Word the earth signifies
the churcb, 585.

Earthquake, An, signifies an inver-
sion of the church, made by falsities, 179.

Eastern Nations. See Orientals .

Eat. Eating from the tree of the knowl-
edge of good and evil means appropriation
of evil, 466. See Tree.

. Eating. By eating is meant appropria-
tion, 702. The Holy Supper is spiritual
eating, 716, 728.

Eden, The Garden of, sig nifi es wis-
dom and intelligence from the Word, 219,
467.

Edom signifies the natural, 200.

Effects. The causes of all things are
formed in the internal man, and all dffects
are produced in the external, 374. See
Cause.

Efflux. Influx adapts itself to efflux,
814. See Influx.

Eggs, Wonders in, 12.

Egypt signifies the scientific, 200.
Egypt means a church which in its be-
ginning was pre-eminent, 635.

Ekronites, 691.

Elect. By gathering together the elect
from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other (Matt. xxiv. 31), is
meant a new heaven and church of those
who have faith in the Lord and live ac-
cording to His commandments, 198. See
Election.

Election. No election is made before
or after birth, but all are called to heaven,
664. The Lord after their death elects
those who have lived well and hehaved
aright, 664. The dogma of the present
church respecting predestination, sprang
from the faith in election as a shoot from
its seed, 486, 628.

Elias or Elijah represented all the
prophetic Word, 222.

Elisha represented the church as to
doctrine from the Word, 223.

Elysian fields, 693.

Embyros in the mother’s womb bave
neither motion nor feeling, 87.

Emerods signify natural loves, which
separate from spiritual love are unclean,
203.

Enchanters. Who those were whom
the ancients called enchanters, 324.

End. The infinite diversity between
the good will of one and of others, origi-
nates in the end, intention, and purpose,


374. Man himself is like a tree. In the
seed of a tree are concealed the end, inten-
tion, and purpose of producing fruits,
374. As a temple of God, man has sal-
vation and eternal life for his end, inten-
tion, and purpose, 374. Good is the end
with all in heaven, and evil is the end
with all in hell, 523. There are three
things which follow in order — end, cause,
and effect, 67. The end is nothing unless
it looks to the efficient cause, and the end
and cause are nothing unless the effect is
produced, 67, 387. The end and cause
may indeed he contemplated abstractly,
but still for the sake of some effect which
the end intends, and for which the cause
provides, 67. In every thing there is a
trine, called the first, mediate, and ulti-
mate; also end, cause, and effect, 210.
The first and last ends contain the mediate
ends, 152. The end, through mediate
causes, produces effects, 374. He who
loves the end also loves the means, 43.
Every one who is in the end, is also in the
means; for the end is most internally in all
the means, actuating and directing them,
13. The universe comprises ends, causes,
and effects, in indissoluble connection, 47,
210. The effect cannot he perfected so
that it may become as its cause, nor the
cause so that it may become as its end,
2. The end of creation was an angelic
eaven from the human race, conse-
quently man, 66, 773. The salvation and
eternal life of men are the first and last
ends of the Lord, 152. See Cause , Effects.

Endeavor, The, or the will is in itself
act, because a continual effort to act,
which hecomes an act when the conclu-
sion is reached, 387.

Ending of the age is the last time of the
church, 758. The ending of a church
takes place when there remains no Divine
truth except what is falsified, 753. When
truth is consummated in a church, good is
also, 753; the good which is then believed
to he good, is only natural good which a
moral life produces, 754. Causes of the
ending of a church, 754. Devastation,
desolation, and decision have a similar
signification with consummation; but
desolation signifies the consummation of
truth, devastatiqn the consummation of
good, and decision full consummation of'
hoth, 755. In the Evangelists and the
Apocalypse the ending of the age means
the end of the present church, 182, 198,
784.

English, The, in the spiritual world,
806-812. The hetter among the English
are in the centre of all Christians, because
they have interior intellectual light, 807;
this light, they acquire from their freedom
to speak and write, and thus to think, 807.
There is among the English a similarity
of minds, owing to which they become
familiarly attached to friends who are


1 1 1 8


INDEX


their countrymen, but rarely to others;
they also aid each other and love sincerity,
80S.

Enjoyments. Enjoyment makes the
life of man’s love, 4go. Every love has its
own enjoyment, 746. Enjoyment, by
which love manifests itself, one calls good,
38. Love’s enjoyments are of two kinds,
enjoyments of love of good and of love of
evil, 38. Man calls that which he loves
enjoyment, because he feels it; but that
which he thinks and does not love, he may
also call enjoyment, hut not the enjoy-
ment of his life, 309. Whatever proceeds
from love is called good, even if it be evil;
for enjoyment, which makes the life of
love, produces this, 658. The love’s en-
joyment is what is good to man, hut the
undelightful is what to him is evil, 399.
The activity of love makes the sense of en-
joyment; its activity in heaven is with wis-
dom, and its activity in hell with insanity;
the activity in hoth yields enjoyment in its
subjects, 570. Enjoyment is the all of
life to all in heaven, and in hell, 570. The
enjoyments of hell are opposite to those of
heaven, 455. The enjoyment of evil en-
compasses the merely natural man as a fog
does a marsh, absorbing the rays of light,
564. Infernal enjoyment is amended, re-
formed, and inverted solely hy the rational
and moral that are spiritual, 564. Enjoy-
ment in use from love through wisdom is
the soul and life of all heavenly joys, 734.
The enjoyments of the soul are in them-
selves imperceptible beatitudes; but they
become more and more perce ptihle as
they descend into thoughts of the mind,
and into sensations of the body, 744.
The enjoyment of doing good to the neigh-
bor is a reward. The angels in heaven
have this enjoyment, and it is a spiritual
enjoyment which is eternal, and exceeds
every natural enjoyment, 440, 734. They
who are in this enjoyment do not wish to
hear of merit; for they love to do, and per-
ceive that they are favored in doing, 440.
Of enjoyments of love and pleasantness of
thought, man is dimly sensihle while he
lives in the natural hody, 569. Enjoy-
ments from loves in the spiritual world are
perceived as odors, 834.

Enlighten, To. The Sun of the an-
gelic heaven enlightens the understanding
of all, hoth angels and men, 59.

Enlightenment is from the Lord
alone, with those who love truths he cause
they are truths, and who make them uses
of the life, 231. What it is to be in en-
lightenment in reading the Word, 231.
When man does not immediately go to
the Lord, enlightenment which from the
Lord alone is spiritual then becomes more
and more natural, and at length sensual,
176. Enlightenment which is from the
Lord is turned into various lights and
heats with every one, according to the
state of mind, 155. The state of those


who are to come Into the Lord's New
Church, 354.

Enoch with his associates collected
correspondences from the men of the
Most Ancient Church, and transmitted
the knowledge of them, 202.

Enormities, The, which have flowed
into the church from the Lord’s being
called the son of Mary, and not the Son of
God, 94.

Enthusiasts. Men should be cautious
how they persuade themselves that the
zeal by which many are actuated while
speaking in puhlic is the Divine operation;
for a similar, and even warmer zeal is ex-
cited in the breasts of enthusiasts, 146.
Most enthusiasts after death fall into the
fancy that they themselves are the Holy
Spirit, 138.

Entrance, The, of the Lord into man
with Divine goods and truths is in the
highest region <pf the mind, 494. En-
trance of man into the world of spirits,
120. Entrance into the spiritual world is
generally on the third day after decease,
13S.

Enunciations, Prophetical, 265,
279. No announcements and answers
from heaven are made except by ultimates,
222.

Ephod, The, signifies the Divine truth
in its ultimate, and thus the Word in the
letter, 218.

Ephraim signifies the understanding of
the Word, 247.

Epicurus, 693.

Epistles of the Apostles, 355. An
epistle written by Paul while in the world,
but not published, 701.

Equilibrium. Man is in spiritual equi-
librium, which is free will, 383, 47s, 478.
There is no suhstance in the universe
which does not tend to equilibrium that
it may he in freedom, 496.

Error. Fundamental error of the
church at this day with regard to re-
demption, 132, 581. With regard to the
Holy Spirit, 153.

Esse in itself is Jehovah God, 21. The
Esse of God, or the Divine Esse cannot
be described, hecause above every idea
of thought, 18, 28. The Divine Esse is
Esse itself, from which all things are, and
which must be in all things, that they may
he, 38. Divine Good is the Esse of His
substance, 624. The will is the esse of
man’s life, 418. Esse (to be), fieri (to
become), and exislere (to exist); the end
is the esse , the cause the fieri, and the
effect the exislere, 210. Esse, unless a
suhstance, is only a thing of reasoning,
20. A distinction to be ohserved hetween
Esse and Essence , and between Ex-
ist ere and Existence as hetween what is
prior and posterior; and what is prior is
more universal than what is posterior, 21.
See Divine Esse.


INDEX


III9


Essence, The, supposes au esse, and
from esse essence is derived, 18, 22.
Essence and form make one, as esse and
existere , in. Essence without form is but
a mere thing of reasoning, 697. Essence
without form, or form without essence, is
nothing; for essence has no quality ex-
cept from form, nor is form subsisting
except from essence, 367. Charity is the
essence of faith and faith is the form of
charity; just as good is the essence of
truth and truth is the form of good, 367.
The essence of love is to love others out
of itself, to desire to he one with them, and
to make them happy, 43* The Essence of
the faith of the New Church is truth from
the Word, 344. Externals derive their
essence from internals, and both of these
derive theirs from the inmost, 220. Every
one acts what he acts from his essence,
145. The essence or nature which any
one appropriated to himself in the world
cannot he changed after death, 651. See
Divine Essence .

Essentials, The Three, called Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, in the Lord are one,
139, 166, 170, 172. The Lord, charity,
and faith are the three essentials of salva-
tion, 450; they are also the essentials of
the church, 712. All the essentials of the
church are in spiritual light, 165. There
are general and also particular essentials,
and together these mzdie one essence, 166.
The general essentials of man are soul,
body, and operation, r66.

Establishment of Order. See Ar-
rangement.

Eternal is i nfini te as to time, 415. To
eternity is predicated of things progressive
without end, 31.

Eternity of God, 27-31. The eter-
nity of God has relation to time, 27.
God’s infinity in relation to time is called
eternity, 31. By eternity the angels per-
ceive Divinity as to Existere , and Wis-
dom, 31. Set Infinity.

Ether. There is ether in land and
water by means of which the terraqueous
globe is held together and made to re-
volve, 30. Ether flows in and out without
affecting, 339. No quality of the ether can
be elevated to any quality of the aura, 32.
See Atmospheres .

Evening and night mean the last time
of the church, 765. The state of the church
before the Coming of the Lord is called
evening, 109.

Evil had its rise in man; to think that
God created evil, is horrible, 490. All
evil is from hell, 383. The evils of hell
should first be removed hefore man can
will the goods of heaven, 329, 435, 436,
520, 523, 614. Evil resides in every man’s
will from birth, 435. The evils into which
man is bora are in the will of the natural
man by generation, 587. Man inclines hy
birth to all kinds of evils, and from in-
clination he lusts after them, 612. See


Hereditary. The man is evil who has an
evil will, and still more so he whose under-
standing favors evil, 601. All evils are
contagious, 120. All kinds of evils arise
from the flesh, 675. God does not hold
man in evil, but withholds him from evil,
61. Man ought to purify himself from
evils, and not wait for the Lord to do tins
immediately, 331, 436. Man turns into
evil the good which is continually flowing
from God, hy turning himself away from
God and to himself, 490. Evil and good
cannot he together, 331. As far as evil is
removed, good is regarded and felt, 331.
So far as one does not will evil he wills
good, 437. To will evil and do good are
opposites, 435. Evil cannot exist in the
internal man and good in the external;
if they do, the good in the external is like
the healing of a wound, within which is
putrid matter, 435. The evil which man
does not see, recognize, and acknowl-
edge, remains; and that which remains
becomes more and more enrooted, until
it ohstructs the interiors; from which man
becomes first natural, then sensual, and at
last corporeal, 564. There are innumer-
able lusts inherent in every evil, 539.
Every evil with man has conjunction with
such in hell as are in similar evil, 613.
Every evil which man has actually appro-
priated to himself remains, 614. Evil and
faith in the one and true God cannot be
together, for evil is against God, and faith
is for Him, 657. Evil obliterates truth and
induces falsity, 77. The Lord imputes
good to man and not evil, 650.

Evil and Falsities. All evils and fal-
sities are from hell, 68. All things con-
trary to Divine order have relation to evil
and falsity, 398. Evil loves to he joined
with falsity and falsity with evil; their con-
junction viewed interiorly is not marriage
but adultery, 398. All insanity and folly
are from conjunction of evil and falsity,
398. Truth cannot be conjoined with
evil, nor good with falsity of evil. If
truth is adjoined to evil, it becomes no
longer truth but talsity, because it is falsi-
fied; and if good is adjoined to falsity of
evil, it becomes no longer good but evil,
because adulterated, 398.

Extnanition. The state of exmani-
tion of the Lord was the same as the state
of His humiliation before the Father, 104.
The' state of His erinanition was the state
of His progress to union, no. Without
this state the Lord could not have been
crucified, 104. See Glorification.

Existence. See Existere .

Existere. Existere , unless it be from
esse is nothing, 21. Distinction between
existere and existence, as between, what is
prior and what is posterior, 21. See Esse.
Divine Truth is the Existere of God’s sub-
stance, 624. God is not only Esse in itself,
but also Existere , 22.

Expanse, The. arises from the centre


I 120


INDEX


and not the reverse, 35- The spiritual
world is not in extension hut in its ap-
pearance, 475. The centre and expanse
of Dature and life, 35.

Expiation signifies removal of sins,
into which mao would rush if Jehovah
not clothed should be approached, 135.

Extense. The expanse around the sun
of heaven is not an extense, but still is in
the extense of the natural sun, and with
the living suhjects there according to re-
ception, and the reception is according to
forms and states, 35.

External. See Internal.

Eyes of the Spirit cannot be opened
with any one in evils and falsities, 777.
When the Lord manifested Himself to
His disciples, He first opened their eyes,
777 -

Fables were correspondences, from
which the earliest men spoke, 693, 201.
The fabulous tales of the Greeks were
derived from correspondences, 202, 275.
The fahles of the ancients concerning hu-
man souls, 1 71.

Fabulous. It is more than fabulous in
the eye of reason that the one God begat
a Son from eternity, 82. Fahulous faith of
the Christians concerning three Divine
Persons from eternity, and the passion of
the Lord that it was redemption, 121.

Faculty, The, for knowing, under-
standing, and being wise, is connate with
man, 335. Man is horn a faculty for
knowing and an inclination for loving,
48. God preserves always with man, even
the wicked, a faculty for understanding
and an inclination for loving, 70. There
are two faculties or parts of the mind, the
will and the understanding, 601, 658.
Description of the properties of each hy
itself, 658. In every man of sound mind
there is a faculty of receiving wisdom
from the Lord, also of receiving love, 718.
Man has the faculty of conjoining him-
self with the Lord and the Lord with him-
self for ever, 718. Every man has the
faculty of receiving redemption, 729.
Whence comes the faculty of knowing,
of understanding, and of speaking ra-
tionally, 719.

Faith is the form of charity, 367, 386.
Faith is no other than truth, 143, 347,
348, 356, 377, 385; it is truth in its light,
349- Faith is spiritual sight, 22, 344, 346.
Faith is nothing but a complex of truths
shining in the mind of man, 347. Faith is
to think aright concerning God and the
essentials of the church, 62 1. Faith is the
truth that man helieves from the Lord,
712. By faith is meant all the truth which
man from the Lord perceives, thinks, and
speaks, 365, 392. Faith is conjunction
with God hy truths of the understanding
and thought, 369. Faith and truth make
one; for the good of faith is as a soul, and


truths make its body, 618. The faith of
the church respecting God is like the soul
of the body, and doctrines are like its
members, 177- The faith of every church
is as seed from which all its dogmas spring,
178, 338. Such as the faith of a church is,
such is its doctrine, 177. Faith enters into
the parts of a system of theology, as blood
enters into the members, 343. The true
faith is the one only faith; it is faith in the
Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ, and is
with those who helieve Him to he the Son
of God, God of Heaven and Earth, and
one with the Father, 379. Faith in the one
and true God causes good to be good in in-
ternal form; and faith in a false god causes
good to he good in outward form only,
which is not good, 655. Saving faith is in
the Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ,
337, 339,. 384- The life and essence of
faith are in and from the Lord, 347. It is
a law of order that man should procure to
himself faith by truths from the Word;
and also that man should justify himself,
71. The truths of which faith in the Di-
vine Human of the Lord God the Saviour
consists, are like stars which form that
faith hy their lights, 137. Man takes this
faith from the Word hy means of natural
light, in which is knowledge, thought, and
persuasion; but the Lord causes it to be-
come, in such as helieve, conviction, trust,
and confidence, 137. How natural faith,
which is only persuasion, becomes spiri-
tual, which is real acknowledgment, ri.
Faith is formed by man’s going to the
Lord, learning truths from the Word, and
living according to truths, 347, 348.
Abundance of truths, coherent as if bun-
dled together, exalts and perfects faith,
349. Truths of faith however numerous,
and however diverse, make one from the
Lord, 354. Faith in its essence is spiritual,
hut natural in its form, 339. When man
is in spiritual faith he is also in natural;
for spiritual is inwardly in natural faith,
360. Faith in the Lord is not indetermi-
nate, but has its terminus, whence it comes
and whither it goes, 339. Faith and life
according to it establish the special church
which is with the individual * man, 335.
Nothing of faith is from man but from the
Lord, 359. Man can aquire faith from
himself, 356. See Charily and Faith.

Faith of the New Church. It is a
gate through which entrance is made into
a temple, 1. Universal form of this faith,
1, 2. Particular form, 2, 3. The Esse of
the faith of the New Church is, 1. Con-
fidence in the Lord God the Saviour Jesus
Christ; 2. Trust that be who lives well
and believes aright is saved by Him. The
Essence of this faith is Truth from the
Word. Its Existence is, r. Spiritual
Sight; 2. Accordance of truths; 3. Con-
viction; 4. Acknowledgment inscribed on
the mind, 344. The first element of faith


INDEX


1 1 2 1


in the Lord is the acknowledgment that
He is the Son of God, 342. See Son 0}
God. The faith of the New Church is,
that there has heen but one Divine Per-
son, thus one God, from eternity; that
there is a Divine Trinity united in one
Person; this faith is in a visible God, ac-
cessible, and with whom can he conjunc-
tion, in whom, as the soul in the body, is
the invisible God, inaccessible, and with
whom cannot be conjunction. The faith
of the New Church attributes to the visible
God in whom is the invisible all power to
impute, and also to work out the effects of
salvation; it is in one God at once Creator,
Redeemer, and Saviour; it teaches repent-
ance, reformation, regeneration, and thus
remission of sins, with man’s cooperation;
an imputation of good and evil, and at the
same time of faith in Jesus Christ Him-
self, God, Redeemer, and Saviour; also
free will on man’s part to apply himself for
reception and cooperating; it conjoins
faith in the Lord and charity toward the
neighhor as two inseparable things, and
so it makes religion, 647. It is now lawful
to enter intellectually into the arcana of
faith, 508. See New Church.

Faith of the Old Church, or of the
Church of the Present Day. . In this
faith, which in its internal form is a faith
in three Gods, and in its external form in
one, there are falsities, 178. When a be-
lief in three Gods was introduced into the
Christian Church, at the time of the
Nicene Council, they hanished all the
good of charity and the truth of faith, for
these two are wholly inconsistent with the
mental worship of three Gods and the oral
worship at the same time of one God, 634.
The faith of the present day prevents the
truths which are in the Word from being
seen clearly, 618. The idea of three Gods
induces stupid faith, 183. Faith in an
invisible God is actually blind, because
the human mind does not see its God,
339. That God is the cause of evil comes
from the faith of this day, 489. Faith with-
out charity is not faith, 392. Faith is not
faith unless conjoined with charity, 336,
355. 3^8, 377, 387. Faith separate from
charity is like the light in winter, and faith
conjoined with charity is like the light in
spring, 385, 618. Actual repentance finds
very great resistance in the Reformed
Christian world, primarily because of
belief that repentance and charity con-
tribute nothing to salvation, hut faith
alone — to the exclusion of man’s coopera-
ting from or as from himself, 561. These
three, faith, imputation, and Christ’s
merit, are one in the present church, and
may be called a trine; for if one of the
three were taken away, the present theol-
ogy would hecome nothing, 627. This
faith is not Christian, because at variance
with the Word, and the imputation be-


longing to this faith is vain, because the
merit of Christ cannot be imputed, 627.
This faith is described in the Apocalypse
by a dragon; and that of the New Church,
by a woman encompassed by the sun, on
whose head was a crown of twelve stars,
648. Merely natural faith, or faith desti-
tute of spiritual essence, is not faith, but
persuasion only, or knowledge, 339, 345.
A man who is merely natural ana dead as
to faith, can indeed speak and teach as
to faith, charity and God, but not from
faith, charity, and God, 384. The practice
of speaking from memory and recollection,
although not at the same time from
thought and intelligence, produces a
species of faith, 77. If the faith is false it
plays the harlot with every truth in the
Word, and perverty and falsifies it, and
makes man insane in spiritual things, 177.
There is a true, a spurious, and a hypo-
critical faith. 378, 380. Spurious faith, in
which falsities are mingled with truths,
345. 346. 380. Hypocritical or Pharisaic
faith is of the mouth and not of the heart,
345, 346, 381. Meretricious faith is from
truths falsified, and adulterous faith from
goods adulterated, 345, 346. Closed or
blind faith is faith in mystical things,
which are believed although it is not
known whether they are truth or falsities,
or whether they are above reason or con-
trary to it, 345, 34 fi- Wandering faith is
a faith in more Gods than one, 345. Pur-
blind faith is a faith in any other than the
true God, and with Christians in any but
the Lord God the Saviour, 345, 346.
Visionary and preposterous faith is die
appearance of falsity as truth from in-
genious confirmation, 345, 346. There is
no faith with the evil, 382, 385.

Fallacies spread in the church; their
origin, 57. Appearances of truth may be
taken for naked truths, which when con-
firmed become fallacies, 254.

Falsify, To, the Word is to take
truths from it and apply them to confirm
falsities, 162. Examples of truth falsi-
fied, 162.

Falsities. All falsities are from bell,
68. Every one who is in falsity from evil,
is as to his spirit in hell with devils, 69.
From one falsity flow falsities in a series,
132. In the light of the world, separate
from the light of the higher regions, falsi-
ties appear as truths, and truths as falsi-
ties, 40. Truths are not only covered
over by falsities, hut also obliterated and
rejected, 246. With those who read the
Word from the doctrine of false religion,
the teuths of the Word are as in the shadow
of night, and falsities as in the light of day
232. Confirmed falsity remains and can-
not be rooted out, 254. Evils accompany
falsities and cling to them, 281. Falsity
not of evil can he conjoined with good,
398. Falsity when it touches the truth,


1122


INDEX


is like the point of a needle touching the the children of Israel, and also by their
fibril of a nerve or the pupil of the eye, eating together of the sacrifices, 433.
258. Falsity does not see truth, but truth Feasts in heaven, 742, 744.


sees falsity, 759. Falsities close up the
understanding, 508. Origin of many bor-
rihle falsities in the present church, 581,
582.

Fame as painted by the ancients, 375.

Families are recognized from their first
father, 103. Spiritual families, 378.

Fanaticism. Origin of the many fana-
tical and heretical opinions introduced
into the world, in every country where
there is religion, 58, 94, 628.

Fantasy is produced by sensual
thought, while ideas from interior thought
are shut out, 80. Fantasies are ideal
thought, 462. In fantasy the apparent is
believed to he reality, 339. By fantasies
infernal spirits can represent magnificent
things, by closing up the interiors of the
mind ana opening only the exteriors, 187,
662, 819. Those axe in the fantasy of lust
who think interiorly in themselves, and
indulge the imagination excessively by
talking to themselves; they almost sepa-
rate the spirit from connection with the
body, and from vision they inundate the
understanding, 662. Fantasy about pre-
eminence, 661.

Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are the
three essentials of one God, which make
one, as the soul, body, and operation of
man, 168. The Father and the Son, that
is, the Divine and the Human in the Lord,
are united like soul and hody, 98, 188;
the union is reciprocal, 99. No one can
see the Father, nor know Him, nor come
to nor believe in Him, unless through His
Human, 94, 113, 188. By the Father is
meant the Divine Good, 88. It is lawful in
a natural sense to call any one father, hut
not in a spiritual sense, 226. The child
has soul and life from the father, 82.

Fatuous light is the light of the con-
firmation of falsity, 162. They who are in
fatuous spiritual light, 334.

Fault. The Lord is not to blame if
man is not saved; man is in fault in not
cooperating, 580, 720. It is wonderful
that one can find fault with another who
is intending evil, and say, “Do not do
that, hecause it is sin,” and yet it is hard
for him to say so to himself, 535.

Feasts. Dinners and suppers of char-
ity are among those only who are in mu-
tual love from similar faith, 433. Feasts
in the andent churches were feasts of
charity, as also in the primitive Christian
Church, 727. With the Christians of the
primitive church feasts were instituted
that they might he glad from the heart to-
gether and he conjoined with one another,
43«v The spiritual sphere which reigned
in those feasts was of love to the Lord and
the neighhor, 433. Consociations of
minds were signified by banquets among


Feel, To. It has been provided by
the Lord that man should feel in himself as
his those things which flow from without,
and should therefore produce them of him-
self as his, although nothing of them is
his, 362. As far as evil is removed, good
is regarded and felt, 331.

Febrillous, The, or medullary sub-
stance of the brain consists of perpetual
bundlings of fibrils issuing from the gland-
ules of the cortical suhstance, 351.

Field in the Word means doctrine,
350.

Fight. Good cannot fight from itself,
but fights by truths; nor can evil fight
from itself, but it fights from falsities,
596. Man is to fight wholly as of him-
self, 596. It is the Lord who fights for
man, and against the evil spirits who in-
fest him, 596, 599.

Figs signify the goods of charity and
faith in the natural man, 461, 600.

Fig Leaves signify truths of the natu-
ral man which were falsified, 638.

Fig Tree signifies natural good, 609.

Finite. Ail that is created is called
finite with respect to God who is Infinite,
29, 33, 470. The Infinite cannot create
any thing hut what is finite, 470. What is
infinite appears to man as nothing, he-
cause man is finite, and thinks from what
is finite; therefore, if the finite which ad-
heres to his thought were taken away, it
would seem to him as if the residue were
nothing, 29. The finite is not capable of
seeing God's infinity, 28. Finite things
are receptacles of the infinite, 33.

Fire in the Word in its spiritual sense
signifies love; the fire of the altar and
candlestick in the tabernacle, among the
Israelites, represented nothing but Di-
vine love, 35. Fire signifies the Divine
good of love, 684, 686. By infernal fire,
in the Word, is meant enjoyment in evil,
455. The fire seen in hell is anger against
those who contradict, isp. _ The sun
from which nature takes its rise and its
essence is pure fire, 12, 41, 472. There
are two properties in fire, that of burn-
ing and shining, 39.

First, The, and the Beginning, from
which are all things, is the Divine Esse,
24. In the Word Jehovah is called the
First and the Last, 84, 102, 261. There
is everywhere a first, mediate, and ulti-
mate; and the first passes through the
mediate to its ultimate, 214, 210. First
in time and first in end, 336. The first in
end is that to which all things look, 406.
That which is first in time is not first
actually, but apparently, 336. That
which is first in end is actually first, 336.
Faith is first in time, but charity first in
end, 336. First use of baptism is intro-


INDEX


,1123


duction into the Christian Church, 677.
See Ultimate.

Fishes signify truths in the natural
man, 635. See also 32.

Five. By five is meant some , 199.

Flame. By the flame of a sword turn-
ing itself (Gen. in. 24) is signified Divine
Truth in ultimates, like the Word in the
letter, which can be so turned, 260. Flame
is the all of light, 388. A flame is no thing
but smoke on fire, 159.

Flattery. Origin of flattery, 592,
hi, 147.

Flesh, The, signifies the good of love
and charity, 367. It signifies spiritual
good, 70s.

Flowers and Blossoms. Blossoms
which precede fruit are means for straining
the sap, which is its blood, and of sepa-
rating its grosser from its purer parts, 586.
There are flowers which open at the rising
of the sun, and dose at his setting, 308.

Food. Heavenly food in its essence is
love, wisdom, and use together, 735.
Food is given to every one in heaven ac-
cording to the use he promotes, 735. See
Idle . The nourishment of the soul is
from no other than spiritual food, 494.
See Meals.

Forest means knowledge, 200.

Foreskin signifies filthy loves of the
flesh, 675.

Form. God is the very and only and
thus the first Form, and His Form is the
very Human, 20, 37. The human form is
nothing else than the image of heaven,
739. All heaven is in the greatest effigy
a form of Divine order , 65 . Love operates
in and by form, 37. Forms receiving faith,
truth, love, charity, and good have been
created; human and angelic minds are
these forms, 40. Those things which flow
in from the Lord are received by man ac-
cording to his form, 366. By form is
meant man’s state as to his love and wis-
dom together; the form or recipient state
induces variations, 366. Man’s form
which is induced by the states of his life
varies the operations, 366. The man who
divides the Lord, charity, and faith, is not
a form receiving but a form destroying
them, 367. Form is not subsisting except
from essence, 367. Without form there
is no quality, 753. Quality is from no
other source than form, 53. See Essence ,
Substance.

Formation. How they are effected,
38. Formation of faith, 347.

Formula Concordde, The, strongly
confirms that the human nature of Christ
is exalted to Divine majesty; 10 1. And
that in Christ, God is Man, and Man
God, 1 12, 137. That man has no free
will in spiritual things is taught in the
book of the Evangelical, called Formula
Concordia. ; to which book the priests
when they are inaugurated, make oath,


356, 463, 484- .The Formula Concordia
puts oral confession in place of repentance,
516. It says that it is damnable idolatry
if the trust and faith of the heart be placed
in Christ not only according to His Di>
vine but also according to His Human
nature, 798. It admits the direful dogma
of predestination, 798.

Foundations, The, of the wall of the
New Jerusalem signify the doctrines of the
New Church, from the letter of the Word,
209, 217.

Fountain, The, of Jacob signifies the
Word, 190. Drinking water means to be
instructed, 693.

Fowls. Wonderful things about them,
12. See Birds.

Foxes. Diabolical love causes its
lusts to appear in the distance in hell like
wild beasts, some like foxes, 45.

Frankincense signifies spiritual good,
205.

Free, The, in the Word are those who
are conjoined with the Lord, 106. See
Slaves.

Free Will is that man can will and do
and think and speak to all appearance as
of himself, 489. As long as man lives in
the world, he is kept in the middle between
heaven and hell, and there in spiritual
equilibrium, which is free will, 475, 477.
The origin of free will is from the spiritual
world where man’s mind is kept by the
Lord, 475. God is perpetually present
and continually strives and acts in man,
and also touches his free will, but never
violates it, 74, 504. It is from free will that
man is man, and not a beast, 469. If man
were deprived of free will in the things
which he wills and thinks, he would no
more breathe than a statue, 480. Man
has free will in spiritual things, 479, 480.
Man has free will in natural things; but
this be has from his free will in spiritual,
481, 482. The freedom of determination
and the will in man may be called living
effort; for when will ceases, action ceases,
and when freedom of determination
ceases, will ceases, 482. Without free will
in spiritual things, the Word would be of
no use, and consequently the church
would be nothing, 483, . 485. Without
free will in spiritual things there would
not be any thing in man by which the
Lord could conjoin Himself with him,
485. That there may be reciprocal con-
junction free choice is given to man, from
which he can walk in the way to heaven
or to hell, 371. Man has free will which
he can turn to good or. evil use, 763. If
there were no free will in spiritual things,
God would be the cause of evil, and so
there would be no imputation, 489.
Every man may know that he has free
will in spiritual things from the observa-
tion of ms own thought, 497. Free will
itself, in spiritual things, resides in man’s


1124


INDEX


soul in all perfection; from that it flows
into liis mind, into its two parts which axe
the will and understanding, and through
these into the senses of the body and
speech and actions, 498. If men had not
free will in spiritual things, all might have
been led in a day to heheve in the Lord,
500. Every man, evil as well as good, has
spiritual free will, 504.

Freedom is of man’s will; and because
it is of the will it is also of his love, 493.
All freedom from the Lord is freedom in-
deed, but that which is from hell is bond-
age, 495. Every spiritual thing of the
church that enters in freedom and is re-
ceived from freedom, remains; but not the
reverse, 493, 496, 499. It is this freedom
of man in which the Lord dwells with
him, in his soul, 498, 580. If one denies
that there is freewill in spiritual things, he
changes spiritual freedom into merely
natural and at length into infernal free-
dom, 495. When the freedom of speech
and writing is restrained, freedom of
thought also, of investigating matters in
their full extent, is kept in restraint, 814.

Friendship is natural conjunction, but
love is spiritual conjunction, 446. Friend^
ship of love contracted with a man with-
out regard to his quality as to the spirit,
is detrimental after death, 446, 449.
Wherein consists friendship of love, 447.
By the friendship of love is meant interior
friendship; it is distinct from external
friendship, which is only of the person,
and which exists for the sake of various
enjoyments of the body and senses, and
for die sake of dealings, 446. External
friendship may he formed with any one,
446. Friends who differ as to the spirit
are gradually parted, and this is so done
that they are not sensihle of it, 447.
Those who in the world contracted the
friendship of love, cannot like others be
separated according to order, and as-
signed to the society correspondent with
their life; for they are bound together in-
teriorly as to the spirit, nor can they be
severed, hecause they are like branches
iogralted into hranches, 448. It is differ-
ent with those who love the good in an-
other; these, if they do not observe the
same things after death, immediately
withdraw from the friendship, 449.
Friendship of love among the evil is intes-
tine hatred of each other, 454, 455.
Friendship among thieves, rohbers, and
pirates, 455. Friendship among those
who have led civil and moral lives for die
sake of various uses as ends and yet have
not curhed the lusts in the internal man,
455. See also 44.

Frogs signify reasonings from desire
of falsifying truths, 635.

Fructification. Perpetual increase of
good and love, 718.

Fruits are the good works which the
Lord does by the man, and which the


man does out of himself from the Lord,
462.

Full, Fulness. The Word is in its ful-
ness in the letter, 229. In this sense Di-
vine truth is in its fulness, 260. The Lord
alooe, in the whole spiritual world, is
fully Man, 109. The fulness of time in
which the Lord came into the world, and
in which He is to come, is the ending, 755.
The universe, as to essence and order, is
the fulness of God, 63. All things are full
of God, and every one takes his portion
from that fulness, 364.

Functions, or Offices. There are
with the Lord two offices, of Priest and
King; whatever the Lord did from Divine
love of good, He did from His priestly
office; but whatever from Divine wisdom
or truth, from His kingly office, 114.
There are functions in heaven, 694.

Gabriel and Michael are not the
names of two in heaven, hut by those
names are meant all in heaven who are
in wisdom concerning the Lord and wor-
ship Him, 300.

Games. Literary schools, 694. Games
and shows in heaven, 745.

Garden signifies wisdom, 200. A
garden signifies intelligence, 461, 467.

Garments signify truths, and garments
of white and fine linen signify Divide
truths, 686, 815. Garments in the spir-
tual world, 742, 804. Garment or vesture
of the Lord signifies the spiritual sense of
the Word; their dividing His garmeots
and casting the lot upon His vesture sig-
nified that they dispersed all truths of the
Word, but not its spiritual sense, 130.
A spirit thinks himself such as his dress is,
663.

Gates. Baptism and the Holy Supper
are like two gates to eternal fife, 721.
By Baptism, the first gate, every Chris-
tian is introduced into what the church
teaches respecting the other life; all of
which serves as means hy which man may
he prepared for heaven and led to it.
The other gate is the Holy Supper;
through this, every man who has suffered
himself to be prepared and led by the
Lord is introduced into heaven. There
are no other universal gates, 721.

Gathered. What is meant when it is
said of those who die, that they are gath-
ered to their own, 607.

Gatherings, Social, in the primitive
church were among such as called them-
selves brethren in Christ; they were as-
semblies of charity, because there was
spiritual brotherhood, 434. There are
assemblies of friendship, but as yet no
gatherings of charity, 434. Social gather-
ings where friendship emulating charity
does not join minds, are mere pretences
of friendship, and deceptive attestations
of mutual love, 434.

General. Particulars adapt the 1 * 1 -


INDEX


1125


selves to tbcir general, and the general
disposes them so that they agree, 47.
Particulars taken together are called a
general, 60. In man there are general
and particular things, and the general in-
clude the particular therein, and they
join themselves so that one is of another,
60.

Generation of men, 92, 103. See
Soul. In the Word natural generations
signify spiritual generations, 583. All
that is said of natural can he said of spiri-
tual generation, 584.

Genesis. First chapters transcribed
from the ancient Word by Moses, 279.

Genevieve, 826.

Genius of the Most Ancient Church,
202. A common genius reigns among
peoples speaking the same language, S13.

Gentiles. Ancient Gentiles acknowl-
edged Jove, as supreme God, socalled per-
haps from Jehovah, g, 275. The ancient
Gentiles, because they thought materially
of God, and of God’s attributes, not only
made three gods but more, even a hun-
dred; for they made a god of every attri-
bute, 623. They who believe in one God,
and live according to the precepts of their
religion, are saved by means of their faith
and life, 107. Gentiles are averse to
Christianity solely on account of faith in
three Gods therein, 183. Africans and
Gentiles in the spiritual world, 835. See
Nations and People.

Geometry teaches that there is nothing
perfect unless a trine, 387. There are
series in geometry which go on to infinity,
32 -

Germans. Character of the Germans,

813. The German nation devotes itself
little to judgment, hut rather to memory,

814. Germans keep spiritual things in-
scribed upon the memory, and seldom ele-
vate them into the higher understanding,
but only admit them to the lower, from
which they reason; thus differently from
free nations, 815. A German, a native of
Saxony, 112.

Germany, i < 5 i , 813.

Germination. Its beginning and con-
tinuance, 499.

Glandular substance of the brain, 351.

Glaucoma, 346.

Globe, 33. By what it is held together
and made to revolve, 30. See Ether.

Glorification, The, of the Lord is
the unition of the Human with the Divine.
This was done successively and fully com-
pleted by the passion of the cross, 126,
128, 97. State of glorification, 104. See
Exinanition. The Lord was in the state
of glorification when transfigured before
three disciples, 104. Glorification or cel-
ebration of the Lord, 625, 738.

Glorify. The Lord asked the Father
to glorify His Name, His Human; to glo-
rify is to make Divine by union with Him-


self, 1 10. Tbe Lord glorified His Human,
made it Divine, in the same maimer in
which He regenerates man, makes him
spiritual, 105, 684. The Lord after temp-
tation glorifies man, renders him spiri-
tual, 684.

Glory. By glory is signified the spiri-
tual sense of the Word, 198, 271, 776; and
its transparence through the sense of its
letter, 271. Glory, in the Word, when
used concerning the Lord, signifies Di-
vine truth united to Divine good, 128.
The glory in which the Lord is to come
signifies Divine Truth in light, in which
the spiritual sense of the Word is, 780.
Why it is said in Isaiah (iv. 5), Upon all
the glory a covering, 213.

Goal, 721.

Goats. The Lord separated evil from
good, and goats from sheep, 95. Com-
parison with he-goats, 316.

God is one in essence and person, 2.
Tbe Sacred Scripture not only teaches
that there is a God, but also that God is
one, 7. There is universal influx from
God into the souls of men, that there is a
God, and that He is one, 8. There is no
nation having religion and sound reason
which does not acknowledge a God, and
that God is one, 9. As to what the one
God is, nations and people have differed
and still differ, 11. Human reason, from
many things in the world, may perceive
that there is a God, and that He is one,
12. Angels do not say Gods, and they
cannot, 25. The universe is like a stage,
upon which are exhihited testimonies
that there is a God, and that He is one,
12. God Himself, as He is in the inmosts
of the Word, cannot be seen hy any crea-
ture, 6. God dwells in every use, because
He dwells in the end, 13. See Uses. God
is the all of the church, r4, 170, 297. The
one God is Substance and Form, 20, 76.
His Form is the very Human, 20. God
is not only Esse in itself, but also Existere
in itself, 21. God is the Itself, Only, and
First, 22. God is called Alpha and
Omega, 19. A God from God is not pos-
sible, 23, 364. God is infinite, since He
is and exists in Himself, and all things in
the universe are and exist from Him, 28.
God was hefore the world, 29, 31, 67.
It is vain to wish to know what God is in
His esse or suhstance; but it is enough to
acknowledge Him from created things, in
which He is infinitely, 28. God, since
the world was made, is in space without
space, and in time without time, 30, 280.
God is Love itself and Wisdom itself,
Good itself and Truth itself, 37, 38. God,
because He is Love itself and Wisdom it-
self, is Life itself, Life in itself, 39. God
is omnipotent, omniscient, and omni-
present by means of the wisdom of His
love, 50. His power and will are one;
and because He wills nothing but good,


1 126


INDEX


therefore He ean do nothing but good,
56. God is the Same; not the same simply,
but infinitely; that is, the Same from eter-
nity to eternity; variableness is in the re-
cipient, 25, 366. God is Order, and at
the creation He introduced order into the
universe and into every part of it, 52.
God perceives, sees, and knows every
thing, even the most minute, which is
done according to order; and thence also
wbat is done contrary to order, 59, 62.
God is omnipresent from firsts to lasts of
His order, 63, 64. God, who is one, de-
scended and became Man to accom-
plish the work of redemption, 83, 224.
God could not redeem man, except by
the assumed Human, 84. God Himself,
the Creator of the Universe, descended to
become the Redeemer, and thus Creator
anew, 637. God, though He descended as
the Divine Truth, did not separate the
Divine Good, 88. God assumed the Hu-
man according to His Divine order, 89.
God came into the world as the Word;
then God, by the Human, which was Di-
vine Truth, put on all power, 224. Thus
God hecame Man, and Man God, in one
person, 101, 838. In Christ, Man is God,
and God Man, 101, 102. Besides the
Lord Jesus Christ there is no God, 294.
God the Saviour Jesus Christ is the visible
God in whom is the invisible, 339, 648,
787. All who acknowledge and worship
one God, Creator of the universe, enter-
tain the idea of God as Man, 836. He
who forms an idea of God as the Sun of
the universe, will from that idea see and
acknowledge His omnipresence, omni-
science, and omnipotence, 837. God is
angry with no one; He does not avenge,
tempt, punish, cast into hell, nor con-
demn; these things are as far from God as
heaven is from hell, and infinitely farther,
135. Grace on the part of God, as it is
infinite, is also eternal, 161. God is
Mercy itself, 256. Every one is allotted
his place in heaven according to his idea
of God, 163, 621, that is, the touchstone
by which are tested the gold and silver,
that is, good and truth, as to their quality
with man, 163. Unless in thought God is
approached as Man, every idea of God
perishes, falling like sight directed upon
the universe, into nothingness, or into
nature or to what is within nature, 538,
787. All things have their heing, live,
and are moved in God and from Him,
679. Whoever denies God is already
among the condemned, and after death is
gathered to his companions, 14.

Godoschalcds, 486, 798.

Gons. Many gods of the Gentiles were
no other than men; some of whom they
worshipped first as saints, afterwards as
divinities, and lastly as gods, 292.

Gog signifies external worship without
internal, 200.


Gold in the Word signifies good, 203;
celestial good, which is of the highest
heaven, 205, 609. Gold signifies internal
good, 5^5. The gold of Sheba (Ps. lxxii.
1 3 _i s) ^ wisdom from Divine truth, 706.
Mice of gold, 203, 595*

Good. All that proceeds from love is
called good, 38. The enjoyment by which
love manifests itself, one calls good, 38.
Every good forms itself by truths, and
clothes itself with them, and thus dis-
tinguishes itself from other goods, 38.
What good without truth is, 87. All good
of love and charity is from God, 41, 69.
God is Good itself, 38. In good God is
omnipresent, continually urging to he
received; and if He is not received still
He does not withdraw, for if He were to
withdraw, man would instantly die, would
lapse into nothing, 490, 766, 774. No one
can do good from love of good except from
God, 333. Goods are manifold: there are
spiritual good and natural good, and both
are joined in genuine moral good, 398.
A man is to be loved according to the
quality of the good in him. Wherefore
good itself is essentially the neighbor, 410,
417, 418. See Neighbor. Good is in
man, and every work which proceeds
from him is good, when the Lord, charity,
and faith reside in his internal, 373.
Every good with man has conjunction
with such in heaven as are in similar good,
613. Good which is good in outward
form only is not good, 655. They who
deny God are not willing, and therefore
not able, to receive good from any other
source than from their selfhood; and
whatever proceeds from this is spiritually
evil, however good it seems naturally,
382. Evil and good cannot be together;
and as far as evil is removed, good is re-
garded, 331. He is good who has a good
will, and still more be whose understand-
ing favors it, 601.

Good and Truth. All good resides in
the will, and all truth in the understand-
ing, 87. The understanding is tbe re-
ceptacle of truth, and the will of good,
249. Good is of the will and truth is of
the understanding, 660. Good is the very
esse of a thing and truth is its exislere;
nothing exists in heaven and the world
that does not have relation to these two,
397. It is according to Divine order for
good and truth to he conjoined and not
separated, 398. The Lord continually
wills to implant truth and good, or faith
and charity, in man, 145. In every thing
of the Word there is the marriage of good
and truth, 248. The marriage of good
and truth in man, 249. Good loves truth,
and truth loves good, and one desires to
be joined with the other, 398. Good or
truth alone is nothing; but by marriage
they exist and hecome something, 624.
See Divine Good and Divine Truth.


INDEX


1127


Goodness. Natural goodness is of the
flesh alone, born of parents; hut spiritual
goodness is of the spirit, bom anew of the
Lord, 537. They who do good from natu-
ral goodness only and not from religion,
are not accepted after death, 537.

Good Works are to do well from wil-
ling well, 374. Charity and faith are to-
gether in good works, 373. Charity and
good works are distinct, like willing well
and doing well, 420, 42 r.

Gottenburg, r37.

Government, The, of three Divine
persons in heaven would be like the gov-
ernment of three kings in one kingdom,
141.

Grace, Divine, is an attribute of the
Divine Essence, 16 1. Grace on the part
of God, as it is infinite is also eternal.
The grace of God may be lost on man if
be does not receive it. If grace were to
depart from God there would be an end
of all heaven and the human race, for
which reason grace on the part of God en-
dures for ever, 161.

Great Heaven. It is a law of order
that man from his little heaven or spiri-
tual world should govern his microcosm
or little natural world, as God from His
great heaven or spiritual world governs
the macrocosm or the natural world in
even' part, 71.

Greece, 202, 275.

Greek Church. Its error, 153. See.
Church {Greek).

Grief. While a man suffers as to the
body, his soul does not suffer, but only
grieves; and God takes away this grief
after the victory, and wipes it away as
one wipes tears from the eyes, 126.

Grind, To. By grinding in a mill is
meant to seek from the Word what is
serviceable for doctrine, 161.

Grove, By a, is meant intelligence,
200.

Gulf. Between heaven and hell there
is a great gulf, 56. The Lord separates
hell from heaven by a gulf, 74.

Gutta Serena, closed or blind faith,
346, 620, 645.

Gymnasiums in the spiritual world,
35 , 136.

H. The h added to names of Ahram
and Sarai, signified infinite and eternal,
278.

Habit in repentance, 562. Habit makes
second nature, 563. Disusage makes man
old in habits, etc., 561.

Hail signifies infernal falsity, 635.

Hair signifies truth in ultimates, and
thus the letter of the Word, 223.

Hamburg. Its people in the spiritual
world, 816.

Hand. The right hand of God sig-
nifies omnipotence, 136. The hands are
the ultimates of man, 462.


Happiness. Eternal happiness, 731,
752. Eternal happiness does not pertain to
place, but to state, 739. From enjoyments
of soul with thoughts of mind and sensa-
tions of body, comes eternal happiness,
744. Happiness from sensations of the
body alone is not eternal but temporal,
which comes to an end, and sometimes
becomes unhappiness, 744.

Harlot signifies falsifications, 277.

Harmony. Pre-estahlished, 695. See
Influx.

Hatred breathes revenge; inwardly
cherishes murder, 612. Unless the in-
ternal man is regenerated, it is hatred
against all charity, 503.

Head signifies intelligence which an-
gels and men have from the Lord, 223.

Head. In the spiritual world, the
hinder parts of the heads of those who
have enjoyment from love of doing evil
are hollow, 160, 563.

Heart and Lungs. The heart and
lungs are the two essentials hy which hu-
man hodies subsist, 37. The heart and
lungs operate in every thing there; be-
cause the heart corresponds to love, and
the lungs to wisdom, 37. The heart cor-
responds to the will and its goods, and
the lungs to the understanding and its
truths, 87, 367, 601. The heart, without
respiration of the lungs, does not produce
motion or feeling, hut respiration of the
lungs from the heart does hoth, 87, 154,
367. Conjunction of heart with lungs,
and of lungs with heart, 371. The heart
acts, and the artery hy its sheaths co-
operates; hence circulation. It is so with
the lungs; the air hy pressure according
to the height acts, and the rihs cooperate
with the lungs, the lungs with the rihs;
hence respiration of every memhrane,
577. In the Word heart signifies the will;
a new heart means a new will, 601. A
new heart means the will of good, 143.
See Lungs.

Heat and Light. From the sun of the
spiritual world proceed heat which is
love, and tight which is wisdom, 39.
The heat and tight which proceed from
the Lord as a sun contain all the infinities
in the Lord; the heat all of His Love, and
the light all of His Wisdom, 365. Heat
and light are in the world, because they
correspond to the Divine Love and Wis-
dom, 37. Natural heat and tight serve
for clothing and support to spiritual heat
and tight, that they may pass to man, 75,
360. The tight and heat in which angels
are, essentially are nothing but affection
of love and truth of wisdom, 385. Spiri-
tual tight in its essence is truth; and spiri-
tual heat is good, 392. The heat of the
spiritual world aspires to generation, and
through it to continuance of creation,
585. Spiritual heat which is love pro-
duces natural heat with men, so far as


1128


INDEX


to inflame their faces and limbs, 35. The
heat of the hlood, or the vital heat is from
no other source than love that makes life,
35, 496. The heat of polygamic love, 834.

Heaven constitutes the Lord’s Body,
719. Heaven in the complex is a form of
Divine order, 65. The angelic heaven
is as a head to the church upon earth, in
both of which the Lord is the Soul, 10.
The end of creation was a heaven from
the human race, 13, 66, 773. Heaven is
arranged into societies according to all
varieties of the love of good, 15, 32, 447.
The whole heaven is arranged into its
form and preserved in it from Divine
Love hy Divine Wisdom, 37. The heaven
is in the sight of God as one man, 65, 68,
1 19, 268, 354, 608. There is plenary
correspondence hetween heaven and man,
65. Three are three heavens, highest,
middle, and lowest, 119, 212, 580; these
are distinct according to three degrees of
love and wisdom, 608; like head, hody,
and feet; the highest heaven makes the
head, the middle the body, and the ulti-
mate the feet, 608. The essence of the
heavens is love, and their existence wis-
dom, 386. The Lord is forming a new
heaven, from those who helieve in the
Lord God the Saviour and go immediately
to Him, 108, 781, 784. The enjoyments
of heaven are of love toward the neighbor
and to God, 455. If any wicked person
is admitted into heaven where charity and
faith in the Lord reign, thick darkness
comes over his eyes, giddiness and mad-
ness come on his mind, pain and torment
on his hody, and he becomes as if without
life, 641. There are administrative offices
in heaven and dignities attached; hut they
who fill them love nothing more than to do
uses, because they are spiritual, 403,
694, 736. In the heavens are most glad-
some companionships, 734, 745; repasts,
735; concerts, games, theatrical exhibi-
tions, 745. In the eastern heaven are
they who are in love from the Lord, but
in the southern heaven those who are in
wisdom from the Lord, 386. Infants in
heaven, 728, 729. The Mohammedan
heaven, 832. Artificial heavens, 819.

Hebrew Letters, 241, 278.

Heirs. They who have faith in the
Lord and are not in evils are called heirs,
729.

Heliconeum, 692, 693, 276.

Helices. The spiritual organism of the
mind consists of helices, 578.

Hell exists from men who, by aver-
sion from God, after death became devils
and satans, 78. Hell consists of myriads,
since it consists of all those who, from the
creation, by evils of life and falsities of
faith have alienated themselves from
God, 123. Hell is arranged into innu-
merable societies, according to all varie-
ties of love of evil, 32, 447. Id the sight of


j God hell Is as one monster, 68, 123.
Those in bell do not acknowledge God,
but worship as gods those who have
power over others, 45. All in hell have
been men, 589. Many in hell are skilled
in arts unknown in our world, in which,
they practise bow they may attack, en-
snare, beset, and assault those who are
from heaven, 123. When the Lord came
into the world, the power of hell pre-
vailed over the power of heaven, 3, 579.
At the time of the first Coining of the Lord,
the hells had grown up to such height that
they filled the world of spirits, and not
only confused the heaven which, is called
ultimate, hut also assaulted the middle
heaven, which they infested in a thousand
ways, 121, 123, 124, 579. It has been
similar at this day, 121. In the spiritual
sense murder means all modes of killing
and destroying the souls of men; such
are done hy all the devils and satans
in hell, with whom they who violate holy
things in this world are conjoined, 310.
Man hy denial of God is excluded from
communion with the angels of heaven;
and when thus excluded, he enters into
communion with satans of hell and thinks
with them, 14. In hell all are gathered
who love themselves and the world ahove
all, 293. Hell is beneath the earths of the
spiritual world, which are spiritual, and
therefore not in extension hut in its ap-
pearance, 293. Hell consists of caverns,
which are eternal workhouses, 281. The
smoke in the hells arises from falsities con-
firmed by reasonings, and the fire is anger
against those who contradict, 159. In-
fernal fire is murder; hence one is said
to be inflamed with hatred, and to burn
with revenge, 309.

Hemiplegia, 367.

Heraclitus, 693.

Hereditary. Every mao inherits
from his parents an inclination to do what
is good and just for the sake of self and
the world, and no man inherits inclina-
tion to do it for the sake of what is good
and just, 423. Hereditary evil is from
parents, by whom is transmitted to their
children an inclination towards the evil
in which they have been, 469, 520, 521,
822. It depends on each one to choose
whether he will accede to the hereditary
inclination or recede, 469. Hereditary
evil acts in and upon man; if evil should
act through the man, be would not he
capahle of being reformed, nor be a sub-
ject of hlame, 154: Hereditary evils have
arisen principally from love of ruling over
all, and love of possessing the wealth of
all, 498, 662, 822; in these two loves
hereditary evil dwells in its fulness, 822.
Man is not horn into evils, but only into
an inclination to evils; having a greater
or less proclivity for particular ones;
wherefore no man is judged from heredi-


INDEX


1129


tary evil, but from the actual evils which
he has committed, 521. The inclination
and proclivity t r evils, transmitted from
parents to children and posterity, are
broken only by the new birth from the
Lord, called regeneration, 521. All the
evils to which man inclines by birth are
inscribed on the will of his natural man;
these inflow into the thoughts, 659.

Heresies. From this, that appear-
ances of truth have been taken for gen-
uine and confirmed, have sprung all
heresies which have been and still are in
the Christian world, 254. Heresies do not
condemn men; but confirmations, from
the Word and by reasonings from the
natural man, of the falsities in heresy;
these and evil life condemn, 254. Here-
sies have flowed chiefly from such as were
sensual, 402. The causes of so many
divisions in the church are principally
three: 1. The Divine Trinity has not been
understood; 2. There has been no just
recognition of the Lord; 3. The passion
of the cross has heen taken for redemp-
tion itself, 378. From the faith that there
are three Divine persons, each of whom
is God, have originated heresies concern-
ing God, 23.

Heterogeneity torments a devil in
heaven, and an angel in hell, 622.

Hieroglyphics were correspondences,
201, 205, 833.

Highest Things. What is highest in
man’s mind is turned toward God; what
is mediate therein, toward the world; and
the lowest there, into the body, 507. If
man does not live according to Divine
order, still God is with him, but in his
highest parts, and gives him the power
to understand truth and will good, 70,
366.

Hill signifies the heaven below the
highest, 205. It means the lower things
of the church, 200.

Hirelings. By hirelings to whom were
assigned services in the outer courts of
the temple, are meant those who demand
reward hecause of merit in matters of sal-
vation, 441. See Merit.

Holiness. The style of the Word is
such that holiness is in every sentence, and
word, in some places in the letters, 191.
The name of God is Holiness itself, 297.
To pervert and falsify the holy things of
the Word, 165. Holiness of the sacra-
ment of the Supper, 701.

Holy of Holies, The, where was the
ark of the covenant, signified the inmost
of heaven and the church, 220.

Holy One op Israel, The, means the
Lord as to the Divine Human, 93. In the
Word, by Jehovah is meant the Lord as
to the Divine good of love, and by the
Holy One of Israel is meant the Lord as
to the Divine truth of wisdom, 253.

Holy Spirit, The, is not a God by it-


self, but by it in the Word is meant the Di-
vine Operation, from the omnipresent
God, 138, 139. The Divine Operation
meant by the Holy Spirit is reformation
and regeneration, 142. By the Holy
Spirit is signified the Divine Truth, thus
j the Word; and in this sense the Lord
| Himself is the Holy Spirit, 139. Those
i things which are attributed to the Holy
! Spirit as to a God by Himself, are the
operations of the Lord, 153. In the Word
of the Old Testament the Holy Spirit is
nowhere named, but only the Spirit of
Holiness in three places, 158. The Holy
Spirit was then first when the Lord came
into the world, 158. Life proceeding
from the Lord is called the Spirit of God,
and in the Word the Holy Spirit, 461.
The Spirit of Jehovah filled Elizabeth
(Luke i. 44 and Zech. i. 67), as also Sim-
eon (ii. 25), which was called the Holy
Spirit on account of the Lord already in
the world, 158.

Holy Supper, The, was instituted for
the sake of consociation with angels, and
conjunction with the Lord; the Bread
becomes in heaven Divine good, and the
Wine Divine truth, hoth from the Lord,
238, 702, 711. Such correspondence is
from creation, so that the angelic heaven
and the church, and in general the spiri-
tual world and the natural may make one,
and that the Lord may conjoin Himself
with both at once, 238. By the Lord’s
Flesh, as by bread, is meant Divine Good;
and by His Blood, as hy wine, is meant Di-
vine truth, 372, 702-710. The two sacra-
ments, Baptism and the Holy Supper, are
the holiest things of worship, 698, 709.
The Holy Supper is a sacrament of re-
pentance, and thus introduction into
heaven, 567. The man who looks to the
Lord and repents, is hy that most holy
thing conjoined with the Lord and intro-
duced into heaven, 621; hread and wine
do not effect this, but love and faith which
correspond, 621, 705. Without knowing
the correspondences of natural with spiri-
tual thin gs, no one can know the uses and
henefits of the Holy Supper, 698-701.
Because real Christianity is now be-
ginning, and the Lord is establishing a
New Church meant by the New Jerusa-
lem in the Apocalypse, it has pleased the
Lord to reveal the spiritual sense of the
Word so that this church may come into
the use and benefit of the sacraments of
Baptism and the Holy Supper, 700.
Bread and wine in the natural sense,
mean the same as flesh and blood, that is,
the passion of the cross, 704. In the spiri-
tual sense hy flesh and bread is meant the
good of charity, and by hlood aod wine
the truth of faith; and in the supreme
sense the Lord as to Divine Good of love
and Divine Truth of wisdom, 705. The
Holy Supper Involves three univorsals,


ii 30


INDEX


namely, the Lord, His Good, and His
Truth; therefore the Holy Supper con-
tains the universais of heaven and the
church, 711-715. The Lord is in the Holy
Supper in His fulness, with His whole
redemption, 716, 717. All who go to the
Holy Co mmuni on worthily become His
redeemed, 717. The Lord is present and
opens heaven to those who approach the
Holy Supper worthily; and He is also
present with those who approach un-
worthily, but does not open heaven to
them; consequently as Baptism is intro-
duction into the church, so the Holy Sup-
is introduction into heaven, 719-721.

hey approach the Holy Supper worthily,
who have faith in the Lord and are in
charity toward the neighbor, thus who
are regenerate, 722-724. By the regener-
ate who approach the Holy Supper wor-
thily, axe meant those who are interiorly
in the three essentials of the church and
heaven, but not those who are so exteriorly
only, 723. They who approach the Holy
Supper worthily, axe in the Lord and the
Lord in them; consequently conjunction
is effected by the Holy Supper, 725-727.
The Holy Supper to those who approach
it worthily is like a seal that they axe sons
of God, 728-730. Baptism and the Holy
Supper are like two gates through which
man is introduced to eternal life, 721.

Homogeneous affection conjoins, and
heterogeneous affection separates, 622.

Honor. To honor father and mother,
in a broader sense means to honor the king
and magistrates, since they provide in
general the necessities which parents pro-
vide in particular. In the hroadest sense
it means that men should love their
country because it supports and protects
them, 305. In the spiritual sense by
father is meant God, the Father of all;
and by mother, the church, 306. In the
celestial sense hy father is meant our Lord
Jesus Christ and by mother, the com-
munion of saints, by which is meant His
Church, in all the world, 307.

Horse signifies the understanding of
the Word, ii3, 277, 623, 776. A white
horse signifies the understanding of the
Word as to truth and good; a red horse,
the understanding of the Word destroyed
as to good; and a hlack horse, the under-
standing of the Word destroyed as to
truth, 113. A dead horse signifies no
understanding of truth, 277, 623. See
Pegasus.

House. A house similar to the one in
which they lived in the world, is pre-
pared in the spiritual world, for most new
comers, 797.

Human. The Lord from eternity who
is Jehovah, came into the world, that He
might subjugate the hells and glorify His
Human, 2. This Human was the Divine
Truth, which He united with Divine


Good, 3. As the Divine Itself which was
from eternity lives in Itself, so also the
Human assumed in time, lives in Itself,
40. God could not make His Human Di-
vine, unless it were at first as the human
of an infant, and afterwards as that of a
boy, and unless the Human afterwards
formed itself into a habitation into which
Its Father might enter, 73, 89. The hu-
man assumed in time was not the Divine
Esse, 81. Jehovah Himself descended
and assumed the Human. Because the
Divine cannot he divided, the Divine of
the Father was Itself the Lord’s soul and
life, 82, 538. God assumed the Human
according to Divine Order. That He
might become Man actually. He could
not hut he conceived, carried in the womb,
brought forth, educated, and successively
gain knowledge, and be introduced into
intelligence and wisdom, 89. Wherefore,
as to the Human, He was an infant as an
infant, a boy as a boy, etc., with this dif-
ference, that He accomplished that pro-
gression sooner, more fully, and perfectly
than others, 89. By the acts of redemp-
tion the Lord put ofi the human from the
mother, and put on a Human from the
Father; hence it is, that the Human of the
Lord is Divine, and that in Him God is
Man, and Man God, 102, 170. The Di-
vine of the Father is the Soul of the Son,
and the Human of the Son is the Body of
the Father, 112. The omnipotent God
could not have entered into hattle with
the hells, unless He had put on the Hu-
man, 124. The Lord did not suffer as to
the Divine, but as to the human, 126.
By the Human God is in lasts as well as
in firsts, 136. The Human does not ask
its Divine to tell what it shall speak or do,
154. The Lord as to the Divine Human
is to be approached, and so and not
otherwise can the Divine called the
Father be approached, 188, 538. The
one God who is invisible came into the
world and assumed the Human, not only
that He might redeem men, but also that
He might hecome visihle, and thus cap-
ahle of conjunction, 786. This Human
is called the Son of God; and this medi-
ates, intercedes, propitiates, and ex-
piates, 135, 539. Concerning the Divine
Human, see in, 691. The Lord rose
from the sepulchre with His whole Body
which He had in the world; nor did He
leave any thing in the sepulchre; conse-
quently, He took thence with Him the
natural Human itself from firsts to lasts,
109. The glorified Human of the Lord is
the Natural Divine, in which He is present
with men, and from which He enlightens
not only the internal spiritual man but also
the external natural, 109. Of those in the
spiritual world who could not pronounce
Divine Human, hi.

Humiliation of the Lord is called His


INDEX


1 1 3 1


state of exinanition, 104. See Exinani-
tion.

Hunchback. Comparison with, 404,
507 -

Husband in the spiritual sense signifies
tile good of charity, 377. Love or charity
is as the hush and, and wisdom or faith as
the wife, 41.

Hypocrisy in worship, 518, 519. Ori-
gin of hypocrisy, 111,592.

Hypocrite. Every man who is not in-
teriorly led by the Lord, is a pretender,
sycophant, hypocrite, 662. Among natu-
ral men the hypocrite is the lowest natural,
for he is sensual, 381. If the internal man
wills evil and the external man acts well,
then they both act from hell; for his will-
ing is from hell, and his doing is hypocrit-
ical-, and in all that is hypocritical, his will-
ing which is infernal is inwardly concealed,
340. With consummate hypocrites there
is an intestine enmity against truly spiri-
tual men; they are not sensible of this
while in the world, but it manifests itself
after death, 381.

Hypotheses concerning faith and free
will, 371.

I. In the third heaven they cannot
utter the vowel i, hut instead, y, 278.

Idea makes one with thought; where
there is no thought there is no idea, 335.
A merely natural idea is formed from
things in the world, and in that idea are
space and time, "30, 31, 280. An idea of
spiritual thought derives nothing from
space, hut all from state, 30. Spiritual
ideas are supernatural, inexpressible, in-
effable, and incomprehensible to the natu-
ral man, 280. An idea concerning the
correspondence between the things in the
spiritual world and the things in the nat-
ural world ought to be first ohtained;
and unless this is done, the human mind
from mere ignorance falls into naturalism
which denies God, 75. One natural idea
contains many spiritual ideas, and one
spiritual idea contains many celestial
ideas, 280. Ideas are fixed in the mind
and remain as they have heen accepted
and confirmed, 351. Ideas of thought be-
come words of speech, 280. Ideas of
thought, which flow from acknowledg-
ment, make one with the words of those
who are in the spiritual world, in. It
is an error that beasts have ideas, 335.
Man has no connate ideas, 335. The
idea of a Trinity of Gods, cannot he ahol-
isbed by oral confession of One God,
172, 173. The idea to be formed of God,
20, 621, 836. Every one is allotted his
place in heaven according to his idea of
God, 163.

Identity. In the created universe there
are not two things the same; there is not
identity of two effects in things successive
in the world, 32. An identity of three Di-
vine Essences is an offence to reason, 23.


Idle. In the spiritual world no food is
given to the idle except they work, 281.

Idolatries, ii, 205, 275, 201, 833.

Idols, Worship of, whence it arose, 291.

Ijim,45, 133.

Image and Likeness of God. What
is meant hy it, 34. The infinite is in men
as in its images, 33, 34. Men are called
images and likenesses of God, 20, 34, 41,
48, 65, 74, 692. Every good of love is an
image of the Lord, 767. The image of
the father is in fulness in the seed, 103.
In the spiritual world when the angels’
inmost sight is opened, they recognize
their own image in the surrounding ob-
jects, 66. The ancients who had know-
ledge of correspondences, made images
which corresponded to heavenly things,
and were delighted with them hecause
they signified things of heaven and the
church, 205.

Immeasurableness is the beginning of
space, 27. God’s infinity in relation to
j space is called immeasurahleness, 31. In
I heaven the angels perceive hy the im-
measurahleness of God Divinity as to Esse,
31 -

Immortality. Man lives for ever be-
cause capahle of being conjoined with
God by love and faith, 621. See also Re-
lation, 697.

Impossible. It is impossible for God
to damn one who lives well and helieves
aright; so it is impossible for God to save
one who lives wickedly and who believes
falsities; this is contrary to His omnipo-
tence, 341. It was impossible for God to
accomplish redemption without the Hu-
man, 84. See Omnipotence.

Imputation is to those who know, and
not to those who know not, 107. The im-
putation of the merit and righteousness of
Christ is impossible, 134, 640, 642, 649.
The Lord remits to every one his sins, and
does not impute them, hecause He is Love
and Good itself, 409, 651, 652. Without
reciprocal conjunction of man with the
Lord and of the Lord with man there
would be no imputation, 485. If there
were no free will in spiritual things, God
would he the cause of evil, and so there
would he no imputation 489, 492. The
imputation of the day deprives man of all
power from any free will in spiritual
things, 630. The faith of the present
church, which is said alone to justify, and
imputation make one, 626, 627. The im-
putation of the faith of the present day is
twofold, the imputation of Christ’s merit,
and the imputation of salvation therefrom,
628-631, 639. Unless the error respecting
imputation were now abolished, atheism
would overrun Christendom, 628. The
faith imputative of Christ’s merit was un-
known in the Apostolic Church, and is no-
where meant in the Word, 636-639; it
first arose from the Council of Nice, con-
cerning three Divine Persons from eter-


1 1 3 2


INDEX


nity, 632-635; when this faith was intro-
duced and pervaded the Christian world,
all other faith was cast into the shade, 639.
The imputation of faith has supplied a
light, like that of a lire in the night, from
which the faith has been seen as if true
theology, 644; if the leaders of the church
were to think of any but this imputative
faith while reading the Word, that light
with all their theology would be extin-
guished, and a darkness would arise from
which the whole Christian Church would
vanish, 644. There is an imputation, hut
it is that of good and evil, and at the same
time of faith, which is what is meant where
imputation is named in the Word, 64^;
there was no other law of imputation in
the beginning of the church, nor will there
he at its end, 643. The good which is
charity, and the evil which is iniquity, are
imputed after death, 646. The faith and
imputation of the New Church can not
he with the faith and imputation of the
former Church, and if they are together,
such collision and conflict result, that every
thing of the church with man perishes,
647-649. The Lord imputes good to
every man, and hell imputes evil, 650-652.
Thought is not imputed to any one, hut
will, 658. Imputation corresponds to
estimation and price, 660. See Relation ,
72.

Inclination towards the evil in which
they themselves have heen, is transmitted
hy parents to children, 469, 521, 612.
Man is not bom into evils, but only into
inclination to evils; having however great-
er or less proclivity for particular ones,
521. All the evils to which man inclines
are inscrihed on the will of his natural
man, 659.

Indies.^ From the ancient Word and
the Israelitish Word, religions emanated
into the Indies and islands, 275. Those
in the Indies, if they helieve in one God,
and live according to their religion, are
saved hy their faith and life, 107.

Infancy, The, of the Christian Church
was when the apostles lived, and preached
through the world repentance ana faith in
the Lord God the Saviour, 4.

Infants. How thought is formed and
ideas exist with infants, 335. Those who
die in infancy have inclination to evils,
and thus will them but still do not do
them; for they are educated under the
Lord’s auspices, and saved, 521. As soon
as infants have heen baptized, angels are
appointed, 677. Infants and children
horn outside of the Christian Church, are
introduced hy other means than Baptism
into the heavens assigned to their religion
after they have received faith in the Lord.
729. In the heavens infants know no
other father and mother than the Lord and
the church, 306. The love callc pa-
rental love exists equally with had and


1 good, and is sometimes stronger with the
wicked, 431. See Parental love.

Infinite. God is infinite, since He is
and exists in Himself, 28. God is infinite,
for He was before the world, thus hef ore
spaces and times arose, 29. The infinite
is in finite things as in receptacles, and in
men as in its images, 53.

Infinity and eternity are applicable to
the Divine Esse, 21. Infinity compre-
hends both jmmeasurahleness and eter-
nity, 27. God’s infinity in relation to
space is called irameasuxableness, and in
relation to time is called eternity, 31. En-
lightened reason, from many things in the
world, may see the infinity of God, 32.
How God made His infinity finite, 33.
As the Esse of God is more universal than
the Essence of God, so the infinity is more
universal than the love of God; wherefore
infinite is an adjective belonging to the
essentials and attributes of Goa, 36. The
heat and light which proceed from the
Lord as a sun contain all the infinities that
are in the Lord; the heat all the infinities
of His Love, and the light all the infinities
of His Wisdom, 365. In every part of the
Word there is infinity, it contains innumer-
able things, which not even the angels can
exhaust, 290.

Influx. There is universal influx from
God into the souls of men, that there is a
God, and that He is one, 8. The reason
that many think that His Divinity is di-
vided into more than one of the same
essence, is hccause when that influx de-
scends it falls into forms not correspond-
ent, and the form itself varies it, 8. How
the Lord flows into the whole universe,
641. pod flows into every man with all
His Divine Life, that is, with all His Love
and Wisdom. 364. The Lord with all the
essence of faith and charity flows into
every man, 365. Those things which flow
from the Lord, are received by man ac-
cording to hi&form, 366. Into every man
God flows with an acknowledgment of
Himself, into knowledges concerning Him
and at the same time with His love toward
men, 457; the man who receives the for-
mer only and not the latter, receives influx
in the understanding and not in the will;
and he remains in knowledges with no in-
terior acknowledgment of God. But the
man who receives hoth receives the influx
in the will and from the will in the under,
standing, thus in the whole mind, 457.
The enjoyment of evil is exhaled from hell,
and flows into every man, hut into the
sales of the feet and his hack and occiput.
But if it is received by the head in the fore-
head, . and hy the hody in the hreast, the
man is made a slave to hell, 564. If the
enjoyment in charity and the pleasantness
of faith were to flow into the spiritual or-
ganism of those who are in enjoyment
from evil and falsity, if such enjoyments


INDEX


1133


and pleasantness were to intrude upon
them, they would be in anguish and tor-
ture, and would finally fall into a swoon,
578. With animals die spiritual world
flows into the senses of their body im-
mediately, and through them determines
actions, 335. See Instinct. At present
nothing is known of influx from the spiri-
tual world into the natural, but of theinflux
of nature into things endowed with natural
qualities, 695. The learned of this age
reason diversely respecting an influx of the
soul into the body and of the body into the
soul, and about this they divide into three
parties, whether the influx is of the soul
into the body, is occasional, or of the body
into the soul, is physical, or whether there
is instantaneous influx into the body and
at the same time into the soul, which is
pre-establisbed harmony, 695. Wonders
from the influx of the spiritual world into
the natural, 695. Influx adapts itself to
efflux, 814. S ee Efflux.

Infra-Lapsarians, 486.

Iniquity once rooted is transmitted to
posterity so as to give an inclination there-
to, and is extirpated only by regeneration,
156. To bear iniquities, does not mean
to take them away, but to represent the
profanation of the truths of the Word, 130.

Inmost. God is omnipresent in the uni-
verse, and in every part of it in the inmosts,
for these are in order, 70. From the in-
most God’s omnipotence governs things
without, 56.

Insects. Wonders about them, 12,
335 -

Inspiration is insertion into angelic
societies, 140. Aspiration was an external
sign of Divine inspiration, 140.

Instinct, The, of animals is from in-
flux from the spiritual world, and is called
instinct because it exists without thought.
There are things accessory to instinct,
from habit, 335. The instinct of every
animal is according to its essence or na-
ture, 145. Without ascent of the under-
standing above the will, man would not
be able to act from reason, but from in-
stinct, 588.

Instruction. Enlightenment and in-
struction with the clergy, 155, 146. Every
man alter death is instructed by angels,
and they are received who see truths, and
from truths falsities; but only those see
truths who have not confirmed themselves
in falsities, 255. They who alter instruc-
tion in the spiritual world recede from the
faith that the Holy Spirit is a God by itself,
are informed concerning the unity of God.
These are then prepared to receive the
faith of the new heaven, 138. Man with-
out instruction is neither man nor beast,
but a form capable of receiving that which
makes man, 692.

Instrumental, The, and the principal
together make one action, 576. The in-


strumental feels the principal as its own,
473 -

Integrity. Without redemption, the
angels could not have continued to exist in
integrity, 118, 119. All things have been
preserved in their integrity from the first
day of creation, 714.

Intelligence is from the Lord and not
from man; man has only the faculty of re-
ceiving, 663. Intelligence resides in the
understanding, 658. It is the light of life,
4r. Those with whom the internal spiri-
tual man is opened into heaven to the Lord
axe in the light of heaven and in illumi-
nation from the Lord, and thereby in in-
telligence and wisdom; these see truth
from light of truth and perceive good from
love of good, 401. According to the af-
fection for knowledges every one has in-
telligence, 694. Human intelligence, truly
intelligence, is from no other source than
Divine truths, distributed into forms, by
means of the light flowing from the Lord,
350. By his own intelligence man cannot
acquire knowledge of God, of heaven and
hell, and of the spiritual things of the
church, 276. See Wisdom.

Intention. Allurement enters merely
into the understanding, but intention into
the will, 313. All that is of intention is also
of the will, and thus in itself is of the deed,
3op. Because the end is the purpose, and
this exercises intention, purpose is also of
the will; and it enters the understanding
by the intention, and prompts it to occupy
itself with and consider means, and to con-
clude on such as tend to effects, 658. In
the spiritual world all are viewed from
their purpose, intention, and end, S23. A
man examines the intentions of his will
while be examines his thoughts, for in
these the intentions make themselves man-
ifest, 532.

Intercession signifies perpetual medi-
ation, 135. See Mediation.

Intercourse. Mutual intercourse be-
tween the soul and body, 154.

Interiors. All of man's interiors go
forth and are continued into his exteriors,
and even into the outmosts, to work out
their effects, 462.

Internal and External. In every
created thing in the world, whether living
or dead, there is an internal and an exter-
nal; one of these is not given without the
other, as there is no effect without cause,
595) 785. The external depends on the
internal as the body on its soul, 785. The
internal must be formed before tbe exter-
nal, and the external must alterward be
formed by means of the internal, 784.
The internal is as a soul in the external,
593. In all man’s will and thought, and
hence in all his action and speech, there is
an internal and an external, 147. The in-
ternal and external in rpan, are distinct
things, but reciprocally united, 154. Tbe


H34


INDEX


internal acts in the external and upon it,
but it does not act through the external;
lor the internal revolves a thousand things,
of which the external takes only such as
are accommodated to use, 154. By the
internal, man is in the spiritual world, and
by the external in the natural world, 401,
454. With the good the internal is in heav-
en and its light, and the external in the
world and its light; and this light is illu-
mined by light of heaven; and so with
them the internal and the external act as
one, like cause and effect, 401. With the
evil the internal is in hell and in its light,
which viewed in relation to the light of
heaven, is thick darkness, 401. The in-
ternal and external, are the internal and
external of man’s spirit; his body is only
an external superadded, within which the
others exist, 401, 420.

Internal Man and External Man.
It is the internal man that is called spiri-
tual, because it is in the light of heaven,
which is spiritual; and it is the external
man that is called natural, because it is in
the light of the world, which is natural,
401. The internal man is to be reformed,
and through this the external, and man is
thus regenerated, 591-595. The external
man does not become internal, or does not
act as one with the internal, until lusts
have been put away, 326. When the in-
ternal man wills well and the external acts
well, then the two make one, 340. The
causes of all things are formed in the in-
ternal man, and all effects are produced
in the external, 374. Man is such as he is
as to his internal man, but not such as he
is as to the external, 454.

Introduction into the Christian
Church by Baptism, 677-680. Intro-
duction into heaven by the Holy Supper,
719-721.

Invocations of saints are mockeries,
825. See Catltolics , Roman.

Israel signifies the spiritual church,
200. The land of Israel means the church,
594 -

Italy, 275. ,

Jacob signifies the natural church, 200.
The Lord to restore the worship of one
God, instituted a church among the pos-
terity of Jacob, 9.

J asher, Book of, or of the Upright,
265, 279.

Jehovah God is Love and Wisdom it-
self, or He is Good and Truth itself, 3, 36,
38. God is one, in whom is a Divine
Trinity, and He is the Lord God the Sav-
iour Jesus Christ, 3. The one God is
called Jehovah from Esse, because He
alone is and was and will be, 19. Jehovah
signifies die supreme and only Being from
whom is every thing that is and exists in
the universe, 9. The one God is Substance
and Form itself, and angels and men are


substances and forms from Him, 20. In
the New Testament Jehovah is called the
Lord, 81, why, 2Q7. The Lord our Sav-
iour is Jehovah the Father in the Human
form, 370. Jehovah is Man, as in firsts
also in lasts, 102. Jehovah God assumed
the Human that He might redeem and
save men, 82, 84, 101, 188, 370, 641, 786.
Jehovah descended as Divine Truth,
which is the Word, and yet did not sep-
arate Divine Good, 85, 86. God could not
redeem men, that is, deliver them from
damnation and hell, except by the as-
sumed Human, 84. Jehovah descended
and became Man, that He might draw
near to man and man to Him, and so con-
junction might be effected, and by that
conjunction man have salvation and eter-
nal life, 370. In the Word, by Jehovah
is meant tiie Divine Love or Good, and by
God, the Divine Wisdom or Truth, 85, 253.
The Jews have not dared and do not dare
to say Jehovah, 297, 81.

Jerusalem signifies the church, 782.
Since the judgment, Jerusalem means the
church in which the Lord alone is wor-
shipped, as to doctrine, 841. Jerusalem
means the holy New Jerusalem described
in Apocalypse xxi., by which is meant the
New Church, 789. See New Jerusalem .

Jesuits, 146.

Jesus, The name, is so holy that it can
be named by no devil, 297. In the spiri-
tual world those who confirmed faith sep-
arate from charity could not name Jesus,
hi. By Jesus is meant all salvation
through redemption, and by Christ all
salvation through His doctrine, 298, 149,
150, 726. The Lord is called Jesus from
the office of Priest; and from the office of
King He is called Christ, 114. Jesus sig-
nifies Saviour, in.

Jesus Christ, who is the Lord Jeho-
vah, from eternity Creator, in time Re-
deemer, and to eternity Regenerator; thus
who is the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, 26, 188, 294-296, 683. No other
God than the Lord Jesus Christ is to be
worshipped, 294. Men ought to have
faith in God the Saviour J esus Christ, be-
cause this is in the visible God in Whom is
the invisible, 339. The first of faith in
Jesus Christ is the acknowledgment that
He is the Son of God, 342. The Body of
Christ is Divine Good and Truth, 372.
By the name of the Lord Jesus Christ in
the Word is meant nothing but an ac-
knowledgment of Him, and a life accord-
ing to His commandments, 682.

Jews, The, were called an adulterous
generation, because they adulterated the
Word, 122. The image of Jacob and Ju-
dah still remains in their posterity, be-
cause they have hitherto adhered firmly to
their system of religion, 103, 521. With
them there was no knowledge of corres-
pondences, though every thing pertaining


INDEX


1135


to their worship, and all the statutes and
judgments given them by Moses, and all
the things of the Word, were correspond-
ences, 205. The hereditary of the Jews,
in time, has increased in them so that they
are not ahle to embrace the Christian re-
ligion from faith at heart; the interior will
of their mind is adverse, 521. The Jews
durst not use the name Jehovah, on ac-
count of its sanctity, 8i, 297. By the rich
man, in the parable of Lazarus, is meant
the Jewish nation, which is called rich he-
cause they had the Word, in which are
spiritual riches, 215, 246. Before the last
judgment, the Jews in the spiritual world
appeared in a valley at the left of the
Christian centre; after that they were
transferred northward, and intercourse
with Christians, except with those outside
of the cities, was forbidden, 841. Many of
the Jewish nation ohtained abode in the
southern quarter in the spiritual world;
they were those who made light of the wor-
ship of others, and who still questioned in
their minds whether the Messiah would
come, and those who in the world thought
from reason, and lived according to it, 841.
How the Jews are instructed, 842. The
Jews are more ignorant than others that
they are in the spiritual world, hut they be-
lieve that they are still in the natural
world. This is because they are wholly ex-
ternal men, and think nothing about re-
ligion from the interior, 844. An angel
with a staff in his hand sometimes appears
to the Jews above, at middle altitude, and
gives them to helieve that he is Moses. He
exhorts them to desist from their senseless
expectation of the Messiah, 842.

Job, The Book of, a book of the An-
cient Church, of correspondences, 201, 846.

John the Baptist, 510, 688-691.

Jordan, The, signified introduction
into the church, for it was the boundry of
Canaan where the church was, 510, 675,
677. See Canaan .

J ove, 9, 275. See Jupiter .
oy and Gladness. Both joy and
gladness are mentioned, because joy is of
good and gladness of truth, or joy of love
and gladness of wisdom; for joy is of the
heart, and gladness of the spirit; or joy is
of the will, and gladness of the understand-
ing, 252. Heavenly joy and eternal happi-
ness, 731, 732. Heavenly joy is the enjoy-
ment of doing something useful, 734.

Judah means the celestial church, 200.
Judas. The Lord betrayed hy Judas
signified that He was betrayed by the Jew-
ish nation, for Judas represented that
nation, 130.

Judges. Conscientious judges, 422, .
459. Unjust judges, 317, 33 2 1 666 -

Judgment. See Justice and Judgment.
All the judgment effected with man after 1
death is according to the use made of free i
will in spiritual things, 497- By judgment '


in the Word is meant judgment to hell
which is damnation; while of salvation
judgment is not said, but resurrection to
life, 652.

Juno, 17, 173.

Jupiter, 17, 178, 292. See Jove.

Justice and Judgment. Justice is of
love, and judgment of wisdom, 51. It is
contrary to justice and judgment that one
should take on himself another’s wicked-
ness, 134. Ali love of justice, with judg-
ment, is from no other source than the
God of heaven, who is Justice itself, and
from whom man has all judgment, 459.
See Righteousness.

Justification by faith alone.
Whence it originated, 206. The doctrine
of justification, by faith alone has intox-
icated the thoughts of those who embrace
it; therefore they have not seen the most
essential thing of the church, 98. Al-
though it is not a faith, hut a chimera, it
carries every point in Christian churches,
18 1, 389. This erroneous and incon-
sistent doctrine induces the feeling of se-
curity, blindness, sleep, and night, in
spiritual things, and consequently death
to the soul, 182. See Relations , 389, 505.

Kidneys, The, do their work of se-
cretion in freedom, 496.

Kill, To, signifies, in the spiritual
sense, to destroy man’s soul, 236, and in
the celestial sense, to hate the Lord and
the Word, 236, 311.

King in the Word signifies Divine truth,
1 14. King signifies the truth of the church,
219. By the king of Tyre is signified the
Word where and whence the knowledge
of truth and good, 260. The king of the
abyss means those who destroy souls by
falsities, 310. Kings in the world, 422,
533 -

Kingdom, Tee. The Father’s king-
dom is when the Lord is approached im-
mediately, and not when God the Father
is approached immediately, 113. Celestial,
spiritual, and natural kingdom of the Lord,
212. Ends are also actual in the celestial,
causes in the spiritual, and effects in the
natural, 236. In the spiritual sense, by
the kingdom of the heavens is meant heav-
en and the church, 199.

Knowledge, Concerning God not
attainable without revelation, n. It is
vain to wish to know what God is in
His esse or suhstance; hut enough to ac-
knowledge Him from finite things, in
which He is infinitely, 28. Knowledge of
the Lord surpasses in excellence all the
knowledge in the church, 81. When
knowledge is wanting, man does not form
judgment concerning God, 24. The Lord
teaches every one hy the Word, and from
the knowledge with the man, and does not
infuse new immediately, 208. By the stars
which will fall from heaven, are meant


1136


INDEX


knowledge of truth and good, 108. Knowl-
edge of sm, and examination of some sin,
hegin repentance, 525-528, 78.

Koran, The, 833.

Labor. The six days of labor signify
the comhat against the flesh and its lusts,
and against tne evils and falsities in man
from hell, 302. In the Word the comhats
of the Lord with the hells are called lahors,
302.

Ladder of Jacob, 24.

Laity. With the laity love of ruling
from love of self climhs up until they wish
to he kings, 405.

Lake of fire and hrimstone signifies
hell, 635.

Lamb signifies innocence, 200. The
lamb which appeared to John on Mount
Zion, Apoc. xiv. 1, was a representation of
the Lord’s innocence, 144. What is meant
hy the Lamb standing as it had heen slain,
Apoc. v. 6; xiii. 8; and hy the crucified,
Apoc. xi. 8; Heb. vi. 6; Gal. iii. 1, 3 it.

Lamps signify the things of faith, 199,
396. By lamps are meant things of the
understanding, 606.

Language. There is a universal lan-
guage in which all angels and spirits are;
this has nothing in common with lan-
guage of men in the world, ig, 280. Every
man comes into this language after death,
for it is implanted in every man from
creation, 19. Every spirit and angel
speaking with man, speaks the man|s lan-
guage, 280. The very sound of spiritual
language differs so much from the sound
of natural language, that even a loud
spiritual sound could not he heard at all
hy a natural man, nor a natural sound hy
a spiritual man, 280.

Last Judgment, The, was performed
in the year 1757, — 115, 772, 796, 818,
841. Since the final judgment the state of
all is so changed that they are not allowed
to hand into companies as formely; hut
for every love, good and evil, ways have
heen appointed which they who come
from the world immediately enter and pass
to societies correspondent to their loves,
818.

Laver of Regeneration. Why called
the laver of regeneration, 685.

Law. The spiritual law is this law of
the Lord: All things whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them, 444, 41 1; this same law is the
universal law of moral life, 444. The
primary thing of Divine law is that man
should think of the law, do it, and obey it,
from himself though from the Lord, 497.
It is a universal law in the spiritual world,
and from this in the natural, that so far as
one does not will evil he wills good, 437.
The laws of justice are truths which can-
not be changed, 341. In a state the laws
of justice are in the highest place, political


in the second, economical in the third, 55.
The doing of evil, in hoth spiritual and
natural world, is restrained hy laws,
since otherwise society would nowhere
continue to exist, 498. Laws of order, 55,
5 6 > 7i* 73. 74, 87. Laws of order are as
many as there are truths in the Word, 55,
73. It is a law of order that as far as man
draws near to God altogether as from him-
self, so far God draws near to man, and in
the midst conjoins Himself with him, 89,
100, no. The law written upon the two
tahles, signified the Word, 220, 262. By
the law is meant the whole Sacred Scrip-
ture, 262, 288. In a strict sense, hy the
law is meant the Decalogue; in a hroader
sense, the statutes given hy Moses to Is-
rael; and in the hroadest, the whole Word,
288. The law and the prophets signify the
whole Word, 287.

Lazarus. By the poor man Lazarus
are meant the Gentiles, hecause they had
not the Word. That they were despised
and rejected hy the Jews, is meant by his
being laid at the rich man’s gate. By his
heing full of sores, is meant that the Gen-
tiles from ignorance of the truth were in
many falsities. The Gentiles are meant
hy Lazarus, hecause the Gentiles were
loved hy the Lord, as the Lazarus who
was raised from the dead was loved, 215.
Learned, The, 77, 159, 333-

Leaves of plants are for lungs, 585.

Leibnitz, 335, 696.

Leopards. Diaholical love causes its
lusts to appear in hell like wild h easts,
some like leopards, 45.

Letters. Alphabetic letters in the
spiritual world, 19. Writing in the third
heaven consists of letters curved, each one
of which contains a certain meaning, 278.
With the angels of the spiritual kingdom
the letters are similar to letters used in
printing; and with the angels of the celes-
tial kingdom they are with some similar
to Arahic letters, and with some similar
to old Hehrew letters, but curved ahove
and helow, with marks over, between, and
within; each of these also involves a com-
plete sense, 241.

Leviathan, 74, 182.

Liberty. In the state of reformation
man is in full liherty of acting according
to the rational; and in the state of re-
generation he is also in similar liherty,
but he then wills and acts, and thinks and
speaks, from a new love and intelligence
which are from the Lord, 105.

Libraries in the spiritual world, 692,
694-

Lie, in the Word, signifies falsities and
false speaking, 322.

Life. God alone is Life, 364. God is
Life itself, which is Life in itself, 21, 39,
461, 474. Life in itself is Divine life, 25.
The Lord’s Divine Love and Wisdom
constitute His Life, 364. life in itself ia


INDEX


*137


the very and only life, from which all
angels and men live, 40, 362. Life is the
inmost activity of the Love and Wisdom
which are in God and are God, which Life
may also be called living Force itself, 471.
Life with Man: God because He is infinite
is Life in Himself; this He cannot create,
and transcribe into man, for that would he
to make him God, 470. God flows into
every man with all His Life. 364. So far
as a man receives the good of love and the
truth of wisdom from God he lives from
God; so far as one does not receive love
and wisdom, or charity and faith, he does
not receive life from God, but from hell;
and this is inverted life called spiritual
death, 471. Life, to man, is God in him ,
and death, to man, is the persuasion and
helief that God is not life to man, but that
man is life to himself, 48. Life with all
belonging to it flows from the God of
heaven who is the Lord, 362. The life
of God in fulness is not only with good and
pious men, but also with the wicked and
impious. The difference is that the wicked
obstruct the way and shut the door, that
God may not enter the lower regions of
their mind; while the good clear the way
and open the door, 366. The life of God
is in the spiritual of man, 369. It is God’s
gift that man should feel that life in him as
his; and God wills that man should feel
it so, that he may as from himself live ac-
cording to the laws of order, 504. Man is
not life, but is a receptacle of life from
God, 470-474. The soul of man is not
life, but a recipient of life, 25. Life is
nothing else than love and wisdom, 35.
The Good of love and the Truth of wis-
dom make life, 461. Life is properly the
light which proceeds from the Sun of the
spiritual world. Divine Love forms life,
as fire forms light, 39. Man’s very life is
his love; and such as the love is, such is
the life, yes, such is the whole man, 399.
There are two universals of life, will and
understanding, 778. The life of man
dwells in his understanding, and is such as
his wisdom is, and the love of the will
modifies it, 39. The will and understand-
ing are the human mind, and all life is
therein in its principles, and thence in the
body, 397. Life, will, and understanding
make one in man, 362. The life of man is
from spiritual light, and from this is his
understanding, 334. Those things which
flow from the Lord, are received by man
according to his form, 366. It is. of life to
he affected and to think, and it is of love
to he affected, and of wisdom to think, 35.
Man’s life is to he able to think, will, and
thence speak and do freely,. 4S2. The per-
fection of life consists not in thought, hut
in the perception of truth from the light of
truth, 42. Enjoyment of love with pleas-
antness of thought, makes man’s life, 569.
There are in man from creation three de-


grees of life, celestial, spiritual, and natu-
ral, 239, 42. There are four periods
through which man. passes from infancy
to old age; the first in which he acts from
others according to instruction; the sec-
ond in which he acts from himself, while
the understanding is the guide; the third
in which will acts upon understanding
and understanding modifies will; the
fourth in which he acts from what has been
confirmed and from purpose. But these
periods are of the life of man’s spirit, and
not likewise of his body, 443. Life in faith
and charity is spiritual which is given by
the Lord to man in his natural state, 358.
Spiritual life is according to truths, 347.
In true conscience is spiritual life, 666.
Man has life through the Word. But only
those have life from the Word, who read it
to draw Divine truths from it, and to
apply Divine truths to life, 19 1. The life
of man’s spirit consists in free will in
spiritual things, 482. Spiritual life is ac-
cording to truths, 347. Moral life when
at the same time spiritual, is charity, 443-
445, 460. Civil life is temporal, which has
an end, and then is as if it had not been;
but spiritual life is eternal, for it has no
end, 415. The body is hut an organ of
life, 35, 362, 363, 461. Life is in every
substantial and material part of man,
though it does not mingle itself therewith,
30. The life of the body is dependent on
the reciprocal conjunction of heart and
lungs, 371. The centre and expanse of
nature and life, 35.

Light, The, of heaven in its essence is
Divine truth, from which is the intelli-
gence and wisdom of angels and men, 269.
In the Word it is read that Jehovah God
dwelleth in light inaccessible; Jehovah
God by the Human sent Himself into the
world, and made Himself visible to the
eyes of men and thus accessible, 176, 188.
The light of heaven discloses the quality
of every form, 187. The light of heaven
is Divine Wisdom, 242. The tight of
heaven in which the spiritual sense of the
Word is, flows into the natural light in
which the letter of the Word is, and il-
luminates the intellectual of man, called
the rational, 215, 401. It is the spiritual
light from which the understanding sees
rational things, as the eye sees natural
things, 365. The light from the sun of
the natural world is not creatable, hut
forms receiving it have heen created, 40.
Fatuous light is not tight; hut in respect
to true light is darkness, 334. Fatuous
light is the light of the confirmation of
falsity; this light corresponds to light in
which birds of night and bats are, 162.
In the Word where light is named wisdom
is meant; when spoken of God Divine
Wisdom is meant, 59, 76; also Divine
Truth, 85. See Heat and Light.

Likeness op God. See Image and


INDEX


1138

Likeness. Likeness of the father in J Is Divine Truth, 142. The Holy Spirit
children, 10?. I proceeds out of the Lord from the Father


Limbus. See Border.

Lenten. By fine linen was signified
truth from a spiritual origin, 220, also
truth of the Word, 215. Fine linen sig-
nifies the righteousness of saints; gar-
ments of fine linen signify Divine truths,
686 .

Lips. Confession of the lips that one is
a sinner is not repentance, 517.

Little Heaven and Little World.
See Microcosm.

Live. Man lives, that is, feels, thinks,
speaks, and acts, as from himself, 470.
To live according to Divine order is ac-
cording to the commandments of God, 96.
Man is so far in God as he lives according
to order, 70.

Liver, The, does its work for the blood
in freedom, 496.

Locusts signify falsities in outmosts,

63s.

London. Two great cities like London
in the spiritual world, 809, 81 1.

Looking. Looking is reciprocal from
God to man, 287.

Lord, The, from eternity, who is Jeho-
vah, came into the world, that He might
suhjugate the hells and glorify His Human,
2. God is one in essence and person, in
Whom is a Divine Trinity, and He is the
Lord God the Saviour Jesus Christ, 2,
608, 615. The only God is Jesus Christ,
who is Jehovah, from eternity Creator, in
time Redeemer, and to eternity Regen-
erator; thus who is at once Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, 26. By the Lord the Re-
deemer we mean Jehovah in the Human,
81. It is said the Lord and not Jehovah,
because Jehovah in the Old Testament is
called the Lord in the New, 81, 297. The
Lord commanded His disciples to call
Him Lord, 81. The Lord came into the
world to fulfil all things of the Word, 85,
261-263. By acts of redemption, the Lord
made Himself righteousness, 95, 102.
That the Lord was the son of Mary is true;
hut that He is so still is not true, 102. The
Lord glorified His Human, made it Divine,
in the same manner in which He regener-
ates man, makes him spiritual, 105. In
the world the Lord put on the Natural
Divine which is the glorified Human, 109.
The Lord alone, in the whole spiritual
world, is fully Man, 109. The Lord while
in the world, fought against the hells, and
conquered and suhjugated them, and thus
hrought them under obedience, 116, 224.
The Lord redeemed not only men, hut
angels, 121, 579. The Lord with Di-
vine power at this day fights against bell
in every man who is becoming regenerate,
123. The Lord is the Word, 263, 384,
778. The Lord, as the Word, is the Holy
Spirit, 130. The Lord is the Divine Truth
itself, and whatsoever proceeds from Him


158, 188. The Lord only is Holy, 158.
The Lord alone, when in the world, was
wise from Himself, and did good from
Himself, because the Divine Itself was in
Him and was His from nativity, 48. The
Lord is God of heaven and earth, God of
faith, Light itself, the Truth, and Life
eternal, 354. The Lord our Saviour is
Jehovah Himself, in the Human Form,
37o* 379. The Lord is called Creator,
Former, and Maker, because He creates
anew and regenerates man, 573. The
Lord became Redeemer, Regenerator,
and Saviour for ever, 579, 599. The Lord
is the life and salvation of all who believe
in Him as visible, 150. Those who go to
the Lord immediately can see doctrinal
truth; those who approach God the
Father immediately cannot see it, 162.
Many times in the New Covenant the
Lord has commanded men to come to and
worship and adore Him, 538. The Lord
is the sun in the spiritual world; from this
are spiritual light and heat, 618, 641, 661.
See Spiritual Sun. The Lord is present
with every man, urging to be received,
766, 774; but His Coming is with those
only who receive Him, ana these are they
who believe in Him and do His command-
ments, 774. The Lord who is Light itself
flows into every man; and in him in whom
are truths from the Word, He causes them
to shine, and so to become of faith, 349.
God is with every man with His Divine
Life, that is, with all His Love and Wis-
dom, 364. The Lord with all the essence
of faith and charity flows into every man,
365. Those things which flow from the
Lord are received by man according to
his form, 366. The man who divides the
Lord, charity, and faith, is not a form re-
ceiving but destroying them, 367. Con-
junction with the Lord is reciprocal, that
is, the Lord is in man, and man in the
Lord, 371. Man cannot be in the Lord,
hut the charity and faith which are with
him from the Lord, from which two man
is man, 368. The Lord does uses med-
iately by the angels, and in the world by
men, 736. The Lord took from the sepul-
chre when He arose His whole Human
Body, both as to flesh and bones, 170.

Lord’s Prayer. This prayer was com-
manded in order that God the Father may
be approached through His Human, 1 12.
The very essential of the church and of
religion is how the words in the Lord’s
prayer, “ Our Father, Who art in the heav-
ens, hallowed be Thy name, Tby kingdom
come,” are understood, 113. The angels
in heaven read the Lord’s prayer daily,
and do not then think of Goa the Father,
because He is invisible; but they think of
Him in His Divine Human, hecause in
this He is visible, 1 13. In the New Church


INDEY


1139


evtfy tiling will be fulfilled which is con-
tained in the Lord’s prayer, 113.

Love, in its essence, is spiritual fire, 35.
Love having its origin from the Lx>rd as a
sun, is the heat of life of angels and men,
thus the esse of their life, 386, 41. The es-
sence of love is to love others out of itself,
to desire to be one with them, and to make
them happy from itself, 43-45. Love is
not only the essence which forms all things
but it also unites and conjoins them, and
thus keeps them in conjunction, 37. Love
is the complex of all varieties of good, 38.
There cannot be love abstracted from
form; love operates in and hy form, 37.
Love is nothing without wisdom, hut in
wisdom it is something; this something
for which it is formed, is use, 3S7. Deri-
vations of love are called affections; and
by these are produced perceptions, and so
thoughts, 3 86. Love in the will is the end,
and in the understanding it seeks and
finds causes, by means of which it may
move onward to the effect, 658. Love
gives sound, and thought speaks, 388.
Love produces heat, to which natural heat
corresponds, 496. Every love in man
breathes out enjoyment, by which it makes
itself felt; it breathes it into the spirit, and
thence into the body, 569. Natural love,
which is that of a beast, cannot be elevated
into spiritual love, which from creation
was implanted in man, 32. There are
two things in love; one to which the burn-
ing. of fire corresponds, and another to
which the shining of fire corresponds, 39.

Love, To, others out of itself is the es-
sence of love. The Lord is loved, when
man lives according to His Divine truths,
231. To love the neighbor is not m erel y to
will and do good to the relative, friend,
and good man, hut also to the stranger,
enemy, and had man, 407. To love the
neighbor viewed in itself, is not to love
the person but the good in the person, 417,
418. To love the good in another from
good in self is genuine love toward the
neighhor, 418. To love the neighbor
is, not to despise him in comparison with
one’s self, to deal justly with him, and not
to judge evil of him, 411.

Love and Wisdom, in God, make one,
41. Love and wisdom are the two es-
sentials, to which all the infinite things in
God and from Him refer themselves, 37.
There are two things which make life,
namely love and wisdom. These flow
from God, and are received by man as his,
461. As far as good of love and truth of
wisdom are conjoined in man, so far man
becomes an image of God, 41. There are
three degrees of love and wisdom, and
hence of life, *42. Love and wisdom do
not exist except ideally when only in the
affection and thought; but they exist in
use really, because simultaneously in the
act and work, 744. All that proceeds from


love is called good, and all that proceeds
from wisdom is called truth, 38.

Love op Heaven. By the love of heav-
en is meant love to the Lord and the neigh-
bor, 394. The love of heaven may he
called love of uses, 394. See Uses. If tlie
love of heaven is inwardly in love of the
world, and by this in love of self, the man
does uses in each from the God of heaven,
395. Heavenly love is to love uses for the
sake of uses, or goods for the sake of goods,
which a man performs for the church,
country, human society and the fellow-
citizen, 400.

Love of Self is to wish well to self
alone, and not to another unless for the
sake of self, 754, 400. Love of self is not
merely the love of honor, glory, fame, and
eminence, but also of meriting and solicit-
ing office, and so. of reigning, 394. Love
of self when it reigns is opposed to love to
God, 754, 400. Love of self in itself is
hatred, for it does not love any one out of
itself, nor does it desire to he conjoined to
others that it may do good to them, but
only that it may do so to itself, 45. Love
of self is such, that as far as reins are given
to it, it rushes on, even till it wishes to com-
mand not only the whole world, hut also
heaven, yes, God Himself, 400, 598, 661,
822. They who are in love of self desire to
rule over the universe, yes, to enlarge its
borders that they may extend their do-
minion, 662. The evils with those who
are in love of self are, contempt of others,
envy, enmity against those who do not
favor, consequently hostility, hatred of
various kinds, revenge, cunning, deceit,
unmercifulness, and cruelty. And where
there are such evils there is also contempt
of God and of the truths and goods of the
church, 400, 405. A man ruled by love of
self regards himself as God, and the world
as heaven, and perverts all truth of the
church, 754.

Love of the World is to wish to draw
to self the wealth of others hy any art, 400.
Love of the world is not merely love of
wealth and property, but also of all that
the world affords, and of all that delights
the senses, 394. Love of the world is not
opposed to heavenly love to such a degree
as love of self, 400. Love of the world
when it reigns is opposed to love of the
neighbor, 754. Love of the world is in
much variety, worse as it verges toward
avarice, 404. They who are in love of the
world desire to possess all things, and they
grieve if any treasures are hidden, 662.
If man’s ruling love is love of the world, he
prefers the world to heaven; be worships
God, indeed, hut from mere natural love
which places merit in all worship; he also
does good to the neighbor, but for the
sake of reward, 404.

Love to the Lord is universal and
consequently is in all things of spiritual


1 140


INDEX


life, and also in all things of natural life,
416. In love to God and the neighbor the
first thing is not to do evil, and the second
is to do good, 329, 435 - 438. Love to the
Lord and the neighbor are the two loves
from which are all goods and truths, 399.
Love to the Lord and the neighbor make
heaven, and also the church, 399; they
open and form the internal spiritual man,
f or they reside there, 399. See Love 0}

coven .

Love toward the Neighbor. There
is influx of God’s love toward men, and
the reception of this by man and co-oper-
ation is love toward the neighbor, 458.
See Charity , Love to the Lord , Neighbor.

Lower Earth, The, is next above hell,
332 .

Lowest things. The lowest things in
man’s mind are turned downward to the
body; and hecause these are turned so, a
roan thinks wholly as of himself, when yet
he thinks from God, 507.

Lucifer. Those who are meant by
Lucifer in Isaiah, and who are of Babel,
are hurried away hy a zeal which is from
infernal love, 146, 276, 507.

Lungs, The, correspond to the under-
standing and its truths, 87. See Heart
and Lungs .

Lust and deed cohere like blood and
flesh, or like flame and oil, 32S. Lust be-
comes as a deed when in the will, for al-
lurement enters merely into the under-
standing, but intention enters into the will,
and the intention of lust is deed, 313.
See 662.

Luther bas renounced his erroneous
opinions concerning justification by faith
in three Divine persons from eternity, and
has therefore been transferred among the
happy of the new heaven, 137. From the
time Luther first entered the spiritual
world, be was a vehement propagator and
defender of his dogmas, in his childhood,
however, before be entered on the Refor-
mation, be was imbued with the pre-emi-
nence of charity; and it resulted that the
faith of justification with him was im-
planted in his external natural man, but
was not rooted in his internal spiritual
man; and when he was convinced that
he bad not taken his dogma of justifica-
tion by faith alone from the Word, but
from lus own intelligence, be suffered him-
self to be instructed respecting the Lord,
charity, true faith, free will, and redemp-
tion also, and this solely from the Word,
796.

Machiaveuians. The Machiavelians
in the spiritual world, 462.

Macrocosm. See Great Heaven and
Great World.

Magpies represent those who believe a
thing to be true because asserted hy a man
of authority, 42.


Mahomet. See Mohammed.

Mahometanism. See Aiohammedan-
ism.

Mahometans. See Mohammedans.

Mammon. The ancients called those
Mammons with whom love of the world
was ruling, 404.

Man was created a form of Divine order,
65-67. Man is not life but a receptacle of
life from God, 470-474, 6g2. Man is a
receptacle of love and wisdom; and a
receptacle becomes an image of God ac-
cording to the reception, 48, 693. Man is
an organ recipient of God, and be is an
organ according to the quality of the re-
ception, 34. Tbe whole man is a form
organized to receive light and heat, as
well from the natural as from the spiritual
world, 472. Man is not man from tbe
human face and body, but from the wis-
dom of his understanding and the good-
ness of his will, 417. Man from creation
is the least effigy, image, and type ot the
great heaven, 739. Man is born into evils
of every kind from his parents, 574. When
bora, a man is more a brute than an ani-
mal, but he becomes man by instruction,
by the reception of which his mind is
formed, 417. Man is not born for the
sake of self, but for the sake of others, 406.
Every man actually consists only of such
things as are in the earth, and from the
earth in the atmospheres, 470. Man in
the earthly state may be compared to a
worm and in the heavenly state to a butter-
fly, 12, 572. Man has been so created that
be is in the spiritual world and in the natu-
ral at the same time, 401; because be has
been so created, there have been given
him an internal and an external; an in-
ternal by which he may be in the spiritual
world, and an external by which he may
be in the natural world. His internal is
called tbe internal man, and his external
is called the external man, 401. The in-
ternal constitutes the man, called the
spirit, and which lives after death, 14.
Every man as to his spirit, is consociated
with his like in the spiritual world, and is
as one with them, 14, 454, 607. Man’s
spirit is in his mind, and whatever pro-
ceeds from bim, *56, 157. See Mind.
Man as to the interiors of his mind bas
been born spiritual, consequently for
heaven, while yet his natural or external
man is hell in miniature, 612. With the
wicked the internal is joined with devils
in bell, and with tbe good it is joined with
angels in heaven, 455, 607. Tbe con-
junction between men and angels is very
dose, 607. If angels and spirits were re-
moved from man, he would fall down
dead as a stock, 118, 607. God is con-
tinually working for the conjunction of
love and wisdom in man; but man, unless
he looks to God and believes in Him, con-
tinually works for their division, 41, God


INDEX


II4I


is in every man, evil as well as good, but
naan is not in God unless be Uvea accord-
ing to order, 70, 74. The absence of God
from man is no more possible than the
absence of the sun, by its heat and light,
from the earth, 70. Man alone receives
light and beat, that is, wisdom and love
immediately from the Lord, 473. Man is
endowed with ability to close and open the
door between bis thought and words, and
between his intentions and actions, 566.
All which man wills, and all which he
understands, flow from without; the
goods of love and charity aDd the truths
of wisdom and faith from the Lord, but
all contrary to them from hell, 362. Every
man enjoys the power of understanding
tenths and of willing goods, 417. Man of
himself does not wish to understand any
thing but wbat is from his self-will, 273.
Man can acquire faith for himself, 356.
Man can acquire charity for himself, 357.
Man can also acquire for himself the life
of faith and charity, 358. Yet nothing of
faith, and of charity, and of the life of
either, is from man, but from the Lord,
35g. Man was created to receive love and
wisdom from God, and yet as from him-
self, and this for the sake of reception and
conjunction; and therefore man is not
bom into love, nor into knowledge, nor
even into power of loving and being wise
from himself. Therefore, if be ascribes
all the good of love and all the truth of
wisdom to God be becomes living; but if
he ascribes them to himself he becomes
dead, 48. Man after death is none the
less a man, and such a man as not to know
that he is not still in the former world; be
is a man in all things, 702, 793- After
death the regenerate man passes into
heaven, to the Lord Himself; and there
though he died an old man, be is restored
to the morning of his life, 766. Man with-
out instruction knows nothing at all about
the modes of loving the sex, 48. Man is
bom corporeal as a worm, and remains
corporeal unless be learns to know, to
understand, and be wise from others, 48.

Manger, The, as in a stable, signified
spiritual nourishment for the understand-
ing, 277.

Marriage. In heaven the conjunction
of good and truth is called the heavenly
marriage, 398. All intelligence and wis-
dom which the angels have is from the
marriage of good and truth, 398. All
things in heaven and the world are from
creation nothing but a marriage of good
and truth, 624. In every thing in the
Word there is the marriage of the Lord
and the church, and hence of good and
truth, 248, 253. The spiritual offspring,
bom from the marriage of the Lord with
the church, are goods of charity and truths
of faith, 307, 380. Marriage of love and
wisdom in use, 737. Nuptials in heaven


represent the Lord’s marriage with the
church; the bridegroom represents the
Lord, and the bride represents the church,
748. After the nuptials, both together
represent the church, 748. Consent is the
essential of marriage, and all other cere-
monies are formalities, 748.

Marriage Love. Marriage Love is
heavenly, free from dominion, 805. Mar-
riage Love corresponds to love of the Lord
and tbe Church; into it are brought all
varieties of blessedness, satisfaction, and
enjoyment that can ever be brought to-
gether by the Lord, 847. Marriage Love
is solely from the Lord, and is given to
those who are being regenerated by Him.
Because marriage love is according to re-
ligion, it is spiritual with the spiritual,
natural with the natural, and merely car-
nal with adulterers, 847.

Mary. The Holy Spirit is Divine
Truth proceeding from Jehovah the
Father; and this proceeding is the Power
of tbe Highest, which overshadowed
Mary, 140. What more ridiculous than
that the soul of our Lord was from the
mother Mary? 82. It is believed that the
Lord as to the Human not only was but
also is the son of Mary; but in this the
Christian world is under delusion. That
He was the son of Mary is true; but that
He is so still is not true, 102. The Lord
never called Mary His mother, 102. The
Lord was bom of Mary, but when He be-
came God He put off all tbe human which
He had from her, 102, 827. By Son of
Mary is meant the human which He as-
sumed, 92. See Son of Mary . Let every
one question whether he has conceived
and cherishes any other idea of the Lord,
as the son of Mary, than as of a mere man,
94. He who believes only that He is the
son of Mary, implants in himself ideas
hurtful aud destructive, 342. The Roman
Catholics have sanctified Mary the mother
above the rest, and have exalted her as a
goddess or queen over all their saints;
when yet the Lord, when He glorified
His Human, put off all of His mother,
and put on all of the Father, 94. Mary in
heaven said that she adores the Lord as
her God, and is unwilling that any should
acknowledge Him as her son, because in
Him all is Divine, 102.

Masses of the Catholics, 159.

Master. From doctrine it is known
that it is lawful in a natural sense, but not
in a spiritual, to call any one master, 226.

Material things originate from tbe
substantial, 694. Substantial things are
the beginnings of material things, 280.
All things in the spiritual world are sub-
stantial, not material, 694. . The material
does not enter into the spiritual, but the
spiritual into the material, 623. What it
is to meditate spiritually and materially
upon the Word, 623. They who are in


1 142


INDEX


the spiritual world are spiritual hecause
they are substantial and not material, 694,
280. See Substantial, Spiritual.

Matter is an aggregation of sub-
stances, 280.

Maxim. See Canons. _

Means, The, of salvation are manifold,

40, 362, 577, 684, 722. They are given

y the Lord to Christians in the Word,
and to Gentiles in the religions, 580.

Meats or Foon. In the spiritual
world food is similar to food in our world,
but from a spiritual origin, and is given
from heaven by the Lord to all according
to uses, 281. Food and hread in the
spiritual sense signify the good of love and
charity, and water and wine the truth of
wisdom and faith, 367. See Food.

Mediate. There is everywhere a first,
mediate, and ultimate; and the first tends
and passes through the mediate to its
ultimate, 214, 210.

Mediation signifies that the Human is
the medium through which man may
come to God the Father, and God the
Father may come to man and so teach and
lead him that he may be saved, 135.

Meditate, To. What it is to meditate
spiritually and materially upon the Word,
623.

Medullary substance of the brain,
351. See Fibrillous.

Melancthon. As soon as he entered
the spiritual world he continued to write
on justification by faith alone, rejecting
charity and good works: but after the
New Heaven hegan to be established by
the Lord, from the light of this be began
to think that he might be in error; and at
last he saw the whole Word was full of
love to God and the neighbor, 797.

Melchisedek represented the Lord,
715 -

Memorable Relations. See Rela-
tions.

Memorandum, A, 791.

Memory, The, of man is the ground of
every science, and hence intelligence and
wisdom, 32. Every man thinks from
things in the memory, 173. The memory
is like the stomach connected with rumi-
nation in birds and heasts; the human
understanding is like the stomach itself in
which food is digested, 173. Whatever is
not received by the understanding, does
not abide in the memory as the thing it-
self, but only as to the words, 621. Faith
of the memory, 344.

Meninges of the bram, 60.

Mercury, 17.

Mercy. God is Mercy and Pity itself,
because He is Love and Good itself, 132.

Merit. In the exercises of charity man
does not place merit in works while he be-
lieves that all good is from the Lord, 43p,
440, 442. It is hurtful to place merit in
works done for the sake of salvation; for


in this are hidden evils of which he who
does so knows not, 439. Enumeration of
those evils, 439. To think that men come
into heaven, and that good is to be done
for that, is not to regard reward as the end
and to place merit in works, 440; they
think thus, who love the neighbor as them-
selves and God ahove all things; these do
not trust to reward of their merit, but they
are in the faith of the promise from grace.
With them enjoyment in doing good to
the neighbor is a reward, 440. The merit
is washed away by the Lord with those
who are imbued with charity by acting
faithfully in the work, business, and office
in which they are, and toward all with
whom they have dealings; but merit is
taken away with difficulty from those who
believe that charity is acquired by reliev-
ing the* needy, 442. The merit of our
Lord the Saviour is redemption, which
was a work purely Divine, 640. The
Lord’s merit cannot be applied, ascribed,
and imputed to man, any more than the
creation and preservation of the universe,
640, 641;.

Mesentery, 496.

Messiah was Jehovah God in Human
form, 691. The Jews wished for a Mes-
siah who would exalt them above all na-
tions, and not for any Messiah who would
provide for their eternal salvation, 205.
The Jews did not acknowledge the Mes-
siah. though all the prophets had an-
nounced His advent, 246. By the Messiah
or Christ is meant Divine Truth, 85.

Metaphysics, 17, 388. Metaphysical
things are in darkness, 52.

Meteors in the spiritual world, 335,
697 -

Mice signify devastation of the church
by falsifications, 203.

Michael, a society in heaven, 113.
Gabriel and Michael are not the names of
persons in heaven, but by those names are
meant all in heaven who are in wisdom as
to the Lord and worship Him, 300.

Microcosm. See Great Heaven. Why
man was called by the ancients a little
heaven and world, 71, 604.

Middle. As long as man lives in the
world, he is kept and walks in the middle
between heaven and hell, and is there in
spiritual equilibrium, which is free will,
383.

Milcom, 292.

Mill, By, and by grinding in a mill is
meant to seek from the Word what serves
for doctrine, 16 1.

Mind {mens). The mind consists of
understanding and will, 151, 656; these
two faculties make life; these are distinct,
but so created as to be one; and when one,
they are called the mind, 397. The under-
standing is the receptacle of Divine truth,
and the will of Divine good; consequently
the mind, which consists of those two is a


INDEX


1143


form of Divine truth and good, spiritually
and naturally organized, 224. The hu-
man mind is organized inwardly of spiri-
tual substances, and outwardly of natural,
and lastly of material _ substances, 38.
The human mind is a spiritual terminating
in a natural organism, 351. The human
mind is formed in three regions, according
to three degrees, 34, 42, 69, 147, 395, 603,
-846. The mind is divided into three re-
gions, as a house into three stories, and as
the abodes of the angels into three heav-
ens, 186. The highest region of the mind
is called celestial, the middle spiritual, and
the lowest natural, 147, 603; how these re-
gions are opened, 42. The mind, organ-
ized according to the three degrees, is a
receptacle of Divine influx, 34. The mind
of man grows like his body; the body in
stature, but the mind in -wisdom, 152; the
latter is exalted from region to region, and
this exaltation is effected as man procures
for himself truths and joins them to good,
152. The mind of every man is his in-
ternal man which actually is the man, and
is within the external which makes his
body, 156. Man’s mind is interiorly
spiritual but exteriorly natural, 475. The
spiritual mind looks principally to the
spiritual world and has for objects the
things there, whether they be in heavenor
hell; but the natural mind looks prin-
cipally to the natural world and has for
objects the things there, whether they he
such as are in heaven or hell, 420. The
mind of man lives after death : it is in com-
plete human form, and is called a spirit;
if good, an angelic spirit, and afterwards
an angel; if evil, a satanic spirit, and after-
wards a satan, 156. What is highest in
man’s mind is turned upward toward God;
what is mediate outward toward the
world; and the lowest, downward to the
body, 507. The human mind is like soil,
in which spiritual and natural truths are
implanted as seeds, and they may be
multiplied without end, 350. The human
mind, however analytical and elevated, is
finite, and the finiteness cannot be re-
moved, 28. The minds of all who deny
the sanctity of the Word and the Divinity
of the Lord, think in the lowest region,
147. Pretenders, flatterers, liars, and
hypocrites possess a double mind, or their
mind is divided into two minds not in ac-
cord, 443.

Mind {animus). By the mind of man
is meant his love’s affection and thought,
373. The mind of one is never exactly
like another’s, 32. See Mind {mens).

Minerva, 17, 159.

Ministers. Ministers of the church;
how each speaks, 154. Ministers who are
hypocrites, 381. Ministers of state, 663.
See Priests.

Miracles. Divine miracles and mag-
ical miracles, 91. Divine miracles done


according to Divine order, but according
to the order of the influx of the Spiritual
World into the Natural, gr. The Lord
was in the state of glorification or union
with the Father when He did miracles,
104. Miracles are not now wrought, be-
cause they compel, and take away free
will in spiritual things, and from spiritual
make man natural. Every one in the
Christian world since the Coming of the
Lord can become spiritual, and he he-
comes spiritual solely from the Lord
through the Word, 501. Miracles were
wrought before the Coming of the Lord,
because those of the church were then
natural men to whom the spiritual things
of the internal church could not be opened,
for if opened they would have profaned
them, 501. They who do not believe the
Word of the Lord, would not believe on
account of miracles any more than the
posterity of Jacob did in the desert, 849.
Miraculous faith, 344.

Mirror. To every one who has formed
the state of his mind from God, the Sacred
Scripture is like a mirror before him in
which he sees God; but each in his own
way, 6. The truths which man learns
from the Word, and with which he is im-
bued by life according to them, compose
a mirror in which he sees God, 6. The
truths of the Word are so many mirrors of
the Lord, 508, 767. Knowledges concern-
ing God are mirrors of God, 11. Works
are as mirrors of the man, 373.

Mqab signifies adulteration of good,
200.

Moguls. The Word, with those who
search for truths of faith and goods of life,
is like the wealth of the Emperor of the
Moguls, 245.

Mohammed presided at first in the
spiritual world over the Mohammedans;
but because he wished to rule as God over
all things of their religion, he was ejected,

830. See Mohammedans.

Mohammedanism, 137.

Mohammedans. The Mohammedans

in the spiritual world appear behind the
Catholics in the west, and form a border
around them, 828. Mohammedans are
hostile to Christians chiefly on account of
the belief in three Divine persons, and
worship of three Gods, so many Creators;
and to the Roman Catholics, still further
on account of their bending|before images,

831. The Mohammedans, like all nations
who acknowledge one God, and who love
justice, and do good from religion, have
their own heaven, but it is outside cf the
Christian, 832. The Mohammedan re-
ligion was raised up from the Lord’s Prov-
idence, so that it might blot out the idol-
atries of many nations, and give them
some knowledge of the Lord before the?
should come into the spiritual world, after
death, 833. This religion would not have


1144


INDEX


been received by so many kingdoms if
polygamy had not been permitted, 833.
Some Mohammed is always placed, in the
spiritual world, in view of the Mohamme-
dans; it is not the Mohammed who wrote
the Koran, hut another; nor is there al-
ways the same person, but he is changed,
820.

Money. See Coins.

Monks in the spiritual world, 817.
The monks when they enter the spiritual
world, search for the saints, especially of
their order, hut do not find them, 824.
There are converted monks, 820.

Moral. There is the spiritual rational
and moral man, and the merely natural
rational and moral man; and the one is
not known from the other in the world,
564. He who lives according to human
and Divine laws as one law is a truly moral
man, 445. Moral life when at the same
time spiritual, is charity, 443-445. In
life's first period, moral life is the life of
charity in outmosts, 443. With those who
love truth because it is truth, morals, theo-
retically perceived, place themselves in
the second region of the mind, 1S6.

Morality. Merely natural morality
and rationality are in themselves dead,
384. No one from the morality of the ex-
ternal man can conclude as to the morality
of the internal, 443.

Morning. The Coming of the Lord is
the morning, 764. # Morning in the Word
signifies the first time of the church, 765.
The faith in three Gods has extinguished
the light in the Word, and removed the
Lord from the church, and has thus pre-
cipitated morning into night, 177.

Moses. See Jews . Moses signifies the
historical Word, 222.

Mother means the church, 304; the
communion of saints, by which is meant
the Lord's church over the world, 307.

Motion. In all motion there is activity
and passivity, 576.

Mountain signifies the highest heaven,
205. By mountains are meant higher
things of the church, 200.

Multiplication. Perpetual multi-
plication of truth and hence of wisdom,
71S.

Murder. In a broader natural sense
murder means enmity, hatred, and re-
venge, which breathe out destruction, for
murder lies concealed within them, 309.
In the spiritual sense murder means all
modes of killing and destroying the souls
of men, 310. In the celestial sense, to kill
means to be angry with the Lord, to hate
Him, and to wish to blot out His name,
311 -

Muscle. Its composition, 147, 351.
United power of the muscles in action,
353 -

Music in the heavens, 745.

Myrrh signifies natural good, 205.


Mysteries of the faith of the present
day, 803.

Name without reality is but vain, 683.
Name means quality, 682. The name of
Jehovah God is in itself holy; also the
name of Jesus, 297. See Jesus, Jesus
Christ. The Lord's Divine Human is the
Father’s Name, 112; this Name is hal-
lowed when the Father is acknowledged
in His Human. 112. The Word, and
whatever the church has therefrom, and
thus all worship, is the name of God, 298.
See Commandments. Names of persons
and places in the Word do not mean per-
sons and places, but things of the church,
300. In the spiritual world no one retains
the name which be received in baptism
and had from his father or ancestors, in
the world; but every one there is named
according to his quality, and the angels
are called according to their moral and
spiritual life, 300, 682.

Nations and People. In the Word by
nations are meant those in good, and in
the opposite sense those in evil; and by
people, those in truths, and in the opposite
sense those in falsities. Therefore they
of the Lord's spiritual kingdom are called
people, and they of the Lord's celestial
kingdom are called nations, 251. Gen-
tiles in the spiritual world, 835. Among
the Gentiles some are interior and others
exterior, 835. There is no nation in the
world which cannot be saved if they ac-
knowledge God and live well, 729. All
nations who acknowledge one God, and
who love justice and do good from re-
ligion have their heaven, 832.

Nativity. See Birth.

Natural things were created that they
might clothe spiritual, 78. See Word.

Naturalism, 75, 94, 342, 771. Origin
of the naturalism which reigns, 4, 173,
339 -

Naturalists, 35, 178, 639. Atheistic
naturalists, 75, 159. 382, 759.

Natural Man. Exterior men are sen-
sual-natural, because they think from the
fallacies of the senses, 839. Those who
are in hell are the lowest natural, 124.

Natural Man, The, viewed in him-
self, does not differ from beasts; like them
he is wild, 574, 566. The natural man
cannot perceive any thing concerning God,
hut only concerning the world, 11. They
who ascribe all things to nature, cannot
think rationally concerning them, still less
spiritually; but they think sensually and
materially, 12. The natural man by his
own reason can apprehend nothing but
what is of nature, 22. The natural man
continually acts against the spiritual, and
regards spiritual things as phantoms, 133,
2761 381. The natural man cannot be
persuaded that the Word is Divine Truth
itself, in which are Divine Wisdom and


INDEX


1145


Life; for he looks at it from its style, in
which he does not see those things, 19 1,
200, 401. The merely natural man does
not think of Divine truths except from
the world, thus from fallacies of the senses,
296, 402, 470. The natural man regards
the things of the spirit, as foolishness, 381.
The natural man looks at every thing
spiritual inversely, 501. The merely natu-
ral man can see evils and goods in others;
but he sees no evils in himself, 564. Truth
cannot be recognized by a merely natural
man, 754. Before regeneration the natu-
ral man is divided into an internal and an
external, 592. The natural man with its
lusts must be subdued, subjugated, and
inverted, 574.

Nature is the receptacle by which love
and wisdom work their effects, 35- Na-
ture of itself is not the operator in any
thing, but God through nature, 12. Na-
ture was created to be subservient to the
life from God, 77. Nature is separate
from God, and yet He is omnipresent in
it, 30. Nature in itself is dead, and thus
it does nothing from itself, but is acted up-
on hy life, 77. Consequences of believing
that nature is the creator of the universe,
are that the universe is what is called God,
and that nature is its essence, 178. Na-
ture with its time and space could not hut
have a beginning: not so God who is
without time and space; therefore nature
is from God, not from eternity but in
time, together with its time and space,
280. All things in nature correspond to
spiritual things, 201. . The spiritual world
operates upon the things that are formed
in the world of nature as the human mind
operates upon the senses and motions of
the body, 695. The particular things of
nature are like tunics, sheaths, and cloth-
ing which envelopspiritual things, and pro-
duce effects corresponding to the end de-
signed by God the Creator, 695. Whether
nature he of life, or whether life be of na-
ture, 35. The centre and the expanse of
nature and of life, 35. The nature of the
spiritual world is as different from the
nature of the natural world as the sub-
stantial is from the material, or the spiri-
tual from the natural, or the prior from the
posterior, 79. Those who acknowledge
nature as God, have filled up the interiors
of their reason or understanding with
worldly or corporeal things, 9. Those
who have turned away from the Divine,
while they hehold the wonderful things in
nature, cannot think rationally, still less
spiritually, 12. They put off the nature of
roan, and put on the nature of h easts, 13.
The essence of nature which one appro-
priated to himself in the world cannot be
changed after death, 651. Wonderful
things of nature, 12.

Nazarites, The, represented the pow-
er of the Word in ultimates, 223.


Neighbor. Good itself is essentially
the neighhor, 410, 418. Every man indi-
vidually is the neighhor to be loved, but
according to the quality of his good, 406,
410. To love the neighbor is not merely
to will and do good to the relative, friend,
and good man, hut also to the stranger,
enemy, and bad man, 407; charity is exer-
cised toward the latter in one way, and
toward the former in another; toward a
relative and friend by direct benefits;
toward an enemy and wicked man by in-
direct benefits, which are conferred by ex-
hortation, discipline, punishment and so
by correction, 407. A smaller or greater
society is the neighbor hecause it is man
collectively, 412, 413. One’s country is
the neighbor more than a society, 414.
See Country. > The church is the neighhor
to be loved in a higher degree, and the
Lord’s kingdom in the highest, 415. Love
toward the Lord’s kingdom is love toward
the neighbor in its fulness; for they who
love the Lord’s kingdom not only love the
Lord above all, but they also love the
neighhor as themselves, 416. The con-
junction of love to God and the neighhor
comes in this way, there is influx of God's
love toward men, and reception of this by
man and cooperation in him is love to-
ward the neighbor, 458. To love the
neighhor, is not to love the person, hut
the good in the person, 417, 4 r8. To love
the good in another from good in self is
genuine love toward the neighbor, 418.
The man who loves good because it is
good, and truth because it is truth, loves
the neighbor eminently, 419. How every
one is neighbor to himself, 406. The
Lord’s commandments all relate to love to
the neighhor, being in sum not to do evil
to him, but to do him good, 458.

Neptune, 17, 159, 178, 292.

Nero, 73.

Nerve. Its composition, 147, 351.
Fibril of the nerve, 258. Optic nerve,
371 *

New Church. The Lord has foretold
that He will come and found a new church
which is the New Jerusalem, 779. It is in
accordance with Divine order that a new
heaven should be formed hefore a new
church on earth, 784. The Lord is at this
day forming a new heaven from Chris-
tians who acknowledged in the world, and
after their departure out of it were able to
acknowledge, that He is the God of heav-
en and earth, 781. As the new heaven
grows, so far does the New Church come
down from that heaven, 784. The New
Church is the crown of ail churches that
have hitherto existed on earth, 786-789.
This New Church is the crown of all the
churches, because it will worship one vis-
ible God, in whom is the invisible, like the
soul in the body, 787. They who have
lived a life of charity, and still more who


1146


INDEX


have loved truth because it is truth, in the
spiritual world suffer themselves to be in-
structed, and accept the doctrinals of the
New Church, 799. A New Church is to he
instituted, 115. What must be done be-
fore a New Church can he instituted, 115.

New Jerusalem means a New Church
which is to he established hy the Lord,
197, 782-784. See New Church. Why
the New Jerusalem signifies a new church,
782.

Nice, Council of. It was called to-
gether in order to cast out the damnable
heresy of Arius, 174, 632, 636, 638; this
was done of the Lord’s Providence, since
if the Divinity of the Lord is denied, the
Christian church is left without life, 636.
The hishops feigned a Son of God from
eternity, who descended and assumed
Humanity; believing that they thus vin-
dicated the Lord’s Divinity and restored
it to Him, and not knowing that God Him-
self the Creator of the Universe descended
to become the Redeemer, and thus Cre-
ator anew, 637. The heretical doctrines
hefore the Nicene Council, and that arose
from that council and after it, have extin-
guished the light in the Word, and re-
moved the Lord from the church, 177,
206. The Nicene council introduced three
Divine persons from eternity, 136, 338,
489, 632, 634. The present faith of justi-
fication originated from the deliberations
and decrees of the Council of Nice, re-
specting three Divine persons from eter-
nity, 206. No other Trinity than a Trinity
of Gods was understood by those who
were in the Nicene council, 172, 177, 632.
We ought not to put faith in councils,
but in the Lord’s Word which is above
councils, 489, 634. There have been two
epochs of the Christian church, one from
the time of the Lord to the Council of
Nice, and the other from that Council to
the present day, 760, 1 76. Since the Ni-
cene Council no one has been admitted
into any spiritual temptation, 597. See
Athanasius , Creed.

Nicene Creed, 632. See Nice.

Night. The last time of the church is
called night, 761.

Nothing is made out of nothing, 76.

Nyctalopia. Visionary and prepos-
% terous faith, the appearance of falsity as
truth from ingenious confirmation, may
he compared to the disease of the eye
called nyctalopia, 346.

O. The vowel 0 is in use in the third i
heaven, because it has a full sound, 278.

Oak, An, means sensual good and
truth of the church, 200.

Oath. To swear by God, and His Holi-
ness, the Word, and the Gospel, in coro-
nations, inaugurations into the priesthood
and inductions into offices of trust, is not
taking the name of God in vain, unless he


who takes the oath casts aside his prom-
ises as vain, 297.

Obedience. The human rational has
hitherto been closed up by the universal
dogma that the understanding is to be
under obedience to the faith of the eccles-
iastics, 840.

Object. To show that the Divine Trin-
ity is conjoined in the Lord is the principal
object of this work, 108.

' Occasional influx, 696.

Occupations of the minds of the angels
in heaven, 695.

Ocean. All whirlpools and sandhanks
follow in their motion the general course
of the sun, 767.

Ochim, 45.

OcTAvrus Augustus, 73.

Odors into which enjoyments of loves
are turned in heaven and hell, 569.

Offence. An identity of three Divine
Essences is an offence to reason, 23.

Offices. See Functions. Distinction
hetween the offices of charity and its bene-
factions, 425. By the offices of charity are
meant the exercises of it which proceed
immediately from charity itself, 425.

Oil, By, are meant things of love, 606.

Old Men signify wisdom, 205. In
heaven old men are restored to the morn-
ing of their life, 76 6.

Olive Tree, The, signifies the celes-
tial good and truth of the church, ^200; the
goad of love, 205; good, which is of the
highest heaven, 6oq.

Omnipotence and omnipresence, hy
means of Divine Love and Wisdom, are
applicable to the Divine Essence and
Existence, 21. Omnipotence, omniscience
and omnipresence pertain to the Divine
Essence, 50. Omnipotence, omniscience,
and omnipresence helong to the Divine
Wisdom from the Divine Love, but not to
the Divine Love by means of the Divine
Wisdom, 50; these three proceed from
the Divine Love and Wisdom, scarcely
otherwise than the power and presence of
the sun, by means of light and heat, 49.
God is omnipotent, omniscient, and omni-
present by means of the Wisdom of His
Love, 50. By omnipresence God per-
ceives all, by omniscience He provides all,
and hy omnipotence He operates all, 63.
Omnipresence, omniscience, and omnipo-
tence make one, one implies another, and
thus they cannot be separated, 63. What
omnipotence is, 74. The faith of this day
with regard to omnipotence is absurd, 58.
The omnipotence of God proceeds and
operates according to the laws of His order,
56, 70, 74, 90, 500, 502. The omnipotence
of God cannot proceed except by tbe way
of justice; and the laws of justice axe
truths which cannot he changed, 341. It
cannot change evil into good, 57, 58, 500—
502. The Divine Omnipotence can by no
means go out to contact of any thing evil,


INDEX


1147


nor promote it from itself, for evil turns
itself away, 56. It is not a contradiction
to act omnipotently according to the laws
of justice with judgment, or according to
the laws inscribed on love from wisdom;
but it is a contradiction that God can act
contrary to the laws of His justice and
love, 74. Redemption could not have
been performed but by an omnipotent
God, 124. God by His omnipotence could
not effect redemption except hy means of
the Human; as no one can work unless he
has an arm; and His Human is called in
the Word the Arm of Jehovah, Isa. xl. 10;
liii. 1, 84. By the Son sitting on the right
hand of the Father is meant the omnipo-
tence of God by means of the tinman
which He assumed in the world, 136.
The man who through falsities concerning
spiritual things has heoome natural, can-
not think of the Divine Omnipotence but
as being above order, and thus apart from
order, 502.

Omnipresence, The, of God cannot be
comprehended by a merely natural idea,
but it may to some extent by a spiritual
idea, 30. God is everywhere present in
the world, and yet nothing proper to the
world is in Him, that is, nothing of space
and time, 30. God is omnipresent from
the firsts to the lasts of His order, by
means of the beat and light from tbe sun
of the spiritual world, 63. In those things
which are contrary to order, God is omni-
present by continual struggle with them
and by continual effort to bring them hack
to order, 70. The Divine omnipresence
may be illustrated by the presence of
angels and spirits in the spiritual world,
64. See Omnipotence.

Omniscience is infinite wisdom, 69.
God is omniscient, perceives, sees, and
knows all things, because He is Wisdom
and Light itself, 59. See Omnipotence.

One. Tbe internal and external man
can act as one actually, and can also act
as one apparently, 340.

Onia\ God has revealed in the Word
that He is the Only which is in itself, 22.

Operate, To, when said of the Lord,
means the same as sending the Holy Spirit,
153. The Lord operates out of Himself
from His Father, and not the reverse,
153. Tbe Lord operates those powers
meant by tbe sending of the Holy Spirit,
in those who believe in Him, 149. There
is a mutual conjunction which is not ef-
fected by action and reaction, but by co-
operation; for the Lord acts, and man re-
ceives action from the Lord and operates
as from himself; yes, out of himself from
the Lord, 371.

Operation, The Divine, is effected by
the Divine truth which proceeds out of
the Lord, 139. The Lord is continually
operating in man for his salvation, 500.
The operation of man from the Lord is


imputed to man as his, for he is constantly
kept in freedom of will by the Lord, 371.
Operation of the Holy Spirit, 142, 155.
Operation of the heart and lungs in the
body, 87.

Opinion, The common, concerning
the state of souls after death, and of an-
gels and spirits, 29.

Opposites are without, and are con-
trary to those things which are within, 62.
To will evil and do good are in themselves
opposites, 435. No such things as are in
heaven appear in hell, hut only the oppo-
sites, 78. Quality is perfected by relative
differences of more or less opposite, 763.
There are relatives in each opposite, in
good as well as in evil, and in truth as well
as in falsity, 62. Tbe relatives in hell are
all opposite to the relatives in heaven, 62.
God perceives and sees, and hence knows
all the relatives in heaven, from the order
in which He is, and thereby perceives,
sees, and knows all the opposite relatives
in hell, 62. See Relatives.

Oral. Mere oral confession that one
is a sinner is not repentance, 516-5 tg.

; Order, in a general definition, is the
disposition, determination, and activity of
parts, substances, or entities which make
form whence is state; the perfection of ’
which is produced by wisdom from its
love, or the imperfection of which is by
the unsoundness of reason from cupidity,
52. God is Order because He is Substance
and Form itself, 52, 53, 502. God intro-
duced order into the universe and into
every part of it at creation, 52, 53. God
created man from, in, and into order, 71.
Divine Love and Wisdom are the two
things from which order has existed and
subsists, 65. No creation was possible
without order, 500. Van ous laws of order,
71, 89, no. The laws of order in the
church are as many as there are truths in
the Word, 55. The primary thing of order
is for man to be an image of God, 500.
Man is so far in God as he lives according
to order, 70. To live according to Divine
order is to live according to the command-
ments of God, 96. There are in heaven
and the world successive order and simul-
taneous order, 300. In successive order
one thing follows another, from highest to
lowest; in simultaneous order one thing is
next to another from inmost to outmost,
214. The highest things of successive or-
der become the inmost of simultaneous or-
der, and the lowest things of successive
order hecome the outmost of simultaneous
order, 214. The consistence of ail things
depends on order, 679. The things in the
universe were all and each created into
their orders, 54, 75, 502. Orders are man-
ifold, general and particular; there is one
which is most universal, and on which de-
pend the general and ^particular in con-
nected senes, 679. Order is universal


INDEX


I 148


from bein^ in the smallest particulars, 60.
Each particular order subsists in the uni-
versal, 54. What is order without dis-
tinction ? and what is distinction without
evidences? and what are evidences with-
out signs hy which qualities are recog-
nized ? For without knowledge of qualities,
order is not recognized as order, 680.

Organ. Man is an organ recipient of
God, 34, 504; and be is an organ according
to the reception, 34. God pours His life
into the organ and every thing thereof, as
the sun pours its heat into the tree and
every part of it, 504-

Organism:. The spiritual organism of
the human mind, 145, 351, 578; it con-
sists of perpetual helices, 578. Spiritual
organism of the brain, 577.

Organization. The life, which flows
into man, is modified according to the
organization induced hy love, 461.

Organs, The. The organs of sense of
the body, 577.

Orientals. The knowledge of corre-
spondences remained with many of the
people of the East even to the Coming of
the Lord, 205.

Origin of love and wisdom, 41; of
man, 103; of faith, 343; of evil, 490; of
idolatries, 833.

Owls represent the speech of those who
are not willing, and not ahle, to perceive
truth, hut only falsity, 42.

Ox means natural affection, 200. Oxen
signified the powers of the natural mau,
205.

Palace in heaven, 740.

Palladium, 177, 759. Palladium on
Pamassium, 692, 693, 694.

Pallas, 292.

Pancreas, 60.

Pantheon 503.

Panther. Man not bom again is as to
his spirit like a panther, 642.

Paper let down from heaven, 848.

Paraclete. See Comforter.

Paradise, 74, 461, 681, 520. Paradisal
joys, 732, 737.

Parental Love. A love implanted in
every one called parental love, 431, 304.
Parental love exists equally with the bad
and good, and is sometimes stronger with
the wicked, 431; it exists in beasts and
birds, 431.

Parisians in the spiritual world, 826.

Parnassium, 692, 693.

Parnassus. The virgins of Parnassus,
58. See also 276.

Particulars taken together are called
a general, 60. See General. Particulars
adapt themselves to their general, and the
general disposes them into form so that
they agree, 47. Particulars resemble
their universals, 32. That particulars may
be beld in their order, it is necessary that
there should be universals from which


they exist and subsist; and it is also neces-
sary that the particulars should in image
answer to their universals; otherwise the
whole would perish with the parts, 714.
See Universal.

Passion of the Cross, The, was the
last temptation which the Lord sustained,
and was the means of the glorification of
His Human, 126. The passion of the
cross was not the act of redemption, but
the act of the glorification of His Human,

1 95, 1 16, 126, 132, 134, 378, 579. Redemp-
tion and the passion of the cross are dis-
tinct and not to be confounded, 581. Be-
lief that the passion of the cross was re-
demption itself is a fundamental error,
132, 134; from this belief have sprung
horrible falsities, 581. They who have
confirmed in themselves the faith of the
present day, that the Lord by the passion
of the cross took away all the sins of the
world, are in hypocritical worship, 518.
The angels in heaven cannot think of the
Lord’s passion, but of Divine Truth and
of His Resurrection, 706. All things of
the passion of the Lord signified the profa-
nation of the Word, 129, 130.

Passive. See Active. The passive or
dead force cannot act from itself, but
must be actuated by the active or living
force, 607.

Paul. An epistle of Paul not published
during his life, 701. How the passage in
Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, iii. 28,
ought to be understood, 506.

Peace. There is peace by conjunction
with the Lord, because there is protection
from hell, 303, 599.

Pegasus. By the winged horse Pega-
sus the ancients understood the under-
standing of truth, which is wisdom; by
his hoofs they understood the experiences
through which is natural intelligence, 693.
See also 276. See Horse .

Perceive. Those who perceive things
exteriorly are in no light of truth, 839.

Perception is from affection, 231, 386,
697. All things of wisdom are called per-
ceptions, 697. There must be perception,
and so reception, each in man’s mine!, 339.
Perception is with man according to the
state of his mind formed by doctrine; if
these are true, the perception becomes
clear from the light which enlightens; but
if they are false, the perception becomes
obscure which may appear as if it were
clear from confirmations, 155. Man has
general perception from the influx of light
from heaven when he hears a truth, a6i;
what a man has from the influx of light
from the world, is his own perception, 461;
these two perceptions, namely the internal
and the external, or the spiritual and the
natural, make one with the wise, 461.
The perception of opposites differs from
the perception of relatives, 62. Various
perceptions of truth, 42.


INDEX


1149


Perfection of life consists not in
thought, but in perception of truth from
light of truth, 42. One degree cannot be
perfected and elevated to the perfection
of another, 32. See Degrees.

Pericardium, 60.

Periods. There are four periods
through which man passes from infancy to
old age, 443, 756. Periodical consumma-
tions, 756.

Peritonaeum, 60.

Permission of Evil. From. the per-
mission of evil, in which permission every
one’s internal man is, it is clearly mani-
fest that man has free will in spiritual
things, 479-482. The laws of permission
are also laws of the Divine Providence,
479 -

Persia. King of, 245.

Person. A definition of person, that it
is what subsists by itself, 17, no. One
person cannot go forth and proceed from
another, but operation can go forth and
proceed, 188. The Divine Trinity is in
one Person, 700.

Persuasion emulates faith in externals,
339. Persuasion is so effective in. the
spiritual world that no one can resist it or
speak against what is said; it is a kind of
incantation, 796. The dire persuasion
that God transfused Himself into man
was held by the men of the most ancient
church at its end, when it was consum-
mated, 470. The atheistic naturalist’s
persuasion of the certain truth of his fan-
tasy, 759.

Perversion. Principal cause of the
total perversion of the church, 132.

Philistia means the church separated
from charity, 487.

Philistines, By the, is signified faith
without charity, 200. The Philistines
signified those who are in faith separate
from charity, 203.

Physical influx, 695.

Physicians. Opinions of physicians
on conscience, 665.

Pia Mater, Dura Mater, 213.

Pillars, The, of the tabernacle ag-
nified the ultimates of the Word, which
are the truths and goods of its letter, 220.

Pineal Gland, 697.

Place in the spiritual world is not
place, but an appearance of place accord-
ing to the state of love or wisdom, or
charity and faith, 739. To he transported
from place to place as to the spirit, 157.
Every man, from infancy, even to old
age, is changing his locality in the world
of spirits, 476. Places of instruction in
the spiritual world, 661.

Plagues of Egypt compared with the
plagues in the Apocalypse, 635. Each
plague spiritually signifies some falsity
which continued its devastation even to
destruction, 635.

Plants. Wonderful things m the pro-
ductions of plants, 12. See Vegetables.


Platforms in the spiritual world, 697,
745 -

Plato, 9, 692, 693.

Platter, By the, is meant food, and
good is signified hy food, 215.

Pleasantness. See Enjoyments.

Pleura, 60.

Plurality of Gods. Whence it arose,
24,275. See Polytheism.

Pluto, 17, 159, 178, 292, 404.

Politics. With those who love truth
because it is truth, political things re-
side in the first region of the mind; ahove
them are moral and theological things,
and below them scientific, 186. See Re-
gion. With politicians love of ruling
from love of self goes higher and higher,
even so that they wish to he kings and
emperors, and if possible rule over all
things in the world, and he called kings
of kings and emperors of emperors, 66 r.

Polygamy. Why permitted in the
Eastern nations, 133, 834.

Polytheism. Its origin, 275, 623.
See Plurality 0} Gods.

Poor, The, in the Word signify those
who are not in knowledge of truth and
good, 427. To give alms to the poor is a
henefaction but not charity, 425, 442,
459 -

Pope. The Catholics always have
some representative pontiff set over them,
whom they adore with similar ceremony
to that ohserved in the world. It seldom
happens that one who has heen a pope in
the world is set over them, 820. Add
transcription and you will be a vicarious
pope, 640.

Poplar Tree, The, signifies the natu-
ral good and truth of the church, 200.

Portuguese Jews, 841. . See Jews.

Posterior. All posterior things are
receptacles of prior, 33. What is prior is
more universal than what, is posterior,
2 r. What is posterior subsists from what
is prior even as it exists from it, 35. Be-
tween prior and posterior there is no
finite ratio, 280. They who are in poste-
rior vision, and not in prior sight, 334.

Posthumous. Man’s mind is his
spirit, or the posthumous man that lives
after his departure from the body, 816.

Power. All the power of God is of
Divine truth from Divine good, 86, 124.
See Omnipotence. In the spiritual world,
the power of truth is conspicuous, 87.
The inexpressible power of the Word,
209, 224. The power of the Word is in
its letter because the Word is there in its
fulness, and the angels of both of the
Lord’s kingdoms and men are together
in that sense, 223, 234, 235. The power
of the Word in ultimates was represented
by the Nazarites, 223. The Lord acts,
and man acts from the Lord; for in man’s
passive there is the Lord’s active; there-
fore the power to act aright is from the
Lord, 576. Man has power to obey and


1 1 So


INDEX


do, 71. No one is able to purify him-
self from evils by his own power and
strength, and yet it cannot be done with-
out the power and strength of man as bis
own, 438; if these were not as his own,
no one could fight against the flesh and
its lusts, but to do this is nevertheless
enjoined upon every one, 438. Man is in

S ower against evil and falsity so far as he
ves according to Divine order, 68.
Power, The, of God and His will are
one; and because He wills nothing but
good, therefore He can do nothing but
good, 56. Ability to understand truth,
and to will it, is given to every man and
to devils also, and is not taken away, 481.
By the power of the Highest is meant the
Divine good, 88; also the Divine Truth
proceeding from Jehovah the Father, 146.

Prayers. Before washing, or purifica-
tion from evils, prayers to God are not
heard, 329. See Lord's Prayer.
Preachers, 381, 146, 147.

Precious Stones signify knowledges
of truth and good, 467. Precious stones
represent Divine truths translucent from
good, 218. The precious stones, of
which the foundations of the wall around
the city New Jerusalem are constructed,
signify the truths of the doctrine of the
New Church, 217. Precious stones cor-
respond to the letter of the Word, 843.
The spiritual origin of precious stones is
from truths in the letter of the Word,
209, 217.

Predestination is abominable, 177;
detestable, 485-488, 628. Predestination
is an offspring of the faith of the church
of the present day; but the faith of the
New Church abhors it as a monster, 486.
■There must flow from predestination
cruel ideas of God, and shameful ideas
of religion, 487. The decree of the Synod
of Dort respecting predestination is not
only an insane but a cruel heresy, 489.
See Relations, 72, 798, 803. God cannot
predestine the soul of any to eternal
death. He cannot even turn away His
face from man and look at him with a
stem countenance, 56, 72. Every man
has been predestined to heaven, and no
one to hell; but a man gives himself over
to hell by the abuse of free will in spiri-
tual things, 490.

Predictions of the consummation of
the Christian Church, 757.

Preparation. Man should prepare
himself as a receptacle into which God
may enter, 80, 105, 359. Preparation for
heaven or hell in the world of spirits,
448, 739. Preparation of the Jews for
the Corning of the Messiah, 688-691.
Preparation for a new spiritual church,
US-

Presence. The Lord before His
Coming into the world was present with
men of the church, but mediately; but
since His Coming, immediately, 109.


I There is a universal and individual pres-
I ence of the Lord with man, or an internal
i and an external. With those who only
understand wbat truth and good are, the
Lord’s presence is universal or external,
while with those who also will and do the
truth and good the Lord's presence is
both universal and individual, or both
external and internal, 719- , Where the
Lord is present, there He is with His
whole essence, 364, 365. .The Lord is
present with every man, urging and press-
ing to be received, 766. The Lord is most
fully present in the letter of the Word,
and He teaches and enlightens men from
it, 225, 229. The Lord’s presence in the
Word comes only by the spiritual sense,
780. Difference between the Presence
and the Coming of the Lord, 774. Won-
derful presence of angels and spirits in
the spiritual world, 64. Cause of this
presence, 64.

Present, The. Since God is in all
time without time, therefore in His Word
He speaks of the past and future, in the
present, 30.

Preservation is perpetual creation,
46, 224. It is unity that effects the preser-
vation of the whole, which would other-
wise fall asunder, 679.

Priesthood sigaifies Divine good, 114.
The priesthood of Aaron represented the
Lord as to the Divine good and the work
of salvation, 218. The priesthood is to
be honored, as it serves, 415.

Priests who minister only for gain or
worldly honor, and who teach such things
as they see from the Word to be not true,
are spiritual thieves, 318, 320. Con-
scientious priests, 422, 662. Priests with-
out conscience, 380, 666. Hypocritical
preachers, 381. Priests in heaven, 731.
See also 134, 836. In the Word priest sig-
nifies Divme good, 114.

Primary, The, is the all in the second-
ary, 388.

Primeval state in paradise, 4po.

Primitive. * The substantial is tbe
primitive of tbe material, 79.

Prince of the World (John xii. 31)
signifies hell, 1 16.

Principal and instrumental, 35. See
Instrumental .

Principles and Derivatives. De-
rivatives have tbeir essence from prin-
ciples, 177. Faith is the principle, and
doctrines are derivatives, 177. Spirits
and angels are in principles, but men in
derivatives, 280. The will and under-
standing in their principles are in the
head, and in their derivatives in the body,
403, 156. Derivatives in the body are
formed for sensation and action, 156.
To make derivatives primitives, is to turn
every thing upside down, 37.

Prior. They who are in posterior
vision, and not in prior sight, 334.


INDEX


IIU


Prisons, Infernal, 66i, 662. See
also 281, 570, 797.

Progression of the Lord in intelli-
gence and wisdom, 89. Progression of
the Lord towards union with the Father,
105. Progress to the infinite, 32.

Prolific. The prolific of the seed is in
every thing pertaining to a tree, 403.

Prophecy signifies doctrine, 149. By
the spirit of prophecy (Apoc. xix. 30) is
meant the truth of doctrine, 149.

Prophesy, To, signifies to teach doc-
trine, 149.

Prophets. State of the prophets when
they saw such things as exist in the spiri-
tual world, 157. Prophets formerly sig-
nified the doctrine of the church, and
hence they represented the church, such
as it was, by various things, and even by
things unjust, grievous, and not fit to he
mentioned, which were enjoined on them
by God, 129. The Lord was willing to be
tempted even to the passion of the cross,
because He was The Prophet, i2g. That
the Lord as The Prophet represented the
state of the Jewish Church, as to the
Word, is manifest from the particulars of
His passion, 130.

Propitiation signifies the operation of
grace, lest man by sins bring himself into
condemnation - , likewise protection, lest
he profane holiness, 135.

Propitiatory, The, or mercy-seat
over the ark in the tabernacle signified
protection, lest the holiness of the Word
be profaned, 135, 691.

Providence. The laws of permission
are also laws of Providence, 479. _

Province. In heaven a society is in
the province of the liver, or pancreas, or
spleen, or stomach, or eye, or ear, or
tongue, etc.; the angels themselves also
know in what part of man they dwell,
65.

Prudence. From God or man? 662.

Pulpit. What is preached and pro-
claimed from the pulpits, 132. Pulpit in
a temple in the spiritual world, 508, 750.

Punishments, Infernal, recur to
eternity, 79.

Pure. The angels are not pure m the
sight of God, 12 r.

Purgatory is a fable invented by the
Roman Catholics, 475*

Purple signifies the good of the Word,
215. Purple signifies heavenly good, 220.
The good of merit appears to the angels as
rust, and good not of merit as purple,
439. They who have been regenerated
by the Divine good of love, in heaven
walk in purple raiment, 686.

Purses full of silver signified knowl-
edge of truth in great abundance, 277.

Pythagoras, 692.

Pythons. Who were called pythons
by the ancients, 324.

Quality is derived from form, 53.


The quality of form is its state, 52. Every
quality exists by varieties, 763. Quality
is perfected by relative differences of more
and less opposite, 763. From the quality
of order in the universe there is something
like it in all created things in the world, 60.

Quarters in the spiritual world, 476.

Raphael, 233. See Michael .

Rational. How the rational of man is
illuminated, 215. Above the rational is
spiritual light, and below, the rational
natural light, 334. There is the spiritual
rational and moral man, and also the
merely natural rational and moral man;
and the one is not known from the other
in the world, 564. The natural rational
can confirm whatever it likes, thus falsity
as well as truth, 758. They are in the
spiritual rational who look to the Lord
and from Him are in the love of truth, 758.

Rationality. There are two ways to
rationality, one from the world, the other
from heaven, 564. Merely natural ra-
tionality is dead, 384. The devils also
have rationality, 507.

Reaction. From the reaction of evil
and falsity against His good and truth,
thus against Himself, God perceives both
the quantity and the quality of man, 61.

Reason. There is no nation having
sound reason which does pot acknowl-
edge a God, and that God is One, 9, 10.
An identity of three Divine Essences is
an offence to reason, 23. Human reason
is at this day bound in relation to the Di-
vine Trinity, like a man fettered in prison,
169, 178. When faith and omnipotence
are named reason is exiled, . 770. From
hoth of these words omnipotence and
faith, reason is hamshed; and when,
reason is banished, in what does the
thought of man excel the reason of a bird
that dies over his head? 57. Human
reason does not rest unless it see the
cause, 33. Enlightened reason, from
many things in the world, may see the
Infinity of God, 32. Interior reason of
judgment, 186.

Receptacle. Man was created a re-
ceptacle of Divine Love and Wisdom, 65,
362. Man is not life, but a receptacle of
life from God, 470-474. The things
proceeding from the sun of the world are
containers or receptacles of life, 35.

Reception of life is according to form,
366. Man is an organ recipient of God,
and an organ according to the quality of
reception, 34. Reception of influx from
the Lord; how effected, 457. Reception
is according to forms and states, 35.
Every thing spiritual is received in natu-
ral in order to be any thing with man.
The naked spiritual does indeed enter
into man, hut it is not received, 339.

Reciprocal. Conjunction is not pos-
sible without reciprocation, 588. Man
thinks and wills as of himself; and this as


1152


INDEX


of himself is the reciprocal element in con-
junction, 588, 457. Reciprocal union of
Father and Son, that is, the Divine and
the Human in the Lord, gg. Reciprocal
conjunction, 100, 287,. 371, 372, 485,
504, 787. All conjunction of God with
man must also be a reciprocal conjunction
of man with God, ana there cannot he
this reciprocation except with a visible
God, 787. See Conjunction.

Reciprocation. There are two kinds
of reciprocation hy which conjunction is
effected: one is alternate, and the other
mutual, 371.

Recreations. The diversions of char-
ity, 433, 434. In what they consisted in
the primitive church among such as called
themselves Brethren in Christ, 433, 434.
See Charity.

Redeem, To, signifies to liberate from
damnation, deliver from eternal death,
rescue from hell, and take away captives
out of the hand of the devil, 118. The
Lord redeemed not only men, but also
angels, 121. God could not redeem men
except by the assumed Human, 84. The
Lord is perpetually redeeming those who
helieve in Him, and keep His words, 570.
He is redeemed who is regenerated hy
the Lord, 685. All who go to the Holy
Communion worthily become His re-
deemed, 717. See Redemption .

Redeemer. By the Lord the Re-
deemer we mean Jehovah in the Human,
81. The Lord, hy union with His Father,
became Redeemer to eternity, 127, 599.
See Lord.

Redemption itself was subjugation of
the hells, and establishment of order in
the heavens, and therehy a preparation
for a New Spiritual Church, 115, 117, 84,
86, 134, 224, 640. The Lord is at this
day performing a redemption, which He
commenced in the year 1757 with the
Last Judgment then performed, 115.
Without redemption, no man could have
been saved, nor could the angels have
continued to exist in integrity, 118, ng.
Without redemption by the Lord, iniquity
and wickedness would spread through
the whole Christian orh, in hotb worlds,
the natural and the spiritual, 120. Re-
demption was a work purely Divine, 123.
Redemption itself could not have been
effected hut by God incarnate, 124, 126.
Jehovah Himself descended and assumed
the Human to accomplish redemption,
81, 82. Redemption pertains to the
priestly and kingly offices of the Lord,
1 14. Unless the Lord had come into the
world and wrought redemption, no flesh
could have been saved, 182. To work
redemption means to found a new heaven
and new church, 182; to effect this the
Divine Good does not avail, hut the Di-
vine Truth from the Divine Good, 86.
In the combats or temptations of men the


Lord works a particular redemption, as
He wrought redemption that embraced
the whole when in the world, sgg. The
passion of the cross was not redemption,
126, 5S1. Redemption and glorifica-
tion are distinct from each other, but yet
they make one with respect to salvation,
126. Where the Lord is in His fulness
there also is His whole redemption, 717.
The Lord is in the Holy Supper in His
fulness, with His whole redemption, 716-
718. Redemption means deliverance
from hell, conjunction with the Lord,
and salvation, 717. Acts of redemption,
95 -

Red Sea signifies hell, 635.

Reflect. Thoughts are in light, but
affections in heat; we reflect on thoughts
hut not on affections, 386, 607.

Reformation according to the laws
of order ought to precede regeneration,
105, 106, 302, 587. Reformation is of the
understanding, 302, 587. The internal
man is to be reformed first, and through
this the external, 302, 591-595. The
Lord, through the spiritual will, reforms
and regenerates the natural, and by this
what is sensual and voluntary pertaining
to the body, thus the whole man, 533.
Man is reformed by comhats, and vic-
tories over the evils of his fleshy 610. In
reformation man looks from his natural
state toward a spiritual one and desires
it, 571. _ This state is formed by truths
which will helong to faith, and by which
he looks to charity, 571. A man who in
the world has begun reformation, can
after death be regenerated, 571. As long
as one sees and acknowledges that evil
is evil, and that good is good, and thinks
that good ought to be chosen, the state is
called that of reformation, 587. No one
can be said to be reformed by mere knowl-
edge of truths', for man can apprehend
them, and talk ahout, teach, and preach
them; he is reformed who is in the affec-
tion of truth for the sake of truth, 589.
A man can reform and regenerate him-
self as of himself, provided he acknowl-
edges in heart that this is from the Lord,
621. In the state of reformation man is
in liberty of acting according to the ra-
tional, 105; in this state the understand-
ing acts first and the will second, 105.
See Regeneration.

Reformation, The. When the Word
was almost rejected by the Papists, by
the Lord’s Providence the Reformation
took place, whereby the Word was drawn
from concealment, and brought into use,
270.

Reformed, The, see the Word and
explain it according to their doctrine,
227. The Reformed supported contri-
tion instead of repentance, in order to
sever themselves from the Catholics, 515.

Reformers of the Christian Church,


INDEX


1153


Luther, Melancthon, and Calvin, 796-
799 '

Refuge. The only refuge is in the
Lord, 120.

Regenerate, To. To be regenerated
means to be born again, 326. Unless a
man is bom again, and created anew, he
cannot enter the kingdom of God, 572-
575' God cannot spiritually regenerate
man, except so far as man according to
His laws regenerates himself naturally, 73.
Man ought to introduce himself into
faith by truths from the Word, and into
charity by good works, and thus reform
and regenerate bimself, 71. The Lord
regenerates man by faith and charity,
144, 5/6, 686. There are three agents
whereby man is regenerated, the Lord,
faith, and charity, 618, 723. Because all
have been redeemed, all can be regener-
ated, each according to his state, 579-
582. Every one is regenerated by ab-
staining from evils of sin, and shunning
them, s 10. The internal man of the natu-
ral must be first regenerated, and by means
of it the external, 593. To regenerate
the internal by means of the external is
contrary to order, 593. Man can be re-
generated only by successive steps, 586,
610. While regeneration is taking place,
a combat arises between the internal and
the external man, and the one that con-
quers rules over the other, 506-600.
The regenerate man has a new will and
understanding, 601-606. With the re-
generate man the Lord through heaven
rules the things of the world, 604. A re-
generate man is in communion with
angels of heaven, and an unregenerate
man with spirits of hell, 607-610. So far
as man is regenerated, sins are removed;
and this removal is remission of sin, 611,
613. While man is regenerated the Lord
is indeed present, and by His operation
prepares man for heaven, 728. The re-
generate man is in the heat of heaven, in
its love, and at the same time in the light
of heaven, 605. A man can reform and
regenerate himself as of himself, pro-
vided he acknowledges in heart that it is
from the Lord, 62 1. He who in the world
has not entered into reformation, cannot
be regenerated after death, 571. In the
Word, the regenerate are called sons of
God, and bom of God, 572.

Regeneration is new birth from the
Lord, 521. The new birth or creation is
effected by the Lord alone through char-
ity and faith as the means, man co-
operating, 576-578. To say that regen-
eration follows the faith of the present
church, which leaves out man's coopera-
tion, is vanity of vanities, 577* Regenera-
tion is effected in a manner like that in
which man is conceived, carried in the
womb, bom and educated, 583-586, 611.
The first act of the new birth is reforma-


tion, which is of tbe understanding; and
the second is regeneration, which is of
the will and hence of the understanding,
586-590, 602. Every man may be re-
generated, each according to his state;
those who constitute the Lord’s external
church are regenerated differently from
those who constitute His internal church;
and this variety is infinite like that of
men’s faces and minds, 580. Man’s re-
generation is not effected in a moment,
but by successive steps from beginning to
end of his life in the world, and it is con-
tinued by combats, and victories, 610,
6 1 1. Regeneration begins when man's
will is to shun evil and do good, 587. Re-
generation is formed by means of goods
of charity, and from these man enters
into truths of faith, 571. Regeneration is
a state of love from the will, 571. Re-
generation is the means of salvation, and
charity and faith are the means of regen-
eration, 577. In the state of regenera-
tion man wills and acts, and thinks and
! speaks, from new love and new intelli-
gence which are from the Lord, 105.
The renunciation of the devil, that is,
of evils from hell and faith in the Lord,
perfect regeneration, 685. So far as man
is regenerated, or so far as regeneration
is perfected in him, so far he attributes
nothing of good and truth, that is, of char-
ity and faith, to himself, but to the Lord,
610. Regeneration cannot take place
without free will in spiritual things, 615-
617. Regeneration cannot take place
without truths by which faith is formed,
and with which charity conjoins itself,
620. All are distinguished in heaven ac-
cording to the differences of their re-
generation, and in hell, according to the
differences in their rejection of it, 582.
There is a correspondence of man's re-
generation with all things in the vegetable
kingdom; therefore also man is de-
scribed in the Word by a tree, his truth
by the seed, and his good by the fruit,
584. In the church of the present there
cannot be a knowledge of regeneration,
Sgi. In the Word regeneration is de-
scribed by a new heart and new spirit,'
572. Regeneration is represented by
Baptism, 685-687. The whole world,
from what is first to what is last in it, is
full of representations and types of re-
generation, 687-

Region. The human mind, according
to the three degrees of love and wisdom,
is formed into regions, 42, 186. The hu-
man mind is distinguished into three
regions, the highest of which the inmost,
is called celestial, the middle spiritual,
and the lowest natural, 147, 34, 603, 608.
These regions are opened successively
with man, 42. The mind of man is ex-
alted from region to region; that is, from
the natural to the spiritual, and from this


H54


INDEX


to the celestial; and in this region man is
called wise, in that intelligent, and in the
lowest knowing, 152. The true light of
life dwells in the higher regions of the
mind, 40. The mind is divided into two
regions; one region which is the higher and
more internal is spiritual, and the other
which is lower and more external is natu-
ral, 420, 421, 603, 604. Three regions of
the body, 403. See Mind.

Relation. It is necessary that the
several particulars should in a certain
image have relation to their universals,
714. See Particulars.

Relations, The, not inventions of
imagination, 851; related by command,
188.

Relatives have respect to the disposi-
tion of various things in convenient
order, 62. There are relatives in each
opposite, 62. See Opposites.

Religion is to shun evil and do good,
389. Religion alone regenerates man; re-
ligion occupies the highest seat in the
human mind, and sees under itself civil
matters of the world, 601, 829. By religion
there is conjunction of God with man, and
of man with God, 283. All who do good
from religion, not Christians only but also
pagans, are acceptable to the Lord, 536.
Whence have sprung different religions,
275 -

Remission of Sins. Purification from
evils is remission of sins, according to the
progress and increase of man’s reforma-
tion and regeneration, 142, 614. Remis-
sion of sin^ is not extirpation of them, but
is the removal of them and thus their sepa-
ration, 614. So far as man repents, sins
with him are removed; and so far as they
are removed, they are remitted, 510, 621.
See Repentance. The remission of sins
is not instantaneous, but follows regen-
eration according to the progress of it,
614. The Lord because He is mercy it-
self, remits their sins to all, nor does He
impute them to any one, 559, 409.

Renovation is operated by the Lord
in those who believe in Him, and who
dispose themselves for His reception, 142.

Repentance. Acts of repentance are
such as cause a man not to will and do
evils which are sins against God, 510.
Repentance is the first of the church with
man, 509-511- No one can be regener-
ated before the grievous evils, which render
man detestable in the sight of God, are re-
moved, and these are removed by repent-
ance, 509. There are many things which
prepare one for the church, as he ad-
vances in the first stages of life, and
which introduce him into it; but acts of
repentance make the church to he in
man, 510. For repentance to be repent-
ance and to be effective in man, it is
necessary for it to be of the will and
thought, and not of the thought alone,


510. Repentance cannot exist unless
man, not only in a universal way 'but also
in particulars, knows that he is a sinner,
513. Mere oral confession that one is a
sinner, is not repentance, 516-519, 529.
Man is bom to evils of every kind; and
unless by repentance he removes them in
part, he remains in them; and he who re-
mains in them cannot be saved, 520-524.
It is said that man must remove evils,
because the Lord does not do it imme-
diately without man’s cooperation, 522.
He who denies and rejects sin thinks
nothing of all that is sin. They who do
not wish to hear any thing about repent-
ance hecome fixed in their purpose, 523.
They who by repentance have removed
some evils that are sins, come into the pur-
pose of believing in the Lord and loving
the neighbor, 523. Knowledge of sin,
and examination of self, begin repentance,
525-527. Actual repentance is to ex-
amine self, recognize and acknowledge
sins, to make supplication to the Lord,
and begin a new life, 528-531, 535, 561,
567, 621. Actual repentance, if per-
formed at seasons, as often as a man
prepares for the communion of the Holy
Supper, if be afterwards abstains from
one sin or another that he then discovers
in himself, is sufficient to initiate him into
repentance, 530, 567. True repentance
is, to examine not only the acts of one’s
life, but also the intentions of his will,
532-534. After scrutiny be who thinks
that he will not do evils because they are
sins, repents truly and interiorly, 532.
They repent also, who. do not examine
themselves, but yet desist from evils be-
cause they are sins; and they repent in
this way who from religion do the works
of charity, 535-537. Actual' repentance
is an easy work for those who have some-
times practised it; but it finds great re-
sistance in those who have not, 561-563.
Actual repentance finds great resistance
in the Reformed Christian world, be-
cause of their helief that repentance and
charity contribute nothing to salvation,
561, 535. 562. One who has never prac-
tised repentance, or has not looked into
and searched himself, at length does not
know what evil is or what good is, 564-
566. Reformation and regeneration fol-
low repentance, and by repentance grad-
ually advance, 571. Man is kept con-
tinually in a state in which repentance
and conversion are possihle, 720. Re-
pentance preached, 567, 568.

Repetitions. Many times in the
Word there are expressions which ap-
pear like repetitions; hut they are not,
one refers to good and the other to truth,
hut they become one by conjunction, 250
-252.

Representations of Divine Love, 44. .
Representations of the two states of


INDEX


reformation, 106; of free will, 469; of the
sacraments, Baptism and the Holy Sup-
per, with their uses, 669; representations
of Baptism as regeneration, 68 7. In the
spiritual world the objects which appear
before the angels are representations of
intelligence and wisdom from the Lord,
467.

Representatives are such things in
the world as correspond to heavenly and
thence signify them, 275. The human
form which Jehovah God put on by
means of an angel and in which He ap-
peared to Moses and others, was rep-
resentative of the Lord who was to come,
786; and hecause this was representa-
tive, therefore the things of their church
were made representative, 786. All the
ancient churches were churches repre-
sentative of spiritual things, 201, 786.
When the Lord came into the world He
annulled the representatives which were
all external, 670.

Resist, To. No one can resist evils
and falsities but God alone, 68. Man
ought to resist evils from the strength
given by the Lord, 438.

Respiration of every membrane in
the hody, 577. Respiration follows
thought and hence speech, 480. Without
free will, and this in every particular,
man would no more breathe than a statue,
480.

Rest. The. seventh day signifies man’s
conjunction with the Lord and regenera-
tion thereby; when regenerated he has
rest, 302. S ee Sabbath.

Resurrection. The Lord’s rising on
the third day signified glorification, or
union of His Human with the Divine of
the Father, 130. Resurrection to life
(John v. 24) signifies salvation, 652.

Retribution; Return. See Reward.

Revelation. Knowledge concerning
God, and hence acknowledgment of Him,
is not attainable without revelation, 11.
Man by revelation is ahle to approach
God and to receive influx, and so from
natural to become spiritual, 11. The
revelation of the first age pervaded the
world, and the natural man perverted it,
11. The Word is the crown of revela-
tions, 11. There is a revelation made
among the Africans, 840.

Reward. Good is not to be done for
reward, 440. They who put reward in
the first place and salvation in the second,
and thus seek the latter for the sake_ of
the former, invert order, 439. To think
that men come into heaven, and that good
is to be done for that, is not to regard re-
ward as the end, and to place merit in
works, 440. They who are in spiritual
enjoyment are sorry if it is helieved that
their doing is for the sake of a return, 440.

Rich. By the rich man (Luke xvi. 19)
Is meant the Jewish nation, called rich


1155


because they had the Word, in which are
spiritual riches, 215, 246, 595.

Riches. No man of sound reason can
condemn riches, for they are in the gen-
eral hody like blood in a man, 403. _

Ride, To, signifies to instruct in Di-
vine truths from the Word, 776. To ride
upon cherubs, means upon the ultimate
sense of the Word, 260.

Righteous. See Just.

Righteousness or Justice op the
Lord. The Lord, by acts of redemption,
made Himself Righteousness, 95, 96, 640.
Righteousness is doing all things accord-
ing to Divine order; and reducing to
order those things which have fallen out
of order; for righteousness is Divine order
itself, 95. It cannot be ascribed to man,
inscribed on him, conjoined to him, other-
wise than light can be to the eye, sound to
the ear, etc., 96. But it is acquired so far
as man exercises righteousness; and he
exercises righteousness as far as he acts
with his neighhor from the love of what
is just and true, 96. In good or in use
which he does, righteousness dwells, 96.
The laws are truths, which cannot be
changed, 341.

Rise prom the Dead. The Lord arose
from the sepulchre early in the morning,
765. Man, when dead, generally re-
vives as to the spirit on the third day
after the heart has ceased to heat, 281.

Rites. The representative rites of the
church in time began to be turned into
what was idolatrous, and magical, 204.

Robe. See T unic.

Rock, The (Matt. xvi. 18), means the
acknowledgment of the truth that Christ
is the Son of the living God, 224, 342.
Everywhere in the Word by Rock is
meant the Lord as to Divine truth, 224.

Royalty signifies Divine truth, 114.

Ruby, The, signifies heavenly good, is
of the highest heaven, 6og.

Rust. The good of merit appears to
the angels as rust, 439. See Purple.

Sabbath in the original tongue signifies
rest, 301. The Sabhath among the chil-
dren of Israel was the sanctity of sancti-
ties, because it represented the Lord; the
six days represented His labors and com-
bats with the hells; and the seventh His
victory over them, and therefore rest,
301. When the Lord came into the world,
and the representations of Him therefore
ceased, that day became a day of instruc-
tion in Divine things, and thus of rest
from labors, and of meditation on such
things as relate to salvation and eternal
life; as also a day of love towards the
neighbor, 301. In the highest sense Sab-
bath signifies peace, 303. The Lord
calls Himself the Lord of the Sabbath,
that is, of rest and peace, 303. The life
of heaven from the worship of God is


1 1 56


INDEX


called a perpetual Sabbath, 738. Cele-
bration of the Sahbath in heaven, 750.

Sacraments. Baptism and the Holy
Supper are in the Christian Church like
two jewels in the sceptre of a king, which,
if their uses are unknown, are no more
than two figures of ebony on a staff, 669.
Without knowing the spiritual sense of
the Word, no one can know what the
two sacraments, Baptism and the Holy
Supper, involve and effect, 667, 66q, 698;
they contain all things of the internal
church in one, 670. The two sacraments,
Baptism and the Holy Supper, are ac-
knowledged in Christendom as the holiest
things of worship; but who knows where
their holiness resides or whence it is?
699. Difference he tween holiness merely
attributed to any thing and holiness which
is seen, 701.

Sacred Scripture, The, or the Word,
is the Divine truth itself, 189-192. It
teaches that there is a God, and that He
is One, 6. All the Sacred Scripture
prophesied concerning the Lord and fore-
told His coming, 205. The Sacred Scrip-
ture which was dictated by the Lord, is
in general and particular a marriage of
good and truth, 624. The Sacred Scrip-
ture is like a mirror, in which every one
who has formed the state of his mind
from God sees God, but each one in his
own way, 6. It is the fulness of God, 6. (

Saints. Catholic saints in the spiri-
tual world, 822-827. See Worship. The
gods of the Gentiles were worshipped
first as saints, alterwards as divinities,
and lastly as gods, 292.

Salvation. Salvation is the result of
reformation and regeneration; it is the
ultimate end of the Lord, 142. By the
conjunction of man with God is given
salvation, 98. Without reciprocal con-
junction of man with the Lord and of
the Lord with man there can be no refor-
mation and regeneration, consequently no
salvation, 485. The salvation of men is a
continuation of creation, 773. See To
Save . Salvation and eternal life are one,
726. It is hy conjunction with God that
man has salvation and eternal life, 369.
The Lord, charity, and faith are the
three essentials of salvation, 450. The
Lord is salvation and eternal life, 150.
Without the Lord there is no salvation,
267. The Lord wills the salvation of all;
therefore the salvation of all is His end,
142. The Lord's coming, redemption,
and the passion of the cross, were for the
sake of salvation, 142. The salvation and
eternal life of men are the first and last
ends of the Lord, 152. The salvation of
the human race depends on the reciprocal
conjunction of the Lord and man, 371.
The salvation of man depends on the
knowledge and acknowledgment of God,
98. The salvation of man depends on


actual repentance, 528, 530. Whatever
Jehovah commands, He commands for
the sake of salvation, 530. The means
of salvation are manifold; but they have
relation to living well and believing
aright, thus to charity and faith, 340, 357.
As a temple of God, man has sal-
vation and eternal life for his end, inten-
tion, and purpose, 374. They who put
reward in the first place and salvation in
the second, and thus seek the latter for
the sake of the former, invert order, and
immerse the desires of their mind in self,
439- See To Save.

Samson. His power in his hair, 223.

Sanctification is operated by the
Lord in those who believe in Him, and
who dispose themselves for His recep-
tion and ahode, 142. The Lord is the all
of sanctification, 150.

Sanctity. . The Sabbath was the sanc-
tity of sanctities, 301.

Sapphire signifies spiritual good, which
is that of the middle heaven, 609.

Satans. They are called satans who
have been in falsities and evils, 281;
they who have confirmed themselves in
falsities even to belief, 80; they who have
confirmed themselves in favor of nature,
and have denied God, 35. No satan can
bear to hear a truth from the Word or to
have Jesus named; if they hear them
they hecome like furies, 380, 799. A
satan can understand the truth when he
hears it, equally with an angel, hut he
does not retain it, because evil obliterates
the truth and induces falsity, 77. They
who acknowledge the Lord but do not
keep His commandments become satans
after death, and can counterfeit an angel
of light, 151. To him who introduces
himself into evil affections by confirma-
tions of falsities and by an evil life, a
spirit from hell adjoins himself; and when
the spirit is joined, man enters more and
more as it were into fraternity with
satans, 3S0. With the evil the internal
man is a satan, and while living in the
body is also in society with satans, and
after separation from the hody comes
among them, 401. See Devils , Hell .

Saturn, 17, 159, 292. Saturnian or
golden age, 692.

Save, To. All can be regenerated;
and, because regeneration and salvation
make one, all can be saved, 579. Every
one can be regenerated, each according
to his state, 580. He who acts well ana
thinks aright, that is, who lives well and
believes aright, is saved, 621. The Lord
is not to blame if man is not saved, but
man himself, 580. The man who re-
mains in his evils cannot be saved, 520-
524. There is not a nation in all the
world which cannot be saved if they ac-
, knowledge God and live well, 729.

I Saviour, The, is the Lord Jesus


INDEX


1157


Christ; His name Jesus also means sal-
vation, 150. See Lord.

Saxony. Prince of Saxony, 796.

Scarlet signifies spiritual good, 220.

Science, Matters of, with those who
love truth because it is truth, make the
door to political things, moral things, and
the things of theology, which occupy the
three regions of the mind, 186.

Scotland, 812.

Screech Owls. By screech owls are
represented the speech of those who are
not willing, and not able, to perceive
truth, but only falsity, 42.

Second Coming of the Lord. See
Coming 0} the Lord.

Secrets. See Arcana.

Seed. There is a kind of immeasur-
ableness and eternity implanted in every
seed, as well of animals as of plants, 32.
In the seed from which conception takes
place, there ism every case a graft of the
father’s soul, in its fulness, wi thin a cer-
tain envelope of elements from nature,
103. The image of the father is in ful-
ness in the seed, because the soul is spiri-
tual from its origin, and what is spiritual
has nothing in common with space;
therefore it is like itself in little com-
pass as in great, 103. See Soul. Man’s
seed is conceived interiorly in the un-
derstanding, and is formed in the will,
and is transferred to the testicle where it
clothes itself with natural covering, 584.
All things that are seen in the natural
world exist and grow from seed, 704.
In the seed of the tree there are concealed
the end, intention, and purpose of produc-
ing fruits; in these the seed corresponds to
the will of man, 374. There is a sphere
ahout every particle of dust; and from this
sphere the inmost of every seed is im-
regnated, 499. Seeds of plants, 32.
piritual seed is the truth of the church
from the Word 421. Seed in the Word
means nothing bufr truth, 350. The seed
of man (Dan. ii. 43) is the truth of the
Word, 761.

Selfhood. Man’s selfhood is the lust
of his flesh; and whatever proceeds from
this is spiritually evil, however good it
seems naturally, 382. The will of man
is his selfhood, and this from nativity is
evil, and hence is falsity in the understand-
ing, 273. Man of himself does not wish
to understand any thing but what is of
self-will; and unless there be some other
source whence he may know it, man
from his self-will would not wish to under-
stand any thing but what is of himself and
the world, 273. What ever proceeds from
the love of the internal will is man’s en-
joyment; and because the same is the
esse of his life, it is also his selfhood; and
from this cause whatever is received from
the freedom of this will remains, for it
adds itself to the selfhood, 493. Man’s


selfhood is in thick darkness as to all
things of heaven and the church, 233. A
man is wholly such as the dominant prin-
ciple of his life is; by this he is distin-
guished from others; it is his selfhood,
390 -

Seneca, 273.

Sensation. From what sensation re-
sults, 577. The two enjoyments of love,
from the sensation of them, are called
good, 38.

Sense of the Letter of the Word is
the basis, container, and support of its
spiritual, and celestial sense, 2 10-2 13.
Divine Truth, in the sense of the letter
of the Word, is in its fulness, holiness, and
power, 214-216. The doctrine of the
church is to he drawn from the sense of
the letter of the Word, and confirmed hy
it, 225, 229. The Lord is most fully pres-
ent in the sense of the letter of the Word,
and He teaches and enlightens man from
it, 225. Genuine truth of doctrine does
not appear in the sense of the letter of
the Word to any but those in enlighten-
ment from the Lord, 231-233. By the
sense of the letter of the Word, there is
conjunction with the Lord, and consocia-
tion with the angels, 234-239. The
things in the letter of the Word commu-
nicate with heaven, 258. The sense of
the letter of the Word is a guard for the
genuine truths concealed within, 260.
This sense may be turned hither and
thither, and explained according to ap-
prehension, 260, 207, 508; provided this
is done in application to some truth, 508.
Tf the sense of the letter is turned to the
false, then its internal holiness perishes,
and with it the exetmal, 207. That the
sense of the letter is understood in one
way hy one person and in a different way
by another person, does no harm; but it
does harm if a man introduces falsities
that are contrary to Divine truth, 260.
The sense of the letter of the Word is
composed of such things as are called
appearances and correspondences, 650.

Sense, Spiritual and Celestial of
the Word. There are the spiritual and
the celestial senses in every thing of the
Word, and these senses are in the light
of heaven, 231. The celestial and the
spiritual senses without the natural are
not the Word, 214. That there is a spiri-
tual sense of the Word within its natural
sense, no one as yet has divined; why,
193, 200, 206. This sense does not ap-
pear in the sense of the letter; but it is in
it, as the soul in the body, as the thought
of the understanding is in the eyes, and
as the affection of love is in the face, 194.

It is in each and every thing in the Word,
196. No one can see the spiritual sense
except from knowledge of correspond-
ences, 196, 206. It is from the spiritual
sense that the Word is divinely inspired,


INDEX


IIS8


and holy in every word, 200, 846. It has
pleased the Lord now to reveal the spiri-
tual sense, in order that it may be known
where in the Word the Divine holiness
is, 200. The spiritual sense of the Word
will not be given to any one hereafter who
is not in genuine truths from the Lord,
208, 231. This sense consists of the Di-
vine truths of the church, 207. It treats
of the Lord alone, and of His kingdom,
208. If any one wishes, from himself and
not from the Lord, to open that sense,
heaven is closed; and when it is closed
man either sees nothing of truth, or be-
comes spiritually insane, 208. The
naked truths themselves, which are en-
closed, contained, clothed, and com-
prised in the literal sense, are in the spiri-
tual sense of the Word and the naked
goods are in its celestial sense, 215. The
spiritual sense is guarded by the Lord
as the angelic heaven is guarded, for
heaven is in it, 230. Doctrine is not
gathered by means of that sense, but only
illustrated and corroborated, 230. See
Sense of the Letter of the Word. Tbe
things hid in the spiritual sense are not
apparent, except to those wbo love truths
because they are truths, and do goods
because they are goods, 244.. In the
spiritual sense Divine truth is in its light,
and in the celestial sense Divine good-
ness is in its beat, 289. Without appre-
hension of the spiritual sense of the Word,
no one can know wbat the two sacra-
ments, Baptism and the Holy Supper,
involve and effect, 667, 669, 698. The
spiritual sense has been disclosed at the
present day for the New Church for the
sake of its use in the worship of the Lord,
669. The spiritual sense is now first dis-
closed, because there has hitherto been
Christianity only in name, and with
some persons some shadow of it, 700.
By the glory and power in which the Lord
Is to come (Matt. xsdv. 30) is meant the
spiritual sense of the Word, 776, 777.
The Lord’s presence in the Word comes
only by means of the spiritual sense, 780.
By means of the spiritual sense the Word
is conjunction of the men of tbe church
with the Lord, and also consociation with
angels; and the holiness of tbe Word re-
sides in that sense, 846. Tbe internal or
spiritual sense is tbe spirit which gives
life to the letter, 192.

Senses, Sensations. Tbe sensations
of light and sound are from life; their
forms from nature, 35. Reciprocal cOh-
junction between the senses and their
organs, 371. Falsities cohere with fal-
lacies of the senses, 186.

Sensual, The, is the ultimate of the
life of man’s mind, adherent to and co-
herent with the five senses, 565. The
ultimate of the understanding belongs
to natural knowledge; the ultimate of the
will is sensual enjoyment, 565.


Sensual Man, The, is the lowest natu-
ral man, 402. He is called a sensual man
wbo judges of all things by the senses,
and who believes nothing but what be
can see with the eyes and touch with the
hands, 402, 565. The sensual and cor-
poreal man is wholly animal, and only
differs from a brute in being able to
speak and reason, 296, 328, 566. The
interiors of the mind, which see from the
light of heaven, are closed in the sensual
man, so that be there sees nothing of the
truth of heaven and the church, 402, 565.
Sensual men reason sharply and ingeni-
ously, because their thought is so near to
speech, almost in it; and as it were in tbe
lips; and because they place all intelli-
gence in speech from memory alone, 402,
565. Sensual men are shrewd above all
others, 402, 565. Tbe interiors of their
minds are foul, for through them they
communicate with the bells, 402, 565.
Men of erudition, who have deeply con-
firmed themselves in falsities, and still
more they who have confirmed them-
selves against the truths of the Word, are
more sensual than others, 402, 565. Tbe
hypocritical, deceitful, voluptuous, ad-
ulterous, and avaricious are for the most
part sensual, 402, 565. Tbe condition in
the spiritual world, of those who have
become corporeal-sensual, by confirma-
tions in favor of nature, 79. They wbo
reason from sensual things only, were
called by the ancients serpents of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, 402,
565. All those who are in the love of
ruling from love of self are sensual men,
405 *

Sensual Things are in the thoughts
from the senses, 35. Sensual things
mean the things presented to the senses
and imbibed through those senses, 402.
By sensual things man communicates
with the world, and by the rational things,
with heaven, 402, 565. Sensual things
minister in furnishing things from the
natural world of service to the interiors
of the mind in the spiritual world, 402,
565. There are sensual things which
minister to tbe understanding, and there
are sensual things which minister to the
will, 402. Unless tbe thought is elevated
above sensual things, man has little wis-
dom, 402, 565. Sensual things ought to
be in the last place, and not in tbe first;
with a wise man they are in die last place,
and are subject to more internal things;
but with an unwise man they are in die
first place, and have dominion, 402, 565.

Sentence. The faith with that to
which it conjoins itself, makes tbe sen-
tence. If true faith conjoins itself with
good, sentence is made for eternal life;
but if faith conjoins itself with evil, sen-
tence is made for eternal death, 654-657.

Series. The arrangement of all things
into series, 351. Tbe organization of the


INDEX 1159


brain consists in an arrangement of all
things in series, and the truths which are
of faith are so disposed in the human
mind, 351. The glandular substance of
the brain is disposed into dusters like
grapes; those clusterings are its series,
Si. The medullary substance of the
rain consists of .perpetual bundlings of
fibrils from the glandular substance;
these bundlings are its series, 351. All
viscera and organs of the body correspond
to the series into which the mental organ-
ism is disposed, 351. There is nothing
in universal nature not fasciculated into
series, 351. The universal cause is, that
Divine truths have such a conformation,
351. When multiplied series cohere as
one, one thing strengthens and confirms
another, 352. There are various series in
geometry which go on to infinity, 32.

Serpents signify the prudence and
cunning of the sensual man, 205. The
serpent (Gen. iii. means the devil as to
love of self and pride of one’s intelligence,
48. Serpents of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil; who were so called by
the ancients, 324, 380, 402.

Servants are those who are not con-
joined with the Lord, 106.

Seventh Day, The, signifies man’s
conjunction with the Lord, and regenera-
tion therehy, 302.

Sex. In trees and all other subjects
of the vegetable kindgom, there are not
two sexes, masculine and feminine, but
every one is masculine; the earth alone is
the common mother, thus as the woman,

585-

Shade. The Lord enlightens not only
the internal man but also the external
natural; and unless the two are enlight-
ened at the same time, the man is in the
shade, 109.

Sheba. The gold of Sheba is the wis-
dom from Divine Truth, 706.

Sheep means charity, 200.

Sheepfold. To enter into the sheep-
fold is to enter into the church, and
heaven, 380.

Shining Property of Fere. To this
corresponds something most interiorly
affecting the understanding of man, 39.
See Burning Property of Fire .

Shortening the Days (Matt. xiv. 22)
means to end the church and establish a
new one, 182.

Shows and Games in heaven, 745 -

Shun. The primary thing in charity is
to shun evils, 535.

Side, The, of the Lord. The pierc-
ing the side of the Lord signified that
they totally extinguished aU the truth of
the Word and the good of it, 130.

Sidon, 200. See Tyre.

Sign, The. By the sign of the Son of
Man in heaven, is meant the appearing
of Divine Truth in the Word from Him,


198. Sign of the cross on the forehead in
Baptism, 682. See Cross .

Sight. When their inmost sight is
opened, the angels recognize their image
in the things that surround them, 66.
Spiritual sight which is of the under-
standing and mind, and natural sight
which is the sight of the eye and body
mutually correspond, 346. The sight of
the spirit is veiled by the natural sight,
767. The sight of the body emulates, in
some respects, the sight of the mind, 395.
In the mind the first sight is that of per-
ception, and the last sight, that of the
eye, 504. They who are in posterior
vision, and not in any prior sight, 334.

Silver signifies spiritual good, 609.

Simon the Magician, 378.

Simple in Spirit. By these are meant
in the Word those wbo will well and think
rationally, and act well and talk ration-
ally; they are called simple, because they
are not double minded, 443. He only is
single minded whose external thinks and
speaks and wills and acts from the inter-
nal; these also are meant hy the simple,

147.

Simultaneous. From the successive
is formed the simultaneous, and this in
each thing of the natural world, and in
each thing of the spiritual world, 214.
See Order.

Sin. The evil of sin is no other than
evil against the neighbor; and evil against
the neighbor is also evil against God,
which is sin, 525. Sins are not abolished
but removed, 539. See Confession , Re-
mission, Repentance.

Singing in heaven, 745, 746.

Single, Singly. The single parts
taken together are called a universal, as
particulars taken together are called a
general, 60. See Universals: also Par-
ticulars.

Sirens know how to induce on them-
selves hy fantasies the habits and forms
of beauty, 80.

Sit, To, at the right hand of God, 136.

Six Days of Labor signify the combat
against the flesh and its lusts, and against
the evils and falsities which are in man
from hell, 302.

Skull, 213.

Sleep. In the Word, natural life is
likened to sleep, and spiritual life to
wakefulness, 606.

Sleep, To. By sleeping in the parable
of the Virgins is meant the life of man in
the world, which is natural, 190.

Smell in the Word signifies percep-
tion, 569.

Smoke, The, seen in the bells arises
from falsities confirmed hy reasonings,
159, 504. See Flame.

Society, A, is like one man; and those
who enter into it compose as it were one
body, and are distinct from each other


1 160


INDEX


like members in one body, 412. There
is no society in heaven which does not
correspond to some member, viscus, or
organ in man, 65. Heaven, although dis-
tinguished into innumerable societies, still
appears before the Lord as one Man, 354.
All who are of the same religion are dis-
posed into societies; in heaven, according
to the affections of love to God and the
neighbor; and in hell, into congregations
according to the affections opposed to
those two loves, and so according to lusts
of evil, 678. The societies in heaven are
as many as the stars in the firmament, 74.
Man in the world is in society with the in-
habitants of the world of spirits, and ac-
cording as his spirit changes . state be
changes societies, 476; his spirit is even
seen in the angelic or infernal societies,
14. All die societies in the world of spirits
are wonderfully arranged according to
the natural affections, good and evil, 281.
See World 0} Spirits. Uses are the bonds
of society; there are as many of these
bonds as there axe good uses, and these
are infinite in number, 746. See Uses.
Without external bonds not only would
society cease to exist, but the whole hu-
man race would perish, 4gS. Man is a
society in miniature. If he did not deal
with himself in a spiritual manner as the
wicked in a great society are dealt with in
a natural manner, he would be castigated
and punished after death, 531. Every
one comes into that society in heaven of
which he is a form in his individual effigy,
739 *

Socinianism. Whence it is, 94; an
abominable heresy, 380.

Socinians and Arlans. Arius and his
followers denied the Divinity of Jesus
Christ, 632, 637; and thus destroyed the
church, 174. Persuasion emulates faith
in externals, but because in its internals
there is nothing spiritual, there is nothing
saving. Such is faith with all who deny
the Divinity of the Lord's Human; such
was the Arian faith, and such als<D is the
Sodnian, 339. One who appropriates to
himself the ideas concerning the Lord
that He is a man and not God, introduces
himself into companionship with the
Arians and Socinians who are in bell, 380.

Socinus, 159.

Socrates, 692.

Soldier. It is glorious for a soldier
to shed his hlood for his country, 414.

Son of God, The, is Jehovah God in
His Human, 92-94, 135. The first ele-
ment of faith in the Lord God the Saviour
Jesus Christ is the acknowledgment that
He is the Son of God. This was the first
element of faith which the Lord revealed
and announced when He came into the
world, 342, 378. It is contrary to what is
natural and rational to think that any Son
was bora of God from eternity, 26. That


any Son bom from eternity descended and
assumed the Human, utterly falls as er-
roneous; God, who is one, descended and
became Man, 83, 637. The Apostolic
church did not acknowledge a Son of God
born from eternity, but only the Son of
God born in time, 636. In the Word the
regenerate are called sons of God, 572,
729.

Son of Man, The, is the Lord as to
the Word, 02, 271. By the sign of the Son
of Man in heaven, is meant the appearing
of Divine Truth in the Word, 198.

Son of Mary, The, is properly the hu-
man which the Lord assumed, 92. He
who believes only that the Lord is the Son
of Mary implants in himself various ideas
concerning Him which are destructive of
salvation, 342. From this common saying
in the mouth of all, that the Lord is called
the Son of Mary, many enormities have
flowed into the church, 94. That the Lord
was the Son of Mary is true; but that He
is so still is not true, 102.

Sophi of ancient times in a society in
heaven, 695; in the spiritual world, 692.

Sores signify interior evils and falsities
destructive of good and truth, 635.

Soul, The, is the very essence of man,
and the body is its form, in. The soul
is in the whole and every part of man, 112.
The soul is the man himself, because it is
the inmost; therefore its form is perfectly
the human form, 697, 8. It is a form of
all tilings of love and wisdom, 697. The
soul is a human form, from which nothing
can he taken away, and to which nothing
can be added; and it is the inmost of all
the forms of the body, 697. The soul of
man is not life, but a recipient of life, 2s.
It is not life, but it is the nearest receptacle
of life from God, and thus God’s dwelling
place, 697. The soul of a child is from
the father and his hody from the mother,
ri2. The body is from the soul, 82. The
soul is in the seed of the father, and is
clothed with a body in the mother, 92.
Man begins from the soul, which is tile
very essence of the seed: this not only
initiates hut also produces in its own order
the things of the hody, 166. In the womb
of a mother nothing is prepared but the
body, conceived and derived from the
soul, 167. That human souls were cre-
ated from the beginning of the world, and
enter into bodies and become men, is
among the fables of the ancients, 171.
The soul acts in and upon, yet not through
the hody; the body acts out of itself from
the soul, 154. The soul from the father is
the man himself, and the body from the
mother is not the man in itself, but is
from him. The hody Is a covering of the
soul, composed of such things as are of
the natural world; but the soul is of such
as are in the spiritual world, 103. Every
man, after death, puts off the natural.


1 161


INDEX


which he had from the mother, and retains tinually proceeds from the Lord a Divine
the spiritual, which he had from the father, sphere of love toward all who embrace
together with a border from the purest the doctrine of His church, and who obey
things of nature, around it; but this bor- Him, as little children in the world obey
der, with those who come into heaven, is father and mother, apply themselves to
below, and the spiritual above; but the Him, and wish to be instructed by Him,
border with those who come into hell is 308; from this heavenly sphere arises a
above, and the spiritual below, 103. What natural sphere, which is one of love toward
is believed respecting the state of souls infants and children; this is most univer-
after death at this day, 769, 770. __ sal, 308. In the spiritual world there ex-

Sound, The, of a man’s voice and hales from every one the sphere of his love,
speech is heard only as a simple sound, which spreads itself round about and al-
and yet when the angels hear it they per- fects, and causes sympathies and antip-
ceive in it all the affections of his love, athies. By these spheres the good are
365; they know his love from the sound of separated from the evil, 331. The will’s
his voice, and his intelligence from his affections and the thoughts of the under-
speech, 778. The sound of spiritual lan- standing from these make a spiritual
guage differs from the sound of natural sphere around them, which is felt in va-
language, 280. rious ways; but in the world this spiritual

Space and Time. There are two things sphere is absorbed by the material body,
peculiar to the natural world which cause and encloses itself within the natural
all things to be finite; one is space, and sphere which then flows out from man,
the other is time, 27. Spaces and times 410. There emanates from every man a
were created together with this world and spiritual sphere, which is of his love’s
make it finite; their two beginnings are affection and the thought therefrom; and
immeasurableness and eternity, 27, 31. it interiorly affects his associates, espe-
There is nothing of space in God’s im- dally at feasts; it emanates through the
measurableness, and nothing of time in face as well as the respiration, 433. Every
His eternity, 3 1. Times and spaces were metal and stone, precious and common,
introduced into the world that one thing freely absorbs the ether, exhales what is
might be distinguished from another, 29. natural to itself, throws off what is worn
Times were introduced into the natural out, and restores itself with what is new;
world by the rotation of the eartb ahout its hence there is a magnetic sphere about
axis; spaces were introduced into the nat- the magnet, an iron sphere ahout iron,
ural world by the earth’s being formed into etc., 499; from this sphere the inmost
a globe, and filled with various kinds of of every seed is impregnated, and what is
matter, 29. Tbe spiritual world is not in prolific vegetates, 499, 785. There is a
space and time, as the natural world is, sphere elevating all to heaven, that pro-
hut is in the appearance of these, 280. ceeds continually from the Lord and fills
The appearances of spaces and times in the natural and the spiritual world. All
the spiritual world are according to the those who believe in the Lord and live
differences of the states in which are the according to His precepts, enter that
minds of spirits and angels there; those sphere and axe lifted; hut they who do not
appearances are real, because constant believe are unwilling to enter, but re-
according to their state, 29. God is pres- move to the sides, and are there carried
ent in space without space and in time away by a stream that sets toward hell,
without time, 30. Spaces and times can- 652. The spheres in the spiritual world
not be predicated of love and wisdom, but which flow forth from the Christendom
instead of them states, 35. of to-day, show manifestly in what thick

Speech is nothing but the form of darkness they are respecting the^ Lord,
sound. Sound corresponds to affection, regeneration, and the conjunction of
and speech to thought, 386. Take sound faith and charity, 618; the sphere belong-
away from speech and we have nothing ing to the conjunction of faith and charity
left, 386. Spiritual speech embraces invades men in the natural world, and
thousands of things which natural speech extinguishes the marriage between truths
cannot express, 386. In the natural world and goods, 619; the angels complain
man has twofold speech, because his greatly of these spheres, and pray to the
thought is twofold, external and internal. Lord that they may he dissipated, 619.
hi. See Language. The spheres of spiritual truths there are

Sphere, The, of Divine Love per- as yet few, only m the new heaven, and
vades the universe, and affects every one with those beneath heaven separated
according to state; not only the good but from the dragonists, 619. The sphere of
also the evil; and not only men, but also infernal spirits conjoins itself with man’s
beasts and birds, 44. The sphere of the sensuals, from behind, 402. 565.
extension of good is infinite; for this Spider. Wonders of the spider, 335.
sphere from the inmost fills the universe Spirals. See Helices .

and every thing therein, 56. There con- Spirit. Man’s spirit a receptacle of


1162


INDEX


the life of the mind, 470. The mind of
man lives after death and is called a
spirit; if good, an angelic spirit, after-
wards an angel; if evil, a satanic spirit,
afterwards a satan, 156. Man’s spirit is
created from finite, vyhich are spiritual
suhstances, that are in the spiritual world,
and are brought together into our earth,
470. The life of a spirit is love’s affection
and thought, 622. After the spirit is
separated from the body it comes into
liberty to act according to its affections
and thoughts, 661. The novitiate is con-
ducted into various societies, 281. It is
the spirit which thinks what it wills, and
wills what it loves, and this is its life, 568.
Man’s spirit is in company with its like
in the spiritual world, and by the material
body it is with men in the natural world,
475. Man does not know that he is in the
midst of spirits as to his mind, because
the spirits with whom he is in company
in the spiritual world think and speak
spiritually; hut man’s spirit, so long as he
is in the material hody, thinks and speaks
naturally, 475, 607. Every man attaches
to himself a spirit similar to the affection
of his will, and the perception of his un-
derstanding, 380. After death men are
called spirits because they are then spiri-
tual, 570. All in the spiritual world are
consociated with their like in the natu-
ral world, 137. Spirits cannot he seen hy
men, 475. They are called angelic spirits
who are preparing for heaven, in the world
of spirits, 387. The spirits of hell cannot
see any thing done in heaven, 61. It is a
peculiarity of the spiritual world that a
spirit thinks himself to be such as his
dress is; this is hecause the understanding
clothes every one there, 663. By being in
the spirit is meant a state of mind separate
from the body, 157. That the spirit of
man signifies such things as are of the
min d, is evident from the Word, 156.
See Mind.

Spiritual, The, is active or a living
force; the natural viewed in itself is pas-
sive or a dead force, 607. The distinction
between the spiritual and natural is not
as hetween the purer and less pure; the
distinction is like that between the prior
and posterior hetween which is no finite
ratio, 280. The natural can by no suh-
tilization approximate the spiritual, so as
to become spiritual, 280. Every thing
spiritual is received in what is natural to
be any thing with man, 339. All the spiri-
tual that man has is from the father, and
all the material from the mother, 92, 103.
The spiritual body must be formed in the
material; how formed, 583. The things
from the sun of heaven are called spiri-
tual; and the things from the sun of the
world are receptacles of life, and are called
natural, 35. Spiritual things are above
natural, 77* Spiritual things ascend into


the highest region of the mind and take
form, 404. The natural man regards
spiritual things as phantoms, 133. A man
of the natural world does not see a man
of the spiritual, nor the reverse, 280.
The thoughts of the spiritual man are in-
comprehensible and ineffable to the natu-
ral, 280. The spiritual is inwardly in the
natural with those in faith in the Lord
and in charity towards the neighbor, 361.
The internal is called the spiritual man,
401. The spiritual-natural man, 607.
The spiritual-moral man, 369, 564. The
spiritual-rational man, 369, 564.

Spiritual World and Natural
World. There are two worlds, the spiri-
tual in which angels and spirits are; and
the natural in which men are, 75. In
each world there is a sun; and the sun of
the spiritual world is pure love, but the
sun of the natural world is pure fire, 75.
The centre of life, the sun of the angelic
heaven, is the Divine Love proximately
proceeding from God, who is m the midst
of that sun; the expanse of that centre,
called the spiritual world, is thence; from
that sun existed the sun of the world, and
from this its expanse, which is called the
natural world, 35. See Spiritual Sun.
The spiritual world has such connection
with the natural that they cannot he
separated, 118, 76. By the spiritual
world are meant both heaven and hell,
454. All things in the spiritual world are
spiritual, and affect the internal man and
make its will and understanding, 24.
There are two things peculiar to the natu-
ral world, which cause all to he finite;
one is space and the other is time, 27.
The spiritual world is not in space and
time, as the natural is, but in the ap-
pearance of these two, 280; these appear-
ances are according to differences of
states in which are the minds of spirits and
angels, 29. See Appearances. There is
nothing in the natural world which is not
also in the spiritual world; but they differ
in origin, 185, 209, 693, 694, 794. The
quarters in the spiritual world are not
like those in the natural, and ahodes ac-
cording to the quarters are according to
the reception of faith and love; they are
in the east who excel in love, and in the
south who excel in intelligence, 800. In
the spiritual world all things in distance
appear according to correspondences;
which, when they appear in forms, are
called representations of spiritual things
in objects similar to those that are natu-
ral, 388. In the spiritual world those
who close the higher regions of the mind
towards God and open its lower regions
for the devil, appear in distance like wild
beasts, 13. All things seen in the spiri-
tual world are instantaneously created
by the Lord; while all things seen in the
natural world grow from seed, 794.


INDEX


U63


There is a spiritual world, and from the
interior this operates upon and actuates
the things that exist and are formed in
the world of nature and upon earth, as
the human mind operates upon the senses
and motions of the hody, 695. The in-
ternal man is in the spiritual world and
the external in the natural world, 454.

Spurious. Spurious charity, 450, 457.
Spurious faith, 345, 380.

Stars, The, are so many suns; and
hence so many systems, 32. Every so-
ciety of heaven, to those under heaven,
sometimes shines like a star, 160. Com-
parison with a new star, appearing in the
starry heaven, and afterward darkened,
176, 348. The star which went before
the wise men from the East, when the
Lord was born, signified knowledge from
heaven, 224. By the stars are meant
knowledges of truth and good, 198.

Starry Heaven. In the starry heaven
there are earths, 32.

State is predicated of love, life, wis-
dom, affections, joys, in general of good
and truth, 30. There are two states of
thought in man, external and internal;
man is in the external state in the natural
world; he is in the internal state in the
spiritual, 806. The Lord, while in the
world, was in two states, of exinanition
and glorification, 104. Every man who
from natural is becoming spiritual under-
goes two states, of reformation and of
regeneration, 105, 106, 571. The states
of men after death, 281. The state of
those who have confirmed themselves
from the Word in falsities of doctrine, who
are those who have done so in favor of
justification by faith alone, 281; of those
who have not practised charity from re-
ligion, 536. The state of those who are
to come into the New Church, 354. Spaces
and times cannot he predicated of love
and wisdom; but instead of them, states,
35. The state of every nation in general in
the spiritual world, 7ps-

Statue, The, which Nebuchadnezzar
saw represented the four churches, 788.

Statues. The statutes according to
which the worship of the Ancient Church
was instituted consisted of correspond-
ences; so did all things of the church with
Israel, 201. There appear, at one ex-
tremity of the spiritual world, two statues,
in monstrous form, hy which those seem
to themselves to be devoured who think
foolish things concerning God from eter-
nity, 31-

Stealing. See Theft.

Stock. There is such union between
the souls and minds of men, and the souls
and minds of angels, and of infernal
spirits, that if they were removed from
man, be would fall dead as a stock, 118.
See Spirit.

Storge. See Parental Lave.


Strabismus. Purblind faith, a faith
in any other than the true God, and with
Christians in any hut the Lord God the
Saviour, may ,be compared to the fault
in the eye called strabismus, 346.

Strength. See Power.

Style. The style of the Word appears
foreign, 189; yet it is the Divine style
itself, with which no other can be com-
pared, however suhlime and excellent it
may seem, 191. Although the style of
the Word seems commonplace, still it
conceals Divine angelic wisdom, 194.
The style of the Word is such that holi-
ness is in every sentence, and word, yes
in some places in the letters, 191. The
Word in heaven is written in a spiritual
style, wholly different from natural style,
241.

Styx, 20. Stygian waters, 319.

Subjection. Wonderful subjection of
all hell to heaven, of evil to good, and of
falsity to truth, 713.

Subjugation of the Hells, 115-117.

Subordination of the three universal
loves, 39s, 403-405-

Subsistence is perpetual existence, 35,
46, 224.

Substance and Form. The one God is
Substance and Form itself; He is the only,
very, and first Substance and Form, 20,
28, 37. God is Suhstance itself, because
all things which suhsist exist from Him;
Form, hecause all the quality of sub-
stances arise from Him, and quality is
from no other source than form, 53.
Every substance is a form; and quality of
the form is its state, the perfection or im-
perfection of which results from order,
52. A substance is nothing unless it be a
form; of a substance, unless it he a form,
nothing can he predicated; and this, he-
cause it has no quality, is in itself no thing ,
21. Unless spiritual substances were to-
gether with material, no seed could he
impregnated from the inmosts, and then
grow up, with no departure from the right
way, from the first shoot even to fruit and
new seed, 470. There is no substance in
the created universe which does not tend
to equilibrium in order that it may be in
freedom, 496. Material things originate
from substantial, 694. God first made
His infinity finite, hy suhstances from
Himself, from which existed His proxi-
mate sphere, which makes the sun of the
spiritual world; and afterwards, by means
of that sun, He perfected other spheres,
even to the last, which consists of things
quiescent; and thus, by means of degrees.
He made the world finite more and more,
33 -

Substantial, The, is the primitive of
the material, 79. The nature of the spiri-
tual world is as different from the nature
of the natural world as the substantial
is from the material, or the spiritual from


INDEX


II64


the natural, or the prior from the pos-
terior, 79. All things m the spiritual world
are substantial, not material. Hence all
tilings w hich exist in the natural world are
found in the spiritual in their perfection,
and many things hesides, 694, 24, 75.
Material things originate from substan-
tial, 604. As there is substantial cxtense
in heaven, therefore angels dwell dis-
tinctly, yea, more distinctly than men who
have a material extense, 29. Spirits and
angels are substantial and not material,
280; they are in a substantial body, and
men in the natural world are in a material
body which invests the substantial, 798,
793, 79* The substantial man sees the
substantial man just as clearly as the ma-
terial man sees the material. But the sub-
stantial man cannot see the material nor
the material the substantial, owing to the
difference between material and sub-
stantial, 793, 79, 846. Man lives a man
after death, with the sole difference that
he then lives a substantial man, not ma-
terial as before, 846. Life is in every
substantial and material part of man
though it does not mingle itself there-
with, 30.

Sun. The sun of the natural world
which is pure fire, is from the sun of the
angelic heaven, which is Jhe Divine Love,
35, 41. The sun of the created world con-
sists of created substances, the activity of
which produces fire, 472. The sun from
which nature takes its rise and essence, is
pure fire, 12. The heat and light from
the sun are the two essentials, by means of
which every thing upon the earth sub-
sists, 37, 308. All things which exist hy
the sun of the natural world are material,
and are called natural, 7 5. The heat and
light trom the sun of the natural world
have nothing of life in them, hut they
serve the spiritual heat and light as re-
ceptacles for the conveyance of them to
man, as instrumental causes serve their
principals, 360. But that the Lord might
operate upon animate things, and things
inanimate, He created the sun, to he in the
natural world as a father, the earth being
as a mother. For the sun is as a common
father, and the earth as a common mother,
from whose marriage exists all vegetation,
308. The sun of the world with all its
essence which is heat and light is per-
ceived to flow into every tree and flower,
and into every stone, common as well as
precious, every object taking its portion
from this common influx, 364.

Son, The, of the Spiritual World.
The sun from which all spiritual things
flow, is pure love from Jehovah God,
who is in the midst of it, 76, 77. The
Divine itself which immediately encom-
passes the Lord makes the sun of the
spiritual world, 641. It is the circle en-
compassing the Lord, emanating from


His Divine Love, and Wisdom, 365.
The sun is of the substance which has
gone forth from Him, the essence of which
is love, 33. God first made His infinity
finite, by suhstances emitted from Him-
self, from which existed His encompassing
sphere, which makes the sun of the spiri-
tual world, 33, 76. From the sun of the
spiritual world proceeds heat which in its
essence is love, and light which in its
essence is wisdom, 39, 63, 75, 360, 66 1.
Out of the sun of the spi^tual world, by
its heat and light, the universe was cre-
ated, 33. The two things which proceed
from the sun of the spiritual world, and
all the things which exist there by them
are substantial, and are called spiritual,
75. The heat and light from the sun of
the spiritual world have life in them;
their life is from the Lord, who is in the
midst of that sun, 360. From the sun of
heaven the Divine love proceeds as heat
and the Divine wisdom as light; these two
flow into human minds and vivify them
according to the quality of the form, each
form taking from the common influx
what is necessary, 364, 365, 641, 661.
They flow into every thing of the uni-
verse, and affect them interiorly, 39.
God is omnipresent from firsts and lasts
of His order, by means of the heat and
light from the sun of the spiritual world;
in the midst of which He is: by means of
this sun order was made, and from it He
sends forth heat and light, which pervade
the universe from firsts to lasts, and pro-
duce life, 63. The sun of the spiritual
world does not appear to rise and set,
nor to he borne along, hut it remains
stationary in the east, in the middle be-
tween the zenith and the horizon, 29.
The sun of the spiritual world is distant
from the angels as the sun of the natural
world is from men; if God, who is in the
midst of that sun, were to come near
to the angels, they would perish as men
would ft the sun of the world were to
come near to them, 691, 641, 370, 837.

Suppers which are diversions of charity
are among those only who are in mutual
love from similar faith, 433. With Chris-
tians of the primitive church, suppers
signified consociations; for evening, when
they took place, signified this state, 433.
See Feasts.

Supplication. There are two duties
incumbent on man, supplication and con-
fession. The supplication will be that
the Lord may be merciful, give power
to resist the evils of which man has re-
pented, and supply inclination and affec-
tion for doing good, 539.

Supra-Lapsarians, 72, 183, 486.

Swammerdam, 585.

Swedenborg. It pleased the Lord to
open the sight of his spirit and so intro-
mit him into the spiritual world, 771, 851.


INDEX


II65


It was granted him to be with angels and
spirits in their world with them, 776, 851.
It was given him hy the Lord to see won-
derful things in and below the heavens,
and, as commanded, he relates what has
been seen, 188; who could have known
such things, bad not the Lord opened the
sight of. some one? 312. He has con-
versed, in the spiritual world, with apos-
tles, popes, emperors, and kings; with
founders of the present church, Luther,
Calvin, and Melancthon; and with others
from countries widely separated, 64;
with all his relations and friends, and
likewise kings and dukes, also with
learned men, and this for twenty-seven
years, 281, 771, 8s 1. He could become
present to those who are in other planets
of this system, and also to those who are
in the planets of other solar systems, 64.
He was at the same time in the natural
world and in the spiritual, .280, 851.
It was often given him to see in societies
the spirits of persons still living, some in
angelic societies and some in infernal;
and to converse with them for several
days, 14. He ramhled through various
places in the spiritual world, for the pur-
pose of ohserving the representations of
heavenly things, there exhihited in many j
places, 277. He was in the state in which
the prophets were when they saw such I
things; with this difference, that he was
in the spirit and in the hody, and only
sometimes out of the body, 157. After
Swedenborg returned from the state of the
spirit into the state of the body, be wrote
out the thin g s seen and heard, 625. The
Lord disclosed to him the spiritual sense
of His Word in which Divine truth is in
its light, 780. The Lord had prepared him
for this office from earliest youth, 850.
Swedenborg from his infancy, bad not
been able to admit into his mind any
other idea than that of one God,. 16. He
had meditated about the creation far a
long time, but to no purpose, hefore he
was admitted by the Lord into the spiri-
tual world, 76. The state in which he
was, while thinking what God was from
eternity; what He did before the world was
created, 31, 280. As Swedenborg had
often thought, and from knowledge and
then from perception and at last from
interior light, bad acknowledged, that
man has very little wisdom, it was granted
him to see the Temple of Wisdom in the
spiritual world, 387. He was suddenly
seized with a disease almost deadly; a
pestilential smoke was let in on him from
’ the Jerusalem called Sodom and Egypt
(Apoc. xi. 8); he lay in his bed three days
and a half. This happened to him while
the eleventh chapter of the Apocalypse
was explained, 567. While he read the
Word from the first chapter of Isaiah to j
the last of Malachi, ana the Psalms of j


David, and kept his thought on their
spiritual sense, it was given him to per-
ceive clearly that every verse communi-
cated with some society in heaven, 272,
2^5. The twelve apostles were sent to
him by the Lord, while he was writing
on the subject of faith in the Lord God
the Saviour, 330. The angels said that
they had not before known the differences
between the spiritual and the natural,
hecause there had not before heen given
the means of comparison, with any man
who was in . both worlds at the same time;
and the differences cannot be known
without comparison, 280. He testifies
that the Lord manifested Himself before
him; likewise from the first day of that
call be has not received any thing of the
doctrines of the New Church from any
angel, but from the Lord alone while be
read the Word, 779. He asserts in truth
that the Relations annexed to the chapters
are not inventions, hut truly seen and
heard; not in any state of sleep, hut in f ull
wakefulness, 851. It was enjoined on
him by the Lord to make puhhc various
things from what he had seen and heard,
both concerning heaven and bell, and the
final judgment, and also to explain the
Apocalypse, 771. He says, speaking of
how the Lord reduced all things, both in
heaven and in hell, into order, “I have
seen and do see every day the Divine
omnipotence of the Lord in this thing,”
123. Swedenborg’s natural thought con-
cerning the Trinity of persons and their
unity, and the birth of a Son of God from
eternity, was from the doctrine of faith in
the church which has its name from
Athanasius, 26. Works of Swedenborg
referred to, Apocalypse Revealed , 196, 367,
635, 684? 686, 687, 754, 771, 846. Con-
tinuation as to Final Judgment , 772.
Earths in Universe , 846. Divine Love
and Wisdom, 20. Divine Providence, 479.
i Final Judgment , 115, 771, 772, 846.
Heaven and Hell , 194, 240, 771, 800.
Heavenly Arcana, 392, 661, 757. Doc-
trine of the Lord , 846. Marriage Love, 19,
313. . New Jerusalem and Its Heavenly
Doctrine, 846. Sacred Scripture , 846.
White Horse, 196..

Sword, The, vihrating in the cherub’s
hand signified that the letter of the Word
can be turned hither and thither pro-
vided this be done in application to some
truth, 508.

Sympathy and Sympathetic. All con-
junction is from no other source than the
reciprocal accession of one to another,
while they both will one thing; hence is
effected something sympathetic, 99. Sym-
pathies derive their origin from no other
source than the sphere of Divine Love,
which pervades the universe, 44. In the
spiritual world there exhales from every
one the sphere of his love, which spreads


n66


INDEX


itself round and affects, and causes sym-
pathies and antipathies, 331. See Antip-
athies.

Synod of Dort. Predestination was
there firmly established, 486, 759. See
Predestination .

Synonymes. There are in the Word two
expressions which appear as synonymous,
yet are not so; for one is predicated of
good, and in the opposite sense of evil,
but tbe other is predicated of truth, and
of falsity, 250.

System, Theological. The whole sys-
tem of the present theology is dependent
on the imputation of the merit of Christ,
268.

Tabernacle, The, built by Moses in
the wilderness represented heaven and
the church, 220. The holiness of this
whole tabernacle was from nothing else
,than the law in the ark, 283. By the
temple was represented the heaven in
which the spiritual angels are, and by
[the tabernacle, the heaven where the
celestial angels are, 221, 187. See
T emple.

. Table, The, upon which was the shew-
bread, represented and signified the in-
most of heaven and the church, 220.

. Tables of the Law. There were two
tables, one for God and the other for man,
285, 287, 456. In the hand of Moses the
two tables of the law made one, on the
right side of which was written what is
concerning God and on the left what is
concerning men, 456; this was done in
order that the tahles united should repre-
sent the conjunction of God with men,
and the reciprocal conjunction of men
with God, 456. See Decalogue, Com-
mandments.

Tares (Matt. xiii. 24-30, 39, 40) mean
the falsities and evils of the former church,
784.

Tartarus, 20.

Tartary. That ancient Word in Asia
before the Israelitish Word is still pre-
served among the people in Great Tar-
taxy, 279, 266. Situation of the people
of Great Tartary in the spiritual world,
279. See Ancient Word.

Teach. The Lord teaches every one
by the Word, and He teaches him from
the knowledge with the man, and does
not infuse new immediately, 208.

Teacher. To call any one teacher is
lawful in a natural sense, but not in a
spiritual, 226. In the spiritual world
children are instructed by teachers, 623.

Teeth. Reasoning from fallacies of
the senses corresponds to the teeth, 402.
Gnashing of teeth is collision of falsities
with each other, and also of false and
true, 402.

Temple, A, is called holy not from itself
but from the Divine that is there taught,


660. A temple is to be consecrated, 126.
How man hecomes a temple of God, 374.
By the temple at Jerusalem was repre-
sented heaven and the church; but espe-
cially the heaven where the spiritual
angels axe, 221. See Tabernacle. The
Divine Human of the Lord was signified
by the temple at Jerusalem in the highest
sense, 221. The interior's of the temple
represented the interiors of heaven and
the church; its exteriors represented the
exteriors of heaven and the church, 221.
By temple (Matt. xxiv. 2) is meant not
only tbe temple at Jerusalem, but also the
church, 174. Temple in heaven, 750.
Temples in the world of spirits, 134.
Description of a magnificent temple sig-
nifying the New Church, 508.

Temptation is the conflict of tbe spirit
and flesh; and this, when it is spiritual,
draws from the spring of conscience, but
if it is natural, it originates from dis-
eases, 666. With the regenerate springs
up dissension hetween the new will which
isjjabove, and tbe old will below; after this
dissension of the wills, a combat arises
which is called spiritual temptation; but
this temptation or combat does not take
place between goods and evils, but be-
tween the truths of good and the falsities
of evil; why ( 596. Man has not a sense
of combat except as in himself, and as
remorse of conscience; nevertheless the
Lord and the devil fight in man, and they
fight for dominion over him, or as to who
shall possess him, 596. Man is to fight
wholly as of himself, for he has free will
to act for the Lord, and also to act for
the devil: he is for the Lord if he abides
in truths from good, and for the devil
if be abides in falsities from evil, 596.
No one has been admitted into spiritual
temptation in all the ages from that when
the Nicene Council introduced the faith
of three Gods; for if any one had been
admitted, he would have succumbed im-
mediately, 597. Conjunction of heaven
and the world is effected with man by
means of temptation, 598. In tempta-
tions man to appearance is left to him-
self, though be has not been left, for God
is then most really present in man's in-
itios ts, and supports him; wherefore,
when any one conquers in temptation
he is most intimately conjoined with God,
126. The passion of the cross was the
last temptation which the Lord under-
went in the world; and He then was most
intimately united to God His Father, 126.

Ten signifies all, 286.

Terminus, 339.

Testament. What makes the dis-
tinction hetween the Old Testament and
the New is that in the New the Lord
taught brotherly love, that is charity, 409.

Testimony. Why the Decalogue is
called the testimony, 285, 323, 456. In


INDEX


H67

the Word testimony signifies confirma- it adjoins to itself the will, 347. Every
don and witnessing of the articles of thought of the underst anding is in space
covenant, 285. Covenant signifies con- without space, and in time without tune,
junction, and testimony signifies life ac- 64. The thought of the understanding
cording to the compact, 456. . By the ought to lead the love of man’s will, 160.
testimony of Jesus (Apoc. xix. 10) is Where there is no thought there is no
meant confession from faith in Him, 149. idea, 33s. There are two states of thought
In the celestial sense to bear witness means in maa, external and internal; these
to speak the truth, and testimony means states make one with the good but not with
the truth itself, 323. To bear false wis- the wicked, 806. Man’s thought is two-
ness; see Commandments. fold, external and internal, hi. A man

Theft or Stealing. The command- can speak from internal thought and ex-
men jt not to steal extends to all imposture, temal thought, and he can speak from
illegitimate gain, usury, and exaction; external thought and not from the bl-
and. also to fraudulent practices in paying temal, yes, contrary to the internal, in.
duties and taxes, and in discharging Interior thought is called perception, 603.
debts, 317. What theft signifies in the Maa can in a moment or two conclude
spiritual and the celestial senses. See what he cannot hy the lower thought ex-
Commandments. press in a brief hour, 603. Thought from

Themis, 159. confirmed appearance is fallacy, 461.

Theological. With those who love Thought is the seat of purification and
truth because it is. truth, theological excretion of the evils resident in man
things rise into the highest region of the from his parents; therefore if the evils
mind; moral, political and scientific that a man thinks of , were imputed, ref or-
things place themselves beneath, 18b, matioa and regeneration could not he
482. With others theological things in effected, 659. Spiritual thoughts are
the mind are put helow scientific, polit- thoughts of thoughts, and by them are
ical, and civil-moral; they speak from expressed the qualities of qualities, and
these in temples and companies, when, the affections of affections; consequently
as soon as they are in freedom, at home, spiritual thoughts are the beginnings and
they laugh at those things which they the origins of natural thoughts, 280. See
have preached in public, sayiag in heart Idea.

that theological things are specious snares Three means what is complete and
for catching doves, 147. perfect, and also all at once, 211, 387.

Theology. Without truths there is no This number is used of a work finished
theology; and where there is not this there and perfect, 211.

is no church, 619, 620. The acknowl- Thummim. See Urim and Tkummim.

edgment of God from knowledge of Him Thunder. The flashing of the light as

is the very essence of all things in universal of lightning and the rolling of the air as of
theology, 5. Freon the idea prevailing at thunder were correspondences and ap-
the present day concerning God and re- pearances of the contest and collision of
demption, all theology has from spiritual arguments, on one side in favor of God,
become in the lowest degree natural, 133. and on the other in favor of nature, 77.

The imputative faith of the merit of Tigers. Diabolical love causes its

Christ is the head of the present theology, lusts to appear in the distance in hell like

644, i8r; if this head or pillar were re- various wild heasts, some like tigers, 45.
moved all would fall asunder, 644. See Time. See Space and Time . Times in
Imputation. the spiritual world are not distinguished

Thieves. They who confirm falsities into days, weeks, moaths, and years, be-
of every kind, regarding truths as of no cause the sun there does not appear to
moment, and who disdiarge the offices rise and set, nor to be borne along, but it
of the priesthood only for gam and honor, remains stationary, 29. See Sun, Spiri-
are spiritual thieves, 320, 318. tual. Times were introduced into the

Think, To, spiritually is to think with- natural world by the rotation of the earth
out time and space, and to think naturally about its axis, 29. . God is in space with-
is to think with time and space, 280. To but space, and in time without time, 30.
think without understanding is tike seeing To-Day (Ps. ii. 7) signifies not from
without the eye, 165. Man thinks wholly eternity, but in time, 101.
as of himself, when yet he thinks from Tortoises represent those of the clergy
God, 507. who altogether separate faith from charity

Thorax. See Chest . and good works, 462.

Thorns and Thistles (Gen. in. 5, Tower. By the tower built in the land
18) mean all evil and falsity, 498. of Shinar is meant inroad of the hells upon

Thought comes from, perception, and the heavens, 121.
perception from affection, 231, 386. Transcription. To imputation, appli-
There is not the least thought but from cation, and ascription, only add transcrip-
enj'oyment of the will, 570. Thought is tion, and you will be a vicarious pope, 640.
so far the man, in quantity and quality, as


n68


INDEX


Transfiguration. The Lord when
transfigured hefore Peter, James, and
John, represented the Word, 222. . The
three disciples were then in the spirit, 157.
What the Lord was, as the Word in ul-
tima tes, He showed to the disciples when
transfigured, 261.

Tree. A tree signifies man, 48, 468.
The tree as to its seed corresponds to the
will with man; in the branches, branch-
lets, and leaves, the tree corresponds, to
the unders tanding in man; in bearing
hlossoms, and yielding fruit the tree corre-
sponds to good works with man, 374. All
things which belong to a tree correspond
to truths, and the fruit to good, 106. The
state of man is like the state of a tree, 41,
106, 374, 584. The Tree of Life signifies
man living from God, 48; the Lord in
man and man in the Lord, 466; also that
intelligence and wisdom are from God,
663. To eat from the tree of life signifies
reception of eternal life, 48. By the way
of the tree of life is signified entrance to
the Lord, which men have through truths
of the spiritual sense of the Word, 260.
By the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil is signified the man believing that be
lives from himself, and not from God, 48.
The tree of the knowledge of good and
evil means man not in the Lord but in self,
466; it signifies the helief that intelligence
and wisdom were from man, 663. Eating
of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil means the appropriation of evil, 466;
it also signifies the reception of damnation,
48. Those who speak falsities from de-
sign, and utter them in a tone imitative of
spiritual affection, and especially if they
mingle with them truths from the Word
which they thus falsify, were called by the
ancients serpents of the tree of the knowl-
edge of good and evil, 324; also they who
reasoned from sensual things, and against
the genuine truths of the Word, and thus
of the church, 402, 565. Those two trees,
one for life and the other for death, repre-
sented man’s free will in spiritual things,
469, 489.

Triarchy. The Trinity which the
present church has embraced, can be con-
ceived by human minds only as a triarchy,
17 *

Trine. In every complete thing there
is a trine, called the first, the mediate,
and the ultimate; also end, cause, and
effect, 210, 387. There are three things
which as one flow from the Lord into our
souls; these three as one, or this trine,
are love, wisdom, and use, 744.

Trinity. There is a Divine Trinity
which is the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
164.. These three, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, are the three essentials of one God,
which make one, as soul, body, and oper-
ation in man, 166, 168, 173. The Divine
Trinity is in the Lord God Jesus Christ,


: 3, 92, 139, 170, 188, 751, 787. The Father
in Him is the Divine, the Son the Divine
Human, the Holy Spirit the proceeding
Divine, 92, *88. The three essentials,
called the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
in the Lord are one, 139, 166. The Divine
Trinity is in the Lord God the Saviour
Jesus Christ, as the soul, body, and oper-
ation are in man, 4. Before the world
was created, there was not this Trinity;
but after the world was created, when God
became incarnate, it was provided and
made; and then in the Lord God, the Re-
deemer and Saviour Jesus Christ, 170.
A Trinity of Divine persons from eternity,
or before the world was created, is, m
thought, a Trinity of Gods; and this can-
not be abolished hy oral confession of one
God, 172, 173. From the division of the
Divine Trinity into three persons, a frenzy
has gone forth into the whole of theology,
and thus into the church, 4, 23, 14 1, 173.
A Trinity of persons involves the idea of
three Gods, 17, 168. 170, 172, 173, 174,
184. The truth is that the division of God,
or of the Divine essence, into three per-
sons, each of whom by himself, or singly,
is God, leads to the denial of God, 15.
A Trinity of persons was unknown in the
Apostolic church; was first broached by
the Nicene council, and from that was
introduced into the Roman Catholic
church, and from this into the churches
separated from it, 174, 1*75. From the
Nicene Trinity and the Athanasian, a faith
arose which perverted the whole Christian
church, 177, 178. The council of Nice
introduced the dogma of three Divine
persons from eternity, because they did
not rightly search the Word, and there-
fore they found no other refuge from the
Arians. That they afterward combined
into one God those three persons, each
one of whom is God by himself, was from
a fear that they should be regarded as
guilty of belief in three Gods, and re-
proached for it by every rational religious
person, .633. Human reason is at this day
bound in relation to the Divine Trinity,
like a man manacled and fettered in pris-
on; when yet the Divine Trinity in the
minds of men of the church ought to shine
like a lamp, since God, in His Trinity,
and in the Unity of it, is All in all the sanc-
tities of heaven and the church, 169.
There is no other way to understand the
Divine Trinity, than for man to go to the
Lord God the Saviour and read the Word
under His auspices, 165. The Divine
Trinity is like a pearl of the greatest value;
but, when divided into persons, it is like
a pearl divided into three parts, which,
consequently, is utterly and manifestly
ruined, 184. From a Trinity of persons,
each one of whom singly is God, have ex-
isted many discordant and heterogeneous
ideas about God, which are hallucinations


INDEX


and abortions, 183, 184. They who con-
firm themselves in the error that three
Divine persons have existed from eternity,
become more and more natural and cor-
poreal, and then cannot interiorly com-
prehend any Divine truth, 296.

Trepersonate, 133.

Triplicity. In every created thing
there is triplicity, 147.

True, The, or Truth. All that which
proceeds from wisdom is called truth, 38.
Truth is supposed to be only a word
spoken by some one in authority, which
ought to he done; consequently, to be like
mere breath from the mouth, or sound in
the ear, when yet truth and good are the
first principles of all things in hoth worlds,
the spiritual and the natural; and hy
means of them the universe was created,
and by them the universe is preserved,
224. That truth which in itself is truth
cannot be recognized and acknowledged
by a merely natural man, nor can it he
given him by God because it falls into the
inverse and becomes falsity, 754. The
understanding is the receptacle and habi-
tation of truth, 87. There is no truth
which does not derive quality from good,
163. Truth without good is not truth in
spirit, and good without truth is not good
in spirit; and so the one makes the other,
460. The truths of faith flow in hy hear-
ing, and so are implanted in the mind;
but man by these truths is only disposed
for receiving influx from God through the
soul, 8. When the church, or man of the
church is in truths, then the Lord flows
into his truths with good, and vivifies
them, 249. Truths send out light from
themselves; for the sun from which the
lights of truths flow is the Lord in the
spiritual world, 620, 618. No one is in
truths but he who goes to the Lord im-
mediately, 597. Without truths there is
no knowledge of the Lord; there is not
faith, and no charity; consequently with-
out truths there is no theology; and where
there is not this, there is no church, 619.
The truths of the letter of the Word, are
in part not naked truths, but are appear-
ances of truth, 215. Truths applied to
confirm false doctrines become truths
falsified, 162.. Truths are not only covered
over hy falsities, but they are also ob-
literated and rejected, 246. See Good and
Truth , Divine Good and Truth . The
truth of wisdom in heaven is light, 385.
Every truth in and from the Word gives
light, 349. Truth shining is faith in es-
sence, 353. Truths open die understand-
ing* 508. The Lord’s words are truths,
349* 347- Truths are to he taken from
the Word, 347. The several truths of the
Word are so many mirrors of the Lord,
508. Truths teach not only that man
ought to believe, hut also whom and what
he ought to believe, 347. When man


I 169

learns truths from the Word, he comes into
consociation with the angels more than he
knows, 347. Truths do not actually live
until they are in deeds. Truths abstracted
from deeds, are of the thought only, 347.
The essentials of faith are truths, 347.
Truth cannot be hroken up, or cut in
halves so that one part of it may look to
the left and another to the right, and still
remain truth, 379. An abundance of
truths, coherent as if bundled, exalts and
perfects faith, 349, 353* The innumerable
truths of faith make as it were one hody,
379. Truths of faith, however numerous
they are, and however diverse they appear,
make one from the Lord, 354. Truths of
faith not only illuminate charity, but also
qualify and nourish it, 378. He who goes
to the Lord and worships Him alone, comes
into the power of recognizing all truths,
354. Every man whose soul desires it can
see the truths of the Word in light, 621.

Trust. Love is not love without trust,
727 -

Turban. In the spiritual world certain
ones not intelligent wore turhans, because
they were hald, 74. See Baldness.

Turtles. See Tortoises .

Twelve signifies all things of truth
from good, 217, 218.

Tyre and Sidon signify the knowl-
edges of good and truth, 200. Tyre signi-
fies the church as to knowledge of truth
and gaod, hy which is wisdom* 467, 219,
260. The king of Tyre signifies the Word,
where and whence the knowledges of truth
and good are, 260.

! . Ultimate. In every thing Divine there
is a first, mediate, and ultimate, 210.
The ultimate is the container, basis, and
support, 210. The ultimate of the under-
standing belongs to natural knowledge,
the ultimate of the will is sensual enjoy-
ment, 565.

Unanimity, because it is the agreement
of several, and of each one from and hy
himself, does not accord with the unity of
God, but with a plurality, 25.

Understanding. From the light of
the spiritual sun man has understanding
and wisdom, 37- The understanding
is one of the two universals of every man’s
life; it is the receptacle and abode of his
intelligence, 778. The understanding is
the receptacle of wisdom and faith, 37,
362. There is in man a higher and lower
understanding, 815. The faith of God
enters into man through a prior way, hut
knowledges concerning God enter through
a posterior way; . and there is a meeting of
influxes in the midst of the understanding;
and natural faith, which is only persua-
sion, there becomes sniritual; therefore
the human understanding is as a refining
vessel, in which the change is effected, 11.
From spiritual freedom, man has a per-
ception of what is good and true, just and


1170


INDEX


right, In civil matters, which perception
is understanding itself in its essence, 482.
The understanding has no authority over
the will, 255. The understanding is suh-
ject to the will; for it merely teaches and
shows what is to he done from the will,
273. The understanding can be elevated
above the lusts of the will, and not only
see hut also moderate them, 574. Man
can rise as to the understanding almost
into the light in which the angels of heaven
are, 602. The church is such with man
as his understanding of the Word is, 243,
247. ^ The understanding closed by re-
ligion is blind, 623.

Union, Unition. No union or con-
junction between two is given, unless they
accede one to the other, 9p. The union of
the Father and the Son m the Lord was
effected by the acts of redemption, 97.
This union is glorification, 97, 104. It is
like that of the soul and the hody, 98.
The unition of the Human of the Lord
with the Divine of His Father was done
successively, and was fully completed hy
the passion of the cross, 126, 128.

Unity of God, 5-15. It is most in-
teriorly inscrihed on the mind of every
man, since it is in the midst of all the
things which flow into the soul of man
from God, 24. By the division of the
unity of God, true faith is hroken in pieces,
379. Every thing which is divided, unless
it depend upon one, would of itself fall to
pieces, 10.

Universal. Single parts taken to-
gether are called a universal, as partic-
ulars taken together are called a general,
60. A universal together with all its parts
is a work cohering as one, so that one part
cannot be touched and affected without
some sense of it heing communicated to
all the rest, 60. He who knows universals
can afterward comprehend the particulars.
All particulars depend on universals, as
contents on their containers, 711. See
Singulars. The universals of the world
are perpetual types of the infinity of God
the Creator, 32. The universals of heaven
are these three loves, love of ruling from
love of use, love of possessing goods of the
world from love of performing uses by
means of them, and true marriage love,
66 1. The universals of hell are these three
loves, love of ruling from love of self, love
of possessing others’ goods from love of
the world, and licentious love, 661. The
essentials of the church are three, namely,
God, charity, and faith; and all things in
the church have relation to those three
as universals, 712, 711, 722. The faith of
the New Heaven and New Church, in
universal and in particular form, 23.

Universal Loves. There are three
universal loves, love of heaven, love of the
world, and love of self, 394, 403. These
are the fundamental loves of all, 394.


They axe in every man from creation, and
therefore from hirth, and when rightly
subordinated they perfect him, and when
not rightly subordinated they pervert him,
395. 403- They are rightly subordinated
when love of heaven makes the head, love
of the world the breast and abdomen, and
love of self the feet and soles, 395, 403,

405, 507- „ ,

Universe. By the universe are meant
both worlds, the spiritual and natural, 77.
No one can obtain for himself a just idea
concerning the creation of the universe
unless some universal knowledges, pre-
viously acquired, put the understanding
into a state of perception, 75.^ This cre-
ation descrihea in five Relations, 76-80.
God did not create the universe out of
nothing; He created it from Divine love
by Divine wisdom, 76. The universe was
created by God that uses might exist;
also, the universe may he called a theatre
of uses, 67. God created the universe by
the Divine truth; and all the laws of or-
der, by which He preserves the universe,
are truths, 87, 224. The universe is like a
stage, upon which are continually exhib-
ited testimonies that there is a God, and
that He is one, 12. Unless God were one,
the universe could not have heen created
and preserved, 13. Tbe universe is the
work of God, and the habitation of His
love and wisdom, 13. The universe is a
work cohering from firsts to lasts, because
it comprises ends, causes, and effects, in
an indissoluble connection, 47. God from
Himself introduced order into the universe
and also into every part of it, 53. Tbe
things in the universe were all created into
their orders, 54. All things in the universe
that are in Divine order have relation to
good and truth, 395. See Creatable , Cre-
ation, Sim.

Urih and Thummim: represented pie
resplendence of Divine truth from Divine
good in ultimates; for Urim is shining
fire, and Thummim is resplendence in an-
gelic language, and integrity in the He-
brew, 218.

Use is to discharge the works of one’3
function faithfully, sincerely, and dili-
gently, 744. Whether it is said use or
good, it is the same, 419. Good and use
are one, 646. Use is actual love of the
neighbor, 661. There is not a single
thing in the universe, in which is not hid-
den a use, more or less remote, for man,
13. AH heaven is nothing but a contain-
ant of use, from firsts to lasts, 661. Every
angel is an angel according to use, 694.
The kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of
uses, 736. Tbe universe may be called a
theatre of uses, 67. To perform uses is to
do goods; and according to the quantity
and quality of the use in goods, so far in
quantity and in quality the goods are
goods, 419. There takes place a deter-


INDEX


mination to uses, according to doctrines as
means, 374. There are three things which
as one flow from the Lord; these three
as one are love, wisdom, and use, 744.
Love and wisdom do not exist except
ideally when only in the affection and
thought of the mind; but they exist in use
really, 744, 67. The love of use, and ear-
nest application to use, holds the mind to-
gether, and prevents its dissipating itself,
and wandering about, and drinking in all
the cupidities which flow through the
senses from the body and the world, 744.
Uses are the bonds of society; there are
just as many of these bonds as there are
good uses, and these are infinite in num-
ber, 746. There are spiritual uses, which
pertain to love to God and the neighhor;
there are moral and civil uses, which per-
tain to the love of the society and state in
which a man is; there are natural uses,
which pertain to the love of the world and
its necessities; and there are bodily uses
which pertain to the love of self-preser-
vation for the sake of higher uses, 746.
Every love regards uses as its end; love of
heaven regards spiritual uses, love of the
world natural uses which may be called
civil, and love of self corporeal uses which
may also be called domestic, done for self,
394. Every man both good and bad per-
forms uses; the uses are performed from
love of self or love of uses, 661. Every
one who believes in the Lord and shuns
evils, as sins, performs uses from the Lord;
but every one who does not believe in the
Lord and shun evils as sins, performs
uses from himself and for his own sake,
661. As far as uses are performed from
the love of them, so far that love increases,
and with it wisdom, 661. The three uses
of Baptism, 677, 681, 684, 685.

Valleys signify the lowest things of
the church, 200.

Variations. The form or recipient
state induces variations, 366.

Variety exists in all things, and by
means of varieties every quality, 763. AU
variableness is in the subject in which
God is, 366. The variety of regeneration
is infinite like that of men’s faces and
minds, 580, Variety of minds, 756. Va-
riety of climates in the natural and spiri-
tual worlds, 185. , , , .

Vegetables. . In the vegetable king-
dom every berb is known from its fruit
and seed, in which its essence is innate
145. In trees and other subjects of the
vegetable kingdom, there are not two
sexes, masculine and feminine, but every
one of them is masculine; the earth alone,
or the soil, is the common mother, thus as
the woman, 584. The root is a kind of
heart, the leaves are lungs; the blossoms
which precede the fruit are means for
straining the sap, which is its blood, and


1 1 7 1


of separating its grosser from its purer
parts, and the fruit in which the seeds are
perfected, may be compared to the tes-
ticle, 585. The vegetative soul, which
governs inmostly in every particle of sap
or its prolific essence, is from no other
source than from the heat of the spiritual
world; which heat, because it is from the
spiritual sun there, aspires to nothing hut
generation, 585. How animals and vege-
tables of every kind were produced hy
God, 78. See Plants.

Vegetation. There can be no vege-
tation without light from the sun, 620.
From the influx of the heavenly sphere in-
to the natural world, exist the wonderful
progressions of vegetation, from seed to
fruit, and to new seed, 308. The distinc-
tions hetween the processes of vegetation
and those of human prolification, 585.
See Sphere.

Veils, The, of the Tabernacle sig-
nified the ultimates of the Word, 220.

Venus, 17, i59-

Verse. Every verse of the Word com-
municates with some society of heaven,
272, 255.

Vertumni, 77.

Vespasian, 23.

Victory. After victory in temptations
God takes away grief, 126.

View. See Vision.

Vine, The, signifies the spiritual good
and truth of the church, 200; it signifies
truth from good of love, 205. The fruit
of the vine (Matt. xxvi. 29) signifies the
truth of the New Church and heaven, 708.

Virgins signify affections for truth, 205;
also the church, 748. They who merely
understand and talk _ about truths and
goods are like the foolish virgins who had
lamps but no oil (Matt. xxv. 1-12; while
they who not only understand and talk
about them but also will and do them, are
the wise virgins who were admitted to the
wedding, 719.

Virtue. The Divine Virtue and Opera-
tion Eire meant hy the Holy Spirit, 142,
146. Virtues which the Lord operates in
those who believe in Him, and who ac-
commodate and dispose themselves for
His reception and abode, 142. Moral
virtues, 443, 745* See Power.

Viscera, 154. See Series , Society.

Visible, View. It pleased Jehovah
God to descend and assume the Human,
and thus exhibit Himself to view, and to
evince that God is not a thing of reason-
ing, but the Itself, 159. Jehovah God
by His Human sent Himself into the
world, and made Himself visible to the
eyes of men and thus accessible, 188, 150,
538, 647, 786. The New Church will
worship one visible God, in whom is the
invisible, like the soul in the'hody, 787.

Vision. Wherein consisted the state
called in the Word, Vision of God, 157.


1172


INDEX


Preposterous vision, 839. They who are
in posterior vision, and not in prior sight,
334 -

VrvtriCATiON is operated by the Lord
in those who believe in Him, and wbo dis-
pose themselves for His reception, 142.

Vowel. A vowel, which serves for
tone, signifies something of affection or
love, iq. In the third heaven the angels
cannot utter the vowels i and e, but in-
stead of them y and cu; the vowels a, o,
and u are in use 'with them, because they
have a full sound, 278.

Wakefulness. In the Word, spiritual
life is compared to wakefulness, 606. See
Sleep.

Wars, The, of Jehovah mean the com-
bats of the Lord with the hells, and His
victories over them, when He should come
into the world, 265. Wars of Jehovah
was the name of one book of the ancient
Word, 279.

Washing, Spiritual, is purification
from evils and falsities, thus regeneration,
670. Among the children of Israel natu-
ral washings signified this purification,
670-672.

Water signifies truth in the natural
man, 144, 572. By living water, is sig-
nified the truth of the Word, 190. Waters
in the spiritual world are correspond-
ences, 567.

Way. By the way of the tree of life is
signified entrance to the Lord, which
men have through the truths of the spiri-
tual sense, 260. Ways in the spiritual
world, 622. A paved way in the north,
through which all pass who depart from
the natural world, 160.

Wedding in the Word signifies the mar-
riage of the Lord with heaven and the
church, by good of love and truth of
faith, 199. The wedding garment (Matt,
xxii. 1 1- 1 3) is faith in the Lord as the
Son of God, the God of heaven and earth,
and one with the Father, 380. Weddings
in heaven, 746-748. See Marriage.

Well, To Do. Good works are to do
well from willing well, 374.

West. In the spiritual world in the
west dwell those who are in evil, 476.

Wheat (Matt. xiii. 24-30) means the
truths and goods of the church, 784.

Whoredom signifies falsification of the
understanding of the Word, of its genuine
truth, 247.

Wicked. The wicked obstruct the
way and shut the door, that God may not
enter the lower regions of their mind, 366.

Widows mean those who are without
truths and still desire them, 427.

Wife, in the spiritual sense, signifies
the truth of faith, 377. The wife of the
Lamh is the New Church and not the
former, 307. A chaste wife signifies con-
junction of good and truth, 277.


Will. Will, viewed in itself, is noth-
ing but the affection of some love, 570.
Will or endeavor is act, because a contin-
ual effort to act, which becomes act in
externals when the conclusion is reached,
387. Intentions of the will are to he ex-
amined because the love has its seat in the
will, 533. Man’s will is twofold, interior
and exterior, or*of the internal and the
external man, 493. Whatever proceeds
from the love of the internal will is man’s
enjoyment; and because the same is the
esse of his life it is also his self -life, 493.
The will of the internal natural man in-
clines to evils; and the thought from it
inclines to falsities, 593. Thought is not
imputed to any one, hut will, 658, 659.
The will is the esse or essence of man’s
life; the understanding is the exislere or
existence; and as an essence is nothing
unless in some form, so the will is nothing
unless in the understanding, 658. In the
spiritual world no one can do any thin g
contrary to his own will, 56. How the
bodily will is formed by man, 593. The
Lord’s will is the exercise of charity ac-
cording to truths of faith, 725.

Will and Understanding. The will
with man is the very esse of his life, but
the understanding is the, existere of life,
397. The will and the understanding
are the two essentials by which human
minds subsist, 37. When the will and
understanding are one they are called
the mind, 397. The will is the receptaele
and habitation of love, and the under-
standing of wisdom, 37, 263, 712, 778;
the will is the receptacle of Divine good
and the understanding of Divine truth,
224. 362, 397, 658, 712, 778. In the cere-
bellum dwells the love of the will, and in
the cerebrum the thought of the under-
standing, 160. The will is the very house
in which man dwells, and the understand-
ing is the hall through which he goes and
comes, 533. All things in man refer to
the understanding and the will, 224 397.
The will and ' the understanding make
man’s spirit; for in them reside his wis-
dom and intelligence, also his love and
charity, and in general his life, 397. The
understanding is where the germination
of the intelligence and wisdom, and the
will is where their fructification takes
place, 32. The will forms itself in the
understanding and so goes forth to the
light, 658. The will moves the under-
standing to think, 570. It is the part of
the understanding to think, and of the
will to do, 151, 273. The will is the man
himself, and it disposes the understanding
at its pleasure, 255, 658. Tbe understand-
ing merely teaches and shows what is to
be done from the will, 273, 347, 658, 660.
The will searches the understanding for
the means of arriving at its ends which
are effects, and in the understanding it


INDEX


1173


places itself in the light, 374. The will
and the understanding make one when
the man forms his understanding from
genuine truths, which is done to appear-
ance as hy himself, and when his will is
filled with the good of love, which is done
by the Lord, 249. . There is no solitary
will, and therefore it does not produce any
thing; nor is there solitary understanding,
nor does it produce any thing; but all pro-
duction is effected by both, and by the
understanding from the will, 377. If the
will and understanding become separated,
the understanding becomes nothing, and
presently the will, 367. The will of man
is his selfhood, and this from nativity is
evil, and hence is falsity in the under-
standing, 273, 593, 612, 658, 659- Since
man’s will is itself evil from birth, and as
the understanding teaches what good and
evil are, it follows that he must be re-
formed by the understanding, 587. If
the will were not held in check by the
understanding, man left to the freedom
of his will would rush into abominations,
588. Unless the understanding could
have been perfected separately, and the
will hy means of it, man would not he
man hut heast, 588. In the state of refor-
mation the understanding acts the first
part and the will the second; in the state
of regeneration the will acts the first and
the understanding the second, 105. The
regenerate man has a new will and under-
standing, 302, 601-606, 650. Man is such
as his will is, and not such as his under-
standing is, for the will easily carries the
understanding to its side and enslaves it,
659. The understanding in every man is
capable of elevation according to knowl-
edges, hut not the will except by life ac-
cording to the truths of the church and
reason, 507. Freedom resides in man’s
will and understanding, 497*. Whatever
man does from freedom of will according
to the reason of the understanding, is per-
manent, 461. Properties of the will and
understanding, 658. The will without
understanding is like the eye without
sight; and the two without action are like
mind without body, 387.

Wine signifies Divine truth, 706, 708-

Wisdom. See Love and Wisdom : Divine
Love and Divine Wisdom. . Wisdom con-
sists of nothing but truths; it is the aggre-
gate of all truths, 38. It is genuine wis-
dom for man to see from the light of heaven
that what he knows, understands, and is
wise in, is as little compared with wbat
he does not know and understand and is
not wise in, as a drop to the ocean, 387.
Man is in wisdom concerning good and
truth, from the Divine omniscience, so
far as he lives according to Divine order,
69. Man cannot be interiorly in truth of
wisdom unless from God, because God
has omniscience, that is, infinite wisdom,


1 69. As far as the human mind is raised
to the higher degrees, so far it is raised
into wisdom, because so far into the light
of heaven, 69, 565. Spiritual wisdom is
wisdom of wisdom, thus inexpressible hy
a wise man in the natural world, 280.
The wisdom of the beavenly angels sur-
passes that of tbe spiritual angels as the
wisdom of the spiritual angels surpasses
the wisdom of men, 242, 280. Wisdom
increases with the angels to eternity; and
the wiser they become, the more clearly'
they see that wisdom is without end, 290.
The Word of the Lord is a great deep
of truths, from which is all angelic wis-
dom, 350. Wisdom is from no. other
source than Divine truths, . distributed
into forms, by means of the light flowing
from the Lord, 350. Unless the thought
is raised ahove sensual things, man has
little wisdom, 565. In every man of sound
mind there is a faculty of receiving wis-
dom from the Lord, that is, of multiply-
ing truths to eternity, 718; there is this
perpetual multiplication of truth and
thence of wisdom, with the angels, and
also with men who are becoming angels,
718. Man as first created was imbued
with wisdom and its love, not for the sake
of himself, but for the sake of its com-
munication with others, 746. The seat
of wisdom is use, 746. Where the good of
love is, there wisdom dwells; but where
there are truths, there no more of wisdom
dwells than there is of the good of love,
242.

Wise Men. They who knew the corre-
spondences of the Ancient Word, were
called wise and intelligent, and alter-
wards diviners and Magi, 279, 203, 205.
From what the wise men of ancient times
inferred four ages of the world, 762.
Sophi in the spiritual world, 692. Sophi
of ancient times in a society in heaven,

695-

Wolfius, 90, 335, 696.

Wolves. Diabolical love causes its
lusts to appear in the distance in hell like
wild beasts, some like wolves, 45.

Wonderful Things, 209-237, 241,
380, 381, 535, 567, 767* „ .

Word. See Sacred' Scripture. The
Word is the Divine Truth itself, 85, 189-
192; for it was dictated by Jehovab Him-
self, 85, 190. In it are Divine Wisdom
and Life, 19 1. It is the crown of revela-
tions, 11. Because it passed through the
heavens, into the world, it hecame ac-
commodated to angels in heaven and to
men in the world, 85, 193, 195* God spake
in the Word according to appearances,
135. The Word could not be written but
by representatives, which are such things
in the world as correspond to heavenly
things and hence signify them, 275.
There is infinity in every part of the Word;
it contains innumerable things, which not


U74


INDEX


even angels can exhaust, 290, 350. There
is in the Word a spiritual sense in which
Divine truth is in light, and a natural
sense in which Divine truth is in shade,
85. In the Word there is a spiritual sense,
hitherto unknown, 193. The spiritual
sense is not that which shines forth from
the letter of the Word when one is study-
ing and explaining the Word to confirm
some dogma; this sense may be called the
literal and ecclesiastical sense; but if the
spiritual sense does not appear in the
letter it is inwardly in it, as the soul in the
body, 194. The Word hy the spiritual
sense communicates with the heavens,
194, 272. The spiritual sense is in every
thing in the Word, 196. By correspond-
ences the natural sense of the Word is
turned into the spiritual in heaven, 698.
The Word is written by correspondences,
194, 201. It is from the spiritual sense
that the Word is divinely inspired, and
holy in every word, 200, 846. The style of
the Word is such that holiness is in every
sentence, and word, yes, in some places
in the letters, rgi, 241. The Word con-
joins man with the Lord and opens
heaven, 19 1. The Word in its ultimate
sense is natural, in its interior sense spiri-
tual, and in its inmost sense celestial, and
in each one of these it is Divine, 195, 216,
289, 777. The letter of the Word is the
basis, container, and support of its spiri-
tual and celestial sense, 210, 212. The
Word without the sense of its letter would
be like a palace without foundation, that
Would vanish away, 213. By the letter
of the Word there is conjunction with the
Lord, and consociation with the angels,
234-239, 267, 268, 272, 846. The Word
in the letter mentions such things as are
the externals, yes, the most external
things of worship, and spiritual things
which are internal are meant hy them, 427.
Without doctrine the Word is not under-
stood, 226-228. Doctrine is to be drawn
from the letter of the Word, and he con-
firmed by it, 229. The Word is in all the
heavens, and angelic wisdom is from it,
240, 241. The Word in heaven is written
in spiritual style, wholly different from
natural; as to the literal sense it is similar
to our Word, while it corresponds to it;
and thus they are one, 241, .242. __ The
Word which is in our world is similar to
the Word in heaven in this, that the simple
understand it simply, and the wise, wisely;
but this comes in another way, 241. A
copy of the Word written by angels in-
spired by the Lord, is kept with every
larger society in its repository, 241. In
the spiritual world die Word, in the
shrines of the temples, shines hefore the
angels like a star, and sometimes like the
sun; also from the bright radiance round
it, there appear as it were most beautiful
rainbows, 209. If, in the spiritual world,


any one who is in falsities looks at the
Word as it lies in the holy place, darkness
spreads before his eyes, and the Word
appears to him black, and sometimes as if
covered with soot, 209. The church is
from the Word, and it is such with man as
his understanding of the Word is, 243,
245. The man who does not read the
Word under the Lord’s auspices, but
under the auspices of his own intelli-
gence, believes himself to be a lynx, and
to have more eyes than Argus, when yet
he inwardly sees no truth whatever, but
only what is false, 165. A man can vio-
late the spiritual sense of the Word, if be
has knowledge of correspondences, and
wishes hy it to investigate the spiritual
sense from his own intelligence, 208.
Truths of faith and goods of charity are
the universals of the Word, 244. In
every thing in the Word there is the mar-
riage of the Lord and the church, and
hence of good and truth; why, 248, 253,,
There is everywhere in the Word con-
junction of charity and faith, 372. All
truths which conduce to salvation are
in the Word, 347. The Word is the cove-
nant which the Lord made with man and
man with the Lord; for the Lord de-
scended as the Word, that is as Divine
Truth, 730. The Word is the only me-
dium by which man draws near to the
Lord, and into which the Lord enters,
142. In the Word alone is spirit and life,
239. Without free will in spiritual things,
the Word would be of no use, 483. Many
things in the letter of the Word are ap-
pearances of truth, in which genuine
truths lie concealed, 257. The sense of
the letter is a guard for the genuine truths
which are concealed, that they may not
be injured, 260. The Lord in the world,
fulfilled all things of the Word, and there-
by became the Word, that is, the Divine
truth in ultimates, 261-263. By means
of the Word those have light who are out
of the church, and have not the Word,
267, 270. It is enough that there be a
church, where the Word is, though it con-
sist of few, 267; still by the Word the Lord
is present in the whole world, for by it
heaven is conjoined with the human race,
267. When the Word with the Jewish
nation was wholly falsified, and made of
no effect, then it pleased the Lord to de-
scend from heaven, and to come as the
Word, and fulfil it, and thereby restore it,
and again to give light to the inhabitants
of earth, 270. Lest the genuine under-
standing of the Word should perish, and
thus the church, it has pleased the Lord
now to reveal the spiritual sense of the
Word, 271. Now it is lawful to enter into
the mysteries of the Word which have
been heretofore shut up; for its truths are
mirrors of the Lord, 508. If there were
not a Word, no one would have knowl-


INDEX


1175


edge of God, heaven and bell, the life those who are in intelligence; and in the
after death, and still less of the Lord, 273- West, those who are in evil, 476. All who
*75* Wonderful things concerning the are in that great space are, as to tbeir in-
Word from its spiritual sense, 209. In- tenors, conjoined with angels of heaven or
expressible power of the Word, 224. devils of hell, 477. Every man after death
There are m the Word two expressions comes, into the world of spirits, anH then
which appear like repetitions, and yet is like himself, such as he was belore; and
are not one thing, but they become one at his entrance he cannot be restrained
thing by conjunction; there are also words, from conversing with deceased parents,
which, because they partake of both good brothers, relatives, and friends, 120. Since
and truth, are used by themselves, others the last judgment took place in the year
not being joined with them, 250. It is 1757, the state of all, and therefore of
not allowable to argue with those who Catholics is so changed that they are not
have confirmed themselves in the opinion allowed to band together as formerly and
that without the Word man would be able care is taken that they shall not form arti-
to know the existence of God, from the ficial heavens as formerly, 818, 819.
Word, but from natural light of reason, Worm. Procreation of worms, 470.
273- Wonderful things about the silk-worm,

Words. The Lord's words (John xv. 12, 335, 687, 785.

7) are truths, 349. In the Word every Worship by sacrifices was known be-
word is a container and support for spiri- fore the Word was given to Israel through
tual things, 220. t Moses and the prophets, 264. Worship

Work. Every Divine work is com- before the Coming of the Lord consisted
plete in the ultimate, 210. In every work in types which represented true worship,
from man there is the whole man such as 109, 188, 201, 670, 674. Jehovah God
he is at to the mind, or essentially, 373. made Himself visible and thus accessible
Works are essentially of will, formally of in human form to the ancients, hut then
understanding, and actually of body, through an angel; this form was repre-
374. Man ought to introduce himself sentative of the Lord who was to come,
mto charity by good works, 71. Good 188. The representative rites of the
works are to do well, from willing well, church, in course of time began to be
374, 421. Charity and works are distinct turned into what was idolatrous, 204, 275.
like will and action, 374. Merely natural The two sacraments of Baptism and the
works, 726. The works of the law do not Holy Supper, viewed in the spiritual sense,
mean the works of the law of the Deca- are the holiest things of worship, 667.
logue, but the works of the Mosaic law The worship of saints is such an abomi-
for the Jews, 338, 506. See Charity , nation in heaven that when it is merely
Good Works , Merit. beard of it exdtes horror, 824. 'Worship

Work, To. God is continually work- of God in the heavens, 750. If a doctrine
mg for the conjunction of love and wis- were put forth solely from rational light,
dom in man; but man, unless be looks to would it not be that one’s self should be
God and believes in Him, continually worshipped? There can be no other
works for their division, 41. See Operate, worship from what is proper to man, not
Workman. A workman, if he does his even tbe worship of the sun and moon,
work honestly, is in the exercise of char- 275. The worship of the Catholics in the
ity, 422. spiritual world, 820, 823, 824.

World of spirits, The, is between Wrath. Why it is said in the Apoca-
beaven and hell, 160, 281, 47 5, 570, 622. lypse. The wrath of the Lamb, 641.

All societies in the world of spirits, which Writing in heaven, 241, 278, 280.

are innumerable, are arranged according Writings in the spiritual world, 794.

to natural affections, good and evil. The

societies arranged according to natural Xenophon, 692.

good affections communicate with heaven,

and the societies arranged according to Y. In the third heaven the angels can
evil affections communicate with hell, 281. not utter i, but instead of it y, 278.
Different states through which the novi- Year. Every year begins with spring,
tiate spirits pass, belore going to heaven 762. The last judgment took place in the
or hell, 281. To those who are there, the spiritual world in the year 1757; 772, 796,
world of spirits appears as a great orb, 818, 841. In the year 1770 the twelve
475; into this space, from hell exhales disciples were sent by the Lord into the
evil in abundance; and from heaven, on spiritual world to preach the Gospel, 791,
the other hand, good flows in abundance, 4, 108.

475. Every man, from infancy to old age, Youth. See Adolescence.
is changing his situation in the world of

spirits, 476. In the East dwell those who Zeal, viewed in itself is violent heating
are in good from the Lord; in the North of tbe natural man;_ if there is within it
those who are in ignorance; in the South, the love of truth, it is like the sacred fire


INDEX


1 176


which flowed into the apostles; but if love
of falsity lies concealed, it is like fire im-
risoned in wood, which hursts forth and
urns the house, 146. They who have
genuine charity have zeal for what is good;
zeal in the external man may seem like
flaming fire, hut its flame is extinguished
and it is quieted as soon as the adversary
returns to reason, 408. With those who
have no charity, zeal is anger and hatred;
for from these their internal is heated and
set on fire, 408. Disposition is from affec-
tion of love in the will; the enjoyment 1


coming from this love disposes; if this is
from the love of evil and hence of falsity,
it excites a zeal which outwardly is stern,
and flaming; and inwardly it is anger,
and unmertifulness: hut if it he of good
and hence of truth, it is outwardly mild,
and flashing; and inwardly it is charity,
and mercy, 155. Zeal is excited in enthu-
siasts, and in those who are in extreme
falsities of doctrine, 146.

Zion signifies the church, 467.

Zones in the spiritual world, 185,


INDEX


OF

SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


Heavier type indicates that the passage is quoted.


GENESIS.

XXV.

16-22

260, 284 , 323


xxvi.

1

284

i.

10, 12, 18-31

490


1, 31, 36

220


26, 27

20, 34 , 48 , 364


31

260

u.

2,3

46


33

284


28-30

46


1,4

670


7

48 , 470 , 697

xxix.

12, 16, 20,21

706

in.

5

48 , 380 , 470 , 498

xxxi.

3


23,24

260


18

284 , 323


22

48

xxxii.

12, 14

220

iv.

14-17

466


15, 16

284, 323

V.

1

48

xxxiii.

5

689


21-24

202


1S-23

691

ix.

14, 15

687


20

107 , 124 , 135, 370 ,

xi.

1-9

121,754


787


2,4

276


20-23

28

xiii.

10

635

xxxiv.

13

264

xiv.

18-20

264, 715


15

314

XV;

16

755


28

286,325

xvii.

10, 11

675


29-35

284

xviii.

21

755

XXXV.

5, 21, 29

495

xxi.

9

451

xxxvi.

8

260

xxviii.

12, 13

24

xl.

20, 38

284 , 323, 707

xxix. .

14

727


30, 31

670

xxxvii.

27

727


xli.

8

156


LEVITICUS.

xlviii.

5, 14

2 47 „


xlix.

11

706, 708

i.

5, 11, 15

706


ii.

1-11

707


iii.

11, 16

707


EXODUS. ‘

iv.

6 , 7, 17, 18,25

706


vii.

1 , 7 , 11

288

iii.

14, 15

19


27

506

xii.

7, 13, 22

706

viii.

6

670

six.

10-23

284

X.

6

223

XX.

2-14

284

xi.

32

670


3

9,291


46

28S, 506


8-10

301

xii.

1-3

675


12

305


7

288, 506


13

3 i 3 , 3 i 7 , 321 , 325

xHi.

59

288,506

xxi.

6

106

xiv.

8,9,

670

xxiii.

21

299

xvi.

2-14

284

rriv.

3-10

706,285


4,24

670


7,8

730


12

706, 323


1178


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


xvii.

6

706


JOSHUA.


11,14

697


15, 16,

670

iii.

1-17

284

xix.

23

468 , 675


2

285

XX.

6

314


5-20

284

xxi.

6,8, 17, 21

707

vi.

1-20

284

xxii.

4, 6,7

707

X.

12

265,279

xxiv.

5

707


JUDGES.


NUMBERS.


17

223


xvi.

ii.

1

284


29

627

vi.

1-21

223, 288, 506


vii.

89

260, 284


1

SAMUEL.

ix.

15, 16

284


X.

35,36

284, 382

iii.

1-8

211

xiv.

18

226,284


5

630


21

780

V.

11,12

691

xvii.

19

323

vi.

203, 284

xix.

2,14

288, 506


3-5

595

xxi.

14, 15

265

XV.

29

226


27-30

265,279

XX.

5, 12-42

211

xxii.

13, 18

264


xxiii.

40

3,5,8, 16, 26

264

264


2

SAMUEL.

xxiv.

XXV.

xxviii.

1,2,14,29,30
7, 18

19

1,13

3, 15

17

1-3

2

264

265

226

264

265

264

264

707

V.

vi.

xix.

xxiii.

17, 18

1

1-19

7

6,7

12, 13
3,4

265 , 279

727

284

284

691

727

109 , 764


DEUTERONOMY.


1

KINGS.

i.

34

284

vi.

7, 29, 30

221

iv.

11

284


19

284

13

286,325


29,32,35 260

V.

6-18

284

vii.

23-29

670


19-23

284, 291


48

707


12-14

301

viii.

3-4)

284


16

305


19-21

285


18

325

xvii.

21

211

vi;

4,5

6 , 81 , 369, 697

xviii.

34

211

vii.

5

264

XX.

35-38

130

viii.

3

707 , 700

286, 325


4


2

KINGS.

ix.

9

285


x :.

16,

675

ii.

23,24

223

xii.

3

264

iv.

38-43

148


5, 11-13, 18

298

xvi.

xvii.

2, 6, 11, 15, 16
15-19

298

288, 506


JOB.

xviii.

xxi.

15-19

32

132, 134

i.

6

729

xxiii.

xxiv.

xxvi.

10-16

16

16

569

226 , 521

697

ii.

ix.

xii.

30,31

7-9

729

671

308

XXX.

6

675

xxvi.

S, 9

776

xxxi.

9-26

288, 506


xxxii.

7,8

264


PSALMS.


14

706


xxxiii.

13-17

247

i.

1,3

468


26

776

ii.

6 , 7, 12

IOI


28

190


7, 12

30, 342, 384

xxxiv.

9

156

v.

6

322


INDEX OE SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


1179


xriii.

10, 11, 13

260, 776

cxxrvii.

5-7

782


35

136

rxrTiT-

8

62


43

251

cxlviii.

1-12

308

dx.

1

780


9

468


14, 15

83, 188, 294, 637


xxii.

9

583


xdv.

8, 10

116


ISAIAH.

Triri-

5

83


xxxii.

2

156, 278

i.

4

93, 251

-ranii.

6

87,224


4, 15-18

329, 459


10

251


16-18

329,435,483, 536,

XXXV.

19

262,288


671

XXXVI.

6

5i


27

5i,95

xxxvii.

6

5i

ii.

19

124

xli.

13

93

iii.

9

782

xliv.

14

251

iv.

2,3

782


22

310


4

671

xlv.

3-7

86, 116


5

213, 776

xlvi.

9-16

5

748

764

V.

1,2

16

354, 708

51

xlvii.

3, 8,9

251


19

93

1L

9

7

495

671

vi.

30

3

761

780


8

252

vii.

14

82


10-12

143, 573, 773

viii.

22

761


11

158

ix.

1-3

251, 270


17

156


6

95, 98, 1 13 116,

lit

8

468


294, 307, 7»

liv.

6

495


6,7

51, 82, ioi, 188,

lv.

18

303


303, 625

lix.

5

93


14,15

628 *

lx.

7

247

X.

5,6

251

lxvii.

3-5

251


20

93

Ixviii.

3

252


22,23

755


4

776

d.

1,2, 4, 5

18?, 789


8

93


1,2


34

776


1-10

354

bed.

6

583


10

251

Irrii.

2

51

xii.

3

190


13-16

706


6

93

lxxviii.

8

156

xiii.

9-11

198


9

247


9, 13

689


41

93

dv.

2, 6,7

251

lxxx.

1

260


12

276


17

136 no


29

487

lxxxii.

6

262,288

xvii.

7

93

lxxxv.

8, 10

303

xyiii.

2,7

251

lxxxix.

14

51

TIT.

1

776


30

262,288


23-25

200

xc-

4

30

XX.

2,3

130

xdx.

1

260


3

211

di.

18

573, 773

xd.

10, 17

93

dv.

16

468


11,12

764


28

573, 773


5 11,12

689

cvi.

4,5

251

xxii.

13

252

cviii.

8

247

xdv.

23

782

ex.

1,2

101, 102, 136

XXV.

3,7

251


3

764


6

7°8


4

262, 264, 715


9

82, 188, 294, 625,

cd.

9

730


637

cdv.

7

583

xxvi.

8, 13

298

cxix.

7, 164

5i


9

143, 144

cxx.

2,3

322

1

18

583

cxxx<

5-8

764

xxvii.

6,7

310


7,8

83

xxviii.

7,8

132, 683

cxjjdu

2

116


15

322


7,8

284,865


22

755


I i8o


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


xxix.

19

93

XXX.

9

322


11, 12

93


26

109 , 641

xxxii.

17, 18

303

xxxiiL

6

5 i


11

156


20

702, 789

xxxiv.

1


11 , 13-15

575

XXXV.

10

252

xxxvii.

32

782

xl.

3

81


3 , 5 , 10, 11

188,294, 625,637


3,5

82, 780


9-11

88

Xli;

20

573 , 773

xlii.

1

188


5

773


6-8

82


6,8

251 , 285 , 730


13

116


14, 15

93

xliii.

3

93


1,7

573,773


9

25 i


11

83, 188, 294


14

83, 93, 294

xliv.

2

583


6

6, 13, 19, 102, 188,


261 , 294, 625, 782


24

13, 2 1, 83, 188,
294


26

782

xlv.

11

93


14, 15

6, 188, 294


14, 21

21


21,22

6,83, 188, 294

xlvi.

3

583

xlvii.

4

83, 93, 188, 294,
637

780

xlviii.

11


12

102


13

136


17

83, 93, 188, 294,
637

83 , 93, 188,294

xlix.

7


22

251


26

83, 188, 294, 625

1 .

1

306

li.

3

252, 467


11

252

Ui.

1 , 2 , 6,9

782


7

303

liii.

4-11

130


12

104

liv.

5

83, 93 , 1 13, 188,
294, 625


8

83, 188, 294

Iv.

1

708 '


4

251

Ivii.

3

314


15

156

Ivin.

8

780


11

467

lix.

5

487


16 , 17, 20

116


19-21

139 , 188


lx.

1

780


16

83, 188, 294

lxi.

1

2

139, 1S8

lxii.

1^4, 11, 12

7I2, 789


8

136

briii.

1-9

95, 1 16


9

92

lxv.

10,11

16

158

83, 1 13, 188. 294,
299, 307, 583, 637
107, 781, 782

17-19


18

21,23

573,773

lxvi.

7-10

252,583


16, 18

780.782


JEREMIAH.

ii.

i3

190


22

671

iii.

6,8

314

iv.

17

782, 789

1

51


4

675


14

671, 675


27

31

I?o s

V.

1,7

314,782

vi.

6,7

782

vii.

22

251

2-4, 9-11
17,18

III ’ 536

viii.

34

252

6-8

782

lx.

10

322

5,6

322


10, 11-15

782

XI;

24

5i

16

468

xii.

3

310

xiii.

9, 10, 14

782


27

314

xiv.

16

782

xvi.

9

93,252

xvii.

8

468


11

527


13

190

xxii;

3, 13, 15

51

xxiii.

5, 6

14

51, 82, os, 177,
r 37, 188, 294, 625


314, 782


14,32

322


23,24

30

XXV.

10

252


14

440,643

xxix.

23

314

XXXI.

9

190, 247


20

247


33,34

354, 789

xxxii.

19

376,483,643

xxxiii.

10,11

252

xlvi.

15

51, 82, 95, 137, 18$
294, 625

5, 10

116

xlviii,

45,46

265


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


uSi


1.

u.


34

39

5


83, 1 88, 294, 637

45

93


vu.

viii.


zu.

xiii.

xvi.

xvii.
xviii.

xx.

xxi.
xxiii.
xxvili.


xxxu.

xxriv.

xxx vi.

xxxvii.
xxx viii.
xxxix.
xli.


89,

21


LAMENTATIONS.

782
252


EZEKIEL.


1

12, 14
1-17
6, 7, 10
3
1
1

1.24
19

3-7, 11
3

15, 22, 23
24

31

32
7

2,3
12-16
12, 13
13-15
2, 3,9
15, 16
3,8, 9, 18
7-9
11,12

23.24
15

26, 27
1-14

14, 16, 18, 19

17,21

18-20


157,260

157

130, 782

764

157

260

260

157,851
143, 705
130
156

314

468

143, 156, 601

lh

314

260

219

773

689

583

467

198

689

171,844

251

143, 601, 705
534, 594
689
706
260


DANIEL.


i.

31-35

43,44

iv.

13

25,26

V.

12

vii.

1,2, 7, 13
7,23

9

13,14

14

viii.

2

14,26

ix.

25,27

27

xii-

3


609

625, 788
93

157.851
761
223

113, 416, 625, 788,

791. 851
251,262,288
157, 537
764

782

135, 179. 378, 755
761, 782
606
788


HOSEA.


2-9

2

2.5

19

1-3

9

10
3

4.5


130

247

306,583

5i

130,247
376, 643
314

3ig, 247
247


vi.

4

247


10

247, 314

vii.

1

318,322

X.

3

247

xi.

8

247

xii.

1

247

xiii.

4

6, 2L 83


13

Do/

583


JOEL.

i.

16

252

ii.

1, 2, 11

82,689


•2

198


9

318


17

251

iii.

2,4

82, 6S9


15

19S, 620


17-20

782, 789


AMOS.

V.

13,18,20 82,689


18,20

761


24

5i

vi.

12

51

viii.

11

707

ix.

2

62


17

9

2


11

1,2

4

5
12
9


OB AD I AH.

318

JONAH.

211

226

226

MICAH.

156

782

304

298

322

51

NAHUM.

322

314


188, 294,


1 1 82


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


HABAKKUK.


iii.

3

93


ZEPHANIAH.

i.

10-15

82, 689


18

755

ii.

9

93,251

iii.

5

764


14-17, 20

782


ZECHARIAH.

u

1,8

157,851


6

376, 439, 483, 643

ii.

1

357 •


10,11

82

iii.

1

157

vi.

.1,2

157

vii.

12

527

viii.

1

190


3,20-23

782


19

252


22

251

LX.

11

285, 706, 730


13

247

X.

7

247

xi.

4,5

310

xii.

1

143


3,6, 10

782

xiv.

14, 26

82


7-9

789


8, 11, 12, 21

782


9

6, 188, 625


MALACHI.

i.

11-13

298

iii.

iii.

1,2

4

92,285,688

782

iv.

5,6

688


MATTHEW.

L

20,25

82, 140, 188


22,23

82, 682

ii.

1,2, 9-11

205

iii.

2

113


6

677


7

689


10

400, 468, 934


11

144, 684, 690


8,12

483


15

95


•16, 17

164, 188, 342

iv.

3,6

342


4

16

239

270


17

528


17,23

113

V.

3

156, 226


10

96


11,12

17, 18

440

162, 262, 278, 581


V.

20

96


21,22

309


27,38

313,326


43-45

409


45

43, 364, 491

vi.

1

440


2,5

452


9

299,306


9, 10

112, 113


19,20

318


22

403


24

383, 536


33

416

vii.

1,2

226


7,8

226


7

459


12

411,444


15,16

381, 59°

435,4 68


16-18


19-21

376


19,20

722


22,23

518, 567,68i


24-26

347, 375

viii.

11

724


26

123


29

342

ix.

15

252,307, 783


17

784


35

113

X.

12-14

303


22

682


39

532


40

92


41

440

xi.

27

in, 1 13, 135, 370

301

xii.

1-14


31

138, 299


33

468, 483


34,35

653


39

314

xiii.

46-49

102, 306

3,4

375,527


9,23

376


14, 15

7 , 232


23

347, 376, 483


24,30,39,40

784


25-31

532


30, 40, 41

38, 653


31,32

290, 499


33

211


38

606,729


40

755


49

96, 755


57

129

xiv.

23

104


33

342

XV.

2,11

671


18, 19

675

xvi.

4

314


13, 16, 18

342


24

92


16, 18

224,379


27

113, 376, 440, 483,
643

xvii.

1^5

85, 222, 261, 342,
776


11

142


in3ex of scripture passages


13, 15, 25
25, 26

25-28

37,38

3

9,10

11

12, 14, 15
15

15, 21, 29

21,22

28

29-31

30

31

37,39, 44,46

1

1-13


28

29

34

39-44
54-56
63, 64
40, 43, 54
43

46, 47
1
3
16
18


298, 682
400, 539

226 i.

729

462, 708

709

129

106, 676
226

483, 572

358, 3S0, 686

287, 369, 357, 483, ii.

722

102 iii.

226, 459, 583
306 iv.

452

215,326,435,517, vi.

671

673

782 vii.

121, 755, 757, 764
682 viii.

179 ix.

378 , 634

755, 758, 761, 782
384,761,788 x.
179, 182, 598, 758,

772 xi.

634

176, 198, 271, 764 xii.
182, 625, 776, 780


199, 527 , 687 , 719 , xiv.

723

676

413 , 462,483

379

527

643 xv.

440, 536, 729
703, 704, 706, 707,

716, 730 xvi.

285 , 730

708

211

211

262

136, 342, 776

342

342

104 i.

170 , 2 11
686
113

98, 104 , iii, 1 13,

133 , 137 , 354 , 379 ,

389, 459, 60S, 615,

637 , 781 , 796 , 798 , ii.
820

164, 668, 677
139, 188, 755, 761


1

4

7

8

8,9
10, H
14,15
15
35 .

19,20

23-28

11

31-5

3, 16, 31, 32
38,39
2
4
12

1-4, 14, 15


41,67

76

10

19, 21
22
25

30-32

40,52

42,46,47


04.0

528, 690

825

144

668, 677, 684
144, 164, 342

113,528

58i

104

252, 307, 783, 784
301
342
102

290,499

123

301

129

578, 581
671

3 4 1 S |' 517
S5, 113, 261
342. 776
113
709
113
113
527
81, 697
102
146

121, 182, 764

190

262

703, 704, 707, 716

706, 730

708

104,704

342, 776

262

104

342

764

170

113, 573, 687

685

136


252

113

188, 342

82 , 92, 93, 98 , 112 ,
140, 158, 164
158

81, 688

113

221

288, 506
158

85, 251

89

89


1184


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


8, 9 106, 483, 528, 722 xxii.

16 144, 684, 689

15 29S

21, 22 144, 342, 681

16-21 139, 188, 262, 301 xxiii.

24 129 xxiv.

16-22, 32 89

43 113, 572

34, 35 252, 307, 7S3

16 104

1-6 301

6-12 301

20 226, 572

23 440

33-36 439

37 226

44,45 373,468

46-49 375, 483, 681

16 129 i.

22 113

27 688

8 572

20, 21 102, 306, 376, 483

28 342

11 572

29 85, 261

32 777

35 342, 776

60 113

5, 6 303

9, 11 113

18 116

25-28 287, 293, 722

27 297, 411,697

30, 37 378, 410

2 112, 113

34 147,403

44 452

40 182

3 S28

6-10 106

10-19 290, 301

26, 27 567, 723

33 129 ii.

1-7 301

7 528

13 437 iii.

17 262, 278, 288, 341,

581

19.20 215

26 455,475,651

31 500

32 505

34 761

8 384, 764

10 142

13-26 462, 483

20 527

41-44 782

41-44 102

1—3 459

20-22 782

27 121, 182, 764, 776

30, 31 113

17. 18. 20 706, 708 iv.

19 703, 704, 707, 709,

716


37

262

41

m

69

136

70

342

28-30

7S2

1-3

170

4

686

25-27

262

26

128, 262

31

777

37-39

109

39

170

44,45

262,288

47

528, 581

JOHN.

1,2

261,384

1,3

76, 85,87

1,3,4, 10, 14

59, 351

1-4

39, 190, 224, 354,

1,3,10

716, 474, 777

76, 87, 224, 761

1,4

38, 358

1,5,9

269

1, 4, 9, 14

780

1, 14

3, in, 112, 140,

9

261, 777, 786
85,354, 776

10

176

12

298, 682

12, 13

729

14,18

188, 342, 637

18

98, 107, 112, 135,

25

153, 188, 339, 683,
787

689, 690

27

825

32, 33

164

32, 34, 35

144,684

34,49

342

46

288,506

3,4

102

19,21

221

23

682

3,5,6

572, 577

5

144, 572

323

11

15, 16

159, 107, 337, 483,
608, 772

16, 18

137, 188, 342, 683

17, 18

226, 652, 772

18

i°7, 298, 337, 342,

19,21

384, 682

85

21

377

27

§, 162, 359, 439,

29

663

252, 307, 783

35

iii, 113, 153, 188,

36

379, 7i6

2. io 7, 337, 356,
384, 483, 722, 798
190

6, 10, 14

14

36

239

440,483


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


27

27, 32, etc.
28, 29
33,35
35, 37
40

46

47,48
48, 51, 58
51

53-58

56


48,49

5

12

13

15

19

24

31-36

36

44

56,58

4

5
5
31
41

1,10

1, 2-9, 11

I, 9

2,3,11

3-5

9

10

II, 17
15, 17
18
30


301
342
358
92, 342

21, 25, 39, 40, i
358, 461, 474
483,043,718
107,135, 153,3
270, 787
239, 707
703, 716
92, 107, 337

107.358

337. 358

2, 107, 337, 2
483, 722, 798
107, 339, 370
107, 337
707

494, 707
706

100, 113, 368, 3
372, 725, 787
153, 190, 199, 2
239, 358, 572, (
19a
342 „

92, 226

107, 190, 337, ;
140, 149, 153, 1
188
288

288, 506

107, 358, 474, '

323

652

92, 98, 107
104, 107, 337, ■
495
106

310, 322
109

42, 761

85

301

376, 483, 722

107, 322

318,370,457

538

380

300

682

370, 457

310.358
131
709
126

98, hi, 112, 1
379, 583, 716,
262, 288

99, 371,379
215

215

107, 337, 358, 4
483, 608, 637, •
729


24

27,28

28

31

32

34

35

35, 36, 46

36

44

45

46

47,48

49

17

IS

20

31.32

34,35

6


11,20

13, 14

15- 21

16- 19
18, 20, 28

19

20


215

762

128

112,(299
1 16
652

262, 288

776

85, 618, 761
107, 337
188

107, 113, 307, 370
107, 176, 354
226, 652,772
104

347.376. 483
262

98, 107
128

357,729

85, 1 07* 1 12, 140,
162, 188, 190, 323,
354, 358, 370, 474,

777

339, 379, 787, 795

538, 798
159,461
107

180,307,339 ^
hi, 188, 294, 307
98, 113,583

99, 130, 37i, 379,
716

153

153, 299

375

139

188

358

107, 146, 368, 370,
458, 787
231,371

32Q, 339, 359, 369,

376. 458. 483

139, 153, 188, 303

lS?, 354, 708
70

100, hi, 113, 347,
368, 371, 439, 459,
462, 787
188,524, 725

8, 354, 359, 459.

539, 663
120, 462, 584
38, 370, 653

m

357

483, 738
262, 288

139, 153, 188
139, 153, 188, 356
337, 384

116

139


1 1 86


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


10

9, 15, 20
12
21

21-23, 26

23
26
9

11

7

24

26,27

28-37

11-15

19-21

22

31


153 OD

139 , 188

98, 379 , 399 , 716
IS 4 , 357
3 .

1 1 6, 303

37 i

128

98, 104, hi, 113,
354 , 637

99, 188,371
104

262

99 , 112 o

43 , 370 , 787

107

298

202

704

342

262

102, 306 , 307

262

170

303

140, 146 , 153, 188
188 , 298, 337, 342,
358, 682

211

764


CORINTHIANS.


342

376, 506, 643
601

573, 687


GALATIANS.


288 , 338 , 506
338, 342
311

338 , 675
327

675 , 687


EPHESIANS.


23

20-22

9

4, 6, 12, 13


PHILIPPIANS.


COLOSSIANS.


ACTS.

ii.

9

101, 109,
188, 294,

i.

10,11

121, 764


655, 698, '


22

690


ii.

3,4

146


2 TIMOTHY.


38

528


iii.

19

528

ii.

17, 18

378

vi.

5

378

iii.

15

338

viii.

37

342


ix.

20

37

342

690


HEBREWS.

xvi.

xvii.
xviii.
tox .

XX.

xx vi.

30, 31
30

25

3-6

21

20

338

528

690

690

4, 107, 137 , 175,
338, 528

528

iv.

V.

vi.

vii.

14

6,8, 10

6

20

1, 10, 11, 15,
17,21

3

342

715

311,342

715

715

342


ROMANS.

X.

29

342


342

376, 643
506

376,506

338

506

288 , 388

687

372

330 , 444. 506


CORINTHIANS.


374

704

372

506, 722 , 796


1 JOHN.


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE PASSAGES


371

342, 368, 371, 379

458

338, 342
164

342

3. 85, 101, 109,
137,342, 354,
367, 560, 722, 720.
777, 798

109, 111, 204, 358,
560, 638, 655, 683


REVELATION.


5-7, 10-13
7

8,11

8.17
10

13-16

12. 13. 17
14

17
2

3

4,5

6

7

8

11, 17, 26
13, 16, 22
16

18

19

4

4,12
5, 12, 21
14

15, 16
15, 19
18

20


625

776

19, 102,261

13

157

85, 261

102

223, 641

225

302

682

528

378

48, 467, 606, 610
261
610
528
137
342
528

298, 682, 686


323, 573, 777
437, 651
528
137

100, 285, 359, 371,

462, 720, 725

260

311

251

^' I79
124, 641, 691
686, 706


162, 635

110, 113, 462, 634
628
251

468

179,310
311, 635
567

1 13, 788,791

285

170, 706
182


1,2

1, 2, 9, 10


9, 10
17-22
23,24
27
1,2
1
2
5

6, 7, 12, 16,
17, 20, 21
8-13
12

13

16, 17, 20


113

149

619

207

848

389

176. 187
107, 311, 652
107

148

389

661

144, 748
759, 796

31 i

338

376, 440, 483
776

I 7g

158. 188
635

17^, 635

314

157

196, 652, 724
3i4

307, 783, 790
6S6

783, 791

196, 207
686
705
661
207
635

ill

107, 376, 440, 483,
643

118, 182

|2, 307,625, 781,

107, 687
307, 783
187
790

102, 261
157, 307, 783
37, 187, 217
780,

107, 652

687

190

48, 467
59

764

625

102, 376, 483, 643,
764

19,26i, 625
252, 625, 783, 790
