Emanuel Swedenborg, Divine Providence (1764)
==========================================================================
Swedenborg's treatise on providence, free will, and the divine government of the world — completes his core theological trilogy with Heaven and Hell and Divine Love and Wisdom. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

■|;H  |i


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arcliive

in  2008  witli  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/divineprovidenGeOOsweduoft


k.;evo1


Presented  to  the

LIBRARIES  of  the

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO

by

Hugh  Anson-Cartwright


EVERYMAN^S    LIBRARY
EDITED     BY    ERNEST    RHYS


THEOLOGY    &
PHILOSOPHY


SWEDENBORG'S

THE      DIVINE      PROVIDENCE

WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION    BY

J.  HOWARD    SPALDING


WBVERSITY  OFTOWUfO  S£P  2  7  '05  LIBRARY


THE  PUBLISHERS  OF  €F61{r3^^0^S
LIB7{</f^r  WILL  BE  PLEASED  TO  SEND
FREELY  TO  ALL  APPLICANTS  A  LIST
OF  THE  PUBLISHED  AND  PROJECTED
VOLUMES  TO  BE  COMPRISED  UNDER
THE   FOLLOWING  THIRTEEN  HEADINGS:


TRAVEL     ^      SCIENCE     ^     FICTION

THEOLOGY  &   PHILOSOPHY

HISTORY         ^        CLASSICAL

FOR      YOUNG      PEOPLE

ESSAYS    ^   ORATORY

POETRY  &  DRAMA

BIOGRAPHY

REFERENCE

ROMANCE


IN  FOUR  STYLES  OF  BINDING:  CLOTH,
FLAT  BACK,  COLOURED  TOP;  LEATHER,
ROUND  CORNERS,  GILT  TOP;  LIBRARY
BINDING  IN  CLOTH,  &  QUARTER  PIGSKIN


London  :  J.  M.  DENT  &  SONS,  Ltd.
New  York:    E.  P.   DUTTON  &  CO.


LONDON:  PUBLISHED
byJ-M-DENT  S<-SONS-&''
AND  IN  NENX/  YORK
BYE-P-DUTTON^CO  a/Ji


INTRODUCTION

Swedenborg's  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  a  translation  of
which  was  published  in  Everyman's  Library  last  year,  gives
the  framework  of  supermundane  fact,  made  known  to  him  by
his  admission  to  conscious  intercourse  with  the  spiritual  world
on  which  the  present  work  is  based.  The  aim  of  both  is
essentially  practical — namely,  to  teach  how  men  ought  to
use  their  own  minds.  For  the  human  mind  is  that  very
man  who  survives  the  death  of  the  body,  and  the  lot  which
awaits  every  one  in  the  eternal  world  is  determined  by  the
use  which  he  has  made  of  his  powers  during  his  life  on  earth.
This  aun  seems  a  simple  one,  and  indeed  it  is  most  simple,
for  it  may  be  summed  up  in  the  statement  that  the  first  duty
of  man  is  to  resist  the  evils  -he  finds  in  himself,  not  only  in
action  but  in  intention  and  desire,  as  sins  against  God.  This
is  the  soul  of  all  religion,  because  it  is  the  religion  of  a  man's
very  life,  and  no  other  kind  of  religion  is  of  any  avail.  This,
and  this  alone,  can  lead  to  the  purification  of  man's  will,
which  is  the  mediate  source  of  all  his  activities,  from  the  evil
propensities  in  which  all  his  bad  actions  originate.  This,
therefore,  has  been,  and  always  will  be,  the  mark  of  true
religion  everywhere ;  and  a  very  simple  mind  can  see  this
truth  quite  easily.  Yet  the  reasons  why  this  admonition  is
a  summary  of  all  religion,  why  obedience  to  it  should  mean
heaven,  and  neglect  of  it,  hell,  can  only  be  explained  by  that
view  of  the  universe  as  a  whole  which  is  given  in  these  works.
For  the  invisible  as  well  as  the  visible  universe  is  permeated
by  Divine  order ;  and  both  together  form  a  connected  whole,
the  parts  of  which  cannot  be  rightly  understood  except  in
their  relation  to  the  whole.  Rightly  to  understand  a  single
human  mind,  we  need  to  have  a  knowledge  of  the  universe
in  which  it  is  placed ;  and  most  of  all  we  need  a  knowledge  of
God,  of  His  nature,  purposes  and  modes  of  action,  for  this
knowledge  is  the  basis  of  all  true  comprehension  of  the  uni-
verse which  He  creates.  Now  the  visible  universe  gives  us
no  direct  knowledge  of  the  invisible;  and  yet  the  invisible


viii  Introduction

universe  is  far  vaster,  and  exercises  an  incomparably  more
potent  influence  for  good  or  evil  on  the  minds  of  men,  than
the  visible  universe  does.  To  leave  this  element  out  of  our
conception  of  the  universe  is  to  take  a  wholly  superficial
view  of  it,  like  that  of  a  man  who  is  acquainted  only  with
the  external  aspects  of  the  human  body,  but  is  ignorant  of
the  interior  organisation  by  which  its  external  form  is  pro-
duced and  maintained.

Every  religious  man  believes  that  God  is  the  Creator  of
the  physical  universe,  and  that  in  some  way  which  he  would
probably  find  it  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  define.  He  is
also  its  constant  Sustainer.  But  being  provided  with  no
apparatus  of  thought  by  which  he  can  connect  the  idea  he
forms  of  God  with  the  universe  with  which  he  is  acquainted
through  his  senses,  his  belief  that  God  constantly  maintains
it  in  being  is  often  little  more  than  nominal;  and  he  is
apt  to  fall  into  the  common  notion,  that  if  God  created  the
universe  in  the  beginning,  He  then  endowed  it  with  the
forces  necessary  for  its  maintenance  and  development,  and
that  it  goes  on  of  itself,  like  a  wound-up  clock,  so  long  as  the
initial  energy  imparted  to  it  is  not  exhausted — unless,  indeed,
God  should  see  fit  to  interfere  with  the  ordinary  course  of
nature  by  miracles  or  by  special  providential  intervention.
This  conception  means  the  exclusion  of  the  idea  of  God
from  any  formative  and  dominating  influence  over  human
thought  about  the  visible  universe ;  and  then  there  is  but  a
step  to  the  belief  that  the  universe  is  self-sufficient  and
self-efficient,  and  that  the  human  mind  is  the  only  intelligence
capable  of  influencing  the  course  of  events.

A  religiously  disposed  man  is  often  little  better  equipped
for  connecting  his  ideas  of  God  as  Creator  with  the  iEvisible
universe  of  mind  than  with  the  visible  universe  of  matter.
He  seems  to  his  own  consciousness  to  be  self-contained  and
self -controlled,  to  generate  his  own  affections,  determina-
tions, thoughts  and  actions  out  of  himself, — in  a  word,  to
create  all  the  activities  of  his  own  mind.  Whether  this  is
really  so,  or  how  it  can  be,  or  why  it  is  so,  he  scarcely  thinks
of  enquiring.  He  takes  his  possession  of  free  will  to  be  a
self-evident  fact ;  but  how  it  comes  to  exist,  in  what  it  con-
sists, and  how  it  is  related  to  the  other  main  elements  of  his
life,  his  understanding  and  his  actions,  and  what  the  real  use


Introduction  ix

of  them  all  is  beyond  enabling  him  to  live  a  rational  life  in
the  world,  he  perceives  only  obscurely,  if  at  all.  Psycho-
logists treat  of  such  matters  at  large,  but  entirely  from  the
intellectual  point  of  view,  as  interesting  subjects  of  investi-
gation. No  one  thinks  of  going  to  them  for  guidance  in
dealing  practically  with  the  perplexing  problems  that  arise
in  his  own  mind.  Yet  if  religion  relates  wholly  to  life,  and
life  consists  in  acts  of  the  will,  the  understanding,  and  the
bod}^  the  true  use  of  these  powers,  and  their  relation  to
each  other,  must  be  explainable  in  a  way  that  every  man
can  both  understand  and  profit  by.

Probably  every  thoughtful  religious  man  has  a  dim  per-
ception of  the  truth  that  in  some  very  real  sense  God  must
be  All.  But  he  scarcely  ventures  to  follow  out  the  thought,
lest  he  should  fall  into  Pantheism.  For  he 'sees  clearly  that
Pantheism  as  commonly  understood  means  a  non-m-oral
God,  who  would  be  practically  no  God  at  all.

Again,  a  thoughtful  religious  man  must  be  aware  that
every  definite  idea  he  foi'ms  about  God  is  framed  on  the
model  of  the  human  mind, — is,  in  a  word,  clearly  anthropo-
morphic ;  and  that  were  he  to  eliminate  from  his  thought
the  human  qualities  which  he  attributes  to  Him,  he  would
inevitably  lapse  into  the  conception  of  some  diffused  ens
universi,  which  again  would  amount  to  no  God  at  all.  Nor
does  he  know  how  to  reconcile  the  inevitable  anthropo-
morphism of  his  thought  with  the  Omnipresence  of  God,
which  is  a  postulate  of  all  religion.  Dominated  as  he  is  by
natural  ideas  of  space  and  time,  he  seems  to  be  reduced  to
the  alternative  conceptions  of  a  God  localh'  situated  in
some  part  of  the  universe,  or  diffused  throughout  its  extense.

These  and  other  similar  difiiculties  did  not  press  upon
the  religious  mind  in  past  ages  with  the  force  they  do  to-
day. When  the  earth  was  supposed  to  be  the  centre  of  the
visible  universe,  and  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  merely  satellites
revolving  round  it,  there  was  no  great  difficulty  in  thinking
of  God  as  a  majestic  human  Being,  seated  on  a  throne  some-
where above  the  crystal  vault  of  the  sky,  and  governing  the
world  by  His  emissaries,  somewhat  as  an  autocratic  monarch
governs  his  dominions.  When  Copernicus  conceived  the
idea  of  the  centrality  of  the  sun  in  the  solar  system,  he  had
no  thought  but  of  formulating  a  simpler  and  more  intelligible


X  Intrcxiuction

explanation  of  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  than  the
Ptolemaic  system  of  astronomy  gave.  Yet  the  indirect
results  of  his  discovery  have  been,  as  so  often  happens,  far
more  important  than  its  direct  results.  If  we  could  read
aright  the  signs  of  the  times,  we  should  perhaps  find  that  the
most  momentous  result  of  the  establishment  of  the  Coperni-
can  system  of  astronomy  has  been  that  it  has  compelled
men  to  seek  for  a  more  adequate  idea  of  God  than  that
which  satisfied  their  fathers.

The  chief  value  of  the  philosophy  of  supernatural  fact
contained  in  Swedenborg's  writings  is,  that  it  enables  us  to
form  rational  conceptions  of  the  universe  as  iheo-centric  ;
that  is,  as  being  constantly  dependent  in  every  minutest  part
of  it,  physical  and  mental,  on  a  creative  act  of  God,  and
yet  as  being  separate  from  God,  no  part  of  it  being  God,
although  it  constantly  subsists  from  Him.  It  may,  indeed,
be  described  as  a  spiritual  counterpart  of  the  G^pernican
discovery.  It  enables  us  to  view  the  universe,  as  it  were,
from  the  Divine  standpoint ;  to  see  it,  in  some  finite  measure,
as  God  sees  it  infinitely;  and  obviously  this  must  be  the
only  true  way  of  thinking  about  it  if  the  universe  is  in  any
intelligible  sense  a  Divine  creation.  If  it  were  produced  by
a  mere  fiat  of  omnipotent  and  arbitrary  power,  it  might  very
well  be  totally  unintelligible  to  man.  But  if  order  and
process  reign  in  it  from  first  to  last,  our  only  hope  of  under-
standing it  lies  in  acquiring  some  conception  of  what  that
order  is,  and  this  means  that  we  must  have  some  conception
of  its  purpose.  For  order  would  be  meaningless  apart  from
purpose,  because  it  would  aim  at  nothing  and  consequently
accomplish  nothing.  A  true  philosophy  of  creation,  there-
fore, involves  a  knowledge  of  its  purpose  or  use,  and  this  can
only  come  from  revelation,  for  no  one  but  God  can  give  us
any  certain  knowledge  about  Himself.  Swedenborg  there-
fore supports  his  teaching  at  every  point  by  references  to
that  supreme  revelation  which  he  calls  "  The  Word,"  and
which  is  contained  in  our  Bible,  though  not  co-extensive
with  it.

Swedenborg  did  not  excogitate  the  philosophical  doctrines
by  which  a  conception  of  the  universe  as  constantly  dependent
upon  God  is  rendered  possible,  although  prior  to  his  intro-
mission into  the  spiritual  world  he  had  acquired  an  outline


Introduction  xi

of  some  of  them  from  his  profound  study  of  nature.  They
were  revealed  to  him,  partly  by  his  experience  of  the  spiritual
world,  and  partly  by  an  illumination  of  his  mind  closely
associated  with  that  experience,  and  indeed  inseparable  from
it,  which  enabled  him  to  discern  the  true  nature,  meaning
and  function  of  the  Word  of  God,  which  being  Divine  Truth
necessarily  embodies  a  Divine  philosophy.

This  theo-centric  conception  of  the  universe  does  not  in
the  least  conflict  with  Science;  but  it  does  require  us  to
modify  profouixdly  some  of  our  beliefs  which  have  been
based  on  observed  facts,  but  are  not  contained  in  them;
which  are  essentially  explanatory  or  philosophical.  Science,
accurately  defined,  is  simply  a  record  of  what  is  found  by
observation  to  happen  under  certain  conditions,  and  the
classification  of  these  facts  under  generalisations  which  we
call  "  laws  of  nature."  None  of  the  causes  which  the  human
mind  has  formulated  to  account  for  these  facts  are  contained
in  the  facts  themselves.  They  are  additions  which  the
mind  has  introduced  into  them  as  convenient  and  even
necessary  abstractions,  and  which  it  has  subsequently  by  a
process  of  reasoning  invested  with  the  functions  of  true
causes.  This  is  admitted  by  all  scientific  men  who  possess
some  analytic  and  philosophical  insight.  The  great  entities
with  which  Science  deals,  such  as  Time,  Space,  Matter  and
Energy,  are  abstractions  which  unquestionably  connote
reahties,  and  are  indispensable  for  every  kind  of  practical  or
theoretical  work,  but  which  may  not,  for  aught  we  know,
exist  in  the  forms  they  assume  in  our  minds.  We  know  that
events  occur  in  orderly  succession,  but  we  do  not  know
what  Time  is.  We  know  that  the  objects  we  observe  exist
separate  from  and  in  definite  spatial  relations  to  one  another,
but  we  do  not  know  what  Space  is.  We  know  that  they
possess  for  us  definite  and  stable  qualities,  but  we  do  not
know  what  Matter  is.  We  know  that  they  move  and  thereby
have  the  power  of  doing  work,  but  we  do  not  know  what
Energy  is.  Yet  the  forms  in  which  these  entities  present
themselves  to  our  minds  are  so  indelibly  impressed  upon  us
by  experience — for  we  use  them  every  moment  of  our  waking
hours  as  the  implements  of  our  work  and  thought — that  it
requires  a  concentrated  and  sustained  efiort  to  free  ourselves
from  the  idea  that  because  we  know  the  conditions  which  will


xii  Introduction

ensure  a  certain,  result  we  are  entitled  to  regard  the  sum
total  of  the  conditions  known  to  us  in  any  given  case  as  its
true  cause.  It  seems  absurd,  for  instance,  to  say  that  when
a  cannon  is  made  at  billiards,  the  direction  of  the  cue  by  the
striker,  the  force  he  applies,  the  contact  of  the  cue-ball  with
the  object- ball  at  a  given  point  on  its  surface,  with  other
similar  circumstances,  are  not  the  cause  of  the  cannon  being
made.  They  are,  indeed,  for  all  practical  purposes,  causa-
tive, because  they  are  the  conditions  by  which  alone  we
can  hope  to  make  the  cannon.  But  we  delude  ourselves
if  we  imagine  that  these  conditions  necessarily  exhaust  the
facts  of  the  case,  or  indeed,  in  any  real  sense,  explain  the
result.  Professor  Huxley  admitted  that  he  had  not  the
least  idea  whj'  the  object-ball,  when  struck  by  the  cue-ball,
began  to  move,  and  the  motion  of  the  latter  was  arrested  or
deflected.  To  suppose  that  we  do  know  this  is  simply  an
instance  of  the  fallacy  to  which  the  human  miad  is  so  prone,
of  supposing  that  it  understands  that  which  has  merety
become  familiar  to  it.  All  the  laws  of  nature  discovered  by
scientific  observation  are  of  this  order.  They  are  descriptive
generalisations,  useful  and  even  indispensable,  for  practical
and  historical  purposes,  and  perfectly  harmless  when  the
limits  within  which  they  are  valid  are  recognised,  but  they
are  not  explanatory  beyond  that  sphere  of  thought  and
action,  and  become  atheistic  in  their  tendency  so  far  as  we
permit  ourselves  to  regard  the  physical  conditions  with
which  we  deal  as  the  totality  of  the  conditions  involved  in
the  case.  For  this  assumption  excludes  everything  that  is
not  sensibly  perceived  or  derived  from  sensible  experience,
and  therefore  excludes  the  Divine.

It  is  with  these  almost  unconscious  assumptions,  not  with
any  facts  established  by  experience,  that  Swedenborg's
philosophy  comes  into  collision.  The  fundamental  assump-
tion of  all  atheistic  Science  is  that  the  universe  works  and
is  sustained  by  its  own  inherent  powers,  without  any  Divine
production  or  control.  This,  Swedenborg  declares,  is  an
error,  although  the  appearances  on  which  it  is  ba^ed  are  so
vivid  and  persistent  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  human  mind,
during  its  earthly  stage  of  existence,  wholly  to  escape  their
influence.  Every  one,  in  fact,  does  think  in  this  way  while
he  is  doing  his  daily  work.     The  error,  therefore,  may  be  a


Introduction  xiii

quite  innocent  one.  It  only  becomes  destructive  when  the
mind  uses  these  appearances  as  reasons  for  disbeHef  in  God
and  in  any  divine  government  of  the  universe.  The  truth
is  that  the  whole  universe,  spiritual  and  physical,  is
constantly  maintained  in  being  and  supplied  with  all  the
mechanical  and  vital  forces  it  exhibits,  by  a  creative  act  of
God.  The  persistence  of  the  phenomena  of  nature,
apparently  in  virtue  of  some  power  inherent  in  themselves,
is  an  illusion  of  the  senses,  comparable  to  the  apparent
diurnal  revolution  of  the  sun  and  stars  round  the  earth.  This,
too,  is  true  for  most  practical  purposes.  It  is  the  basis  of
time-keeping  and  of  .determinations  of  latitude  and  longi-
tude throughout  the  world;  but  it  does  not  give  a  true
account  of  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  themselves.

Why  the  human  mind  should  be  subjected  to  this  strong
illusion  can  only  be  explained  by  a  knowledge  of  the  purpose
of  man's  life  on  earth,  and  of  the  processes  by  which  that
purpose  is  accomplished.  For  all  the  purposes  of  natural
existence  it  is  not  an  illusion,  any  more  than  the  apparent
diurnal  revolution  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  It  is,  in  fact,  an
indispensable  condition  of  the  formation  and  development  of
man's  natural  reason,  which  is  the  basis  on  which  the  develop-
ment of  his  spiritual  reason  is  founded.  If  natural  qualities
of  mind  did  not  exist,  spiritual  qualities  could  not  be  super-
imposed upon  them.  Man,  in  fact,  derives  from  the  orderly
sequences  of  nature  his  first  ideas  of  cause  and  process,  and
by  means  of  them  he  is  able  to  exercise  all  the  ingenuities
and  industries  of  natural  life,  every  one  of  which  contributes
something  to  the  development  of  his  spiritual  nature.
Obviously  all  these  would  be  impossible  unless  men  came
into  existence  in  a  world  whose  phenomena  were  in  large
measure  calculable,  or,  in  other  words,  apparently  mechanical.
The  adequacy  of  this  explanation  of  course  depends  entirely
on  our  recognition  of  the  truth,  that  in  the  production  and
education  of  the  human  mind  God  works  by  processes  in  which
man's  will  and  understanding  are  throughout  active  and
efficient,  although  their  powers  are  not  inherent  in  them,
but  are  constantly  derived  from  God.

Natural  science  assumes  that  all  causation  is,  as  it  were,
horizontal  or  lateral,  being  communicated  from  one  body
to  another  on  the  same  plane  of  physical  existence.     Sweden-


xiv  Introduction

borg  asserts  that  it  is,  as  it  were,  vertical  or  radial.  It
constantly  descends  from  God,  through  channels  both  of  in-
finite simplicity  and  complexity,  in  every  detail  of  which  an
inviolable  order  reigns,  into  the  created  universe  of  mind  and
matter.  Science  has  nothing  to  object  to  this  conception.
An  objector  can  only  resort  to  such  a  reply  as  Laplace  is
said  to  have  made  to  the  first  Napoleon,  after  giving  him
an  outline  of  his  Systems  Mecanique,  "  Where,  in  your
system, ' '  asked  the  Emperor, ' '  does  God  come  in  ?  "  "  Sire, ' '
said  Laplace,  "  I  had  no  need  of  that  hypothesis."  A  man
who  is  inclined  to  theoretical  or  practical  atheism  is  simply
uninterested  or  repelled  by  the  conception.  Not  so  the  man
who  feels  irresistibly  impelled  to  believe  in  the  existence  of
God,  and  who  wishes  to  be  able  to  find  Him  in  His  creation.
To  him  this  conception,  fortified  by  the  experiential  meta-
physic  contained  in  Swedenborg's  writings,  ma}^  be  a  "  key
wherewith  to  unlock  the  secret  causes  of  things."

It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the  processes  by  which
reason  seeks  to  account  for  the  existence  of  the  universe  by
natural  causation  resolve  themselves  into  an  endless  recession
of  supposed  causes,  and  necessarily  end  in  an  impasse,  or  some
entity  the  existence  of  which  must  be  assumed  as  the  primal
and  all-originating  Reality.     If  we  suppose,  for  instance,  that
all  the  suns  and  worlds  in  the  universe  arose  in  the  course
of  any  number  of  billions  of  years  we  like  to  imagine,  out
of  a  primeval  nebula,  that  nebula,  which  must  have  contained
potentially  all  the  wonders  of  animate  and  inanimate  nature,
remains  unaccounted  for.     The  atheistic,  no  less  than  the
theistic  thinker  is  inexorably  pinned  down  to  the  hypothesis
of  some  primal,  self-existent  being  or  thing,  from  which  all
other  beings  and  thin^js  have  been  derived.     Self-existence
must  be  assumed  somewhere.     Thus   the  first  ontological
question  we  have  to  face  is,  whether  it  is  more  consonant
with  reason,  in  view  of  all  the  facts  known  to  man,  to  assume
that  this  primal  Being  is  to  be  thought  of  as  material  and
mechanical,  or  as  Will  and  Intelligence.     The  idea  that  life,
consciousness,   and  the  will,   understanding  and  conscience
of  man,  have  been  evolved  out  of  the  pressure  of  merely
mechanical  forces  is  probably  the  most  insane  which  ever
entered  the  human  mind.     It  has  been  practically  aban-
doned, now-a-days,  by  every  serious  thinker.     Even  Haeckel


Introduction  xv

has  been  compelled  to  endow  every  particle  of  that  primal,
inchoate  substance  out  of  which  he  supposes  all  things  to
have  been  e\-oh^e'^.,  with  something  of  the  nature  of  will  and
understanding.  This  concession  is  valuable  as  a  recognition
of  the  former  absurdity',  but  is  worthless  as  an  explanation.
The  universe  is  a  unity,  and  if  it  is  the  product  of  mind,  it
must  be  the  work  of  one  mind,  and  that  one  mind,  according
to  Swedenborg's  teaching,  is  the  infinite  God,  immanent  in
it,  and  yet  transcending  it.

The  weakness  of  the  theistic  position  has  been  that  it  has
only  been  able  to  oppose  to  the  mechanistic  absurdity  another
nearly  as  great — the  idea  of  the  creation  of  the  universe  out
of  nothing,  by  a  mere  fiat  of  Omnipotent  power.  Not  only
is  this  unthinkable,  but  it  contradicts  all  that  we  can  learn
from  the  order  of  nature,  of  the  method  of  God's  working.
There  we  never  meet  with  a  magical  production  of  something
out  of  nothing,  but  we  find  evolutionary  process  e^'er}'where,
form  and  function  being  indissolubly  connected  with  each
other.  It  also  involves  us  in  insuperable  difficulties  with
regard  to  the  Divine  nature ;  for  if  it  is  possible  for  God  to
produce  nature  in  this  way,  it  must  be  possib'e  for  Him  also
to  produce  mind.  If  the  Omnipotence  which  we  attribute
to  God  meant  the  power  of  accomplishing  anything  whatever
by  a  mere  exercise  of  will,  without  means,  we  could  not
acquit  Him  of  an  indifference  to  human  suffering  and  evil
which  in  a  man  we  should  describe  as  diabolical.  For  in
that  case,  had  He  chosen.  He  might  have  created  man  in  a
state  of  perfection  from  which  no  lapse  would  be  possible.
All  the  ends  to  the  attainment  of  which  we  may  assume  the
\'icissitudes  and  sufferings  of  man's  life  on  earth  conduce,
might  have  been  attained  without  them.  The  mere  fact
that  so  much  suffering  exists  in  the  world  should  be  a  clear
proof  to  the  believer  in  God  that  some  tremendous  issue  in
which  man  himself  has  a  vital  part  to  play,  hangs  on  his
brief  life  on  earth ;  an  issue  in  view  of  which  all  temporary
mental  and  physical  suffering  becomes  a  matter  of  absolute
insignificance,  except  so  far  as  it  contributes  to  the  accom-
plishment of  the  end  for  which  it  is  permitted,  and  in  which
the  issue  is  involved.

It  is  impossible  to  see  clearly  the  nature  of  this  issue  while
the  mind  is  possessed  with  the  idea  that  men  are  a  different


xvi  Introduction

order  of  beings  from  angels  and  spirits.  Most  Christian
people  probably  imagine  that  they  get  this  idea  from  the
Bible;  but  any  one  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  examine
the  evidence  with  an  open  mind  will  find  what  slight  warrant
Scripture  gives  for  this  belief,  and  how  strong  its  evidence
is  to  the  contrary'.  \Vhen  once  the  notion  that  angels  and
spirits  are  a  distinct  order  of  beings  from  man  is  abolished,
the  fundamental  position  involved  in  all  Swedenborg's  teach-
ing, that  the  physical  universe  is  created  to  be  the  basis  on
which  men  may  be  brought  into  existence  and  trained  for
heaven,  and  that  angels  could  not  be  created  in  any  other  way,
becomes  a  simple  and  adequate  explanation  of  the  mystery
of  life.

The  difficulty  we  experience  in  convincing  ourselves  of
the  truth  of  Swedenborg's  philosophy  arises,  in  large  measure,
from  the  fact  that  it  is  primarily  based  on  other-world  ex-
periences in  which  we  cannot  participate.  Any  one  who
takes  the  pains  needed  to  enable  him  to  understand  Sweden-
borg's teaching  will  probably  admit  that  he  had  good  grounds
for  the  beliefs  he  held,  if  his  peculiar  psychical  experiences
were  not  only  real,  but  also  veridical.  The  establishment  of
the  first  of  these  conditions  on  a  firm  basis  of  conviction  does
not  necessarily  establish  the  other.  Swedenborg  might  have
had  a  real  intercourse  with  the  spiritual  world,  that  is,  he
might  have  come  into  actual  contact  with  men  and  women
living  there  after  the  death  of  the  body,  and  yet  have  in
many  respects  misinterpreted  its  phenomena.  This  was
the  opinion  expressed  by  the  late  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  in
his  Human  Personality  and  Us  Survival  of  Bodily  Death.
Swedenborg's  own  statements  show  what  boundless  possi-
bilities of  error  there  are  in  the  phenomena  of  the  spiritual
world.  They  are  as  numerous  as  the  imaginations  which
the  human  mind  can  fabricate  about  the  nature  of  things.
For  there  the  miad  sees  all  spiritual  states  other  than  its
ovm — and  these  are  its  sole  objects  of  sight — according  to  its
oimi  state,  just  as  we,  in  this  world,  see  all  spiritual  things ;
but  there  the  inner  sight  becomes  objective  also,  and  is
therefore  far  more  persuasive  than  those  passing  phases  of
the  mind  to  which  we  hardly  attribute  any  substantial  exist-
ence. If,  therefore,  Swedenborg  had  been  admitted  to
conscious  intercourse  with  the  spiritual  world  without  a  life-


Introduction  xvii

long  preparation,  by  which  he  was  led  to  lay  down  his  self-
hood both  of  will  and  intellect,  and  became  capable  of  being
led  every  step  of  the  unknown  way  by  Divine  guidance,  he
would  certainly  have  brought  us  back  a  very  different  report
than  he  has  done.  A  mere  acquaintance  with  the  phenomena
of  the  spiritual  world  has  no  tendency  to  alter  the  modes  of
thought  which  a  man  has  deliberately  embraced.  Every
one  acquires  such  knowledge,  when,  after  the  death  of  the
body,  he  becomes  consciously  an  inliabitant  of  the  spiritual
world ;  but  this  makes  no  difference  in  the  rooted  convictions
which  he  has  confirmed  in  his  mind  by  his  life.  If  he  has
seen  no  indications  of  the  Divine  in  the  natural  world,  he  sees
none  in  the  other.

The  only  verification  which  is  of  any  value  comes  from
the  gradual  growth  of  a  conviction  that  Swedenborg's  teach-
ing gives  us  a  key  to  the  mj^steries  of  life,  and  especially  when
we  find  that  it  opens  up  to  us  a  true  knowledge  of  ourselves.
For  I  suppose  that  to  every  thoughtful  man  he  himself  is  the
greatest  mystery  of  all ;  and  no  wonder,  for  he  is  an  epitome
of  the  universe,  and  concentrates  in  his  own  personality
all  the  perplexing  problems  of  the  world  around  him.

J.  Howard  Spalding.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

The  following  are  the  principal  works  of  Emanuel  Sweden-
borg  : —

Philosophical  and  Scientific— Dsedalus  Hyperboreus,  1716  ;
Prodromus  Principiorum  Rerum  naturalium,  1721  ;  Miscellanea  Obser-
vata  circa  Res  nat'urales,  1722  ;  Opera  Philosophica  et  Mineralia,  1734,
Vol.  I.,  being  his  Principia  ;  De  Infinito  et  Causa  finali  Creationis,
1734;  CEconomia  Regni  Animalis,  1740:  Regnum  Animale,  1744-5;
De  Cultu  et  Amore  Dei,  1745.  The  more  important  posthumous  scientific
works  which  have  been  published  are  :  The  Brain,  considered  anato-
mically, physiologically,  and  philosophically,  1882-7  !  The  Soul,  or
Rational  Psychology,  1S87.  Under  the  auspices  of  the  Swedish  Royal
Academy  of  Sciences,  its  Swedenborg  Committee  has  published :
Geologica  et  Epistolae,  with  introduction  in  English  by  Prof.  A.  _G.
Nathorst,  1907  ;  Cosmologica,  with  introduction  by  Prof  Sv.  Arrhenius,
1908.

Theological.— Arcana  Coelestia,  1749-56 ;  De  Coelo  et  Inferno,
1758  ;  De  Ultimo  Judicio,  1758  ;  De  Equo  Albo,  1758  ;  De  Telluribus
in  mundo  nostro  solari,  175S  ;  De  Nova  Hierosol>ma  et  ejus  doctrina
ccelesti,  1758 ;  Sapientia  Angelica  de  Divino  Amore  et  de  Divina
Sapientia,  1763  ;  Docirina  Novas  Hierosolymsede  Domino — deScriptura
Sacra— de  Fide,  1763:  Doctrina  Vitse  pro  Nova  Hierosolyma,  1763;
Sapientia  Angelica  de  Divina  Providentia,  1764  ;  Apocalypsis  Revelata.
1766;  DelitiEe  Sapientise  de  Amore  Conjugiali,  etc.,  1768;  Summaria
Expositio  Doctrinse  Novae  Ecclesias,  1 769  ;  De  Commercio  Animre  et
Corporis,  1769;  Vera  Christiana  Rehgio,  1771.  Among  his  posthumous
theological  treatises  which  have  been  published  the  following  are  the
chief:  Apocalypse  Explained,  1811-15:  The  Memorabilia,  or  Spiritual
Diary,  1883- 1902  ;  Summaries  of  the  Internal  Sense  of  the  Prophets
and  Psalms,  1799  ;  Adversaria  in  Libros  Veteris  Testamenti,  1S42-54  ;
Index  Biblicus,  sive  Thesaurus  Bibliorum  Emblematicus  et  Allegoricus,
1859-68.

Published  by  photolithography  :  10  folio  vols,  of  unpubhshed  MSS.
edited  by  R.  L.  TafeL  1869-70.  By  phototypy :  Sensus  Internus
Psalmorura,  etc.,  1896  ;  Diarium  Spiri'tuale,  3  folio  vols.,  1901-7.

The  Swedenborg  Concordance.  By  J.  F.  Potts.  6  quarto  vols.,
1 888- 1 902.

A  Swedenborg  Bibliography,  by  J.  Hyde,  1906.

Biographies.— By  E.  Paxton  Hood,  1854;  by  W.  White,  1868;
by  E.  Swift,  1S83  ;  by  J.  J.  Garth  Wilkinson,  1886 ;  by  B.  Worcester,
seventh  edition,  1907  ;  by  G.  Trobridge,  1908  ;  Documents  concerning
Life  and  Character,  edited  by  R.  L.  Tatel,  1S75-77.

Most  of  Swedenborg's  works  have  been  translated  mto  English,  and
a  number  of  them  into  seventeen  other  languages,  European  and
Oriental.


DIVINE   PROVIDENCE


The  divine  Providence  is  the  government  of  the
Lord's  divine  Love  and  Wisdom

I.  In  order  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  divine  Provi-
dence, and  that  it  is  the  government  of  the  divine  Love  and
Wisdom  of  the  Lord,  it  is  important  to  know  what  has
already  been  stated  and  explained  concerning  the  divine
Love  and  Wisdom  in  the  work  on  those  subjects.  The
following  propositions  are  there  laid  down  :  In  the  Lord
divine  Love  is  inseparable  from  divine  Wisdom,  and  divine
Wisdom  from  divine  Love  (nos.  34-39)-  Divine  Love  and
Wisdom  must  necessarily  be  and  manifest  ^  themselves  in
other  beings  created  therefrom  (nos .  47-5 1 ).  All  things  in  the
universe  were  created  by  the  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.
52,  53,  151-156).  All  things  in  the  universe  are  recipients
of  the  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  55-60).  The  Lord  is
seen  by  the  angels  as  a  sun ;  the  heat  thence  proceeding  is
love,  and  the  hght  thence  proceeding  is  wisdom  (nos.  83-88,
89-92,  93-98,  296-301).  The  divine  Love  and  Wisdom
which  proceed  from  the  Lord  are  one  (nos.  99-102).  The
Lord  from  eternity,  who  is  Jehovah,  created  the  universe
and  all  things  thereof  from  Himself,  and  not  from  nothing
(nos.  282-284,  290-295).  These  propositions  are  discussed
in  the  work  entitled  Angelic  Wisdom  concerning  the  Divine
Love  and  Wisdom.'^

2.  These  facts,  when  compared  with  those  concerning
creation  in  the  same  work,  indicate,  indeed,  that  the  govern-
ment of  the  Lord's  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  is  what  is  called
the  divine  Providence ;  but  as  creation  was  the  subject  there,
and  not  the  preservation  of  the  state  of  things  after  their
creation,  which  is  the  Lord's  government,  this  subject  must

^  Wherever  in  this  translation  the  words  Being  and  Manifes-
tation, or  the  corresponding  verbs,  are  printed  in  small  capitals,
the  Latin  words  in  the  original  text  are  Esse  and  Existere.

-  Published  in  "  Everj-man's  Library"  under  the  title:  The
Divine  Love  and  Wisdom.
B


2  Divine  Providence

now  be  dealt  with.  The  present  article  will  treat  of  the
preservation  of  the  union  of  divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  or  of
divine  Good  and  Truth,  in  all  created  things,  and  the  subject
will  be  discussed  in  the  following  order  :

I.  The  universe,  and  all  it  contains  in  general  and  par-
ticular, was  created  out  of  the  divine  Love  by  means  of  the
divine  Wisdom.

II.  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  proceed  from  the  Lord  in
union.

III.  There  is  a  certain  likeness  of  this  union  in  every
Created  thing.

IV.  It  is  in  accordance  with  divine  Providence  that  every
created  thing,  in  whole  and  in  part,  should  be  such  a  unit;
or  if  it  is  not,  that  it  should  be  made  so.

V.  The  good  of  love  is  not  good  unless  it  is  united  to  the
truth  of  wisdom ;  and  the  truth  of  wisdom  is  not  truth  unless
it  is  united  to  the  good  of  love.

VI.  The  good  of  love  when  not  united  to  the  truth  of
wisdom  is  not  real  but  apparent  good;  and  the  truth  of
wisdom  when  not  united  to  the  good  of  love  is  not  real  but
apparent  truth.

VII.  The  Lord  does  not  permit  anything  to  be  divided;
and  therefore  it  must  either  be  in  good  and  at  the  same  time
in  truth,  or  it  must  be  in  evil  and  at  the  same  time  in  falsity.

VIII.  Whatever  is  in  good  and  at  the  same  time  in  truth
has  a  real  existence ;  and  whatever  is  in  evil  and  at  the  same
time  in  falsity  has  no  real  existence.

IX.  The  Lord's  divine  Providence  causes  evil  and  falsity
to  be  of  service  for  equilibrium,  relation  and  purification,
and  thus  for  the  union  of  good  and  truth  in  others.

3.  I.  The  universe,  and  all  it  contains  in  general  and  par-
ticular, was  created  out  of  the  divine  Love  by  7iieans  of  the  divine
Wisdom.  It  has  been  shown  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love
and  Wisdom,  that  the  Lord  from  eternity,  who  is  Jehovah,
is  as  to  His  essential  Being  divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  and
that  He  created  the  universe  and  all  things  therein  from
Himself.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  universe,  in  general
and  particular,  was  created  out  of  the  divine  Love  by  means
of  the  divine  Wisdom.  In  the  same  work  it  was  also  shown
that  love  without  wisdom  cannot  accomplish  anything,  nor
wisdom  without  love.  For  love  without  wisdom,  or  the  will
without  the  understanding,  cannot  think,  or  even  see  and


Divine  Providence  3

feel,  nor  speak;  and  therefore  love  without  wisdom,  or  the
will  without  the  understanding,  can  accomphsh  nothing.
Similarly  wisdom  without  love,  or  the  understanding  without
the  will,  cannot  think,  see,  feel,  nor  even  speak ;  and  there-
fore wisdom  without  love,  or  the  understanding  without  the
will,  can  do  nothing;  for  if  love  were  removed  the  will  would
no  longer  act,  and  so  there  could  be  no  action.  Since  this
is  true  of  the  actions  of  a  man,  much  more  was  it  true  of  God,
who  is  Love  itself  and  Wisdom  itself,  when  He  created  and
made  the  universe  and  all  things  therein.  That  the  universe
with  all  it  contains  in  general  and  particular,  was  created  out
of  the  divine  Love  by  means  of  the  divine  Wisdom  may  be
corroborated  by  all  the  visible  things  of  this  world.  Take
any  particular  object,  and  examine  it  intelligently,  and  you
will  be  convinced  of  this.  Take  a  tree,  or  its  seed,  fruit,
flower,  or  leaf;  summon  up  all  your  wisdom,  examine  the
object  with  a  good  microscope,  and  you  will  see  wonderful
things;  and  the  interior  forms  which  cannot  be  seen  are
more  wonderful  still.  Mark  the  gradual  process  by  which
the  tree  grows  from  the  seed  until  new  seed  is  produced ;  and
consider  whether  at  every  step  there  is  not  a  constant  en-
deavour to  continue  its  species;  for  the  end  to  which  it  is
tending  is  the  seed  in  which  the  power  of  reproduction  exists
anew.  If  after  this  you  are  willing  to  think  spiritually  also,
(and  you  can  do  this  if  you  wish),  you  will  see  wisdom
displayed  in  that  power,  and  if  your  thought  be  suf-
ficiently spiritual,  you  will  see  that  this  power  comes
neither  from  the  seed,  nor  from  the  sun  of  the  world,  which
is  pure  fire,  but  that  it  is  in  the  seed  from  God  the  Creator,
whose  wisdom  is  infinite;  and  that  it  not  only  was  in  the
seed  at  creation,  but  remains  in  it  afterwards ;  for  preserva-
tion is  perpetual  creation,  as  subsistence  is  perpetual  exist-
ence. To  take  away  this  power  would  be  like  taking  away
will  from  action,  when  the  work  would  stop,  or  like  taking
away  thought  from  speech,  when  speech  would  cease ;  or  like
taking  away  effort  from  movement,  when  motion  would
cease;  in  a  word,  if  you  were  to  take  away  the  cause  from
any  effect,  the  latter  would  cease ;  and  so  on.  Everv  created
thing  is  indeed  endowed  with  power ;  no  power,  however,  is
self-generated,  but  is  derived  from  Him  who  imparted  it.
Observe  any  natural  object,  such  as  a  silkworm,  a  bee,  or
any  other  small  creature ;  look  at  it  first  naturally,  afterwards


4  Divine  Providence

rationally,  and  at  length  spiritually  :  then,  if  you  can  think
deeply,  you  will  be  astonished  at  all  you  see ;  and  if  you  listen
to  the  voice  of  wisdom  speaking  within  you,  you  will  say  in
amazement,  "  Who  does  not  see  the  Divine  in  these  things?
They  are  all  the  work  of  divine  Wisdom."  Still  more  will
this  be  the  case,  if  you  consider  the  uses  of  all  created  things,
how  they  proceed  in  their  order  even  up  to  man,  and  from
him  back  to  the  Creator  from  whom  they  originate;  and
how  the  connection  of  all  things,  and,  if  you  will  believe  it,
their  preservation  too,  is  dependent  upon  the  union  of  the
Creator  with  man.  In  the  following  pages  it  will  be  seen  that
divine  Love  has  created  all  things,  but  always  by  means  of
divine  Wisdom.

4.  II.  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  -proceed  from  the  Lord  in
union.  This,  also,  is  evident  from  what  was  explained  in  the
work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  especially  from  the
following  statements :  Being  and  Manifestation  in  God-
Man  are  distinct  and  yet  one  (nos.  14-17).  In  the  Lord  there
are  infinite  things  which  are  distinct  and  yet  one  (nos.  17-22).
Divine  Love  is  inseparable  from  divine  Wisdom,  and  divine
Wisdom  from  divine  Love  (nos.  34-39).  Love  can  accom-
plish nothing  unless  it  is  married  to  wisdom  (nos.  401-403).
Spiritual  heat  and  light,  because  they  emanate  from  the  Lord
as  a  sun,  are  one,  like  His  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  99-
102).  From  the  explanations  of  these  statements  in  that
work  the  truth  of  the  above  proposition  is  evident.  But
as  it  is  not  known  how  two  things  distinct  from  each  other
can  act  as  one,  I  desire  to  explain  here  that  there  cannot  be
a  unit  without  a  form,  but  that  the  form  itself  constitutes  the
unit ;  and  next,  that  the  form  makes  a  more  perfect  unit,  as
the  things  composing  it  are  individually  distinct  and  yet
united.

There  cannot  be  a  unit  without  a  form,  because  the  form  itself
constitutes  the  unit : — Every  one  who  thinks  intently,  may
see  clearly  that  there  cannot  be  a  unit  without  a  form,  and
that  if  a  unit  exist  at  all,  it  must  be  a  form ;  for  it  is  from
its  form  that  everything  derives  its  nature,  predicate,  change
of  state,  relation,  and  the  like ;  and  therefore  anything  desti-
tute of  form  would  be  incapable  of  being  affected  in  any  way,
and  this  would  be  equivalent  to  non-existence.  It  is  form
that  imparts  all  these  qualities.  And  because  all  the  com-
ponents of  a  form,  if  the  form  be  perfect,  are  related  to  one


Divine  Providence  5

another  as  are  the  links  in  a  chain,  it  follows  that  the  form
itself  constitutes  the  unit  and  therefore  the  subject,  of  which
may  be  predicated  quality,  state,  activity,  or  anything  else
according  to  the  perfection  of  its  form.  Every  object  visible
in  the  world  is  such  a  unit,  and  so  is  everything  invisible,
whether  it  be  in  the  hidden  recesses  of  nature,  or  in  the  spiritual
world.  A  man  is  such  a  unit,  and  so  is  human  society;  so
are  the  Church  and  the  whole  angelic  heaven  in  the  sight  of
the  Lord ;  in  a  word,  such  a  unit  is  the  created  universe,  not
only  in  general  but  also  in  every  particular.  In  order  that
all  things  in  general  and  particular  may  be  forms,  it  needs
must  be  that  He  who  created  them  should  be  Form  itself,
and  that  all  things  which  have  been  created  in  forms  should
be  derived  from  Form  itself.  This,  therefore,  is  what  was  ex-
plained in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  namely :
divine  Love  and  Wisdom  are  substance  and  form  (nos.  40-
43).  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  are  absolute  substance  and
form,  thus  the  one  and  only  reality  (nos.  44-46).  Divine
Love  and  Wisdom  are  one  in  the  Lord  (nos.  14-22);  and  they
proceed  as  one  from  the  Lord  (nos.  99-102  and  elsewhere).

Form  makes  a  more  perfect  unit  in  proportion  as  the  com-
ponents of  the  form  are  individually  distinct  and  yet  united.
This  is  a  difficult  matter  for  the  understanding  to  grasp
unless  it  is  enlightened,  for  it  appears  as  if  form  can  make  a
unit  only  by  the  similarity  of  its  component  parts.  On  this
subject  I  have  frequently  spoken  with  angels,  who  said  that
it  is  an  arcanum  which  the  wise  among  them  perceive  clearly,
and  the  less  wise  obscurely ;  but  that  the  truth  is  that  a  form
is  more  perfect  in  proportion  as  its  constituents  are  indi-
vidually distinct,  and  yet,  each  in  its  own  way,  united  to  the
rest.  They  confirmed  this  by  reference  to  the  various  com-
munities of  heaven,  which,  regarded  as  a  whole,  constitute
the  form  of  heaven ;  and  also  to  the  angels  of  each  community,
for  the  form  of  a  community  is  more  perfect  in  proportion
as  each  angel  is  more  completely  his  own  and  thus  perfectly
free,  and  so  loves  his  companions  as  if  of  himself  and  from
his  own  affection.  They  also  gave  as  an  instance  of  this  the
marriage  of  good  and  truth,  showing  that  the  more  distinctly
they  are  two,  the  more  perfectly  they  can  be  united ;  so,  too,
with  love  and  wisdom;  and  they  said  that  what  is  not
distinct  is  confused,  and  this  gives  rise  to  all  imperfection
of  form.


6  Divine  Providence

But  how  things  perfectly  distinct  are  united  and  so  make
one,  they  also  proved  by  reference  to  many  things ;  especially
to  those  which  are  in  man,  in  whom  innumerable  things  are
distinct  yet  united,  distinct  by  means  of  their  coats  and
united  by  their  ligaments.  They  showed,  likewise,  that  it
is  the  same  with  love  and  all  its  components,  and  with  wisdom
and  all  its  components,  each  of  which  is  invariably  perceived
as  one.  ]\Iore  on  these  subjects  may  be  seen  in  the  work
on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  14-22),  and  in  the
work  on  Heaven  and  Hell  ^  (nos.  56  and  489).  These  facts
have  been  adduced  because  they  are  matters  of  angelic
wisdom.

5.  III.  Titer e  is  a  certain  likeness  of  this  unity  in  every
created  thing.  That  there  is  in  every  created  thing  a  certain
likeness  of  the  divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  which  in  the  Lord
are  one,  and  proceed  as  one  from  Him,  may  be  seen  from  what
is  stated  throughout  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,
and  especially  in  nos.  47-51,  55-60,  282-284,  290-295,  313-
318,  319-326,  349-357;  it  is  there  shown  that  the  Divine  is
in  every  created  thing,  because  God  the  Creator,  who  is  the
Lord  from  eternity,  produced  from  Himself  the  sun  of  the
spiritual  world,  and  by  means  of  that  sun  all  things  in  the
universe;  consequently  that  that  sun,  which  is  from  the
Lord,  and  in  which  the  Lord  dwells,  is  not  only  the  first  but
the  one  only  substance  from  which  all  things  are  derived;
and  because  it  is  the  one  only  substance,  it  follows  that  it
exists  in  every  created  thing,  but  with  infinite  variety  accord-
ing to  the  uses  contemplated.  Now  because  divine  Love
and  Wisdom  are  in  the  Lord,  and  divine  fire  and  brightness
exist  from  Him  in  the  sun,  and  spiritual  heat  and  light
proceed  from  that  sun,  and  each  of  these  pairs  makes  one,
it  follows  that  there  is  a  certain  likeness  of  this  union  in
every  created  thing.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  ever}-thing  in
the  universe  has  relation  to  good  and  truth,  and  indeed  to
their  union;  or,  what  is  the  same,  that  everything  in  the
universe  has  relation  to  love  and  wisdom  and  to  their  union ;
for  good  is  inseparable  from  love,  and  truth  from  wisdom ;  for
love  calls  everything  which  it  possesses  good,  and  wisdom
calls  everything  which  it  possesses  true.  That  there  is  a  union
of  these  in  every  created  thing  will  be  seen  in  what  follows.

^  Published  in  "  Everyman's  Library."


Divine  Providence  7

6.  It  is  acknowledged  by  many  that  there  is  one  only
substance,  which  is  also  the  primal  substance  from  which
all  things  are  derived;  but  the  nature  of  that  substance  is
not  understood.  It  is  believed  to  be  so  simple  that  nothing
could  be  more  so ;  that  it  may  be  compared  to  a  point  which
has  no  dimensions;  and  that  from  an  infinite  number  of
such  points  spatial  forms  have  arisen.  This,  however,  is  a
mistake  arising  from  our  idea  of  space,  for  this  idea  seems  to
favour  the  existence  of  such  points;  but  the  truth  is,  that
the  simpler  and  purer  any  thing  is,  the  fuller  and  more  com-
plete it  is.  For  this  reason,  the  more  interiorly  any  object
is  examined,  the  more  wonderful,  perfect,  and  beautiful  are
the  things  seen  in  it ;  and  therefore  in  the  primal  substance
are  the  most  wonderful,  perfect,  and  beautiful  of  all.  This  is
so,  because  the  primal  substance  is  derived  from  the  spiritual
sun,  which,  as  was  said  above,  is  derived  from  the  Lord,  and
is  His  dwelling-place;  thus  that  sun  is  itself  the  only  sub-
stance, and,  not  being  in  space,  is  the  all  in  all,  and  is  in  the
greatest  and  least  things  in  the  created  universe.  Since
that  sun  is  the  primal  and  only  substance  from  which  all
things  exist,  it  follows  that  there  are  in  that  substance
infinitely  more  things  than  can  be  seen  in  the  substances
derived  from  it,  which  are  called  subsidiary  substances  and,
in  their  ultimate  form,  matter.  They  cannot  be  seen  in  the
latter  because  they  descend  from  that  sun  through  degrees
of  two  kinds,  according  to  which  all  perfection  decreases.
Hence,  as  was  said  above,  the  more  interiorly  any  thing  is
examined,  the  more  wonderful,  perfect,  and  beautiful  are
the  things  seen  in  it.  These  remarks  have  been  made  to
show  that  there  is  a  certain  hkeness  of  the  Divine  in  every
created  thing ;  but  that  it  is  less  and  less  evident  in  descend-
ing through  the  various  degrees,  and  still  less  when  the  lower
degree,  separated  from  the  higher  by  being  closed  against  it,
is  packed  with  matter.  But  these  things  must  needs  seem
obscure,  unless  those  parts  of  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love
and  Wisdom  have  been  read  and  understood,  which  deal  with
the  spiritual  sun  (nos.  83-172),  degrees  (nos.  173-281),  and
the  creation  of  the  universe  (nos.  282-357).

7.  IV.  It  is  in  accordance  with  divine  Providence  that  every
created  thing,  in  whole  and  in  part,  should  be  such  a  unit ;  or,
if  it  is  not,  that  it  should  be  made  so  :  that  is,  that  in  every
created  thing  there  should  be  something  from  the  divine  Love


8  Divine  Providence

and  at  the  same  time  from  the  divine  Wisdom ;  or,  what  is
the  same,  that  in  every  created  thing  there  should  be  good
and  truth,  or  a  union  of  good  and  truth.  Since  good  is
inseparable  from  love  and  truth  from  wisdom,  as  was  said
above  (no.  5),  in  the  following  pages  the  terms  good  and  truth
will  be  used  throughout  as  the  equivalents  of  love  and  wisdom ;
and  the  marriage  of  good  and  truth,  as  equivalents  of  the
union  of  love  and  wisdom.

8.  From  the  preceding  article  it  is  evident  that  there  is  in
everything  created  by  the  Lord  a  certain  likeness  of  the  divine
Love  and  Wisdom,  which  in  the  Lord  are  one,  and  which
proceed  as  one  from  Him.  Something  also  shall  now  be  said
particularly  concerning  that  oneness  or  union  which  is  called
the  marriage  of  good  and  truth,  i.  This  marriage  exists  in
the  Lord  Himself,  for,  as  stated  above,  the  divine  Love  and
Wisdom  in  Him  are  one.  ii.  It  is  derived  from  the  Lord,  for
in  everything  that  proceeds  from  Him,  love  and  wisdom  are
fully  united ;  these  two  proceed  from  the  Lord  as  a  sun,  the
divine  Love  as  heat,  and  the  divine  Wisdom  as  light,
iii.  They  are  indeed  received  separately  by  the  angels,  but
they  are  united  in  them  by  the  Lord;  this  is  also  the  case
with  members  of  the  church,  iv.  It  is  by  reason  of  the  influx
of  united  love  and  wisdom  from  the  Lord  into  the  angels  of
heaven  and  the  members  of  the  church,  and  their  reception
by  angels  and  men,  that  the  Lord  is  called  in  the  Word  the
Bridegroom  and  the  Husband,  and  heaven  and  the  church
are  called  a  bride  and  a  wife.  v.  As  far,  therefore,  as  this
union,  or  the  marriage  of  good  and  truth,  exists  in  heaven
and  the  church  in  general  and  in  an  angel  of  heaven  and  a
member  of  the  church  in  particular,  so  far  they  are  the  Lord's
image  and  likeness ;  since  good  and  truth  are  one  in  the  Lord,
and,  indeed,  are  the  Lord.  vi.  Love  and  wisdom,  in  heaven
and  in  the  church  in  general,  also  in  an  angel  of  heaven  and  in
a  member  of  the  church,  are  one  when  the  will  and  the
understanding,  or  good  and  truth,  are  united ;  or,  what  is  the
same,  when  charity  and  faith  are  united  ;  or,  what  is  still  the
same,  when  doctrine  from  the  Word  and  a  life  according  to
it  are  united,  vii.  How  the  two  are  united  in  man  and  in
all  things  belonging  to  him  is  explained  in  the  work  on  The
Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  Part  V.,  nos.  358-432,  where  the
creation  of  man,  and  especially  the  correspondence  of  the
will  and  understanding  with  the  heart  and  lungs  are  discussed.


Divine  Providence  9

g.  In  the  following  pages  it  will  be  explained  how  these  two
are  united  in  the  things  inferior  to  or  external  to  man,  in
both  the  animal  and  the  vegetable  kingdoms ;  but  the  three
following  propositions  must  first  be  stated,  i.  In  the  universe
and  in  every  part  of  it  as  first  created  by  the  Lord,  there  was  a
marriage  of  good  and  truth,  ii.  This  marriage  was  dissolved
in  man  after  creation,  iii.  It  is  in  accordance  with  divine
Providence  that  what  was  thus  separated  should  be  reunited,
and  that  the  marriage  of  good  and  truth  should  be  restored.
As  these  three  propositions  are  fully  established  in  the  work
on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  further  proof  is  unnecessary.
Besides,  any  one  may  reasonably  conclude  that  as  there
existed  from  creation  the  marriage  of  good  and  truth  in
every  created  thing,  and  as  this  marriage  was  afterwards
dissolved,  the  Lord  is  continually  working  to  restore  it;
consequenthy  that  its  restoration,  and  thereby  the  union  of
the  created  universe  with  the  Lord  through  man,  is  the  object
of  divine  Providence.

10.  V.  The  good  of  love  is  not  really  good  unless  it  is  united
with  the  truth  of  wisdom  ;  and  the  truth  of  wisdom  is  not  real
truth  unless  it  is  united  with  the  good  of  love.  Good  and  truth
derive  this  from  their  origin.  Good  has  its  source  in  the  Lord,
and  so  has  truth ;  for  the  Lord  is  Good  itself  and  Truth  itself,
and  these  two  in  Him  are  one.  For  this  reason  good  in  the
angels  of  heaven  and  in  men  on  earth  is  not  really  good,  except
so  far  as  it  is  united  with  truth ;  and  truth  is  not  real  truth,
except  so  far  as  it  is  united  with  good.  It  is  well  known  that
every  good  and  every  truth  comes  from  the  Lord;  hence,
as  good  makes  one  with  truth,  and  truth  with  good,  it  follows
that  good  to  be  really  good,  and  truth  to  be  real  truth,  must
be  united  in  the  recipient,  that  is,  in  an  angel  of  heaven  or
a  man  on  earth.

11.  It  is  indeed  known  that  everything  in  the  universe  has
relation  to  good  and  truth,  because  by  good  is  understood
that  which  universally  embraces  and  involves  everything
connected  with  love,  and  by  truth  is  understood  that  which
universally  embraces  and  involves  everything  connected  with
wisdom ;  but  it  has  not  hitherto  been  known  that  there  is
no  such  thing  as  good  divorced  from  truth,  and  that  there  is
no  such  thing  as  truth  divorced  from  good.  It  seems  indeed
that  good  could  exist  without  truth,  and  truth  without  good,
but  they  cannot ;  for  love,  whose  derivatives  are  called  goods.


lo  Divine  Providence

is  the  Being  of  a  thing ;  and  wisdom,  whose  derivatives  are
called  truths,  is  the  Manifestation  of  a  thing  from  that
Being,  as  is  shown  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom
(nos.  14-16);  and  therefore,  as  there  is  no  Being  without
Manifestation,  nor  Manifestation  without  Being,  so  there
is  no  good  without  truth,  nor  truth  without  good.  Again,
what  is  good  unless  it  has  relation  to  something  ?  Can  it  be
called  good  if  it  effects  nothing  and  gives  rise  to  no  percep-
tion ?  That  which  is  one  with  good,  gives  rise  to  feeling,  and
thus  makes  itself  perceived  and  felt,  relates  to  truth,  for  it
relates  to  the  contents  of  the  understanding.  If  you  speak
to  any  one  simpl}^  of  good  without  saying  that  this  or  that  is
good,  will  the  word  have  any  meaning  for  him  ?  But  if  this
or  that  thing  is  identified  with  the  term  good,  then  the  word
has  a  real  meaning.  Now  it  is  identified  with  good  only  in
the  understanding,  and  everything  in  the  understanding
relates  to  truth.  It  is  the  same  with  wilhng.  To  will,
without  knowing,  perceiving,  and  thinking  about  what  one
wills,  amounts  to  nothing,  but,  when  united  with  these,  it
becomes  something.  All  willing  is  an  attribute  of  love  and
has  relation  to  good ;  and  all  knowing,  perceiving,  and  thinking
are  attributes  of  the  understanding,  and  have  relation  to
truth  :  hence  it  is  evident  that  willing  by  itself  is  nothing,
but  willing  this  or  that  is  something.  It  is  the  same  with
every  use,  because  a  use  is  a  good ;  unless  it  is  directed  to
something  with  which  it  may  be  identified,  it  is  not  a  use,
and  is  therefore  nothing.  Use  is  defined  in  the  understand-
ing ;  and  what  comes  from  the  understanding,  and  is  united
or  conjoined  with  use,  has  relation  to  truth;  and  from  this
the  use  derives  its  quality.  From  these  few  remarks  it  will
be  evident  that  good  without  truth  and  truth  without  good
are  naught.  It  has  been  stated  that  good  together  with
truth,  and  truth  together  with  good,  are  realities ;  it  follows
that  evil  together  with  falsity,  and  falsity  together  with  evil
are  not  anything  real,  for  the  latter  are  the  opposites  of  the
former,  and  opposition  destroys,  and  in  this  case  destroys  that
reahty.     But  more  will  be  said  concerning  this  hereafter.

12.  Note  that  there  is  a  marriage  of  good  and  truth  in  the
cause,  and  also  a  marriage  of  good  and  truth  from  the  cause
in  the  effect.  The  marriage  of  good  and  truth  in  the  cause
is  the  marriage  of  the  will  and  understanding,  or  of  love  and
wisdom ;    it  exists  in  all  that  a  man  wills  and  thinks  and


Divine  Providence  1 1

tl\ence  concludes  and  purposes.  This  marriage  enters  into
the  effect  and  produces  it ;  but  in  producing  the  effect  good
and  truth  appear  as  if  they  were  distinct,  because  what  is
simultaneous  then  produces  what  is  successive.  For  ex-
ample :  While  a  man  is  exercising  his  will  and  thought  about
food,  clothing,  his  house,  business  and  work,  or  social  inter-
course, he  first  wills  and  thinks,  or  concludes  and  purposes
simultaneously;  but  when  he  has  put  these  intentions  into
practice  and  so  produced  the  effects,  then  one  succeeds  the
other,  although  in  his  will  and  thought  they  still  continue
to  be  united.  In  these  effects  the  uses  have  reference  to
lo^^e  or  good,  while  the  means  to  those  uses  have  reference  to
the  understanding  or  truth.  Any  one  may  confirm  these
general  truths  by  particular  instances,  if  he  sees  clearly  what
relates  to  the  good  of  love,  and  what  to  the  truth  of  wisdom,
and  also  how  this  relation  exists  in  the  cause,  and  how  in  the
effect.

13.  It  has  been  stated  more  than  once  that  love  is  the  life
of  man.  This  does  not  mean  love  separate  from  wisdom,  or
good  separate  from  truth  in  the  cause ;  for  love  by  itself  or
good  by  itself  have  no  existence;  and  therefore  the  love
which  constitutes  man's  inmost  life,  which  life  comes  from
the  Lord,  is  love  united  with  wisdom.  Moreover,  the  love
that  constitutes  the  hfe  of  man,  so  far  as  he  is  capable  of
receiving  it,  is  not  love  separate  from  wisdom  in  the  cause,
but  in  the  effect :  for  love  has  no  meaning  apart  from  the
quahties  it  possesses  and  these  qualities  constitute  wisdom;
and  quality,  or  wisdom,  can  only  exist  by  derivation  from
its  Being  which  is  love ;  hence  they  are  one.  It  is  the  same
with  good  and  truth.  Now  because  truth  arises  from  good
as  wisdom  does  from  love,  therefore  both  taken  together  are
called  love  or  good ;  for  wisdom  is  the  form  of  love,  and  truth
is  the  form  of  good ;  for  all  quaUty  is  derived  from  form  and
from  no  other  source.  From  these  considerations  it  may
now  be  seen  that  good  is  not  really  good  except  so  far  as  it
is  united  with  its  proper  truth,  and  that  truth  is  not  real
truth  unless  it  is  united  with  its  proper  good.

14.  VI.  The  good  of  love  when  not  united  to  the  truth  of
wisdom  is  not  real,  but  apparent  good  ;  and  the  truth  of  wisdom
when  it  is  not  united  to  the  good  of  love  is  not  real,  but  apparent
truth.  It  is  a  fact  that  there  is  no  good  which  is  really  good
unless  it  is  united  with  its  proper  truth ;  nor  any  truth  which


12  Divine  Providence

is  real  unless  it  is  united  to  its  proper  good.  Nevertheless
good  does  exist  apart  from  truth,  and  truth  apart  from  good.
This  is  the  case  with  hypocrites  and  flatterers,  with  evil
persons  of  every  kind,  and  also  with  those  who  are  in  natural
but  not  in  spiritual  good.  All  such  people  can  do  good  to  the
church,  their  country,  society,  their  fellow-citizens,  the  needy,
the  poor,  the  widow,  and  the  orphan ;  they  can  also  under-
stand truths,  think  of  them  with  their  understanding,  and
thus  speak  and  teach  them.  Still,  the  goods  and  truths  in
them  are  not  interiorly  or  really  goods  and  truths  but  only
outwardl)^,  and  thus  in  appearance ;  for  they  are  only  for  the
sake  of  self  and  the  world,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  good  itself
and  truth  itself,  consequently  they  are  not  derived  from  good
and  truth ;  and  so  they  are  of  the  mouth  and  the  body  only,
and  not  of  the  heart.  They  may  be  likened  to  gold  and  silver
overlaid  with  dross  or  rotten  wood  or  dung;  and  the  truths
that  are  uttered  may  be  compared  to  a  breath  that  passes
away,  or  a  delusive  light  that  vanishes,  though  they  appear
outwardly  like  real  truths.  In  those  who  speak  them,  such
truths  are  only  apparent;  but  they  may  be  otherwise  with
those  who  hear  and  receive  them,  not  knowing  that  they
are  only  apparent,  for  what  is  external  affects  every  one
according  to  his  own  internal  character ;  a  truth,  by  whom-
soever uttered,  enters  into  another's  hearing,  and  is  received
by  his  mind  according  to  its  own  state  and  quality.  The
case  is  almost  similar  with  those  who  are  hereditarily  in
natural  good,  but  not  in  spiritual  good;  for  the  internal  of
every  good  and  of  every  truth  is  spiritual,  and  this  repels
falsities  and  evils,  while  what  is  merely  natural  favours  them ;
and  it  is  inconsistent  to  favour  evils  and  falsities  and  yet  to
do  good.

15.  Good  may  be  separated  from  truth,  and  truth  from
good,  and,  when  separated,  still  look  like  good  and  truth,
because  man  has  the  faculty  of  acting,  which  is  called  liberty,
and  the  faculty  of  understanding,  which  is  called  rationality.
It  is  from  the  abuse  of  these  faculties  that  a  man  may  seem
different  outwardly  from  what  he  is  inwardly;  consequently
a  wicked  man  can  do  good  and  speak  truth,  and  a  devil  can
pretend  to  be  an  angel  of  hght.  But  on  this  subject  see  the
following  passages  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wis-
dom :  The  origin  of  evil  is  in  the  abuse  of  liberty  and  ration-
ality which  are  essentially  human  faculties  (nos.  264-270).


Divine  Providence  13

A  wicked  man  enjoys  these  two  faculties  as  well  as  a  good  man
(no.  266).  Love  can  accomplish  nothing  unless  it  is  married
to  wisdom,  neither  can  good  unless  it  is  married  to  truth
(no.  401).  Love  does  nothing  except  in  union  with  wisdom
or  the  understanding  (no.  409).  Love  unites  with  wisdom  or
the  understanding,  and  causes  it  to  be  reciprocally  united
with  itself  (409-412).  Wisdom,  or  the  understanding,  is
capable  of  being  elevated  by  a  power  derived  from  love  so
as  to  receive  and  understand  the  truths  revealed  by  the  light
of  heaven  (no.  413).  Love  can  in  like  manner  be  elevated  so
as  to  receive  the  good  conveyed  by  the  warmth  of  heaven,
if  it  loves  wisdom,  its  consort,  in  a  corresponding  degree
(nos.  414,  415).  Otherwise  love  draws  down  wisdom,  or  the
understanding,  from  its  elevation,  so  as  to  act  in  unison  with
itself  (nos.  416-418).  Love  is  purified  by  wisdom  in  the
understanding,  if  they  are  elevated  together  (nos.  419-421).
Love  purified  by  wisdom  in  the  understanding  becomes
spiritual  and  celestial ;  but  love  defiled  in  the  understanding
becomes  sensual  and  corporeal  (nos.  422-424).  It  is  the
same  with  charity  and  faith  and  their  union,  as  it  is  with  love
and  wisdom  and  their  union  (nos.  427-430).  The  nature  of
charity  in  the  heavens  (no.  431).

16.  VIL  The  Lord  does  not  permit  any  thing  to  be  divided  ;
and  therefore  it  must  either  be  in  good  and  at  the  same  time  in
truth,  or  it  must  be  in  evil  and  at  the  same  time  in  falsity.  The
divine  Providence  of  the  Lord  has  for  its  chief  end  that  a  man
may  be  in  good  and  at  the  same  time  in  truth ;  and  for  this
end  it  works ;  for  thus  a  man  is  his  own  good  and  his  own
love,  and  also  his  own  truth  and  his  own  wisdom ;  and  then
man  is  a  man,  and  becomes  an  image  of  the  Lord.  But
because  a  man  while  living  in  the  world  can  be  in  good  and  at
the  same  time  in  falsity,  also  can  be  in  evil  and  at  the  same
time  in  truth,  can  even  be  in  evil  and  at  the  same  time  in
good,  and  thus  as  it  were  have  a  double  nature,  and  because
this  division  destroys  that  image  and  so  destroys  the  man,
therefore  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  in  all  its  operations
seeks  to  prevent  this  division.  And  as  it  is  less  hurtful  for
a  man  to  be  in  evil  and  at  the  same  time  in  falsity,  than  to  be
in  good  and  at  the  same  time  in  evil,  therefore  the  Lord
permits  this,  not  because  He  wills  it,  but  because  He  cannot
prevent  it  consistently  with  His  own  purpose,  which  is  the
salvation  of  man.    The  reason  whv  a  man  is  allowed  to  be


14  Divine  Providence

in  e\i\  and  at  the  saiue  time  in  truth,  and  why  the  Lord
cannot  prevent  this  consistently  with  His  purpose  of  salvation
is  that  his  understanding  may  in  this  way  be  raised  into  the
light  of  wisdom,  and  see  trutlis  or  acknowledge  them  when
heard,  while  his  love  remains  below ;  for  a  man  can  thus  be
in  hea^'en  as  regards  his  understanding,  but  in  hell  as  regards
his  love.  This  permission  cannot  be  denied  to  man.  because
the  two  faculties  of  rationality  and  Hberty  cannot  be  taken
from  him,  by  \"irtue  of  which  he  is  a  man.  and  is  distin-
guished from  the  beasti;,  and  by  which  alone  he  can  be  re-
generated and  thus  saved :  for  by  these  faculties  a  man  can
act  according  to  wisdom,  and  can  also  act  from  a  love  that  is
devoid  of  wisdom :  by  these  also,  his  wisdom  above  enables
him  to  see  his  love  beneath,  and  in  this  way  see  the  thoughts,
intentions,  affections  and  consequently  the  e%-ils  and  falsities
and  also  the  goods  and  truths  of  his  hfe  and  belief:  and
without  a  knowledge  and  acknowledgement  of  these  in
himself,  he  cannot  be  reformed.  Of  these  two  faculties
something  has  already  been  said,  and  more  will  be  said  in
what  follows.  This  is  the  reason  why  a  man  can  be  in  good
and  at  the  same  time  in  truth,  in  e\'il  and  at  the  same  time
in  falsity,  and  also  alternately  in  the  one  and  the  other.

17.  Dining  his  hfe  in  the  world  a  man  can  hardly  attain
to  either  conjunction  or  union,  whether  of  good  and  truth,
or  of  evil  and  falsity ;  for  so  long  as  he  hves  in  the  world  he
is  kept  in  a  state  of  reformation  or  regeneration  :  but  after
death  ever\-  man  comes  into  one  or  the  other  union,  because
then  he  can  no  longer  be  reformed  or  regenerated :  he  then
remains  such  as  his  hfe  in  the  world,  that  is.  such  as  his
ruling  love  has  been.  If  his  life,  therefore,  has  been  a  hfe
of  the  lo^e  of  e\il,  all  the  truth  that  he  has  acquired  in  the
world  from  teachers,  sermons,  or  the  Word,  is  taken  away;
and  then  he  drinks  in  the  falsity  which  accords  with  his  evil,
as  a  sponge  does  water.  On  the  other  hand,  if  his  hfe  has
been  a  hfe  of  the  love  of  good,  all  the  falsity  which  he  has
acquired  in  the  world  from  hearing  and  reading,  but  which
he  has  not  confirmed  in  himself,  is  then  removed :  and  in  its
place  there  is  imj)arted  to  him  truth  accordant  with  his  good.
This  is  meant  by  these  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  Take  the  talent
from  him,  and  give  it  unto  him  that  hath  ten  talents ;  for
unto  every  one  that  hath  shall  be  given,  that  he  may  have
abundance ;  but  from  him  that  hath  not,  shall  be  taken  away


Divine  Providence  15

even  that  which  he  hath  "  (Matt.  xxv.  2S,  29;  xiii.  12  ;  Mark
iv.  25;  Luke  viii.  18;  xix.  24-26).

18.  The  reason  why  every  one  after  death  must  either  be
in  good  and  at  the  same  time  in  truth,  or  in  evil  and  at  the
same  time  in  falsity,  is  that  good  and  evil  cannot  be  united,
nor  can  good  and  the  falsity  of  evil,  nor  evil  and  the  truth  of
good;  for  they  are  opposites,  and  opposites  fight  together
until  one  destroys  the  other.  Those  who  are  in  evil  and  at
the  same  time  in  good  are  meant  by  these  words  of  the  Lord
to  the  church  of  the  Laodiceans,  in  the  Apocalypse  :  "  I
know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot ;  I  would
thou  wert  cold  or  hot ;  so  then  because  thou  art  lukewarm,
and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spew  thee  out  of  my  mouth"
(iii.  15,  16) :  and  also  by  these  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  No  man
can  serve  two  masters ;  for  either  he  will  hate  the  one  and
love  the  other,  or  else  he  will  hold  to  the  one  and  despise  the
other"  (Matt.  vi.  24).

19.  VIIL  Whatever  is  in  good  and  at  the  same  time  in
truth,  is  real ;  and  whatever  is  in  evil  and  at  the  same  time  in
falsity,  is  not  real.  It  may  be  seen  above  (no.  11),  that  what
is  in  good  and  at  the  same  time  in  truth  is  something;  and
from  this  it  follows  that  what  is  evil  and  at  the  same  time
false  is  not  anything  real.  By  its  not  being  real,  is  meant
that  it  has  no  power  and  no  spiritual  life.  Those  who  are
in  evil  and  at  the  same  time  in  falsity,  all  of  whom  are  in  hell,
have  indeed  power  with  one  another ;  for  one  who  is  evil  can
do  evil,  and  he  does  it  in  a  thousand  ways ;  nevertheless,  he
can  do  evil  to  the  e\i\  only  through  their  evil ;  but  he  cannot
harm  the  good  in  the  least,  except,  as  sometimes  happens,  by
a  union  with  their  evil;  this  is  the  origin  of  temptations  or
infestations  by  attendant  evil  spirits  which  give  rise  to  com-
bats whereby  the  good  can  be  freed  from  their  evils.  Since
the  evil  have  no  power,  all  hell  is  not  only  as  nothing  in  the
sight  of  the  Lord,  but  is  absolutely  nothing  as  regards  power ;
this  I  have  seen  proved  by  abundant  experience.  But  it
is  a  remarkable  fact  that  the  wicked  all  believe  themselves
to  be  powerful,  and  the  good  all  believe  themselves  to  be
destitute  of  power.  This  is  because  the  evil  attribute  every-
thing to  their  own  power,  thus  to  cunning  and  malice,  and
nothing  to  the  Lord ;  but  the  good  attribute  nothing  to  their
own  prudence,  but  everything  to  the  Lord,  who  is  Omni-
potent.    Furthermore,  evil  and  falsity  together  are  nothing


i6  Divine  Providence

real,  because  there  is  no  spiritual  life  in  them :  for  this  reason
the  life  of  the  infernals  is  not  called  Hfe  but  death ;  now  since
nothing  is  real  unless  it  has  life,  no  reality  can  be  attributed
to  death.

20.  Those  who  are  in  evil  and  at  the  same  time  in  truths,
may  be  compared  to  eagles  that  soar  on  high,  but  drop  down
when  depri^•ed  of  the  use  of  their  wings ;  for  this  is  what
happens  to  men  after  death,  when  they  have  become  spirits,
if  they  have  understood  truths,  have  uttered  them  and  taught
them,  and  yet  have  had  no  regard  to  God  in  their  lives.  They
raise  themselves  on  high  by  means  of  their  understanding,
and  sometimes  they  enter  the  heavens  and  pretend  to  be
angels  of  hght ;  but  when  the  truths  are  taken  from  them  and
they  are  expelled,  they  sink  down  into  hell.  Eagles,  more-
over, signify  rapacious  men  whose  understandings  are  en-
lightened, and  wings  signify  spiritual  truths.  Such  are  those
who  ha^•e  had  no  regard  to  God  in  their  lives.  Having  regard
to  God  in  one's  life,  means  simply  thinking  this  or  that  evil
to  be  a  sin  against  Him,  and  refraining  from  it  for  that  reason.

21.  IX.  The  Lord's  divine  Providence  causes  evil  and  falsity
to  be  of  service  for  equilibrium,  relation,  and  purification,  and
thus  for  the  union  of  good  and  truth  in  others.  From  what  has
already  been  said  it  should  be  e\'ident  that  the  Lord's  divine
Providence  continually  works  for  the  union  in  man  of  truth
with  good,  and  of  good  with  truth,  because  this  union  con-
stitutes the  church,  and  also  heaven.  For  this  union  exists
in  the  Lord,  and  in  all  things  that  proceed  from  Him.  It  is
for  this  reason  that  heaven  and  the  church  are  called  a
marriage;  and  therefore  the  kingdom  of  God  is  compared
in  the  Word  to  a  marriage.  It  is  for  this  reason  also  that
in  the  Israelitish  church  the  Sabbath  was  a  most  holy  reUgious
ordinance,  because  it  signified  that  union.  It  is  also  for
the  same  reason  that  in  the  Word,  and  in  every  part  of  it,
there  is  a  marriage  of  good  and  truth,  concerning  which  see
the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred
Scripture  (nos.  80-90).  The  marriage  of  good  and  truth
arises  from  the  Lord's  marriage  with  the  church,  and  this
from  the  marriage  of  Love  and  Wisdom  in  the  Lord;  for
good  is  derived  from  love,  and  truth  from  wisdom.  From
these  considerations  it  may  be  seen  that  the  constant  object
of  divine  Providence  is  to  unite  good  with  truth  and  truth
with  good  in  man,  for  thus  he  is  united  with  the  Lord.


Divine  Providence  17

22.  But  as  many  have  violated  and  still  violate  this
marriage,  especially  by  separating  faith  from  charity, — for
faith  pertains  to  truth  and  truth  to  faith,  and  charity  per-
tains to  good  and  good  to  charity, — and  as  they  thereby
unite  in  themselves  evil  and  falsity,  and  have  thus  become
and  are  becoming  opposed  to  good  and  truth,  it  is  neverthe-
less provided  by  the  Lord  that  evil  and  falsity  shall  con-
tribute as  means  of  equihbrium,  relation,  and  purification  to
union  of  good  and  truth  in  others.

23.  The  union  of  good  and  truth  in  others  is  provided
for  by  the  Lord,  by  means  of  the  equilibrium  between  heaven
and  hell;  for  there  is  a  constant  exhalation  of  evil  and
falsity  from  hell,  but  of  good  and  truth  from  heaven.  Every
man  is  maintained  in  this  equilibrium  as  long  as  he  lives  in
the  world;  and  thus  he  is  maintained  in  that  hberty  of
thinking,  willing,  speaking  and  acting  by  which  he  can  be
reformed.  Concerning  this  spiritual  equilibrium,  by  virtue
of  which  man  possesses  freedom,  see  the  work  on  Heaven  and
Hell  (nos.  589-603).

24.  The  union  of  good  and  truth  is  provided  for  by  the
Lord  by  means  of  relation  ;  for  the  quahty  of  good  is  recog-
nised only  by  its  relation  to  what  is  less  good,  and  by  its
contrariety  to  evil.  This  is  the  origin  of  all  perception  and
sensation,  because  thus  only  can  its  quality  be  discerned;
for  example,  everything  delightful  is  perceived  and  felt  by
means  of  that  which  is  less  delightful,  or  displeasing ;  everj--
thing  beautiful  by  means  of  what  is  less  beautiful,  or  ugly;
every  good  of  love  by  means  of  what  is  less  good,  or  evil;
and  every  truth  of  wisdom  by  means  of  what  is  less  true,  or
false.  There  must  needs  be  variety  in  ever\'  thing  in  general
and  in  particular ;  and  when  there  is  a  corresponding  variety
in  its  opposite,  and  there  results  an  equihbrium  between
them,  then  a  relation  is  also  established  between  the  several
degrees  of  each;  and  thus  the  perception  and  sensation  of
the  thing  are  heightened  or  diminished.  But  it  is  to  be
noted  that  an  opposite  may  destroy  or  exalt  these  perceptions
and  sensations;  when  an  opposite  invades  perceptions  and
sensations,  it  destroys  them ;  but  when  it  remains  separate
it  exalts  them.  For  this  reason  the  Lord  exquisitely  separates
good  and  evil  in  man,  that  they  may  not  be  mingled,  just  as
He  separates  heaven  from  hell.

25.  The  union  of  good  and  truth  in  others  is  provided  for
c


i8  Divine  Providence

by  the  Lord  by  means  of  -purification,  which  is  effected  in
two  ways,  one  by  temptation  and  the  other  by  leavening.
Spiritual  temptations  are  nothing  but  combats  against  the
evils  and  falsities  that  are  exhaled  from  hell  and  aSect  man  ;
by  these  he  is  purified  from  evils  and  falsities,  and  good  is
united  to  truth  in  him,  and  truth  to  good.  Spiritual  leavening
takes  place  in  many  ways,  in  the  heavens  as  well  as  on  earth ;
but  in  the  world  it  is  not  known  what  it  is,  nor  how  it  is
effected.  For  there  are  evils  and  falsities  which,  when
introduced  into  a  community,  act  just  like  leaven  when  put
into  meal,  or  ferment  put  into  new  wine,  by  which  the
elements  that  disagree  are  separated  from  the  rest,  and  things
that  agree  are  united,  and- purity  and  clearness  are  the  result.
This  is  what  is  meant  by  these  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  The
kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  unto  leaven,  which  a  woman
took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal,  till  the  whole  was
leavened  "  (Matt.  xiii.  33;  Luke  xiii.  21).

26.  These  uses  are  provided  for  by  the  Lord  by  the  union
of  evil  and  falsity  which  exists  in  the  inhabitants  of  hell;
for  the  dominion  of  the  Lord  which  extends  not  only  over
heaven,  but  also  over  hell,  is  a  dominion  of  uses;  and  the
Lord's  Providence  ordains  that  there  shall  be  in  it  no  useless
person  or  thing.

The  Lord's  divine  Providence  has  for  its  end  a
heaven  from  the  human  race

27.  By  long-continued  intercourse  with  angels  and  spirits
it  has  been  made  known  to  me  and  proved  that  heaven  does
not  consist  of  angels  so  created  from  the  first,  and  that  hell
is  not  the  abode  of  a  devil  who  was  created  an  angel  of  light
and  cast  down  from  heaven,  but  that  both  heaven  and  hell
are  derived  from  the  human  race, — heaven  from  those  who
are  in  the  love  of  good  and  therefore  perceive  truth,  and  hell
from  those  who  are  in  the  love  of  evil  and  therefore  perceive
falsity.  On  this  subject  see  also  the  work  on  Heaven  and
Hell  (nos.  311-316);  the  little  work  on  The  Last  Jtidgtnent
(nos.  14-27);  and  the  Continuation  to  the  Last  Judgment,  and
the  Spiritual  World,  from  beginning  to  end.  Now  as  heaven
is  derived  from  the  human  race,  and  to  dwell  with  the  Lord
for  ever  constitutes  heaven,  it  follows  that  the  Lord  proposed
this  as  the  end  of  creation ;  and  because  heaven  is  the  end  of
creation,  it  is  also  the  end  of  His  divine  Providence.     The


Divine  Providence  19

Lord  did  not  create  the  universe  for  His  own  sake,  but  for
the  sake  of  those  with  whom  He  may  dwell  in  heaven;  for
spiritual  love  wishes  to  impart  whatever  it  possesses  to  others ;
and  so  far  as  it  can  do  this,  it  attains  its  true  Being,  its  peace
and  its  blessedness.  Spiritual  love  derives  this  quality  from
the  Lord's  di\ine  Love,  which  is  of  this  nature  in  an  infinite
degree.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  divine  Love,  and
therefore  the  divine  Providence,  has  for  its  end  a  heaven
consisting  of  men  who  have  become  or  are  becoming  angels,
to  whom  the  Lord  may  impart  all  the  blessings  and  happiness
of  love  and  wisdom,  as  a  gift  from  Himself,  by  His  presence
in  them.  He  cannot  do  otherwise,  for  there  is  in  men  by
creation  an  image  and  hkeness  of  Himself;  the  image  in
them  is  wisdom,  and  the  Hkeness  is  love;  and  the  Lord  in
them  is  love  united  to  \visdom,  and  wisdom  united  to  love ;
or,  what  is  the  same,  good  united  to  truth,  and  truth  to  good,
which  union  was  described  in  the  preceding  article.  But  as
it  is  not  known  what  heaven  is  in  general,  or  in  a  community,
and  what  it  is  in  particular,  or  in  one,  what  it  is  in  the  spiritual
world,  and  what  in  the  natural  world, — and  yet  it  is  important
that  this  should  be  known,  because  heaven  is  the  end  of  the
divine  Providence, — therefore  I  desire  to  throw  some  light
upon  this  subject  in  the  following  series  :

I.  Heaven  is  union  with  the  Lord.

II.  Man  by  creation  is  capable  of  being  more  and  more
closely  united  with  the  Lord.

III.  The  more  closely  a  man  is  united  with  the  Lord,  the
wiser  he  becomes.

IV.  The  more  closely  a  man  is  united  with  the  Lord,  the
happier  he  becomes.

V.  The  more  closely  a  man  is  united  with  the  Lord,  the
more  distinctly  he  seems  to  be  his  own,  and  the  more  clearly
he  perceives  that  he  is  the  Lord's.

28.  I.  Heaven  is  union  ivith  the  Lord.  Heaven  does  not
originate  with  the  angels,  but  from  the  Lord ;  for  the  love
and  wisdom  of  the  angels,  which  constitute  heaven,  are  not
derived  from  themselves  but  from  the  Lord,  and  are  indeed
the  Lord  in  them.  And  since  love  and  wisdom  are  the  Lord's,
and  are  the  Lord  in  heaven,  and  since  love  and  wisdom
constitute  the  life  of  the  angels,  it  is  also  evident  that  their
hfe  is  the  Lord's,  and  is  indeed  the  Lord.  The  angels  them-
selves acknowledge  that  thev  derive  their  life  from  the  Lord ;


20  Divine  Providence

and  hence  it  may  be  seen  that  heaven  is  union  with  the  Lord.
But  as  union  with  the  Lord  is  of  various  kinds,  and  therefore
heaven  is  not  the  same  for  one  as  for  another,  it  also  follows
that  heaven  differs  in  its  character  according  to  the  kind  of
union  with  the  Lord  which  exists  in  it.  It  will  be  seen  in
the  following  article  that  the  union  may  be  closer  and  closer,
or  more  and  more  remote.  Something  shall  now  be  said  to
explain  how  this  union  is  brought  about,  and  of  what  nature
it  is  :  It  is  a  union  of  the  Lord  with  the  angels,  and  of  the
angels  with  the  Lord,  and  is  thus  reciprocal.  The  Lord  flows
into  the  life's  love  of  the  angels,  and  the  angels  receive  Him
in  wisdom,  and  in  this  way  reciprocally  unite  themselves
with  the  Lord.  But  it  is  to  be  carefully  noted  that  although
it  appears  to  the  angels  as  if  they  unite  themselves  with  the
Lord  by  wisdom,  yet  it  is  the  Lord  who  in  this  way  unites
them  with  Himself;  for  their  wisdom  also  comes  from  the
Lord.  It  amounts  to  the  same  thing  if  we  say  that  the  Lord
unites  Himself  with  the  angels  by  good,  and  that  the  angels
reciprocally  unite  themselves  with  the  Lord  by  truth;  for
all  good  is  of  love,  and  all  truth  is  of  wisdom.  But  as  this
reciprocal  union  is  an  arcanum  which  few  can  understand
without  explanation,  I  will  explain  it,  as  far  as  possible,  by
such  things  as  the  mind  can  grasp.  In  the  work  on  The
Divine  Love  and  Wisdotn  (nos.  404,  405),  it  is  shown  how  love
unites  itself  with  wisdom,  namely,  by  the  love  of  knowledge,
whence  comes  the  affection  of  truth,  by  the  love  of  under-
standing truth,  whence  comes  the  perception  of  truth,  and
by  the  love  of  seeing  what  is  known  and  understood,  whence
comes  thought.^  The  Lord  is  present  in  all  these  affections,
for  they  are  derivations  from  the  life's  love  of  every  one;
and  the  angels  receive  the  influx  of  good  from  Him  in  the
perception  of  truth,  and  in  their  thought,  for  in  these  the
influx  becomes  sensible  to  them,  but  not  in  their  affections.
Now,  as  perceptions  and  thoughts  appear  to  the  angels  as
if  they  were  their  own,  although  they  come  from  affections
which  are  derived  from  the  Lord,  the  angels  seem  to  unite
themselves  reciprocally  with  the  Lord,  whereas  the  Lord
unites  them  with  Himself ;  for  perceptions  and  thoughts  are
the  products  of  affection  which,  being  a  derivative  of  love,
is  their  soul ;  for  no  one  can  have  any  perception  or  thought
without  affection,  and  every  one  perceives  and  thinks
*  That  is,  deliberative  thought  or  meditation. — Tr.


Divine  Providence  21

according  to  affection.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  the
reciprocal  union  of  the  angels  with  the  Lord  is  not  the  act
of  the  angels  but  only  seems  to  be  so.  Of  a  similar  nature  is
that  union  of  the  Lord  with  the  church,  and  of  the  church
with  the  Lord,  which  is  called  the  heavenly  and  spiritual
marriage.

29.  People  meet  together  in  the  spiritual  world  as  a  result
of  mental  concentration.^  When  any  one  there  thinks  of
another  and  has  also  a  desire  to  speak  with  him,  the  other  at
once  becomes  present,  and  they  see  each  other  face  to  face ;
and  so  it  is  when  any  one  thinks  of  another  from  an  affection
of  love ;  but  by  the  latter  affection  union  is  effected,  by  the
former,  presence  only.  This  is  peculiar  to  the  spiritual  world,
because  all  there  are  spiritual ;  it  is  otherwise  in  the  natural
world,  where  all  are  material.  In  the  natural  world  the  same
thing  takes  place  with  men  in  the  affections  and  thoughts  of
their  spirit ;  but  because  there  are  spaces  in  the  natural  world,
while  in  the  spiritual  world  the  spaces  are  only  appearances,
therefore  in  the  spiritual  world  that  which  takes  place  in  the
thought  of  any  one's  spirit  is  actually  effected.  This  has
been  mentioned  to  show  how  the  Lord's  union  with  the  angels
is  effected,  and  also  the  apparently  reciprocal  union  of  the
angels  with  the  Lord,  for  all  the  angels  turn  their  faces  to  the
Lord,  and  the  Lord  looks  at  them  in  the  forehead,  and  the
angels  look  to  the  Lord  with  the  eyes,  because  the  forehead
corresponds  to  love  and  its  affections,  and  the  eyes  correspond
to  wisdom  and  its  perceptions.  Still  the  angels  do  not  of
themselves  turn  their  faces  to  the  Lord,  but  the  Lord  turns
them  to  Himself ;  this  He  does  by  an  influx  into  their  life's
love,  and  through  that  love  He  enters  into  their  perceptions
and  thoughts,  and  so  turns  them  to  Himself.  In  every
process  of  the  human  mind,  there  is  a  similar  passing  of  love
into  thought,  and  thought  into  love ;  this  circular  process  is
effected  by  love,  and  may  be  called  the  circle  of  life.  On  this
subject  something  may  also  be  seen  in  the  work  on  The  Divine
Love  and  Wisdom  ;   for  example  : —

The  angels  always  face  the  Lord  as  a  sun  (nos.  129-134).
All  the  interior  organic  forms,  both  of  the  minds  and  the
bodies  of  angels,  are  likewise  turned  to  the  Lord  as  a  sun
(nos.  135-139).    Every  spirit,  whatever  his  character  may  be,

1  Or  the  direction  in  which  or  the  object  to  which  the  face  and
therefore  the  attention  is  turned. — Tr.


22  Divine  Providence

turns  in  like  manner  to  his  ruling  love  (nos.  140-145).  Love
unites  with  wisdom,  and  causes  it  to  be  reciprocally  united
to  itself  (nos.  410-412).  The  angels  are  in  the  Lord,  and  the
Lord  in  them;  and  since  the  angels  are  only  recipients  of
life,  the  Lord  alone  constitutes  heaven  (nos.  113-118).

30.  The  Lord's  heaven  in  the  natural  world  is  called  the
Church ;  and  an  angel  of  this  heaven  is  a  member  of  the  Church
who  is  united  with  the  Lord ;  he  also  becom.es  an  angel  of  the
spiritual  heaven  after  his  departure  from  the  world.  From
this  it  is  evident  that  what  has  been  said  concerning  theangelic
heaven  must  be  understood  also  of  the  human  heaven  or  the
Church.  The  reciprocal  union  with  the  Lord  which  con-
stitutes heaven  in  man  is  revealed  by  the  Lord  in  these
words  :  "  Abide  in  Me  and  I  in  you.  He  that  abideth  in  Me
and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit ;  for  without
Me  ye  can  do  nothing  "  (John  xv.  4,  5).

31.  From  these  considerations  it  is  evident  that  the  Lord
is  heaven  not  only  in  general  as  regards  all  its  inhabitants,
but  also  in  particular  as  regards  each  of  them;  for  every
angel  is  a  heaven  in  miniature ;  and  heaven  in  general  con-
sists of  as  many  heavens  as  there  are  angels,  as  may  be  seen
in  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell  (nos.  51-58).  Since  this  is
so,  let  no  one  entertain  the  mistaken  idea,  which  occurs  to
many  when  they  first  think  about  the  subject,  that  the  Lord
is  in  heaven  among  the  angels,  or  that  He  dwells  with  them
as  does  a  king  in  his  kingdom.  To  their  sight  He  appears
above  them  in  the  spiritual  sun;  but  as  to  their  Hfe  of  love
and  wisdom.  He  is  within  them.

32.  n.  Man  by  creation  is  capable  of  being  more  and  more
closely  united  with  the  Lord.  This  is  evident  from  what  is
said  about  Degrees,  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  ami
Wisdom,  Part  UL,  especially  from  the  following  sections  : —
There  are  by  creation  three  discrete  degrees  or  degrees  of
ascent  in  man  (nos.  230-235).  These  three  degrees  exist  in
every  man  by  birth;  and  in  the  proportion  that  they  are
opened,  the  man  is  in  the  Lord  and  the  Lord  in  him  (nos.  236-
241).  The  higher  the  degree,  the  greater  is  its  perfection
(nos.  199-204).  From  this  it  is  evident  that  man  by  creation
is  capable  of  being  more  and  more  closely  united  with  the
Lord  by  these  degrees.  But  it  is  important  to  know  what
degrees  are,  namely,  that  they  are  of  two  kinds,  discrete
degrees  or  those  of  ascent,  and  continuous  degrees  or  those


Divine  Providence  23

of  extension;  and  how  they  differ  from  one  another;  and
to  know  further,  that  every  man  by  creation,  and  therefore
by  birth,  possesses  these  three  discrete  degrees  or  degrees
of  ascent ;  that  he  comes  by  birth  into  the  first  degree,  which
is  called  the  natural,  and  may  develop  this  degree  in  himself
on  its  own  plane  until  he  becomes  rational ;  that  he  progresses
to  the  second  or  spiritual  degree,  if  he  Hves  according  to  the
spiritual  laws  of  order,  which  are  divine  truths;  and  that
he  can  also  progress  to  the  third  or  celestial  degree,  if  he  lives
according  to  the  heavenly  laws  of  order,  which  are  divine
goods.  These  degrees  are  actually  opened  by  the  Lord  in
man  according  to  his  life  in  the  world,  but  not  perceptibly
and  sensibly  until  he  leayes  the  world;  and  as  they  are
opened  and  afterwards  perfected,  so  the  man  is  more  and
more  closely  united  with  the  Lord.  By  drawing  nearer  to
Him,  this  union  may  increase  for  ever,  and  with  the  angels
it  is  for  ever  increasing;  but  still  an  angel  cannot  attain  to,
or  even  approach,  the  first  degi-ee  of  the  Lord's  Love  and
Wisdom,  because  the  Lord  is  infinite,  and  an  angel  is  finite,
and  there  is  no  ratio  between  the  Infinite  and  the  finite.
Since  no  one  can  understand  the  state  of  man,  and  the  state
of  his  elevation  and  approximation  to  the  Lord,  unless  he  has
a  knowledge  of  these  degrees,  they  have  been  particularly
explained  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom
(nos.  173-281),  which  the  reader  may  consult.

33.  We  shall  now  briefly  explain  how  a  man  can  be  more
closely  united  with  the  Lord,  and  then  how  this  union  is  seen
to  be  closer  and  closer.

A  man  is  more  and  more  closely  united  with  the  Lord,  not
by  knowledge  alone,  nor  by  intelligence  alone,  nor  even  by
wisdom  alone,  but  by  a  life  in  accordance  with  these.  Man's
life  is  his  love,  and  love  is  of  many  kinds.  In  general,  there
is  the  love  of  evil,  and  the  love  of  good.  The  love  of  evil  is
the  love  of  adultery,  revenge,  fraud,  blasphemy,  and  of
depriving  others  of  their  goods ;  the  love  of  evil  finds  pleasure
and  delight  in  thinking  of  these  things  and  doing  them.  The
derivatives  of  this  love,  which  are  its  affections,  are  as  many
as  the  evils  which  it  has  made  its  ends ;  and  the  perceptions
and  thoughts  of  this  love  are  as  many  as  the  falsities  which
favour  these  evils  and  confirm  them.  These  falsities  unite
with  the  evils,  as  the  understanding  unites  with  the  will.
They  cannot  exist  apart,  for  they  are  inseparable.     Now


24  Divine  Providence      *

because  the  Lord  enters  by  influx  into  the  life's  love  of  every
one,  and   through  its   affections  into  his  perceptions  and
thoughts,  and  not  the  reverse,  as  was  said  above,  it  follows
that  He  can  unite  Himself  closely  with  any  man  to  the  extent
that  the  love  of  evil  with  its  affections  or  lusts  has  been  put
away;  and  as  these  lusts  reside  in  the  natural  man,  and  as
a  man  feels  that  he  does  from  himself  whatever  he  does  from
the  natural  man,  he  ought  to  remove  the  evils  of  that  love
as  if  by  his  own  power ;  and  then  in  proportion  as  he  removes
them,  the  Lord  draws  nearer,  and  unites  Himself  with  him.
It  stands  to  reason  that  lusts  with  their  delights  block  the
way,  and  close  the  door  against  the  Lord,  and  cannot  be
cast  out  by  the  Lord  while  the  man  himself  is  keeping  the
door  shut,  and  is  pressing  and  pushing  from  the  other  side,
to  prevent  its  being  opened.     That  a  man  ought  to  open  the
door  himself,  is  evident  from  the  Lord's  words  in  the  Apo-
calypse :    "  IBehold  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock;   if  any
man  hear  My  voice  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,
and  will  sup  with  him  and  he  with  Me  "  (iii.  20).     It  is  there-
fore evident  that,  so  far  as  any  one  shuns  evils  as  diabolical
and  as  obstacles  to  the  Lord's  entrance,  he  is  more  and
more  closely  united  with  the  Lord ;  and  he  most  closely  who
loathes  them  as  so  many  dark  and  fiery  devils ;  for  evil  and
the  Devil  are  identical,  and  so  are  the  falsity  of  evil  and  Satan.
For  the  Lord's  influx  is  into  the  love  of  good  and  its  affec-
tions, and  through  these  affections  into  the  perceptions  and
thoughts,  which  all  derive  their  truth  from  the  good  in  which
the  man  is ;  and  the  influx  of  the  Devil,  or  of  hell,  is  into  the
love  of  evil  and  its  affections,  which  are  lusts,  and  through
these  into  the  perceptions  and  thoughts,  which  all  derive
their  falsity  from  the  evil  in  which  the  man  is.

How  this  union  is  seen  to  be  closer  and  closer.  The  more
thoroughly  the  evils  of  the  natural  man  are  removed  by
shunning  and  turning  away  from  them,  the  more  closely  is  the
man  united  with  the  Lord ;  and  as  love  and  wisdom,  which
are  the  Lord  Himself,  are  not  in  space, — for  affection  and
thought  which  are  derivatives  of  love  and  wisdom  have
nothing  in  common  with  space — therefore,  according  to  this
union  by  means  of  love  and  wisdom,  the  Lord  seems  nearer ;
and  conversely.  He  seems  more  remote  according  to  the
rejection  of  love  and  wisdom.  Space  does  not  exist  in  the
spiritual  world,  but  distance  and  proximity  there  are  appear-


Divine  Providence  25

ances  in  accordance  with  the  similarity  or  dissimilarity  of
affection ;  for,  as  before  said,  affections  and  thoughts,  being
derivatives  of  love  and  wisdom,  are  spiritual,  and  do  not
exist  in  space.  On  this  subject  see  the  work  on  The  Divine
Love  and  Wisdottt  (nos.  7-10,  69-72,  and  elsewhere).  The
Lord's  union  with  a  man  from  whom  evils  have  been  removed,
is  meant  by  these  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  The  pure  in  heart
shall  see  God  "  (Matt,  v,  8);  and  by  these  :  "  He  that  hath
my  commandments  and  keepeth  them  ...  we  will  come
unto  him  and  make  our  abode  with  him  "  (John  xiv.  21,  23).
To  have  the  commandments  is  to  know  them,  and  to  keep
them  is  to  love  the  Lord;  for  it  is  also  there  said,  "  He  that
keepeth  My  commandments,  he  it  is  that  loveth  Me."

34.  in.  The  more  closely  a  man  is  ufiiied  with  the  Lord,
the  wiser  he  becomes.  As  there  are  three  degrees  of  hfe  in
man  by  creation,  and  therefore  by  birth  (see  above,  no.  32),
there  are  especially  three  degrees  of  wisdom  in  him.  These
are  the  degrees  which  are  opened  in  man  according  to  this
union;  they  are  opened  according  to  his  love,  for  love  is
union  itself;  but  man  has  only  an  obscure  perception  of
the  ascent  of  love  according  to  degrees ;  the  ascent  of  wisdom,
however,  is  clearly  perceived  by  those  who  know  and  see
what  wisdom  is.  The  degrees  of  wisdom  are  perceived,
because  love  enters  through  the  affections  into  the  percep-
tions and  thoughts,  and  these  come  within  the  range  of  the
mind's  internal  sight,  which  corresponds  to  the  external
sight  of  the  body.  It  is  owing  to  this  that  wisdom  is  seen,
but  not  the  affection  of  the  love  that  produces  it.  It  is  the
same  with  everything  that  is  actually  done  by  man.  He
notices  how  his  body  acts  in  effecting  it,  but  not  how  his
soul  acts ;  so  also  the  way  in  which  a  man  ponders,  discerns,
or  thinks  is  perceptible,  but  not  how  the  soul  of  these  actions,
which  is  an  affection  of  good  and  truth,  produces  them.
There  are  three  degrees  of  wisdom,  the  natural,  spiritual,  and
celestial.  Man  is  in  the  natural  degree  of  wisdom  so  long  as
he  lives  in  the  world.  This  degree  may  during  that  time
be  perfected  in  him  to  its  highest  point,  and  yet  it  cannot
enter  the  spiritual  degree,  because  this  degree  is  not  con-
nected with  the  natural  degree  continuously,  but  is  united
with  it  by  correspondence.  After  death  man  is  in  the
spiritual  degree  of  wisdom ;  and  this  degree  is  also  capable
of  being  perfected  to  its  highest  point,  but  yet  it  cannot


26  Divine  Providence

enter  the  celestial  degree  of  wisdom,  for  this  degree  is  not
connected  with  the  spiritual  continuously,  but  is  united  with
it  by  correspondence.  From  this  it  is  seen  that  wisdom  can
be  elevated  in  a  triplicate  ratio ;  and  that  in  each  degree  it
may  be  perfected  to  its  highest  point  in  a  simple  ratio.
Whoever  understands  how  these  degrees  are  elevated  and
perfected  can  form  some  idea  of  what  is  meant  by  saving
that  angelic  wisdom  is  inexpressible;  it  is  so  inexpressible
that  a  thousand  ideas  derived  from  the  wisdom  of  the  angels
present  themselves  only  as  a  single  idea  in  the  thought  of
men,  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  of  these  angelic  ideas
being  unable  to  enter  the  mind  of  man,  because  they  tran-
scend nature.  That  this  is  the  case  has  been  shown  me  by
frequent  and  convincing  experience ;  but,  as  was  said  above,
no  one  can  acquire  that  ineffable  wisdom  of  the  angels
except  by  union  with  the  Lord  and  according  to  it,  for  the
Lord  alone  opens  the  spiritual  and  celestial  degrees,  and
only  in  those  whose  wisdom  is  from  Him ;  and  those  receive
wisdom  from  the  Lord  who  resist  the  devil,  that  is,  evil
from  themselves.

35.  But  let  no  one  suppose  that  it  is  wisdom  to  know
many  things,  to  perceive  them  clearly,  and  to  be  able  to
converse  intelligently  about  them,  unless  such  wisdom  is
united  with  love ;  for  love  by  means  of  its  affections  produces
wisdom.  Unless  it  is  united  with  love,  wisdom  is  like  a
meteor  which  vanishes  in  the  air,  or  like  a  falling  star ;  but
wisdom  united  with  love  is  like  the  steadfast  light  of  the
sun,  or  like  a  fixed  star.  A  man  possesses  the  love  of  wisdom
so  far  as  he  loathes  the  diabolic  crew,  that  is,  the  lusts  of
evil  and  falsity.

36.  The  wisdom  of  which  a  man  is  conscious  is  the  per-
ception of  truth,  arising  from  the  love  of  it,  especially  the
perception  of  spiritual  truth, — for  there  is  civil  truth,  moral
truth,  and  spiritual  truth.  Those  who  perceive  spiritual
truth  from  the  love  of  it,  also  perceive  moral  and  civil  truth ;
for  the  love  of  spiritual  truth  is  the  soul  of  these  perceptions.
I  have  sometimes  conversed  with  the  angels  about  wisdom;
and  they  said  that  wisdom  is  union  with  the  Lord,  because
He  is  Wisdom  itself ;  and  that  a  man  is  admitted  into  that
union  by  rejecting  heli,  and  in  proportion  to  his  resistance
to  it.  They  said  that  they  picture  wisdom  to  themselves  as
a  magnificent  and  richly  adorned  palace,  the  ascent  to  which


Divine  Providence  27

is  by  twelve  steps ;  and  that  no  one  reaches  the  first  step
except  by  union  with  the  Lord,  brought  about  by  Him^  and
that  every  one  ascends  according  to  the  perfection  of  this
union ;  and  that,  as  he  ascends,  he  sees  that  no  one  is  wise
from  himself,  but  only  from  the  Lord ;  also,  that  the  things
in  which  a  man  is  wise,  compared  with  those  in  which  he  is
not  wise,  are  as  a  few  drops  in  comparison  with  a  great
lake.  The  twelve  steps  to  the  palace  of  wisdom  signify
goods  united  with  truths,  and  truths  united  with  goods.

37.  IV.  The  more  closely  a  man  is  united  with  the  Lord,
the  happier  he  becomes.  The  same  may  be  said  about
degrees  of  happiness  as  was  said  above  (nos.  32,  34),  about
the  degrees  of  life  and  wisdom  according  to  a  man's  union
with  the  Lord;  for  felicity,  beatitude  and  delight  increase
as  the  higher  degrees  of  the  mind,  the  spiritual  and  celestial,
are  opened  in  man;  and  after  his  life  in  the  world  these
degrees  are  perfected  to  eternity.

38.  No  one  who  takes  delight  in  the  lusts  of  evil  can
know  anything  of  the  delight  arising  from  the  affection  of
good  which  the  angelic  heaven  enjoys;  for  these  delights
are  wholly  opposite  to  each  other  in  their  inward  nature,
and  consequently  are  interiorly  opposite  in  externals,  though
they  may  differ  but  little  on  the  surface.  For  every  love
has  its  own  delight ;  even  those  who  are  under  the  influence
of  evil  desires  feel  a  delight  in  the  love  of  evil,  for  example,
in  the  love  of  adultery,  revenge,  fraud,  theft  or  cruelty;
indeed,  very  wicked  men  find  a  dehght  in  blaspheming  the
holy  things  of  the  Church,  and  pouring  out  their  venom
against  God.  The  selfish  love  of  rule  is  the  fountain-head
of  these  delights ;  they  flow  from  the  lusts  that  beset  the
inner  regions  of  the  mind ;  from  them  they  flow  down  into
the  body,  and  there  excite  unclean  things  that  titillate  the
fibres;  and  thus  from  the  delight  of  the  mind,  according
to  the  kind  of  lust,  comes  the  delight  of  the  body.  The
nature  and  quality  of  these  unclean  things  that  titillate  the
bodily  fibres  of  those  who  are  addicted  to  such  lusts,  any  one
may  learn  after  death  in  the  spiritual  world.  In  general,
they  are  corpse-like,  excrementitious,  rotten,  stinking  and
urinous;  for  the  hells  are  full  of  such  unclean  things.  That
these  things  are  correspondences  may  be  seen  in  the  treatise
on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  422-424).  But  these
filthv  delights  are  turned  into  direful  states  in  those  who


28  Divine  Providence

have  entered  hell.  These  matters  have  been  mentioned
to  make  clearer  the  nature  of  heavenly  happiness,  which
will  now  be  spoken  of;  for  everything  is  known  by  its
opposite.

39.  The  blessing,  charm,  delight,  and  pleasantness,  in
a  word  the  happiness  of  heaven,  cannot  be  described  in
words,  though  it  is  perceptible  to  the  sense  in  heaven;  for
what  is  perceptible  to  sense  only,  cannot  be  described,
because  it  does  not  come  within  the  compass  of  ideas  or
words;  for  the  understanding  alone  sees,  and  it  only  sees
the  things  of  wisdom  or  truth,  not  those  of  love  or  good ;
and  therefore  the  delights  are  inexpressible,  but  still  they
ascend  in  a  like  degree  with  wisdom;  their  varieties  are
infinite,  and  each  is  indescribable.  I  have  heard  this  stated,
and  I  have  had  experience  of  it.  Now  these  delights  enter
the  mind  as  a  man  puts  away  the  lusts  of  the  love  of  evil
and  falsity,  acting  as  if  by  a  power  originating  in  himself,  but
really  by  that  of  the  Lord ;  for  they  arise  from  the  affections
of  good  and  truth,  which  are  opposed  to  the  lusts  of  the  love
of  evil  and  falsity.  The  delights  of  the  affections  of  the  love
of  good  and  truth  begin  from  the  Lord,  and  thus  arise  from
man's  inmost  being;  and  they  diffuse  themselves  thence
into  lower  things  even  to  ultimates;  and  they  so  fill  every
angel  that  he  seems  to  be,  as  it  were,  pure  delight.  Such
delights  with  infinite  variety  are  attendant  upon  every
affection  of  good  and  truth,  especially  that  of  wisdom.

40.  The  delights  of  the  lusts  of  evil  and  the  delights  of
the  affections  of  good  cannot  be  compared;  because  the
devil  is  inwardly  in  the  delights  of  the  lusts  of  evil,  and  the
Lord  is  inwardly  in  the  delights  of  the  affections  of  good.  If
a  comparison  must  be  made,  the  delights  of  the  lusts  of  evil
may  be  compared  only  to  the  unclean  delights  of  frogs  in
stagnant  ponds,  and  of  serpents  amid  stenches;  while  the
■delights  of  the  affections  of  good  may  be  compared  to  the
pleasant  effect  produced  upon  the  mind  by  gardens  and
flower-beds ;  for  things  like  those  which  affect  frogs  and
serpents,  also  affect  those  in  hell  who  are  addicted  to  the
lusts  of  evil ;  and  things  like  those  which  affect  the  mind
in  gardens  and  flower-beds,  also  affect  those  in  the  heavens
who  are  in  the  affections  of  good;  for,  as  was  said  above,
corresponding  unclean  things  affect  the  evil,  and  correspond-
ing clean  things  affect  the  good.


Divine  Providence  29

41.  It  may  now  be  seen  that  the  more  closely  any  one  is
united  with  the  Lord,  the  happier  he  becomes.  But  this
happiness  rarely  shows  itself  in  the  world;  for  man  is  then
in  a  natural  state,  and  that  which  is  natural  does  not  com-
municate with  that  which  is  spiritual  by  continuity,  but  only
by  correspondence;  and  this  communication  is  not  felt
except  as  a  certain  repose  and  peace  of  mind,  especially  after
a  struggle  against  evil.  But  when  man  puts  off  the  natural,
and  enters  the  spiritual  state,  which  he  does  after  his
departure  from  the  world,  then  the  happiness  above  described
gradually  manifests  itself.

42.  V.  The  more  closely  a  man  is  united  with  the  Lord,
the  more  distinctly  he  seems  to  be  his  own,  and  the  more  clearly
he  perceives  that  he  is  the  Lord's.  It  seems  as  if,  the  more
closely  any  one  is  united  with  the  Lord,  the  less  he  is  his
own.  It  seems  so  to  all  wicked  men,  and  also  to  those  who
have  a  religious  behef  that  they  are  not  under  the  yoke  of
the  law,  and  that  no  one  can  do  good  of  himself.  For  these
last,  as  well  as  the  wicked,  cannot  but  suppose  that  not  to
be  allowed  to  think  and  will  evil,  but  only  good,  is  not  to
be  one's  own ;  and  because  those  who  are  united  with  the
Lord  are  neither  willing  nor  able  to  think  and  will  evil,
these  two  classes  conclude  from  the  appearance  which  pre-
sents itself  to  their  own  minds,  that  this  is  not  to  be  one's
own  ;   nevertheless  this  is  totally  contrary  to  the  truth.

43.  There  are  hellish  freedom  and  heavenly  freedom.
Hellish  freedom  is  that  of  thinking  and  willing  evil,  and  so
far  as  civil  and  moral  laws  do  not  hinder,  of  speaking  and
doing  it;  it  is  characteristic  of  heavenly  freedom  to  think
and  will  what  is  good,  and,  so  far  as  one  is  able,  to  speak
and  do  it.  Whatever  a  man  thinks,  wills,  speaks,  and  does
in  freedom,  he  feels  to  be  his  own,  for  all  freedom  comes
from  love,  and  therefore  those  who  are  in  the  love  of  evil
necessarily  suppose  that  hellish  liberty  is  true  liberty;
but  those  who  are  in  the  love  of  good  feel  that  heavenly
liberty  is  true  liberty,  consequently  both  deem  the  opposite
to  be  slavery.  Still  no  one  can  deny  that  one  or  the  other
alone  is  freedom;  for  two  kinds  of  freedom,  in  themselves
opposite,  cannot  each  be  true  freedom.  Moreover,  it  cannot
be  denied  that  to  be  led  by  good  is  freedom,  and  to  be  led
by  evil  is  slavery ;  for  to  be  led  by  good  is  to  be  led  by  the
Lord,  and  to  be  led  by  evil  is  to  be  led  by  the  devil.    Now,


30  Divine  Providence

as  all  that  a  man  does  in  freedom  appears  to  be  his  own,
for  it  comes  from  his  love  (to  act  from  one's  love  is  to  act  in
freedom^  as  was  said  above),  it  follows  that  union  with  the
Lord  gives  a  man  the  sensation  of  being  free,  and  therefore
his  own;  and  the  closer  his  union  with  the  Lord,  the  more
free  he  feels,  and  consequently  the  more  his  own.  The
reason  why  he  seems  more  distinctly  his  owti  is,  that  the
di\ane  Love  desires  to  impart  whatever  it  possesses  to  others,
that  is,  to  men  and  angels.  All  spiritual  love  and  pre-
eminently the  di\-ine  Love,  is  of  this  character.  And
further  :  the  Lord  never  compels  any  one ;  for  am-thing
into  which  any  one  is  forced  does  not  seem  to  be  his  own;
and  what  does  not  seem  to  be  his  own,  cannot  be  incorpor-
ated in  his  love,  and  thus  appropriated  as  his  own.  There-
fore, man  is  led  by  the  Lord  continually  in  freedom,  and  is
also  reformed  and  regenerated  in  freedom.  But  concerning
this,  more  will  be  said  in  what  follows ;  something  may  also
be  seen  above  (no.  4).

44.  The  reason  why  the  more  distinctly  a  man  seems  to
himself  to  be  his  own,  the  more  clearly  he  perceives  that  he
is  the  Lord's,  is  that  the  more  closely  he  is  united  with  the
Lord  the  wiser  he  becomes,  as  shown  above  (nos.  34-36);
and  wisdom  teaches  this  truth  and  also  understands  it.
The  angels  of  the  third  heaven,  being  the  wisest  of  the  angels,
also  perceive  it:  and  further  they  call  it  true  freedom;
but  they  call  it  slavery'  to  lead  themselves.  They  also  give
as  the  reason  that  the  Lord  does  not  flow  immediately  into
the  perceptions  and  thoughts  of  their  wisdom,  but  into  the
afiections  of  the  love  of  good,  and  through  these  into  the
former;  and  that  they  perceive  this  influx  in  the  affection
from  which  they  derive  their  wisdom ;  and  that,  afterv\-ards,
ever}-thing  that  they  think  in  their  wisdom  appears  as  if
it  originated  in  themselves,  and  thus  as  their  own ;  and  that
in  this  manner  a  reciprocal  union  is  established.

45.  As  the  Lord's  divine  Pro\adence  has  for  its  end  a
heaven  from  the  human  race,  it  follows  that  its  end  is  the
union  of  the  human  race  Avith  Himself  (nos.  28-31);  and
again,  that  its  end  is  that  man  may  be  more  and  more  closely
united  with  Him  (nos.  32,  2>3),  for  thus  he  has  heaven  more
interiorly  within  him ;  also,  that  its  end  is  that  man  by  this
union  may  become  wiser  (nos.  34-36);  and  he  thus  becomes
happier  (nos.  37-41),  because  it  is  from  and  according  to


Divine  Providence  31

his  possession  of  wisdom  that  man  has  heaven  within  him,
and  thus  happiness  also;  and  finally,  that  its  end  is  that
man  may  seem  to  himself  to  be  more  and  more  distinctly  his
own,  and  yet  perceive  more  clearly  that  he  is  the  Lord's
(nos.  42-44).  All  these  things  are  ends  of  the  Lord's  divine
Providence;  for  they  constitute  heaven  which  it  has  for
its  end.

The  Lord's  Providence  in  all  that  it  does  has
regard  to  what  is  infinite  and  eternal

46.  It  is  known  in  the  Christian  world  that  God  is  Infinite
and  Eternal;  for,  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  that  takes
its  name  from  Athanasius,  it  is  said  that  God  the  Father  is
Infinite,  Eternal,  and  Omnipotent;  in  like  manner  God  the
Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  that,  nevertheless,
there  are  not  three  Infinite,  Eternal,  and  Omnipotent  Beings,
but  One.  It  follows  from  this  that,  as  God  is  Infinite  and
Eternal,  nothing  can  be  predicated  of  Him  but  what  is
Infinite  and  Eternal.  That  which  is  Infinite  and  Eternal
cannot  be  comprehended  by  a  finite  mind— and  yet  it  can.
It  is  incomprehensible,  because  the  finite  cannot  grasp  the
Infinite ;  it  is  comprehensible  by  means  of  abstract  ideas,
which  enable  the  mind  to  see  that  things  exist,  although
their  properties  are  not  understood.  Such  ideas  exist
concerning  the  Infinite,  as  for  example,  that  God  or  the
Divine  because  He  is  Infinite,  is  Being  itself.  Essence  and
Substance  itself,  Love  itself,  and  Wisdom  itself.  Good  itself
and  Truth  itself;  is  thus  the  only  Reahty,  and  indeed  very
Man ;  such  ideas  are  also  involved  in  the  statement  that  the
Infinite  is  the  All, — as  for  example,  that  Infinite  Wisdom
is  Omniscience,  and  that  Infinite  Power  is  Omnipotence.
But  still  these  ideas  become  involved  in  obscurity,  and
being  incomprehensible,  may  lead  to  denial,  unless  they  are
purified  from  the  elements  which  thought  derives  from
nature,  especially  from  the  two  things  proper  to  nature,
space  and  time;  for  these  cannot  but  hmit  thought,  and
destroy  the  very  essence  of  abstract  ideas.  But  if  the  mind
of  man,  like  that  of  an  angel,  can  be  freed  from  such  con-
ceptions, then  the  Infinite  may  be  comprehended  by  means
of  such  ideas  as  were  mentioned  above ;  it  may  also  be  under-
stood that  man  has  a  real  existence,  because  he  was  created
by  the  Infinite  God  Who  is  the  All ;   and  that  he  is  a  finite


3"2  Divine  Providence

substance,  because  he  was  created  by  the  Infinite  God  who
is  Substance  itself ;  also  that  he  is  a  form  of  wisdom,  because
he  was  created  by  the  Infinite  God  who  is  Wisdom  itself,
and  so  on.  For  unless  the  Infinite  God  were  the  All,  Sub-
stance itself,  and  Wisdom  itself,  man  would  have  no  real
existence ;  thus  he  would  either  be  nothing  at  all,  or  merely  an
idea  of  being,  as  the  visionaries  called  Idealists  hold.  From
the  contents  of  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdotn,
it  is  evident  that  the  divine  Essence  is  Love  and  Wisdom
(nos.  28-39);  ^hat  the  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  are  Sub-
stance itself  and  Form  itself,  thus  the  one  and  only  Reality
(nos.  40-46);  and  that  God  created  the  universe  and  all
things  therein  from  Himself  and  not  from  nothing  (nos.  282-
284).  It  follows  from  this  that  every  created  thing,  and
especially  man  with  his  love  and  wisdom,  is  something  real,
and  is  not  merely  an  idea  of  being;  for  unless  God  were
Infinite,  there  could  be  no  finite;  and  unless  the  Infinite
were  All,  nothing  could  exist;  and  unless  God  had  created
all  things  from  Himself,  there  would  be  absolutely  nothing.
In  a  word,  we  are  because  God  is.

47.  As  the  divine  Providence  is  the  subject  of  this  work,
and  this  article  is  intended  to  show  that  in  all  it  does  it
has  regard  to  what  is  Infinite  and  Eternal,  and  as  this  cannot
be  set  forth  distinctly  unless  in  due  order,  the  order  shall  be
as   follows  : —

I.  That  which  is  Infinite  and  Eternal  in  itself  is  the  same
as  the  Divine.

II.  The  Infinite  and  Eternal  in  itself  cannot  but  regard
that  which  is  infinite  and  eternal,  by  derivation  from  itself,
in  finite  things.

III.  The  divine  Providence  in  all  that  it  does,  has  in
view  what  is  infinite  and  eternal  from  itself,  especially  in
the  salvation  of  mankind.

IV.  A  likeness  to  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  exists  in  the
angelic  heaven  from  a  saved  human  race.

V.  It  is  the  inmost  aim  of  divine  Providence  to  regard
what  is  infinite  and  eternal  in  forming  an  angelic  heaven,
which  may  be  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  as  one  man,  the  like-
ness of  Himself.

48.  I.  That  which  is  Infinite  and  Eternal  in  itself  is  the
sa}?ie  as  the  Divine.  This  should  be  evident  from  what  has
been  said  in  many  parts  of  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love


Divine  Providence  33

and  Wisdom.  That  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  in  itself  is  the
Divine,  is  in  accordance  with  angelic  thought;  by  the  In^
finite  the  angels  understand  nothing  but  the  divine  Being,
and  by  the  Eternal,  the  divine  Manifestation.  But  that
the  Infinite  and  Eternal  in  itself  is  the  Divine,  can  be  seen
by  men,  and  yet  cannot  be  seen.  It  can  be  seen  by  those
who  think  of  the  Infinite  apart  from  space,  and  of  the  Eternal
apart  from  time ;  but  it  cannot  be  seen  by  those  whose  ideas
about  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  are  involved  in  space  and  time.
Thus  it  can  be  seen  by  those  who  think  on  a  higher  plane,
that  is,  inwardly  in  the  rational  mind ;  but  it  cannot  be  seen
by  those  who  think  on  a  lower  plane,  that  is,  externally.
Those  by  whom  it  can  be  seen,  reflect  that  there  can  be  no
such  thing  as  an  infinity  of  space,  nor  an  infinity  of  time,
that  is,  an  eternity  from  which  things  have  existed;  because
infinity  has  no  end,  either  first  or  last,  and  is  thus  without
limits.  They  also  reflect  that  neither  can  there  be  an
Infinite  from  itself;  because  the  expression  irom  itself
indicates  a  limit  and  a  beginning,  or  a  prior  thing  from
which  it  is  derived ;  and  therefore  it  is  unmeaning  to  speak
of  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  from  itself,  for  this  would  be  Hke
speaking  of  Being  from  itself,  which  is  contradictory;  for
an  Infinite  from  itself  would  be  an  Infinite  from  an  Infinite,
and  Being  from  itself  would  be  Being  from  a  Being;  and
this  Infinite  Being  would  either  be  identical  with  the
infinite,  or  would  be  finite.  For  these  and  similar  reasons
which  may  be  seen  interiorly  in  the  rational  mind,  it  is
evident  that  there  is  an  Infinite  and  an  Eternal  in  itself ;  and
that  this  Infinite  and  Eternal  is  the  Divine  from  which  all
things  exist.

49.  I  know  that  many  will  say  to  themselves.  How  can
one  inwardly  comprehend  anything  in  his  rational  mind
apart  from  space  and  time,  and  that  it  not  only  exists,
but  also  that  it  is  the  All,  and  is  the  very  Being  from  which
all  things  are?  But  consider  attentively  whether  love,  or
any  one  of  its  affections,  or  wisdom  or  any  one  of  its  per-
ceptions, indeed,  whether  thought  itself  is  in  space  and  time,
and  you  will  find  that  they  are  not;  and  since  the  Divine
is  Love  and  Wisdom  itself,  it  follows  that  the  Divine  cannot
be  conceived  of  as  existing  in  space  and  time;  and  neither
can  the  Infinite.  To  attain  to  a  clearer  perception  of  this,
ask  yourself  whether  thought  is  in  time  and  space.     Suppose

D


34  Divine  Providence

that  you  are  engaged  in  thought  for  ten  or  twelve  hours,
may  not  this  space  of  time  seem  but  an  hour  or  two?  and
may  it  not  possibly  seem  to  be  one  or  two  days?  All
depends  on  the  state  of  the  affection  from  which  the  thought
arises.  If  the  state  of  mind  is  a  glad  one,  without  any
thought  of  time,  ten  or  twelve  hours  spent  in  thought  seem
hardly  equal  to  one  or  two.  But  the  reverse  is  the  case  if
the  state  of  mind  is  a  sorrowful  one  in  which  one  takes  count
of  time.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  time  is  only  an  appear-
ance depending  on  the  state  of  affection  which  gives  rise  to
the  thought.  So  it  is  with  distance,  if  we  are  engaged  in
thought  while  walking  or  travelling.

50.  Since  angels  and  spirits  are  affections  of  love,  and
thoughts  thence  derived,  they  also  are  not  in  space  and
time,  but  only  in  the  appearance  of  them.  The  appearance
of  space  and  time  with  them  depends  on  the  states  of  their
affections  and  thoughts.  And  therefore  when  any  one  is
thinking  of  another  with  affection,  and  has  a  definite  wish
to  see  him  or  speak  with  him,  he  finds  himself  immediately
in  his  presence.  This  is  why  there  are  spirits  present  with
every  man,  whose  affections  are  similar  to  his  own,  evil
spirits  with  one  who  feels  delight  in  similar  evil,  and  good
spirits  with  one  who  feels  delight  in  similar  good ;  and  their
presence  is  as  real  as  if  he  were  a  niember  of  their  com-
munity. Space  and  time  contribute  nothing  towards  any
one's  presence ;  because  affection  and  its  derivative  thought
are  not  in  space  and  time;  and  spirits  and  angels  are
affections  and  thoughts  thence  derived.  I  have  been  con-
vinced of  this  by  actual  experience  extending  over  many
years ;  and  also  by  having  conversed  with  many  after  their
death,  some  of  whom  had  lived  in  Europe  and  its  various
kingdoms,  and  some  in  Asia  and  Africa  and  their  various
kingdoms ;  they  were  all  quite  near  me,  but  if  they  had  been
living  in  space  and  time,  a  journey,  and  time  to  make  it,
would  have  been  necessary.  Indeed  every  one  knows  this
by  some  power  implanted  in  himself,  or  in  his  own  mind;
for  I  have  noticed  that  no  one  has  thought  of  any  intervening
space  when  I  have  told  him  that  I  had  spoken  with  some  who
had  died  in  Asia,  Africa,  or  Europe,  for  example,  with
Calvin,  Luther,  Melanchthon,  or  with  some  king,  ruler,  or
priest  in  a  distant  land;  nor  did  even  the  thought  arise  how
I  could  speak  with  those  who  lived  in  those  places,  and  how


Divine  Providence  35

they  could  come  and  be  with  me  while  land  and  sea  lay
between.  This  has  convinced  me  that  one  does  not  think
of  those  who  are  in  the  spiritual  world  in  terms  of  space  and
time.  Nevertheless,  that  they  live  in  an  appearance  of
space  and  time  may  be  seen  in  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell
(nos.  162-169,  191-199).

51.  From  these  considerations  it  should  now  be  evident
that  the  Infinite  and  Eternal,  or  the  Lord,  is  to  be  thought
of  apart  from  space  and  time,  and  that  such  thought  is
possible ;  also  that  those  who  think  inwardly  in  the  rational
mind  think  in  this  manner,  and  then  the  Infinite  and  Eternal
is  seen  to  be  the  same  as  the  Divine.  Such  is  the  thought
of  angels  and  spirits.  The  divine  Omnipresence  and  Omni-
potence, and  also  the  existence  of  the  Divine  from  eternity,
may  be  understood  by  thought  divested  of  ideas  based  on
space  and  time,  but  not  at  all  by  thought  in  which  such
ideas  inhere.  It  may  be  seen  from  these  considerations  that
we  can  think  of  God  as  existing  from  eternity,  but  not  of
nature  as  so  existing;  consequently  that  we  can  think  of
the  creation  of  the  universe  by  God,  but  not  of  creation  by
natural  agencies  alone;  for  space  and  time  are  properties
of  nature,  but  not  of  the  Divine.  That  the  Divine  is
independent  of  space  and  time  may  be  seen  in  the  work  on
The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  7-10,  69-76  and  elsewhere).

52.  II.  The  Infinite  and  Eternal  in  itself  cannot  but  regard
that  which  is  infinite  and  eternal  by  derivation  from  itself,  in
finite  things.  By  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  in  itself  is  meant
the  Divine  itself,  as  was  shown  in  the  preceding  article;  by
finite  things  are  meant  all  things  created  by  the  Divine,  and
especially  men,  spirits,  and  angels;  and  to  regard  what  is
infinite  and  eternal  from  itself  is  to  regard  the  Divine,  that  is,
itself  in  them,  as  a  man  looks  at  an  image  of  himself  in
a  mirror.  That  this  is  so,  is  explained  in  manv  places  in
the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  especially  where
it  is  shown  that  in  the  created  universe  there  is  an  image
of  man,  and  an  image  of  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  (nos.  317,
318),  thus  an  image  of  God  the  Creator,  or  of  the  Lord  from
eternity.  But  it  must  be  noticed  that  that  which  is  in  itself
Divine  is  in  the  Lord  alone;  but  the  Divine  proceeding
therefrom  is  the  Divine  existing  from  the  Lord  in  created
things.

53.  But  this  must  be  explained,  that  it  may  be  more  fully


36


Divine  Providence


understood.  The  Divine  can  only  regard  that  which  is
Divine ;  and  it  can  regard  that  which  is  Divine  nowhere  but
in  things  created  by  itself.  This  is  clear  from  the  fact  that
one  man's  view  of  another  depends  on  what  exists  in  his  own
mind.  He  who  loves  another  regards  him  from  the  love
existing  in  himself ;  one  who  is  wise  regards  another  from  the
wisdom  existing  in  himself.  He  may  indeed  see  that  the
other  loves  him  or  does  not^  and  that  he  is  wise  or  unwise ;
but  he  sees  this  by  virtue  of  the  love  and  the  wisdom  existing
in  himself;  therefore  he  unites  himself  with  the  other  so
far  as  that  other  loves  him  as  he  loves  the  other,  or  so  far  as
the  other's  views  agree  with  his  own ;  in  this  way  they  become
united.  It  is  similar  with  Him  who  is  in  Himself  divine ;
for  the  Divine  Itself  cannot  regard  that  which  is  divine  in
another  being,  such  as  a  man,  a  spirit,  or  an  angel;  for  in
them  there  is  nothing  of  the  Divine  Itself  from  which  all
things  are;  and  to  regard  the  divine  in  another,  in  whom
there  is  nothing  of  the  Divine,  would  be  to  regard  the  Divine
from  what  is  not  divine,  which  is  impossible.  This  is  why
the  Lord  is  so  united  with  man,  spirit,  and  angel,  that  every-
thing which  has  relation  to  the  Divine  is  from  the  Lord,  and
not  from  them.  For  it  is  well  known  that  none  of  the  good
and  none  of  the  truth  which  any  one  possesses  is  from  him-
self, but  from  the  Lord ;  indeed,  that  one  cannot  even  name
the  Lord,  or  utter  the  words  Jesus  and  Christ,  except  by
power  derived  from  Him.  From  this  it  follows  that  the
Infinite  and  Eternal,  which  is  the  same  as  the  Divine,
regards  everything  infinitely,  even  in  finite  things;  and
that  He  unites  Himself  with  them  according  to  the  degree  of
their  reception  of  love  and  wisdom.  In  a  word,  the  Lord
cannot  have  a  dwelling-place  in  a  man  or  an  angel,  and  abide
with  them,  except  in  that  which  is  His  Own;  He  cannot
dwell  in  what  belongs  to  them,  for  this  is  evil,  and  even  if
it  were  good,  it  is  finite,  which  in  itself  and  from  itself  is
incapable  of  containing  the  Infinite.  From  these  con-
siderations it  is  evident  that  it  can  never  be  possible  for  the
finite  to  behold  the  Infinite,  but  that  the  Infinite  can  behold
the  infinite  from  Himself  in  finite  things.

54.  It  appears  as  if  the  Infinite  could  not  be  united  with
the  finite,  because  there  is  no  ratio  between  them,  and  because
the  finite  is  incapable  of  containing  what  is  infinite;  but
this  union  is  possible,  both  because  the  Infinite  created  all


Divine  Providence  37

things  from  Himself,  as  was  shown  in  the  work  on  The
Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  282,  284),  and  because  the
Infinite  cannot  regard  anything  in  the  finite  except  what
is  infinite  from  Himself,  and  this  can  appear  to  finite  beings
as  existing  in  them;  and  thus  a  ratio  exists  between  the
finite  and  the  Infinite,  not  based  on  the  finite,  but  on  the
Infinite  in  the  finite;  and  thus  the  finite  can  receive  the  In-
finite; not  by  any  power  of  its  own,  but  as  if  by  its  own
power,  through  the  Infinite  which  dwells  in  it.  But  of  this
more  in  the  following  sections.

5^.  III.  The  Divine  Providence  in  all  that  it  does  regards
what  is  Infinite  and  Eternal  from  itself,  especially  in  the  salva-
tion of  mankind.  The  Infinite  and  Eternal  is  the  Divine
itself,  or  the  Lord  as  He  is  in  Himself ;  but  the  infinite  and
eternal  derived  therefrom  is  the  proceeding  Divine,  or  the
Lord  in  others  created  from  Himself,  that  is,  in  men  and
angels;  and  this  Divine  is  the  same  as  the  divine  Providence;
for  the  Lord,  by  the  Divine  derived  from  Himself,  provides
that  all  things  shall  be  held  together  in  the  order  in  which
and  into  which  they  were  created ;  and  because  the  proceed-
ing Divine  effects  this,  it  follows  that  all  this  is  the  work  of
divine  Providence.

56.  That  the  divine  Providence  in  all  that  it  does  regards
what  is  infinite  and  eternal  derived  from  itself,  should  be
evident  from  this,  that  every  created  thing  proceeds  from
the  First  cause,  who  is  the  Infinite  and  Eternal,  to  ultimates,
and  from  ultimates  back  to  the  First  Cause  whence  it  came,
as  is  shown  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  in
the  part  which  treats  of  the  creation  of  the  universe.  And
because  the  First  Cause  exists  most  inwardly  in  all  its
derivatives,  it  follows  that  the  proceeding  Divine,  or  the
divine  Providence,  regards,  in  all  that  it  does,  some  likeness
to  the  Infinite  and  Eternal.  It  regards  this  in  all  things;
in  some  things  this  likeness  is  evident,  but  in  others  not  so.
It  is  evident  in  the  variety  of  all  things,  and  in  their
fructification  and  multiphcation.

The  likeness  to  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  in  the  variety  of
all  things  is  evident  in  this,  that  there  are  no  two  things
exactly  alike,  nor  can  there  be  to  eternity.  This  is  manifest
in  the  faces  of  human  beings  from  the  beginning  of  creation,
from  their  dispositions,  of  which  their  faces  are  the  outward
expression,  and  also  from  the  affections,  perceptions,  and


38


Divine  Providence


thoughts,  of  which  the  mind  is  composed.  For  this  reason
there  are  no  two  angels  in  the  whole  of  heaven,  nor  two  spirits,
who  are  exactly  alike,  nor  can  there  be  to  eternity.  And  so
it  is  with  every  visible  object  in  both  the  natural  and  spiritual
worlds.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  variety  is  infinite  and
eternal.

The  likeness  to  the  Infinite  mid  Eternal  in  the  fructification
and  multiplication  of  all  things,  is  e\ddent  from  the  power
inherent  in  the  seeds  of  the  vegetable  kingdom,  and  from
prolification  in  the  animal  kingdom,  especially  as  regards
fishes;  for  if  they  increased  to  the  limit  of  their  capacity,
they  would  within  a  century-  fill  the  whole  world,  indeed,
the  universe.  From  this  it  is  clear  that  in  the  power  of
increase  lies  hidden  an  endeavour  to  propagate  itself  to
infinity.  And  as  fruitfulness  and  increase  have  not  failed
from  the  beginning  of  creation,  and  never  will  cease,  it  follows
that  in  this  faculty  there  is  the  endeavour  to  propagate
itself  to  eternity.

57.  It  is  the  same  with  the  affections  of  love,  and  the
perceptions  of  wisdom  in  man.  The  variety  of  them  both  is
infinite  and  eternal;  so  also  are  their  fruitfulness  and
increase,  which  are  spiritual.  No  man  enjoys  any  affection
or  perception  so  hke  another's  as  to  be  identical;  nor  can
that  ever  happen  to  eternity.  Moreover,  affections  and
perceptions  may  be  multiphed  without  end;  and  that
knowledge  is  inexhaustible  is  well  known.  JIan  possesses
this  power  of  becoming  fruitful  and  multiplying  without
end,  or  to  infinity  and  eternity  in  natural  things,  but  spiritual
angels  have  it  in  spiritual  things,  and  celestial  angels  in
celestial  things.  This  is  true  not  only  of  affections,  per-
ceptions, and  knowledges  in  general,  but  also  of  every  single
detail  in  them,  even  the  most  minute.  They  are  of  tliis
nature  because  they  have  their  being  from  that  which  is
Infinite  and  Eternal  in  itself,  by  means  of  what  is  infinite
and  eternal  derived  from  the  former.  But  because  the
finite  has  nothing  of  the  Divine  in  Itself,  it  follows  that
not  even  the  most  minute  of  these  things  exists  in  man  or
angel  as  his  own ;  for  a  man  or  angel  is  finite,  and  only  a
receptacle  which  in  itself  is  dead,  and  everything  that  fives
in  him  is  derived  from  the  proceeding  Divine,  united  with
him  by  contiguity,  and  appears  to  him  as  his  own.  That
this  is  so  will  be  seen  in  what  follows.


Divine  Providence  39

58.  Divine  Providence  regards  what  is  infinite  and  eternal
derived  from  itself  especially  in  the  salvation  of  mankind,
because  a  heaven  from  the  human  race  is  the  end  of  the
divine  Providence,  as  was  shown  above  (nos.  27-45);  and
this  being  the  end,  it  follows  that  the  reformation  and  re-
generation of  man,  or  his  salvation,  is  what  the  divine
Providence  especially  regards ;  for  heaven  is  composed  of
those  who  are  saved,  or  of  the  regenerate.  Since  to  re-
generate man  is  to  unite  good  and  truth,  or  love  and  wisdom
in  him,  as  they  are  united  in  the  Divine  which  proceeds  from
the  Lord,  therefore  divine  Providence  primarily  looks  to
this  in  saving  mankind;  for  in  man  the  likeness  of  the
Infinite  and  Eternal  exists  only  in  the  marriage  of  good  and
truth.  That  the  proceeding  Divine  effects  this  union  in
the  human  race,  is  known  from  the  case  of  those  mentioned
in  the  Word  who,  being  filled  with  the  proceeding  Divine
which  is  called  the  Holy  Spirit,  have  prophesied,  and  also
from  those  who,  being  enlightened,  see  divine  truths  in  the
light  of  heaven;  this  is  especially  true  of  the  angels,  who
sensibly  perceive  the  divine  presence  and  influx,  and  the
resulting  union;  but  the  angels  state  that  this  is  rather  to
be  called  approximation  than  union.

59.  It  has  not  hitherto  been  kno\\'n  that  the  divine
Providence  in  the  whole  process  of  its  operation  with  man,
has  in  view  that  spiritual  state  in  which  he  will  remain  for
ever ;  but  it  cannot  regard  anything  else,  because  the  Divine
is  the  Infinite  and  Eternal ;  and  the  Infinite  and  Eternal,  or
the  Di\ane,  is  not  in  time,  and  therefore  all  future  things  are
present  to  it ;  and  because  the  Divine  is  such,  it  follows  that
something  eternal  is  involved  in  every  single  thing  that  it
does.  But  it  is  difficult  for  those  who  think  from  time  and
space  to  see  this,  not  only  because  they  love  the  things  of
time,  but  also  because  their  thoughts  are  based  on  what
exists  in  the  world,  and  not  on  what  exists  in  heaven,  this
being  to  them  as  far  away  as  the  ends  of  the  earth.  But
because  those  who  are  in  union  with  the  Divine  think  from
the  Lord,  they  also  base  their  thoughts  on  what  is  eternal,
even  when  they  are  tliinking  about  the  present,  sapng
within  themselves : — "  What  is  that  which  is  not  eternal  ?
Are  not  temporal  matters  as  nothing  by  comparison,  and
do  they  not  actually  become  nothing  in  the  end?  It  is
otherwise  with  what  is  eternal;    this  alone  exists  because


40  Divine  Providence

its  Being  is  endless."  To  think  in  this  manner,  while  thinking
of  the  present,  is  to  base  one's  thought  on  what  is  eternal ;
and  when  a  man  so  thinks,  and  also  lives  accordingly,  then
the  proceeding  Divine,  or  the  divine  Providence,  regards
the  state  of  his  eternal  life  in  heaven  in  the  whole  process  of
its  operation  in  him  and  leads  him  to  it.  It  will  be  seen  in
what  follows  that  the  Divine  regards  what  is  eternal  in  every
man,  evil  or  good.

60.  IV.  A  likeness  to  the  In-finite  and  Eternal  exists  in  the
angelic  heaven.  It  is  important  to  know  something  of  the
angelic  heaven,  for  every  religious  man  thinks  about  it,  and
wishes  to  go  there.  But  heaven  is  attainable  Ijy  none  but
those  who  know  the  path  that  leads  to  it,  and  who  walk
therein.  This  path  can  be  known,  in  some  measure,  from
the  character  of  those  who  constitute  heaven,  and  from  the
fact  that  no  one  becomes  an  angel,  or  enters  heaven,  unless  he
brings  with  him  from  the  world  an  angelic  nature ;  and  this
presupposes  a  knowledge  of  the  way  from  having  walked
in  it,  and  a  walking  in  the  way  from  a  knowledge  of  it.  In
the  spiritual  world,  also,  there  are  actually  paths  which  lead
to  every  society  of  heaven,  and  every  society  of  hell;  and
every  one,  as  it  were,  instinctively  sees  his  way.  That  he
does  so,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  there  is  a  path  corresponding
to  every  love :  and  love  opens  up  the  way,  and  leads  him
to  those  like  himself.  No  one  sees  any  other  path  than  the
one  corresponding  to  his  love.  It  is  therefore  evident  that
angels  are  nothing  but  heavenly  loves ;  for  otherwise  they
would  not  have  seen  the  paths  leading  to  heaven  :  but  a
description  of  heaven  will  make  this  clearer.

61.  Every  man's  spirit  is  affection,  and  thought  arising
therefrom ;  and  as  all  affection  pertains  to  love,  and  thought
to  the  understanding,  it  follows  that  every  spirit  is  his  own
love,  and  consequently  his  own  understanding;  for  this
reason,  when  a  man  is  thinking  only  in  his  spirit,  which  he
does  while  meditating  by  himself  at  home,  he  thinks  from
the  affection  which  arises  from  his  love.  It  is  therefore
evident  that  when  a  man  becomes  a  spirit,  as  he  does  after
death,  he  is  the  affection  of  his  own  love,  and  his  thought
is  solely  the  outcome  of  his  affection.  He  is  an  evil  affection
or  lust,  if  his  love  has  been  the  love  of  evil,  and  he  is  a  good
affection  if  his  love  has  been  the  love  of  good ;  and  every  one
possesses  good  affection  so  far  as  he  has  shunned  evils  as


Divine  Providence  41

sins ;  and  evil  affection  so  far  as  he  has  not  shunned  them.
Now  because  all  spirits  and  angels  are  affections,  it  is  evident
that  the  entire  angelic  hea\-en  is  nothing  but  the  love  of  all
the  affections  of  good,  and  consequently  the  wisdom  of  all
the  perceptions  of  truth  ;  and  because  all  good  and  truth  are
from  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  is  Love  itself  and  Wisdom  itself,
it  follows  that  the  angehc  heaven  is  His  hkeness;  and  be-
cause divine  Love  and  Wisdom  as  regards  their  form  are
Man,  it  follows,  also,  that  the  angelic  heaven  cannot  but  be
in  such  a  form.  But  of  this  more  will  be  said  in  the  following
section.

62.  The  angelic  heaven  is  a  likeness  of  the  Infinite  and
Eternal,  because  it  is  a  likeness  of  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord
is  Infinite  and  Eternal.  A  Hkeness  of  his  Infinite  and
Eternal  Being  is  seen  in  this,  that  there  are  myriads  of
myriads  of  angels  of  whom  heaven  is  composed,  and  just  so
many  communities  in  it  as  there  are  general  affections  of
heavenly  love,  and  that  each  angel  in  every  community  is
individually  his  own  affection,  and  that  all  these  affections,  in
general  and  in  particular,  constitute  the  form  of  heaven,
which  is  as  one  before  the  Lord,  even  as  a  man  is  one ;  and
that  this  form  is  for  ever  increasing  in  perfection  according
to  the  increase  of  its  numbers,  for  the  more  there  are  who
enter  the  form  of  the  divine  Love,  which  is  the  form  of  forms,
the  more  perfect  the  union  becomes.  From  these  facts,  it
is  clearly  evident  that  a  likeness  of  the  Infinite  and  Eternal
is  presented  in  the  angelic  heaven.

63.  From  this  brief  description  it  is  evident  that  the
affection  of  the  love  of  good  constitutes  heaven  with  man.
But  who  at  the  present  day  knows  this  ?  Who  knows  even
what  is  meant  by  affection  arising  out  of  the  love  of  good  ?
Or  that  the  affections  derived  from  the  love  of  good  are
innumerable,  indeed,  infinite?  For,  as  mentioned  above,
every  angel  is  individually  his  own  affection;  and  the  form
of  heaven  is  the  form  of  all  the  affections  of  divine  Love
there.  No  one  can  unite  all  affections  into  this  form  but
He  who  is  Love  and  at  the  same  time  Wisdom  itself  and  who
is  both  Infinite  and  Eternal ;  for  what  is  infinite  and  eternal
is  in  the  whole  form,  that  which  is  infinite  in  the  union,  and
that  which  is  eternal  in  the  perpetuity;  if  the  Infinite  and
the  Eternal  were  withdrawn  from  it,  it  would  perish  in  a
moment.     Who  else  can  bring  affections  together  into  one


42  Divine  Providence

form  ?  Indeed,  who  else  can  do  this  for  a  single  one  of  the
constituent  affections  ?  For  one  affection  cannot  be  united
to  the  rest  except  by  means  of  a  universal  perception  of
them  all;  and  the  perception  of  the  whole  cannot  exist
except  from  a  particular  perception  of  the  nature  of  each.
There  are  mjTiads  of  m\Tiads  composing  this  form ;  m}Tiads
enter  it  every  year,  and  will  do  so  for  ever ;  all  children  enter
it,  and  as  many  of  adult  age  as  are  affections  of  the  love  of
good.  These  considerations  again  show  how  a  likeness
to  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  exists  in  the  angelic  heaven.

64.  V.  It  is  the  inmost  aim  of  divine  Providence  to  regard
what  is  infinite  and  eternal  in  forming  an  angelic  heaven,
which  may  be  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  as  one  man,  the  likeness
of  Himself.  That  the  entire  heaven  is  as  one  man  in  the
sight  of  the  Lord,  and  likewise  every  society  of  heaven,
and  that  consequently  every  angel  is  a  man  in  perfect  form,
and  this  because  God  the  Creator,  who  is  the  Lord  from
eternity,  is  a  Man,  may  be  seen  in  the  work  on  Heaven  and
Hell  (nos.  59-86);  also  that  in  consequence  of  this  there  is
a  correspondence  of  all  things  in  heaven  with  all  things  in
man  (nos.  87-102).  I  have  not  seen  the  entire  heaven  as
one  man,  because  the  whole  of  heaven  cannot  be  seen  by
any  one  but  the  Lord,  but  I  have  several  times  seen  an
entire  community  of  heaven,  whether  great  or  small,  as  one
man;  and  I  was  then  told  that  the  greatest  community,
which  is  heaven  in  the  aggregate,  is  seen  in  a  similar  manner
by  the  Lord ;  and  that  this  is  the  reason  why  every  individual
angel,  as  regards  his  whole  form,  is  a  man.

65.  Since  the  whole  heaven  is  as  one  man  in  the  Lord's
sight,  heaven  is  divided  into  as  many  general  communities
as  there  are  organs,  viscera  and  members  in  a  man;  and
each  general  community,  into  as  many  less  general  or  parti-
cular communities  as  there  are  larger  divisions  in  each  of
the  viscera  and  organs;  this  again  clearly  indicates  the
nature  of  heaven.  Now  because  the  Lord  is  Himself  a  Man,
and  heaven  is  His  likeness,  therefore  to  be  in  heaven  is  de-
scribed as  being  in  the  Lord.  That  the  Lord  is  very  Man,
may  be  seen  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom
(nos.  11-13,  285-289).

66.  These  facts  will  in  some  measure  explain  the  follow-
ing statement,  which  may  be  called  an  angelic  arcanum  : —
Every  affection  of  good  and  at  the  same  time  of  truth,  is


Divine  Providence  43

in  the  human  form;  for  whatever  proceeds  from  the  Lord
is  an  affection  of  good,  because  it  originates  from  His  divine
Love,  and  an  affection  of  truth,  because  it  originates  from
His  divine  Wisdom.  The  affection  of  truth  which  proceeds
from  the  Lord  manifests  itself  first  as  a  perception  of  truth,
and  afterwards  as  thought  in  angels  and  in  men ;  because
attention  is  given  to  perception  and  thought,  but  hardly
any  notice  is  taken  of  the  affection  from  which  these  arise,
though  they  both  proceed  from  the  Lord  as  one  with  the
affection  of  truth.

67.  Now  as  man  by  creation  is  a  heaven  in  miniature^
and  therefore  a  likeness  of  the  Lord ;  and  as  heaven  consists
of  as  many  affections  as  there  are  angels,  and  every  affection
is  in  the  human  form ;  it  follows  that  the  divine  Providence
is  continually  striving  to  induce  upon  man  the  form  of  heaven,
and  therefore  to  make  him  a  hkeness  of  the  Lord;  and,
because  this  is  done  by  means  of  the  affection  of  good  and
truth,  it  continually  strives  to  make  him  such  an  affection.
This,  therefore,  is  the  constant  endeavour  of  divine  Provi-
dence; and  its  inmost  effort  is  to  lead  man  to  some  place
in  heaven,  or  in  the  divine,  heavenly  Man ;  for  then  he  is  in
the  Lord.  Now  this  is  done  in  the  case  of  those  whom  the
Lord  can  lead  to  heaven,  and  as  the  Lord  foresees  this,  He
also  provides  for  it  continually;  for  thus  every  one  who
suffers  himself  to  be  led  to  heaven  is  prepared  for  his  own
place  there.

68.  As  was  said  above,  heaven  is  divided  into  as  many
communities  as  there  are  organs,  viscera,  and  members  in
a  man;  and  in  these  no  part  can  occupy  any  place  but  its
own.  Since,  therefore,  the  angels  are  such  parts  in  the
divine  heavenly  Man,  and  all  angels  have  once  been  men  in  the
vvorld,  it  follows  that  the  man  who  suffers  himself  to  be  led
to  heaven  is  continually  prepared  by  the  Lord  for  his  own
place,  which  is  done  by  means  of  such  an  affection  of  good
and  truth  as  corresponds  with  that  place.  To  this  place
also  every  man-angel  is  appointed  after  his  departure  from
the  world.  This  is  the  inmost  purpose  of  the  divine
Providence  in  relation  to  heaven.

69.  But  the  man  who  does  not  suffer  himself  to  be  led
to  heaven,  and  appointed  to  his  place  there,  is  prepared  for
his  own  place  in  hell;  for  man  of  himself  is  continually
tending  towards  the  lowest  hell,  but  is  continually  restrained


44  Divine  Providence

by  the  Lord ;  and  he  who  cannot  be  withheld  is  prepared  for
a  certain  place  there,  to  which  also  he  is  appointed  immedi-
ately after  his  departure  from  the  world;  and  this  place  is
opposite  to  a  certain  place  in  heaven,  for  hell  is  the  direct
opposite  of  heaven.  Wherefore,  as  a  man-angel,  according
to  his  affection  for  good  and  truth,  is  allotted  his  own  place
in  heaven,  so  a  man-devil,  according  to  his  affection  for  evil
and  falsity,  is  allotted  his  own  place  in  hell ;  for  two  opposites
set  in  similar  situation  over  against  each  other  are  thus
held  in  connection.  This  is  the  inmost  purpose  of  the  divine
Providence  concerning  hell.

There  are  laws  of  divine  Providence  that  are
unknown  to  men

70.  That  there  is  a  divine  Providence  is  well  known ;  but
its  nature  is  not  understood.  This  is  because  the  laws  of
divine  Providence  are  arcana  which  have  hitherto  been
concealed  in  the  wisdom  of  the  angels,  but  now  are  to  be
revealed  in  order  that  what  is  the  Lord's  may  be  ascribed
to  Him,  and  that  no  man  may  claim  what  is  not  his  own.
For  many  in  the  world  attribute  everything  to  themselves
and  their  prudence,  and  what  they  cannot  so  claim,  they
call  fortuitous  and  accidental;  not  knowing  that  human
prudence  is  naught,  and  that  "  fortuitous  "  and  "  accidental "
are  empty  words.  We  say  that  the  laws  of  the  divine
Providence  are  arcana,  hitherto  concealed  in  the  wisdom  of
the  angels,  because  in  the  Christian  world  the  understanding
has  been  debarred  by  religion  from  the  consideration  of
divine  things,  and  has  consequently  become  so  obtuse
and  antagonistic  in  these  matters  that  man  has  been
unable  because  unwilling,  or  unwilling  because  unable,
to  understand  anything  about  the  divine  Providence,  except
only  that  it  exists.  Some  men  also  dispute  whether  it
exists  or  not,  and  whether  it  is  general  only,  or  particular
as  well.  The  understanding  being  debarred  by  religion
from  thought  about  divine  things  could  make  no  further
progress ;  but  as  it  is  acknowledged  in  the  Church  that  man
cannot  of  himself  do  good  that  is  really  good,  nor  think  truth
that  is  really  true,  and  this  fact  is  so  closely  bound  up
with  divine  Providence,  that  beUef  in  the  one  depends  on
belief  in  the  other,  therefore,  that  the  one  may  not  be  be-
lieved and  the  other  denied,  and  thus  both  perish,  it  is  most


Divine   Providence  45

important  that  the  nature  of  divine  Providence  should  be
made  known.  This,  however,  cannot  be  done  unless  the
laws  by  which  the  Lord  watches  over  and  rules  man's  will
and  understanding  are  disclosed,  for  these  laws  make  known
the  nature  of  divine  Providence ;  and  he  alone  who  under-
stands its  nature  can  acknowledge  it,  for  then  he  sees  it.
For  this  reason,  the  laws  of  divine  Providence  hitherto
concealed  in  the  wisdom  of  the  angels  are  now  to  be  revealed.


It  is  a  law  of  divine  Providence  that  a  man  should

ACT  according   TO   REASON   IN    FREEDOM

71.  It  is  well  known  that  a  man  is  free  to  think  and  will
as  he  pleases,  but  not  to  say  whatever  he  thinks  or  to  do
whatever  he  wills.  The  freedom  here  meant  is  therefore
spiritual,  and  not  natural  freedom,  except  when  the  two  are
united ;  for  thinking  and  willing  are  spiritual,  but  speaking
and  acting  are  natural.  They  are,  moreover,  clearly  dis-
tinct in  man;  for  a  man  can  think  without  expressing  his
thought  in  words,  and  can  will  without  putting  his  desire
into  action;  this  shows  that  the  spiritual  and  natural  in
man  are  separate,  and  therefore  a  man  cannot  pass  from  one
to  the  other  except  by  an  effort  of  the  will.  This  effort
may  be  compared  to  the  unfastening  and  opening  of  a  door.
This  door  stands,  as  it  were,  open  in  those  who  think  and
will  reasonably,  in  accordance  with  the  civil  laws  of  the
state  and  the  moral  laws  of  society,  for  they  speak  as  they
think,  and  act  as  they  will ;  but  the  door  stands,  as  it  were,
shut  in  those  who  think  and  will  in  opposition  to  those  laws.
Whoever  examines  his  wishes  and  consequent  deeds,  will
observe  that  such  an  effort  is  required,  and  sometimes  fre-
quently in  a  single  conversation  or  action.  These  intro-
ductory remarks  have  been  made  to  show  that  by  acting
according  to  reason  in  freedom  is  meant  to  think  and  will
freely,  and  thereby  to  speak  and  do  freely  what  is  according
to  reason.

72.  But  few  suppose  that  this  can  be  a  law  of  divine
Providence,  chiefly  because  man  is  thus  free  to  think  evil
and  falsity,  although  divine  Providence  is  continually
leading  him  to  think  and  will  good  and  truth ;  in  order  there-
fore to  make  this  clear,  we  must  proceed  by  distinct  steps,
in  the  following  order  : —


46


Divine  Providence


I.  Man  possesses  reason  and  freedom,  or  rationality  and
liberty,  and  he  receives  these  two  faculties  from  the  Lord.

II.  Whate\-er  a  man  does  in  freedom  appears  to  be  his
own,  whether  it  be  reasonable  or  not,  provided  it  is  according
to  his  reason.

III.  Whatever  a  man  does  in  freedom,  according  to  his
thought,  is  appropriated  to  him  as  his  own,  and  becomes
permanent  in  him.

IV.  A  man  is  reformed  and  regenerated  by  the  Lord
by  means  of  these  two  faculties,  and  this  cannot  be  done  in
any  other  way.

V.  By  means  of  these  two  faculties,  a  man  can  be  reformed
and  regenerated  so  far  as  he  can  be  led  by  them  to
acknowledge  that  everything  good  and  true  that  he  thinks
and  does  is  from  the  Lord  and  not  from  himself.

VI.  The  union  of  the  Lord  with  man,  and  the  reciprocal
union  of  man  with  the  Lord,  is  effected  by  means  of  these
two  faculties.

VII.  The  Lord  keeps  these  two  faculties  unimpaired
and  inviolable  in  man,  in  the  whole  course  of  His  divine
Providence.

VIII.  It  is  therefore  in  accordance  with  divine  Providence
that  a  man  should  act  according  to  reason  in  freedom.

73.  I.  Man  possesses  reason  and  freedom,  or  rationality
and  liberty,  and  he  receives  these  two  faculties  from  the  Lard.
That  a  man  has  the  faculty  of  understanding,  or  rationality,
and  the  faculty  of  thinking,  willing,  speaking,  and  doing
what  he  understands,  or  liberty,  and  that  these  two  faculties
are  given  him  by  the  Lord,  has  been  shown  in  the  work  on
The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  264,  270,  425;  and  also
above,  nos.  43,  44).  But  as  many  doubts  may  occur
concerning  each  of  these  faculties  when  they  are  made  the
subject  of  thought,  I  wish  first  of  all  to  say  something  about
man's  freedom  of  acting  according  to  reason.  But  first
it  must  be  knowTi  that  all  freedom  belongs  to  love,  so  that
love  and  freedom  are  one;  and  because  love  is  man's  life,
freedom  also  comes  from  his  life;  for  all  the  delight  that
a  man  experiences  is  derived  from  his  love,  no  delight  coming
from  any  other  source ;  and  to  act  from  the  delight  of  love
is  to  act  in  freedom.  For  delight  draws  a  man  along,  just
as  a  stream  carries  along  whatever  floats  in  it.  Now  as
there  are  many  kinds  of  love,  some  harmonious  and  some


Divine  Providence  47

discordant,  it  follows  that  there  are  likewise  many  kinds
of  freedom.  In  general,  there  are  three  kinds  of  freedom,
natural,  rational,  and  spiritual.

•  Natural  freedom  comes  to  every  man  by  birth;  in  the
exercise  of  this,  he  loves  nothing  but  himself  and  the  world.
His  life  at  first  is  nothing  else;  and  because  all  evils  arise
from  these  two  loves,  and  through  them,  also,  become
incorporated  in  the  love,  it  follows  that  it  is  natural  freedom
to  think  and  will  evil ;  and  that  when  a  man  has  confirmed
himself  in  this  habit  by  the  use  of  his  reason,  he  practises
evil  in  freedom  according  to  his  reason.  He  does  this  by
virtue  of  his  faculty  of  liberty;  and  he  confirms  himself  in
evil  by  his  faculty  of  rationality.  For  example,  it  is  from
the  love  which  a  man  inherits  by  birth  that  he  desires  to
commit  adultery,  to  defraud,  to  blaspheme,  and  take  re-
venge ;  and  when  he  confirms  these  evils  in  himself,  and  so
persuades  himself  that  they  are  allowable,  then  from  the
delight  caused  by  his  love  of  such  practices,  and,  as  it  were,
according  to  reason,  he  freely  thinks  and  wills  them ;  and  so
far  as  civil  laws  do  not  restrain  him,  he  openly  speaks  about
them  and  carries  them  out  into  action.  It  is  of  the  Lord's
divine  Providence  that  a  man  is  permitted  to  do  so,  because
he  enjoys  freedom  or  liberty.  This  freedom  comes  to  a  man
by  nature,  because  he  inherits  it;  and  those  are  in  this
freedom  who  have  confirmed  themselves  in  it  by  reasoning
from  the  delight  of  the  love  of  self  and  of  the  world.

Rational  freedom  arises  from  the  love  of  reputation  regarded
as  a  means  of  acquiring  honour  or  wealth.  The  delight  of
this  love  is  to  appear  externally  moral ;  and  as  a  man  values
this  reputation,  he  refrains  from  fraud,  adultery,  revenge,
and  blasphemy;  and  since  this  is  a  matter  of  deliberate
judgment,  he  acts  in  freedom  and  according  to  his  reason,
and  consequently  acts  the  part  of  a  sincere,  just,  chaste,  and
friendly  man ;  and  he  can  even  by  use  of  his  reason  speak  in
suitable  terms  in  favour  of  so  doing.  But  if  his  rational
faculty  is  merely  natural,  and  not  at  the  same  time  spiritual,
this  freedom  is  only  external,  not  internal ;  for  he  does  not
love  good  inwardly,  but  only  outwardly,  for  the  sake  of  his
reputation  as  was  said  before ;  and  so  the  good  deeds  which
he  does  are  not  really  good.  He  may  also  sa}-  that  such
things  ought  to  be  done  for  the  sake  of  the  public  good ;  but
he  says  this  not  from  a  love  for  the  public  good,  but  out  of


48


Divine  Providence


regard  for  his  own  honour  or  gain.  His  freedom,  therefore,
derives  nothing  from  the  love  of  the  public  good ;  nor  does
his  reason,  for  this  merely  assents  to  his  love.  This  rational
freedom  is,  therefore,  in  reality  only  natural  freedom.  This
freedom  also  is  accorded  by  the  Lord's  divine  Providence
to  every  one.

Spiritual  freedom  arises  from  the  love  of  eternal  life.  This
love  and  its  enjoyment  is  acquired  by  no  one  unless  he
regards  evils  as  sins,  and  therefore  refuses  to  will  them,  and
at  the  same  time  looks  to  the  Lord.  When  a  man  does  this,
he  is  then  in  the  enjoyment  of  that  freedom,  for  no  one  can
refuse  to  will  evils  because  they  are  sins,  and  therefore
refrain  from  doing  them,  unless  he  does  so  from  that  interior
or  higher  freedom  which  comes  from  an  interior  or  higher
love.  At  first  this  freedom  does  not  look  like  freedom,
although  it  is  so ;  but  it  afterwards  appears  so,  and  then  man
acts  in  freedom  according  to  reason  in  thinking,  willing,
speaking  and  doing  what  is  good  and  true.  This  freedom
increases  as  natural  freedom  decreases  and  becomes  sub-
servient ;  and  it  unites  with  rational  freedom  and  purifies
it.  Any  one  may  acquire  this  freedom,  provided  he  is  willing
to  reflect  that  hfe  is  eternal,  and  that  the  enjoyment  and
bliss  of  a  temporary  existence  are  but  as  a  fleeting  shadow
compared  with  the  enjoyment  and  bhss  of  eternal  life ;  and
a  man  can  think  so  if  he  chooses,  because  he  possesses
rationality  and  liberty,  and  because  the  Lord,  from  whom  he
receives  these  two  faculties,  continually  gives  him  the  ability
to  do  so.

74.  IL  Whatever  a  man  does  in  freedom  appears  to  be  his
own,  whether  it  be  reasonable  or  not,  provided  it  is  according
to  his  reason.  The  nature  of  rationality  and  liberty,  which
are  proper  to  man,  cannot  be  more  clearly  explained  than
by  a  comparison  of  men  with  animals,  for  these  have  no
rationality,  or  faculty  of  understanding,  nor  any  liberty,  or
faculty  of  willing  freely ;  and  therefore  they  have  no  under-
standing and  will,  but  instead  of  understanding  they  have
knowledge,  and  instead  of  will,  affection,  and  both  are
natural.  And  because  they  have  not  these  two  faculties,
neither  have  they  thought,  but  they  have  instead  an  internal
sight  which  makes  one  by  correspondence  with  their  external
sight.  Every  affection  has  its  correlative  truth  as  a  consort ;
an  affection  of  natural  love  has  knowledge,  an  affection  of


Divine  Providence  49

spiritual  love^  intelligence,  and  an  affection  of  celestial  love,
wisdom;  for  affection  without  its  correlative  as  a  consort
is  nothing;  for  it  is  like  Being  without  Manifestation,
or  substance  without  form,  of  which  nothing  can  be  pre-
dicated. Hence,  in  every  created  thing  there  is  something
which  may  be  compared  to  the  marriage  of  good  and  truth,
as  has  been  shown  above  in  many  places.  In  animals,  there
is  the  marriage  of  affection  and  knowledge;  with  them  the
affection  is  that  of  natural  good,  and  the  knowledge  that  of
natural  truth.  Now  affection  and  knowledge  act  in  perfect
unison  in  them,  and  their  affection  cannot  be  raised  above
their  knowledge,  nor  their  knowledge  above  their  affection;
if  they  were,  both  would  have  to  be  raised  together;  and
as  they  have  no  spiritual  mind,  into  which,  or  into  the  hght
and  heat  of  which,  they  can  be  raised,  they  have  no  faculty
of  understanding,  or  rationality,  and  no  faculty  of  wilhng
freely,  or  liberty,  but  merely  natural  affection  with  its
attendant  knowledge.  Their  natural  affection  is  a  desire
for  food,  shelter,  offspring,  and  of  escaping  from  and  avoiding
danger,  united  with  all  the  knowledge  needed  for  the  purpose.
Such  being  the  state  of  their  life  they  cannot  think  "  I  wish
this,  and  not  that  " ;  nor  "  I  know  this,  and  not  that  " ;
much  less  "I  understand  and  love  this";  but  they  are
actuated  by  their  desires  according  to  their  knowledge,
without  rationality  or  liberty.  That  they  are  so  actuated
is  not  an  effect  derived  from  the  natural  but  from  the  spiritual
world,  whence  all  efficient  causes  proceed.  Something  on
this  subject  may  also  be  seen  below  (no.  96).

75.  It  is  different  with  man  ;  he  has  not  only  the  affection
of  natural  love,  but  also  the  affection  of  spiritual  and  celestial
love;  for  the  human  mind  has  three  degrees,  as  shown  in
Part  III.  of  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom;  and
therefore  a  man  can  be  raised  from  natural  knowledge  into
spiritual  intelligence,  and  from  this  into  celestial  wisdom;
and  from  these  two,  intelligence  and  wisdom,  he  can  look
to  the  Lord,  and  thus  be  united  with  Him,  and  so  live  for
ever.  But  this  elevation  of  affection  could  not  take  place
unless  man  had  from  rationality  the  ability  to  raise  the  under-
standing, and  from  liberty  the  desire  to  do  so.  A  man  by
these  two  faculties  is  able  to  reflect  upon  what  he  perceives
outside  himself  by  his  bodily  senses ;  and  he  has  also  a  higher
thought,  which  can  contemplate  his  lower  thought.     For

E


50  Divine  Providence

any  one  can  say,  "  I  have  thought  this,  or  I  think  this  ";
also,  "  I  have  willed  this,  or  I  will  this  " ;  or  again,  "  I
understand  that  this  is  so,"  and  "  I  love  this  for  this  reason,"
and  so  on.  This  shows  that  man  has  a  higher  thought  which
sees  beneath  it  his  lower  thought.  Man  has  this  faculty
from  rationality  and  liberty,  from  rationality,  that  he  can
think  more  loftily,  and  from  liberty,  that  from  affection
he  wills  to  think  so ;  for  unless  he  had  liberty  so  to  think,
he  would  not  have  the  will  nor  consequently  the  thought.
For  this  reason  those  who  do  not  care  to  understand  anything
but  what  belongs  to  the  world  and  nature,  and  have  no  desire
to  know  anything  about  moral  and  spiritual  good  and  truth,
cannot  be  raised  from  knowledge  into  intelligence,  still  less
into  wisdom ;  for  they  have  perverted  those  faculties ;  and
the  consequence  is  that  they  are  men  only  to  this  extent,
that  they  can  understand  if  they  choose,  and  can  exercise
their  will  by  virtue  of  the  rationality  and  liberty  implanted
in  them.  It  is  from  these  two  faculties  that  men  can  think
and  speak  their  thoughts ;  in  all  other  respects  they  are  not
men  but  animals,  and  some,  from  the  abuse  of  these  faculties,
are  worse  than  animals.

76.  Any  one  whose  rationality  is  not  obscured  may  see
or  understand  that  man  could  have  no  affection  of  knowing,
or  of  understanding,  but  for  the  appearance  that  it  is  his
own  affection;  for  all  delight  and  pleasure,  thus  all  that
belongs  to  the  will,  comes  from  an  affection  of  love.  Who
can  wish  to  know  or  understand  anything,  unless  he  feels
some  pleasure  arising  from  affection?  And  who  can  feel
this  pleasure  or  affection  unless  that  by  which  he  is  affected
appears  to  be  his  own  ?  If  nothing  were  his  but  all  another's,
that  is,  if  any  one  else  should  infuse  something  of  his  own
affection  into  the  mind  of  one  who  had  no  desire  to  know
or  understand  on  his  own  account,  would  he  receive,  nay,
could  he  receive  it  ?  Would  he  not  be  what  is  called  a  fool
and  a  blockhead?  From  this  it  may  be  clearly  seen  that,
although  everything  which  a  man  perceives  and  con-
sequently thinks  and  knows,  and  which  according  to  his
perception  he  wills  and  does,  flows  into  his  mind  from
elsewhere,  yet  it  is  of  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  that  it
should  appear  as  the  man's  own;  for,  as  was  said  above,
the  man  would  otherwise  receive  nothing,  and  therefore
could   not  be  endowed   with  any  intelligence  or  wisdom.


Divine  Providence  51

It  is  well  known  that  all  goodness  and  truth  are  not  man's,
but  the  Lord's ;  and  yet  they  appear  to  man  as  if  they  were
his;  and  because  all  goodness  and  truth  so  appear,  so  do
all  things  of  the  Church  and  of  heaven,  and  consequently
all  things  of  love  and  wisdom,  and  of  charity  and  faith.
Nevertheless,  not  one  of  them  is  a  man's  own,  but  no  one
can  receive  them  from  the  Lord  unless  it  seems  to  him
that  he  perceives  them  of  himself.  From  these  consider-
ations the  truth  should  be  evident,  that  whatever  a  man
does  in  freedom  appears  to  him  as  his  own,  whether  it  be
reasonable  or  not,  provided  it  is  according  to  his  own
reason.

77.  Who  is  not  able,  by  his  faculty  of  rationality,  to  under
stand  that  this  or  that  good  is  useful  to  the  community,
and  that  this  or  that  evil  is  hurtful  to  it?  For  example,
that  justice,  sincerity,  and  conjugal  chastity,  are  useful
to  the  community;  and  that  injustice,  insincerity,  and
adultery  with  the  wives  of  others,  are  hurtful  to  it ;  conse-
quently that  these  evils  in  themselves  are  injtirious,  and
that  the  goods  in  themselves  are  beneficial.  Who,  therefore,
cannot  rationally  assent  to  all  this  if  he  chooses  ?  He  has
rationality  and  liberty,  and  these  faculties  are  revealed  and
made  manifest,  regulate  his  life  and  endow  him  with  per-
ception and  power,  so  far  as  from  such  considerations  he
shuns  those  evils  in  himself;  and  so  far  as  he  does  this,  he
regards  the  above-mentioned  virtues  as  a  friend  regards  his
friends.  By  his  faculty  of  rationality  a  man  may  after-
wards draw  conclusions  from  these  things  with  regard  to  the
goods  that  are  useful  to  a  community  in  the  spiritual  world,
and  with  regard  to  the  evils  that  are  hurtful  there,  if  only  by
evils  he  understands  sins,  and  by  goods,  the  works  of  charity.
This  also  he  can  rationally  assent  to  if  he  chooses,  since  he
possesses  rationality  and  liberty;  and  these  are  revealed
and  made  manifest,  regulate  his  life  and  endow  him  with
perception  and  power,  so  far  as  he  shuns  the  same  evils
as  sins ;  and  so  far  as  he  docs  this,  he  regards  the  goods  of
charity  with  a  love  like  the  mutual  love  of  neighbours.
Now,  as  it  is  the  Lord's  will,  for  the  sake  of  reception  and
union,  that  whatever  a  man  does  freely  according  to  reason
should  appear  to  him  as  his  own,  and  as  this  is  in  accordance
with  reason  itself,  it  follows  that  a  man  can  exercise  his
will  according  to  his  reason,  because  this  concerns  his  eternal


52  Divine  Providence

happiness,  and  can  act  accordingly  if  he  seeks  the  aid  of  the
Lord's  divine  Power.

78.  III.  Whatever  a  man  does  in  freedom,  according  to  his
thought,  is  appropriated  to  him  as  his  own  and  becomes  per-
ma7ient  in  him.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  man's  selfhood
makes  one  with  his  freedom.  A  man's  selfhood  is  inseparable
from  his  life;  and  what  a  man  does  from  his  life  he  does
from  freedom ;  moreover  man's  selfhood  is  inseparable  from
his  love,  for  love  is  the  life  of  every  one,  and  what  a  man
does  from  his  life's  love,  he  does  from  freedom.  From
freedom  a  man  acts  according  to  his  thought,  because
whatever  is  of  the  life  or  love  is  also  the  subject  of  thought,
and  is  thus  confirmed ;  and  when  it  is  confirmed,  a  man  does
it  in  freedom  according  to  his  thought.  For  whatever  a
man  does,  he  does  from  the  will  by  means  of  the  understand-
ing; and  freedom  comes  from  the  will,  and  thought  comes
from  the  understanding.  A  man  can  also  act  in  freedom
contrary  to  reason;  again,  he  can  act  according  to  reason,
yet  not  in  freedom;  but  things  so  done  are  not  appro-
priated to  the  man ;  they  are  merely  acts  of  his  tongue  and
body,  not  of  his  spirit  or  heart;  but  if  the  acts  of  his  spirit
and  heart  are  expressed  in  word  and  deed  also,  they  are
appropriated  to  him.  The  truth  of  this  might  be  shown
by  many  illustrations ;  but  this  is  not  the  place  for  them.
By  their  being  appropriated  to  man  is  meant,  that  they
enter  his  life,  become  a  part  of  his  life,  and  consequently
become  his  own.  It  will  be  seen,  however,  in  what  follows,
that  nothing  is  man's  own,  although  it  appears  to  him  as
if  it  were.  Suffice  it  to  say  here,  that  every  good  which  a
man  does  in  freedom  according  to  reason,  is  appropriated
to  him  as  his  own,  because  in  thinking,  willing,  speaking
and  acting,  it  appears  so  to  him;  still,  the  good  is  not  the
man's  but  the  Lord's  in  the  man,  as  may  be  seen  above
(no.  76).  How  evil  is  appropriated  to  man  will  be  seen
in  its  proper  article.

79.  It  has  been  stated  above  that  what  a  man  does  in
freedom  according  to  his  thought,  becomes  permanent  in
him,  for  nothing  that  man  has  appropriated  to  himself  can
be  eradicated;  it  has  become  the  object  both  of  his  love
and  of  his  reason,  or  of  his  will  and  of  his  understanding,
and  hence  of  his  life.  It  may  indeed  be  put  away,  but  not
cast  out;    and  when  it  is  put  away,  it  is  relegated,  as  it


Divine  Providence  53

were,  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference,  and  there  it
stays;  this  is  what  is  meant  by  its  becoming  permanent.
If  a  man  has  in  boyhood  and  youth  made  some  evil  his  own
by  taking  delight  in  doing  it, — for  example,  if  he  has  been
given  to  fraud,  blasphemy,  revenge,  or  fornication,  then,
as  he  has  done  these  things  in  freedom  according  to  his
thought,  he  has  made  them  his  own;  but  if  he  afterwards
repents,  and  shuns  them,  and  regards  them  as  hateful  sins,
and  so  in  freedom  according  to  reason  desists  from  them,
then  he  is  endowed  with  the  goods  to  which  those  evils
are  opposite.  These  goods  then  constitute  the  centre,  and
they  remove  the  evils  more  and  more  towards  the  circumfer-
ence according  to  the  aversion  and  abhorrence  he  feels  for
them.  Yet  they  cannot  be  so  cast  out  as  to  be  extirpated,
although  by  that  removal  they  may  appear  to  be  so.  This
happens  when  a  man  is  withheld  from  evil  and  maintained
in  good  by  the  Lord.  All  a  man's  hereditary  and  all  his
actual  evil  can  be  thus  removed.  I  have  seen  this  proved
by  experience  with  regard  to  some  in  heaven  who,  being
maintained  in  good  by  the  Lord,  supposed  themselves  to
be  free  from  evil ;  but  lest  they  should  believe  the  good  in
them  to  be  their  own,  they  were  brought  down  from  heaven
and  into  their  evils,  until  they  acknowledged  that  the  evil
within  them  was  their  own,  but  that  the  good  was  from  the
Lord;  after  this  acknowledgment  they  were  taken  back  to
heaven.  Let  it  be  known,  therefore,  that  good  is  appropriated
to  a  man  only  in  the  sense  that  it  is  constantly  the  Lord's
in  him;  and  that  so  far  as  a  man  acknowledges  this,  the
Lord  grants  that  it  may  appear  to  him  as  his  own,  that  is,
that  he  may  appear  to  love  the  neighbour  or  to  exercise
charity  as  from  himself,  to  believe  or  have  faith  as  from
himself,  and  to  do  good,  understand  truth,  and  so  be  wise,
as  from  himself.  From  these  facts  an  enlightened  mind
may  see  the  nature  and  vividness  of  the  appearance  in  which
the  Lord  desires  that  man  should  live ;  the  Lord  wills  this  for
the  sake  of  man's  salvation,  for  without  this  appearance  no
one  could  be  saved.  On  this  subject  see  above  (nos.  42-45)
80.  Nothing  is  appropriated  to  a  man  which  he  only
thinks,  nor  even  that  which  he  thinks  of  willing,  unless  he
at  the  same  time  wills  it  so  strongly  that,  were  opportunity
given,  he  would  do  it;  the  reason  of  this  is  that  when  he
acts  in  this  way,  from  his  will  through  his  understanding^


54  Divine  Providence

or  from  the  affection  of  his  will  through  the  thought  of  his
understanding,  he  actually  does  the  thing;  but  as  long  as  it
is  merely  the  subject  of  his  thought,  it  cannot  be  appro-
priated, because  the  understanding  cannot  unite  itself  with
the  will,  or  the  thought  of  the  understanding  with  the
affection  of  the  will ;  but  the  will  and  its  affection  unite
with  the  understanding  and  its  thought,  as  was  frequently
explained  in  Part  V.  of  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and
Wisdom.  This  is  meant  by  the  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  Not
that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth  a  man;  but  that
which  goeth  out  of  the  heart  through  the  mouth,  this  defileth
a  man  "  (Matt.  xv.  n,  17,  18,  19).  In  the  spiritual  sense,  by
the  mouth  is  meant  thought,  because  thought  is  expressed  in
words  by  the  mouth ;  and  by  heart  is  meant  affection,  which
belongs  to  love.  If  man  thinks  and  speaks  from  evil
affection,  he  makes  himself  unclean.  The  heart  also  signifies
the  affection  of  the  love  or  the  will,  and  the  mouth  signifies
the  thought  of  the  understanding,  in  Luke  vi.  45.

81.  The  evils  which  a  man  considers  permissible  are  also
appropriated  to  him,  even  though  he  does  not  commit
them;  for  the  thought  that  they  are  permissible  comes
from  the  will;  there  is,  in  fact,  consent  on  its  part,  and
therefore  when  a  man  believes  any  evil  to  be  permissible,
he  releases  it  from  internal  restraint,  and  is  withheld  from
committing  it  only  by  external  restraints,  which  are  fears.
And  because  the  man's  spirit  favours  the  evil,  when  external
restraints  are  removed,  he  commits  it  as  being  allowable;
and  meanwhile  he  continually  commits  it  in  his  spirit.  But
concerning  this,  see  the  Doctrine  of  Life  for  the  New  Jerusalem
(nos.  108-113).

82.  IV.  A  man  is  reformed  and  regenerated  by  the  Lord
by  inea7is  of  these  two  facidties  ;  and  lie  cannot  be  reformed  and
regenerated  in  any  other  way.  The  Lord  teaches  that  unless
a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God
(John  iii.  3,  5,  7);  but  few  know  what  is  meant  by  being  born
again,  or  regenerated.  The  reason  is  that  being  ignorant
of  the  nature  of  love  and  charity,  every  one  has  misunder-
stood the  nature  of  faith ;  for  without  a  knowledge  of  love
and  charity  no  one  can  know  what  faith  is,  because  charity
and  faith  make  one,  like  good  and  truth,  or  like  the  affection
of  the  will  and  the  thought  of  the  understanding;  concerning
this  union,  see  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom


Divine  Providence  55

(nos.   427-431);    and   the   Doctrine  of  the  New   Jerusalem
(nos.  13-24);  it  may  also  be  seen  above  (nos.  3-20).

83.  The  reason  why  no  one  can  enter  the  kingdom  of
God  unless  he  has  been  born  again  is,  that  man  inherits
through  his  parents  evils  of  every  kind,  but  is  capable  of
being  made  spiritual  by  the  removal  of  those  evils;  and
unless  he  becomes  spiritual  he  cannot  enter  heaven.  To
become  spiritual  instead  of  natural,  is  to  be  born  again,
or  regenerated.  But  to  understand  how  a  man  is  re-
generated, three  things  must  be  considered,  namely  the
nature  of  his  first  state,  which  is  a  state  of  condemnation,
the  nature  of  his  second  state,  which  is  a  state  of  reform-
ation, and  the  nature  of  his  third  state  which  is  a  state  of
regeneration.

Man's  first  state,  or  state  of  condemnation,  is  inherited  by
every  one  from  his  parents ;  for  their  offspring  is  born  in  the
love  of  self  and  the  world,  and  these  are  the  source  in  him  of
evils  of  every  kind.     He  is  allured  by  the  delight  of  these
loves  which  blmd  him  to  the  fact  that  he  is  in  evil ;  for  the
delight  of  every  love  is  felt  only  as  good;    and  therefore,
unless  a  man  is  regenerated,  he  supposes  that  to  love  himself
and  the  world  above  all  things  is  good  itself,  and  that  to
dominate  over  and  possess  the  wealth  of  all  others  is  the
chief  good.     This  is  the  source  of  all  his  evil;  for  he  has  no
love  for  any  one  but  himself;   or  if  he  has,  it  is  only  as  one
devil  regards  another  or  as  one  thief  regards  another,  when
they  are  acting  together.     Those  who  confirm  themselves
in  these  loves  and  their  resulting  evils  on  account  of  the
delight   that    they  derive  from  them,  remain  natural,  and
become  corporeal  and  sensual;    and  as  regards  their  own
thought,  or  that  of  their  spirit,  they  are  insane ;  but  as  they
are  men,  and  therefore  possess  rationality  and  hberty,  they
are  still  able,  while  in  the  world,  to  speak  and  act  rationally ;
but  they  do   this   from  the   love   of  self  and  the   world.
After  death,  when  they  become  spirits,  they  are  unable  to
feel  any  other  delight  than  that  which  they  felt  in  their
spirit  while  in  the  world ;  and  that  is  the  delight  of  infernal
love,  now  turned  into  the  misery,  pain  and  horror  described
in  the  Word  as  torment  and  hell-fire.     From  this  it  is  evident
that  man's  first  state  is  a  state  of  condemnation,  and  that
this  is  the  state  of  those  who  are  unwilling  to  be  regenerated.
Man's  second  state,  or  state  of  reformation,  is  that  in  which


56


Divine  Providence


he  begins  to  think  of  heaven  on  account  of  the  happiness
enjoyed  there;  and  thus  he  begins  to  think  of  God  from
whom  the  joy  of  heaven  comes;  but  at  first  this  thought
arises  from  the  delight  of  the  love  of  self,  for  to  him  the  joy
of  heaven  means  that  delight;  but  as  long  as  the  delight  of
that  love  reigns  in  his  mind,  together  with  the  delights  of
the  evils  flowing  from  it,  he  cannot  conceive  any  other
means  of  getting  to  heaven  than  by  pouring  forth  pravers,
listening  to  sermons,  and  attending  the  Holy  Supper,  giving
to  the  poor,  helping  the  needy,  spending  money  on  churches,
making  contributions  to  hospitals,  and  so  on.  ]\Ioreover
a  man  while  in  this  state  supposes  that  he  will  be  saved  by
merely  thinking  about  what  religion  teaches,  whether  it
relate  to  faith,  or  to  faith  united  to  charity.  He  believes
this  because  he  thinks  nothing  of  the  evils  in  which  he
delights,  and  as  long  as  he  delights  in  them  the  evils  remain ;
these  dehghts  arise  from  the  lust  which  continually  inspires
them,  and  which  also  brings  them  forth  into  act  when  no
fear  restrains.  So  long  as  evils  continue  in  their  lusts  and
thence  in  the  delights  of  their  love,  they  have  no  faith,
charity,  piety,  nor  worship  except  in  externals,  which  to  the
world  seem  real,  and  yet  are  not  so.  They  may  be  compared
to  water  issuing  from  an  impure  fountain,  which  is  not  fit  to
drink.  So  long  as  a  man  thinks  religiously  of  heaven  and
of  God,  and  yet  does  not  consider  evils  to  be  sins,  he  is  still
in  his  first  state ;  but  he  enters  the  second  state,  or  that  of
reformation,  when  he  begins  to  think  that  there  is  such  a
thing  as  sin;  and  still  more  when  he  thinks  that  this  or
that  is  sinful,  and  when  he  in  some  measure  searches  it  out
in  himself,  and  ceases  to  will  it.

Man's  third  state,  or  state  of  regeneration,  is  a  continuation
of  the  former  state.  It  begins  when  he  desists  from  evils
because  they  are  sins,  advances  as  he  shuns  them,  and  is
perfected  as  he  fights  against  them ;  and  then  so  far  as  he
conquers  under  the  guidance  of  the  Lord,  he  is  regenerated.
In  a  regenerate  man  the  order  of  life  is  reversed ;  instead  of
being  natural,  he  becomes  spiritual;  for  the  natural  mind
when  separated  from  the  spiritual,  is  contrary  to  order,
while  the  spiritual  mind  is  according  to  order ;  and  therefore
a  regenerate  man  acts  from  charity,  and  makes  his  faith
conform  to  his  charity.  Yet  he  only  becomes  spiritual  so
far  as  he  possesses  truths ;  for  every  man  is  regenerated  by


Divine  Providence  57

truths,  and  by  a  life  according  to  them;  for  by  truths  he
knows  how  he  ought  to  hve,  and  by  his  hfe  he  acts  according
to  the  truths.  Thus  he  unites  good  and  truth  in  a  spiritual
marriage,  in  which  heaven  abides.

85.  Man  is  reformed  and  regenerated  by  means  of  the
two  faculties  of  rationality  and  liberty,  and  he  cannot  be
reformed  and  regenerated  without  them,  because  by  his
rationality  he  can  know  and  understand  the  nature  of  evil
and  good,  and  therefore  of  falsity  and  truth ;  and  by  liberty
he  can  will  that  which  he  knows  and  understands.  But  so
long  as  the  delight  of  the  love  of  evil  predominates,  he  cannot
freely  will  good  and  truth,  and  embody  them  in  his  under-
standing; and  therefore  he  cannot  make  them  his  own;
for,  as  shown  above,  that  which  a  man  does  in  freedom
according  to  reason  becomes  his  own;  otherwise  he  cannot
be  reformed  and  regenerated.  He  acts  for  the  first  time
from  the  delight  of  the  love  of  good  and  truth,  when  the
delight  of  the  love  of  evil  and  falsity  is  removed;  for  two
opposite  delights  cannot  exist  together.  To  act  from  the
delight  of  love  is  to  act  in  freedom;  and  it  is  also  according
to  reason,  for  the  understanding  supports  the  love.

86.  As  all  men,  whether  wicked  or  good,  possess  rationality
and  liberty,  a  bad  as  well  as  a  good  man  can  understand
truth  and  do  good ;  but  a  bad  man  cannot  do  so  in  freedom
according  to  reason,  while  a  good  one  can;  because  a  bad
man  is  in  the  delight  of  the  love  of  evil,  but  a  good  man  in
the  delight  of  the  love  of  good.  Therefore  the  truth  which
a  bad  man  understands,  and  the  good  which  he  does,  are
not  appropriated  to  him,  but  truth  and  good  are  appropriated
to  a  good  man ;  and  without  this  appropriation  there  could
be  no  reformation  or  regeneration.  For  with  wicked  men,
evils  with  their  falsities  are  in  the  centre,  and  goods  with
their  truths  in  the  circumference;  but  in  good  men,  goods
with  their  truths  are  in  the  centre,  and  evils  with  their
falsities  in  the  circumference;  and  in  both  cases  whatever  is
at  the  centre  diffuses  itself  to  the  circumference,  as  heat  is
diffused  from  fire,  or  cold  from  ice.  Thus  with  evil  men
goods  at  the  circumference  are  defiled  by  evils  within ;  and
with  good  men  evils  at  the  circumference  are  mitigated  by
goods  within.  This  is  the  reason  why  evils  do  not  condemn
the  regenerate  man,  and  goods  do  not  save  the  unregenerate.

87-  V.  By  means  of    these  two  faculties,  a  man  can  be


58


Divine  Providence


refonned  and  regenerated  so  jar  as  he  can  be  led  by  them  to
acknowledge  that  everything  true  and  good  which  he  thinks  and
does  is  from  the  Lord  and  not  from  himself.  The  nature  of
reformation  and  regeneration  has  been  explained  just  above ;
also  that  man  is  reformed  and  regenerated  by  means  of  the
two  faculties  of  rationality  and  liberty;  and  because  this
is  brought  about  by  their  means,  something  further  shall
be  said  about  them.  From  rationality  man  derives  the
power  to  understand,  and  from  liberty  the  power  to  will,
both  as  if  of  himself ;  but  to  be  able  freely  to  will  good  and
thence  to  do  it  according  to  reason,  is  only  possible  to  the
regenerate.  A  bad  man  can  freely  will  only  evil,  and  he
does  so  according  to  his  thought,  which  he  clothes  with  an
appearance  of  reasonableness  by  various  arguments.  Reasons
can  be  adduced  in  favour  of  evil  as  well  as  good;  but  evil
is  supported  by  fallacies  and  outward  appearances  which
become  falsities  when  confirmed;  and,  when  confirmed,
they  appear  to  be  in  accordance  with  reason.

88.  Every  one  whose  thought  is  at  all  based  on  interior
reason  may  see  that  the  power  to  will  and  understand  does
not  come  from  man,  but  from  Him  who  has  power  itself,  or
is  its  essence.  Only  consider  whence  power  of  action  comes.
Is  it  not  from  Him  who  has  it  in  its  essential  potency,  that
is,  who  possesses  it  in  Himself,  and  so  transmits  it  from
Himself.^  Power,  therefore,  in  itself  is  divine.  Every
power  must  come  from  something  which  supplies  it  and
actuates  it  from  within  or  above.  The  eye  cannot  see  of
itself,  nor  can  the  ear  hear  of  itself,  nor  the  mouth  speak  of
itself,  nor  the  hand  act  of  itself ;  they  must  be  supplied  with
power,  and  directed  by  the  mind.  Neither  can  the  mind
think  and  will  this  or  that  of  itself,  but  from  something
interior  or  higher,  by  which  it  is  actuated  or  directed.  It
is  the  same  with  the  power  to  understand  and  will;  these
can  be  derived  from  no  other  source  than  Him  who  possesses
the  power  in  Himself  of  willing  and  understanding.  From
these  considerations  it  is  evident  that  these  two  faculties
of  rationality  and  liberty  are  derived  from  the  Lord,  and  not
from  man;  and  because  they  are  from  the  Lord,  it  follows
that  man  wills  and  understands  nothing  whatever  of  himself,
but  only  as  if  of  himself.  That  this  is  so,  any  one  can  con-
vince himself,  who  knows  and  believes  that  the  willing  of
every  good,  and  the  understanding  of    every  truth,  comes


Divine  Providence  59

from  the  Lord,  and  not  from  man.  The  Word  teaches  that
a  man  cannot  receive  anything  from  himself,  and  cannot  do
anything  from  himself  (John  iii.  27  ;  xv.  5).

89.  Now  as  all  willing  comes  from  love,  and  all  under-
standing from  wisdom,  it  follows  that  the  power  to  will
comes  from  the  divine  Lo^'e,  and  the  power  to  understand
from  the  divine  Wisdom;  both,  therefore,  from  the  Lord,
who  is  divine  Lo^re  itself  and  di\ane  Wisdom  itself.  From
this  it  follows  that  acting  in  freedom  according  to  reason
is  from  no  other  source.  Every  one  does  act  according  to
reason,  because  freedom,  like  love,  is  inseparable  from
willing.  But  in  man  there  is  an  interior  and  an  exterior
will ;  and  he  can  act  according  to  the  exterior  will  without
acting  according  to  the  interior;  thus  he  acts  the  hypocrite
and  flatterer ;  and  yet  the  exterior  will  is  in  freedom,  for  it
acts  from  the  man's  desire  to  appear  different  from  what  he
really  is,  or  from  a  love  of  some  evil  intention,  originating
in  the  love  of  the  exterior  will.  But,  as  was  said  before,
a  bad  man  cannot,  in  freedom  according  to  his  reason,  do
anything  but  evil;  he  cannot  do  real  good  in  freedom
according  to  reason.  He  can  indeed  do  good,  but  not  from
the  interior  freedom  which  is  his  proper  freedom,  for  which
reason  the  exterior  freedom  is  not  really  good.

90.  It  has  been  said  above  that  man  may  be  reformed  and
regenerated,  so  far  as,  by  means  of  these  two  faculties,  he
can  be  led  to  acknowledge  that  everything  good  and  true
which  he  thinks  and  does,  comes  from  the  Lord  and  not  from
himself.  ^lan  can  acknowledge  this  only  by  means  of  these
two  faculties,  because  they  also  are  derived  from  the  Lord,
and  are  the  Lord's  in  man,  as  is  evident  from  what  has
already  been  said.  It  therefore  follows  that  man  cannot
do  this  of  himself,  but  by  power  received  from  the  Lord;
yet  he  can  do  it  as  if  of  himself ;  this  power  the  Lord  gives
to  every  one.  Even  if  he  believes  the  power  to  be  his  own,
still,  when  he  attains  wisdom  he  will  acknowledge  that  it  is
not  his  own;  otherwise  the  truth  which  he  thinks  and  the
good  which  he  does  are  not  intrinsically  true  and  good ;  for
the  man,  and  not  the  Lord,  is  in  them;  and  such  good,  if
it  is  done  for  the  sake  of  attaining  salvation,  is  a  good  on
account  of  which  he  claims  merit;  but  good  in  which  the
Lord  is,  is  untainted  by  any  such  claim.

91.  But  few  can  understand  why  it  is  that  the  acknow-


6o  Divine  Providence

ledgment  of   the  Lord,  and   the  acknowledgment  that  all
good  and  truth  are  from  Him,  causes  a  man  to  be  reformed
and  regenerated;  for  they  say  within  themselves,— "  Where  is
the  necessity  of  acknowledgement,  since  the  Lord  is  omni-
potent and  desires  the  salvation  of  all,  and  consequently  He
can  and  will  save  all  men,  provided  his  mercy  is  implored?"
But  such  thoughts  do  not  come  from  the  Lord,  nor,  therefore,
from  the  interior  sight  of  the  understanding,  that  is  from
any  enlightenment;   the  necessity  of   this   acknowledgment
shall  therefore  be  briefly  explained.     In  the  spiritual  world,
where  space  is  only  an  appearance,  wisdom  causes  presence,
and  love  causes  union,  and  conversely.     There  is  an  acknow-
ledgment of  the  Lord  from  wisdom,  and  there  is  an  acknow-
ledgment of   the  Lord    from    love.     The  acknowledgment
of  the  Lord  from  wisdom,  which  intrinsically  is  only  know-
ledge, comes  from  doctrine;    and    the    acknowledgment  of
the  Lord  from  love  comes  from  a  life  according  to  doctrine ;
this  causes  union,  but  the  other  only  causes  presence.    This
is  the  reason  why  those  who  despise  all  teaching  about  the
Lord  remove  themselves  from  Him ;   and  because  thev  also
despise  a  life  in  accordance  with  such  teaching,  that  belief
disjoins  themselves  from  Him;    while  those  who  do  not
despise  doctrine,  but  ignore  it  in  their  lives,  are  in  His  pres-
ence,  but   still  are   disjoined   from   Him.      They  are   like
friends  who  converse  together,  but  do  not  love  each  other;
and  they  are  like  two  persons,  one  of  whom  speaks  to  the
other  like  a  friend  but  hates  him  as  an  enemy.     This  is
generally  admitted,  because  it  is  well  known  that  he  who
teaches  rightly  and  lives  rightly  is  saved,  but  not  he  who
teaches  rightly  and  lives  wickedly ;   also,  that  he  who  does
not  believe  in  God  cannot  be  saved.     These  considerations
show  what  kind  of  religion  it  is  to  think  about  the  Lord
from  a  so-called    faith,  and   not  to  act  from  charity.    And
therefore  the  Lord  says,  "  Why  call  ye  Me  Lord,  Lord,  and
do  not  the  things  which  I  say?     Whosoever  cometh  to  Me,
and  heareth  My  sayings,  and  doeth  them,  is  like  a  man  who
built  a  house  and  laid  the  foundation  on  a  rock.     But  he
that  heareth,  and  doeth  not,  is  like  a  man  who  without  a
foundation  built  a  house  upon  the  earth  "  (Luke  vi.  46-49).
92.  VL  The  union  of  the  Lord  7vith  man,  and  the  reciprocal
union  of  man  with  the  Lord,  is  effected  by  means  of  these  two
j-aculties.     Union  with  the  Lord  and  regeneration  are  the


Divine    Providence  6r

same  thing,  for  so  far  as  any  one  is  united  with  the  Lord
he  is  regenerated.  And  therefore  all  that  has  been  said
above  about  regeneration  may  also  be  said  of  union ;  and
what  is  here  said  about  union  may  also  be  said  of  regenera-
tion. That  there  is  a  union  of  the  Lord  with  man,  and  a
reciprocal  union  of  man  with  the  Lord,  He  Himself  teaches
in  John  :  "  Abide  in  Me  and  I  in  you.  He  that  abideth  in  Me
and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit  "  (xv.  4,  5).
"  At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  ye  are  in  Me,  and  I  in  you  "
(xiv.  20).  Any  one  may  see  by  the  light  of  reason  alone  that
a  union  of  minds  is  impossible  unless  it  is  reciprocal,  and  that
the  mutual  relation  is  the  cause  of  union.  If  one  person
loves  another,  and  is  not  loved  in  return,  then  as  the  one
approaches  the  other  retires,  but  if  he  is  loved  in  return,
then  as  the  one  approaches,  the  other  approaches  also,  and
a  union  is  effected.  Moreover,  love  desires  to  be  loved  ;
this  is  implanted  in  it,  and  so  far  as  it  receives  love  in  return,
it  enjoys  its  full  life  and  happiness.  From  these  considera-
tions it  is  evident  that  if  the  Lord  loved  man,  and  were  not
loved  in  return  by  him,  the  Lord  would  approach  and  man
would  retire ;  thus  the  Lord  would  continually  desire  to
come  to  man,  and  to  enter  into  him,  and  man  would  turn
away  and  depart.  This  is  the  case  with  those  in  hell ;  but
with  those  in  heaven  there  is  mutual  union.  Since  then  the
Lord  desires  union  with  man  for  the  sake  of  his  salvation.
He  also  provides  that  man  should  have  a  power  of  recipro-
cation. The  reciprocation  consists  in  this,  that  the  good
which  he  wills  and  does  in  freedom,  and  the  truth  derived
from  that  willing,  which  he  thinks  and  speaks  according  to
reason,  appear  as  if  they  came  from  himself,  and  that  this
good  in  his  will  and  truth  in  his  understanding  appear  to
be  his  own.  Indeed,  they  appear  to  man  to  originate  in
himself,  and  to  be  his  own,  just  as  if  they  were  really  his
own;  there  is  no  difference  whatever;  consider  whether
any  one  feels  it  to  be  otherwise.  (Concerning  this  appear-
ance that  they  originate  in  himself,  see  above  [nos.  74-77] ;
and  concerning  their  appropriation  as  his  ow-n  [nos.  78-81.])
The  only  distinction  is  that  a  man  ought  to  acknowledge
that  he  neither  does  good  nor  thinks  truth  of  himself,  but
by  power  derived  from  the  Lord;  and  therefore  that  the
good  which  he  does,  and  the  truth  which  he  thinks,  are  not
his  own.   To  believe  this — under  the  influence  of  some  degree


62  Divine  Providence

of  love  in  the  will— because  it  is  true,  causes  union;  for  thus
man  looks  to  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  to  man.

93.  I  have  been  enabled  to  hear  and  see,  in  the  spiritual
world,  what  a  difference  there  is  between  those  who  believe
that  all  good  comes  from  the  Lord,  and  those  who  believe
that  it  originates  in  themselves.  Those  who  believe  that
good  comes  from  the  Lord,  look  to  Him,  and  receive  the
delight  and  blessedness  of  good.  But  those  who  believe
that  good  originates  in  themselves,  look  to  themselves,  and
attribute  merit  to  themselves;  and  because  they  look  to
themselves,  they  can  only  perceive  the  delight  of  their  own
good,  which  is  not  the  delight  of  good,  but  of  evil,  for  what
is  man's  own  is  evil,  and  the  delight  of  evil  perceived  as
good,  is  hell.  If  those  who  have  done  good  and  have
believed  that  it  originated  in  themselves,  do  not  admit  after
death  the  truth  that  all  good  comes  from  the  Lord,  they
associate  with  evil  spirits,  and  at  length  unite  with  them;
while  those  who  receive  this  truth  are  reformed.  But  none
receive  it  but  those  who  have  looked  to  God  in  their  daily
life ;  to  look  to  God  in  their  life  means  nothing  else  than  to
shun  evils  as  sins.

94.  The  union  of  the  Lord  with  man,  and  the  reciprocal
union  of  man  with  the  Lord,  is  effected  by  man  loving  his
neighbour  as  himself,  and  the  Lord  above  all  things.  Lovino-
the  neighbour  as  himself  consists  in  not  acting  insincerely
and  unjustly  towards  him,  not  hating  him  or  burning  with
revenge  against  him,  not  reviling  and  defaming  him,  not
committing  adultery  with  his  wife,  and  not  perpetrating
other  such  offences  against  him.  Who  cannot  see  that  those
who  do  such  things  do  not  love  their  neighbour  as  them-
selves? But  those  who  refrain  from  such  things  because
they  are  evils  against  their  neighbour,  and  at  the  same  time
sins  against  the  Lord,  act  sincerely,  justly,  kindly  and  faith-
fully towards  their  neighbour;  and  because  the  Lord  does
likewise,  reciprocal  union  takes  place;  and  then  whatever
a  man  does  to  his  neighbour,  he  does  from  the  Lord;  and
whatever  a  man  does  from  the  Lord  is  good;  and  then  for
him  the  neighbour  is  no  longer  a  person,  but  the  good  in
that  person.  To  love  the  Lord  above  all  things  means,  to
do  no  violence  to  the  Word  because  the  Lord  is  in  the  Word,
nor  to  the  holy  things  of  the  Church,  because  the  Lord  is  in
them,  nor  to  the  soul  of  any  one,  because  every  soul  is  in


Divine  Providence  63

the  Lord's  hands.  Those  who  shun  these  evils  as  terrible
sins,  love  the  Lord  above  all  things ;  but  only  those  can  do
this,  who  love  the  neighbour  as  themselves,  for  the  two  things
are  inseparable.

95.  Since  there  is  a  union  of  the  Lord  with  man,  and  of
man  with  the  Lord,  there  are  two  tables  of  the  law,  one
relating  to  the  Lord,  and  the  other  to  man.  In  so  far  as
a  man,  as  if  by  his  own  power,  fulfils  the  laws  of  his  table,
the  Lord  enables  him  to  fulfil  the  laws  of  His  table.  But
the  man  who  does  not  obey  the  laws  of  his  own  table,  which
all  have  reference  to  neighbourly  love,  cannot  obey  the  laws
of  the  Lord's  table,  which  all  have  reference  to  love  to  the
Lord.  How  can  a  murderer,  thief,  adulterer,  or  false  witness
love  the  Lord  ?  Does  not  reason  declare,  that  to  be  of  such
a  character  and  to  love  God  are  contradictory  ?  Is  not  the
de^^l  of  this  character?  Can  he  do  otherwise  than  hate
God  ?  But  when  a  man  detests  murder,  adultery,  theft,  and
false  witness  as  infernal,  then  he  can  love  the  Lord,  for  he
then  turns  his  face  from  the  devil  to  the  Lord;  and  when
he  does  this,  love  and  wisdom  are  given  him;  these  enter
man  by  the  face,  and  not  by  the  back  of  the  neck.  Because
union  with  the  Lord  takes  place  only  in  this  reciprocal  way,
the  two  tables  are  called  a  covenant,  a  covenant  being  made
between  two  persons.

96.  VII.  The  Lord  keeps  these  two  faculties  unimpaired
and  inviolable  in  man,  in  the  whole  course  of  His  divine
Providence.  The  reason  is  that  without  these  two  faculties
man  would  not  have  any  understanding  or  will,  and  so  he
would  not  be  a  man ;  and  again,  without  these  two  faculties
man  could  not  be  united  with  the  Lord,  and  so  could  not
be  reformed  and  regenerated;  and  further,  without  these
two  faculties,  man  would  not  be  immortal  nor  enjoy  eternal
life.  That  this  is  so,  may  indeed  be  seen  from  a  knowledge
of  liberty  and  rationality — which  are  the  two  faculties  in
question — as  given  in  the  preceding  pages ;  but  not  clearly,
unless  the  reasons  just  stated  are  deduced  as  conclusions;
they  must  therefore  be  explained.

Without  these  two  faculties  man  would  not  have  any  will  or
understanding,  and  so  would  not  be  a  man.  For  this  human
will  consists  solely  in  being  able  freely  to  will  as  if  by  his
owm  power;  and  to  will  freely  in  this  way  is  derived  from
the  faculty  of  hberty,  which  is  continually  given  him  by


64


Divine  Providence


the  Lord;  the  human  understanding  consists  solely  in
being  able  to  understand  as  if  by  its  own  power  what  is
reasonable  or  the  reverse ;  and  this  power  is  derived  from
rationality^  the  other  faculty  which  is  continually  given  him
by  the  Lord.  These  faculties  unite  in  man,  like  the  will
and  understanding.  For  instance  because  a  man  can  will,
he  can  also  understand;  for  willing  is  not  possible  without
understanding;  understanding  is  its  partner  or  consort,
without  which  it  cannot  exist;  and  therefore  with  the
faculty  of  liberty  is  given  that  of  rationality.  And  further,
if  the  element  of  will  were  abstracted  from  the  act  of  under-
standing, you  could  understand  nothing;  and  so  far  as  you
will,  so  far  you  have  power  to  understand,  provided  there
are  present,  or  at  the  moment  recalled  to  memory,  those
aids  which  are  called  knowledge,  for  these  are  as  implements
in  the  hand  of  a  worker.  We  say,  you  can  understand  as  far
as  you  will,  that  is  as  far  as  you  love  to  understand,  for  the
will  and  love  act  as  one.  This,  indeed,  sounds  hke  a
paradox,  but  only  to  those  who  do  not  love  to  understand,
nor,  consequently,  will  to  do  so ;  and  those  who  do  not  want
to  understand,  say  they  cannot.  Those  who  cannot  under-
stand, and  those  who  can  only  understand  with  difficulty
will  be  described  in  the  following  article.  It  is  evident
without  proof,  that  unless  a  man  had  a  will  derived  from  the
faculty  of  liberty,  and  an  understanding  from  the  faculty
of  rationality,  he  would  not  be  a  man.  Animals  have  not
these  faculties.  They  seem  to  be  able  to  will  and  under-
stand, but  they  cannot;  natural  affection,  which  intrinsic-
ally is  mere  desire,  with  knowledge  as  its  mate,  alone  leads
and  induces  them  to  act  as  they  do.  There  is  indeed  a
social  and  moral  element  in  their  knowledge;  but  their
minds  are  not  elevated  above  the  knowledge,  for  animals  have
no  spiritual  part  to  give  them  a  perception  of  morality,  and
anal}-tic  thought  about  it.  They  can  indeed  be  taught
to  do  various  things ;  but  this  is  only  a  natural  acquirement
annexed  to  their  knowledge,  and  at  the  same  time  to  their
affection,  and  is  reproduced  either  by  means  of  sight  or
hearing;  but  it  never  becomes  in  them  a  subject  of  thought,
still  less  of  reason.  But  something  on  this  subject  may  be
seen  above  (no.  74).

That  without  these  tivo  faculties  man  could  not  be  united
zvith  the  Lord,  nor  consequently  reformed  and  regenerated,  has


Divine  Providence  65

been  shown  above.  For  the  Lord  dwells  in  these  two
faculties  with  men,  both  evil  and  good^  and  by  means  of
them  He  unites  Himself  with  every  man.  This  is  why  a
bad  man^  as  well  as  a  good  one,  has  understanding;  and
therefore  he  has  potentially  the  will  to  do  good,  and  the
understanding  of  truth;  that  they  are  not  actually  in  him,
is  owing  to  his  perversion  of  these  faculties.  That  the
Lord  resides  in  these  faculties  with  every  man  is  a  result
of  the  influx  of  His  will.  His  desire  to  be  received  by
man,  to  have  His  abode  in  him,  and  to  give  him  the
felicities  of  eternal  life,  are  all  of  the  Lord's  Will,  for  they  are
of  His  di\ane  Love.  It  is  this  Will  of  the  Lord  that  makes
it  appear  to  man  as  if  he  thought,  spoke,  willed,  and  acted
of  himself.  Many  things  in  the  spiritual  world  confirm  the
truth,  that  it  is  the  influx  of  the  Lord's  will  that  effects  this.:
For  sometimes  the  Lord  so  fills  an  angel  with  His  Di^■ine,
that  the  angel  does  not  know  that  he  is  not  the  Lord.  This
was  the  state  of  the  angels  mentioned  in  the  Word  as  having
been  seen  by  Abraham,  Hagar,  and  Gideon,  and  who  there-
fore called  themselves  "  Jehovah."  So,  also,  one  spirit  may
be  so  possessed  by  another,  that  he  imagines  himself  to  be
the  other.  I  have  often  seen  this.  It  is  also  known  in
heaven,  that  the  Lord  works  all  things  by  His  will,  and  that
what  He  wills  is  done.  It  is  therefore  evident,  that  it  is  by
these  two  faculties  that  the  Lord  unites  Himself  with  man,
and  causes  man  to  be  reciprocally  united  to  Him.  But  how
man  is  reciprocally  united  to  the  Lord,  and  consequently
reformed  and  regenerated  by  means  of  these  two  faculties
has  been  explained  above,  and  will  be  more  fully  explained
later.

That  man  without  these  two  faculties  would  not  be  immortal
nor  enjoy  eternal  life,  follows  from  what  has  just  been  said —
that  union  with  the  Lord,  and  also  reformation  and  re-
generation, are  effected  by  means  of  them;  by  this  union
man  has  immortality,  and  by  reformation  and  regeneration
he  has  eternal  Hfe.  And  because  by  means  of  these  two
faculties  there  is  a  union  of  the  Lord  with  every  man,  evil
as  well  as  good,  as  has  been  stated  above,  therefore  every
man  is  immortal.  But  only  that  man  has  eternal  life,  that
is,  the  life  of  heaven,  in  whom  there  is  a  reciprocal  union
with  the  Lord  from  inmost  things  to  ultimates.  It  can  now
be  seen  why  the   Lord   keeps   these   two   human  faculties

F


66  Divine  Providence

unimpaired  and  inviolable^  in  the  whole  course  of  His  divine
Providence.

97.  VIII.  It  is  therefore  in  accordance  with  divine  Provi-
dence that  man  should  act  according  to  reason  in  freedom.
Acting  according  to  reason  in  freedom^  and  acting  from  liberty
and  rationality,  are  the  same  thing;  so  also  is  acting  from
the  will  and  the  understanding;  but  it  is  one  thing  to  act
in  freedom  according  to  reason,  or  from  liberty  and  ration-
ahty,  and  another  to  act  in  genuine  freedom  according  to
genuine  reason,  or  from  liberty  itself  and  rationality  itself;
for  even  the  man  who  does  evil  from  a  love  of  evil,  and  con-
firms himself  in  it,  acts  in  freedom  according  to  reason;
but  still  his  freedom  is  not  genuine  freedom,  or  freedom  itself,
but  it  is  really  infernal  freedom,  which  intrinsically  is
slavery;  and  his  reason  is  not  genuine  reason,  but  is  either
spurious  or  false,  or  what  appears  to  him  as  reason,  owing  to
self-persuasion.  But  still,  both  are  of  the  divine  Provi-
dence; for  if  freedom  to  will  evil,  and  by  self-persuasion  to
make  it  seem  reasonable,  were  taken  away  from  the  natural
man,  liberty  and  rationality  would  perish,  and  will  and
understanding  with  them;  and  then  he  could  not  be  with-
drawn from  evils  and  reformed,  nor  could  he  be  united  with
the  Lord  and  live  for  ever ;  and  therefore  the  Lord  protects
man's  freedom  as  a  man  guards  the  apple  of  his  eye.  Yet  the
Lord  by  means  of  freedom  continually  withdraws  man  from
evils;  and  as  he  so  withdraws  him.  He  implants  good  in
him  by  means  of  freedom.  Thus  He  gradually  substitutes
heavenly  freedom  in  him  for  hellish  freedom.

98.  It  was  said  above  that  every  man  has  the  faculty  of
wining  or  Hberty,  and  the  faculty  of  understanding  or
rationality;  but  it  is  to  be  noted  that  these  faculties  are  as
if  ingrafted  in  man,  for  his  humanity  itself  is  bound  up  in
them;  but,  as  has  just  been  said,  it  is  one  thing  to  act  in
freedom  according  to  reason,  and  another  to  act  in  true
freedom,  according  to  true  reason.  None  act  in  true  freedom
according  to  true  reason  but  those  who  have  suffered  them-
selves to  be  regenerated  by  the  Lord ;  all  others,  however,
act  from  freedom  according  to  thought,  which  they  invest
with  an  appearance  of  reason.  Every  man,  however,  unless
born  an  idiot  or  excessively  stupid,  can  attain  to  true  reason,
and  by  means  of  it  to  true  freedom.  But  many  reasons  will
be  given  in  what  follows  to  show  why  many  men  fail  to  do


Divine  Providence  67

this.  We  will  here  only  mention  those  to  whom  true  freedom
or  liberty,  together  with  true  reason  or  rationahty,  cannot
be  imparted,  and  those  to  whom  they  can  only  be  imparted
with  difficulty.  True  liberty  and  rationality  cannot  be
given  to  those  who  are  born  insane,  nor  to  those  who  have
become  insane,  so  long  as  they  remain  insane.  True  liberty
and  rationality  cannot  be  imparted  to  those  who  are  mentally
defective  from  birth,  nor  to  those  who  have  become  so  from
habitual  indolence,  or  from  sickness  that  has  warped  or  closed
up  the  inner  mind,  or  from  the  love  of  a  merely  sensual  hfe.
True  liberty  and  rationality  cannot  be  imparted  to  those
in  the  Christian  world  who  utterly  deny  that  the  Lord  is
divine  and  that  the  Word  is  holy,  and  have  maintained  this
denial  unshaken  to  the  end  of  their  life ;  for  this  is  meant  by
the  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  cannot  be  forgiven
in  this  world  nor  in  the  world  to  come  (Matt.  xii.  31,  32).
Neither  can  true  liberty  and  rationality  be  given  to  those  who
attribute  all  things  to  nature  and  nothing  to  the  Divine,  and
have  made  this  their  faith  by  reasoning  based  on  visible
things,  for  these  are  atheists.  True  liberty  and  rationality
can  with  difficulty  be  given  to  those  who  have  deeply  con-
firmed themselves  in  false  religious  beliefs,  for  a  confirmer
of  falsity  is  a  denier  of  truth ;  but  they  can  be  given  to  those
who  have  not  so  confirmed  themselves,  of  whatever  rehgion
they  may  be;  on  this  subject  see  the  Doctrine  of  the  New
Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture  (nos.  91-97).
Infants  and  children  cannot  acquire  true  liberty  and  ration-
ality until  they  reach  the  age  of  adolescence;  for  in  man
the  inner  regions  of  the  mind  are  opened  gradually ;  mean-
while these  faculties  are  like  seeds  in  unripe  fruit,  which
cannot  yet  germinate  in  the  ground.

99.  It  has  been  stated  above  that  true  liberty  and  ration-
ality cannot  be  imparted  to  those  who  have  denied  that  the
Lord  is  divine  and  that  the  Word  is  holy,  nor  to  those  who
have  confirmed  themselves  against  the  Divine  and  in  favour
of  nature;  and  that  they  can  with  difficulty  be  imparted
to  those  who  have  strongly  confirmed  themselves  in  false
religious  beliefs;  but  all  of  these  have  not  lost  the  very
faculties  themselves.  I  have  been  told  that  atheists,  who
have  become  devils  and  satans,  have  understood  the  arcana
of  wisdom  as  well  as  angels,  but  only  while  they  heard  them
from  others;    when  they  returned  to  their  own  thoughts.


68  Divine  Providence

they  no  longer  understood  them  because  they  did  not  wish
to  do  so.  But  they  were  told  that  they  could  also  wish  to
understand,  if  the  love  and  thence  the  delight  of  evil  did
not  lead  them  astray ;  this  also  they  understood  when  they
heard  it,  and  they  agreed  that  they  had  the  power,  but  did
not  wish  to  exercise  it;  because  then  they  would  not  have
been  able  to  will  as  they  liked,  that  is,  to  indulge  in  the
impure  delight  arising  from  their  evil.  I  have  often  heard
similar  wonderful  things  in  the  spiritual  world ;  and  by  them
I  have  been  fully  convinced  that  every  man  possesses  liberty
and  rationality;  and  that  every  one  can  acquire  true  liberty
and  rationality  if  he  shuns  evils  as  sins.  But  an  adult  who
has  not  acquired  true  liberty  and  rationality  in  the  world,
can  never  acquire  them  after  death;  for  then  his  state  of
life  remains  eternally  such  as  it  had  been  in  the  world.

It  is  a  law  of  the  divine  Providence  that  man  should,
as  if  by  his  own  power,  remove  evils  from  the

external  man  because  THEY  ARE  SINS;  IN  THIS,  AND
IN  NO  OTHER  WAY,  CAN  THE  LORD  REMOVE  EVILS  FROM
THE  INTERNAL  MAN,  AND  AT  THE  SAME  TIME  FROM  THE
EXTERNAL.

loo.  Every  one  may  see  from  the  mere  light  of  reason
that  the  Lord,  who  is  Good  itself  and  Truth  itself,  cannot
enter  into  a  man  unless  the  evils  and  falsities  in  him  are
removed;  for  evil  is  the  opposite  of  good,  and  falsity  of
truth;  and  two  opposites  cannot  be  commingled,  for  when
one  draws  near  to  the  other,  a  combat  takes  place,  which
lasts  until  the  one  gives  way  to  the  other;  and  that  which
}aelds,  withdraws,  while  the  other  takes  its  place.  Such
is  the  opposition  of  heaven  and  hell,  or  of  the  Lord  and  the
devil.  Can  any  one  reasonably  suppose  that  the  Lord  can
enter  where  the  devil  reigns  ?  or  that  heaven  can  be  where
hell  is  ?  Who  cannot  see  from  the  rationality  given  to
every  sane  man,  that  for  the  Lord  to  enter,  the  devil  must  be
cast  out;  or  for  heaven  to  enter,  hell  must  be  removed?
This  opposition  is  expressed  by  Abraham's  words  from  heaven
to  the  rich  man  in  hell,  "  Between  us  and  you  a  vast  gulf  is
fixed ;  so  that  they  who  would  pass  from  hence  to  }'ou  cannot ;
neither  can  they  pass  to  us  that  would  come  from  thence  "
(Luke  xvi.  26).  Evil  itself  is  hell,  and  good  itself  is  heaven ;
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  evil  itself  is  the  devil,  and  good


Divine  Providence  69

itself  is  the  Lord ;  and  the  man  in  whom  evil  reigns  is  a  hell
in  miniature ;  and  the  man  in  whom  good  reigns  is  a  heaven
in  miniature.  This  being  the  case,  how  can  heaven  enter
hell,  since  between  them  so  vast  a  gulf  is  fixed  that  there
can  be  no  passing  over  from  one  to  the  other?  From  this
it  follows  that  hell  must  be  altogether  removed,  in  order  that
the  Lord,  with  heaven,  may  be  able  to  come  in.

loi.  But  many,  especially  those  who  have  confirmed
themselves  in  faith  separate  from  charity,  do  not  know  that
they  are  in  hell  when  they  are  in  evils;  nor  do  they  even
know  what  evils  are,  because  they  never  think  about  them ;
for  they  say  that  they  are  not  under  the  yoke  of  the  law,
and  thus  that  the  law  does  not  condemn  them;  also  that,
because  they  cannot  contribute  anything  to  salvation,  they
cannot  remove  from  themselves  any  evil;  and,  moreover,
that  they  cannot  do  anything  good  of  themselves.  Such
persons  never  think  about  evil;  and  owing  to  this  neglect,
they  are  continually  immersed  in  it.  That  these  are  meant
by  the  goats  spoken  of  by  the  Lord  in  Matthew  (xxv.  32,  33,
41-46),  may  be  seen  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Neiv  Jerusalem
concerning  Faith  (nos.  61-68).  In  verse  41  it  is  said  of
them,  "  Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed,  into  eternal  fire,  prepared
for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  For  those  who  do  not  think
at  all  about  the  evils  within  them,  that  is,  do  not  examine
themselves,  and  afterwards  desist  from  them,  cannot  but
be  ignorant  of  what  evil  is,  and  then  they  love  it,  because
they  delight  in  it ;  for  he  who  is  ignorant  of  its  nature  loves
it,  and  he  who  never  thinks  about  it,  is  continually  immersed
in  it.  He  can  no  more  see  than  a  blind  man ;  for  thought
sees  good  and  evil,  as  the  eye  sees  the  beautiful  and  ugly.
He  is  in  evil  who  thinks  and  wills  it,  as  also  he  who  believes
that  evil  is  not  seen  by  God,  or  that,  if  it  is  seen,  it  is  forgiven ;
for  thus  he  imagines  he  is  free  from  evil.  If  such  persons
abstain  from  committing  evils,  they  do  so,  not  because  these
are  sins  against  God,  but  because  they  fear  the  laws,  and  the
loss  of  reputation;  but  still  they  commit  them  in  their
spirit,  for  it  is  a  man's  spirit  that  thinks  and  wills;  and,
therefore,  what  a  man  thinks  in  his  spirit  in  the  world,  that
he  does  after  his  departure  from  the  world,  when  he  becomes
a  spirit.  In  the  spiritual  world,  into  which  every  one  comes
after  death,  it  is  not  asked  what  your  faith  has  been,  nor
what  your  doctrine,  but  what  has  been  the  character  of  your


"JO  Divine  Providence

life ;  for  it  is  well  known  there,  that  a  man's  faith  and  doctrine
are  such  as  his  life  is ;  for  the  life  makes  its  own  doctrine,
and  its  own  faith.

102.  From  what  has  now  been  said  it  should  be  evident
that  it  is  a  law  of  the  divine  Providence  that  evils  should  be
put  away  by  man ;  for  without  their  removal  the  Lord  cannot
be  united  with  man,  and  by  Himself  lead  him  to  Heaven.
But  as  it  has  not  hitherto  been  known  that  man  ought,  as
if  by  his  own  power,  to  put  away  evils  in  the  external  man,
and  that  unless  he  does  this  as  if  by  his  own  power,  the  Lord
cannot  remove  the  evils  that  are  in  his  internal  man,  these
things  shall  be  submitted  to  the  light  of  reason  in  the
following  order  :

I.  Every  man  has  external  and  internal  thought.
IL  Man's  external  thought  is  intrinsically  of  the  same
nature  as  his  internal  thought.

III.  The  internal  man  cannot  be  purified  from  evil  lusts,
unless  evils  in  the  external  man  are  removed,  because  they
block  the  way.

IV.  Evils  in  the  external  man  cannot  be  removed  by  the
Lord  unless  the  man  co-operates.

V.  Therefore  a  man  ought,  as  if  by  his  own  power,  to  put
away  evils  from  his  external  man.

VI.  The  Lord  then  purifies  man  from  evil  lusts  in  the
internal  man,  and  from  the  evils  themselves  in  the  external.

VII.  The  continual  endeavour  of  the  Lord's  divine  Provi-
dence is  to  unite  man  with  Himself,  and  Himself  with  man,
that  He  may  give  him  the  felicities  of  eternal  Hfe,  which  can
be  done  only  so  far  as  evils  with  their  lusts  are  removed.

103.  I.  Every  man  has  external  and  internal  thought.  By
external  and  internal  thought  is  meant  the  same  as  by  the
external  and  internal  man,  which  are  equivalent  to  the
external  and  internal  will  and  understanding;  for  the  will
and  understanding  constitute  the  man  :  and  because  both
of  these  manifest  themselves  in  the  thought,  we  speak  of
external  and  internal  thought.  Now  as  it  is  not  man's
body,  but  his  spirit,  that  wills  and  understands,  and  there-
fore thinks,  it  follows  that  this  external  and  internal  thought
are  those  of  man's  spirit.  What  the  body  does,  whether  in
speaking  or  acting,  is  only  an  effect  from  the  internal  and
external  of  man's  spirit;   for  the  body  is  merely  obedient.

104.  That  every  man  of  adult  age  has  external  and  internal


Divine  Providence  71

thought,  and  therefore  an  external  and  internal  will  and
understanding,  or  an  external  and  internal  spirit,  which  is
the  same  as  the  external  and  internal  man,  is  evident  to
any  one  who  notices  the  thoughts  and  intentions  of  another
as  shown  by  his  words  or  deeds,  and  his  own  also  when  he
is  in  company  and  when  by  himself.  For  one  man  can  speak
to  another  in  a  friendly  way  from  external  thought,  and  yet
be  unfriendly  to  him  in  his  internal  thought.  From  external
thought  and  its  affection,  one  may  speak  about  love  to  the
neighbour,  and  love  to  God,  although  in  his  internal  thought
he  cares  nothing  for  his  neighbour  and  does  not  fear  God.
A  man  may  also  speak  from  external  thought  and  affection,
about  the  justice  of  civil  laws,  the  virtues  of  moral  life,
and  matters  of  doctrine  and  spiritual  life ;  and  yet,  when  he
is  by  himself,  from  internal  thought  and  its  aSection,  he  may
repudiate  all  these.  Those  do  so  who  are  in  the  lusts  of
evil,  and  who  yet  wish  to  disguise  this  fact  from  the  world.
Many,  also,  when  listening  to  others,  think  within  themselves,
"  Does  the  interior  thought  of  these  men  correspond  with
that  of  their  speech?  are  they  to  be  believed  or  not?  and
what  is  their  motive?"  Flatterers  and  hypocrites  have
a  double  thought,  as  is  well  known;  for  they  can  restrain
themselves,  and  take  care  not  to  disclose  their  interior
thought;  and  some  can  conceal  it  very  deeply,  and,  as  it
were,  block  up  the  doors  lest  it  should  be  seen.  Man  evidently
possesses  exterior  and  interior  thought,  because  his  interior
thought  is  able  to  contemplate  his  exterior  thought,  and
also  to  reflect  about  it,  and  judge  whether  it  is  evil  or  not^
The  human  mind  is  of  this  nature,  because  of  the  two
faculties,  liberty  and  rationality,  which  are  given  him  by  the
Lord.  Unless  man  had  external  and  internal  thought
derived  from  these,  he  could  not  perceive  or  see  any  evil
in  himself,  and  so  be  reformed ;  nor  indeed,  could  he  speak,
but  only  utter  sounds  like  an  animal.

105.  Internal  thought  comes  from  the  life's  love  and  its
affections  and  consequent  perceptions;  external  thought
comes  from  the  contents  of  the  memory,  which  serve  the
Hfe's  love  as  supports  and  as  means  for  attaining  its  end.
From  infancy  to  youth,  man  is  in  external  thought  arising
from  the  desire  for  knowledge  which  then  constitutes  its
internal;  and  besides  this,  there  emerges  something  of
lust  and  its  inclinations,  from  the  life's  love  that  is  inherited


72  Divine  Providence

from  his  parents.  But,  afterwards,  his  life's  love  is  developed
according  to  the  kind  of  life  he  leads ;  and  then  its  affections
and  perceptions  constitute  his  internal  thought.  And  from
the  life's  love  comes  the  love  of  the  means  it  employs,  and
the  delights  of  these  together  with  the  knowledge  they  call
forth  from  the  memory,  constitute  his  external  thought.

io6.  II.  Man's  external  thought  is  intrinsically  of  the  same
nature  as  his  internal  thought.  ^lan  from  head  to  foot
resembles  his  life's  love,  as  was  shown  above.  Something
then  shall  first  be  said  about  the  life's  love  of  man,  for  till
this  has  been  done,  nothing  can  be  said  about  the  affections
and  perceptions  which  constitute  man's  internal  mind  or
about  the  delights  of  the  affections  and  thoughts,  which
constitute  his  external  mind.  There  are  many  kinds  of
love;  but  two,  heavenly  love  and  infernal  love,  are  as  it
were  lords  and  kings  over  them.  Heavenly  love  is  love  to
the  Lord  and  the  neighbour;  and  infernal  love  is  the  love
of  self  and  of  the  world.  These  loves  are  the  opposites  of
each  other,  as  hell  and  heaven  are ;  for  he  who  is  in  the  love
of  self  and  the  world  does  not  seek  the  good  of  any  one  but
himself ;  but  he  who  loves  the  Lord  and  the  neighbour  seeks
the  good  of  all  men.  These  two  loves  are  the  loves  of  man's
life,  but  they  exist  in  great  variety.  Heavenly  love  is  the
life's  love  of  those  whom  the  Lord  leads,  and  infernal  love
is  the  life's  love  of  those  whom  the  devil  leads.  But  the
life's  love  of  any  one  cannot  but  have  derivations,  which  are
called  affections.  The  derivations  of  infernal  love  are  the
affections  of  evil  and  falsit)',  which  are  properly  called
lusts;  and  the  derivations  of  heavenly  love  are  the
affections  of  good  and  truth,  which  are  properly  called
loving-kindnesses.  The  affections  of  infernal  love,  or  lusts,
are  as  many  as  there  are  evils ;  and  the  affections  of  heavenly
love,  or  loving-kindnesses,  are  as  many  as  there  are  kinds
of  good.  Love  dwells  in  its  affections,  as  a  lord  in  his  domain,
or  as  a  king  in  his  kingdom ;  their  dominion  and  sovereignty
are  over  everything  pertaining  to  the  mind,  or  to  the  will
and  understanding,  and  therefore  over  everything  pertaining
to  the  body.  Man's  life's  love  rules  the  whole  man  by  its
affections  and  consequent  perceptions,  and  by  its  delights
and  consequent  thoughts— his  internal  mind  by  the  affections
and  perceptions,  and  his  external  mind  by  the  delights  of
the  affections  and  consequent  thoughts.


Divine  Providence  73

107.  The  form  of  this  government  may  be  seen  to  some
extent  by  comparisons.  Heavenly  love  with  the  affections
of  good  and  truth  and  resulting  perceptions,  together  with
the  delights  from  these  affections  and  the  consequent
thoughts,  may  be  compared  to  a  tree  with  beautiful  branches,
leaves  and  fruits.  The  life's  love  is  the  tree ;  the  branches
and  leaves  are  the  affections  of  good  and  truth  with  their
perceptions ;  and  the  fruits  are  the  delights  of  the  affections
with  their  thoughts.  But  infernal  love  with  its  affections
of  e"vil  and  falsity,  or  lusts,  together  with  the  dehghts  of
these  lusts,  and  the  resulting  thoughts,  may  be  compared  to
a  spider  and  its  web.  The  love  itself  is  the  spider ;  the  lusts
of  evil  and  falsity  with  their  interior  wiles,  are  the  net-like
threads  nearest  the  spider's  seat;  and  the  delights  of  these
lusts,  with  their  crafty  contrivances,  are  the  more  remote
threads  where  the  flies  are  caught,  entangled  and  devoured.

108.  The  union  of  everything  in  the  will  and  understand-
ing or  in  man's  mind,  with  his  life's  love,  may  be  illustrated
by  such  comparisons,  though  they  do  not  furnish  a  rational
explanation.  The  union  may  be  seen  rationally  in  the  follow-
ing manner :  there  is  a  universal  series  of  three  things  which
together  make  one;  these  are  called  end,  cause,  and  efiect;
in  this  case  the  life's  love  is  the  end,  the  affections  with  their
perceptions  are  the  cause,  and  the  delights  of  the  affections
with  their  thoughts  are  the  effect ;  for  just  as  the  end  through
the  cause  passes  into  effect,  so  also  love  through  its  affections
passes  into  its  delights,  and  through  its  perceptions  into  its
thoughts.  The  effects  are  in  the  delights  of  the  mind
and  the  resulting  thoughts,  when  the  delights  are  products
of  the  will,  and  the  thoughts  are  products  of  the  under-
standing, that  is,  when  there  is  full  consent  between  them.
They  are  then  the  effects  of  his  spirit  which,  although  they
may  not  result  in  bodily  action,  are  yet  potentially  active
when  there  is  consent;  they  are  also  then  together  in  the
body,  and  dwell  there  with  his  life's  love,  and  they  long  to
be  carried  into  action,  which  is  done  provided  nothing
hinders.  Such  are  the  lusts  of  evil,  and  evils  themselves
in  those  who  in  their  spirit  consider  evils  to  be  allowable.
Now  as  the  end  unites  with  the  cause,  and  through  the  cause
with  the  effect,  so  does  the  life's  love  unite  with  internal
thought,  and  through  this  with  external  thought.  It  is
evident,  therefore,  that  man's  external  thought  is  intrinsically


74  Divine  Providence

like  his  internal  thought ;  for  the  end  transmits  itself  entirely
to  the  cause,  and  through  the  cause  to  the  effect ;  for  there
is  nothing  essential  in  the  effect  but  what  is  in  the  cause,  and
through  the  cause  in  the  end;  and  as  the  end  is  thus  the
essential  element  which  enters  the  cause  and  the  effect,
cause  and  effect  are  called  the  mediate  and  the  ultimate
ends.

109.  It  sometimes  appears  as  if  man's  external  thought  is
not  essentially  such  as  the  internal;  but  this  appearance
arises  because  the  life's  love,  with  its  attendant  affections,
places  below  itself  a  delegate,  which  is  the  love  of  means,
and  appoints  it  to  watch  carefully  so  that  nothing  arising
from  its  lusts  may  be  seen.  This  delegate,  therefore,  insti-
gated by  the  cunning  of  its  chief,  which  is  the  hfe's  love,
speaks  and  acts  according  to  the  civil  laws  of  the  kingdom,
the  moral  laws  of  reason,  and  the  spiritual  laws  of  the  church ;
and  some  do  this  so  craftily  and  ingeniously,  that  no  one
detects  the  hypocrisy  of  their  words  and  actions;  and  at
last,  from  the  habit  of  concealment,  they  hardly  reaUse  it
themselves.  Such  are  all  hypocrites;  such  are  priests  who
at  heart  care  nothing  for  their  neighbour,  and  do  not  fear
God,  and  yet  preach  about  the  love  of  the  neighbour  and
of  God;  such  are  judges  who  give  partial  judgments,  or
accept  bribes,  while  they  simulate  a  zeal  for  justice,  and
pronounce  learned  judgments;  such  are  merchants,  dis-
honest and  fraudulent  at  heart,  although  they  conduct
their  business  honestly  for  the  sake  of  gain;  and  such  are
adulterers  who,  in  the  light  of  reason  common  to  all  men,
talk  of  the  chastity  of  marriage,  and  so  on.  But  if  these
same  persons  strip  the  love  of  means,  the  delegate  of  their
life's  love,  of  the  garments  of  purple  and  fine  linen  with
which  they  have  clothed  it,  and  put  on  it  its  o\vn  familiar
dress,  then  they  think  the  contrary,  and  in  the  company  of
their  most  intimate  friends,  whose  life's  love  is  like  their
own,  they  sometimes  express  their  thoughts,  and  affirm
the  contrary.  It  may  be  supposed  that  when  from  the  love
of  means  they  speak  so  justly,  sincerely  and  piously,  the
quality  of  their  internal  thought  is  not  transmitted  to  their
external  thought,  but  it  is ;  for  it  is  full  of  hypocrisy  and
the  love  of  self  and  the  world ;  and  the  cunning  of  these
evils  is  directed  to  securing  reputation,  for  the  sake  of  honour
or  wealth,  by  every  kind  of  outward  show.    This  quality


Divine  Providence  75

of  their  internal  thought  is  present  in  their  external  thought,
when  they  speak  and  act  in  this  way.

no.  With  those,  however,  who  are  in  heavenly  love,
internal  and  external  thought,  or  the  internal  and  external
man,  act  as  one  when  they  speak,  nor  do  they  know  of
any  distinction  between  them.  Their  life's  love,  with  its
affections  of  good  and  perceptions  of  truth,  is,  as  it  were,  the
soul  of  their  thought,  and  therefore  of  their  speech  and
actions.  If  they  are  ministers,  they  preach  from  love  of
the  neighbour  and  of  the  Lord;  if  judges,  they  give  their
verdicts  in  accordance  with  true  justice;  if  merchants,  they
act  from  real  sincerity ;  if  married,  they  love  their  wife  with
truly  chaste  affection,  and  so  on.  Their  life's  love,  too,  has
a  love  of  means  as  its  delegate,  which  it  teaches  and  leads  to
act  prudently,  and  which  it  clothes  with  the  garments  of
zeal  for  the  truths  of  doctrine,  and  also  the  goods  of  Ufe.

III.  III.  The  internal  man  cannot  be  purified  from  evil
lusts  unless  evils  in  the  external  man  are  removed,  because  they
block  the  way.  This  follows  from  what  has  been  said  above,
that  man's  external  thought  is  intrinsically  of  the  same
nature  as  his  internal  thought;  and  that  they  cohere  like
two  things,  one  of  which  is  not  only  in  the  other  but  is
derived  from  it;  and  therefore  one  cannot  be  removed
unless  the  other  is  removed  at  the  same  time.  Thus  it  is
with  every  external  that  is  derived  from  an  internal,  and
with  everything  posterior  that  is  derived  from  something
prior,  and  with  every  effect  that  is  derived  from  a  cause.
Now  because  lusts  together  with  craftiness  constitute  the
internal  thought  of  the  evil,  and  the  delight  of  lust  with
deceit  constitute  their  external  thought,  and  these  last  are
closely  united  with  the  others,  it  follows  that  the  internal
man  cannot  be  purified  from  lusts  so  long  as  the  evils  in  the
external  man  are  not  removed.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  man's
internal  will  is  in  the  lusts  and  the  internal  understanding
in  craftiness,  and  that  the  external  will  is  in  the  delights  of
the  lusts,  and  the  external  understanding  in  the  crafty  deceit.
Any  one  can  see  that  lusts  and  their  delights  are  inseparable,
and  that  craftiness  and  deceit  are  inseparable ;  also  that  all
the  four  compose  one  series,  and  together  make,  as  it  were,
one  company ;  from  this  again  it  is  evident  that  the  internal,
which  consist  of  lusts,  cannot  be  cast  out  except  by  the
removal  of  the  external,  which  consists  of  evils.    Lusts  by


76


Divine  Providence


their  delights  produce  evils,  but  when  evils  are  looked  upon
as  allowable,  which  arises  from  a  consent  of  the  will  and
understanding,  then  the  delights  and  evils  make  one.  That
consent  is  equivalent  to  the  deed  is  well  known;  this  is
what  the  Lord  says,  "  Whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to
lust  after  her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already
in  his  heart "  (Matt.  v.  28).  It  is  the  same  with  other
evils.

112.  It  should  now  be  evident,  that  for  man  to  be  purified
from  evil  lusts,  evils  must  necessarily  be  removed  from  the
external  man ;  for  until  this  is  done,  there  is  no  way  out  for
the  lusts ;  and  if  no  outlet  is  provided  the  lusts  remain  within,
exhale  delights  from  themselves,  and  urge  man  to  consent
and  thus  to  act.  Lusts  enter  the  body  by  means  of  external
thought;  and  therefore,  when  there  is  consent  in  external
thought,  they  are  instantly  in  the  body  by  means  of  the
delight  which  is  felt  there.  That  every  one's  body,  indeed
his  whole  man,  is  of  the  same  character  as  his  mind,  may  be
seen  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  362-
370).  This  m.ay  be  illustrated  by  comparisons,  and  also  by
examples.  By  comparisons  : — Lusts  with  their  delights  may
be  compared  to  fire;  the  more  it  is  fed  the  more  it  burns;
and  the  freer  the  course  given  it,  the  wider  it  spreads,  until
it  consumes  the  houses  in  a  city,  and  the  trees  in  a  forest.
Evil  lusts  are  compared  in  the  Word  to  fire,  and  the  evils
derived  from  them  to  a  conflagration.  Evil  lusts  with  their
delights  are  seen  as  fires  in  the  spiritual  world;  the  fire  of
hell  is  nothing  else.  They  may  also  be  compared  to  floods,
and  inundations  of  water,  when  dykes  or  dams  give  way.
They  may  also  be  compared  to  gangrenous  sores  and  ulcers
which  cause  death  if  they  spread,  or  are  not  cured.  The
following  are  examples  : — It  is  evident  that  if  evils  in  the
external  man  are  not  removed,  lusts  and  their  delights
increase  and  multiply.  The  more  a  thief  steals,  the  more  he
wants  to  steal,  till  at  last  he  cannot  stop;  so  with  the
defrauder,  the  more  he  cheats.  It  is  the  same  with  hatred
and  revenge,  with  luxury  and  intemperance,  with  fornication
and  blasphemy.  It  is  well-known  how  the  love  of  ruling
originating  in  self-love  grows  unless  it  is  checked ;  so  with
the  love  of  possession  originating  in  the  love  of  the  world ;
it  seems  as  if  they  had  no  limit  or  end.  It  is  therefore
evident  that  unless  evils  in  the  external  man  are  removed,


Divine  Providence  77

their  lusts  abound;    and  again  that  the    lusts  increase  in
proportion  as  evils  are  given  a  loose  rein.

113.  Man  cannot  perceive  the  lusts  of  his  evil;  he  does
indeed  perceive  their  delights,  but  still  he  reflects  little  upon
them;  for  the  delights  captivate  the  thoughts  and  banish
reflection.  And  therefore  unless  one  knew  from  some  other
source  that  they  were  evils,  he  would  call  them  goods,  and
in  freedom  according  to  the  reason  of  his  own  thought,  he
would  commit  them ;  and  when  he  does  this  he  makes  them
his  own.  So  far  as  he  confirms  himself  in  the  belief  that  they
are  allowable,  he  adds  to  the  retinue  of  the  ruling  love,
which  is  his  life's  love.  Lusts  form  its  retinue;  for  they  are
like  its  ministers  and  officers,  by  which  it  governs  the  ex-
teriors which  constitute  its  kingdom.  But  such  as  the  king
is,  such  are  the  ministers  and  officers,  and  the  whole  kingdom.
If  the  king  is  a  devil,  then  his  ministers  and  officers  are
insanities,  and  the  people  of  his  kingdom  are  falsities  of
every  kind:  his  ministers,  whom  the  people  call  wise,
though  they  are  insane,  by  fallacious  reasoning  and  vain
imaginations  cause  the  falsities  to  appear  and  be  acknow-
ledged as  truths.  Can  such  a  state  in  man  be  changed
except  by  the  removal  of  evils  from  the  external  man?
Thus  too,  the  lusts  which  cohere  with  the  evils  are  removed.
Otherwise  there  is  no  way  open  for  the  lusts  to  depart ;  for
they  are  shut  in  as  in  a  besieged  city  or  a  closed  ulcer.

114.  IV.  Evils  in  the  external  man  cannot  be  removed  by
the  Lord  unless  the  man  co-operates.  In  all  Christian  Churches
this  doctrine  is  accepted,  that  man,  before  he  attends  Holy
Communion,  should  examine  him.self,  see  and  acknowledge
his  sins,  and  do  the  work  of  repentance  by  desisting  from
them,  and  by  rejecting  them  because  they  are  from  the
devil ;  and  that  otherwise  his  sins  are  not  forgiven,  and  he
is  condemned.  The  English,  though  they  accept  the  doctrine
of  faith  alone,  yet  in  their  exhortation  to  the  Holy  Commun-
ion, plainly  inculcate  self-examination,  acknowledgment,  the
confession  of  sins,  repentance,  and  a  new  life;  and  those
who  neglect  these  things  are  admonished  in  the  following
words  :  That  otherwise  the  devil  will  enter  into  them  as  he
did  into  Judas,  and  will  fill  them  with  all  iniquity,  and  destroy
both  body  and  soul.  The  Germans,  Swedes,  and  Danes,
who  also  accept  the  doctrine  of  faith  alone,  teach  the  same
thing  in  the  prayer  at  the  Holy  Communion;   warning  the


78


Divine  Providence


communicants  that  otherwise  they  will  be  in  danger  of  hell-
torment  and  eternal  damnation,  for  mingling  the  holy  and
the  profane.  This  is  read  by  the  priest  in  a  loud  voice  to
those  about  to  attend  the  Holy  Supper ;  and  they  listen  to  it
with  the  full  acknowledgment  that  it  is  true.  Nevertheless
when  these  same  persons  hear  a  sermon  the  same  day  on
faith  alone,  and  that  the  law  does  not  condemn  them  because
the  Lord  fulfilled  it  for  them,  and  that  of  themselves  they
can  do  no  good  except  what  is  self-meritorious,  and  that  works
have,  therefore,  no  power  to  save  them,  but  faith  alone  can
do  so,  they  return  home  entirely  forgetful  of  their  former
confession,  and  rejecting  it  so  far  as  their  thought  is  influenced
by  the  sermon  on  faith  alone.  Now  which  is  true  (for  two
opposite  things  cannot  both  be  true) — that  without  the
examination,  recognition,  acknowledgment,  confession  and  re-
jection of  sins,  that  is  without  repentance,  there  is  no  forgive-
ness of  them,  and  thus  no  salvation,  but  eternal  damnation  }
or,  that,  such  things  contribute  nothing  towards  salvation,
because  the  Lord  by  suffering  on  the  cross  has  made  full
atonement  for  all  man's  sins  in  behalf  of  those  who  have
faith ;  and  that  those  who  have  faith  only,  and  have  confi-
dence in  the  truth  of  this  doctrine,  and  trust  in  the  imputation
of  the  Lord's  merit,  are  sinless,  and  appear  in  the  sight  of
God  as  it  were  with  cleansed  and  shining  faces  ?

It  is  evident  from  these  facts  that  the  religion  of  all  the
Churches  in  the  Christian  world  teaches  that  man  should
examine  himself,  should  see  and  acknowledge  his  sins,  and
afterwards  desist  from  them;  and  that  otherwise  there
can  be  no  salvation,  but,  on  the  contrary,  damnation.  That
this  is  also  the  very  divine  Truth  of  the  matter  is  clear  from
the  passages  in  the  Word  where  man  is  commanded  to  repent ;
for  example :  "  John  said,  Bring  forth  therefore  fruits
worthy  of  repentance.  And  now  also  the  axe  is  laid  unto
the  root  of  the  trees;  every  tree  therefore  which  bringeth
not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire  "
(Luke  iii.  8,  9);  "  Jesus  said.  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall
all  Hkewise  perish  "  (Luke  xiii.  3,  5);  "  Jesus  preached  the
gospel  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  saying,  repent  ye  and  believe
the  gospel  "  (Mark  i.  14, 15);  "  Jesus  sent  forth  His  disciples,
who  went  out,  and  preached  that  men  should  repent  "  (Mark
vi.  12;)  "  Jesus  said  to  the  apostles  that  they  should  preach
repentance  and  remission  of  sins  among  all  nations  "


Divine  Providence  79

(Luke  xxiv.  47) ;  "  John  preached  the  baptism  of  repentance
FOR  THE  REMISSION  OF  SINS  "  (Mark  i.  4 ;  Luke  iii.  3).  Think
of  this  also  with  some  intelligence ;  and  if  you  are  a  religious
man  you  will  see  that  the  repentance  of  sins  is  the  way  to
heaven,  and  that  faith  apart  from  repentance  is  not  faith;
and  that  those  who  have  no  faith  because  they  do  not
repent,  are  on  the  way  to  hell.

115.  Those  who  possess  a  faith  devoid  of  charity,  and  have
confirmed  themselves  in  it  from  Paul's  saying  to  the  Romans
"  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the
law  "  (Rom.  iii.  28),  venerate  this  saying  like  men  who  adore
the  sun;  and  they  become  like  men  who  fix  their  eyes  on
the  sun,  until  their  sight  is  so  dimmed  that  they  cannot  see
anything  even  in  broad  daylight.  For  they  do  not  see  what
is  meant  in  that  passage  by  the  deeds  of  the  law,  namely,  the
rituals  prescribed  by  Moses,  which  in  his  books  are  always
called  the  Law ;  and  that  Paul  does  not  mean  the  precepts  of
the  Decalogue.  He  explains  that  he  does  not  mean  the  pre-
cepts of  the  Decalogue  by  saying,  "Do  we  then  make  void
the  law  through  faith  ?  God  forbid ;  yea,  we  estabhsh  the
law  "  (verse  31).  Those  who  have  confirmed  themselves  by
this  saying  in  a  faith  devoid  of  charity,  gazing  at  this  passage
as  at  the  sun,  make  no  account  of  the  passage  where  Paul
enumerates  the  laws  of  faith  as  being  the  very  works  of
charity,  and  asks  what  is  faith  without  its  laws.  Nor  do
they  notice  the  passage  where  he  enumerates  evil  works,
and  says  that  those  who  do  them  cannot  enter  heaven.  It  is
manifest  therefore  what  blindness  has  been  caused  by  this
single  passage,  wrongly  interpreted.

116.  Evils  in  the  external  man  cannot  be  removed  except
by  man's  cooperation,  because  it  is  of  the  Lord's  Divine
Providence  that  whatever  a  man  hears,  sees,  thinks,  wills,
speaks  and  does,  appears  to  be  entirely  his  own.  It  has  been
shown  above  (nos.  71-95  sqq.)  that  without  this  appearance
man  could  not  receive  the  divine  Truth,  could  not  resolve
to  do  good,  could  not  assimilate  love  and  wisdom  nor  charity
and  faith,  and  therefore  could  not  be  united  with  the  Lord';
and  consequently  could  not  be  reformed,  regenerated,  and
thus  saved.  It  is  evident  that  vv^ithout  this  appearance  there
could  be  no  repentance  for  sins,  nor  even  faith ;  as  also  that
without  this  appearance  a  man  would  not  be  human,  but
devoid  of  rational  life,  like  a  beast.     Let  him  who  will,  consult


8o  Divine  Providence

his  reason^  and  see  whether  it  is  not  true,  that  a  man  seems
to  think  of  good  and  truth,  spiritual  as  well  as  moral  and  civil,
by  a  power  originating  in  himself ;  and  let  him  then  receive  this
doctrine,  that  everything  good  and  true  is  from  the  Lord,
and  nothing  from  man,  and  he  will  then  acknowledge  this  as  a
consequence,  that  man  must  do  good  and  think  truth  as  if
by  his  own  power,  but  still  acknowledge  that  they  are  from
the  Lord ;  therefore  also  that  a  man  should  remove  evils  as
if  of  himself,  yet  always  acknowledge  that  he  does  so  from
the  Lord.

117.  There  are  many  who  do  not  know  that  they  are  in
evils,  because  they  do  not  practise  them  outwardly,  for  they
fear  the  civil  laws  and  also  the  loss  of  reputation;  and  so
from  custom  and  habit  they  learn  to  shun  evils  as  detri-
mental to  their  honour  and  wealth.  But  if  they  do  not  shun
evils  from  a  religious  principle,  because  they  are  sins  and
against  God,  then  evil  lusts  with  their  delights  still  remain
in  them,  like  impure  waters  wliich  are  dammed  up  or  stag-
nant. Let  them  examine  their  thoughts  and  intentions,  and
they  will  discover  those  lusts,  provided  they  know  what  sin
is.  There  are  many  such  men,  who  have  confirmed  them-
selves in  faith  without  charity,  because  they  believe  the  law
does  not  condemn  them,  and  therefore  never  think  about  sins ;
and  some  doubt  whether  there  are  such  things  as  sins,  and
think  that  if  there  are,  they  are  not  sins  before  God,  because
they  are  forgiven.  Such  men  are  moraUsts  on  the  natural
plane,  who  believe  that  a  prudent  civil  and  moral  life  with
its  foresight  effects  everything,  and  the  divine  Providence
nothing.  Such  also  are  those  who,  for  the  sake  of  honour
or  profit,  studiously  cultivate  a  reputation  and  name  for
probity  and  sincerity.  But  men  of  this  character  who  have
also  despised  religion,  alter  death  become  spirits  given  up  to
unbridled  desires.  They  appear  to  themselves  to  be  men,
but  to  those  at  a  distance  they  look  like  priapl ;  like  owls
they  see  in  the  dark  and  not  in  the  light.

118.  The  truth  of  Section  V.  at  once  follows,  namely,  that
man  ought  as  if  by  his  own  pov/er  to  remove  evils  from  the
external  man.  This  may  also  be  seen  explained  in  three
sections  of  the  Doctrine  of  Life  for  the  New  Jerusalem  :  in  one.
No  one  can  shun  evils  as  sins,  so  as  to  be  inwardly  averse  from
them,  except  by  combats  against  them  (nos.  92-100)  :  in
another,  Man  ought  to  shun  evils  as  sins,  and  fight  against


Divine  Providence  8i

them,  as  if  by  his  own  power  (nos.  101-107) :  in  a  thirds
If  any  one  shuns  evils  from  any  cause,  other  than  that  they
are  sins,  he  does  not  shun  them,  but  only  prevents  their
being  seen  by  the  world  (nos.  108-113).

119.  VI.  The  Lord  then  purifies  man  from  evil  lusts  in
the  internal  man,  and  from  the  evils  themselves  in  the
external.  The  reason  why  the  Lord  cleanses  a  man  from  evil
lusts  when  the  man,  as  if  by  his  own  power,  puts  away  evils,
is  that  the  Lord  cannot  cleanse  him  before;  for  the  evils
are  in  the  external,  and  the  evil  lusts  in  the  internal  man,
and  they  are  joined  together  as  roots  are  to  the  trunk  of  a
tree.  And  therefore  unless  evils  are  removed,  there  is  no
passage  for  good ;  for  they  obstruct,  and  close  the  door,  and
this  cannot  be  opened  by  the  Lord  except  by  man's  coopera-
tion, as  was  shown  just  above.  When  man  thus,  as  if  by  his
own  power,  opens  the  door,  then  the  Lord  at  the  same  time
extirpates  the  lusts.  Another  reason  is  that  the  Lord  acts
into  man's  inmost  mind,  and  through  that  into  the  rest
of  his  mind,  even  to  ultimates,  where  the  man  himself  also
acts.  As  long,  therefore,  as  the  ultimates  are  kept  closed  by
the  man  himself,  there  can  be  no  purification ;  but  the  Lord
can  only  operate  in  the  inner  mind,  in  the  same  way  as  He
operates  in  Hell  (and  the  man  who  is  in  lusts,  and  at  the  same
time  in  evils,  is  a  form  of  hell),  that  is.  He  takes  care  that  one
thing  may  not  destroy  another,  and  that  good  and  truth  may
not  be  profaned.  That  the  Lord  continually  urges  and  presses
man  to  open  the  door  to  Him  is  evident  from  His  own  words,
"  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock  :  if  any  man  hear
My  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will
sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me  "  (Apoc.  iii.  20).

120.  Man  knows  nothing  at  all  of  the  interior  state  of  his
mind,  or  of  his  internal  man;  nevertheless  it  contains
infinite  things  not  one  of  which  he  is  aware  of.  For  man's
internal  thought,  or  his  internal  man,  is  his  spirit  itself;  and
it  contains  things  as  infinite  and  innumerable  as  there  are
in  his  body,  yea,  even  more  innumerable;  for  man's  spirit
IS  m  the  human  form,  and  all  things  belonging  to  it  correspond
with  all  things  in  his  body.  Now  as  a  man  knows  nothing
sensibly,  of  the  manner  in  which  his  mind  or  soul  acts  upon
ever)i:hing  in  his  body,  jointly  and  severally,  so  neither  does
he  know  how  the  Lord  acts  upon  everything  in  his  mind  or
soul,  that  is,  in  his  spirit.     The  operation  is  continual;    in

G


82  Divine  Providence

this  a  man  has  no  part,  but  yet  the  Lord  cannot  cleanse  a  man
from  any  evil  lust  in  his  spirit,  or  internal  man,  so  long  as  he
keeps  the  external  closed.  A  man  keeps  his  external  closed
by  evils,  each  of  which  seems  to  him  as  but  one,  although
there  are  infinite  things  in  each;  when  a  man  puts  away
this  evil  as  one,  then  the  Lord  removes  the  infinite  things
contained  in  it.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  Lord's  then
cleansing  man  from  evil  lusts  in  the  internal  man,  and  from
his  actual  evils  in  the  external.

121.  Many  people  think  that  a  man  is  purified  from  evils  by
merely  beUeving  what  the  Church  teaches,  or  by  doing  good,
or  by  knowing,  speaking,  or  teaching  what  the  Church  enjoins,
by  reading  the  Word  and  religious  books,  by  going  to  church
and  listening  to  sermons,  and  especially  by  attending  the
Holy  Supper;  by  renouncing  the  world,  and  devoting
themselves  to  piety,  and  by  confessing  themselves  guilty
of  all  sins,  and  so  on.  Yet  these  things  do  not  purify  man
at  all,  unless  he  examines  himself,  sees  his  sins,  acknowledges
them,  condemns  himself  on  account  of  them,  and  repents  by
desisting  from  them;  and  he  must  do  all  this  as  if  by  his
own  power,  but  still  with  a  heart- felt  acknowledgment  that  he
does  it  in  the  power  of  the  Lord.-  Before  this  is  done,  the
things  mentioned  above  are  of  no  avail ;  for  they  are  either
tainted  with  self-merit  or  hypocritical,  and  those  who  do  them
appear  to  the  angels  in  heaven  like  beautiful  harlots  from
whom  arises  a  fetid  odour  caused  by  disease,  or  like  ugly
women,  painted  so  as  to  appear  handsome ;  or  like  masked
actors  and  mimics  on  the  stage,  or  like  apes  in  human  clothing.
But  when  evils  are  removed,  then  the  above-mentioned
actions  become  incorporated  in  their  love,  and  they  are  seen
by  the  angels  in  heaven  as  beautiful  human  beings,  their  own
associates  and  companions.

122.  But  it  must  be  noted  that  a  man  in  the  work  of
repentance  ought  to  look  to  the  Lord  alone ;  if  he  looks  to
God  the  Father  only,  he  cannot  be  purified ;  nor  if  he  looks
to  the  Father  for  the  sake  of  the  Son ;  nor  if  to  the  Son  merely
as  a  man.  For  there  is  one  God,  who  is  the  Lord,  His  Divinity
and  Humanity  being  one  Person,  as  explained  in  the  Doctrine
of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerinng  the  Lord.  In  order  that
every  one  when  beginning  the  work  of  repentance  may  look
to  the  Lord  alone,  He  instituted  the  Holy  Supper,  which
confirms  the  remission  of  sins  in  those  who  repent;  it  con-


Divine  Providence  83

firms  it,  because  in  the  Holy  Supper  or  Communion,  every
one's  gaze  is  directed  to  the  Lord  alone.

123.  VII.  The  cordinual  endeavour  of  the  Lord's  divine
Providence  is  to  unite  man  with  Himself,  and  Himself  with  man,
that  He  may  give  him  the  felicities  of  eternal  life  ;  which  can
he  done  only  so  far  as  evils  with  their  lusts  are  removed.  That
it  is  the  continual  endeavour  of  the  Lord's  Divine  Providence
to  unite  man  with  Himself,  and  Himself  with  man,  and  that
this  union  is  what  is  called  reformation  and  regeneration,
and  that  by  this  means  man  is  saved,  was  shown  above
(nos.  27-45).  Who  cannot  see  that  union  with  God  is  eternal
life  and  salvation  ?  Every  one  sees  it  who  believes  that  men
are  created  in  the  image  and  likeness  of  God  (Gen.  i.  26,  27),
and  knows  what  this  means.  What  man  of  sound  reason,
while  thinking  rationally,  and  desiring  to  do  so  freely,  can
believe  that  there  are  three  Gods,  equal  in  essence,  and  that
the  divine  Being,  or  the  divine  Essence,  can  be  divided?
That  there  is  a  Trinity  in  the  one  God,  is  thinkable  and  com-
prehensible, just  as  it  can  be  understood  that  there  are  a
soul  and  a  body,  and  a  hfe  proceeding  from  these,  in  angels
and  men.  And  as  this  Trinity  in  Unity  exists  only  in  the
Lord,  it  follows  that  the  union  must  be  with  Him.  Make  use
of  your  rationality  and  liberty  of  thought,  and  you  will  see
this  truth  in  its  light ;  but  first  admit  that  there  is  a  God,  and
that  there  is  heaven,  and  eternal  hfe.  Now  as  God  is  one
and  man  by  creation  was  made  an  image  and  Hkeness  of
Him,  and  as  by  infernal  love  and  its  lusts  and  their  enjoyments
he  acquired  the  love  of  all  evils  and  thereby  destroyed  in
himself  the  image  and  likeness  of  God,  it  follows  that  the
continual  endeavour  of  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  is
to  unite  man  with  Himself,  and  Himself  with  man,  and  thus
to  restore  His  image  in  man.  It  also  follows  that  this  is  to
the  end  that  the  Lord  may  give  man  the  felicities  of  eternal
Hfe,  for  such  is  the  nature  of  divine  Love.  But  He  cannot
give  these  to  man,  nor  can  He  make  him  an  image  of  Himself,
unless  man,  as  if  by  his  own  power,  puts  away  sins  from  the
external  man,  because  the  Lord  is  not  only  divine  Love,
but  also  divine  Wisdom,  and  divine  Love  does  nothing  but
by  means  of  its  own  divine  Wisdom  and  according  to  it.
That  man  cannot  be  united  with  the  Lord,  and  thus  reformed,
regenerated  and  saved,  unless  he  is  allowed  to  act  from  liberty
according  to  reason    (for  this  is  what  constitutes  a  man),


84


Divine  Providence


is  in  accordance  with  the  Lord's  divine  Wisdom ;  and  what-
ever is  in  accordance  with  the  Lord's  divine  Wisdom^  is
also  in  accordance  with  His  divine  Providence.

124,  To  this  I  will  add  two  arcana  of  angelic  wisdom,  from
which  the  nature  of  the  divine  Providence  may  be  seen  :
the  first  is  that  the  Lord  never  acts  upon  any  particular
detail  in  man,  without  at  the  same  time  acting  upon  his
whole  nature ;  the  second  is,  that  the  Lord  acts  at  the  same
time  through  inmost  things  and  through  ultimates.

The  Lord  7iever  acts  upon  any  particular  detail  in  man,
without  at  the  same  time  acting  upon  his  whole  nature,  because
all  things  in  man  are  so  connected  together,  and  are  therefore
in  such  a  form,  that  they  act,  not  as  many  things,  but  as  one.
It  is  well  known  that  man's  body  is  so  connected  and  is
consequently  in  such  a  form.  The  human  mind  also  is  in
a  similar  form,  from  the  connection  of  all  its  parts ;  for  the
human  mind  is  the  spiritual  man,  and  is  also  actually  a  man.
This  is  why  man's  spirit,  which  is  his  mind  in  the  body,  is  in
a  perfect  human  form;  and  therefore  a  man  after  death
is  as  much  a  man  as  when  in  the  world,  with  this  sole  difference,
that  he  has  cast  off  his  earthly  body.  Now  as  the  human
form  is  such  that  all  its  parts  make  a  whole  which  acts  as
one,  it  follows  that  one  part  cannot  be  displaced  or  modified
except  in  harmony  with  the  rest;  for  if  one  were  displaced
and  changed  as  to  its  state,  the  form  which  acts  as  one  would
suffer.  It  is  evident  therefore  that  the  Lord  never  acts  upon
any  one  particular,  without  acting  simultaneously  upon  all.
Such  is  the  action  of  the  Lord  upon  the  universal  angelic
heaven,  because  this  in  the  Lord's  sight  is  as  one  man.  Thus,
too,  He  acts  upon  each  angel,  because  each  angel  is  a  heaven
in  miniature.  Thus  also  He  acts  upon  every  man,  directly
upon  all  the  constituents  of  his  mind,  and  through  these
upon  everything  in  his  body;  for  man's  mind  is  his  spirit,
which  becomes  an  angel  by  virtue  of  its  union  with  the
Lord,  while  the  body  is  mere  obedience.  But  it  should
be  carefully  noted  that  the  Lord  also  acts  upon  every
particular  in  man,  nay,  upon  the  minutest  particulars,  only
He  does  this  simultaneously  throughout  his  whole  form;
moreover  He  does  not  change  the  state  of  any  part,  or  of
any  detail,  unless  suitably  to  the  whole  form.  But  more
will  be  said  of  this  in  what  follows,  where  it  will  be  shown
that  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  is  universal  because  it  is


Divine  Providence  85

in  every  detail^  and  that  it  is  in  every  detail  because  it  is
universal.

The  Lord  acts  at  the  same  time  through  inmost  things  and
through  ultimates  because  thus  and  not  otherwise  are  all  things
in  general  and  particular  held  together  in  connection;  for
intermediate  things  depend  upon  inmost  things,  and  are
based  upon  ultimates,  and  in  the  ultimates  they  all  coexist ;
for,  as  was  shown  in  Part  III.  of  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love
and  Wisdom,  all  things  derived  from  the  first  cause  coexist  in
the  ultimate.  Because  of  this,  also,  the  Lord  from  eternity,
or  Jehovah,  came  into  the  world,  and  there  assumed  and
sustained  a  Humanity  in  ultimates,  that  He  might  be  univer-
sally present  from  primaries  to  ultimates ;  and  so,  from  first
things  through  ultimates,  might  rule  the  whole  world  and
thus  save  mankind,  which  He  can  do  according  to  the  laws
of  His  divine  Providence,  which  are  also  those  of  His  divine
Wisdom.  And  therefore,  as  is  well  known  in  the  Christian
world,  no  mortal  could  have  been  saved  unless  the  Lord  had
come  into  the  world ;  concerning  this  see  the  Doctrine  of  the
New  Jerusalem  concerning  Faith  {no.  2,5)-  This  is  whv  the
Lord  is  called  the  First  and  the  Last.

125.  These  arcana  of  angelic  wisdom  have  been  stated  here,
to  show  how  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  works  to  unite
man  with  Himself  and  Himself  with  man ;  He  does  not  act
upon  any  particular  thing  belonging  to  man,  without  acting
simultaneously  upon  all  that  belongs  to  him ;  and  He  acts  at
the  same  time  on  man's  inmost  and  on  his  outmost  mind.
Man's  inmost  is  his  life's  love ;  the  ultimates  are  the  things  in
his  external  thought ;  and  the  intermediates  are  the  things  in
his  internal  thought ;  the  nature  of  these  in  an  evil  man  has  al-
ready been  shown.  Once  more  then  it  is  evident  that  the  Lord
cannot  act  through  inmost  things  and  ultimates  at  the  same
time,  unless  with  the  cooperation  of  man ;  for  in  ultimates,
man  is  with  the  Lord ;  and  therefore,  as  man  acts  in  ultimates
which  are  under  his  control  because  they  are  within  the  sphere
of  his  freedom,  so  the  Lord  acts  through  man's  inmost  mind
right  down  to  ultimates.  The  things  in  man's  inmost  mind
and  in  what  follows  in  order  from  them  down  to  ultimates,
are  wholly  unknown  to  man;  and  therefore  he  is  wholly
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  Lord's  work  there ;  but  as  those
things  form  one  with  the  ultimates,  it  is  unnecessary  for  him
to  know  more  than  that  he  must  shun  evils  as  sins,  and  look


86  Divine  Providence

to  the  Lord.  Thus^  and  in  no  other  way,  can  his  life's  love,
which  from  birth  is  hellish,  be  removed  by  the  Lord,  and  a
heavenly  life's  love  be  implanted  in  its  place.

126.  When  the  love  of  a  heavenly  life  is  implanted  by  the
Lord  in  place  of  the  love  of  a  hellish  life,  then  affections  of
good  and  truth  are  implanted  in  place  of  the  lusts  of  evil
and  falsity;  and  the  delights  of  the  affections  of  good  are
implanted  in  place  of  the  delights  of  the  lusts  of  evil  and  falsity ;
and  the  goods  of  heavenly  love  are  implanted  in  place  of  the
evils  of  hellish  love.  Then  prudence  takes  the  place  of
cunning  and  wicked  thoughts  are  replaced  by  wise  ones.
Thus  man  is  born  again  and  becomes  a  new  man.  What
kinds  of  good  take  the  place  of  the  evils,  may  be  seen  in  the
Doctrine  of  Life  for  the  New  Jerusalem  (nos.  67-73,  74-79;
80-86,  87-91) :  and  that  so  far  as  man  shuns  and  turns
away  from  evils  as  sins,  he  loves  the  truths  of  wisdom
(nos.  32-41) ;  and  so  far  has  faith  and  is  spiritual  (nos.  42-52).

127.  It  has  been  shown  above  from  the  exhortations  read
in  all  Christian  Churches  before  the  Holy  Communion,  that
the  common  belief  of  the  Christian  world  is,  that  man  must
examine  himself,  see  his  sins,  acknowledge  them,  confess
them  before  God,  and  desist  from  them ;  and  that  this  con-
stitutes repentance,  the  remission  of  sins,  and  consequently
salvation.  The  same  may  be  seen  from  the  so-called  Atha-
nasian  Creed,  which  has  been  accepted  throughout  the  whole
Christian  world ;  at  the  end  of  it  are  these  words  :  "  The
Lord  will  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  at  whose
coming,  those  who  have  done  good  shall  enter  into  life  eternal,
and  those  who  have  done  evil  into  eternal  fire."

128.  Who  does  not  know  from  the  Word  that  a  life  is
allotted  to  every  one  after  death  according  to  his  deeds?
Open  the  Word,  read  it,  and  you  will  see  this  clearly ;  but,
while  doing  so,  put  away  all  thought  based  on  justifica-
tion by  faith  alone.  Take  these  few  passages  as  evidence
that  the  Lord  teaches  this  everywhere  in  His  Word  :  "  Every
tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down,
and  cast  into  the  fire.  Wherefore  by  their  fruits  ye  shall
know  them  "  (Matt.  vii.  19,  20).  "  Many  will  say  to  Me  in
that  day.  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  Thy  Name,  and
in  Thy  Name  done  many  wonderful  works  }  And  then  will
I  profess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you  :  depart  from  Me,
ye  that  work  iniquity  "  (Matt.  vii.  22,  23).     "  Therefore


Divine  Providence  87

whosoever  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine,  and  doeth  them,
I  will  liken  him  unto  a  wise  man  who  built  his  house  upon  a
rock  :  and  every  one  that  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine  and
DOETH  THEM  NOT,  shall  be  likened  unto  a  foolish  man,  who
built  his  house  upon  the  ground  without  a  foundation  "  (Matt,
vii.  24,  26;  Luke  vi.  46-49).  "For  the  Son  of  Man  shall
come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  and  then  he  shall  reward

EVERY    MAN    ACCORDING    TO    HIS    WORKS  "    (Matt.    Xvi.    27).

"  The  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from  you,  and  given

TO  a  nation  BRINGING  FORTH  THE  FRUITS  THEREOF  "  (Matt.

xxi.  43).  "  Jesus  said,  My  mother  and  My  brethren  are  these
who  hear  the  Word  of  God  and  do  it  "  (Luke  viii.  21).  "  Then
shall  ye  begin  to  stand  without,  and  to  knock  at  the  door,
saying.  Lord,  open  unto  us;  but  He  answering  shall  say,
I  tell  you,  I  know  you  not  whence  ye  are ;  depart  from  Me,
ALL  YE  WORKERS  OF  INIQUITY  "  (Lukc  xiii.  25-27).  "  They
that  have  done  good  shall  come  forth  into  the  resurrection
of  life ;  and  they  that  have  done  evil  into  the  resurrection
of  judgment  "  (John  v.  29).  "  We  know^  that  God  heareth
not  sinners;  but  if  any  man  be  a  worshipper  of  God,  and
do  HIS  WILL,  him  He  heareth  "  (John  ix.  31).  "  If  ye  know
these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them  "  (John  xiii.  17).
"  He  that'hath  My  commandments  and  keepeth  them,  he
it  is  that  loveth  Me,  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will  come  to  him,
and  make  My  abode  with  him  "  (John  xiv.  15,  21,  24).  "  Ye
are  My  friends  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you.  I
have  chosen  you  that  ye  should  bring  forth  fruit,  and
that  your  fruit  should  remain  "  (John  xv.  14,  16).  "  The
Lord  said  to  John,  Unto  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Ephesus
write ;  I  know  thy  works  :  I  have  against  thee  that  thou
hast  left  thy  first  charity;  repent,  and  do  the  first
WORKS,  or  else  I  will  remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  its  place  "
(Apoc.  ii.  I,  2,  4,  5).  "  Unto  the  angel  of  the  Church  in
Smyrna  ^vrite ;  I  know  thy  works  "  (Apoc.  ii.  8,  9).  "  Unto
the  angel  of  the  Church  in  Pergamos  wTite;  I  know  thy
works  :  repent"  (Apoc.  ii.  12,  13,  16).  "  Unto  the  angel
of  the  Church  in  Thyatira  wTite ;  I  know  thy  works  and
charity,  and  the  last  to  be  more  than  the  first  "  (Apoc.  ii.
18,  19).  "Unto  the  angel  of  the  Church  in  Sardis  ^vrite;
I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest
but  art  dead.  I  have  not  found  thy  works  perfect
before  god;  repent"  (Apoc.  iii.  i,  3).     "  Unto  the  angel


88  Divine  Providence

of  the  Church  in  Philadelphia  write;  I  know  thy  works"
(Apoc.  iii.  7,  8).  "  Unto  the  angel  of  the  church  of  the
Laodiceans  \vrite;  I  know  thy  works:  repent"  (Apoc.
iii.  14,  15,  19).  "  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying,  Write,
blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth  :

THEIR    works    do     FOLLOW    THEM  "    (ApOC.    xiv.    13).      "  A

book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life;  and  the  dead
were  judged  all  according  to  their  works  "  (Apoc.  xx.
12,  13).  "Behold,  I  come  quickly;  and  My  reward  is
with  Me,  TO  give  every  man  according  to  his  work  "
(Apoc.  xxii.  12).  Thus  far  the  New  Testament;  there  are
yet  more  in  the  Old  Testament,  from  which  I  will  quote
this  one  only  :  "  Stand  in  the  gate  of  Jehovah,  and  proclaim
there  this  word  :  Thus  saith  Jehovah  Zebaoth,  the  God  of
Israel,  Amend  your  ways  and  your  doings;  trust  ye  not  in
lying  words,  saying.  The  temple  of  Jehovah,  the  temple  of
Jehovah,  the  temple  of  Jehovah,  are  these.  Will  ye  steal,
murder,  and  commit  adultery,  and  swear  falsely,  and  come
and  stand  before  Me  in  this  house,  which  is  called  by  My  name,
and  say.  We  are  delivered,  while  ye  do  these  abominations  ?
Is  this  house  become  a  den  of  robbers  ?  Behold,  even  I  have
seen  it,  saith  Jehovah  "  (Jer.  vii.  2-4,  9-1 1).

It  is  a  law  of  the  divine  Providence  that  a  man  should
not  be  compelled  by  external  means  to  think  and

will,  THAT  IS  TO  BELIEVE  AND  LOVE  WHAT  PERTAINS
TO  RELIGION,  BUT  THAT  HE  SHOULD  BRING  HIMSELF  TO
DO  THIS,  AND  SOMETIMES  COMPEL  HIMSELF

129.  This  law  of  the  divine  Providence  follows  from  the
two  preceding  ones,  namely.  That  man  should  act  in  freedom
according  to  reason  (nos.  71-99);  and  that  he  should  do  this
of  himself,  although  he  does  it  by  power  derived  from  the
Lord  thus,  as  if  of  himself  (nos.  100-128).  And  as  compul-
sion, when  not  self-imposed,  is  incompatible  with  action  in
freedom  according  to  reason,  being  the  negation  of  freedom
and  coming  from  outside,  therefore  this  law  of  the  divine
Providence  follows  from  the  two  former.  Moreover  every
one  knows  that  no  one  can  be  compelled  to  think  what  he  does
not  wish  to  think,  nor  to  will  what  he  does  not  intend  to  will ;
nor  to  believe  what  he  does  not  believe,  and  certainly  not
what  he  is  unwilling  to  believe ;  nor  to  love  what  he  does  not
love,  and  certainly  not  what  he  is  unwilling  to  love.    For  a


Divine  Providence  89

man's  spirit^  or  his  mind,  is  in  the  full  liberty  of  thinking,
willing,  believing,  and  loving;  it  enjoys  this  liberty  by  an
influx  from  the  spiritual  world  devoid  of  all  compulsion,  for
man's  spirit  or  mind  lives  in  that  world ;  liberty  does  not
depend  on  influx  from  the  natural  world,  which  is  only
received  in  conjunction  with  the  former  influx.  A  man  can
be  driven  to  say  that  he  thinks  and  wishes  this  or  that,  and
that  he  believes  and  loves  them ;  but  if  they  are  not  in  agree-
ment with  his  affection,  and  therefore  with  his  reason,  or  if
they  do  not  become  so,  he  does  not  really  think,  will,  beheve,
and  love  them.  A  man  may  also  be  compelled  to  speak  in
favour  of  religion,  and  to  act  in  accordance  with  its  dictates ;
but  he  cannot  be  compelled  to  have  any  faith  in  it,  or  to  act
willingly  in  accordance  with  it.  Moreover  in  states  where
justice  and  judgment  are  maintained,  no  one  is  permitted  to
speak  or  act  against  rehgion,  but  yet  no  one  can  be  compelled
to  think  and  will  in  its  favour.  For  every  one  is  at  liberty
either  to  think  and  will  in  accordance  with  hell,  or  to  think
and  will  in  accordance  with  heaven ;  but  reason  teaches  the
nature  of  the  one  and  of  the  other,  and  the  kind  of  lot  which
awaits  the  one  and  the  other ;  and  then  the  will  by  means
of  the  understanding  has  a  freedom  of  choice  and  power  of
decision.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  external  has  no
power  to  compel  the  internal.  Nevertheless  this  is  sometimes
done,  but  it  is  hurtful,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  following
order  : —

I.  No  one  is  reformed  by  miracles  and  signs,  because  they
coerce.

II.  No  one  is  reformed  by  \isions  and  by  converse  with
the  dead,  because  they  coerce.

III.  No  one  is  reformed  by  threats  and  punishments,
because  they  coerce.

IV.  No  one  is  reformed  in  a  state  devoid  of  rationality  and
liberty.

V.  It  is  not  contrary  to  rationality  and  liberty  to  compel
oneself.

VI.  The  external  man  must  be  reformed  by  means  of  the
internal,  and  not  the  reverse.

130.  I.  No  one  is  reformed  by  miracles  and  signs,  because
they  coerce.  It  was  shown  above  that  man  has  internal  and
external  thought,  and  that  the  Lord  acts  upon  him  by  influx
through  his  internal  into  his  external  thought,  and  so  teaches


90  Divine  Providence

and  leads  him ;  also  that  it  is  of  the  Lord's  divine  Providence
that  man  should  act  in  freedom  according  to  reason.     All
this  would  perish  in  man  if  miracles  were  wrought  and  he
were  driven  by  them  to  believe.     The  truth  of  this  may  be
rationally  seen  as  follows  : — It  cannot  be  denied  that  miracles
induce  faith,  and  powerfully  persuade  men  that  what  is  said
and  taught  by  the  worker  of  the  miracles  is  true ;  and  that  all
this  at  first  so  occupies  man's  external  thought  as,  in  a
manner,  to  subdue  and  fascinate  it.     But  man  is  thus  de-
prived of  his  two  faculties  of  rationality  and  liberty,  so  that
he  cannot  act  in  freedom  according  to  reason ;  and  the  Lord
cannot  flow  in  through  his  internal  into  his  external  thought,
except  so  far  as  to  allow  him  to  confirm  by  his  rationality
what  has  been  made  an  article  of  his  faith  by  means  of  the
miracle.    The  human  mind  is  so  constituted  that  its  internal
thought  is,  as  it  were,  mirrored  in  its  external  thought ;  for,
as  was  said  above,  a  man  can  inspect  his  own  thought,  and
this  can  only  be  done  by  means  of  a  more  internal  thought,
and  when  he  sees  it  as  in  a  mirror,  he  can  also  turn  it  this  way
and  that,  and  shape  it  till  it  appears  beautiful  to  him.     The
object,  if  it  is  a  truth,  may  be  compared  to  a  beautiful  and
living  virgin  or  youth ;   but  if  a  man  cannot  turn  it  in  this
way  and  that,  and  shape  it,  but  only  believe  it  from  per-
suasion induced  by  a  miracle,  then,  if  it  is  a  truth,  it  may  be
compared  to  a  virgin  or  youth  carved  out  of  wood  or  stone,
in  which  there  is  no  hfe.     It  may  also  be  compared  to  an
object  right  in  front  of  the  eyes,  which  alone  is  seen,  and
hides  from  view  all  that  is  at  either  side  of  it  or  behind  it.
Again,  it  may  be  compared  to  a  monotonous  sound  in  the  ear,
which  makes  one  deaf  to  the  harmonj^  arising  from  other
sources.     Such  blindness  and  deafness  are  induced  on  the
human  mind  by  miracles.     It  is  the  same  with  everything
confirmed,  which  has  not  previously  been  examined  with
some  degree  of  intelligence.

131.  It  should  be  evident  from  this,  that  faith  induced  by
miracles  is  not  faith,  but  merely  persuasion;  for  there  is
nothing  rational,  still  less  spiritual  in  it,  for  it  is  merely  an
external  without  an  internal.  It  is  the  same  with  everything
which  a  man  does  under  the  influence  of  such  persuasion,
whether  he  acknowledges  God,  worships  Him  at  home  or  at
church,  or  does  good  deeds.  When  his  acknowledgment,
worship,  and  piety  are  merely  induced  by  a  miracle,  it  is  the


Divine  Providence  91

natural;  not  the  spiritual  man  that  acts.  For  a  miracle  infuses
faith  by  an  external  way,  and  not  by  an  internal  way,  that  is,
from  the  world  and  not  from  heaven;  and  the  Lord  enters
man  only  by  an  internal  way,  that  is,  by  the  Word,  and  by
doctrine  and  preaching  founded  upon  it;  and  as  miracles
close  up  this  way,  no  miracles  are  wrought  at  the  present
time.

132.  That  miracles  have  this  effect  may  be  clearly  seen
from  those  wrought  before  the  people  of  Judah  and  Israel.
Although  they  had  seen  so  many  miracles  wrought  in  the  land
of  Egypt,  and  afterwards  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  in  the  desert,
and  especially  on  Mount  Sinai  when  the  Law  was  promul-
gated, nevertheless,  a  single  month  afterwards,  while  Moses
tarried  on  that  mountain,  they  made  themselves  a  golden
calf,  and  acknowledged  it  for  Jehovah,  who  had  led  them
forth  from  the  land  of  Egj^it  (Ex.  xxxii.  4-6).  Then  again,
many  miracles  were  afterwards  wrought  in  the  land  of
Canaan;  yet  the  people  often  departed  from  the  worship
that  was  commanded  them.  It  is  equally  evident  from  the
miracles  that  the  Lord  wrought  before  them  when  He  was
in  the  world,  for  they  crucified  Him  nevertheless.  Miracles
were  performed  among  the  men  of  Judah  and  Israel  because
they  were  wholly  external  men  and  were  introduced  into  the
land  of  Canaan  solely  that  they  might  represent  the  Church
and  its  inner  realities,  by  means  of  external  rites,  and  a  bad
man  can  do  this  as  well  as  a  good  man;  for  externals  are
rituals,  all  of  which  among  this  nation  signified  spiritual  and
heavenly  things  :  even  Aaron,  although  he  made  the  golden
calf  and  commanded  them  to  worship  it  (Ex.  xxxii.  2-5,  35),
could  yet  represent  the  Lord  and  His  work  of  salvation.  And
so,  as  they  could  not  be  led  by  the  inner  realities  of  worship
to  represent  those  things,  they  were  led,  yea,  driven  and  forced
to  do  so  by  miracles.  They  could  not  be  led  by  the  inner
realities  of  worship  because  they  did  not  acknowledge  the
Lord,  although  the  whole  Word,  which  they  had  in  their
possession,  treats  of  Him  alone  ;  and  he  who  does  not  acknow-
ledge the  Lord  cannot  receive  the  inner  realities  of  worship.
But  after  the  Lord  manifested  Himself,  and  was  received
and  acknowledged  in  the  Churches  as  the  eternal  God,
miracles  ceased.

133.  But  the  effect  of  miracles  upon  the  good  is  different
from  their  effect  on  the  wicked.     The  good  do  not  desire  to


92  Divine  Providence

see  miracles,  but  they  believe  the  miracles  recorded  in  the
Word;  and  if  they  hear  about  a  miracle,  they  consider  it
only  as  a  slight  argument  which  confirms  their  faith;  for
they  found  their  belief  upon  the  Word,  that  is,  upon  the  Lord,
and  not  upon  any  miracle.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  wicked ;
they  may,  indeed,  be  driven  and  forced  into  faith  by  miracles,
and  even  into  worship  and  piety,  but  only  for  a  little  while ;
for  their  evils  are  shut  in,  and  the  lusts  of  these  evils  and  the
delights  therefrom  continually  act  against  the  external  forms
of  worship  and  piety  which  they  display;  so  in  order  to
escape  from  their  confinement  and  break  out,  they  reflect
upon  the  miracle,  and  at  last  call  it  a  trick  or  artifice,  or  a
natural  phenomenon,  and  thus  they  return  to  their  evils;
and  he  who  after  worship  returns  to  his  evils,  profanes  the
goods  and  truths  of  religion;  and  the  lot  after  death  of
profaners  is  the  worst  of  all.  It  is  of  these  that  the  Lord  says
(Matt.  xii.  43-45),  that  their  last  state  is  worse  than  the  first.
Moreover,  if  miracles  were  to  be  wrought  for  the  benefit  of
those  who  are  not  convinced  by  the  miracles  in  the  Word,  they
would  have  to  be  continually  performed  in  their  sight.  This
shows  clearly  why  miracles  are  not  wrought  at  this  day.

134.  II.  No  one  is  reformed  by  visions  and  by  converse  with
the  dead,  because  they  coerce.  Visions  are  of  two  kinds,  divine
and  diabolical.  Divine  visions  take  place  by  means  of
representative  scenes  in  heaven;  and  diabolical  visions  by
means  of  magic  in  hell.  There  are  also  fantastic  visions,  which
are  the  illusions  of  an  abstracted  mind.  Divine  visions,
which,  as  has  just  been  said,  are  produced  by  means  of  re-
presentative scenes  in  heaven,  are  like  those  of  the  prophets,
who,  when  they  saw  them,  were  not  in  the  body,  but  in  the
spirit ;  for  visions  cannot  be  seen  by  any  one  who  is  in  a  state
of  bodily  wakefulness.  And  therefore,  when  the  prophets
saw  them,  they  were  said  to  be  in  the  spirit;  as  is  evident
from  the  following  passages :  Ezekiel  says,  "  The  Spirit
hfted  me  up  and  brought  me  in  a  vision  of  God,  in  the  Spirit
OF  God  into  Chaldea,  to  them  of  the  captivity.  So  the  vision
that  I  had  seen  went  up  above  me  "  (xi.  i,  24).  Again  he
says,  "  the  Spirit  lifted  me  up  between  the  earth  and  the
heaven,  and  brought  me  in  the  visions  of  God  to  Jerusalem  "
(viii.  3,  sqq.).  He  was  hkewise  "  in  the  vision  of  God,"
or  "in  the  spirit,"  when  he  saw  the  four  living  creatures
which  were  cherubim  (i.,  x.);  as  also  when  he  saw  the  new


Divine  Providence  93

temple  and  the  new  earth,  and  the  angel  measuring  them
(xl.-xlviii).  That  he  was  then  "  in  the  visions  of  God,"  he
says  (xl.  2);  and  "  in  the  spirit  "  (xhii.  5).  Zechariah  was  in
a  similar  state  when  he  saw  the  man  riding  among  the  myrtle
trees  (i.  8,  sqq.);  when  he  saw  the  four  horns  (i.  18);  and  a
man  in  whose  hand  was  a  measuring  line  (ii.  i,  sqq.);  when
he  saw  the  candlestick  and  two  olive  trees  (iv.  1-3,  sqq.);
when  he  saw  the  flying  roll  and  the  ephah  (v.  1-6) ;  when  he
saw  the  four  chariots  coming  out  from  between  two  moun-
tains, and  the  horses  (vi.  i,  sqq.).  Daniel  was  in  a  similar
state  when  he  saw  the  four  beasts  coming  up  from  the  sea
(vii.  I,  sqq.);  when  he  saw  the  combat  between  the  ram  and
the  he-goat  (viii.  i,  sqq.).  It  is  stated  that  he  saw  these
things  in  the  vision  of  his  spirit  (vii.  i,  2,  7,  13 ;  viii.  2 ;  x.  i,
7,  8) ;  and  that  the  angel  Gabriel  was  seen  by  him  in  a  vision
(ix.  21).  John,  also,  was  in  the  vision  of  the  spirit  when  he
saw  what  he  described  in  the  Apocalypse ;  for  instance,  the
seven  candlesticks,  and  in  their  midst  theSon  of  Man  (Apoc.  i.
12-16);  a  throne  in  heaven,  and  One  sitting  upon  the  throne,
and  the  four  animals  which  were  cherubim  round  about  it
(iv.);  the  Book  of  Life  received  by  the  Lamb  (v.);  horses
going  forth  out  of  the  book  (vi.);  the  seven  angels  with  trum-
pets (viii.);  the  pit  of  the  abyss  opened  and  locusts  issuing
from  it  (ix.);  the  dragon,  and  its  combat  with  Michael  (xii.);
the  two  beasts,  one  rising  out  of  the  sea  and  the  other  out
of  the  earth  (xiii.);  the  woman  sitting  upon  the  scarlet
beasts  (xvii.);  the  destruction  of  Babylon  (xviii.);  the  white
horse,  and  Him  who  sat  thereon  (xix.);  the  new  heaven  and
the  new  earth,  and  the  holy  Jerusalem  descending  from
heaven  (xxi.);  and  the  river  of  the  water  of  life  (xxii.)  It  is
stated  that  he  saw  these  things  in  the  vision  of  the  spirit,
(i.  10;  iv.  2;  v.  i;  vi.  i;  xxi.  i,  2).  Such  were  the  visions
which  were  seen  by  the  prophets  from  heaven,  with  the  sight
of  the  spirit  and  not  of  the  body.  No  such  visions  are  seen
at  the  present  day,  for  if  they  were,  they  would  not  be  under-
stood ;  because  they  are  representative  scenes,  in  which  every-
thing signifies  the  internal  things  of  the  Church,  and  the  arcana
of  heaven.  Moreover,  it  was  foretold  by  Daniel  (ix.  24),  that
they  would  cease  when  the  Lord  should  come  into  the  world.
Diabolical  visions  have  sometimes  been  seen,  induced  by
fanatical  and  visionary  spirits  who  in  their  insanity  called
themselves  the  Holy  Spirit.     But  these  spirits  have  now  been


94  Divine  Providence

gathered  together^  and  cast  into  a  hell  separate  from  the  other
hells.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  no  one  can  be  reformed
by  any  other  visions  than  those  described  in  the  Word.
There  are  also  fantastic  visions,  but  these  are  merely  the
illusions  of  an  abstracted  mind.

134  (a).  Neither  is  any  one  reformed  by  conversing  with
the  dead,  as  is  evident  from  the  Lord's  words  concerning  the
rich  man  in  hell,  and  Lazarus  in  Abraham's  bosom ;  for  the
rich  man  said  :  "I  pray  thee  therefore,  father,  that  thou
wouldst  send  Lazarus  to  my  father's  house,  for  I  have  five
brethren,  that  he  may  testify  unto  them,  lest  they  also  come
into  this  place  of  torment.  Abraham  said  unto  him,  They
have  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  let  them  hear  them.  But  he
said,  Nay,  father  Abraham,  but  if  one  went  unto  them  from
the  dead,  they  will  repent.  And  he  said  unto  him.  If  they
hear  not  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  neither  will  they  be  per-
suaded though  one  rose  from  the  dead  "  (Luke  xvi.  27-31).
Speech  with  the  dead  would  produce  the  same  effect  as  that
of  the  miracles  mentioned  above,  that  is,  a  man  would  be
persuaded  and  driven  to  worship  for  a  little  time ;  but  as  this
deprives  him  of  rationality,  and  at  the  same  time  shuts  in
his  evils,  as  said  above,  this  spell,  or  internal  bond,  is  soon
broken,  and  the  imprisoned  evils  burst  forth,  with  blasphemy
and  profanation.  But  this  takes  place  only  when  spirits
infuse  some  religious  dogma,  which  is  never  done  by  any  good
spirit,  still  less  by  any  angel  of  heaven.

135.  Nevertheless  speech  is  sometimes  allowed  with
spirits,  though  rarely  with  angels  of  heaven,  and  it  has  been
granted  to  many  for  ages  back;  but  when  this  is  allowed,
they  speak  with  a  man  in  his  mother-tongue,  and  only  a  few
words ;  but  those  who  speak  by  the  Lord's  permission,  never
say  any  thing  which  takes  away  the  freedom  of  man's
reason;  nor  do  they  teach  him,  for  the  Lord  alone  teaches
man,  but  indirectly  by  means  of  the  Word,  while  he  is  in  a
state  of  enlightenment,  of  which  more  hereafter.  I  have  been
allowed  to  learn  the  truth  of  this  by  personal  experience.
I  have  conversed  with  spirits  and  angels  now  for  many  years ;
nor  has  any  spirit  dared,  nor  any  angel  wished,  to  tell  me,
still  less  to  instruct  me,  about  anything  in  the  Word,  or  any
doctrine  derived  from  the  Word,  but  the  Lord  alone  has  taught
me.  He  has  revealed  Himself  to  me,  and  has  since  constantly
been  seen  by  me,  and  is  still  seen  as  the  sun  in  which  He


Divine  Providence  95

dwells,  just  as  He  is  seen  by  the  angels,  and  has  thus
enlightened  me.

136.  III.  No  one  is  reformed  by  threats  and  punishments,
because  they  coerce.  It  is  well-known  that  the  external
cannot  compel  the  internal,  but  that  the  internal  can  compel
the  external,  also  that  the  internal  so  resents  compulsion  by
the  external  that  it  turns  away.  It  is  also  known  that  the
internal  mind  is  enticed  by  external  delights  to  sanction  and
love  them ;  it  should  also  be  known  that  there  is  such  a  thing
as  a  forced  internal  as  well  as  a  free  internal.  But  all  these
things,  though  known,  need  illustration;  for  there  are
many  things  which,  being  true,  are  at  once  perceived  to  be
so  when  stated,  and  are  therefore  assented  to;  but  if  they
are  not  also  supported  by  reasons,  doubt  may  be  cast  upon
them  by  fallacious  arguments,  and  at  last  they  may  be  denied.
Therefore  the  things  that  have  just  been  mentioned  as  known
must  again  be  stated  and  proved  rationally,  as  follows  :

i.  The  external  cannot  compel  the  internal,  but  the  internal
can  compel  the  external.  Who  can  be  compelled  to  believe
and  love  ?  One  can  no  more  be  compelled  to  believe,  than
to  think  that  a  statement  is  true  when  one  thinks  that  it  is
untrue;  and  one  can  no  more  be  compelled  to  love  than  to
desire  what  one  feels  to  be  undesirable  :  faith  also  is  a  state
of  the  thought,  and  love  is  a  state  of  the  will.  But  the
internal  may  be  compelled  by  the  external  not  to  speak  ill
of  the  civil  law  of  the  state,  the  moral  law,  and  the  holy  things
of  the  Church;  thus  far  the  internal  may  be  compelled  by
threats  and  punishments,  and  it  is  so  compelled,  and  ought
to  be.  This  internal,  however,  is  not  the  internal  that  is
properly  human;  it  is  an  internal  that  man  has  in  common
with  animals,  which  can  also  be  coerced ;  the  human  internal
has  its  seat  higher  than  this  animal  internal.  It  is  the  human
internal  which  is  here  meant  and  that  cannot  be  compelled.

ii.  The  internal  so  resents  compulsion  by  the  external  that
it  turns  away.  This  is  because  the  internal  wishes  to  be
in  freedom,  and  loves  freedom ;  for  freedom  belongs  to  man's
love  or  life,  as  shown  above.  And  therefore  when  freedom
feels  itself  constrained,  it  withdraws  as  it  were  within  itself,
and  turns  away,  and  regards  compulsion  as  its  enemy;  for
the  love  of  a  man's  life  is  incensed,  and  makes  the  man  feel
under  these  circumstances  that  he  is  not  his  own,  conse-
quently, that  he  does  not  hve  for  himself.     It  is  a  law  of  the


96


Divine  Providence


Lord's  divine  Providence  that  man's  internal  mind  should
be  of  this  nature,  that  is,  that  he  should  act  in  freedom  accord-
ing to  reason.  Evidently,  therefore,  it  is  hurtful  to  constrain
men  to  worship  God  by  threats  and  punishments.  But  there
are  some  who  allow  themselves  to  be  coerced  in  religious
matters  and  some  who  do  not.  Many  of  those  who  allow
themselves  to  be  coerced  are  within  the  papal  jurisdiction;
but  this  only  takes  place  with  those  whose  worship  is  not
internal,  but  merely  external.  Many  of  those  who  do  not
allow  themselves  to  be  coerced  are  of  the  English  nation;
and  from  this  it  results  that  there  is  something  internal  in
their  worship  and  that  their  external  worship  is  derived  from
it.  In  spiritual  light  the  religious  state  of  their  inner  minds
presents  the  appearance  of  bright  clouds ;  but  in  the  light
of  heaven  the  religious  state  of  the  inner  minds  of  the  former
looks  like  dark  clouds.  Both  of  these  appearances  are
clearly  seen  in  the  spiritual  world,  and  any  one  who  wishes
will  see  them  when  he  comes  into  that  world  after  death.
Moreover,  compulsory  worship  shuts  in  evils,  which  then  lie
hidden  like  a  wood  fire  smouldering  under  ashes,  which  is
continually  kindling  and  spreading  till  it  breaks  out  in  flames ;
while  willing  and  spontaneous  worship  does  not  shut  in  evils,
which  therefore  are  like  fires  that  blaze  up  at  once  and  dis-
appear. From  this  it  is  evident  that  the  internal  so  resents
compulsion  that  it  turns  itself  away.  The  internal  may
compel  the  external,  because  the  internal  is  like  a  master,
and  the  external  like  a  servant.

iii.  The  internal  mind  is  enticed  by  external  delights  to
sanction  and  love  them.  Delights  are  of  two  kinds,  the
delights  of  the  understanding,  and  the  delights  of  the  will;
those  of  the  understanding  are  delights  of  wisdom,  and  those
of  the  will  are  delights  of  love ;  for  wisdom  is  a  state  of  the
understanding,  and  love  is  a  state  of  the  will.  Now  as  the
delights  of  the  body  and  its  senses,  which  are  external,  act
as  one  with  the  internal  delights  of  the  understanding  and  will,
it  follows  that  whereas  the  internal  so  resents  compulsion  by
the  external  as  to  turn  away,  it  looks  with  such  favour  on
delight  in  the  external,  as  to  turn  towards  it;  hence  comes
consent  on  the  part  of  the  understanding  and  love  on  the
part  of  the  will.  All  little  children  in  the  spiritual  world  are
led  by  the  Lord  into  angelic  wisdom,  and  thereby  into
heavenly  love,  by  means  of  delights  and  pleasures ;  first,  by


Divine  Providence  97

beautiful  things  in  their  homes,  and  by  charming  objects  in
their  gardens;  afterwards  by  representations  of  spiritual
things,  which  delight  their  inner  minds  ;  and  at  length  by  the
truths  of  wisdom,  and  so  by  the  goods  of  love ;  thus  they  are
maintained  in  continual  delight;  first  come  the  delights  of
the  love  of  the  understanding  and  its  wisdom,  and  lastly  the
delights  of  the  love  of  the  will,  which  becomes  their  life's
love,  to  which  all  that  has  entered  by  means  of  delight  is
subordinated.  This  is  because  everything  in  the  understand-
ing and  the  will  must  be  formed  by  the  external  before  it  is
formed  by  the  internal ;  for  everything  in  the  understanding
and  will  is  formed  first  by  means  of  what  enters  by  the  senses,
chiefly  by  sight  and  hearing ;  but  when  the  first  understand-
ing and  the  first  will  have  been  formed,  then  the  internal
thought  regards  these  as  the  externals  of  its  thought,  and
either  unites  with  them  or  separates  from  them;  it  unites
with  them  if  they  are  delightful,  and  it  separates  from  them
if  they  are  not.  But  it  must  be  carefully  noted  that  the
internal  understanding  does  not  unite  itself  with  the  internal
will,  but  that  the  internal  will  unites  itself  with  the  internal
understanding,  and  makes  the  union  reciprocal,  this  also  being
done  by  the  internal  will,  and  not  at  all  by  the  internal
understanding.  This  is  why  man  cannot  be  reformed  by
faith  alone,  but  by  the  love  of  the  will,  which  makes  a  faith
for  itself.

iv.  There  is  a  forced  internal  and  a  free  internal.  There  is
a  forced  internal  in  those  whose  worship  is  exclusivelv  ex-
ternal; for  their  internal  consists  in  thinking  and  willing
that  to  which  their  external  is  forced.  Such  are  they  who
worship  men,  living  or  dead,  and  who,  consequently,  worship
idols,  and  whose  faith  is  founded  on  miracles ;  they  have  no
internal  except  what  is  at  the  same  time  external.  There
exists,  however,  a  form  of  inward  compulsion  in  those  whose
worship  is  internal,  arising  either  from  fear  or  from  love.
The  inward  compulsion  arising  from  fear  exists  in  those  who
worship  because  they  dread  the  pains  of  hell  and  its  fires.
But  this  is  not  the  internal  thought  mentioned  above,  but
external  thought  which  is  here  called  internal  simply  because
it  is  thought.  The  internal  thought  mentioned  above  cannot
be  compelled  by  fear,  but  it  can  be  compelled  by  love,  and
by  the  fear  of  losing  it.  The  fear  of  God  in  a  true  sense  is  no
other  than  this.     To  be  compelled  by  love  or  bv  the  fear  of


98


Divine  Providence


losing  it,  is  to  compel  oneself;   and  to  compel  oneself  is  not
contrary  to  liberty  and  rationality,  as  will  be  seen  below.

137.  This  shows  the  nature  of  forced  worship  and  of
spontaneous  worship.  Forced  worship  is  corporeal,  in-
animate, obscure,  and  sad;  corporeal,  because  it  belongs  to
the  body  and  not  to  the  mind ;  inanimate,  because  there  is
no  life  in  it ;  obscure,  because  the  understanding  has  no  part
in  it ;  and  sad,  because  the  light  of  heaven  is  absent  from  it.
But  spontaneous  worship  when  genuine,  is  spiritual,  living,
lucid,  and  joyful;  spiritual,  because  the  Lord's  spirit  is
present  in  it ;  living,  because  it  contains  life  from  the  Lord ;
lucid,  because  it  is  enlightened  by  wisdom  from  the  Lord;
and  joyful,  because  heaven  from  the  Lord  is  present  within  it.

138.  IV.  No  one  is  reformed  in  a  state  devoid  of  rationality
and  liberty.  It  was  shown  above  that  nothing  is  assimilated
by  man  except  what  he  does  in  freedom  according  to  reason.
This  is  because  freedom  is  a  state  of  the  will,  and  reason  a
state  of  the  understanding;  and  when  man  acts  in  freedom
according  to  reason,  he  then  acts  from  his  will  by  his  under-
standing ;  and  whatever  is  done  by  the  union  of  these  two  is
incorporated  in  his  nature.  Now  as  the  Lord  wills  that  m.an
should  be  reformed  and  regenerated  in  order  that  he  may  have
eternal  life,  or  the  life  of  heaven,  and  as  no  one  can  be  reformed
and  regenerated  unless  good  is  incorporated  in  his  will  as  his
own,  and  unless  truth  is  incorporated  in  his  understanding
as  his  own ;  and  as  no  one  can  appropriate  anything  except
in  the  free  exercise  of  his  will,  according  to  his  reason,  it
follows,  that  no  one  is  reformed  in  states  devoid  of  liberty  and
rationality.  There  are  many  such  states,  but  in  general  they
may  be  classified  as  follows  :  a  state  of  fear,  of  misfortune,
of  mental  or  bodily  disease,  of  ignorance,  or  of  intellectual
bhndness.  But  something  shall  be  said  of  each  state  in
particular.

139.  Xo  one  is  reformicd  while  in  a  state  of  fear,  because  fear
takes  away  freedom  and  reason,  or  liberty  and  rationality;
for  love  opens  the  inner  mind,  but  fear  closes  it ;  and  when
it  is  closed,  man  thinks  but  little,  and  then  only  of  what
presents  itself  to  the  lower  mind,  or  the  senses.  So  it  is  with
all  fear  which  invades  the  lower  mind.  It  was  shown  above
that  man  has  an  internal  and  an  external  thought.  A  man's
fear  can  never  take  possession  of  internal  thought;  this  is
always  in  freedom,  because  it  is  in  its  life's  love;   but  fear


Divine  Providence  99

can  take  possession  of  his  external  thought,  and  then  it
arrests  internal  thought  so  that  man  can  no  longer  act  in
freedom  according  to  his  reason,  and  so  cannot  be  reformed.
The  fear  which  takes  possession  of  external  thought  and
arrests  internal  thought,  is  chiefly  the  fear  of  losing  honour
or  wealth;  but  the  fear  of  legal  penalties  and  of  external
ecclesiastical  penalties  does  not  obstruct  internal  thought,
because  these  laws  only  impose  penalties  on  those  who  speak
and  act  against  the  civil  interests  of  the  state  and  the  spiritual
things  of  the  Church,  but  not  on  those  who  think  against
them.  The  fear  of  punishment  in  hell  may  indeed  take
possession  of  man's  external  thought,  but  only  for  a  few
moments,  hours  or  days ;  the  mind  soon  regains  the  free-
dom of  internal  thought,  which  properly  belongs  to  the  spirit
and  to  the  life's  love,  and  is  called  the  thought  of  the  heart.
But  the  fear  of  losing  honour  and  wealth  takes  possession
of  man's  external  thought,  and  then  it  closes  the  internal
mind  from  above  against  influx  from  heaven,  and  makes  it
impossible  for  man  to  be  reformed.  The  reason  of  this  is
that  the  life's  love  of  every  man  is  from  his  birth  the  love  of
self  and  of  the  world ;  and  the  love  of  self  makes  one  with  the
love  of  honour,  and  the  lo\'e  of  the  world  makes  one  with  the
love  of  gain.  When  a  man  therefore  is  in  the  possession  of
honour  or  wealth,  for  fear  of  losing  them  he  strengthens  within
himself  the  means  that  are  available  for  securing  them ;  these
may  be  either  civil  or  ecclesiastical,  and  in  either  case  they
increase  his  power.  A  man  who  has  not  yet  attained  honour
or  wealth  acts  in  like  manner  if  he  desires  to  acquire  them;
but  he  does  so  from  a  fear  lest  for  lack  of  them  his  reputation
should  suffer.  We  have  said  that  this  fear  takes  possession
of  his  external  thought,  and  closes  the  internal  mind  from
above  against  influx  from  heaven ;  and  this  mind  is  said  to
be  closed  when  it  entirely  coalesces  with  the  external,  for
it  is  not  then  independent,  but  is  sunk  in  the  external.  But
as  the  loves  of  self  and  of  the  world  are  infernal  loves  and  the
sources  of  all  evil,  one  can  see  the  intrinsic  nature  of  the
internal  thought  of  those  in  whom  these  loves  are  the  life's
loves,  or  in  whom  they  reign ;  namely,  that  it  is  full  of  the
lusts  of  every  kind  of  evil.  This  is  not  known  to  those,  who
from  fear  of  losing  reputation  and  wealth  are  strongly  biased
in  favour  of  their  own  religious  persuasion;  especially  if  this
involves  the  worship  of  themselves  as  deities,  or  as  the  rulers


lOO  Divine  Providence

in  hell.  These  can  exhibit  a  blazing  zeal  for  the  salvation
of  souls,  which  yet  is  inspired  by  the  fire  of  hell.  As  this  fear
especially  destroys  rationality  and  liberty,  which  are  heavenly
in  their  origin,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  an  obstacle  to  man's
reformation.

140.  No  one  is  reformed  in  a  state  of  misfortune — if  then
only  he  thinks  of  God,  and  implores  His  aid — because  he  is
then  in  a  state  of  constraint ;  and  therefore,  when  he  regains
his  freedom,  he  returns  to  his  former  state,  in  which  he  thought
little  or  nothing  about  God.  It  is  otherwise  with  those  who
in  their  previous  state  of  freedom  had  feared  God.  By  the
fear  of  God  is  meant  the  fear  of  displeasing  Him,  that  is,  by
sin ;  and  this  is  not  fear  but  love ;  for  does  not  one  who  loves
another  fear  to  do  him  wrong  ?  And  the  deeper  his  love  the
greater  his  fear.  Without  this  fear  love  is  insipid  and  super-
ficial; it  is  of  the  thought  alone,  and  not  of  the  will.  By
States  of  misfortune  are  meant  states  of  desperation  on
account  of  some  danger,  as  in  battles,  duels,  shipwrecks,  falls,
fires,  imminent  or  sudden  loss  of  wealth,  loss  of  position  and
consequently  of  honours,  and  other  similar  things.  To  think
of  God  under  such  circumstances  only,  is  to  do  so  not  from
God  but  from  self ;  for  the  mind  is  then  as  it  were  imprisoned
in  the  body,  and  therefore  not  at  liberty,  nor  in  posses-
sion of  rationality,  and  without  these  no  reformation  is
possible.

141.  No  one  is  reformed  in  a  state  of  mental  disorder,
because  this  takes  away  rationality  and  consequently  the
freedom  of  acting  according  to  reason.  For  the  mind  is  sick
and  not  sound;  and  a  sound  mind  is  rational,  but  a  sick
mind  is  not.  Such  mental  disorders  are  melancholy,  the
promptings  of  a  spurious  or  false  conscience,  hallucinations
of  various  kinds,  mental  sufferings  arising  from  misfortune,
anxiety  or  bodily  disease.  Such  sufferings  are  sometimes
regarded  as  temptations,  but  wrongly,  for  in  genuine  tempta-
tion the  mind  is  concentrated  on  spiritual  ends  and  is  in  full
vigour,  while  in  the  other  case,  it  is  concentrated  on  natural
things  and  is  disordered.

142.  No  one  is  reformed  in  a  state  of  bodily  disease,  because
his  reason  is  not  then  in  freedom,  for  the  state  of  the  mind
depends  on  the  state  of  the  body.  When  the  body  is  sick  the
mind  also  is  sick,  if  only  because  it  is  isolated  from  the  world ;
for  a  mind  so  isolated  thinks,  indeed,  concerning  God  but  not


Divine  Providence  loi

from  God,  for  it  has  not  the  free  exercise  of  reason.  ^laii
enjoys  the  free  exercise  of  his  reason  because  he  is  in  a  state
intermediate  between  heaven  and  the  world,  and  can  thus
derive  his  thought  from  heaven  and  from  the  world,  and  can
think  from  heaven  about  the  world,  and  from  the  world
about  heaven.  When,  therefore,  a  man  is  ill,  and  is  thinking
about  death  and  the  state  of  his  soul  after  death,  he  is  not
then  in  the  world,  but  secluded  in  his  own  spirit ;  in  this  state
no  one  can  be  reformed,  but  his  convictions  may  be  confirmed
if  he  was  reformed  before  he  fell  sick.  The  same  is  true  of
those  who  renounce  the  world  and  its  affairs  and  devote
themselves  wholly  to  thoughts  about  God,  heaven,  and
salvation;  but  of  this  more  elsewhere.  For  these  reasons
those  who  were  not  reformed  before  their  sickness,  in  case
of  their  death,  relapse  into  their  former  state.  It  is,  therefore,
idle  to  suppose  that  any  one  can  do  the  work  of  repentance
or  acquire  any  faith  during  sickness;  for  there  is  no  life  in
that  repentance,  and  no  charity  in  that  faith ;  both  are  merely
matters  of  the  lips  and  not  of  the  heart.

143.  No  one  is  reformed  in  a  state  of  ignorance,  because  all
reformation  is  effected  by  truths,  and  by  a  life  in  accordance
with  them ;  and  therefore  those  who  are  entirely  ignorant  of
the  truth  cannot  be  reformed;  but  if  they  desire  the  truth
from  an  affection  for  it,  they  are  reformed  in  the  spiritual
world  after  death.

144.  Nor  can  those  be  reformed  who  are  in  a  state  of
intellectual  blindness.  These,  also,  are  entirely  ignorant  of
truth,  and  consequently  of  what  their  life  should  be ;  for  the
understanding  must  teach  truths  and  the  will  put  them  into
practice;  and  when  the  will  does  this  its  life  is  conformed  to
the  truths.  But  when  the  understanding  is  blinded,  the  will
is  also  obstructed,  and  when  acting  in  freedom  according  to
its  own  reason,  it  practises  nothing  but  the  evil  which  is
established  as  falsity  in  the  understanding.  The  under-
standing is  blinded  even  more  by  a  religion  that  teaches  a
blind  faith  than  by  ignorance ;  so,  too,  is  it  by  false  doctrine ;
for  just  as  truths  open  the  understanding,  so  falsities  close
it  up ;  they  close  it  above  and  open  it  below,  and  the  under-
standing opened  only  below  cannot  see  truths  but  can  only
confirm  whatever  it  wills,  especially  falsity.  The  under-
standing is  also  blinded  by  the  lusts  of  evil ;  so  long  as  the
will  is  dominated  by  them,  it  urges  the  understanding  to


102  Divine  Providence

confirm  them ;  and  so  far  as  the  lusts  of  evil  are  confirmed,
the  will  cannot  be  influenced  by  the  affections  of  good,  and
see  truths  from  them  and  so  he  reformed.  For  example  :
If  any  one  desires  to  commit  adultery,  his  will,  which  is  in
the  delight  of  his  love,  urges  the  understanding  to  justify  it ;
for  it  says  :  What  is  adultery  ?  Is  there  any  harm  in  it  ?
Does  not  the  same  thing  take  place  between  husband  and
wife?  Cannot  children  be  born  from  adultery,  as  well  as
from  marriage  ?  Why  should  not  a  woman  receive  more  than
one  without  hurt  ?  What  has  spiritual  life  to  do  with  this  ?
So  thinks  the  understanding  which  is  then  the  prostitute  of
the  will,  and  which  has  become  so  stupid  from  debauchery
with  the  will  that  it  cannot  see  that  marriage  love  is  spiritual
and  heavenly  love  itself,  and  the  likeness  of  the  love  of  the
Lord  and  the  Church,  from  which  indeed  it  is  derived ;  and
thus  that  it  is  intrinsically  holy,  chaste,  pure  and  innocent,
and  that  it  induces  upon  men  the  very  form  of  love,  because
married  partners  can  love  each  other  from  their  inmost  soul,
and  thus  make  themselves  forms  of  love ;  and  that  adultery
destroys  this  form,  and  with  it  the  likeness  of  the  Lord ;  and,
horrible  to  relate,  the  adulterer  mingles  his  life  with  that  of
the  husband  in  his  wife,  man's  life  being  in  his  seed.  And
because  this  is  profane,  hell  is  called  adultery,  whilst  heaven
is  called  a  marriage.  Moreover  the  love  of  adultery  com-
municates with  the  lowest  hell,  while  true  marriage  love
communicates  with  the  inmost  heaven.  The  organs  of
generation  also,  in  either  sex,  correspond  to  communities
of  the  inmost  heaven.  These  facts  have  been  mentioned
to  show  how  blind  the  understanding  is  when  the  will  is
dominated  by  the  lust  of  evil,  and  that  no  one  can  be  re-
formed in  a  state  of  intellectual  blindness.

145.  V.  It  is  not  contrary  to  rationality  and  liberty  to  compel
oneself.  It  has  been  shown  above  that  man  has  internal  and
external  thought,  and  that  these  are  distinct  as  things  prior
and  posterior,  or  superior  and  inferior ;  and  that  because  they
are  so  distinct  they  can  act  either  separately  or  in  unison.
They  act  separately  when  a  man  from  his  external  thought
says  and  acts  otherwise  than  he  inwardly  thinks  and  wills;
and  they  act  in  unison  when  he  says  and  does  that  which  he
inwardly  thinks  and  wills ;  the  latter  is  usual  with  the  sincere,
the  former  with  the  insincere.  Now  as  the  internal  and
external  minds  are  thus  distinct,  the  internal  may  even  fight


Divine    Providence  103

against  the  external,  and  thus  force  it  to  consent.  Such  a
struggle  takes  place  when  a  man  reflects  that  evils  are  sins
and  therefore  determines  to  desist  from,  them ;  for  when  he
desists,  the  door  is  opened ;  and  when  it  is  opened  the  lusts
of  evil  that  obsessed  his  internal  thought  are  cast  out  by  the
Lord,  and  good  affections  are  implanted  in  their  place ;  this
is  done  in  the  internal  of  his  thought.  But  as  the  delights  of
the  evil  lusts  which  beset  his  external  thought  cannot  be
cast  out  at  the  sam^e  time,  a  struggle  ensues  between  his
internal  and  external  thought.  The  internal  wishes  to  cast
out  those  delights  because  they  are  evil  and  do  not  agree  with
the  affections  of  good  which  now  reside  in  his  internal  man ;
and  in  place  of  the  evil  delights  it  wishes  to  introduce  delights
of  good  in  harmony  with  itself ;  delights  of  good  are  the  goods
of  charity.  From  this  opposition  there  arises  a  struggle
which,  if  it  increases  in  \*iolence,  is  called  temptation.  Now
as  man  is  a  man  by  virtue  of  his  faculty  of  internal  thought —
for  this  is  his  very  spirit — it  is  evident  that  a  man  compels
himself  when  he  compels  his  external  thought  to  consent  to
or  receive  the  delights  of  his  affections  which  are  the  goods  of
charity.  Evidently  this  is  not  contrary  to  rationality  and
liberty,  but  in  accordance  with  them,  for  rationality  causes
the  struggle,  and  liberty  continues  it.  Moreover  liberty  and
rationality  reside  in  the  internal  man,  and  by  derivation
thence  in  the  external.  When,  therefore,  the  internal  con-
quers, which  it  does  when  it  has  forced  the  external  to  consent
and  obey,  then  the  Lord  gives  man  true  liberty  and  rationaUty  ;
for  he  is  then  withdrawn  by  the  Lord  from  hellish  freedom,
which  is  really  slavery,  and  is  gifted  with  heavenly  freedom,
which  is  the  only  true  freedom,  and  he  is  brought  into  associa-
tion with  angels.  That  those  are  slaves  v,-ho  are  in  bondage
to  sin,  and  that  the  Lord  makes  those  free  who  receive  truth
from  Him  through  the  Word,   He    teaches  in   John  (viii.

3^-3^)-

146.  This  change  may  be  illustrated  by  the  example  of  a
man  who  has  taken  delight  in  fraud  and  secret  theft,  and
now  sees  and  inwardly  acknowledges  that  they  are  sins,  and
therefore  intends  to  desist  from  them.  As  soon  as  he  desists,
there  ensues  a  struggle  between  his  internal  and  external
man.  His  internal  man  longs  for  sincerity,  but  his  external
man  still  takes  delight  in  fraud ;  this  delight,  being  wholly
opposite   to   the   delight   of    sincerity,  will   not   give  way


I04  Divine  Providence

unless  compelled,  nor  can  it  be  compelled  except  by  combat ;
and  afterwards,  when  the  victory  has  been  won,  the  external
man  acquires  a  delight  in  the  love  of  sincerity,  which  is  the
same  as  charity ;  and  even  pleasure  in  fraud  gradually  becomes
distasteful  to  him.  It  is  the  same  with  all  other  sins,  as  for
example  with  adultery  and  whoredom,  revenge  and  hatred,
blasphemy  and  lying.  But  the  hardest  struggle  of  all  is
with  the  love  of  domination  founded  on  self-love;  he  who
subdues  this  easily  subdues  the  other  evil  loves,  for  this  is
their  head.

147.  We  will  also  state  briefly  how  the  Lord  casts  out  the
evil  lusts  which  obsess  the  internal  man  from  birth,  and
substitutes  good  affections  for  them,  when  a  man,  as  if  by
his  own  power,  puts  away  evils  as  sins.  It  has  been  shown
above  that  man  has  a  natural  mind,  a  spiritual  mind,  and
a  celestial  mind;  and  that  he  is  in  the  natural  mind  alone
as  long  as  he  is  in  bondage  to  evil  lusts  and  their  delights;
all  this  time  the  spiritual  mind  is  excluded ;  but  as  soon  as
the  man,  after  self-examination,  acknowledges  evils  as  being
sins  against  God  because  they  are  contrary  to  divine  laws,
and  therefore  intends  to  desist  from  them,  the  Lord  opens
the  spiritual  mind,  and  enters  the  natural  mind  by  means  of
affections  for  good  and  truth,  and  He  enters  into  the  rational
faculty  and  thereby  sets  in  order  everything  in  the  natural
mind  beneath  that  is  contrary  to  order.  This  process  is
what  is  felt  by  man  as  a  struggle;  and,  by  those  who  have
indulged  much  in  evil  delights,  it  is  felt  as  temptation;  for
the  mind  suffers  while  the  order  of  its  thoughts  is  being
inverted.  Now  as  this  is  a  struggle  against  states  that  exist
in  the  man  himself,  and  which  he  feels  to  be  his  own,  and
as  no  one  can  fight  against  himself  except  by  means  of  an

"^  inner  self  possessing  freedom,  it  follows  that  the  internal  man
then  fights  in  freedom  against  the  external,  and  also  that  it
forces  the  external  into  subjection;  this,  then,  is  what  is
meant  by  coercing  oneself.  It  is  evident  that  this  is  not
contrary  to  liberty  and  rationality,  but  in  accordance  with
them.

148.  Moreover,  every  man  desires  to  be  free,  and  to  divest
himself  of  everything  that  partakes  of  the  nature  of  servitude.
Every  boy  who  is  under  a  master  wishes  to  be  independent
and  thus  free,  and  so  does  every  servant  under  his  master,
and  every  maid  under  her  mistress;  every  girl  desires  to


Divine  Providence  105

leave  her  father's  house  and  marry,  that  she  may  act  freely
in  her  own  house ;  every  youth  who  desires  to  work,  to  become
a  business  man  or  an  official,  while  he  is  subject  to  control
wishes  to  be  released  so  as  to  be  at  his  own  disposal.  All
who  serve  voluntarily  place  themselves  under  compulsion
for  the  sake  of  attaining  liberty;  and  when  they  compel
themselves  they  act  in  freedom  according  to  reason,  but
from  an  interior  freedom,  which  looks  upon  exterior  freedom
as  its  servant.  This  is  intended  to  prove  that  it  is  not
contrary  to  rationality  and  liberty  to  coerce  oneself.

149.  One  reason  why  man  does  not  in  like  manner  wish
to  emerge  from  spiritual  sers'itude  into  spiritual  liberty  is,
that  he  does  not  know  what  spiritual  servitude  and  liberty
are ;  he  has  not  learnt  the  truths  that  teach  this,  and  in  the
absence  of  such  truths,  he  thinks  that  spiritual  servitude  is
freedom  and  spiritual  freedom  servitude.  Another  reason
is  that  the  religion  of  the  Christian  world  has  shut  out  the
understanding,  and  the  doctrine  of  faith  alone  has  sealed  it
up ;  for  both  these  states  of  mind  are  defended,  as  with  a  wall
of  iron,  by  the  dogma  that  theological  matters  transcend  the
human  understanding  and  are,  therefore,  not  to  be  examined
rationally,  and  that  they  are  for  the  blind,  and  not  for  those
who  see ;  thus  the  truths  that  teach  what  spiritual  liberty  is
have  been  hidden.  A  third  reason  is,  that  few  examine
themselves,  and  see  their  sins ;  and  unless  a  man  sees  and
desists  from  them,  he  exercises  the  freedom  proper  to  them,
which  is  hellish  freedom,  which  in  itself  is  slavery ;  and  from
this  point  of  view,  to  see  heavenly  freedom,  which  is  freedom
itself,  is  like  trying  to  see  the  daylight  while  in  thick  dark-
ness, or  the  light  of  the  sun  while  under  a  dark  cloud.  These
are  the  reasons  why  men  are  ignorant  of  heavenly  freedom,
and  do  not  know  that  the  difference  between  heavenly  and
hellish  freedom  is  like  that  between  what  is  living  and  what
is  dead.

150.  VL  The  external  man  must  be  reformed  by  means  of  the
internal  and  not  the  reverse.  The  internal  and  external  man
are  the  same  as  the  faculty  of  internal  and  external  thought,
of  which  much  has  been  said  above.  The  external  man  is
formed  by  the  internal,  because  the  internal  flows  into  the
external,  and  not  the  reverse.  That  there  is  an  influx  of  the
Spiritual  into  the  Natural,  and  not  the  reverse,  is  known  in
the  learned  world;  and  that  the  internal  man  must  first  be


io6  Divine  Providence

purified  and  renewed,  and  afterwards  the  external,  is  known
in  the  Church ;  it  is  known  because  the  Lord  teaches  it,  and
reason  dictates  it.  The  Lord  teaches  it  in  these  words  :
"  Woe  unto  you,  hypocrites,  for  ye  make  clean  the  outside
of  the  cup,  and  of  the  platter,  but  within  they  are  full  of
extortion  and  excess.  Thou  blind  Pharisee,  cleanse  first  the
inside  of  the  cup  and  platter,  that  the  outside  of  them  may
be  clean  also  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  25,  26).  That  reason  so  dictates
has  been  proved  at  length  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love
and  Wisdom.  For  what  the  Lord  teaches,  he  enables  a  man
to  apprehend  rationally,  and  this  in  two  ways ;  firstly  the
man  may  perceive  intuitively  that  a  thing  is  true  as  soon
as  he  hears  it;  or  he  may  understand  it  by  the  use  of  his
reason.  Intuitive  perception  is  a  faculty  of  the  internal  man ;
and  to  understand  by  reasoning  is  a  faculty  of  the  external  man.
Who  does  not  at  once  assent,  when  he  hears  it  stated  that
the  internal  man  must  be  purified  first,  and  the  external  man
by  means  of  the  internal  ?  But  without  a  general  idea  on
this  subject  given  by  influx  from  heaven,  a  man  may  be
deceived  when  he  consults  his  external  thought;  merely
external  thought  induces  the  belief  that  salvation  may  be
obtained  by  outward  acts  of  charity  and  piety,  quite  apart
from  internal  acts;  so  in  other  things;  for  example,  that
sight  and  hearing  flow  into  thought,  and  smell  and  taste
into  perception,  thus  the  external  into  the  internal,  whereas
the  contrary  is  the  case.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that
what  is  seen  and  heard  flows  into  the  thought;  for  it  is  the
understanding  that  sees  with  the  eye  and  hears  with  the
ear,  and  not  the  reverse.     So  it  is  in  all  other  cases.

151.  But  here  something  shall  be  said  as  to  how  the
internal  man  is  reformed,  and  the  external  by  means  of
it.  The  internal  man  is  not  reformed  merely  by  knowledge,
understanding  and  wisdom,  that  is,  by  mere  thought,  but
by  willing  what  knowledge,  understanding  and  wisdom  teach.
When  a  man  knows,  understands,  and  has  wisdom  to  see
that  there  are  a  heaven  and  a  hell,  and  that  all  evils  are
from  hell,  and  all  good  from  heaven,  and  if  he  shuns  evil
because  it  is  from  hell,  and  wills  good  because  it  is  from
heaven,  he  has  taken  the  first  step  in  his  reformation,  and
is  on  the  threshold  between  hell  and  heaven.  When  he  makes
up  his  mind  to  desist  from  evils,  he  has  taken  the  second
step  in  his  reformation,  and  is  then  outside  hell,  but  not  yet


Divine  Providence  107

in  heaven,  which  he  sees  above  him.  A  man  must  possess
an  internal  of  this  kind  in  order  that  he  may  be  reformed;
but  he  is  not  reformed  until  both  the  external  and  the  internal
are  reformed.  The  external  man  is  reformed  by  means  of
the  internal  man,  when  the  external  desists  from  evils  which
the  internal  does  not  will  because  they  are  hellish,  and  still
more  when  for  that  reason  it  shuns  them  and  fights  against
them.  In  this  case,  it  is  for  the  internal  to  will,  and  for
the  external  to  act;  for  unless  a  man  does  what  he  desires
to  do,  there  is  a  certain  disincUnation  within  him,  and  at
last  he  becomes  unwilling.  From  these  few  statements  it
may  be  seen  how  the  external  man  is  reformed  by  means  of
the  internal ;  this  also  is  the  meaning  of  the  Lord's  words  to
Peter  :  "  Jesus  answered  him,  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast
no  part  with  Me.  Simon  Peter  saith  unto  Him,  Lord,  not
my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands  and  my  head.  Jesus  saith
unto  him.  He  that  is  washed,  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his
feet  but  is  clean  every  whit  "  (John  xiii.  8,  9,  10).  Washing
means  spiritual  washing,  which  is  purification  from  evils ;
washing  the  head  and  the  hands,  means  the  purification  of
the  internal  man,  and  washing  the  feet,  the  purification  of
the  external  man;  that  after  the  internal  man  has  been
purified,  the  external  man  must  also  be  purified  is  meant  by
these  words  :  "  He  that  is  washed  needeth  not  save  to  wash
his  feet."  That  all  purification  from  evils  is  effected  by  the
Lord,  is  meant  by  these  words  :  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou
hast  no  part  with  Me."  That  washing  among  the  Jews  repre-
sented purification  from  evils,  and  that  this  is  signified  in
the  Word  by  washing,  and  that  by  the  washing  of  the  feet
is  signified  the  purification  of  the  natural  or  external  man,
has  been  shown  in  the  Arcana  Ccelestia,  in  many  places.

152.  As  a  man  has  an  internal  and  an  external  mind,  and
both  need  to  be  reformed  in  order  that  he  may  be  reformed,
and  as  no  one  can  be  reformed  unless  he  examines  himself,
sees  and  acknowledges  his  evils,  and  afterwards  desists  from
them,  it  follows  that  not  only  must  the  external  be  examined
but  the  internal  also.  If  the  external  alone  is  examined,  a
man  sees  only  what  he  has  actually  done,  as  for  example,
that  he  has  not  committed  murder,  adultery  or  theft,  nor
borne  false  witness,  and  so  on.  He  thus  searches  out  only
bodily  evils  and  not  those  of  his  spirit,  and  yet  in  order
that  any  one  may  be  reformed  the  evils  of  his  spirit  must


io8  Divine  Providence

be  searched  out;  for  after  death  man  Hves  as  a  spirit,  and
all  the  evils  that  exist  in  his  spirit  remain ;  and  the  spirit  can
be  examined  only  by  paying  attention  to  the  thoughts,  and
especially  the  intentions,  for  intentions  are  thoughts  arising
from  the  will ;  here  evils  are  to  be  found  in  their  origin  and
root,  that  is,  in  their  lusts  and  their  delights;  and  unless
these  are  seen  and  acknowledged,  the  man  is  still  in  bondage
to  evils,  although  he  may  not  have  committed  them  out-
wardly. That  thought  from  intention  is  equivalent  to  w^illing
and  acting,  is  evident  from  the  Lord's  words,  "  Whosoever
looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  committed
adultery  with  her  already  in  his  heart  "  (Matt.  v.  28).  Such  is
the  examination  of  the  internal  man  upon  which  the  examina-
tion of  the  external  man  essentially  depends.

153.  I  have  very  often  wondered  that  although  the  whole
Christian  world  is  taught  that  evils  should  be  shunned  as
sins,  and  that  otherwise  they  are  not  remitted,  and  that  if
sins  are  not  remitted  there  can  be  no  salvation,  yet  hardly
one  among  thousands  knows  this.  Inquiry  has  been  made
concerning  this  matter  in  the  spiritual  world  and  it  has  been
found  to  be  true.  For  every  one  in  the  Christian  world  has
learnt  this  from  the  exhortations  read  to  those  who  attend
the  Holy  Supper,  for  it  is  clearly  stated  in  them;  and  yet,
when  asked  whether  they  know  this,  they  answer  they  do
not,  and  that  they  never  have  known  it.  The  reason  is  that
they  have  not  thought  about  it,  and  that  the  greater  number
have  thought  only  of  faith,  and  of  salvation  by  faith  alone.
I  have  also  wondered  that  the  doctrine  of  faith  alone  has  so
closed  men's  e3'es,  that  when  those  who  have  confirmed  them-
selves in  it  read  the  Word,  they  see  nothing  there  about  love,
charity  and  works.  It  is  as  if  they  had  smeared  faith  all
over  the  Word,  as  one  crosses  out  ^vriting  with  a  red  pencil,
so  that  nothing  underneath  it  can  be  seen ;  if  anything  should
be  seen,  it  is  appropriated  by  such  faith,  and  said  to  be  part
of  it.

It  is  a  law  of  the  divine  Providence  that  man  should
be  led  and  taught  by  the  lord  from  heaven  by
means  of  the  word,  and  by  doctrine  and  exhorta-
tion from  it,  and  yet  that  he  should  appear  to
teach  and  lead  himself

154.  It  appears  as  if  man  were  led  and  taught  by  himself;


Divine  Providence  109

but  the  fact  is  a  man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone.
Those  who  confirm  themselves  in  the  appearance,  and  not
also  in  the  truth,  cannot  put  away  evils  as  sins;  but  those
who  confirm  themselves  in  both  the  appearance  and  the
truth  can  do  so ;  for  evils  regarded  as  sins  are  apparently
removed  by  man,  but  really  by  the  Lord.     These  latter  can
be  reformed,  but  the  former  cannot.    Those  who  confirm
themselves  in  the  appearance  and  not  also  in  the  truth,  are
all  inwardly  idolaters,  for  they  are  worshippers  of  self  and
of  the  world ;  if  they  have  no  religion  they  become  worshippers
of  nature,  that  is,  atheists  ;  but  if  they  have  any  religion  they
become  worshippers  of  men,  and  also  of  images.     These  are
referred  to  in  the  first  commandment  of  the  Decalogue  as
those   who   worship   other  gods.     But   those   who   confirm
themselves  in  the  appearance  and  also  in  the  truth,  become
worshippers  of  the  Lord ;  for  the  Lord  raises  them  above
their  selfhood,  which  sees  only  the  appearance^  and  brings
them  into  the  light  in  which  dwells  the  truth,  and  which  is
the  truth;  and  He  enables  them  to  perceive  inwardly  that
they  are  not  led  and  taught  by  themselves  but  by  the  Lord.
The  rational  faculty  of  both  these  classes  of  men  may  appear
to  many  to  be  similar,  but  it  is  not  so.    The  rational  faculty
of  those  who  see  not  only  the  appearance  but  also  the  truth
is  spiritual :  while  the  rational  faculty  of  those  who  see  only
the  appearance  and  not  the  truth  is  natural;  this  latter
faculty  may  be  compared  to  a  garden  in  the  light  of  winter,
while  the  former  may  be  compared  to  a  garden  in  the  light
of  spring.     But  more  on  these  subjects  will  be  stated  in  the
following  order  :

I.  Man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone.

II.  Man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone  by  the
angelic  heaven  and  by  means  of  it.

III.  The  Lord  leads  man  by  influx,  and  teaches  him  by
enlightening  his  mind.

IV.  The  Lord  teaches  man  by  the  Word,  and  by  doctrine
and  exhortation  founded  on  it;  he  is  thus  taught  directly  by
the  Lord  alone.

V.  Man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  in  externals,  although
he  appears  to  lead  and  teach  himself.

155.  I.  Moji  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone.  This
follows  as  a  general  conclusion  from  all  that  was  stated  in
the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom;  as  well  from  those


no  Divine  Providence

sections  dealing  with  the  Lord's  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  in
Part  I.,  as  from  those  concerning  the  sun  of  the  spiritual
world,  and  the  sun  of  the  natural  world  in  Part  II.,  degrees
in  Part  III.,  the  creation  of  the  universe  in  Part  IV.,  and
the  creation  of  man  in  Part  V.

156.  To  say  that  man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone
means,  that  he  lives  from  the  Lord  alone;  for  his  inmost  will
is  led  and  his  inmost  understanding  is  taught  by  the  Lord
alone.  But  this  is  contrary  to  appearance,  for  it  seems  to
a  man  that  he  lives  by  some  inherent  power  of  his  own,  and
yet  the  truth  is  that  he  derives  his  life  from  the  Lord  and
not  from  himself.  Now  as  man,  so  long  as  he  is  in  the  world,
can  have  no  sensible  perception  that  he  derives  his  life  from
the  Lord  alone — for  the  appearance  that  he  lives  of  himself
is  not  taken  away  from  him,  because  without  it  he  would  not
be  a  man — he  must  therefore  be  convinced  by  reasons,  which
should  afterwards  be  confirmed  by  experience,  and  finally
by  the  Word.

157.  That  man  lives  from  the  Lord  alone,  and  not  from
himself  is  proved  by  the  following  reasons  :— There  is  onlv
one  Essence,  one  Substance,  and  one  Form,  from  which  al'l
created  essences,  substances,  and  forms  are  derived.  This
one  only  Essence,  Substance  and  Form  is  the  divine  Love  and
Wisdom,  from  which  come  all  things  that  relate  to  love  and
wisdom  in  man.  It  is  also  Good  itself  and  Truth  itself  to
which  all  things  relate;  and  these  are  the  Life  from  which
comes  the  life  of  all  things,  and  all  the  attributes  of  life.
Moreover  this  one  and  only  Reality  is  omnipresent,  omni-
scient and  omnipotent,  and  is  the  Lord  from  eternity,  or
Jehovah.

i.  There  is  only  one  Essence,  Substance  and  Form,  frojn  which
all  created  essences,  substances  and  forms  are  derived.  This  is
explained  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom
<nos.  44-46);  and  in  Part  II.  of  that  work  it  is  stated  that
the  sun  of  the  angelic  heaven,  which  is  from  the  Lord,  and
in  which  is  the  Lord,  is  the  one  only  substance  and  form
from  which  all  created  things  exist,  and  that  nothing  exists
or  can  exist  which  is  not  from  that  sun.  That  all  things
are  derived  from  it  according  to  degrees  is  proved  in  Part
III.  Who  cannot  perceive  and  acknowledge  by  the  light
of  reason  alone,  that  there  is  only  one  Essence,  from  which
all  other  essences  are  derived,  or  only  one  Being  from  which


Divine  Providence  1 1 1

all  other  being  is  derived?  How  can  anything  manifest
itself,  unless  it  possesses  Being  ?  And  how  can  that  Being
from  which  all  other  being  comes  be  conceived,  but  as
absolute  Being?  And  absolute  Being  is  also  the  sole
Being,  and  is  intrinsic  Being.  Since  this  is  so  (and  every  one
rationally  perceives  and  acknowledges  this,  or  at  any  rate
he  can  perceive  and  acknowledge  it)  does  it  not  follow  that
this  Being,  which  is  the  Divine  itself,  or  Jehovah,  is  the  All
of  all  crea,ted  things  ?  It  is  manifest  that  there  is  only  one
substance  from  which  come  all  things;  and  as  there  is  no
such  thing  as  substance  without  form,  it  follows  that  there
is  only  one  form,  from  which  all  things  com.e.  That  the  sun
of  the  angelic  heaven  is  this  one  only  substance  and  form  is
stated  in  the  above-mentioned  work,  and  it  is  also  explained
in  what  manner  this  essence,  substance  and  form  is  varied
in  created  things.

ii.  This  one  only  essence,  substance  and  form,  is  the  divine
Love  and  Wisdom,  from  which  come  all  things  that  relate  to
love  and  wisdom  in  man.  This  also  has  been  fully  explained
in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom.  Whatever
things  appear  to  live  in  man  relate  to  his  will  and  under-
standing, and  every  one  rationally  perceives  and  acknowledges
that  these  two  constitute  man's  life.  What,  otherwise,  is
the  meaning  of  such  phrases  as  "  I  will  do  this,"  or  "  I
understand  this  " ;  "  I  love  this,"  or  "  I  think  this  "  ?  And
as  a  man  wills  what  he  loves,  and  thinks  what  he  understands,
everything  in  the  Vv-ill  relates  to  love,  and  everything  in  the
understanding  to  wisdom.  And  as  these  two  cannot  exist
in  any  one  from  himself,  but  only  from  Him  who  is  Love
itself  and  Wisdom  itself,  it  follows  that  they  are  received
from  the  Eternal  Lord,  or  Jehovah;  unless  they  came  from
that  source,  man  would  be  love  itself  and  wisdom  itself,  and
therefore  the  eternal  God,  which  is  shocking  to  human
reason.  Can  anything  exist  except  from  something  prior  to
itself?  And  can  this  prior  thing  exist  except  from  what
again  is  prior  to  itself,  and  thus,  finally,  from  the  First  Cause,
which  is  absolute  Being?

iii.  In  like  manner  all  things  relate  to  Good  itself  and  Truth
itself.  It  is  agreed  and  acknowledged  by  every  rational  man
that  God  is  Good  itself  and  Truth  itself,  and,  further,  that
all  good  and  truth  are  from  Him ;  and  therefore  that  no  good
or  truth  can  come  from  any  other  source  than  Good  itself  and


112  Divine  Providence

Truth  itself.  These  things  are  admitted  by  every  rational
man,  as  soon  as  he  hears  them  stated.  When,  therefore,
it  is  said  that  everything  belonging  to  the  will  and  under-
standing, or  to  love  and  wisdom,  or  to  affection  and  thought,
in  a  man  who  is  led  by  the  Lord,  relates  to  good  and  truth,
it  follows  that  everything  that  such  a  man  wills  and  under-
stands, or  loves  and  perceives,  or  by  which  he  is  influenced,
and  which  he  thinks,  comes  from  the  Lord.  This  is  why
every  one  in  the  Church  knows  that  all  good  and  truth  which
have  their  origin  in  man,  are  not  intrinsically  good  and  true,
for  real  good  and  truth  can  come  only  from  the  Lord.  This
being  true,  it  follows  that  everything  that  such  a  man  wills
and  thinks  is  from  the  Lord.  It  will  be  seen  in  what  follows,
that  even  a  bad  man  wills  and  thinks  from  the  same
source.

iv.  Good  and  Truth  are  the  life  from  which  comes  the  life
of  all  things  and  all  the  attributes  of  life.  This  has  been
explained  in  many  parts  of  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and
Wisdom.  Human  reason,  at  the  first  hearing,  also  agrees
and  acknowledges  that  the  whole  of  man's  life  consists  of
states  of  his  will  and  understanding,  for  if  his  will  and  under-
standing were  taken  away,  he  would  no  longer  live ;  or,  what
is  the  same,  that  a  man's  whole  life  consists  in  states  of  his
love  and  thought,  for  if  love  and  thought  were  taken  away
he  would  no  longer  live.  Now  as  everything  in  man's  will
and  understanding,  or  in  his  love  and  thought,  is  from  the
Lord,  as  has  already  been  stated,  it  follows  that  every
element  in  his  life  is  also  from  Him.

v.  This  One  and  Only  Reality  is  omnipresent,  omniscient,
and  omnipotent.  This,  too,  every  Christian  acknowledges  as
part  of  his  doctrine,  and  every  Gentile  as  part  of  his  religion.
This  is  why  every  one,  wherever  he  is,  believes  that  God  is
there  also,  and  prays  to  Him  as  present.  And  as  every  one
so  thinks  and  prays,  it  follows  that  he  cannot  but  think  that
God  is  everywhere  and  therefore  omnipresent ;  similarly  that
He  is  omniscient  and  omnipotent ;  and  so  ever}'  one,  when
praying  in  his  heart  to  God,  implores  Him  to  lead  him,
because  He  is  able  to  do  so ;  thus  every  one  at  such  a  moment
acknowledges  the  divine  omnipresence,  omniscience  and
omnipotence.  He  acknowledges  these  because  he  turns  to
the  Lord  when  he  is  praying,  and  this  truth  then  flows  in
from  Him.


Divine  Providence  113

vi.  This  One  and  Only  Reality  is  the  Lord  from  eternity,
or  Jehovah.  In  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning
the  Lord,  it  was  shown  that  God  is  One  in  essence  and  in
person,  and  that  this  God  is  the  Lord ;  and  that  the  Divine
Itself,  or  Jehovah  the  Father,  is  the  Eternal  Lord ;  that  the
Divine  Human  is  the  Son  conceived  from  His  Eternal  Divine,
and  born  in  the  world ;  and  that  the  emanating  Divine  is  the
Holy  Spirit.  He  is  called  the  One  Only  Reality,  because,  as
said  above,  the  Eternal  Lord,  or  Jehovah,  is  Life  itself,  or
Good  itself  and  Truth  itself,  from  which  all  things  are  created.
That  the  Lord  created  all  things  from  Himself,  and  not  from
nothing,  may  be  seen  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and
Wisdom  (nos.  282-284,  349-357).  These  statements  have  been
made  as  a  rational  confirmation  of  the  truth  that  man  is  led
and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone.

158.  The  angels  are  confirmed  in  this  truth  not  only  by
reasoning,  but  also  by  living  perception;  this  is  especially
the  case  with  the  angels  of  the  third  heaven,  who  perceive
the  influx  of  the  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  from  the  Lord,
and  because  they  perceive  it,  and  know  in  their  wisdom  that
these  are  life,  they  say  that  they  live  from  the  Lord  and  not
from  themselves ;  and  they  not  only  say  this,  but  they  also
love  and  desire  that  it  should  be  so.  Yet  to  all  appearance
they  live  from  themselves ;  indeed,  this  impression  is  stronger
with  them  than  with  other  angels,  for,  as  was  shown  above
(nos.  42-45),  the  more  closely  any  one  is  united  with  the  Lord
the  more  distinctly  he  appears  to  himself  to  be  his  own,  and
the  more  clearly  he  perceives  that  he  is  the  Lord's.  I  also
have  been  allowed  for  many  years  now  to  have  a  similar
perception,  and  at  the  same  time  to  be  conscious  of  this
appearance ;  I  have  thus  been  fully  convinced  that  I  will  and
think  nothing  from  myself  although  it  appears  as  if  1  do;
and  it  has  also  been  granted  me  to  will  and  to  love  that  it
should  be  so.  This  truth  may  also  be  confirmed  by  many
other  things  in  the  spiritual  world  ;  but  these  two  are  enough
for  the  present.

159.  That  the  Lord  alone  has  life,  is  evident  from  these
passages  in  the  Word  :  "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life;
he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he
live  "  (John  xi.  25).  "  1  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the
life  "  (John  xiv.  6).  "  God  was  the  Word,  in  him  was  life,
and  the  life  Avas  the  light  of  men  "  (John  i.  i,  4);  the  Word

I


114  Divine  Providence

here  means  the  Lord.  "  As  the  Father  hath  Hfe  in  Himself,
so  hath  He  given  to  the  Son  to  have  hfe  in  Himself  "  (John
V,  26).  That  man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone,  is
evident  from  the  following  passages.  "  Without  Me  ye  can
do  nothing  "  (John.  xv.  5).  "  A  man  can  receive  nothing
except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven  "  (John.  iii.  27).  "  A  man
cannot  make  one  hair  white  or  black  "  (Matt.  v.  36).  A  hair,
in  the  Word,  signifies  the  least  of  all  things.

160.  It  will  be  explained  below  in  the  proper  place  that
the  life  of  the  wicked  is  also  derived  from  the  same  origin.
Here  this  fact  shall  merely  be  illustrated  by  a  comparison.
From  the  sun  of  the  world  flow  both  heat  and  light,  and
they  flow  alike  into  trees  that  bear  poisonous  fruit,  and
into  trees  that  bear  good  fruit,  both  of  which  are  alike
invigorated  by  them,  and  grow  and  increase  alike.  It  is
not  the  heat  itself,  but  the  forms  into  which  the  heat  flows
that  cause  this  diversity.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  light,
which  is  split  up  into  various  colours  according  to  the  forms
into  which  it  flows ;  there  are  beautiful  and  pleasing  colours,
and  there  are  ugly  and  gloomy  colours,  and  yet  the  light
is  the  same.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  influx  from  the
sun  of  the  spiritual  world,  of  spiritual  heat  or  love,  and  of
spiritual  light  or  wisdom.  A  diversity  is  caused  not  by  the
heat  which  is  love,  nor  by  the  light  which  is  wisdom,  but  by
the  forms  into  which  they  flow.  The  forms  into  which  they
flow  are  human  minds.  It  should  now  be  evident  that  man
is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone.

161.  The  nature  of  animal  life  was  explained  above,  where
it  was  shown  that  it  is  a  life  of  merely  natural  affection  with
its  allied  knowledge,  and  that  it  is  a  mediate  life,  derived
by  the  laws  of  correspondence  from  the  life  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  spiritual  world.

162.  II.  The  Lord  alone  leads  and  teaches  man  by  the
angelic  heaven  and  by  means  of  it.  We  say  that  the  Lord  leads
and  teaches  man  by  heaven,  and  by  means  of  heaven ;  it  is
an  appearance  that  he  is  led  by  heaven,  but  the  truth  is
that  he  is  led  by  means  of  heaven.  The  appearance  arises
from  the  fact  that  the  Lord  is  seen  above  heaven  as  a  sun ;
but  the  truth  that  the  leading  and  teaching  are  effected  by
means  of  that  heaven  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  Lord  is
in  the  heavens,  as  the  soul  is  in  a  man.  For,  as  was  shown
above,  the  Lord  is  omnipresent,  and  is  not  in  space,  and


Divine  Providence  115

therefore  distance  in  the  spiritual  world  is  an  appearance
which  varies  according  to  the  closer  or  remoter  union  of
the  angels  with  Him;  and  this  union  exists  according  to
their  reception  of  love  and  wisdom  from  Him.     And  as  no
one  can  be  united  with  the  Lord  as  He  is  in  Himself^  He
appears  to  the  angels  to  be  at  a  distance,  like  a  distant
sun;    but  nevertheless  He  is  present  in  the  whole  angelic
heaven,  as  the  soul  is  in  a  man;  and  He  is  also  present  in
every  community  of  heaven,  as  well  as  in  every  angel;  for
a  man's  soul  is  not  only  the  soul  of  the  whole  man,  but  also
of  every  part  of  him.     But  as  the  Lord  appears  to  rule  the
whole  heaven,  and  through  it  the  world,  from  the  Sun  which
emanates  from  Him,  and  in  which  He  is  {The  Divine  Love  and
Wisdom,  Part  II.),  and  as  it  is  allowable  for  any  man  to
speak  according  to  appearances, — indeed  he   cannot  help
doing  so — it  is   also  permissible   for  any  one  who   is   not
gifted  with  true  wisdom  to  suppose  that  the  Lord  rules
everything  in  general  and  in  particular  from  His  sun;  and
also  that  he  rules  the  world  by  the  angelic  heaven.     Even
angels  of  the  lower  heavens  think  according  to  this  appear-
ance ;  but  angels  of  the  higher  heavens  speak,  indeed,  accord-
ing to  the  appearance,  but  they  think  in  accordance  with
the  truth,  that  the   Lord   Himself  rules  the  universe   by
means  of  the  angelic  heaven.     That  the  simple  and  the  wise
speak  alike,  but  do  not  think  alike,  may  be  illustrated  by
the  case  of  the  sun  of  the  world.     Every  one  speaks  of  it
according  to  the  appearance  that  it  rises  and  sets ;  but  the
wise,  although  they  speak  in  this  way,  know  that  it  remains
stationary,  this  being  the  truth  while  the  other  is  an  appear-
ance.    The  same  thing  may  also  be  illustrated  by  appearances
in  the  spiritual  world;  for  space  and  distance  appear  there
as  they  do  in  the  natural  world;  but  nevertheless  they  are
appearances   which   vary   according   to   the   differences   of
affections  and  consequently  thoughts.     The  same  is   true
of  the  appearance  of  the  Lord  in  His  sun.

163.  A  brief  description  shall  now  be  given  of  how  the
Lord  leads  and  teaches  every  man  by  means  of  the  angelic
heaven.  In  the  book  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  and
above  in  the  present  work,  and  also  in  that  on  Heaven  and
Hell,  it  has  been  stated  from  things  seen  and  heard,
that  the  whole  angelic  heaven  is  seen  by  the  Lord  as
one  man,  and  so  also  is  every  community  in  heaven,  and


ii6  Divine  Providence

that  this  is  why  every  angel  and  spirit  is  a  man  in  perfect
form.  And  it  is  also  stated  in  the  above-named  works^  that
heaven  is  not  heaven  from  the  selfhood  of  the  angels^  but
from  their  reception  of  the  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  of  the
Lord.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  Lord  rules  the  whole
angelic  heaven  as  one  man ;  and  that  heaven^  being  essentially
a  man,  is  the  very  image  and  likeness  of  the  Lord,  and  that
the  Lord  Himself  rules  heaven  as  the  soul  rules  the  body.
And  because  the  whole  human  race  is  ruled  by  the  Lord,  it  is
not  ruled  by  the  agency  of  heaven,  but  by  the  Lord  through
heaven,  thus  from  Himself,  because  He  is  heaven,  as  has
been  already  stated.

164.  But  as  this  is  an  arcanum  of  angelic  wisdom,  it  can
only  be  understood  by  a  man  whose  spiritual  mind  is  opened  ;
for  he,  by  virtue  of  his  union  with  the  Lord,  is  an  angel;
such  a  man,  in  the  light  of  what  has  been  said  above,  may
understand  what  now  follows  :  i.  All  men  and  angels  are
in  the  Lord  and  the  Lord  in  them,  according  to  their  union
with  Him,  or,  what  is  the  same,  according  to  their  reception
of  love  and  wisdom  from  Him.  ii.  Every  one  of  these  has
his  allotted  place  in  the  Lord,  and  consequently  in  heaven,
according  to  the  nature  of  his  union  with,  or  reception  of
Him.  iii.  Every  one  in  his  allotted  place  is  in  a  state
distinct  from  that  of  others,  and  from  the  common  good  he
derives  his  portion  according  to  his  place,  office  and  need,
just  as  everything  in  the  human  body  does.  iv.  Every  man
has  his  place  assigned  to  him  by  the  Lord  according  to  his
life.  v.  Every  man  is  from  infancy  introduced  into  that
divine  Man  whose  soul  and  life  is  the  Lord,  and  in  that
divine  Man  and  not  apart  therefrom,  he  is  led  and  taught
from  His  divine  Love  according  to  His  divine  Wisdom.
But  as  man  is  never  deprived  of  his  freedom,  he  can  only
be  led  and  taught  in  the  degree  that  he  receives  the  Lord
as  if  by  the  exercise  of  his  own  power,  vi.  Those  who  receive
the  Lord  are  led  to  their  own  places  by  infinite  windings
like  those  of  a  meandering  stream,  almost  as  the  chyle  is
carried  through  the  mesentery  and  the  lacteal  vessels  into
its  receptacle,  and  from  this  through  the  thoracic  duct  into
the  blood,  and  so  to  its  destination,  vii.  Those  who  are
not  receptive  are  separated  from  those  who  are  within  the
divine  Man,  just  as  the  faeces  and  urine  are  separated  from
man.     These  are  arcana  of  angelic  wisdom  which  man  can


Divine  Providence  117

in  some  measure  understand;  but  there  are  many  more
which  he  cannot.

165.  III.  The  Lord  leads  man  by  influx,  and  teaches  him
by  enlightening  his  mind.  The  Lord  leads  man  by  influx,
because  leading  and  inflowing  are  expressions  applicable  to
the  love  and  the  will;  and  the  Lord  teaches  man  by  en-
lightening his  mind,  because  teaching  and  enlightenment
are  expressions  proper  to  wisdom  and  the  understanding.  It
is  well  known  that  every  man  acts  according  to  his  own
love,  and  is  led  by  others  according  to  it,  and  not  according
to  his  understanding.  He  is  led  by  his  understanding  and
according  to  it  only  when  the  love  or  will  forms  it;  and
when  this  is  the  case  the  understanding  may  also  be  said
to  be  led;  but  even  then  the  understanding  is  not  led,  but
the  will  from  which  it  originates.  The  term  influx  is  used
because  it  is  customary  to  say  that  the  soul  flows  into  the
body,  that  influx  is  spiritual  and  not  physical,  and  that  a
man's  soul  or  life  is  his  love  or  will,  as  has  already  been
stated;  moreover  influx  may  be  compared  to  the  influx  of
the  blood  into  the  heart,  and  from  the  heart  into  the  lungs.
That  there  is  a  correspondence  of  the  heart  with  the  will,
and  of  the  lungs  with  the  understanding,  and  that  the
union  of  the  will  with  the  understanding  is  like  the  influx
of  the  blood  from  the  heart  into  the  lungs,  has  been  shown
in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  371-432).

166.  But  man  is  taught  by  enlightenment,  because  teaching
and  enlightenment  are  expressions  proper  to  the  under-
standing; for  the  understanding,  which  is  man's  internal
sight,  is  enlightened  by  spiritual  light  just  as  the  eye,  or
man's  external  sight,  is  enlightened  by  natural  light.  Both
also  are  similarly  taught;  but  the  internal  sight,  or  that  of
the  understanding,  is  taught  by  means  of  spiritual  objects,
and  the  external  sight,  or  that  of  the  eye,  is  taught  by  means
of  natural  objects.  There  is  spiritual  light,  and  there
is  natural  light,  and  both  are  alike  in  their  external  appear-
ance, but  unlike  internally ;  for  natural  light  comes  from  the
sun  of  the  natural  world,  and  therefore  intrinsically  is  dead ;
but  spiritual  light  comes  from  the  sun  of  the  spiritual  world,
and  is  therefore  intrinsically  living;  it  is  this  latter  light
that  enlightens  the  human  understanding,  and  not  natural
light.  Natural  rational  light  does  not  come  from  this  latter
source  but  from  the  former.     It  is  called  natural  rational


ii8  Divine  Providence

light,  because  it  is  spiritual-natural;  for  there  are  three
degrees  of  light  in  the  spiritual  world,  celestial  light,  spiritual
light,  and  spiritual-natural  light.  Celestial  light  is  a  flaming
and  ruddy  light,  which  enlightens  the  inhabitants  of  the
third  heaven;  spiritual  light  is  a  white  and  shining  light,
which  enlightens  the  inhabitants  of  the  middle  heaven ;  and
spiritual-natural  light  resembles  the  light  of  day  in  our
world;  those  who  are  in  the  ultimate  heaven  receive  the
latter  light,  and  so  do  those  who  are  in  the  world  of  spirits,
which  is  intermediate  between  heaven  and  hell;  but  in  the
world  of  spirits  this  light  appears  to  the  good  like  that  of
summer  on  earth,  and  to  the  evil  like  that  of  winter.  It
should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  light  of  the  spiritual
world  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  light  of  the  natural
world ;  they  differ  as  what  is  living  differs  from  what  is  dead.
It  is  therefore  evident  that  natural  light,  or  the  light  of  our
eyes,  does  not  enlighten  the  understanding,  but  spiritual
light  does.  Man  does  not  know  this  because  he  has  hitherto
known  nothing  about  spiritual  light.  That  spiritual  light
in  its  origin  is  divine  Wisdom,  or  divine  Truth,  was  shown
in  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell  (nos.  126-140).

167.  As  the  light  of  heaven  has  been  spoken  of,  something
must  also  be  said  of  the  light  of  hell.  Light  in  hell  is  also
of  three  degrees.  The  light  in  the  lowest  hell  resembles  that
from  burning  charcoal,  the  light  in  the  middle  hell  resembles
that  from  the  flame  of  a  fire  on  the  hearth,  and  light  in  the
uppermost  hell  is  like  candle-light,  and,  to  some,  like  moon-
light. These  different  kinds  of  light,  also,  are  not  natural
but  spiritual,  for  all  natural  light  is  dead,  and  extinguishes
the  understanding.  The  inhabitants  of  hell  have  the  faculty
of  understanding,  or  rationality,  as  was  previously  stated,
and  rationality  itself  comes  from  spiritual  light,  and  not  in
the  least  from  natural  light.  Now  the  spiritual  light  which
they  have  from  their  rationality  is  changed  with  them  into
infernal  light,  as  the  light  of  day  is  changed  into  the  dark-
ness of  night.  Yet  all  in  the  spiritual  world,  both  in  the
heavens  and  in  the  hells,  see  in  their  own  light  as  clearly
as  man  sees  by  day  in  his  light ;  the  reason  is  that  the  eyes
of  all  are  adapted  to  receive  the  light  which  enters  them.
Thus  the  eyes  of  the  angels  of  heaven  are  adapted  to  receive
their  light,  and  the  eyes  of  the  spirits  of  hell  are  adapted
to  receive  their  own  light,  and  may  be  compared  to  those


Divine  Providence  119

of  owls  and  bats^  which  see  objects  at  night  and  in  the
evening  as  clearly  as  birds  in  general  see  them  by  day,  for
their  eyes  are  adapted  to  their  own  light.  But  the  difference
between  these  kinds  of  light  is  evident  to  those  who  whilst
in  one  light  look  towards  another  kind;  for  example  when
an  angel  of  heaven  looks  into  hell  he  sees  nothing  but  thick
darkness  there,  and  when  a  spirit  of  hell  looks  into  heaven,
he  sees  nothing  but  thick  darkness  there.  The  reason  is
that  heavenly  wisdom  is  like  thick  darkness  to  those  who
are  in  hell;  and  on  the  other  hand  the  insanity  of  hell  is
like  thick  darkness  to  those  who  are  in  heaven.  From  these
facts  it  may  be  seen  that  the  nature  of  man's  understanding
is  determined  by  the  kind  of  light  he  receives,  and  that
every  one  comes  into  his  own  light  after  death,  for  he  cannot
see  in  any  other.  And  in  the  spiritual  world,  where  even  the
body  is  spiritual,  the  eyes  of  all  are  formed  to  see  in  their
own  light.  The  life's  love  of  every  one  forms  his  under-
standing to  serve  its  own  ends,  and  therefore  also  forms  its
light;  for  love  is  like  the  fire  of  life,  from  which  comes  the
light  of  life.

168.  Since  few  know  anything  about  the  enlightenment
of  the  understanding  of  a  man  who  is  taught  by  the  Lord,
something  shall  be  said  about  it.  There  is  an  internal  and
an  external  enlightenment  which  man  receives  from  the
Lord,  and  also  an  internal  and  an  external  enlightenment
which  he  acquires  for  himself.  Internal  enlightenment
received  from  the  Lord  consists  in  his  perceiving  intuitively
whether  anything  is  true  or  not,  as  soon  as  he  hears  it  stated ;
external  enlightenment  is  a  derivative  of  this  perception  in
his  deUberative  thought.  The  internal  enhghtenment  which
man  acquires  for  himself  is  only  the  result  of  self-persuasion,
and  his  external  enlightenment  comes  from  knowledge  which
he  has  acquired.  But  something  shall  be  said  of  these
severally.

A  rational  man  who  receives  internal  enlightenment  from  the
Lord  perceives  whether  many  things  are  true  or  not  true,  as
soon  as  he  hears  them  stated;  as  lor  example,  that  love  is
the  life  of  faith,  or  that  faith  Hves  from  love.  A  man  also
perceives  from  internal  enlightenment  that  whatever  he
loves  he  wills,  and  what  he  wills  he  does,  and  consequently
that  to  love  is  to  act ;  and  again,  that  whatever  man  believes
from  love,  this  too  he  wills  and  does,  and  consequently  that


i20  Divine  Providence

to  have  faith  is  also  to  act;  furthermore  that  an  impious
man  cannot  love  God,  and  so  cannot  have  faith  in  God.
The  rational  man  gifted  with  internal  enlightenment  perceives
the  truth  of  the  following  statements  as  soon  as  he  hears
them  : — That  God  is  One ;  that  He  is  omnipresent ;  that  all
good  is  from  Him ;  that  all  things  relate  to  good  and  truth ;
that  all  good  is  from  Good  itself,  and  all  truth  from  Truth
itself.  Man  perceives  the  truth  of  these  things  and  others
like  them  inwardly  in  himself  as  soon  as  he  hears  them;  he
has  this  perception  because  he  is  rational,  and  rationality
is  illuminated  by  the  light  of  heaven.  External  enlightenment
consists  in  an  illumination  of  the  faculty  of  deliberative
thought  derived  from  such  internal  enhghtenment,  and  the
thought  is  illuminated  in  the  degree  that  it  abides  in  the
perception  which  comes  from  internal  enhghtenment,  and
also  reflects  about  what  is  true  and  good ;  for  from  this  it
gathers  reasons  in  support  of  its  conclusions.  Thought  from
this  external  enhghtenment  sees  both  sides  of  a  question;
on  the  one  side,  it  sees  the  reasons  that  support  it,  on  the
other  the  appearances  that  impugn  it;  the  latter  it  dispels,
the  former  it  collects.  The  interior  enlightenment  which  a
man  acquires  for  himself  is  wholly  different;  by  it  he  sees
only  one  side  of  a  question  and  not  the  other;  and  when
he  has  confirmed  it,  he  sees  it  in  a  light  which  apparently
resembles  the  light  spoken  of  above,  but  it  is  a  wintry  light.
For  example,  a  judge  who,  influenced  by  bribes  or  his  own
interest,  gives  an  unjust  verdict,  sees  nothing  unjust  in  it
when  once  he  has  supported  it  by  law  and  argument.  Some
of  them  do  see  the  injustice ;  but  as  they  do  not  wish  to  see
it,  they  darken  their  eyes  and  blind  themselves,  and  so  no
longer  see.  It  is  the  same  with  a  judge  whose  verdicts  are
biased  by  friendship,  self-interest,  or  by  the  ties  of  kinship.
Such  persons  regard  in  the  same  way  everything  they  hear
from  the  mouth  of  any  influential  or  celebrated  man,  or  that
they  have  hatched  from  their  own  intelligence.  They  are
blind  reasoners,  for  their  sight  comes  from  the  falsities  which
they  confirm,  and  falsity  closes  the  eyes,  whereas  truth  opens
them.  Such  persons  do  not  see  any  truth  in  the  light  of
truth,  nor  anything  just  from  the  love  of  justice,  but  only
in  the  light  of  self-persuasion,  which  is  a  delusive  Hght.  In
the  spiritual  world  they  appear  like  faces  without  a  head,
or  like   faces  resembling   the   human   with   wooden  heads


Divine  Providence  121

attached  to  them;  and  they  are  called  reasoning  animals,
because  their  rational  faculty  is  merely  potential.

The  external  enlightenment  which  a  man  acquires  for  himself
exists  with  those  who  think  and  speak  from  mere  knowledge
impressed  on  the  memory ;  they  can  scarcely  confirm  anything
independently.

169.  These  are  the  different  kinds  of  enlightenment,  and
consequently  of  perception  and  thought.  This  enlightenment
by  spiritual  hght  is  real ;  but  it  is  not  perceived  by  any  one
in  the  natural  world,  because  natural  light  has  nothing  in
common  with  spiritual  light ;  but  I  have  sometimes  perceived
it  in  the  spiritual  world,  with  those  who  were  enlightened
by  the  Lord,  as  a  luminous  appearance  around  the  head,
glowing  with  the  tints  of  the  human  face.  With  those,
however,  who  were  enlightened  by  themselves,  this  luminous
appearance  was  not  about  the  head,  but  about  the  mouth
and  above  the  chin.

170.  Besides  these  kinds  of  enlightenment  there  is  also
another  by  which  the  nature  of  man's  faith,  inteUigence  and
wisdom  are  revealed  to  him ;  this  revelation  is  such  as  to
carry  conviction  to  his  mind.  He  is  sent  into  a  society  where
genuine  faith  and  true  intelligence  and  wisdom  are  found;
and  there  his  interior  rationality  is  exposed  to  view,  by
which  he  sees  the  nature  of  his  faith,  intelligence  and  wisdom,
and  is  brought  to  acknowledge  them.  I  have  seen  some
returning  from  such  an  examination,  and  I  have  heard  them
confess  that  they  had  no  faith,  although  in  the  world  they
had  believed  that  they  had  much,  indeed,  that  they  were
conspicuous  above  others  for  their  faith;  and  they  made  a
similar  confession  as  regards  their  inteUigence  and  wisdom.
They  were  persons  who  were  wholly  given  up  to  faith  alone,
who  had  no  charity,  and  whose  intelligence  was  self-derived.

171.  IV.  The  Lord  teaches  yuan  by  the  Word,  and  by  doctrine
and  exhortation  founded  on  it  ;  he  is  thus  taught  directly  by  the
Lord  alone.  It  has  been  stated  and  explained  above,  that
man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  alone,  and  this  by  means
of  heaven  and  not  by  it,  nor  by  any  angel  there ;  and  as  he
is  led  by  the  Lord  alone,  it  follows  that  he  is  led  directly
and  not  indirectly.  How  this  is  done  shall  now  be
described.

172.  In  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the
Sacred  Scripture,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  Lord  is  the


122  Divine  Providence

Word,  and  that  all  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  must  be  drawn
from  the  Word.  Now  because  the  Lord  is  the  Word,  it
follows  that  he  who  is  taught  out  of  the  Word  is  taught  by
the  Lord  alone.  But  as  this  is  difficult  to  understand,  it
shall  be  explained  in  the  following  order  :

i.  The  Lord  is  the  Word  because  the  Word  comes  from
Him  and  treats  of  Him.

ii.  And  because  it  is  the  divine  Truth  of  the  divine
Good.

iii.  Therefore  to  be  taught  out  of  the  Word  is  to  be  taught
by  Him.

iv.  This  teaching  comes  none  the  less  directly  from  the
Lord  because  it  is  effected  by  means  of  instruction  from
others.

i.  The  Lord  is  the  Word,  because  it  comes  from  Him  and
treats  of  Him.  That  the  Word  is  from  the  Lord  is  not  denied
by  any  one  in  the  Church ;  but  that  the  Word  relates  to  the
Lord  alone  is  not  denied^  but  is  unknown ;  this,  however,  is
shown  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  tJie
Lord  (nos.  1-7,  37-44);  also  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jeru-
salem concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture  (nos.  62-69 ;  80-90 ;
98-100).  Now  as  the  Word  is  from  the  Lord  alone,  and
treats  of  the  Lord  alone,  it  follows  that  when  a  man  is  taught
from  the  Word  he  is  taught  by  the  Lord,  for  the  Word  is
divine.  Who  can  communicate  the  Divine  and  implant  it
in  the  heart,  except  the  Di\dne  Himself,  from  whom  it  is,  and
of  whom  it  treats ?  Therefore  the  Lord  sa\s,  when  speaking
of  his  union  with  the  disciples,  that  they  should  abide  in
Him,  and  His  words  in  them  (John  xv.  7);  that  His  words
are  spirit  and  life  (John  vi.  63);  and  that  He  makes  His
abode  with  those  who  keep  His  words  (John  xiv.  20-24).
Therefore  to  derive  one's  thought  from  the  Word  is  to
derive  it  from  the  Lord,  although  it  appears  to  come  from
the  Word.  That  everything  in  the  Word  communicates
with  heaven,  has  been  shown  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jeru-
salem concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture,  from  beginning  to
end ;  and  as  the  Lord  is  heaven,  this  means  that  everything
in  the  Word  communicates  with  Him.  The  angels  of  heaven
do  indeed  have  a  like  communication;  but  this  also  is  from
the  Lord.

ii.  The  Lord  is  the  Word,  because  it  is  the  divine  Truth
of  the  divine  Good.    That  the  Lord  is  the  Word,  He  teaches


Divine  Providence  123

in  John  in  these  words  :  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,
and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  God  was  the  Word,  and  the
Word  was  made  Flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  "  (John  i.  i,  14).
As  this  has  hitherto  been  taken  to  mean  that  God  taught
man  through  the  Word,  it  has  been  explained  as  a  h}^er-
bolical  expression,  impl}ang  that  the  Lord  is  not  the  Word
itself.  The  reason  is  that  men  did  not  know  that  the  Word
means  the  di^dne  Truth  of  the  di^dne  Good,  or  what  is  the
same  thing,  the  divine  Wisdom  of  the  divine  Love.  That
these  are  the  Lord  himself  is  shown  in  Part  I.  of  the  work
on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom;  and  that  they  are  the  Word,
is  shown  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the
Sacred  Scripture  (nos.  1-86).  A  brief  explanation  shall  also
be  given  of  how  the  Lord  is  the  di\ane  Truth  of  the  divine
Good.  No  man  is  a  man  by  \artue  of  his  face  and  body,
but  by  virtue  of  the  good  of  his  love,  and  the  truths  of  his
wisdom;  and  because  a  man  is  a  man  on  account  of  these,
every  one  is  his  own  truth  and  his  own  good,  or  his  own
love  and  his  own  wisdom ;  but  for  them  he  would  not  be  a
man.  But  the  Lord  is  Good  itself  and  Truth  itself,  or  Love
and  Wisdom  itself;  and  these  are  the  Word  which  in  the
beginning  was  with  God,  and  was  God,  and  was  made
Flesh.

iii.  To  be  taught  out  of  the  Word  is  therefore  to  be  taught
by  the  Lord  Himself,  because  it  is  to  be  taught  from  Good
itself  and  Truth  itself,  or  from  Love  itself  and  Wisdom  itself,
which  are  the  Word,  as  has  already  been  said ;  but  every  one
is  taught  according  to  the  faculty  of  understanding  which
he  derives  from  his  own  love ;  whatever  transcends  this  soon
passes  away.  All  those  who  are  instructed  by  the  Lord  in
the  Word  are  taught  but  few  truths  in  the  world,  but  many
when  they  become  angels;  for  the  inner  contents  of  the
Word,  which  are  divine  things  both  spiritual  and  celestial,
are  implanted  in  man  at  the  same  time,  but  not  disclosed
until  after  his  death,  when  he  goes  to  heaven  and  enjoys
angelic  wisdom,  which  is  ineffable  when  compared  to  human
wisdom,  and  consequently  to  that  which  he  himself  formerly
enjoyed.  That  the  divine  things  both  spiritual  and  celestial
which  constitute  angelic  wisdom,  are  contained  in  every
single  part  of  the  W^ord,  may  be  seen  in  the  Doctrine  of
the  New  Jerusale?n  concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture  (nos.
5-26).


124  Divine  Providence

iv.  This  teaching  comes  none  the  less  directly  from  the  Lord
because  it  is  effected  by  means  of  instruction  from  others.  The
Word  must  be  taught  to  mankind  indirectly  by  parents,
teachers,  preachers,  books,  and  especially  by  their  reading
it.  Yet  it  is  not  taught  by  these,  but  by  the  Lord  through
them.  This  is  well  known  to  preachers,  who  say  that  they
do  not  speak  of  themselves,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and
that  all  truth,  like  all  good,  comes  from  God;  they  can
indeed  speak  the  truth,  and  convey  it  to  people's  miinds,  but
not  to  any  one's  heart ;  and  what  does  not  lodge  in  the  heart
perishes  in  the  understanding,  for  the  heart  means  a  man's
love.  This  shows  how  man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord
alone ;  and  when  he  is  taught  out  of  the  Word,  he  is  taught
directly  by  the  Lord.  This  is  one  of  the  chief  arcana  of
angelic  wisdom.

173.  That  those  also  receive  light  through  the  Word  who
are  outside  the  Church  and  do  not  possess  the  Word  is  shown
in  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred
Scripture  (nos.  104-113).  And  as  man  has  light  from  the
Word,  and  understanding  from  that  light,  and  the  evil  as
well  as  the  good  possess  understanding,  it  follows  that  from
the  primal  source  of  light  there  proceed  the  derivations  of
light,  these  being  perceptions  and  thoughts  of  every  kind.
The  Lord  says  :  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing  "  (John
XV.  5);  "A  man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  given
him  from  heaven  "  (John  iii.  27);  and  "  the  Father  in  the
heavens  maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,
and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust  "  (Matt.  v.  45),
By  the  sun  here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  Word,  is  meant,  in  the
spiritual  sense,  the  divine  Good  of  the  divine  Love,  and  by
rain,  the  divine  Truth  of  the  divine  Wisdom.  These  are
given  to  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  to  the  just  and  the
unjust,  for  otherwise  no  one  could  have  perception  and
thought.  It  was  shown  above  that  there  is  only  one  life,
from  which  all  receive  their  life ;  and  perception  and  thought
are  attributes  of  life,  and  therefore  perception  and  thought
come  from  the  same  fountain  as  life.  It  has  already  been
fully  shown  that  all  the  light  which  forms  the  understanding
comes  from  the  sun  of  the  spiritual  world,  which  is  the
Lord.

174.  V.  Man  is  led  and  taught  by  the  Lord  in  externals,
■although  he  appears  to  lead  and  teach  himself.     This  is  true


Divine  Providence  125

of  man's  external  but  not  of  his  internal  life.  No  one
knows  how  the  Lord  leads  and  teaches  man  interiorly^  just
as  no  one  knows  how  the  soul  operates  in  order  that  the
eye  may  see,  the  ear  hear,  the  tongue  and  mouth  speak,  the
heart  impart  motion  to  the  blood,  the  lungs  breathe,  the
stomach  digest,  the  liver  and  pancreas  work,  the  kidneys
secrete,  and  innumerable  other  things.  These  things  are
not  felt  or  perceived  by  man.  It  is  similar  with  the  things
done  by  the  Lord  in  the  interior  substances  and  forms  of  the
mind,  which  are  infinitely  more  numerous.  The  Lord's
operations  in  them  are  not  felt  by  man;  but  the  effects,
which  are  numerous,  are  felt,  and  so  are  some  of  the  causes
of  the  effects.  These  are  the  externals  in  which  man  acts
conjointly  with  the  Lord.  And  as  externals  are  inseparable
from  internals,  for  they  are  connected  together  in  a  single
series,  no  disposition  can  be  made  by  the  Lord  in  internals,
except  in  accordance  with  the  disposition  made  in  externals
by  the  agency  of  the  man.  Every  one  knows  that  a  man
thinks,  wills,  speaks  and  acts  to  all  appearances  as  if  he
did  so  by  some  inherent  power ;  and  every  one  can  see  that
without  this  appearance  he  would  have  no  will  or  under-
standing, thus  no  affection  or  thought,  and  would  receive
no  good  or  truth  from  the  Lord.  Such  being  the  case,  it
follows  that  without  this  appearance  there  could  be  no
knowledge  of  God,  no  charity  and  faith,  consequently  no
reformation  and  regeneration,  and  therefore  no  salvation.
From  these  facts  it  is  evident  that  this  appearance  is  given
to  man  by  the  Lord  for  the  sake  of  all  these  uses,  and  chiefly
that  he  may  have  a  power  of  reception  and  reciprocation  by
which  the  Lord  may  be  united  with  him,  and  he  with  the
Lord,  and  that  by  this  union  he  may  live  for  ever.  This  is
the  appearance  which  is  meant  here.

It  is  a  law  of  the  divine  Providence  that  a  man  should
not  perceive  or  feel  anything  of  the  operation  of
THE  DIVINE  Providence,   but  nevertheless   should

KNOW   AND   ACKNOWLEDGE   IT

175.  The  natural  man  who  does  not  believe  in  the  divine
Providence  thinks  to  himself,  "  What  is  divine  Providence,
when  the  wicked  gain  more  honour  and  wealth  than  the  good,
and  when  many  other  such  things  fall  to  those  who  do  not
believe  in  the  divine  Providence,  rather  than  to  those  who


126  Divine  Providence

do;   and,  moreover,  the  unbelieving  and  ungodly  can  brin^
injury,   loss,   misfortune   and   sometimes    death   upon   the
believing  and  godly,  and  this  by  cunning  and  malice  ?  "
And  so  he  thinks,  "  Do  I  not  see  by  experience  as  in  clear
daylight  that  deceitful  arts,  provided  a  man  by  his  crafty
ingenuity  can  clothe  them  with  an  appearance  of  sincerity
and  justice,  prevail  over  fidelity  and  uprightness  ?     What  is
all  else  but  necessity,   causation,  and  accident,  in  which
nothing  is  to  be  seen  of  divine  Providence  ?     Is  not  necessity
a  law  of  nature  ?     Are  not  consequences  the  result  of  some
cause  flowing  1   from  natural  or  civil  laws?     And  are  not
accidents  the  result  of  unknown  causes,  or  purely  fortuitous  ?"
So  thinks  the  natural  man  who  ascribes  nothing  to  God,
but  all  things  to  nature;   for  he  who  attributes  nothing  to
God,  attributes  nothing  to  the  divine  Providence,  for  God
and   divine  Providence  are  inseparable.     But  the  spiritual
man  says  or  thinks  differently.     Although  he  has  no  mental
perception  of  the  course  of  divine  Providence,  and  it  is
invisible  to  him,  still  he  knows  and  acknowledges  that  it
exists.     Now    as    the    above-mentioned    appearances    and
consequent  fallacies  have  blinded  the  understanding,  which
cannot   see   unless   the   fallacies   and   falsities   which   have
induced  blindness  and  thick  darkness  be  dispelled,  and  as
this  can  only  be  done  by  means  of  truths,  which  have  the
power  of  dispelling  falsities,  these  truths  must  be  disclosed ;
for  the  sake  of  clearness  this  shall  be  done  in  the  following
order  :

I.  If  a  man  perceived  and  felt  the  operation  of  divine
Providence,  he  would  not  act  in  freedom  according  to
reason.

II.  If  a  man  clearly  saw  the  operation  of  divine  Providence,
he  would  interfere  with  its  order  and  sequence,  and  would'
pervert  and  destroy  it.

III.  If  a  man  saw  the  operation  of  divine  Providence,  he
would  either  deny  God,  or  think  himself  a  god.

ly.  Man  is  allowed  to  see  the  divine  Providence  from
behind,  but  not  in  front,  also  while  he  is  in  a  spiritual  state,
but  not  while  he  is  in  a  natural  state.

176.  I.  //  a  man  perceived  and  felt  the  operation  oj  divine
Providence,  he  would  not  act  in  freedom  according  to  reason,

1  Reading  fliientis. — Tr.


Divine  Providence  127

nor  would  anything  appear  to  him  to  be  done  by  himself  ;  and
the  same  result  would  follow  if  he  had  a  knowledge  of  future
events.

It  was  clearly  shown  above  that  it  is  a  law  of  the  divine
Providence  that  man  should  act  in  freedom  according  to
reason ;  also  that  everything  that  a  man  wills,  thinks,  speaks
and  does  should  appear  to  come  from  himself;  and  that
without  this  appearance  no  man  would  have  anything  of  his
own,  nor  would  he  be  his  own  master,  and  thus  he  would  have
no  selfhood ;  and  so  he  would  have  no  responsibility,  without
which  it  would  not  matter  whether  he  did  evil  or  good,
whether  he  embraced  the  faith  of  God  or  the  false  persuasions
of  hell ;  in  a  word,  he  would  not  be  a  man.  It  must  now  be
shown  that  man  would  have  no  liberty  to  act  according  to
reason,  and  that  he  would  not  seem  to  be  acting  of  his  own
accord,  if  he  perceived  and  felt  the  operation  of  the  divine
Providence.  For  if  he  perceived  and  felt  it,  he  would  also  be
led  by  it;  for  the  Lord  leads  all  by  means  of  His  divine
Providence,  and  man  only  appears  to  lead  himself,  as  was
also  shown  above;  and  therefore  if  he  were  led,  with  a
vivid  perception  and  sensation  of  being  led,  he  would  not  be
conscious  of  life ;  and  then  he  would  be  impelled  to  speak  and
act  almost  like  an  automaton.  If  he  were  still  conscious
of  life,  he  would  then  be  led  as  one  bound  in  manacles  and
fetters,  or  like  a  beast  harnessed  to  a  cart.  Who  cannot  see
that  a  man  would  then  have  no  freedom ;  and  if  he  had  no
freedom  he  would  have  no  reason;  for  every  one  thinks
from  freedom  and  in  freedom,  and  whatever  he  does  not  thus
think  seems  to  come  not  from  himself,  but  from  some  one
else ;  indeed,  if  you  consider  this  deeply,  you  will  see  that  he
would  have  no  thought,  still  less  any  reason,  and  therefore
would  not  be  a  man.

177.  The  operation  of  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  is  to
withdraw  man  from  evils.  If  any  one,  even  were  he  not  led
as  a  captive,  were  yet  to  perceive  and  feel  this  unceasing
operation,  would  he  not  continually  resist  it,  and  then
either  strive  against  God,  or  interfere  with  the  divine
Providence.?  In  the  latter  case  he  would  imagine  himself
also  to  be  a  god ;  in  the  former  he  would  cast  off  all  restraint
and  deny  God.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  there  would  be  two
forces  continually  acting  against  each  other,  the  force  of
evil  from  man,  and  the  force  of  good  from  the  Lord;   and


128  Divine  Providence

when  two  opposites  act  against  each  other,  either  one  con-
quers or  both  perish ;  but  in  this  case,  if  one  were  to  conquer
both  would  perish;  for  human  evil  does  not  receive  good
from  the  Lord  instantaneously,  nor  does  good  from  the  Lord
cast  out  evil  from  man  instantaneously;  if  either  were
effected  instantaneously,  there  would  remain  no  life  in  the
man.  These  and  many  other  hurtful  consequences  would
ensue,  if  man  were  clearly  to  perceive  or  feel  the  working
of  divine  Providence.  But  this  will  be  fully  explained  by
examples  in  what  follows.

178.  Man  is  also  debarred  from  the  knowledge  of  future
events,  in  order  that  he  may  act  in  freedom  according  to
reason;  for  it  is  well  known  that  whatever  a  man  loves,  he
desires  to  bring  about,  and  he  gains  his  end  by  means  of  his
reason;  also  that  there  is  nothing  that  a  man  revolves  in
his  mind,  which  does  not  arise  out  of  his  love,  in  order  that
by  means  of  thought  it  may  be  put  into  effect.  And  there-
fore if  he  foresaw  the  effect  or  event  from  divine  prediction,
his  reason  would  go  to  sleep,  and  with  his  reason  his  love;
for  both  love  and  reason  cease  their  activity  when  the  effect
is  reached,  and  from  that  make  a  new  departure.  It  is  the
delight  of  reason  to  foresee  from  love  the  effect  in  thought,
not  as  an  accomplished  fact,  but  by  anticipation — not  in
the  present  but  in  the  future.  This  is  the  origin  of  hope,
which  increases  or  diminishes  as  reason  foresees  or  anticipates
the  event.  This  delight  is  fulfilled  in  the  event;  but  it  is
afterwards  obliterated,  together  with  the  thought  concerning
the  event.  It  would  be  the  same,  if  an  event  were  known
beforehand.  The  mind  of  man  is  continually  engaged  in
these  three  things,  the  end,  the  cause,  and  the  effect.  If  one
of  these  were  lacking,  the  human  mind  would  lose  its  vitality.
The  affection  of  the  will  is  the  originating  end ;  the  thought
of  the  understanding  is  the  effective  cause;  bodily  action,
speech,  or  external  sensation,  are  the  effects  produced  by  the
end  through  the  thought.  Every  one  knows  that  the  human
mind  would  be  lifeless  if  it  had  only  the  affection  of  the  will
and  nothing  else,  and  so  it  would  be  if  it  merely  experienced
the  effect.  The  mind,  therefore,  has  its  life  not  from  one
only  of  these  things,  but  from  the  three  conjointly.  This
life  of  the  mind  would  be  diminished  and  weakened  by  the
foreknowledge  of  any  event.

179.  Since  a  foreknowledge  of  future  events  would  destroy


Divine  Providence  129

the  distinctive  human  faculty  of  acting  in  freedom  according
to  reason,  a  knowledge  of  the  future  is  granted  to  no  one;
but  it  is  right  for  every  one  to  form  rational  conclusions
about  future  events,  for  this  is  the  life  of  reason  and  of
everything  pertaining  to  it.     This  is  why  a  man  does  not
know  what  his  lot  will  be  after  death,  and  why  he  is  ignorant
of  future  events ;   for  if  he  knew  these  things,  he  would  no
longer  meditate  inwardly  how  to  act  or  live  in  order  to  bring
them  about;   he  would  merely  realise  that  they  were  bound
to  happen,  and  this  state  would  close  up  his  inner  mind,
which  is  the  special  abode  of  liberty  and  rationality,  the  two
faculties  of  his  life.     The  desire  to  foreknow  the  future  is
innate  in  most  people,  and  it  has  its  origin  in  a  love  of  evil;
it  is  therefore  taken  away  from  those  who  believe  in  the
divine  Providence,  and  they  receive  instead  a  confidence  that
the  Lord  ordains  their  lot,  and  consequently  they  do  not
desire  to  foreknow  it,  lest  in  any  way  they  should  interfere
with  the  divine  Providence.     The  Lord  teaches  this  repeatedly
in  Luke  xii.  14-48.     Many  things  that  happen  in  the  spiritual
world  prove  that  this  is  a  law  of  the  divine  Pro\adence.
Most  persons,   when  they  enter   that   world    after   death,
desire  to  know  what  their  lot  will  be,  and  they  are  told  that
if  they  have  lived  well  their  lot  will  be  in  heaven,  but  if  they
have  lived  ill,  it  will  be  in  hell.     But  since  even  the  evil  fear
hell,  they  ask  what  they  shall  do  and  believe,  that  they  may
enter  heaven ;   they  receive  however  the  following  reply  : —
"  Act  and  believe  as  you  will,  but  be  sure  that  only  in  heaven,
and  not  in  hell,  is  good  done  and  truth  beheved.     Seek  out
what  is  good  and  true,  think  what  is  true,  and  do  what  is
good,  if  you  are  able."     Thus  every  one  is  left  to  act  in
freedom  according  to  reason  in  the  spiritual  world  as  in  the
natural ;  but  as  they  have  done  in  this  world,  so  they  do  in
the  next,  for  every   one's  life  awaits    him  there,  and  he
receives  his  lot  accordingly ;   for  one's  lot  is  bound  up  with
one's  life.

180.  IL  If  a  man  clearly  saw  the  operation  of  divine
Providence,  he  would  interfere  with  its  order  and  sequence,  and
ivoidd  pervert  and  destroy  it.  That  the  rational  man,  and
the  natural  man  also,  may  clearly  perceive  the  truth  of  this,
it  must  be  illustrated  by  examples  in  the  following  order : —

Firstly,  external  things  are  so  connected  with  internal
things  that  they  are  inseparably  united  in  every  action.

K


130  Divine  Providence

Secondly,  man  acts  conjointly  with  the  Lord  only  in
certain  external  actions ;  if  he  were  also  to  act  thus  in  in-
ternals he  would  pervert  and  destroy  the  whole  order  and
sequence  of  the  divine  Providence.

But,  as  said  before,  these  statements  must  be  illustrated
by  examples.

First :  External  things  are  so  connected  with  internal
things  that  they  are  inseparably  united  in  every  action.
This  may  be  illustrated  by  examples  taken  from  various
parts  of  the  human  body.  In  the  whole  body  and  in  every
part  of  it  there  are  external  and  internal  parts.  Its  external
parts  are  called  skins,  membranes  and  coats;  the  internal
parts  are  forms  variously  composed  and  interwoven  by  means
of  nerve  fibres  and  blood-vessels.  Processes  emitted  from
the  covering  that  surrounds  these,  interpenetrate  all  the  inner
and  inmost  parts;  thus  the  external  covering  unites  itself
with  all  the  internal  parts,  which  are  organic  forms  composed
by  means  of  the  nerves  and  blood-vessels.  It  follows  that  as
the  external  covering  acts  or  is  acted  upon,  so  also  the  internal
parts  act  or  are  acted  upon,  for  all  are  closely  bound  up  with
one  another.  Take  some  general  covering  in  the  body,  the
pleura,  for  example,  which  is  the  covering  of  the  chest,  or
of  the  heart  and  lungs,  and  examine  it  with  an  anatomical
eye;  or,  if  you  have  not  made  a  study  of  anatomy,  consult
anatomists,  and  you  will  perceive  that  this  general  covering,
by  various  circumvolutions  and  also  by  finer  and  finer
processes  emitted  from  itself  enters  into  the  inmost  parts
of  the  lungs,  even  into  the  smallest  bronchial  tubes,  and
into  the  very  follicles  that  are  the  origins  of  the  lungs,  not
to  mention  its  subsequent  continuations  through  the  trachea
to  the  larynx  towards  the  tongue.  From  these  facts  it  is
evident  that  there  is  a  continuous  connection  between  the
outermost  and  the  inmost  parts ;  and  therefore  as  the  outer-
most covering  acts  or  is  acted  upon,  so  also  the  inner  parts
from  their  inmost  recesses  act  or  are  acted  upon.  This  is
the  reason  why  when  this  outermost  coat,  the  pleura,  is
congested,  inflamed  or  ulcerated,  the  lungs  labour  from
their  inmost  recesses ;  and  if  the  disease  grows  worse,  all
action  of  the  lungs  may  cease,  and  the  man  die.  It  is
the  same  with  everything  else  in  the  whole  body;  as,
for  example,  with  the  peritoneum,  which  is  the  general
covering  of  all  the  abdominal  viscera;    and  also  with  the


Divine  Providence  131

coats  surrounding  the  several  organs,  as  the  stomach,  liver,
pancreas,  spleen,  intestines,  mesentery,  kidneys,  and  the
organs  of  generation  in  both  sexes.  Take  any  one  of  these
abdominal  viscera,  and  either  examine  it  yourself  and  you
wHl  see,  or  ask  those  skilled  in  the  science  and  you  will  hear.
Take,  for  instance,  the  liver,  and  you  will  find  that  there  is
a  connection  between  the  peritoneum  and  the  coat  of  that
organ,  and,  through  its  coat,  with  its  inmost  parts ;  for  there
are  continuous  processes  emitted  from  the  coat  towards  the
interior  parts,  which  reach  their  inmost  recesses,  and  by
these  means  all  the  parts  are  so  bound  together  that  when  the
covering  acts  or  is  acted  upon,  the  whole  form  likewise  acts
or  is  acted  upon.  It  is  the  same  with  the  other  organs,
because  in  every  form  the  general  and  the  particular,  or  the
universal  and  the  singular,  by  a  wonderful  union  act  as  one.
It  will  be  seen  below  that  the  changes  and  variations  of
state  in  spiritual  forms,  which  have  relation  to  the  operations
of  the  will  and  the  understanding,  are  similar  to  those  which
take  place  in  natural  forms  and  their  operations,  which  have
relation  to  motion  and  action.  Now,  as  man  operates
conjointly  with  the  Lord  in  some  external  actions,  and  the
liberty  of  acting  according  to  reason  is  never  taken  away
from  any  one,  it  follows  that  the  Lord  cannot  act  otherwise
internally  than  as  He  acts  conjointly  with  man  externally.
And  therefore  if  a  man  does  not  shun  and  turn  away  from
evUs  as  sins,  the  external  thought  and  will,  and  at  the  same
time  their  internal  counterparts,  become  vitiated  and
destroyed ;  just  as  when  the  pleura  is  affected  by  the  disease
called  pleurisy,  which  causes  the  death  of  the  body.

Secondly  :  If  man  were  to  act  conjointly  with  the  Lord  in
internals,  he  would  pervert  and  destroy  the  whole  order  and
sequence  of  the  operation  of  the  divine  Providence.  This  also
may  be  illustrated  by  examples  from  the  human  body.  If
a  man  knew  of  all  the  operations  of  both  brains  upon  the
fibres,  of  the  fibres  upon  the  muscles,  and  of  the  muscles
upon  the  actions,  and  from  this  knowledge  were  to  control
all  things  as  he  controls  his  actions,  would  he  not  pervert
and  destroy  them  all  ?  If  he  knew  how  the  stomach  digests,
how  the  surrounding  viscera  absorb  their  portion,  build  up
the  blood,  and  distribute  it  for  the  sake  of  every  vital
function,  and  if  he  had  the  same  control  of  these  operations
as  he  has  of  external  matters,  such  as  eating  and  drinking.


132  Divine  Providence

would  he  not  pervert  and  destroy  them  all?  Since  he
cannot  direct  his  external  life,  which  seems  a  simple  matter,
without  ruining  it  by  luxury  and  intemperance,  what  would
he  do  if  he  had  the  control  of  internal  operations,  which  are
infinite  in  number  ?  This  is  why  the  internal  operations  are
altogether  beyond  the  control  of  man's  will,  so  that  he
cannot  deliberately  interfere  with  them  and  subject  them
to  his  control,  with  the  exception  of  the  muscles,  which
act  as  a  covering;  moreover,  he  does  not  know  how  these
act,  but  only  knows  that  they  do  act.  It  is  the  same  with
the  other  organs;  suppose  that  a  man  were  to  control  the
inner  parts  of  the  eye  in  seeing,  of  the  ear  in  hearing,  of  the
tongue  in  tasting,  of  the  skin  in  feeling,  of  the  heart  in  its
systolic  action,  of  the  lungs  in  breathing,  of  the  mesentery
in  distributing  the  chyle,  of  the  kidneys  in  secretion,  of  the
organs  of  generation  in  prolification,  of  the  womb  in  perfect-
ing the  embryo,  and  so  on;  would  he  not  in  numberless
ways  pervert  and  destroy  in  them  the  progressive  order  of
the  divine  Providence?  It  is  well  known  that  man  is  re-
stricted to  external  actions;  for  example,  he  sees  with  the
eye,  hears  with  the  ear,  tastes  with  the  tongue,  feels  with
the  skin,  breathes  with  the  lungs,  begets  children,  and  so
on.  Is  it  not  enough  for  him  to  know  about  these  external
matters,  and  to  control  them  for  the  sake  of  mental  and
bodily  health?  Seeing  that  he  cannot  even  do  this,  what
would  be  the  result  if  he  had  also  the  control  of  internal
operations  ?  From  these  considerations  it  should  be  evident
that  if  a  man  clearly  saw  the  workings  of  the  divine  Provi-
dence, he  would  interfere  with  the  order  and  sequence  of  its
operations,  and  would  pervert  and  destroy  them.

181.  What  is  true  of  the  natural  things  of  the  body,  is  also
true  of  the  spiritual  things  of  the  mind,  because  all  mental
things  correspond  to  bodily  things;  this  is  why  the  mind
has  such  complete  external  and  general  control  over  the  body.
It  controls  the  eye  in  seeing,  the  ear  in  hearing,  the  mouth
and  tongue  in  eating  and  drinking  and  in  speaking,  the  hands
in  working,  the  feet  in  walking,  and  the  generative  organs
in  conception.  The  mind  not  only  excites  the  external  but
also  the  internal  organs  to  these  actions  in  their  whole
series,  the  ultimate  from  the  inmost,  and  the  inmost  from  the
ultimate.  So  while  it  incites  the  mouth  to  speak,  it  at  the
same  time  excites  the  lungs,  the  larynx,  the  glottis,  the  tongue.


Divine  Providence  133

the  lips,  each  to  perform  its  proper  function,  and  it  also
causes  the  face  to  assume  a  suitable  expression.  It  is
therefore  evident  that  what  has  been  said  of  the  natural
forms  of  the  body  must  also  be  said  of  the  spiritual  forms
of  the  mind;  and  that  what  has  been  said  of  the  natural
operations  of  the  body,  must  also  be  said  of  the  spiritual
operations  of  the  mind;  consequently,  as  man  regulates
the  external  actions,  the  Lord  regulates  the  internal;  this
He  does  in  one  way  if  man  regulates  his  external  actions
from  himself,  but  in  another  way  if  he  regulates  his  actions
from  the  Lord,  and  at  the  same  time  as  if  he  did  so  from  him-
self. Man's  mind,  moreover,  is  in  a  perfect  human  form,  for
it  is  his  spirit,  which  after  death  is  seen  as  a  man  just  as  in
the  world;  there  are  therefore  similar  things  in  both  body
and  mind.  Consequently  what  has  been  said  of  the  union
of  external  with  internal  activities  in  the  body,  must  also
be  applied  to  the  union  of  external  with  internal  operations
in  the  mind,  the  sole  difference  being  that  the  one  is  natural,
and  the  other  spiritual.

182.  in.  //  a  man  clearly  saw  the  operation  of  divine
Providence,  he  would  either  deny  God,  or  think  himself  a  god.
The  merely  natural  man  says  to  himself,  "  What  is  divine
Providence?  Is  it  anything  but  a  word  that  the  common
people  have  heard  from  a  priest?  Who  sees  anything  of
it?  Is  not  everything  in  the  world  accomplished  by
prudence,  wisdom,  cunning,  or  malice?  And  are  not  all
the  results  they  accomplish  necessary  consequences,  or  mere
accidents?  Does  the  divine  Providence  he  concealed  in
such  things  as  these  ?  How  can  it  be  in  deceit  and  cunning  ?
And  yet  divine  Providence  is  said  to  control  all  things.  In
that  case,  let  me  see  it,  and  I  will  beheve  in  it.  Can  any  one
believe  in  it  before  he  sees  it?  "  Thus  speaks  the  merely
natural  man;  but  the  spiritual  man  speaks  differently.
As  he  acknowledges  God,  he  also  acknowledges  the  divine
Providence,  and  he  also  sees  it.  But  he  cannot  make  it
evident  to  any  one  who  thinks  only  naturally  and  from
nature,  for  such  a  man  cannot  raise  his  mind  above  nature,
nor  see  in  its  phenomena  an)i;hing  of  the  divine  Providence,
nor  draw  conclusions  about  Providence  from  its  laws,  which
are  also  laws  of  the  divine  Wisdom.  And  so  if  he  were
to  see  clearly  the  workings  of  divine  Providence,  he  would
attribute  it  to  nature,  and    thus  would    not  only  envelop


134  Divine  Providence

it  in  fallacies,  but  would  also  profane  it;  and  instead  of
acknowledging  it,  he  would  den)-  it;  and  he  who  in  heart
denies  the  divine  Providence,  also  denies  God.  A  man  will
believe  either  that  God  governs  all  things,  or  that  nature
does.  He  who  believes  that  God  governs  all  things,  thinks
that  they  are  governed  by  Love  itself  and  Wisdom  itself,
thus  by  Life  itself ;  but  he  who  beheves  that  nature  governs
all  things,  thinks  that  they  are  governed  by  natural  heat
and  light,  which  in  themselves  are  dead  because  they  proceed
from  a  dead  sun.  Does  not  what  is  living  govern  what
is  dead  ?  Can  what  is  dead  govern  anything  ?  If  you  think
that  what  is  dead  can  generate  life,  you  are  insane;  life
must  come  from  Life.

183.  It  seems  improbable  that  a  man  would  deny  God
if  he  clearly  perceived  the  operation  of  divine  Providence;
for  it  seems  as  though  any  one  who  clearly  perceived  it
could  not  but  acknowledge  it,  and  thus  acknowledge  God;
but  it  is  altogether  otherwise.  The  divine  Providence
never  acts  in  unison  with  the  love  of  a  man's  will,  but  alwa3^s
against  it;  for  man,  in  consequence  of  his  hereditary  evil,
is  always  ardently  pressing  towards  the  lowest  hell;  but
the  Lord  by  His  Providence  continually  leads  him  away
and  withdraws  him  from  it,  first  towards  a  milder  hell,  then
away  from  hell,  and  at  length  to  Himself  in  heaven.  This
effort  of  the  divine  Providence  is  unceasing,  and  therefore
if  man  clearly  perceived  or  felt  himself  being  thus  with-
drawn or  led  away,  he  would  be  angry,  would  regard  God
as  his  enemy,  and  from  the  evil  of  his  selfhood  would  deny
Him.  In  order,  therefore,  that  man  may  not  know  this,
he  is  kept  in  freedom,  and  therefore  supposes  that  he  is
leading  himself.  But  let  some  instances  serve  as  illustra-
tion : — Man,  owing  to  his  hereditary  nature,  desires  to
become  great,  and  also  to  become  rich,  and  unless  these
desires  are  moderated,  he  aspires  to  become  still  greater
and  richer,  and  at  length  to  be  the  greatest  and  richest  of
all  men;  and  he  would  not  stop  there,  but  would  desire  to
be  greater  than  God  Himself,  and  to  own  heaven  itself.
This  lust  of  possession  is  deeply  hidden  in  hereditary  evil,
and  consequently  in  man's  life,  and  in  human  nature.  The
divine  Providence  does  not  remove  this  evil  instantaneously,
for  in  that  case  man  would  cease  to  live;  but  removes  it
so  quietly  and  gradually  that  man  is  unconscious  of  the


Divine  Providence  135

change.  This  is  done  by  letting  him  act  according  to  the
thought  which  he  considers  reasonable ;  and  then  by  various
means,  rational,  civil  and  moral,  the  di\-ine  Providence
leads  him  away  from  that  state  so  far  as  he  can  be  led  in
freedom.  Nor  can  evil  be  removed  from  any  one  unless
it  comes  forth,  is  seen,  and  acknowledged ;  it  is  Uke  a  sore
which  cannot  be  healed  unless  it  is  opened.  If,  therefore,
a  man  were  to  know  and  perceive  that  the  Lord  by  His
divine  Providence  is  thus  working  against  his  life's  love,
in  which  he  finds  his  highest  dehght,  he  could  not  but  resist
and  become  enraged,  impugn  it,  revile  it,  and  at  length  in
consequence  of  his  evil  nullify  the  operation  of  divine  Provi-
dence, by  denying  it  and  thus  den^nng  God ;  especially  if
he  thought  that  he  was  being  debarred  from  success,  cast
down  from  honour,  and  stripped  of  wealth.  But  it  must
be  observed  that  the  Lord  never  deters  a  man  from  seeking
positions  of  honour,  or  from  amassing  wealth,  but  only
from  greedily  seeking  honours  for  the  mere  sake  of  ambition,
or  for  the  sake  of  himself,  and  also  from  amassing  wealth  for
its  OT^Ti  sake,  or  as  a  means  of  gaining  power.  But  when
He  leads  him  away  from  these  ends,  He  leads  him  to  the
love  of  uses,  so  that  he  may  value  the  distinction  he  enjoys
not  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  services  it  en-
ables him  to  render,  and  thus  as  belonging  to  him  for  the
sake  of  use,  and  not  as  being  useful  only  to  himself;  and
so  also  with  wealth.  The  Lord  teaches  in  many  places  in
the  Word  that  He  always  humbles  the  proud  and  exalts
the  humble,  and  what  He  there  teaches  is  also  a  law  of  His
divine  Providence.

184.  The  same  is  the  case  with  man's  other  hereditary
evils,  such  as  adultery,  fraud,  revenge,  blasphemy,  and  so
on;  none  of  these  could  be  removed  unless  man  were  at
liberty  to  think  and  will  them,  that  so  he  might  remove
them,  as  if  he  did  it  of  himself;  nevertheless  he  cannot  do
this  unless  he  acknowledges  the  divine  Providence,  and
prays  that  it  may  accomplish  the  work.  Without  the
joint  operation  of  human  liberty  and  divine  Providence,
those  e\dls  would  be  like  poison  kept  within,  and  not  cast
out,  which  would  soon  spread  and  carry  death  to  every
part;  and  they  would  be  hke  a  disease  of  the  heart  itself,
which  soon  kills  the  whole  body.

185.  The  best  illustration  of  this  is  the  case  of  men  after


136


Divine  Providence


death  in  the  spiritual  world.  Most  of  those  who  in  the
natural  world  had  become  great  and  wealthy,  and  had
valued  honours  and  riches  for  the  sake  of  their  own  aggrand-
isement alone,  at  first  talk  about  God,  and  about  the  divine
Providence,  as  if  they  had  acknowledged  these  in  their
hearts.  But  because  they  then  clearly  see  the  divine  Provi-
dence, and  realise  accordingly  that  their  final  lot  is  in  hell,
they  combine  with  the  devils  there,  and  then  not  only  deny,
but  also  blaspheme  God ;  and  at  last  they  become  so  insane
as  to  acknowledge  the  more  powerful  of  the  devils  as  their
gods,  and  they  desire  nothing  more  ardently  than  to  become
gods  themselves  also.

186.  Man  would  resist  God,  and  would  also  deny  Him,  if
he  plainly  saw  the  workings  of  His  divine  Providence,  be-
cause he  is  in  the  delight  of  his  love,  and  this  delight  consti-
tutes his  very  life.  And  therefore,  when  a  man  is  kept  in
the  dehght  of  his  life,  he  is  in  freedom ;  for  freedom  and
that  delight  are  inseparable.  If  therefore  he  were  to  per-
ceive that  he  is  continually  being  led  away  from  his  delight,
he  would  be  enraged,  as  if  with  an  enemy  who  threa-tened
his  life.  To  avoid  this,  the  Lord  does  not  let  His  divine
Providence  be  seen,  but  by  it  He  leads  man  as  gently  as  a
ship  is  borne  along  by  an  imperceptible  stream,  or  a  favourable
current.  In  consequence  of  this,  man  does  not  know  but
that  he  is  constantly  in  the  exercise  of  his  selfhood,  for
freedom  and  selfhood  are  inseparable.  It  is  therefore
evident,  that  man  by  freedom  appropriates  what  the  divine
Providence  introduces ;  but  this  could  not  be  so  if  the  divine
Providence  were  manifest.  To  be  appropriated  is  to
become  incorporated  in  the  life.

187.  IV.  Man  is  allowed  to  see  the  divine  Providence  from
behind,  but  not  in  front  ;  also  while  he  is  in  a  spiritual  state,  but
not  while  he  is  in  a  natural  state.  To  see  the  divine  Provi-
dence from  behind,  and  not  in  front,  is  to  see  it  after  the
event,  and  not  before;  and  to  see  it  in  a  spiritual  but  not
in  a  natural  state,  is  to  see  it  from  heaven,  and  not  from
the  world.  All  who  receive  influx  from  heaven,  and  acknow-
ledge the  divine  Providence,  and  especially  those  who  by
reformation  are  made  spiritual,  when  they  see  events  occur
in  some  wonderful  sequence,  see,  as  it  were,  the  divine
Providence,  and  by  an  inward  acknowledgment  affirm
that  it  exists.     They  do  not  desire  to  see.  it  in  front,  that


Divine  Providence  137

is  before  the  event,  for  they  fear  lest  their  own  will  should  in
any  way  interfere  with  its  order  and  sequence.  It  is  differ-
ent with  those  who  admit  into  their  minds  only  influx
from  the  world,  and  none  from  heaven,  especially  if  they
have  become  natural-minded  from  the  confirmation  of
appearances.  These  do  not  see  anything  of  the  divine
Providence  from  behind,  or  after  the  event,  but  they  desire
to  see  it  from  in  front,  or  before  the  event ;  and  because  the
divine  Providence  works  by  means,  using  man  or  the  world
as  its  instruments,  therefore  whether  they  see  it  from  in
front  or  behind,  they  attribute  it  either  to  man  or  to  nature,
and  thus  confirm  themselves  in  the  denial  of  it.  The  reason
why  they  attribute  it  to  man  or  to  nature  is,  that  their
understanding  is  closed  above,  and  open  only  below,  thus
closed  towards  heaven,  and  open  towards  the  world;  and
it  is  not  possible  to  see  the  divine  Providence  from  the  world,
but  only  from  heaven.  I  have  sometimes  wondered  whether
they  would  acknowledge  the  divine  Providence  if  their  under-
standing were  opened  above,  and  they  saw,  as  in  clear  day-
light, that  nature  in  itself  is  dead,  and  that  human  intelligence
in  itself  is  nothing,  but  that  both  appear  to  be  alive  by
virtue  of  the  influx  which  they  receive;  and  I  perceived
that  those  who  have  confirmed  themselves  in  favour  of
nature  and  human  prudence  would  not  acknowledge  it,
because  the  natural  light  flowing  in  from  below  would
instantly  extinguish  the  spiritual  light  flowing  in  from
above.

189.  The  man  who  has  become  spiritual  by  the  acknow-
ledgment of  God,  and  wise  by  putting  away  his  selfhood,
sees  the  divine  Providence  at  work  in  the  whole  world,  and
in  every  single  part  of  it.  He  sees  it  whether  he  looks  at
natural,  civil,  or  spiritual  things,  and  this  both  in  the  simul-
taneous and  the  successive  relations  of  things,  in  ends,
causes,  effects,  uses,  forms,  and  in  things  great  and  small,
and  especially  in  the  salvation  of  men ;  for  example,  in  the
fact  that  Jehovah  gave  them  the  Word,  taught  them  by
it  concerning  God,  heaven,  hell  and  eternal  life,  and  that
He  Himself  came  into  the  world  to  redeem  and  save  men.
When  natural  light  is  pervaded  by  spiritual  light,  the  man
sees  these  and  many  other  things,  and  the  divine  Providence
in  them.  But  the  merely  natural  man  sees  none  of  them.
He  is  like  one  who  sees  a  magnificent  temple,  and  hears  a


138


Divine  Providence


preacher  enlightened  in  divine  things,  and  says  at  home  that
he  has  seen  nothing  but  a  house  of  stone,  and  has  heard
nothing  but  articulate  sounds ;  or  like  a  near-sighted  person,
who  enters  an  orchard  adorned  with  fruits  of  every  kind,
and  then  goes  home  and  says  that  he  has  only  seen  a  wood
and  trees.  When  such  persons  become  spirits  after  death
and  are  raised  up  into  the  angelic  heaven,  where  all  things
exist  in  forms  representative  of  love  and  wisdom,  they  do
not  even  see  that  such  objects  exist;  I  have  seen  this
tried  with  many  who  have  denied  the  Lord's  divine
Providence.

190.  There  are  many  constant  things  which  have  been
created  in  order  that  it  may  be  possible  for  mutable  things
to  exist.  The  constant  things  are  the  regular  changes  in
the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun,  moon  and  stars,  their  ob-
scuration by  occultations,  called  eclipses,  the  heat  and  light
they  emit,  the  seasons  of  the  year,  spring,  summer,  autumn
and  winter,  the  times  of  the  day,  morning,  noon,  evening
and  night ;  also  the  atmospheres,  waters  and  lands,  regarded
in  their  intrinsic  nature;  the  power  of  growth  in  the  vege-
table kingdom,  and  the  power  of  propagation  in  the  animal
Icingdom;  and  further  whatever  is  constantly  produced  by
these  when  they  are  set  in  action  according  to  the
laws  of  order.  These  things,  and  many  more,  have  been
created  in  order  that  an  endless  variety  of  things  may  exist ;
for  variable  things  cannot  exist  except  in  things  immutable,
regular  and  certain.  But  let  us  take- some  examples  : — the
varieties  of  plants  could  not  exist  unless  the  rising  and  the
setting  of  the  sun,  and  the  heat  and  light  it  emits  were
constant.  Music  is  of  endless  variety,  but  it  could  not  exist
unless  the  laws  of  the  atmospheres,  and  the  form  of  the  ear
were  constant.  The  varieties  of  sight,  which  are  also  endless,
could  not  exist  unless  the  ether  were  constant  in  its  laws,
and  the  eye  in  its  form;  in  the  same  manner  colours  could
not  exist  unless  the  light  were  constant.  It  is  the  same  with
thoughts,  words  and  actions,  which  are  also  of  endless
variety;  these  could  not  exist  unless  the  organic  forms  of
the  body  were  constant.  Must  not  a  house  be  a  stable
structure,  in  order  that  man's  various  activities  may  be
carried  on  in  it  ?  Must  not  a  church  be  stable  for  the  purpose
of  worship,  sermons,  instruction  and  pious  meditation?
So  in  other  cases.    As  regards  the  varieties  themselves.


Divine  Providence  139

which  have  their  existence  in  things  constant,  fixed,  and
definite,  they  go  on  infinitely,  and  have  no  end,  and  yet  there
is  never  one  wholly  the  same  as  another  among  all  the  things
of  the  universe,  or  in  any  one  of  them ;  nor  can  there  be  in
those  that  will  follow,  to  eternity.  Who  arranges  these
varieties  progressing  to  infinity  and  eternity  so  that  they
may  exist  in  due  order,  but  He  who  created  the  constant
things  in  order  that  by  them  the  varieties  might  have  exist-
ence? And  who  can  set  in  due  order  the  infinite  varieties
of  life  among  men,  but  He  who  is  Life  itself,  that  is  Love
itself,  and  Wisdom  itself  ?  Without  His  divine  Providence,
which  is  as  it  were  continual  creation,  could  men's  numberless
affections,  and  their  thoughts  arising  from  them,  and  thus
the  men  themselves,  be  organised  into  a  whole  ? — evil  affec-
tions and  their  attendant  thoughts  forming  one  devil,  which
is  hell;  and  good  affections  and  their  attendant  thoughts
forming  the  presence  of  one  Lord  in  heaven?  That  the
whole  angelic  heaven  is  in  the  Lord's  sight,  as  it  were,  one
Man,  who  is  His  image  and  likeness,  and  that  the  whole  of
hell  is  opposed  to  it  as  one  human  monster,  has  been  stated
and  explained  several  times  before.  This  has  been  said,
because  some  natural  men  get  arguments  suggested  by  their
own  infatuation  in  favour  of  nature  and  their  own  prudence
even  from  the  constant  and  fixed  things  which  are  necessary
in  order  that  things  variable  may  come  into  existence  by
their  means.

There  is  no   such  thing  as   self-derived   prudence,
there  only  appears  to  be;    and  it  is  right  that

there    should   BE    THIS    APPEARANCE;     BUT   THE   DIVINE

Providence  is  universal  because  it  deals  with  the

MINUTEST  details

191.  To  say  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  self-derived
prudence  is  wholly  contrary  to  appearance,  and  is  therefore
contrary  to  the  general  belief;  and  this  being  so,  no  one
who,  relying  on  the  appearance  believes  that  human  prudence
alone  avails,  can  be  convinced  except  by  reasons  founded
upon  considerations  of  a  higher  order,  which  must  be  de-
duced from  an  investigation  of  causes.  The  above-mentioned
appearance  is  an  effect,  and  a  series  of  causes  will  disclose
its  origin.  In  these  preliminary  remarks,  something  shall
be  said  about  the  general  belief  on  this  subject.    The  teaching


140  Divine  Providence

of  the  Church,  that  love  and  faith,  wisdom  and  intelligence,
and  therefore  prudence  also,  and  in  general  all  good  and
truth,  are  not  from  man  but  from  God,  is  contrary  to  appear-
ances. If  this  teaching  is  accepted,  it  must  also  be  admitted
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  self-derived  prudence,  but
that  it  onl}^  appears  to  exist.  Prudence  arises  from  no
other  source  than  intelligence  and  wisdom,  and  these  come
only  from  understanding,  and,  consequently,  from  thinking
what  is  true  and  good.  These  statements  are  accepted  and
believed  by  those  who  acknowledge  the  divine  Providence,
but  not  by  those  who  believe  only  in  human  prudence.  Now
the  truth  must  either  be  what  the  Church  teaches,  that  all
wisdom  and  prudence  come  from  God,  or  what  the  world
teaches,  that  all  wisdom  and  prudence  come  from  man.
Can  these  two  views  be  reconciled  in  any  other  way  than
by  saying,  that  what  the  Church  teaches  is  the  truth,  and
that  what  the  world  teaches  is  the  appearance?  For  the
Church  draws  its  proof  from  the  Word,  but  the  world  from
its  selfhood,  and  the  Word  is  from  God,  and  selfhood
from  man.  Since  prudence  comes  from  God,  and  not
from  man,  a  Christian  in  his  devotions  prays  that  God
will  direct  his  thoughts,  counsels,  and  deeds;  and  he  also
adds  that  of  himself  he  cannot  do  this.  And  when  he
sees  any  one  doing  good,  he  says  that  he  has  been  led  to  it
by  God,  and  so  forth.  Who  can  speak  thus  unless  at  the
time  he  inwardly  believes  it?  Now  an  inward  belief  of
this  truth  comes  from  heaven.  But  when  he  thinks  to
himself,  and  collects  arguments  in  favour  of  human  prudence,
he  can  believe  the  contrary ;  and  this  belief  comes  from  the
world.  But  with  those  who  acknowledge  God  in  their
heart,  the  inward  faith  prevails ;  and  with  those  who  do  not
acknowledge  God  in  their  heart,  although  they  may  with  the
lips,  the  outward  faith  prevails.

192.  We  have  said  that  any  one  who,  judging  by  the
appearance,  believes  that  human  prudence  alone  avails,
cannot  be  convinced  except  by  reasons  founded  upon  con-
siderations of  a  higher  order,  which  must  be  deduced  from
causes.  In  order,  therefore,  that  reasons  deduced  from
causes  may  be  presented  to  the  understanding,  they  shall  be
set  forth  in  the  following  order.

I.  All  a  man's  thoughts  come  from  the  affections  of  his


Divine  Providence  141

life's  love,  and  there  are  no  thoughts  whatever,  nor  can  be,
except  from  these.

II.  The  affections  derived  from  the  love  which  constitutes
a  man's  life,  are  known  to  the  Lord  alone.

III.  The  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  directs  the  affec-
tions of  a  man's  life's  love,  and  at  the  same  time  the  thoughts
from  which  human  prudence  is  derived.

IV.  The  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  arranges  the
affections  of  the  whole  human  race  into  one  form,  which  is
the  human  form.

V.  Heaven  and  hell,  which  are  from  the  human  race,  are
consequently  in  the  human  form.

VI.  Those  who  have  acknowledged  nature  and  human
prudence  alone,  constitute  hell,  and  those  who  have  acknow-
ledged God,  and  His  divine  Providence,  constitute  heaven.

VII.  All  these  things  depend  on  the  appearance  to  man
that  he  thinks  and  acts  by  a  self-generated  power.

193.  I.  All  a  man's  thoughts  come  from  the  affections  of
his  life's  love,  and  there  are  no  thoughts  whatever,  nor  can  be,
except  from  these.  The  essential  nature  of  the  love  which
constitutes  the  life  of  man,  of  affections  and  their  thoughts,
and  of  bodily  sensations  and  actions  derived  from  them,
has  been  discussed  in  this  work,  and  also  in  The  Divine  love
and  wisdom,  particularly  in  Parts  I.  and  V.  Now  since  these
are  the  causes  of  which  human  prudence  is  an  effect,  it  will
be  necessary  here  also  to  say  something  about  them;  for
matters  recorded  elsewhere  cannot  be  closely  connected
with  later  statements  unless  they  are  repeated,  and  compared
with  them.  In  a  former  part  of  the  present  work  and  in  The
Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  Lord
possesses  divine  Love  and  Wisdom;  that  these  are  life
itself;  that  from  these  are  derived  the  will  and  understanding
of  man,  his  will  from  the  divine  Love,  and  his  understanding
from  the  divine  Wisdom;  that  the  heart  and  lungs  in  the
body  correspond  to  them;  and  that  it  is  therefore  evident
that,  as  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  together  with  the  respira-
tion of  the  lungs  governs  the  whole  man  as  to  his  body,  so
the  will  together  with  the  understanding,  governs  the  whole
mind  of  man ;  and  that  thus  there  are  two  principles  of  life
in  every  man,  the  one  natural  and  the  other  spiritual,  and
that  the  natural  principle  of  life  is  the  pulsation  of  the  heart.


142  Divine  Providence

and  the  spiritual  principle  of  life  is  the  will  of  the  mind ;  and
that  each  unites  with  its  consort,  with  which  it  continually
dwells,  and  performs  the  functions  of  life,  the  heart  con-
joining the  lungs  with  itself,  and  the  will  conjoining  the
understanding  with  itself.  Now  as  love  is  the  soul  of  the
will,  and  wisdom  the  soul  of  the  understanding,  both  of  them
being  from  the  Lord,  it  follows  that  love  is  the  life  of  every
one,  and  that  the  nature  of  this  life  depends  on  its  union  with
wisdom;  or,  what  is  the  same,  that  the  will  is  the  life  of
every  one,  and  that  its  nature  depends  on  its  union  with  the
understanding.  But  more  about  these  matters  may  be
seen  above  in  this  work,  and  especially  in  Parts  I.  and  V.  of
The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom.

194.  It  has  also  been  shown  in  the  above-named  works
that  the  Hfe's  love  puts  forth  from  itself  subordinate  loves,
which  are  called  affections,  and  that  these  are  either  exterior
or  interior;  also  that  taken  together  they  form  as  it  were
one  dominion  or  kingdom,  in  wliich  the  life's  love  is  lord  or
king.  It  has  also  been  shown  that  each  of  these  subordinate
loves  or  affections  takes  to  itself  its  own  consort,  the  interior
affections  uniting  to  themselves  consorts  called  perceptions,  and
the  exterior  affections  adjoining  to  themselves  consorts  called
thoughts ;  that  each  dwells  constantly  with  its  own  consort,
and  performs  its  vital  functions ;  and  that  each  union  is  like
that  of  the  Being  and  Manifestation  of  life,  each  of  which
is  powerless  without  the  other ;  for  what  would  be  the  Being
of  life  without  its  Manifestation,  and  what  the  Manifes-
tation of  life  without  its  Being  ?  It  has  also  been  shown,
that  the  union  of  life  is  like  that  of  sound  and  harmony,  or
of  sound  and  speech,  or,  in  general,  of  the  pulsation  of  the
heart  and  the  respiration  of  the  lungs ;  which  union  is  such,
that  each  is  powerless  without  the  other,  and  each  becomes
efficient  by  union  with  the  other:  they  must  either  be
united,  or  give  rise  to  union.  Take  sound  for  example  :
It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  sound  has  any  meaning  unless
it  has  some  distinctive  quality;  a  man's  voice  also  cor-
responds to  his  affection;  and  as  it  always  has  some  dis-
tinctive quality,  the  affection  of  a  speaker's  love  is  known
from  the  tone  of  his  voice,  and  his  thought  is  known  from
its  variations,  that  is,  from  his  words.  This  is  why  the  wiser
angels  perceive  the  ruling  love  of  a  man's  life,  together  with
certain  affections  derived  from  it,  merely  from  the  tone  of


Divine  Providence  143

his  voices  These  facts  have  been  adduced  to  show  that  no
affection  can  exist  without  its  corresponding  thought,  nor
thought  without  its  corresponding  affection.  But  more  on
these  subjects  may  be  seen  above  in  the  present  work,  and
also  in  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (Part  V.).

195.  Now  as  the  love  characteristic  of  every  one's  life  has
its  proper  delight,  and  its  allied  wisdom  has  its  pleasure,
so  it  is  with  every  affection,  which  is  essentially  a  sub-
ordinate love,  derived  from  the  life's  love,  as  a  stream  from
its  fountain,  as  a  branch  from  a  tree,  or  as  an  artery  from  the
heart;  and  therefore  every  particular  affection  has  its  own
proper  dehght,  and  every  derivative  perception  and  thought
has  its  pleasure.  It  follows  therefore,  that  these  delights
and  pleasures  constitute  man's  hfe.  What  is  life  without
delight  and  pleasure?  It  would  not  be  life  but  death.  If
these  dehghts  are  diminished,  a  man  grows  cold,  or  torpid;
if  they  are  taken  away,  he  breathes  his  last  and  dies.  Vital
heat  comes  from  the  delights  of  the  affection,  and  from  the
pleasures  of  the  perceptions  and  thoughts.  Since  every
affection  has  its  delight,  and  the  derivative  thought  its
pleasure,  we  may  see  the  origin  of  good  and  truth,  and  also
their  essential  nature.  To  every  one  good  is  that  in  which
his  affection  delights,  and  truth  is  that  which  his  thought
derived  from  his  affection  finds  agreeable;  for  every  one
calls  good,  whatever,  from  the  love  of  his  will,  he  feels  to  be
delightful;  and  he  calls  truth,  whatever,  from  the  wisdom
of  his  understanding,  he  finds  agreeable.  Both  flow  from
the  love  characteristic  of  his  hfe,  as  water  flows  from  a
fountain,  or  as  blood  from  the  heart;  both  taken  together
are  Uke  water  or  atmosphere  in  which  the  whole  human
mind  is  immersed.  Dehght  and  pleasantness  are  spiritual
in  the  mind,  but  natural  in  the  body;  in  each  sphere  they
constitute  man's  life.  This  shows  what  it  is  that  a  man
calls  good,  and  what  he  calls  truth;  also  what  it  is  that  a
man  calls  evil,  and  what  he  calls  falsity ;  he  calls  evil  what-
ever destroys  the  delight  of  his  affection,  and  falsity,  what-
ever destroys  the  pleasure  of  his  thought;  it  follows  also
that  evil  and  falsity  from  the  pleasure  they  give  may  be
called  good  and  truth,  and  may  be  believed  to  be  so.  Goods
and  truths  are,  indeed,  changes  and  variations  of  state  in
the  forms  of  the  mind;  but  these  are  felt,  and  live,  solely
by  means  of  the  delight  and  pleasure  they  give.    These


144  Divine  Providence

things  have  been  mentioned  to  show  wherein  the  life  of
affection  and  thought  consists.

196.  Now  as  it  is  man's  mind,  and  not  his  body,  which
thinks,  and  it  thinks  from  the  delight  of  its  affection,  and  as
man's  mind  is  his  spirit  which  lives  after  death,  it  follows
that  man's  spirit  is  nothing  but  affection,  and  its  derivative
thought.  That  there  cannot  be  any  thought  without  affec-
tion, is  clearly  evident  from  the  cases  of  spirits  and  angels
in  the  spiritual  world ;  for  there  all  think  from  the  affections
of  their  life's  love,  and  the  delight  of  these  affections  pro-
ceeding from  every  one,  is  like  an  atmosphere  surrounding
him,  and  all  there  are  associated  together  according  to  these
spheres  exhaled  from  their  affections  through  their  thoughts ;
the  nature  also  of  every  one  is  recognised  from  the  sphere  of
his  Hfe.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  every  thought  is  derived
from  affection,  and  that  it  is  the  form  of  its  own  affection.
The  case  is  similar  with  the  will  and  the  understanding,  with
good  and  truth,  and  with  charity  and  faith.

197.  II.  The  affections  derived  from  the  love  which  consti-
tutes a  man's  life  are  known  to  the  Lord  alone.     Man  knows
his   own  thoughts   and   thence  his  intentions,   because   he
perceives  them  in  himself;    and  as  all  prudence  exists  by
means  of  these,  he  perceives  prudence  also  as  existing  in
himself.     If,  then,  his  life's  love  is  the  love  of  self,  he  acquires
the  pride  of  self-intelligence,  and  arrogates  prudence  to  him-
self ;  he  also  collects  arguments  in  support  of  it,  and  so  loses
his  belief  in  the  divine  Providence.     The  same  thing  happens
if  his  life's  love  is  the  love  of  the  world,  but  this  does  not
cause  him  to  lose  his  behef  to  the  same  extent.     It  is  there-
fore evident,  that  these  two  loves  attribute  everything  to
man  and  his  own  prudence,  and  if  inwardly  examined,  are
found  to  attribute  nothing  to  God  and   His   Providence.
When  therefore  such  men  hear  it  said  that  the  truth  is  that
human  prudence  is  of  no  account,  but  that  the  divine  Provi-
dence alone  governs  all  things,  they  laugh,  if  they  are  con-
firmed atheists;    but  if  they  retain  in  the  memory  some
religious  knowledge,  and  they  are  told  that  all  wisdom  comes
from  God,  they  indeed  assent  at  the  first  hearing,  but  in-
wardly, in  their  spirit,  they  deny  it.     Such,  especially,  are
those  priests  who  love  themselves  more  than  God,  and  the
world  more  than  heaven,  or,  what  is  the  same,  who  worship
God  for  the  sake  of  honour  and  gain,  and  nevertheless  preach


Divine  Providence  145

that  all  charity  and  faith,  good  and  truth,  wisdom  and
prudence  come  from  God,  and  not  from  man.  In  the  spiritual
world,  I  once  heard  two  priests  disputing  with  a  certain
ambassador  as  to  whether  human  prudence  is  from  God  or
from  man.  They  were  carrying  on  a  heated  argument.
At  heart,  all  three  believed  that  human  prudence  accom-
plishes everything,  and  the  divine  Providence  nothing;  but
the  priests,  who  were  filled  with  theological  zeal,  said  that
nothing  of  wisdom  or  prudence  is  from  man ;  and  when  the
ambassador  retorted  that  in  that  case  nothing  of  thought  is
from  him,  they  agreed  to  that  also.  And  as  the  angels  per-
ceived that  all  three  believed  alike,  they  said  to  the  ambas-
sador, "  Put  on  the  vestments  of  a  priest,  and  think  yourself
a  priest,  and  then  speak."  He  put  them  on,  and  thought  in
this  way ;  and  then  he  declared  loudly,  that  there  could  not
possibly  be  any  wisdom  or  prudence  in  man  except  from
God;  and  he  defended  this  with  his  accustomed  eloquence,
and  with  numerous  rational  arguments.  Afterwards  they
said  to  the  two  priests,  "  Lay  aside  your  vestments,  and  put
on  the  garments  of  political  ministers,  and  imagine  your-
selves to  be  such  " ;  they  did  so,  and  they  then  at  once
thought  from  their  inner  self,  and  used  the  arguments  that
they  had  before  secretly  entertained,  in  support  of  human
prudence  against  the  divine  Providence.  After  this,  the
three  being  of  the  same  belief,  became  cordial  friends,  and
together  they  entered  upon  the  way  of  self-prudence,  which
leads  to  hell.

198.  It  was  shown  above,  that  a  man  has  no  thought
except  from  some  affection  of  his  life's  love,  and  that  thought
is  nothing  but  the  form  of  affection.  But  as  man  sees  his
thought,  but  cannot  see  his  affection  (for  this  he  only  feels),
it  follows  that  it  is  from  his  sight,  which  observes  external
appearances,  and  not  from  his  affection,  that  he  concludes
that  self-prudence  does  everything;  for  affection  is  itself
invisible,  and  is  only  felt.  Affection  manifests  itself  only
by  a  certain  delight  and  pleasure  in  thinking  and  in  reason-
ing; and  then  this  pleasure  and  delight  unite  with  thought
in  those  who,  from  the  love  of  self  or  the  love  of  the  world,
believe  in  their  own  prudence;  and  thought  flows  on  in  its
delight,  as  a  ship  does  in  the  current  of  a  river,  which
the  master  does  not  notice  as  he  does  the  sails  which  he
spreads.


146  Divine  Providence

199.  Man  can  indeed  reflect  upon  the  delight  of  his  external
affection,  when  it  unites  with  the  delight  of  some  bodily-
sense  ;  but  still  he  does  not  reahse  the  fact,  that  that  delight
comes  into  his  thought  from  the  delight  of  his  affection.  For
example :  \\Tien  a  licentious  man  sees  a  harlot,  his  e5^e  sparkles
with  the  fire  of  lasciviousness,  which  kindles  a  delight  in  his
body ;  nevertheless  he  does  not  feel  the  delight  of  his  affection
or  lust  in  his  thought,  unless  it  be  some  desire  of  the  flesh.
So  with  a  robber  in  a  forest  when  he  sees  travellers,  or  ^vith
a  pirate  on  the  sea  when  he  sees  merchant  vessels,  and  so
on.  It  is  evident  that  those  delights  govern  the  man's
thoughts,  and  that  the  thoughts  would  have  no  existence
without  them;  but  he  thinks  that  they  are  only  thoughts,
although  the  thoughts  are  nothing  but  affections  disposed
into  forms  by  his  life's  love,  so  that  they  may  appear  in  the
light ;  for  all  affection  is  in  warmth,  and  all  thought  in  Ught.
The  above  affections  are  of  external  thought,  which  indeed
become  manifest  in  bodily  sensation,  but  rarely  in  thought
itself.  But  the  affections  of  internal  thought,  from  which
the  external  exist,  never  manifest  themselves  to  man;  of
them  he  knows  no  more  than  one  sleeping  in  a  carriage  knows
of  the  road  he  travels,  or  than  one  is  sensible  of  the  revolution
of  the  earth.  Now,  since  man  knows  nothing  of  the  in-
numerable things  that  are  going  on  in  the  inner  regions  of
his  mind,  and  yet  the  few  external  things  which  come  within
the  range  of  his  thought  are  produced  from  the  inner  regions
which  are  governed  by  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  alone,
and  those  few  external  things  by  the  Lord  together  with  the
man,  how  then  can  any  one  say,  that  his  own  prudence  does
everything.?  If  you  were  to  see  the  contents  of  but  one
idea  fully  disclosed,  you  would  see  indescribable  wonders.
That  in  the  inner  regions  of  man's  mind  there  are  infinite
things  which  cannot  be  expressed  by  numbers,  is  evident
.from  the  infinite  things  in  the  body,  of  which  we  see  and  feel
nothing,  except  the  actions  they  produce,  these  being  of  a
comparatively  simple  nature.  These  actions,  however,  are
produced  by  the  concurrence  of  thousands  of  motor  or
muscular  fibres,  thousands  of  nervous  fibres,  thousands  of
blood-vessels,  thousands  of  vessels  in  the  lungs,  besides
thousands  in  the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  all  of  which  must
cooperate  in  every  action ;  and  there  are  many  more  in  the
spiritual  man,   or  human   mind,   which  consists   solely  of


Divine  Providence  147

affections^  and  forms  of  perception  and  thought  derived
from  them.  Does  not  the  soul,  which  controls  the  interior
parts,  also  control  the  resulting  actions?  Man's  soul  is
nothing  but  the  love  of  his  will,  and  the  love  of  his  under-
standing derived  from  it.  Such  as  this  love  is,  such  is  the
whole  man ;  and  his  character  is  determined  by  his  external
life  in  which  man  and  the  Lord  act  together.  If  therefore
he  attributes  all  things  to  himself  and  to  nature,  his  soul
becomes  the  love  of  self;  but  if  he  attributes  all  things  to
the  Lord;  his  soul  becomes  love  to  the  Lord ;  and  the  latter
love  is  heavenly,  but  the  former  hellish.

200.  Now  as  the  delights  of  man's  affections,  coming  from
the  inmost  regions  of  the  mind  through  the  interior  to  the
exterior,  and  at  last  to  the  outermost,  which  are  in  the  body,
bear  a  man  along,  as  wind  and  water  bear  a  ship,  and  as
nothing  of  them  appears  to  the  man  except  what  goes  on  in
the  outermost  parts  of  the  mind  and  the  body,  how  can  man
claim  to  himself  what  is  divine,  merely  because  those  few
outermost  things  appear  to  be  his  own  ?  Still  less  ought  he
to  claim  for  himself  what  is  di\'ine,  when  he  knows  from  the
Word  that  a  man  cannot  receive  anything  unless  it  be  given
him  from  heaven;  and  his  reason  enables  him  to  beheve
that  this  appearance  has  been  given  him  that  he  may  be  a
man,  may  see  what  is  good  and  evil,  may  choose  the  one  or
the  other,  may  appropriate  to  himself  what  he  chooses,  so
that  he  may  be  reciprocally  united  with  the  Lord,  reformed,
regenerated,  saved,  and  may  live  for  ever.  That  this  appear-
ance has  been  given  to  man  in  order  that  he  may  act  in
freedom  according  to  reason,  thus  as  if  by  his  own  power,
and  not  passively  wait  for  influx,  was  stated  and  explained
above.  This  suffices  to  establish  the  next  proposition,
namely  :

III.  The  Lard  by  His  divine  Providence  directs  the  affections
of  a  Plan's  life's  love,  and  at  the  same  time  the  thoughts  from
-di'hich  human  prudence  is  derived.

201.  IV.  The  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  arranges  the
affections  of  the  whole  human  race  into  one  form  which  is  the
human  form.  That  this  is  a  universal  law  of  the  divine
Providence,  will  be  seen  in  a  subsequent  paragraph.  Those
who  ascribe  everything  to  nature,  also  ascribe  everything  to
human  prudence ;  for  those  who  ascribe  everything  to  nature,
in  heart  deny  God;    and  those  who  ascribe  everything  to


148


Divine  Providence


human  prudence,  in  heart  deny  the  divine  Providence ;  these
two  denials  are  inseparable.  But  both  classes  of  men,  for
the  sake  of  their  good  name  and  for  fear  of  losing  it,  say  that
the  divine  Providence  is  universal,  but  that  the  details  depend
on  man,  and  that  these  details  in  the  aggregate  are  what  is
meant  by  human  prudence.  But  consider  what  universal
Providence  would  be,  if  details  were  taken  away  from  its
control.  Would  it  be  anything  but  an  empty  word?  For
a  universal  is  made  up  of  all  the  details  which  compose  it,
as  a  general  thing  exists  from  its  particulars.  If,  therefore,
you  take  away  the  details,  what  is  the  universal  but  some-
thing empty,  like  a  surface  with  nothing  inside,  or  a  complex
body  with  no  components?  Can  the  divine  Providence  be
called  a  universal  government  if  it  does  not  govern  particular
things,  but  is  only  seen  in  the  order  which  reigns  among  them,
while  the  function  of  government  is  exercised  by  others  ?  No
king  governs  in  this  way ;  for  if  a  king  permitted  his  subjects
to  control  everything  in  his  kingdom,  he  would  merely  be  a
king  in  name,  for  he  would  have  no  real,  but  only  a  nominal
dignity.  Such  a  king  would  not  govern,  still  less  would  he
govern  all  things  in  his  kingdom.  That  which  is  Providence
in  God  is  prudence  in  man.  As  universal  prudence  cannot
be  the  attribute  of  a  king  who  has  reserved  to  himself  nothing
but  the  name,  in  order  that  the  kingdom  may  be  called  a
kingdom,  and  may  thus  be  kept  together,  so  there  cannot
be  said  to  be  a  universal  Providence,  if  men  control  every-
thing by  their  own  prudence.  So  also  when  the  terms
"  universal  Providence  "  and  "  universal  government  "  are
applied  to  nature,  meaning  thereby  that  God  created  the
universe  and  endowed  nature  with  the  power  of  producing
all  things  from  itself;  in  this  case,  what  is  universal  Provi-
dence but  a  metaphysical  term  without  any  meaning?
Moreover  among  those  who  attribute  all  production  to  nature,
and  to  human  prudence  everything  that  is  accomplished,
and  who  still  make  a  verbal  acknowledgment  that  God
created  nature,  there  are  many  to  whom  the  divine  Providence
is  a  meaningless  expression.  But  the  real  truth  is  that  the
divine  Providence  controls  the  minutest  particulars  of  nature
and  of  human  prudence,  and  that  this  constitutes  its
universality.

202.  The   Lord's   divine   Providence  is  universal  in  the
minutest  particulars,  and  for  this  reason  :    He  created  the


Divine  Providence  149

universe  in  order  that  in  it  there  might  be  brought  into
existence  an  infinite  and  eternal  creation  from  Himself ;  and
this  creation  is  brought  into  existence  by  the  Lord's  forming
from  the  human  race  a  heaven  which  in  His  sight  may  be  as
one  Man,  in  His  own  image  and  likeness.  That  heaven  is
formed  of  men,  and  is  as  one  man  in  the  Lord's  sight,  and
that  this  was  the  end  of  creation,  is  shown  above  (nos.  27-
45);  also  that  the  Divine,  in  all  that  it  does,  has  the  infinite
and  eternal  in  view  (nos.  46-69).  The  infinite  and  eternal
object  of  the  Lord  in  forming  His  heaven  of  men,  is  that  it
shall  increase  to  infinity  and  eternity;  and  thus  that  He
may  constantly  dwell  in  the  end  of  His  creation.  This  is
the  infinite  and  eternal  creation  which  the  Lord  provided
by  the  creation  of  the  universe,  and  He  is  constantly  creating
it  through  His  divine  Providence.  Who  that  knows  and
beheves  from  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  that  God  is  infinite
and  eternal  (for  it  is  the  doctrine  of  all  the  Churches  in  the
Christian  world  that  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God
the  Holy  Spirit,  is  infinite,  eternal,  uncreated,  and  omnipo-
tent,— see  the  Athanasian  Creed),  can  be  so  devoid  of  reason
as  not  to  admit,  as  soon  as  he  hears  it,  that  God  cannot  but
have  an  infinite  and  eternal  end  in  His  great  work  of  creation  ?
What  other  purpose  can  His  divine  Nature  dictate  ?  And  so
He  must  have  that  purpose  in  view  in  creating  the  human
race,  out  of  which  He  forms  His  heaven.  What  end  therefore
can  the  divine  Providence  have  in  view,  but  the  reformation
and  salvation  of  the  human  race?  And  no  one  can  be  re-
formed by  himself  and  his  own  prudence,  but  by  the  Lord
through  His  divine  Providence.  It  follows  that  unless  the
Lord  led  a  man  every  moment,  even  the  minutest  fraction
of  a  moment,  the  man  would  depart  from  the  way  of  reforma-
tion and  perish.  Every  change  and  variation  of  the  state
of  the  human  mind  produces  some  organic  change  and  varia-
tion in  its  present,  and,  consequently,  its  subsequent  con-
dition ;  how  great  then  would  the  change  be,  if  the  variation
went  on  to  eternity  ?  It  would  be  like  an  arrow  shot  from  a
bow,  which,  if  ill-aimed  ever  so  little,  at  a  long  distance
would  deviate  greatly  from  the  mark.  So  would  it  be  if  the
Lord  did  not  lead  the  states  of  the  human  mind  perpetually.
The  Lord  does  this  according  to  the  laws  of  His  divine
Providence ;  and  it  is  in  accordance  with  these  laws  that  man
should  seem  to  be  leading  himself;    but  the  Lord  foresees


150  Divine  Providence

how  he  will  lead  himself,  and  continually  adapts  circum-
stances. That  the  laws  of  permission  are  also  laws  of  the
divine  Providence,  and  that  every  man  may  be  reformed
and  regenerated,  and  that  there  is  no  other  kind  of
predestination,  will  be  seen  in  what  follows.

203.  As,  therefore,  every  man  after  death  lives  for  ever,
and  is  allotted  a  place  either  in  heaven  or  in  hell  according
to  his  life,  and  as  both  heaven  and  hell  must  be  in  a  form
which  will  act  as  one,  as  before  stated,  and  as  no  one  can
be  allotted  any  place  in  that  form  but  his  own,  it  follows
that  the  human  race  throughout  the  whole  world  is  under
the  Lord's  guidance;  and  that  every  one,  from  infancv  to
the  end  of  his  life,  is  led  by  Him  as  regards  the  minutest
particulars,  and  that  his  final  abode  is  foreseen  and  provided.
From  this  it  is  evident  that  the  divine  Providence  of  the
Lord  is  universal  because  it  enters  into  the  minutest  par-
ticulars, and  that  this  is  the  Infinite  and  eternal  creation
which  the  Lord  provided  for  Himself  by  the  creation  of  the
universe.  Of  this  universal  Providence  man  sees  nothing;
and  if  he  did,  he  would  only  see  it  as  a  passer-by  sees  the
scattered  heaps  and  collections  of  materials  frorn  which  a
house  is  to  be  built;  but  the  Lord  sees  it  as  a  magnificent
palace,  the  construction  and  enlargement  of  which  never
end.

204.  V.  Heaven  and  hell  are,  therefore,  in  the  human  form.
That  heaven  is  in  the  human  form  has  been  stated  in  the
work  on  Heaven  and  Hell  (nos.  59-102),  also  in  the  work  on
The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  and  also  in  several  passages  of
the  present  work.  To  adduce  further  proof  is  therefore
unnecessary.  We  say  that  hell,  too,  is  in  the  human  form,
but  it  is  in  a  deformed  human  form  like  that  of  the  devil,
which  means  hell  regarded  as  a  whole.  Hell  is  in  the
human  form  because  its  inhabitants  were  born  men,  and
they  also  have  the  two  human  faculties  of  liberty  and
rationality;  but  they  have  abused  their  liberty  by  willing
and  doing  evil,  and  their  rationality  by  thinking  evil  and
confirming  it.

205.  VL  Those  who  have  acknowledged  nature  and  human
prudence  alone,  constitute  hell,  and  those  who  have  acknowledged
God,  and  His  divine  Providence,  constitute  heaven.  All  who
lead  an  evil  life  inwardly  acknowledge  nature  and  human
prudence   alone;    the  acknowledgment  of    these  is  secretly


Divine  Providence  151

hidden  in  all  evil,  however  it  may  be  veiled  over  with  goods
and  truths;  these  are  only  borrowed  garments,  or  like
garlands  of  perishable  flowers,  put  on  lest  evil  should  appear
in  its  nakedness.  Owing  to  this  general  concealment,  it  is
not  known  that  all  who  lead  an  evil  life  inwardly  acknowledge
nature  and  human  prudence  alone,  for  the  fact  is  hidden
by  the  covering;  but  that  they  nevertheless  do  so  may  be
made  evident  by  an  inquiry  into  the  origin  and  cause  of
their  acknowledgment.  In  order  that  these  may  be  disclosed
to  view,  it  is  necessary  to  explain  the  origin  and  nature  of
human  prudence,  then  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  divine
Providence,  then  the  nature  and  character  of  those  who
acknowledge  the  former  or  the  latter,  and  lastly  to  show
that  those  who  acknowledge  the  divine  Providence  are  in
heaven,  and  those  who  acknowledge  their  own  prudence  are
in  hell.

206.  The  nature  and  origin  of  man's  own  prudence  :  Human
prudence  arises  from  man's  selfhood,  which  is  his  nature,
and  is  called  his  soul,  which  he  derives  from  his  parents.
This  selfhood  is  the  love  of  self,  and  the  consequent  love  of
the  world,  or  the  love  of  the  world  and  the  consequent  love
of  self.  The  nature  of  the  love  of  self  is  to  care  for  self  only,
and  look  upon  others  with  contempt ;  it  only  considers
others  of  any  importance  so  long  as  they  honour  and  pay
court  to  it.  The  desire  to  become  great,  if  possible  a  king,
and  then,  if  possible,  a  god,  lies  secretly  hidden  in  that  love,
like  the  endeavour  to  increase  and  multiply  in  a  seed.  A
devil  is  of  this  nature,  for  he  is  self-love  itself;  he  adores
himself,  and  favours  no  one  who  does  not  also  adore
him,  he  hates  other  devils,  because  he  wishes  that  he
alone  should  be  adored.  There  can  be  no  love  without  its
consort,  and  the  consort  of  man's  love  or  will  is  the  under-
standing; now  when  self-love  inspires  its  consort,  the  under-
standing, with  its  own  love,  this  in  the  understanding  be-
comes pride,  which  is  the  pride  of  man's  own  intelligence;
this  is  the  origin  of  man's  own  prudence.  Now  since  the
love  of  self  desires  to  be  sole  lord  of  the  world,  and  thus  a
god,  the  lusts  of  evil  which  are  its  derivations  draw  their  life
from  it;  as  do  also  the  perceptions  of  the  lusts,  which  are
craftiness,  the  delights  of  the  lusts,  which  are  evils,  and  the
thoughts  of  these  delights,  which  are  falsities.  They  are  all
like  slaves  and  servants  of  their  lord,  who  obey  his  slightest


152  Divine  Providence

sign  without  being  conscious  of  the  fact  that  they  are  not
acting  independently,  but  being  acted  upon ;  they  are  acted
upon  by  self-love,  through  the  pride  of  man's  own  intelligence.
This  is  why  man's  own  prudence  lies  hidden  in  every  evil
from  its  very  origin.  The  acknowledgment  that  nature
alone  exists  is  also  hidden  in  it,  because  self-love  has  closed
the  window  of  its  roof  through  which  heaven  is  seen,  and  also
the  side  windows,  lest  it  should  see  and  hear  that  the  Lord
alone  governs  all  things,  that  nature  is  essentially  dead,  that
man's  selfhood  is  hell,  and  that  consequently  the  love  of  the
selfhood  is  the  devil;  and  so,  the  windows  being  closed,  it
is  in  darkness,  and  there  it  makes  itself  a  hearth,  at  which
it  sits  with  its  consort,  and  in  perfect  accord  with  each
other,  they  reason  in  favour  of  nature  against  God,  and
in  favour  of  man's  own  prudence  against  the  divine
Providence.

207.  The  nature  and  origin  of  the  divine  Providence.
Divine  Providence  is  the  divine  operation  in  the  man  who
has  put  away  the  love  of  self ;  for  the  love  of  self  is,  as  has
been  said,  the  devil,  and  lusts  and  their  delights  are  the
evils  of  his  kingdom,  which  is  hell.  When  hell  is  removed,
the  Lord  enters  with  the  affection  of  neighbourly  love,  and
opens  the  window  of  his  roof,  and  then  the  side  windows,
and  causes  him  to  see  that  there  is  a  heaven,  a  life  after
death,  and  eternal  happiness ;  and  by  the  spiritual  light  and
love  which  then  flow  in.  He  causes  him  to  acknowledge  that
God  governs  all  things  by  His  divine  Providence.

208.  The  nature  and  character  of  those  who  acknowledge
human  prudence  and  divine  Providence.  Those  who  acknow-
ledge God,  and  His  divine  Providence,  are  like  the  angels  of
heaven,  who  are  unwilling  to  lead  themselves,  and  love  to
be  led  by  the  Lord.  The  proof  that  they  are  led  by  the
Lord  is,  that  they  love  their  neighbour.  But  those  who
acknowledge  nature  and  man's  own  prudence,  are  like  the
spirits  of  hell,  who  dislike  being  led  by  the  Lord  and  love  to
lead  themselves.  If  they  have  been  great  men  in  some
kingdom,  in  the  spiritual  world  they  desire  to  rule  over  all
things ;  so,  too,  if  they  have  been  dignitaries  of  the  Church.
If  they  have  been  judges,  they  pervert  judgment,  and
arbitrarily  violate  the  laws ;  if  they  have  been  learned  men,
they  apply  their  knowledge  to  confirm  the  belief  in  man's
selfhood  and  in  nature;   if  they  have  been  merchants,  they


Divine  Providence  153

act  as  robbers;    if  husbandmen,  as  thieves.     They  are  all
enemies  of  God,  and  scoff  at  the  divine  Providence.

209.  It  is  remarkable  that  when  heaven  is  opened  to  such
persons,  and  they  are  told  that  they  are  insane,  and  when
they  are  convinced  of  this  by  means  of  influx  and  enlighten-
ment, they  still  shut  heaven  against  themselves  with  indigna-
tion, and  look  to  the  earth,  beneath  which  lies  hell.  This
takes  place  with  those  in  the  spiritual  world  who  are  not  as
yet  in  hell,  although  their  character  is  infernal.  This  shows
the  error  of  those  who  think, — "  When  I  see  heaven,  and  hear
angels  talking  to  me,  I  shall  acknowledge  the  truth."  Their
understanding  acknowledges  the  truth,  but  if  the  will  does
not  assent  at  the  same  time,  they  still  do  not  acknowledge
it ;  for  the  will's  love  inspires  the  understanding  with  what-
ever it  desires,  and  not  the  reverse ;  nay,  it  expels  from  the
understanding  whatever  has  not  come  from  itself.

210.  VII.  All  these  things  depend  on  the  appeara?tce  to  man
that  he  thinks  and  acts  by  a  self-generated  power.  It  has  been
fully  shown  in  the  preceding  pages  that  man  would  not  be
man  unless  he  seemed  to  live  from  himself,  and  thus  think
and  will,  speak  and  act  from  himself.  It  follows,  that  unless
man  were  to  control  everything  connected  with  his  employ-
ment and  life  as  if  by  his  own  prudence,  he  could  not  be  led
and  controlled  by  the  divine  Providence;  for  he  would  be
like  one  standing  with  his  hands  dangling,  mouth  open,
eyes  shut,  and  holding  his  breath  in  expectation  of  influx;
he  would  thus  lose  the  human  characteristic  which  comes
to  him  from  the  perception  and  sensation  that  he  lives,  thinks,
wills,  speaks  and  acts  from  himself;  and  he  would  at  the
same  time  lose  his  two  faculties  of  liberty  and  rationality
by  which  he  is  distinguished  from  the  beasts.  That  without
this  appearance  a  man  could  have  no  power  of  reception
and  reciprocation,  and  thus  would  not  be  immortal,  has  been
shown  already  in  this  work,  and  also  in  the  work  on  the
Divine  Love  and  Wisdom.  If,  therefore,  you  wish  to  be  led
by  divine  Providence,  use  your  prudence  as  a  servant  and
subordinate  who  faithfully  manages  the  property  of  his
master.  This  prudence  is  the  talent  which  was  given  to  the
servants  to  trade  with,  and  of  which  they  had  to  render
an  account  (Luke  xix.  13-25;  Matt.  xxv.  14-30).  It
seems  to  man  as  if  his  own  prudence  were  prudence  itself;
and  he  believes  this  so  long  as  he  cherishes  within  him  the


154  Divine  Providence

deadliest  enemy  of  God  and  the  divine  Providence,  the  love
of  self.  This  dwells  in  every  man's  inner  mind  from  birth;
if  you  fail  to  detect  it — and  it  shuns  detection — it  dwells
securely,  and  guards  the  door  lest  this  should  be  opened  by
man,  and  lest,  after  man  has  opened  the  door,  it  should  be  cast
out  by  the  Lord.  Man  opens  the  door  by  shunning  evils  as
sins  as  if  by  his  own  power,  but  with  the  acknowledgment
that  he  does  so  by  power  given  by  the  Lord.  This  is  the
prudence  with  which  the  divine  Providence  cooperates.

211.  The  reason  why  the  divine  Providence  works  so
secretly  that  scarcely  any  one  knows  of  its  existence  is,  that
man  may  not  perish.  For  man's  selfhood,  which  is  his  will,
never  cooperates  with  the  divine  Providence;  man's  self-
hood has  an  inborn  enmity  against  it,  for  this  is  the  serpent
that  seduced  the  first  parents,  of  which  it  is  said,  "  I  will  put
enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  and  between  thy  seed
and  her  seed;  and  it  shall  bruise  thy  head"  (Gen.  iii.  15).
The  serpent  signifies  evil  of  every  kind ;  its  head  is  self-love ;
the  seed  of  the  woman  is  the  Lord ;  enmity  is  put  between
the  love  of  man's  selfhood  and  the  Lord,  thus  also  between
man's  own  prudence  and  the  Lord's  divine  Providence;  for
man's  own  prudence  is  continually  lifting  up  its  head,  and
the  divine  Providence  is  continually  thrusting  it  down.  If
a  man  felt  this,  he  would  be  angry  and  exasperated  against
God,  and  would  perish ;  but  as  he  does  not  feel  it,  he  can  be
angry  and  exasperated  with  men,  with  himself,  and  with
fortune,  but  this  does  not  cause  him  to  perish.  For  this
reason  the  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  continually  leads
man  in  freedom,  and  this  freedom  appears  to  the  man  en-
tirely as  his  own.  Moreover,  leading  a  man  to  act  freely  in
opposition  to  his  own  desires  is  like  raising  a  heavy  weight
from  the  earth  by  screws  whose  power  prevents  the  weight
and  resistance  from  being  felt;  and  it  is  like  a  man  in  a
company  with  an  enemy  whose  secret  intention  is  to  kill
him,  but  a  friend  leads  him  away  by  unknown  paths,  and
afterwards  discloses  the  intention  of  his  enemy.

212.  Who  does  not  speak  of  chance?  And  as  he  speaks
of  it  and  knows  something  of  it  from  experience,  does  he  not
also  acknowledge  it?  But  who  knows  what  it  really  is?
It  cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  such  a  thing  because  it  is  a
matter  of  actual  experience,  and  it  could  not  be  so  without
a  cause;   but  the  cause  of  what  we  vaguely  call  chance  is


Divine  Providence  155

unknown.  But  if  you  doubt  its  existence  owing  to  ignorance
of  its  cause,  take  dice  or  cards  and  play,  or  consult  those  who
play.  Does  any  one  of  them  deny  the  existence  of  chance  ?
Indeed  they  play  with  it,  and  it  with  them,  in  a  wonderful
way.  Who  can  succeed  if  the  luck  is  against  him?  Does
not  fortune  laugh  at  prudence  and  wisdom?  When  you
shake  the  dice  and  shuflRe  the  cards,  does  it  not  seem  as  if
fortune  knew  and  controlled  the  turns  and  movements  of  the
muscles  of  the  hand,  in  order  for  some  reason  to  favour  one
player  more  than  another?  Can  a  cause  exist  from  any
other  source  than  the  divine  Providence  in  ultimates,  where
by  things  changeable  and  unchangeable  it  deals  wonderfully
with  human  prudence,  and  all  the  time  remains  hidden?
It  is  known  that  the  nations  of  antiquity  acknowledged
Fortune,  and  that  the  Romans  built  her  a  temple  at  Rome.
Of  this  fortune  which  is,  as  was  said  above,  the  divine  Provi-
dence in  ultimates,  I  have  been  permitted  to  learn  many
things  which  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  make  knowTi;  by  these
I  have  been  convinced  that  it  is  no  illusion  of  the  mind,  nor
a  freak  of  nature,  nor  something  without  a  cause,  for  this
would  be  nothing;  but  that  it  supplies  ocular  evidence  that
the  divine  Providence  enters  into  the  minutest  of  man's
thoughts  and  actions.  Since  the  divine  Providence  enters
into  the  minutest  details  of  things  so  worthless  and  trivial,
must  it  not  also  enter  into  the  minutest  details  of  things  not
insignificant  and  trifling,  such  as  peace  and  war  in  the  world,
salvation  and  life  in  heaven?

213.  But  I  know  that  human  prudence  enlists  the  sym-
pathy of  the  rational  mind  more  than  the  divine  Providence
does;  because  the  divine  Providence  does  not  show  itself,
but  human  prudence  does.  It  is  easier  to  convince  people
that  there  is  one  only  Life,  which  is  God,  and  that  all  man-
kind receive  life  from  Him,  as  has  often  been  said  above;
and  yet  this  is  the  same  thing,  because  prudence  is  a  matter
of  life.  Who  does  not  reason  in  favour  of  man's  own  prudence
and  of  nature,  when  speaking  from  the  natural  or  external
man?  Who  also  does  not  reason  in  favour  of  the  divine
Providence,  and  of  God,  when  speaking  from  the  spiritual
or  internal  man?  But  I  say  to  the  natural  man, — "  Write
books,  I  pray  you,  one  in  favour  of  man's  o'wti  prudence,
and  another  in  favour  of  nature,  and  fill  them  with  plausible,
persuasive,  and,  in  your  judgment,  sound  arguments;   and


iS6


Divine  Providence


then  put  them  into  the  hand  of  any  angel,  and  I  know  that
the  angel  will  write  on  them  these  words,  '  They  are  all
appearances  and  fallacies.'  "

The  divine  Providence  looks  to  eternal  things,  and
to  temporal  things  so  far  only  as  they  subserve
eternal  things.

214.  That  the  divine  Providence  looks  to  eternal  things,
and  is  concerned  with  temporal  things  only  so  far  as  they
coincide  with  eternal  things  is  to  be  explained  in  the  following
order  :

I.  Temporal  things  relate  to  dignities  and  riches,  thus  to
worldly  honours  and  gain.

II.  Eternal  things  relate  to  spiritual  honours  and  wealth,
which  in  heaven  consist  of  love  and  wisdom.

III.  Temporal  and  eternal  things  are  separated  by  man,
but  are  united  by  the  Lord.

IV.  The  Lord's  divine  Providence  consists  in  the  union  of
temporal  with  eternal  things.

215.  I.  Temporal  things  relate  to  dignities  and  riches,  thus
to  worldly  honours  and  gain.  Temporal  things  are  of  many
kinds,  but  they  all  relate  to  dignities  and  riches.  Temporal
things  are  such  as  either  perish  with  time,  or  cease  with
man's  life  in  the  world ;  but  eternal  things  are  those  which
do  not  perish  and  cease  with  time,  nor  with  life  in  the  world.
Since,  as  has  been  stated,  all  temporal  things  relate  to  dignities
and  riches,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  following  : — The
nature  and  origin  of  dignities  and  riches ;  the  nature  of  the
love  of  these  for  their  own  sake,  and  the  nature  of  the  love  of
them  for  the  sake  of  uses ;  the  difference  between  these  two
loves,  which  is  as  great  as  that  between  hell  and  heaven;
and  the  difficulty  which  man  feels  in  understanding  the
difference  between  these  loves.  But  each  of  these  subjects
must  be  dealt  with  separately.

i.  The  nature  and  origin  of  dignities  and  riches.  Dignities
and  riches  in  the  most  ancient  times  were  entirely  different
from  what  they  afterwards  gradually  became.  Dignities  in
the  earliest  times  were  exclusively  such  as  are  enjoj^ed  by
parents  with  regard  to  their  children;  they  were  dignities
arising  out  of  love,  full  of  respect  and  veneration ;  not  because
parents  gave  their  children  birth,  but  because  they  gave  them


Divine  Providence  157

instruction  and  wisdom,  which  is  a  second  birth,  in  itself
spiritual,  because  it  was  the  birth  of  their  spirit.  This  was
the  only  dignity  in  the  most  ancient  times,  because  then
nations,  families,  and  households  lived  apart,  and  not  under
governments,  as  at  the  present  day.  It  was  the  father  of
the  family  with  whom  that  dignity  resided.  Those  times
were  called  by  the  ancients  the  Golden  Age.  But  after-
wards the  love  of  ruling  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  delight
inherent  in  that  love  gradually  crept  in,  and  as  this  intro-
duced with  it  enmity  and  hostility  against  those  who  would
not  submit,  nations,  families  and  households  were  obliged
to  gather  together  into  communities,  and  appoint  over  them-
selves one  whom  they  at  first  called  a  judge,  afterwards  a
prince,  and  finally  a  king  or  emperor ;  and  then  they  began
to  protect  themselves  by  towers,  mounds  and  walls.  From
the  judge,  prince,  king  or  emperor,  the  lust  of  dominion  spread
like  a  contagion  among  many,  as  from  the  head  into  the
body ;  this  was  the  origin  of  degrees  of  dignity,  and  of  the
honours  attached  to  them,  and  with  these,  of  the  love  of
self,  and  of  pride  in  one's  own  foresight.  The  same  took
place  with  regard  to  the  love  of  riches.  In  the  most  ancient
times,  when  nations  and  families  dwelt  apart  from  one
another,  there  was  no  other  love  of  riches  than  a  desire  to
possess  the  necessaries  of  life,  which  were  supplied  by  flocks
and  herds,  and  by  the  lands,  fields  and  gardens  which
furnished  them  with  food.  Among  the  necessaries  of  life
were  also  beautiful  houses,  adorned  with  useful  things  of
every  kind,  and  clothing;  in  every  house  the  parents,
children,  menservants  and  maidservants  were  engaged  in
the  care  and  preparation  of  all  these  things.  But  after  the
love  of  dominion  had  invaded  and  destroyed  this  common-
wealth, the  love  of  acquiring  wealth  beyond  their  needs  also
entered,  and  grew  to  such  an  extent  that  it  desired  to  possess
the  wealth  of  all.  These  two  loves  are  like  blood  relations ;
for  he  who  desires  to  have  dominion  over  all  things,  desires
also  to  possess  all  things ;  for  thus  all  others  become  servants,
and  they  alone  are  the  masters.  This  is  evident  from  those
within  the  papal  jurisdiction,  who  have  exalted  their  dominion
even  into  heaven,  to  the  throne  of  the  Lord,  which  they
have  usurped;  for  they  also  seek  to  acquire  the  wealth
of  the  whole  earth,  and  they  add  to  their  hoards  without
end.


158


Divine  Providence


ii.  The  nature  of  the  love  of  dignity  and  riches  for  their  own
sake  ;  and  the  nature  of  the  love  of  dignities  and  riches  for
the  sake  of  uses.  The  love  of  dignities  and  honours  for  their
own  sake  is  the  love  of  self,  or  to  speak  more  exactly,  it  is
the  love  of  dominion  springing  from  the  love  of  self,  and  the
love  of  riches  and  wealth  for  their  own  sake,  is  the  love  of
the  world,  or  to  speak  more  exactly,  the  love  of  getting
possession  of  the  goods  of  others  by  any  means  whatsoever.
But  the  love  of  dignities  and  riches  for  the  sake  of  uses,  is
the  love  of  uses,  which  is  the  same  as  the  love  of  the  neigh-
bour ;  for  that  for  the  sake  of  which  a  man  acts  is  the  end
for  which  he  acts,  and  is  first  or  primary,  but  other  things
are  means,  and  are  secondary.  As  to  the  love  of  dignities
and  honours  for  their  own  sake,  which  is  the  same  as  the  love
of  self, — or  more  exactly,  a  love  of  rule  derived  from  the
love  of  self, — it  is  the  love  of  the  selfhood,  and  man's  self-
hood is  entirely  evil.  Man  is  therefore  said  to  be  born  into
every  kind  of  evil,  and  his  hereditary  nature  to  be  nothing
but  evil.  Man's  hereditary  nature  is  his  selfhood,  in  which
he  is  immersed,  and  into  which  he  has  come  through  the  love
of  self,  and  especially  through  the  love  of  ruling  inspired  by
the  love  of  self ;  for  the  man  who  is  in  bondage  to  that  love
regards  only  himself,  and  so  immerses  his  thoughts  and
affections  in  his  selfhood.  This  is  why  the  love  of  self  con-
tains the  love  of  doing  evil.  The  reason  is  that  the  man
does  not  love  his  neighbour,  but  himself  alone,  and  one  who
loves  himself  alone  sees  others  only  as  apart  from  himself,
or  as  worthless  and  of  no  account,  whom  he  despises  in  com-
parison with  himself,  thinking  nothing  of  inflicting  injury
on  them.  This  is  why  one  who  is  imbued  with  the  love  of
ruling  arising  from  the  love  of  self,  thinks  nothing  of  de-
frauding his  neighbour,  committing  adultery  with  his  neigh-
bour's wife,  slandering  him,  cherishing  revengeful  feelings
against  him,  so  as  even  to  desire  to  put  him  to  death,  raging
against  him,  and  so  forth.  Man  derives  this  character  from
the  fact  that  the  devil  himself,  with  whom  he  is  united  and
by  whom  he  is  led,  is  nothing  but  the  love  of  ruling  inspired  by
the  love  of  self ;  and  he  who  is  led  by  the  devil,  that  is,  by
hell,  is  led  into  all  those  evils ;  •  and  he  is  continually  led
by  means  of  the  pleasure  which  those  evils  give  him.  This
is  why  all  in  hell  desire  to  do  evil  to  all;  but  all  in  heaven
desire  to  do  good  to  all.    From  this  opposition  there  results


Divine  Providence  159

the  middle  state  in  which  man  is ;  he  is  as  it  were  in  equili-
brium,, so  that  he  can  turn  either  to  hell  or  to  heaven;  so
far  as  he  favours  the  evils  of  the  love  of  self,  he  turns  towards
hell,  but  so  far  as  he  expels  those  evils  from  himself,  he
turns  towards  heaven.  I  have  been  permitted  to  feel  the
nature  and  extent  of  the  delight  of  the  love  of  ruling  from  the
love  of  self.  It  was  induced  upon  me  in  order  that  I  might
understand  it,  and  I  found  it  to  exceed  all  worldly  deHghts ;
it  filled  the  whole  mind  from  its  inmost  recesses  to  its
ultimates,  but  it  was  only  felt  in  the  body  as  something
agreeable  and  pleasant  expanding  the  heart ;  and  I  was
made  to  realise  that  from  that  deHght,  as  from  their  fountain,
gushed  forth  the  delights  of  all  evils,  such  as  adultery,  re-
venge, fraud,  blasphemy  and  evil-doing  in  general.  There
is  also  a  similar  delight  in  the  love  of  possessing  the  property
of  others  by  whatsoever  means,  and  in  its  derivative
lusts;  but  this  delight  is  not  so  keen,  unless  this  love  is
united  with  the  love  of  self.  But  as  regards  the  love  of
dignities  and  riches  valued  not  for  their  own  sake  but  for
the  sake  of  uses,  this  is  not  a  love  of  the  dignities  and  riches,
but  of  the  uses  to  be  performed  by  means  of  them ;  this  is  a
heavenly  love.  But  more  will  be  said  on  this  subject  later,
iii.  These  two  loves  are  as  distinct  from  each  other  as  hell
and  heaven.  This  is  evident  from  what  has  just  been  said ;
I  will  add,  that  all  whosoever  they  may  be,  whether  high  or
low,  who  are  in  the  love  of  dominating  over  others  from  the
love  of  self,  are  as  to  their  spirit  in  hell,  and  that  all  who  are
in  that  love  are  in  the  love  of  all  evils ;  if  they  do  not  commit
them  all,  yet  in  their  spirit  they  consider  them  allowable,
and  consequently  they  commit  them  when  they  are  not
restrained  by  their  love  of  distinction  and  reputation,  or  fear
of  the  law ;  and  what  is  more,  the  love  of  dominion  from  the
love  of  self  conceals  in  its  inmost  recesses  a  hatred  of  God,
consequently  of  the  divine  things  of  the  Church,  and  especially
of  the  Lord.  If  they  acknowledge  God  they  do  it  only  with
the  lips,  and  if  they  acknowledge  the  divine  things  of  the
Church  they  do  so  from  a  fear  of  losing  their  reputation.
The  reason  why  this  love  conceals  in  its  inmost  recesses  a
hatred  for  the  Lord  is,  that  its  inmost  wish  is  to  be  a  god,
for  it  worships  and  adores  itself  alone.  This  is  why  if  any  one
magnifies  this  love  so  far  as  to  say  that  there  is  divine  wisdom
in  itj  and  that  it  is  the  deity  of  the  world,  it  heartily  loves


i6o  Divine  Providence

him.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  love  of  distinction  and  riches
for  the  sake  of  uses ;  this  is  a  heavenly  love,  because,  as  was
said  above,  it  is  identical  with  the  love  of  the  neighbour.
By  use  is  meant  good,  and  therefore  by  performing  a  use  is
meant  doing  good,  and  by  performing  a  use  or  doing  good  is
meant  being  of  service  to  others  and  helping  them.  Although
such  men  may  enjoy  distinction  and  wealth,  they  regard  them
only  as  a  means  for  performing  uses,  or  for  serving  and  helping
others.  These  are  meant  by  the  Lord's  words  :  "  Whosoever
would  be  great  among  you,  let  him  be  your  minister,  and
whosoever  would  be  first  among  you,  let  him  be  your  servant "
(Matt.  XX.  26,  27).  These  also  are  they  to  whom  dominion  is
entrusted  by  the  Lord;  for  dominion  is  to  them  a  means
of  performing  uses  or  doing  good,  thus  of  serving  others;
and  when  use  or  good  is  the  end  of  love,  it  is  not  they  who
rule  but  the  Lord,  for  all  good  is  from  Him.

iv.  It  is  difficult  for  men  to  understand  the  difference  between
these  loves.  This  is  because  most  of  those  who  possess  dignity
and  wealth  also  perform  uses  ;  but  they  do  not  know  whether
they  do  so  for  their  own  sake,  or  for  the  sake  of  the  uses,  and
they  know  it  the  less  because  in  the  love  of  self  and  of  the
world,  there  is  more  of  the  fire  and  ardour  of  performing
uses,  than  with  those  who  are  not  in  the  love  of  self  and  the
world ;  the  former  perform  uses  for  the  sake  of  reputation
or  gain,  thus  for  their  own  benefit ;  but  those  who  perform
uses  for  the  sake  of  use,  or  do  good  for  the  sake  of  good,  act
not  from  themselves  but  from  the  Lord.  It  is  difficult  for
any  one  to  distinguish  the  difference  between  these  motives,
because  a  man  does  not  know  whether  he  is  led  by  the  devil
or  by  the  Lord.  He  who  is  led  by  the  devil  performs  uses
for  the  sake  of  himself  and  the  world,  but  he  who  is  led  by
the  Lord  performs  uses  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord  and  heaven ;
and  all  who  shun  evils  as  sins  perform  uses  from  the  Lord,
but  all  who  do  not  shun  evils  as  sins  perform  uses  from  the
devil ;  for  evil  is  the  devil,  and  use  or  good  is  the  Lord.  In
this  way  and  in  no  other  can  the  difference  be  known.  Out-
wardly they  look  alike,  but  inwardly  they  are  utterly  unlike ;
one  is  like  dross  plated  with  gold,  but  the  other  is  like  solid
gold;  one  is  like  artificial  fruit,  which  looks  like  real  fruit,
although  it  is  coloured  wax,  containing  within  it  dust  or
bitumen,  while  the  other  is  like  a  fine  fruit,  with  a  delightful
taste  and  smell,  and  containing  seeds  within  it.


Divine  Providence  i6i

216.  II.  Eternal  things  relate  to  spiritual  honours  and
wealth,  which  in  heaven  consist  of  love  and  ivisdom.  As  the
delights  of  the  love  of  self,  which  are  also  the  delights  of  the
lusts  of  evil,  are  considered  good  by  the  natural  man,  and
as  he  confirms  himself  in  the  belief  that  they  are  really  good,
he  calls  honours  and  wealth  divine  blessings.  But  when
the  natural  man  sees  that  the  evil  as  well  as  the  good  are
raised  to  honours  and  advanced  to  wealth,  and  still  more
when  he  sees  the  good  despised  and  in  poverty,  and  the  evil
in  glory  and  possessing  wealth,  he  says  to  himself :  "  Why
is  this  ?  It  cannot  be  the  work  of  the  divine  Providence ;
for  if  it  governed  all  things,  it  would  heap  honours  and  wealth
upon  the  good,  and  would  inflict  poverty  and  contempt  upon
the  evil,  and  would  thus  force  the  evil  to  acknowledge  that
there  is  a  God,  and  a  divine  Providence."  But  the  natural
man,  unless  enlightened  by  the  spiritual  man,  that  is,  unless
he  is  at  the  same  time  spiritual,  does  not  see  that  honours
and  wealth  may  be  blessings,  but  may  also  be  curses ;  and
that  when  they  are  blessings  they  are  from  God,  and  when
curses,  from  the  devil.  That  honours  and  wealth  are  also
given  by  the  devil  is  well  known,  for  on  this  account  he  is
called  the  prince  of  the  world.  Now  as  it  is  not  known  when
honours  and  wealth  are  blessings,  and  when  they  are  curses,
the  facts  of  the  case  must  be  stated  in  the  following  order  : —

i.  Honour  and  wealth  are  sometimes  blessings  and  some-
times curses.

ii.  When  honour  and  wealth  are  blessings,  they  are  spiritual
and  eternal,  but  when  they  are  curses,  they  are  temporal  and
transitory.

iii.  Honour  and  wealth  as  curses,  when  compared  to  those
which  are  blessings,  are  as  nothing  to  everything,  or  as  that
which  is  intrinsically  non-existent  to  that  which  intrinsically
exists.

217.  These  three  propositions  must  now  be  explained
separately.

i.  Honour  and  wealth  are  sometimes  blessings  and  some-
times curses.  General  experience  testifies  that  both  the
pious  and  the  impious,  or  both  the  just  and  the  unjust,  that
is,  both  the  good  and  the  wicked  enjoy  dignities  and  wealth ;
and  yet  it  cannot  be  denied  by  any  one  that  the  impious  and
unjust,  that  is,  the  wicked,  go  to  hell,  while  the  pious  and
just,  that  is,  the  good,  go  to  heaven.    This  being  so,  it  follows

M


1 62  Divine  Providence

that  dignities  and  riches^  or  honour  and  weahh  are  either
blessings  or  curses^  and  that  they  are  blessings  to  the  good
and  curses  to  the  evil.  In  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell
(nos.  357-365),  it  is  shown  that  there  are  in  heaven  and  in
hell  both  those  who  had  been  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low;
this  shows  that  dignities  and  riches  were  blessings  in  the
world  to  those  who  are  now  in  heaven,  and  that  they  were
curses  in  the  world  to  those  now  in  hell.  But  the  reason
why  they  are  blessings,  or  curses,  will  be  evident  to  any  one
who  reflects  upon  the  subject  intelligently;  for  he  will  see
that  they  are  blessings  to  those  who  do  not  set  their  hearts
upon  them,  and  curses  to  those  who  do.  To  set  the  heart
upon  them  is  to  love  oneself  in  them;  and  not  to  set  the
heart  upon  them  is  to  love  use,  and  not  self,  in  them.  The
nature  of  the  difference  between  these  two  loves  was  stated
above  (no.  215).  It  may  be  further  stated  that  dignities
and  wealth  seduce  some  men  and  not  others.  They  seduce
when  they  excite  the  love  of  man's  selfhood,  which  is  self-
love,  and  it  was  stated  above  that  this  is  the  love  of  hell,
which  is  called  the  devil ;  but  they  do  not  seduce  when  they
do  not  excite  this  love.  The  reason  why  the  wicked  as  well
as  the  good  are  exalted  to  honour  and  advanced  to  wealth
is,  that  they  equally  with  the  good  perform  uses;  but  the
wicked  do  so  for  the  sake  of  their  own  and  profit  and  advan-
tage, but  the  good,  for  the  sake  of  the  profit  and  advantage
of  the  object  for  which  they  work.  The  good  regard  the
profit  and  advantage  of  the  thing  itself  as  of  primary  im-
portance, and  their  own  as  secondary ;  but  the  wicked  regard
their  own  profit  and  advantage  as  primary  and  those  of  the
object  as  secondary.  But  who  does  not  see  that  the  person,
his  office,  and  his  honour,  are  for  the  sake  of  the  thing  that
he  administers,  and  not  the  contrary  ?  Who  cannot  see  that
the  judge  exists  for  the  sake  of  justice,  the  magistrate  for  the
sake  of  the  common  welfare,  and  the  king  for  the  sake  of
the  kingdom,  and  not  the  contrary?  And  therefore  every
one,  according  to  the  laws  of  any  kingdom,  receives  dignity
and  honour  according  to  the  dignity  of  his  function;  and
there  is  a  distinction  among  these  like  that  between  the
principal  and  the  instrumental.  He  who  attributes  to  him-
self or  to  his  own  person  the  honour  belonging  to  the  object,
is  represented  in  the  spiritual  world  as  a  man  with  the  body
inverted,  feet  upwards  and  head  downwards.


Divine  Providence  163

ii.  When  Jionour  and  wealth  are  blessings  they  are  spiritual
and  eternal ;  but  when  they  are  curses  they  are  temporal  and
transitory.  There  are  honours  and  wealth  in  heaven  as  in
the  world,  for  there  are  governments  there,  and  consequently
administrations  and  offices;  there  is  also  commerce  there,
and  therefore  wealth,  for  there  are  societies  and  communities
in  heaven.  The  whole  heaven  is  divided  into  two  kingdoms,
one  of  which  is  called  the  celestial  and  the  other  the  spiritual
kingdom,  and  each  kingdom  is  divided  into  innumerable
societies  both  greater  and  smaller,  all  of  which,  with  all  their
inhabitants,  are  arranged  according  to  differences  of  love
and  consequently  of  wisdom ;  the  communities  of  the  celestial
kingdom  are  arranged  according  to  the  differences  of  celestial
love  or  love  to  the  Lord ;  and  the  communities  of  the  spiritual
kingdom  according  to  the  differences  of  spiritual  love  or  love
to  the  neighbour.  As  there  are  such  communities,  and  all
their  members  have  been  men  in  the  world  and  therefore
retain  the  loves  which  they  had  in  the  world  (with  the  differ-
ence that  they  are  now  spiritual,  and  that  the  honours  and
wealth  are  spiritual  in  the  spiritual  kingdom  and  celestial  in
the  celestial  kingdom)  it  follows  that  those  who  have  greater
love  and  wisdom  than  others  enjoy  greater  honour  and
wealth,  and  are  those  to  whom  dignities  and  wealth  had
been  blessings  in  the  world.  From  this  it  may  be  seen  that
spiritual  honour  and  wealth  belong  to  the  function,  and  not
to  the  person.  Persons  who  are  in  positions  of  dignity  there
are  indeed  surrounded  by  magnificence  like  that  of  earthly
kings ;  but  they  pay  no  regard  to  the  dignity  itself,  but  only
to  the  uses  in  the  administration  and  discharge  of  which  they
are  engaged.  They  accept  the  honours  belonging  to  their
position,  but  they  do  not  attribute  them  to  themselves,  but
to  the  uses ;  and  as  all  uses  come  from  the  Lord,  they  attri-
bute them  to  the  Lord,  from  whom  they  are  derived.  Such
therefore  are  the  spiritual  distinctions  and  wealth  which
are  eternal.  But  the  case  is  different  with  those  to  whom
honour  and  wealth  in  the  world  were  curses.  As  they  attri-
buted them  to  themselves  and  not  to  the  uses,  and  did  not
desire  that  uses  should  govern  them  but  that  they  should
control  uses,  regarding  them  as  uses  only  so  far  as  they  were
serviceable  to  their  own  honour  and  glory,  they  are  in  hell,
and  are  common  slaves  there,  despised  and  poverty-stricken.
Now  as  honour  and  wealth  of  this  kind  perish,  they  are


164


Divine  Providence


called  temporary  and  transitory.  As  regards  these  two
classes  the  Lord  teaches  thus  :  "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves
treasures  upon  earth,  where  moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,
and  where  thieves  break  through  and  steal ;  but  lay  up  for
yourselves  treasures  in  heaven,  where  neither  moth  nor  rust
doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor
steal;  for  where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  heart  be
also"  (Matt.  vi.  19-21).

iii.  Honour  and  wealth  as  curses,  when  compared  with  those
which  are  blessings,  are  as  nothing  to  everything,  or  as  that  which
is  intrinsically  non-existent  to  that  which  intrinsically  exists.
Everything  which  perishes  and  ceases  to  be  is  intrinsically
nothing;  outwardly,  indeed,  it  is  something,  indeed  it  may
seem  to  be  much,  and  to  some  it  may  seem  to  be  all,  while
it  lasts ;  but  inwardly  it  is  nothing.  It  is  like  a  surface  with
nothing  inside  it,  or  like  an  actor  in  royal  robes  when  the
play  is  over.  But  that  which  remains  for  ever  is  always
real,  indeed,  the  only  reality;  and  it  also  really  exists,  be-
cause it  never  ceases  to  be.

218.  IIL  Temporal  and  eternal  things  are  separated  by
man,  but  are  united  by  the  Lord.  The  reason  of  this  is  that
all  things  pertaining  to  man  are  temporary,  and  from  this
point  of  view  man  may  be  called  temporary ;  and  all  things
pertaining  to  the  Lord  are  eternal,  and  therefore  the  Lord
is  called  eternal.  Temporary  things,  too,  are  those  which
have  an  end  and  perish,  but  eternal  things  are  those  which
have  no  end,  and  never  perish.  Any  one  can  see  that  the
two  cannot  be  united  except  by  the  Lord's  infinite  wisdom,
and  thus  that  they  can  be  united  by  the  Lord,  but  not  by
man.  That  the  two  are  separated  by  man,  and  united  by
the  Lord,  shall  be  explained  in  the  following  series  of  articles.

i.  The  nature  of  temporary  things  and  of  eternal  things.

ii,  Man  is  in  himself  temporary,  and  the  Lord  is  in  Himself
eternal;  and  therefore  nothing  can  proceed  from  man  but
what  is  temporary,  and  from  the  Lord  nothing  but  what  is
eternal.

iii.  Temporary  things  disjoin  eternal  things  from  them-
selves, and  eternal  things  conjoin  temporary  things  to
themselves.

iv.  The  Lord  unites  man  with  Himself  by  means  of
appearances.

V.  He  also  does  so  by  means  of  correspondences.


Divine  Providence  165

219.  But  these  propositions  must  be  explained  and
established  one  by  one.

i.  The  nature  of  temporary  things  and  of  eternal  things.
Temporary  things  are  all  those  that  are  proper  to  nature
and  are  consequently  proper  to  man.  The  things  proper
to  nature  are  especially  space  and  time,  both  of  them  having
limit  and  termination ;  the  things  proper  to  man,  dependent
on  these,  are  those  of  his  will  and  understanding,  and  conse-
quently of  his  affection  and  thought,  and  especially  of  his
prudence ;  it  is  well  known  that  these  are  finite  and  limited.
But  eternal  things  are  all  those  proper  to  the  Lord,  which
by  derivation  from  Him  are,  as  it  were,  proper  to  man.
The  things  proper  to  the  Lord  are  all  infinite  and  eternal,
thus  apart  from  time,  and  consequently  without  limit  or
end.  The  things  which  by  derivation  from  these  are,  as  it
were,  proper  to  man,  are  likewise  infinite  and  eternal;  yet
no  part  of  them  is  man's,  but  they  are  of  the  Lord  alone  in
man.

ii.  Man  is  in  himself  temporary,  and  the  Lord  is  in  Himself
eternal ;  and  therefore  nothing  can  proceed  from  man  but  what
is  temporary,  and  from  the  Lord  nothing  but  what  is  eternal.
It  was  stated  above  that  man  is  in  himself  temporary,  and
the  Lord  is  in  Himself  eternal.  As  nothing  can  proceed
from  any  one  but  that  which  is  in  him,  it  follows  that  nothing
can  proceed  from  man  but  w^hat  is  temporary,  and  nothing
from  the  Lord  but  what  is  eternal.  For  the  infinite  carmot
proceed  from  the  finite ;  to  say  that  it  can  is  a  contradiction.
Still  the  infinite  can  proceed  from  the  finite,  yet  not  from  the
finite  itself,  but  through  the  finite  from  the  infinite ;  on  the
other  hand,  the  finite  cannot  proceed  from  the  infinite;  to
say  that  it  can  is  also  a  contradiction ;  yet  the  finite  can  be
produced  by  the  infinite,  but  this  is  not  proceeding,  but
creation.  On  this  subject  see  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,
from  beginning  to  end ;  and  therefore,  when  there  proceeds
from  the  Lord  what  is  finite,  as  is  the  case  with  many  things
in  man,  it  does  not  proceed  from  the  Lord  but  from  the
man ;  but  we  may  speak  of  its  being  from  the  Lord  through
the  man,  because  it  appears  to  be  so.  This  statement  may
be  illustrated  by  these  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  But  let  your
discourse  be  Yea,  yea ;  Nay,  nay ;  for  whatsoever  is  beyond
these  is  from  evil  "  (Matt.  v.  37).  Such  is  the  manner  of
speaking  of  all  in  the  third  heaven,  for  they  never  reason


1 66  Divine  Providence

about  divine  things,  whether  anything  is  true  or  not,  for
they  see  intuitively  from  the  Lord  whether  it  is  true  or  not,
and  therefore  all  reasoning  about  divine  things,  as  to  whether
this  or  that  is  true,  is  a  consequence  of  the  reasoner  not
seeing  them  from  the  Lord,  but  desiring  to  see  from  himself ;
and  what  man  sees  from  himself  is  evil.  But  the  Lord
continually  wills  not  only  that  a  man  should  think  and
speak  of  divine  things,  but  also  should  reason  about  them,
to  the  end  that  he  may  come  to  see  whether  a  statement
is  true  or  not;  and  this  thought,  discussion  or  reasoning,
provided  the  end  is  to  see  the  truth,  may  be  said  to  be  from
the  Lord  with  the  man ;  but  it  is  from  the  man  himself,  until
he  sees  the  truth  and  acknowledges  it.  ]\Ie?mwhile  the  Lord
alone  gives  him  the  power  of  thinking,  speaking,  and  reason-
ing ;  for  man  has  this  power  from  the  two  faculties  of  liberty
and  rationality,  and  he  has  these  from  the  Lord  alone.

iii.  Temporary  things  disjoin  eternal  things  from  themselves,
and  eternal  things  conjoin  temporary  things  to  themselves.
That  temporary  things  disjoin  eternal  things  from  themselves
means  that  man  does  so,  because  he  is  temporary,  on  account
of  the  temporary  things  in  himself;  and  that  eternal  things
conjoin  temporary  things  to  themselves  means  that  the  Lord
does  do,  because"  He  is  eternal  from  the  eternal  things  in
Himself,  as  was  said  above  (no.  218).  In  the  foregoing  pages
it  has  been  shown  that  there  is  a  union  of  the  Lord  with  man,
and  a  reciprocal  union  of  man  with  the  Lord ;  but  that  the
reciprocal  union  of  man  with  the  Lord  is  not  from  man,  but
from  the  Lord ;  also  that  man's  will  opposes  the  Lord's  will,
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  man's  own  prudence  opposes  the
Lord's  divine  Providence.  From  this  it  follows  that  man
from  his  own  temporary  things  separates  from  himself  the
Lord's  eternal  things,  but  that  the  Lord  unites  His  eternal
things  with  man's  temporary  things,  that  is,  Himself  with
man  and  man  with  Himself.  As  these  points  have  been  fully
dealt  with  above,  further  confirmation  is  not  necessary.

iv.  The  Lord  unites  man  with  Himself  by  means  of  appear-
ances. For  the  appearance  is  that  man  from  himself  loves
his  neighbour,  does  good,  and  speaks  the  truth.  Unless
these  appeared  to  man  to  be  from  himself,  he  would  not  love
the  neighbour,  do  good,  or  speak  truth,  and  in  that  case  he
would  not  be  united  to  the  Lord.  But  as  love,  good,  and
truth  are  from  the  Lord,  it  is  evident  that  the  Lord  unites


Divine  Providence  167

man  with  Himself  by  means  of  appearances.  But  of  this
appearance^  and  of  the  Lord's  union  with  man,  and  of  man's
reciprocal  union  by  this  means  with  the  Lord,  enough  has  been
said  above.

V.  The  Lord  unites  jnan  to  Himself  by  means  of  correspon-
dences. This  is  done  by  means  of  the  Word,  whose  literal
sense  consists  of  pure  correspondences.  That  by  the  literal
sense  there  is  a  union  of  the  Lord  with  man,  and  a  reciprocal
union  of  man  with  the  Lord,  is  shoA\Ti  in  the  Doctrine  of
the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture,  from
begirming  to  end.

220.  IV.  The  Lord's  divine  Providence  consists  in  the  union
of  temporal  with  eternal  things  in  man.  As  statements  of
this  kind  do  not  carry  conviction  at  first  sight,  unless  they  are
first  reduced  to  a  connected  series  of  propositions,  and  set
forth  and  explained  in  sequence,  the  following  series  shall  be
adopted.

i.  It  is  of  the  divine  Providence  that  m.an  by  death  puts
off  that  which  is  natural  and  temporary,  and  puts  on  that
which  is  spiritual  and  eternal.

ii.  The  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  unites  Himself  with
natural  things  by  spiritual  things,  and  with  temporary  things
by  eternal  things,  according  to  uses.

iii.  The  Lord  unites  Himself  with  uses  by  correspondences,
and  thus  by  appearances  as  confirmed  by  man.

iv.  This  union  of  temporary  and  eternal  things  is  the  divine
Providence.  But  these  statements  will  be  made  clearer
by  explanation.

i.  It  is  of  the  divine  Providence  that  man  by  death  puts  off
that  which  is  statural  and  temporary,  and  puts  on  that  which
is  spiritual  and  eternal.  Natural  and  temporary  things  are
the  outmost  external  and  ultimate  things  into  which  man  is
initiated  at  birth,  in  order  that  he  may  afterwards  be  intro-
duced into  interior  and  higher  things ;  for  the  externals  and
ultimates  are  in  the  natural  world,  and  are  the  supports  of
interior  things.  This  is  why  no  angel  or  spirit  has  been
created  immediately,  but  all  of  them  were  born  men  first,
and  afterwards  led  into  heaven.  Consequently  they  possess
the  most  external  and  ultimate  coverings  which  are  fixed
and  constant,  and  within  which  and  by  which  interior  things
can  be  held  in  connection  with  each  other.  Man  first
puts  on  the  grosser  things  of  nature  which  compose  his  body;


1 68  Divine  Providence

but  by  death  he  puts  these  off,  and  retains  the  purer  things
of  nature  which  are  nearest  to  spiritual  things;  and  these
are  then  his  integuments.  Furthermore,  all  interior  or  higher
things  coexist  in  the  outermost  or  ultimate,  as  has  already
been  shown  in  the  proper  places  ;  and  therefore  all  the  Lord's
work  includes  first  and  last  things  simultaneously,  and  is
thus  complete.  But  because  the  outermost  and  ultimate
things  of  nature  cannot  receive  the  spiritual  and  eternal
things  for  which  the  human  mind  is  formed,  in  their  intrinsic
nature,  and  yet  man  was  born  to  become  spiritual  and  live
for  ever,  therefore  man  puts  off  the  outer,  and  retains
only  the  inner  natural  things  which  are  adapted  to  and
accord  with  spiritual  and  celestial  things,  and  serve  them  as
coverings;  this  is  effected  by  the  rejection  of  temporary
and  natural  ultimates,  which  takes  place  by  the  death  of  the
body.

ii.  The  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  unites  Himself  with
natural  things  by  spiritual  things,  and  with  temporary  things
by  eternal  things,  according  to  uses.  Natural  and  temporary
things  are  not  only  those  which  belong  to  nature,  but  also
those  which  belong  to  men  in  the  natural  world.  Man  puts
off  both  by  death,  and  puts  on  spiritual  and  eternal  things
corresponding  to  them.  That  he  puts  these  on  according  to
uses,  has  been  fully  explained  in  the  foregoing  pages.  The
natural  things  proper  to  nature  have  relation  in  general  to
time  and  space,  and  especially  to  the  visible  objects  on  the
earth.  Man  leaves  these  at  death,  and  in  place  of  them  he
receives  spiritual  things,  which  are  similar  externally  or  in
appearance,  but  not  internally  or  as  to  their  very  essence;
this  has  also  been  dealt  with  above.  The  temporary  things
belonging  to  men  in  the  natural  world  relate  in  general  to
honour  and  wealth,  and  especially  to  food,  clothing  and
habitation,  which  are  needed  by  every  man.  These  also  are
abandoned  at  death  and  left  behind,  and  other  things  are
assumed  and  received  which  externally  or  in  appearance  are
similar,  but  not  internally  or  in  essence.  These  all  have
their  internal  character  or  essence  from  the  uses  made  of
temporary  things  in  the  world.  Uses  are  the  goods  of  charity.
From  these  considerations  it  should  be  evident  that  the  Lord
by  his  divine  Providence  unites  spiritual  and  eternal  things
with  natural  and  temporary  things  according  to  uses.

iii.  The  Lord  unites  Himself  with  uses  by  correspondences,


Divine  Providence  169

and  thus  by  appearances  as  confirmed  by  man.  But  as  these
statements  must  seem  obscure  to  those  who  have  not  yet
gained  a  clear  idea  about  the  nature  of  correspondence  and
appearance,  they  must  be  illustrated  by  examples  and  thus
explained.  All  things  in  the  Word  are  pure  correspondences
of  spiritual  and  celestial  things,  and  being  correspondences
they  are  also  appearances ;  that  is,  all  things  in  the  Word  are
divine  Goods  of  the  divine  Love,  and  divine  Truths  of  the
divine  Wisdom, which  intrinsically  are  bare,  but  in  the  literal
sense  of  the  Word  are  clothed.  They  are  therefore  like  a
man  clothed  with  a  garment  which  corresponds  to  the  state
of  his  love  and  wisdom.  This  shows  that  to  take  appearances
for  realities  is  like  supposing  that  garments  are  men ;  in  that
case  appearances  become  fallacies.  It  is  otherwise  if  a  man
seeks  out  truths,  and  sees  them  in  the  appearances.  Now  as
all  uses,  or  the  truths  and  goods  of  neighbourly  charity,  may
be  performed  either  according  to  the  appearances  in  the
Word,  or  according  to  its  very  truths,  if  a  man  performs
them  according  to  the  appearances  which  have  become  firmly
established  in  his  mind  as  real  truths,  he  is  the  victim  of
fallacies ;  but  if  he  does  them  according  to  real  truths,  he  does
them  as  he  ought.  These  considerations  should  show
what  is  meant  by  the  Lord's  uniting  Himself  with  uses  by
correspondences,  and  thus  by  appearance  as  confirmed  by
man.

iv.  This  union  of  temporary  and  eternal  things  is  the  divine
Providence.  To  make  this  clearer  let  us  take  two  examples,
one  relating  to  dignities  and  honours,  and  another  relating
to  riches  and  wealth.  Both  are  natural  and  temporary
in  external  form,  but  in  their  internal  form  they  are  spiritual
and  eternal.  Dignities  and  the  honours  attached  to  them
are  natural  and  temporal  when  man  regards  himself  personally
in  them,  and  not  the  commonwealth  and  uses ;  for  he  then
cannot  but  think  to  himself  that  the  commonwealth  exists
for  him,  and  not  he  for  the  commonwealth.  He  is  like  a
king  who  thinks  that  the  kingdom  and  all  its  people  exist
for  him,  and  not  that  he  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom
and  its  inhabitants.  But  these  same  dignities  with  the
honours  attached  to  them,  are  spiritual  and  eternal  when  a
man  regards  himself  personally  as  existing  only  for  the  sake
of  the  commonwealth  and  its  uses,  and  not  these  as  existing
for  his  own  benefit.     If  he  does  this  he  is  in  the  truth  and  in


lyo  Divine  Providence

the  essence  of  his  dignity  and  honour ;  but  if  he  does  the  former
he  is  deluded  by  correspondence  and  appearance ;  and  if  he
confirms  himself  in  these  he  is  the  victim  of  fallacies,  and  is
connected  with  the  Lord  only  as  those  are  who  are  in  falsities
and  in  the  evils  derived  from  them;  for  fallacies  are  the
falsities  with  which  evils  unite  themselves.  They  have
indeed  performed  uses  and  done  good,  but  from  themselves
and  not  from  the  Lord ;  they  have  therefore  put  themselves
in  the  Lord's  place.  It  is  the  same  with  riches  and  power,
which  also  are  either  natural  and  temporary',  or  spiritual
and  eternal.  Riches  and  power  are  natural  and  temporary
with  those  who  think  of  them  only,  and  of  themselves  in
connection  with  them,  finding  in  these  two  gratifications
all  their  pleasure  and  delight ;  but  the  same  things  are  spiritual
and  eternal  with  those  who  regard  good  uses  in  them,  and  find
in  these  an  inward  pleasure  and  delight.  With  these  even
the  outward  pleasure  and  delight  become  spiritual,  and  the
temporary  becomes  eternal.  Therefore  after  death  they  are
in  heaven,  and  they  live  there  in  palaces  the  furniture  of
which  shines  with  gold  and  precious  stones ;  these,  however,
they  regard  only  as  externals,  bright,  and  translucent  with
the  internal  uses  from  which  flow  the  pleasure  and  delight
which  are  the  essential  joy  and  happiness  of  heaven.  Quite
contrary  is  the  lot  of  those  who  have  valued  riches  and  power
solely  as  possessions  for  themselves,  thus  for  external  and  not
at  the  same  time  for  internal  reasons,  or  for  what  they  seem,
and  not  for  what  they  really  are.  When  they  relinquish  these
at  death,  they  assume  the  corresponding  internals  which,
not  being  spiritual,  cannot  but  be  infernal ;  for  inwardly  they
must  be  either  the  one  or  the  other,  they  cannot  be  both.
And  so  instead  of  being  rich  and  wealthy  they  become  poor
and  destitute.  By  uses  are  meant  not  only  the  necessaries
of  life,  that  is,  food,  clothing  and  habitation  for  oneself  and
one's  dependants,  but  also  the  good  of  one's  country,  the  good
of  society,  and  the  good  of  one's  fellow-citizens.  Commerce
is  such  a  good,  when  the  love  of  it  is  the  chief  motive,  and  the
love  of  money  is  subordinate,  provided  the  merchant  shuns
and  detests  fraud  and  double  dealing,  as  sins.  It  is  different
when  the  love  of  money  is  the  chief  end,  and  the  love  of  com-
merce subordinate,  for  this  is  avarice  which  is  the  root  of
evil.  (See  Luke  xii.  15;  and  the  parable  concerning  it  in
verses  16-21.)


Div^ine  Providence  171


A  MAN  IS  XOT  ADMITTED  TO  AN  INWARD  PERCEPTION  OF  THE
TRUTHS  OF  FAITH  AND  OF  THE  GOODS  OF  CHARITY,  UNLESS
HE  CAN  BE  KEPT  IN  THESE  STATES  TO  THE  END  OF  HIS
LIFE

221.  It  is  known  in  the  Christian  world  that  the  Lord
desires  the  salvation  of  all  and  that  He  is  almighty;  and
many  infer  from  this  that  He  is  able  to  save  every  one,  and
that  He  saves  those  who  implore  His  mercy,  especially  those
who  do  this  according  to  the  formula  of  the  received  faith,
namely,  that  God  the  Father  will  be  merciful  for  the  sake
of  the  Son,  and  more  especially  if  at  the  same  time  they
pray  that  they  may  receive  that  faith.  It  will  be  seen  in
the  final  section  of  this  work  that  this  view  is  entirely  erro-
neous ;  it  will  there  be  explained  that  the  Lord  cannot  act
contrary  to  the  laws  of  His  divine  Providence,  because  to
do  so  would  be  to  act  against  His  own  divine  Love  and
Wisdom,  thus  against  Himself ;  and  it  will  be  seen  that  such
immediate  mercy  is  not  possible,  because  the  salvation  of
man  is  effected  by  means,  and  none  but  the  Lord,  who  wills
the  salvation  of  all  and  is  at  the  same  time  omnipotent,  can
lead  man  according  to  these  means.  The  means  by  which
man  is  led  by  the  Lord  are  what  are  called  the  laws  of  the
divine  Providence ;  among  them  is  this,  that  a  man  is  not
admitted  to  an  inward  perception  of  the  truths  of  wisdom
and  the  goods  of  love  except  so  far  as  he  can  be  kept  in
these  states  to  the  end  of  his  Hfe.  But  to  make  this  clear,
it  shall  be  explained  in  the  following  order  :

I.  A  man  may  be  initiated  into  wisdom  respecting  spiritual
things,  and  even  into  a  love  for  them,  and  yet  not  be  reformed.

II.  If  a  man  afterwards  repudiates  them,  and  lapses  into
contrary  states,  he  profanes  holy  things.

III.  There  are  many  other  kinds  of  profanation,  but  this
is  the  worst.

IV.  The  Lord  therefore  does  not  admit  a  man  to  an  inward
perception  of  the  truths  of  wisdom  and  at  the  same  time  of
the  goods  of  love,  unless  he  can  be  kept  in  these  states  to
the  end  of  his  Hfe.

222.  I.  A  man  may  be  initiated  into  wisdom  respecting
spiritual  things,  and  even  into  a  love  for  them,  and  yet  not  be
reformed.  The  reason  is  that  man  possesses  rationality  and
liberty ;  by  his  rationality  he  can  be  raised  to  wisdom  almost


172  Divine  Providence

angelic,  and  by  liberty  to  love  not  unlike  angelic  love.
Nevertheless,  his  wisdom  is  of  the  same  character  as  his
love;  if  his  love  is  celestial  and  spiritual,  his  wisdom  also
becomes  celestial  and  spiritual,  but  if  his  love  is  diabolical
and  infernal,  his  wisdom  is  also  diabolical  and  infernal.
His  wisdom,  indeed,  in  its  outward  form,  and  thus  to  other
people,  may  appear  to  be  celestial  and  spiritual,  but  in  its
inward  form,  which  is  its  very  essence,  it  is  diabolical  and
infernal,  as  it  exists  in  him,  not  as  regarded  in  itself.  It
does  not  seem  to  be  so  to  men,  because  they  are  natural,
and  they  see  and  hear  naturally,  and  the  outward  form  is
natural.  But  it  is  seen  to  be  so  by  the  angels,  because  they
are  spiritual,  and  see  and  hear  spiritually;  and  the  inward
form  is  spiritual.  This  shows  that  a  man  may  become  wise,
or  even  acquire  a  love  for  spiritual  things,  and  yet  not  be
reformed;  but  in  that  case  he  acquires  only  a  natural,  and
not  a  spiritual  love  of  them.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  a
man  can  acquire  natural  love  for  himself,  but  the  Lord
alone  can  endow  him  with  spiritual  love ;  and  those  who  are
endowed  with  this  love  are  reformed,  but  those  who  acquire
natural  love  only  are  not  reformed.  For  the  latter  are  for
the  most  part  hypocrites,  and  many  of  them  Jesuits,  who
do  not  inwardly  believe  in  anything  divine,  although  like
soothsayers  they  juggle  with  divine  things.

223.  I  have  learnt  by  much  experience  in  the  spiritual
world  that  man  is  capable  of  understanding  the  arcana  of
wisdom  like  the  angels  themselves.  For  I  have  seen  fiery
devils  who,  when  they  heard  arcana  of  wisdom,  not  only
understood  them  but  also  talked  about  them  from  their
own  rational  perceptions;  but  as  soon  as  they  returned
to  their  infernal  love,  they  no  longer  understood  them,  but
on  the  contrary,  instead  of  them,  things  which  were  mere
insanities,  which  they  then  called  wisdom.  I  have  been  told
that  while  they  were  in  a  state  of  wisdom,  they  laughed  at
their  own  insanity ;  and  afterwards  when  in  a  state  of  insanity,
they  laughed  at  wisdom.  A  man  who  has  been  of  this  nature
in  the  world,  after  death  when  he  becomes  a  spirit,  is  generally
brought  into  alternate  states  of  wisdom  and  insanity,  that
he  may  see  the  one  by  contrast  with  the  other.  But  although,
when  in  a  state  of  wisdom,  they  see  that  they  are  insane,
yet  when  the  choice  is  given  them,  as  it  is  to  every  one,  they
induce  upon  themselves  a  state  of  insanity  and  love  it,  and


Divine  Providence  173

then  they  hate  the  state  of  wisdom.  The  reason  is  that  their
internal  mind  has  been  diaboHcal,  and  their  external  mind,
so  to  speak,  divine.  These  are  meant  by  the  devils  who
make  themselves  angels  of  light,  and  by  the  man  who  at
the  wedding,  was  not  clothed  in  a  wedding  garment,  and
was  cast  into  outer  darkness  (Matt.  xxii.  11-13).

224.  Who  cannot  see  that  the  external  exists  from  the
internal,  and  consequently  that  the  external  derives  its
essence  from  the  internal  ?  And  who  does  not  know  from
experience  that  the  external  can  appear  different  from  its
internal  essence  ?  For  this  is  evidently  the  case  with  hypo-
crites, flatterers  and  dissemblers;  and  a  man  can  externally
personate  characters  not  his  own,  as  is  evident  from  actors
and  mimics ;  for  they  know  how  to  imitate  to  the  life  the
tone,  language,  face  and  gesture  of  kings,  emperors  and  even
angels,  yet  they  are  but  actors.  This  has  been  mentioned
because  a  man  can  in  a  similar  manner  dissemble  in  civil,
moral  and  spiritual  matters,  and  it  is  well  known  that
many  do  so.  When,  therefore,  the  internal  is  essentially
infernal,  while  the  external  appears  to  be  spiritual,  and  yet
the  external  derives  its  essence  from  the  internal,  as  was
said  above,  the  question  arises  as  to  where  that  essence  is-
concealed  in  the  external.  It  does  not  appear  in  gesture,
tone,  language  or  countenance,  but  it  lies  inwardly  concealed
in  all  four  of  them.  This  is  proved  to  be  true  by  experience
of  such  persons  in  the  spiritual  world ;  for  when  a  man  goes
from  the  natural  into  the  spiritual  world,  which  he  does  at
death,  he  leaves  behind  him  the  external  attributes  of  his
mind  along  with  the  body,  and  retains  the  internal  which
he  had  stored  up  in  his  spirit ;  and  then,  if  his  internal  mind
has  been  hellish,  he  appears  like  a  devil,  such  as  he  was  in
his  spirit  while  he  lived  in  the  world.  Who  does  not  admit
that  every  man  leaves  external  things  together  with  the
body,  and  enters  into  internal  things  when  he  becomes  a
spirit  ?  To  this  I  will  add  that  in  the  spiritual  world  every
one's  affections,  and  the  thoughts  to  which  they  give  rise,
are  perceived  by  others ;  it  is  owing  to  this  that  no  one  in
that  world  can  speak  otherwise  than  as  he  thinks,  and  that
every  one's  countenance  is  changed  there,  and  becomes  the
likeness  of  his  own  affection,  so  that  his  face  becomes  the
index  of  his  character.  Hypocrites  are  sometimes  permitted
to  speak  otherwise  than  as  they  think ;  but  the  tone  of  their


174  Divine  Providence

voice  is  perceived  to  be  wholly  out  of  harmony  with  their
interior  thoughts;  and  by  this  lack  of  harmony  they  are
detected.  This  shows  that  the  internal  mind  is  inwardly
concealed  in  the  tone,  language,  face  and  gesture  of  the
external,  and  that  although  this  is  not  perceived  by  men
in  the  natural  world,  it  is  evident  to  angels  in  the  spiritual
world.

225.  From  these  facts  it  is  clear  that  man,  so  long  as
he  lives  in  the  natural  world,  can  be  initiated  into  wisdom
concerning  spiritual  things,  and  also  into  a  love  for  them,
and  that  this  may  take  place,  and  does  take  place,  as  well
with  those  who  are  merely  natural  as  with  those  who  are
spiritual;  but  there  is  this  difference,  that  the  latter  are
thereby  reformed  but  the  former  are  not.  A  merely  natural
man  may  also  appear  to  love  wisdom;  but  he  only  loves  it
as  an  adulterer  loves  a  noble  woman,  treating  her  as  if  she
were  a  prostitute,  talking  courteously  to  her  and  giving  her
beautiful  garments ;  but  he  says  to  himself  at  home,  "  She
is  no  better  than  a  common  harlot,  whom  I  will  pretend  to
love,  that  she  may  satisfy  my  lust,  but  if  she  should  refuse
to  satisfy  it,  I  would  cast  her  off."  The  internal  man  of
such  a  one  as  is  described  above  is  this  adulterer,  and  his
external  is  this  woman.

226.  II.  //  a  man  afterwards  repudiates  them,  and  lapses
into  contrary  states,  he  profanes  holy  things.  There  are  many
ways  in  which  holy  things  may  be  profaned,  which  will  be
dealt  with  in  a  subsequent  article,  but  this  is  the  most
grievous  of  all ;  for  profaners  of  this  kind  after  death  are  no
longer  men;  they  live,  indeed,  but  in  a  continual  state  of
insane  delusion;  they  seem  to  themselves  to  be  flying  on
high,  and  while  there  they  befool  themselves  with  vain  con-
ceits, and  sport  with  fantastic  appearances  which  they  mistake
for  reahties ;  and  being  no  longer  men,  they  are  not  called
he  and  she,  but  it.  Indeed,  when  seen  in  the  light  of  heaven
they  look  like  skeletons,  some  of  the  colour  of  bone,  some
fiery,  and  others  as  if  scorched.  It  is  not  known  in  the
world  that  this  is  the  lot  after  death  of  profaners,  because
the  cause  is  not  known.  The  reason  is  that  when  a  man
first  acknowledges  divine  things  and  believes  in  them,  and
afterwards  turns  away  from  them  and  denies  them,  he
mingles  together  holy  and  profane  things;  and  then  they
cannot  be  separated  except  by  total  destruction.     But  to


Divine  Providence  175

make  this  more  clear  the  subject  must  be  unfolded  in  the
proper  order,  as  follows  :

i.  Whatever  a  man  in  the  free  exercise  of  his  will,  thinks,
speaks  and  does,  whether  it  be  good  or  evil,  is  incorporated
in  his  nature  and  becomes  permanent  within  him.

ii.  The  Lord  by  His  di\ine  Providence  continually  foresees
and  disposes  man's  states,  so  that  evil  and  good  may  remain
apart,  and  thus  be  separated.

iii.  This  is  impossible  if  a  man  first  acknowledges  the
truths  of  faith  and  lives  according  to  them,  and  afterwards
repudiates  and  denies  them.

iv.  He  thus  commingles  good  and  evil  so  that  they  cannot
be  separated.

v.  As  good  and  e\'il  in  every  human  being  ought  to  be
separated,  and  in  a  profaner  they  cannot  be  separated,  he
is  destroyed  as  to  all  that  is  truly  human.

227.  These  are  the  causes  of  this  enormity;  but  as  they
are  involved  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  they  must  be
explained.

i.  Whatever  a  man  in  the  free  exercise  of  his  will,  thinks,
speaks  and  does,  whether  it  be  good  or  evil,  is  incorporated  in
his  nature  and  becomes  permaneyit  within  him.  This  was
proved  above  (nos.  78-81).  For  man  has  an  external  or
natural  memory,  and  an  internal  or  spiritual  memory.  On
his  spiritual  memory  are  inscribed  all  things  in  general  and
particular  which  he  had  dehberately  chosen  to  think,  speak
and  do  in  the  world,  and  this  so  completely  that  not  one  is
wanting.  This  memory  is  the  book  of  his  hfe  which  is  opened
after  death,  and  according  to  which  he  is  judged.  Many
other  facts,  acquired  from  actual  experience,  respecting  this
memory,  are  stated  in  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell  (nos.
461-465).

ii.  The  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  continually  foresees
and  disposes  man's  states,  so  that  evil  and  good  may  remain
apart,  and  may  thus  be  separated.  Every  man  is  in  both
e\-il  and  good;  for  he  is  in  e\'il  from  himself,  and  in  good
from  the  Lord,  and  he  could  not  live  unless  he  were  in  both ;
for  if  he  were  in  self  alone,  and  thus  in  evil  alone,  he  would
have  no  life ;  neither  if  he  were  in  the  Lord  alone,  and  thus
in  good  alone,  would  he  have  any  Hfe;  for  in  this  latter
condition,  he  would  be  like  one  suffocated,  continually
gasping  for  breath  as  if  in  the  throes  of  death;  and  in  the


176


Divine  Providence


former  condition  he  would  perish^  for  evil  without  any  good
is  intrinsically  dead.  Every  man  therefore  is  in  both
good  and  evil,  but  the  difference  is  that  some  men  are  inte-
riorly in  the  Lord  and  exteriorly,  as  it  were,  in  self,  while
others  are  interiorly  in  self,  but  exteriorly,  as  it  were,  in
the  Lord;  the  latter  are  in  evil  and  the  former  in  good,
but  each  class  is  both  in  good  and  in  evil.  A  bad  man  is
in  both  because  he  is  in  the  good  of  civil  and  moral  life,  and
also  outwardly  in  some  good  of  spiritual  life ;  besides,  he  is
maintained  by  the  Lord  in  rationality  and  liberty  in  order
that  he  may  be  capable  of  living  in  good;  this  is  the  good
by  which  every  one,  even  a  bad  man,  is  led  by  the  Lord.
From  these  considerations  it  may  be  seen,  that  the  Lord
separates  evil  and  good,  so  that  one  may  be  interior  and  the
other  exterior,  and  thus  He  provides  that  they  shall  not  be
commingled.

iii.  This  is  impossible  if  a  man  first  achiowledges  the  truths
of  faith  and  lives  according  to  them,  and  afterwards  repudiates
and  denies  them.  This  is  evident  from  what  has  been  stated
above  in  the  first  section,  namely,  that  everything  which
man  thinks,  says  and  does  deliberately,  is  incorporated  in
his  nature,  and  becomes  permanent  within  him;  and  from
the  second,  that  the  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  con-
tinually foresees  and  disposes  the  states  of  the  human  mind,
so  that  good  and  evil  may  remain  apart,  and  may  thus  be
separated.  Moreover  they  are  separated  by  the  Lord  after
death;  good  is  taken  away  from  those  who  are  inwardly
evil  and  outwardly  good,  and  thus  they  are  left  to  their
evil;  the  reverse  takes  place  with  those  who  are  inwardly
good,  and  who  outwardly,  like  other  men,  have  laboured  to
acquire  wealth,  sought  for  dignities,  taken  delight  in  various
worldly  pursuits,  and  have  been  addicted  to  some  forms  of
self-indulgence.  In  these,  however,  good  and  evil  are  not
commingled,  but  are  separated  as  the  internal  is  from  the
external;  thus  externally  they  have  been  in  many  ways
like  the  evil,  but  not  internally.  The  reverse  is  the  case
with  the  wicked  who  outwardly  have  appeared  like  the  good
as  regards  their  piety,  worship,  words  and  deeds,  and  yet
inwardly  have  been  evil ;  in  them  also  evil  is  separated  from
good.  But  in  those  who  first  acknowledged  the  truths  of
faith  and  lived  according  to  them,  and  afterwards  have  fallen
into  a  contrary  state  and  rejected  them,  and  especially  if


Divine  Providence  177

they  have  denied  them,  good  and  evil  are  no  longer  separated,
but  mingled  together ;  for  such  a  man  has  appropriated  both
good  and  evil  to  himself,  and  thus  he  has  united  and  com-
mingled them.

iv.  He  thus  commingles  good  and  evil  so  that  they  cannot
be  separated.  This  follows  from  what  has  just  been  stated ;
and  if  evil  cannot  be  separated  from  good,  and  good  from
evil,  it  is  impossible  to  be  either  in  heaven  or  in  hell.  Every
one  must  be  either  in  the  one  or  the  other;  he  cannot  be  in
both,  for  then  he  would  be  sometimes  in  heaven,  and  some-
times in  hell ;  and  while  in  heaven  he  would  act  in  sympathy
with  hell,  and  while  in  hell  he  would  act  in  sympathy  with
heaven;  thus  he  would  destroy  the  hfe  of  all  around  him,
heavenly  life  among  the  angels,  and  infernal  life  among  the
devils;  and  in  this  way  the  hfe  of  every  one  would  perish,
for  every  one  must  be  in  possession  of  his  own  Hfe;  no  one
hves  in  the  hfe  of  another,  still  less  in  a  hfe  opposed  to  his
own.  This  is  why  in  every  man  after  death,  when  he
becomes  a  spirit  or  a  spiritual  man,  the  Lord  separates  good
from  evil,  and  evil  from  good ;  good  from  evil  in  those  who
are  inwardly  evil,  and  evil  from  good  in  those  who  are
inwardly  good.  This  is  according  to  His  words  :  "  Whosoever
hath  to  him  shall  be  given  that  he  may  have  abundance;
and  from  him  who  hath  not  shall  be  taken  away  even  that
wliich  he  hath  "  (Matt.  xiii.  12;  xxv.  29;  Mark  iv.  25;  Luke
viii.  18 ;  xix.  26).

v.  As  good  and  evil  in  every  human  being  ought  to  be  separated,
and  in  a  profaner  they  cantiot  be  separated,  he  is  destroyed  as
to  all  that  is  truly  human.  As  was  said  above,  the  truly
human  element  in  every  one  is  derived  from  rationality,
and  consists  in  the  abiHty  to  see  and  know,  if  he  wants  to,
what  is  true  and  what  is  good,  and  also  in  being  able  freely
to  will,  think,  speak,  and  act  accordingly.  But  this  liberty
and  rationality  have  been  destroyed  in  those  who  have  com-
mingled good  and  evil  in  themselves;  for  they  cannot  from
good  see  evil,  nor  from  evil  know  good,  for  good  and  evil
are  inseparably  united  in  them ;  and  therefore  they  no  longer
possess  rationality  either  actually  or  potentially,  neither  have
they  any  liberty.  For  this  reason  they  are  like  the  phantoms
conjured  up  by  a  disordered  imagination,  as  was  said  above;
and  they  no  longer  appear  like  men,  but  like  bones  with
skin  over  them;  and  therefore  when  they  are  mentioned
N


178


Divine  Providence


tihey  are  not  called  he  or  she,  but  it.  Such  is  the  lot  of
those  who  in  this  way  mingle  holy  things  with  profane.  But
there  are  many  kinds  of  profanation  which  differ  from  these,
and  will  be  discussed  in  the  next  article.

228.  No  man  thus  profanes  holy  things,  unless  he  has  some
knowledge  of  them;  for  without  this  he  could  not  acknow-
ledge them,  and  afterwards  deny  them.  And  therefore  those
who  are  outside  the  Christian  world,  and  know  nothing  of
the  Lord  and  of  redemption  and  salvation  by  Him,  do  not
profane  what  is  holy  by  not  accepting  it,  or  even  by  con-
troverting it.  Nor  do  the  Jews  themselves  profane  it,
because  from  infancy  they  are  unwilling  to  accept  or  ac-
knowledge it.  It  would  be  otherwise  if  they  accepted  and
acknowledged  it  and  afterwards  denied  it,  but  this  is  rarely
the  case ;  many  of  them,  however,  acknowledge  it  outwardly,
and  deny  it  inwardly,  like  hypocrites.  But  those  profane
holy  things,  by  mingling  them  with  profane  things,  who
first  accept  and  acknowledge  them,  and  afterwards  repudiate
and  deny  them.  No  harm  comes  from  their  having  accepted
and  acknowledged  them  in  infancy  and  childhood,  this  being
done  by  all  Christians ;  because  they  do  not  then  accept  and
acknowledge  the  things  of  faith  and  charity  in  the  exercise
of  rationality  and  liberty,  that  is,  by  the  understanding
animated  by  the  will,  but  only  in  the  memory,  and  from
confidence  in  their  teacher;  and  if  they  live  according  to
them,  it  is  from  blind  obedience.  But  when  a  man  acquires
the  use  of  his  rationahty  and  liberty,  which  he  does  gradually
as  he  grows  up  into  youth  and  manhood,  if  he  then  acknow-
ledges truths  and  lives  according  to  them,  and  afterwards
denies  them,  he  commingles  holy  things  and  profane,  and,
as  was  said  above,  becomes  a  monster  instead  of  a  man.
But  if  a  man  is  in  evil  from  the  time  he  comes  into  possession
of  his  own  rationality  and  liberty,  that  is,  becomes  his  own
master,  and  if  he  remains  so  until  early  manhood,  and
afterwards  acknowledges  the  truths  of  faith  and  lives  accord-
ing to  them,  provided  he  then  remains  in  them  until  the  end
of  his  life,  he  does  not  mingle  good  and  evil;  for  the  Lord
then  separates  the  evils  of  his  former  life  from  the  goods  of
his  later  life.  This  is  done  for  all  who  repent.  But  of  these
things  more  will  be  said  in  what  follows.

229.  III.  There  are  many  other  kinds  of  profanation  of  what
is  holy,  but  this  is  the  worst.     In  the  widest  sense  profanation


Divine  Providence  179

means  all  impiety;  so  by  profaners  are  meant  all  the  im-
pious, who  in  heart  deny  God,  the  holiness  of  the  Word,
and  consequently  the  spiritual  things  of  the  Church,  which
are  the  very  holy  things  themselves  concerning  which  they
speak  impiously.  But  we  are  now  speaking  only  of  those
who  profess  to  believe  in  God,  maintain  that  the  Word  is
holy,  and  acknowledge  the  spiritual  things  of  the  Church,
but  a  great  many  of  them  only  with  the  lips.  These  commit
profanation,  because  holiness  from  the  Word  is  in  them  and
with  them,  and  they  profane  this  which  is  in  them  and  is  a
constituent  of  their  understanding  and  will;  while  in  the
wicked,  who  deny  the  existence  of  the  Divine  and  divine
things,  there  is  nothing  holy  which  they  can  profane.  They
indeed  speak  profanely,  but  still  do  not  commit  profanation.
230.  The  profanation  of  what  is  holy  is  meant  in  the
Second  Commandment  of  the  Decalogue  by  the  words,
"  Thou  shalt  not  take  in  vain  the  name  of  thy  God,"  and
that  profanation  should  not  be  committed  is  meant  in  the
Lord's  Prayer  by  the  words  "  Hallowed  be  Thy  Name."
Hardly  any  one  in  the  Christian  world  knows  what  is  meant
by  God's  name,  because  it  is  not  known  that  in  the  spiritual
world  names  are  not  given  as  they  are  in  the  natural  world,
but  every  one  receives  a  name  according  to  the  nature  of
his  love  and  wisdom ;  for  as  soon  as  any  one  enters  a  society
or  community  there,  he  is  immediately  named  according  to
his  character.  The  naming  is  done  in  spiritual  language,
which  can  give  a  name  to  everything,  because  in  the  spiritual
world,  each  letter  of  the  alphabet  signifies  one  thing,  and
several  letters  joined  into  a  word,  as  in  any  one's  name,
involve  the  entire  state  of  the  thing.  This  is  one  of  the
wonders  of  the  spiritual  world.  From  these  facts  it  is  clear
that  in  the  Word,  God's  Name  signifies  God  Himself,  with
all  His  indwelling  and  proceeding  Divine ;  and  as  the  Word
is  the  proceeding  Divine,  it  is  the  Name  of  God;  and  as  all
the  divine  things  which  constitute  the  spiritual  things  of  the
Church  are  derived  from  the  Word,  they  too  are  God's  Name.
It  may  now  be  seen  what  is  meant  in  the  Second  Command-
ment of  the  Decalogue  by  the  words,  "  Thou  shalt  not  take
the  Name  of  God  in  vain  " ;  and  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  by  the
words,  "  Hallowed  be  Thy  Name."  The  Name  of  God,  and
of  the  Lord,  has  a  similar  signification  in  many  places  in  the
Word,  in  both  Testaments,  as  in  Matt.  vii.  22 ;  x.  22 ;  xviii.-


i8o  Divine  Providence

5^  20;  xix.  29;  xxi.  9;  xxiv.  9;  John  i.  12;  ii.  23;  iii.  18;
xii.  13,  28;  xiv.  13,  14;  xvi.  23,  24,  26;  xvii.  6;  xx.  31,
besides  other  places,  and  very  many  in  the  old  Testament.
Any  one  who  understands  this  signification  of  "  name,"  may
know  what  is  meant  by  these  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  Whoever
receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  shall  receive
a  prophet's  reward ;  and  whoever  receiveth  a  righteous  man
in  the  name  of  a  righteous  man  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's
reward ;  and  whoseover  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these
little  ones  a  draught  of  cold  water  only  in  the  name  of  a
disciple  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward  "  (Matt.  x.  41,  42).
Any  one  who  by/'  the  name  of  a  prophet,"  "  the  name  of  a
righteous  man,"  and  "  the  name  of  a  disciple,"  here  under-
stands only  a  prophet,  a  righteous  man,  and  a  disciple,
understands  only  the  literal  sense;  nor  does  he  know  what
the  reward  of  a  prophet  is,  or  the  reward  of  a  righteous
man,  or  the  reward  for  giving  a  draught  of  cold  water  to  a
disciple;  yet  by  "  the  name  and  the  reward  of  a  prophet"
is  meant  the  happy  state  of  those  who  live  in  obedience  to
divine  truth;  by  "the  name  and  reward  of  a  righteous
man  "  is  meant  the  happy  state  of  those  who  live  in  obedience
to  divine  good ;  and  by  a  "  disciple  "  is  meant  the  state  of
those  who  live  in  accordance  with  some  of  the  spiritual
precepts  of  the  Church;  the  "  draught  of  cold  water  "  means
somewhat  of  truth.  The  character  of  man's  state  of  love
and  wisdom,  or  good  and  truth,  is  signified  by  his  name,  as
is  evident  from  these  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  He  that  entereth
in  through  the  door,  is  the  shepherd  of  the  sheep;  to  him
the  porter  openeth,  and  the  sheep  hear  his  voice;  and  he
calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out "
(John  x.  2,  3).  To  call  the  sheep  by  name  is  to  teach  and
to  lead  every  one  who  is  in  the  good  of  charity,  according  to
the  state  of  his  love  and  wisdom ;  by  the  door  is  meant  the
Lord,  as  is  evident  from  the  ninth  verse;  "  I  am  the  Door;
through  Me  if  any  one  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved."  This
shows  clearly  that  the  Lord  Himself  must  be  approached,  in
order  that  any  one  may  be  saved;  that  he  who  approaches
Him  is  a  shepherd  of  the  sheep;  and  that  he  who  does  not
approach  Him  is  a  thief  and  a  robber,  as  is  said  in  the  first
verse  of  the  same  chapter.

231.  As  the  profanation  of  what  is  holy  means  the  profana-
tion committed  by  those  who  have  a  knowledge  of  the  truths


Divine  Providence  i8i

of  faith  and  the  goods  of  charity  from  the  Word^  and  also
in  some  measure  acknowledge  them,  but  not  the  profanation
committed  by  those  who  are  ignorant  of  them,  nor  by  those
who  being  totally  irrehgious  altogether  reject  them,  the  follow-
ing statements  are  made  concerning  the  former,  not  the  latter.
Their  profanation  is  of  several  kinds,  some  slighter  and  others
more  grave;  but  they  are  included  in  the  following  seven
classes  :  The  first  kind  of  profanation  is  committed  by  those
who  make  the  Word  or  the  divine  things  of  the  Church  the  subject
of  or  material  for  jesting.  Some  men  have  a  bad  habit  of
taking  names  or  expressions  from  the  Word,  and  introducing
them  into  remarks  that  are  unbecoming,  and  sometimes
filthy ;  this  cannot  but  involve  some  contempt  for  the  Word ;
yet  all  things  in  the  W^ord,  both  general  and  particular,,  are
divine  and  holy,  for  every  expression  therein  conceals  within
it  something  divine,  by  which  it  communicates  with  heaven.
But  this  kind  of  profanation  is  slighter  or  more  grave  accord-
ing to  the  jester's  acknowledgment  of  the  holiness  of  the
Word,  and  the  irreverence  of  his  remarks.

A  second  kind  of  profanation  is  committed  by  those  who
understand  and  acknowledge  divine  truths  and  yet  live  in
disregard  of  them.  Those  who  only  understand  divine  truths,
profane  more  slightly,  but  those  who  also  acknowledge  them,
profane  more  gravely;  for  the  understanding  only  teaches
like  a  preacher,  and  does  not  necessarily  unite  with  the  will;
but  acknowledgment  unites  with  the  will,  for  nothing  can
be  acknowledged  except  with  the  consent  of  the  will.  But
this  union  is  of  many  kinds,  and  when  the  life  is  opposed  to
the  truths  which  are  acknowledged,  the  profanation  varies
according  to  the  closeness  of  the  union.  Thus  if  any  one
acknowledges  that  revenge  and  hatred,  adultery  and  forni-
cation, fraud  and  deceit,  blasphemy  and  lying  are  sins
against  God,  and  yet  commits  them,  he  commits  this  graver
kind  of  profanation;  for  the  Lord  says  :  "  The  servant  who
knoweth  his  Lord's  will,  and  doeth  not  His  will,  shall  be
beaten  with  many  stripes  "  (Luke  xii.  47);  and  in  another
place  :  "  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  have  no  sin;  but  now
ye  say.  We  see ;  therefore  your  sin  remaineth  "  (John  ix.  41).
But  it  is  one  thing  to  acknowledge  apparent  truths  and
another  to  acknowledge  genuine  truths.  In  the  spiritual
world  those  who  acknowledge  genuine  truths,  and  yet  do
not  live  according  to  them,  appear  as  mere  inert  creatures


1 82  Divine  Providence

whose  tone  of  voice  and  speech  are  devoid  of  the  light  and
warmth  of  Hfe.

A  third  kind  of  profanation  is  committed  by  those  zvho  use
the  literal  sense  of  the  Word  to  confirm  evil  loves  and  false
principles.  This  is  because  the  confirmation  of  falsity  is  a
denial  of  truth,  and  the  confirmation  of  evil  is  a  rejection
of  good,  and  the  Word  is  inwardly  nothing  but  divine  Truth
and  divine  Good;  in  the  ultimate  or  literal  sense,  divine
truth  and  good  do  not  appear  in  the  form  of  genuine  truths,
except  where  it  teaches  about  the  Lord,  and  the  way  of
salvation;  but  they  are  presented  as  truths  covered  with
garments,  which  are  called  appearances  of  truth ;  and  there-
fore the  literal  sense  can  be  perverted  so  as  to  support  many
kinds  of  heresy.  But  he  who  confirm.s  evil  loves  violates
divine  goods,  and  he  who  confirms  false  principles  violates
divine  truths.  The  latter  kind  of  violation  is  called  the
falsification  of  truth ;  the  former,  the  adulteration  of  good ;
both  are  meant  in  the  Word  by  the  term  "  bloods."  For
a  spiritual  holiness,  which  is  also  the  spirit  of  truth  proceed-
ing from  the  Lord,  is  within  every  detail  of  the  literal  sense
of  the  Word.  Violence  is  offered  to  this  holy  thing  when
the  Word  is  falsified  and  adulterated;  and  this  is  evidently
profanation.

A  fourth  kind  of  profanation  is  committed  by  those  who
converse  about  pious  and  holy  things,  and  also  adopt  the  tone
and  manner  of  one  who  loves  them,  and  yet  in  heart  neither
believe  nor  love  them.  Most  of  these  are  hypocrites  and
Pharisees,  who  after  death  are  deprived  of  all  truth  and
good,  and  are  sent  into  outer  darkness.  Those  who  by
profanation  of  this  kind  have  confirmed  themselves  against
the  Divine  and  against  the  Word,  and  also  against  the
spiritual  truths  it  contains,  sit  silent  in  that  darkness,
deprived  of  speech,  wanting  to  prate  about  pious  and  holy
things  as  they  did  in  the  world,  but  unable  to  do  so;  for  in
the  spiritual  world  every  one  is  compelled  to  speak  as  he
thinks,  although  a  hypocrite  wishes  to  speak  otherwise ;  this
gives  rise  to  an  impediment  in  their  speech,  owing  to  which
they  can  only  mutter.  But  hypocrisy  is  a  more  or  less
grave  evil,  according  to  the  disparity  between  a  man's
inward  disbelief  in  God  and  the  arguments  he  advances
in  favour  of  belief  in  God.

A  fifth  kind  of  profanation  is  committed  by  those  who  ascribe


Divine  Providence  183

to  themselves  divine  things.  These  are  signified  by  Lucifer
in  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  Isaiah,  and  Lucifer  has  the  same
signification  as  Babel,  as  is  evident  from  the  fourth  and
twenty-second  verses  of  the  same  chapter,  where  also  their
lot  is  described.  The  same  too  are  described  in  the  seven-
teenth chapter  of  the  Revelation  by  the  whore  sitting  on
the  scarlet  beast.  Babel  and  Chaldea  are  often  mentioned
in  the  Word;  Babel  means  the  profanation  of  good,  and
Chaldea  the  profanation  of  truth,  and  both  refer  to  those
who  ascribe  to  themselves  divine  things.

A  sixth  kind  of  profanation  is  committed  by  those  who
acknowledge  the  Word,  and  yet  deny  the  Divinity  of  the  Lord.
These  in  the  world  are  called  Socinians,  or  Arians.  The  lot
of  both  is  to  call  on  the  Father  and  not  on  the  Lord,  and
continually  to  pray  to  the  Father,  some  even  for  the  sake  of
the  Son,  to  be  admitted  into  heaven;  but  they  call  in  vain
until  they  lose  all  hope  of  salvation ;  and  then  they  are  sent
down  to  hell  among  those  who  deny  God.  These  are  meant
by  those  who  blaspheme  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  for  whom  there
will  be  no  forgiveness  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come
(Matt.  xii.  32).  The  reason  is  that  God  is  one  in  Person
and  in  Essence,  in  whom  there  is  a  Trinity,  and  that  the
Lord  is  this  God;  and  as  the  Lord  is  also  heaven,  and  con-
sequently those  who  are  in  heaven  are  in  the  Lord,  those
who  deny  the  Divinity  of  the  Lord  cannot  be  admitted  to
heaven  and  be  in  the  Lord.  It  was  shown  above  that  the
Lord  is  heaven,  and  that  consequently  those  who  are  in
heaven  are  in  the  Lord.

A  seventh  kind  of  profanation  is  committed  by  those  ivho  first
acknowledge  divine  truths  and  live  according  to  them,  and
afterwards  repudiate  and  deny  them.  This  is  the  worst  kind
of  profanation  because  they  mingle  holy  things  with  pro-
fane to  such  a  degree  that  they  cannot  be  separated;  and
yet  such  persons  cannot  be  either  in  heaven  or  in  hell  unless
these  are  separated;  and  as  this  cannot  be  done  in  them,
they  are  utterly  deprived  of  every  human  attribute  both
intellectual  and  voluntary,  and,  as  said  before,  they  cease
to  be  men.  Nearly  the  same  thing  takes  place  with  those
who  at  heart  acknowledge  the  divine  things  of  the  Word  and
the  Church,  and  immerse  them  wholly  in  their  selfhood,  which
is  the  love  of  having  universal  dominion,  as  has  been  said
frequently  above ;  for  after  death,  when  they  become  spirits.


184  Divine  Providence

they  are  wholly  unwilling  to  be  led  by  the  Lord,  but  desire
to  lead  themselves;  and  when  their  love  is  freed  from  all
restraint  they  desire  not  only  to  have  dominion  over  heaven
but  also  over  the  Lord ;  and  as  this  is  impossible,  they  deny
the  Lord,  and  become  devils.  It  should  be  noted  that  the
life's  love,  which  is  also  the  ruling  love,  remains  in  every
one  after  death  and  cannot  be  taken  away.  Profaners  of
this  kind  are  meant  by  the  lukewarm,  of  whom  it  is  said  in
the  Revelation  :  "  I  know  thy  works  that  thou  art  neither
cold  nor  hot;  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  hot;  but  because
thou  art  lukewarm,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spew
thee  out  of  my  mouth  "  (iii.  15, 16).  This  kind  of  profanation
is  described  as  follows  by  the  Lord  in  ilatthew.  "  When  the
unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man,  he  walketh  through  dry
places  seeking  rest,  but  findeth  none  :  Then  he  saith,  I  will
return  into  my  house  from  whence  I  came  out ;  and  when  he
has  returned  and  found  it  empty,  swept  and  garnished  for
him,  he  goeth  away  and  taketh  to  himself  seven  other  spirits
more  wicked  than  himself ;  and  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there ;
and  the  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first  "
(xii.  43-45).  Man's  conversion  is  there  described  by  the
unclean  spirit  going  out  of  him;  and  his  returning  again  to
former  evils  after  good  and  truth  have  been  cast  out,  is
described  by  the  return  of  the  unclean  spirit  into  the  house
furnished  for  him,  with  seven  others  worse  than  himself;
and  the  profanation  of  what  is  holy  by  such  a  person  is
described  by  the  last  state  of  that  man  being  worse  than
the  first.  The  same  thing  is  meant  by  this  passage  in  John  :
"  Jesus  said  to  him  who  had  been  healed  at  the  pool  of
Bethesda,  Sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  unto  thee  "
(v.  14).  The  Lord  provides  that  man  shall  not  inwardly
acknowledge  truths,  and  afterwards  fall  away  from  them
and  become  profane,  as  is  indicated  by  these  words  :  "  He
hath  blinded  their  eyes  and  hardened  their  heart,  lest  they
should  see  with  their  eyes  and  understand  with  their  heart,
and  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal  them  "  (John  xii.  40).
The  words  "  lest  they  should  be  converted  and  healed  "
signify,  lest  they  should  acknowledge  truths  and  afterwards
fall  away  from  them  and  thus  become  profaners.  For  the
same  reason  the  Lord  spoke  in  parables,  as  He  Himself  says  :
(Matt.  xiii.  13).  The  Jews  were  forbidden  to  eat  fat  or
blood  (Lev.  iii.  17;   vii.  23,  25)  because  this  signified  that


Divine  Providence  185

they  should  not  profane  what  is  holy ;  for  fat  signified  divine
good,  and  blood  divine  truth.  He  who  is  once  converted
ought  to  remain  in  good  and  truth  to  the  end  of  his  life,  as
the  Lord  teaches  in  Matthew  :  "  Jesus  said,  He  that  endureth
to  the  end  shall  be  saved  "  (x.  22 ;  also  Mark  xiii.  13).

232.  IV.  The  Lord  therefore  does  not  admit  a  man  to  an
inward  perception  of  the  truths  of  wisdom  and  at  the  same  time
of  the  goods  of  love,  tmless  he  can  be  kept  in  these  states  to  the
end  of  his  life.  To  make  this  clear  we  must  proceed  by
distinct  steps  for  two  reasons;  firstly,  because  it  concerns
human  salvation ;  secondly,  because  on  the  knowledge  of  this
law  depends  the  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  permission,  which
will  be  the  subject  of  the  next  chapter.  It  concerns  human
salvation,  as  was  said  above,  because  one  who  first  acknow-
ledges the  divine  things  of  the  Word,  and  consequently  of
the  Church,  and  afterwards  falls  away  from  them,  profanes
holy  things  most  grievously.  In  order  to  exhibit  this
arcanum  of  the  divine  Providence  in  its  own  light,  it  must
be  explained  in  the  following  series  : —

i.  Evil  and  good  cannot  exist  together  in  man's  inner
mind,  nor  consequently  can  the  falsity  of  evil  and  the  truth
of  good.

ii.  Good  and  the  truth  of  good  cannot  be  introduced  by
the  Lord  into  a  man's  inner  mind,  except  so  far  as  evil  and
the  falsity  of  evil  have  been  removed  from  it.

iii.  If  good  and  its  truth  were  introduced  otherwise  than
in  proportion  as  evil  and  its  falsity  were  removed,  the  man
would  fall  away  from  good,  and  return  to  his  evil.

iv.  While  a  man  is  in  evil,  many  truths  may  be  introduced
into  his  understanding,  and  these  may  be  stored  in  his
memory,  and  yet  not  be  profaned.

V.  The  Lord,  however,  by  His  divine  Providence  provides
most  carefully  that  the  will  shall  not  receive  these  truths
unless  a  man  puts  away  evil  from  his  external  man,  as  if
by  his  own  power.

vi.  If  they  were  otherwise  received  the  will  would  adul-
terate good,  and  the  understanding  would  falsify  truth,  by
mingling  them  with  evil  and  falsity.

vii.  The  Lord  therefore  does  not  admit  a  man  to  an
inward  perception  of  the  truths  of  wisdom  and  the  goods
of  love,  unless  he  can  be  kept  in  these  states  to  the  end  of
his  life.


1 86  Divine  Providence

233.  In  order  to  explain  this  arcanum  of  the  divine
Providence  so  that  the  rational  man  may  see  it  in  its  own
light,  the  above-mentioned  propositions  must  be  explained
one  by  one.

i.  Evil  and  good  cannot  exist  together  in  man's  iiiner  mind,
nor  consequently  can  the  falsity  of  evil  and  the  truth  of  good.
By  man's  inner  mind  is  meant  his  internal  thought,  of  which
he  knows  nothing  till  he  passes  into  the  spiritual  world  and
its  light,  which  he  does  after  death.  The  nature  of  this
thought  can  only  be  recognised  in  the  natural  world  by  the
delight  of  a  man's  love  as  manifested  in  his  external  thought,
and  by  an  examination  of  the  evils  he  finds  in  himself ;  for,
as  was  shown  above,  the  internal  thought  of  man  coheres
with  his  external  thought  so  closely  that  they  cannot  be
separated.  But  more  about  this  may  be  seen  above.  We
say  "  good  and  the  truth  of  good,"  and  "  evil  and  the  falsity
of  evil,"  because  good  cannot  exist  without  its  truth,  nor
evil  without  its  falsity;  they  are  bed-fellows,  or  married
partners,  for  the  life  of  good  comes  from  its  truth,  and  the
life  of  truth  from  its  good ;  and  it  is  the  same  with  evil  and
its  falsity.  A  reasonable  man  can  see  without  explanation
that  evil  and  its  falsity,  and  good  and  its  truth,  cannot  be
together  in  man's  inner  mind;  for  evil  is  the  opposite  of
good,  and  good  of  evil,  and  two  opposites  cannot  exist
together.  Moreover  there  is  in  all  evil  an  inherent  hatred
of  good,  and  there  is  in  all  good  an  inherent  desire  to  protect
itself  against  evil,  and  to  reject  it;  it  follows  that  one  cannot
dwell  together  with  the  other,  for  in  that  case  there  would
first  arise  conflict  and  combat,  and  then  destruction,  as  the
Lord  teaches  in  these  words  :  "  Every  kingdom  divided
against  itself  is  brought  to  desolation;  and  every  city  or
house  divided  against  itself  shall  not  stand.  Whosoever  is
not  with  Me,  is  against  Me ;  and  whosoever  gathereth  not
with  Me,  scattereth  abroad."  (Matt.  xii.  25-30).  And  in
another  place  :  "  No  one  can  at  the  same  time  serve  two
masters;  for  either  he  will  hate  the  one  and  love  the  other,
or  else  he  will  hold  to  the  one  and  despise  the  other  "  (Matt.
vi.  24).  Two  opposites  cannot  exist  together  in  one  substance
or  form,  without  its  being  torn  asunder  and  perishing.  If
one  should  approach  and  draw  near  to  the  other,  they  would
certainly  separate  like  two  enemies,  one  of  whom  would
keep  within  his  camp  or  fortifications,  and  the  other  would


Divine  Providence  187

remain  outside  them.  So  it  is  with  evil  and  good  in  a
hypocrite ;  he  is  in  both,  but  the  evil  is  inside  and  the  good
outside,  and  so  the  two  are  separate  and  are  not  commingled.
It  should  now  be  evident  that  evil  with  its  falsity  and  good
with  its  truth  cannot  exist  together.

ii.  Good  and  the  truth  of  good  camwt  be  introduced  by  the
Lord  into  a  man's  inner  mind,  except  so  jar  as  evil  and  the
falsity  of  evil  have  been  removed  from  it.  This  is  a  necessary
consequence  of  the  foregoing;  for  as  evil  and  good  cannot
exist  together,  good  cannot  bie  introduced  before  evil  has
been  removed.  By  the  "  inner  mind  "  is  meant  the  internal
thought;  and  in  this  inner  mind,  either  the  Lord  or  the
devil  must  dwell;  the  Lord  is  there  after  reformation,  and
the  devil  is  there  before ;  and  therefore  m  proportion  as  a
man  allows  himself  to  be  reformed,  the  devil  is  cast  out;
but  so  far  as  he  does  not  allow  himself  to  be  reformed,  the
devil  remains.  Any  one  can  see  that  the  Lord  cannot  enter
as  long  as  the  devil  is  there ;  and  he  is  there  so  long  as  man
keeps  the  door  shut,  by  which  he  has  communication  with
the  Lord.  That  the  Lord  enters  when  that  door  is  opened
through  man's  own  action.  He  teaches  in  the  Revelation  :
"  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock;  if  any  one  hear  My  voice
and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him  and  will  sup  with
him,  and  he  with  Me  (iii.  20).  The  door  is  opened  by  removing
evil,  shunning  it,  and  loathing  it  as  infernal  and  diabolical;
for  it  is  the  same  whether  we  say  evil  or  the  devil,  and
whether  we  say  good  or  the  Lord,  for  the  Lord  is  interiorly
present  in  all  good,  and  the  devil  in  all  evil.  The  truth  of
this  second  proposition  should  now  be  evident.

iii.  //  good  and  its  truth  were  introduced  otherwise  than  in
proportion  as  evil  and  its  falsity  were  removed,  the  man  would
fall  away  from  good,  and  return  to  his  evil.  The  reason  is
that  the  evil  would  be  the  stronger,  and  that  which  is  stronger
must  sooner  or  later  prevail.  While  evil  is  stronger,  good
cannot  be  introduced  into  the  inmost  apartments,  but  only
into  the  entrance  hall;  for,  as  was  said  above,  evil  and
good  cannot  be  together,  and  what  is  only  in  the  entrance
hall  is  expelled  by  the  enemy  within;  thence  comes  a  de-
parture from  good,  and  a  return  to  evil,  which  is  the  worst
kind  of  profanation.  j\Ioreover,  the  very  delight  of  man's
life  is  to  love  himself  and  the  world  above  all  things.  This
delight  cannot  be  expelled  in  a  moment,  but  only  gradually  ;


i88  Divine  Providence

but  so  far  as  this  delight  remains  in  man,  so  far  evil  is  the
stronger.  And  this  evil  can  be  removed  only  by  the  love
of  self  becoming  the  love  of  uses,  or  by  the  love  of  ruling
being  no  longer  for  the  sake  of  self,  but  for  the  sake  of  use ;
for  thus  use  constitutes  the  head,  and  the  love  of  self,  or  of
ruling  others,  constitutes  first,  the  body  beneath  the  head,
and  afterwards  the  feet  by  which  it  walks.  Who  does  not
see  that  good  must  constitute  the  head,  and  that  when  this
is  the  case  the  Lord  is  present  there  ?  Good  and  use  are  one.
Who  does  not  see  that  if  evil  constitutes  the  head,  the  devil
is  there?  And  as  civil  and  moral  good,  and  also  spiritual
good,  in  an  external  form,  must  constantly  be  received,
who  does  not  see  that  good,  in  such  case,  constitutes  the
feet,  nay,  the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  is  trampled  upon  ?  Since
therefore  the  state  of  man's  life  must  be  inverted,  so  that
what  is  above  may  be  below  (and  this  inversion  cannot  be
effected  in  a  moment,  for  the  greatest  delight  of  life  which
comes  from  the  love  of  self,  and  the  consequent  love  of
domination,  can  only  gradually  be  diminished  and  converted
into  the  love  of  uses),  therefore  good  cannot  be  introduced
by  the  Lord  otherwise  than  in  proportion  as  this  evil  is
removed;  and  if  it  were  otherwise  introduced  man  would
depart  from  good  and  return  to  his  evil.

iv.  While  a  man  is  in  evil,  many  truths  may  be  introduced
into  his  understanding,  and  these  may  be  stored  in  his  memory,
and  yet  not  be  profaned.  The  reason  is  that  there  is  no  influx
from  the  understanding  into  the  will,  but  from  the  will  into
the  understanding;  and  therefore  many  truths  may  be  re-
ceived by  the  understanding  and  stored  in  the  memory,  and
yet  not  be  mingled  with  the  evil  of  the  will,  and  thus  holy
things  not  be  profaned.  Moreover  it  is  the  duty  of  every
one  to  learn  truths  from  the  Word,  or  from  sermons,  to
lay  them  up  in  the  memory,  and  to  reflect  upon  them.  For
the  intellect  has  to  instruct  the  will,  or  in  other  words,  the
man,  as  to  what  ought  to  be  done,  by  means  of  truths  deposi-
ted in  the  memory,  which  pass  thence  into  the  thought ;  this
is  consequently  the  principal  means  of  reformation.  While
truths  are  only  lodged  in  the  understanding,  and  from  the
understanding  in  the  memory,  they  are  not  yet  assimilated
by  the  man,  but  are  extraneous  to  him.  Man's  memory
may  be  compared  to  the  ruminatory  stomach  of  certain
animals  in  which  they  first  deposit  their  food;  while  it  is


Divine  Providence  189

there,  it  is  not  yet  assimilated  by  their  body,  but  is  extraneous
to  it ;  when,  however,  they  draw  the  food  out  of  this  stomach
and  absorb  it,  it  becomes  part  of  their  Ufe,  and  the  body  is
nourished.  But  in  man's  memory  there  are  not  material
but  spiritual  foods,  or  truths,  which  in  themselves  are  various
kinds  of  knowledge ;  so  far  as  man  calls  these  forth  by  think-
ing or,  as  it  were,  ruminating  upon  them,  his  spiritual  mind
is  nourished.  The  love  of  the  will  is  what  desires  and,  as
it  were,  has  an  appetite  for  them,  and  causes  them  to  be
consumed,  and  to  nourish  the  mind.  If  that  love  is  evil,
it  desires  and  has  an  appetite  for  unclean  things ;  but  if  good,
it  desires  and  has  an  appetite  for  clean  things ;  and  it  sepa-
rates, removes  and  expels  in  various  ways  whatever  does
not  suit  it.

y.  The  Lord,  however,  by  his  divine  Providence  provides
most  carefully  that  the  will  shall  not  receive  these  truths  unless
a  man  puts  away  evil  from  his  external  man  as  if  by  his  own
power.  For  what  proceeds  from  the  will  enters  the  man
and  is  appropriated  by  him,  and  becomes  part  of  his  life;
and  in  the  life  itself  which  man  derives  from  the  will,  there
cannot  be  evil  and  good  together,  for  then  he  would  perish;
yet  both  may  be  active  in  the  understanding  and  there
become  falsities  of  evil,  or  truths  of  good,  but  not  at  the
same  time;  if  this  were  not  so  man  would  not  be  able  to
see  evil  by  contrast  with  good,  or  to  know  good  by  contrast
with  evil;  but  they  are  distinguished  and  separated  there,
as  a  house  is  into  inner  and  outer  apartments.  When  a  bad
man  thinks  and  speaks  good  things,  he  then  thinks  and
speaks  externally,  but  when  evil  things,  then  internally,  and
therefore  when  he  speaks  good  things,  his  speech  comes  as
it  were  from  the  wall  of  the  house ;  and  it  may  be  compared
to  fruit  which  is  outwardly  fair,  but  worm-eaten  and  rotten
within,  and  also  to  a  serpent's  egg  wnth  a  beautiful  outside.

vi.  //  they  were  otherwise  received  the  will  would  adulterate
good  and  the  understanding  would  falsify  truth,  by  mingling
them  with  evil  and  falsity.  When  the  will  is  in  evil  it
defiles  good  in  the  understanding;  and  good  defiled  in  the
understanding  means  evil  in  the  will ;  for  the  understanding
persuades  itself  that  evil  is  good,  and  that  good  is  evil;
evil  does  this  with  all  good  that  is  opposite  to  itself.  Evil
also  falsifies  truth,  because  the  truth  of  good  is  the  opposite
of  the  falsity  of  evil ;  this  too  is  done  by  the  will  in  the  under-


190  Divine  Providence

standing,  and  not  by  the  understanding  of  itself.  The
defilement  of  good  is  described  in  the  Word  by  adultery,  and
the  falsification  of  truth  by  whoredom.  These  defilements
and  falsifications  are  effected  by  reasonings  suggested  by
the  natural  man,  who  is  in  evil ;  and  also  by  confirming  the
appearances  of  the  literal  sense  of  the  Word.  The  love  of
self,  which  is  the  source  of  all  evils,  surpasses  other  loves  in
its  skill  in  adulterating  goods  and  falsifying  truths,  and  it
does  this  by  an  abuse  of  the  rationality  which  every  man,
evil  as  well  as  good,  has  from  the  Lord.  By  ingenious
reasoning  it  can  even  make  evil  appear  like  good,  and  falsity
like  truth.  What  can  it  not  do  when  it  can  bring  a  thousand
arguments  to  prove  that  nature  created  itself,  and  that  it
then  created  men,  beasts  and  plants  of  every  kind,  and  also
that  by  influx  from  its  inner  self  nature  causes  men  to  live,
and  to  think  analytically  and  wisely?  The  love  of  self  is
exceedingly  ingenious  in  proving  whatever  it  likes,  because
a  certain  brightness  of  iridescent  light  constitutes  its  outer
surface.  This  brightness  is  intellectual  pride,  which  results
in  a  pride  of  excelling  and  dominating  others,  which  is
characteristic  of  that  love.  But  when  that  love  has  con-
firmed such  conclusions,  it  becomes  so  blind  as  to  suppose
that  man  is  a  mere  animal,  and  that  men  and  animals  think
in  the  same  way;  indeed,  that  if  an  animal  could  speak,  it
would  be  a  man  in  another  form.  If  led  by  some  influence  to
believe  that  there  is  something  in  man  which  survives  death,
it  is  so  blind  as  to  imagine  that  beasts  also  live  after  death,
and  that  this  something  that  survives  death,  is  only  a  subtle
exhalation  of  life,  like  a  vapour  which  constantly  haunts
its  dead  body;  or  that  it  is  some  vital  principle,  devoid  of
sight,  hearing  or  speech,  and  therefore  blind,  deaf  and  dumb,
fluttering  about,  and  thinking;  not  to  mention  other  insane
ideas,  suggested  to  its  imagination  by  nature,  which  is  dead.
This  is  done  by  the  love  of  self,  which  intrinsically  is  the
love  of  the  selfhood ;  and  man's  selfhood,  as  to  its  affections
which  are  all  natural,  is  not  unlike  the  life  of  a  beast,  and
as  to  its  perceptions  from  these  affections,  is  not  unlike  an
owl.  And  therefore  one  who  continually  immerses  his
thoughts  in  his  selfhood,  cannot  be  raised  out  of  natural
into  spiritual  light,  nor  see  anything  of  God,  heaven  and
eternal  life.  Being  of  this  nature,  and  exceedingly  skilful
is  proving  whatever  it  pleases,  this  love  can  with  equal


Divine  Providence  191

ingenuity  defile  the  goods  of  the  Word  and  falsify  its  truths,
when  led  by  various  motives  to  make  a  profession  of  them.

vii.  The  Lord  there] ore  does  not  admit  a  man  to  an  inward
perception  of  the  truths  of  wisdom  and  the  goods  of  love,  unless
he  can  be  kept  in  these  states  to  the  end  of  his  life.  This  is  in
order  that  man  may  not  fall  into  that  gravest  kind  of  pro-
fanation of  what  is  holy^  which  has  been  described  in  this
section.  On  account  of  this  danger  the  Lord  also  permits
evils  in  men's  lives  and  many  religious  heresies.  Concerning
the  permission  of  these,  something  will  be  seen  in  the  following
sections.

The  laws  of  permission  are  also  laws  of
THE  DIVINE  Providence

234.  There  are  no  laws  of  permission  independent  of  or
separate  from  the  laws  of  the  divine  Providence,  but  they  are
the  same.  That  is  why  we  say  that  God  permits  a  thing,
which  does  not  mean  that  He  wills  it,  but  that  in  view  of  the
end,  which  is  salvation,  He  cannot  prevent  it.  Whatever  it
done  for  the  sake  of  salvation  is  done  according  to  the  laws
of  the  di\'ine  Pro\ndence.  For,  as  was  said  before,  the  divine
Pro\adence,  keeping  this  end  continually  in  view,  constantly
acts  against  man's  will,  and  contrary  to  it ;  and  therefore,  as
every  moment  of  its  operation,  or  at  every  step  of  its  progress,
when  it  sees  man  swerve  from  the  end,  it  directs,  bends,  and
controls  him  according  to  its  laws,  by  leading  him  away  from
evil  and  towards  good.  That  this  cannot  be  done  without  the
permission  of  evil  will  be  seen  in  what  follows.  Moreover
nothing  can  be  permitted  without  a  reason,  and  the  reason
exists  only  in  some  law  of  the  divine  Providence  wliich  shows
why  it  is  permitted.

235.  He  who  is  totally  destitute  of  any  belief  in  the  divine
Pro\adence  does  not  at  heart  believe  in  God,  but  instead  of
God  he  believes  in  nature,  and  instead  of  the  di\ine  Providence
in  human  prudence.  It  is  not  evident  that  this  is  so ;  for  a
man  can  think  in  two  different  ways,  and  speak  in  two  differ-
ent wavs ;  he  can  think  and  speak  in  one  way  from  his  inner
self,  and  in  another  way  from  his  outer  self ;  he  is  like  a  hinge
which  allows  a  door  to  swing  either  way,  one  way  when  some-
one is  coming  in,  and  the  other  when  he  is  going  out ;  or  like  a
sail  by  which  a  vessel  can  be  turned  in  its  course,  as  the  master
sets  it.    Those  who  have  so  persuaded  themselves  of  the


192  Divine  Providence

efficacy  of  human  prudence  as  to  deny  the  existence  of  divine
Providence,  do  not,  while  possessed  by  that  idea,  attend  to
anything  else  in  what  they  see,  hear  and  read;  nor  indeed
can  they,  because  they  receive  nothing  from  heaven,  but
everything  from  themselves;  and  because  they  draw  their
conclusions  only  from  appearances  and  fallacies,  and  see
nothing  else,  they  are  ready  to  swear  that  their  view  is  the
correct  one.  If  they  also  acknowledge  nature  alone,  they
may  be  angry  with  those  who  maintain  that  there  is  a  divine
Providence,  unless  the  latter  are  clergymen,  who,  they  think,
only  say  so  because  it  is  part  of  their  creed,  and  required  by
their  official  position.

236.  We  will  now  mention  some  of  the  things  permitted,
alwa\s  according  to  the  laws  of  the  divine  Providence,  by
which  the  merely  natural  man  confirms  his  belief  in  nature
rather  than  God,  and  in  human  prudence  rather  than  the
divine  Providence.  For  example,  he  reads  in  the  Word  that
the  wisest  of  mankind,  Adam  and  his  wife,  allowed  themselves
to  be  seduced  by  a  serpent,  and  that  God  did  not  prevent  this
by  His  divine  Providence;  that  their  eldest  son  Cain  killed
his  brother  Abel,  and  that  God  did  not  restrain  him  by
admonition  but  only  cursed  him  after  the  deed;  that  the
Israelitish  nation  worshipped  a  golden  calf  in  the  wilderness,
and  acknowledged  it  as  the  God  who  had  led  them  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt,  whilst  Jehovah  saw  this  from  Mount  Sinai
near  by,  and  did  not  prevent  it ;  and  again,  that  David  num-
bered the  people,  and  thus  brought  a  pestilence  upon  them  by
which  many  thousands  perished,  and  that  God,  not  before
but  after  the  deed,  sent  Gad  the  prophet  to  him  and  announced
his  punishment;  that  Solomon  was  permitted  to  establish
idolatrous  worship,  and  that  many  kings  after  him  were
permitted  to  profane  the  temple  and  the  holy  things  of  the
Church ;  and  finally,  that  the  Jewish  nation  was  permitted  to
crucify  the  Lord.  In  these  and  many  other  passages  in  the
Word,  he  who  believes  only  in  nature  and  human  prudence,
sees  nothing  but  what  is  contrary  to  the  divine  Providence,
and  therefore  he  is  able  to  use  them  as  arguments  for  its
denial,  if  not  in  his  outer  thought  which  is  nearest  to  speech,
still  in  his  inner  thought  which  is  remote  from  it.

237.  Every  worshipper  of  himself  and  of  nature  confirms
himself  in  the  denial  of  divine  Providence,  when  he  sees  in  the
world  so  many  wicked  people,  some  of  whom  even  boast  of


Divine  Providence  193

their  wickedness,  yet  receive  no  punishment  from  God.
He  finds  a  stronger  argument  against  the  divine  Providence,
when  he  sees  that  artfulness,  cunning  and  fraud  are  successful
even  against  the  pious,  just  and  sincere,  and  that  injustice
triumphs  over  justice  in  the  courts  of  law,  and  in  business.
He  especially  confirms  himself  in  this  opinion,  when  he  sees
the  impious  raised  to  honour  as  magnates  and  primates,
rolling  in  wealth,  and  living  in  elegance  and  luxury,  while  he
sees  the  worshippers  of  God  exposed  to  contempt  and  poverty.
He  also  confirms  his  disbehef  in  the  divine  Providence,  when
he  reflects  that  wars  are  permitted,  involving  the  slaughter  of
so  many  men  and  the  plundering  of  so  many  cities,  nations
and  families;  and  also  that  victory  declares  itself  rather
on  the  side  of  prudence  than  justice,  and  that  it  makes  no
difference  whether  the  general  is  a  virtuous  or  a  wicked  man  ;
besides  other  similar  events,  all  of  which  are  permitted  by
the  laws  of  the  divine  Providence.

238.  The  natural  man  also  confirms  his  disbelief  in  the
divine  Providence,  when  he  considers  the  religious  views  of
various  nations ;  for  example,  he  finds  that  some  people  are
altogether  ignorant  of  God,  others  worship  the  sun  and  the
moon,  others  worship  idols  and  monstrous  images,  and  others
worship  dead  men.  Moreover  he  strengthens  his  opinion,
when  he  sees  the  Mohammedan  belief  adopted  by  so  many
empires  and  kingdoms,  and  the  Christian  religion  established
only  in  Europe,  the  smallest  division  of  the  habitable  globe,
and  even  there  it  is  divided ;  and  some  Christians  claim  for
themselves  divine  power,  and  wish  to  be  worshipped  as  gods,
and  pray  to  dead  men ;  and  others  suppose  that  salvation
depends  on  thinking  about  or  reciting  certain  formulae,  and
not  at  all  on  good  deeds ;  also,  there  are  few  who  act  up  to
their  own  religion;  and  then  he  considers  the  numerous
heresies,  some  of  which  exist  at  this  day,  such  as  those  of  the
Quakers,  the  Moravians,  the  Anabaptists  and  others ;  he  sees
also  that  Judaism  still  survives.  He  who  denies  the  divine
Providence  concludes  from  all  these  things,  that  religion  is
a  merely  imaginary  thing,  but  that  it  is  necessary  as  a  useful
restraint.

239.  At  this  day,  those  who  inwardly  favour  a  belief  in
nature  and  human  prudence  alone, may  still  further  strengthen
their  opinion  by  the  following  arguments;  that  the  whole
Christian  world  has  acknowledged  three  Gods,  not  knowing


194  Divine  Providence

that  God  is  one  in  Person  and  in  Essence^  and  that  He  is
the  Lord ;  that  it  has  not  hitherto  been  known  that  in
every  particular  of  the  Word  there  is  a  spiritual  sense,
and  that  in  this  resides  its  holiness,  nor  that  to  shun
evils  as  sins  is  the  essence  of  the  Christian  religion,  nor
that  a  man  lives  as  a  man  after  death.  For  men  may  say
to  themselves  and  to  one  another,  "  Why  does  divine  Provi-
dence, if  there  is  any,  now  reveal  these  things  for  the  first
time  ?  "

240.  All  the  things  enumerated  in  numbers  236-239,  have
been  adduced  to  show  that  every  single  thing  which  takes
place  in  the  world,  as  regards  both  the  evil  and  the  good,
is  under  the  control  of  the  divine  Providence ;  consequently
that  the  divine  Providence  is  operative  in  the  minutest  details
of  man's  thoughts  and  actions,  and  that  consequently  it  is
universal.  But  as  this  truth  cannot  be  seen  from  these
statements,  unless  each  is  separately  explained,  they  must  be
briefly  expounded  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  mentioned,
beginning  with  number  236.

241.  i.  The  wisest  of  mankind,  Adam  and  Ms  wife,  allowed
themselves  to  be  seduced  by  a  serpent,  and  God  did  not  prevent
this  by  his  divine  Providence.  This  is  because  Adam  and  his
wife  do  not  mean  the  first  created  of  mankind  in  this  world,
but  the  men  of  the  Most  Ancient  Church,  whose  new  creation,
or  regeneration,  is  described  as  follows;  their  new  creation
itself  or  regeneration,  is  described  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis
by  the  creation  of  heaven  and  earth,  their  wisdom  and  intelli-
gence by  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  the  end  of  that  Church  by
their  eating  of  the  tree  of  knowledge.  For  in  its  recesses  the
Word  is  spiritual,  containing  arcana  of  divine  Wisdom,  and
that  is  why  it  is  written  throughout  by  means  of  pure  corre-
spondences and  representations.  When  these  are  used  as  a
means  of  interpretation,  it  becomes  clear  that  the  men  of  that
Church,  who  were  at  first  the  wisest  of  men,  and  at  last  from  the
pride  of  their  own  intelligence,  the  worst,  were  not  seduced  by
any  serpent,  but  by  the'love  of  self,  which  is  there  indicated
by  the  serpent's  head  which  the  Seed  of  the  woman,  that  is,  the
Lord,  would  bruise.  Who  cannot  see  in  the  light  of  reason
that  other  things  are  meant  than  those  told  in  the  literal
story  ?  For  who  can  suppose  that  the  creation  of  the  world
could  have  taken  place  in  the  way  there  described.^  And
therefore,  the  learned  labour  to  explain  the  contents  of  that


Divine  Providence  195

first  chapter,  and  at  last  confess  that  they  do  not  understand
it.  Again,  who  can  believe  that  two  trees  were  placed  in
their  garden  or  paradise,  one  of  life,  and  one  of  knowledge,
the  latter  as  a  stumbling  block;  that  from  the  mere  eating
of  this  last-named  tree  they  transgressed  to  such  a  degree,
that  not  only  they,  but  also  the  whole  human  race,  their
posterity,  became  Hable  to  damnation;  and  that  a  serpent
was  able  to  seduce  them ;  moreover,  that  the  wife  was  created
out  of  the  rib  of  the  husband,  that  they  acknowledged  their
nakedness  after  the  fall  and  covered  it  with  fig-leaves,  that
coats  of  skin  were  given  them  to  cover  their  bodies,  and  that
cherubim  were  placed  with  a  flaming  sword  to  guard  the  way
to  the  tree  of  life.  All  these  things  are  symbols  which  describe
the  establishment  of  the  Most  Ancient  Church,  its  state,  its
change,  and  at  last  its  destruction.  The  arcana  of  the  spirit-
ual sense,  contained  in  the  minutest  particulars  of  all  these
things  are  explained  in  the  Arcana  Ccelestia,  on  Genesis  and
Exodus;  it  will  there  be  seen  that  the  tree  of  life  signifies
the  Lord  as  to  His  divine  Providence,  and  the  tree  of  know-
ledge, man  as  to  his  own  prudence.

242.  ii.  Their  eldest  son  Cain  killed  his  brother  Abel,  and
God  did  not  then  restrain  him  by  admonitioji ,  but  only  cursed
him  after  the  deed.  Since  Adam  and  his  wife  signify  the
Most  Ancient  Church,  as  just  stated  above,  Cain  and  Abel,
their  eldest  sons,  signify  the  two  essentials  of  the  Church,
namely  love  and  Avisdom,  or  charity  and  faith ;  Abel  denotes
love  and  charity,  and  Cain,  wisdom,  or  faith,  especially
wisdom  when  separated  from  love,  or  faith  from  charity ;  and
it  is  the  nature  of  wisdom  or  faith  so  separated,  not  only
to  reject  love  and  charity,  but  also  to  destroy  them,  and
thus  it  kills  its  brother.  That  faith  separate  from  charity
does  this,  is  fairly  well  known  in  the  Christian  world ;  see  the
Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  Faith.  The  curse  of
Cain  describes  the  spiritual  state  after  death  of  those  who
separate  faith  from  charity,  or  wisdom  from  love.  But  that
wisdom  or  faith  should  not  perish  in  consequence,  a  mark  was
set  on  Cain,  that  he  might  not  be  slain ;  for  love  cannot  exist
without  wisdom,  nor  charity  without  faith.  Since  this
story  has  almost  the  same  meaning  as  the  eating  of  the  tree
of  knowledge,  it  follows  after  the  description  of  Adam  and  his
wife.  Moreover,  those  whose  faith  is  divorced  from  charity
get  their  intelligence    from  themselves,  and    those  whose


196


Divine  Providence


faith  is  derived  from  charity  get  it  from  the  Lord;  and  thus
are  in  the  order  of  the  divine  Providence.

243.  iii.  The  Israelitish  nation  worshipped  a  golden  calf  i?i
the  wilderness,  and  acknowledged  it  as  the  God  who  had  led
them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  whilst  Jehovah  saw  this  pom
Mount  Sinai  near  by,  and  did  not  prevent  it.  This  took  place
in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai  near  the  mount.  That  Jehovah  did
not  withhold  them  from  that  abominable  worship,  is  in
accordance  with  all  the  laws  of  the  divine  Providence  thus  far
set  forth,  and  also  in  accordance  with  those  which  follow.
This  evil  was  permitted  them  lest  they  should  all  perish ;  for
the  children  of  Israel  were  led  out  of  Eg)^t,  that  they  might
represent  the  Lord's  Church,  and  they  could  not  have  done
this,  unless  Egyptian  idolatry  had  first  been  eradicated  from
their  hearts ;  and  this  could  not  have  been  effected  unless  they
had  been  allowed  to  act  according  to  what  was  in  their  hearts,
in  order  that  it  might  afterwards  be  removed  by  means  of
severe  punishment.  What  besides  is  signified  by  that
worship,  and  by  the  threat  that  they  should  be  wholly  rejected
and  that  a  new  nation  should  be  raised  up  from  Moses,  may
be  seen  in  the  Arcana  Ccelestia  in  the  exposition  of  the  thirty-
second  chapter  of  Exodus.

244.  iv.  David  numbered  the  people,  and  thus  brought  a
pestilence  upon  them  by  which  many  thousands  perished;  and
God,  not  before  hut  after  the  deed,  sent  Gad  the  prophet  to  him
and  announced  his  punishment.  This  event  may  also  suggest
various  thoughts  and  reflections  to  any  one  who  does  not
believe  in  the  divine  Providence,  especially  as  to  why  Da^^d
was  not  warned  beforehand,  and  why  the  people  were  so
severely  punished  for  the  king's  transgression.  That  he  was
not  previously  warned,  is  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the
divine  Providence  already  disclosed  (especially  nos.  129-153,
and  nos.  154-174).  The  severe  punishment  of  the  people
because  of  the  transgression  of  the  king,  and  the  smiting  of
seventy  thousand  with  pestilence,  was  not  on  the  king's
account,  but  on  account  of  the  people;  for  the  passage  reads,
"Again  the  anger  of  Jehovah  was  kindled  against  Israel;
therefore  He  moved  David  against  them,  saying.  Go,  number
Israel  and  Judah  "  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  i).

245.  V.  Solomon  was  permitted  to  establish  idolatrous
worship.  This  was  in  order  that  he  might  represent  the
Lord's  kingdom,  or  the  Church  as  existing  in  all  the  religions


Divine  Providence  197

of  the  whole  world;  for  the  church  founded  amongst  the
people  of  Israel  and  Judah  was  a  representative  church,
and  therefore  all  the  judgments  and  statutes  of  that  church
represented  the  spiritual  things  of  the  Church,  which  are
its  internals;  the  nation  itself  represented  the  Church,  the
king  represented  the  Lord;  David,  the  Lord  who  was  to
come  into  the  world;  and  Solomon,  the  Lord  after  His
coming.  And  because  the  Lord  after  the  glorification  of
His  Humanity  had  power  over  heaven  and  earth,  as  He
Himself  says  (Matt,  xxviii.  i8),  therefore  Solomon,  His
representative,  was  clothed  with  glory  and  magnificence,
and  excelled  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  in  wisdom,  and  also
built  the  temple.  Moreover,  Solomon  permitted,  and
himself  instituted,  many  foreign  religions,  which  represented
the  various  religious  systems  in  the  world.  His  seven
hundred  wives  and  his  three  hundred  concubines  had  a  like
signification  (i  Kings  xi.  3);  for  a  wife  in  the  Word  signifies
a  Church,  and  a  concubine  a  religious  persuasion.  It  should
now  be  clear  why  Solomon  was  allowed  to  build  the  temple,
which  signified  the  Lord's  divine  Human  (John  ii.  19,  21),
and  also  the  Church ;  and  why  he  was  permitted  to  establish
idolatrous  worship,  and  to  mcarry  so  many  wives.  That  by
David  in  many  places  in  the  Word  is  meant  the  Lord  who
was  to  come  into  the  world,  may  be  seen  in  The  Doctrine  of
the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Lord  (nos.  43,  44).

246.  vi.  Many  kings  after  Solomon  were  -permitted  to
profane  the  temple  and  the  holy  things  of  the  Church.  This
was  because  the  people  represented  the  Church,  and  the
king  was  their  head.  And  as  the  people  of  Israel  and  Judah
could  no  longer  represent  the  Church,  for  they  were  idolaters
at  heart,  they  gradually  fell  away  from  representative
worship,  by  perverting  all  the  things  of  the  Church  to  Such
a  degree,  that  at  last  they  brought  desolation  upon  it.
This  was  represented  by  the  profanation  of  the  temple  by
the  kings,  and  by  their  idolatries;  the  ruin  of  the  Church
was  represented  by  the  destruction  of  the  temple  itself,  by
the  carrying  away  of  the  people  of  Israel,  and  by  the  captivity
of  the  people  of  Judah  in  Babylonia.  This  was  the  reason,
and  the  reason  of  everything  that  takes  place  is  to  be  found
in  some  law  of  the  divine  Providence.

247.  vii.  The  Jewish  nation  was  permitted  to  crucify  the
Lord.    This  was  because  the  Church  amongst  that  nation


198


Divine  Providence


had  been  altogether  brought  to  desolation,  so  that  they  not
only  did  not  know  and  acknowledge  the  Lord,  but  even
hated  Him;  but  everything  that  they  did  to  Him  was
according  to  the  laws  of  His  divine  Providence.  That  the
passion  of  the  cross  was  the  last  temptation,  or  the  last
combat  by  which  the  Lord  fully  conquered  the  hells  and  fully
glorified  His  Humanity,  may  be  seen  in  The  Doctrine  of  the
New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Lord  (nos.  12-14);  and  in
The  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  Faith   (nos.

34,  35)-

248.  So  far  we  have  explained  the  things  mentioned  above
(no.  236)  which  are  instances  from  the  Word  by  which  a
natural  man  who  is  a  reasoner,  can  confirm  his  disbelief  in
the  divine  Providence.  For,  as  before  said,  whatever  such
a  man  sees,  hears  and  reads,  he  may  use  as  an  argument
against  it.  Few,  however,  confirm  their  disbelief  in  the
divine  Providence  from  passages  in  the  Word,  but  many  do
so  from  what  they  see  around  them,  such  as  the  things
mentioned  in  no.  237,  which  are  now  also  to  be  explained.

249.  i.  Every  worshipper  of  himself  and  of  nature  confirms
himself  in  the  denial  of  divine  Providence,  when  he  sees  in
the  world  so  many  wicked  people,  some  of  whom  even  boast  of
their  wickedness,  yet  receive  no  punishment  from  God.  All
wickedness  and  all  boasting  about  it  are  permissions,  the
causes  of  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  laws  of  the  divine
Providence.  Every  man  can  freely,  indeed,  in  perfect
freedom,  think  what  he  will,  whether  against  or  for  God;
and  he  who  thinks  against  God  is  rarely  punished  in  the
natural  world,  because  while  there  he  is  always  capable  of
reformation;  but  he  is  punished  in  the  spiritual  world  after
death,  for  then  he  can  no  longer  be  reformed.  The  laws  of
the  divine  Providence  as  previously  set  forth,  supply  the
reasons  of  these  permissions,  as  will  be  e^ddent,  if  they  are
recalled  and  examined;  they  are  as  follows:  Man  should
act  from  freedom  according  to  reason  (nos.  71-99).  Man
should  not  be  compelled  by  external  means  to  think  and  to
will,  thus  to  believe  and  love,  the  things  which  are  of  religion ;
but  man  should  bring  himself  to  do  it,  and  sometimes  compel
himself  (nos.  129-153).  There  is  no  such  thing  as  self-
derived  prudence,  there  only  appears  to  be;  and  it  is  right
that  there  should  be  this  appearance ;  but  the  divine  Provi-
dence is  universal  because  it  deals  with  the  minutest  details


Divine  Providence  199

(nos.  191-213).  The  divine  Providence  looks  to  eternal
things,  and  temporary  things  only  so  far  as  they  subserve
eternal  things  (nos.  214-220).  A  man  is  not  admitted  to
an  inward  perception  of  the  truths  of  faith  and  of  the  goods
of  charity,  unless  he  can  be  kept  in  these  states  to  the  end
Oi'  his  hfe  (nos.  221-233).  That  the  reasons  for  these  per-
missions are  to  be  found  in  the  laws  of  the  divine  Providence
win  be  seen  from  what  follows,  for  example  : — Evils  are
permitted  for  the  sake  of  the  end,  which  is  salvation ;  again,
the  divine  Providence  is  unceasing  and  watches  equally
over  the  evil  and  the  good ;  and  finally,  the  Lord  carmot  act
in  opposition  to  the  laws  of  His  divine  Providence,  for  to
do  so  would  be  to  act  in  opposition  to  His  divine  love  and
wiscom,  thus  to  Himself.  These  laws,  if  collated,  will  show
why  wickedness  is  permitted  by  the  Lord,  and  is  not  punished
while  it  is  only  in  the  thought,  and  rarely  when  in  the  intention
or  will,  if  it  is  not  put  into  action.  But  still  its  own  punish-
ment follows  every  evil ;  it  is  as  if  evil  had  engraved  upon  it
its  own  punishment,  which  the  impious  man  suffers  after
death.

What  has  now  been  said  wall  throw  light  upon  the  state-
ment in  no.  237,  that  the  worshipper  of  himself  and  of  nature
iinds  a  stronger  argument  against  the  divine  Providence,  wheft
he  sees  that  artfulness,  cunning  and  fraud  are  successful  even
against  the  pious,  just  and  sincere,  and  that  injustice  triumphs
over  justice  in  the  courts  of  law  and  in  business.  All  the  laws
of  the  divine  Pro\adence  are  indispensable,  and  as  they  are
the  reasons  why  such  evils  are  permitted,  it  is  evident  that
in  order  that  a  man  may  live  as  a  man,  and  be  reformed
and  saved,  the  Lord  can  remove  such  evils  from  him  only
by  means  of  the  Word,  and  especially  the  commandments
of  the  Decalogue,  in  the  case  of  those  who  regard  all  kinds
of  murder,  adultery,  theft  and  false  witness  as  sins.  But  in
the  case  of  those  who  do  not  regard  these  as  sins,  he  acts
by  means  of  civil  laws  and  the  fear  of  punishment  for  dis-
obeying them,  by  moral  laws,  and  fear  of  the  loss  of  reputa-
tion, honour  and  gain,  if  they  are  infringed.  By  these  means
the  Lord  deters  the  wicked  from  doing  evil,  but  not  from
thinking  and  willing  it ;  but  by  the  means  first  mentioned,
the  Lord  leads  the  good  not  only  to  cease  to  practise  these
evils,  but  also  to  cease  to  think  about  or  wish  for  them.

250.  ii.  The  worshipper  of  himself  and  of  nature  confirms


200  Divine  Providence

himself  in  his  denial  of  the  divine  Providence ,  when  he  sees
the  impious  raised  to  honour,  as  magnates  and  primates,
tolling  in  wealth,  and  living  in  elegance  and  luxury,  while  he
sees  the  worshippers  of  God  exposed  to  contempt  and  poveriyt
The  worshipper  of  himself  and  of  nature  believes  honours
and  wealth  to  be  the  highest  and  only  possible  happiness,
and  therefore  happiness  itself;  and  if  he  ever  thinks  of  God
in  consequence  of  the  worship  instilled  during  childhood,
he  calls  them  divine  blessings,  and  so  long  as  he  is  conient
with  these,  he  thinks  that  there  is  a  God,  and  also  worships
Him;  but  in  his  worship  there  Hes  concealed,  what  he  at
that  time  is  ignorant  of,  the  desire  to  be  raised  by  Gcd  to
still  higher  dignities  and  still  greater  wealth;  and  if  he
acquires  these,  his  worship  is  turned  more  and  more  to  out-
ward things,  until  he  falls  away,  so  that  at  length  he  despises
and  denies  God;  and  he  does  the  same  if  he  is  cast  down
from  the  dignity  and  wealth  or  which  he  has  set  his  heart.
What,  then,  are  honours  and  wealth  to  the  evil  but  stumbling-
blocks  ?  Not  so,  however,  to  the  good,  for  they  do  not  set
their  hearts  upon  them,  but  on  the  uses  or  goods  in  the
performance  of  which  honour  and  wealth  serve  but  as
means.  And  therefore,  from  the  advancement  of  the  wicked
to  honour  and  wealth  as  magnates  and  primates,  no  one  can
eonfirm  himself  against  the  divine  Providence,  except  a  nian
who  is  a  worshipper  of  himself  and  of  nature.  Moreover,
what  is  honour,  whether  greater  or  less  ?  And  what  is
wealth,  greater  and  less  ?  Is  it  not  intrinsically  a  matter  of
the  imagination?  Is  one  person  more  highly  favoured  and
happier  than  another?  Is  not  the  dignity  of  a  great  man,
even  of  a  king  or  emperor,  regarded  after  a  single  year  as
something  common,  which  no  longer  swells  his  heart  with
joy,  and  may  even  become  worthless  in  his  sight  ?  Do  these
men  derive  from  their  dignities  a  greater  happiness  than  those
in  a  lower,  or  even  the  lowest,  station  in  life,  such  as  farmers
and  their  servants  ?  The  latter  may  enjoy  greater  happiness
when  it  is  well  with  them  and  they  are  content  with  their
lot.  Who  is  more  restless  at  heart,  more  easily  provoked,
more  violently  enraged,  than  one  who  loves  himself,  especially
when  he  is  not  honoured  according  to  the  pride  of  his  heart,
and  when  he  does  not  succeed  according  to  his  pleasure  and
desire  ?  What  then  is  dignity  but  an  idea,  if  it  contributes
nothing  to  the  purpose  or  use  ?     And  can  such  an  idea  exist


Divine  Providence  201

in  any  other  kind  of  thought,  than  that  which  regards  self
and  the  world,  and  assumes  that  the  world  is  everything
and  eternity  nothing?

Now  something  shall  be  said  to  explain  why  the  divine
Providence  permits  the  wicked  in  heart  to  be  raised  to
dignities,  and  to  be  loaded  with  wealth.  The  impious  or
wicked  can  perform  uses  equally  with  the  pious  or  good;
indeed,  they  act  with  greater  zeal,  for  they  regard  themselves
in  the  uses  they  perform,  and  the  honours  as  the  uses  for  the
sake  of  which  they  exert  themselves;  and  therefore  the
higher  the  love  of  self  climbs,  the  hotter  burns  their  lust  of
doing  uses  for  the  sake  of  their  own  glory.  There  is  no
such  fire  with  the  pious  or  good,  unless  it  is  excited  from
below  by  the  love  of  honour.  The  Lord  therefore  governs
the  impious  in  heart  who  are  in  positions  of  distinction,  by
concern  for  their  o^vn  renown,  and  thereby  excites  them  to
perform  uses  for  the  community,  country,  society,  or  city
in  which  they  dwell,  and  also  for  their  fellow-citizens  or
neighbours.  With  such  men  this  is  the  method  of  the  Lord's
government  or  of  the  divine  Providence ;  for  the  Lord's
kingdom  is  a  kingdom  of  uses,  but  where  there  are  only
a  few  who  perform  uses  for  the  sake  of  uses,  He  causes  the
worshippers  of  self  to  be  raised  to  high  offices  in  which  each
of  them  is  excited  to  do  good  by  means  of  his  love.  Suppose
that  there  were  an  infernal  kingdom  in  the  world, — though
none  such  exists, — where  only  the  love  of  self  or  the  devil
bore  rule,  would  not  every  one  perform  uses  from  the  fire
of  the  love  of  self  and  for  the  lustre  of  his  own  glory,  more
than  in  any  other  kingdom?  But  all  such  men  have  the
public  good  on  their  lips,  but  their  own  in  their  hearts ;  and
as  every  one  looks  to  his  own  prince,  that  he  may  be  made
greater  (for  he  aspires  to  be  the  greatest),  can  such  a  one  see
that  there  is  a  God,  while  a  thick  smoke  like  that  of  a  con-
flagration surrounds  him,  through  which  the  light  of  no
spiritual  truth  can  penetrate?  I  have  seen  that  smoke
about  the  hells  of  such  men.  Light  your  lamp,  and  try  to
find  out  how  many  aspirants  for  honours  there  are  in  the
kingdoms  of  the  present  day,  who  are  not  lovers  of  self  and
the  world.  Will  you  find  fifty  in  a  thousand  who  love  God,
and  will  there  not  be  only  a  few  among  these  who  seek
positions  of  dignity  ?  As  therefore  there  are  so  few  who  love
God,  and  so  many  who  love  self  and  the  world,  and  as  the


202  Divine  Providence

latter,  from  their  zeal,  perform  more  uses  than  the  former
from  theirs,  how  can  any  one  confirm  his  disbelief  in  the
divine  Providence  by  the  fact  that  the  wicked  acquire  more
honour  and  wealth  than  the  good  ?  This  position  is  supported
by  these  words  of  the  Lord  :  "  And  the  Lord  commended
the  unjust  steward  because  he  had  acted  prudently;  for
the  sons  of  this  world  are  in  their  generation  more  prudent
than  the  sons  of  light.  So  I  say  unto  you,  Make  to  your-
selves friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness;  that
when  ye  fail  they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  habita-
tions "  (Luke  xvi.  8,  9).  What  is  meant  by  these  words
in  the  natural  sense  is  evident ;  but  in  the  spiritual  sense  the
mammon  of  unrighteousness  signifies  the  knowledges  of
truth  and  good  possessed  by  the  evil,  which  they  use  only
to  acquire  for  themselves  honour  and  wealth.  These  are
the  knowledges  out  of  which  the  good,  or  the  children  of
light,  are  to  make  to  themselves  friends,  and  which  will
admit  them  into  everlasting  habitations.  That  many  love
self  and  the  world,  and  that  few  love  God,  the  Lord  teaches
in  these  words  :  "  Wide  is  the  gate  and  broad  is  the  way  that
leadeth  to  destruction,  and  many  there  be  which  enter  in
through  it;  but  straight  and  narrow  is  the  way  which
leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  be  that  find  it  "  (Matt.  vii.
13,  14).  That  honour  and  wealth  are  a  curse  to  some  men
and  a  blessing  to  others,  may  be  seen  above  (no.  217).

251.  iii.  A  worshipper  of  himself  and  of  nature  '  confirms
his  disbelief  in  the  divine  Providence,  when  he  reflects  that  wars
are  permitted,  involving  the  slaughter  of  so  many  men,  and  the
plundering  of  their  goods.  Divine  Providence  does  not  cause
wars,  because  they  involve  slaughter,  plunder,  violence,
cruelty  and  other  monstrous  evils,  which  are  diametrically
opposed  to  Christian  charity;  but  still  they  are  inevitable,
because  the  life's  love  of  man  since  the  time  of  the  most
ancient  people  (signified  by  Adam  and  his  wife,  see  no.  241),
has  become  so  perverted  as  to  wish  to  rule  over  others,  and
finally  over  all,  and  to  possess  worldly  wealth,  and  finally  all
wealth.  These  two  loves  cannot  be  kept  in  bonds,  since
every  one  is  permitted  by  the  divine  Providence  to  act  in
freedom  according  to  reason  (nos.  71-99);  and  without  such
permission  the  Lord  cannot  lead  man  away  from  evil,  and
thus  reform  and  save  him;  for  unless  evils  were  permitted
to  break  forth,  man  would  not  be  aware  of  them,  and  therefore


Divine  Providence  203

could  not  acknowledge  them,  and  so  could  not  be  led  to
resist  them.  This  is  why  evils  cannot  be  prevented  by
Providence;  for  they  would  remain  shut  in,  and  hke  a
cancer  or  gangrene,  would  spread  and  consume  all  that  is
vital  in  man.  For  man  is  from  birth  Hke  a  little  hell,  between
which  and  heaven  there  is  perpetual  discord.  No  one  can  be
withdrawn  from  his  hell  by  the  Lord,  unless  he  sees  that  he
is  there,  and  desires  to  be  delivered;  and  this  cannot  be
done  without  permissions,  the  reasons  for  which  are  laws
of  the  divine  Providence.  This  is  why  there  are  wars,  great
and  small,  the  latter  between  the  owners  of  estates  and  their
neighbours,  and  the  former  between  the  sovereigns  of  king-
doms and  their  neighbours;  the  only  difference  between  a
small  and  a  great  war  being  that  the  former  is  kept  within
bounds  by  the  laws  of  the  nation,  and  the  latter  by  inter-
national law,  and  that  while  in  both  cases  there  is  a  desire
to  override  the  laws,  the  lesser  combatants  cannot  do  so,
while  the  greater  can,  at  least  to  some  extent.  There  are
many  other  reasons  stored  up  in  the  treasury  of  di\'ine
Wisdom,  why  the  greater  wars  of  kings  and  dukes,  involving
as  they  do  slaughter,  plunder,  violence  and  cruelty,  are
not  stopped  by  the  Lord  either  at  the  beginning  or  during
their  progress,  but  only  when  the  power  of  one  or  the  other
combatant  has  been  so  weakened  that  he  is  in  danger  of
destruction.  Some  of  these  reasons  have  been  revealed  to
me,  and  among  them  is  this;  that  all  wars,  even  those
relating  solely  to  worldly  affairs,  represent  in  heaven  the
states  of  the  Church,  and  are  correspondences.  This  is
true  of  all  the  wars  described  in  the  Word,  and  also  of  all
wars  at  this  day.  The  wars  described  in  the  Word  are  those
waged  by  the  children  of  Israel  with  various  nations,  such  as
the  Amorites,  Ammonites,  Moabites,  Phihstines,  Syrians,
Eg}-ptians,  Chaldeans,  and  Ass}Tians ;  and  when  the  children
of  Israel,  who  represented  the  Church,  transgressed  the
precepts  and  statutes  which  they  were  commanded  to  observe,
and  fell  into  the  evils  signified  by  those  nations  (for  each
nation  with  which  the  children  of  Israel  waged  war  signified
some  particular  kind  of  evil)  then  they  were  punished  by
that  nation.  For  example,  when  they  profaned  the  holy
things  of  the"  Church  by  foul  idolatries,  they  were  punished
by  the  Assyrians  and  Chaldeans,  because  Ass}Tia  and  Chaldea
signified  the  profanation  of  what  is  holy.     What  is  signified


204  Divine  Providence

by  their  wars  with  the  Philistines,  may  be  seen  in  The
Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  Concerning  Faith  (nos.  50-54).
Similar  things  are  represented  by  wars  at  the  present  day
wherever  they  are  waged;  for  all  events  in  the  natural
world  correspond  to  spiritual  events  in  the  spiritual  world,
and  all  spiritual  things  relate  to  the  Church.  Nobody  in
this  world  knows  which  kingdoms  in  the  Christian  world
correspond  to  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites,  which  to  the
Syrians  and  Philistines,  and  which  to  the  Chaldeans  and
Assyrians,  and  the  others  with  whom  the  children  of  Israel
waged  wars ;  nevertheless,  there  are  nations  which  thus
correspond.  But  in  the  natural  world,  the  character  of  the
Church  on  earth,  and  the  evils  into  which  it  falls,  and  for
which  it  is  punished  by  wars,  cannot  be  seen  at  all ;  because
in  this  world  nothing  is  seen  but  external  things,  which  do
not  constitute  the  Church;  but  in  the  spiritual  world  the
internal  states  which  constitute  the  Church  itself  are  re-
vealed, and  there  all  men  are  united  according  to  their
various  states.  The  conflicts  of  these  states  in  the  spiritual
world  correspond  to  wars,  which  are  regulated  on  both  sides
by  the  divine  Providence  of  the  Lord,  according  to  the
laws  of  correspondence.  That  wars  in  this  world  are  governed
by  the  divine  Providence  of  the  Lord,  the  spiritual  man
acknowledges,  but  the  natural  man  does  not,  except  that
when  a  thanksgiving  is  appointed  on  account  of  a  victory,
he  may  give  thanks  on  his  knees  to  God  for  the  victory,  and
he  may  utter  a  brief  prayer  before  he  goes  into  action;
but  when  he  relapses  into  his  usual  state  of  mind,  he  either
ascribes  the  victory  to  the  skill  of  the  general,  or  to  some
unexpected  suggestion  or  event  in  the  course  of  the  battle
which  decided  the  issue.  That  the  divine  Providence,  which
men  call  fortune,  is  at  work  in  the  minutest  details  of  even
trivial  things,  may  be  seen  above  (no.  212);  and  if  you
acknowledge  that  the  divine  Providence  regulates  these
things,  you  should  certainly  admit  that  it  regulates  the  affairs
of  war.  Successes,  also,  and  lucky  strokes  in  war,  are
commonly  called  the  fortune  of  war;  but  this  is  the  divine
Providence,  which  is  especially  operative  in  the  plans  and
preparations  of  the  general,  even  though  he  then  and  after-
wards ascribes  the  whole  to  his  own  sagacity.  This  he  may
do  if  he  will,  for  he  has  full  liberty  to  believe  in  divine
Providence  or  not,  and  even  to  believe  in  God  or  not;   yet


Divine  Providence  205

let  him  know  that  no  detail  of  his  plans  and  preparations
originates  in  himself ;  they  all  come  to  him  either  from  heaven
or  hell;  they  come  from  hell  by  permission^  they  are  sent
from  heaven  by  Providence.

252.  iv.  The  worshipper  of  himself  and  of  nature  confirms
his  disbelief  in  the  divine  Providence,  when  he  reflects  that,  so
far  as  he  can  see,  victory  declares  itself  on  the  side  of  prudence
rather  than  justice,  and  that  it  makes  7io  difference  whether  the
general  is  a  virtuous  or  a  wicked  man.  Victory  seems  to
incline  to  the  side  of  prudence  rather  than  justice,  because
man  judges  from  appearances,  and  favours  one  side  more
than  the  other,  and  what  he  favours  he  supports  by  reason-
ing ;  he  does  not  know  that  the  justice  of  a  cause  is  spiritual
in  heaven,  and  natural  in  the  world,  as  has  just  been  stated ;
and  that  these  two  are  united  by  a  chain  of  past  and  future
events  known  only  to  the  Lord.  The  reason  why  it  makes
no  difference  whether  the  general  is  virtuous  or  wicked  is
the  same  as  that  given  above  (no.  250),  namely,  that  the  evil
equally  with  the  good  perform  uses,  and  the  evil  in  their
ardour  act  more  zealously  than  the  good,  especially  in  wars,
because  a  bad  man  is  especially  crafty  and  cunning  in  devising
stratagems;  moreover  the  love  of  glory  makes  him  delight
more  than  a  good  man  does  in  killing  and  plundering  those
whom  he  knows  and  declares  to  be  his  enemies ;  a  good  man,
on  the  other  hand,  is  prudent  and  zealous  in  defence,  but
seldom  has  any  ability  or  eagerness  for  aggression.  The
same  is  true  of  the  spirits  of  hell  and  of  the  angels  of  heaven ;
the  spirits  of  hell  attack,  and  the  angels  of  heaven  defend
themselves.  It  follows,  that  any  one  is  justified  in  defending
his  country  and  its  allies  against  invaders,  even  by  employing
generals  who  are  bad  men,  but  not  in  unprovoked  aggression.
The  mere  love  of  glory  is  essentially  diabolical,  for  it  springs
from  the  love  of  self.

253.  Thus  far  we  have  explained  the  facts  mentioned
above  in  no.  237,  by  which  the  merely  natural  man  confirms
his  disbelief  in  the  divine  Providence.  Now  we  must  explain
those  mentioned  in  no.  238,  which  relate  to  the  religious
systems  of  various  nations,  and  which  can  also  serve  the
merely  natural  man  as  arguments  against  the  divine  Provi-
dence; for  he  says  in  his  heart,  "  How  can  there  be  so  many
discordant  religions,  instead  of  one  true  religion  throughout
the  world,  if  the  divine  Providence  has  for  its  end  a  heaven


2o6  Divine  Providence

from  the  human  race?  (nos.  27-45).  But  consider  :  All  the
human  beings  ever  born,  however  many,  and  of  whatever
religion,  can  be  saved  provided  they  acknowledge  God
and  live  according  to  the  precepts  of  the  Decalogue,  which
forbid  murder,  adultery,  theft  and  false  witness,  because  to
commit  these  crimes  is  contrary  to  religion,  and  therefore
to  God ;  such  men  fear  God  and  love  their  neighbour.  They
fear  God,  because  they  believe  that  to  do  these  things  is
enmity  against  Him,  and  they  love  their  neighbour,  because
to  kill,  to  commit  adultery,  steal,  bear  false  witness,  and
covet  another  man's  house  or  wife,  is  to  injure  the  neighbour.
As  such  men  reverence  God  in  their  life  and  do  no  evil  to
their  neighbour,  they  are  led  by  the  Lord ;  and  all  who  are
thus  led  are  taught  about  God  and  the  neighbour  by  means
of  their  religion;  for  those  who  so  live,  love  to  be  taught,
while  those  who  live  otherwise  do  not  care  to  be  taught ;  and
because  they  love  to  be  taught  they  are  instructed  by  the
angels  after  death  when  they  become  spirits,  and  gladly
receive  the  truths  of  the  Word.  Something  concerning  men
of  this  character  may  be  seen  in  The  Doctrine  oj  the  New
Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture  (nos.  91-97
1 04-1 13).

254.  i.  The  merely  natural  man  confirms  his  disbelief  in
the  divine  Providence  when  he  considers  the  religions  oj  vaiioiis
nations  ;  for  example,  he  finds  that  some  people  are  altogether
ignorant  of  God,  and  that  others  worship  the  sun  and  moon,
or  idols  and  graven  images.  Those  who  use  these  facts  as
arguments  against  the  divine  Providence,  know  nothing  of
the  innumerable  arcana  of  heaven,  of  which  scarcely  one  is
known  to  man ;  among  them  is  this,  that  man  is  not  taught
directly  from  heaven,  but  indirectly  (nos.  154-174);  and
as  man  is  taught  indirectly,  and  the  Gospel  could  not  be
proclaimed  by  missionaries  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  but  nevertheless  religion  could  in  various  ways  be
conveyed  even  to  the  nations  dwelling  in  the  most  distant
parts  of  the  world,  this  has  been  brought  about  by  the  divine
Providence.  For  no  man  acquires  his  religion  from  himself,
but  by  transmission  from  others,  who  either  learned  directly
from  the  Word,  or  have  heard  from  others  who  have  been
taught  from  the  Word,  that  there  is  a  God,  a  heaven,  a  hell,
and  a  life  after  death,  and  that  true  happiness  results  from
the  worship  of  God.     That  religion  was  disseminated  through-


Divine  Providence  207

out  the  whole  world  from  the  Ancient  Word,  and  afterwards
from  the  Israelitish  Word,  may  be  seen  in  The  Doctrine  of  the
New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture  (nos.  101-103) ;
and  that  without  the  Word  no  one  would  have  had  a  know-
ledge of  God,  of  heaven  and  hell,  and  the  life  after  death,  still
less  of  the  Lord,  may  be  seen  in  the  same  work  (nos.  114-
118).  When  a  religion  has  once  been  implanted  in  a  nation,
that  nation  is  led  by  the  Lord  according  to  the  precepts  and
tenets  of  its  own  religion ;  and  the  Lord  has  provided  that  in
every  religion  there  shall  be  precepts  resembling  those  of
the  Decalogue,  namely  that  God  is  to  be  worshipped,  that
His  name  is  not  to  be  profaned,  that  the  Sabbath  is  to  be
observed,  that  parents  are  to  be  honoured,  that  murder,
adultery  and  theft  are  not  to  be  committed,  and  that  false
witness  is  not  to  be  borne.  The  nation  which  holds  such
precepts  to  be  divine,  and  lives  according  to  them  from  a
religious  motive,  is  saved,  as  was  said  just  above  (no.  253);
moreover,  most  nations  outside  Christendom  do  regard  those
laws,  not  as  civil  but  as  divine,  and  hold  them  sacred.
That  man  is  saved  by  a  life  according  to  these  precepts,
may  be  seen  in  The  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  from  the
Cointnandments  of  the  Decalogue,  from  beginning  to  end.
Another  arcanum  of  heaven  is  this,  that  the  angelic  heaven
is  seen  by  the  Lord  as  one  ^lan,  whose  soul  and  life  is  the
Lord ;  and  this  divine  Man  is  a  perfect  man,  not  only  as
to  the  external  members  and  organs,  but  also  as  to  the
more  numerous  internal  members  and  organs,  as  well  as
the  skins,  membranes,  cartilages  and  bones,  all  of  which,
however,  in  that  Man,  are  not  material  but  spiritual.  It
has  also  been  provided  by  the  Lord  that  those  whom  the
Gospel  has  not  reached,  but  who  have  a  religion,  should  also
be  capable  of  having  a  place  in  that  divine  Man,  that  is,
in  heaven,  by  forming  the  skins,  membranes,  cartilages  and
bones ;  and  that  they,  like  others,  experience  heavenly
joy ;  for  it  matters  not  whether  their  joy  is  like  that  of  the
angels  of  the  highest,  or  of  the  ultimate  heav-en;  for  every
one  who  enters  heaven  attains  the  highest  joy  of  his  heart;
greater  he  could  not  bear,  for  it  would  oppress  and  stifle
him.  The  case  may  be  compared  to  that  of  a  peasant  and
a  king  :  A  peasant  may  experience  the  greatest  joy  when  he
goes  about  clothed  in  new  garments  of  coarse  wool,  and  sits
down  to  a  table  loaded  with  pork,  beef,  cheese,  beer  and


2o8  Divine  Providence

mulled  wine ;  he  would  feel  oppressed  if,  like  a  king,  he  were
clothed  in  purple  and  silk,  gold  and  silver,  and  a  table  were
laid  before  him  with  delicacies,  costly  dishes  of  many  kinds,
and  rare  wines.  This  shows  how  it  is  that  there  is  heavenly
joy  for  the  last  as  well  as  for  the  first,  each  in  his  degree;
and  consequently,  also,  for  those  who  are  outside  the  Christian
world,  provided  they  shun  evils  as  sins  against  God  and
contrary  to  religion.  Few  are  totally  ignorant  of  God;
that  these,  if  they  have  lived  a  moral  life,  are  instructed  by
angels  after  death  and  receive  a  spiritual  element  into  their
moral  life,  may  be  seen  in  The  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem
concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture  (no.  ii6).  It  is  the  same
with  those  who  worship  the  sun  and  moon,  believing  God
to  be  in  them;  they  know  no  better,  and  therefore  this  is
not  imputed  to  them  as  sin ;  for  the  Lord  says,  "  If  ye  were
blind," — that  is,  if  ye  did  not  know, — "  ye  should  have  no
sin "  (John  ix.  41).  But  there  are  many  who  worship
idols  and  graven  images  even  in  the  Christian  world.  This
is  indeed  idolatrous,  but  not  in  every  case;  for  there  are
some  to  whom  graven  images  serve  as  a  means  of  arousing
thought  about  God,  for  an  influx  from  heaven  leads  those
who  acknowledge  God  to  desire  to  see  Him;  and  as  people
of  this  kind  cannot  raise  their  minds  above  the  things  of  the
senses  like  those  who  are  inwardly  spiritual,  they  foster  that
desire  by  looking  at  the  idol  or  image.  Those  who  do  this
without  adoring  the  graven  image  itself  as  God,  are  saved
if  they  also,  from  a  religious  motive,  live  according  to  the
precepts  of  the  Decalogue.  This  makes  it  clear  that  as  the
Lord  desires  the  salvation  of  all,  He  has  provided  that  every
one  may  have  a  place  in  heaven  if  he  lives  rightly.  That
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  heaven  is  as  one  Man,  and  that  there-
fore heaven  corresponds  to  all  things  in  general  and  particular
in  the  human  form,  and  also  that  there  are  some  who  corre-
spond to  the  skins,  membranes,  cartilages  and  bones,  may
be  seen  in  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell  (nos.  59-102) ;  and  in
the  Arcana  Coelestia  (nos.  5552-5569);  and  also  above
(nos.  201-204).

255.  ii.  The  merely  natural  man  confirms  his  disbelief  in
the  divine  Providence  when  he  sees  the  Mohammedan  faith
adopted  by  so  many  empires  and  kingdotns.  The  fact  that
this  faith  is  adopted  by  more  nations  than  the  Christian
religion,  may  be  a  stumbling-block  to  those  who  think  about


Divine  Providence  209

the  divine  Providence,  and  believe  that  no  one  can  be  saved
except  those  who  are  born  Christians,  that  is,  who  possess
the  Word  and  therefore  know  of  the  Lord.  But  the  Mo-
hammedan reUgion  is  not  a  stumbUng-block  to  those  who
beheve  that  all  things  are  regulated  by  the  divine  Providence ;
these  inquire  what  part  Providence  has  in  Mohammedanism,
and  they  find  that  the  Mohammedan  religion  acknowledges
the  Lord  as  the  Son  of  God,  the  wisest  of  men,  and  a  very
great  prophet,  who  came  into  the  world  to  teach  men.  A
large  number  of  Mohammedans  consider  Him  greater  than
Mohammed.

In  order  to  show  more  fully  that  Mohammedanism  was
raised  up  by  the  divine  Providence  of  the  Lord  to  destroy  the
idolatries  of  many  nations,  the  subject  must  be  explained  in  a
certain  order,  and,  firstly,  something  must  be  said  about  the
origin  of  idolatry.  Previous  to  the  birth  of  Mohammedanism,
the  worship  of  idols  was  common  throughout  the  whole  world.
The  reason  was  that  the  Churches  before  the  coming  of  the
Lord,  were  all  representative  Churches.  Such  also  was  the
Israelitish  Church;  the  tabernacle,  Aaron's  garments,  the
sacrifices,  everything  connected  with  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,
and  the  laws  themselves  were  representative.  The  science
of  correspondences,  the  very  science  of  the  wise,  involving
as  it  does  a  knowledge  of  what  is  represented  by  various
objects,  existed  among  the  ancient  nations  of  the  world,  and
was  especially  cultivated  in  Egypt,  where  it  gave  rise  to
their  hieroglyphics.  That  knowledge  taught  them  the
signification  of  all  kinds  of  animals  and  trees,  and  of
mountains,  hills,  rivers,  fountains,  and  also  of  the  sun,
moon  and  stars ;  and  as  all  their  worship  was  representative,
consisting  wholly  of  correspondences,  they  celebrated  it  on
mountains  and  hills,  and  also  in  groves  and  gardens ;  and  they
therefore  consecrated  fountains,  and  when  worshipping  God,
they  turned  their  faces  to  the  rising  sun ;  moreover  they  made
graven  images  of  horses,  oxen,  calves,  lambs,  and  even  of
birds,  fishes  and  serpents ;  and  in  their  houses  and  elsewhere
they  placed  these  in  an  order  based  on  the  spiritual  things
of  the  Church  to  which  they  corresponded,  or  which  they
represented.  They  also  placed  similar  images  in  their
temples,  to  remind  them  of  the  holy  things  which  they
signified.  After  a  time,  when  the  knowledge  of  correspond-
ences had  been  forgotten,  their  descendants  began  to  worship
p


2IO  Divine  Providence

the  graven  images  themselves  as  holy,  not  knowing  that  their
ancestors  saw  nothing  holy  in  them,  but  only  looked  upon
them  as  representing  and  thus  expressing  holy  things  by
their  correspondences.  This  is  how  the  idolatries  which
filled  the  whole  world  arose,  not  only  in  Asia  and  its  adjacent
islands,  but  also  in  Africa  and  Europe.  To  extirpate  all
these  idolatries,  the  divine  Providence  of  the  Lord  caused
a  new  religion  to  be  instituted  suited  to  the  character  of  the
people  of  the  East,  which  should  contain  something  frorii  the
Word  of  both  Testaments,  and  should  teach  that  the  Lord
came  into  the  world,  that  He  was  a  very  great  prophet,
the  wisest  of  men,  and  the  Son  of  God.  This  was  done
through  Mohammed,  after  whom  that  religion  has  been
called  Mohammedanism.  The  divine  Providence  of  the
Lord  raised  up  this  religion,  suited  to  the  character  of  the
people  of  the  East,  as  already  stated,  that  it  might  destroy
the  idolatries  of  so  many  nations,  and  give  them  some
knowledge  of  the  Lord  before  entering  the  spiritual  world;
and  this  religion  would  not  have  been  adopted  by  so  many
kingdoms,  and  have  extirpated  their  idolatries,  unless  it  had
been  accommodated  and  adapted  to  the  ideas  and  life  of
them  all.  The  reason  why  the  Koran  did  not  acknowledge
the  Lord  as  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth  was,  that  the
Orientals  acknowledged  God  as  the  Creator  of  the  universe,
and  they  could  not  have  understood  that  He  came  into  the
world,  and  assumed  a  human  nature ;  just  as  Christians
do  not  understand  this,  for  in  their  thought  they  separate
His  Divinity  from  His  Humanity,  and  think  of  His  divine
Nature  as  dwelling  with  the  Father  in  heaven,  and  His  human
Nature  they  know  not  where.  These  considerations  enable
us  to  see  that  the  Mohammedan  religion  also  is  due  to  the
Lord's  divine  Providence ;  and  that  all  of  that  religion  who
acknowledge  the  Lord  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  live  according
to  the  precepts  of  the  Decalogue,  which  they  also  possess,
by  shunning  evils  as  sins,  go  to  a  heaven  called  the
Mohammedan  heaven.  This  heaven  also  is  divided  into  three,
— a  highest,  middle  and  lowest  heaven.  Those  are  in  the
highest  heaven,  who  acknowledge  the  Lord  as  one  with  the
Father,  and  thus  as  the  only  God;  those  are  in  the  second
heaven  who  renounce  polygamy  and  live  with  one  wife ;  and
in  the  last  are  those  who  are  being  taught.  More  may  be
seen  about  Mohammedanism  in  The  Continuation  concerning


Divine  Providence  211

the  Last  Judgment  ayid  the  Spiritual  World  (nos.  68-72),  where
the  IMohammedans  and  Mohammed  are  the  subject  treated  of.

256.  iii.  The  merely  natural  man  con-firms  his  disbelief  in
the  divine  Providence  when  he  sees  that  the  Christian  religion
is  only  established  in  the  small  part  of  the  habitable  globe  called
Europe,  and  that  it  is  split  up  into  sects.  The  Christian  rehgion
is  received  only  in  the  small  part  of  the  habitable  globe
called  Europe,  because  it  is  not  suited  to  the  character  of
the  Orientals  like  the  Mohammedan  religion,  in  which  truth
and  falsity  are  mingled,  as  was  sho^^^l  just  above;  and  a
religion  which  is  not  adapted  to  men's  state  of  mind,  is  not
accepted  by  them.  For  example,  a  religion  which  makes
it  unlawful  to  marry  more  than  one  wife  is  not  accepted,
but  rejected,  by  nations  who  for  ages  past  have  been  poly-
gamists ;  so  too  with  some  other  ordinances  of  the  Christian
religion.  Nor  does  it  matter  whether  a  smaller  or  a  greater
part  of  the  world  has  received  the  Christian  religion,  pro-
vided there  are  people  who  possess  the  Word,  for  in  this  way
light  from  the  Word  is  transmitted  to  those  who  are  outside
the  Church  and  do  not  possess  the  Word,  as  is  shown  in
The  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred
Scripture  (nos.  104-113);  and,  wonderful  to  relate,  the
Lord  and  also  heaven  are  present  wherever  the  Word  is
read  devoutly  and  the  Lord  is  worshipped  according  to  its
precepts.  The  reason  is  that  the  Lord  is  the  Word,  and  the
Word  is  divine  Truth  which  constitutes  heaven;  this  is
why  the  Lord  says  :  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered
together  in  My  Name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them  "
(Matt,  xviii.  20).  This  use  of  the  Word  can  be  made  by
Europeans  in  many  parts  of  the  habitable  globe,  because
their  commerce  extends  over  all  the  earth,  and  everywhere
they  read  the  Word  and  teach  men  from  it.  This  sounds  like
a  fabrication,  but  it  is  true.

The  Christian  religion  is  divided  into  sects,  because  it  is
derived  from  the  Word,  and  the  Word  is  written  throughout
by  pure  correspondences,  and  these  correspondences  are  in
great  part  appearances  of  the  truth,  within  which,  however,
genuine  truths  lie  concealed ;  and  as  the  doctrine  of  the
Church  ought  to  be  drawn  from  the  literal  sense  of  the  Word,
which  is  of  the  character  just  explained,  there  necessarily,
have  been  disputes,  controversies,  and  dissensions  in  the
Church,  especially  as  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Word,  but


212  Divine  Providence

not  as  to  the  Word  itself  or  the  Lord's  divinity;  for  it  is
everywhere  acknowledged  that  the  Word  is  holy,  and  that
the  Lord  is  divine,  and  these  two  doctrines  are  the  essentials
of  the  Church.  This  is  why  those  who  deny  the  Lord's
divinity,  who  are  called  Socinians,  have  been  excommunicated
from  the  Church;  and  those  who  deny  the  holiness  of  the
Word  are  not  regarded  as  Christians.  To  this  I  will  add
a  remarkable  fact  concerning  the  W^ord,  from  which  it  may
be  inferred  that  in  its  inner  recesses  the  Word  is  the  divine
Truth  itself,  and  in  its  inmost  is  the  Lord.  When  any
spirit  opens  the  Word,  and  rubs  his  face  or  clothing  with  it,
this  causes  his  face  or  clothing  to  shine  from  the  mere  contact
as  brightly  as  the  moon  or  a  star,  in  the  sight  of  all  whom  he
meets.  This  is  evidence  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  world
more  holy  than  the  Word.  It  may  be  seen  in  The  Doctrine
of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture  (nos.
5-26),  that  the  Word  is  written  throughout  by  pure  corre-
spondences ;  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  must  be  drawn
from  the  literal  sense  of  the  Word,  and  confirmed  by  it
(nos.  50-61);  that  heresies  can  be  drawn  from  the  literal
sense  of  the  Word,  but  that  it  is  hurtful  to  confirm  them
(nos.  91-97);  that  the  Church  is  founded  upon  the  Word,
and  that  its  character  varies  according  to  its  interpretation
of  the  Word  (nos.  76-79).

257.  iv.  The  merely  natural  man  confirms  his  disbelief  in
the  divine  Providence  by  the  fact  that  in  many  Christian
kingdoms  there  are  men  who  claim  for  themselves  divine
power,  and  wish  to  be  worshipped  as  gods,  and  who  pray  to
dead  men.  They  deny,  indeed,  that  they  claim  divine
power  for  themselves  or  that  they  wish  to  be  worshipped  as
gods ;  but  they  declare  that  they  can  open  and  close  heaven,
remit  and  retain  sins,  and  therefore  save  and  condemn  men,
and  this  is  equivalent  to  divine  power.  For  the  divine
Providence  has  for  its  end  nothing  but  reformation  and,
consequently,  salvation;  this  is  its  continual  endeavour
on  behalf  of  every  one;  and  salvation  cannot  be  attained
except  by  an  acknowledgment  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Lord,  and
a  trust  that  He  will  effect  it,  if  a  man  lives  according  to  His
precepts.  Who  cannot  see  that  this  arrogance  is  the
Babylon  described  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  the  Babel  fre-
quently mentioned  in  the  prophets  ?  That  it  is  also  Lucifer,
spoken  of  in  Isaiah  xiv.,  is  evident  from  the  verses  of  that


Divine  Providence  213

chapter  in  which  these  words  occur :  "  Pronounce  this
proverb  against  the  king  of  Babel  "  (ver.  4);  and,  "  I  will
cut  off  from  Babel  the  name  and  remnant  "  (ver.  22);  from
which  passage  it  is  clear  that  Babel  is  the  same  as  Lucifer;
for  of  him  it  is  said  :  "  How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,
0  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning  !  For  thou  hast  said  in  thy
heart,  I  will  ascend  into  the  heavens ;  I  will  exalt  my  throne
above  the  stars  of  God,  and  I  will  sit  upon  the  mount  of
the  assembly,  in  the  sides  of  the  north ;  I  will  ascend  above  the
heights  of  the  clouds ;  I  will  be  like  the  Most  High  "  (ver.
12-14).  It  is  well  known  that  they  pray  to  dead  men  and
implore  their  aid,  for  prayer  to  them  was  sanctioned  by
a  papal  bull  confirming  the  decree  of  the  Council  of  Trent,
in  which  it  is  openly  said  that  prayer  should  be  offered  to
the  dead.  Yet  who  does  not  know  that  prayer  should  be
offered  to  God  alone,  and  not  to  any  dead  man.?  But  it
shall  now  be  stated  why  the  Lord  has  permitted  this.  It
cannot  be  denied  that  He  has  permitted  it  for  the  sake  of
the  salvation  of  man.  For  it  is  well  known  that  without  the
Lord  there  is  no  salvation;  and  therefore  it  was  necessary
that  the  Lord  should  be  preached  from  the  Word,  and  that
the  Christian  Church  should  thereby  be  established.  But
this  could  only  be  done  by  leaders  zealous  in  the  work,  of
whom  there  were  found  none  but  those  whose  apparent  zeal
was  kindled  by  the  ardour  or  self-love.  This  ardour  first
incited  them  to  make  the  Lord  known,  and  to  teach  the  truths
of  the  Word ;  and  it  is  on  account  of  this,  their  first  state,  that
Lucifer  is  called  the  "  son  of  the  morning  "  (ver.  12).  But
when  they  saw  that  they  could  exercise  dominion  by  means  of
the  holy  things  of  the  Church,  the  love  of  self  by  which  they
were  first  impelled  to  make  the  Lord  known,  broke  forth  from
within,  and  at  length  rose  to  such  a  height  that  they  arrogated
to  themselves  all  the  divine  power  of  the  Lord,  not  leaving
Him  any.  This  could  not  be  prevented  by  the  divine
Providence  of  the  Lord ;  for  in  that  case  they  would  have
declared  that  the  Lord  was  not  God,  the  Word  not  holy,
would  have  become  Socinians  or  Arians,  and  would  thus  have
destroyed  the  whole  Church,  which  now  survives  among  the
general  body,  whatever  may  be  the  character  of  its  rulers;
for  all  those  of  this  religion  who  approach  the  Lord  and  shun
evils  as  sins  are  saved,  and  therefore  there  are  many  heavenly
communities   formed    from    them   in    the   spiritual    world.


214  Divine  Providence

Moreover  one  nation  among  them  has  providentially  escaped
the  yoke  of  such  domination,  and  holds  the  Word  to  be  holy ;
this  is  the  noble  French  nation.  But  what  has  happened  ?
When  the  love  of  self  exalted  its  dominion  even  to  the  Lord's
throne,  removed  Him,  and  set  itself  thereon,  the  love  called
Lucifer  necessarily  profaned  the  whole  Word  and  the  Church ;
to  prevent  this,  the  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  took  care
that  they  should  depart  from  His  worship  and  invoke  dead
men,  pray  to  their  statues,  kiss  their  bones,  and  bow  down
at  their  tombs,  should  forbid  the  reading  of  the  Word,
should  think  that  holy  worship  consisted  in  reciting  masses
not  understood  by  the  common  people,  and  should  sell
salvation  for  money.  If  they  had  not  done  these  things,  they
would  have  profaned  the  holy  things  of  the  Word  and  the
Church;  for,  as  was  shown  in  the  preceding  section,  only
those  profane  holy  things  who  are  acquainted  with  them.
Lest,  therefore,  they  should  profane  the  most  Holy  Supper,
the  divine  Providence  of  the  Lord  has  led  them  to  divide  it,
and  give  the  bread  to  the  people,  and  drink  the  wine  them-
selves ;  for  the  wine  in  the  Holy  Supper  signifies  holy  truth,
and  the  bread,  holy  good;  but  when  they  are  divided,  the
wine  signifies  truth  profaned,  and  the  bread,  good  adulter-
ated; and  they  have  further  been  led  to  regard  the  Holy
Supper  as  something  corporeal  and  material,  and  to  adopt
this  as  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  religion.  Any  one  who
considers  these  facts,  and  weighs  them  with  a  mind  in  some
degree  enlightened,  may  see  the  wonderful  working  of  the
divine  Providence  in  guarding  the  holy  things  of  the  Church,
in  saving  all  who  can  be  saved — as  it  were,  in  snatching  from
the  fire  those  who  are  willing  to  be  rescued.

258.  V.  The  merely  natural  man  confirms  his  disbelief  in  the
divine  Providence  by  the  fact  that  among  professing  Christians
there  are  some  who  suppose  that  salvation  depends  on  believing
or  repeating  certain  formulce,  and  not  at  all  on  good  deeds.  That
such  men  consider  faith  alone  necessary  for  salvation,  without
a  life  of  charity,  and  therefore  separate  faith  from  charity,  is
shown  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  Faith  ;
there  too  it  is  shown  that  these  men  are  denoted  in  the  Word
by  the  Philistines,  by  the  "  dragon,"  and  by  the  "  goats."
This  doctrine  also  has  been  permitted  by  the  divine  Provi-
dence, in  order  that  the  Divine  of  the  Lord  and  the  holiness
of  the  Word  might  not  be  profaned.     The  Divine  of  the


Divine  Providence  215

Lord  is  not  profaned  when  salvation  is  considered  to  be
secured  by  a  prayer  that  God  the  Father  may  be  merciful
for  the  sake  of  His  Son,  who  suffered  on  the  cross  and  made
satisfaction  for  us ;  for  in  this  manner  they  do  not  approach
the  Lord's  Divinity,  but  His  humanity,  which  they  do  not
acknowledge  as  divine.     Nor  do  they  profane  the  Word,
for  they  pay  no  attention  to  the  passages  where  love,  charity,
deeds  and  works  are  mentioned.    They  say  that  these  are  all
included  in  a  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  the  prayer  just  men-
tioned ;  and  those  who  confirm  this  opinion  say  to  themselves,
"  As  the  law  does  not  condemn  me,  neither  does  evil;  and
good  will  not  save  me,  because  good  of  my  own  devising  is
not  good."     So  they  are  like  men  totally  destitute  of  truth
from  the  Word,  who  therefore  cannot  profane  it.     But  none
confirm  their  faith  in  the  efficacy  of  that  prayer,  except  those
who  from  self-love  are  in  the  pride  of  their  own  intelligence  ;
nor  are  they  Christians  at  heart,  but  only  wish  to  appear  so.
We  will  now  explain  how  the  Lord's  divine  Providence
is  continually  working  for  the  salvation  of  those  who  regard
it  as  a  matter  of  religious  obligation  to  separate  faith  from
charity.    The   Lord's    divine  Providence  takes  care  that,
although  faith  of  that  kind  has  been  made  a  religious  duty,
every  one  may  know  that  faith  alone  does  not  save,  but  a
life  of  charity  acting  as  one  with  faith ;  for  in  all  Churches
where  this  belief  prevails,  it  is  taught  that  salvation  is
impossible  unless  a  man  examines  himself,  sees  his  sins,
acknowledges  them,  repents,  desists  from  them,  and  begins
a  new  life.     This  doctrine  is  solemnly  read  in  the  presence
of  all  who  approach  the  Lord's  Supper;  and  it  is  added,  that
unless  they  do  this  they  mingle  together  what  is  holy  with
what  is  profane,  and  cast  themselves  into  eternal  damnation ;
moreover  in  England  it  is  added,  that  unless  they  do  this
the  devil  will  enter  into  them  as  he  entered  into  Judas  and
destroy  them  soul  and  body.     It  is  evident  from  this,  that
even  in  those  Churches  where  faith  alone  is  believed  in,
every  one  is  taught  that  evils  should  be  shunned  as  sins.
Furthermore,  every  one  who  is  born  a  Christian  knows  that
evils  should  be  shunned  as  sins,  because  the  Decalogue  is
placed  in  the  hands  of  every  boy  and  girl,  and  is  taught  by
parents  and  teachers;  and  further,  all  citizens  of  the  king-
dom, especially  the  common  people,  after  having  repeated
the  Decalogue  from  memory,  are  examined  by  the  priest


2i6  Divine  Providence

as  to  what  they  know  of  the  Christian  reUgion^  and  are
admonished  to  do  the  things  which  it  commands.  At  such
times  they  are  never  told  by  any  priest  that  they  are  not
under  the  yoke  of  the  law,  or  that  they  cannot  obey  the
commandments  because  they  cannot  do  good  from  them-
selves. Again,  the  Athanasian  Creed  has  been  adopted
throughout  the  whole  Christian  world,  and  the  truth
contained  in  its  last  paragraphs  acknowledged,  namely,
that  the  Lord  will  come  to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead,
and  that  those  who  have  done  good  will  enter  into  ever-
lasting life,  and  those  who  have  done  evil  into  everlasting
fire.  In  Sweden,  where  the  religion  of  faith  alone  has  been
accepted,  it  is  plainly  taught  that  faith  separate  from  charity,
or  without  good  works,  has  no  existence ;  this  is  found  in  a
certain  monitory  Appendix  inserted  in  all  Swedish  psalm-
books,  which  is  called  Hindrances  or  Stumbling-blocks  of
the  Impenitent,^  and  in  which  these  words  occur  :  "  Those
who  are  rich  in  good  works  thereby  show  that  they  are  rich
in  faith,  since  a  saving  faith  operates  through  charity;  for
a  justifying  faith  never  exists  alone  and  separate  from  good
works,  just  as  a  good  tree  is  not  without  fruit,  or  as  the  sun
without  light  and  heat,  or  water  without  moisture."  These
few  particulars  have  been  mentioned  to  show  that  although
a  religious  system  inculcating  faith  alone  has  been  adopted,
still  the  goods  of  charity,  or  good  works,  are  everywhere
taught ;  and  this  is  of  the  Lord's  divine  Providence,  lest  the
common  people  should  be  led  astray.  I  have  heard  Luther,
with  whom  I  have  sometimes  spoken  in  the  spiritual  world,
denouncing  faith  alone,  saying  that  when  he  instituted  it
he  was  warned  by  an  angel  of  the  Lord  not  to  do  so;  but
that  he  thought  that  unless  he  rejected  works,  there  would
be  no  separation  from  the  Catholic  religion,  and  so,  contrary
to  the  warning,  he  established  that  faith.

259.  vi.  The  merely  natural  man  confirms  his  disbelief  in
the  divine  Providence  by  the  fact,  that  there  have  been  and
still  are  so  many  heresies  in  the  Christian  world,  such  as
Quakerism,  Moravianism,  Anabaptism  and  many  others.
For  he  thinks  to  himself,  "  If  the  divine  Providence  governed
all  particulars  without  the  least  exception,  and  had  the
salvation  of  all  for  its  end,  it  would  have  caused  one  true

^^This  Appendix  was  deleted  when  the  psalm-book  was  revised
in  the  year  1S19.


Divine  Providence  217

religion  to  exist  throughout  the  whole  world,  and  that  not
divided  into  sects,  still  less  torn  by  heresy."  But  take  a
deeper  and  more  rational  view  if  you  can.  Can  a  man  be
saved  unless  he  be  first  reformed  ?  For  he  was  born  in  the
love  of  self  and  the  world,  and  as  these  loves  have  nothing
in  common  with  the  love  of  God  and  of  the  neighbour,
unless  it  be  for  the  sake  of  self,  he  was  also  born  in  evils  of
every  kind.  What  love  or  mercy  is  there  in  these  loves?
Does  a  man  think  anything  of  defrauding  another,  cursing
him,  hating  him  with  a  deadly  hatred,  committing  adultery
with  his  wife,  and  taking  cruel  revenge  upon  him,  while  he
cherishes  the  desire  to  set  himself  above  all  others  and  to
possess  their  goods,  regarding  them  as  trifling  and  insignifi-
cant compared  with  himself  ?  If  such  a  man  is  to  be  saved,
must  he  not  first  be  delivered  from  these  evils  and  thus
reformed  ?  This  cannot  be  done  except  in  accordance  with
many  laws  of  the  divine  Providence,  as  has  been  stated
above  in  many  places.  These  laws  are  for  the  most  part
unknown;  nevertheless  they  derive  their  existence  both
from  divine  Wisdom  and  divine  Love ;  and  the  Lord  cannot
infringe  them,  because  to  do  so  would  destroy  man,  and
not  save  him.  Read  again  and  compare  the  laws  mentioned
above,  and  you  will  see  how  true  this  is.  Since  therefore
according  to  those  laws  influx  does  not  come  directly  from
heaven,  "but  indirectly  through  the  Word,  doctrine  and
sermons,  and  since  the  Word  in  order  that  it  may  be  a
divine  work,  must  necessarily  be  \\Titten  by  pure  corre-
spondences, it  follows  that  dissensions  and  heresies  were
inevitable,  and  that  they  are  permitted  by  the  laws  of  the
divine  Providence.  But  this  is  not  all;  the  Church  itself
has  adopted  as  its  essentials  merely  intellectual  and  doctrinal
tenets,  and  not  such  as  relate  to  the  will  and  life ;  and  when
the  latter  are  not  made  the  essentials  of  the  Church,  man's
understanding  is  shrouded  in  darkness,  and  he  wanders
about  like  a  blind  man,  stumbling  against  obstacles,  and
falling  into  pits.  For  the  will  sees  in  the  understanding,  and
not  the  understanding  in  the  will;  or,  what  is  the  same
thing,  the  life  and  its  love  must  lead  the  understanding  to
think,  speak  and  act,  and  not  contrariwise ;  if  it  were  other-
wise, the  understanding,  impelled  by  an  evil  or  even  diabolical
desire,  might  seize  upon  any  suggestion  of  the  senses,  and
force  the  will  to  comply  with  it.     These  facts  show  the


2i8  Divine  Providence

origin  of  dissensions  and  heresies.  But  it  has  been  provided
that  every  one^  in  whatever  heresy  his  mind,  or  intellect,
may  be  involved,  can  still  be  reformed  and  saved,  provided
he  shuns  evils  as  sins,  and  does  not  confirm  his  belief  in
heretical  falsities ;  for  by  shunning  evils  as  sins  the  will  is
reformed,  and  by  means  of  the  will  the  understanding,
which  then  first  emerges  from  darkness  into  light.  There
are  three  essentials  of  the  Church — an  acknowledgment  that
the  Lord  is  divine,  an  acknowledgment  of  the  holiness  of
the  word,  and  a  life  of  charity.  Every  one  has  faith  in
proportion  as  he  lives  a  life  of  charity ;  the  Word  tells  us
what  our  life  should  be,  and  the  Lord  provides  for  our
reformation  and  salvation.  If  the  Church  had  held  to  these
three  essentials,  intellectual  differences  would  not  have
divided,  but  only  varied  it,  as  light  gives  variety  to  the
colour  of  beautiful  objects,  and  as  various  gems  adorn  a
king's  crown.

260.  vii.  The  merely  natural  man  confirms  his  disbelief
in  the  divine  Providence  by  the  fact  that  Judaism  still  flourishes.
For  the  Jews  have  not  been  converted  after  so  many  cen-
turies, although  they  live  among  Christians ;  and  in  accordance
with  the  predictions  of  the  Word,  they  do  not  confess  the
Lord  and  acknowledge  Him  as  the  Messiah,  who,  they
expected,  would  lead  them  back  to  the  land  of  Canaan ;  and
they  persist  in  denying  Him,  and  yet  prosper.  But  men
who  for  these  reasons  call  in  question  the  divine  Providence,
do  not  know  that  "  Jews  "  in  the  Word  denote  all  in  the
Church,  who  acknowledge  the  Lord ;  and  that  the  "  land  of
Canaan,"  into  which  they  are  to  be  led,  denotes  the  Lord's
Church.  But  they  persist  in  the  denial  of  the  Lord,  because
their  disposition  is  such  that  were  they  to  admit  and  ac-
knowledge the  Lord's  Divinity,  and  the  holy  things  of  His
Church,  they  would  afterwards  profane  them;  this  is  why
the  Lord  say^  of  them,  "  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and
hardened  their  hearts,  that  they  should  not  see  with  their
eyes,  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and  be  converted,
•  and  I  should  heal  them"  (John  xii.  40;  Matt.  xiii.  15;
Mark  iv.  12  ;  Luke  viii.  10 ;  Isaiah  vi.  9,  10).  He  says,  "  Lest
they  should  be  converted  and  I  should  heal  them,"  because
if  they  had  been  converted  and  healed,  they  would  have
committed  profanation;  and  it  is  a  law  of  the  divine  Provi-
dence (nos.  221-233),  that  no  one  should  be  admitted  by


Divine  Providence  219

the  Lord  to  an  inward  perception  of  the  truths  of  faith  and
the  goods  of  charity,  unless  he  can  be  kept  in  these  states
to  the  end  of  his  Hfe;  otherwise  he  would  profane  what  is
holy.  The  Jewish  nation  has  been  presented,  and  dispersed
over  a  great  part  of  the  world  for  the  sake  of  the  Word  in
its  original  language,  which  they  venerate  more  than  Chris-
tians do ;  and  in  every  particular  of  the  Word,  the  Lord's
Divine  is  present,  for  it  is  divine  Truth,  united  to  divine
Good,  proceeding  from  the  Lord;  and  owing  to  this,  the
Word  is  the  means  by  which  the  Lord  is  united  with  His
Church,  and  by  which  heaven  is  present  with  man,  as  was
shown  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Neio  Jerusalem  concerning  the
Sacred  Scripture  (nos.  62-69);  and  the  Lord  and  heaven  are
present  wherever  the  Word  is  devoutly  read.  This  is  the
purpose  of  divine  Providence  in  preserving  them,  and
dispersing  them  over  a  great  part  of  the  world.  Their  lot
after  death  may  be  seen  in  the  Continuation  concerning  the
Last  Judgment  and  the  Spiritual  World  (nos.  79-82).

261.  These  now  are  the  reasons  mentioned  above  (now
238),  by  which  the  natural  man  confirms,  or  may  confirm,  his
disbelief  in  divine  Providence.  Others  now  follow,  men-
tioned above  in  no.  239,  which  may  also  serve  the  natural
man  as  arguments  against  the  divine  Providence,  and  may
also  occur  to  others,  and  excite  doubt  in  their  minds.

262.  i.  Doubt  concerning  the  divine  Providence  may  be
suggested  by  the  fact,  that  the  whole  Christian  world  worships
one  God  as  three  Persons,  that  is,  three  Gods  ;  and  that  hitherto
it  has  not  been  knoivn  that  God  is  one  in  Person  and  Essence,  in
whom  is  the  Trinity,  and  who  is  the  Lord.  A  man  who  reasons
about  Divine  Providence  may  say,  "  Are  not  three  Persons
three  Gods,  if  each  Person  by  himself  is  God  ?  Who  can
or  does  think  otherwise  ?  Athanasius  himself  could  not,  for
in  the  Creed  which  is  named  after  him  he  says  :  '  For  like
as  we  are  compelled  by  the  Christian  verity  to  acknowledge
every  Person  by  Himself  to  be  God  and  Lord,  so  are  we
forbidden  by  the  Catholic  religion  to  say  there  are  three
Gods,  or  three  Lords.'  "  This  means  simply  that  we  ought  to
acknowledge  three  Gods  and  Lords,  but  that  we  must  not
mention  or  name  three  Gods  or  Lords.  Who  can  possibly
conceive  of  one  God,  unless  He  is  one  in  Person?  If  the
reply  is  that  it  is  conceivable  if  one  thinks  that  the  Three
have  one  Essence,  who  can  or  does  mean  anything  by  this,


220  Divine  Providence

except  that  although  they  are  of  one  mind  and  agree  together,
they  are  yet  three  Gods  ?    And  if  he  thinks  more  deeply
he  says  :  "  How  can  the  divine  Essence  which  is  infinite
be  divided?  and  how  can  it  from  eternity  beget  another
divine  Essence,  and  produce  still  another,  which  proceeds
from  them   both?"     It .  may   be   said  that  this   must  be
believed  and  not  thought  about,  but  who  can  help  thinking
about  what  he  is  told  to  believe  ?     How  else  can  he  obtain
that  acknowledgment  which  is  the  essence  of  faith  ?     Have
not  Socinianism  and  Arianism,  which  reign  in  more  hearts
than  you  believe,  sprung  from  thinking  about  the  Godhead
as  consisting  of  three  Persons?     Faith  in  one  God,  who  is
the  Lord,  constitutes  the  Church,  for  the  divine  Trinity  is
in  Him.     That  this  is  the  truth  may  be  seen  in  the  Doctrine
of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Lord  from  beginning  to
end.     But  what  is  thought  of  the  Lord  at  this  day  ?     Is  it
not  believed  that  He  is  both  God  and  Man,  God  from  Jehovah
the  Father  by  whom  He  was  conceived,  and  Man  from  the
Virgin  Mary  of  whom  He  was  born  ?     But  who  believes  that
God  and  Man  in  Him,  or  His  Divinity  and  His  Humanity,
are  one  Person,  and  that  they  are  one  as  soul  and  body  are
one?     Does  any  one  know  this?     Ask  the  doctors  of  the
Church,  and  they  will  say  that  they  do  not  know  it ;  yet  it
is  stated  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  received  throughout
the  whole  Christian  world,  as  follows  :   "  Our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  God  and  Man;  and  although  He
is  God  and  Man,  still  they  are  not  two,  but  one  Christ ;  He
is  one  because  the  Divine  took  to  itself  the  Human;  yea,
He  is  altogether  one,  for  He  is  one  in  Person;  since  as  soul
and  body  make  one  man,  so  God  and  Man  is  one  Christ."
This  is  from  the  Faith  or  Creed  of  Athanasius.     The  clergy
do  not  know  this,  because  when  they  read  it,  they  do  not
think  of  the  Lord  as  God,  but  only  as  a  Man.     If  the  same
persons  are  asked  whether  they  know  by  whom  He  was
conceived,  whether  by  God  the  Father  or  by  His  own  Divinity,
they  will  answer  that  he  was  conceived  by  God  the  Father,
for  this  is  according  to  the  Scriptures.     Then,  are  not  the
Father  and  He  one,  as  the  soul  and  body  are  one?     Who
can  possibly  think  that  He  was  conceived  by  two  Divine
Beings,  and  if  from  His  own  Divinity,  that  this  was  His
Father  ?     If  you  ask  them  further,  what  is  their  idea  of  the
Lord's  Divinity,  and  what  of  His  Humanity,  they  will  say


Divine  Providence  221

that  His  Divinity  is  from  the  Father's  Essence,  and  the
Humanity  from  the  mother's  essence,  and  that  His  Divinity
is  with  the  Father ;  and  if  you  then  ask,  where  His  Humanity
is,  they  will  make  no  reply ;  for  in  their  thought  they  separate
His  Divinity  and  His  Humanity,  and  make  the  Divinity
equal  to  that  of  the  Father,  and  the  Humanity  like  that  of
another  man;  they  do  not  know  that  in  this  way  they
separate  soul  and  body;  nor  do  they  see  the  difficulty  in-
volved in  the  supposition,  that  in  that  case,  a  rational
man  was  born  from  a  mother  alone.  Impressed  with  the
idea  that  the  Lord's  Humanity  is  like  that  of  any  other
man,  a  Christian  can  with  difficulty  be  led  to  think  of  a
Divine  Humanity,  although  he  may  admit  the  statement
that  the  Lord's  soul  or  life  by  conception  was,  and  is,  Jehovah
Himself.  Now  review  all  the  arguments,  and  consider  whether
there  is  any  God  in  the  universe  but  the  Lord  alone,  in  whom
is  the  essential  Divinity  and  source  of  all  things,  called  the
Father,  the  Divine  Humanity,  called  the  Son,  and  the
proceeding  Divine,  called  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  thus  that
God  is  one  in  Person  and  Essence,  and  is  the  Lord.  If  you
urge  that  the  Lord  Himself  named  three  in  Matthew,  "  Go
ye  therefore  and  make  disciples  of  all  nations,  baptizing  them
into  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy
Spirit  "  (xxviii.  19),  yet  it  is  evident  from  the  verses  im-
mediately preceding  and  following,  that  He  said  this  to
show  that  in  Himself,  now  glorified,  was  the  divine  Trinity.
In  the  verse  immediately  preceding.  He  says  that  all  power
is  given  unto  Him  in  heaven  and  upon  earth ;  and  in  that
immediately  following.  He  says  that  He  would  be  with  them
until  the  consummation  of  the  age ;  thus  speaking  of  Himself
alone,  and  not  of  three.

Now  as  to  why  the  divine  Providence  has  permitted
Christians  to  worship  one  God  as  three  persons,  or  three
Gods,  and  why  Christians  have  not  hitherto  known  that
God  is  one  in  Person  and  Essence,  in  whom  is  a  Trinity,  and
who  is  the  Lord,  the  cause  does  not  lie  in  the  Lord,  but  in
man.  For  the  Lord  has  taught  the  truth  plainly  in  His
Word,  as  may  be  seen  from  all  the  passages  quoted  in  the
Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Lord  ;  and  He
has  also  taught  it  in  the  creed  adopted  by  all  the  churches,
where  it  is  stated  that  His  Divinity  and  His  Humanity  are
not  two,  but  one  Person,  united  like  soul  and  body.     But


222  Divine  Providence

the  primary  cause  of  their  dividing  the  Divinity  and  the
Humanity,  and  making  the  Divinity  equal  to  that  of  Jehovah,
the  Father,  and  the  Humanity  to  that  of  any  other  man,
was  that  the  Church  after  its  rise  went  astray  into  Babylonia,
and  arrogated  to  itself  the  Lord's  divine  Power;  but  that
it  might  not  be  called  divine  Power,  but  human  power,
they  declared  the  Lord's  Humanity  to  be  like  that  of  any
other  man.  Afterwards,  when  the  Reformation  took  place,
and  faith  alone  was  accepted  as  the  only  means  of  salvation,
— the  faith  that  God  the  Father  would  have  mercy  for  the  sake
of  the  Son, — the  Lord's  Humanity  could  not  be  regarded
otherwise;  for  no  one  can  approach  the  Lord,  and  in  heart
acknowledge  Him  as  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth,  unless
he  lives  according  to  His  precepts.  In  the  spiritual  world,
where  every  one  is  obliged  to  speak  as  he  thinks,  no  one  can
utter  the  name  of  Jesus  unless  he  had  lived  in  the  world  as
a  Christian;  and  this  is  of  His  divine  Providence,  lest  His
Name  should  be  profaned.

263.  To  make  clear  what  has  just  been  said,  I  will  add
the  following  passage  taken  from  the  end  of  the  Doctrine  of
the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Lord  (nos.  60,  61) :  "  That
God  and  Man  in  the  Lord,  according  to  this  doctrine,  are
not  two  but  one  person,  and  altogether  one  as  the  soul  and
body  are  one,  appears  clearly  from  many  of  the  Lord's
sayings ;  for  example,  that  the  Father  and  He  are  one ;  that
all  things  of  the  Father  are  His,  and  all  His  the  Father's ;
that  He  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Him;  that  all
things  are  given  into  His  hand ;  that  He  has  all  power ;  that
He  is  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth ;  that  he  who  believes  in
Him  has  eternal  life ;  and  that  the  wrath  of  God  abides  on
him  who  does  not  believe  in  Him;  and  further,  that  both
the  Divinity  and  the  Humanity  were  taken  up  into  heaven ;
and  that,  as  regards  both.  He  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,
that  is,  that  He  is  almighty;  and  many  other  passages
concerning  His  divine  Humanity  have  been  quoted  above
which  all  testify  that  God  is  one  in  Person  and  in  Essence,
in  whom  is  a  Trinity,  and  who  is  the  Lord.  These  things
concerning  the  Lord  are  now  for  the  first  time  disclosed,
because  it  was  foretold  in  the  Apocalypse  (chapters  21,  22),
that  a  new  Church  would  be  instituted  at  the  end  of  the
former,  in  which  this  would  be  the  primary  doctrine.  This
Church  is  there  denoted  by  the  New  Jerusalem,  into  which


Divine  Providence  223

none  can  enter  but  those  who  acknowledge  the  Lord  alone
as  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth ;  and  therefore  in  the  Apoca-
lypse this  church  is  called  the  "  Lamb's  Wife."  This  I  can
declare,  that  the  whole  heaven  acknowledges  the  Lord  alone,
and  that  only  those  who  acknowledge  Him  are  admitted
into  heaven,  for  heaven  is  heaven  from  the  Lord.  This  very
acknowledgment  born  of  love  and  faith  causes  them  to  be
in  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  in  them,  as  He  Himself  teaches
in  John  :  "  In  this  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  My  Father
and  ye  in  Me,  and  I  in  you"  (xiv.  20);  and  again  :  "  Abide
in  Me  and  I  also  in  you.  I  am  the  Vine,  ye  are  the  branches ;
he  that  abideth  in  Me  and  I  in  him,  the  same  beareth  much
fruit;  for  without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing.  If  a  man  abide
not  in  Me,  he  is  cast  forth  "  (xv.  4-6;  xvii.  22,  23),  This
was  not  seen  from  the  Word  before  because,  if  it  had  been,
it  would  not  have  been  believed ;  for  the  Last  Judgment  had
not  yet  been  accomplished,  and  before  that  the  power  of
hell  prevailed  over  the  power  of  heaven ;  for  man  occupies
an  intermediate  position  between  heaven  and  hell,  and,
therefore,  if  it  had  been  seen  before,  the  devil  or  hell  would
have  snatched  the  truth  out  of  men's  hearts,  and  would
moreover  have  profaned  it.  This  predominance  of  the
power  of  hell  was  altogether  broken  by  the  Last  Judgment,
which  has  now  been  accompHshed.  Since  that  judgment,
and  therefore  at  the  present  day,  every  man  who  desires
it  can  receive  enlightenment  and  wisdom.

264.  Douht  may  arise  concerning  the  divine  Providence  from
the  fact,  that  hitherto  men  have  not  known  that  every  detail  of
the  Word  contains  a  spiritual  sense,  which  is  indeed  the  source
of  its  holiness.  This  doubt  concerning  the  divine  Providence
may  find  expression  as  follows  :  "  Why  is  this  fact  now
revealed  for  the  first  time?  and  why  is  it  revealed  by  one
who  is  not  a  dignitary  of  the  Church  ?  "  But  the  Lord  in
his  good  pleasure  may  choose  a  dignitary  of  the  Church,  or
the  servant  of  one,  for  He  knows  the  character  of  the  one
and  of  the  other.  But  the  reasons  why  the  spiritual  sense
of  the  Word  was  not  revealed  before  are  these  : —

(c)  Because,  if  it  had  been,  the  Church  would  have  profaned
it  and  would  thereby  have  profaned  the  very  sanctity  of  the
Word.

{b)  Because  genuine  truths,  containing  the  spiritual  sense
of  the  Word,  were  not  revealed  by  the  Lord  till  after  the


224  Divine  Providence

last  judgment  had  been  accomplished,  and  the  New  Church
signified  by  the  Holy  Jerusalem  was  about  to  be  established
by  the  Lord.  But  these  points  shall  be  examined  separately.
(a)  The  spiritual  sense  of  the  Word  was  not  revealed  before
because,  if  it  had  been,  the  Church  would  have  profaned  it,  and
would  thereby  have  profaned  the  very  sanctity  of  the  Word.
The  Church,  not  long  after  its  establishment,  was  changed
into  Babylon,  and  afterwards  into  Philistia ;  the  Babylonians
do  indeed  acknowledge  the  Word,  but  hold  it  in  light  esteem,
saying  that  the  Holy  Spirit  inspires  them  in  their  final  de-
cisions, just  as  much  as  it  inspired  the  prophets.  They
acknowledge  the  Word  for  the  sake  of  the  vicariate  founded
by  them  on  the  Lord's  words  to  Peter;  but  they  yet  hold
the  Word  in  light  esteem  because  it  does  not  support  their
pretensions,  and  therefore  they  take  it  away  from  the  people,
and  hide  it  in  monasteries  where  few  read  it.  If  therefore
the  spiritual  sense  of  the  Word,  in  which  the  Lord  is  present
with  all  angelic  wisdom,  had  been  revealed,  the  Word  would
have  been  profaned,  not  only  as  it  is  now,  in  its  ultimate
or  literal  sense,  but  also  in  its  inmost  sense.  Philistia,  which
denotes  faith  separated  from  charity,  would  also  have
profaned  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  Word,  because  it  makes
salvation  depend  upon  thinking  about,  or  uttering,  certain
words,  and  not  upon  doing  good,  as  was  said  before;  and
thus  it  puts  forward  false  m.eans  of  salvation,  and  excludes
man's  reason  from  any  share  in  faith.  What  do  such  persons
care  about  the  light  in  which  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  Word
is  seen  ?  Would  they  not  turn  it  into  darkness  ?  If  the
natural  sense  is  perverted,  what  would  they  not  do  with
the  spiritual  sense?  Does  any  one  who  has  confirmed
himself  in  faith  separated  from  charity,  and  in  justification
by  such  faith,  want  to  understand  what  the  good  of  life  is,
what  love  of  the  Lord  and  love  for  the  neighbour  are,  what
charity  and  the  goods  of  charity  are,  what  good  works  are,
and  what  is  the  meaning  of  doing  them,  or  even  what  faith
in  its  essence  is,  or  any  one  of  its  constituent  truths  ?  They
write  volumes  only  to  confirm  that  which  they  call  faith,
and  all  the  things  just  mentioned,  they  declare  to  be  involved
in  that  faith.  Evidently  then,  if  the  spiritual  sense  of  the
Word  had  been  revealed  before,  the  Lord's  words  in  Matthew
would  have  been  fulfilled.  "  If  thine  eye  be  evil  thy  whole
body  will  be  full  of  darkness ;  if  therefore  the  light  which  is


Divine  Providence  225

in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  "  (vi.  23).
The  eye,  in  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  Word,  denotes  the
understanding.

(b)  Genuine  truths,  such  as  those  contained  in  the  spiritual
sense  of  the  Word,  were  not  revealed  by  the  Lord  until  after  the
last  judgment  had  been  accomplished,  and  the  new  Church,  which
is  meant  by  the  Holy  Jerusalem,  was  about  to  be  established  by
the  Lord.  It  was  foretold  by  the  Lord  in  the  Apocalypse,
that  after  the  accomplishment  of  the  last  judgment,  genuine
truths  would  be  revealed,  a  new  Church  established,  and  the
spiritual  sense  of  the  Word  disclosed.  That  the  Last  Judg-
ment has  been  accomplished,  is  shown  in  a  little  work
concerning  the  Last  Judgment,  and  again,  in  its  Continuation  ;
and  also  that  this  is  meant  by  the  "  heaven  and  earth  "
which  were  to  pass  away  (Apoc.  xxi.  i).  That  genuine  truths
were  then  to  be  revealed,  is  foretold  by  these  words  in  the
Apocalypse  :  "  And  He  that  sat  upon  the  throne  said.  Behold,
I  make  all  things  new  (xxi.  5 ;  xix.  17,  18;  xxi.  18-21 ;  xxii.
I,  2);  and  that  then  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  Word  is  to
be  revealed  (xix.  11-16).  This  is  meant  by  the  White  Horse,
whose  rider  was  called  the  Word  of  God,  and  Lord  of  lords,
and  King  of  kings  (see  the  little  work  on  The  White  Horse).
That  the  holy  Jerusalem  means  a  new  Church  now  to  be
established  by  the  Lord,  may  be  seen  in  the  Doctrine  of  the
New  Jerusalem  concertiing  the  Lord  (nos.  62-65).  I^  "^^.y
be  concluded  from  these  considerations,  that  the  spiritual
sense  of  the  Word  was  to  be  revealed  for  a  new  Church,
which  will  acknowledge  and  worship  the  Lord  alone,  hold
His  Word  sacred,  love  divine  truths,  and  reject  faith  separa-
ted from  charity.  Many  things  about  the  spiritual  sense  of
the  Word  may  be  seen  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem
concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture  (nos.  5-26,  sqq.),  for  example
the  nature  of  the  spiritual  sense  (nos.  5-26) ;  that  the  spiritual
sense  is  contained  in  every  part  of  the  Word,  in  general  and
particular  (nos.  9-17);  that  by  reason  of  the  spiritual  sense
the  Word  is  divinely  inspired.,  and  holy  in  every  word  (nos.
18,  19);  that  the  spiritual  sense  has  been  hitherto  unknown,
and  the  reason  of  this  (nos.  20-25);  and  that  the  spiritual
sense  will  not  hereafter  be  disclosed  to  any  man,  unless  he
is  in  genuine  truths  from  the  Lord  (no.  26).  These  con-
siderations should  make  it  clear,  that  it  is  of  the  Lord's
divine  Providence  that  the  spiritual  sense  has  been
Q


226  Divine  Providence

hidden  from  the  world  until  the  present  age,  and  has  been
preserved  meanwhile  in  heaven  among  the  angels,  who  derive
thence  their  wisdom.  The  spiritual  sense  was  known  and
studied  among  the  ancients  who  lived  before  Moses;  but
because  their  descendants  turned  into  various  idolatries
the  correspondences  of  which  alone  their  Word,  and  con-
sequently their  religion  consisted,  and  the  Egyptians  turned
them  into  magic,  it  was  sealed  up  by  the  Lord's  divine
Providence,  first  among  the  children  of  Israel,  and  afterwards
among  Christians,  for  the  reasons  given  above;  now  once
more  it  is  unsealed  for  the  Lord's  New  Church.

265.  iii.  Doubt  may  arise  concerning  the  divine  Providence
from  the  fact  that  hitherto  men  have  not  known  that  the  Christian
religion  consists  in  shunning  evils  as  sins.  That  this  is  the
Christian  religion  is  shown  in  the  Doctrine  of  Life  for  the  Nezv
Jerusalem,  from  beginning  to  end;  and  as  faith  separated
from  charity  is  the  only  obstacle  to  the  reception  of  this
belief,  that  also  is  treated  of.  We  say  that  men  have  not
known  that  the  essence  of  the  Christian  religion  consists  in
the  shunning  of  evils  as  sins,  because  almost  all  are  ignorant
of  this ;  and  yet  every  one  knows  it,  as  may  be  seen  above
(nos.  258).  Hitherto  almost  a,ll  have  been  ignorant  of  it,
because  faith  separate  from  charity  has  obliterated  it;  for
this  affirms  that  salvation  comes  from  faith  alone,  without
any  good  work  or  good  of  charity,  and  that  those  who  have
faith  are  no  longer  under  the  yoke  of  the  law,  but  are  free.
Having  heard  this  repeated  many  times,  a  man  no  longer
thinks  about  the  evil  or  the  good  of  life ;  besides,  every  man
is  naturally  inclined  to  adopt  this  belief,  and  when  once  he
has  adopted  it,  he  thinks  no  more  about  the  state  of  his  life.
This  then  is  the  reason  of  man's  ignorance  on  this  subject.
That  it  is  actually  unknown  has  been  made  known  to  me
in  the  spiritual  world.  I  have  asked  more  than  a  thousand
new-comers  from  the  world  whether  they  knew  that  to  shun
evils  as  sins  was  the  essence  of  religion,  and  they  said  that
they  did  not  know  it,  and  that  this  was  something  new  and
unheard  of,  but  that  they  had  heard  that  they  could  do  no
good  of  themselves,  and  that  they  were  not  under  the  yoke
of  the  law.  When  I  asked  whether  they  did  not  know  that
a  man  ought  to  examine  himself,  see  the  sins  of  which  he  is
guilty,  repent,  and  then  begin  a  new  life,  and  that  otherwise
sins  were  not  forgiven,  and  that  if  sins  were  not  forgiven


Divine  Providence  227

men  were  not  saved,  and  whether  this  had  not  been  read
aloud  to  them  as  often  as  they  had  attended  the_  Holy-
Supper,  they  replied  that  they  had  paid  no  attention  to
such  things,  but  only  to  this,  that  their  sins  were  remitted
by  means  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Holy  Supper,  and  that
faith  did  the  rest  without  their  knowledge.  Again  I  said,
"Why  did  you  teach  your  little  children  the  Decalogue?
Did  you  not  do  this  that  they  might  know  what  evils  are
to  be  shunned  as  sins  ?  and  not  merely  that  they  might  know
and  believe  the  commandments  without  obeying  them?
Why  then  do  you  say  that  this  is  something  new  ?  "  To
this  they  would  only  reply,  that  they  knew,  and  yet  did
not  know  all  this,  that  they  never  thought  of  the  sixth
commandment  when  committing  adultery,  or  of  the  seventh
commandment  when  stealing  or  defrauding,  and  so  on,  and
that  it  never  occurred  to  them  that  such  things  were  contrary
to  divine  Law,  and  therefore  to  God.  When  I  quoted  from
the  creeds  of  the  Churches,  and  from  the  Word,  to  prove
that  the  Christian  religion  consists  in  shunning  and  hating
evils  as  sins,  and  that  every  one's  faith  depends  on  his  shun-
ning and  hating  them,  they  were  silent.  But  they  were
convinced  that  this  was  true,  when  they  saw  how  all  were
examined  with  respect  to  their  life,  and  were  judged  according
to  their  deeds,  and  not  according  to  their  faith  as  distinct
from  their  life,  because  every  one's  faith  depends  on  his  life.
The  Christian  world  has,  for  the  most  part,  remained  ignorant
of  this,  because  the  laws  of  Divine  Providence  leave  every
one  to  act  in  freedom  according  to  reason  (nos.  71-99,
100-128);  it  is  also  a  law  that  no  one  is  taught  directly  from
heaven,  but  indirectly  through  the  Word  and  doctrines  and
sermons  founded  thereon  (nos.  154-174);  and  there  are  also
laws  of  permission,  which  are  also  laws  of  the  divine  Provi-
dence. More  on  these  subjects  may  be  seen  above  (no.  258).
274.''-  iv.  Doubt  may  arise  regarding  the  divine  Providence
from  the  fact  that  hitherto  no  one  has  known  that  man  lives  as  a
man  after  death,  and  that  this  fact  has  not  been  revealed  before.
The  reason  why  this  has  remained  unknown  is,  that  those
who  do  not  shun  evils  as  sins  believe  in  their  hearts  that
man  does  not  live  after  death,  and  therefore  they  care  not
whether  they  are  told  that  he  lives  as  a  man  after  death,  or
that  he  is  to  rise  again  at  the  day  of  the  last  judgment ;  and
^  The  numberinfr  follows  the  original.


228  Divine  Providence

if  by  chance  a  belief  in  the  resurrection  creeps  into  his  mind,
he  says  to  himself,  "  It  will  be  no  worse  for  me  than  for
others ;  if  I  go  to  hell  I  shall  go  there  with  many  others,  and
so  also  if  I  go  to  heaven.'"'  But  in  all  who  have  any  religion
there  is  implanted  the  belief  that  they  live  as  men  after
death;  the  idea  that  they  live  as  souls,  and  not  as  men,
exists  in  those  alone  who  have  become  infatuated  by  a  belief
in  their  own  sagacity  and  discernment.  That  in  all  who  have
any  religion  there  is  implanted  a  belief  that  they  live  as  men
after  death,  will  be  evident  from  the  following  considerations  :
I.  Who  does  not  believe  this  when  he  is  dying.?  2.  What
orator,  when  delivering  a  funeral  oration,  does  not  speak
of  the  departed  as  being  in  heaven,  among  angels,  and
conversing  with  them,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  happiness  ?
Some  men  indeed  have  been  deified.  3.  Who  among  the
common  people  does  not  believe  that  when  he  dies,  if  he
has  lived  a  good  life,  he  will  enter  a  heavenly  paradise,  be
clothed  in  white  raiment,  and  enjoy  eternal  Ufe  ?  4.  What
clergyman  does  not  say  the  same  or  similar  things  to  the
dying?  And  at  the  moment  be  believes  what  he  says,
provided  he  does  not  happen  to  think  about  the  Last  Judg-
ment. 5.  Who  does  not  believe  that  the  little  children  he
has  lost  are  in  heaven,  and  that  after  death  he  will  see  his
wife  whom  he  has  loved?  No  one  supposes  that  they  are
ghosts,  still  less  that  they  are  souls  or  minds  floating  about
the  universe.  6.  Who  contradicts  a  statement  about  the
lot  and  condition  of  those  who  have  passed  out  of  time  into
eternal  life?  I  have  spoken  to  many  about  the  state  and
lot  of  this  or  that  person,  and  no  one  has  ever  replied  that
their  lot  was  not  yet  decided,  but  that  it  would  be  at  the
time  of  judgment.  7.  To  whom  does  it  not  seem  right  that
angels  should  be  represented  as  men  in  painting  and  sculpture  ?
Who  thinks  then  that  they  are  bodiless  spirits,  misty  or
cloudy  entities,  as  some  of  the  learned  have  thought  ?  8.  The
Papists  believe  that  their  saints  are  men  in  heaven,  and  that
others  are  living  elsewhere;  the  Mohammedans  believe  the
same  of  their  dead ;  the  Africans  especially  believe  this,  and
so  do  many  other  nations ;  why  then  should  not  the  reformed
Christians  believe  it,  since  the  Word  teaches  it?  9.  This
belief  implanted  in  every  one,  causes  some  to  aspire  to  an
immortality  of  fame ;  for  it  takes  the  form  of  such  an  aspira-
tion in  some  people,  and  makes  them  heroes  and  brave  in


Divine  Providence  229

war.  10.  Inquiry  has  been  made  in  the  spiritual  world,  as
to  whether  this  belief  is  implanted  in  all,  and  it  has  fcieen
found  implanted  in  every  one's  spiritual  or  internal  thought,
but  not  in  their  natural  or  external  thought.  Evidently  then
no  doubt  ought  to  arise  concerning  the  divine  Providence
from  the  reflection  that  it  has  now  for  the  first  time  been
revealed  that  man  lives  as  a  man  after  death.  It  is  only
the  sensual  faculty  of  men  that  wants  to  see  and  touch  the
objects  of  their  behef;  unless  a  man's  thought  rises  above
that  level,  he  is  in  thick  darkness  as  regards  the  state  of
his  life.

Evils  are  permitted  for  the  sake  of  salvation

275.  If  man  were  born  in  the  love  which  was  his  by
creation,  he  would  not  be  in  any  evil;  he  would  not  even
know  what  evil  is ;  for  if  a  man  has  never  been  in  evil,  and
is  therefore  free  from  all  evil,  he  cannot  know  what  evil  is;
if  he  were  told  that  this  or  that  is  evil,  he  would  not  believe
that  such  a  thing  could  possibly  exist.     This  is  the  state  of
innocence  in  which  Adam  and  his  wife  Eve  were ;  the  naked-
ness of  which  they  were  not  ashamed  denoted  that  state.
The  knowledge  of  evil  after  the  Fall  is  signified  by  their
eating  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.    The
love  into  which  man  was  created,  is  the  love  of  the  neighbour,
so  that  he  may  care  as  much  for  others  as  for  himself,  and
even  more,  and  that  he  may  enjoy  the  delight  of  that  love
in  doing  good  to  the  neighbour,  almost  as  a  parent  enjoys
doing  good  to  his  children.     This  love  of  the  neighbour  is
truly  human,  for  it  contains  a  spiritual  element  by  which
it  is  distinguished  from  the  natural  love  of  animals.     If  man
were  born  with  that  love,  he  would  not  be  born  in  the  dark-
ness of  ignorance,  as  is  now  the  case,  but  in  a  certain  light
of  knowledge  and  consequent  intelligence,  and  he  would
quickly  acquire  knowledge  and  intelligence  themselves.     He
would,  indeed,  at  first  go  on  all  fours  like  a  quadruped,  but
with  an  innate  endeavour  to  stand  erect  upon  his  feet;  for
however  much  he  resembled  an  animal,  he  would  not  turn
his  face  dowmwards  to  the  earth,  but  forwards  towards
heaven,  and  at  length  he  would  stand  erect  so  that  he  might
also  look  upwards.

276.  But  when  the  love  of  the  neighbour  was  changed
into  the  love  of  self,  and  this  love  increased,  then  human


230  Divine  Providence

love  became  changed  into  an  animal  love ;  and  man  became
a  beast^  with  the  difference  that  he  could  reflect  on  his  bodily
sensations,  and  rationally  distinguish  one  thing  from  another,
and  could  be  instructed,  and  become  a  civil,  moral  and,  at
length,  a  spiritual  man.    For  as  was  said  before,  a  man  has
a  spiritual  part,  by  which  he  is  distinguished  from  an  animal ;
and  this  enables  him  to  understand  the  nature  of  social  good
and  evil,  then  of  moral  good  and  evil,  and  lastly,  if  he  will,
of  spiritual  good  and  evil.     When  the  love  of  the  neighbour
was  changed  into  the  love  of  self,  man  could  no  longer  be
born  in  the  light  of  knowledge  and  intelligence,  but  he  was
born  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  because  in  the  very  ultimate
plane  of  life  constituted  by  the  bodily  senses ;  and  from  this
he  could  be  introduced  to  the  inner  degrees  of  the  natural
mind  by  instruction,  the  spiritual  mind  being  associated  with
the  process  throughout.     The  reason  why  he  is  born  in  the
ultimate  plane  of  life  constituted  by  the  bodily  senses,  and
therefore  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  will  be  seen  in  what
follows.    The  love  of  the  neighbour  and  the  love  of  self
are  opposites,  as  every  one  can  see ;  for  the  love  of  the  neigh-
bour wishes  to  give  of  its  own  to  all  others,  but  the  love  of
self  wishes  to  secure  good  for  itself  alone;  the  love  of  the
neighbour  wishes  to  serve  all,  but  the  love  of  self  wishes  to
be  served  by  all ;  the  love  of  the  neighbour  regards  all  men
as  brothers  and  friends,  but  the  love  of  self  regards  them
as  its  servants,  and  as  its  enemies  if  they  will  not  serve  it;
in  a  word,  it  is  so  selfish  as  scarcely  to  look  upon  others  as
men,  holding  them  secretly  as  of  less  acount  than  its  horses
and  dogs ;  and  as  it  regards  them  of  so  little  value,  it  thinks
nothing  of  doing  evil  to  them;  hence  come  hatred  and
revenge,  adultery  and  fornication,  theft  and  fraud,  lying
and  defamation,  harshness  and  cruelty,  and  other  such  evils.
These  are  evils  which  man  inherits  from  birth.    That  they
are  permitted  for  the  sake  of  salvation  shall  be  explained
in  the  following  order  : —

I.  Every  man  is  in  evil,  and  must  be  led  away  from  evil
in  order  that  he  may  be  reformed.

II.  Evils  cannot  be  removed  unless  they  show  themselves.

III.  So  far  as  evils  are  removed,  they  are  remitted.

IV.  The  permission  of  evil  is  thus  for  the  sake  of  salvation.
277.  I.  Every  man  is  in  evil  and  must  be  led  away  from  evil

that  he  may  be  reformed.     It  is  well-known  in  the  Church  that


Divine  Providence  231

every  man  is  tainted  with  hereditary  evil^  and  that  he  is
therefore  prone  to  many  evils.  This  is  why  he  cannot  do
good  from  himself ;  for  evil  cannot  do  good,  except  such  good
as  contains  evil  within  it;  this  hidden  evil  consists  in  doing
good  for  the  sake  of  self,  and  thus  only  for  the  sake  of  ap-
pearances. This  evil  is  well-known  to  be  inherited  from
parents.  It  is  said  to  be  inherited  from  Adam  and  his  wife,
but  this  is  an  error ;  for  every  one  is  born  in  it  by  inheritance
from  his  own  parent  and  this  parent  was  born  in  it  from
his  parent,  and  so  on;  thus  it  is  transmitted  from  one  to
another,  and  increases  and  accumulates,  and  is  transmitted
to  offspring.  This  is  why  there  is  nothing  whole  in  man,
but  that  he  is  altogether  evil.  Who  feels  that  it  is  wrong
to  love  himself  more  than  others?  Who  therefore  knows
that  it  is  evil,  whereas  it  is  the  chief  of  all  evils  ?  That  it
is  inherited  from  parents,  grandfathers  and  great-grand-
fathers, is  evident  from  many  things  known  in  the  world,
as  for  instance  that  households,  families,  and  even  nations,
can  be  distinguished  from  one  another  merely  by  the  face;
and  the  face  is  the  index  of  the  mind,  and  the  mind  takes
its  character  from  the  affections,  which  are  states  of  a  man's
love.  Sometimes  the  face  of  a  grandson  or  great-grandson
bears  a  remarkable  resemblance  to  that  of  his  great-grand-
father. I  can  tell  from  the  face  alone  whether  a  man  is  a
Jew  or  not,  and  also  the  nationality  of  some  other  people;
and  no  doubt  others  can  do  the  same.  If  the  affections
of  love  are  thus  derived  and  transmitted  from  parents,  it
follows  that  evils  are  also,  for  they  are  bound  up  with  the
affections.  The  origin  of  this  resemblance  shall  be  explained.
Every  one's  soul  is  derived  from  his  father,  and  it  is  only
clothed  with  a  body  by  the  mother;  that  the  soul  is  from
the  father,  follows  not  only  from  what  has  just  been  said,
but  is  indicated  in  many  other  ways ;  for  example,  the  child
of  a  negro  or  Moor  by  a  v.-hite  or  European  woman  is  born
with  a  dark  skin,  and  vice  versa  ;  again,  the  soul  is  in  the
seed  which  causes  conception,  and  the  seed  is  clothed  with
a  body  by  the  mother.  The  seed  is  the  primary  form  of
the  love  characteristic  of  the  father;  it  is  a  form  of  his
ruling  love,  with  its  nearest  derivations,  which  are  the
inmost  affections  of  that  love.  These  affections  in  every  one
are  veiled  over  with  the  proprieties  of  moral  life,  and  with
the  good  of  social,  and  to  some  extent,  spiritual  life;  these


232  Divine  Providence

things  constitute  the  external  life  even  of  the  evil.  Into  this
external  life  every  child  is  born,  and  to  this  it  owes  its
charm;  but  as  the  child  grows  to  boyhood  and  youth,  he
passes  from  this  external  life  to  raore  inward  affections,  and
at  length  to  his  father's  ruling  love;  and  if  this  was  evil,
and  it  has  not  by  various  means  been  tempered  and  moulded
by  instructors,  it  becomes  his  ruling  love  as  it  was  his  father's.
But  in  any  case,  the  evil  is  not  extirpated,  but  only  removed,
of  which  more  in  what  follows.  It  is  therefore  evident  that
every  man  is  in  evil.

277  (a).  It  is  self-evident  that  man  must  be  led  away  from
evil  in  order  to  be  reformed ;  for  he  who  is  in  evil  in  this  world,
remains  so  after  his  departure  from  the  world ;  and  therefore
if  evil  is  not  removed  in  the  world,  it  cannot  be  removed
afterwards.  Where  the  tree  falls,  there  it  lies;  so  also  does
man's  life,  when  he  dies,  remain  of  a  like  nature.  Moreover
every  one  is  judged  according  to  his  deeds ;  not  that  they  are
brought  up  against  him,  but  because  he  returns  to  them,  and
continues  to  act  as  he  did  before ;  for  death  is  a  continuation
of  life,  with  this  difference,  that  man  cannot  then  be  reformed.
All  reformation  is  effected  completely,  that  is  alike  in  first
principles  and  in  ultimates ;  the  ultimates  are  reformed  in
the  world  conformably  with  the  first  principles,  and  they
cannot  be  reformed  afterwards,  because  the  ultimates  of
life  that  man  takes  with  him  into  the  other  world  become
quiescent,  and  concur  or  act  as  one  with  his  inner  mind.

278.  II.  Evils  cannot  be  removed  unless  they  show  them-
selves. Do  not  suppose  that  man  should  commit  evils  in
order  that  they  may  come  to  light;  but  he  must  examine
himself,  not  only  as  to  his  actions  but  also  his  thoughts ;  and
he  should  ask  himself  what  he  would  do  if  he  did  not  fear  the
laws,  and  disgrace,  and  especially  what  evils  he  inwardly
regards  as  allowable,  and  as  not  being  sins,  for  he  commits
these  continually.  In  order  that  man  may  examine  himself,
an  understanding  has  been  given  him  separate  from  the  will,
that  he  may  know,  understand  and  acknowledge  what  is  good
and  what  is  evil,  and  that  he  may  see  the  nature  of  his  will,
or  what  he  loves  and  desires.  In  order  that  he  may  see  this,
his  understanding  is  capable  of  higher  and  lower,  or  interior
and  exterior  thought,  so  that  from  higher  or  interior  thought  he
may  see  what  his  will  is  doing  in  the  lower  or  exterior  thought ;
he  sees  this  as  a  man  sees  his  face  in  a  mirror,  and  when  he


Divine  Providence  233

sees  it,  and  realises  what  sin  is,  he  can,  if  he  prays  to  the  Lord
for  help,  cease  to  will  it,  shun  it,  and  afterwards  resist  it;  if
he  cannot  do  this  with  full  consent  of  the  will,  still  he  can
restrain  the  evil  by  fighting  against  it,  and  at  length  hate  and
abominate  it;  then,  and  not  before,  he  perceives  and  feels
that  evil  is  evil,  and  that  good  is  good.  This  then  is  what  is
meant  by  examining  oneself,  seeing  one's  evils,  acknowledging
them,  confessing  them,  and  afterwards  desisting  from  them.
But  as  few  know  that  this  is  the  essence  of  the  Christian
religion,  because  only  men  who  act  in  this  way  possess
charity  and  faith,  and  are  led  by  the  Lord,  and  do  good  from
Him,  therefore  something  shall  be  said  of  those  who  neglect
this  duty,  and  yet  suppose  that  they  are  religious  men.  They
may  be  classed  as  follows  :

i.  Those  who  confess  that  they  are  guilty  of  all  kinds  of
sin,  and  yet  do  not  search  out  any  particular  sin  in  them-
selves.

ii.  Those  who  are  led  by  their  religious  belief  to  omit  the
search.

iii.  Those  worldly  men  who  never  think  about  sins,  and
therefore  know  nothing  about  them.

iv.  Those  who  approve  of  them,  and  therefore  cannot  know
their  true  nature.

v.  Sins  are  never  brought  to  light  in  any  of  these,  and
therefore  cannot  be  removed.

vi.  Lastly,  the  reason,  hitherto  unknown,  shall  be  dis-
closed, why  evils  cannot  be  removed  unless  they  are  examined,
brought  to  light,  acknowledged,  confessed,  and  resisted.

But  these  points  must  be  examined  one  by  one,  because
they  are  the  essentials  of  the  Christian  religion  so  far  as  man's
duty  is  concerned.

278  (a),  i.  Those  who  confess  that  they  are  guilty  of  all  kinds  of
sin,  and  yet  do  not  search  out  any  particular  sin  in  themselves.
Such  a  man  says,  "  I  am  a  sinner;  I  was  born  in  sin;  there
is  nothing  sound  in  me  from  head  to  foot ;  I  am  nothing  but
evil;  good  God,  be  merciful  to  me,  pardon  me,  purify  me,
save  me,  make  me  to  walk  in  purity  and  in  the  way  of
righteousness,"  and  so  on.  Yet  he  does  not  examine  himself,
and  therefore  does  not  detect  any  particular  evil ;  and  no  one
can  shun  that  of  which  he  knows  nothing,  still  less  can  he
fight  against  it ;  and  he  also  believes  himself  to  be  cleansed
and  purified  after  the  confession,  when  yet  he  is  unclean  and


234  Divine  Providence

impure  from  head  to  foot ;  for  the  confession  of  all  sin  means
insensibility  to  all,  and  at  length  induces  blindness  to  all;
it  is  like  a  universal  without  any  particular,  which  is  nothing.

ii.  Those  who  are  led  by  their  religious  belief  to  omit  the  search.
These  are  chiefly  those  who  separate  charity  from  faith ;  for
they  say  to  themselves,  "  Why  should  I  search  for  evil  or
good  ?  Why  search  for  evil,  when  it  does  not  condemn  me,
or  for  good  when  it  does  not  save  me?  It  is  faith  alone,
meditated  upon  and  expressed  with  trust  and  confidence,
which  justifies  and  purifies  from  all  sin ;  and  when  once  I  am
justified,  I  am  whole  before  God.  I  am  indeed  in  evil,  but
God  wipes  away  evil  as  soon  as  it  is  committed,  and  so  it
disappears  " ;  and  so  on.  But  who  does  not  see,  if  he  opens
his  eyes,  that  these  are  empty  words,  devoid  of  all  reality
because  devoid  of  all  good  ?  Any  one  can  think  and  talk
like  that,  even  with  trust  and  confidence,  when  he  is  at  the
same  time  thinking  of  hell  and  eternal  damnation.  Does  such
a  man  want  to  know  anything  either  of  truth  or  of  good  ?  Of
truth  he  says,  "  V/hat  is  truth,  but  that  which  confirms  my
faith  ?  "  And  of  good  he  says,  "  What  is  good,  but  that
which  my  faith  produces  in  me?  But  that  it  may  be  im-
puted to  me,  I  must  not  do  it  as  if  from  myself,  because  that
would  be  to  seek  to  acquire  merit,  and  self-meritorious  good
is  not  really  good."  So  he  neglects  everything,  until  he  does
not  know  what  evil  is ;  and  then  how  can  he  search  for  and
find  out  evil  in  himself  ?  Is  not  his  state  then  such  that  the
pent-up  fire  of  evil  lusts  consumes  his  inner  mind,  and  lays
it  waste  to  the  very  gate  ?  This  gate  alone  he  guards,  lest
the  fire  should  be  seen ;  but  after  death,  the  gate  is  opened,
and  then  the  fire  is  visible  to  all.

iii.  Those  worldly  men  who  never  think  about  sins,  and
therefore  know  nothing  about  theju.  These  love  the  world  above
all  things,  and  never  admit  any  truth  that  diverts  their
thought  from  the  false  tenets  of  their  religion ;  they  say  to
themselves ;  "  What  is  that  to  me  ?  I  have  other  things  to
think  about."  Thus  they  reject  the  truth  the  moment  they
hear  it ;  and  if  they  hear  it  they  stifle  it.  These  persons  do
much  the  same  when  listening  to  a  sermon ;  they  remember
only  a  few  expressions  and  nothing  of  the  substance.  As  they
deal  thus  with  the  truth,  they  do  not  know  what  good  is,
for  good  and  truth  act  as  one;  and  good  devoid  of  truth
takes  no  notice  of  evil,  unless  perhaps  to  make  out  that  it  is


Divine  Providence  235

goodj  by  reasoning  from  false  principles.  These  are  meant
by  the  seed  which  fell  among  thorns^  of  which  the  Lord  says  :
"  Other  seed  fell  among  thorns,  and  the  thorns  sprang  up
and  choked  them.  These  are  they  who  hear  the  Word ;  but
the  care  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  choke
the  Word,  so  that  it  becometh  unfruitful  "  (Matt.  xiii.  7,  22 ;
Mark  iv.  7,  19  ;  Luke  viii.  7,  14).

iv.  Those  who  approve  of  sinful  actions,  and  therefore  cannot
knozv  their  true  nature.  These  acknowledge  God,  and  worship
Him  according  to  the  usual  forms,  and  confirm  their  belief
that  some  evil  is  not  sinful;  for  they  veil  it  over  with  fal-
lacious appearances,  and  so  hide  its  enormity;  and  having
done  this  they  approve  of  it,  and  make  it  their  familiar  friend.
Wt  say  that  some  who  acknowledge  God  do  this,  because
others  do  not  regard  any  evil  as  sin,  for  all  sin  is  against  God.
But  let  us  take  some  examples  : — a  covetous  man  regards  evil
as  not  being  sinful,  when  he  makes  out  by  specious  reasoning
that  some  kinds  of  fraud  are  allowable ;  another  man  does  the
same  by  justifying  himself  in  taking  revenge  on  his  enemies ;
and  another  by  justifying  the  plunder  of  non-combatants  in
time  of  war.

V.  In  such  men  as  are  described  above  sins  do  not  come  to
light  and  therefore  ca^inot  be  removed.  All  evil  which  does  not
come  to  hght  grows  inwardly;  it  is  like  a  wood  fire  under
ashes,  or  like  corrupt  blood  in  a  closed  wound ;  for  all  pent-up
evil  increases  in  virulence  until  it  causes  universal  destruc-
tion. Lest  therefore  evil  should  be  pent-up,  every  one  is
permitted  to  think  in  favour  of  or  against  God,  and  in  favour
of  the  holy  things  of  the  Church  or  against  them,  and  is  not
punished  for  it  in  this  world.  On  this  subject  the  Lord  says
in  Isaiah  :  "  From  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head
there  is  no  soundness  in  it,  but  a  wound  and  scar,  and  a  fresh
bruise;  they  have  not  been  pressed  out,  neither  bound  up,
neither  mollified  with  ointment.  Wash  you,  make  you  clean ;
put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine  eyes;
cease  to  do  evil ;  learn  to  do  good ;  then  if  your  sins  have  been
as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  white  as  snow;  if  they  have  been  red
like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool.  But  if  ye  refuse  and
rebel,  ye  shall  be  devoured  by  the  sword"  (i.  6,  16-20);
being  devoured  by  the  sword  means  to  perish  by  the  falsity
of  e\'il.

vi.  The   reason,   hitherto   unknown,    why   evils    cannot   be


236  Divine  Providence

removed  unless  they  are  examined,  brought  to  light,  ackno7v-
ledged,  confessed  and  resisted.  It  has  been  mentioned  in  the
preceding  pages^,  that  the  whole  heaven  consists  of  com-
munities arranged  in  due  order  according  to  the  affections  of
good,  and  the  whole  hell  of  communities  similarly  arranged
according  to  the  lusts  of  evil,  opposite  to  the  affections  of
good.  Every  man  as  to  his  spirit  is  in  one  of  these  com-
munities ;  he  is  in  a  heavenly  community  if  he  loves  good,
but  in  an  infernal  community  if  he  loves  evil.  Man  does  not
know  this  while  he  is  in  the  world,  but  nevertheless  as  to  his
spirit  he  is  in  one  of  these  communities — otherwise  he  could
not  live — and  through  this  association  he  is  governed  by  the
Lord.  If  he  is  in  a  hellish  community,  he  can  only  be  led
out  of  it  by  the  Lord  according  to  the  laws  of  the  divine
Providence,  one  of  which  is  that  the  man  should  see  that  he
is  there,  should  desire  to  escape,  and  should  himself  endeavour
to  do  so.  Man  can  do  this  while  he  is  in  the  world,  but  not
after  death ;  for  then  he  remains  for  ever  in  the  community
into  which  he  made  his  way  while  in  the  world.  This  is  the
reason  why  man  must  examine  himself,  see  and  acknowledge
his  sins,  repent,  and  afterwards  persevere  to  the  end  of  life.
I  could  bring  convincing  proof  of  this  from  my  own  ex-
perience, but  this  is  not  the  place  to  bring  forward  such
evidence.

279.  III.  So  far  as  evils  are  removed  they  are  remitted.  It
is  an  error  of  this  age  to  suppose  that  evils  are  separated
from  man,  and  are  utterly  cast  out  when  once  they  have  been
remitted,  and  that  the  state  of  man's  life  can  be  changed  in
a  moment  into  an  opposite  state,  and  that  thus,  by  the  Lord's
immediate  mercy,  man  instead  of  being  evil  can  become  good,
and  consequently  can  be  led  out  of  hell  and  straightway
transferred  to  heaven.  Those  who  hold  this  belief  and
opinion,  have  no  idea  of  what  evil  and  good  are ;  they  know
nothing  whatever  of  the  state  of  man's  life ;  they  do  not  even
know  that  affections  of  the  will  are  mere  changes  and  varia-
tions of  the  state  of  the  purely  organic  substances  of  the  mind,
and  that  thoughts  in  the  understanding  are  mere  changes  and
variations  of  the  form  of  those  substances,  and  that  memory
is  the  permanent  state  induced  by  the  changes.  When  all
this  is  known,  it  can  be  clearly  seen  that  evil  can  only  be
removed  gradually,  and  that  the  remission  of  evil  is  not  the
same  thing  as  its  removal.     But  these  are  summary  state-


Divine  Providence  237

meats,  and  unless  they  are  explained,  they  may  indeed  be
acknowledged,  but  not  understood ;  and  what  is  not  under-
stood is  like  the  aimless  turning  of  a  wheel  by  the  hand,  and
therefore  the  propositions  laid  down  above  must  be  explained
one  by  one,  in  the  order  in  wliich  they  were  stated.

i.  //  is  an  error  of  this  age  to  suppose  that  evils  are  separated
and  utterly  cast  out,  when  07ice  they  have  been  remitted.  My
experience  of  heaven  has  taught  me  that  none  of  the  evil  in
which  man  is  born,  or  which  he  acquires  for  himself,  is
separated  from  him,  but  is  only  removed  out  of  sight.  I
previously  believed  with  most  people  in  the  world,  that  evils
when  remitted  are  cast  away,  washed  off  and  wiped  away,  as
dirt  is  washed  from  the  face.  But  it  is  not  so  with  evils  or
sins;  they  all  remain,  and  when  after  repentance  they  are
remitted,  they  are  moved  from  the  centre  to  the  circum-
ference; then  what  is  in  the  centre,  being  directly  in  view,
is  presented  as  in  the  light  of  day,  and  what  is  at  the  circum-
ference is  in  the  shade,  and  sometimes  as  it  were  in  the  dark-
ness of  night ;  and  because  evils  are  not  separated,  but  only
removed,  or  sent  away  to  the  circumference,  and  as  the  man
himself  may  be  transferred  from  the  centre  to  the  circum-
ference, he  may  also  return  to  his  evils,  which  he  believed  to
have  been  cast  out.  For  man  is  such  that  he  can  pass  from
one  affection  to  another,  and  sometimes  to  an  opposite  one,
and  so  from  one  centre  to  another ;  man's  affection  while  he
is  under  its  influence  constitutes  the  centre,  for  he  is  then  in
its  delight  and  its  light.  There  are  some  men  who  after  death
are  raised  by  the  Lord  to  heaven,  because  they  have  lived
well,  but  yet  have  brought  with  them  the  belief  that  they  are
clean  and  pure  from  sin,  and  are  therefore  free  from  reproach.
They  are  at  first  clothed  in  white  garments  in  accordance  with
their  belief,  for  white  signifies  a  state  of  purified  evil.
But  afterwards  they  begin  to  think  as  they  did  in  the  world,
that  they  are,  as  it  were,  cleansed  from  all  evil,  and  therefore
to  boast  that  they  are  no  longer  sinners  like  others ;  this  is
almost  sure  to  involve  some  self-exaltation,  coupled  with  a
mean  opinion  of  others  as  compared  with  themselves;  and
therefore,  to  cure  them  of  this  unfounded  belief,  they  are
sent  out  of  heaven,  and  allowed  to  relapse  into  the  evils
which  they  had  acquired  in  the  world ;  and  at  the  same  time
they  are  shown  that  they  have  inherited  evils,  of  which  they
previously  knew  nothing;  after  they  have  thus  been  obliged


238  Divine  Providence

to  acknowledge  that  their  evils  have  not  been  separated  from
them  but  only  removed  out  of  sight,  and  that  they  are  there-
fore intrinsically  impure,  indeed  wholly  evil,  and  that  they
are  withheld  from  evil  and  preserved  in  good  by  the  Lord,
although  this  appears  to  them  as  if  it  were  their  own  act,  they
are  again  raised  by  the  Lord  to  heaven,

ii.  It  is  an  error  of  this  age  to  suppose  that  the  state  of  a
man's  life  can  he  changed  in  a  moment,  and,  that  thus,  hy  the
Lord's  immediate  mercy,  man  instead  of  being  evil  can  become
good,  and  consequently  can  be  led  out  of  hell  and  straightway
transferred  to  heaven.  Those  who  labour  under  this  error
separate  charity  from  faith,  and  regard  salvation  as  the  result
of  faith  alone ;  for  they  imagine  that  justification  and  salva-
tion result  merely  from  beheving  and  repeating  the  words
expressing  that  faith,  if  this  is  done  with  trust  and  confidence ;
many  also  suppose  that  the  same  result  is  effected  instan-
taneously, at  the  last  hour  of  a  m.an's  life  if  not  before.  These
cannot  but  believe  that  the  state  of  man's  hfe  can  be  changed
in  a  moment,  and  that  he  can  be  saved  by  immediate  mercy.
But  it  will  be  seen  in  the  last  section  of  this  work,  that  the
Lord's  mercy  is  not  immediate,  that  man  cannot  from  being
evil  become  good  in  a  moment,  and  that  he  cannot  be  led  out
of  hell  and  transferred  to  heaven  except  by  the  continual
operation  of  the  divine  Providence  from  infancy  to  the  very
end  of  his  life.  Here  we  will  adduce  from  it  the  statement
that  all  the  laws  of  the  divine  Providence  have  for  their  end
man's  reformation,  consequently  his  salvation,  and  therefore
the  change  of  his  state,  which  by  birth  is  hellish,  into  the
opposite  heavenly  state ;  and  this  can  only  be  done  gradually
as  man  withdraws  from  evil  and  its  delight,  and  enters  into
good  and  its  delight.

iii.  Those  who  hold  this  belief  have  no  idea^  of  what  evil  and
good  are.  For  they  do  not  know  that  evil  is  the  delight  of
the  propensity  to  act  and  think  contrary  to  divine  Order,
and  that  good  is  the  delight  of  the  love  of  acting  and  thinking
according  to  divine  Order,  and  that  there  are  myriads  of
propensities  to  evil  which  enter  into  and  compose  every
particular  evil,  and  that  myriads  of  affections  in  hke  manner
enter  into  and  compose  every  particular  good,  and  that  these
myriads  exist  in  such  an  order  and  connection  in  man's  inner
mind,  that  one  cannot  be  changed  unless  all  are  changed
together.      Those  who  are  ignorant  of  this  may  hold  the


Divine  Providence  239

opinion  or  belief  that  evil,  which  to  them  appears  to  be  asimple
thing,  can  easily  be  removed,  and  that  good,  which  also
appears  simple,  can  be  introduced  in  its  place ;  not  knowing
what  evil  and  good  are,  they  are  bound  to  suppose  that
instantaneous  salvation  and  immediate  mercy  are  possible;
but  it  will  be  seen  m  the  last  section  of  this  \\-ork  that  they
are  not  possible.

iv.  Those  who  believe  in  instantaneous  salvation  and  imme-
diate mercy  do  not  know  that  the  affections  of  the  will  are  mere
changes  iji  the  state  of  the  purely  organic  substances  of  the
mind  ;  and  that  thoughts  in  the  understanding  are  mere  changes
and  variations  of  the  form  of  those  substances ;  and  that  the
memory  is  the  -permanent  state  induced  by  these  changes  and
variations.  Who  does  not  admit  that  affections  and  thoughts
can  only  occur  in  the  substances  and  forms  which  are  their
subjects?  And  as  they  occur  in  the  brain,  which  is  full  of
substances  and  forms,  they  are  called  purely  organic  forms.
No  one  who  thinks  rationally  can  help  laughing  at  the  fancies
of  some  who  suppose  that  affections  and  thoughts  do  not
occur  in  substantial  subjects,  but  are  vapours  modified  by
heat  and  light,  like  mirages  in  the  air  and  ether.  Thought
can  no  more  exist  apart  from  a  substantial  form  than  sight
without  its  organ  the  eye,  hearing  without  the  ear,  or  taste
without  the  tongue.  Examine  the  brain,  and  you  will  see
innumerable  substances  and  fibres,  and  in  it  nothing  which  is
not  organised.  What  need  of  any  other  than  this  ocular
proof  ?  But  some  one  may  ask,  "  How  do  affection  and
thought  exist  in  the  brain?  "  The  answer  may  be  inferred
from  all  things  in  general  and  particular  in  the  body,  which
contains  many  viscera,  each  fixed  in  its  place,  and  performing
its  functions  by  changes  and  variations  of  its  state  and  form.
That  each  is  engaged  in  its  proper  function  is  well  known,  the
stomach  in  its  owti,  the  intestines  in  theirs,  the  kidneys  in
theirs,  the  liver,  pancreas  and  spleen  in  theirs,  and  the  heart
and  lungs  in  theirs ;  and  all  these  are  actuated  from  within,
that  is,  by  changes  and  variations  of  state  and  form.  This
should  make  it  clear  that  the  operations  of  the  purely  organic
substances  of  the  mind  are  similar,  the  only  difference  being,
that  the  operations  of  the  organic  substances  of  the  body  are
natural,  but  those  of  the  mind  are  spiritual,  and  that  the  two
sets  of  operations  are  united  by  correspondence.  The  nature
of  the  changes  and  variations  of  state  and  form  in  the  organic


240  Divine  Providence

substances  of  the  mind,  which  changes  are  affections  and
thoughts,  cannot  be  ocularly  demonstrated ;  but  they  may  be
seen  as  in  a  mirror  from  the  changes  and  variations  of  the
state  of  the  lungs  in  speaking  and  singing.  There  is  also  a
correspondence  between  them ;  for  the  tone  of  the  voice  in
speaking  and  singing,  and  the  articulations  of  this  tone  which
form  the  words  and  notes  of  a  song,  are  produced  by  means  of
the  lungs;  and  the  sound  corresponds  to  affection  and  the
words  to  thought.  Sound  and  speech  are  also  caused  by
affection  and  thought;  and  this  is  done  by  changes  and
variations  in  the  state  and  form  of  the  organic  substances  of
the  lungs,  and  from  the  lungs,  by  way  of  the  trachea  or  wind-
pipe, in  the  larj-nx  and  glottis,  then  in  the  tongue,  and  finally
in  the  lips.  The  first  changes  and  variations  of  the  state  and
form  of  the  sound  take  place  in  the  lungs ;  the  second,  in  the
trachea  and  larynx ;  the  third,  in  the  glottis  by  the  opening
and  closing  of  its  orifice;  the  fourth,  in  the  tongue  by  its
various  applications  to  the  palate  and  teeth ;  the  fifth,  in  the
lips  from  the  various  forms  they  assume.  These  facts  should
make  it  evident  that  the  mere  changes  and  variations  of  the
state  of  organic  forms,  successively  continued,  produce  the
sounds  and  articulations  which  constitute  speech  and  singing.
Now  as  sound  and  speech  are  produced  from  no  other  source
than  the  affections  and  thoughts  of  the  mind  (for  they  exist
from  them,  and  never  without  them),  it  is  evident  that  the
aft'ections  of  the  will  are  changes  and  variations  in  the  state
of  the  purely  organic  substances  of  the  mind,  and  that  the
thoughts  of  the  understanding  are  changes  and  variations
in  the  form  of  those  substances,  similar  to  those  which  take
place  in  the  lungs.  As  affections  and  thoughts  are  simply
changes  in  the  state  of  mental  forms,  it  follows  that  memory
is  nothing  but  the  permanent  record  of  these  changes;  for
all  changes  and  variations  of  state  in  organic  substances  are
such  that  having  once  become  customary  they  are  permanent.
Thus  the  lungs  are  accustomed  to  produce  various  sounds  in
the  trachea,  to  vary  them  in  the  glottis,  to  articulate  them
with  the  tongue,  and  to  modify  them  in  the  mouth;  and
when  once  the  changes  in  these  organs  have  become  habitual,
they  are  inherent  in  them  and  can  be  reproduced.  That
those  changes  and  variations  are  infinitely  more  perfect  in
the  organs  of  the  mind  than  in  those  of  the  body,  is  evident
from  what  was  said  in  the  work  on  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom


Divine  Providence  241

(nos.  199-204),  where  it  was  shown  that  all  perfections  in-
crease and  ascend  with  and  according  to  degrees.  On  this
subject  more  may  be  seen  below  (no.  319).

280.  It  is  also  an  error  common  to  this  age  to  suppose  that
when  sins  are  forgiven  they  are  also  taken  away.  Those  make
this  mistake  who  believe  that  their  sins  are  forgiven  them  by
means  of  the  sacrament  of  the  Holy  Supper^  although  they
have  done  nothing  to  remove  them  by  repentance ;  the  same
mistake  is  made  by  those  who  believe  that  they  are  saved
by  faith  alone^,  and  by  those  who  believe  they  are  saved
by  papal  dispensations.  All  these  believe  in  immediate
mercy  and  instantaneous  salvation.  But  the  opposite  of
this  is  true,  namely,  that  when  sins  have  been  removed  they
are  also  forgiven;  for  repentance  precedes  remission,  and
without  repentance  there  is  no  remission.  This  is  why  the
Lord  commanded  the  disciples  to  preach  repentance  for  the
remission  of  sins  (Luke  xxiv.  47);  and  John  preached  the
baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  sins  (Luke  iii.
3).  The  Lord  forgives  the  sins  of  all;  He  does  not  accuse
men  nor  impute  sin  to  them,  but  He  cannot  take  away  their
sins  except  according  to  the  laws  of  His  divine  Providence.
He  said  to  Peter,  when  he  asked  how  often  he  should  forgive
a  brother  sinning  against  him,  whether  he  should  do  so  seven
times,  that  he  should  forgive  not  only  seven  times  but  until
seventy  times  seven  (Matt,  xviii.  21,  22);  what  then,  will  not
the  Lord  forgive,  who  is  mercy  itself?

281.  IV.  The  permission  of  evil  is  therefore  for  the  sake  of
salvation.  It  is  well  known  that  a  man  is  perfectly  at  liberty
to  think  and  will  as  he  pleases,  but  not  to  say  and  do  whatever
he  thinks  and  wills.  For  he  may  think  as  an  atheist,  deny
God  and  blaspheme  the  holy  things  of  the  Word  and  the
Church,  and  may  even  desire  by  word  and  deed  utterly  to
destroy  them ;  but  civil,  moral  and  ecclesiastical  laws  prevent
this,  and  therefore  he  secretly  cherishes  these  impious  and
wicked  thoughts,  desires  and  purposes,  but  dare  not  express
or  fulfil  them.  Moreover  a  man  who  is  not  an  athiest  is
perfectly  free  to  think  of  other  evils  such  as  fraud,  lascivious-
ness,  revenge,  and  other  insanities,  and  sometimes  he  does  so
think.  Any  one  can  see  that  unless  man  had  full  liberty,  he
not  only  could  not  be  saved,  but  would  even  perish  utterly.
Hear  now  the  reason  for  this  : — every  man  by  birth  inherits
evils  of  all  kinds ;  these  evils  are  in  his  will  and  are  therefore

R


242  Divine  Providence

loved,  for  what  a  man  inwardly  wills  that  he  loves,  and  what
he  loves  he  wills;  and  the  love  of  the  will  flows  into  the
understanding  and  is  felt  there  as  a  delight,  and  passes  thence
into  the  thoughts  and  intentions.  And  therefore  unless
a  man  were  permitted  to  think  according  to  the  hereditary-
love  implanted  in  his  will,  that  love  would  remain  pent  up
and  would  never  be  brought  to  light;  and  the  hidden  love
of  evil  is  like  an  enemy  in  ambush,  corrupt  blood  in  an  ulcer,
poison  in  the  blood,  or  festering  matter  in  the  breast;  when
such  things  are  pent  in  they  cause  death.  But  when  a  man
is  allowed  to  think  the  evils  of  his  life's  love,  and  even  to
intend  them,  they  are  cured  by  spiritual  remedies,  as  diseases
are  by  natural  remedies.  What  a  man  would  become  if  he
were  not  allowed  to  think  according  to  the  delights  of  his  life's
love,  shall  now  be  stated.  He  would  no  longer  be  a  man,  for
he  would  lose  the  two  faculties  of  liberty  and  rationality
which  constitute  manhood ;  the  delights  of  those  evils  would
so  fill  his  inner  mind  as  to  force  the  door,  and  then  he  would
not  be  able  to  help  speaking  and  doing  things  of  a  like  nature ;
thus  he  would  act  like  a  madman,  not  only  when  alone,  but
in  face  of  the  whole  world,  and  at  length  he  would  not  have
the  sense  to  cover  his  nakedness.  To  prevent  this,  he  is
permitted  to  think  and  will  his  hereditary  evils,  but  not  to
express  them  by  word  or  deed;  and  meanwhile  he  learns
social,  moral,  and  spiritual  truths,  which  enter  his  thoughts,
and  remove  these  insane  impulses ;  thus  he  is  healed  by  the
Lord,  but  only  so  far  as  to  guard  the  door  against  them,  unless
indeed  he  also  acknowledges  God  and  implores  His  aid  in
resisting  them ;  so  far  as  he  resists  them,  he  keeps  them  out  of
his  intentions,  and  at  length  even  out  of  his  thoughts.  Since
then  man  is  at  liberty  to  think  as  he  pleases,  so  that  his  life's
love  may  come  forth  from  its  lurking-place  into  the  light  of
his  understanding,  and  since  he  would  otherwise  know
nothing  of  his  evil,  nor  consequently  how  to  shun  it,  it  follows
that  it  would  then  increase  in  him  to  such  a  degree,  that  there
would  be  no  possibility  of  restoration  for  him,  and  scarcely
any  for  his  children  if  he  should  have  any,  for  the  parent's
evil  is  transmitted  to  the  offspring.  But  the  Lord  provides
against  this.

282.  The  Lord  could  heal  every  man's  understanding,  and
make  him  think  in  favour  of  good  instead  of  evil,  by  working
on  his  fears,  and  by  miracles^  speech  with  the  dead,  or  visions


Divine  Providence  243

and  dreams.  But  to  heal  the  understanding  alone^  is  only  to
heal  man  outwardly ;  for  the  understanding  with  its  thought
is  the  external  hfe  of  man,  and  the  will  with  its  affections  is
his  internal  life ;  and  therefore  the  healing  of  the  understand-
ing only  would  be  like  a  temporary  cure,  whereby  the  interior
corruption,  shut  in  and  prevented  from  coming  out,  would
consume  first  the  neighbouring  and  then  the  remote  parts,
till  the  whole  would  mortify.  It  is  the  will  itself  that  must
be  healed,  not  by  an  influx  from  the  understanding,  for  that
is  impossible,  but  by  instruction  and  admonition  from  the
understanding.  If  the  understanding  alone  were  healed,
man  would  become  like  a  dead  body  embalmed  or  covered  with
fragrant  aromatics  and  roses,  whjch  would  soon  draw  from
the  corpse  an  unbearable  stench.  So  would  it  be  with
heavenly  truths  in  the  understanding  if  the  evil  love  of  the
will  were  pent  in.

283.  As  already  stated,  the  reason  why  man  is  permitted  to
think  of  evils  and  even  intend  them  is,  that  they  may  be
removed  by  means  of  civil,  moral,  and  spiritual  considera-
tions; this  is  effected  when  he  reflects  that  some  evil  is
contrary  to  justice  and  equity,  dishonourable  and  unseemly,
at  variance  with  good  and  truth,  and  therefore  destructive  of
tranquillity,  happiness  and  blessedness.  By  means  of  these
three  influences,  the  Lord  heals  the  love  of  man's  will,  first
by  fear  and  afterwards  by  love.  But  even  then  evils  are  not
separated  and  cast  out  of  man,  but  only  removed  and  rele-
gated to  the  circumference;  and  when  they  are  there,  and
good  is  in  the  centre,  the  evils  are  no  longer  visible ;  for  what
is  in  the  centre  is  directly  in  view,  and  is  seen  and  recognised.
But  it  should  be  noted  that  although  good  is  in  the  centre,
it  does  not  follow  that  a  man  is  in  good,  unless  the  evils  which
are  at  the  circumference  tend  downwards  and  outwards;
if  they  look  upwards  and  inwards,  they  have  not  been  wholly
removed,  for  they  are  still  striving  to  return  to  the  centre.
They  tend  and  look  downwards  or  outwards  when  the  man
shuns  his  evils  as  sins,  and  still  more  when  he  detests  them ;
for  then  he  condemns  them,  banishes  them  to  hell,  and  turns
them  in  that  direction.

284.  Man's  understanding  is  a  recipient  of  both  good  and
evil,  and  of  both  truth  and  falsity,  but  man's  will  is  not ;  the
will  must  be  either  in  evil  or  in  good ;  it  cannot  be  in  both,
for  the  will  is  the  man  himself,  and  his  Hfe's  love  resides  in  it.


244  Divine  Providence

In  the  understanding,  however,  good  and  evil  exist  separately,
like  wha.t  is  internal  and  what  is  external ;  and  therefore  man
can  be  internally  in  evil  and  externally  in  good;  but  still,
when  a  man  is  being  reformed,  good  and  evil  are  brought
together,  and  then  there  results  a  conflict  and  combat  which,
if  severe,  is  called  temptation  but,  if  not  severe,  is  like  the
fermentation  of  wine  or  other  liquor.  If  good  then  conquers,
evil  with  its  falsity  is  relegated  to  the  circumference,  as  the
lees  fall  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  the  good  liquor
becomes  hke  generous  wine  and  liquor  which  is  clear  after
fermentation.  But  if  evil  conquers,  then  good  with  its  truth
is  transferred  to  the  circumference,  and  becomes  turbid  and
foul  like  imperfectly  fermented  wine  and  other  such  beverages.
There  is  an  analogy  with  fermentation,  because  leaven  in
the  Word  denotes  the  falsity  of  evil  (Hosea  vii.  4;  Luke  xii.
I,  and  elsewhere).

The  divine  Providence  cares  equally  for  the  evil
and  the  good

285.  Every  man,  whether  good  or  evil,  has  two  faculties,
the  understanding  and  the  will.  The  faculty  of  understand-
ing consists  in  being  able  to  understand  and  think,  and  is
therefore  called  rationality;  the  faculty  of  will  consists  in
being  able  to  do  so  in  freedom,  that  is,  to  think,  speak  and  act
as  he  wills,  provided  that  this  is  not  contrary  to  reason  or
rationality ;  for  to  act  freely  is  to  act  as  often  as  one  wills  and
just  as  one  wills.  Since  man  is  never  deprived  of  these  two
faculties  which  are  involved  from  first  to  last  in  every  detail
of  his  thought  and  action,  and  since  they  are  not  self-derived
but  are  gifts  from  the  Lord,  it  follows  that  when  the  Lord  is
present  in  them.  He  is  present  in  every  particular,  even  in
the  minutest  details  of  man's  understanding  and  thought,
consequently  of  his  will  and  affection  and  of  his  speech  and
action.  Take  away  these  faculties  from  the  smallest  detail
of  the  mind,  and  it  will  become  incapable  of  thought  or
speech.  It  has  already  been  fully  shown  that  man  by  virtue
of  these  two  faculties  is  a  man,  is  able  to  think  and  speak,
to  apprehend  good  and  to  understand  not  only  civil  and
moral,  but  also  spiritual  truths,  to  be  reformed  and  re-
generated, in  a  word,  to  be  united  with  the  Lord  and  thereby
live  for  ever.    It  has  also  been  shown  that  not  only  the  good


Divine  Providence  245

but  also  the  wicked  possess  these  two  faculties.  Now  as  these
two  faculties  are  gifts  from  the  Lord,  and  are  never  trans-
ferred to  man  as  his  own — for  the  Divine  cannot  be  so  trans-
ferred although  it  can  be  united  with  him  and  thereby  appear
as  his  own- — and  as  the  Divine  is  present  in  the  minutest
details  of  man's  hfe,  it  follows  that  the  Lord  governs  the
minutest  particulars  in  a  bad  man  as  well  as  in  a  good  one,
and  the  government  of  the  Lord  is  what  is  called  the  divine
Providence.

286.  Now  because  it  is  a  law  of  the  divine  Providence  that
man  shall  act  in  freedom  according  to  reason,  that  is  from
the  two  faculties  of  liberty  and  rationality,  and  because  it  is
also  a  law  of  the  divine  Providence  that  what  a  man  does  shall
appear  to  him  as  if  self-originated  and  therefore  his  own,  and
it  is  also  a  law  that  evils  must  be  permitted  in  order  that  man
may  be  led  away  from  them,  if  follows  that  man  can  misuse
those  faculties  to  confirm  whatever  he  pleases  in  freedom
according  to  reason,  for  he  can  make  anything  he  likes  seem
reasonable,  whether  it  be  intrinsically  reasonable  or  not.
And  so  some  say,  "  What  is  truth?  Can  I  not  make  out
anything  I  choose  to  be  true  ?  Does  not  every  one  do  this  }  "
And  whoever  does  this,  does  it  by  reasoning.  Take  the
greatest  falsity,  and  tell  a  clever  man  to  prove  it,  and  he  will
do  so.  Tell  him,  for  instance,  to  prove  that  man  is  a  mere
animal,  or  that  the  soul  is  like  a  spider  in  its  web,  and  controls
the  body  as  a  spider  does  its  web  by  its  threads,  or  tell  him
to  prove  that  religion  is  nothing  but  a  bond  of  restraint,  and
he  will  defend  any  of  these  statements  until  it  looks  as  if  it
were  true.  Nothing  could  be  easier,  because  he  does  not
understand  the  nature  of  appearances,  nor  of  falsity  mistaken
by  a  blind  faith  for  truth.  This  is  why  man  cannot  see  this
truth,  that  the  divine  Providence  is  present  in  the  minutest
details  of  the  understanding  and  the  will,  or  the  thoughts  and
affections  of  every  man  whether  evil  or  good.  He  confuses
himself  especially  by  supposing  that  if  this  were  true  the
Lord  would  be  the  author  of  evil.  It  will  be  seen  however  in
the  following  pages  that  not  an  atom  of  evil  is  from  the  Lord,
but  from  man,  and  is  due  to  his  becoming  firmly  convinced
that  the  appearance  of  independent  thought,  will,  speech  and
action  is  a  reality.  For  the  sake  of  clearness  this  matter  will
be  dealt  with  in  the  following  order  :

I.  The  divine  Providence  is  universally  present  in  the


246


Divine  Providence


minutest  details  of  the  lives  of  both  good  and  wicked  men,
and  yet  it  is  not  in  their  evils.

II.  Wicked  men  continually  lead  themselves  into  evil,  but
the  Lord  continually  leads  them  away  from  evil.

III.  Wicked  men  cannot  be  led  by  the  Lord  entirely  away
from  evil  and  into  good,  so  long  as  they  believe  their  own
intelligence  is  everything  and  the  divine  Providence  nothing.

IV.  The  Lord  governs  hell  by  opposites ;  and  He  governs
in  hell  the  inner  but  not  the  outer  minds  of  the  wicked,  while
they  are  still  in  this  world.

287.  I.  The  divine  Providence  is  universally  present
IN  the  minutest  details  of  the  lives  of  both  good  and
wicked  men,  and  yet  it  is  not  in  their  evils.  It  was
shown  above  that  the  divine  Providence  is  present  in  the
minutest  details  of  man's  thoughts  and  affections ;  this  means
that  man  can  think  and  will  nothing  of  himself,  but  that
everything  that  he  thinks  and  wills,  and  consequently  says
and  does,  is  due  to  influx  from  heaven  if  his  will  and  under-
standing are  good,  and  to  influx  from  hell  if  they  are  evil,  and
that  good  flows  into  him  from  the  Lord,  and  evil  from  his
selfhood.  I  know  that  these  things  are  difficult  to  under-
stand, because  of  the  distinction  made  between  that  which
flows  in  from  heaven  or  from  the  Lord,  and  that  which  flows
in  from  hell  or  man's  selfhood,  and  yet  we  say  that  the  divine
Providence  is  present  in  the  minutest  details  of  man's
thoughts  and  affections  so  completely  that  he  can  think  and
will  nothing  of  himself ;  now  because  we  also  assert  that  he
can  think  and  will  from  hell  and  from  his  selfhood,  there
appears  to  be  a  contradiction.  But  there  is  none,  as  will  be
seen  in  what  follows,  after  some  preliminary  statements
which  will  throw  light  upon  the  subject.

288.  All  the  angels  of  heaven  confess  that  no  self-originated
thought  is  possible,  but  that  all  thought  is  derived  from  the
Lord ;  while  all  the  spirits  of  hell  assert  that  all  thought  is
self-originated.  Yet  it  has  sometimes  been  demonstrated
to  these  spirits  that  not  one  of  them  thinks  or  can  think  from
himself,  but  only  by  influx ;  but  all  was  in  vain,  for  they  were
not  wilUng  to  be  convinced.  Experience,  however,  will  show
first,  that  all  thought  and  affection,  even  in  the  spirits  of  hell,
flow  in  from  heaven,  but  that  the  inflowing  good  is  there
turned  into  evil  and  the  truth  into  falsity,  and  thus  every-
thing into  its  opposite.     This  was  proved  as  follows  : — a


Divine  Providence  247

certain  truth  from  the  Word  was  sent  down  from  heaven,
was  received  by  those  in  the  upper  part  of  hell,  and  trans-
mitted by  them  into  the  lower  parts  until  it  reached  the
lowest ;  on  its  way  it  was  gradually  turned  into  falsity,  and
finally  into  a  falsity  utterly  opposed  to  the  truth ;  and  those
in  whom  it  was  changing  were  thinking  the  falsity  as  if  they
had  devised  it,  quite  unaware  of  the  real  fact,  namely,  that
it  was  a  truth  flowing  down  from  heaven  which  was  thus
falsified  and  perverted  on  its  way  to  the  lowest  hell.  I  have
witnessed  this  transformation  three  or  four  times.  The  same
thing  happens  with  good,  which,  flowing  down  from  heaven,
is  changed  as  it  goes  into  the  opposite  evil.  It  is  therefore
evident  that  truth  and  good  proceeding  from  the  Lord,  when
received  by  those  who  are  in  falsity  and  evil,  are  completely
transformed,  and  change  into  another  form  which  quite
obliterates  their  first  form.  A  similar  process  goes  on  in
every  wicked  man,  for  as  to  his  spirit  he  is  in  hell.

289.  It  has  often  been  shown  me  that  no  one  in  hell  thinks
from  himself,  but  from  others  around  him;  and  that  these
others  do  not  think  from  themselves  but  from  others;  and
that  thought  and  affection  pass  successively  from  one  com-
munity to  another,  without  any  one  suspecting  that  they  do
not  originate  in  himself.  Certain  persons  who  believed  that
they  thought  and  willed  from  themselves  were  sent  into
another  community  and  detained  there;  communication
having  been  cut  off  from  the  neighbouring  spirits  with  whom
their  thoughts  were  usually  shared,  they  were  told  to  think
differently  from  the  spirits  of  that  community,  and  even  to
force  themselves  to  think  in  opposition  to  them;  but  they
admitted  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  do  so.  Amongst
others,  this  was  done  to  Leibnitz,  and  he  also  was  convinced
that  no  one  thinks  from  himself,  but  from  others ;  and  that
these  others  do  not  think  from  themselves,  but  that  all  think
by  virtue  of  influx  through  heaven  from  the  Lord.  Some
having  meditated  on  this  subject  said  that  it  was  astounding,
and  that  scarcely  any  one  could  be  brought  to  believe  it,
because  it  is  quite  contrary  to  the  appearance,  but  that  they
could  not  deny  it  because  it  was  proved  beyond  a  doubt.
But  in  the  midst  of  their  wonder,  they  declared  that  in  that
case  they  were  not  to  blame  for  thinking  evil,  and  that  it
seemed  that  evil  came  from  the  Lord ;  and  also  that  they  did
not  understand  how  the  Lord  alone  could  cause  men  to  think


248  Divine  Providence

in  such  different  ways.     But  these  three  points  shall  be
explained  presently.

290.  To  the  experience  already  adduced,  let  me  add  the
following  :— When  I  was  enabled  by  the  Lord  to  speak  with
spirits  and  angels,  this  arcanum  was  at  once  revealed  to  me ;
for  I  was  told  from  heaven  that  like  others  I  believed  that  I
thought  and  willed  from  myself,  although  nothing  was  from
myself,  but  that  if  good  it  was  from  the  Lord,  and  if  evil
from  hell.  That  such  was  the  case,  was  proved  to  me  by
living  experience  when  various  thoughts  and  affections  were
induced  upon  me;  for  I  was  gradually  enabled  to  perceive
and  feel  the  influx,  and  afterwards,  whenever  any  evil  infused
itself  into  my  will,  or  any  falsity  into  my  thought,  I  tried  to
find  out  whence  it  came ;  this  was  made  known  to  me,  and
I  was  allowed  to  converse  with  those  from  whom  it  came,  to
confute  them,  and  to  compel  them  to  withdraw,  and  so  take
back  their  evil  and  falsity  and  keep  them  to  themselves,  and
no  longer  infuse  such  things  into  my  mind.  This  has  hap-
pened a  thousand  times,  and  I  have  now  been  in  this  state
for  many  years  and  remain  in  it  still ;  and  yet  it  seems  to  me,
just  as  it  does  to  others,  that  I  think  and  will  from  myself,
for  it  is  of  the  Lord's  Providence  that  it  should  so  appear  to
every  one,  as  was  shown  above  in  its  proper  article.  Newly
arrived  spirits  wonder  at  my  state,  supposing  that,  as  I  do
not  think  and  will  anything  from  myself,  I  am  like  an  empty
vessel ;  but  I  have  explained  the  mystery  to  them,  and  have
shown  them  further  that  I  have  an  interior  thought  which
shows  me  whether  the  influx  into  my  exterior  thought  is
from  heaven  or  from  hell,  that  I  reject  what  is  from  hell  and
accept  what  is  from  heaven,  and  that  nevertheless  I  seem  to
think  and  will  of  myself,  just  as  they  do.

291.  That  all  good  comes  from  heaven  and  all  evil  from
hell,  is  not  unknown  in  the  world,  for  it  is  known  to  every  one
in  the  Church.  What  priest  after  his  consecration  does  not
teach  that  all  good  comes  from  God,  and  that  man  cannot  of
himself  receive  anything  unless  it  be  given  him  from  heaven  ?
He  also  teaches  that  the  devil  infuses  evil  into  the  thoughts
of  men  and  seduces  them,  and  excites  them  to  commit  evils.
And  therefore  a  priest  who  believes  that  his  words  are  inspired
by  holy  zeal,  prays  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  teach  him  and
direct  his  thoughts  and  speech;  some  say  that  they  have
sensibly  felt  such  guidance;  and  when  their  sermons  are


Divine  Providence  249

praised,  they  piously  reply  that  they  have  spoken  not  from
themselves  but  from  God.  This  is  why,  when  they  observe
any  one  whose  speech  and  conduct  are  good,  they  say  that
he  is  led  by  God ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  when  they  find  any-
one speaking  or  acting  wickedly,  they  say  that  he  is  led  by  the
devil.  It  is  well  known  that  religious  men  say  this,  but  how
many  of  them  really  believe  it  ?

292.  That  all  man's  thoughts  and  purposes  and  consequent
speech  and  action  flow  from  the  only  Fountain  of  life,  and  yet
that  the  Fountain  of  life,  or  the  Lord,  is  not  the  cause  of
man's  thinking  evil  and  falsity,  may  be  illustrated  by  the
following  natural  phenomena.  Heat  and  light  proceed  from
the  sun  and  flow  into  all  visible  subjects  and  objects,  not
only  into  good  subjects  and  beautiful  objects,  but  also  into
evil  and  ugly  ones,  and  produce  different  effects  in  them ;  for
they  not  only  flow  into  trees  bearing  good  fruit,  but  also  into
trees  bearing  bad  fruit,  and  even  into  the  fruits  themselves
and  cause  their  growth ;  in  like  manner  they  flow  into  good
seed  and  also  into  weeds,  into  shrubs  that  have  a  good  use,  or
are  wholesome,  and  also  into  those  that  have  an  evil  use  or
are  poisonous ;  yet  it  is  the  same  heat  and  the  same  light,  and
the  cause  of  evil  is  not  in  these  but  in  the  recipient  subjects
and  objects.  Heat  which  hatches  the  eggs  of  a  screech-owl,
a  horned  owl,  or  a  viper,  acts  in  the  same  way  as  when  it
hatches  the  eggs  of  a  dove,  a  swan  or  other  beautiful  bird.'
Put  eggs  of  two  kinds  under  a  hen,  and  they  will  all  be  hatched
by  her  heat,  which  in  itself  is  innocuous ;  what  then  has  heat
in  common  with  evil  and  noxious  things?  Heat  flowing
into  marshy,  stercoraceous,  putrid  and  cadaverous  substances
acts  in  the  same  way  as  when  it  flows  into  vines,  flowers,
plants,  and  other  living  organisms.  Who  cannot  see  that  the
cause  of  any  ill  effect  is  not  in  the  heat  but  in  the  recipient  ?
Moreover  the  same  light  produces  pleasing  colours  in  one
object  and  disagreeable  colours  in  another;  it  becomes
especially  bright  and  brilliant  in  white  objects  and  gloomy  and
dark  in  dull  ones.  The  case  is  similar  in  the  spiritual  world ;
there  also  heat  and  light  proceed  from  the  sun,  or  the  Lord,
and  flow  into  subjects  and  objects.  These  are  angels  and
spirits,  and  their  wills  and  understandings  in  particular;
spiritual  heat  is  the  divine  Love,  and  spiritual  light  the
divine  Wisdom,  both  proceeding  from  the  Lord ;  they  are
not  the  cause  of  their  being  received  differently  by  different


250  Divine  Providence

persons ;  for  the  Lord  says,  "  He  maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on
the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on
the  unjust "  (Matt.  v.  45).  The  sun,  in  the  supreme  sense,
means  the  divine  Love,  and  rain  means  the  divine  Wisdom.

293.  I  Avill  now  describe  how  angels  think  about  human  will
and  intelligence.  They  say  that  there  is  not  in  any  man  a
grain  of  v.ill  or  prudence  that  is  his  own,  and  that  if  there
were,  neither  heaven  nor  hell  could  endure,  but  that  the  whole
human  race  would  perish.  The  reason,  they  say,  is  that
myriads  of  myriads  of  men,  as  many  as  have  been  born  since
the  creation  of  the  world,  constitute  heaven  and  hell,  which
are  placed  one  under  the  other  in  such  an  order  that  each
constitutes  a  one,  heaven  being  in  the  form  of  one  beautiful
man,  and  hell  in  that  of  one  deformed  man.  If  any  one  had
a  grain  of  will  or  intelligence  of  his  own,  that  unity  would  no
longer  be  possible,  but  would  be  destroyed ;  and  with  it  would
perish  that  divine  Form,  which  could  not  continue  to  exist
unless  the  Lord  were  all  in  all  and  men  absolutely  destitute  of
power.  A  further  reason,  they  say,  is  that  to  originate
thought  and  volition  is  essentially  a  divine  attribute,  and  to
think  and  will  from  God  is  the  essential  human  attribute;
and  that  the  Divine  itself  cannot  be  transferred  to  any  man,
for  thus  man  would  be  God.  Bear  this  in  mind  and,  if  you
wish,  you  will  have  it  confirmed  by  the  angels  when  after
death  you  come  into  the  spiritual  world.

294.  It  is  stated  above  (no.  289),  that  certain  persons  when
convinced  that  a  man  does  not  think  from  himself  but  from
others,  and  these  others  think  not  from  themselves  but  by
influx  through  heaven  from  the  Lord,  said  in  astonishment
that  in  that  case  they  were  not  blameworthy  for  doing  evil,
and  that  it  seemed  as  if  evil  came  from  the  Lord,  and  they
did  not  understand  how  the  Lord  alone  could  cause  men  to
think  so  diversely.  As  these  three  ideas  cannot  but  occur  to
those  who  think  of  effects  only  as  effects,  and  not  of  effects  as
derived  from  causes,  they  must  be  taken  up  separately  and
explained  by  their  causes.

i.  Men  would  not  in  this  case  be  to  blame  for  doing  evil.
For  if  everything  a  man  thinks  flows  into  him  from  others,
the  fault  seems  to  be  in  those  from  whom  it  flows ;  yet  the
fault  is  essentially  with  him  who  receives  the  thought,  for  he
accepts  it  as  his  own,  and  neither  knows  nor  wants  to  know
that  it  is  otherwise.     For  every  one  wishes  to  be  his  own


Divine  Providence  251

master  and  govern  himself,  and  especially  to  think  and  will
of  himself,  for  this  is  the  very  freedom  which  appears  to
every  man  as  his  selfhood;  and  therefore  if  he  knew  that
his  thought  and  will-power  flowed  from  another,  he  would
seem  to  himself  like  one  bound  and  captive  and  no  longer  his
own  master ;  and  thus  all  the  delight  of  his  life  Avould  perish,
and  at  length  his  very  human  nature.  I  have  often  had
evidence  that  this  is  so.  Certain  persons  were  enabled  to
perceive  and  feel  that  they  were  led  by  others,  and  became
so  enraged  that  they  lost  all  self-control,  and  they  said  that
they  would  rather  be  chained  up  in  hell  than  not  be  allowed
to  think  as  they  will,  and  will  as  they  think ;  not  to  be  allowed
to  do  this  they  called  having  their  very  life  fettered,  a  harder
and  more  intolerable  thing  than  having  the  body  fettered^
Not  to  be  allowed  to  speak  and  do  as  they  thought  and  willed,
they  did  not  call  being  fettered,  because  the  pleasure  of  social
and  moral  life,  which  consists  in  words  and  deeds,  restrains
and  moderates,  as  it  were,  the  desire  for  freedom.  Now
since  man  does  not  want  to  know  that  he  is  led  to  think  by
others,  but  wants  to  think  from  himself,  and  also  believes
that  he  does  so,  it  follows  that  he  is  himself  in  fault  if  he
thinks  wrongly ;  nor  can  he  be  freed  from  blame  so  long  as  he
loves  to  think  as  he  does ;  but  if  he  does  not  love  to  do  so,  he
severs  his  connection  with  those  others.  This  takes  place
when  he  knows  that  anything  is  wrong,  and  therefore  desires
to  shun  and  desist  from  it.  Then  also  he  is  transferred  by  the
Lord  from  the  community  which  is  in  that  evil,  to  a  commu-
nity which  is  free  from  it.  But  if  he  recognises  the  evil  and
yet  does  not  shun  it,  then  the  fault  is  imputed  to  him,  and
he  becomes  guilty  of  that  evil.  Whatever  therefore  a  man
believes  that  he  does  of  himself  is  attributable  to  him  and
not  to  the  Lord.

ii.  In  that  case  it  would  seem  that  evil  came  from  the  Lord.
This  may  be  thought  to  be  the  conclusion  from  what  was
pointed  out  above  (no.  288),  that  good  flowing  from  the  Lord
is  turned  into  evil,  and  truth  into  falsity  in  hell.  But  who
cannot  see  that  the  evil  and  falsity  are  not  produced  by  the
good  and  truth,  or  by  the  Lord,  but  by  the  recipient  subject
and  object  which  is  in  evil  and  falsity,  and  perverts  and  in-
verts that  which  flows  in  ?  This  was  fully  explained  above
(no.  292).  But  the  origin  of  evil  and  falsity  in  man  has  been
frequently  indicated  in  the  preceding  pages.     This  has  been


252  Divine  Providence

proved  by  experience  in  the  spiritual  world,  in  the  case  of
those  who  believed  that  the  Lord  could  remove  evil  from  the
evil  and  put  good  in  its  place,  and  thus  convert  hell  into
heaven,  and  save  all ;  but  the  impossibility  of  this  will  be  seen
towards  the  end  of  this  work,  where  instantaneous  salvation
and  unconditional  mercy  will  be  the  subject.

iii.  They  do  not  understand  how  the  Lord  alone  can  cause
men  to  think  so  diversely.  The  Lord's  divine  Love  and  Wisdom
are  infinite,  and  infinite  forms  of  love  and  wisdom  proceed
from  Him,  and  they  flow  into  all  in  heaven,  and  thence  into
all  in  hell,  and  from  both  of  these  into  all  in  the  world ;  this
is  why  thought  and  will  are  never  lacking  to  any  one ;  for  that
which  is  infinite  remains  infinite  in  all  finite  things.  The
infinites  which  proceed  from  the  Lord  flow  forth  not  only  in
their  entirety  but  also  most  distinctly;  for  the  Divine  is
universal  owing  to  the  distinct  things  of  which  it  consists,
and  these  distinct  divine  things  are  what  are  called  "  univer-
sal "  as  was  shown  above ;  and  each  distinct  divine  attribute
is  itself  infinite.  These  considerations  enable  the  mind  to
understand  how  the  Lord  alone  causes  everyone  to  think  and
will  according  to  his  nature,  and  according  to  the  laws  of  His
Providence.  That  all  things  in  the  Lord  and  which  proceed
from  Him  are  infinite  is  shown  above  (nos.  46-69) ;  see  also
the  work  on  the  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  (nos.  17-22).

295.     II.  Wicked  men  continually  lead  themselves

INTO  EVIL,  BUT  THE  LORD    CONTINUALLY  LEADS    THEM  AWAY

FROM  EVIL.  The  nature  of  the  Lord's  Providence  with  regard
to  the  good  is  more  easily  understood  than  with  regard  to
the  evil;  and  as  the  latter  is  now  the  subject  it  shall  be
explained  in  the  following  order  :

i.  There  are  innumerable  components  in  every  evil.

ii.  A  wicked  man  of  himself  plunges  deeper  and  deeper
into  his  own  evils.

iii.  Divine  Providence  with  the  wicked  is  a  continual  per-
mission of  evil,  in  order  that  they  may  be  continually  with-
drawn from  it.

iv.  This  withdrawal  is  effected  by  the  Lord  n  a  thousand
ways,  some  being  most  inscrutable.

In  order,  therefore,  that  the  nature  of  the  divine  Provi-
dence with  the  evil  may  be  distinctly  seen  and  understood,
the  foregoing  propositions  shall  be  explained  in  the  order
stated.


Divine  Providence  253

296.  i.  There  are  innumerable  components  of  every  evil.
In  man's  sight  every  evil  appears  as  a  simple  whole ;  thus
appear  hatred  and  revenge,  theft  and  fraud,  adultery  and
fornication,  pride  and  haughtiness,  and  so  on;  and  it  is  not
known  that  every  evil  contains  innumerable  details,  more  in
number  than  the  fibres  and  vessels  in  a  man's  body.  For  a
wicked  man  is  a  hell  in  miniature,  and  hell  consists  of  myriads
of  myriads  of  spirits,  every  one  there  being  in  a.  perverted
human  form ;  for  all  the  fibres  and  vessels  of  his  body  are
inverted ;  the  spirit  himself  is  an  evil  which  appears  to  him  as
one  thing,  but  there  are  as  many  lusts  of  that  evil  as  there  are
innumerable  things  in  the  spirit  himself ;  for  every  man  is  his
own  evil  or  his  own  good  from  head  to  foot.  Since  therefore
a  wicked  man  is  of  this  character,  it  is  evident  that  he  is  one
evil,  composed  of  numberless  varieties  which  are  distinct
evils,  and  are  called  evil  lusts.  From  these  considerations
it  follows  that  all  these  things  in  their  order  must  be  restored
and  reversed  by  the  Lord,  in  order  that  the  man  may  be
reformed,  and  that  this  cannot  be  effected  except  gradually,  by
the  divine  Providence,  acting  continually  from  the  commence-
ment of  man's  life  to  its  end.  Every  evil  lust  in  hell,  when
presented  to  view,  appears  like  some  noxious  creature,  such
as  a  dragon  or  a  basilisk,  a  viper,  a  horned  owl,  or  a  screech-
owl,  and  so  on;  evil  lusts  in  a  wicked  man  have  the  same
appearance  when  he  is  looked  at  by  the  angels.  These  forms
of  lust  must  be  transformed ;  the  man  himself  who  as  to  his
spirit  appears  as  a  deformed  man  or  a  devil,  must  thus  be
transformed  into  a  beautiful  angel,  and  every  evil  lust  must  be
so  changed  as  to  look  like  a  lamb,  a  sheep,  a  pigeon,  or  a  turtle
dove,  just  as  the  good  affections  of  the  angels  in  heaven  appear
when  they  are  presented  to  view;  the  transformation  of  a
dragon  into  a  lamb,  a  basilisk  into  a  sheep,  or  an  owl  into  a
pigeon,  could  only  be  effected  gradually  by  eliminating
defects  from  its  seed,  and  replacing  them  with  good  qualities.
But  this  can  only  be  done  as  in  the  grafting  of  trees  when
the  roots  and  some  of  the  trunk  remain,  but  the  ingrafted
branch  turns  the  sap  sucked  up  through  the  old  root  into
sap  producing  good  fruit.  The  branch  to  be  ingrafted  must
be  taken  from  the  Lord,  who  is  the  Tree  of  Life,  according
to  His  own  words  (John  xv.  1-7).

ii.  A  wicked  man  of  himself  plunges  deeper  and  deeper
into   his   own   evils.    We   say    "  of   himself,"    because    all


254  Divine  Providence

evil  comes  from  man,  for  he  turns  the  good  which  comes
from  the  Lord  into  evil,  as  was  said  above.  The  true  reason
why  a  bad  man  plunges  himself  more  deeply  into  evil  is,
that  he  introduces  himself  more  and  more  intimately  and
deeply  into  hellish  communities,  by  willing  and  doing  evil;
thus  his  delight  in  evil  grows,  and  so  occupies  his  thoughts
that  at  length  it  becomes  his  chief  delight.  He  who  has
introduced  himself  more  intimately  and  deeply  into  the
communities  of  hell,  becomes  as  it  were  bound  with  cords;
but  so  long  as  he  lives  in  the  world  he  does  not  feel  these
bonds ;  they  are  like  soft  wool  or  smooth  threads  of  silk  which
are  pleasant  to  the  touch ;  but  after  death  these  bonds,  instead
of  being  soft  and  pleasant,  become  hard  and  galling.  That
a  delight  in  evil  constantly  grows,  is  known  from  the  case  of
theft,  robbery,  plunder,  revenge,  tyranny,  greed  and  so  on.
Who  is  not  conscious  of  the  increase  of  delight  in  these  things,
in  the  measure  of  his  success  in  attaining  them,  and  his  unre-
strained indulgence  in  them  ?  It  is  well  known  that  a  thief
feels  such  delight  in  theft,  that  he  cannot  desist  from  it;
and  strange  to  say,  he  is  more  delighted  with  one  stolen  coin
than  with  ten  that  are  given  him.  It  would  be  the  same
with  adultery,  if  it  had  not  been  decreed  that  this  evil  should
be  attended  with  a  loss  of  potency,  proportioned  to  the  excess
of  the  abuse ;  but  notwithstanding  this,  many  retain  the  de-
light of  thinking  and  speaking  about  it,  and,  if  nothing  more,
the  lust  of  contact  remains.  But  it  is  not  known  that  this
comes  from  a  man's  introducing  himself  more  and  more
inwardly  and  deeply  into  hellish  communities  in  proportion
as  the  evils  are  committed  with  the  consent  both  of  his  will
and  understanding ;  if  the  evils  are  only  in  his  understanding
and  not  in  his  will,  he  is  not  as  yet  in  an  infernal  society  in
consequence  of  his  evil,  but  he  enters  it  when  the  evils  are
also  in  his  will.  If  he  knows  that  this  evil  is  contrary  to  the
commandments  of  the  Decalogue,  and  acknowledges  these
as  divine,  he  then  commits  evil  deliberately,  and  thereby
sinks  to  a  depth  from  which  he  cannot  be  raised  except  by
genuine  repentance.  It  should  be  noted  that  as  to  his  spirit
every  man  is  in  some  community  of  the  spiritual  world,  an
evil  man  in  a  hellish  community,  and  a  good  man  in  a  heavenly
one ;  sometimes,  while  in  deep  meditation,  they  are  seen  there.
It  should  also  be  noted  that  as  the  sound  of  speech  diffuses
itself  into  the  air  of  the  natural  world,  so  affection  together


Divine  Providence  255

with  thought  diffuses  itself  amongst  the  communities  of  the
spiritual  world ;  there  is  also  a  correspondence  between  them,
for  affection  corresponds  to  sound  and  thought  to  speech.

iii.  Divine  Providence  with  the  wicked  is  a  continual
permission  of  evil,  in  order  that  they  may  be  continually  with-
drawn from  it.  Di\dne  Providence  with  wicked  men  is  a
continual  permission,  because  nothing  but  evil  can  go  forth
from  their  life ;  for  man  cannot  be  in  both  good  and  evil  at
the  same  time,  nor  in  them  alternately  unless  he  is  lukewarm ;
and  the  evil  of  life  is  not  introduced  into  the  will  and  thereby
into  the  thought  by  the  Lord,  but  by  man;  this  is  called
permission.  Now  since  the  whole  will  and  thought  of  a
bad  man  are  the  subject  of  permission,  the  question  arises,
What  part  in  them  has  the  divine  Providence,  which  is  said
to  be  in  the  minutest  particulars  of  every  man's  mind,
whether  he  be  evil  or  good?  It  consists  in  continual  per-
mission for  a  definite  end,  and  in  permitting  nothing  which
does  not  conduce  to  that  end ;  and  in  continually  examin-
ing, separating,  and  purifying  the  evils  which  are  allowed
to  go  forth,  expeUing  what  are  not  conducive  to  that  end,
and  discharging  them  by  unknown  ways.  These  things  are
done  especially  in  man's  inner  \\\\\,  and  from  this  in  his
inner  thought.  The  di\ane  Providence  also  continually
operates  to  prevent  the  things  which  are  expelled  and  dis-
charged from  being  received  again  by  the  will,  since  every-
thing received  by  the  will  is  appropriated  to  the  man ;  but
those  received  by  the  thought,  and  not  by  the  will,  are
separated  and  banished.  Herein  consists  the  Lord's  continual
Providence  ^vith  the  evil,  which  is,  as  has  been  said,  a  con-
tinual permission,  in  order  that  they  may  be  continually
withdrawn  from  it.  Man  knows  scarcely  anything  of  this
process,  because  he  has  no  sensible  perception  of  it.  The
chief  reason  of  this  is,  that  the  evils  arise  out  of  the  lusts  of
his  life's  love,  and  these  evils  are  not  felt  as  evils,  but  as
dehghts,  which  attract  no  notice.  Who  pays  any  attention
to  the  delights  of  his  love  ?  His  thought  floats  along  in
them  hke  a  boat  borne  along  by  a  river's  current,  or  it  is
perceived  as  sweet  air  of  which  he  takes  a  deep  breath ;  he
can  only  perceive  something  derived  from  these  delights  in
his  external  thought,  but  he  does  not  notice  them  there,
unless  he  knows  that  they  are  evils.  But  of  this,  more  in
what  follows.


256


Divine  Providence


iv.  This  withdrawal  from  evil  is  effected  by  the  Lord  in  a
thousand  ways,  some  being  most  inscrutable.  Some  of  these
have  been  disclosed  to  me,  but  only  the  most  general ;  they
are  as  follows  : — The  impure  delights  of  which  man  knows
nothing  are  emitted  in  troops  or  bundles  into  the  inner
thought  of  his  spirit,  and  thence  into  his  outer  thought,  in
which  they  appear  as  some  feeling  of  delight,  pleasure  or
desire;  and  they  are  there  mingled  with  his  natural  and
sensual  delights.  Here  are  provided  the  means  of  separation
and  purification,  and  also  the  channels  of  expulsion  and
removal.  The  means  are  chiefly  the  delights  of  meditation,
thought  and  reflection  for  the  sake  of  certain  ends  or  uses;
and  the  ends  or  uses  are  as  numerous  as  the  particulars  and
details  of  any  one's  business  or  calling,  or  as  the  delights  of
thinking  how  one  ought  to  act  as  a  law-abiding,  moral  or
even  a  spiritual  man,  not  to  mention  the  painful  feelings
which  sometimes  intervene.  These  delights,  being  those  of
his  love  in  the  external  man,  are  the  means  for  the  separation,
purification,  excretion  and  withdrawal  of  the  delights  of
the  lusts  of  evil  in  the  internal  man.  Take  for  example
an  unjust  judge  who  has  an  eye  to  gain  or  to  the  advantage
of  his  friends  as  the  ends  or  uses  of  his  office;  inwardly  he
is  continually  considering  those  things,  but  outwardly  he
tries  to  act  hke  a  just  man  learned  in  the  law.  He  is  con-
stantly influenced  by  the  delight  of  meditating,  thinking,
reflecting  and  devising  how  he  may  twist,  turn,  adapt  and
pervert  the  law  so  that  there  may  still  appear  a  conformity
with  the  laws  and  a  semblance  of  justice ;  nor  does  he  know
that  his  internal  delight  consists  in  cunning,  fraud,  deceit,
secret  theft,  and  many  other  such  things,  and  that  this
dehght,  made  up  of  so  many  delights  of  evil  lusts,  rules  his
whole  external  thought,  where  dwells  the  delight  of  seem-
ing just  and  sincere.  Internal  delights  are  let  down  into
these  external  delights,  and  mixed  with  them  like  various
kinds  of  food  in  the  stomach ;  and  there  they  are  separated,
purified  and  drawn  off ;  but  this  is  done  only  with  the  more
impure  of  these  delights;  for  with  a  wicked  man  no  other
separation,  purification  and  withdrawal  take  place,  than
of  the  more  grievous  evils  from  the  less  grievous;  while
with  a  good  man  there  is  not  only  the  separation,  purification
and  withdrawal  of  the  more  grievous  evils,  but  also  of  the
less  grievous ;  this  is  accomplished  by  means  of  the  delights


Divine  Providence  257

of  afiections  for  good  and  truth,  justice  and  sincerity,  which
he  experiences  in  proportion  as  he  regards  evils  as  sins,  and
therefore  shuns  and  loathes  them,  and  still  more  if  he  fights
against  them.  These  are  the  means  by  wliich  the  Lord
purifies  all  who  are  saved.  He  also  purifies  the  same  persons
by  external  means,  which  have  to  do  with  reputation,  honour
and  sometimes  gain;  but  even  in  these  motives  the  Lord
implants  the  delights  of  the  affections  of  good  and  truth,
by  which  they  are  adjusted  and  fitted  to  become  the  dehghts
of  the  love  of  the  neighbour.  If  the  delights  of  evil  lusts
could  take  visible  form,  or  if  they  could  be  distinctly  per-
ceived by  any  of  the  senses,  they  would  be  seen  and  per-
ceived to  be  innumerable ;  for  the  whole  of  hell  is  nothing
but  a  form  of  all  evil  lusts,  and  there  is  no  evil  lust  exactly
like  another  or  the  same  as  another,  nor  can  there  be  to
eternity;  and  of  these  numberless  lusts  man  knows  hardly
anything,  still  less  how  they  are  connected  with  one  another ;
and  yet  the  Lord  by  His  divine  Providence  continually
permits  them  to  come  forth,  in  order  that  they  may  be
removed,  which  is  effected  in  innumerable  ways.  An  evil
man  is  a  hell  in  miniature,  as  a  good  man  is  a  heaven  in
miniature.  That  the  withdrawal  from  evils  is  effected  by
the  Lord  in  a  thousand  ways,  some  being  most  inscrutable,
cannot  be  better  seen  and  confirmed  than  by  the  secret
operations  of  the  soul  in  the  body.  Those  known  to  man
are  as  follows  :  he  looks  at  the  food  he  is  about  to  eat,  smells
it,  feels  an  appetite  for  it,  tastes  it,  grinds  it  with  the  teeth,
and  despatches  it  with  the  tongue  on  its  way  to  the  stomach.
But  the  soul's  secret  workings,  of  which  man  knows  nothing
because  he  does  not  feel  them,  are  these  :  the  stomach  rolls
about  the  food  which  it  has  received,  dissolves  and  dis-
integrates it  by  means  of  solvents,  that  is,  digests  it ;  conveys
suitable  quantities  to  the  minute  ducts  which  open  into  it,
and  to  the  veins  which  absorb  them;  it  sends  some  to  the
blood,  some  to  the  lymphatic  vessels,  some  to  the  lacteal
vessels  of  the  mesentery,  and  some  to  the  intestines ;  finally,
the  chyle  conveyed  through  the  thoracic  duct  from  its
receptacle  in  the  mesentery,  is  carried  into  the  vena  cava
and  so  into  the  heart,  and  from  the  heart  into  the  lungs,
and  thence  through  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  into  the
aorta,  and  from  this  by  its  branches  to  the  viscera  of  the
whole  body  and  also  to  the  kidneys ;  in  each  of  these  organs
S


258


Divine  Providence


the  blood  is  filtered,  purified  and  freed  from  incongruous
substances;  moreover,  the  heart  sends  the  blood,  when
purified  in  the  lungs,  to  the  brain  through  the  carotid
arteries,  and  the  brain  returns  the  vivified  blood  to  the  vena
cava  just  above  the  orifice  by  which  the  thoracic  duct  brings
in  the  chyle,  and  so  back  again  to  the  heart.  These  and
innumerable  other  processes  are  due  to  the  secret  operation
of  the  soul  on  the  body.  Man  perceives  nothing  of  these
operations,  and  any  one  unversed  in  the  science  of  anatomy
knows  nothing  about  them.  And  yet  similar  things  take
place  in  the  recesses  of  man's  mind ;  for  nothing  can  take
place  in  the  body  except  from  the  mind ;  for  man's  mind  is
his  spirit,  and  his  spirit  is  equally  a  man,  the  sole  difference
being  that  the  things  done  in  the  body  are  done  naturally,
and  those  done  in  the  mind  are  done  spiritually;  the
similarity  between  them  is  complete.  It  is  thus  e\'ident
that  the  divine  Providence  works  in  every  man  in  a  thousand
inscrutable  ways,  and  that  its  constant  purpose  is  to  purify
him  because  its  purpose  is  to  save  him ;  and  that  no  responsi-
bility rests  on  man,  except  that  of  removing  the  evil  that  he
discovers  in  his  external  man.  The  Lord  does  the  rest,  if
His  aid  be  sought.

297.  III.  Wicked  men  cannot  be  led  by  the  Lord  entirely
aivay  from  evil  and  into  good,  so  long  as  they  believe  their  own
intelligence  is  everything,  and  the  divine  Providence  nothing.
It  seems  as  if  man  can  withdraw  himself  from  evil,  provided
he  thinks  this  or  that  to  be  contrary  to  the  common  good,  to
what  is  useful,  and  to  the  law  of  his  own  and  of  other  nations.
A  bad  man  can  do  this  just  as  well  as  a  good  one,  provided
that  by  birth  or  education  he  has  acquired  the  power  of
thinking  clearly,  both  analytically  and  rationally.  Never-
theless he  cannot  withdraw  himself  from  evil,  because  the
faculty  of  understanding  and  perceiving  even  abstract  things
is  given  by  the  Lord  to  every  one  whether  evil  or  good,  as
has  been  shown  above  throughout;  but  man  cannot  deliver
himself  from  evil  by  means  of  that  faculty,  for  evil  exists
in  the  will,  and  nothing  flows  into  the  will  from  the  under-
standing except  light  which  illuminates  and  teaches  him;
now  if  the  heat  of  the  will,  that  is,  the  man's  life's  love,  is
inflamed  with  the  lust  of  evil,  it  is  cold  to  the  affection  of
good ;  and  therefore  it  does  not  receive  it,  but  either  rejects
or  extinguishes  it,  or  by  some  subtle  falsity  turns  it  into


Divine  Providence  259

evil.  This  cold  light  of  the  understanding  produces  no
more  effect  on  the  will  than  the  cold  light  of  winter,  although
it  is  as  bright  as  that  of  summer,  does  on  the  trees.  But
this  truth  can  be  more  fully  seen  if  dealt  with  in  the  following
order  :

i.  If  a  man's  will  is  in  evil,  his  understanding  apprehends
nothing  but  falsity,  and  neither  desires  nor  is  able  to  appre-
hend anything  else.  ii.  If  a  man's  understanding  then  sees
the  truth,  it  either  turns  away  from  it,  or  falsifies  it.  iii.
The  divine  Providence  continually  causes  man  to  see  truth,
and  also  disposes  him  to  perceive  and  accept  it.  iv.  Man
is  thus  withdrawn  from  evil,  not  by  himself  but  by  the
Lord.

But  that  these  things  may  be  clear  to  the  rational  man,
whether  he  is  evil  or  good,  that  is,  whether  he  is  in  the  light
of  winter  or  of  summer,  in  both  of  which  the  same  colours
are  seen,  they  must  be  explained  in  an  orderly  manner.

298.  i.  A  man's  own  intelligence,  when  his  will  is  evil,
sees  nothing  but  falsity,  and  neither  desires  nor  is  able  to  see
anything  else.  This  has  often  been  proved  in  the  spiritual
world.  Every  man  when  he  becomes  a  spirit,  which  takes
place  after  death  when  he  puts  off  the  material  and  puts
on  the  spiritual  body,  is  introduced  by  turns  into  the  two
states  of  his  life,  the  external  and  the  internal.  While  he
is  in  the  external  state,  he  speaks  and  acts  rationally  and
wisely,  just  as  a  rational  and  wise  man  does  in  the  world ;
he  can  also  teach  others  many  things  which  concern  moral
and  civil  life,  and  if  he  has  been  a  preacher,  he  can  also
give  instruction  concerning  spiritual  life.  But  when  he
is  withdrawn  from  this  external  state,  and  brought  into  his
internal  state,  the  external  becoming  dormant  and  the
internal  being  awakened,  then  if  he  is  evil  the  scene  is
changed;  instead  of  being  rational  he  becomes  sensual,  and
instead  of  being  wise  he  becomes  insane ;  for  he  then  thinks
from  the  evil  of  his  will  and  its  delight,  that  is,  from  his
own  understanding,  and  sees  nothing  but  falsity,  and  does
nothing  but  e\nl,  believing  that  wickedness  is  wisdom  and
that  cunning  is  prudence ;  and  his  own  understanding  leads
him  to  suppose  himself  a  god,  and  his  whole  mind  is  filled
with  wicked  arts.  Such  insanity  I  have  often  seen ;  I  have
also  seen  spirits  brought  into  these  alternate  states  two  or
three  times  within  an  hour ;   and  then  they  were  led  to  see


26o  Divine  Providence

their  insanity  and  to  acknowledge  it;  yet  they  did  not
desire  to  remain  in  a  rational  and  moral  state,  but  returned
of  their  own  accord  to  their  sensual  and  insane  internal
state,  for  they  loved  this  more  than  the  other,  because  it
was  the  dehght  of  their  life's  love.  Who  would  believe  that
beneath  his  outward  appearance  a  wicked  man  is  of  this
character,  and  that  he  undergoes  such  a  transformation
when  his  internal  state  is  disclosed  !  This  experience  is
sufficient  to  indicate  the  nature  of  man's  own  understanding
when  he  thinks  and  acts  from  the  evil  of  his  will.  The  case
is  different  with  the  good;  when  they  are  brought  from
their  external  into  their  internal  state,  they  become  still
wiser  and  more  moral.

ii.  //  a  man's  understanding  then  sees  the  truth,  it  either
turns  away  from  it  or  falsifies  it.  Man  has  a  voluntary  and
an  intellectual  selfhood;  the  voluntary  selfhood  is  evil,
and  the  intellectual  selfhood  is  the  falsity  arising  therefrom ;
the  latter  is  meant  by  the  will  of  man,  and  the  former  by
the  will  of  the  flesh  in  John  i.  13.  The  voluntary  selfhood
is  essentially  the  love  of  self,  and  the  intellectual  selfhood
is  pride  arising  out  of  that  love ;  these  two  are  like  married
partners,  and  their  marriage  is  that  of  evil  with  falsity;  this
marriage  is  brought  about  in  every  evil  spirit  before  he  enters
hell;  and  when  in  hell  he  does  not  know  what  good  is,  for
he  calls  his  evil  good  because  he  feels  it  to  be  delightful ;
and  then  he  turns  away  from  the  truth,  nor  does  he  desire
to  see  it,  because  he  sees  the  falsity  which  agrees  with  his
evil,  as  the  eye  sees  what  is  beautiful,  and  he  listens  to  it
as  the  ear  listens  to  what  is  harmonious.

iii.  The  divine  Providence  continually  causes  man  to  see
truth,  and  also  disposes  him  to  perceive  and  accept  it.  This
is  because  the  divine  Providence  acts  through  the  inner  mind,
and  flows  thence  into  the  outer  mind,  or  from  the  spiritual
into  the  natural  man,  illuminating  the  understanding  by
the  light  of  heaven,  and  vivifying  the  will  by  the  warmth
of  heaven.  The  hght  of  heaven  in  its  essence  is  divine
Wisdom,  and  the  warmth  of  heaven  divine  Love ;  and  from
divine  Wisdom  nothing  can  flow  but  truth,  and  from  divine
Love  nothing  but  good;  and  by  divine  Love  the  Lord
disposes  the  understanding  to  see  truth  and  also  to  perceive
and  accept  it ;  thus  man  becomes  truly  human  not  only  in
outward  but  also  in  inward  form.     Who  does  not  desire  to


Divine  Providence  261

be  thought  a  rational  and  spiritual  man?  And  who  is  not
conscious  that  he  desires  this  in  order  that  others  may  regard
him  as  a  genuine  man?  If  therefore  he  is  rational  and
spiritual  in  outward  form  only,  and  not  at  the  same  time
in  inward  form,  is  he  really  a  man  ?  Is  he  not  like  a  play-
actor, or  an  ape  with  a  face  almost  human?  May  it  not
therefore  be  concluded  that  he  alone  is  a  man  who  is  inwardly
what  he  desires  to  appear  outwardly  ?  He  who  acknow-
ledges the  former  truth,  must  also  acknowledge  the  latter.
A  man's  own  understanding  can  induce  the  human  form  on
the  outward  life  only,  but  the  divine  Providence  induces  that
form  on  the  inward  life,  and  through  the  inward  on  the
outward ;  and  when  it  has  been  so  induced,  the  man  does  not
merely  appear  to  be  a  man,  but  he  is  a  man.

iv.  Man  is  thus  withdrawn  from  evil,  not  by  himself  but  by
the  Lord.  When  the  divine  Providence  enables  a  man  to
see  the  truth,  and  at  the  same  time  gives  him  an  affection
for  it,  he  can  be  withdrawn  from  evil,  because  the  truth
shows  and  prescribes  what  must  be  done ;  and  when  the
will  acts  in  accordance  with  this  truth,  it  unites  with  it,  and
turns  the  truth  into  good  within  itself ;  for  the  truth  becomes
incorporated  in  its  love,  and  what  is  incorporated  in  the  love
is  good.  All  reformation  is  effected  by  means  of  truth,  and
not  otherwise ;  for  without  truth  the  will  is  continually
immersed  in  its  evil,  and  the  understanding,  when  consulted,
gives  no  instruction,  but  confirms  the  evil  by  falsities.
The  intelligence  both  of  good  and  wicked  men  seems  to
them  to  be  exclusively  their  own ;  and  besides,  a  good  man
is  bound  to  act  as  if  his  intelligence  were  his  own,  just  as
much  as  a  bad  man;  but  he  who  believes  in  the  divine
Providence  is  withdrawn  from  evil,  whereas  he  who  does  not
believe  in  it  is  not  withdrawn;  the  believer  is  one  who
acknowledges  evil  to  be  sin,  and  desires  to  be  delivered  from
it,  and  the  unbeliever  is  he  who  does  neither.  The  difference
between  the  intelligence  of  two  such  persons,  is  hke  that  be-
tween reaUty  and  illusion,  or  between  an  external  with  or
without  a  corresponding  internal;  for  example,  the  words
and  gestures  of  mimics  and  actors  representing  kings,  princes
and  generals,  compared  with  the  kings,  princes  and  generals
themselves ;  the  latter  are  really  what  they  appear,  but  the
others  are  not,  and  when  their  disguise  is  laid  aside,  they
are  seen  as  mere  comedians,  actors  and  players.


262  Divine  Providence

299.  IV.  The  Lord  governs  hell  by  opposites  ;  and,  as  part
of  it,  He  governs  the  inner  but  not  the  outer  minds  of  the  wicked
while  they  are  still  in  this  world.  He  who  does  not  know  the
nature  of  heaven  and  hell  is  utterly  unable  to  understand
the  nature  of  man's  mind,  this  being  his  spirit  which  lives
after  death.  The  reason  is  that  the  mind  or  spirit  of  man
has  a  form  entirely  similar  to  that  of  heaven  or  hell;  there
is  not  the  slightest  difference,  except  that  one  is  on  the  largest
and  the  other  on  the  smallest  scale,  or  that  one  is  the  proto-
type and  the  other  the  copy.  And  therefore  a  man  as  to
his  mind  or  spirit  is  either  a  heaven  or  a  hell  in  miniature.
The  man  who  is  led  by  the  Lord  is  a  heaven,  and  the  man
who  is  led  by  his  own  selfhood  is  a  hell.  Now  as  I  have  been
instructed  as  to  the  nature  of  heaven  and  hell,  and  as  it  is
important  to  understand  the  nature  of  man's  mind  or  spirit,
I  will  describe  both  briefly.

300.  All  in  heaven  are  simply  good  affections,  and  true
thoughts  derived  from  them;    and  all  in  hell  are  merely
lusts  of  evil,  and  false  imaginations  derived  from  them ;  and
all  these  are  so  co-ordinated  that  the  evil  lusts  and  false
imaginations  in  hell,  are  exactly  opposite  to  the  good  affec-
tions and  the  true  thoughts  of  heaven ;  and  therefore  hell  is
beneath  heaven,  and  diametrically  opposite  to  it ;  they  are  like
two  men  lying  with  feet  together  and  heads  apart,  or  standing,
one  on  his  head,  and  the  other  upright  upon  the  feet  of  the
former,  so  that  they  repel  each  other  with  the  soles  of  their
feet.     Sometimes    hell  is   seen   in   such  a  position,   or   so
inverted  with  respect  to  heaven.     The  reason  is  that  those
in  hell  make  evil  lusts  the  head,  and  good  affections  the
feet;   while  those  in  heaven  make  good  affections  the  head,
and  evil  lusts  the  soles  of  the  feet ;  hence  the  mutual  opposi-
tion.    We  say  that  there  are  good  affections  and  true  thoughts
therefrom  in  heaven  and  that  there  are  lusts  of  evil  and  false
imaginations  therefrom  in  hell;    this  means  that  there  are
spirits  and  angels  there  who  are  of  this  nature;    for  every
one  is  his  own  affection,  or  his  own  lust,  an  angel  in  heaven
being  his  own  affection,  and  a  spirit  in  hell  his  own  lust.

301.  The  angels  of  heaven  are  good  affections  and  true
thoughts  therefrom,  because  they  are  recipients  of  divine
Love  and  Wisdom  from  the  Lord,  and  all  good  affections
are  from  the  divine  Love,  and  all  true  thoughts  from  the
divine  Wisdom.     But  the  spirits  of  hell  are  evil  lusts,  and


Divine  Providence  263

false  imaginations  therefrom,  because  they  are  in  the  love
of  self  and  in  their  own  intelligence ;  and  all  evil  lusts  come
from  the  love  of  self,  and  all  false  imaginations  from  man's
own  understanding.

302.  There  is  a  wonderful  co-ordination  of  affections  in
heaven,  and  of  lusts  in  hell,  which  is  known  to  the  Lord
alone ;  they  are  respectively  divided  into  genera  and  species,
and  are  so  united  as  to  act  as  one ;  and  as  they  are  divided
into  genera  and  species,  they  are  distinguished  into  greater
and  lesser  communities;  and  as  they  are  so  united  as  to
act  as  one,  they  are  united  like  all  the  various  things  in  man.
Thus  the  form  of  heaven  is  that  of  a  beautiful  man,  whose
soul  is  the  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  and  therefore  the
Lord ;  and  the  form  of  hell  is  that  of  a  deformed  man,  whose
soul  is  self-love,  and  self-intelligence,  and  therefore  the
devil;  for  there  is  no  one  devil  who  alone  rules  there,  but
the  love  of  self  is  called  the  devil.

303.  But  in  order  to  understand  better  the  nature  of
heaven  and  hell,  think  of  delight  in  good  instead  of  good
affections,  and  delight  in  evil  instead  of  lusts ;  for  there  can
be  no  affection  or  lust  without  delight,  for  this  constitutes  the
life  of  every  one  of  them.  These  delights  are  distinguished
and  combined  like  the  good  affections  and  evil  lusts  mentioned
above.  The  delight  of  his  affection  fills  and  surrounds  every
angel  of  heaven,  and  a  general  delight  fills  and  surrounds
every  community  of  heaven,  and  the  delight  of  all  together,
or  a  universal  delight,  fills  and  surrounds  the  whole  of
heaven.  In  like  manner  the  delight  of  his  own  lust  fills
and  surrounds  every  spirit  of  hell,  and  a  general  delight
every  community  of  hell,  and  the  delight  of  all,  or  a  universal
delight,  fills  and  surrounds  the  whole  of  hell.  Since  the
affections  of  heaven  and  the  lusts  of  hell  are  diametrically
opposed  to  each  other,  as  stated  above,  it  is  evident  that  the
delight  of  heaven  is  so  painful  in  hell  that  it  cannot  be
endured ;  and  on  the  other  hand  the  delight  of  hell  is  so
painful  in  heaven  that  it  cannot  be  endured.  Hence  come
antipathy,  aversion  and  separation.

304.  These  delights,  because  they  constitute  the  life  of
every  one  in  particular  and  of  all  in  general,  are  not  sensibly
perceived  by  those  in  whom  they  reside,  but  their  opposites
are  sensibly  perceived  when  they  approach,  especially  when
they  are  converted  into  odours ;   for  every  particular  delight


264


Divine  Providence


corresponds  to  some  odour,  and  in  the  spiritual  world  can
take  that  form;  and  then  the  general  delight  in  heaven  is
sensibly  perceived  as  the  fragrance  of  a  garden,  varying
according  to  the  odours  of  the  flowers  and  fruits  it  contains  ;
and  the  general  delight  in  hell  is  sensibly  perceived  as  stag-
nant water,  into  which  filth  has  been  thrown,  varying  accord-
ing to  the  stenches  arising  from  the  putrid  and  malodorous
things  in  it.  I  have  also  learnt  how  the  delight  of  a  good
affection  in  heaven,  and  the  delight  of  an  evil  lust  in  hell,
is  sensibly  perceived,  but  it  would  take  too  long  to  describe
it  here.

305.  I  have  heard  many  new-comers  from  the  world
complaining  that  they  had  not  known  that  their  lot  in  the
other  life  would  be  according  to  the  affections  of  their  love ;
they  said  that  in  the  world  they  had  not  thought  of  those
affections,  still  less  of  their  delights,  because  they  loved
what  was  delightful  to  them;  and  that  they  had  beheved
that  every  one's  lot  would  be  according  to  the  thoughts  of
his  understanding,  especially  according  to  thoughts  inspired
by  piety  and  faith.  But  they  were  told  that  they  might  have
known,  if  they  had  wished,  that  an  evil  life  is  repugnant  to
heaven  and  displeasing  to  God,  but  is  agreeable  to  hell  and
delightful  to  the  devil ;  and  on  the  other  hand  that  a  good
life  is  agreeable  to  heaven  and  pleasing  to  God,  but  repugnant
to  hell  and  painful  to  the  devil;  consequently,  that  evil
is  essentially  stinking,  and  good  fragrant;  and  since  they
might  have  known  this  if  they  had  wished,  why,  it  was  asked,
had  they  not  shunned  evil  as  infernal  and  diabolical,  and
why  had  they  preferred  evils  merely  because  they  were
delightful?  And  as  they  had  now  learnt  that  evil  delights
smell  so  offensively,  they  might  also  know  that  those  who
exhale  such  stenches  could  not  enter  heaven.  After  this
reply  they  betook  themselves  to  those  who  were  in  similar
delights,  because  they  could  breathe  there  and  nowhere  else.

306.  From  the  idea  just  given  of  heaven  and  hell,  the
nature  of  man's  mind  should  be  evident;  for,  as  has  been
stated,  man's  mind  or  spirit  is  either  a  heaven  or  a  hell  in
miniature ;  that  is,  its  inner  constituents  are  simply  affections
and  thoughts  thence  derived,  distinguished  into  genera  and
species  as  into  greater  and  lesser  communities,  and  so  com-
bined as  to  act  as  one ;  it  may  also  be  seen  that  the  Lord
governs  them  in  the  same  way  as  He  governs  heaven  or  hell.


Divine  Providence  265

That  man  is  either  a  heaven  or  a  hell  in  miniature  may  be
seen  in  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell  (nos.  51-87).

307.  To  return  to  the  main  point,  that  the  Lord  governs
hell  by  opposites,  and  that  He  governs  in  hell  the  inner  but
not  the  outer  minds  of  the  wicked  while  they  are  still  in
this  world : —

i.  The  Lord  governs  hell  by  opposites.  It  was  shown
above  (nos.  288,  289),  that  the  angels  of  heaven  are  not  in
love  and  wisdom,  or  in  the  affection  of  good  and  thence  the
thought  of  truth,  from  themselves  but  from  the  Lord;  also
that  good  and  truth  flow  from  heaven  into  hell,  and  that
good  is  there  turned  into  evil  and  truth  into  falsity,  because
the  inner  minds  of  their  respective  inhabitants  are  turned
in  opposite  directions.  Now  since  all  things  in  hell  are
opposed  to  all  things  in  heaven,  it  follows  that  the  Lord
governs  hell  by  opposites.

ii.  The  Lord  governs  in  hell  the  evil  who  are  still  in  this
world.  This  is  because  man  as  to  his  spirit  is  in  the  spiritual
world,  and  in  some  community  there,  in  an  infernal  com-
munity if  he  is  wicked,  and  in  a  heavenly  one  if  he  is  good ;
for  man's  mind,  which  in  itself  is  spiritual,  must  of  necessity
be  among  spiritual  beings,  whose  society  also  he  enters  after
death ;  that  this  is  so  has  been  stated  and  explained  above.
But  a  man  is  not  there  in  the  same  manner  as  a  spirit  who
has  become  a  permanent  member  of  some  community;  for
man  is  always  in  a  state  capable  of  reformation ;  if  there-
fore he  is  evil,  he  is  transferred  by  the  Lord  from  one
society  of  hell  to  another,  according  to  his  life  and  the
changes  it  undergoes ;  but  if  he  allows  himself  to  be  reformed,
he  is  led  out  of  hell  and  raised  into  heaven,  and  there  also
he  is  transferred  from  one  society  to  another,  and  this
continues  until  his  death,  after  which  he  is  no  longer  trans-
ferred from  one  society  to  another,  because  he  is  then  no
longer  in  a  state  to  be  reformed,  but  remains  in  the  state
resulting  from  the  life  he  has  led.  And  therefore  when  a
man  dies  his  own  place  is  assigned  to  him.

iii.  The  Lord  in  this  way  governs  the  wicked,  while  still  in  this
world,  as  to  their  inner,  but  not  as  to  their  outer  minds.  The
Lord  governs  man's  inner  mind  as  has  just  been  stated;
but  his  outer  mind  He  governs  in  the  world  of  spirits,  which
is  intermediate  between  heaven  and  hell.  The  reason  is
that  man  is  for  the  most  part  different  outwardly  from  what


266  Divine  Providence

he  is  inwardly ;  for  outwardly  he  can  pretend  to  be  an  angel
of  light,  and  yet  be  inwardly  a  spirit  of  darkness;  for  this
reason  his  outer  mind  is  governed  in  one  way,  and  his  inner
mind  in  another.  So  long  as  he  is  in  this  world,  his  outer
mind  is  governed  in  the  world  of  spirits,  but  his  inner  mind
is  governed  either  in  heaven  or  in  hell ;  and  therefore  when
he  dies  he  comes  first  into  the  world  of  spirits,  and  is  there
still  invested  with  his  outer  mind ;  this  is  put  off  in  the  world
of  spirits,  and  then  he  is  transferred  to  his  own  place  to
which  he  is  permanently  assigned.  The  nature  of  the
world  of  spirits  is  described  in  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell
(nos.  421-535)-

The  divine  Providence  does  not  appropriate  either

EVIL    OR    GOOD    TO    ANY    ONE,    BUT    MAN'S   OWN    PRUDENCE
APPROPRIATES   BOTH

308.  Nearly  every  one  believes  that  man  thinks  and  wills
from  himself,  and  consequently  speaks  and  acts  from  him-
self. Who  can  believe  otherwise,  if  his  belief  is  founded
merely  on  his  own  observation  ?  For  the  appearance  is
so  vivid  that  it  does  not  differ  at  all  from  actually  thinking,
willing,  speaking  and  acting  from  oneself,  which  nevertheless
is  impossible.  In  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  it  is  shown
that  there  is  only  one  Life,  and  that  men  are  recipients  of
life ;  also  that  man's  will  is  the  receptacle  of  love,  and  his
understanding  the  receptacle  of  wisdom,  and  that  love  and
wisdom  are  that  only  Life.  It  is  also  there  shown  that  it
is  in  accordance  with  the  purpose  of  creation,  and  therefore
with  the  continual  working  of  the  divine  Providence,  that
this  life  should  appear  to  man  as  part  of  himself,  and  therefore
his  own,  but  that  this  is  an  appearance  in  order  that  man
may  be  able  to  receive  it.

It  is  also  shown  above  (nos.  288-294),  that  no  man  thinks
from  himself,  but  from  others,  nor  these  others  from  them-
selves, but  ail  from  the  Lord,  and  that  this  is  so  with  both
the  evil  and  the  good;  also  that  this  is  well  known  in  the
Christian  world,  especially  by  those  who  not  only  say  but
believe  that  all  good  and  truth  come  from  the  Lord,  as  also
all  wisdom,  and  therefore  faith  and  charity;  and  moreover
that  all  evil  and  falsity  come  from  the  devil  or  from  hell.

From  all  this  no  other  conclusion  can  be  drawn  than  that
everything  which  a  man  thinks  and  wills  flows  into  him;


Divine  Providence  267

and  since  all  speech  flows  from  thought  as  an  effect  from  its
cause,  and  in  like  manner  all  action  flows  from  the  will,  it
follows  that  everything  which  a  man  speaks  and  does  also
flows  into  him,  although  derivatively,  or  indirectly.  It
cannot  be  denied  that  everything  a  man  sees,  hears,  tastes
and  feels  flows  into  him.  Why  not  that  which  he  thinks
and  wills?  Can  there  be  any  other  difference  than  that
natural  things  flow  into  the  organs  of  the  external  or  bodily
senses,  and  that  spiritual  things  flow  into  the  organic  sub-
stances of  the  internal  senses  or  those  of  the  mind?  It
follows  that  as  the  organs  of  the  external  or  bodily  senses
are  receptacles  of  natural  objects,  so  the  organic  substances
of  the  internal  sense,  or  of  the  mind,  are  receptacles  of  spiritual
objects.  Such  being  the  state  of  man,  in  what  does  his  self-
hood consist,  unless  in  his  being  a  recipient  of  one  kind  or
another  ?  for  this  selfhood  is  nothing  but  a  mode  of  reception,
and  is  not  a  self-generated  life.  Yet  every  one  understands
by  the  term  selfhood  that  man  lives  from  himself,  and  there-
fore thinks  and  wills  from  himself ;  but  that  such  selfhood
is  not  possessed  by  man,  indeed  that  it  could  not  exist  in
any  man,  follows  from  what  was  stated  above.

309.  But  I  will  relate  what  I  have  heard  from  some  in  the
spiritual  world.  They  were  people  who  believed  that  every-
thing depended  on  their  own  prudence,  and  nothing  on  the
divine  Providence.  I  said,  "  A  man  has  no  selfhood,  unless
you  define  selfhood  as  being  a  subject,  or  organ,  or  form  of
one  kind  or  another ;  but  as  a  selfhood  of  this  kind  is  merely
a  mode  of  reception,  this  is  not  what  you  mean.  No  man
has  any  selfhood  in  the  common  acceptation  of  the  term."
These  men,  who  ascribed  everything  to  their  own  prudence,
and  who  might  be  described  as  lords  of  themselves  in  their
own  estimation,  became  so  enraged  that  a  flame  appeared  to
issue  from  their  nostrils,  and  they  exclaimed,  "  What  you
say  is  paradoxical  and  insane  !  Would  not  a  man  in  that
case  be  mere  nothing  and  emptiness,  or  an  idea  and  a  fantasy,
or  a  graven  image  or  a  statue?  "  But  I  could  only  reply
that  it  is  paradoxical  and  insane  to  believe  that  man  produces
his  own  life,  and  that  wisdom  and  prudence  do  not  flow  from
God  but  originate  in  man,  as  also  the  good  of  charity  and  the
truth  of  faith.  To  attribute  the  latter  to  oneself  is  considered
insane  by  every  wise  man,  and  consequently  it  is  paradoxical ;
and,  moreover,  those  who  do  so  are  like  men  occupying  the


268  Divine  Providence

house  and  property  of  another,  who  persuade  themselves  that
they  are  the  owners;  or  hke  managers  and  stewards  who
beUeve  everything  belonging  to  their  lord  to  be  theirs ;  or
like  servants  to  whom  their  lord  has  given  talents  or  pounds
to  trade  with,  and  who  have  rendered  no  account,  but  have
kept  them  as  their  own  and  thus  acted  as  thieves.  It  may  be
said  of  all  these  that  they  are  insane,  indeed,  that  they  are
mere  nothing,  emptiness  and  dreams,  because  they  do  not
accept  from  the  Lord  that  good  and  truth  which  are  the  very
essence  of  life.  Such  m.en  therefore  are  called  "  dead,"  and
"  nothing  "  and  "  emptiness  "  (Isaiah  xl.  17,  23);  and  else-
where "  makers  of  an  image,"  "  graven  images "  and
"  statues."  But  more  of  this  in  the  following  series  of  articles.

I.  The  nature  of  one's  own  prudence,  and  of  prudence  not
one's  own.

II.  Man  by  his  own  prudence  convinces  himself,  and  con-
firms himself  in  the  belief,  that  all  good  and  truth  are  from
and  in  himself,  and  likewise  all  evil  and  falsity.

III.  Everything  of  which  a  man  has  become  convinced,
and  in  which  he  has  confirmed  himself,  remains  in  him  as
part  of  his  selfhood.

IV.  If  man  believed,  as  is  the  fact,  that  all  good  and
truth  come  from  the  Lord,  and  all  evil  and  falsity  from  hell,
he  would  not  appropriate  good  to  himself  and  claim  merit
on  account  of  it,  nor  would  he  appropriate  evil  to  himself
and  incur  guilt  in  consequence.

310.  I.  The  nature  of  one's  own  prudence  and  of  prudence
not  one's  own.  Those  believe  only  in  their  own  prudence  who
take  appearances  for  realities  and  regard  them  as  truths,
especially  the  appearance  that  one's  own  prudence  is  every-
thing and  the  divine  Providence  nothing,  unless  it  be  some-
thing merely  universal  which,  as  was  shown  above,  could
not  exist  without  the  particulars  of  which  it  is  composed.
They  are  also  the  victims  of  fallacy,  for  every  appearance
believed  to  be  a  truth  becomes  a  fallacy ;  and  to  the  extent
that  they  confirm  themselves  in  fallacies  they  become  mate-
rialists and  believe  nothing  but  what  they  can  perceive  by
some  bodily  sense,  chiefly  by  the  sight,  because  this  sense
especially  acts  as  one  with  thought.  They  finally  become
sensual,  and  if  they  acquire  a  confirmed  belief  in  nature
rather  than  in  God,  they  close  their  inner  minds,  and  draw
as  it  were  a  veil  over  them,  and  afterwards  think  of  what  is


Divine  Providence  269

beneath  the  veil,  but  of  nothing  that  is  above  it.    These
sensual  men  were  called  by  the  ancients  "  serpents  of  the
tree  of  knowledge/'  and  in  the  spiritual  world  it  is  said  of
them  that  in  the  degree  that  they  confirm  themselves  in
their  belief,  they  close  up  their  inner  minds  even  to  the  nose ;
for  the  nose  signifies  the  perception  of  truth,  and  of  this
they  have  none.     Their  character  shall  now  be  explained.
They  are  more  crafty  and  subtle  than  others,  and  are  skilful
reasoners ;    and  they  call  craftiness  and  subtlety  intelligence
and  wisdom,  knowing  no  better.     They  regard  all  others
as  simple  and  stupid,  especially  those  who  worship  God,
and  acknowledge  the  divine  Providence.     As  to  the  inner
principles  of  their  minds,  of  which  they  know  little,  they  are
like  the  so-called  Machiavellians  who  regard  murder,  adultery,
theft  and  false  witness  as  intrinsically  of  no  account;    and
if  they  argue  against  them,  it  is  solely  from  prudence,  lest
their  true  character  should  appear.     Of  man's  life  in  the
world  they  think  only  that  it  resembles  that  of  a  beast;
and  of  man's  life  after  death,  that  it  is,  as  it  were,  a  vital
exhalation  which,  rising  out  of  the  corpse  or  the  grave,  sinks
down  again  and  so  dies.     From  this  arises  the  insane  idea
that  spirits  and  angels  are  nothing  but  air,  and  in  those  who
have  been  taught  to  believe  in  a  future  life,  that  the  souls
of  men  are  of  a  similar  nature,  unable  to  see,  hear  or  speak,
and  therefore  blind,  deaf  and  dumb,  and  only  able  to  think
in  the  particle  of  air  of  which  they  consist.     They  say,  "  How
can  the  soul  be  anything  else  ?     Have  not  the  external  senses
died   with   the   body  ?  "     They   believe   that   they   cannot
possess  these  senses  again  until  the  soul  is  re-united  to  the
body ;    and  as  they  had  a  merely  sensual,  and  not  a  spiritual
idea  of  the  state  of  the  soul  after  death,  they  established
a  belief  in  this  state ;    otherwise  the  belief  in  eternal  life  would
have  perished.     They  especially  confirm  themselves  in  the
love  of  self,  calling  it  the  fire  of  life,  and  a  spur  to  public
service.     And  being  of  this  character  they  worship  themselves,
and  their  thoughts,  being  fallacies  and  derived  from  fallacies,
are   images   of   falsity;    and   because  they   favour   impure
delights  they  are  satans  and  devils,  those  being  called  satans
who  confirm  themselves  in  evil  lusts,  and  those  devils  who
live  in  them.     I  have  also  been  instructed  as  to  the  character
of  the  most  cunning  sensual  men.     Their  hell  is  deep  down
at  the  back  and  they  wish  to  be  invisible ;    and  therefore  they


270  Divine  Providence

appear  there  flying  about  like  spectres,  which  are  the  forms
of  their  fantasies,  and  they  are  called  Genii.  Some  of  them
were  once  allowed  to  come  out  of  that  hell,  so  that  I  might
know  their  character;  they  at  once  applied  themselves  to
my  neck  beneath  the  occiput,  and  so  entered  into  my  affec-
tions, not  wishing  to  enter  my  thoughts,  which  they  dexter-
ously avoided;  and  they  changed  my  affections  one  after
another  with  the  intention  of  converting  them  insensibly
into  their  opposites,  or  into  evil  lusts;  and  as  they  did  not
directly  affect  my  thoughts,  they  would  have  altered  and
converted  them  without  my  knowledge,  if  the  Lord  had  not
prevented  this.  Such  is  the  future  state  of  those  who  in  the
world  have  not  believed  that  there  is  any  such  thing  as  divine
Providence,  and  who  seek  out  nothing  in  others  but  their
lusts  and  desires,  and  thus  lead  them  on  until  they  have
entire  control  over  them;  and  because  they  do  this  so
secretly  and  cunningly  that  the  others  know  nothing  about  it,
and  after  death  they  stand  revealed  in  their  true  character,
therefore  as  soon  as  they  enter  the  spiritual  world  they  are
cast  down  to  their  own  hell.  Seen  in  the  light  of  heaven,
they  appear  to  have  no  nose;  and,  what  is  remarkable,
although  they  are  so  cunning  they  are  more  sensual  than  the
rest.  As  the  ancients  called  a  sensual  man  a  serpent,  and
as  such  a  man  is  shrewd  and  cunning,  and  more  skilful  as  a
reasoner  than  others,  it  is  written,  "  Now  the  serpent  was
more  subtle  than  any  beast  of  the  field  "  (Gen.  iii.  i);  and
the  Lord  says  :  "  Be  ye  therefore  prudent  as  serpents  and
simple  as  doves  "  (Matt.  x.  16);  and  also  the  dragon,  which
is  likewise  called  the  old  serpent,  the  devil,  and  satan,  is
described  as  having  "  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  seven
crowns  upon  his  heads  "  (Apoc.  xii.  3,  9).  By  the  seven
heads  is  signified  cunning,  by  the  ten  horns  the  power  of
persuading  by  false  reasoning,  and  by  the  seven  crowns  the
profanation  of  the  holy  things  of  the  Word  and  the  Church.
311.  From  this  description  of  man's  own  prudence  and
of  those  who  believe  in  it,  the  character  may  be  understood
of  prudence  not  one's  own,  and  the  nature  of  those  who  rely
upon  it ;  namely,  that  prudence  not  one's  own  is  the  prudence
of  those  who  do  not  confirm  themselves  in  the  belief  that
intelligence  and  wisdom  are  from  man ;  for  they  say,  "  How
can  one  be  wise  from  oneself,  and  how  can  one  do  good  from
oneself  ?  "     And  when  they  say  this,  they  see  in  themselves


Divine  Providence  271

that  it  is  so,  for  they  think  inwardly ;  and  they  behave  that
others  think  so  too,  especially  the  learned,  because  they  do
not  know  that  thought  can  be  merely  external.  They  are
not  the  victims  of  fallacies  through  the  confirmation  of  appear-
ances, and  therefore  they  know  and  perceive  that  murder,
adultery,  theft,  and  false  witness  are  sins,  and  shun  them  for
that  reason ;  they  know  also  that  wickedness  is  not  wisdom,
and  that  cunning  is  not  intelligence,  and  when  they  hear
ingenious  reasoning  based  upon  fallacies,  they  are  astonished
and  secretly  amused.  The  reason  is  that  there  is  no  veil
interposed  between  their  inner  and  outer  minds,  or  between
the  spiritual  and  natural  things  of  their  minds,  as  there  is
with  the  sensual ;  and  therefore  they  receive  an  influx  from
heaven  which  shows  them  the  inward  nature  of  such  reasoning.
They  speak  more  simply  and  sincerely  than  others,  and  make
wisdom  a  matter  of  life,  not  of  words.  They  are  like  lambj
and  sheep,  while  those  who  rely  on  their  own  prudence  are
like  wolves  and  foxes ;  and  they  are  like  those  who  live  in  a
house,  and  see  heaven  through  the  windows,  while  those
who  believe  in  their  own  prudence  are  like  men  living  in
the  basement  of  a  house,  who  through  the  windows  see  only
what  is  below  the  level  of  the  ground ;  and  they  are  like  those
who  stand  on  a  mountain,  and  see  those  who  believe  in  their
own  prudence  like  men  wandering  in  valleys  and  forests.
From  these  considerations  it  should  be  evident  that  prudence
not  one's  own  is  prudence  from  the  Lord,  outwardly  resem-
bling one's  own  prudence,  but  wholly  unlike  it  inwardly.
Prudence  not  one's  own,  when  exhibited  in  its  internal
state  in  the  spiritual  world,  has  the  appearance  of  a  man,
but  one's  own  prudence  is  seen  as  an  image  which  seems  to  live
only  because  of  the  fact  that  those  who  attribute  everything
to  their  own  prudence  still  possess  rationality  and  liberty,
or  the  faculty  of  understanding  and  willing,  and  therefore
of  speaking  and  acting,  and  that  by  means  of  those  faculties
they  can  look  like  men.  They  are  images  of  this  kind  because
evils  and  falsities  are  dead,  but  goods  and  truths  are  alive;
and  because  they  know  this  from  their  rationality  (for  if
they  did  not  know  it  they  would  not  counterfeit  goodness
and  truth),  they  have  a  semblance  of  human  life.  Who  does
not  know  that  a  man  is  such  as  he  is  inwardly,  consequently
that  he  is  truly  a  man  who  is  inwardly  what  he  desires  to  seem
outwardly,  and  that  he  is  a  mere  image  who  is  a  man  outwardly


272  Divine  Providence

only  and  not  inwardly?  Do  not  only  speak,  but  think
also  in  favour  of  God,  religion,  justice,  and  sincerity,  and  you
will  be  a  man ;  and  then  the  divine  Providence  will  be  your
prudence,  and  you  will  see  in  others  that  one's  own  prudence
is  insanity.

312.  II.  Man  by  his  own  prudence  convinces  himself,  and
con-firms  himself  in  the  belief,  that  all  good  and  truth  are  from
and  in  himself,  and  likewise  all  evil  and  falsity.  Let  us  employ
an  argument  drawn  from  the  analogy  between  natural  good
and  truth,  and  spiritual  good  and  truth.  What  are  truth  and
good  as  regards  the  sight  of  the  eye?  Is  not  truth  what
is  called  beautiful,  and  good  what  is  called  delightful  ?  For
delight  is  felt  in  seeing  beautiful  things.  What  are  truth
and  good  as  regards  hearing?  Is  not  truth  what  is  called
harmonious,  and  good  what  is  called  charming  ?  For  charm
is  felt  in  hearing  harmonious  sounds.  So  also  with  the  other
senses.  From  this  the  character  of  natural  truth  and  good  is
evident.  Now  consider  what  spiritual  truth  and  good  are.  Is
spiritual  truth  anything  but  the  beautiful  and  harmonious
in  spiritual  things  and  objects  ?  And  is  spiritual  good  any-
thing but  delight  and  pleasure  resulting  from  the  perception
of  their  beauty  or  harmony?  Consider  now  whether  any-
thing can  be  said  of  the  one  which  cannot  be  said  of  the  other,
or  of  the  spiritual  which  cannot  be  said  of  the  natural.
Of  the  natural  we  say  that  beauty  and  delight  flow  into  the
eye  from  objects,  and  that  harmony  and  charm  flow  into  the
ear  from  musical  instruments.  What  is  there  different
in  the  organic  substances  of  the  mind  ?  We  say  of  the  organic
substances  of  the  mind  that  the  things  they  perceive  are  in
them,  and  of  the  natural  things,  or  senses  of  the  body,  that
the  things  they  perceive  flow  into  them.  But  if  it  is  asked
why  we  say  that  the  natural  objects  flow  in,  there  can  be
no  other  reply  than  that  it  is  on  account  of  their  distance.
But  why  is  it  said  that  the  objects  perceived  are  in  the  organic
substances  of  the  mind  ?  There  can  be  no  other  reply  than
that  it  is  because  no  distance  is  observed.  It  follows  then
that  it  is  the  appearance  of  distance  which  causes  a  different
belief  concerning  what  man  thinks  and  perceives,  from  that
concerning  what  he  sees  and  hears.  But  this  distinction
falls  to  the  ground  when  it  is  known,  that  the  spiritual  is
not  in  space  as  the  natural  is.  Think  of  the  sun  and  the  moon,
or  of  Rome  and  Constantinople ;  are  they  not  in  the  thought


Divine  Providence  273

apart  from  distance,  provided  this  thought  is  not  associated
with  the  actual  sensations  of  sight  and  hearing?  Why
then  persuade  yourself  that  because  there  appears  no  distance
in  the  thought,  good  and  truth,  and  also  evil  and  falsity,
exist  in  the  mind  without  flowing  into  it  ?  To  this  I  will  add
a  common  experience  in  the  spiritual  world.  One  spirit  can
infuse  his  thoughts  and  affections  into  another  spirit,  and
the  latter  may  suppose  that  what  is  infused  is  his  own  thought
and  affection;  this  is  called  thinking  from  another  and
thinking  in  another.  I  have  seen  this  a  thousand  times,
and  I  have  also  done  it  frequently  myself,  and  yet  the  appear-
ance of  distance  was  quite  distinct.  But  as  soon  as  any  one
knew  that  his  thoughts  and  affections  were  infused  by  another
he  became  indignant  and  turned  away,  acknowledging
however  that  in  the  internal  sight  or  thought  there  is  no
sense  of  distance  unless  it  is  revealed  by  the  external  sight  of
the  eye,^  and  that  the  latter  fact  has  given  rise  to  the  belief
that  the  sensation  comes  from  without.  To  this  I  will
add  something  from  my  everyday  experience.  Evil  spirits
have  very  often  injected  into  my  thought  evils  and  falsities,
which  appeared  to  me  as  if  in  and  from  myself,  or  as  if  I
thought  them  myself;  but  knowing  that  they  were  evils
and  falsities,  I  inquired  who  had  injected  them,  and  those
who  had  done  so  were  detected  and  driven  away ;  they  had
been  at  a  very  great  distance  from  me.  From  this  it  should
be  evident  that  all  evil  with  its  falsity  flows  in  from  hell,
and  all  good  with  its  truth  flows  in  from  the  Lord,  and  that
both  seem  to  belong  to  man.

313.  The  character  of  those  who  believe  in  their  own
prudence,  and  of  those  who  believe  in  prudence  not  their
own,  and  thus  believe  in  the  divine  Providence,  is  described
in  the  Word  by  Adam  and  his  wife  Eve  in  the  garden  of
Eden,  where  there  were  two  trees,  one  of  life  and  the  other
of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and  by  their  eating  of
this  latter  tree.  That  by  Adam  and  his  wife  Eve,  in  the
internal  or  spiritual  sense,  is  signified  and  described  the
Most  Ancient  Church  of  the  Lord  on  this  earth,  which  was
more  noble  and  heavenly  than  the  succeeding  Churches,
may  be  seen  above  (no.  241).  The  signification  of  the  other
things  is  as  follows  :  The  Garden  of  Eden  denotes  the  wisdom
of  the  men  of  that  Church ;  the  tree  of  life,  the  Lord  as  to  His
^  Reading  in  visu  externo  [Tr.].


274  Divine  Providence

divine  Providence ;  and  the  tree  of  knowledge,  man  as  to  his
own  prudence;  the  serpent  signifies  the  sensual  part  or
selfhood  of  man,  which  intrinsically  is  the  love  of  self  and
the  pride  of  his  own  intelligence,  thus  the  devU  and  satan;
eating  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  signifies  the  appropriation
of  good  and  truth,  not  as  coming  from  the  Lord  and  therefore
being  the  Lord's,  but  as  coming  from  man  and  therefore
being  man's  own.  And  because  good  and  truth  constitute
the  presence  of  the  Divine  with  man,  for  good  means  every-
thing of  love,  and  truth  everything  of  wisdom — therefore,
if  man  claims  these  as  his  own,  he  cannot  but  believe  that  he
is  as  God.  This  is  why  the  serpent  said,  "  In  the  day  ye
eat  thereof,  your  eyes  shall  be  opened  and  ye  shall  be  as
God,  knowing  good  and  evil  "  (Gen.  iii.  5).  This  is  the
belief  of  the  inhabitants  of  hell,  who  are  in  the  love  of  self
and  consequently  in  the  pride  of  their  own  intelligence.
The  condemnation  of  the  serpent  signifies  the  condemnation
of  love  and  intelligence  claimed  as  one's  own ;  the  condemna-
tion of  Eve  signifies  that  of  the  selfhood  of  the  will  and  Adam's
condemnation  that  of  the  selfhood  of  the  understanding;
the  thorn  and  the  thistle  which  the  earth  would  bring  forth
for  him  signify  mere  falsity  and  evil;  the  expulsion  from
the  garden  signifies  the  deprivation  of  wisdom ;  the  guarding
of  the  way  to  the  tree  of  life,  the  Lord's  care  lest  the  holy
things  of  the  Word  and  the  Church  should  be  violated ;  the
fig-leaves  with  which  they  covered  their  nakedness  signify
moral  truths  by  which  their  love  and  pride  were  veiled;
and  the  coats  of  skin  with  which  they  were  afterwards  clothed
signify  the  appearances  of  truth  which  alone  they  possessed.
This  is  the  spiritual  meaning  of  those  things.  Let  any  one
who  chooses  abide  in  the  sense  of  the  letter,  but  let  him  know
that  it  is  so  understood  in  heaven.

314.  The  character  of  those  who  are  infatuated  by  their
own  intelligence  should  be  evident  from  their  notions  about
matters  requiring  interior  judgment,  such  as  influx,  thought
and  life.

Of  influx  they  think  inversely,  supposing  that  the  sight
of  the  eye  flows  into  the  internal  sight  of  the  mind  or  under-
standing, and  that  the  hearing  of  the  ear  flows  into  the  internal
hearing,  which  also  is  the  understanding;  they  do  not  see
that  the  understanding  from  the  will  flows  into  the  eye  and
ear,  and  not  only  produces  those  senses,  but  also  uses  them


Divine  Providence  275

as  its  instruments  in  the  natural  world.  But  as  this  is  not  in
accordance  with  appearances,  they  do  not  understand  the
simple  statement  that  the  natural  does  not  flow  into  the
spiritual,  but  that  the  spiritual  flows  into  the  natural ;  but
they  still  say,  "  What  is  the  spiritual  but  a  purer  natural  ?  Is
it  not  evident  that  if  the  eye  sees  anything  beautiful,  or
the  ear  hears  anything  harmonious,  the  mind,  or  the  under-
standing and  the  will,  is  delighted  ?  "  They  do  not  know
that  the  eye  does  not  see  of  itself,  nor  the  tongue  taste  of
itself,  nor  the  nose  smell  of  itself,  nor  the  skin  feel  of  itself,
but  that  it  is  man's  mind  or  spirit  which  perceives  things  by
the  senses,  and  is  thereby  affected  according  to  its  individual
character ;  and  that  man's  mind  or  spirit  does  not  feel  these
things  of  itself,  but  from  the  Lord,  and  that  to  think  other-
wise is  to  think  from  appearances  and,  if  these  are  confirmed,
from  fallacies.

Of  thought  they  say,  that  it  is  some  modification  of  the
air,  varied  according  to  its  objects  and  enlarged  according
to  culture,  thus  that  ideas  are  appearances  like  meteors
seen  in  the  air ;  and  that  the  memory  is  the  tablet  on  which
thoughts  are  impressed,  not  knowing  that  thoughts  reside
in  substances  purely  organic,  just  as  the  sight  and  the  hearing
reside  in  natural  substances.  Let  them  examine  the  brain
and  they  will  see  that  it  is  full  of  such  substances;  injure
them,  and  the  man  will  become  delirious;  destroy  them
and  he  will  die.  But  the  nature  of  thought  and  memory,
may  be  seen  above  (no.  279  ad  -fin.).

As  regards  life  their  sole  idea  is  that  it  is  a  certain  activity
of  nature  which  makes  itself  felt  in  various  ways,  as  a  living
body  moves  itself  organically.  If  you  object  that  this  makes
nature  to  be  ahve,  they  deny  this,  but  admit  that  nature
gives  life.  If  you  say,  "  Is  not  life  then  dissipated  when  the
body  dies  ?  "  they  answer,  "  Life  remains  in  a  particle  of
air  called  the  soul."  If  you  say,  "What  is  God  then?
Is  He  Life  itself  or  not  ?  "  they  are  silent  and  do  not  wish  to
disclose  what  they  think.  If  you  say,  "  Will  you  not  allow
that  divine  Love  and  Wisdom  are  Life  itself?  "  they  answer,
"  What  is  love  and  what  is  wisdom  ?  "  For  their  fallacies
prevent  them  from  knowing  what  they  are,  or  what  God  is.
These  things  are  mentioned  to  show  how  man  is  infatuated
by  his  own  prudence,  because  he  draws  all  conclusions  from
appearances,  and  hence  from  fallacies.


276


Divine  Providence


316.^  The  reason  why  man's  own  prudence  induces  and
confirms  the  idea  that  all  good  and  truth  come  from  man,
and  are  inherent  in  man,  is  that  man's  own  prudence  is  his
intellectual  selfhood  flowing  from  the  love  of  self,  which  is
the  selfhood  of  his  will ;  and  selfhood  cannot  help  claiming  all
things  as  its  own,  for  it  cannot  be  raised  above  this  idea.  AH
who  are  led  by  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  are  raised
out  of  their  selfhood,  and  then  they  see  that  all  good  and
truth  come  from  the  Lord ;  indeed  they  also  see  that  whatever
man  receives  from  the  Lord  is  always  the  Lord's,  and  never
his  own.  He  who  thinks  otherwise  is  like  one  who  holds  his
master's  goods  in  trust,  and  claims  them  for  himself,  or
appropriates  them;  he  is  not  a  steward  but  a  thief;  and  be-
cause the  selfhood  of  man  is  nothing  but  evil,  he  also  immerses
those  gifts  in  his  evil,  whereby  they  are  destroyed  like  pearls
cast  into  dung  or  vinegar.

317.  III.  Everything  of  which  a  man  has  become  convinced,
and  in  which  he  has  confirmed  himself,  remains  in  him  as
■part  of  his  selfhood.  It  is  believed  by  many  tha.t  no  truth
can  be  seen  by  man  unless  it  be  proved,  but  this  is  not  true.
In  the  civil  and  economical  affairs  of  a  kingdom  or  a  republic,
what  is  useful  and  good  cannot  be  seen  without  a  knowledge
of  many  statutes  and  ordinances ;  nor  can  what  is  useful  or
good  in  judicial  matters,  unless  the  laws  are  known;  nor  in
the  study  of  nature,  for  example,  in  physics,  chemistry,
anatomy,  mechanics  and  so  on,  unless  a  man  has  been  in-
structed in  the  sciences.  But  in  things  purely  rational,
moral  and  spiritual,  truths  appear  in  their  own  proper  light,
if  only  a  sound  education  has  made  a  man  somewhat  rational,
moral  and  spiritual.  The  reason  is  that  every  man  as  to  his
spirit  with  which  he  thinks,  is  in  the  spiritual  world  and
among  its  inhabitants ;  he  is  consequently  in  spiritual  light
which  illuminates  and,  as  it  were,  directs  his  inner  under-
standing. For  spiritual  light  is  in  its  essence  the  divine
Truth  of  the  Lord's  divine  Wisdom.  This  is  why  a  man  is
able  to  think  analytically,  to  draw  conclusions  as  to  what  is
just  and  right  in  judicial  affairs,  to  see  what  is  honourable
in  moral  life  and  good  in  spiritual  life,  and  also  to  under-
stand many  truths,  which  are  not  obscured  except  by  the
confirmation  of  falsities.  Man  sees  these  things  in  much  the
same  way  as  he  sees  another's  disposition  in  his  face,  and
1  The  numbering  here  follows  the  original.


Divine  Providence  277

perceives  his  affections  from  the  tone  of  his  voice,  without
any  other  knowledge  than  what  is  innate  in  every  one.  Why
should  not  a  man  in  some  measure  see  by  influx  from  the
spiritual  world  the  inner  realities  of  his  lite,  which  are  spiritual
and  moral,  when  there  is  no  animal  that  does  not  by
such  influx  know  its  own  natural  needs  ?  A  bird  knows  how
to  build  its  nest,  lay  its  eggs,  hatch  its  young,  and  recognise
its  food;  not  to  mention  other  wonderful  things,  which  we
attribute  to  instinct.

318.  We  will  now  explain  in  order,  how  man's  state  is
changed  by  confirmations,  and  his  resulting  convictions.

i.  There  is  nothing  that  cannot  be  confirmed,  and  falsity
more  easily  than  truth.

ii.  When  falsity  is  confirmed,  truth  is  no  longer  seen;  but
when  truth  is  confirmed,  falsity  becomes  manifest.

iii.  To  be  able  to  confirm  whatever  one  pleases  is  not
intelligence,  but  only  ingenuity,  which  may  exist  even  in  the
worst  men.

iv.  There  is  a  confirmation  which  exists  in  the  understand-
ing but  not  in  the  will ;  but  all  confirmation  in  the  will  exists
also  in  the  understanding.

V.  The  confirmation  of  evil  that  exists  both  in  the  will  and
the  understanding,  causes  man  to  believe  that  everything
depends  on  his  own  prudence  and  nothing  on  the  divine
Providence ;  but  intellectual  confirmation  alone  does  not  do
this.

vi.  Ever>1:hing  confirmed  both  by  the  will  and  the  under-
standing remains  for  ever,  but  what  is  confirmed  by  the
understanding  only  does  not  so  remain.

i.  There  is  nothing  that  cannot  be  confirmed,  and  falsity  more
easily  than  truth.  What  cannot  be  confirmed,  seeing  that
atheists  are  convinced  that  God  is  not  the  creator  of  the
universe,  but  that  nature  creates  herself;  that  religion  is
only  a  restraint  for  simple  and  common  people ;  that  man  is
like  a  beast  and  dies  like  one ;  and  some  are  convinced  that
adultery,  secret  theft,  fraud  and  deceitful  plots  are  allowable,
that  cunning  is  intelligence,  and  wickedness  wisdom  ?  Who
does  not  confirm  his  own  heresy?  Are  there  not  volumes
filled  with  proofs  of  the  two  heresies  that  reign  in  the  Christian
world  ?  Invent  ten  heresies,  even  abstruse  ones,  and  tell  a
clever  man  to  confirm  them  and  he  will  prove  them  all.  If
you  afterwards  consider  them  only  in  the  light  of    these


278


Divine  Providence


proofs,  will  you  not  see  falsities  as  truths  ?  As  all  falsity
shines  in  the  natural  mind,  with  its  appearances  and  fallacies,
and  truth  only  shines  in  the  spiritual  mind,  it  is  evident  that
falsity  can  be  confirmed  more  easily  than  truth.  In  order  to
show  that  every  falsity  and  evil  can  be  confirmed  until  the
falsity  appears  as  truth  and  the  evil  as  good,  take  an  example ;
let  the  problem  be  to  show  that  light  is  darkness  and  dark-
ness light.  May  it  not  be  said,  "What  is  light  in  itself?
Is  it  not  merely  something  which  manifests  itself  in  the  eye
according  to  its  state  ?  What  is  light  to  a  closed  eye  ?  Do
not  the  eyes  of  bats  and  owls  see  light  as  darkness  and  dark-
ness as  light  ?  I  have  heard  of  some  men  who  had  similar
vision,  and  of  the  infernals  that  although  they  are  in  dark-
ness they  still  see  each  other.  Are  not  man's  dreams  at  night
seen  in  the  light  ?  And  therefore  is  not  darkness  light  and
light  darkness  ?  "  But  it  may  be  answered,  "  What  is  all
this  ?  Light  is  light,  as  truth  is  truth ;  and  darkness  is  dark-
ness, as  falsity  is  falsity."  Take  another  example ;  let  the
problem  be  to  prove  that  a  raven  is  white.  May  it  not  be
said,  "  Its  blackness  is  only  a  shadow  which  is  not  its  real
colour?  Its  feathers  are  inwardly  white,  so  is  its  body,
and  these  are  the  substances  of  which  the  raven  consists.
Since  its  blackness  is  merely  a  shadow,  the  raven  grows
white  when  it  becomes  old;  such  ravens  have  been  seen.
What  is  black  in  itself  but  white  ?  Pulverise  black  glass,  and
you  will  see  that  the  powder  is  white.  And  therefore  when
you  say  the  raven  is  black,  you  speak  from  the  shadow,  and
not  from  the  reality."  But  the  reply  may  be,  "  What  is  all
this  ?  According  to  such  reasoning  all  birds  might  be  called
white."  These  things,  although  contrary  to  sound  reason,
have  been  mentioned  to  show  that  falsity  directly  opposed
to  truth  and  evil  directly  opposed  to  good  can  be  confirmed,
ii.  When  falsity  is  confirmed,  truth  is  no  longer  seen  ;  hut
when  truth  is  confirmed,  falsity  becomes  manifest.  All  falsity
is  in  darkness  and  all  truth  in  light ;  and  in  darkness  nothing
is  seen,  but  must  be  handled  in  order  to  be  known ;  in  light
it  is  otherwise.  This  is  why  in  the  Word  falsities  are  called
darkness,  and  those  who  are  in  falsities  are  said  to  walk  in
darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death ;  and  on  the  other  hand,
truths  in  the  Word  are  called  light  and  those  who  are  in  truths
are  said  to  walk  in  the  light  and  are  called  sons  of  light.
Many  things   show   that  when   falsity  has   been   confirmed


Divine  Providence  279

truth  is  no  longer  seen,  but  that  when  truth  is  confirmed
falsity  becomes  manifest.  For  example,  who  could  see  any
spiritual  truth  unless  the  Word  taught  it  ?  Would  there  not
be  merely  thick  darkness  that  could  only  be  dispelled  by  the
light  of  the  Word,  and  only  in  one  wiUing  to  be  enlightened  ?
What  heretic  can  see  his  falsities  unless  he  admits  the  genuine
truth  of  the  Church  ?  He  does  not  see  them  before.  I  have
spoken  with  those  who  have  confirmed  themselves  in  faith
without  charity,  and  when  asked  whether  they  had  noticed
the  many  passages  in  the  Word  relating  to  love  and  charity,
works  and  deeds,  keeping  the  commandments,  and  stating
that  he  is  blessed  and  wise  who  does  them  and  foolish  who
does  them  not,  they  said  that  whilst  reading  those  passages
they  regarded  them  merely  as  referring  to  faith,  and  so  they
passed  them  by  as  it  were  with  their  eyes  shut.  Those  who
have  confirmed  themselves  in  falsities  are  like  men  looking
at  marks  on  a  wall  that  in  the  shade  of  evening  look  to
them  hke  a  horseman  or  a  man,  which  illusion  is  dispelled  by
the  approach  of  day.  Who  can  realise  the  spiritual  unclean-
ness  of  adultery  but  one  who  is  in  the  spiritual  cleanness  of
chastity  ?  Who  can  realise  the  cruelty  of  revenge  but  one
whose  goodness  flows  from  love  to  the  neighbour  ?  What
adulterer,  or  man  thirsting  for  revenge,  does  not  sneer  at
those  who  call  such  delights  infernal,  and  who  on  the  other
hand  call  the  delights  of  marriage  love  and  love  for  the
neighbour  heavenly  ?    And  so  on.

iii.  To  be  able  to  confirm  whatever  one  pleases  is  not  intelli-
gence but  only  ingenuity ,  which  may  exist  even  in  the  worst  men.
There  are  some  very  clever  reasoners  who  know  nothing  of
truth,  and  yet  can  confirm  both  truth  and  falsity ;  and  some
of  them  say,  "  What  is  truth  ?  Is  there  any  such  thing  ?  Is
not  that  truth  which  I  consider  true  ?  "  Such  men  as  these  are
believed  in  the  world  to  be  intelligent ;  yet  they  are  but
plasterers  of  the  wall.  Those  only  are  intelligent  who  perceive
truth  to  be  truth,  and  confirm  it  by  other  truths  which
continually  enter  their  minds.  But  little  difference  can  be  seen
between  these  two  classes,  because  no  distinction  can  be  seen
between  the  light  of  confirmation  and  the  light  of  the  percep-
tion of  truth ;  for  those  who  are  in  the  light  of  confirmation
think  they  are  in  the  light  of  the  perception  of  truth ;  the
difference  between  them  is  like  that  between  illusive  light  and
true  light ;  and  illusive  light  in  the  spiritual  world  is  of  such


28o  Divine  Providence

a  nature  that  it  turns  the  inflowing  true  Hght  into  darkness.
There  is  an  illusive  light  of  this  kind  with  many  in  hell,  who
when  sent  forth  into  true  light  see  nothing  at  all.  From
these  considerations  it  is  evident,  that  to  be  able  to  confirm
whatever  one  pleases  is  merely  ingenuity,  and  may  exist
even  in  the  worst  men.

iv.  There  is  a  confirmation  which  exists  in  the  understanding
but  not  in  the  will;  but  all  confirmation  in  the  will  exists
also  in  the  understanding.  Let  this  be  illustrated  by  examples.
Those  who  confirm  faith  separate  from  charity  and  yet  live
a  life  of  charity,  and  in  general  those  who  confirm  false
doctrine  and  yet  do  not  live  according  to  it,  are  those  who
confirm  it  in  the  understanding  but  not  in  the  will.  But
those  who  confirm  false  doctrine  and  live  according  to  it,
confirm  it  both  in  the  will  and  the  understanding.  The
reason  is  that  the  understanding  does  not  flow  into  the  will,
but  the  will  into  the  understanding.  This  also  shows  the
nature  of  the  falsity  of  evil,  and  of  falsity  not  of  evil.  Falsity
not  of  evil  can  be  allied  with  good,  while  the  falsity  of  evil
cannot,  the  reason  being  that  falsity  not  of  evil  is  in  the
understanding  and  not  in  the  will,  while  the  falsity  of  evil  is
in  the  understanding  from  evil  in  the  will.

V.  The  confirmation  of  evil  that  exists  both  in  the  will  and
understanding  causes  man  to  believe  that  everything  depends  on
his  own  prudence  and  nothing  on  the  divine  Providence;  but
intellectual  confirmation  alone  does  not  do  this.  There  are
many  who  confirm  themselves  in  their  own  prudence  from
appearances  in  the  world,  but  still  do  not  deny  the  divine
Providence ;  theirs  is  only  intellectual  confirmation ;  but  the
confirmation  of  those  who  also  deny  the  divine  Providence  is
of  the  will;  this  confirmation  and  persuasion  are  chiefly
found  in  those  who  worship  nature  and  self.

vi.  Everything  confirmed  both  by  the  will  and  the  understand-
ing remains  for  ever;  but  what  is  confirmed  by  the  understanding
only  does  not  so  remain.  For  whatever  is  of  the  understanding
alone  is  not  in  a  man,  but  is  outside  him,  for  it  is  only  his
thought ;  and  nothing  enters  man  and  is  appropriated  by  him
except  what  is  accepted  by  his  will,  for  this  becomes  an
element  of  his  hfe's  love.  That  this  remains  to  eternity
will  be  shown  in  the  next  section.

319.  Everything  confirmed  both  by  the  will  and  the  under-
standing remains  for  ever,  because  every  man  is  his  own  love^


Divine  Providence  281

and  love  is  a  state  of  his  will ;  and  also  because  every  man  is
his  own  good  or  his  own  evil,  for  all  is  called  good  which
belongs  to  the  love,  and  so  with  evil.  Since  man  is  his  own
love,  he  is  also  the  form  of  his  own  love,  and  may  be  called
the  organ  of  his  own  life's  love.  It  was  said  above  (no.  279),
that  the  affections  of  a  man's  love,  and  the  thoughts  thence
arising,  are  changes  and  variations  of  the  state  and  form  of
the  organic  substances  of  his  mind.  We  will  now  describe
the  nature  of  these  changes  and  variations.  An  idea  of  them
may  be  gained  from  the  alternate  expansions  and  compressions
or  dilatations  and  contractions  of  the  heart  and  lungs
called  in  the  heart  its  systole  and  diastole,  and  in  the  lungs,
respirations,  which  are  alternate  expansions  and  contractions,
or  the  stretching  apart  and  closing  together  of  its  lobes;
these  are  the  changes  and  variations  of  the  heart  and  lungs.
Similar  movements  occur  in  the  other  viscera  of  the  body,
and  also  in  their  component  parts,  by  which  the  blood  and
the  animal  fluid  are  received  and  impelled  onward.  There
are  also  similar  motions  in  the  organic  forms  of  the  mind,
which  are  the  subjects  of  man's  affections  and  thoughts,  as
was  shown  above ;  the  only  difference  is  that  their  reciprocal
expansions  and  contractions  are  so  much  more  perfect,  that
they  cannot  be  expressed  in  words  of  natural  language,  but
only  in  words  of  spiritual  language,  the  nearest  equivalent  of
which  would  be  "  vortical  ingyrations  and  egy rations  like
perpetual  spirals  curving  inwards,  and  wonderfully  combined
into  forms  receptive  of  life."  We  must  now  explain  the  nature
of  these  purely  organic  substances  and  forms  in  the  evil  and
in  the  good  respectively.  In  the  good  the  spirals  curve
forwards,  but  in  the  evil  backwards,  and  the  substances  and
forms  which  curve  forwards  are  turned  towards  the  Lord  and
receive  influx  from  Him;  but  those  which  curve  backwards
are  turned  towards  hell  and  receive  influx  thence.  It  should
be  noted  that  so  far  as  they  are  turned  backwards  they  are
open  behind  and  closed  in  front ;  and  on  the  other  hand  so
far  as  they  are  turned  forwards  they  are  opened  in  front  and
closed  behind.  From  this  it  should  be  evident  what  kind  of
form  or  organ  a  bad  man  is,  and  what  kind  of  form  or  organ
a  good  man  is,  namely,  that  they  are  the  subject  of  contrary
motions;  and  as  the  spiral  motion  when  once  estabhshed
cannot  be  reversed,  it  is  evident  that  a  man  remains  for  ever
such  as  he  is  when  he  dies.    It  is  the  love  of  man's  will  which


282  Divine  Providence

sets  up  this  motion^  and  converts  or  reverses  it;  for^  as  was
said  above,  every  man  is  his  own  love.  This  is  why  every  one
after  death  goes  the  way  of  his  own  love;  he  whose  love  is
good  goes  to  heaven,  and  he  whose  love  is  evil  to  hell;  nor
can  he  be  at  ease  anywhere  but  in  that  society  where  his
reigning  love  is,  and  what  is  wonderful  every  one  knows  the
way  thither;  it  is  as  if  he  scented  it  with  his  nostrils.

320.  IV.  //  man  believed,  as  is  the  fact,  that  all  good  and
truth  come  from  the  Lord,  and  all  evil  and  falsity  from  hell,  he
would  not  appropriate  good  to  himself  and  claim  merit  on  account
of  it,  nor  would  he  appropriate  evil  to  himself  and  incur
guilt  in  consequence.  As  this  is  contrary  to  the  belief  of
those  who  have  confirmed  themselves  in  the  appearance
that  wisdom  and  prudence  are  from  man,  and  do  not  flow
into  him  according  to  the  state  of  the  organisation  of  his
mind  (no.  319),  it  must  be  explained ;  for  the  sake  of  clearness
this  shall  be  done  in  the  following  series  : —

i.  Whoever  confirms  himself  in  the  appearance  that  wisdom
and  prudence  come  from  man,  and  therefore  are  his  own,
cannot  help  supposing  that  otherwise  he  would  not  be  a
man,  but  a  beast  or  a  statue,  yet  the  contrary  is  the  truth.

ii.  To  believe  and  acknowledge  the  fact  that  all  good  and
truth  are  from  the  Lord,  and  all  evil  and  falsity  from  hell,
appears  impossible,  yet  it  is  truly  human  and  therefore
angelic.

iii.  To  believe  and  acknowledge  this  is  impossible  for  those
who  do  not  acknowledge  the  Divine  of  the  Lord,  and  who
do  not  regard  evils  as  sins ;  but  it  is  possible  for  those  who
acknowledge  these  truths.

iv.  Those  who  are  in  the  acknowledgment  of  these  two
truths,  so  far  as  they  shun  and  hate  evils  as  sins,  merely  notice
the  evils  within  themselves,  and  dismiss  them  to  hell  whence
they  have  come.

V.  Thus  the  divine  Providence  does  not  appropriate  evil
or  good  to  any  one,  but  man's  own  prudence  appropriates
both.  But  these  things  shall  be  explained  in  the  above
order.

321.  i.  Whoever  confirms  himself  in  the  appearance  that
wisdom  and  prudence  come  from  man,  and  are  therefore  his
own,  cannot  help  supposing  that  otherwise  he  would  not  be  a
man,  but  a  beast  or  a  statue,  yet  the  contrary  is  the  truth.  It  is
a  law  of  the  divine  Providence  that  man  should  think  as  if


Divine  Providence  283

from  himself,  and  should  act  prudently  as  if  from  himself,
but  still  should  acknowledge  that  he  does  so  from  the  Lord.
It  follows  that  he  who  thinks  and  acts  prudently  as  if  from
himself,  and  at  the  same  time  acknowledges  that  he  does
so  from  the  Lord,  is  a  man ;  but  he  is  not  a  man  who  con-
firms himself  in  the  belief  that  everything  he  thinks  and  does
originates  from  himself ;  nor  is  he  who,  knowing  that  wisdom
and  prudence  come  from  God,  is  always  waiting  for  influx;
for  this  man  becomes  like  a  statue,  and  the  other  like  a  beast.
He  who  is  always  waiting  for  influx  is  evidently  like  a  statue ;
for  he  must  stand  or  sit  motionless,  with  hands  dangling  at
his  side,  and  eyes  either  shut  or  staring,  neither  thinking
or  breathing.     What  life  has  he  then  ?     He  who  believes  that
everything  he  thinks  and  does  comes  from  himself,  is  evidently
not  unlike  a  beast,  for  he  thinks  only  from  the  suggestions
of  the  natural  mind,  which  is  common  to  man  and  beast,
and  not  from  those  of  the  spiritual-rational  mind  which  is  the
truly  human  mind;    for  the  spiritual  mind  acknowledges
that  God  alone  thinks  from  Himself,  and  that  man  thinks
from  God;    and  therefore  the  above-mentioned  man  does
not  know  the  difference  between  a  man  and  a  beast,  except
that  a  man  talks,  and  a  beast  utters  sounds,  and  he  believes
that  both  alike  perish.     Of  those  who  are  always  waiting
for   influx,   something  more   shall   be  said.     They  do  not
receive  any  influx,  except  that  a  few  who  earnestly  desire  it
occasionally  receive  some  response  by  a  vivid  perception  m
the  thought,  or  by  silent  and  occasionally  by  audible  speech;
this  is  always  to  the  effect  that  they  should  think  and  act
as  they  wish  or  can,  and  that  he  who  acts  wisely  is  wise,
and  he  who  acts  foolishly  is  foolish ;  they  are  never  told  what
to  believe  and  do,  lest  human  rationality  and  liberty  should
perish,  which  are  given  to  man  that  he  may  act  in  freedom
according  to  reason,   and  to   all    appearance   of    himself.
Those  who  are  told  by  influx  what  to  believe  or  do,  are  not
instructed  by  the  Lord,  nor  by  any  angel  of  heaven,  but  by
some  fanatical  Quaker  or  Moravian  spirit,  and  are  led  astray.
All  influx  from  the  Lord  takes  place  by  the  affection  of  truth,
which  passes  into  and  enlightens  the  understanding.

ii.  To  believe  and  acknowledge  the  fact  that  all  good  and  truth
come  from  the  Lord,  and  all  evil  and  falsity  from  hell,  appears
impossible,  yet  it  is  truly  human  and  therefore  angelic.  To
believe  and  acknowledge  that  all  good  and  truth  come  from


284  Divine  Providence

God  seems  possible,  provided  nothing  further  is  said,  because
this  is  according  to  theological  faith,  which  must  not  be
rejected.  But  to  believe  and  think  that  all  evil  and  falsity
come  from  hell  appears  impossible,  because  this  would
involve  the  belief  that  man  cannot  think  at  all.  But  man
thinks  as  if  of  himself,  even  though  he  does  so  from  hell,
])ecause  the  Lord  allows  every  one's  thought  to  appear  as
his  own,  from  whatever  source  it  may  come;  otherwise  he
would  not  live  as  a  man,  nor  could  he  be  led  out  of  hell  and
into  heaven,  nor  be  reformed,  as  has  been  frequently  ex-
plained above.  This  is  why  the  Lord  enables  man  to  know
and  believe  that  he  is  in  hell  if  he  is  in  evil,  and  that  he
thinks  from  hell  if  he  thinks  from  evil ;  and  He  also  enables
him  to  think  of  means  whereby  he  may  escape  from  hell  and
no  longer  think  from  it,  but  may  come  into  heaven  and
there  think  from  the  Lord ;  and  He  also  gives  man  freedom
of  choice.  From  this  it  may  be  seen  that  a  man  may  think
evil  and  falsity  as  if  from  himself,  and  may  also  think  that
this  or  that  is  evil  and  false,  consequently  that  it  is  only  an
appearance  that  he  does  this  from  himself,  but  that  without
this  appearance  a  man  would  not  be  human.  It  is  essentially
human  and  therefore  angelic  to  think  in  accordance  with  the
truth ;  and  the  truth  is  that  man  does  not  think  from  him-
self, but  that  the  Lord  enables  him  to  think  to  all  appearance
from  himself.

iii.  To  believe  and  acknowledge  the  above  fact  is  impossible
for  those  who  do  not  acknowledge  tlie  Divine  of  the  Lord,  and
who  do  not  regard  evils  as  sins  ;  but  it  is  possible  for  those
who  acknowledge  these  truths.  It  is  impossible  for  those  who
do  not  acknowledge  the  Lord's  Divine,  because  the  Lord
alone  enables  man  to  think  and  will,  and  those  who  do  not
acknowledge  the  Lord's  Divine,  being  separated  from  Him,
believe  that  they  think  from  themselves.  It  is  also  impossible
for  those  who  do  not  acknowledge  that  evils  are  sins,  because
they  think  from  hell,  and  every  one  in  hell  imagines  that  he
thinks  from  himself.  But  it  is  possible  for  those  who  acknow-
ledge these  two  truths,  as  should  be  evident  from  what  was
said  above  (nos.  288-294).

iv.  Those  who  are  in  the  acknowledgment  of  these  two  truths,
so  far  as  they  shun  and  hate  evils  as  sins,  merely  notice  the
evils  within  themselves  and  dismiss  them  to  hell  whence  they
have  come.     Who  does  not  know  or  may  not  know  that  evil


Divine  Providence  285

is  from  hell  and  good  from  heaven?  And  who  may  not
conclude  that  so  far  as  a  man  shuns  and  hates  evil,  he  shuns
and  hates  hell ;  and  that  so  far  as  any  one  shuns  and  hates
evils  he  wills  and  loves  good ;  consequently,  that  so  far  he
is  taken  out  of  hell  by  the  Lord  and  led  to  heaven  ?  Every
rational  man  can  see  these  things,  provided  he  knows  that
heaven  and  hell  exist,  and  that  evil  comes  from  hell  and  good
from  heaven.  Now  if  a  man  reflects  upon  or  examines  the
evils  in  himself  and  shuns  them,  he  then  extricates  himself
from  hell,  and  puts  it  behind  him ;  and  he  introduces  himself
into  heaven,  and  there  sees  the  Lord  face  to  face.  The  man
is  said  to  do  this,  but  he  does  it  as  if  from  himself,  but
really  from  the  Lord.  When  a  good  heart  and  a  pious_  faith
lead  a  man  to  acknowledge  this  truth,  it  lies  hidden  in  his
inner  mind  in  connection  with  everything  that  he  afterwards
thinks  and  does  as  if  from  himself :  it  is  like  the  reproductive
power  in  a  seed,  which  inwardly  attends  its  growth  until
new  seed  is  produced ;  or  like  the  pleasurable  appetite  for
food  that  a  man  has  once  recognised  as  wholesome;  in  a
word,  it  is  the  heart  and  soul  of  everything  that  he  thinks
and  does.

V.  Thus  the  divine  Providence  does  not  appropriate  evil  or
good  to  any  one,  but  man's  own  prudence  appropriates  both.
This  follows  from  all  that  has  now  been  said.  Good  is  the
end  of  the  divine  Providence;  this  is  therefore  the  object
of  all  its  working,  and  therefore  it  does  not  appropriate
o-ood  to  any  one,  for  good  would  thus  become  meritorious;
nor  does  it  attribute  evil  to  any  one,  for  thus  it  would  make
him  guilty  of  the  evil.  Nevertheless  man  appropriates  both
under  the  influence  of  his  selfhood,  because  this  is  nothing
but  evil ;  the  selfhood  of  his  will  is  the  love  of  self,  and  the
selfhood  of  his  understanding  is  pride  in  his  own  intelligence ;
and  this  is  the  origin  of  the  prudence  which  he  claims  as
his  own.

Every  man  is  capable  of  being  reformed,  and  there
is  no  such  thing  as  predestination
322.  Sound  reason  afhrms  that  all  men  are  intended  for
heaven  and  none  for  hell,  for  all  are  born  men  and  therefore
the  image  of  God  is  in  them.  The  image  of  God  is  in  them
because  they  can  understand  truth  and  do  good.  The
capacity   of   understanding  truth   comes   from   the   divine


286  Divine  Providence

Wisdom,  and  the  ability  to  do  good  from  the  divine  Love ;
this  power  is  the  image  of  God,  and  remains  with  every  sane
man  and  is  never  lost.  This  is  why  he  can  become  a  civil
and  moral  man;  and  he  who  is  civil  and  moral  can  also
become  spiritual,  for  the  things  that  relate  to  civil  and
moral  life  are  formed  to  receive  and  contain  that  which  is
spiritual.  A  civil  man  is  one  who  knows  the  laws  of  his
country,  and  lives  according  to  them;  and  a  moral  man  is
one  who  adopts  these  laws  as  his  moral  principles  and
virtues,  and  lives  rationally  in  accordance  with  them.  I  will
now  explain  how  a  civil  and  moral  life  is  the  receptacle  of
spiritual  life.  Obey  these  laws  not  only  as  civil  and  moral
laws,  but  also  as  divine  laws,  and  you  will  become  a  spiritual
man.  There  scarcely  exists  a  nation  so  barbarous  as  not
to  have  laws  forbidding  murder,  adultery  with  the  wife  of
another,  theft,  false-witness  and  spoliation.  The  civil  and
moral  man  keeps  these  laws  that  he  may  be,  or  seem  to  be,
a  good  citizen ;  but  if  he  does  not  also  regard  these  laws  as
divine,  he  is  only  a  civil  and  moral  natural  man;  while  if
he  also  regards  them  as  divine,  he  becomes  a  civil  and  moral
spiritual  man.  The  difference  is  that  the  latter  is  not  only
a  good  citizen  of  the  earthly,  but  also  of  the  heavenly
kingdom;  while  the  former  is  only  a  good  citizen  of  the
earthly,  but  not  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  The  good  which
they  do  distinguishes  them ;  the  good  which  civil  and  moral
natural  men  do  is  not  really  good,  for  self  and  the  world  are
in  it ;  the  good  done  by  civil  and  moral  spiritual  men  is  really
good,  because  the  Lord  and  heaven  are  in  it.  From  these
considerations  it  should  be  evident  that  every  man,  since
he  was  born  to  become  a  civil  and  moral  natural  man,
was  also  born  to  become  a  civil  and  moral  spiritual  man.
All  that  is  necessary  is  that  he  should  acknowledge  God,  and
abstain  from  evil  as  being  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,
and  do  good  as  being  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God ;
by  this  means  a  spirit  is  breathed  into  his  civil  and  moral
actions  and  they  live ;  otherwise  there  is  no  spirit  in  them,
and  they  are  dead.  This  is  why  the  natural  man  is  said  to
be  dead,  however  good  his  actions  may  be  from  a  civil  and
moral  point  of  view;  but  the  spiritual  man  is  said  to  be
living.  It  is  of  the  Lord's  divine  Providence  that  every
nation  has  some  religion;  and  the  fundamental  precept
of  every  religion   is   to  acknowledge   God,  for  otherwise   it


Divine  Providence  287

is  not  a  religion ;  and  every  nation  that  lives  according  to
its  religion,  that  is,  which  abstains  from  doing  evil  as  contrary
to  the  will  of  its  God,  receives  something  spiritual  in  its
natural.  Who,  on  hearing  some  heathen  say  that  he  will
not  do  this  or  that  evil  because  it  is  contrary  to  the  will  of
his  God,  does  not  say  to  himself,  "  Surely  this  man  will  be
saved  ?  I  cannot  believe  the  contrary."  Sound  reason  tells
him  it  must  be  so.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  hears  a  Christian
say,  "I  attach  no  importance  to  this  or  that  evil ;  what  sense
is  there  in  saying  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  will  of  God  ?  "
who  does  not  say  to  himself,  "  Can  this  man  be  saved?  It
seems  impossible."  This  also  is  a  dictate  of  sound  reason.
If  he  says,  "  I  was  born  a  Christian,  I  have  been  baptized,  I
have  known  about  the  Lord,  I  have  read  the  Word,  I  have
attended  the  Holy  Supper,"  is  all  this  of  any  account  when
he  does  not  regard  as  sins  either  murder,  or  the  revenge  that
inspires  it,  or  adultery,  secret  theft,  false  testimony,  lying
and  various  kinds  of  violence?  Does  such  a  man  think  of
God  or  eternal  life  ?  Does  he  believe  that  they  exist  ?  Does
not  sound  reason  afhrm  that  such  a  person  cannot  be  saved  ?
These  things  have  been  said  of  a  Christian,  because  heathens
think  more  of  God  in  their  daily  life  from  a  religious  principle
than  Christians  do.  More  will  be  said  about  this  in  what
now  follows  :

I.  The  end  of  creation  is  a  heaven  from  the  human  race.

II.  Hence  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  divine  Providence
that  every  man  can  be  saved;  and  those  are  saved  who
acknowledge  God  and  live  a  good  life.

III.  It  is  a  man's  own  fault  if  he  is  not  saved.

IV.  Thus  all  are  intended  to  go  to  heaven  and  none  to
heU.

323.  I.  The  end  of  creation  is  a  heaven  from  the  human
race.  That  heaven  consists  of  none  but  those  who  have  been
born  men,  is  shown  in  the  work  on  Heaven  and  Hell,  and  also
above ;  and  as  heaven  consists  of  no  others,  it  follows  that
the  end  of  creation  is  a  heaven  from  the  human  race.  This
was  indeed  shown  above  (nos.  27-45),  but  it  will  be  seen  still
more  clearly  from  an  explanation  of  the  following  proposi-
tions.

i.  Every  man  is  created  that  he  may  live  for  ever.

ii.  Every  man  is  created  that  he  may  live  for  ever  in
happiness.


288  Divine  Providence

iii.  Thus  every  man  is  created  that  he  may  enter  heaven.

iv.  Divine  Love  cannot  but  will  this,  and  divine  Wisdom
cannot  but  provide  for  it.

324.  As  these  propositions  involve  that  the  divine  Provi-
dence intends  that  all  men  shall  go  to  heaven,  and  that
this  is  its  unalterable  purpose,  we  must  prove  in  the  above
order,  that  the  end  of  creation  is  a  heaven  from  the  human
race.

i.  Every  man  is  created  that  he  may  live  for  ever.  In  the
work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  Parts  I.  and  V.,  it  is
shown  that  every  man  possesses  three  degrees  of  life,  which
are  called  the  natural,  spiritual  and  celestial,  and  that  these
degrees  are  actually  in  every  man ;  but  that  in  beasts  there
is  but  one  degree  of  life,  which  is  like  the  ultimate  or  natural
degree  in  man.  It  follows  that  man,  by  the  elevation  of  his
life  to  the  Lord,  is  so  far  removed  above  the  state  of  animals
that  he  can  understand  the  things  of  divine  Wisdom,  and
will  the  things  of  divine  Love,  and  thus  receive  the  Divine ;
and  he  who  is  able  so  to  receive  the  Divine  as  to  see  and  per-
ceive it  in  himself,  cannot  but  be  united  with  the  Lord  and
thus  live  for  ever.  Why  should  the  Lord  have  created  the
universe  unless  He  had  also  created  images  and  likenesses  of
Himself,  to  whom  He  might  impart  His  Divine  ?  Otherwise
it  would  have  been  the  making  of  something  to  be  and  not  to
be,  or  to  exist  and  not  to  exist,  and  this  for  no  other  purpose
than  that  He  might  contemplate  from  afar  mere  vicissitudes
and  continual  changes  as  upon  some  stage?  What  would
there  be  divine  in  such  things,  unless  they  existed  to  the  end
that  they  might  serve  as  subjects  which  should  receive  the
Divine  more  nearly,  and  see  and  feel  it  ?  And  as  the  divine
perfections  are  inexhaustible,  would  He  keep  them  to  Himself,
and  could  He  do  so  ?  For  love  wishes  to  communicate  what-
ever it  has  to  another,  indeed  to  give  as  much  of  its  own  as
possible.  How  much  more  the  divine  Love  which  is  infinite  ?
Can  it  give  and  take  away  again  }  Would  not  this  be  giving
what  is  perishable,  and  essentially  nothing  ?  for  when  a  thing
perishes  it  becomes  nothing  because  it  does  not  contain  that
which  IS.  But  divine  Love  gives  what  is,  or  what  never
ceases  to  be,  and  this  is  eternal.  In  order  that  every  man  may
live  for  ever,  his  mortal  part  is  removed.  This  is  his  material
body,  which  is  laid  aside  at  death.  Thus  his  immortal  part,
which  is  his  mind,  is  laid  bare,  and  he  then  becomes  a  spirit


Divine  Providence  289

in  human  form,  his  mind  being  that  spirit.  That  the  mind  of
man  cannot  die,  was  seen  by  the  sages  or  wise  men  of  old ;
for  they  said,  "  How  can  the  soul  or  the  mind  die,  seeing  that
it  is  able  to  become  wise  ?  "  Few  at  this  day  know  what  they
really  thought  on  this  subject ;  but  their  thought  descended
from  heaven  into  their  general  perception,  and  was,  that
God  is  Wisdom  itself,  of  which  man  receives  a  share,  and  that
God  is  immortal,  or  eternal.  As  I  have  been  permitted  to
speak  with  angels,  I  will  relate  something  from  my  own  expe-
rience. I  have  spoken  with  those  who  lived  many  ages  ago,
with  some  who  lived  before  the  Flood  and  with  some  who  lived
after  it,  with  some  who  lived  in  the  time  of  the  Lord,  including
one  of  His  Apostles,  and  with  many  who  lived  in  after  ages ;
they  all  looked  like  men  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  they  said  that
they  did  not  know  what  death  is,  but  only  what  damnation
is.  Moreover  all  who  had  lived  a  good  life,  on  entering  heaven
come  into  the  state  corresponding  to  that  of  their  youth  in  the
world,  and  they  remain  in  it  for  ever,  even  those  who  in  the
world  were  old  and  decrepit ;  and  women,  although  they  had
been  old  and  wrinkled,  returned  to  the  flower  of  their  age  and
beauty.  That  man  after  death  lives  for  ever  is  evident  from
the  Word,  where  life  in  heaven  is  called  eternal  life  (Matt.
xix.  29 ;  XXV.  46 ;  Mark  x.  17  ;  Luke  x.  25 ;  xviii.  30 ;  John  iii.
15,  16,  36;  V.  24,  25,  39;  vi.  27,  40,  68;  xii.  50  :  it  is  called
simply  "  life  "  in  Matt,  xviii.  8,  9 ;  John  v.  40 ;  xx.  31).  The
Lord  also  said  to  the  disciples  :  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall
live  also  "  (John  xiv.  19);  and  concerning  the  resurrection  He
said  that  "  God  is  the  God  of  the  living,  and  not  the  God  of
the  dead,"  and  that  "  they  cannot  die  any  more  "  (Luke  xx.

36,38).  ,.     ^  .    ,        .

ii.  Every  man  is  created  that  he  may  live  for  ever  in  happiness.
This  follows  as  a  consequence,  for  He  who  intends  that
man  should  live  for  ever,  also  intends  that  he  should  live
in  happiness.  What  v/ould  eternal  life  be  without  this?
All  love  desires  the  good  of  others ;  the  love  of  parents  desires
the  good  of  their  children;  the  love  of  a  bridegroom  and
husband  desires  the  good  of  his  bride  and  wife ;  and  the  love
of  friendship  desires  the  good  of  friends.  What  then
must  be  the  desire  of  divine  Love?  What  is  good  but
delight  ?  And  what  is  divine  Good  but  eternal  blessedness  ?
Every  good  is  called  good  by  virtue  of  delight  or  blessedness ;
what  is  given  and  possessed  is  indeed  called  good,  but  unless
u


290  Divine  Providence

it  is  also  delightful  it  is  a  barren  good  which  is  not  really
good.  This  shows  that  eternal  life  is  also  eternal  blessedness.
This  state  of  man  is  the  purpose  of  creation,  and  it  is  not  the
fault  of  the  Lord  but  of  man  that  only  those  who  enter  heaven
are  in  that  state.  That  it  is  man's  fault  will  be  seen  in  what
follows.

iii.  Thus  every  man  is  created  that  he  may  enter  heaven.
This  is  the  purpose  of  creation,  but  all  do  not  enter  heaven,
because  they  become  obsessed  with  the  delights  of  hell,
which  are  the  opposite  of  the  blessedness  of  heaven ;  and  those
whose  minds  are  not  in  harmony  with  the  blessedness  of  heaven
cannot  enter  heaven,  for  they  cannot  endure  it.  No  one
who  enters  the  spiritual  world  is  forbidden  to  ascend  into
heaven ;  but  when  he  whose  delight  is  hellish  approaches  it,
his  heart  throbs,  he  pants  for  breath,  his  life  begins  to  fail,
he  is  in  anguish  and  torrnent,  and  writhes  like  a  serpent
put  close  to  a  fire;  this  is  because  opposites  act  against
opposites.  But  as  all  were  born  men,  and  thereby  have
the_  faculty  of  thinking  and  vv^illing,  and  derive  from  this
their  faculty  of  speaking  and  acting,  they  cannot  die ;  and  as
they  cannot  live  with  any  but  those  the  delight  of  whose  life
is  similar  to  their  own,  they  are  sent  away  to  them ;  conse-
quently those  who  delight  in  evil  are  sent  to  their  own,  and
those  who  delight  in  good  to  theirs.  Every  one  is  indeed
allowed  to  live  in  the  delight  of  his  evil  provided  he  does  not
molest  those  who  delight  in  good ;  but  as  evil  cannot  but
molest  good,  for  there  is  in  it  a  hatred  of  good,  lest  they  should
do  harm  to  others,  they  are  removed  and  cast  down  to  their
own  place  in  hell,  where  their  delight  turns  into  pain.  But
this  does  not  contradict  the  fact  that  man  is  by  creation
born  to  enter  heaven ;  for  every  one  who  dies  as  a  child  goes
to  heaven,  is  there  educated  and  instructed  as  in  the  world,
and  by  means  of  the  affection  of  s^ood  and  truth  is  imbued
with  wisdom  and  becomes  an  angel;  this  too  might  be  the
lot  of  every  man  who  is  educated  and  instructed  in  the  world,
for  he  has  in  his  nature  everything  that  the  child  has.  Con-
cerning children  in  the  spiritual  world,  see  the  work  on
Heaven  and  Hell  (nos.  329-345).  But  with  many  in  the  world
this  preparation  for  heaven  does  not  take  place,  because  they
love  the  first  or  natural  degree  of  their  life,  and  they  do  not
want  to  withdraw  from  it  and  become  spiritual;  and  the
natural  degree  of  life  considered  in  itself  loves ''nothing  but


Divine  Providence  291

self  and  the  world,  for  it  cleaves  to  the  senses  of  the  body,
which  belong  to  the  world ;  but  the  spiritual  degree  of  life
considered  in  itself  loves  the  Lord  and  heaven;  it  also  loves
self  and  the  world,  but  it  regards  God  and  heaven  as  higher,
principal  and  predominant,  and  self  and  the  world  as  lower,
instrumental  and  subservient.

iv.  Divine  Love  cannot  but  will  this,  and  divine  Wisdom
cannot  hut  provide  for  it.  That  the  divine  Essence  is
di^'ine  Love  and  Wisdom  has  been  fully  shown  in  the  work  on
The  Divi7ie  Love  and  Wisdom  ;  and  it  is  also  stated  there
(nos.  358-370)  that  in  every  human  embryo  the  Lord  forms
two  receptacles,  one  for  the  divine  Love  and  the  other  for
the  divine  Wisdom,  the  receptacle  of  divine  Love  for  the
future  will  of  the  man,  and  the  receptacle  of  divine  Wisdom
for  his  future  understanding ;  and  that  He  has  thus  imparted
to  every  man  the  faculty  of  willing  good  and  understanding
truth.  Now  as  the  Lord  has  given  man  these  two  faculties
and  is  therefore  present  in  them  as  His  own,  it  is  evident  that
His  divine  Love  cannot  but  desire  that  man  should  enter
heaven  and  there  enjoy  eternal  happiness,  and  that  the
divine  Wisdom  cannot  but  provide  for  this.  But  as  it  is
of  His  divine  Love  that  man  should  feel  heavenly  blessedness
as  his  own,  and  this  cannot  take  place  unless  he  is  maintained
in  the  appearance  of  thinking  and  willing,  speaking  and  acting
from  himself,  He  cannot  lead  man  except  by  means  of  the
laws  of  His  divine  Providence.

325.  II.  Hence  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  divine  Providence
that  every  man  can  he  saved  ;  and  those  are  saved  who  acknow-
ledge God  and  live  a  good  life.  That  every  man  can  be  saved
is  evident  from  what  has  been  said  above.  Some  suppose
that  the  Lord's  Church  only  exists  in  the  Christian  world,
because  there  alone  the  Lord  and  the  Word  are  known.  But
there  are  also  many  who  believe  that  the  Church  of  God  is
universal,  or  spread  and  dispersed  throughout  the  whole
world,  and  therefore  among  those  who  have  no  knowledge
either  of  the  Lord  or  the  Word ;  they  say  that  this  is  not  their
fault,  and  that  their  ignorance  is  unavoidable,  and  that  it  is
contrary  to  God's  Love  and  Mercy  that  those  who  are  just
as  much  men  as  others  should  be  born  for  hell.  Now  as
many  Christians,  if  not  all,  believe  that  the  Church  is  open
to  all,  and  is  therefore  called  a  communion,  it  follows  that
there  are  certain  general  principles  of  the  Church  which  are


292  Divine  Providence

common  to  all  religions  and  constitute  that  communion.
That  these  general  principles  are  the  acknowledgment  of
God,  and  the  good  of  life,  will  be  seen  in  the  following  order  :

i.  The  acknowledgment  of  God  causes  a  union  of  God  with
man  and  of  man  with  God;  and  the  denial  of  God  causes
disunion.

ii.  Every  one  acknowledges  God  and  is  united  with  Him
according  to  the  good  of  his  life.

iii.  The  good  of  life,  or  leading  a  good  life,  consists  in
shunning  evils  because  they  are  contrary  to  religion  and
therefore  to  God.

iv.  These  are  the  general  principles  common  to  all  re-
ligions, by  which  every  one  can  be  saved.

These  propositions  must  be  examined  and  explained
separately.

326.  i.  The  acknowledgment  of  God  causes  a  union  of  God
with  mail  and  of  man  with  God  ;  and  the  denial  of  God  causes
disunion.  Some  may  think  that  those  who  do  not  acknow-
ledge God  can  be  saved  just  as  well  as  those  who  do  acknow-
ledge Him,  provided  they  lead  a  moral  life.  They  say,
"  What  effect  is  produced  by  this  acknowledgment  ?  Is  it
not  merely  an  idea?  Shall  I  not  easily  acknowledge  God
when  I  know  for  certain  that  there  is  a  God  ?  I  have  heard
of  Him,  but  I  have  not  seen  Him.  Show  me  Him,  and  I  will
believe."  Such  is  the  language  of  many  who  deny  God,  when
they  are  admitted  to  a  free  discussion  with  one  who  acknow-
ledges God.  But  that  the  acknowledgment  of  God  causes
union,  and  the  denial  of  Him  disunion,  shall  now  be  illustrated
by  certain  experiences  I  have  had  in  the  spiritual  world.
When  any  one  in  the  spiritual  world  is  thinking  of  another
and  desires  to  speak  to  him,  the  other  is  immediately  present ;
this  is  a  universal  law  there  and  never  fails.  The  reason  is
that  in  the  spiritual  world  there  is  no  distance  as  in  the  natural
world,  but  only  an  appearance  of  distance.  Another  pecu-
liarity is  that  as  thought  combined  with  some  knowledge  of
another  person  causes  his  presence,  so  love  combined  with
some  affection  for  another  causes  union;  the  result  of  this
union  is  that  they  come  together  and  converse  in  a  friendly
way,  dwell  in  the  same  house  or  community,  often  meet  and
do  each  other  kindnesses.  The  contrary  also  takes  place;
for  example,  if  any  one  does  not  love  another  person,  and
still  more  if  he  hates  him,  he  neither  sees  nor  meets  him,  and


Divine  Providence  293

they  are  distant  from  each  other  in  the  proportion  of  the
indiflference  or  hatred  they  feel  for  each  other;  indeed,  if
any  one  is  present  with  another,  and  his  hatred  occurs  to  his
mind,  he  disappears  from  his  view.  These  few  particulars
should  make  it  clear  what  presence  and  union  in  the
spiritual  world  are,  namely,  that  presence  results  from  the
recollection  of  another  combined  with  a  desire  to  see  him,
and  that  union  results  from  the  affection  of  love.  So  it  is
with  all  things  in  the  human  mind ;  it  contains  innumerable
things,  and  the  particular  things  are  associated  and  united
according  to  the  affection  or  love  of  one  thing  for  another.
This  union  is  spiritual,  and  is  of  a  similar  nature  both  in
general  and  particular.  It  derives  its  origin  from  the  union
of  the  Lord  with  the  spiritual  and  natural  worlds  in  general
and  particular.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  so  far  as  any  one
has  a  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  thereby  thinks  of  Him,  the
Lord  is  present;  and  so  far  as  any  one  acknowledges  Hin?
from  an  affection  of  love,  the  Lord  is  united  with  him ;  on
the  other  hand,  so  far  as  any  one  has  no  knowledge  of  the
Lord,  the  Lord  is  absent;  and  so  far  as  any  one  denies  the
Lord,  he  is  separated  from  Him.  The  effect  of  this  union  is
that  the  Lord  turns  man  towards  Himself  and  then  leads  him,
and  the  effect  of  disunion  is  that  hell  turns  man  to  itself  and
leads  him.  This  is  why  all  the  angels  of  heaven  turn  to  the
Lord  as  a  sun,  and  all  the  spirits  of  hell  turn  away  from  Him.
From  these  considerations  the  result  of  acknowledging  God,
and  the  result  of  denying  Him  are  evident.  Moreover  those
who  deny  God  in  the  world  deny  Him  after  death,  and  then
they  become  organically  constituted  according  to  the  descrip-
tion given  above  (no.  319);  and  the  organisation  acquired
in  the  world  remains  for  ever.

ii.  Every  one  acknowledges  God  and  is  united  with  Him
according  to  the  good  of  his  life.  All  who  have  any  religious
knowledge  may  know  God ;  they  may  also  talk  of  God  from
knowledge  or  the  memory,  and  some  can  think  of  Him
intellectually ;  but  unless  the  man  leads  a  good  life  this  only
brings  him  into  God's  presence ;  for  he  can  nevertheless  turn
away  from  God  towards  hell,  and  does  so  if  he  lives  wickedly.
But  only  those  can  in  heart  acknowledge  God  who  live  good
lives ;  according  to  the  good  of  their  lives  the  Lord  turns
these  away  from  hell  and  towards  Himself.  The  reason  is
that  they  alone  love  God;   for  they  show  their  love  for  the


294  Divine  Providence

divine  things  which  are  from  Him  by  doing  them ;  the  divine
things  from  God  are  the  precepts  of  His  law ;  these  are  God,
for  He  Himself  is  His  own  proceeding  Divine ;  and  to  obey
them  is  to  love  God.  This  is  why  the  Lord  says :  "  He  who
doeth  my  commandments,  he  it  is  who  loveth  Me,  but  he
who  doeth  not  my  commandments  loveth  Me  not  "  (John  xiv.
21,  24).  This  is  the  reason  why  there  are  two  tables  of  the
Decalogue,  one  for  God  and  the  other  for  man.  God  works
continually  that  man  may  receive  what  is  contained  in  His
table ;  but  if  man  does  not  do  the  things  of  his  o\vn  table,  he
does  not  at  heart  believe  the  things  of  God's  table  and,  in  that
case,  he  is  not  united  with  God.  This  is  why  the  two  tables
were  so  united  as  to  form  one,  and  were  called  the  tables  of
the  covenant,  for  a  covenant  signifies  union.  The  reason
why  every  one  acknowledges  God  and  is  united  with  Him
according  to  the  good  of  his  life  is,  that  the  good  of  life  re-
sembles that  good  which  is  in  pnd  from  the  Lord;  and  there-
fore when  man  is  in  the  good  of  life,  union  is  brought  about.
The  contrary  is  the  case  with  evil  of  life,  for  this  rejects  the
Lord.

iii.  The  good  of  life,  or  leading  a  good  life,  consists  in  shunning
evils  because  they  are  contrary  to  religion  and  therefore  to  God.
That  this  constitutes  the  good  of  life,  or  living  a  good  life,
is  fully  shown  in  the  Doctrine  of  Life  for  the  New  Jerusalem,
from  beginning  to  end.  I  will  merely  add  that  if  you  do  good
actions  in  abundance,  for  example,  if  you  build  churches,
decorate  them  and  fill  them  with  offerings,  spend  money  on
hospitals  and  refuges,  give  alms  every  day,  relieve  widows
and  orphans,  diligently  attend  to  the  sacred  duties  of  religion,
and  even  think,  talk  and  preach  about  them  as  if  in  all
sincerity,  and  yet  do  not  shun  evils  as  sins  against  God,  all
those  actions  are  not  really  good ;  they  are  either  hypocritical
or  defiled  with  the  idea  of  merit,  for  evil  s  still  latent  within
them ;  for  every  one's  life  is  in  each  and  every  thing  that  he
does,  and  good  actions  become  really  good  only  when  evil
is  removed  from  them.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  to  shun
evils  as  contrary  to  religion  and  therefore  to  God,  is  to  live
a  good  life.

iv.  These  are  the  general  principles  common  to  all  religions,
by  which  every  one  can  be  saved.  To  acknowledge  God  and
shun  evil  as  contrary  to  God,  are  the  two  things  which  make
a  genuine  religion;   if  one  of  these  is  lacking,  it  cannot  be


Divine  Providence  295

called  a  religion ;  for  it  is  contradictory  to  acknowledge  God
and  yet  do  evil^  as  it  is  also  to  do  good  but  not  acknowledge
God;   for  the  one  cannot  exist  without  the  other.     It  has
been  provided  by  the  Lord  that  some  sort  of  religion  should
exist  nearly  everywhere,  and  that  in  every  religion  these  two
principles  should  be  found;   and  it  has  also  been  provided
by  the  Lord  that  every  one  who  acknowledges  God  and  shuns
evil  as  displeasing  to  Him,  should  have  a  place  in  heaven.
For  heaven  in  the  aggregate  presents  the  form  of  one  Man,
whose  life  or  soul  is  the  Lord ;  this  heavenly  Man  is  composed
of  the  same  constituent  parts  as  a  natural  man,  except  for
the  distinction  between  heavenly  and  natural  things.     It  is
well  known  that  a  man  possesses  not  only  visceral  organs,
formed  out  of  blood-vessels  and  nervous  fibres,  but  also
skins,  membranes,  tendons,  cartilages,  bones,  nails  and  teeth.
These  latter  are  alive  in  a  less  degree  than  the  organic  forms
for  which  they  serve  as  ligaments,  coverings  and  supports.
The  heavenly  Man,  or  heaven,  that  he  may  comprise  all  these
details,  cannot  be  formed  out  of  men  of  a  single  religion,  but
of  many  religions;   all  therefore  who  incorporate  those  two
universal  principles  of  the  Church  in  their  lives  have  a  place
in  that  heavenly  Man,  that  is  in  heaven,  and  are  happy  in
their  degi-ee.     But  on  this  subject  more  may  be  seen  above
(no.  254).     These  two  principles  are  evidently  paramount
in  every  religion,  for  they  are  the  two  which  the  Decalogue
teaches ;   and  the  Decalogue  was  the  first  part  of  the  Word
promulgated  from  Mount  Sinai  by  the  voice  of  Jehovah,  and
was  written  by  the  finger  of  God  on  two  tables  of  stone ;  and
being  then  placed  in  the  ark,  it  was  called  Jehovah,  and
constituted  the  holy  of  holies  in  the  tabernacle  and  the  shrine
in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  where  all  things  derived  their
holiness  from  it  alone;   not  to  mention  many  other  things
from  the  Word  concerning  the  Decalogue  contained  in  the
ark,  which  are  quoted  in  the  Doctrine  of  Life  for  the  New
Jerusalem  (nos.  53-61);    I  will  however  add  the  following  :
it  is  known  from  the  Word  that  the  ark  containing  the  two
tables  on  which  the  Decalogue  was  written,  was  taken  by  the
Philistines  and  placed  in  the  house  of  Dagon  in  Ashdod,  and
that  Dagon  fell  to  the  earth  before  it,  and  that  his  head  and
the  palms  of  his  hands,  severed  from  his  body,  lay  upon  the
threshold  of  the  house ;  and  that  the  people  of  Ashdod  and
Ekron,  to  the  number  of  many  thousands,  were  smitten  with


296  Divine  Providence

hemorrhoids  on  account  of  the  ark,  and  their  land  devastated
by  mice;  also  that  the  Philistines,  by  the  advice  of  the  lords
of  their  nation,  made  five  golden  hemorrhoids  and  five  golden
mice,  and  a  new  cart,  and  placed  the  ark  upon  it,  and  near
the  ark  the  golden  hemorrhoids  and  mice;    and  they  sent
back  the  ark,  drawn  by  two  cows  which  lowed  in  the  way,
to  the  sons  of  Israel   by  whom  the  cows  and  the  cart  were
sacrificed   (i    Sam.  v.,  vi.).     The   signification  of  all  these
things  shall  now  be  stated.     The  Philistines  signified  those
whose  faith  is  devoid  of  charity;    Dagon  represented  the
corresponding  religion;    the  hemorrhoids  with  which  they
were  smitten  signified  natural  loves,  which  when  separated
from  spiritual  love  are  unclean;   and  the  mice  signified  the
devastation  of  the  Church  by  the  falsification  of  truth;  the
new  cart  upon  which  they  sent  back  the  ark,  signified  new
doctrine,  but  a  natural  one,  for  in  the  Word  doctrine  from
spiritual  truths  is  signified  by  a  chariot;  the  cows  signified
good  natural  affections;    the  hemorrhoids  of  gold  signified
natural  loves  purified  and  made  good;    the  golden  mice
signified  the  devastation  of  the  Church  and  its  restoration  by
good,  for  in  the  Word  gold  signifies  good ;  the  lowing  of  the
cows  on  the  way  signified  the  difficulty  of  converting  the  evil
lusts  of  the  natural  man  into  good  affections;   the  sacrifice
of  the  cows  and  the  cart  as  a  whole  burnt-offering,  signified
the  propitiation  of  the  Lord.     These  are  the  spiritual  things
meant  by  those  historical  particulars ;  coordinate  them  into
one  interpretation,  and  apply  them  to  your  life.     That  the
Philistines  represented  those  whose  faith  is  devoid  of  charity,
may  be  seen  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning
Faith  (nos.  49-54),  and  that  the  ark,  because  it  contained
the  Decalogue,  was  the  holiest  thing  of  the  Church,  may  be
seen  in  the  Doctrine  of  Life  for  the  New  Jerusalem  (nos.  53-61).
327.  III.  //  is  a  man's  own  fault  if  he  is  not  saved.     Every
rational  man  at  once  acknowledges  the  truth  that  evil  cannot
flow  forth  from  good  nor  good  from  evil,  because  they  are
opposites ;  consequently  that  from  good  there  flows  nothing
but  good,  and  from  evil  nothing  but  evil.     The  acknowledg-
ment of  this  truth  implies  a  further  acknowledgment  that
good  can  be  turned  into  evil,  not  by  a  good  recipient  but  by
an  evil  one ;  for  every  form  assimilates  to  itself  whatever  flows
into  it  (no.  292).     Now  as  the  Lord  is  Good  in  its  very  essence,
or  Good  itself,  it  is  evident  that  evil  cannot  proceed  from


Divine  Providence  297

Him  nor  be  produced  by  Him,  but  that  good  is  turned  into
evil  by  a  recipient  subject  whose  form  is  evil.  Such  a  subject
is  the  selfhood  of  man ;  this  continually  receives  good  from
the  Lord,  and  continually  assimilates  it  to  its  own  form  which
is  evil.  It  follows  that  it  is  a  man's  own  fault  if  he  is  not
saved.  Evil  is  indeed  from  hell,  but  as  a  man  receives  it
thence  as  his  own  and  thereby  appropriates  it,  it  is  the  same
whether  we  say  that  evil  is  from  the  man  or  from  hell.  But
how  evil  is  appropriated  until  at  last  religion  perishes  will  be
explained  in  the  following  series  :  i.  In  process  of  time  every
religion  declines  and  is  consummated,  ii.  Every  religion
declines  and  is  consummated  by  its  inversion  of  God's  image
in  man.  iii.  This  arises  from  the  accumulation  of  hereditary
evil  in  successive  generations,  iv.  Nevertheless  the  Lord
provides  that  every  one  may  be  saved,  v.  He  also  provides
that  a  new  Church  shall  be  instituted  in  place  of  the  preceding
ruined  Church.  But  these  propositions  must  be  dealt  with
in  their  order.

328.  i.  In  process  of  time  every  religion  declines  and  is
consummated.  On  this  earth  there  have  been  many  Churches,
one  after  another,  because  wherever  the  human  race  exists
there  is  a  Church ;  for  heaven,  which  is  the  end  of  creation,
is  from  the  human  race,  as  was  shown  above,  and  no  one
can  enter  heaven  unless  he  is  in  the  two  universals  of  the
Church,  which  are  to  acknowledge  God  and  to  live  a  good
life,  as  shown  just  above  (no.  326).  It  follows  that  on  this
earth  there  have  been  Churches  from  the  most  ancient  times
to  the  present  day.  These  Churches  are  described  in  the
Word,  but  not  historically,  excepting  the  Israelitish  and
Jewish  Church;  before  this  however  there  were  others  which
are  described  only  by  the  names  of  nations  and  persons,
and  by  certain  particulars  concerning  them.  The  Most
Ancient  Church,  which  was  the  first,  is  described  by  Adam
and  his  wife  Eve.  The  Church  that  followed,  which  may  be
called  the  Ancient  Church,  is  described  by  Noah  and  his  three
sons,  and  their  posterity.  This  was  widely  extended  through
many  kingdoms  of  Asia,  including  the  land  of  Canaan  on
both  sides  of  the  Jordan,  S\Tia,  Ass\Tia,  Chaldea,  Mesopo-
tamia, Eg}-pt,  Arabia,  T}Te  and  Sidon.  Among  these
nations  there  existed  the  ancient  Word,  mentioned  in  the
Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  concerning  the  Sacred  Scripture
(nos.  101-103).     That  this  Church  embraced  those  kingdoms


298  Divine  Providence

is  evident  from  various  things  said  of  them  in  the  prophetical
parts  of  the  Word.  But  this  Church  was  changed  in  a  re-
markable manner  by  Eber,  who  founded  the  Hebrew  Church.
In  this  Church  worship  by  sacrifice  was  first  instituted.  From
the  Hebrew  Church  was  born  the  Israelitish  and  Jewish
Church;  but  this  was  solemnly  instituted  for  the  sake  of
the  Word  which  was  to  be  written  in  that  Church.  These
four  churches  are  signified  by  the  statue  seen  by  Nebuchad-
nezzar in  a  dream,  the  head  of  which  was  of  pure  gold,  the
breast  and  arms  of  silver,  the  belly  and  thighs  of  copper,
and  the  legs  and  feet  of  iron  and  clay  (Dan.  ii.  32,  33).  Nor
is  anything  else  meant  by  the  gold,  silver,  copper  and  iron
ages  mentioned  by  ancient  writers.  That  the  Christian
Church  succeeded  the  Jewish  is  well  known.  It  may  also
be  seen  in  the  Word  that  all  these  Churches  in  process  of
time  dechned  to  their  fall,  which  is  called  their  consumma-
tion. The  consummation  of  the  Most  Ancient  Church,
which  was  caused  through  the  eating  of  the  tree  of  know-
ledge, denoting  the  pride  of  self-derived  intelligence,  is
described  by  the  Flood.  The  consummation  of  the  Ancient
Church  is  described  by  the  disasters  which  befel  the  various
nations  mentioned  both  in  the  historical  and  prophetical
parts  of  the  Word,  especially  by  the  expulsion  of  the  heathen
from  the  land  of  Canaan  by  the  children  of  Israel.  The
consummation  of  the  Israelitish  and  Jewish  Church  is  denoted
by  the  destruction  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  and  by  the
carrying  away  of  the  Israelitish  people  into  perpetual  cap-
tivity, and  of  the  Jewish  nation  into  Babylonia,  and  at  last
by  the  second  destruction  of  the  temple  and  of  Jerusalem,  and
by  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews ;  this  end  was  foretold  in  many
places  in  the  prophets,  and  especially  in  Daniel  ix.  24-27.
But  the  gradual  decline  of  the  Christian  Church  until  its
end,  is  described  by  the  Lord  in  Matthew  xxiv.,  in  Mark  xiii.,
and  in  Luke  xxi. ;  and  its  consummation  in  the  Apocalypse.
From  these  considerations  it  should  be  evident  that  Churches
and  religions  in  process  of  time  decline  and  are  consummated,
ii.  Every  religion  declines  and  is  consummated  by  its  inversion
of  God's  image  in  man.  It  is  well  known  that  man  was
created  in  the  image  of  God,  according  to  His  hkeness  (Gen.
i.  26);  we  must  now  explain  what  is  meant  by  the  image  and
likeness  of  God.  God  alone  is  Love  and  Wisdom ;  man  was
created  to  be  a  receptacle  of  both,  his  will  to  be  a  receptacle


Divine  Providence  299

of  divine  Love  and  his  understanding  to  be  a  receptacle  of
divine  Wisdom.     That  these  two  receptacles  are  in  man  by
creation,  and  that  they  constitute  man,  and  are  formed  in
every  one  in  the  womb,  was  shown  above.    Man's  being  an
image  of  God  means,  therefore,  that  he  is  a  recipient  of
divine  Wisdom;  his  being  a  likeness  of  God  means  that  he
is  a  recipient  of  divine  Love;  and  therefore,  the  receptacle
called  the  understanding  is  an  image  of  God,  and  the  recep-
tacle called  the  will  is  a  Ukeness  of  God.    As  man  has  been
created  and  formed  to  be  a  receptacle,  it  follows  that  he
has  been  created  and  formed  that  his  will  may  receive  love
and  his  understanding  wisdom  from  God ;  man  receives  these
when  he  worships  God  and  lives  according  to  His  command-
ments, but  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  in  proportion  as  his
religion  gives  him  a  knowledge  of  God,  of  the  commandments,
and  of  the  nature  of  truth ;  for  truth  teaches  about  God  and
how  he  should  be  worshipped,  and  also  explains  the  com-
mandments, and  shows  how  man  should  hve  according  to
them.    The  image  and  likeness  of  God  have  not  been  utterly
destroyed  in  man  though  the  effect  is  the  same,  for  they  are
immanent  in  his  two  faculties  of  liberty  and  rationality,
frequently  treated  of  above;  they  were  in  effect  destroyed
when  man  made  the  receptacle  of  divine  Love,  or  his  wall,
the  receptacle  of  the  love  of  self,  and  the  receptacle  of  divine
Wisdom,  or  his  understanding,  the  receptacle  of  his  self-
derived   intelligence.     By  this  means  he   has  inverted  the
image  and  likeness  of  God,  for  he  has  turned  these  receptacles
away  from  God  and  to  himself ;  hence  they  are  closed  above
and  open  below,  or  closed  in  front  and  open  behind;  by
creation  they  were  opened  in  front  and  closed  behind ;  when
they  are  thus  open  where  they  should  be  closed  and  closed
where  they  should  be  open,  the  receptacle  of  love,  or  the
will,  receives  influx  from  hell  or  its  selfhood,  and   likewise
the  receptacle  of  wisdom,  or  the  understanding.     In  con-
sequence of  this  there  has  sprung  up  in  the  churches  a  worship
of  men  in  place  of  the  worship  of  God,  and  worship  from
false  doctrine  in  place  of  worship  from  true  doctrine,  false
worship  from  man's  own  intelligence,  and  the  worship  of
men  from  the  love  of  self.    This  shows  that  in  process  of
time  a  religion  declines  and  comes  to  an  end  by  the  inversion
of  the  image  of  God  in  man.

iii.  TJds  arises  from  the  accumulation  of  hereditary  evil  in


300  Divine  Providence

successive  generations.  It  was  stated  and  explained  above
that  hereditary  evil  does  not  come  from  Adam  and  his  wife
Eve  through  their  eating  of  the  tree  of  knowledge,  but  that
it  is  successively  received  by  parents  and  transmitted  to
their  offspring;  thus  it  accumulates  and  becomes  worse  from
generation  to  generation.  When  evil  thus  increases  amongst
a  number  of  men  it  contaminates  others,  for  there  is  in  all
evil  a  lust  of  corrupting  others,  which  in  some  men  bums
with  rage  against  good ;  hence  the  contagion  of  evil.  When
evil  has  taken  possession  of  the  rulers,  officers  and  leaders
of  a  Church,  religion  becomes  perverted,  and  the  remedies,
which  are  truths,  become  corrupted  by  falsification.  These
bring  upon  the  Church  a  successive  corruption  of  good  and
destruction  of  truth,  until  at  last  it  is  consummated.

iv.  Nevertheless  the  Lord  provides  that  every  one  may  be
saved.     It  is  provided  by  the  Lord  that  there  should  every-
where  be   some   religion,   and   that   every  religion   should
inculcate  two  essentials  of  salvation,  namely,  belief  in  God,
and  the  shunning  of  evil  as  being  against  God.    All  else
pertaining  to  the  understanding,  and  consequently  to  thought,
and  which  is  called  faith,  is  provided  for  every  one  according
to  his  life,  for  faith  is  a  matter  of  life ;  until  it  becomes  so,
it  does  not  really  live,  although  it  may  have  been  acquired
before.     It  is  also  provided  that  all  who  have  lived  good
lives,  and  have  believed  in  God  are  instructed  after  death
by  angels;  and  then  those  who  in  the  world  had  lived  in
conformity  with  these  two  essentials  of  religion,  accept  the
truths  of  the  Church  contained  in  the  Word,  and  acknowledge
the  Lord  as  the  God  of  heaven  and  the  Church ;  they  believe
this  more  easily  than  Christians  who  have  brought  with  them
from  the  world  an  idea  of  the  Lord's  Humanity  as  being
separated  from  His  Divinity.     It  has  also  been  provided
by  the  Lord  that  all  who  die  in  childhood  should  be  saved,
wherever  they  may  have  been  born.     There  is  also  given  to  all
men  after  death  the  opportunity  of  amending  their  fife  if  they
can ;  they  are  instructed  and  led  by  the  Lord  acting  through
the  instrumentality  of  angels,  and  as  they  then  know  that
they  are  living  after  death  and  that  there  is  a  heaven  and  a
hell,  they  at  first  assent  to  truths ;  but  those  who  while  in
the  world  did  not  believe  in  God  nor  shun  evils  as  sins,  after
a  short  time  feel  a  repugnance  for  truth  and  reject  it ;  and
those  who  have  acknowledged  it  with  the  lips  but  not  with


Divine  Providence  301

the  heart  are  hke  the  foolish  virgins  who  had  lamps  but
no  oil,  and  who  begged  others  for  oil,  and  went  away  and
bought  some,  and  yet  were  not  admitted  to  the  wedding.
Lamps  signify  the  truths  of  faith  and  oil  the  good  of  charity.
These  facts  show  that  the  divine  Providence  makes  it  possible
for  every  one  to  be  saved,  and  that  it  is  a  man's  own  fault
if  he  is  not  saved.

V.  The  Lord  also  provides  that  a  new  Church  shall  be  in-
stituted in  place  of  the  preceding  ruined  Church.  This  has  been
the  case  from  the  most  ancient  times,  namely,  that  a  new
Church  has  followed  whenever  a  former  Church  has  been
ruined.  The  Ancient  Church  succeeded  the  Most  Ancient;
after  the  Ancient  Church  followed  the  Israelitish  or  Jewish;
after  this,  the  Christian.  It  is  foretold  in  the  Apocalypse
that  after  this,  also,  is  to  follow  a  new  Church,  which  is  there
signified  by  the  New  Jerusalem  descending  out  of  heaven.
The  reason  why  a  new  Church  is  provided  by  the  Lord  to
take  the  place  of  a  former  ruined  Church,  may  be  seen  in
the  Doctrine  of  the  New  Jerusalem  Concerning  the  Sacred
Scripture  (nos.  104-113).

329.  IV.  Thus  all  are  intended  to  go  to  heaven,  and  none
to  hell.  That  the  Lord  casts  no  one  into  hell,  but  that  the
spirit  casts  himself  thither,  is  shown  in  the  work  on  Heaven
and  Hell  (nos.  545-550).  This  is  the  case  with  every  wicked
and  godless  man  after  death,  and  also  while  he  is  in  the
world;  there  is  this  difference,  however,  that  in  the  world
he  can  be  reformed,  and  may  embrace  and  assimilate  the
means  of  salvation,  but  not  after  his  departure  from  the
world.  The  means  of  salvation  depend  upon  these  two
truths,  that  evils  ought  to  be  shunned  as  contrary  to  the
divine  laws  in  the  Decalogue,  and  that  the  existence  of
God  ought  to  be  acknowledged.  These  two  things  are  possible
to  every  one,  provided  he  does  not  love  evils ;  for  the  Lord
flows  continually  into  his  will  giving  him  power  to  shun
evils,  and  into  his  understanding  giving  him  power  to  believe
that  there  is  a  God ;  but  no  one  can  do  either  unless  he  also
does  the  other ;  the  two  are  united  like  the  two  tables  of  the
Decalogue,  of  which  one  relates  to  the  Lord,  and  the  other
to  man.  The  Lord  by  His  table  enlightens  every  man  and
gives  him  power,  and  man  receives  the  power  and  enlighten-
ment so  far  as  he  obeys  the  commands  of  his  own  table ;
before  this,  the  two  tables  appear  as  if  lying  one  upon  the


302  Divine  Providence

other  and  sealed  up^  but  so  far  as  man  obeys  the  commands
of  his  own  table,  they  are  unsealed  and  opened.  What  is  the
Decalogue  to-day  but,  as  it  were,  a  closed  book  or  document,
opened  only  for  the  use  of  children  and  boys  ?  Say  to  any
one  a  little  older,  "  Do  not  do  this,  because  it  is  contrary
to  the  Decalogue,"  and  will  he  Hsten  ?  But  if  you  say,
"  Do  not  do  this,  because  it  is  contrary  to  the  divine  laws,"
he  may  listen;  yet  the  commandments  of  the  Decalogue
are  the  divine  laws  themselves.  A  trial  has  been  made
with  many  in  the  spiritual  world,  and  when  the  Decalogue
or  catechism  was  mentioned,  they  rejected  it  with  contempt ;
the  reason  was  that  the  Decalogue  teaches  in  its  second
table,  which  is  man's  table,  that  evils  should  be  shunned;
and  when  a  man  fails  to  shun  them,  whether  from  impiety
or  from  the  dogmatic  belief  that  works  are  of  no  avail  but
only  faith,  he  receives  any  mention  of  the  Decalogue  or
catechism  with  some  degree  of  contempt,  as  if  it  were  a  book
for  children,  which  is  no  longer  of  any  use  to  him.  These
things  have  been  stated  to  show  that  no  one  who  wishes
to  be  saved  lacks  either  a  knowledge  of  the  means  or  the
power  whereby  he  may  be  saved.  It  follows  that  all  men
are  intended  for  heaven  and  none  for  hell.  But  since  some
have  entertained  a  belief  concerning  predestination  to  non-
salvation  or  damnation,  and  as  this  belief  is  harmful,  and
cannot  be  dispelled  unless  reason  sees  its  madness  and
cruelty,  it  must  be  dealt  with  as  follows  :

i.  Predestination  except  to  heaven  is  contrary  to  the
infinity  of  the  divine  Love.

ii.  Predestination  except  to  heaven  is  contrary  to  the
infinity  of  the  divine  Wisdom.

iii.  It  is  an  insane  heresy  to  suppose  that  only  those  born
within  the  Church  are  saved.

iv.  It  is  a  cruel  heresy  to  suppose  that  any  of  the  human
race  are  predestined  to  damnation.

To  show  how  harmful  is  the  belief  in  predestination  as
generally  understood,  these  four  propositions  must  be  taken
in  order  and  elucidated.

330.  i.  Predestination  except  to  heaven  is  contrary  to  the
infinity  of  the  divine  Love.  That  Jehovah  or  the  Lord  is  divine
Love,  and  that  He  is  infinite,  and  the  Being  of  all  life,  also
that  man  was  created  in  the  image  and  likeness  of  God,
has  been  shown  in  the  work  on  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  ;


Di\'ine  Providence  303

and  as  every  man  is  formed  by  the  Lord  in  the  womb  in
that  image  and  likeness,  as  has  also  been  explained,  it  follows
that  the  Lord  is  the  Heavenly  Father  of  all  men,  and  that
men  are  His  spiritual  sons ;  these  also  are  the  names  given  in
the  Word  to  Jehovah  or  the  Lord,  and  to  men ;  for  He  says  :
"  Call  no  man  your  father  upon  the  earth,  for  One  is  your
Father  who  is  in  the  heavens"  (Matt,  xxiii.  9);  this  means
that  He  alone  is  the  Father  as  to  life,  and  that  the  earthly
father  is  the  father  only  as  to  the  outward  covering  of  Hfe,
which  is  its  body;  wherefore  in  heaven  no  other  father  is
named  than  the  Lord.  That  men  who  do  not  pervert  that
life  are  called  His  sons,  and  said  to  be  born  of  Him,  is  also
evident  from  many  passages  in  the  Word,  This  shows
that  the  divine  Love  is  in  all  men,  both  evil  and  good,
consequently  that  the  Lord,  who  is  divine  Love,  cannot  but
treat  them  as  a  father  on  earth  treats  his  children,  and  He
takes  infinitely  greater  care  of  them,  because  the  divine  Love
is  infinite;  and  again.  He  cannot  abandon  any  one  because
every  one's  life  comes  from  Him.  He  appears  to  withdraw
from  the  evil,  but  the  evil  really  withdraw  from  Him,  while
He  from  His  love  still  leads  them.  Wherefore  the  Lord
says,  "  Ask  and  it  shall  be  given  you,  seek  and  ye  shall
find,  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.  What  man  is
there  of  you  who,  if  his  son  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a  stone  ?
If  ye  then  being  evil  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your
sons,  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  who  is  in  the  heavens
give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  Him?  "  (Matt.  vii.  7-11).
And  elsewhere,  "  He  maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil
and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the
unjust  "  (Matt.  v.  45).  It  is  also  known  in  the  Church  that
the  Lord  desires  the  salvation  of  all,  and  the  death  of  none.
From  these  considerations  it  may  be  seen  that  any  pre-
destination except  to  heaven  would  be  contrary  to  the
divine  Love.

ii.  Predestination  except  to  heaven  is  contrary  to  the  infinity
of  the  divine  Wisdom.  The  divine  Love  by  its  own  divine
Wisdom  provides  the  means  whereby  every  man  may  be
saved ;  and  therefore  to  say  that  any  one  is  predestined
except  to  heaven  amounts  to  saying  that  divine  Love  cannot
provide  the  means  of  salvation ;  yet  all  possess  these  means,
as  was  shown  above,  and  they  are  given  by  the  divine  Provi-
dence which  is  infinite.     But  the  reason  whv  some  are  not


304  Divine  Providence

saved  is,  that  the  divine  Love  wills  that  man  should  feel
the  happiness  and  blessedness  of  heaven  in  himself,  for
otherwise  it  would  not  be  heaven  to  him ;  now  this  cannot  be,
unless  it  appears  to  man  that  he  thinks  and  wills  from  himself ;
for  without  this  appearance  nothing  would  be  really  his,  nor
would  he  be  a  man ;  the  divine  Providence  which  is  the  work
of  divine  Wisdom  from  divine  Love  has  this  for  its  end.  The
fact  that  some  are  not  saved  does  not  disprove  the  truth
that  all  are  predestined  to  heaven  and  none  to  hell,  but  if
the  means  of  salvation  were  wanting,  it  would  do  so.  It  has
already  been  shown  that  the  means  of  salvation  are  pro-
vided for  every  one,  and  that  heaven  is  of  such  a  nature
that  all  who  live  a  good  life,  of  whatever  religion  they  may
be,  can  find  a  home  there.  Man  is  like  soil  which  produces
fruits  of  every  kind,  this  being  its  distinctive  characteristic ;
the  fact  that  it  produces  noxious  fruits  does  not  prevent  it
from  producing  useful  fruits  also,  but  total  inability  would.
Man  is  also  like  an  object  which  converts  the  rays  of  light
into  various  colours ;  if  it  exhibits  only  unpleasing  colours^
it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  light ;  the  rays  of  light  may  also  be
converted  into  pleasing  colours.

iii.  It  is  an  insane  heresy  to  suppose  that  only  those  horn
within  the  Church  are  saved.  Those  born  outside  the  Church
are  just  as  much  men  as  those  born  within  it,  are  from  a
like  heavenly  origin,  and  are  equally  living  and  immortal
souls.  They  also  have  a  religion  which  teaches  them  to
believe  in  God  and  to  live  good  lives;  and  he  who  believes
in  God  and  lives  a  good  life  becomes  spiritual  in  his  degree
and  is  saved,  as  was  shown  above.  It  may  be  said  that
they  have  not  been  baptised;  but  baptism  saves  none  but
those  who  are  spiritually  cleansed,  that  is,  who  are  regenerated ;
for  baptism  is  a  sign  and  a  memorial  of  this.  It  may  be
said  that  the  Lord  is  unknown  to  them,  and  that  without
the  Lord  there  can  be  no  salvation;  but  no  one  is  saved
merely  because  the  Lord  is  known  to  him,  but  because  he
lives  according  to  His  commandments ;  and  the  Lord  is  known
to  every  one  who  beheves  in  God,  for  He  is  the  God  of  heaven
and  earth,  as  He  Himself  teaches  in  Matt,  xxviii.  18,  and
elsewhere.  And  furthermore,  those  outside  the  Church  have
a  clearer  idea  than  Christians  of  God  as  a  Man;  and  those
who  think  of  God  as  a  Man,  and  live  good  lives,  are  accepted
by  the  Lord ;  they  also  believe  God  to  be  one  in  Person  and


Divine  Providence  305

Essence,  whereas  Christians  do  not.  Their  idea  of  God
also  affects  their  Hfe,  for  they  regard  evils  as  sins  against
Him;  and  all  who  do  this  think  of  God  in  their  daily  life.
Christians  derive  religious  precepts  from  the  Word,  but
there  are  few  who  draw  thence  any  precepts  of  hfe.  The
Papists  do  not  read  it,  and  the  Reformed  who  separate  faith
from  charity  pay  no  attention  to  those  passages  in  the  Word
which  relate  to  life,  but  only  to  those  which  relate  to  faith ;
yet  the  whole  Word  is  nothing  but  a  doctrine  of  life.
Christianity  is  prevalent  only  in  Europe;  Mohammedanism
and  paganism  prevail  in  Asia,  the  East  and  West  Indies,
Africa  and  America;  and  the  human  race  in  those  parts  of
the  globe  is  ten  times  more  numerous  than  in  the  Christian
area;  and  even  there,  there  are  few  who  make  religion  a
matter  of  life.  What  therefore  can  be  more  insane  than  to
suppose  that  only  these  latter  are  saved,  and  the  former
condemned,  and  that  man  gets  to  heaven  by  his  birth  and
not  by  his  life  ?  This  is  why  the  Lord  says  :  "  I  say  unto
you  that  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west,  and  shall
sit  down  with  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom
of  the  heavens;  but  the  sons  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  cast
out"  (Matt.  viii.  ii,  12).

iv.  It  is  a  cruel  heresy  to  suppose  that  any  of  the  human  race
are  predestined  to  damnation.  It  is  cruel  to  believe  that  the
Lord,  who  is  Love  itself  and  Mercy  itself,  suffers  such  a  vast
multitude  of  men  to  be  born  for  hell,  or  that  so  many  myriads
of  m}Tiads  are  by  their  birth  devoted  to  damnation,  that  is,
are  born  as  devils  and  satans ;  and  that  by  His  divine  Wisdom
He  does  not  save  those  who  live  a  good  life  and  acknowledge
God  from  being  cast  into  eternal  fire  and  torment.  The
Lord  is  at  all  times  the  Creator  and  Saviour  of  all,  and  He
alone  leads  all,  and  desires  the  death  of  none ;  it  is  therefore
cruel  to  believe  and  dwell  upon  the  thought  that  so  great
a  multitude  of  nations  and  peoples  under  His  care  and
protection  should  be  a  predestined  prey  of  the  devil.

The  Lord  cannot  act  against  the  law^s  of  the  divine

Providence,  because  that  would  be  to  act  against

His  divine  Love  and  ^VISD0M,  thus  against  Himself

331.  In  The  Divine  Love  and  Wisdom  it  was  shown  that

the  Lord  is  divine  Love  and  Wisdom,  and  that  these  two

are  Being  and  Life  itself,  from  which  everything  else  has


3o6


Divine  Providence


its  being  and  its  life;  and  it  was  also  shown  that  the  divine
Love  and  Wisdom  go  forth  from  Him^  as  also  that  this
proceeding  Divine  is  Himself.  Among  the  things  which
proceed  from  Him,  the  divine  Providence  is  the  first  and
most  essential,  for  this  continually  seeks  the  end  for  which
the  universe  was  created ;  the  production  and  advancement
of  the  end  through  the  means  is  what  is  called  the  divine
Providence.  Now  because  the  proceeding  Divine  is  the
Lord  Himself,  and  the  divine  R-ovidence  is  the  primary
thing  which  proceeds  from  Him,  it  follows  that  to  act  against
the  laws  of  His  divine  Providence  would  be  to  act  against
Himself.  It  may  also  be  said  that  the  Lord  is  Providence,
just  as  it  is  said  that  God  is  Order ;  for  the  divine  Providence
is  divine  Order  exhibited  in  its  first  and  most  essential  end,
which  is  that  of  saving  mankind;  and  as  there  is  no  order
without  laws,  for  laws  constitute  order,  and  as  every  law  is
order  because  it  is  part  of  an  orderly  system,  it  follows  that
as  God  is  Order,  He  is  also  the  Law  of  His  own  Order.  It
must  also  be  said  of  the  divine  Providence  that,  as  the  Lord
is  His  own  Providence,  He  is  also  the  Law  of  His  own  Provi-
dence. It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  Lord  cannot  act
against  the  laws  of  His  divine  Providence,  for  that  would
be  to  act  against  Himself.  Furthermore,  there  can  be  no
operation  except  upon  a  subject,  and  by  the  employment
of  means ;  no  other  kind  of  operation  is  possible.  The  subject
of  the  divine  Providence  is  man,  the  means  are  the  divine
truths  by  which  man  acquires  wisdom  and  the  divine  goods
by  which  he  acquires  love.  The  divine  Providence  by  these
means  works  for  its  end  which  is  man's  salvation ;  for  whoever
desires  an  end  also  desires  the  means;  and  therefore,  when
one  who  wishes  to  attain  some  end  works  to  secure  it,  he
does  so  by  employing  means.  But  these  things  will  be
clearer  when  examined  in  the  following  order  :

I.  The  working  of  divine  Providence  to  save  man  begins
at  his  birth,  and  continues  to  the  end  of  his  life,  and  after-
wards to  eternity.

II.  The  divine  Providence  always  works  by  means,  and
this  from  pure  mercy.

III.  Instantaneous  salvation  from  immediate  mercy  is
impossible.

IV.  Instantaneous  salvation  from  immediate  mercy  is
the  fiery  flying  serpent  in  the  Church.


Divine  Providence  307

332.  I.  The  working  of  divine  Providence  to  save

MAN  begins  at  HIS  BIRTH,  AND  CONTINUES  TO  THE  END  OF
HIS    LIFE^    AND    AFTERWARDS    TO    EtERNITY.      It    waS    shown

above  that  a  heaven  from  the  human  race  is  the  very  end
of  the  creation  of  the  universe,  and  that  the  production  and
advancement  of  this  end  is  the  divine  Providence  for  the
salvation  of  mankind;  and  that  all  things  outside  man  and
useful  to  him  are  secondary  ends  of  creation,  which  in  the
aggregate  have  relation  to  everything  that  exists  in  the
animal,  vegetable  and  mineral  kingdoms.  As  these  things
progress  constantly  according  to  the  laws  of  divine  order
established  in  creation  from  the  beginning,  why  should
not  the  primary  end  which  is  the  salvation  of  the  human
race,  progress  constantly  according  to  the  laws  of  its  order,
which  are  the  laws  of  the  divine  Providence  ?  Consider  a
fruit  tree;  does  it  not  first  spring  forth  as  a  slender  shoot
from  a  little  seed,  and  afterwards  gradually  grow  to  a  stalk,
and  spread  forth  branches  which  are  covered  with  leaves,
and  then  put  forth  blossoms  and  bring  forth  fruit,  depositing
therein  new  seeds  by  which  it  aims  at  perpetuity  ?  A
similar  process  takes  place  in  every  shrub  and  herb  of  the
field.  Do  not  all  things  in  general  and  particular  proceed
constantly  and  wonderfully  from  end  to  end  according  to
the  laws  of  their  order?  Why  should  not  the  primary  end
which  is  a  heaven  from  the  human  race,  do  so  also  ?  Can
there  be  anything  in  its  progress  which  does  not  constantly
proceed  according  to  the  laws  of  divine  Providence  ?  As
there  is  a  correspondence  between  man's  life  and  the  growth
of  a  tree,  let  an  analogy  or  comparison  be  drawn  between
them  : — Man's  infancy  is  like  the  tender  shoot  of  a  tree
sprouting  from  the  seed  out  of  the  ground;  his  childhood
and  youth  are  like  that  shoot  growing  into  a  stalk  with  its
little  branches;  the  natural  truths  with  which  every  man  is
first  endowed  are  like  the  leaves  with  which  the  branches
are  covered,  leaves  in  the  Word  signifying  natural  truths;
man's  introduction  to  the  marriage  of  good  and  truth,  or
the  spiritual  marriage,  is  like  the  blossoms  which  the  tree
puts  forth  in  the  springtime ;  spiritual  truths  are  the  petals
of  those  flowers ;  the  firstfruits  of  the  spiritual  marriage  are
like  the  first  beginnings  of  the  fruit;  spiritual  goods,  or  the
goods  of  charity,  are  like  the  ripe  fruit,  this  being  the  meaning
of   fruit  in  the  Word;   the   products   of  wisdom  and  love


3o8


Divine  Providence


resemble  seeds,  by  which  a  man  becomes  Hke  a  garden  or
paradise.  Man  also  is  described  in  the  Word  as  a  tree,
and  his  wisdom  proceeding  from  love  as  a  garden ;  the  garden
of  Eden  signifies  nothing  else.  Man  is  indeed  a  bad  tree
as  regards  the  seed,  but  he  may  be  engrafted  or  inoculated
with  a  shoot  taken  from  the  tree  of  life,  by  which  the  sap
drawn  from  the  old  root  is  turned  into  sap  producing  good
fruit.  This  comparison  is  made  to  show  that  since  there
is  so  constant  a  progression  of  the  divine  Providence  in  the
growth  and  improvement  of  trees,  it  must  certainly  be
constant  in  the  reformation  and  regeneration  of  men,  who
are  of  much  more  value  than  trees,  according  to  these  words
of  the  Lord  :  "  Are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two  farthings,
yet  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  God  }  But  even  the
very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.  Fear  not  there-
fore ;  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows.  And  which
of  you  by  taking  thought  can  add  one  cubit  to  his  stature  ?
If  ye  then  be  not  able  to  do  that  which  is  least,  why  take  ye
thought  for  the  rest?  Consider  the  lilies  how  they  grow;
if  then  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field,  which  to-day  is,
but  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven,  how  much  more  will
He  clothe  you,  0  men  of  little  faith?  "  (Luke  xii.  6,  7,  25-28).
333.  The  working  of  the  divine  Providence  to  save  man
was  said  above  to  begin  at  his  birth  and  to  continue  to  the
end  of  his  life.  In  order  to  understand  this,  it  must  be
known  that  the  Lord  knows  the  man's  character,  and  fore-
sees what  he  wishes  to  be,  and  thus  what  he  will  be ;  and  as
he  is  a  man  and  therefore  immortal,  the  freedom  of  his  will
cannot  be  taken  away,  as  has  been  frequently  pointed  out
above.  And  therefore  the  Lord  foresees  his  state  after
death  and  provides  for  it  from  his  birth  to  the  end  of  his
life.  He  provides  for  the  wicked  by  permitting  their  evils
while  He  continually  withdraws  them  therefrom;  but  He
provides  for  the  good  by  leading  them  to  good.  Thus  the
divine  Providence  is  continually  working  to  save  men;  but
only  those  can  be  saved  who  are  willing  to  be  saved,  and
those  are  willing  to  be  saved  who  believe  in  God  and  are  led
by  Him;  but  those  are  not  willing,  who  do  not  believe  in
God  and  who  lead  themselves ;  for  these  do  not  think  about
eternal  life  and  salvation,  but  the  others  do.  The  Lord
sees  this,  and  He  continually  leads  them  according  to  the
aws  of  His  divine  Providence,  against  which  He  cannot  act,


Divine  Providence  309

since  that  would  be  to  act  against  His  divine  Love  and
Wisdom,  or  against  Himself.  Now  as  the  Lord  foresees
the  states  of  all  after  death,  and  also  foresees  the  place  in
heaven  of  those  who  desire  to  be  saved,  and  the  place  in  hell
of  those  who  are  not  willing  to  be  saved,  it  follows,  as  was
said,  that  He  provides  places  for  the  evil  by  permission  and
withdrawal,  and  for  the  good  by  guidance ;  unless  this  were
done  continually  from  every  one's  birth  until  the  end  of  his
life,  neither  heaven  nor  hell  could  endure;  for  without  that
Foreknowledge  and  Providence,  both  heaven  and  hell  would
be  in  a  state  of  confusion.  That  the  foresight  of  the  Lord
provides  a  place  for  every  one  may  be  seen  above  (nos.  202-
203).  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  following  comparison  : —
If  an  archer  or  marksman  should  aim  at  a  target  behind
which  a  straight  hne  is  drawn  to  the  distance  of  a  mile,  and
if  he  should  err  in  his  aim  but  a  nail's  breadth,  the  arrow  or
ball  continuing  its  flight  to  the  end  of  the  mile  would  diverge
very  greatly  from  the  line  drawn  behind  the  target.  So
would  it  be  if  the  Lord  did  not  at  every  moment  provide  for
the  eternal  abode  of  every  one  after  death.  The  Lord  does
this  because  the  future  is  to  Him  as  the  present,  and  the
present  is  to  Him  eternal.  That  the  divine  Providence  in
all  that  it  does  regards  the  infinite  and  eternal,  may  be
seen  above  (nos.  46-69,  214,  sqq.).

334.  The  working  of  the  divine  Providence  was  also  said
above  to  continue  to  eternity,  because  every  angel  is  per-
fected in  wisdom  to  eternity,  each  according  to  the  degree
of  his  love  for  good  and  truth  when  he  left  the  world.  It
is  this  degree  which  is  perfected  to  eternity ;  whatever  exceeds
that  degree  is  outside  the  angel  and  not  within  him.  This
is  meant  by  the  "  good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken
together,  and  running  over"  which  shall  be  given  into  the
bosom  of  those  who  forgive  and  give  to  others  (Luke  vi.
37,  38),  that  is,  who  live  in  the  good  of  charity.

335.  II.  The  divine  Providence  always  works  by
MEANS,  AND  THIS  FROM  PURE  MERCY.  There  are  means
and  methods  of  the  divine  Providence.  Its  means  are
those  by  which  man  becomes  truly  human,  and  is  perfected
in  understanding  and  will ;  and  by  its  methods  these  things
are  accomplished.  The  means  by  which  man  becomes
truly  human  and  is  perfected  in  understanding  are  called
simply  truths;  they  become  ideas  in  the  thought,  and  form


3IO


Divine  Providence


the  contents  of  the  memory ;  essentially  they  are  knowledge,
which  is  the  basis  of  the  sciences.  All  these  means  are  in-
trinsically spiritual,  but  as  they  have  a  natural  outside  or
covering,  they  appear  to  be  natural,  and  some  of  them
material.  These  means  are  infinite  in  number  and  variety ;
they  are  more  or  less  simple  or  compound,  and  more  or  less
perfect  or  imperfect.  There  are  means  for  forming  and
perfecting  natural  civil  life,  also  for  forming  and  perfecting
rational  moral  life,  and  also  for  forming  and  perfecting
heavenly  spiritual  life.  These  means  follow,  one  kind  after
another,  from  infancy  to  old  age  and  after  this  to  eternity ;
and  as  they  follow  in  their  development,  the  prior  become
the  means  of  attaining  the  posterior,  for  they  enter  as  mediate
causes  into  everything  formed  from  them;  for  from  them
every  effect  or  conclusion  becomes  efficient,  and  therefore  a
cause.  Thus  the  posterior  in  their  turn  become  means;
and  as  this  process  goes  on  for  ever,  there  is  no  last  or  ultimate
which  ends  the  process.  For  as  the  eternal  is  without  end,
wisdom  which  increases  to  eternity  is  also  without  end.  If
there  were  an  end  to  the  wisdom  of  a  wdse  man,  the  delight
of  his  wisdom,  which  consists  in  its  perpetual  multiplication
and  fructification,  would  perish,  and  thus  his  life's  delight
would  perish,  and  in  its  place  would  arise  the  delight  of
fame  in  which,  if  it  is  the  sole  motive,  there  is  no  heavenly
life;  the  wise  man  then  would  no  longer  be  like  a  youth
but  like  an  old  man,  and  at  length  a  decrepit  one.  Although
the  wisdom  of  a  wise  man  in  heaven  increases  for  ever,  still
angelic  wisdom  cannot  attain  to  divine  Wisdom,  just  as
the  asymptote  approaches  a  hyperbola  continually,  but
never  touches  it;  and  so  with  the  squaring  of  the  circle.
This  should  make  clear  what  is  meant  by  the  means  em-
ployed by  divine  Providence  that  man  may  become  truly
human,  and  may  be  perfected  in  understanding;  and  that
these  means  are  simiply  truths.  There  are  just  as  many
means  whereby  man  is  formed  and  perfected  in  will,  but  these
are  simply  goods ;  from  these  the  man  acquires  love,  but  from
the  others  he  acquires  wisdom.  Their  union  constitutes
man,  for  such  as  the  union  is,  such  is  the  man.  This  union
is  what  is  called  the  marriage  of  good  and  truth.

336.  But  the  methods  by  which  the  divine  Providence
works  upon  and  through  the  means  to  form  and  perfect
man,  are  also  infinite  in  number  and  variety;  they  are  as


Divine  Providence  311

numerous  as  the  operations  of  the  divine  Wisdom  from  the
divine  Love  to  save  man,  or  as  are  the  operations  of  the
divine  Providence  according  to  its  laws,  which  have  been
explained  above.  That  these  methods  are  most  secret,
was  illustrated  above  by  the  operation  of  the  soul  upon  the
body,  concerning  which  man  knows  little  or  nothing.  For
instance  how  the  eye,  ear,  nose,  tongue  and  skin  experience
sensation ;  how  the  stomach  digests ;  how  the  mesentery,  the
chyle  and  the  liver  elaborate  the  blood;  how  the  pancreas
and  spleen  purify  the  blood,  the  kidneys  free  it  from  impure
humours,  the  heart  collects  and  distributes  it,  the  lungs
vivify  it ;  and  how  the  brain  refines  and  heightens  its  power ;
besides  innumerable  other  secret  processes  which  are  almost
beyond  the  ken  of  science.  It  is  evident  therefore  that  still
less  can  any  one  pry  into  the  secret  workings  of  the  divine
Providence ;  it  is  enough  that  its  laws  are  known.

337.  The  divine  Providence  does  everything  out  of  pure
mercy,  because  the  divine  Essence  is  pure  Love ;  it  is  this
which  operates  by  the  divine  Wisdom,  and  this  is  the  divine
Providence.  This  pure  Love  is  pure  mercy  for  the  following
reasons  : — i.  This  pure  love  operates  with  all  men  thoughout
the  whole  world,  who  are  all  so  constituted  as  to  be  unable
to  do  anj-thing  of  themselves.  2.  It  operates  equally  with
the  evil  and  unjust  and  with  the  good  and  just.  3.  It  leads
the  former  in  hell,  and  rescues  the  latter  from  it.  4.  It  per-
petually strives  with  the  evil  in  hell,  and  fights  for  them
against  the  devil,  that  is,  against  the  evils  of  hell.  5.  It
came  into  the  world  on  this  account,  and  underwent  tempta-
tions even  to  the  last,  which  was  the  passion  of  the  cross.
6.  It  continually  acts  with  the  unclean  to  make  them  clean,
and  with  the  insane  to  make  them  sane.  Thus  it  labours
continually  out  of  pure  mercy.

338.  III.  Instantaneous  salvation  from  immediate
MERCY  IS  impossible.  It  was  shown  above  that  the  opera-
tion of  divine  Providence  to  save  man  begins  at  his  birth
and  continues  to  the  end  of  his  life,  and  afterwards  to
eternity ;  also  that  this  operation  continually  employs  means
out  of  pure  mercy.  It  follows  that  there  is  no  such  thing
as  instantaneous  salvation  or  immediate  mercy.  But  as
many  who  never  think  of,  or  try  to  understand,  matters
relating  to  the  Church  or  religion,  believe  that  they  are
saved  by  immediate  mercy,  and  therefore  that  salvatioa  is


312  Divine  Providence

instantaneous,  and  as  this  is  contrary  to  the  truth,  and  is
moreover  a  harmful  beUef,  it  is  important  to  consider  the
subject  in  proper  order  as  follows.

i.  The  belief  in  instantaneous  salvation  from  immediate
mercy  has  been  founded  upon  the  conditions  of  man's  natural
life.

ii.  This  belief  results  from  ignorance  of  the  spiritual  state,
which  is  altogether  different  from  the  natural.

iii.  The  doctrines  of  all  the  Churches  in  the  Christian  world
are  fundamentally  opposed  to  instantaneous  salvation  from
immediate  mercy;  but  external  members  of  the  Church
nevertheless  defend  this  doctrine.

i.  The  belief  in  instantaneous  salvation  from  immediate
mercy  has  been  founded  upon  the  conditions  of  man's  natural
life.  The  natural  man  infers  from  his  own  state  of  life  that
heavenly  joy  is  like  worldly  joy,  and  that  it  flows  in  and  is
received  in  a  similar  manner ;  for  example,  that  it  resembles
the  state  of  a  poor  man  who  becomes  rich,  and  so  passes
from  a  sad  state  of  want  into  a  happy  state  of  opulence ;  or
like  that  of  a  humble  person  who  becomes  eminent,  and  so
passes  from  neglect  to  fame;  or  like  that  of  one  who  goes
from  a  house  of  mourning  to  the  festivity  of  a  wedding.  As
these  states  may  succeed  each  other  within  a  day,  and
similar  changes  are  supposed  to  be  possible  in  man's  state
after  death,  it  is  evident  whence  comes  the  belief  in  instan-
taneous salvation  from  immediate  mercy.  In  the  world,
also,  many  men  differing  in  character  can  live  in  pleasant
association  with  each  other  in  the  same  company  or  social
circle.  This  is  the  case  in  the  natural  state,  because  the
external  of  one  man  can  be  accommodated  to  the  external
of  another,  however  unlike  they  may  be  inwardly.  From
this  natural  state  it  is  inferred  that  salvation  is  merely
admission  into  heaven  among  the  angels,  and  that  this
admission  is  granted  from  immediate  mercy.  And  therefore
it  is  also  believed  that  heaven  can  be  granted  to  the  evil  as
well  as  the  good,  and  that  there  results  a  social  intercourse
like  that  in  the  world,  differing  only  in  the  fulness  of  its  joy.

ii.  This  belief  results  from  ignorance  of  the  spiritual  state,
which  is  altogether  different  from  the  natural.  The  spiritual
state,  or  the  state  of  man  after  death,  has  been  described
above  in  many  places ;  and  it  has  been  shown  that  every  one
is  his  own  love  and  that  no  one  there  can  live  with  any  but


Divine  Providence  313

those  whose  love  is  similar,  and  that  if  he  comes  among
others  he  cannot  breathe  his  own  life.  This  is  the  reason
why  every  one  after  death  comes  into  the  society  of  others
like  himself,  or  of  those  whose  love  is  similar,  and  that  he
recognises  these  as  if  they  were  neighbours  and  friends ;  and
what  is  still  more  wonderful,  when  he  meets  and  sees  them,
he  seems  to  have  known  them  from  childhood ;  it  is  spiritual
kinship  and  friendship  which  causes  this.  Moreover  no
member  of  any  community  can  dwell  in  any  house  but  his
own ;  every  one  has  his  own  house,  which  he  finds  ready  for
him  when  he  first  joins  the  community.  He  m.ay  associate
with  others  outside  his  own  house,  but  he  cannot  abide
anywhere  else;  and  again,  no  one,  when  in  the  apartment
of  another,  can  sit  anywhere  but  in  his  own  place ;  if  he  sits
anywhere  else,  he  becomes  stupid  and  dumb;  and  strange
to  say,  every  one  when  he  enters  a  room  knows  his  own
place.  It  is  the  same  when  they  meet  together  in  places  of
worship  or  in  public  assemblies.  It  is  evident  therefore
that  the  spiritual  state  is  wholly  different  from  the  natural,
and  is  such  that  every  one  must  be  where  his  reigning  love  is,
for  that  is  the  delight  of  his  life,  and  every  one  desires  to  be
in  the  delight  of  his  life ;  moreover  a  man's  spirit  cannot  be
elsewhere,  because  this  delight  constitutes  his  life,  indeed,
it  is  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  and  the  beating  of  his  heart.
In  the  natural  world  it  is  different.  In  this  world  a  man  is
taught  from  childhood  to  simulate  outwardly  in  face,  speech
and  gesture,  delights  other  than  those  which  he  cherishes
inwardly;  and  therefore  from  man's  state  in  the  natural
world  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  as  to  his  state  after  death ;
for  every  one's  state  after  death  is  spiritual,  so  that  he  cannot
be  elsewhere  than  in  the  delight  of  his  love,  which  delight
he  had  acquired  for  himself  by  his  life  in  the  natural  world.
It  should  be  clearly  evident  from  this,  that  no  one  who  is  in
hellish  delight  can  be  admitted  to  the  delight  of  heaven,
which  is  generally  called  heavenly  joy ;  or,  what  is  the  same,
no  one  who  is  in  the  delight  of  evil  can  be  introduced  into
the  delight  of  good  :  and  it  may  be  still  more  clearly  seen
from  the  fact  that  after  death  no  one  is  forbidden  to
ascend  into  heaven;  the  way  is  shown  him,  opportunity  is
given  him,  and  he  is  admitted;  but  when  he  comes  into
heaven  and  breathes  in  its  delight,  he  begins  to  suffer  pain
in  the  breast,  to  be  tortured  at  heart,  and  to  feel  a  faint-


314  Divine  Providence

ness  which  causes  him  to  writhe  hke  a  serpent  placed  close
to  a  fire ;  then  turning  away  from  heaven  and  towards  hell,
he  flees  headlong  away,  nor  does  he  pause  till  he  reaches  the
community  where  his  own  love  reigns.  It  should  therefore
be  evident  that  no  one  enters  heaven  from  immediate  mercy,
nor  is  this  merely  a  matter  of  admission,  as  many  in  the
world  suppose ;  nor  is  there  any  such  thing  as  instantaneous
salvation,  for  this  presupposes  immediate  mercy.  There
were  some  who  in  the  world  had  believed  in  instantaneous
salvation  out  of  immediate  mercy,  and  when  they  became
spirits,  they  wished  that  their  hellish  delight,  or  their  delight
in  evil,  should  be  changed  by  Divine  omnipotence  and  mercy
into  heavenly  delight,  or  delight  in  good ;  and  because  they
so  desired,  permission  was  granted  to  the  angels,  who  then
removed  their  hellish  delight.  But  as  this  was  the  delight
of  their  life's  love,  and  consequently  their  very  life,  they  lay
as  if  dead,  deprived  of  all  sense  and  motion ;  nor  was  it  possible
to  breathe  into  them  any  life  other  than  their  own,  because
it  was  impossible  to  reverse  the  whole  organisation  of  their
mind  and  body,  which  had  all  been  distorted.  They  were
therefore  revived  by  the  immission  of  the  delight  of  their
life's  love.  After  this  they  said  that  in  that  state  they  had
had  a  horrible  and  dreadful  inward  feeling  which  they  would
not  divulge.  This  shows  why  they  say  in  heaven  that  it
is  easier  to  change  an  owl  into  a  turtle-dove,  or  a  serpent
into  a  lamb,  than  a  spirit  of  hell  into  an  angel.

iii.  The  doctrines  of  the  Churches  in  the  Christian  world  are
fundamentally  opposed  to  instantaneous  salvation  from  im-
mediate mercy  ;  but  external  members  of  the  Church  nevertheless
defend  this  doctrine.  The  doctrines  of  all  churches,  viewed
interiorly,  teach  men  how  to  live.  What  Church  is  there
whose  doctrine  does  not  teach  that  man  ought  to  examine
himself,  see  and  acknowledge  his  sins,  confess  them,  repent,
and  then  live  a  new  life?  Who  is  admitted  to  the  Holy
Communion  without  this  admonition  and  command  ?  Make
inquiry,  and  you  will  be  convinced.  What  Church  is  there
whose  doctrine  is  not  founded  on  the  commandments  of  the
Decalogue?  and  the  commandments  of  the  Decalogue  are
precepts  of  life.  What  member  of  the  Church,  in  whom
anything  of  the  Church  really  exists,  does  not  at  once  acknow-
ledge that  he  who  lives  a  good  life  is  saved,  and  he  who  lives


Divine  Providence  315

wickedly  is  condemned?  And  therefore  the  Athanasian
Creed,  which  is  accepted  in  the  whole  Christian  world,  states,
"  That  the  Lord  will  come  to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead,
and  then  they  who  have  done  good  will  enter  into  life  eternal,
and  they  who  have  done  evil  into  eternal  fire."  This  shows
that  the  doctrines  of  all  Churches,  viewed  interiorly,  teach
how  men  should  live,  and  because  they  do  so,  they  teach
that  salvation  depends  on  a  man's  life ;  and  man's  life  is  not
breathed  into  him  in  a  moment,  but  is  formed  gradually,
and  is  reformed  as  he  shuns  evils  as  sins,  learns  what  sin
is,  recognises  and  acknowledges  it,  ceases  to  will  it  and
therefore  desists  from  it,  and  learns  about  those  means
of  reformation  which  depend  on  a  knowledge  of  God.  By
all  these,  man's  life  is  formed  and  reformed;  they  cannot
be  acquired  in  a  moment,  for  hereditary  evil  which  in
itself  is  hellish,  must  be  removed,  and  good  which  in
itself  is  heavenly,  must  be  implanted  in  its  place.  As  regards
this  hereditary  evil,  man  may  be  compared  to  an  owl  in
understanding,  and  to  a  serpent  in  will;  and  a  reformed
man  may  be  compared  to  a  dove  in  understanding,  and  to
a  sheep  in  will.  Instantaneous  reformation  and  salvation
thereby  might  thus  be  compared  to  the  instantaneous  con-
version of  an  owl  into  a  dove,  or  of  a  serpent  into  a  sheep.
Who  that  has  any  knowledge  of  man's  life  does  not  see  that
this  is  impossible,  unless  the  nature  of  the  owl  and  serpent
is  removed,  and  the  nature  of  the  dove  and  sheep  substi-
tuted? It  is  also  well  known  that  every  intelligent  man
can  become  more  intelligent,  and  every  wise  man  wiser,
and  that  intelligence  and  wisdom  may  increase,  and  with
some  men  do  increase,  from  childhood  to  the  end  of  life,
and  that  man  is  thus  continually  perfected.  Why  should  not
this  be  even  more  true  of  spiritual  intelligence  and  wisdom,
for  these  rise  above  natural  intelligence  and  wisdom  by  two
degrees ;  and  when  they  so  rise  they  become  angelic  wisdom,
which  is  ineffable.  That  the  wisdom  of  the  angels  increases
to  eternity  was  stated  above.  Who  cannot  understand,  if
he  will,  that  it  is  impossible  for  that  which  is  being  perfected
to  eternity,  to  be  made  perfect  in  an  instant?

339.  It  should  now  be  evident  that  no  one  whose  view  of
salvation  is  based  upon  life,  thinks  of  instantaneous  salvation
out  of  immediate  mercy,  but  of  the  means  of  salvation  in


3i6


Divine  Providence


and  by  which  the  Lord  works  according  to  the  laws  of  His
divine  Providence,  that  is,  by  which  man  is  led  by  the  Lord
out  of  pure  mercy.  But  those  who  do  not  think  from  life
about  salvation,  suppose  that  salvation  is  instantaneous
and  mercy  immediate;  for  example,  those  who  separate
faith  from  charity — charity  being  life — also  suppose  that
faith  is  instantaneous  and  is  acquired  at  the  last  hour  of
death,  if  not  before.  And  those  also  do  this  who  believe
the  pardon  of  sins  without  repentance  amounts  to  an  acquittal
from  them,  and  thus  ensures  salvation,  and  therefore  go  to
the  Holy  Supper ;  as  also  those  who  trust  in  the  indulgences
of  the  monks,  and  in  their  prayers  for  the  dead,  and  in  the
dispensations  they  grant  in  virtue  of  the  power  they  claim
over  the  souls  of  men.

340.  IV.  Instantaneous  salvation  from  immediate  mercy  is
the  iiery  flying  serpent  in  the  Church.  By  the  fiery  flying
serpent  is  meant  evil  glowing  with  infernal  fire;  the  same  is
meant  by  the  fiery  flying  serpent  spoken  of  in  Isaiah  :  "  Re-
joice not  thou,  all  Philistia,  that  the  rod  that  smote  thee
is  broken;  for  out  of  the  serpent's  root  shall  go  forth  a
basihsk,  whose  fruit  shall  be  a  fiery  flying  serpent  "  (xiv.  29).
Such  evil  flies  about  in  the  Church  when  there  is  a  belief
in  instantaneous  salvation  out  of  immediate  mercy,  for  by
it — i.  Religion  is  abolished,  ii.  Carelessness  is  induced,
iii.  Damnation  is  ascribed  to  the  Lord.

i.  By  belief  in  instantaneous  salvation  religion  is  abolished.
There  are  two  things  which  are  at  once  the  essentials  and
the  universals  of  religion,  namely,  belief  in  God,  and  repent-
ance. They  are  both  void  of  meaning  to  those  who  believe
that  men  are  saved  from  mercy  alone,  however  they  may
live;  for  what  need  is  there  to  do  more  than  say,  "  Have
mercy  upon  me,  0  God  ?  "  Concerning  all  other  religious
matters  they  are  in  thick  darkness,  indeed  they  love  thick
darkness.  Of  the  first  essential  of  the  Church,  which  is  a
belief  in  God,  they  merely  think,  "  What  is  God  ?  Who
lias  seen  him?  "  If  they  are  told  that  He  exists,  and  that
He  is  One,  they  agree  that  He  is  One;  if  they  are  told  that
there  are  three,  they  agree  that  t-here  are  three,  but  say  that
the  three  are  to  be  called  one;  this  is  their  conception  of  a
belief  in  God.  About  the  second  essential  of  the  Church,
which  is  repentance,  they  never  think,  and  therefore  they


Divine  Providence  317

do  not  think  about  sin ;  and  at  length  they  do  not  know  that
there  is  any  such  thing;  and  then  they  hear  with  pleasure
and  eagerly  imbibe  the  assurance  that,  "  the  law  does  not
condemn,  because  the  Christian  is  not  under  its  yoke;  only
say,  God  have  mercy  upon  me  for  the  sake  of  the  Son,  and
you  will  be  saved."  This  is  their  conception  of  repentance
of  life.  But  take  away  repentance,  or  what  is  the  same
thing,  separate  life  from  religion,  and  what  is  left  but  the
mere  words,  "  Have  mercy  on  me  ?  "  Consequently  such
men  cannot  but  think  that  salvation  is  effected  in  a  moment
by  the  utterance  of  those  words,  about  the  hour  of  death
if' not  before.  What  then  is  the  Word  to  them,  but  as  it  were
an  obscure  and  ambiguous  declaration  issuing  from  a  tripod
in  a  cave,  or  an  incomprehensible  response  from  the  oracle
of  an  idol  ?  In  a  word,  if  you  take  away  repentance,  that  is,
separate  life  from  religion,  what  is  man  but  evil  glowing
with  infernal  fire,  or  a  fiery  flying  serpent  in  the  Church  ?
For  without  repentance  man  is  in  evil,  and  evil  is  hell.

ii.  By  a  belief  in  instantaneous  salvation  from  pure  mercy
alone,  carelessness  of  life  is  induced.  Carelessness  of  life
arises  either  from  a  godless  man's  belief  that  there  is  no  life
after  death,  or  from  his  belief  that  life  has  nothing  to  do  with
salvation.  A  man  of  the  latter  kind,  although  he  believes  in
eternal  life,  still  thinks,  "  Whether  I  live  a  good  or  a  bad  life,
I  can  be  saved,  since  salvation  is  of  pure  mercy,  and  God's
mercy  is  universal  because  He  does  not  desire  the  death  of
any  one  "  ;  and  if  perchance  it  occurs  to  him  that  mercy  ought
to  be  prayed  for  in  the  words  of  the  received  faith,  he  may
think  that  this  can  be  done  just  before  death,  if  it  has  not  been
done  before.  Every  man  who  is  careless  in  this  way,  thinks
nothing  of  adultery,  fraud,  injustice,  violence,  blasphemy
or  revenge ;  but  he  gives  himself  up,  body  and  soul,  to  them
all;  nor  does  he  know  what  spiritual  evil  and  its  lusts  are;
if  he  learns  anything  of  this  from  the  Word,  it  is  like  some-
thing that  falls  on  ebony  and  rebounds,  or  like  something
that  falls  into  a  ditch  and  is  swallowed  up.

iii.  By  a  belief  in  instantaneous  salvation  damnation  is
ascribed  to  the  Lord.  Who  can  avoid  the  conclusion  that
not  man  but  the  Lord  is  at  fault  if,  while  He  is  able  to  save
every  one  out  of  pure  mercy,  any  one  is  not  saved?  It
may  be  said  that  faith  is  the  means  of  salvation;  but  what


3i8


Divine  Providence


man  is  there  to  whom  that  faith  cannot  be  given?  for  it
is  merely  thought,  which  may  be  accepted  with  confidence
by  any  one  whose  state  of  mind  is  withdrawn  from  worldly
things;  and  he  may  also  say,  "  I  cannot  acquire  that  faith
of  myself  " ;  if  therefore  it  is  not  granted  and  the  man  is
damned,  what  can  he  think  but  that  the  Lord,  who  had
the  power  to  save  and  would  not,  is  in  fault  ?  Would  not
this  be  to  call  Him  unmerciful  ?  And  moreover  in  the  glow
of  his  faith  he  may  say,  "  How  can  He  bear  to  see  so  many
damned  in  Hell,  when  He  is  able  out  of  pure  mercy  to  save
them  all  in  a  moment?"  And  he  may  say  other  such
things,  which  can  only  be  called  abominable  imputations
against  the  Divine.  From  these  considerations  it  should
now  be  evident  that  the  belief  in  instantaneous  salvation
from  pure  mercy  is  the  fiery  flying  serpent  in  the  Church.
******
Excuse  the  addition  of  what  follows,  that  the  paper  which
is  left  may  be  filled.  Some  spirits  ascended  by  permission
from  hell,  and  said  to  me,  "  You  have  written  many  things
from  the  Lord ;  wTite  something  from  us  also."  I  replied,
"What  shall  I  write?"  They  said,  "Write  that  every
spirit,  whether  good  or  evil,  lives  in  his  own  delight,  a  good
spirit  in  the  delight  of  his  good,  and  an  evil  spirit  in  the
delight  of  his  evil."  I  asked,  "What  is  your  delight?"
They  said  that  it  was  the  delight  of  committing  adultery,
stealing,  cheating  and  lying.  Again  I  asked,  "  What  is  the
nature  of  those  delights  ?  "  They  said,  that  they  were
perceived  by  others  as  the  stench  of  excrement,  as  the  putrid
smell  of  dead  bodies,  and  as  the  pungent  odour  of  stale  urine.
I  said,  "  Are  those  things  delightful  to  you  ?  "  They  answered,
that  they  were  most  delightful.  I  said,  "  Then  you  are  like
the  unclean  beasts  that  wallow  in  such  things."  They
replied,  "  If  we  are,  we  are;  but  such  things  are  the  delight
of  our  nostrils."  I  asked,  "  What  more  shall  I  write  from
you?  "  They  said,  "  Write  this  :  that  every  one  is  allowed
to  live  in  his  own  delight,  even  the  most  unclean,  provided
he  does  not  molest  good  spirits  and  angels;  but  because  we
could  not  do  otherwise  than  molest  them,  we  were  driven
away  and  cast  into  hell,  where  we  suffer  dreadful  things."
I  said,  "  Why  did  you  molest  the  good  ?  "  They  replied,
that   they  could  not  help   it.     They  are  seized   with  fury


Divine  Providence  319

when  they  see  any  angel  and  feel  the  divine  sphere  around
him.  Then  I  said,  "  In  this  respect  also  you  are  like  wild
beasts."  When  they  heard  this,  they  were  seized  with  fury
like  the  fire  of  hatred,  and  lest  they  should  do  harm,  they
were  sent  back  into  hell.  Concerning  delights  sensibly  per-
ceived as  odours  and  foul  smells  in  the  spiritual  world,  see
above  (nos.  303-305,  324).


Richard  Clay  S:  Sons,  LuiiTEr,

BRUNSWICK    STREET,    STAMFORD   STREET,    S.E.
AND    BUNGAV,  SUFFOI.IC.


'o
