Angelic Wisdom Concerning the Divine Love and Divine Wisdom (Emanuel Swedenborg, 1763)
======================================================================================
Swedenborg's core theological metaphysics — divine love and wisdom as the substance of reality. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1912 reprint.

angelic wisdom.

176. There are evidently atmospheres in the spiritual
world as well as in the natural, because angels and spirits
breathe and speak and hear just as men in the natural world
do; and respiration, speech, and hearing, are not possible
without the ultimate atmosphere called the air. Moreover
angels and spirits see just as men do in the natural world, and
sight is not possible without an atmosphere purer than air;
and they think and feel as men in the natural world do, and
thought and affection are only possible by means of still
purer atmospheres. Lastly, all the external and internal
components of the bodies of angels and spirits are held
together in connection, the external by an aérial and the
internal by ethereal atmospheres. But for the pressure and
action of these atmospheres, it is clear that the internal and
external components of the body would be dissipated. Now
as the angels are spiritual, and all the components of their
bodies are held in connection, form, and order by atmospheres,
it follows that these atmospheres are spiritual; and they are
spiritual because they originate from the spiritual sun, which
is the first emanation from the divine Love and Wisdom of
the Lord.

177. That in the spiritual world there are also land and
water as in the natural world, except that they are spiritual,
was stated above, and fully demonstrated in the work on
Heaven and Hell. And being spiritual, they are actuated and
modified by the heat and light of the spiritual sun trans-
mitted through its atmospheres, just as are those of the
natural world by the heat and light of the natural sun
transmitted through its atmospheres.

178. Atmospheres, water, and land are here specially
mentioned because these three are the general sources from
and out of which all things exist in infinite variety. The
atmospheres are the active forces, the waters the inter-

| 70 Divine Love and Wieder

mediate forces, and the lands the passive forces by which all
effects are produced. This series of forces is due solely to
the life which proceeds from the Lord as the sun and makes
them active.

179. THERE ARE DEGREES OF LOVE AND WISDOM, AND
THEREFORE OF HEAT, LIGHT, AND ATMOSPHERE. What
follows will be incomprehensible without a knowledge of the
existence, nature, and character of degrees; for there are
degrees in every created thing, thus in every form; degrees
therefore will be the subject of this part.

The existence of three angelic heavens shows clearly that
there are degrees of love and wisdom. The angels of the
third heaven so far excel those of the second in love and
wisdom, and these again so far excel those of the ultimate
heaven, that they cannot dwell together on account of the
degrees of love and wisdom which differentiate and separate
them. This is why the angels of the lower heavens cannot
ascend to those of the higher, and if they are allowed to do
so, they see neither those angels nor anything around them.
The reason is, that the love and wisdom of these heavens are
of a higher degree, and therefore are beyond their ‘appre-
hension. Each angel is his own love and his own wisdom, for
love when united to wisdom makes the human form, because
God, who is Love itself and Wisdom itself, isa Man. Some-
times I have been allowed to see angels of the ultimate
heaven ascend to those of the third, and when they! had
toiled up thither, I have heard them complaining that they
could not see any one, and yet they were in the midst of the
higher angels. Afterwards they were told that those angels
were invisible to them because they had no perception of their
love and wisdom, for his love and wisdom cause an angel
to be seen as a man..

180. That there are degrees of love and wisdom is even
more clearly shown by comparing angelic with human love
and wisdom. The wisdom of the angels is well known to be
indescribably superior to that of men, and it will be seen in
what follows to be incomprehensible to men whose love is
natural. The reason why angelic wisdom seems to them
ineffable and incomprehensible is that it is of a higher degree
than their own.

181. As there are degrees of love and wisdom, there are also

Divine Love and Wisdom 71 =

degrees of heat and light. We mean spiritual heat and light,
such as angels receive in the heavens and such as men also
receive in their inner minds; for the warmth of men’s love
and the light of their wisdom are similar to those of the angels.
In the heavens the case is as follows. The quality and
quantity of warmth and light received by the angels is pro-
portionate to their love and wisdom: the reason is that love
is contained in their warmth and wisdom in their light, as
was shown above. It is the same with men on earth except
that angels feel that warmth and see that light, but men do
not; for men live in natural heat and light, and so long as
this is the case they do not feel spiritual warmth except as a
certain delight springing from their love, nor do they see
spiritual light except as a perception of truth. Now as man,
while living in natural warmth and light, knows nothing of
the spiritual warmth and light within him, and this know-
ledge cannot be acquired except through experience of the
spiritual world, we shall proceed to speak of the warmth and
light received by the angels in heaven. This is the only way
in which the mind can be enlightened on this subject.

182. But the degrees of spiritual heat cannot possibly be
described from experience, because love, to which spiritual
heat corresponds, does not come within the range of definite
ideas in the same way that spiritual light does; but the
degrees of spiritual light can be described, because this light
does come within the range of such ideas, for it is intellectual
light. Still, degrees of spiritual warmth may be in some
measure understood by the help of ideas founded on the
degrees of spiritual light; for they both exist together in
the same degree. With respect then to spiritual light which
the angels enjoy, I have been allowed to see it with my
own eyes. Light with the angels of the higher heavens is so
brilliant that 1t cannot be compared even to the whiteness
of snow, and so glowing that it cannot be compared even to
the glory of the sun of this world. In a word, that light
exceeds a thousand times the noon-day light on earth. The
light enjoyed by the angels of the lower heavens can in a
measure be described, but it exceeds even the brightest
light of our world. The reason of the indescribable brilliance
of the light of the angels of the higher heavens is that their
light is one with their wisdom, and as their wisdom is inde-
scribably superior to that of men, so also is theirlight. These

72 Divine Love and Wisdom

few observations will show that there are degrees of light;
and as wisdom and love always exist together in the same
degree, it follows that there are similar degrees of warmth.

183. Since the atmospheres receive and contain heat and
light, it follows that there are as many degrees of atmospheres
as there are of heat and light, and also as many as there are
of love and wisdom. That there are several atmospheres
distinct from each other because they are in different degrees,
I have learnt from much experience in the spiritual world;
especially from this, that the angels of the lower heavens
cannot breathe in the region of the higher angels; they feel
as if they were gasping for breath, as living creatures would
if raised from the air into the ether, or from water into the
air. Moreover, spirits dwelling beneath the heavens appear
to be living in a misty cloud. That there are several atmos-
pheres distinct in degree from one another may be seen
above (no. 176). ;

184. DEGREES ARE OF TWO KINDS, DEGREES OF ASCENT
AND DEGREES OF EXTENSION. A knowledge of degrees is,
as it were, a key wherewith to open up the causes of things
and penetrate their secrets. Without this knowledge
scarcely anything can be known of causation. For then
the objects and subjects of both worlds appear so simple as
to contain nothing beyond what the eye sees; yet this,
when compared to the hidden things within, is as one to
thousands or myriads. The interior things which are not
visible to the eye cannot be disclosed without a knowledge
of degrees. For exterior things pass to interior ince
and thence to inmost things through degrees which are
not continuous but discrete. Continuous degrees may be
illustrated by the decrease or fading away of what is
gross to what is fine, or of what is dense to what is rare;
or rather by the increase and growth of the converse process;
for instance, the gradual fading away of light into shade or
heat into cold. But discrete degrees are quite different:
they are related like first, middle, and last, or like end, cause,
and effect. They are called discrete, because each is distinct
from the others; but nevertheless, taken together they
constitute one thing. The atmospheres which we call air
and ether, from the highest to the lowest, or from the sun
to the earth, are separated from each other by such degrees ;

Divine Love and Wisdom 723

and they are like simples, compounds of these, and compounds
of these compounds, which taken together are called a
composite substance. These degrees are discrete, because
they have a distinct existence, and they are what we mean
by degrees of ascent; but the former degrees are continuous,
because they increase gradually, and they are what we
mean by degrees of extension.

185. Both discrete and continuous degrees, that is, degrees
both of ascent and of extension, are necessary to the existence
of every single thing in the natural and spiritual worlds.
Regarded as discrete they are called degrees of ascent, and
regarded as continuous they are called degrees of extension;
their visible position does not alter their denomination.
Without a knowledge of these degrees nothing can be known
of the distinction between the three heavens, nor of the
distinction between the love and wisdom of the angels there,
or between the warmth and light which they receive, or
between the atmospheres which envelop and contain these.
Moreover, without a knowledge of these degrees nothing
can be known of the distinctions which exist between the
various interior faculties of the human mind, nothing of the
states men pass through in the course of reformation and
regeneration, nor of the distinctions which exist between the
various exterior faculties of the bodies both of angels and
men, and nothing at all of the distinction between spiritual
and natural, and therefore nothing of correspondence;
nothing even can be known of the distinction between human
and animal life or between the more perfect and less perfect
animals, nor of the distinctions which exist among the various
forms of the vegetable kingdom, and among the various
substances of the mineral kingdom. Therefore any one
ignorant of these degrees is unable to form a correct judgment
about causes: he sees only effects and judges of causes from
them, his method being for the most part to explain one
effect by another. Yet causes do not produce effects by
continuity but discretely; for the cause is one thing, and
the effect another, the distinction being like that between
prior and posterior, or that between the agent and the thing
acted upon.

186. In order to understand still better the nature and
quality of discrete degrees, and how they differ from con-
tinuous degrees, let the angelic heavens serve as an example.

7 4 Divine Love and Wisdom

There are three heavens distinct from one another by degrees
of ascent, so that one heaven is below another; and they have
no communication with one another except by influx from
the Lord, which passes through the heavens in their order
down to the lowest heaven, and not conversely. But each
heaven, taken by itself, is not divided by degrees of ascent
but of extension. Those who are in its middle or centre
are in the light of wisdom; but those who are in the circum-
ference even to its furthest limits are in the shade of wisdom.
Thus wisdom diminishes gradually until it becomes ignorance,
as light fades away into shade. This takes place by con-
tinuity. It is the same with men. Their inner minds are
divided into the same number of degrees as the angelic
heavens, and one of these degrees is above another; and
so the interior forms of men’s minds are distinct because they
exist in discrete degrees or degrees of ascent. For this
reason a man may be consciously in the lowest, the higher,
or the highest degree according to the degree of his wisdom;
and when he is only in the lowest degree, the higher degree is
closed; but this is opened according as he receives wisdom
from the Lord. There are in heaven, just as in man} degrees
of continuity or extension. The reason why man thus
resembles the heavens is, that his inner mind is a\heaven
in miniature, so far as he receives love and wisdom from the
Lord. That man as to his inner mind is a heaven in‘minia-
ture may be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell (nos. 51-58).

187. These few remarks show that without a knowledge
of discrete degrees or those of ascent nothing can be known
of the state of a man’s reformation and regeneration, which
are brought about by his receiving love and wisdom from
the Lord, and by the opening up in their order of the interior
degrees of his mind. Nor can anything be known of influx
from the Lord through the heavens, or of the order which
exists in man by creation. For any one whose thought
about these matters is not based on discrete degrees, or those
of ascent, but on continuous degrees, or those of extension,
sees nothing of their causes except as inferred from their
effects. Now the habit of thinking of things merely from
the point of view of effects comes from relying on deceptive
appearances, whence flow numerous errors which may be
multiplied by inferential reasoning till monstrous falsities
are taken for truths.

Divine Love and Wisdom : aS

188. Nothing, so far as I am aware, has hitherto been
known of discrete degrees or those of ascent, as distinct from
continuous degrees or those of extension. Yet nothing can
really be known of causation without a knowledge of degrees
of both kinds. Therefore the whole of the present Part
will be devoted to these degrees. For the object of this
little work is to reveal causes, and so shed light upon effects,
and dispel the darkness in which the Christian world is
involved concerning God, the Lord, and divine and spiritual
things in general. This I can declare, that the angels lament
over the darkness which exists on earth: they say that they
hardly see light anywhere, that men seize on and confirm
fallacies and thereby multiply falsities upon falsities, that
to confirm these they make use of arguments based on
falsities and falsified truths, and so become involved in errors
which cannot be dispelled owing to the prevalent darkness
concerning causes, and the ignorance of truth. Most of all
do the angels lament over the confirmation of faith separated
from charity, and of justification by that faith, and over the
ideas of men about God, angels, and spirits, and over their
ignorance of the nature of love and wisdom.

189. DEGREES OF ASCENT ARE HOMOGENEOUS, ONE BEING
SUCCESSIVELY DERIVED FROM ANOTHER, LIKE END, CAUSE,
AND EFFECT. Degrees of extension or continuity are like
gradations from light to shade, heat to cold, hard to soft,
dense to rare, thick to thin, and so on; and these degrees
are well known from ocular and other experience; but the
degrees of ascent, or discrete degrees, cannot be known in
this way, and therefore the latter especially will be dealt with
in this Part; for causes cannot be understood without a
knowledge of these degrees. It is known indeed that end,
cause, and effect follow in order, as the first, middle, and last
end, and also that for the end to manifest itself, it must
produce first the cause and then the effect by means of the
cause: and several other things are known on this subject.
Yet to know these matters without seeing their application
to actual facts, is but abstract knowledge, which remains
in the mind only so long as analytical and metaphysical
subjects engage the thought. This is why little or nothing
is known in this world about discrete degrees, although end,
cause, and effect involve them. For a mere acceptance of

a

76 Divine Love and Wisdom

abstract truths, is like vapour which is soon dissipated; but
if abstract ideas are brought into relation with the facts of
this world, they are then like visible objects on earth, and
remain fixed in the memory.

190. Every object in the world which has three dimensions
and is called a compound, derives its existence from degrees
of ascent, or discrete degrees. Let us take some examples.
It is well known from ocular evidence, that every muscle
in the human body consists of very minute fibres, and that
these, bound together in bundles, form the larger or motor
fibres, and that bundles of these produce the compound
which is called a muscle. It is the same with the nerves;
in them very minute fibres combine to form larger fibres,
which constitute filaments, and these grouped together form
the nerve. The same is the case with the rest df the com-
binations, fascicles, and groups of which the organs and
viscera consist; for these are compounds of fibres and
vessels variously formed by the agency of similar degrees.
It is the same with everything in the vegetable and mineral
kingdoms. In wood the combinations of filamentts are in
threefold order, and so are the conglomerations of iparticles
in metals and stones. These examples show the nature
of discrete degrees, namely, that the second degree is. formed
from the first, and the third from the second, the third being
called the compound, and that each degree ‘is distinct from
the others.

191. From these visible objects we may form a conclusion
about invisible things, as for instance about the organic
substances which are the receptacle and seat of thoughts
and affections in the brain, about the atmospheres, about
heat and light, and about love and wisdom. For the atmos-
pheres are the receptacles of heat and light, and heat and
light are the receptacles of love and wisdom. It follows
that, as there are degrees of atmosphere, there are also
similar degrees of heat and light and of love and wisdom;
for the law of the one is the same as that of the others.

192. That these degrees are homogeneous, that is, of the
same character and nature, is evident from the examples
just quoted. The motor fibres of the muscles, least, larger,
and largest, are homogeneous; so are the nerve fibres, the
most minute, larger, and largest; wood fibres from. the
minutest filaments to their compounds; the particles of

Divine Love and Wisdom 77,

stone and metal of every kind; the organic substances
which are the receptacle and seat of thought and affection,
from the simplest elements to the general aggregate, the
brain; the atmospheres from pure ether to air; the degrees
of heat and light in their series, corresponding to the degrees
of the atmosphere; and therefore also the degrees of love
and wisdom. Things which are not of the same character
and nature are heterogeneous, and do not agree with the
homogeneous; therefore they cannot combine with them
to form discrete degrees, but can only combine with their
similars, which are homogeneous, that is, of the same
character and nature.

193. It is clear that these degrees in their series are related
as ends, causes, and effects; for the first or least degree
produces its cause through the intermediate or second, and
its effect through the ultimate or third.

194. It should be observed that one degree is kept distinct
from another by its proper envelope, and that the whole is
surrounded by a common envelope which communicates
with the inner and inmost envelopes in their order. This
produces the union and united action of all.

195. THE FIRST DEGREE IS THE SOLE SOURCE OF ALL THAT
EXISTS IN THE SUBSEQUENT DEGREES. The reason of this
is that the degrees of every subject or thing are homogeneous
because they are produced from the first degree. For they
are produced in the following manner. The first degree by
forming fascicular or globular aggregations, or in other
words, by the grouping of its own units, produces the second,
and through it the third; and it separates each from the
other by drawing an envelope round it. This shows that the
first degree is the principal and paramount factor in the
subsequent degrees, and is indeed the source of all that
exists in them.

196. It has been stated that the degrees are related in this
way, but this means that substances are so related as regards
their degrees. The term “ degree” is abstract or universal,
and therefore applicable to every subject or thing which
involves these degrees.

197. This law is exemplified in all those things enumerated
in the preceding article, namely, the muscles, the nerves, the
material substances and parts composing the objects of the

78 Divine Love and Wisdom

vegetable and mineral kingdoms, the organic substances
which are the seat of man’s thoughts and affections, the
atmospheres, heat and light, and love and wisdom. In all
these the first constituent is paramount in the derivatives;
indeed it is the one only thing in them, and is therefore their
sole constituent. This is evident from the following facts:
that the end is the sole agent in the cause, and through the
cause it is the sole agent in the effect; and therefore the end,
cause, and effect are called the first, middle, and ultimate end;
further that the cause of a cause is also the cause of its effect,
and that there is nothing essential in causes except the end,
and nothing essential in motion except effort; and also that
there is only one Substance which is underived.

198. In this way it may be clearly seen that the Divine is
underived or the one and only substance out of which all
created things have been formed; consequently, that God
is the sole source of everything in the universe, in accordance
with what has been explained in Part I., namely, that the
divine Love and Wisdom is substance and form (nos. 40-43);
the divine Love and Wisdom is underived substance and
form and therefore the very and one only reality (nds. 44-46);
all things in the universe were created by the divine Love
and Wisdom (nos. 55-60); the created universe is therefore
His image (nos. 61-64); the Lord alone constitutes heaven
where the angels dwell (nos. 113-118).

199. THE HIGHER THE DEGREE THE GREATER IS ITS PER-
FECTION. It was shown above (nos. 184-188) that there are
degrees of two kinds, degrees of extension and of ascent;
and that the degrees of extension are like those of light verg-
ing to shade, or of wisdom to ignorance; but that the degrees
of ascent are as end, cause, and effect, or as first, middle, and
last. The latter are said to ascend or descend, but the former,
being degrees of extension, are said to increase or decrease.
These two kinds of degrees differ so much as to have nothing
in common, and therefore they are to be accurately distin-
guished and by no means confused.

200. All perfection increases in and according to the
ascent to higher degrees because all predicates vary with
their subjects; now perfection and imperfection are general
predicates, which are applied to life, forces, and forms.

The Perfection of Life is the perfection of ‘love and wisdom;

Divine Love and Wisdom 79

and as the will and understanding are formed to receive
these, it follows that the perfection of life is also the perfection
of the will and understanding, and therefore of the affections
and thoughts; and as spiritual heat contains love and
spiritual light contains wisdom, their perfection may also be
regarded as the perfection of life.

The Perfection of Forces is the perfection of all things that are
actuated and moved by the agency of life, though they them-
selves are lifeless. Such are the atmospheres, so far as they
are active, the interior and exterior organic substances in
man and in animals of every kind, and everything in the
natural world which receives potency directly or indirectly
from the sun.

The Perfection of Forms is inseparable from that of forces,
for the forces are such as the forms, the only difference
being that forms are substances, while forces are their
activities; and therefore both have a like degree of per-
fection. Forms which are not at the same time forces, are
also perfect according to their degree.

201. We are not speaking of the perfection of life, forces,
and forms as increasing or decreasing according to degrees of
extension or continuity, because these degrees are generally
known, but as ascending or descending according to the
degrees of ascent, or discrete degrees; because these degrees
are not known. But how perfection ascends and descends
according to these degrees can be but little known from things
visible in the natural world, but can be known clearly from
things visible in the spiritual world. From the former we
learn only that the more intimately they are examined the
more wonderful their contents appear. Take for example
the eyes, ears, tongue, muscles, heart, lungs, liver, pancreas,
kidneys, and other viscera, also seeds, fruits, and flowers, and
metals, minerals, and stones; it is well known that the more
these are examined the greater are the wonders disclosed.
Yet an ignorance of discrete degrees has concealed the fact
that all these things have a still greater inward perfection
according to degrees of ascent, or discrete degrees. But in
the spiritual world discrete degrees are clearly seen, for the
whole of that world, from the highest regions to the lowest,
is subdivided according to these degrees, and therefore a
knowledge of them may be thence obtained. And then con-
clusions may be drawn as to the perfection attained by the

80 Divine Love and Wisdom

forces and forms of the natural world in their corresponding
degrees.

202. In the spiritual world there are three heavens disposed
in order according to degrees of ascent. In the highest
heaven the angels excel those of the middle heaven in every
kind of perfection or spiritual endowment, as do the angels
of the middle heaven those of the lowest. The degrees of
their perfection are such that the angels of the lowest heaven
cannot ascend to the lowest limit of the perfection of the
angels of the middle heaven, nor these to the lowest limit of
the perfection of the angels of the highest heaven. This
sounds like a paradox, but it is the truth. The reason is,
that. the angels are classified according to discrete, not con-
tinuous degrees. I have learnt from experience that the
angels of the higher and lower heavens differ so much in
affection, thought, and therefore in speech, that they have
nothing in common, and that they communicate only by the
correspondence between them which results from the direct
influx of the Lord into all the heavens, and from His indirect
influx through the highest heaven into the lowegt. These
differences being so great, they cannot be expressed or
described in natural language; for angels’ thoughts, being
spiritual, do not come within the range of natural ideas.
They cannot be expressed and described in human, but only in
angelic language, words, and writing. This is why it is often
said that ineffable things are heard and seen in heaven.
This difference, however, may be explained in some measure
as follows. Angels of the highest or third heaven think from
ends, and angels of the middle or second heaven from éauses,
and angels of the lowest or first heaven from effects. Take
note, that it is one thing to think from ends and another to
think of ends, also that it is one thing to think from causes,
and another to think of causes; and again that it is one thing
to think from effects, and another to think of effects. The

angels of the lower heavens think of causes and ends, but
the angels of the higher heavens from causes and ends; and
to think from these is characteristic of a higher order of
wisdom, but to think of them is a characteristic of wisdom of
a lower order. To think from ends is the method of wisdom,
from causes that of intelligence, and from effects that of
knowledge. From this it may be seen that all perfection
increases in and according to the ascent to higher degrees.

Divine Love and Wisdom 81

203. As the interior organic forms of man’s mind, which
constitute his will and understanding, are like the heavens
as regards the degrees of which they are composed (for man,
as to his inner mind, is a heaven in miniature) the perfection
‘of these mental degrees corresponds with that of the heavens.
But no man is aware of this while he is living in the world,
for his consciousness then resides in the lowest degree, and
the higher degrees cannot thence be perceived. But after
death the higher degrees become perceptible, for he then
becomes conscious in that degree which corresponds to his
love and wisdom, for he becomes an angel, and thinks and
speaks in a manner incomprehensible to the natural man.
His whole mind is then elevated, not in a simple but in a tripli-
cate ratio. The degrees of ascent are in this ratio, but the
degrees of extension are in simple ratio. But only those
ascend and are exalted to these degrees of consciousness who
in the world have been imbued with truths and have applied
them to life.

204. It appears as if prior things must be less perfect than
posterior, or simple things than composite, yet prior or simple
things from which are formed the posterior or composite, are
more perfect. The reason is that the prior or simpler are
more open, being less concealed in substances and matters
devoid of life; they are as it were diviner and therefore nearer
to the spiritual sun where the Lord is. For perfection itself
is in the Lord, and therefore in the sun which is the first
emanation from His divine Love and Wisdom; next in per-
fection are the things nearest to that sun, and so on down to
the lowest, the imperfection increasing with the distance.
But for this superior perfection in prior and simple things,
neither man nor animal could possibly exist from seed, or
continue to exist, nor could the seeds of trees and shrubs
germinate and bear fruit. Fora thing, in proportion to its
priority or simplicity, is to that extent secure from harm,
because of its greater perfection.

205. IN SUCCESSIVE ORDER THE FIRST DEGREE IS THE
HIGHEST, AND THE THIRD THE LOWEST; BUT IN SIMULTANEOUS
ORDER THE FIRST DEGREE IS THE INMOST AND THE THIRD
THE OUTERMOST. Order is either successive or simultaneous.
The successive order. of these degrees is from the highest to
the lowest, or from the top to the bottom. The angelic

F 635

82 Divine Love and Wisdom

heavens are in this order. The third heaven is the highest,
the second is the middle, and the first is the lowest; such is
their relative position. In similar successive order are the
states of love and wisdom, or of warmth and light which the
angels enjoy, and also the spiritual atmospheres, and so is
all the perfection of forms and forces there. When degrees
of ascent or discrete degrees are in successive order, they
may be compared to a column consisting of three steps by
which to ascend and descend, in the upper part of which
are the most perfect and beautiful things; in the middle,
things less perfect and beautiful; but in the lowest, things
still less perfect and beautiful. But simultaneous order,
which consists of similar degrees, is different. In it the
highest things of successive order which, as was said, are
the most perfect and beautiful, are in the centre, the lower
things are round this, and the lowest in the circumference.
They are like a solid body consisting of those three degrees;
in its middle or centre are the most refined parts, round
about this the less refined, and in the borders which form
the circumference, are the comparatively gross parts com-
pounded of these. It is as if the column spokenjof above
subsided into a plane; the highest part of the column would
then form the central part of the plane, the middle, the
intermediate part, and the lowest, the outermost.

206. Since that which is highest in successive order becomes
the inmost in simultaneous order, and the lowest, the outer-
most, therefore in the Word “inner” is equivalent to
“ higher,’ and “outer” to “lower”; and so with, “ up-
wards ” and “‘ downwards,” and “ high” and “ deep.”

207. In every ultimate thing there are discrete degrees
in simultaneous order. ‘The motor fibres in every muscle,
the fibres in every nerve, and the fibres and vessels in all the
viscera and organs are in this order. The simplest things,
which are also the most perfect, constitute their inmost
nature, whereas their outward form is a compound derived
from those simples. So it is with the component parts of
every seed, fruit, metal, and stone; their component parts
are similarly related, and the parts form the whole. Their
inmost, middle, and outermost elements are arranged in those
degrees, for they are successive compositions, or combina-
tions and conglomerations of simple things which are their
original substances or elements.

Divine Love and Wisdom 83

208. In a word, there are such degrees in every ultimate,
and therefore in every effect. For every ultimate consists
of prior things, and these of their primary elements; and
every effect is the result of a cause, and this of an end; and
the end is the sole agent in the cause, and the cause in the
effect, as was shown above; and the end is the inmost, the
cause the middle, and the effect the ultimate. That the
same is true of the degrees of love and wisdom, heat and
light, and the organic forms of man’s affections and thoughts,
will be seen in what follows. The series of these degrees in
successive and simultaneous order is also explained in The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture
(no. 38 and elsewhere). It is there shown that similar
degrees exist in every part of the Word.

209. THE ULTIMATE DEGREE EMBRACES, CONTAINS, AND
SUPPORTS THE PRIOR DEGREES. The doctrine of degrees
set forth in this Part has hitherto been illustrated by various
examples taken from both worlds; by the degrees of the
angelic heavens, of their heat and light, of the atmospheres,
of various things in the human body and in the animal and
mineral kingdoms. But this doctrine is of wider extension;
it applies not only to natural things, but also to every detail
of civil, moral, and spiritual things. There are two reasons
for this. Firstly, in everything to which we can assign a
definite quality, there is the trine of end, cause, and effect,
and these three exemplify the degrees of ascent. Secondly,
everything civil, moral, and spiritual is no mere abstraction,
but a substance. For love and wisdom are not abstractions,
but substance, as was shown above (nos. 40-43), and so is
everything civil, moral, and spiritual. These can indeed be
thought of as abstractions, but in themselves they are not
abstract. Take for example affection and thought, charity
and faith, will and understanding. What is true of love
and wisdom is also true of these; they do not exist apart
from their subjects which are substances, but are states or
variations of these, as will be seen in what follows. The
term substance includes form as well, for substance cannot
exist apart from form.

210. But as the will and understanding, affection and
thought, and also charity and faith, can be and have been
thought of apart from the substances which are their sub-

84 Divine Love and Wisdom

jects, men have lost the true conception of these as being
states of substances or forms. The case is precisely the same
with sensations and actions, which also are not mere abstrac-
tions existing apart from the organs of sense and motion.
Abstracted or separated from these, they are only fictions
of the imagination, like sight without an eye, hearing without
an ear, taste without a tongue, and so on.

211. Since all civil, moral, and spiritual things proceed
according to degrees, as all natural things do, and not only
according to continuous but also discrete degrees, and the
progression of discrete degrees is like that of ends to causes,
and of causes to effects, I have chosen to illustrate and
confirm the present point, which is that the ultimate degree
embraces, contains, and supports the prior degrees, by the
things above mentioned, namely, those which relate to love
and wisdom, the will and the understanding, eficction and
thought, and charity and faith.

212. That the ultimate degree embraces, ona and
supports the prior degrees, is clearly shown by the progres-
sion of ends and causes to effects. Enlightened reason will
show that the effect embraces, contains, and supports the
cause and the end, but it is not so evident that the end and
all it contains and the cause and all it contains are actually
present in the effect, and that the effect is their complete
embodiment. The truth of this, however, should ‘appear
from the considerations adduced above in this Part, espe-
cially from these, that one degree is derived from the ‘others
in a triplicate series, and that the effect is nothing but the
end expressed in its ultimate realisation; now as the ultimate
is the realisation of the end, it follows that it also contains
and sustains the whole.

213. As regards love and wisdom, love is the end, wisdom
the cause, and use the effect; and use embraces, contains,
and sustains both wisdom and love; so much so, that it
actually contains love and wisdom in their entirety and is
identical with them. Remember especially that everything
homogeneous and concordant with love and wisdom is con-
tained in use, for this agrees with what was stated and
explained above (nos. 189-194).

214. Affection, thought, and action also form a series of
discrete degrees, because affection has reference to love,
thought to wisdom, and action to use. Charity, faith, and

Divine Love and Wisdom 85

good work form a similar series; for charity is related to
affection, faith to thought, and good work to action. Will,
understanding, and effort form another such series; for will
is related to love and affection, understanding to wisdom
and faith, and effort to use and work. Just as all wisdom
and love are embodied in use, so are all thought and affection
in action, all faith and charity in good work, and so forth;
but they must all be homogeneous, that is, concordant.

215. Hitherto it has not been known that the ultimate or
last term of each series, namely, use, action, work, or effort,
embraces and contains all things prior to it. Nothing more
appears to exist in use, action, work, and effort than in motion;
yet all their prior things are so fully included in them that
nothing is wanting. They are inclosed in them like wine in
a cask or furniture in a house. The reason of the error is,
that they are viewed externally only, that is, as mere activities
and motions. It is as when a man moves his arms and hands;
he is unaware that a thousand muscular fibres concur to
produce these motions, and that in correspondence with
these there are a thousand details of thought and affection
which excite the muscular fibres to action. As these act
most inwardly they are not apparent to any bodily sense.
This much, however, is known, that nothing is done in or by
the body, except from the will by means of thought; now as
both these are active, so also must be every single thing com-
prised in them, for they cannot be separated. This is why
men judge of the thought or intention of a man’s will by his
deeds or actions. I have been told that the angels, from a
single action or work of a man, can perceive and see the whole
contents of his will and thought; the angels of the third
heaven perceive from his will the end he has in view, and the
angels of the second heaven see the cause by means of which
the end acts. This is why works and deeds are so often
insisted upon in the Word, and why a man is said to be known
by them.

216. It is a maxim of angelic wisdom that unless the will
and understanding, affection and thought, charity and faith
pass into and invest themselves with works or deeds, when
circumstances permit, they are only like vapours which pass
away or mirages which vanish; and that they then only
become permanent in man and part of his very life, when he
carries them out into work and deed. The reason is that the

86 Divine Love and Wisdom

ultimate embraces, contains, and supports all its prior things.
Faith separated from good works is suchan airy phantasm, and
so are faith and charity unless they are put into practice; the
only difference between these two forms of belief is that those
who hold that faith and charity ought to be united at least
know what good works are and can will to do them, but not
so those whose faith is separated from charity.

217. THE DEGREES OF ASCENT ARE IN THEIR PLENITUDE
AND POWER IN THE ULTIMATE DEGREE. In the preceding
article it was shown that the ultimate degree embraces and
contains the prior degrees. It follows that these degrees are
in their plenitude in the ultimate degree; for they are con-
tained in their effect, and every effect is the plenary expression
of its cause.

218. That those ascending and descending degrees, called
prior and posterior, and also degrees of ascent, dr discrete
degrees, attain their full power in the ultimate degree may be
confirmed by all that has been adduced as evidence in the
preceding articles from sensible and perceptiblé things.
Here, however, I select for this purpose effort, force, and
motion in dead and living subjects. It is well known that
effort does nothing of itself, but acts through forcés corre-
sponding to itself, and so produces visible motion; thus,
effort is the sole agent in force, and therefore, through the
force, in motion; and as motion is the ultimate degree of
effort, it is the ultimate expression of its power. Effort,
force, and motion are related to one another like the degrees
of ascent, which are united not by continuity, for they are
discrete, but by correspondence. Effort is not force, and
force is not motion, but force is produced by effort, for force is
the expression of effort, and is the means of producing motion.
Thus there is no power exhibited by effort or by force alone
until they produce motion. This may seem doubtful, as we
have not yet illustrated it by reference to sensible and per-
ceptible things in nature; nevertheless, this is how power is
generated by effort, force, and motion.

219. Let us now apply these principles to living effort,
force, and motion. The living effort in man, who is a living
subject, is his will united to his understanding. The living
forces in man are the inner constituents of his body which all
contain motor fibres bound together in various ways. And

Divine Love and Wisdom 87

the living motion in man is action, produced through these
forces by the united will and understanding. Thus the
inner constituents of the will and understanding constitute
the first degree; those of the body constitute the second;
and the whole body, which is the aggregate of these, con-
stitutes the third. It is a recognised fact that the constituent
parts of the inner mind have no power except through the
forces operating in the body, and that these forces again are
powerless except through bodily action. These three do not
act by continuity, but discretely, that is, by correspondence.
The inward parts of the mind correspond to those of the body,
and these again correspond to its exterior forms which make
action possible; wherefore the two prior degrees exercise their
power in the exterior forms of the body. It may seem that
effort and force in man have some power apart from action,
as during sleep and in repose; but at such times effort and
force are directed to the general motor organs of the body,
namely, the heart and lungs; when the action of these ceases,
force and effort also cease.

220. As the whole body directs its powers chiefly to the
arms and hands, which are ultimates, these in the Word
signify power, and the right hand superior power. As the
superior degrees put forth and exhibit their power in this way,
the angels, who are in close relationship with man and
conscious of the states of his mind corresponding to all that
he does, know from the mere action of his hands the character
of his understanding and will, and of his charity and faith,
and therefore the inward life of his mind, and the outward
life resulting from this in his body. I have often wondered
how the angels get such knowledge from the mere action of
the body through the hands; but that they do so has occa-
sionally been shown by living experience, and I have been told
that this is why ministers are ordained by the laying on of
hands, and why touching with the hands signifies communi-
cation; besides other similar matters. All these facts
show that charity and faith are fully manifested in works,
and that without these they are like halos about the sun,
which vanish and are lost in the clouds. On this account
works are so often mentioned in the Word, and we are told to
do them, and that the salvation of man depends on them;
and he who doeth is called wise, and he who doeth not is
called foolish. But it should be noted that works here mean

88 Divine Love and Wisdom

the uses which are actually performed; for charity and faith
are fully manifested in and according to uses. This corre-
spondence of uses with works is a spiritual one, though it is
brought about by means of material and other substances
used as instruments.

221. What precedes has made possible the revelation of
two arcana.

The first arcanum is, that the Word is in its plenitude and
power in the literal sense. For the Word contains three
senses according to the three degrees, namely, the celestial
sense, the spiritual sense, and the natural sense. As these
in the Word are related to one another according to the three
degrees of ascent, and are therefore united by correspond-
ence, it follows not only that the ultimate, natural, or literal
sense embraces, contains, and supports the corresponding
interior senses, but also that the Word in the ultimate sense
is in its plenitude and power. For the elaboratiomand proof
of this proposition see the Doctrine of the New Jerusalem
concerning the Sacred Scripture (nos. 27-36, 37-49, 50-61, 62-69).

The second arcanum is that the Lord came into the world,
and assumed a human nature ? in order that He might invest
Himself with power to reduce the hells to submission, and
restore to order all things both in heaven and on earth.
The human nature which He assumed in the world was like
that of a man in the world. This human nature He;super-
induced upon His former Humanity, both however being
Divine, and therefore infinitely transcending the finite
humanity of angels and men. And as He fully glorified
the natural humanity, even to its ultimates, He rose again
with the whole body, therein differing from. any man., By
taking upon Himself this Humanity, He clothed Himself
with divine Omnipotence, not only to reduce the hells to
submission and restore the heavens to order, but also to
keep the hells in subjection for ever, and to save mankind.
This power is indicated by His sitting at the right hand of
the power and might of God. Since the Lord by assuming
a natural humanity made Himself divine Truth in ultimates,
He is called the Word, and it is said that the Word was made

1 The Divine Humanity which the Lord assumed during His earthly
life must not be confused with the human nature which He assumed
by birth from the Virgin Mary, and which was only the means by

which the Divine Humanity was subsequently assumed. (See True
Christian Religion, nos. 102, 103.)—Tr.

Divine Love and Wisdom 89

flesh; and the divine Truth in ultimates is the Word in the
literal sense. He did this by fulfilling all the prophecies
concerning Himself in Moses and the Prophets. For every
man is his own good and his own truth; through this alone
aman is a man. But the Lord, by assuming a natural
humanity, became divine Good and Truth itself, or, what is
the same, divine Love and Wisdom itself, in its ultimate
manifestation as well as in its first origin. This is the reason
why since His advent into the world, He is seen in the angelic
heavens as a more brilliant and splendid sun than before.
This is an arcanum which is brought within the range of
comprehension by the doctrine of degrees. His omnipotence
before His advent into the world will be spoken of later.

222. THERE ARE DEGREES OF BOTH KINDS IN THE GREATEST
AND LEAST OF ALL CREATED THINGS. That all things, whether
great or small, consist of both discrete and continuous degrees,
or degrees of ascent and extension, cannot be illustrated by
examples from the visible world; for the smallest things are
invisible, and the greatest things, which are visible, do not
seem to be separable into degrees. And so this matter does
not admit of any explanation except by means of universal
truths, And as the angels derive their wisdom from universal
truths, and from these acquire a knowledge of particular
truths, I am permitted to repeat what they say on this
subject.

_ 223. Their statements on this subject are as follows:
There does not exist anything so minute as not to contain
degrees of both kinds, not the least thing in any animal,
vegetable, or mineral, not the least thing in the ether or
the air. And as the ether and the air are formed to transmit
heat and light, no heat or light can exist without these.
degrees. And as spiritual heat and light are formed to
transmit love and wisdom, neither can there be any love
or wisdom in which degrees of both kinds do not exist.
Moreover degrees of both kinds exist in the minutest element
of every affection, thought, and idea; otherwise it could not
exist, for it would have no form, thus no quality, nor any
state which could suffer change and variation, and so exist.
The angels confirm this by the truth that in God the Creator,
who is the Lord from eternity, there is an infinity of things
which are distinct and yet one; and that there are infinite

go Divine Love and Wisdom

things in His infinite attributes; and that in thése infinitely
infinite attributes there are degrees of both kinds, which
also are distinct and yet one in Him; and because He pos-
sesses such attributes and all created things exist from Him,
and creation presents, as it were, in a visible form those
things which exist in Him, it follows that no finite thing can
be so minute as not to contain these degrees. The reason
why such degrees exist both in the greatest things and in the
least, is that the Divine is the same in the greatest things
and in the least. That in God-Man infinite things are dis-
tinct and yet one may be seen above (nos. 17-22), and that
the Divine is the same in the greatest things and in the least
(nos. 77-82), which propositions are further illustrated in
nos. 155, 169, I71.

224. The reason why there can be no particle of love and
wisdom, or of affection and thought, or even of any idea,
without degrees of both kinds, is that love and wisdom are
substance and form, as was shown above (nos. 40-43); and
the same is true of affection and thought. Now as no form
is possible without such degrees, it follows that they must
exist in all these things. For to separate love and wisdom
or affection and thought from substance and form would be
to annihilate them; they can have no existence apart from
their subjects, because they are the variations of, these
subjects as perceived by man; for it is by their states that
subjects are made manifest.

225. The greatest things in which there are degrees of'both
kinds are the universe as a whole, the natural world as a
whole, and the spiritual world as a whole; every empiresand
kingdom, together with their civil, moral, and spiritual con-
cerns in their entirety; the whole animal kingdom , the whole
vegetable kingdom, and the whole mineral kingdom, each
in its entirety; all the atmospheres of either world taken
together, and also their heat and light; likewise things less
general, such as every man, animal, tree, shrub, stone, and
metal, each in its entirety. The forms of all these are similar
in that they consist of degrees of both kinds, the reason
being that the Divine, by which they were created, is the
same in the greatest things and the least, as was shown above
(nos. 77-82). All these things from their minutest particulars
to their largest aggregates are alike in this, that they consist
of both kinds of degrees.

Divine Love and Wisdom gl

226. The greatest and the least things alike, from primaries
to ultimates, are held together by the fact. that they are
composed of both kinds of degrees, for it is their similarity
which connects them. Nevertheless, not even the minutest
thing can be exactly like any other; it is owing to this that
not only minute, but even the minutest things, are distinct
from one another. No two particles, even the most minute,
can be exactly alike in any form, or in any similar forms,
because there are such degrees in the greatest things, and
the greatest things are composed of the least. Since there
are such degrees in the greatest things, and therefore per-
manent distinctions from top to bottom and from centre to
circumference, it follows that not the least of their com-
ponent parts, which also contain similar degrees, can be
exactly alike.

227. It is also a matter of angelic wisdom, that the per-
fection of the created universe is the result of there being
similar degrees in things general and particular, or in the
greatest things and the least; for thus all things are dis-
posed to work in harmony for the common use and for the
attainment of a common end.

228. But these may seem paradoxes, because they are not
illustrated by application to visible objects; yet abstract
principles being universal are usually better understood than
examples of their application, for the latter exist in endless
variety, and variety obscures.

229. It is asserted by some that there is a substance so
simple as not to be composed of lesser forms, and that from
its accumulation into masses are produced derivative or
composite substances, and finally those which are called
material. But no such absolutely simple substances could
exist. For what would substance be without a form? It
would be something of which nothing could be predicated;
and out of an entity of which nothing could be predicated
nothing could be produced by any process of accumulation.
When later on we come to speak of forms, it will be seen that
even in the primary created substances which are the simplest
and minutest of all, there are innumerable things.

230. THERE ARE THREE INFINITE AND UNCREATE DEGREES
OF ASCENT IN THE LORD, AND THREE FINITE. AND CREATED
DEGREES IN MAN. The reason why there are three infinite

92 Divine Love and Wisdom

and uncreate degrees of ascent in the Lord is that He is Love
itself and Wisdom itself, as was shown above, and because
the Lord is Love itself ‘and Wisdom itself, therefore He is
also use itself; for use is the end which love attains by means
of wisdom. Love and wisdom apart from use have no
termination or end, that is, no abode of their own; and so
they cannot be said really to exist except in use. These
three constitute the three degrees of ascent in living subjects,
being the first end, the middle end or the cause, and the
ultimate end or the effect. That end, cause, and effect
constitute the three degrees of ascent was shown above,
and proved in many ways.

231. That these three degrees exist in man may be seen
from the elevation of his mind into those degrees of love and
wisdom proper to the angels of the second and third heavens; .
for all the angels were born men, and man’s inner mind 1s a
heaven in miniature, and therefore there are as many degrees
of ascent in man by creation as there are heavens. Man
also is an image and likeness of God; and therefore those
three degrees are formed in man because they existyin God-
Man who is the Lord. That these degrees in the Gord are
infinite and uncreate, and that those in man are finite and
created should be evident from the propositions stated in
Part I.; for instance, that the Lord is Love and Wisdom in
Himself; that man is a recipient of love and wisdom from
the Lord; also that every attribute of the Lord is Sense,
but every attribute of man is finite.

232. Among the angels these three degrees are dalled
celestial, spiritual, and natural, the celestial degree beingsthat
of love, ‘the spiritual degree that of wisdom, and the natural
degree ‘that of uses. The reason why these degrees are so
called is that the heavens are distinguished into two king-
doms, the celestial and the spiritual, to which is added a
third, the natural kingdom to which men in the world
belong. The angels of whom the celestial kingdom consists
are specially characterised by love, and those of the spiritual
kingdom by wisdom, but men in the world by uses, and
therefore these kingdoms are united. The meaning of the
statement that men are characterised by uses will be
explained in the next part.

233. I have been told from heaven that in the Lord from
eternity who is Jehovah, before the assumption of a human

Divine Love and Wisdom 93

nature in the world, there existed the two prior degrees
actually, and the third degree potentially, as is the case
with the angels; but after that assumption He also put on
the third or natural degree, and so became like man in the
world, except that this degree, like the prior degrees, is
infinite and uncreate in Him, but finite and created in angels
and men. In this manner the Divine which had filled all
space apart from space (nos. 69-72), entered the very
ultimates of nature. Before the assumption of humanity,
the Divine influx into the natural degree [of man] flowed in-
directly through the angelic heavens, but after the assumption
directly from Himself. This is why all the churches which
existed in the world before His advent were representative
of spiritual and celestial things, but after His advent they
were made natural, spiritual, and celestial, and representa-
tive worship was abolished. This again is why the sun of the
angelic heaven, which, as was said above, is the first emana-
tion from His divine Love and Wisdom, after His assump-
tion of humanity shone forth with greater brilliance and
splendour than before. This also is the meaning of these
words in Isaiah: “‘ In that day the light of the moon shall be
as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be
sevenfold, as the light of seven days ” (xxx. 26), for this is
spoken of the state of heaven and the church aiter the Lord’s
advent into the world. And in the Apocalypse it is written,
“The face of the Son of Man was as the sun shining in his
strength” (i. 16); see also Isaiah Ix. 20; 2 Sam. xxill. 3, 4;
Matt. xvil. 1,2. The indirect enlightenment of men through
the angelic heaven which existed before the coming of the
Lord, may be compared to the light of the moon, which is the
reflected light of the sun; and as, after His advent, this light
flowed directly from Himself, it is said in Isaiah that * the
light of the moon shall be as ‘the light of the sun”’; and by
David, ‘‘ In His day shall the mghteous man flourish, and
abundance of peace until there be no moon ” (Ps. Ixxii. 7):
this also is said of the Lord.

234. The following is the reason why the Lord from
eternity, or Jehovah, put on this third degree by the assump-
tion of humanity in the world; He could not come into
the world except by assuming a nature similar to the human,
and this was only possible by conception from His Divine,
and by birth from a virgin: for thus He was able to put off

94 Divine Love and Wisdom

nature, which in itself is dead, although a receptacle of the
Divine, and put on the Divine. This is the meaning of the
Lord’s two states in the world, called the state of Exinanition
and that of Glorification, which are treated of in The Doctrine
of the New Jerusalem concerning the Lord.

235. The above are general statements concerning the
triple ascent of discrete degrees; but as these degrees exist
in the greatest things and the least, as was stated in a pre-
ceding article, nothing more specific can here be said. It
may however be mentioned that these degrees exist in every
particle of love, and therefore in every particle of wisdom
and use; but all these degrees are infinite in the Lord and
finite in angels and men. How these degrees exist in love,
wisdom, and use cannot be described and explained except
in a series of articles. :

236. THESE THREE DEGREES OF ASCENT EXIST IN EVERY
MAN BY BIRTH AND MAY BE OPENED SUCCESSIVELY, AND IN
THE PROPORTION THAT THEY ARE OPENED THE MAN IS IN
THE LORD AND THE LORD IN HIM. No one has hitherto been
aware that there are three degrees of ascent in evety man,
because their existence lay hidden; and consequently there
could be no knowledge of any but continuous degreés; and
when there is no knowledge of any degrees besides these, it
may be supposed that man’s love and wisdom i increase only
by continuity. Be it known, however, that in every man
from his birth there are three degrees of ascent, or discrete
degrees, one above or within the other; .and that each
degree of ascent, or discrete degree, has also degrees of exten-
sion, or continuous degrees, according to which it increases
by continuity. For there are degrees of both kinds in the
greatest and least of all things, as shown above (nos. 222-
229); for no degree of one kind can possibly exist without
degrees of the other kind.

237. These three degrees of ascent are called natural,
spiritual, and celestial, as was said above (no. 232). Whena
man is born, he comes first into the state of the natural
degree, and this is developed by continuity as he acquires
various kinds of knowledge and so develops his intelligence,
until he reaches the highest degree of such intelligence which
is called rationality. Nevertheless the second or spiritual
degree is still closed. It can only be opened by a love of use

Divine Love and Wisdom 95

derived from intellectual considerations,! but this must be
a spiritual love of use, which is the same thing as love of the
neighbour. This degree may likewise be developed to its

highest point by a knowledge of truth and good, that is, by

spiritual truths; but the third or celestial degree is not
opened by these truths, but by a heavenly love of use, that is,
by love to the Lord; and love to the Lord is nothing but the
application of the precepts of the Word to life, the sum of
which precepts is to shun evil as infernal and diabolical, and
to do good as being heavenly and divine. This is how
these three degrees in man are successively opened up.

238. So long as a man lives in the world, he knows nothing
of the opening up of these degrees within him. The reason
is that his consciousness is then in the natural or ultimate
degree, and by means of this he thinks, wills, speaks, and acts,
and the spiritual degree being interior does not communicate
with the natural degree by continuity but by correspondence,
and such communication is not sensibly felt. But when a
man dies and so puts off the natural degree, he then becomes
conscious of that degree which has been opened up within
him in the world; he in whom the spiritual degree has been
opened becomes conscious in the spiritual degree; he in
whom the celestial degree has been opened, in the celestial.
He who comes after death into the spiritual degree no longer
thinks, wills, speaks, and acts naturally, but spiritually, and
he who comes into the celestial degree thinks, wills, speaks, and
acts according to this degree. And as communication between
the three degrees is possible only by correspondence, these
three kinds of love, wisdom, and use are so different that one of
them cannot possibly pass by continuity into the other. It is
evident then that there are three degrees of ascent in man,
and that they may be opened up successively.

239. As there exist in man three degrees of love and wisdom
and of use arising from these, it follows that he possesses three
degrees of will and understanding and of their conclusions or
determinations to use; for the will is the receptacle of love, the

1Swedenborg makes a distinction between the rational and the
intellectual faculties. Thus in Arcana Celestia, no. 1496, he says:
“There is a difference between scientific truth [t.e. truth which is
merely lodged in the memory, whether it relates to religion or to other
subjects], rational truth, and ‘intellectual truth, and they are suc-
cessively attained. Scientific truth is mere knowledge, rational truth is
scientific truth confirmed by the reason, tntellectual truth involves an
inward perception that the thing believed is true.”—Tr.

96 Divine Love and Wisdom

understanding that of wisdom, and their determination is the
use arising out of these. This shows that there exists in each
man a natural, spiritual, and celestial will and understanding,
which are potential at his birth and actual when they are
opened up. In a word, the mind of man, which consists of
will and understanding, is composed of three degrees by
creation and thus from his birth; so that he has a natural
mind, a spiritual mind, and a celestial mind, and can thus be
elevated to angelic wisdom and possess it while living in the
world; yet he does not consciously possess it until after death,
when he becomes an angel; then, however, he speaks things
ineffable and incomprehensible to the naturalman. I knewa
man of moderate education in the world, and after his death
I saw and conversed with him in heaven, and I clearly per-
ceived that he spoke like an angel, and that what he said was
beyond the comprehension of anatural man. The reason was
that in the world he had applied the precepts of the Word to
life and had worshipped the Lord, and therefore he was raised
by him to the third degree of love and wisdom. A knowledge
of this elevation of the human mind is necessary in order that
the reader may understand what follows.

240. The Lord has endowed man with two faculties, which
distinguish him from the beasts. One enables him to under-
stand what is true and good; this is called rationality, and
is his power of understanding. The other enables him to do
what is true and good; this is called liberty, and is his power
of willing. For rationality enables a man to think whatever
he pleases, either in favour of God or against Him, either in
favour of his neighbour or against him; he is also able to will
and act in accordance with what he thinks; but when he sees
evil or fears punishment, he is able of his own free-will to desist.
By virtue of these two faculties a man is a man and is dis-
tinguished from the beasts. He possesses them as a perpetual
gift from the Lord, nor are they ever taken away from him,
for then he would no longer be human. The Lord is present
with every man, whether good or evil, in these two faculties,
for they are His dwelling-place in the human race, and
this is why every man both good and bad lives to eternity.
But the Lord is more intimately present with man when by
means of these faculties he opens up the higher degrees of his
mind; for then he comes into the higher degrees of love and
wisdom, and draws nearer to the Lord. This shows that in

Divine Love and Wisdom 97

proportion as these degrees are opened up, the man is in the
Lord and the Lord in him.

241. It was said above that the three degrees of ascent are
like end, cause, and effect, and that love, wisdom, and use
form a series in accordance with them; and so a few words
shall be said here to show that love is end, wisdom cause, and
use effect. Any one who is guided by enlightened reason can
see that a man’s love is the end which he pursues in all his
concerns; for the object of his love is also that of his thought,
determination, and action, and is therefore the end he has in
view. It also stands to reason that wisdom is cause; for he,
or the love which is his end, seeks in the understanding means
to attain his end, that is, he consults his wisdom; and these
means are the cause by which he acts. It is evident without
any explanation that use is the effect. But love in one man is
not the same as in another, and neither are wisdom, nor con-
sequently use. But since these three are homogeneous, as
was shown above (nos. 189-194), it follows that the nature of
a man’s love determines that of his wisdom and of his use.
The wisdom here spoken of means a man’s understanding
of whatever nature it may be.

242. SPIRITUAL LIGHT FLOWS INTO MAN THROUGH THE
THREE DEGREES, BUT NOT SPIRITUAL HEAT, EXCEPT SO FAR AS
HE SHUNS EVILS AS SINS AND LOOKS TO THE LorD. It is evident
from what has been shown above in Part II. that light and heat
flow forth from the sun of heaven, which is the first emanation
from the divine Love and Wisdom; that light proceeds from
its wisdom and heat from its love; that the light is the
receptacle of wisdom, and the heat that of love; and that
in proportion as man receives wisdom he comes into that
divine light, and that in proportion as he receives love, he
comes into that divine heat. It is, moreover, evident that
there are three degrees of light and heat, or of wisdom and
love, and that these were created in man that he might be a
recipient of divine Love and Wisdom, that is, of the Lord.
We must now show that spiritual light flows into man through
these three degrees, but not spiritual heat, except so far as he
shuns evils as sins and looks to the Lord; or, what is the same
thing, that a man can receive wisdom up to the third degree,
but not love unless he shuns evils as sins and looks to the Lord ;
or what is still the same, that man’s understanding can be

G 635

F

5

98 Divine Love and Wisdom

elevated into wisdom, but not his will, except so far as he
shuns evils as sins.

243. That man’s understanding can be elevated into the
light of heaven or into angelic wisdom, but that his will
cannot be elevated into the heat of heaven or into angelic
love, unless he shuns evils as sins and looks to the Lord, has
been made evident to me by my experience in the spiritual
world. Many times I have seen and perceived that simple
spirits, who knew scarcely anything except that there is a
God, and that the Lord was born a Man, understood the
arcana of angelic wisdom almost as fully as the angels did;
and this was the case not only with these simple folk, but
also with many of the infernal crew. But these latter only
understood while they were listening to others, but not
when they were thinking to themselves. While they were
listening light entered from above, but when ‘they were
thinking to themselves no other light could enter than that
which corresponded to their heat or love. And therefore,
although they heard and understood these truths, they
forgot everything when they turned away. In fact, those
who belonged to the infernal crew totally rejected what they
had heard, and utterly denied it. The reason was ‘that the
fire and light of their love, which were delusive, brought on
darkness by which the heavenly light from above was
extinguished.

244. The same thing happens in the world. When any
one who is not absolutely stupid, and has not confirmed
himself in false beliefs out of pride in his own intelligence,
hears others speak on some deep subject, or himself ‘reads
about it, he understands, remembers, and can afterwards
confirm what he has learnt, provided he has some love for
the acquisition of knowledge. A wicked man can do this
as well as a good one. Although in his heart he denies the
divine truths of the church, still he can understand them
and speak and preach about them, and support them skilfully
with his pen; but when left to himself, his own infernal love
inspires him to think against and deny them. This shows
that the understanding can be in spiritual light although the
will is not in spiritual heat; and it also follows that the
understanding does not lead the. will, nor does wisdom pro-
duce love, but it only teaches and shows the way; it teaches
how a man ought to live and it shows the way in which he

Divine Love and Wisdom 99

ought to go. It also follows that the will leads the under-
standing and makes it act in unison with itself, and that
the love which pertains to the will regards as wisdom every-
thing which agrees with it in the understanding. In the
following pages it will be seen that the will does nothing by
itself, that is, apart from the understanding, but always acts
in union with it, and that it wins over the understanding to
its side by influx, but that the converse proposition is not
true.

245. We will now describe how light flows into the three
degrees of man’s life. The forms in him which are the
receptacles of heat and light or of love and wisdom, and
which, as was said, are in triple order and consist of three
degrees, are by birth translucent, and transmit spiritual light
as transparent glass does natural light. This is why man, as
regards wisdom, may be elevated to the third degree. But
these forms are not opened until spiritual heat unites with
spiritual light or love with wisdom; by this union these
translucent forms are opened according to their degrees.
This is similar to the action of the light and heat of the sun
of the world upon vegetation. The light of winter, which
is as bright as the summer light, does not open anything in
seed or tree, but when the vernal heat unites with it then it
does so. The case is similar, for spiritual light and heat
correspond to natural light and heat.

246. Spiritual heat is acquired in no other way than by
shunning evils as sins and looking to the Lord. For so long
as a man is in evils he is also in the love of them; for he
desires them, and the love of and desire for evil are opposed
to spiritual love and affection, and cannot be removed except
by shunning evils as sins; and as man cannot shun them in
his own strength but only in the Lord’s, he must look to
Him. When he shuns them in the Lord’s strength, the love
of evil and its heat are removed, and the love of good and
its heat take their place, and thus the higher degree is
opened. For the Lord enters from above and opens it, and
then unites love or spiritual heat with wisdom or spiritual
light; and by virtue of this union the man begins to flourish
spiritually, as a tree does in the springtime.

247. By the influx of spiritual light into all three degrees
of his mind, man is distinguished from the beasts and,
unlike them, can think analytically and see not only natural

100 Divine Love and Wisdom

but also spiritual truths; and when he also acknowledges
them, he can be reformed and regenerated. The ability to
receive spiritual light is what was above called rationality,
and this is a gift which every man has from the Lord and
which is never taken away from him, for if it were taken away
he could not possibly be reformed. This faculty of ration-
ality enables a man, unlike the beasts, not only to think but
also to express his thought in speech, and afterwards, by
means of his other faculty which was above called liberty,
he is able to do those things which his understanding thinks.
But as these two faculties, rationality and liberty, which are
proper to man, were dealt with above (no. 240), more need
not be said of them here.

' 248. MAN BECOMES NATURAL AND SENSUAL UNLESS HIS
HIGHER OR SPIRITUAL DEGREE IS OPENED. It was shown
above that there are three degrees of the human mind,
called natural, spiritual, and celestial, and that these degrees
can be opened up successively. It was also shown that first
the natural degree is opened, and that next, if he shuns evils
as sins and looks to the Lord, the spiritual degree i$ opened _
and lastly the celestial. Since these degrees are successively
opened according to the life a man leads, it follows that the
two higher degrees may remain closed, and that he then
continues in the natural or ultimate degree. It is also
known in the world that there is a natural and a spiritual
man, or an external and an internal man; but it is not known
that the natural man becomes spiritual when any higher
degree in him is opened up and that this is brought about
by a spiritual life, that is, a life according to the Divine
precepts; otherwise he remains natural.

249. There are three kinds of natural men; the first
consists of those who know nothing of the divine precepts;
the second, of those who know that there are such precepts
but think nothing of a life according to them; and the
third, of those who despise and deny them. The first kind,
consisting of those who know nothing of the divine precepts,
must necessarily remain natural, because they cannot teach
themselves. Every man is taught the divine precepts not
by immediate revelation but by others who have learnt them
from their religion; on this subject see The Doctrine of the
New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture (nos. 114-118).

Divine Love and Wisdom IOI

The second kind, who know that there are divine precepts,
but think nothing of a life according to them, also remain
natural, and care about nothing but the world and the body;
these after death perform menial and servile labours accord-
ing to the uses which they are able to render to the spiritual;
for the natural man is a menial and a drudge, and the spiritual
man a master and a lord. The third kind, who despise and
deny the Divine precepts, not only remain natural but also
become sensual according to the measure of their contempt
and denial. Sensual men are natural men of the lowest
order, whose thought cannot rise above the appearances and
fallacies of the bodily senses: these after death are in hell.

250. As the difference between a spiritual and a natural
man is unknown in the world, each being often mistaken for
the other, a distinct statement on this subject shall be
made, as follows:

I. The difference between the natural and the spiritual
man.

II. The character of the natural man when the spiritual
degree has been opened.

III. The character of the natural man when the spiritual
degree has not been opened, but is not altogether closed.

IV. The character of the natural man when the spiritual
degree is entirely closed.

V. The difference between the life of the merely natural
man and that of the beasts.

251. I. The difference between the natural and the spiritual
man, A man is not a man by virtue of his face and body
but of his understanding and will; and therefore by the
natural man and the spiritual man are meant a man’s under-
standing and will, which are either natural or spiritual.
The natural man as regards the understanding and will is,
as it were, a natural world, and may be called a world or
microcosm; and the spiritual man as regards the under-
standing and will is, as it were, a spiritual world, and may
be called a spiritual world or heaven. Now the natural man,
resembling the natural world, evidently loves the things of
that world; and the spiritual man, resembling the spiritual
world, evidently loves spiritual and heavenly things. The
spiritual man indeed also loves the natural world, but only
as a master loves his servant by whom he performs uses ;
according to the uses so performed the natural man too is

102 Divine Love and Wisdom

made, as it were, spiritual, and becomes sensible of delight
in use derived from the spiritual degree of the mind; such
a mind may be called a spiritual-natural man; then the
spiritual man loves spiritual truths, not only loving to know
and understand them, but also having the will to do them;
while the natural man loves to speak those truths, and also
to act accordingly, that is, to perform uses. This subordi-
nation is the result of the union of the spiritual and natural
worlds, for whatever is seen and done in the natural world
derives its origin from the spiritual world. It is evident,
therefore, that the spiritual man is altogether distinct from
the natural man, and that no other connection exists between
them than that which exists between cause and effect.
_ 252. Il. The character of the natural man when the spiritual
degree has been opened. ‘This is evident from what was said
above. It must however be added that the natural man
attains complete manhood when the spiritual degree is
opened within him; for then he is closely associated with
angels in heaven and at the same time with men in the world,
and as regards both he lives under the guidance of the Lord,
for the spiritual man derives precepts from the Lord)through
the Word and puts them into practice by means of thé natural
man. The natural man, when the spiritual degree is opened
within him, does not know that his thoughts and actions are
inspired by his spiritual man; they appear to be self-origi-
nated, but yet they are from the Lord. Nor does the natural
man whose spiritual degree is opened know that as to his
spiritual man he is in heaven; yet his spiritual man is in the
midst of the angels of heaven, and sometimes he is even
visible to them; but as he relapses into his natural man, he
soon parts from them. Nor does he know that his spiritual
mind 1s filled by the Lord with innumerable arcana of wisdom
and innumerable delights of love, or that he comes into the
enjoyment of these after death when he becomes an angel.
The reason why the natural man is not aware of these things,
is, that communication between the natural and spiritual
man takes place by correspondence, and communication by
correspondence is not perceptible except in the understanding
by truths being seen in light, and in the will by uses being
put in the first place because they are loved.

253. II. The character of the natural man when the spiritual
degree has not been opened, but is not altogether closed. The

Divine Love and Wisdom 103

spiritual degree is not opened, and yet not altogether closed,
in those who have in some measure lived a life of charity,
and yet have known little of genuine truth. The reason is
that this degree is opened by the union of love and wisdom,
or of heat and light: love or spiritual heat alone does not
open it, nor does wisdom or spiritual light alone, but both
must act in union. So long therefore as genuine truths,
which are the source of wisdom or light, remain unknown,
love cannot open that degree, but can only maintain the possi-
bility of its being opened. This is what is meant by saying
that it is not altogether closed. Something similar occurs
- in the vegetable kingdom, for heat alone does not cause seeds
and trees to vegetate, but only heat together with light.
Let it be remembered that all truth comes from spiritual
light, and all good from spiritual heat, and that good by
means of truths opens the spiritual degree, for good produces
use by means of truths, and use is the good of love, which
derives its essence from the union of good and truth. The
lot after death of those in whom the spiritual degree is not
opened and yet not altogether closed, and who are therefore
neither natural nor spiritual, is in the lowest parts of heaven,
where they sometimes undergo severe suffering; or some-
times they are placed in the boundaries of some higher
heaven, where they live as it were in twilight: for, as was
said above, in heaven and in each of its communities the
light decreases from the centre to the circumference, and those
who are eminently gifted with divine truths are in the centre,
while those who are acquainted with only a few truths are
in the boundaries; the latter know nothing more from the
religious instruction they have received than that there is
a God, that the Lord has suffered for them, and that charity
and faith are the essentials of the church, and do not trouble
themselves to inquire what faith and charity are; yet faith
in its essence is truth, and truth is manifold, and charity is the
discharge, under the Lord’s guidance, of every duty of a man’s
calling; he does this under the guidance of the Lord if he
shuns evils as sins. It is exactly as was said before, namely,
that the end is the all of the cause, and the effect is the all
of the end through the cause: the end is charity or good,
the cause is faith or truth, and the effects are good works
or uses. From this it is plain that charity can be translated
into acts only so far as it is united with truths, which

104 Divine Love and Wisdom

are called truths of faith. By means of these truths
charity is expressed in works and gives them their specific
character.

254. IV. The character of the natural man when the spiritual
degree is entirely closed. The spiritual degree is closed in
those who lead an evil life, and still more in those who are
imbued with falsity from evil. For just as the fibre of a
nerve shrinks at the slightest touch of any foreign substance,
and just as the motor fibres of a muscle, and the muscle
itself, and indeed the whole body, shrink from the touch of
anything hard or cold, so the substances or forms of the
spiritual degree in man shrink from evils and their falsities,
for these are foreign to their nature. The spiritual degree is
in the form of heaven, and admits nothing but goods and
the truths derived from them, these being of a similar nature
to itself; but evils and the falsities derived from them are
foreign to it. This degree shrinks and closes up ‘especially
in those who in the world, by reason of self-love, are imbued
with the love of dominion, for this love is opposed to love
to the Lord. It is also closed in those who, from ae of the
world, are insanely eager to possess the goods of others, but
not so much as in the former case. The reason why these
loves close the spiritual degree is that they are thé origin
of evil. The shrinking or closing of this degree is like the
twisting back of a spiral in the contrary direction. This is
why after that degree has been shut, it reflects the light of
heaven and then there is darkness there instead of the light
of heaven, and consequently truth, which is in the light of
heaven, becomes nauseous. In such men not only is’ this
degree itself closed, but also the higher region of the natural
degree which is called the rational, and the process continues
until the lowest region of the natural degree, which is called
the sensual, alone stands open; for this is nearest to the
world and to the external senses of the body, and these are
then the source of all thought, speech, and reasoning. In
the spiritual world the light of heaven causes the natural
man who has become sensual through evils and their falsities
to appear not as a man but as a deformed being with a
flattened nose, because the nose corresponds to the per-
ception of truth. Moreover men of this character can-
not endure a ray of heavenly ‘light, and have in their
caverns no other light than such as proceeds from a coal

Divine Love and Wisdom 105

or wood fire. These facts show plainly who and what are
those in whom the spiritual degree is closed.

255. V. The difference between the life of a merely natural
man and that of a beast. This difference will be specially
considered when we come to treat of life. Here let it suffice
to say that man has three degrees of mind, or of understand-
ing and will, which may be opened successively, and as they
are translucent, his understanding may be raised into the
light of heaven and see not only civil and moral, but also
spiritual truths; and from many truths already seen he may
advance to other truths and in this way continue to perfect
his understanding to eternity. Beasts, however, have not.
the two higher degrees but only the natural degree, which
has no power by itself of thinking about any matter, civil,
moral, or spiritual. And as these natural degrees of theirs
cannot be opened for the reception of, and so rendered
capable of elevation into a higher light, they are unable to
think in successive but only in simultaneous order, which is
not thinking at all, but merely acting according to a know-
ledge corresponding to their love. And as they are unable
to think analytically and thus contemplate a lower mode
of thought from a higher point of view, they cannot speak,
but only utter sounds expressive of the knowledge they
derive from their love. Yet the sensual man, who is in the
lowest degree natural, differs from a beast only in this, that
he can fill his memory with facts and think and speak by
means of them; this power he gets from the faculty which
every man possesses of being able to understand truth if he
chooses; it is this faculty which makes the difference. And
yet many by the abuse of this faculty have made themselves
lower than the beasts.

256. THE NATURAL DEGREE OF THE HUMAN MIND IS
INTRINSICALLY CONTINUOUS, BUT BY CORRESPONDENCE
WITH THE TWO HIGHER DEGREES, IT IS SO ELEVATED AS TO
APPEAR TO BE DISCRETE. This, although difficult for
those to understand who do not yet possess a knowledge
of the degrees of ascent, must nevertheless be revealed
because it is a matter of angelic wisdom, and this wisdom,
although it cannot be comprehended by the natural man
in the same way as by the angels, may yet be grasped by
the understanding whenever this is raised into the degree of

106 Divine Love and Wisdom

light in which the angels live; for the understanding can be
raised even to that extent and be enlightened accordingly.
But the enlightenment of the natural mind does not increase
by discrete degrees but in a continuous degree; and as this
enlightenment increases, it is augmented from within by
the light of the two higher degrees. It can be understood
how this happens when it is known that one degree of ascent
is above another, and that the natural or ultimate degree is,
as it were, the general covering of the two higher degrees.
Now as the natural degree is raised towards the higher degree,
this acts from within upon the exterior natural degree and
illumines it. The illumination is effected indeed from within
by the light of the higher degrees, but this light is received
in continuity by the natural degree which envelops and sur-
rounds them, and therefore with greater clearness and purity
in proportion to its elevation; thus the natural degree is
illumined from within by the light of the higher degrees
acting discontinuously, but within the natural degree the
illumination is continuous. Evidently then a man, so long
as he lives in the world and is consequently in the {natural
degree, cannot be elevated into the very wisdom of the/angels,
but he can be raised into association even with the, angels
and receive illumination from their superior light, ‘which
flows down and enlightens his mind from within. As yet
this matter cannot be presented more clearly, though it will
be made easier by a study of effects; for if one has some
little previous knowledge of causes, effects will present them
in the light and thus illumine them. ;
257. These effects are as follows: x. The natural mind
can be raised into the light of heaven in which the angels are,
and perceive naturally what the angels perceive spiritually,
thus not so fully because it cannot be raised into actual
angelic light. 2. Man, when his natural mind is raised into
the light of heaven, can think as angels do and even speak
with them; but then the thought and speech of the angels
flow into the natural thought and speech of the man, and
not conversely; and therefore the angels speak with the
man in the natural language which is his mother tongue.
3. This is effected by the influx of the spiritual into the
natural, and not of the natural into the spiritual. 4. Human
wisdom, being natural so long as man lives in the natural
world, cannot be raised to angelic wisdom, but only into a

Divine Love and Wisdom 107

certain semblance of it; the reason is that the natural mind
is elevated by a continuous process of change, like that of
darkness to light or of density to rarity. But a man in
whom the spiritual degree is opened comes into possession
of that wisdom when he dies, and even before this, when his
bodily sensations are dormant, by an influx from above
into the spiritual elements of the natural mind. 5. Man’s
natural mind is composed both of spiritual and natural
substances, and thought is produced from spiritual and not
from natural substances; the latter become quiescent when
he dies, but not so the spiritual; and so, after death, when
he becomes a spirit or angel, his natural mind retains a form
like that which it had in the world. 6. The natural sub-
stances of that mind, which, as was said, become quiescent
at death, form the skin of the spiritual bodies of spirits and
angels. This skin which is taken from the natural world
enables their spiritual bodies to subsist, for the natural is the
containing ultimate; and this is why there is no spirit or angel
who was not born a man. These arcana of angelic wisdom
are here disclosed in order that the character of man’s
natural mind may be known, a subject which is further
elucidated in the following pages.

258. Every man is born with the faculty of understanding
truths even of the inmost degree, which is that of the angels
of the third heaven; for the human understanding, rising by
continuity around the two higher degrees, receives the light
of their wisdom in the manner stated above (no. 256). This
is why man can become rational in proportion to his elevation:
if he is raised to the third degree he becomes rational in that
degree; if to the second degree he becomes rational in that
degree; and if he is not raised at all he is rational in the first
degree. He is said to become rational in these degrees
because the natural degree is the general receptacle of their
light. The reason why a man does not become rational to
the full height of his powers is that the love of his will cannot
be raised in the same manner as the wisdom of his under-
standing. The love of his will can only be elevated by
shunning evils as sins, and then performing uses or the goods
of charity by power received from the Lord. If this is not
done, the wisdom of the understanding, however high it may
have ascended, relapses to the level of its love. Hence a
a man’s love, if it is not raised to the spiritual degree at the

108 Divine Love and Wisdom

same time, is only rational in the ultimate degree. This
shows that man’s rational mind seems to consist of three
degrees, a rational derived from the celestial degree, a
rational derived from the spiritual degree, and a rational
derived from the natural degree; and also that rationality,
which is the faculty capable of elevation, remains with man
whether it be elevated or not.

259. It has been said that every man is born with the
faculty of rationality, but this means every man whose brain
has not been injured in any way, either in the womb or by
disease after birth, or by a blow on the head, or by any insane
desire bursting forth and breaking down all restraints. The
rational mind of such persons cannot be elevated, for the life
of their will and understanding does not possess the limits and
boundaries necessary for the orderly performance of its
ultimate acts. It works indeed by means of ultimate de-
terminations but not from them.? It may also be seen below
that infants and children have no rationality (no. 266, at the
end).

260. THE NATURAL DEGREE OF THE MIND, AS IT ENVELOPS
AND CONTAINS THE HIGHER DEGREES, REACTS AGAINST THEM,
AND, IF THE HIGHER DEGREES ARE NOT OPENED, RESISTS
THEM; BUT IF THEY ARE OPENED IT ACTS IN CONCURRENCE
WITH THEM. In the preceding article it was shown that the
natural mind, being of the ultimate degree, envelops and
encloses the spiritual and celestial minds, which are of a
higher degree. It must now be shown that the natural mind
reacts against the higher or interior minds. The reason is
that it envelops, encloses, and contains them, and this could
not possibly be the case without reaction; for unless it
reacted, the interior or enclosed parts would relax and protrude
outwards and thus collapse. It would be as if the muscular
coats which invest the human body did not react; in that
case the viscera, or interiors of the body, would force their
way out and lose their cohesion. Or it would be as if the
membrane surrounding the fibres of a muscle did not react
against their contraction, in which case not only would action
cease but all the inner tissues would be dissolved. The same
is true of every ultimate degree of ascent, and therefore of
the natural mind relatively to the higher degrees; for, as was

1 That is, they do not realise the consequences of their acts. —T7r.

Divine Love and Wisdom 109

said above, there are three degrees of the human mind, the
natural, the spiritual, and celestial, and the natural mind is
the ultimate. Another reason why the natural mind reacts
against the spiritual is that it consists not only of substances
of the spiritual but also of the natural world, as was said
above (no. 257); and the substances of the natural world by
their very nature react against those of the spiritual world;
for the substances of the natural world are in themselves dead,
and are acted upon from without by those of the spiritual
world, and dead substances which are acted upon from
without by their very nature resist and thus react. This
shows that the natural man reacts against the spiritual man,
and that a contest between them results. It is the same thing
whether you say the natural and spiritual man, or the natural
and spiritual mind.

261. It should now be clear that if the spiritual mind is
closed up, the natural mind acts continually against the
things of the spiritual mind, fearing lest anything should
flow in thence to disturb it. All that flows through the
spiritual mind is from heaven, for the spiritual mind is con-
stituted like a heaven; and all that flows into the natural mind
is from the world, for the natural mind is constituted like
a world. It follows that, when the spiritual mind is closed
up, the natural mind reacts against all heavenly things, and
refuses them admittance except so far as they are the means
of acquiring for itself and possessing the things of the world.
And when heavenly things serve the natural mind as means
to its own ends, then those means, although they still appear
to be heavenly, become natural; for the end desired gives
them their specific character, and they become like the know-
ledge of the natural man which is devoid of inward life. But
heavenly things cannot in this way be so united with natural
things as to act as one with them, and in men who are alto-
gether naturally minded heavenly things are relegated to an
outside position round the natural things which are within.
This is why a merely natural man can talk and preach about
heavenly things, and even seem to act in accordance with
them, although i in his heart he denies them; the latter he does
when he is alone, but the former when he isin company. But
on this subject more will be said below.

262. By virtue of this inherent reaction the natural mind or
man, when he loves himself and the world above all things,

110 Divine Love and Wisdom

acts against the spiritual mind or man. Then he feels delight
in all kinds of evil, such as adultery, fraud, revenge, blasphemy,
and other evils; ‘and then also he believes nature to be the
creator of the universe, and uses his reason in support of all
these things; and then he either perverts, suffocates, or
repels the goods and truths of heaven and the church, and at
length either shuns them, turns his back upon them, or hates
them. This he does in spirit, and also in the body so ‘far as he
dares to disclose his real opinions without fearing the loss of
honour or gain consequent on a loss of reputation. Such a
man gradually shuts up his spiritual mind more and more
closely, especially when evil is confirmed by falsity. This is
why evil confirmed by falsity cannot be eradicated from the
mind after death, but only by repentance while a man is still
living in the world.

263. Widely different is the state of the natural mind when
the spiritual mind is opened; it is then brought into a state
of submission to the spiritual mind, and occupies a sub-
ordinate position. For the spiritual mind acts from above
or within upon the natural mind, removing whatever reacts
and adjusting whatever concurs; "thus the excessiveireaction
is gradually overcome. It is to be noted that action and
reaction exist in the greatest and least things of the universe,
both living and dead; the equilibrium of all things depends
on this, and is destroyed when action overcomes reaction or
when the contrary takes place. It is the same with the
natural and spiritual minds. When the natural mind acts
under the influence of the delight of its own love and the
pleasure of its own thought, which in themselves are evil and
false, it reacts against and expels whatever comes from the
spiritual mind, shutting the door against it, and inciting
action from such motives as accord with its own. reaction.
This causes an action and reaction of the natural mind opposed
to those of the spiritual mind. The result is a closing of the
spiritual mind, like the twisting up of a spiral. But if the
spiritual mind is opened, the “action and reaction of the
natural mind are reversed; for then the spiritual mind acts
from above or from within, and also from below or from
without by means of those things in the natural mind which
are compliant with it, and reverses the spiral motion char-
acteristic of the action and reaction of the natural mind; for
this mind is from birth antagonistic to everything pertaining

Divine Love and Wisdom III

to the spiritual mind, a quality which it receives by heredity,
as is well known. Such is the change of state called reforma-
tion and regenération. The state of the natural mind before
reformation may be compared to a spiral turning or revolving
downwards, but after reformation to a spiral turning or
revolving upwards; this is why a man before reformation
looks downwards to hell, but after reformation upwards to
heaven.

264. THE ORIGIN OF EVIL IS IN THE ABUSE OF LIBERTY AND
RATIONALITY WHICH ARE THE ESSENTIALLY HUMAN FACULTIES.
Rationality is the power of understanding what is true and
thence what is false, and what is good, and thence what is
evil; and liberty is the power of freely thinking, willing, and
acting accordingly. From what precedes it is clear and from
what follows it will be still clearer, that every man possesses
these two faculties by creation, and consequently, by birth;
that they are from the Lord in him, and that he is never
deprived of them, and that they cause it to seem that
man thinks, speaks, wills, and acts by a power originating in
himself; that the Lord dwells with every man in these
faculties; that in consequence of that union he lives to
eternity; that by means of these faculties and these alone he
can be reformed and regenerated; and also that by them
man is distinguished from the beasts.

265. That the origin of evil lies in the abuse of these
faculties will now be shown in the following series.

I. A wicked man enjoys these two faculties as well as a
good man.

II. A wicked man abuses them to confirm evil and falsity,
while a good man uses them to confirm good and truth.

III. The evil and falsity which a man has confirmed
remain in him and are incorporated in his love and thus in
his life.

IV. Everything which has been incorporated in a man’s
love and life is transmitted by heredity to his offspring.

V. All evil whether hereditary or acquired resides in the
natural mind.

266. I. A wicked man enjoys these two faculties as well as a
good man. It was shown in a former article that the natural
mind as regards the understanding can be raised up even to
the light enjoyed by the angels of the third heaven, and thus

112 Divine Love and Wisdom

see truths, acknowledge them, and speak them. As the
natural ‘mind‘is ‘capable of being thus elevated, a wicked man
evidently enjoys the faculty of rationality as well as a good
man; and can therefore think and speak truths. Moreover,
that he can also will and act accordingly, although he does not
choose to do so, is taught both by reason and experience.

As regards reason: who is not able to will and act in accord-
ance with his thought? If he does not will and practise
truths, it is because he has no inclination to do so. His
power to will and act is the liberty given to every man by the
Lord; but his unwillingness to do that which is good when
he is able, comes from the love of evil which prevents him;
yet he can resist this love, and many do resist it. This has
been sometimes corroborated by experience in the spiritual
world. Ihave sometimes listened to evil spirits who inwardly
were devils, and who in the world rejected the truths of
heaven and the church: so long as the love of knowledge,
which is common to all from childhood, was excited by the
glory that surrounds every love like the splendour of fire,
they perceived the arcana of angelic wisdom as well as the
good spirits who inwardly were angels. These diabolical
spirits even acknowledged that they were able to ‘will and
practise truths, but that they would not. When told that
they would will truths also if they only shunned evils as sins,
they said that they could also do this, but that they-did not
choose to. This showed that the wicked equally with the
good enjoy the faculty of liberty. Let each examine himself
and he willsee that itisso. The reason why all men have this
power is that the Lord, from whom it comes, gives it to them
continually ; for as was said above, the Lord dwells with every
man in these two faculties, and therefore in his ability to will.
With regard to the faculty of understanding, or rationality,
it is not operative in any one until his natural mind matures;
in the meantime it is like the seed of unripe fruit, which cannot
germinate in the ground and grow into a shrub; nor does
rationality exist in those mentioned above (no. 259).

267. II. A wicked man abuses these faculties to confirm evil
and falsity, but a good man uses them to confirm good and truth.
From his voluntary and intellectual faculties or his will and
understanding, man has the power of confirming whatever he
pleases; for the natural man can raise his understanding into
higher light to any extent he desires, but one who is in evil

Divine Love and Wisdom 1:13

‘and thence in falsity seldom raises it above the upper region
of his natural mind to that of the spiritual: mind. The
reason is that he delights in the love of his natural mind, and
if he raises his understanding above this he loses that delight.
If the understanding is raised still higher, and sees truths
which are opposed to the delights of his life, or to the prin-
ciples of his own understanding, then he either falsifies them,
or passes them by and leaves them in contempt, or he retains
them in the memory to serve the purposes of his ruling love or
the pride of his own understanding. That the natural man
can confirm anything he likes, is very plain from the large
number of heresies in the Christian world, each of which is
confirmed by its adherents. Who does not know that evil
and falsity of every kind can be confirmed? It is possible to
maintain, and the wicked do in their hearts maintain, that
there is no God, but that nature is everything and has
created herself; that religion is only a means of keeping
simple minds in subjection; that human prudence does every-
thing and divine Providence nothing except sustain the
universe in the order established by creation; also that
murder, adultery, theft, fraud, and revenge are allowable, as
Machiavelli and his followers maintained. The natural man
can confirm these and many similar beliefs, and fill books
with the proofs; and when they are confirmed these falsities
are seen in their own deceptive light, and truths are involved
in such obscurity as to seem like phantoms of the night. In
a word, take the greatest falsity and express it as a pro-
position, and tell a clever person to prove it, and he will do
.so to the utter extinction of the light of truth; but set aside
his proofs, begin again and view the same proposition in the
light of your reason, and you will see the falsity in all its
deformity. All this shows that a man can abuse the two
faculties given him by the Lord, by confirming evils and
falsities of every kind. No beast can do this, because it does
not possess these faculties.. This is why a beast, unlike a man,
is introduced fully into the order proper to its life and into all
the knowledge adapted to the needs of its natural love.

268. III. The evil and falsity which a man has confirmed in
himself remain in him and are incorporated tn hts love and thus
in his life. Theconfirmation of evil and falsity is nothing but
the removal of good and truth and, if the process be continued,

‘it becomes their rejection, for evil and falsity remove and
H 635

114 Divine Love and Wisdom

reject good and truth. This is why the confirmation of evil
and falsity shuts out heaven; for all good and truth flows
from the Lord through heaven, and when heaven is shut out
the man is in hell and associated there with those in whom a
similar evil and falsity reign; his escape thence is afterwards
impossible. I have been allowed to speak with some who
ages ago had confirmed themselves in the false beliefs of their
religion, and I saw that they still adhered to them just as
they did in the world. This was because everything in which
a man persists becomes incorporated in his love and life; for
it is incorporated in his will and understanding, and these
constitute the life of every one; and when it becomes a part
of his life, it affects his whole mind and body. Evidently
then a man who has confirmed himself in evil.and falsity is
evil and false from head to foot, and then by no inversion or
reversal of his state can he be brought back to an opposite
state or be liberated from hell. The contents of this article
show once more where the origin of evil lies.

269. IV. Everything which has been incorporated in a
man’s love and life 1s transmitted by heredity to his pffspring.
It is well known that man is born in evil, and that he get this
evil by inheritance from his parents; some indeed believe
that he derives it, not from his parents, but through them
from Adam, but this is a mistake. He gets his soul from
his father, and the body with which it is clothed ftom his
mother. The father’s seed is the first receptacle of life,
but such a receptacle as it was in the father, for it is,in the
form of his love, and a man’s love is of the same nature in
its largest and smallest components; moreover theré, is in
the seed an effort to produce the human form, and this it
gradually assumes. It follows that the evils which are called
hereditary are transmitted through a succession of ancestors,
that is, through fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers
to their posterity. Experience also teaches this, for as
regards the character, there is a likeness in races to their
first founder, and a greater likeness between the members
of a family, and a still greater likeness between those of the
same household; and so strong is this likeness that one
generation resembles another not only in disposition, but
also in face. But the manner in which parents transmit
by heredity the love of evil to their offspring will be explained
below where the correspondence of the mind, or of the will and

Divine Love and Wisdom Dis

understanding, with the body and its members and organs
1s treated of at large. These few facts are mentioned here
to show that evils are derived from a succession of forefathers,
and that they increase by the accumulated evils of one after
another, until man by birth is nothing but evil; and the
malignity of the evil increases in proportion as the spiritual
mind is excluded; for the natural mind is thus shut off from
its influence, and ‘this cannot be remedied in the descendants
unless they shun evils as sins, in the power of the Lord.
Only in this way can the spiritual mind be opened and the
natural mind be reduced to a corresponding form.

270. V. All evil and the falsity arising from it, whether
hereditary or acquired, reside in the natural mind. Evils and
their attendant falsities reside in the natural mind because
that mind is itself a world in a certain form or similitude;
but the spiritual mind is a heaven in form or similitude, and
in heaven evil can find no home: this is why the spiritual
mind is closed at birth, but is capable of being opened after-
wards. A man’s natural mind derives its form partly from
substances of the natural world, but his spiritual mind only
from those of the spiritual world; his spiritual mind is pre-
served in its integrity by the Lord, that he may be able to
become a man; for he is born an animal but becomes a man.
The natural mind with all its contents is bent round from
right to left, whereas the spiritual mind has a similar tendency
from left to right. Thus these minds tend in a contrary
direction—an indication that evil resides in the natural mind,
and that its nature is to oppose the spiritual mind. More-
over the tendency from mnght to left is downwards, thus
towards hell; whereas the tendency from left to right is
upwards, thus towards heaven.

271. EVIL AND FALSITY ARE UTTERLY OPPOSED TO GOOD
AND TRUTH, BECAUSE EVIL AND FALSITY ARE DIABOLICAL
AND INFERNAL, AND GOOD AND TRUTH ARE DIVINE AND
HEAVENLY. Every one acknowledges, as soon as he hears
the statement made, that evil and good are opposites, like-
wise the falsity which originates in evil and the truth which
originates in good; those however who are in evil have the
feeling, and therefore think, that evil is good, for evil delights
their senses, especially those of sight and hearing, and there-
fore also delights their thoughts. and perceptions; and so

116 Divine Love and Wisdom

though they acknowledge that evil and good are opposites,
yet when they are immersed in evil, its delight causes them
to say that evil is good and good evil. Take an example.
When by an abuse of his liberty a man thinks and does evil,
he calls this freedom; and the opposite, namely, thinking
and doing good which is really good, seems to him to be
bondage; yet the latter is freedom and the former bondage.
He who loves adultery considers that it is freedom to be able
to commit adultery, but bondage to be restrained, for lasci-
viousness is delightful to him, but chastity is irksome. He
who loves to rule others from a selfish motive feels therein
a delight exceeding all other joys; he therefore calls every-
thing good which accords with his desires, and everything
evil which does not; and so it is with every other evil. And
therefore although every one acknowledges that, evil and
good are opposites, still those who are in evil entertain
a wrong idea on this subject, and only those who are in
good think rightly about it. No one while he is in evil is
able to see good, but he who is in good can see evil; for evil,
so to speak, is in a cave down below, but good. is above
upon a mountain.

272. As many do not know what the nature of eviliis, and
that it is altogether antagonistic to good, and yet it is im-
portant that this should be known, the subject shall be
explained in the following order:—

I. The natural mind, when it is full of evils and their
allied falsities, is a form and similitude of hell. 4

II. The natural mind, which is a form and similitude of
hell, has three degrees of descent.

IL. The three degrees of the natural mind which is a Roun
and similitude of hell, are opposed to the three degrees of
the spiritual mind which is a form and similitude of heaven.

IV. The natural mind which is a hell is utterly opposed
to the spiritual mind which is a heaven.

273. 1. The natural mind, when tt ts full of evils and their
allied falsities, 1s a form and similitude of hell. It is not
possible to describe the substantial form of man’s natural
mind, how it is interwoven from the substances of both
worlds and lodged primarily in the brain. A general idea
of that form will be given presently when the correspondence
of the mind and body are dealt with. Here we shall briefly
explain how perceptions, thoughts, intentions, and determi-

_ Divine Love and Wisdom 117

nations in all their details are the result of the states and
changes of its form; for as regards these, the natural mind,
being full of evil and derivative falsity, is a form and image
of hell. This form pre-supposes a substantial subject, for
otherwise there could be no changes of state, just as sight
is impossible without an eye and hearing without an ear.
Now the form, or similitude, which causes the natural mind
to resemble hell is of such a nature that the ruling love, with
the attendant lusts which constitute its general state, is
like the Devil in hell, and the false ideas thence arising are
like the infernal crew; nothing else is meant in the Word
by the Devil and all his crew. And the case is similar; for
in hell the selfish love of domineering over others is the ruling
passion, and this is called the devil in the Word; and a love
for what is false, and thoughts arising from that love, are
called his crew. It is the same in all the communities of
hell, except that they differ as do the various species of one
genus. The natural mind when it is full of evils and falsities
is in a similar form; and so a natural man of this character
comes after death into association with that community in
hell which is of a like nature with himself, and then he acts
altogether as one with it; for he then acts according to his
own form, which is that of the states of his mind. There
is also another love, called Satan, subordinated to the former
love called the Devil; this is the love of possessing the goods
of others by every wicked contrivance, and cunning villainies
and devices are its attendant crew. All the inhabitants of
this hell are called satans, and those of the former hell devils;
and they do not repudiate these designations, unless they
are acting deceitfully. This is why the hells in the aggregate
are called the Devil and Satan. The reason why the two
hells are generically distinct according to those two kinds
of infernal love, is that all the heavens are distinguished into
two kingdoms, the celestial and the spiritual, according to
two kinds of heavenly love; and the diabolical hell corres-
ponds, in an opposite sense, to the celestial kingdom, and the
satanic hell corresponds, in the same sense, to the spiritual
kingdom. That the heavens are distinguished into two
kingdoms, the celestial and the spiritual, may be seen in the
work on Heaven and Hell (nos. 20-28). The natural mind
is in the form of hell because all spiritual forms are alike in
their greatest and least components. This is why every

=

118 Divine Love and Wisdom

angel is a heayen in miniature, as is also shown in the work
on Heaven and Hell (nos. 51-58). And this is also why
every man or spirit who is a devil or satan, is a hell in
miniature.

274. Il. The natural mind which ts a form or similitude of
hell has three degrees of descent. That in the greatest and
least of all things there are degrees of two kinds, namely, of
ascent and extension, may be seen above (nos. 222-229); this
then must be the case with the greatest and least things of
the natural mind. The degrees here spoken of are degrees
of ascent. The natural mind, by virtue of its two faculties
of rationality and liberty, can ascend or descend through
three degrees; it ascends by means of good and truth, and it
descends by means of evil and falsity; when it is ascending,
the lower degrees which tend towards hell are shut; but when
it is descending the higher degrees which tend towards heaven
are shut; and this takes place because they react aBainst one
another. These three degrees, higher and lower, are neither
open nor shut in man’s early infancy, for he then knows
nothing either of good and truth or of evil and falsity; but as
he commits himself to one or the other, the degrees aré opened
and closed in one or the other direction. When they are
opened towards hell, the ruling love of the will takes the
highest or inmost place, the false thoughts of the ,under-
standing derived from that love take the second or middle
place, and the determinations of the love through the thought,
or of the will through the understanding, take the lowest place.
Indeed, it is the same as with the degrees of ascent treated of
above, for they form a series of end, cause, and effect,‘or of
first, middle, and ultimate ends. The descent of these degrees
is towards the body, and so as they descend they gradually
become more gross, and thus material and corporeal. If
truths from the Word are admitted by the second degree for
its formation, they are falsified by the love of evil in the first
degree, and become its servants and:slaves. It may be seen
from this what is the character of the truths of the Church
derived from the Word which are possessed by those who are
in the love of evil, and whose natural mind is in the form of
hell: they are profaned, because they are made to serve the
devil as means; for the Devil is the same as the love of evil
reigning in the natural mind as ina hell.

275. Ill. The three degrees of the natural mind which is a

Divine Love and Wisdom 119

form and similitude of hell, are opposed to the three degrees of the
spiritual mind which ts a form and similitude of heaven. That
there are three degrees of the mind, the natural, spiritual,
and celestial, and that the human mind consisting of these
degrees looks towards heaven and is directed towards it, was
shown above. Evidently, therefore, when the natural mind
looks downwards and is organically directed towards hell, it
consists in like manner of three degrees, and each degree is
opposed to a degree of the heavenly mind. This was made
very plain to me by my experience in the spiritual world,
where I observed that there are three heavens, distinct from
one another according to three degrees of ascent; that there
are three hells also distinct according to three degrees of ascent
or rather descent; that the hells are in every detail opposed
to the heavens; and that the lowest hell is opposite to the
highest heaven, the middle hell to the middle heaven, and
the highest hell to the ultimate heaven. It is the same with
the natural mind which is in the form of hell, for all spiritual
forms are alike in their greatest and least component parts.
The reason why the heavens and the hells are so opposed is
that their loves are contrary. Love to the Lord and love to
the neighbour thence derived, constitute the inmost degree
of heaven, but the love of self and the love of the world con-
stitute the inmost degree of hell. Wisdom and intelligence
proceeding from their own loves constitute the middle degree
of heaven, and folly and insanity proceeding from their own
loves, but assuming the appearance of wisdom and intelli-
gence, constitute the middle degree of hell. Moreover the
determinations of the two heavenly degrees which are either
laid up in the memory as knowledge or expressed as bodily
action, constitute the ultimate degree of heaven; and the
determination of the two mfernal degrees, either as know-
ledge or as action, constitute the outermost degree of hell.
The following experience will show how the good and truth of
heaven are converted in hell into their opposite evil and
falsity. I heard that acertain divine truth flowed down from
heaven into hell, and that as it descended through the various
degrees it was converted into falsity, and in the lowest hell
into its very opposite. From this it was plain that the degrees
of hell are in opposition to all the good and truth of heaven,
and that these are converted into evil and falsity by descend-
ing into perverted forms. It is well known that whatever

-~

120. Divine Love and Wisdom

flows in is variously perceived and felt according to the state
of the récipient forms. This conversion into the opposite
was also made evident to me by the following experience.
I was allowed to see the position of hell relatively to that of
heaven, and I noticed that its inhabitants appeared with
their heads downwards and their feet upwards; but I was
told that they appear to themselves to be standing upright,
as is the case with men at the antipodes. These experiences
show that the three degrees of the natural mind, which is in
the form and similitude of hell, are opposite to the three
degrees of the spiritual mind which is in the form and simili-
tude of heaven.

276. IV. The natural mind which ts a hell, ts utterly opposed
to the spiritual mind which ts a heaven. When loves are
opposite there is a consequent opposition in all perception;
for out of the love which constitutes the very life of man all
other things flow as streams do from their source:. In the
natural mind whatever emanates from its ruling love is in the
centre, and all other things are separated and relegated to
the sides. If these are truths of the Church drawn from the
Word, they are sent farther and farther away from thé centre,
until at last they are expelled beyond the borders; and then
the man, or his natural mind, perceives evil as good and
falsity as truth, and conversely. He consequently believes
that villainy is wisdom, that insanity is intelligence, that
cunning is prudence, and that wicked devices are strokes of
genius, and then he sets at nought the divine and heavenly
things of the Church and of worship, and considers bodily
and worldly things to be of the greatest value. Thus he
inverts the state of his life, so that he tramples upon what
should adorn his head and makes a crown for his head of what
should be trodden under foot. And so from being alive he
becomes dead, for he is called living whose mind is a heaven,
and he dead whose mind is a hell.

277. THE WHOLE CONTENTS OF THE THREE DEGREES OF THE
NATURAL MIND ARE EXPRESSED IN WORKS OR BODILY ACTIONS.
The knowledge of degrees given in this Part discloses this
arcanum, that all things belonging to a man’s mind, that is
to his will and understanding, are comprised in his actions,
much as things visible and invisible are contained in seeds,
fruits, or eggs. So far as outward appearance is concerned,

Divine Love and Wisdom 12!

actions or works appear not unlike these, but inwardly they
involve things innumerable, for they are the product of all
the forces of the motor fibres of the whole body and of all
the mental activities which excite and direct those forces,
these being of three degrees, as was shown above. And as
actions thus express all the activities of the mind, so alsc
do they all those of the will, that is, all the affections of a
man’s love which constitute the first-degree, and all those of
the understanding, or all the thoughts arising out of his per-
ceptive capacity which constitute the second degree, and all
the contents of his memory, or the ideas adapted to expression
by speech taken from the memory, which constitute the third
degree. The result of all these prior things being concen-
trated upon action is the work, which does not indeed out-
wardly reveal them, but yet actually contains them within.
That the ultimate embraces, contains, and supports prior
things may be seen above (nos. 209-216); and that the degrees
of ascent attain their full development in the ultimate
(nos. 217-221).

278. Every ultimate 1s enveloped in a covering which keeps
it distinct from its prior constituents, and this is why bodily
actions appear outwardly to be simple and uniform, just as
do seeds, fruits, eggs, and the kernels of nuts and almonds,
and yet they contain within them all the prior things of
which they are the product. Each degree is enclosed in a
covering and is thus divided from the other degrees, and so
the elements of the first degree are not revealed in the second
degree, nor those of the second in the third. For example,
the love of the will, or the first degree of the mind, is not
revealed in the wisdom of the understanding or the second
degree, except as a certain delight in thinking about a given
subject; nor is it revealed in the knowledge contained in the
memory, or the third degree, except as a certain pleasure
felt in possessing knowledge on any subject, and in talking
about it. It follows that a work or act of the body involves
all these prior things although outwardly it appears as one
simple thing.

279. This is proved by the following fact. The angels
who are associated with a man perceive every one of the
things in his mind which produce his acts; the spiritual
angels perceive everything in his understanding, and the
celestial angels everything in his will. This sounds like

122 Divine Love and Wisdom

a paradox, but it is true. It should be noted that those
things in the mind which relate to a proposed or present act
are in the midst, and the rest grouped around them according
to their nearer or more remote connection with it. The
angels say that a man’s character is revealed in every one
_ of his deeds, each being a different likeness of his love as
expressed in his affections and thence in his thoughts. In
a word, to the angels every act or deed of a spiritual man
seems like a fruit which is pleasing to the palate, delightful
to the eye, and good for the health. That the angels have
such a perception of the actions and deeds of men may also
be seen above (no. 220).

280. It is the same with a man’s speech. The angels per-
ceive a man’s love from the tone of his voice, his wisdom from
the articulation of the sound, and his knowledge from the
meaning of the words; they say moreover that these three
things are contained in every word, because a word is some-
thing complete in itself, involving sound, articulation, and
meaning. Angels of the third heaven have told me that.
they perceive the general state of a man’s mind, amd some
particular states too, from every word of every sentence he
utters. That in every single expression of the Word there
is something spiritual derived from divine Wisdom, and
something celestial derived from divine Love, and that the
angels perceive these things when the Word is devoutly
read by man, has been fully proved in The Doctrine of the
New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture. b

281. The conclusion is that the deeds of a man whose
natural mind descends through three degrees into ‘hell,
contain all his evils and their attendant falsities, and that
the deeds of a man whose natural mind ascends into heaven,
contain all his goods and truths; and that the angels perceive
both the former and the latter from his very words and
actions. This is why the Word declares that a man shall
be judged according to his deeds and shall render an account
of his works,

PAR BY,

282. THE LorRD FROM ETERNITY, WHO iS JEHOVAH,
CREATED THE UNIVERSE AND ALL THINGS THEREIN FROM
_ HIMSELF, AND NOT FROM NOTHING. It is known all over the
world and inwardly acknowledged by every wise man that
there is one God who is the Creator of the universe; and it
is known from the Word that God the Creator of the universe
is called Johovah from BEtnc, because He alone zs. That
the Lord from eternity is Jehovah is shown by many quota-
tions from the Word in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem
concerning the Lord. Jehovahis called the Lord from eternity,
because He assumed a human nature in order that He might
save men from hell; and then He commanded His disciples
to call Him Lord, and therefore in the New Testament He is
called the Lord; as is evident from the following passages:
“Thou shalt love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart and with
all thy soul” (Deut. vi. 5); and in the New Testament,
“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and
with all thy soul” (Matt. xxii. 37); and from many other
passages cited from the Old Testament by the Evangelists.

283. Every one of enlightened judgment sees that the
universe was not created out of nothing, because it is im-
possible to make anything out of nothing; for nothing is
nothing, and to suppose anything to be made out of nothing
is absurd and therefore contrary to the light of truth, which
comes from the divine Wisdom; and whatever is incon-
sistent with the divine Wisdom is also inconsistent with the
divine Omnipotence. Every one of enlightened judgment
also sees that all things were created out of self-existent
substance, the very BEING out of which all things that exist
come forth: and as God is the only self-existent Substance,
and thus is essential BEING, it is plain that this is the source
of all things that exist. Many have seen this because it is
consistent with reason; but they have not dared to confirm
it, fearing to be led to suppose that the created universe is
God, because it exists from Him, or that nature is self-

123

124 Divine Love and Wisdom

existent, and thus that what is called God is only nature in
her inmiost recesses. Hence it is, that although many have
seen that all things must exist from God and His BEING,
yet they have not dared to advance beyond this first idea,
lest they should entangle the understanding in a so- called ”
Gordian knot, from which they might afterwards be unable
to extricate it, the cause of this difficulty being that they
thought of God and His creation of the universe in terms
of time and space which are attributes of nature, and from
nature no one can obtain a just conception of God and
creation; but every one whose understanding is inwardly
enlightened can form a conception of nature and of its
creation by God, because He is not in time and space. That
the Divine is not in space, may be seen above (nos. 7-10);
that the Divine fills all space apart from space (nos. 69-72);
and that the Divine is in all time apart from time (nos. 72-76).
In what follows it will be seen that although God ¢reated the
universe and all things therein out of Himself, yet there is
nothing in the created universe which is God; and other
considerations will be adduced which will place is § matter
in its proper light.

284. The First Part of this Work treated of God, and
showed that He is divine Love and Wisdom, that He is Life,
and that He is Substance and Form which are the very and
the oneonly Beinc. The Second Part treated of the spiritual
sun and its world and of the natural sun and its world, and
showed that the universe with all therein was created by
God by means of both suns. The Third Part treated of the
degrees which are involved in every single created thing.
This Fourth Part will deal with the creation of the universe
by God. These and the former subjects are treated of because
the angels have lamented before the Lord that when they
looked into the world they saw nothing but darkness, and
found among men no knowledge of God, of heaven or of the
creation of nature, and no knowledge whatever which might
serve as the basis of their angelic wisdom.

285. THE LORD FROM ETERNITY, OR JEHOVAH, COULD
NOT HAVE CREATED THE UNIVERSE AND ALL THINGS THEREIN
UNLESS HE WERE A Man. Those who have a merely natural
conception derived from the bodily senses concerning Gcd
as a Man, cannot possibly understand how He as a Man

Divine Love and Wisdom 125

could create the universe and all things therein; for they say
to themselves, How could God as a Man travel through the
universe from place to place and so create it? Or how could
He speak a word from His abode, and creation result from
what He said? When God is spoken of as a Man, such ideas
occur to those who think of God-Man as they do of a man
in the world, and whose thoughts of God are taken from
nature and its properties of time and space. But those
who think of God-Man not as of a man in the world, nor as
limited by natural space and time, clearly perceive that
the universe could not have been created unless God were
aMan. Think according to the angelic idea of God as a Man,
and put aside as far as possible the idea of space, and your
thought will approach the truth. Some of the learned also
perceive that spirits and angels are not in space, because they
think of everything spiritual as devoid of space; just as
thought, although it is in a man, yet enables him to be
present as it were in any place however distant. The same
is true of spirits and angels, who are men even as to their
bodies. They appear in the place where their thought is,
because space and distance in the spiritual world are appear-
ances, and correspond exactly with their thought derived
from their affections.

From this it may be seen that God, who appears far above
the spiritual world as a sun, and to whom there can be no
appearance of space, is not to be thought of in terms of space.
And then it can be understood that He created the universe,
not out of nothing but out of Himself; also that His Human
Body must not be thought of as great or small or of any
particular stature, because this also would imply space; and
consequently that He is the same in the first things and the
last, in the greatest things and the least; and moreover, that
His Humanity is the inmost in every created thing, but apart
from space. That the Divine is the same in the greatest and
least things may be seen above (nos. 77-82); and that the
Divine fills all space apart from space (nos. 69-72). And
because the Divine is not in space, it is not continuous like
the inmost parts of nature.

286. Any intelligent person may very clearly understand
that God could not create the universe and all things therein
unless He were a Man, for he cannot deny that in God there
are Love and Wisdom, Mercy and Clemency, and therefore

126 Divine Love and Wisdom

absolute Goodness and Truth, all these things being derived
from Him. And as he cannot deny these things, neither can
he deny that God is a Man; for not one of them is possible
apart from man; man is their subject, and to separate them
from their subject i is to say that they do not exist. Think of
wisdom apart from a man. Is it anything? Can you con-
ceive it as a kind of ether or flame? You cannot do so, unless
perchance you think of it as being in these; and then it must
be in such a form as man has and in the whole of that form—
nothing can be wanting if wisdom is to dwellinit. Inaword,
the form of wisdom is man; and as man is a form of wisdom,
he is also a form of love, mercy, clemency, good, and truth,
because these make one with wisdom. That love and wisdom
cannot exist except in a form may be seen above (nos. 40-43).
. 287. The angels of heaven are a proof that love and wisdom
form a man, for they are men whose beauty is in proportion
to the love and wisdom they receive from the Lord. The
same truth is evident from what is said of Adam in the Word,
that ‘he was created in the likeness and image of God ”’
(Gen. i. 26), because in the form of love and wisdom. Every
man on earth is born in the human form as regards his body.
The reason is that his spirit or soul is a man, and it'is a man
because it is capable of receiving love and wisdom from the
Lord. And so far as the spirit or soul of man receives these,
he becomes a man after the death of the material body with
which he is clothed; and so far as he does not receive them he
becomes a deformed being whose only resemblance to man is
due to this faculty of reception.

288. Inasmuch as God is a Man, the Se angelic
heaven in the aggregate is, as it were, one man, and it
is distinguished into regions and provinces according to the
members, viscera, and organs in man. Thus there are
societies of heaven which constitute the province of every-
thing in the brain, in the organs of the head, and in the
viscera of the body; these regions are distinct one from
another, just as those organs are in man, and the angels know
in what part of this human form they are situated. The
universal heaven is in this form because God is a Man, and
God is heaven because the angels who constitute heaven are
recipients of love and wisdom from the Lord and therefore
are in His image. That heaven is in a complete human form
is shown in the Arcana Celestia at the end of several chapters.

‘Divine Love and Wisdom 127

289. This shows how vain are the ideas of those who do
not think of God as a Man, nor of the Divine attributes as
being in God as a Man; because apart from man they are mere
abstractions. That God is very Man, from whom every one
is a man according to his reception of love and wisdom, may
be seen above (nos. 11-13). This truth is again insisted upon
here to make clear what follows, namely, that the creation of
the universe by God is due to the fact that He is a Man.

290. THE LORD FROM ETERNITY OR JEHOVAH PRODUCED
OUT OF HIMSELF THE SUN OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD, AND OUT
OF IT CREATED THE UNIVERSE AND ALL THINGS THEREIN.
The sun of the spiritual world is treated of in Part II. of this
work, and the following propositions are there proved. The
divine Love and Wisdom are seen in the spiritual world as a
sun (nos. 83-88). Spiritual heat and light proceed from that
sun (nos. 89-92). That sun is not God, but an Emanation of
the divine Love and Wisdom of God-Man; so also is the heat.
and light of that sun (nos. 93-98). The sun of the spiritual
world is in a middle altitude, and appears to be distant from
the angels as the sun of the natural world is from men
(nos. 103-107). In the spiritual world the east is where
the Lord appears as the sun, and the other quarters are
determined accordingly (nos. 119-128). The angels always
face the Lord as the sun (nos. 129-139). The Lord created.
the universe and all things therein by means of the sun
which is the first emanation from the divine Love and
Wisdom (nos. 151-156). The sun of the natural world is
pure fire, and nature, which originated from that sun, is:
therefore dead; and the sun of the natural world was created
that the work of creation might be separate and complete
(nos. 157-162). Without two suns, the one living and the
other dead, there could be no creation (nos. 163-166).

291. Among the other statements contained in Part II.
will be found this, that the spiritual sun is not the Lord, but
an emanation from His divine Love and Wisdom. It is called
an emanation because it was produced from the divine Love
and Wisdom, which are essential Substance and Form, and
through it the Divine goes forth. But as it is the nature:
of human reason not to be convinced of any fact unless it
sees its cause, and how it has come about, a few words shall
now be said to explain how the sun of the spiritual world,

128 ‘Divine Love and Wisdom

which is not the Lord but an emanation from Him, was pro-
duced.’ I have spoken much with the angels on this subject.
They say that they understand it clearly in their spiritual
light, but that it is difficult for them to place it before man in
his natural light, because there is such a difference between
these two kinds of light and the two kinds of thought proper
to them. They say, however, that the emanation of the
spiritual sun is like the sphere of affection and derivative
thought which surrounds each angel, whereby his presence is
made known to others far and near; that this encompassing
‘sphere is not the angel himself, but is composed of substances
which continually stream forth from his whole body and every
jpart of it and remain around it; also that these substances
adjacent to his body, being continually acted upon by the
two sources of his vital activity, his heart and lungs, excite
the atmospheres to their own activity, and by this means
cause his presence, as it were, to be perceived by others; thus
the sphere of affection and thought which continually goes
forth from him, is not a separate sphere although it is so
called, for the affections are merely states of the mental forms
within him. They say, moreover, that such a sphere exists
around every angel because there is one around the Lord,
and that the sphere around the Lord emanates in like manner
from Him, and that that sphere is their sun or one sun of
the spiritual world.

292. I have very often perceived that there is such a sphere
around each angel and spirit, and also a general sphere’around
a numerous community, and that this ‘assumed yarious
appearances. In heaven it sometimes looked like #trans-
parent flame; in hell like dense fire; sometimes in heaven
dike a transparent white cloud, and in hell like a thick black
thundercloud. I have also perceived these spheres as odours.
and stenches of various kinds. I have been convinced by
these experiences that a sphere, consisting of substances set
free and separated from the body, surrounds every one in
heaven and every one in hell.

293. I have also perceived that a sphere emanates not
only from angels and spirits but also from everything which
is seen in the spiritual world, from trees and their fruits,
from shrubs and their flowers, from herbs and grasses, and
veven from earths and their particles; from this it was
evident. that it is universally true both of living and dead

Divine Love and Wisdom 129

things, that each breathes forth, and so surrounds itself with,
substances of a similar nature to itself. Many learned men
know from experience that this is also true in the natural
world; they know, for example, that a stream of effluvia is
continually flowing forth from every man, animal, tree,
fruit, shrub, flower, and even from every metal and stone.
The natural world derives this from the spiritual world, and
the spiritual world from the Divine.

294. Since the constituents of the sun of the spiritual
world are not the Lord, although they emanate from Him,
they do not live of themselves, being devoid of inherent life,
just as what flows forth from angels and men and makes
spheres around them, is not the angel or man, but is derived
from them and is devoid of their life; it is identified with
the angel or man to this extent only, that it perfectly accords
with their nature, being derived from the forms of their
bodies which determine the mode in which they receive life.
This is an arcanum which the angels with their spiritual
ideas are able to see in thought and express in words; but
men with their natural ideas cannot do so, because a thousand
spiritual ideas make up one natural idea, and one natural
idea cannot be resolved by man into any spiritual idea, much
less into a thousand. The reason is that these ideas differ
according to degrees of ascent, the nature of which was
explained in the Third Part.

295. This difference between the thoughts of angels and
men was proved to me by the following experience. The
angels were told to think spiritually on some subject and
afterwards to tell me what they had thought. But when
they wished to tell it to me they were unable to do so, and
confessed their inability. It was the same with their spiritual
speech and spiritual writing; there was not one word of
spiritual speech that resembled a word of natural speech, nor
anything of spiritual writing similar to natural writing,
except the letters, each of which contained a complete idea.
Strange to say, they told me that they seemed to themselves
to be thinking, speaking, and writing in their spiritual state
just as a man does in a natural state, although the two states
are entirely different. It was plain from this that natural
and spiritual things differ according to degrees of ascent,
and that they communicate with each other only by
correspondences.

I 635

130 Divine Love and Wisdom

296. THERE ARE THREE THINGS IN THE LORD WHICH ARE
THE LORD, DIVINE LOVE, DIVINE WISDOM, AND DIVINE USE;
AND THESE THREE APPEAR OUTSIDE THE SUN OF THE SPIRITUAL
WORLD, DIVINE LOVE AS HEAT, DIVINE WISDOM AS LIGHT, AND
DIVINE USE AS THE ATMOSPHERE WHICH CONTAINS THEM.
That heat and light proceed from the sun of the spiritual
world, the heat from the divine Love of the Lord, and the
light from His divine Wisdom, may be seen above (nos. 89-
92, 99-102, 146-150). It remains to show that the third
thing proceeding from that sun is an atmosphere which
contains the heat and light, and that this proceeds from the
divine attribute of the Lord which is called Use.

297. Any one whose mind is at all enlightened can see
that love has use for its end and strives to accomplish it, and
that it produces use by means of wisdom; for love of itself
cannot produce any use except by means of wisdom. What
indeed is love unless there be something that.is loved?
This is use; and because use is what is loved, and it is pro-
duced by means of wisdom, it follows that use contains both
wisdom and love. That these three, love, wisdom, and use,
follow in order according to the degrees of ascent, and that
the last degree embraces, contains, and supports the prior
degrees, was shown in nos. 209-216, and elsewhere. It is
therefore evident that those three, divine Love, divine
Wisdom, and divine Use, are in the Lord, and that in essence
they are the Lord.

298. That man, as regards both his mind and body, is a
form of all uses, and that all the uses in the created universe
correspond to those uses in him, will be amply shown in what
follows. It is only mentioned here to make known that
God as a Man is the very form of all uses, and the source
of all uses in the created universe; and thus that the created
universe viewed as to uses is His image. All things are
called uses which proceed in the order of creation from
God-Man, that is, from the Lord; nothing which comes

' from the selfhood of man can be called a use, for this selfhood
is hell, and whatever proceeds thence is contrary to order.

299. Now because these three, love, wisdom, and use, are
in the Lord and are the Lord, and because the Lord is every-
where, for He is omnipresent, and because the Lord cannot
make Himself present to any angel or man as He is in Him-
self and as He is in His own sun, He therefore manifests His

Divine Love and Wisdom ea

presence by such things as can be received by them, and
He does this as to love by means of heat, as to wisdom by
means of light, and as to use by means of an atmosphere.
The Lord manifests Himself as to use by means of an atmo-
sphere because this contains heat and light, as use contains
love and wisdom. For the light and heat which proceed
from the divine Sun cannot do so through nothing, or a
vacuum, but must’ do so through something which can
contain them and thus be subjected to their influence; and
this containing medium is the atmosphere which surrounds
the sun, receives it in its bosom and transmits it to heaven
where the angels are, and thence to the world where men are,
and thus constitutes the universal presence of the Lord.

300. That there are atmospheres in the spiritual world just
as there are in the natural world was shown above (nos. 173-
183); and it was there stated that the atmospheres of the
spiritual world are spiritual and those of the natural world
natural. Now from the origin of the spiritual atmosphere
which closely surrounds the spiritual sun, it is evident that
everything belonging to it is of essentially the same nature
as that sun. The angels, whose ideas are spiritual and dis-
sociated from space, prove this as follows: there is one only
substance from which all things exist, and that substance is
the sun of the spiritual world; and because the Divine is not
in space and is the same in the greatest and least things, this
is also true of that sun which is the first emanation from
God-Man; and further, that the one only substance which
is the Sun, proceeding by means of atmospheres according
to continuous degrees or those of extension, and at the same
time according to discrete degrees or those of ascent, causes
the variety of all things in the created universe. The angels
said that these things cannot be understood unless all idea
of space be set aside; for otherwise appearances must
necessarily give rise to fallacies. Yet these fallacies cannot
arise so long as the belief. is held that God is BEING itself,
from which all things exist.

zor. Moreover angelic ideas, which are dissociated from
space, make it very clear that nothing in the created universe
is living except God-Man alone, that is, the Lord ; and that
nothing moves except by life imparted by Him; and that
nothing exists except from Him by means of the sun; so
that it is true that in God we live, move, and have our being.

132 Divine Love and Wisdom

302. THE ATMOSPHERES, OF WHICH THERE ARE THREE IN
BOTH THE SPIRITUAL AND THE NATURAL WORLDS, TERMINATE
IN THE MATERIAL SUBSTANCES OF THE EARTH. That there
are three atmospheres in each world, the spiritual and the
natural, which are distinct from one another according to
degrees of ascent, and whose potency decreases in their
downward progress according to degrees of extension, was
shown in the Third Part (nos. 173-176). And as the atmos-
pheres thus decrease as they descend, it follows that they
become more and more compressed and inert, and at last so
compressed and inert that they are no longer atmospheres
but substances at rest, and in the natural world those concrete
substances known as matter. From this origin of material
substances it follows, firstly, that they also are in three
degrees; secondly, that they are held together an mutual
connection by the surrounding atmospheres, and thirdly, that
they are adapted to the production of all forms of use.

303. That material substances like those of this earth have
been produced by the sun by means of its atmospheres will
assuredly be believed by all who consider that there is an
unbroken connection between what is primary and} what is
ultimate, and that nothing can possibly exist excépt from
something prior to itself, and finally from a first cause. The
first cause of all things is the sun of the spiritual world, and
the Cause of that sun is God-Man or the Lord. Now as the
atmospheres are the prior things by means of which that sun
is present in ultimates, and as those prior things continually
decrease in activity and lose their power of expansion in their
progress to ultimates, it follows that when their activity
ceases and they lose their power of expansion in ultimates,
they become material substances like those existing on this
earth; but they retain in themselves from the atmospheres
whence they originated, the effort and endeavour to bring
forth uses. Those who do not trace the creation of the
universe and all things therein through an unbroken con-
nection to a first Cause, cannot but construct theories
which ignore causes: such theories when examined by a
mind of more interior perception appear not like houses,
but like heaps of rubbish.

304. This common origin of all things in the created universe
confers a similar nature upon every individual object, so that
each, in order that it may be terminated and so continue to

Divine Love and Wisdom 133

exist, proceeds from its origin to ultimates, which are in a
state of comparative rest. Thus fibres in the human body
proceed from their primary forms until at last they become
tendons; fibres also with their vessels proceed from their
primary forms until they become cartilages and bones, upon
which they rest-and subsist. Now because there is such a
progression of the fibres and vessels in man from primaries to
ultimates, there is a similar progression of their states, which
are sensations, thoughts, and affections. These also pass
from their origins where they are in light to their ultimates
where they are in shade, or from their origins where they are
in heat to their ultimates where they are no longer so. And
because of this, there is a similar progression of love and all
pertaining to it, and likewise of wisdom and all pertaining
to it. Ina word, there is a similar progression in everything
in the created universe. This exemplifies what was pointed
out above (nos. 222-229), that there are degrees of both kinds
in the greatest and least of all created things. The reason
why there are degrees of both kinds even in the minutest
parts of everything, is that, according to the spiritual ideas
of the angels, the spiritual sun is the sole substance out of
which all things originate (no. 300).

305. IN THE MATERIAL SUBSTANCES COMPOSING EARTHS
THERE IS NOTHING OF THE DIVINE ITSELF, BUT STILL THEY
ARE DERIVED FROM THE DivINE. The explanation given in
the preceding article of the origin of earths shows that in
their material substances there is nothing of the Divine itself,
but that they are devoid of everything intrinsically Divine.
For, as was said, they are the limits and terminations of the
atmospheres, whose heat, light, and activity have ended in
cold, darkness, and inertia. Yet they have in them some-
thing Divine derived from the substance of the spiritual sun
which, as stated above (nos. 291-298), is the sphere encom-
passing God-Man, or the Lord. For this sphere acting
by derivation through the sun and the atmospheres has
produced the material substances of which earths consist.

306. Except in this way it is impossible to convey by
means of words which express material ideas any conception
of the origin of earths from the spiritual sun, but a fuller con-
ception may be given by words expressive of spiritual ideas,
because these ideas borrow nothing from space, .and therc-

134 Divine Love and Wisdom

fore they cannot be expressed by the words of any natural
language. That spiritual thought, speech, and writing differ
so entirely from natural thought, speech, and writing that
they have nothing in common and communicate only by
correspondence, may be seen above (no. 295). A natural and
inadequate comprehension of the origin of earths must there-
fore suffice.

307. ALL USES, WHICH ARE THE ENDS OF CREATION, EXIST
IN FORMS, AND CLOTHE THEMSELVES WITH CORRESPONDING
FORMS FROM THE MATERIAL SUBSTANCES OF THE EARTH. All
the things spoken of hitherto, the sun, atmospheres, and
earths, are only means to ends. The ends of creation are
produced from the earths by the Lord as the sun acting
through the atmospheres, and these ends are called uses. In
general they include everything in the vegetable and animal
kingdoms, and finally, the human race, and from it the
angelic heaven. These are called uses because they are
recipients of the divine Love and Wisdom, and because they
look to God the Creator from whom they originate and so
unite Him with His great work; the result of this is that
they continue to exist from Him just as they come into
existence from Him. To say that they look to God the
Creator from whom they come and unite Him with His great
work, is to speak according to appearance. The meaning is
that God the Creator causes them to look to and unite with
Him, as it were, of themselves; but how this takes place will
be explained in what follows. Something has already been
said on this subject; for example, that the divine Loye and
Wisdom must necessarily abide and manifest themselves in
other beings created by them (nos. 47-51); that all things in
the created universe are recipients of the divine Love and
Wisdom (nos. 54-60); that the uses of all created things
ascend through degrees to man, and through man to God the
Creator from whom they originate (nos. 65-68).

308. Who does not see clearly that uses are the ends of
creation, if he considers that from God the Creator nothing
but use can possibly exist, and therefore nothing else can be
created? And that use, properly so called, must be for the
sake of others, for even if it be for oneself it is also for the
sake of others, for a use performed for the sake of self enables
a man to be of use to others. Whoever considers this can

Divine Love and Wisdom 135

also see that a use, properly so called, cannot possibly exist
from man, but only in man from Him from whom there comes
into existence nothing but use, thus from the Lord.

309. But as the forms of uses are here treated of, the
subject shall be set forth in a series, as follows :—

I. There is an effort in earths to produce uses in forms, or
forms of uses.

II. All forms of uses bear a certain resemblance to the
creation of the universe. net

III. All forms of uses bear a certain resemblance to man.

IV. All forms of uses bear a certain resemblance to the
Infinite and Eternal.

310. I. There is an effort in earths to produce uses in forms,
or forms of uses. Their origin shows clearly that this effort
exists in earths; for the substances and materials of which
earths consist are the limits and terminations of the atmos-
pheres which proceed as uses from the spiritual sun, as may
be seen above (no. 305). And because the substances and
materials of which earths consist are from that source, and
these aggregates are retained in connection by the pressure
of the atmospheres, it follows that they acquire from them
a perpetual effort to produce forms of uses. This power of
production they derive from their origin, as being the
ultimates of the atmospheres, in concurrence with which they
therefore act. When it is said that this effort and power
reside in earths, the meaning is that they reside in the
material substances of which earths are composed, whether
they are in the earths or exhaled thence into the atmospheres.
That the atmospheres are full of such exhalations is well
known. ‘That the material substances of earths possess this
effort and power is very plain from the fact that seeds of
all kinds, expanded by means of heat to their inmost core,
are impregnated with the most subtle substances, which can
have no other than a spiritual origin; whence they derive their
power of uniting with use and so becoming fertile, and then
by uniting with material substances of a natural origin they
can produce the forms of uses, and afterwards put them forth
as from a womb, to come at length into the light and thus
germinate and grow. This effort is afterwards continued
from the earth through the root to ultimates, and from the
ultimates back to the primaries whence the use itself is
derived. Thus uses pass into forms, and all the forms and

136 Divine Love and Wisdom

every detail of them are of some use, because use acts in them
as a soul as*they pass from their primary causes to their
ultimate effects and back again from ultimate effects to
primary causes. Use is said to be like a soul because its form
is like a body. It follows that there is a still more inward
effort, that of producing uses for the animal kingdom by
means of vegetable growths; for animals of all kinds are
nourished in this way. That there is also an inmost effort
in these substances, that of affording use to mankind,
likewise follows.

All these things flow as necessary consequences from the
following facts: 1. These substances are ultimates, and in
ultimates all prior things exist simultaneously in their order, as
has been shown above in various places. 2. There are degrees
of both kinds in the greatest and least of all things, as was
shown above (nos. 222-229), and consequently in the above
mentioned effort. 3. All uses are produced by, the Lord
from ultimates, wherefore in ultimates there must be an
effort towards uses.

311. Still these are not living efforts, because they are
efforts of the ultimate forces of life, in which, by virtue of the
life from which they spring there is finally an endeavour to
return to their origin by means which are provided. The
atmospheres ultimately become such forces, by which the
material substances of the earth are moulded into and main-
tained in forms both internal and external. Space does not
permit a fuller elucidation of these statements, for the wanes:
is a large one.

312. The first production from those earths while they
were still fresh, and in their elementary condition, wa$ that
of seeds; the first effort in them could not be any. other.

B13. Il. All forms of uses bear a certain resemblance to
creation. Forms of uses are of three kinds, those of the
mineral, the vegetable, and the animal kingdoms. The forms
of the uses of the mineral kingdom cannot be described because
they are invisible. The first forms are the material sub-
stances of which earths consist in their smallest particles;
the second are aggregates of these and are of infinite variety;
the third originate from plants fallen to dust, from the
remains of animals and from continual evaporations and
exhalations from these, which go to increase the earths and
form their soil. These forms of the three degrees of the

Divine Love and Wisdom 137

mineral kingdom resemble creation in this respect, that,
incited to action by the sun through the atmospheres and
their heat and light, they evolve uses in forms which are the
ends of creation. This likeness to creation lies concealed in
their efforts, concerning which see above (no. 310).

314. In the forms of the uses of the vegetable kingdom
the resemblance to creation appears in this, that from
primaries they proceed to ultimates, and from the ultimates
back to the primaries. Their primaries are seeds, their
ultimates are stems clothed with bark, and through the bark

which is the ultimate of the stems they tend to the production

of seeds which, as was said, are their primaries. The stems
clothed with layers of bark correspond to the globe clothed
with earths, from which result the creation and formation of
all uses. It is known to many that vegetable growth is

_ effected by means of the outer and inner barks and coatings,

which push through the envelopes of the roots continued
around the stalks and branches into the rudiments of the
fruits, and also through the fruits into the seeds. A resem-
blance to creation is exhibited in the forms of these uses by
the progress of their formation, from their primaries to their
ultimates, and from these back to their primaries, and also
in this, that during the entire process the end is the production
of fruits and seeds which are uses. From what has now been
said it is plain that the process of the creation of the universe
was from its first origin, the Lord encircled by the sun, to
the ultimates which are earths, and from these through uses
back to its origin, the Lord; also that uses are the ends of the
whole creation.

315. Be it known that the heat, light, and atmospheres of
the natural world contribute absolutely nothing to this likeness
of creation, but only the heat, light, and atmospheres of the
sun of the spiritual world; these bear that resemblance with
them and clothe it with the forms of the uses of the vegetable
kingdom. The heat, light, and atmospheres of the natural
world only expand seeds, keep their shoots in a state of.
tension, and clothe them with materials which give them
fixity. But this does not result from the power of their own
sun, which in itself is destitute of all power, but from the
power of the spiritual sun which perpetually impels them to
these activities. The natural forces contribute absolutely
nothing to this likeness of creation, for this is spiritual. But

138 Divine Love and Wisdom

in order that it may be manifested and perform a use in the
natural ‘world and may be fixed and permanent, it must be
materialised, that is, clothed with the material substances of
which that world is composed.

316. In the forms of the uses of the animal kingdom there
is a similar resemblance to creation, in that a body is formed
from seed introduced into a womb or an egg; this body is the
ultimate of the seed and itself produces new seed when it has
reached maturity. This process is similar to that of the forms
of the uses of the vegetable kingdom; the seed is the rudiment,
the womb or egg is like the earth; the state before birth is
like that of the seed in the earth while it is taking root; the
state after birth until that of prolification is reached is like
the growth of a tree until it arrives at the period of fruit-
bearing. From this resemblance it is plain that as there is a
likeness to creation in the forms of plants, so is there also in
the forms of animals, for in them, too, there is a progression
from primaries to ultimates, and from ultimates back to
primaries. A similar likeness to creation exists in every
single thing in man; for example, in the process by which
love passes through wisdom to uses; or the process By which
the will passes through the understanding to acts, or charity
through faith to works. The will and understanding, also
charity and faith, are the primaries; acts and works are the
ultimates; from these through the delight of uses a return is
made to their primaries, which, as was said, are the will and
the understanding, or charity and faith. That the return
is effected through delight in uses is very evident from the
delight felt in those actions and deeds which proceed from
any one’s love; for they flow back to their primary love, and
union with it is thus effected: the delight inherent in actions
and deeds is the delight of use.

A similar progression from primaries to ultimates, and
from ultimates back to primaries, is exhibited in the purely
organic forms of man’s affections and thoughts. In the brain
there are starlike forms called the cineritious substances;
from these, fibres go forth through the medullary substance
down the neck into the body. These fibres proceed tu
ultimates there, and from the ultimates return to their
primaries, this being done by means of the blood-vessels.
There is a similar progression of all affections and thoughts,
these being changes and variations of the state of those forms

Divine Love and Wisdom 139

and substances. The fibres proceeding from those forms or
substances may be compared to the atmospheres proceeding
from the spiritual sun which transmit heat and light. The
acts of the body are like things produced from earths by
means of the atmospheres, the delights of whose uses return
to the source from which they sprang. But that these
progressions actually take place and present a likeness to
creation is a very difficult matter to understand, because
thousands and myriads of forces combine to produce a single
action, and because the delights of uses do not give rise to
definite ideas, but only produce a vague impression on the
mind. In connection with this subject it has already been
shown that the uses of all created things rise through degrees
of ascent to man and through man to God the Creator from
whom they originate (nos. 65-68); that the end of creation
is manifested in ultimates, the end being that all things shall
return to the Creator and be united with Him (nos. 167-172).
But a clearer light will be thrown on these matters in the
following part, where the correspondence of the will and
understanding with the heart and lungs will be dealt with.

317. III. All forms of uses bear a certain resemblance to
man, as was shown above (nos. 61-64). It will be seen in the
following article that all uses from primaries to ultimates
and from ultimates back to primaries have relation to and
correspond with all things in man, and therefore that man
bears a certain resemblance to the universe, and conversely
that the universe as regards its uses has a certain resemblance
to man.

318. IV. All forms of uses bear a certain resemblance to
the Infinite and Eternal. ‘The representation of the Infinite in
these forms is evident from their endeavour and ability to fill
the whole world, and even innumerable worlds. For one seed
produces a tree, shrub, or plant, which occupies a certain
space, and each ‘tree, shrub, or plant produces seeds, in some
cases thousands of them, which, if they are deposited i in the
ground and grow, fill more space. If each of their seeds
produced a similar number of new growths and the process
were continually repeated, in the course of years the whole
world would be filled; and if this were continued, many
worlds could be filled and this without end. Reckon a
thousand produced from one seed, and multiply thousands
by thousands ten times, twenty times, a hundred times, and

»

140 Divine Love and Wisdom

you will see the truth of this. There is a similar resemblance
to the Eternal in these forms, for seeds are produced every
year and the production never ceases; it has not ceased from
the creation of the world till now, nor will it cease to eternity.
These two facts are clear indications and speaking proofs
that all things in the universe have been created by an
infinite and eternal God.

Another resemblance to the Infinite and Eternal is fur-
nished by the variety in Nature, for no substance, state, or
thing in the created universe can ever be the same as any
other, whether in atmospheres, earths, or in forms arising
from these; so that in the whole contents of the universe
there can be no sameness to all eternity. This is clearly
evident in the varieties of the human face; there is not one
face in the,whole world exactly like any other, neither can
there be to all eternity; and as the face is an image of the
mind, neither can any mind ever be exactly like another.

319. ALL THINGS IN THE CREATED UNIVERSE AS REGARDS
THEIR USES BEAR A CERTAIN RESEMBLANCE TO MAN, AND
THIS TESTIFIES THAT Gop Is A Man. Man was called by the
ancients a microcosm, because he resembles the macrocosm
or universe as a whole. But it is not known at the'present
day why man was so called by the ancients; for no more
of the universe or macrocosm appears in him than this, that
he is nourished and, so far as his body is concerned, lives by
means of its animal and vegetable kingdoms, that all his vital
functions are maintained by its heat, and that he sees by its
light and hears and breathes by its atmosphere. Yet these
things do not constitute man a microcosm in the sense’ that
the universe with all it contains is a macrocosm. But the
ancients called man a microcosm or little universe from a
knowledge of the science of correspondences, which the most
ancient people possessed, and also from their intercourse
with the angels of heaven; for the angels know from the
visible objects around them that all things in the universe,
as regards their uses, bear a certain resemblance to man.

320. But that man is a microcosm or little universe because
the created universe, regarded as to its uses, is in the human
form, cannot be made intelligible nor consequently be
accepted as a fact, except by means of the conception of the
universe which obtains in the spiritual world. The truth,

Divine Love and Wisdom 141

therefore, can only be established by the testimony of an
angel who lives in the spiritual world, or of some one who has
been permitted to enter that world and witness its pheno-
mena. As this experience has been granted to me, I can
make known this arcanum from what I have seen there.

321. Be it known that the spiritual world in outward
appearance is entirely similar to the natural world. There
are countries, mountains, hills, valleys, plains, fields, lakes,
rivers, and springs of water as in the natural world; thus all
things of the mineral kingdom. There are parks, gardens,
groves, woods, and in them all kinds of trees and shrubs
bearing fruit and seeds, plants, flowers, herbs, and grasses;
thus all things of the vegetable kingdom. There are also
animals, birds, and fishes of every kind; thus all things
of the animal kingdom. Man is there an angel or a spirit.
This preliminary statement is made to show that the universe
of the spiritual world is entirely similar to the universe of the
natural world, with this difference only, that things there
are not fixed and settled like those in the natural world,
because everything there is spiritual and not natural.

322. That the universe of that world bears a certain
resemblance to man is clearly evident from the fact that all
the things just mentioned (no. 321) are seen to the life
existing around the angels and their angelic communities,
as though produced or created by them; these form a per-
manent environment and do not pass away. That they are,
so to speak, produced or created by them is evident from
the fact that when an angel goes away or a community
removes to another region the same objects are no longer
seen. And when other angels come in place of the former,
the appearance of all the objects around them is changed;
the parks with their trees and fruits, the gardens with their
flowers and seeds, the fields with their herbs and grasses,
and the species of animals and birds are all changed. All
these things exist in this manner and undergo these changes
because they depend upon and correspond to the affections
and thoughts of the angels; and because things that corre-
spond make one with that to which they correspond, they
are a representation of it. The true likeness is not seen
when the outward forms of all these things are regarded,
but it is seen when their uses are considered. I have been
permitted to perceive how the angels, when their eyes were

142 Divine Love and Wisdom

opened by the Lord and they viewed the things around them
as to their correspondence with uses, saw and acknowledged
their own likeness in them.

323. Now because these things which exist around the
angels in accordance with their affections and thoughts
represent a kind of universe in this respect, that they include
lands, plants, and animals which are a representative likeness
of the angels, the reason is plain why the ancients called
man a microcosm.

324. The truth of this is abundantly proved in the Arcana
Celestia, and also in the work on Heaven and Hell, and
throughout the preceding pages where the subject is corre-
spondence. Also it has been shown that there is nothing
in the created universe which does not correspond to some-
thing in man, not only to his affections and consequently
to his thoughts, but also to the organs and viscera of his
body; the correspondence, however, is not with these
regarded as substances but with their uses. It is for this
reason that in the Word where the Church and its members
are spoken of, trees are so often mentioned; for example,
olives, vines, and cedars; also gardens, groves, and woods;
and again, the beasts of the earth, the birds of the’ air, and
the fish of the sea. They are mentioned in the Word\because
they are correspondences and make one by correspondence
with that to which they correspond, as was said above. This
is why when men read about these things in the Word, the
angels have no consciousness of such objects, but think only
of the corresponding states of the Church and its members.

325. Since all things in the universe bear a certain re-
semblance to man, Adam is described as te his wisdom and
intelligence by the garden of Eden, in which there were trees
of every kind, and also rivers, precious stones and gold, and
animals to which he gave names. All these things signify
the various attributes he possessed, and which constituted
the being who is described as Man. Almost the same things
are said of Ashur in Ezekiel (chap. xxxi. 3-9) by which is
signified the Church as to its intelligence; and of Tyre
(Ezekiel xxvii. 12-23), by which is signified the Church as to
the knowledge of good and truth.

326. It should now be clear that al! things in the universe
as regards their uses bear a certain resemblance to man, and

1 See note to No. 117.—Tr.

Divine Love and Wisdom 143

that this testifies that God is a Man. For the things above
mentioned are not produced around a man-angel by himself,
but by the Lord acting through him. They are produced by
the influx of the divine Love and Wisdom of the Lord into
the angel, who is a recipient, and thus the creation, as it
were, of a universe is exhibited before his eyes. From this
they know that God is a Man, and that the created universe,
as regards its uses, is a likeness of Him.

327. ALL THINGS CREATED BY THE LORD ARE USES, AND
THEY ARE USES IN THE ORDER, DEGREE, AND RESPECT IN
WHICH THEY ARE RELATED TO MAN AND THROUGH HIM TO
THE LORD FROM WHOM THEY ORIGINATE. The following
statements have already been made on these subjects.
Nothing but use can exist from God the Creator (no. 308).
The uses of all created things ascend through degrees from
ultimates to man, and through man to God the Creator
from whom they originate (nos. 65-68). The end of creation
exists in ultimates, and is that all things may return to God
the Creator and be united with Him (nos. 167-172). Things
are uses in so far as they look to the Creator (no. 307). The
Divine must necessarily BE and manifest itself in others
created from itself (nos. 47-51). All things in the. universe
are recipients according to the degrees of their uses (no. 58).
The universe, as regards its uses, 1s a likeness of God (no. 59);
besides many other statements. Thus it is evident that all
things created by the Lord are uses, and that they are uses
in the order, degree, and respect in which they are related
to man, and through him to the Lord from whom they
originate. It remains to say something in particular con-
cerning uses.

328. By man, for whom uses exist, is to be understood not
only an individual but also an assemblage of men, a com-
munity on a smaller or larger scale, such as a commonwealth,
kingdom, or empire, and also the greatest community, the
whole world; for all these are Man. So also in the heavens,
the whole angelic heaven and each of its communities is as
one man in the sight of the Lord. This is why every angel
is a man. The truth of this may be seen in the work on
| Heaven and Hell (nos. 68-102). It is therefore evident what
is meant by Man in the following pages.

329. The nature of use is evident from the end for which

144 Divine Love and Wisdom

the universe was created, namely, the existence of an angelic
heaven; and an angelic heaven being the end, so also is man-
kind or the human race, since out of this heaven is formed.
It follows that all created things are means to an end, and
are uses in the order, degree, and respect in which they are
related to man and through him to the Lord.

330. Since the end of creation is an angelic heaven from
the human race and therefore the human race itself, all other
created things are means to that end; these means, because
they have reference to man, have respect to these three
human attributes, his body, his rational faculty, and the
spiritual nature which is given him in order that he may be
united with the Lord. For a man cannot be united with
the Lord unless he be spiritual, nor can he be spiritual unless
he be rational, nor rational unless his body be in a sound
condition. These things are like a house; the body is like
the foundation, the rational faculty is like the house built
upon it, the spiritual nature is like the things in the house,
and union with the Lord is like dwelling in it. Hence are
evident the order, degree, and respect in which} uses, as
means to the end of creation, have relation to man; they
sustain his body, they perfect his rational faculty, and they
enable him to receive what is spiritual from the Lord.

331. Uses for supporting the body comprise its nourishment,
clothing, housing, recreation and enjoyment, protection and
preservation. Uses created for the nourishment of the body
include all things in the vegetable kingdom which are good
for food and drink, such as fruits, berries, seeds, pulse, and
herbs; all things in the animal kingdom which serve for
meat, such as oxen, cows, calves, deer, sheep, kids, goats,
lambs, the milk they yield, and also birds and fish of many
kinds. The uses created for the clothing of the body from
these two kingdoms are also numerous; likewise the uses
for habitation, recreation, enjoyment, protection, and preser-
vation. It is not necessary to mention all these because
they are well known, and a mere list of them would fll many
pages. There are indeed many things which are of no actual
use to man; but superabundance is not incompatible with
use, but makes it durable. There may also be an abuse of
uses; but this does not destroy use any more than the
falsification of truth destroys truth, except in the mind of
those who falsify it.

Divine Love and Wisdom 145

332. Uses for perfecting the rational faculty are all modes
of teaching the sciences and other branches of study relating
to natural, economic, civil, and moral affairs, which are
learnt either from parents ‘and masters, from books, from
intercourse with others, or from independent reflection on
these subjects. Such studies perfect the rational faculty in
proportion as they are uses in a higher degree, and they are
permanent so far as they are applied to life. There is no
need to mention all these uses, on account of their abundance
and the variety of ways in which they affect the common
good.

333. Uses which enable man to receive what ts spiritual
from the Lord are all matters of religion and worship, that
is, all things which teach the way of eternal life by the
knowledge and acknowledgment of God, of good, and of truth.
They are acquired in the same way as the various branches
of learning, from parents, masters, lectures, and books, and
especially by a life according to such knowledge, and in the
Christian world by doctrine and sermons drawn from the
Word and through the Word from the Lord. These uses
in general may be described in terms similar to those which
are applied to the uses of the body, such as nourishment,
clothing, habitation, recreation and enjoyment, protection
and preservation of state. Only interpret the terms in a
sense suitable to the soul; its nourishment as the goods of
love, its clothing as the truths of wisdom, its dwelling-place
as heaven, its recreation and enjoyment as life-happiness
and heavenly joy, its protection as safety from infesting
evils, and its preservation as eternal life. All these are
given by the Lord according as a man acknowledges that
all things pertaining to the body are also from the Lord, and
that man is only like a servant and steward put in charge
of the goods of his Lord.

334. That such things are given to man for his use and
enjoyment, and that they are free gifts, is very evident from
the state of the angels in heaven, who have a body, a rational
faculty, and a spiritual nature just like men on earth. They
receive their food, clothing, and houses as free gifts. Nor
have they any anxiety about these things; and so far as they
are spiritually rational, they enjoy happiness, protection,
and preservation. The difference between them and men is,
that the angels see that all these are from the Lord, because

K $35

146 Divine Love and Wisdom

they are created in accordance with the state of their love
and wisdom, ‘as was shown in a preceding article (no. 322);
but men do not see this, because their supplies return yearly
and do not come into existence according to the state of their
love and wisdom but according to their industry.

335. Although it has been stated that these things are
uses because through man they have relation to the Lord,
yet it cannot be said that they are uses derived from man
for the sake of the Lord, but from the Lord for the sake of
man; for all uses are infinitely one in the Lord, and there
are no uses in man except from the Lord, for man cannot
do good from himself, but only from the Lord. Good is
what is called use. The essence of spiritual love lies in doing
good to others, not for the sake of self, but for the sake of
others; infinitely more is this the case as regards the essence
of divine Love. This resembles the love of parents for their
children, to whom the parents do good from love, not for
their own sake, but for the sake of the children; this is
evident in the love of a mother for her offspring. It is
supposed that the Lord, because He ought to be, adored,
worshipped, and glorified, loves adoration, worship, and
glory for His own sake; but He loves them for man’s sake,
because man thereby comes into a state of mind into which
it is possible for the Divine to enter by influx and be per-
ceived. For man thus lays aside his selfhood, which hinders
influx and reception. This selfhood is the love of self, which
hardens and closes up the heart. It is laid aside by the
acknowledgment that man of himself does nothing but evil,
and from the Lord nothing but good; from this comes a
softening of the heart and a humility from which adoration
and worship spontaneously flow. It follows that the use
which the Lord performs for Himself through man is this,
that from His love He is able to bless him; and, as He loves
to do this, He rejoices when man receives Him. Let no one,
however, suppose that the Lord is with those who merely
adore Him. He is with those who obey His commandments,
and thus perform uses; with these He has His abode, but
not with the former. See also what was said above on this
subject (nos. 47-49).

336. EvIL USES WERE NOT CREATED BY THE LORD, BUT
CAME INTO EXISTENCE TOGETHER WITH HELL. All the good

Divine Love and Wisdom 147

which is expressed in act is called use, and all the evil which
is expressed in act is also called use, but the latter is an evil
use and the former a good use. Now as all good is from the
Lord and all evil from hell, it follows that none but good
uses are created by Him, and that evil uses have arisen from
hell. The uses specially treated of in this article are the
things seen on earth, such as animals and vegetables of all
kinds; all of these which are useful to man are from the
Lord, and those which are noxious to man are from hell.
Similarly, uses from the Lord are all things which perfect the
rational faculty of man and enable him to receive spiritual
life from the Lord. But evil uses are all things which destroy
the rational faculty and prevent man from becoming spiritual.
Those things which do harm to man are called uses because
they serve the evil for doing evil, and also conduce to the
mitigation of evil and thus to its cure. Use, like love, has
two meanings; for we speak of good and evil love, and love
calls everything a use which is the result of its own activity.

337. That good uses are from the Lord and evil uses from
hell will now be shown in the following order.

I. What is meant by evil uses existing on earth.

II. All evil uses originate in hell and all good uses in
heaven.

III. There is a continual influx from the spiritual world
into the natural world.

IV. Influx from hell gives rise to evil uses in places where
there are corresponding conditions.

V. The ultimate degree of the spiritual faculty, when it
is separated from its higher degrees, is the cause of this.

VI. There are two forms which are acted upon by influx,
the vegetable form and the animal form.

VII. To both these forms is given the power of repro-
ducing their kind, and the conditions necessary for that
reproduction.

338. I. What ts meant by evil uses existing on earth. Evil
uses on earth are all the noxious things in the animal, vege-
table, and mineral kingdoms. It is unnecessary to enumerate
all these, for a mere list of names, without indicating the
noxious effect of each kind, would contribute nothing to the
object of this work. Let it suffice to give a few examples.
In the animal kingdom there are poisonous snakes, scorpions,
crocodiles, serpents, horned owls, screech owls, mice, locusts,

148 Divine Love and Wisdom

frogs, spiders, flies, drones, moths, lice, and other parasites ;
in a word, creatures that consume grasses, leaves, fruits,
seeds, meat, and drink, and do harm to beasts and men.
In the vegetable kingdom there are hurtful, baneful, and
poisonous herbs, plants, and shrubs; and in the mineral
kingdom many poisonous earths. These few instances will
show what is meant by evil uses on earth. They include
all things inimical to good uses, concerning which see above
(no. 336).

339. II. All evil uses originate in hell and all good uses
in heaven. In order that it may be seen that all evil uses
existing upon earth are from hell and not from the Lord.
something must first be said concerning heaven and hell.
For otherwise it might be thought that evil uses as well as
good may be attributed to the Lord, and that both were
created at the same time; or they might be ascribed to
nature, and their origin to the sun. Men cannot avoid these
two errors unless they know that everything in the natural
world has its cause and origin in the spiritual world, and
that good is from the Lord and evil from the devil,, that is,
from hell. The spiritual world includes both heaven and
hell. All good uses are to be seen in heaven (no. 336); but
all evil uses are to be seen in hell (no. 338); for example, wild
beasts of all kinds, snakes, scorpions, serpents, crocodiles,
tigers, wolves, foxes, swine, owls of various kinds, and other
nocturnal birds, bats, mice, rats, frogs, locusts, spiders, and
noxious insects of many kinds; hemlocks, aconites, and all
kinds of poisons both vegetable and mineral ; in a word,
all things which harm and kill men. All such things are
seen to the life in hell, exactly resembling similar objects on
earth. It is said that they are seen there, still they do not
exist in the same way as on earth, for they are nothing but
correspondences of the inordinate desires which pour forth
from the evil loves of those dwelling there, and which take
these visible forms. Since such things exist in the hells,
these are also full of foul, corpse-like, filthy, urinous, and
putrid smells, which delight the evil spirits, as rank smells
delight some animals. Hence it is evident that correspond-
ing things in the natural world have not originated from the
Lord, were not created from the beginning, and have not
sprung from nature by means of the sun, but are from hell.
That they have not come from nature by means of the sun

Divine Love and Wisdom 149

is evident, for what is spiritual flows into what is natural,
and not conversely; and that they are not from the Lord is
evident, because neither hell nor anything corresponding to
its evil is from Him.

340. III. There is a continual influx from the spiritual
world into the natural world. No one can know anything
about this influx unless he first knows that there is a spiritual
world, and that it is distinct from the natural world as what
is prior is distinct from what is posterior, or as cause is
distinct from effect. This is why those who have written
about the origin of plants and animals have not been able
to avoid attributing it to nature, or to God only in the sense
that He from the beginning endowed nature with a power
to produce such things; not knowing that there is no inherent
power in nature, for nature in itself is dead, and contributes
to the production of these things only as a tool which has
to be kept constantly in motion by the workman in order to
accomplish anything. It is the Spiritual, originating from
the sun where the Lord is, and proceeding to the ultimates
of nature, that produces the forms of plants and animals
and exhibits the marvels existing in both, and packs them
with materials out of the ground to give them fixity and
permanence. Now that it is known that there is a spiritual
world and that everything spiritual is from the sun where
the Lord is, that this sun exists from the Lord, that it impels
nature to act as a living thing impels a dead one, and that
there are things in that world similar to those in the natural
world, it may also be seen that plants and animals have come
into existence from the Lord by means of the spiritual world
alone, and that they are maintained in existence in the same
way. Thus there is a continual influx from the spiritual
world into the natural. Many proofs of this will be given
in the next article. Noxious things are produced on earth
by influx from hell, in accordance with the same law which
permits evils themselves to flow from hell into men, | This
law will be spoken of in the work on Divine Providence.

341. IV. Influx from hell gives rise to evil uses in places
where there are corresponding conditions. The things that
correspond to evil uses, that is, to poisonous herbs and noxious
animals, are cadaverous, putrid, excrementitious, filthy,
rancid, and urinous matters; and therefore places containing
such things foster the growth of poisonous herbs and such

150 Divine Love and Wisdom

small creatures as were mentioned above. In the torrid
zones are found’ similar things on a larger scale, such as
serpents, lizards, crocodiles, scorpions, rats, mice, and so
forth. Every one knows ‘that swamps, stagnant pools,
dunghills, and fetid bogs are full of such things; also that
clouds of noxious insects fill the air, and swarms of vermin
creep about and devour the grass to the very roots. I once
noticed in my garden that for the space of an ell almost all
the dust was turned into minute winged insects, which being
stirred with a stick rose in clouds. Experience shows that
cadaverous and putrid substances suit these noxious and
useless creatures and that the two orders of things are of
a similar nature. This is evident from the cause of such
phenomena, which is, that there are similar foul smells and
stenches in the hells, where such creatures alsq abound.
The hells therefore are named accordingly, some being called
cadaverous, some excrementitious, some urinous, and so
forth; but all these hells are covered over lest they should
exhale these stenches. If they are but slightly opened,
which occurs when newly-arrived devils enter, they cause
vomiting and severe headaches, and if they are also péisonous
they induce fainting. Their very dust is of the same\nature,
and is therefore described as damned. Hence it is evident
that noxious things exist where there are such stenches,
because the two correspond. :

342. The question, then, is whether such things arise from
eggs conveyed to the spot by wind, rain, or “the flow of
water, or whether they originate from moisture and putridity.
That such noxious creatures and insects are hatched from
eggs carried thither or lying in the ground since the creation,
is not conclusively proved by experience. For worms are
found in minute seeds, nuts, wood, stones, and leaves. And
upon and within plants there are parasites and grubs which
correspond to them. Great swarms of flies, too, appear in
houses, fields, and woods in summer, with no eggs to account
for them. Then there are the creatures that devour meadows
and lawns and in some hot countries fill and infest the air,
and those microscopic creatures that swim in stagnant
water, and fermenting wine, and fly in pestilential air. These
facts support the opinion that the very smells, stenches, and
exhalations proceeding from plants, earths, and ponds them-
selves produce such animalcules. The fact that when they

Divine Love and Wisdom 1s

have come into existence they are afterwards propagated
either by eggs or by parturition does not disprove their
spontaneous generation. For every living creature of the
kind, along with its tiny viscera, is endowed also with organs
of generation and means of propagation (see below, no. 347).
These contentions are now supported by the fact, hitherto
unknown, that there are similar things in the hells.

343. That the hells above mentioned not only communi-
cate but are also united with such things on earth may be
inferred from the fact that the hells are not remote from men,
but are around them, in fact, are within those who are evil;
thus they are contiguous to the earth. A man as regards
his affections and desires and the thoughts they suggest,
and also as to actions resulting from all these, which are
good or evil uses, is either in the midst of angels of heaven
or spirits of hell. And because there are things in heaven
and hell like those on earth, it follows that the influx from
the former directly produces the latter when the conditions
are favourable. All things seen in the spiritual world, both
in heaven and hell, correspond to the affections and desires
of their inhabitants; for they are brought into existence in
accordance with these. Therefore, when affections and
desires, which intrinsically are spiritual, meet with things
of a similar or corresponding nature on earth, there is present

_ a spiritual element which provides a soul and a material

element which provides a body. Moreover, in every spiritual
thing there lies an effort to clothe itself with a body. The
hells are around men, and therefore contiguous to the earth,
because the spiritual world is not in space, but is wherever
a corresponding affection exists.

344. I heard two presidents of the English Royal Society,
Sir Hans Sloane and Martin Folkes, conversing in the spiritual
world about the existence on earth of seeds and eggs and
their produce. The former ascribed the whole to nature,
contending that nature was endowed by creation with the
ability and power to produce such effects by means of the
sun’s heat. The other maintained that power is constantly
given by God the Creator to nature. To settle the question,
a beautiful bird was shown to Sir Hans Sloane and he was
asked to examine it carefully and see whether it differed in
the slightest degree from a similar bird on earth. He held
it in his hand, examined it, and then said that there was no

152 Divine Love and Wisdom

difference. He knew, indeed, that it was nothing but an
affection:of a certain angel represented outside him as a bird,
and that it would vanish, or cease to exist, along with the
affection; and that is what actually happened. Sir Hans
Sloane was convinced by this fact that nature has no part
whatever in the formation of plants and animals, which
results solely from an influx from the spiritual world into
the natural. He said that if all the minute parts of that
bird were packed with corresponding materials from the
earth and thus made permanent, it would continue to exist
as a bird like those on earth, and that the same is true of the
productions from hell. To this he added that if he had known
what he then knew about the spiritual world, he would have
ascribed to nature no more than this, that it is a means
whereby the spiritual power derived from God gives a durable
form to everything which flows therefrom continually into
nature. .

345. V. The ultimate degree of the spiritual faculty, when
it 1s separated from its higher degrees, 1s the cause of this. It
was shown in the Third Part that spiritual power proceeds
from the spiritual sun through three degrees to the ultimates
of nature, that these degrees are named celestial, spiritual,
and natural, and that they exist in man by creation and
therefore at his birth, and are developed according’ to his
life. Also that if the highest and inmost or celestial‘degree
is opened, the man becomes celestial; if the middle or
spiritual degree is opened, the man becomes spiritualy and
if only the lowest and outermost or natural degree is opened,
the man becomes natural. Further, that if he be¢omes
merely natural, he then loves only worldly and corporeal
things, and so far as he loves these, he becomes indifferent
to celestial and spiritual things and does not look to God,
and so far he becomes evil. It is therefore plain that the
ultimate spiritual, or the natural degree of the spirit, can
be separated from the higher degrees, and is so separated
in the inhabitants of hell. Men alone have the power of
separating the ultimate spiritual degree from the higher
degrees and turning it towards hell; no such thing is possible
in animals or minerals. It follows, therefore, that the
ultimate spiritual degree, when separated from the higher
degrees, as it is in the inhabitants of hell, produces on earth
the evil uses mentioned above.

Divine Love and Wisdom [53

The fact that noxious things on earth derive their origin
from man and so from hell, may be confirmed by the con-
dition of the land of Canaan as described in the Word. For
when the children of Israel lived according to the command-
ments of the law, the earth gave forth its increase, and so did
the flocks and herds; but when they disobeyed the command-
ments, the ground was barren and, as it is said, accursed;
instead of harvests it yielded thorns and briars, the flocks and
herds cast their young, and wild beasts broke in. The same
conclusion may be drawn from the locusts, frogs, and lice in
Egypt.

346. VI. There are two forms which are acted upon by influx,
the vegetable form and the animal form. It is well known that
the only two general forms produced out of the earth are those
of the animal and vegetable kingdoms, as also that the
members of each kingdom have much in common. Thus
the members of the animal kingdom have organs of sense,
organs of motion, and members and viscera which are
actuated by the brain, heart,and lungs. So also the members
of the vegetable kingdom send down a root into the ground
and bring forth a stem, branches, leaves, flowers, fruits, and
seeds. The development of the forms of both the animal and
vegetable kingdoms is derived from a spiritual influx and
operation from the sun of heaven where the Lord is, and not
from the influx and operation of the sun of nature, except as
to their permanence, as was said above.

All animals great and small originate from spiritual power
manifested in the ultimate or natural degree; man alone
originates from all three degrees, the celestial, spiritual, and
natural. Because each degree of ascent, or discrete degree,
decreases by continuity from perfection to imperfection as
light decreases to shade, so also do animals; there are there-
fore perfect, less perfect, and imperfect animals. The perfect
are elephants, camels, horses, mules, oxen, sheep, goats, and
the other gregarious kinds; the less perfect are birds; and
the imperfect are fish and shell-fish which, being the lowest
of their degree, are as it were in shade, while the others are in
light. But as they all live only from the ultimate spiritual
degree which is called the natural, they cannot look else-
where than to the earth for their food, and to creatures of
their own kind for the sake of the perpetuation of their species ;
the soul of all these is natural affection and appetite. It is

‘\

154 Divine Love and Wisdom

the same with the members of the vegetable kingdom; they
also include«the perfect, less perfect, and imperfect; the
perfect are fruit trees, the less perfect are vines and shrubs,
and the imperfect are grasses. From the spiritual origin of
the two kingdoms plants derive their uses, while animals
derive thence their affections and appetites.

347. VII. Both these forms, so long as they exist, receive the
means of reproducing their kind. That all the products of
the earth which, as was said above, belong either to the
vegetable or the animal kingdom, bear some resemblance to
creation and to man, and also to the infinite and eternal, was
shown above (nos. 313-318); and that the resemblance to the
infinite and eternal is evident from the fact that they can be
propagated to infinity and eternity. This is why they all
receive the means of propagation, the members of the
animal kingdom by means of seed in the egg or in ‘the womb,
or by parturition, and the members of the vegetable kingdom
by means of seeds in the ground. It is therefore evident that
although the more imperfect and noxious animals and plants
originate by direct influx from hell, yet afterwards they are
propagated indirectly by seeds, eggs, or offshoots. {The one
fact does not invalidate the other.

348. That all uses whether good or evil have a spiritual
origin, that is, from the sun where the Lord is, may be illus-
trated by the “following experience. I heard that goods and
truths have been sent down by the Lord through the heavens
to the hells, and that having descended by degrees .to the
abyss, they were there changed into the opposite evils and
falsities. The reason of this was that recipient forms give to
everything poured into them a like nature to their own.
Thus the white light of the sun is turned into hideous colours,
and even into blackness, by objects whose inward form
suffocates and extinguishes the light; and stagnant pools,
dunghills, and dead bodies turn the heat of the sun into
offensive smells. From these facts it is clear that even evil
uses are derived from the spiritual sun, but only by good uses
being converted by hell into evil ones. It is, therefore,
evident that the Lord never has created nor ever will create
any but good uses, but that hell produces evil uses.

349. THE VISIBLE THINGS IN THE CREATED UNIVERSE BEAR
WITNESS THAT NATURE NEVER HAS PRODUCED NOR EVER WILL

£

Divine Love and Wisdom 155

PRODUCE ANYTHING, BUT THAT THE DIVINE FROM ITSELF, BY
MEANS OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD, PRODUCES ALL THINGS.
Most people in the world, judging by appearances, say that
the sun by its heat and light produces the effects seen in
plains, fields, gardens, and woods; also that by its heat it
hatches grubs from eggs, makes the beasts of the earth and
the fowls of the air prolific, and even gives life to mankind.
They may speak in this way from the appearance of things
without ascribing them to nature, for they do not reflect on
the subject; they are like those who speak of the sun as rising
and setting, causing days and years, and being at this or that
altitude. These likewise speak according to the appearance
of things and may do so without attributing these effects to
the sun, for they do not reflect that the sun is stationary and
that the earth revolves round it. But those who confirm

, themselves in the belief that the sun by its heat and light
produces the things seen on the earth, at length ascribe all
things to nature, even the creation of the universe, and then
they become materialists and at last atheists. They may
indeed say that God created nature and endowed it with the
power of producing such things, but they say this from the
fear of losing their good name; when they speak of God
the Creator they mean nature, or its inmost activities, and
then they make light of the divine things which the Church
teaches.

350. Some indeed are to be excused for having ascribed the
origin of certain visible things to nature, and this for two
reasons. Firstly, because they know nothing of the sun of
heaven where the Lord is and of its influx, nor of the spiritual
world and its conditions, nor of its relation to man. Hence

they could not but think that the spiritual is a purer natural,
and thus that the angels dwell either in the ether or the stars,
and that the devil is the evil in man, or that, if he actually
exists, he lives either in the air or in the depths of the earth;
also that the souls of men after death live in the bowels of
| the earth, or in some indefinite place or space awaiting the
day of judgment; and other similar fancies begotten of their
ignorance of the spiritual world and its sun. The second
excuse for them is that they cannot understand how the
Divine could produce everything existing on earth, which
contains both good and evil things; they are afraid to accept
this belief lest they should ascribe evil things also to God,

156 Divine Love and Wisdom

and should«conceive a material idea of Him, making Him
one with nature and thus indistinguishable from it. ‘These are
two reasons for excusing those who believe that nature pro-
duces visible objects by a power implanted by creation. On
the other hand, those who have become atheists by arguing
in favour of merely natural causation are inexcusable, because
they might have acquired a firm belief in the Divine. Ignor-
ance indeed frees from blame, but it cannot set aside con-
firmed falsity, for such falsity is intimately connected with
evil and therefore with hell. For this reason those who have
made up their minds in favour of nature to the exclusion of
the Divine, regard nothing as sinful, because all sin is con-
trary to the Divine which they have excluded and rejected.
Those who in their own minds regard nothing as being sinful,
after death, being then spirits and conjoined with hell, rush
into all kinds of wickedness suggested by their evil desires,
because they have cast away all the bonds which might have
restrained these evils.

351. Those who believe in a divine operation, in every
detail of nature, can support their conviction with as good
or even better evidence, afforded by very many things which
they observe in nature, than can those who attribute every-
thing to nature alone. Those who reason in favour of divine
operation consider the wonders exhibited by the growth both
of plants and animals. As regards plants, they see how
from a small seed cast into the ground there goes forth a root
by means of which a stem, branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits
follow in due order, until at length new seeds are produced ;
just as if the seed knew the order to be observed and the
process by which to renew itself. What rational man can
suppose that the sun, which is pure fire, knows all this, or can
enable its heat and light to produce these results and give to
plants their wonderful forms, and propose use as their end?
Any man of enlightened reason who sees and considers these
things must believe that they come from an infinitely wise
God. Those who believe in God see and acknowledge this,
but those who have no belief in Him neither see nor acknow-
ledge it, because they do not wish to do so, and so they sink
their rational in their sensuous faculty, which draws all its
ideas from the light proper to the senses of the body and
confirms their fallacies by such considerations as the following.
Do you not see the sun effecting these things by its heat and

Divine Love and Wisdom Gy

light? Why should you believe in what you cannot see?
Is there any such thing ?

Those who make up their minds in favour of the Divine
consider the wonders manifested in the production of animal
life. To take the case of eggs alone. A chick is latent there
in its seed or origin, with everything necessary for its develop-
ment before it is hatched, and afterwards until it becomes a
bird or winged creature resembling its parents. Then again,
if any one reflects deeply about form, he cannot fail to be
astonished when he sees that in the smallest as well as in the
largest of living creatures, in the invisible as well as in the
visible, there are organs of sense, namely, sight, smell, taste,
and touch; also organs of motion or muscles, for they fly and
walk; and viscera around their heart and lungs, which are
set in motion by their brain. That even common insects have
such organs is shown in works dealing with their anatomy,
and especially in the Biblia Nature of Swammerdam. Those
who ascribe everything to nature, see and admit the existence
of all these things, but say that nature produces them; and
they say this because they have turned away their minds
from thinking of the Divine. And when such men see the
wonders of nature they cannot think rationally, still less
spiritually, but only sensuously and materially; their
thought cannot rise above nature, but is immersed in natural
considerations, like that of the inhabitants of hell. They
differ from beasts only in this, that they have a rational
faculty, that is to say, they can understand and therefore
think otherwise if they choose.

352. Those who are disinclined to think of the Divine
while they see the wonders in nature, and thus have become
sensuously-minded, do not consider that the sight of the eye
is so gross that it sees a multitude of little insects obscurely
as one object, although each of them has sensory and motor
organs, andis therefore endowed with nerves and blood-vessels,
a tiny heart, pulmonary tubes, minute viscera, and brains.
These organs are formed of the most subtle elements of
nature, and their tissues correspond to some form of life,
which animates their minutest parts. As the sight of the eye
is so gross that many such creatures, with the innumerable
parts contained in each, appear as one obscure speck, and yet
those who think and judge from the senses form their con-
clusions from what they see, it is evident how dense their

158 Divine Love and Wisdom

minds are and what darkness they are in concerning spiritual
things.

353. Every one who will may confirm his belief in God by
the visible things of nature, and every one whose thoughts
about God are based upon life does confirm himself in this
belief; for instance, when he sees the birds of the air and
notices how every species knows its food and where to find it,
recognises its kind by sound and sight, and knows which
other kinds are its friends and which its enemies. He sees
also how they mate, come together, skilfully build nests in
which they lay their eggs, sit upon them, know how long
they take to hatch, release the chicks from the shell at the
proper time, love them tenderly, gather them under their
wings, bring them food and feed them, until these can
provide for themselves, live a similar life, bring forth another
brood and so perpetuate their species. Every one who is
willing to believe that there is a divine influx through the
spiritual world into the natural, may see it clearly in these
things; and can say in his heart if he will, ‘“ These creatures
cannot acquire such knowledge from the sun’s ray$; for the
sun from which nature derives its origin and essenee is pure
fire, and therefore its rays are absolutely dead;”’ and so he
may conclude that such things result from the influx of the
divine Wisdom into the ultimates of nature.

354. Every one may confirm his belief in God by What he
sees in nature, if he considers the case of caterpillars, which,
impelled by a certain pleasurable desire, long and aspire to
change their earthly state into a kind of heavenly one.; They
therefore creep into corners and put themselves as it were
into a womb in order to be born again, and there become
chrysalises, aurelias, pups, or nymphs, and at length butter-
flies; and having undergone this change, being clothed with
beautiful wings each after its kind, they ascend into the air
as their heaven, sport there and mate, lay eggs, and per-
petuate their species, being nourished meanwhile by the
sweet and pleasant honey of the flowers. Can any man who
seeks to strengthen his belief in God by what he observes in
nature fail to see in these grubs some resemblance to the
earthly state of man, and in the butterflies a resemblance to
his heavenly state? But those who are disposed to believe
in nature alone, when they observe the same things, call them
blind operations of nature, because they have dismissed from

Divine Love and Wisdom 159

their minds all belief in a heavenly state to which man may
attain.

355. Every one may confirm his belief in God by what he
sees in nature, if he considers the facts known about bees.
They know how to collect wax and get honey from herbs and
flowers, to build cells like little houses and arrange them in
the form of a city with streets, by which they come in and
go out. They scent from afar the flowers and herbs from
which they gather wax for the hive and honey for food, and
Jaden with these they fly straight back to the hive. Thus
they provide themselves with food and shelter for the coming
winter, as if they foresaw its approach. They also choose a
mistress or queen who is to propagate the race; for her they
build, as it were, a palace above them, with guards around
it; and she, when her time is at hand, goes attended by her
guards from cell to cell and lays her eggs, which a crowd of
followers seal up to protect them from the air; and from them
a new progeny springs. Afterwards when the young ones
have arrived at maturity and can repeat this mode of life,
they are driven from the hive; the swarm thus expelled first
assembles, and then, to prevent being scattered, flies away in
a body to look out fora new home. About autumn, also, the
useless bees or drones are led out and deprived of their wings,
to prevent them from coming back and eating the food for
which they have not laboured: not to mention other parti-
culars. It may be seen from this that the bees, on account of
the use they perform for the human race, possess, by influx
from the spiritual world, a form of government resembling
that of men on earth, and even of angels in heaven.

Can any man of sound reason fail to see that such know-
ledge in these creatures is not derived from the natural world?
What has the sun from which nature originates in common
with a government comparable to and resembling that of
heaven? These and similar facts regarding the lower
animals strengthen the convictions of him who believes in
and worships nature, and the very same things strengthen
the faith of him who believes in and worships God. The
spiritual man sees in them spiritual things, and the natural
man natural, each according to his disposition. To me,
such things have long been evidence of an influx of what is
spiritual into what is natural, or, in other words, of the
spiritual world into the natural world; thus, of an influx

160 Divine Love and Wisdom

from the divme Wisdom of the Lord. Consider this. Could
you think analytically concerning any form of government,
any civil law, any moral virtue, or any spiritual truth, unless
the Divine, from His Wisdom, entered your mind by influx
through the spiritual world? For myself I neither could
nor can do so. For I have constantly perceived and felt
that influx now for about nineteen years; therefore I speak
from experience.

356. Can any natural thing propose use as its end and
arrange uses in order and in forms? Only one who is wise
can do this, and none but an infinitely wise God could so
order and form the universe. Who else or what else could
foresee and provide all things necessary for the food and
clothing of mankind, food from the fruits of the earth and
from animals, and clothing from the same? It is one of
many wonders that a humble creature like the silkworm
should be the means of clothing with silk and sumptuous
attire both men and women, from kings and queens to men-
servants and maid- -servants; as also that lowly insects like
bees should supply wax for candles, and illuminat churches
and palaces. These and many other things are! speaking
proofs that all things in nature are produced through the
spiritual world by and from the Lord alone.

357. To the above let me add that I have seen in the
spiritual world men who from their study of things visible
on earth had acquired such a rooted belief in nature alone
as to become atheists. In spiritual light their understanding
appeared to be open below but closed above, because their
thought looked downwards to the earth and not upwards to
heaven. Above their sensuous faculty, or the lowest part of
their understanding, there appeared as it were a veil, either
flashing with hellish fire, black as soot, or livid as a corpse.
Therefore let every one beware of confirming a belief in
nature; let him confirm his belief in God, for there is no lack
of materials.

PART V

353. THe Lorp HAS CREATED AND FORMED IN MAN TWO
RECEPTACLES AND HABITATIONS FOR HIMSELF, THE WILL
AND THE UNDERSTANDING; THE WILL FOR His DIVINE Love
AND THE UNDERSTANDING FOR HIS DIvINE Wispom. We
have already spoken of the divine Love and Wisdom of God
the Creator, who is the Lord from eternity, and also of the
creation of the universe; something shall now be said
concerning the creation of man. We read that man was
created in the image of God, after His likeness (Genesis 1. 26).
The divine Wisdom is there meant by the image of God, and
the divine Love by His likeness; for wisdom is nothing but
the image of love, since love manifests itself to sight and
knowledge in wisdom; and because that is how love is seen
and known, wisdom is its image. Love also is the very
Betnc of Life and wisdom is its MANIFESTATION. The image
and likeness of God are clearly seen in the angels; for their
inward love shines forth in their faces, and wisdom in their
beauty, and beauty is the form of their love. This I know
because I have seen it.

359. A man cannot be an image of God after His likeness
unless God dwells in him and is his inmost life. That God
is present in man, and is his inmost life, follows from what
was shown above (nos. 4-6), that God alone is life, and that
men and angels receive life from Him. It is also known
from the Word that God is in man, and that He makes His
abode with him; and because it is known from the Word,
it is usual for preachers to exhort their hearers to prepare
themselves to receive God, in order that He may enter into
them and be in their hearts, and that they may become His
dwelling-place. The devout also pray to the same effect,
and some speak openly of the Holy Spirit, which they believe
to be in them when they feel moved by a holy zeal while
thinking, speaking, or preaching. That the Holy Spirit is
the Lord, and not a separate person in the Godhead, is shown
in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Lord

L 935 161

on ia

162 Divine Love and Wisdom

(nos. 51+53):.«for the Lord says, “In that day ye shall know
that ye are in me, and I in you” (John xiv. 20; xv. 4, 5;
XVli. 23).

360. Now as the Lord is divine Love and Wisdom, and
these two essentially are Himself, therefore in order that
He might dwell in man and give him life, it was necessary
that He should create and form in him faculties of reception
and habitation for Himself, one for love and another for
wisdom. The will and the understanding in man are such
faculties of reception and habitation; the will is the faculty
by which love is received and in which it dwells, and the
understanding is the faculty by which wisdom is received
and in which it dwells. That these two are the Lord’s in
man, and that a man’s whole life proceeds from these two,
will be seen in what follows. ¥

361. That every man has these two faculties, the will and
the understanding, and that they are distinct from'each other
as are love and wisdom, is known and yet unknown in the
world. It is known from common perception, but not
known from thought, and still less from thought @xpressed
in words. Who does not know from common perception
that the will and the understanding are two distinct faculties
in aman? Every one sees the truth of this when he hears
it, and people often say, ‘‘ This man’s intention is gaod, but
he does not rightly understand; and another man’ under-
stands what is right, but his intentions are bad. I love one
who both wills and understands aright, but not one who
understands clearly, while his will is evil.”” But when the
same person thinks of the will and understanding, hé does
not regard them as two different faculties and distinguish
between them, but confuses them, the reason being that his
thought identifies itself with his bodily sight. If he is
writing, he realises still less that the will and the under-
standing are two distinct faculties, because then his thought
identifies itself with the sensuous faculty, which constitutes
the selfhood of man. This is why some persons can think
and speak well but cannot write well, as is commonly the
case with the female sex.

It is the same in regard to many other things. Who does
not know from common perception that a man who leads
a good life is saved, and that he’who leads a bad life is con-
demned? also that a man who leads a good life becomes

Divine Love and Wisdom 163

a companion of angels, and then sees, hears, and speaks as
aman does? also that a man who practises justice and recti-
tude for their own sake has a conscience? But if, mistrust-
ing common perception, he submits the matter to a mental
inquiry, he no longer knows what conscience is, or that the
soul can see, hear, and speak as a man does, or that the good
of life is anything more than giving to the poor. And if he
reduces such thoughts to writing, he supports them by
appearances, fallacies, and meaningless phrases. This is
why many of the learned who have thought much, and
especially those who have written much, have impaired and
obscured their common perception, and indeed destroyed it;
and why the simple see more clearly what is good and true
than those who think themselves their superiors in wisdom.
This common perception is due to the influence of heaven on
both thought and sight; but thought separated from common
perception acts upon imagination arising from visible things
and from the selfhood. Experience shows that this is so.
Tell some truth to any one who has common perception and
he will see it; tell him that we live, move, and have our being
from God and in God, and he will see it; tell him that God
dwells with man in love and wisdom, and he will see it; tell
him further that the will is the receptacle of love and the
understanding the receptacle of wisdom, and explain it a
little, and he will see it; tell him that God is Love itself and
Wisdom itself, and he will see that; ask him what conscience
is, and he will tell you. But say the same things to one of
the learned, who has not trusted to common perception but
relies on principles orideas based upon an examination of nature,
and he will not see. Then consider which is the wiser.

362. THE WILL AND UNDERSTANDING, WHICH ARE THE
RECEPTACLES OF LOVE AND WISDOM, ARE IN THE WHOLE
BRAIN AND IN EVERY PART OF IT, AND THENCE IN THE WHOLE
BODY AND IN EVERY PART OF IT. This shall be shown in
the following order:—

I. Love and wisdom, and therefore the will and under-
standing, are the very life of man.

II. The life of man is primarily in the brain, and by
derivation thence in the body.

III. Life as a whole and in every detail is such as it is in
its origin.

164 Divine Love and Wisdom

IV. Owing to this origin, life flows from every part into
the whole and from the whole into every part.

V. A man’s love determines the nature of his wisdom, and
therefore of his character.

363. I. Love and wisdom, and therefore the will and under-
standing, are the very life of man. Scarcely any one knows
what life is. When a man thinks about life, it appears to be
something volatile, of which no definite idea can be formed.
This arises from ignorance of the fact that God alone is life
and that His life is divine Love and Wisdom. It is, there-
fore, evident that there is no other life than this in man, and
that he lives in proportion as he receives it. We know that
heat and light proceed from the sun, and are received by
all things in the universe, which grow warm and bright in
the degree that they receive them. So also heat ‘and light
proceed from the sun where the Lord is; and the heat is love
and the light is wisdom, as was shown in the Second Part.
Life therefore is the result of these two things, which proceed
from the Lord as a sun. That love and wisdom from the
Lord constitute life is also evident from this, that man
becomes sluggish as his love fails and stupid as his wisdom
fails, and if he were altogether deprived of them, he would
no longer be a man. There are several derivations of love
which are known by other names, such as affections, desires,
appetites, and their pleasures and delights. There are also
several derivations of wisdom, such as perception, reflection,
recollection, thought, and attention; and there are several.
common to both love and wisdom, as consent, decision; and
determination to action, besides others, All the foregoing,
indeed, are derived from both love and wisdom, but they are
named according to the predominating element. From
these two are ultimately derived the sensations of sight,
hearing, smell, taste, and touch, with their delights and
pleasures. It is in appearance only that the eye sees; the
understanding sees through the eye, and therefore the under-
standing is said to see. It appears as if the ear hears; but
the understanding hears through the ear, and therefore
attention and obedience, which are acts of the understanding,
are described as hearing. It appears as if the nostrils smell
and that the tongue tastes; but the understanding smells
and tastes by virtue of its perception, and therefore the
terms smelling and tasting are used to describe various kinds

Divine Love and Wisdom 165

of perception; and so in other cases. Love and wisdom
are the sources of all the senses; from which it is evident
that these two constitute the life of man.

364. Every one sees that the understanding is the recep-
tacle of wisdom, but few see that the will is the receptacle
of love. The reason of this is, that the will does nothing of
itself, but acts by means of the understanding; and also that
when the love of the will enters the wisdom of the under-
standing, it first takes the form of an affection, and so pursues
its course; and affection is only perceived as a certain
pleasure in thinking, speaking, and acting, which is scarcely
noticed. Nevertheless this pleasure is evidently derived
from love, because every one wills what he loves, and does
not will what he does not love.

365. II. The life of man is primarily in the brain and by
derivation thence in the body. Life begins in primary faculties
and passes thence into derivative faculties produced and
formed from them; by the primary faculties of life are meant
the will and the understanding; and these are the two
faculties which are primarily in the brain and thence derived
into the body. That the beginning or origin of life is in the
brain is evident from the following considerations: 1. When
a man applies his mind to anything and thinks, he is conscious
of the fact that he does it with his brain; he, as it were,
retracts the sight of the eye, keeps the forehead on the
stretch, and perceives that thought is going on within,
principally inside the forehead and somewhat above it.
2. During the formation of man in the womb, the brain or
head is formed first, and for a long time afterwards it is
larger than the body. 3. The head is above and the body
below, and it is according to order that the higher should act
upon the lower, and not the contrary. 4. When the brain
is injured either in the womb or by accident, disease, or
overwork, thought is enfeebled, and the mind is sometimes
deranged. 5. All the external senses, sight, hearing, smell,
taste, together with the general sense of touch, and the
organs of speech are at the front of the head in the face,
and communicate directly by means of nerves with the
brain, and derive thence their sensitive and active life.
6. This is why the affections of a man’s love are mirrored
in his face, while his thoughts which pertain to wisdom
show themselves by a kind of light in his eyes. 7. Anatomy

166 Divine Love and Wisdom

also shows that all the nerves descend from the brain through
the neck*into ‘thé body, and that none ascend from the body
through the neck into the brain; and where the nerves
begin, there is the source of life. Will any one venture to
deny that where the origin of the fibres is, there is the origin
of life? 8. Ask any one gifted with common sense where
his thought is, or where he thinks, and he will reply that he
thinks in his head. But afterwards take some one who
considers some particular gland, or the heart, or some other
organ, to be the seat of the soul, and. ask him where affection
and thought originate if not in the brain, and he will say
that he cannot tell. The reason of his ignorance may be
seen above (no. 361).

366. III. Life as a whole and in every detail 1s such as it
is in its origin. To elucidate this point we shall now de-
scribe the origin of life in the brain, and the derivations
thence. Anatomy plainly shows in what part of the brain
life begins. It shows that there are two brains, and that
these are continued from the head into the spine, that they
consist of two substances, a cortical and a medullary sub-
stance, and that the cortical substance consists, asyit were,
of innumerable glands, and the medullary substan¢e, as it
were, of innumerable fibres. Now as these glands \are the
heads of the fibres, they are also their origins; the fibres
begin from them, and subsequently combine to form‘nerves
which pass to the organs of sense in the face, and to the
organs of motion in the body, and form them. Consult any
anatomist, and he will explain this to you. The cortical
or glandular substance composes the surface of the cerebrum,
and also the surface of the corpora striata which give rise
to the medulla oblongata; it also forms the interior parts
of the cerebellum and of the spinal marrow. But the medul-
lary or fibrous substance everywhere begins and proceeds
from the cortical, and is the origin of the nerves, which again
are the origin of everything in the body. Ocular demonstra-
tion can be given of all this. Whoever is aware of these
things, either from having studied anatomy or from informa-
tion supplied by anatomists, may see that the origins of life
are in the same place as the beginnings of the fibres and in
no other, and that the fibres cannot possibly proceed from
themselves, but must proceed from those origins. These
beginnings which appear as glands are almost innumerable.

Divine Love and Wisdom 167

The number of them may be compared to the multitude of
the stars in the universe; and the number of the fibres pro-
ceeding from them may be compared to the multitude of
rays going forth from the stars, which transmit their heat
and light to the earth. The number of these glands may
also be compared to that of the angelic communities in
heaven, which also are innumerable and, as I have been told,
are arranged m a similar order; while the number of the
fibres originating from these glands may be compared to the
spiritual truths and goods which in like manner proceed as
rays from the angelic communities. Hence it is that a man
is, as it were, a universe and a miniature heaven, as stated
and explained above in various places. These facts show
that such as life is in its origin, such it is in its derivations,
or such as it is in its source in the brain, such it is also in the
things formed therefrom in the body.

367. IV. Owing to this origin, life flows from every part
into the whole and from the whole into every part. This is
because the whole, which is the brain and the body together,
at first consists of nothing but the fibres which proceed from
their origins in the brain. It has no other source, as is
evident from what was shown just above (no. 366); hence
the whole is the product of the parts. Also life flows through
these origins into every part from the whole, because the
whole supplies each part with its function and requirement
and thereby makes it a part of the whole. In a word, the
whole exists from the parts, and the parts subsist from the
whole. The existence of this mutual relation and consequent
union is illustrated by many things in the body. It resembles
the organisation of a city, commonwealth, or kingdom; the
community exists from men who are the parts, and the parts
or men subsist from the community. The same is true of
everything which has any form, and is especially true of man.

368. V. A man’s love determines the nature of his wisdom
and therefore of his character. This is because the will and
understanding are such as the love and wisdom are, the will
being the receptacle of love, and the understanding the
receptacle of wisdom, as was shown above; and these two
constitute the man and his character. Love is manifold, so
much so that its varieties are innumerable, as may be seen
from the human race on earth and in heaven. There is no
man or angel exactly like any other; it is love which distin-

:
168 Divine Love and Wisdom

guishes them, for each man is his own love. Some suppose
that wisdom distinguishes them, but wisdom is derived from
love and is its form, for love is the BE1nc of life, and wisdom is
its MANIFESTATION through that Brinc. It is believed in
the world that the understanding constitutes man; this is
because the understanding can be raised into the light of
heaven, as was shown above, and thus a man may appear
wise; nevertheless such of man’s thoughts as transcend, or
are not derived from, his love, seem indeed to be his and to
indicate his character, but this is an illusion. Such thought
pertains indeed to the love of knowing and being wise, but not
to the love of applying such knowledge and wisdom to life.
It therefore generally dies away in this world, or lingers in
the outskirts of the memory ready to fade away; for this
reason, it is taken away after death, no more remaining than
is in agreement with the characteristic love of the spirit.
Because a man’s love constitutes his life, and thus the man
himself, all the communities of heaven and all the angels in
them are arranged in their order and connection according
to affections derived from love; and no community, and no
angel in any community, is placed according to anything of
the understanding separate from love. So also the hells and
their communities are arranged according to loves opposed
to those of heaven. From these facts it may be seen that a
man’s love determines the nature of his wisdom and therefore
of his character.

369. It is, indeed, admitted that a man is what his,reign-
ing love is, yet only i in mind and disposition, not in body,
thus not wholly so. But I have been convinced by much
experience in the spiritual world that from head to foot, or
from primaries in the head to ultimates in the body, a man
is such as his love is. For all in that world are forms of their
own love; the angels are forms of heavenly love and the
devils are forms of hellish love; the latter are ugly in face
and body, but the angels are beautiful in face and body.
Moreover when any one’s love is assailed, his face undergoes
a change, and if his love is grievously assailed he vanishes.
This is peculiar to that world. It happens because a spirit’s
body makes one with his mind. The reason is plain from
what was said above, namely, that all things in the body are
derivations, that is, they are woven by “fibres proceeding
from primary forms which are the first receptacles of love and

Divine Love and Wisdom 169

wisdom; as this is their origin, the derivative forms are
necessarily of the same nature. Therefore, whithersoever the
beginnings proceed the derivatives must follow; they are
inseparable. This is why any one who elevates his mind to
the Lord, is wholly elevated; and he who degrades his mind
to hell is wholly degraded. Wherefore the whole man,
according to his life’s love, goes either to heaven or to hell.
It is a matter of angelic wisdom, that the mind of man is a
man because God is a Man; and that the body which feels
and acts is the external counterpart of the mind; thus they
are one and indivisible.

370. It must be observed that the very structure of
human members, organs, and viscera arises from the fibres
proceeding from their origins in the brain, but that they are
fixed by means of material substances found in the earth or,
exhaled therefrom into the air and ether. This is effected
by means of the blood. In order therefore that everything
in the body may preserve its formation and so continue its
function, the body requires to be nourished with material
food and continually renewed.

371. THERE IS A CORRESPONDENCE OF THE WILL WITH
THE HEART AND OF THE UNDERSTANDING WITH THE LUNGS.
This will be shown in the following series of articles.

I, All things in the mind have reference to the will and
understanding, and all things in the body to the heart and
lungs.

II. There is a correspondence of the will and understanding
with the heart and lungs, and therefore a correspondence of
everything in the mind with everything in the body.

III. The will corresponds to the heart.

IV. The understanding corresponds to the lungs.

V. Many arcana concerning the will and understanding,
and therefore concerning love and wisdom, may be dis-
covered by means of this correspondence.

VI. A man’s mind is his spirit, and the spirit is a man, and
the body is the external instrument by means of which the
mind or spirit feels and acts in the world to which it belongs.

VII. The union of man’s spirit with his body takes place
by means of the correspondence of his will and understand-
ing with his heart and lungs, and disumion through non-
correspondence.

170 Divine Love and Wisdom

372. I. All things in the mind have reference to the will and
understanding, and all things in the body to the heart and lungs.
By the mind nothing is meant but the will and the under-
standing, which include everything that a man feels and
thinks, thus all his affection and thought; the things which
a man feels belong to his will and those which he thinks
belong to his understanding. It is well known that all a
man’s thought belongs to his understanding, inasmuch as
he thinks with his understanding, but it is not so well known
that all a man’s affection belongs to his will. The reason is
that when a man thinks, he does not pay attention to the
affection but only to the thought. In like manner when he
hears a person speaking, he does not attend to the tone of
voice but only to the words; yet affection bears the same
relation to thought as sound does to speech, and therefore
the affection of a speaker may be known from the tone of his
voice, and his thought from his words. Affection belongs
to the will because all affection is from love, and the will is
the receptacle of love, as was shown above. Whoever is
unaware that affection belongs to the will confuses, affection
with understanding; he says it is one with thought; but they
are distinct, though they act as one. That they are often
confused is plain from the common remark, “‘ I think of doing
this;”’ meaning, “I intend to do it.” But that they are
distinct is also plain from the common remark, “ Ff intend
to think of this,’ and when he does think about it, the
affection of his will is involved in the thought of his,under-
standing, as his tone of voice is in his words, as was said
above. That everything in the body has reference to the
heart and lungs is well known, but that there is a correspond-
ence of the heart and lungs with the will and understanding
is not known. This shall therefore be explained in what
follows.

373- Since the will and understanding are the receptacles of
love and wisdom, these two are organic forms, or forms com-
posed of the purest substances; they must be so in order to
be receptacles. It is no objection that their structure is not
visible to the eye; it transcends vision, even when aided by
the microscope. Very small insects are also invisible, though
they have organs of sense and motion; for they feel, walk,
and fly; and that they also have brains, hearts, pulmonary
tubes, and viscera has been revealed by the careful study of

Divine Love and Wisdom 171

their anatomy under the microscope. Now since these little
ansects are invisible, and still more their tiny internal organs,
each one of which is admitted to have an elaborate structure,
how can it be said that the two receptacles of love and wisdom,
the will and understanding, have no organic form? How can
love and wisdom, which are life from the Lord, act upon any-
thing that is not subject to their influence, or on anything
that has no substantial existence? How else could thought
be a man’s own, or how could he speak from thought that
was not his own? Is not the brain, where thought exists,
complete and fully organised? Its organic forms are visible
even to the naked eye, especially the original receptacles of the
will and understanding which are seen as little glands in the
cortical substance (no. 366). Do not let the idea of a vacuum
enter your mind with regard to these things; a vacuum is
nothing, and in nothing nothing happens, and from nothing
nothing comes. Respecting the idea of a vacuum see above
(no. 82).

374. II. There ts a correspondence of the will and under-
standing with the heart and lungs, and therefore a correspond-
ence of everything in the mind with everything in the body. These
facts have not hitherto been known, because no one has under-
stood the nature of spiritual things, and how they differ from
natural, nor consequently what is meant by the correspond-
ence which exists between spiritual and natural things and
effects their union. Nevertheless both might have been
understood. Who does not know that affection and thought
are spiritual? and therefore that everything that composes
them is also spiritual? Who does not know that action and
speech are natural? and consequently that everything that
composes them is also natural? Who does not know that
affection and thought, which are spiritual, cause man to act
and speak? Who cannot see the nature of the correspond-
ence between spiritual and natural things? Does not thought
make the tongue speak, and affection united with thought
cause the body to act? There are two distinct things here.
I can think and yet not speak, and I can will and not act.
And it is evident that the body does not think and will, but
that thought is expressed in speech and will in action.
Does not every one know that affection shines forth from the
face and portrays itself there? Is not affection in itself
spiritual, and are not the changes in the expressions of the

172. . Divine Love and Wisdom

face natural? Might it not be concluded from this that there
is a correspondence here, and hence that there is a corre-
spondence of everything in the mind with everything in the
body? And because everything in the mind has reference
to affection and thought, or what is the same thing, to the will
and understanding, and everything in the body to the heart
and lungs, it might have been seen that there is a correspond-
ence between the will and the heart, and between the under-
standing and the lungs. The reason why these facts have
not been recognised, although they might have been, is that
man has become so external that he has been unwilling to
acknowledge anything but what was natural. This has been
_the delight of his love and therefore of his understanding,
until it has become painful for him to raise his thoughts
to anything spiritual above and distinct from the natural;
and so, influenced by his natural love and delight, he could
only suppose that what is spiritual is only a purer form of
what is natural, and that correspondence is something flowing
in by continuity. Indeed, the merely natural man cannot
conceive of anything distinct from the natural; to him it
seems to have no existence. Another reason why these things
have not hitherto been discovered and understood is, that all
things pertaining to religion, which are spiritual, have been
withdrawn from the mental view of man by the dogma,
prevailing in the whole Christian world, that théological
matters, which are spiritual, and which certain councils and
leaders have formulated, are to be blindly believed, Because
they are said to transcend the understanding. Conse-
quently, some have supposed spiritual things to be like birds
flying above the air in ether, beyond the sight of the eye;
yet they are like birds of paradise flying near the eye and
touching the pupil with their beautiful wings and longing to be
seen. By the sight of the eye is meant the intellectual sight.

375. The correspondence of the will and understanding
with the heart and lungs cannot be proved as an abstract
proposition, but it can be proved by a consideration of effects.
It is the same with all causes; these may, indeed, be seen
rationally, but not clearly, except through the effects they
produce; for causes are in their effects and manifest them-
selves thereby. Only in this way does the mind become
convinced of the existence of causes. The effects resulting
from the above correspondence will be stated in the following

Divine Love and Wisdom 173

pages. But lest any one, while thinking about this corre-
spondence, should drift into ideas derived from hypotheses
about the soul, let him first read over carefully the statements
made in the preceding article, and also nos. 363-4. Love and
wisdom, and therefore the will and understanding, are the
very life of man. The life of man is primarily in the brain and
by derivation thence in the body (no. 365). Life as a whole
and in every detail is such as it is in its origin (no. 366).
Owing to this origin, life flows from every part into the whole
and from the whole into every part (no. 367). A man’s love
determines the nature of his wisdom and therefore of his
character (no. 368).

376. As further evidence I am permitted to adduce a
representation of the correspondence of the will and under-
standing with the heart and lungs as seen in heaven among
the angels. By a wonderful and indescribable series of
curves they produced a representation of a heart and lungs
with all their interior structures, acting all the while under
heavenly influence, for heaven has an innate tendency to
produce such forms by virtue of the influx of love and wisdom
fromthe Lord. Andso they represented the unionof the heart
and lungs and also their correspondence with the love of
the will and the wisdom of the understanding. This corre-
spondence and union they called the heavenly marriage; and
they said that it was the same with the whole body and its
various members, organs, and viscera, as with the heart and
lungs, and that without the action of the heart and lungs,
life with its voluntary movements and intellectual per-
ceptions would be impossible.

377. Since the correspondence of the heart and lungs with
the will and understanding is discussed in what now follows,
and since the correspondence of everything in the body,
including the members, organs of sense, and viscera, is founded
upon this correspondence, and since the correspondence of
natural things with spiritual has been hitherto unknown,
and yet is amply set forth in two works, one of which treats of
Heaven and Hell, and the other, the Arcana Celestia, of the
spiritual sense of the Word in Genesis and Exodus, I will
here indicate what is stated and explained in those two works
respecting correspondence. In the work on Heaven and Hell :
There is a correspondence of everything in heaven with every-
thing in man (nos. 87-102). There is a correspondence of

———- '.. = ie

1
¥

174 Divine Love and Wisdom

everything in heaven with everything on earth (nos. 103-115).
In the Arcana Celestia, the work on the spiritual sense of the
Word in Genesis and Exodus: The correspondence of the face
and its expression with the affections of the mind (nos. 1568,
2988, 2989, 3631, 4796, 4797, 4800, 5165, 5168, 5695, 9306).
The correspondence of the gestures and actions of the body
with the states of the understanding and will (nos. 2988,
3632, 4215). The correspondence of the senses in general
(nos. 4318-4330). The correspondence of the eyes and their
sight (nos. 4403-4420). The correspondence of the nostrils
and of smell (nos. 4624-4633). The correspondence of the
ears and of hearing (nos. 4652-4659). The correspondence of
the tongue and of taste (nos. 4791-4805). The, correspond-
‘ence of the hands, arms, shoulders, and feet (nos. 4931-4952).
The correspondence of the loins and the organs of generation
(nos. 5050-5061). The correspondence of the interior viscera of
the body, specially of the stomach, thymus gland, receptaculam
chyli and lacteals, and of the mesentery (nos. 5171-5181).
The correspondence of the spleen (no. 9698). The correspond-
ence of the peritoneum, kidneys, and bladder (fos. 5377-
5385). The correspondence of the liver and of the hepatic,
cystic, and pancreatic ducts (nos. 5183-5185). The corre-
spondence of the intestines (nos. 5392-5395, 5379). The
correspondence of the bones (nos. 5560-5565). The corre-
spondence of the skin (nos. 5552-5559). The correspondence
of heaven with man (nos. 911, 1900, 1982, 2996, 2998, 3624-
3649, 3741-3745, 3884, 4051, 4279, 4523-4525, 6013, 6057,
9279, 9632). All things which exist in the natural world and
in its three kingdoms correspond to those which are seen in
the spiritual world (nos. 1632, 1881, 2758, 2990-2993, 2987-
3003, 3213-3226, 3483, 3624-3648, 4044-4054, 4116, 4366, 4939,
5116, 5377, 5428, 5477, 8211, 9280). All things which are seen
in the heavens are correspondences (nos. 1521, 1532, 1619-
1625,1807,1808,1971,1974,1977, 1980, 1981, 2299, 2601, 3213-
3226, 3348-3350, 3472-3485, 3748, 9481, 9570,9576,9577). The
correspondence between the sense of the letter of the Word
and its spiritual sense is treated of in the Arcana Celestia
throughout, and on this subject see also the Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem concerning the sacred Scripture (nos. 5-65).

378. III. The will corresponds to the heart. This cannot
be so clearly seen as a bare statement as in the effects pro-
duced by the will, as was said above (no. 375). There is

Divine Love and Wisdom 175

evidence of the truth of the statement in the fact that all the
affections of love induce changes in the beating of the heart,

as is shown by the pulse of the arteries, which synchronise
with the heart. The changes and movements this undergoes
in response to the affections of love are innumerable. The
touch can only detect that the pulse is slow or quick, high or
low, soft or hard, regular or irregular, and so forth; thus that
it is different in joy. and in sorrow, in tranquillity of mind and
in violent passion, in confidence and in fear, in fevers and in
chills, and so forth. As the motions of the heart, called its.
systole and diastole, change and vary in this manner accord-
ing to the affections of each man’s love, many ancient and
some modern writers have thought that the affections
originated in the heart, and that it was their seat. Many
common expressions have originated in this way. Thus we
speak of a stout heart or a timid one, of a joyful or a sad one,,
of a soft or a hard heart, of a great or timid heart, of a whole
or a broken heart, of a heart of flesh and a heart of stone;
also of being gross-, meek-, or tender-hearted, and of setting
one’s heart upon doing a thing, of being single-hearted, of
giving a new heart, of laying up in the heart, receiving in the
heart, of not entering the heart, of hardening one’s heart
and of a heart-felt friendship. Hence, too, come the terms,
concord, discord, and madness (vecordia), and other similar
expressions which are applied to love and its affections. The
Word uses similar expressions because it is written by corre-
spondences. It does not matter whether you say the love or
the will, because the will is the receptacle of love, as explained
above.

379. It is well known that vital heat exists in man and in
every living creature; but its origin is not known. People:
speak of it from conjecture. Those who know nothing of
the correspondence of natural things with spiritual have:
ascribed its origin either to the heat of the sun or to the
activity of the component parts of the body, or to life itself;
but as they did not know what life is they were merely using
empty phrases. But he who is aware that there is a corre-
spondence of love and its affections with the heart and its.
derivatives may know that love is the origin of vital heat.
For love proceeds as heat from the spiritual sun where the:
Lord is, and is also felt as heat by the angels. This spiritual.
heat, which in its essence is love, is what flows by correspond--

%
¥

176 Divine Love and Wisdom

ence into the heart and its blood and warms it and gives
it life. It is well known that a man grows warm and, as it
were, burns according to the degree of his love, and becomes
sluggish and cold according to its decrease, for this is felt
and seen; it is felt in the heat of the whole body and seen in
the redness of the face; and the converse is felt in the cold-
ness of the body and seen in the pallor of the face. As love
is the life of man, his life begins and ends with the action of the
heart. Again as love is the life of man and the soul lives in
the body by means of the blood, in the Word the blood is
called the soul (Gen. ix. 4; Lev. xvi. 14). The various
meanings of the term soul will be indicated presently.

380. Moreover the blood is red because of the corre-
‘spondence of the heart and blood with the love and its affec-
tions. In the spiritual world there are colours of every kind.
Red and white are the primary colours, and thé rest derive
their varieties from them and from their opposites, namely
lurid red and black. Red corresponds to love and white to
wisdom. Red corresponds to love because it origipates from
the fire of the spiritual sun, and white corresponds ‘to wisdom
because it originates from the light of that sun. And because
of the correspondence of love with the heart, the: blood of
necessity indicates its origin by its red colour. Hence it is
that in the heavens, where love to the Lord is supreme,
the light is glowing and the angels are clothed in crimson
garments; and in the heavens where wisdom reigns, the
light is white and the angels there are clothed in white linen
garments. %

The various heavens are divided into two kingdoms, the
celestial and the spiritual; love to the Lord reigns in the
celestial kingdom and wisdom from that love in the spiritual
kingdom. The kingdom where love reigns is called the
cardiac kingdom of Heaven and that in which wisdom reigns
is called the pulmonic kingdom of Heaven. It is to be noted
that the angelic heaven as a whole is in the human form, and
is seen by the Lord as one man; and therefore its heart
makes one kingdom and its lungs another: for there is a
general cardiac and pulmonic motion in the whole heaven,
and in consequence a similar motion in each angel; and the
general cardiac and pulmonic motion is from the Lord alone,
because love and wisdom are from Him alone: for these
two motions exist in the sun where the Lord is and which

Divine Love and Wisdom 177

emanates from Him, and therefore they exist also in the
angelic heaven and throughout the universe. Remove from
your thought the idea of space, and then think of His Omni-
presence, and you will see that it is so. That the heavens
are divided into two kingdoms, the celestial and the spiritual,
may be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell (nos. 26-28);
and that the whole angelic heaven is in the human form
(nos. 59-87).

382. IV. The understanding corresponds to the lungs. This
follows from what has been said concerning the correspond-
ence of the will with the heart: for there are two things
which reign in the spiritual man, or in the mind, the will
and the understanding, and there are two things which
reign in the natural man, or in the body, the heart and the
lungs; and there is a correspondence of everything in the
mind with everything in the body, as was said above; it
follows that as the will corresponds to the heart, the under-
standing corresponds to the lungs. Every one also may
notice in himself, both from his thought and his speech, that
the understanding corresponds to the lungs. First as regards
thought: no one can think unless his breathing be in con-
currence and harmony with his thought; and therefore when
a man thinks without deliberate purpose he breathes quietly ;
when he thinks deeply, he breathes deeply; he inhales and
exhales or contracts and expands the lungs slowly, quickly,
eagerly, gently, or with deliberation, in sympathy with his
thought and therefore with the influx of affection from love.
And if he holds his breath, he cannot think, except by the
unconscious respiration of his spirit. Secondly as regards
speech: the mouth cannot utter the slightest sound without
the help of the lungs; the sound, articulated into words,
is caused by the lungs acting through the trachea and
epiglottis; so that according to the inflation of those bellows,
and the opening of their vent, speech becomes loud, and
according to their contraction, it sinks into a whisper; and
if the passage be closed, speech ceases and thought with it.

383. As the understanding corresponds to the lungs, and
therefore thought to breathing, “soul” and “ spirit” in the
Word signify the understanding: as where it is said, “ Thou
shalt love the Lord Thy God with all thy heart and with all
thy soul ” (Matt. xxii. 37); and “ God will give a new heart
and a new spirit” (Ezek. xxxvi. 26; Ps. li. 10). That the

M 635

178 Divine Love and Wisdom

heart signifiés the love of the will was shown above; it
follows that the soul and the breath signify the wisdom of
the understanding. That the breath of God, also called
the Holy Spirit, means the divine Wisdom, and therefore
the divine truth which is the light of men, may be seen in
The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Lord (nos.
50, 51). Hence it is that “the Lord breathed on His dis-
ciples, and said, Receive ye the Holy Spirit ” (John xx. 22),
and that “ Jehovah God breathed into the nostrils of Adam
the breath of lives, and he was made into a living soul”
(Gen. ii. 7). And Jehovah said to the prophet, ‘“‘ Prophesy
upon the breath, and say unto the wind, Come from the
four winds, O breath, and breathe into these slain, that they
may live” (Ezek. xxxvii. 9); and so in other places. This
is why the Lord is called “ the breath of the nostrils,” and
“the breath of life.” The nostrils signify perception because
the breath passes through them, and an intelligent man is
said to have a keen scent and a stupid man the reverse. For
this reason also “spirit” [or breath] and “‘ wind,” in the Hebrew
and some other languages, are expressed by the same word;
for the word spirit derives its origin from breathing or
animation, and therefore when a man dies he is said to expire.
And hence too men believe that spirit is wind or ‘an airy
something of the same nature as the breath emitted by the
lungs, and the soul likewise. Thus it is plain that to love
God with the whole heart and soul, is to love Him with the
whole love and understanding, and that to give a new heart
and a new spirit is to give a new will and a new understanding.
As spirit signifies understanding, it is said of Bezaleel that
he was “filled with the spirit of wisdom, of intelligence, and
of knowledge ” (Ex. xxxi. 3); and of Joshua, that he was
“ filled with the spirit of wisdom ” (Deut. xxxiv. 9); and
Nebuchadnezzar says of Daniel, that “an excellent spirit of
knowledge, of intelligence, and of wisdom was in him”
(Dan. v.12); and it is said in Isaiah that “‘ they that erred in
spirit shall have intelligence ” (xxix. 24). So also in many
other places.

384. As everything in the mind has reference to the will
and understanding, and everything in the body to the heart
and lungs, there are in the head two brains distinct from each
other as are the will and the understanding. The cerebellum
is especially for the will, and the cerebrum especially for the

Divine Love and Wisdom 179

understanding. Similarly the heart and lungs in the body
are distinct from the rest of the organs. They are divided
from these by the diaphragm, and enclosed by a covering of
their own, the pleura, and form that part of the body called
the chest. In the other parts of the body, namely, the
members, organs, and viscera, the will and the understanding
are united, and therefore these parts are in pairs; for example,
the arms and hands, the loins and feet, the eyes, the nostrils;
also, inside the body, the kidneys, ureters, and testicles; and
the internal organs which are not in pairs are divided into
right and left sides. The brain itself is also divided into two
hemispheres, the heart into two ventricles and the lungs into
two lobes; the right side of these relates to the good of truth
and the left to the truth of good; or, what is the same thing,
the right relates to the good of love from which comes the
truth of wisdom, and the left to the truth of wisdom from
the good of love. And as the union of good and truth is
reciprocal and so makes of them, as it were, one thing, these
pairs in man act as a united whole in function, motion, and
sensation.

385. V. Many arcana concerning the will and under-
standing, and therefore concerning love and wisdom, may be
discovered by means of this correspondence. In the world it is
scarcely known what love and will are, because men cannot
love and will as they please, as they can, to all appearance,
understand and think as they please: just as they cannot
control the beating of the heart as they can the respiration
of the lungs. Now the nature of will and love being almost
unknown in the world, whereas the functions of the heart
and lungs are known—for they can be seen and examined,
and have been examined and described by anatomists, while
the will and understanding cannot be investigated in the
same way—when once it is known that there is a correspond-
ence between them, and that by this correspondence they act
together, many arcana concerning the will and understand-
ing may be brought to light, which could not otherwise be
detected; for example, concerning the union of the will with
the understanding, and the reciprocal union of the under-
standing with the will, or the union of love with wisdom
and the reciprocal union of wisdom with love; also concerning
the derivation of affections from love, their combination and
influx into perception and thought, and at length by corre-

180 Divine Love and Wisdom

spondence into’ the actions and senses of the body. These
and many other arcana may be discovered and exhibited by
the union of the heart and lungs, and by the influx of the
blood from the heart into the lungs, and back again, and
then through the arteries into all the members, organs, and
viscera of the body.

386. VI. A man’s mind is his spirit, and his spirit is a man,
and his body is the external instrument by means of which his
mind or spirit feels and acts in the world to which it belongs.
That a man’s mind is his spirit, and that his spirit is a man,
can only with difficulty be believed by those who have always
thought that spirit is wind and that the soul is something
ethereal like the breath of the lungs; for they say, ‘“‘ How
can a spirit be a man, when it is a breath? and how can the
soul be a man, when it is wind?”’1 They think in the same
way of God because He is called a Spirit. They haye acquired
this idea of spirit and soul from the fact that spirit and wind
in some languages are expressed by the same word, and that
when a man dies, he is said to yield up his spirit or,soul, and
that life returns after suffocation or fainting, when the spirit
or breath of the lungs returns. Now because in these cases
they have no notion of anything but wind and air, they judge
by sight and the other senses that the spirit or soul of a man
after death is not a man. This materialistic conception of
spirit and soul has given rise to various theories which have
generated a belief that a man does not become a man until
the day of the last judgment, and that in the meantime he
remains somewhere or other awaiting reunion with thé. body
(see the Continuation concerning the Last Judgment, nos. 32-
38). Since the mind of a. man is his spirit, the angels who are
also spirits are called minds.

387. The reason why the mind of a man is his spirit, and
why the spirit is a man, is that the term mind includes every-
thing belonging to the will and understanding, and these
exist primarily in the brain and by derivation thence in
the body, and therefore they constitute all the parts that
compose man, regarded as to their organic forms. This is
why the mind, or the will and the understanding, exercises
perfect control over the body and all its parts. Does not the
body perform whatever the mind thinks and wills? The

* Spirttus means breath as well as spirit, and anima means wind as
well as soul.—Tr.

Divine Love and Wisdom 181

mind excites the ear to hear and directs the eye to see; the
mind impels the tongue and lips to speak; it sets the hands
and fingers to do whatever it pleases, and the feet to walk
whither it will. Does the body do anything but obey the
mind? And could this be so, unless the mind were present by
derivation in the body? Is it reasonable to suppose that the
body chooses to do what the mind wills? In that case they
would be two, one above and the other below, and the one
would command and the other obey. Since this is not
reasonable, it follows that the life of man exists primarily in
the brain, and by derivation thence in the body, according
to what was said above (no. 365); also that such as life
is in its origin so it is in the whole and every part (no. 366);
and that by reason of this origin, life flows into the whole from
every part and into every part from the whole (no. 367).
That everything in the mind has reference to the will and
understanding, and that the will and understanding are the
receptacles of love and wisdom from the Lord, and that these
two constitute the life of man, has been shown in the preceding
pages.

388. It may be seen from what has just been stated that
the mind of man is the man himself. For the first frame-
work of the human form, or the essential human form itself
with all its details, originates from its beginnings in the brain
which are continued by means of the nerves as was shown
above. Into this form man comes after death, and is then
called a spirit or an angel, and is a perfect man in every
respect, but a spiritual man. The material frame which is
adjoined to it and with which it is clothed in the world, is only
a human form by virtue of the spiritual form which it clothes ;
and it is given to man that he may perform uses in the
natural world, and may take with him from the purer sub-
stances of this world a certain fixed containant of spiritual
things, to continue and perpetuate his life. It is a matter of
angelic wisdom that the mind of man not only in general but
also in particular, is in perpetual effort towards the human
form, because God is a Man.

389. In order that a man may be a man, no part of the
perfect human form can possibly be wanting either in the head
or in the body, for there is nothing superfluous in the human
form, which is essentially the form of the divine Love and
Wisdom. All the purposes of love and wisdom are in it, and

“y

182 Divine Love and Wisdom

these are infinite in God-Man but finite in men, angels, and
spirits, who are made in His image. If any part of the man
were wanting, some corresponding derivative of love and
wisdom would be absent, something by which the Lord might
be present with man from primaries to ultimates and out of
His divine Love, by means of His divine Wisdom, might
provide uses in the created universe.

390. VII. The union of man’s spirit with his body takes
place through the correspondence of his will and understanding
with hts heart and lungs, and their separation by non-correspond-
ence. As it has been unknown hitherto that the mind of
man, or his will and understanding, is his spirit, and that the
spirit is a man, and also that the spirit of man has a pulse
and respiration equally with the body, it could not of course
be known that the pulse and respiration of man’s spirit flow
into and cause those of his body. But as the spirit of man
has a pulse and a respiration equally with the body, it
follows that there is a similar correspondence of the pulse and
respiration of the spirit of man with those of his body. For
the mind, as was said, is his spirit, and therefore ;when the
correspondence of these two motions ceases, a separation
takes place which constitutes death. Separation ‘or death
ensues when the body is in such a state from disease or
accident that it cannot act in unison with its spirit; for thus
the correspondence perishes and the union with it, not when
the respiration only ceases, but when the pulse of the heart
ceases. For as long as the heart acts, so long love with its
vital heat remains and preserves life, as is evident in cases of
fainting and suffocation, and also from the life of the embryo
in the womb. In a word, the life of man’s body depends on
the correspondence of its pulse and respiration with the pulse
and respiration of his spirit, and when that correspondence
ceases, the life of the body also ceases, and his spirit departs
and continues its life in the spiritual world, which life is so
similar to that which he led in the natural world, that he does
“not know that he has died.1_ Most people are released from
the body and become conscious in the spiritual world at the
expiration of two days after their decease; indeed I have
spoken with some after two days.

391. That a spirit has a pulse and respiration equally

? Unless he reflects on the subject. (See Arcana Celestia, nos. 5883,
6054.)—Tr.

Divine Love and Wisdom 183

with a man living in the body in this world, cannot be proved
except by spirits and angels, when permission is given to
speak with them. This privilege has been granted to me.
When questioned on this subject, they said that they were as
much men as the inhabitants of this world and possessed a
body as well as they, but a spiritual body; and that they felt
the beating of the heart in the chest and the pulse of the
arteries at the wrist just as men in the natural world do. I
have questioned many of them on this subject, and they all
said the same thing. That the spirit of man breathes in his
body, I have been permitted to learn by my own experience.
On one occasion the angels were permitted to control my
respiration, to moderate it at pleasure, and at length to with-
hold it until only the respiration of my spirit remained, which
I then sensibly perceived. I had a similar experience when
I was permitted to learn the state of the dying, as may be
seen in the work on Heaven and Hell (no. 449). Sometimes
also my respiration has been confined to that of my spirit,
which I then sensibly perceived to be in accord with the
general respiration of heaven. Many times also I have been
in a state similar to that of the angels, and have also been
raised up to their heaven, and then I was in the spirit apart
from the body and spoke with them while breathing just as
in the world. By these and other living proofs I have been
convinced that the spirit of man respires not only in the body
but also after it has left the body, and that the respiration
of the spirit is so tacit that it is not perceived by man, and
that it passes by influx into the conscious respiration of the
body, almost exactly as cause passes into effect and as thought
does into the lungs and through them into speech. From
these things also it is clear that the union of the spirit and
body in man is effected by the correspondence of the cardiac
and pulmonic motions in each.

392. These two vital motions, the cardiac and pulmonic,
exist and persist because the whole angelic heaven, both in
general and in particular, experiences them. And the whole
angelic heaven experiences them because the Lord from the
sun where He is, and which is an emanation from Him, com-
municates them. That sun transmits these two motions
from the Lord; and as all things in heaven and on earth
depend on the Lord’s operation through that sun, and stand
in a relation to each other due to their form, like the parts of

184 Divine Love and Wisdom

a mechanism which are arranged in series from first to last»
and as the life of love and wisdom is from Him, and all the
forces of the universe derive their life from His Love and
Wisdom, it is plain that these two motions have no other
origin; and it follows that their variations take place accord-
ing to the reception of love and wisdom.

393. More will be said of the correspondence of these
motions in what follows; for instance, what the nature of
that correspondence is in those who respire with heaven, and
in those who respire with hell; also what it is in those who
speak with heaven, but think with hell; and therefore what
it is in hypocrites, flatterers, deceivers, and others.

394. EVERYTHING THAT CAN BE KNOWN ABOUT THE WILL
AND UNDERSTANDING, OR ABOUT LOVE AND WISDOM, AND
THEREFORE ABOUT THE SOUL OF MAN, MAY BE KNOWN FROM
THE CORRESPONDENCE OF THE HEART WITH THE WILL AND OF
THE UNDERSTANDING WITH THE LUNGS. In the learned
world many have laboured hard in their search for the soul;
but because they knew nothing of the spiritual werld or of
man’s state after death, they could do no more than put
forward theories, not about the nature of the soul, but about
its action on the body. They could form no idea of the nature
of the soul except as of something very pure existing in and
held together by the ether. About this, however, they dared
not say much for fear of attributing a physical nature to the
soul, which they knew to be spiritual. Now having such a
conception of the soul, and yet knowing that the soul acts on
the body and produces everything therein which has ito do
with its sense and motion, they laboured hard, as before
observed, to discover how the soul acted on the body, some
saying it was by influx and some by harmony. But this
investigation has disclosed nothing which the enquiring mind
can accept as final, and therefore I have been allowed to
speak with angels and receive enlightenment on the subject
from their wisdom. And this is what they told me. ‘The
soul of man which lives after death is his spirit, is in a perfect
human form, and consists of his will and understanding, and
the soul of these is love and wisdom from the Lord; these
two are what constitute the life of man, which is from the
Lord alone, but the Lord, for the sake of His reception by
man, makes that life seem as if it were the man’s own. Lest

'
;
j

Divine Love and Wisdom 185

however he should claim this life as his own, and so deprive
himself of the reception of the Lord, He Himself has taught
that all love or good, and all wisdom or truth, is from Him,
and not at all from man; and because these two are life, all
life properly so called is from Him.

395. Since the soul in its inmost BEING is love and wisdom,
and these two are in man from the Lord, He has created for
His dwelling-place in man two receptacles, one for love and
the other for wisdom; that which is for love is the will, and
the other which is for wisdom is the understanding. Now
as love and wisdom in the Lord are distinct and yet one
(nos. 17-22), and the divine Love is inseparable from His
divine Wisdom, and the divine Wisdom from His divine Love
(nos. 34-39), and these both proceed from God-Man, that is,
from the Lord, therefore these two receptacles and dwelling-
places in man, the will and understanding, are so created by
the Lord as to be two distinct faculties and yet to make one in
every action and sensation; for the will and understanding
must act together in all these. But in order that man may
be capable of becoming such a receptacle and dwelling-place,
it has necessarily been provided for this end, that his under-
standing can be elevated above his own love into a light of
wisdom which transcends that love; thus he may see and be
taught how he ought to live, and attain a love which as yet he
does not possess, and so enjoy happiness to eternity. Now
because man has abused this faculty of elevating his under-
standing above his own love, he has destroyed in himself what
might have been the receptacle and abode of the Lord, that is
of His love and wisdom, by making his will the abode of
selfish and worldly love and his understanding the abode of
beliefs which uphold and justify those loves. This is why his
will and understanding have become the abodes of infernal
love and, by justifying such love, of infernal thought which
in hell is regarded as wisdom.

396. The reason why the love of self and the love of the
world are infernal, and why man could acquire them, to the
destruction of his will and understanding, is that these loves
are by creation heavenly, for they belong to the natural man
and are serviceable to spiritual love, as a foundation is to a
house. For the love of self and the world lead a man to take
good care of his body, to desire food, clothing, and a dwelling,
to provide for the welfare of his household, to seek useful

186 Divine Love and Woiddern

employment, to wish to be honoured for the sake of obedience,
according to*the importance of the affairs he manages, and
also to enjoy and be invigorated by the pleasures of the world;
but all these things ought to be sought with a certain end in
view, which should be some use; for thus he is brought into
a condition to serve the Lord and his neighbour. But when
he has no love of serving the Lord and his neighbour, but only
a love of serving himself by means of the world, then that love
instead of remaining heavenly becomes hellish, for it causes
a man to immerse his mind and disposition in his selfhood,
which in itself is utterly evil.

397. Now lest a man’s understanding should be in heaven,
as it can be, while his will is in hell, and he should thus have a
divided mind, after death whatever in the understanding is
above the level of his own love is taken away, and therefore
the will and understanding in all men at last act as one.
With those who are in heaven the will loves gogd and the
understanding thinks truth, but with those who are in hell the
will loves evil and the understanding thinks falsity. It is the
same with a man in this world when he is thinking i in his
spirit, as he does when he is alone, although many think
quite differently when they are thinking i in the body, as they
do when they are in company with others. The reason why
they then think differently is that they raise their under-
standing above the selfhood of their will, or the love of their
spirit. This is said in order to show that the will and under-
standing although distinct are yet created to act as one, and
that they are bound to act as one after death, if not before.

398. As love and wisdom, thus the will and understanding,
constitute the soul, we shall now proceed to explain how
the soul acts on the body and controls all its operations.
This knowledge can be discovered from the correspondence of
the heart with the will and of the lungs with the understand-
ing, and the following facts have been so discovered.

I. Love, or the will, is the very life of man.

II. Love, or the will, is in a perpetual endeavour to pro-
duce the human form and everything that belongs to it.

III. Love, or the will, can accomplish nothing by means of
its human form unless it is married to wisdom, or the under-
standing.

IV. Love, or the will, prepares an abode, or bridal chamber,
for wisdom, or the understanding, its future consort.

Divine Love and Wisdom 107,

V. Love, or the will, prepares everything in its human
form for united action with wisdom, or the understanding.

VI. After the marriage, the first union is effected by the
love of knowledge, whence comes the affection of truth.

VII. The second union is effected by the love of under-
standing truth, whence comes the perception of truth.

VIII. The third union is effected by the love of seeing truth,
whence comes thought.

IX. By these three unions, love, or the will, acquires its
sensitive and active life.

X. Love, or the will, introduces wisdom, or the under-
standing, into every part of its abode.

XI. Love, or the will, does nothing except in union with
wisdom or the understanding.

XII. Love, or the will, unites with wisdom or the under-
standing, and causes it to be reciprocally united to itself.

XIII. Wisdom, or the understanding, is capable of being
elevated by a power derived from love or the will, so as to
receive and understand the truths revealed by the light of
heaven.

XIV. Love, or the will, can in like manner be elevated, so
as to receive the good conveyed by the warmth of heaven, if
it loves wisdom, its consort, in a corresponding degree.

XV. Unless love, or the will, is thus elevated, it draws
down wisdom, or the understanding, from its elevation, so
that it may act in unison with itself.

XVI. Love, or the will, is purified by wisdom in the under-
standing, if they are elevated together.

XVII. Love, or the will, is defiled in and by the under-
standing, unless both are elevated together.

XVIII. Love, purified by wisdom in the understanding,
becomes spiritual and celestial.

XIX. Love, defiled in and by the understanding, becomes
natural, sensual, and corporeal.

XX. Rationality, or the faculty of understanding, and
freedom, or the faculty of acting, still remain.

XXI. Spiritual and celestial love is the love of the neigh-
bour and of the Lord, and natural and sensual love is the
love of the world and of self.

XXII. Charity and faith are related to and united with
each other, just as are the will and understanding. _

399. I. Love, or the will, ts the very life of man. ‘This follows

188 Divine Love and Wisdom

from the correspondence of the heart with the will (nos. 378-
381). For as the heart acts in the body, so the will acts in
the mind, and as everything in the body depends upon the
heart for its existence and motion, so everything in the mind
depends for its existence and life upon the will—or rather
upon love, because the will is the receptacle of love, and love
is life itself (nos. 1-3); and love which is life itself comes from
the Lord alone. The reason why the heart, with its extension
throughout the body by means of the arteries and veins, shows
that love or will is the life of man, is that things which corre-
spond act in a similar manner, with this distinction only, that
one is natural and the other spiritual. How the heart acts
in the body is shown by anatomy; wherever the heart acts
by means of the blood-vessels, everything is alive or sub-
serves life, and wherever it does not act there is no life.
Besides, the heart is the first and last thing that acts in the
body; that it is the first, is evident from the state of the
embryo, and that it is the last, is evident from that of the
dying; and that it can act without the co- operation of the
lungs is shown by cases of suffocation and fainting. This
indicates that just as the subsidiary life of the body depends
on the heart alone, so the life of the mind depends on the will
alone, and that the will can live when thought ceases, as the
heart can live when breathing ceases. This again'is plain
from the state of embryonic life, from the state of: persons
who are dying, and from cases of suffocation and fainting.
It follows therefore that love or the will is the very, life of
man. :

400. II. Love, or the will, 1s in a perpetual endeavour'to pro-
duce the human form and everything that belongs to it. This is
evident from the correspondence of the heart with the will.
For it is well known that everything in the body is formed in
the womb by means of nerves from the brain and blood vessels
from the heart, and that the structure of all the organs and
viscera results from these two causes. This shows that
everything in man comes from the life of the will, which is
love, beginning in the brain and proceeding through the
nerves, and that everything in the body comes from the heart,
acting ‘through the arteries and veins. For these reasons it is
very ‘clear that life, which is love and consequently will, is
always striving to produce and maintain the human form.
And as the human form is composed of all the various parts

Divine Love and Wisdom 189

which exist in man, it follows that love or the will is in a
continual effort and endeavour to form them all. The cause
of this effort and endeavour is that God is a Man, and divine
Love and Wisdom are His life, from which everything living
proceeds. Any one may see ‘that unless the Life which is
Very Man acted on that which in itself is not alive, no such
thing as the human form would be possible; for it contains
thousands upon thousands of things which nevertheless form
one thing and with one consent tend to produce a representa-
tive image of the Life from which they originate, so that man
may be a receptacle and habitation of that Life. It may
thus be seen that the love, and by derivation from it, the
will, and by derivation from that, the heart, continually strive
to produce and maintain the human form.

401. III. Love, or the will, can accomplish nothing by means
of its human form unless tt is married to wisdom, or the under-
standing. This also is evident from the correspondence of
the heart with the will. The embryo lives by means of its
heart, but not by means of its lungs. For its blood does not
flow from the heart into the lungs to give them the power of
respiring, but it flows through the foramen ovale into the left
ventricle of the heart; and this is why the embryo cannot
move its body, but lies enswathed; nor can it feel, for the
organs of the senses are closed, and so is its love or will, from
which nevertheless it has life, but an indistinct life devoid of
feeling or action. But as soon as the lungs are opened, which
is the case at birth, the infant begins at once to feel, act, will,
and think. This shows that love, or the will, can do nothing
by means of its human form unless it is married to wisdom, or
the understanding.

402. IV. Love, or the will, prepares an abode, or bridal
chamber, for wisdom, or the understanding, its future consort.

_ There is a marriage of good and truth in every part of the
created universe, even the most minute, and this is because
| good is a property of love and truth of wisdom, and these two
| exist in the Lord who has created all things from Himself.

This marriage in man may be seen reflected in the union of the
heart with the lungs; for the heart corresponds to love or
good and the lungs to wisdom or truth (nos. 378-381, 382-384).
How love, or the will, betroths wisdom, or the understanding,
to itself and afterwards marries or enters into a conjugal
relation with it, may also be seen in that union. Love

190 Divine Love and Wisdom

betroths wisdom to itself by preparing for it an abode or
bridal chamber; and marries it by uniting wisdom to itself by
means of the affections; and then the works of wisdom are
produced in that abode. This cannot be fully described
except in spiritual language, because love and wisdom, as
also the will and understanding, are of a spiritual nature.
These facts can indeed be stated in natural language, but
only obscurely, owing to imperfect knowledge of the nature of
love, wisdom, the affections of good, and the affections of
wisdom, or of truth. Nevertheless the nature of the betrothal
and marriage of love with wisdom, or of the will with the
understanding, may be seen in the analogy afforded by their
correspondence with the heart and lungs, for the cases are so
similar that there is no difference at all, except that the one
is spiritual and the other natural. It can be seen from the
relation of the heart to the lungs that the heart’ first forms
the lungs and afterwards unites itself to them; it forms the
lungs in the embryo and unites with them at birth: This the
heart does in its abode, the chest, where their common
dwelling-place is, separated from the rest of the body by the
partition called the diaphragm, and by the covering galled the
pleura. The case is similar with love and wisdom, or,with the
will and understanding. \!

403. V. Love, or the will, prepares everything in its human
form for united action with wisdom, or the understanding. The
will and understanding are specified here, but it is very
necessary to know that the will constitutes the whole man;
for the will and understanding are present primarily. in the
brain and by derivation thence in the whole body and in every
part of it (nos. 365-367). It is therefore evident that the
will constitutes the whole man as to his very form, both in
general and particular; and that the understanding is its
consort, as the lungs are that of the heart. Beware of
supposing that the will is something separate from the human
form, for it is that very form. From this it may be seen not
only how the will prepares a bridal chamber for the under-
standing, but also how it prepares all things in its abode, the
whole body, to enable it to act in union with the understand-
ing. This is effected by bringing every part of the body, even
the most minute, into union with the understanding, in the
same way that it is in union with the will, or by making it
subservient to the understanding as it is to the will. How

Divine Love and Wisdom Ig!

everything in the body is prepared for union with the under-
standing, 1 in like manner as with the will, can only be seen,
as it were, in a mirror or representation by a knowledge of
anatomy. This science teaches us how all the parts of the
body are so connected, that when the lungs respire, the
motion is transmitted to every part of the body, and the same:
is true of the beat of the heart. Anatomy also shows that
the heart is connected with the lungs by the auricles, these:
being continued into the recesses of the lungs; also that all.
the viscera of the body are joined by ligaments to the cavity
of the chest in such a way that when the lungs respire every
single thing in the body, in general and in “particular, has:
something of their motion imparted to it. Thus when the
lungs are filled, the ribs expand the thorax, the pleura is
dilated, and the diaphragm contracts, and thus all the lower
parts of the body, being connected by ligaments attached to
these organs, are affected by the action of the lungs. I do
not enter into further details, lest those who have no know-
ledge of anatomy should be confused, owing to their want of
acquaintance with its terms. Consult those who are well
versed in anatomy, as to whether all things in the body, from
the chest to the lowest part, be not so bound together that
when the lungs are expanded in the act of respiration, they
also are impelled to simultaneous action. From this it may
be seen how the will provides for the union of the understand-
ing with everything in the human form. Examme the con-
nections well, survey them with an anatomical eye, consider
their consequent co-operation with the breathing of the lungs.
and the beating of the heart, and then instead of the lungs.
and heart think of the understanding and will, and you
will see.

404. VI. After the marriage, the first union ts effected by
the love of knowledge, whence comes the affection of truth. The:

|| state of man after birth, from a state of ignorance to one of

intelligence, and from this to a state of wisdom, is here meant
by marriage. The first state, which is one of complete
ignorance, is not meant, because at that time there is no
intelligent thought, but only an obscure affection of the love
or will. This state is preparatory to the marriage. The
second state, which is that of childhood, is characterised by

a love of knowledge, as is well known. Owing to this, the:

young child learns to speak and read, and afterwards gradu-

Line Ai
192 Divine Love and Wisdom

ally acquires other matters relating to the understanding.
It cannot be doubted that this effect is produced by love, which
is a property of the will, for otherwise nothing would be done.
All who reflect upon their experience will admit that the love
of knowledge is developed i in every man after birth, and that
he thereby : acquires everything by which the understanding
is gradually formed, strengthened, and perfected. It is also
clear that the love of truth is derived from this source; for
when by the love of knowledge a man has become intelligent,
he is led, not so much by a love of knowledge, as by a love of
reasoning and forming conclusions, in accordance with his
love, on economic, political, or ethical subjects. When this
love is directed to spiritual things it becomes a love of spiritual
truth. That the origin or germ of this was the love of know-
ledge, may be seen from the fact that the love of truth is an
exalted love of knowledge; for to be affected by truths is to
desire to know them out of a love for them, and when they
are found, to drink them in with heart-felt joy. ,
VII. The second union is effected by the love of understand-
ing iruth, whence comes the perception of truth. This will be

obvious to all who are willing to consider the subject in the
light of interior reason, for it is clear that the affection of
truth and the perception of truth are two faculties of the
understanding, both of which exist together in some persons,
but not in others. Both exist in those who desire to see
truths with the understanding, but not in those who only
desire to know them. It is also clear that every one perceives
the truth, just so far as he desires to understand it. For take
away the love of understanding truth and there will be no
perception of it; but if there be a love of understanding
truth there will be a corresponding perception of it. No
man of sound reason is. ever destitute of the perception of
truth so long as he desires to understand it. Every man is
endowed with rationality, or the faculty of understanding
truth, as was shown above.

VIII. The third union ts effected by the love of seeing truth,
whence comes thought.1 A love of knowing the truth is one
thing, a love of understanding is another, and a love of seeing
it is a third; in other words, the affection of truth is one
thing, the perception of truth is another, and thought is yet
another; but these differences are only seen obscurely by those

1 That is, deliberative thought or meditation.—Tr.

Divine Love and Wisdom 193

who cannot analyse the operations of the mind, but clearly
by those who can. The cause of the obscurity in which the
former are involved is, that these mental operations proceed
simultaneously in the thought of those who have both an
affection for and a perception of truth, and thus they evade
analysis. A man is engaged in conscious thought when his
spirit thinks in the body, which is especially the case when he
is in company with others; but when he is under the influence
of the love of understanding truth, and by means of this
attains some perception of it, he at such times thinks in his
spirit, which thought is called meditation. It is true that
this flows into the bodily thought, but only imperceptibly,
for it is on a higher level, and sees the elements of thought
which are drawn from the memory, as from a superior eleva-
tion, and draws from them conclusions and corroborations.
But the love of truth itself is perceived only as an effort of the
will, arising from a vague sense of pleasure, which is the inner
life of meditation, but of which little notice is taken. It
should now be evident that these three, the love of truth, the
perception of truth, and thought are derived in an orderly
series from a man’s love, and that they are manifested only
in the understanding. For when love enters the understand-
ing, which happens when their union is accomplished, it first
produces the love of truth, next the love of understanding
what it knows, and lastly the love of seeing in natural thought
what it understands; for thought is nothing but internal
sight. Thought indeed exists from the first, for thought is
a faculty of the natural mind; but thought from a perception
of truth, derived from a love of truth, comes last; this is the
thought of wisdom, but the former comes from the sight of
the natural mind, aided by the memory. All the operations
of love or the will apart from the understanding have refer-
ence to the love of good, not to the love of truth.

405. That these three follow in order in the understanding
from the love of the will can indeed be understood by human
reason, but not so clearly as to become a firm belief. Now
because by correspondence the love of the will acts in unison
with the heart, and the wisdom of the understanding acts in
unison with the lungs, as was shown above, what has just
been said (no. 404) about the love of truth, the perception of
truth, and thought, cannot better be exhibited and supported
than by reference to the lungs and their structure; a brief

N %5

194 Divine Love and Wisdom

description of them, therefore, shall be given., After birth the
heart sends the blood into the lungs from its right ventricle,
and through them into its left ventricle, and thus the lungs are
opened. This the heart does by meansofthepulmonary arteries
and veins. The lungs have bronchial tubes which ramify and
at length end in air-sacs, into which the lungs admit the air and
so respire. Around the bronchial tubes and their ramifica-
tions there are also other arteries and veins named the
bronchial, coming from the aorta and passing into the vena
azygos or vena cava; these are distinct from the pulmonary
arteries and veins. From this it is plain that the blood flows
into the lungs and out again by two ways. Hence the lungs
do not need to keep time with the beating of the heart. That
the alternating movements of the heart and lungs do not keep
time with one another is well known. Now because there is
a correspondence of the heart and lungs with the will and
‘understanding as shown above, and union by correspondence
makes one thing act as the other does, it may be.seen by the
influx of the blood from the heart into the lungs, how the
will acts upon the understanding and produces the results
above stated (no. 404) with regard to the affection and per-
ception of truth, and thought. It was by this cérrespond-
ence that I discovered this and many other facts incapable
of brief description. Since love, or the will, corresponds to
the heart, and wisdom, or the understanding, to the lungs, it
follows that the blood-vessels of the heart in the lungs corre-
spond to the affections of truth, and that the ramifications
of the bronchial tubes in the lungs correspond to the per-
ceptions and thoughts from those affections. Whoever will
trace all the structures of the lungs from these origins, and
work out the analogy with the love of the will and wisdom of
the understanding, will be able to see in a kind of image the
things spoken of above (no. 404) and confirm his belief in them.
But as the anatomical details of the heart and lungs are
known only to few, and an attempt to prove a statement by
something unknown is confusing, I shall not pursue the
analogy further.

406. IX. By these three unions, love, or the will, acquires its
sensitive and active life. Love apart from the understanding,
or the affection of the love apart from the thought of the
understanding, can have neither bodily sense nor action;
because love apart from the understanding is, as it were,

Divine Love and Wisdom 195

blind, and affection apart from thought is, as it were, in dark-
ness, for the understanding is the light by which love sees.
The wisdom of the understanding, moreover, is a result of the
light which proceeds from the Lord as a sun. Since there-
fore the love of the will apart from the light of the under-
standing sees nothing and is blind, it follows that apart from
the light of the understanding the very senses of the body
would be blind and dull, not only sight and hearing but the
other senses also. The same would be the case with the other
senses, because all perception of truth belongs to love in the
understanding, as was shown above; and all the senses of the
body derive their perception from the perception of the mind.
It is the same with every act of the body; for action from love
apart from understanding is like that of a man-in the dark
when he knows not what he is doing. In such an act there
could be no intelligence or wisdom, and it could not be called
a living act, for action derives its essence from love and
its distinctive character from intelligence. Besides, all the
power of good is exercised by means of truth; wherefore good
operates in and through truth, and good pertains to love and
truth to the understanding. These facts show that love or
the will by these three unions (no. 404) acquires its sensitive
and active life.

407. A living proof of this is furnished by the union of the
heart and lungs, because such is the correspondence between
the will and the heart and between the understanding and
the lungs, that what the love does spiritually with the under-
standing that the heart does naturally with the lungs; hence
the things stated above may be presented, as it were, visibly.
That man has neither sensitive nor active life before the heart
and lungs act together, is clear from the state of the embryo
or infant in the womb, and from its state after birth. While
the embryo is in the womb the lungs are closed, there is no
feeling or action, the organs of sense are closed, and the hands
and feet are bound; but after birth the lungs are opened by
blood sent from the heart, and then the infant feels and acts.
That man has no sensitive or active life without the co-
operation of the heart and lungs, is also evident in fainting-
fits when the heart alone acts and the lungs cease their action
for the time; in this case there is no sensation or action, as is
well known. The same thing happens in cases of suffocation,
whether by drowning or from any cause that closes the larynx

196 Divine Love and Wisdom

and stops the passage of air to the lungs.. The man then
appears to be dead, he feels nothing and does nothing, and
yet his heart is, still alive, as is well known; for he returns to
both sensitive and active life as soon as the obstruction to
the lungs is removed. The blood indeed in the meantime
circulates through the lungs, not through the bronchial but
through the pulmonary arteries and veins, and it is the
former circulation that gives man the power of breathing.
The influx of love into the understanding is a parallel case.
408. X. Love, or the will, introduces wisdom, or the under-
standing, into every part of its abode. ‘The abode of love, or
the will, means here the whole contents of the man’s mind;
and because these correspond to everything in the body, as
shown above, this abode also means the whole contents of the
body,—all the members, organs, and viscera. That the lungs
act upon all these, just as the understanding does upon every-
thing in the mind, is evident from what was pointed out
above, namely, that love, or the will, prepares an abode, or
bridal chamber, for its future consort, wisdom, or'the under-
standing (no. 402); and that love, or the will, prepares every-
thing in its human form or abode for united action with
wisdom, or the understanding (no. 403). From the particulars
given in these two articles, it is plain that all the parts of the
body are so connected by ligaments sent out from the ribs,
vertebre, sternum, and diaphragm, and from the peritoneum
which is supported by these, that when the lungs respire all
of them are drawn and impelled into a similar alternate
action. Anatomy also clearly shows that the alternate
motions of respiration actually reach the inmost recesses of
the viscera; for the ligaments above mentioned are sfirmly
attached to the integuments of the viscera, and thé pro-
longations of these integuments enter their innermost parts,
as do also ramifications of the arteries and veins. Hence it
is evident that the respiration of the lungs acts in perfect
union with the heart in every part of the body. And that
the union may be in all respects complete, even the heart
shares in the pulmonic motion, for it les between the lungs
and is attached to them by the auricles, and rests upon the
diaphragm, by virtue of which its arteries again participate in
the pulmonic motion. Moreover, the stomach is similarly
united by the attachment of the cesophagus to the trachea.
These anatomical facts are mentioned in order to exhibit the

Divine Love and Wisdom | 197

nature of the union between love, or the will, and wisdom, or
the understanding, and also the union of both acting together
upon everything in the mind; for the anatomical union is
analogous to the mental.

409. XI. Love, or the will, does nothing except in union with
wisdom or the understanding. As love has no sensitive or
active life apart from the understanding, and love introduces
the understanding into everything contained in the mind
(nos. 407, 408), it follows that love or the will does nothing
except in union with the understanding. What is action
from love without the aid of the understanding? Such
action could only be called irrational. The understanding
points out what 1s to be done and how it is to be done; and
love cannot know this without the help of the understanding;
and therefore there is such a marriage between love and the
understanding that, although they are two, they still act as
one. There is a similar marriage between good and truth,
for good pertains to love and truth to the understanding.
There is such a marriage in every single thing in the universe
created by the Lord; its use has relation to good and the
form of its use to truth. It is because of this marriage that
in every part of the body there is a right and left side, the
right relating to the good from which truth proceeds and the
left to truth arising from good, thus to the union of both.
This is also why there are pairsinman. There are two brains,
two hemispheres of the brain, two ventricles of the heart,
two lobes of the lungs, two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, two
arms, hands, loins, feet, kidneys, testicles, etc. And where
the members are not in pairs, there is a right and left side.
These things are so because good looks to truth in order that
it may make itself manifest, and truth looks to good in order
that it may really exist. It is the same in the angelic
heavens and in their various communities. More may be
seen above on this subject (no. 401), where it is shown that
love, or the will, can do nothing by means of its human form
apart from marriage with wisdom, or the understanding. The
union of evil and falsity, which is the opposite of that of good
and truth, will be spoken of in another place.

410. XII. Love, or the will, unites with wisdom, or the under-
standing, and causes 1t to be reciprocally united to itself. That
love, or the will, unites with wisdom, or the understanding, is
evident from their correspondence with the heart and lungs.

alla SS
198 Divine Love and Wisdom
Anatomy teaches that the heart begins its vital motion before
the lungs begin theirs. Experience teaches the same thing in
cases of fainting and suffocation, and also by the state of ‘the
embryo in the womb and the chick in the egg. Anatomy also
teaches that the heart, while acting alone, forms the lungs and
adapts them for respiration; also that it forms the other
viscera and organs, that it may carry out in them the various
functions it needs, the organs of sense in the head that it may
experience sensation, the organs of motion that it may be
able to act, and the remaining parts of the body that it may
be able to bring forth uses corresponding to the affections of
love.

The main conclusion is that as the heart produces all these
for the sake of the various functions which it is to discharge
in the body, so love, in its receptacle the will, produces
similar things for the sake of the various affections which

constitute its form, which was shown above to be the human
form. Now because the primary affections of the love and
their first derivatives are those of knowing, understanding,
and then seeing what it knows and understands, jt follows
that love forms the understanding for these affections, and
that it actually comes into the possession of them'when it
begins to feel, act, and think. That the understanding
contributes nothing ‘to this result is evident from the analogy
of the heart and lungs, respecting which see above.

On these grounds it may be seen that love, or the will,
unites with wisdom, or the understanding, but that wisdom,
or the understanding, does not unite with love, or the will;
and therefore again it is evident that the kn owledge which love
acquires from the desire to know, and the perception of truth
which it acquires from the desire to understand, and the
thought which it acquires from the desire to see what it knows
and understands, do not belong to the understanding but to
the love. Thoughts, perceptions, and therefore knowledge,
flow indeed from the spiritual world, but they are not received
by the understanding but by the love, according to the mode
in which it is affected in the understanding. It appears as
if the understanding receives them, and not love, or the will;
but this is a mistake. It appears also as if the understand-
ing unites itself to love, or the will, but this also is a mistake;
love, or the will, unites itself to the understanding and brings
about a reciprocal union, which arises from its marriage with

pita a
Divine Love and Wisdom 199

love; for it is the life and power of the love which cause this
reciprocal union.

It is the same with the marriage of good and truth, for
good pertains to love, and truth to the understanding.
Good does everything, receiving truth into its abode and
uniting with it so far as it harmonises with itself. Good can
also admit truths which do not harmonise with it; but it
does this from the love of knowing, understanding, and think-
ing about what concerns itself, while it has not yet betaken
itself to the uses which are its ends, and are called its goods.
There is absolutely no reciprocal union of truth with “good;
all reciprocal union is from the life of good. It is for this
reason that every man, spirit, and angel is regarded by the
Lord according to his love or good, and no one according to
his understanding or truth separate from love or good. For
the life of a man is his love, as was shown above, and the
character of his life depends on whether he has purified his
affections by truths, that is, whether he has perfected his
affections by wisdom; for the affections which belong to love
are exalted and perfected by truths, and therefore by wisdom;
and then love acts in unison with wisdom and, as it were, from
it, but it acts from itself by means of wisdom as its own form,
which derives nothing at all from the understanding, but
everything from some purpose of love, which is called an
affection.

411. Love calls all those things good which favour it, and
all those things true which serve as means to that good; and
because they are means they are loved and come to be objects
of affection and so affections in form; wherefore truth is
nothing but the form of. an affection of love. The human
form is nothing but the form of all the affections of love;
beauty is its intelligence, acquired by means of the truths
which it receives by external and internal sight or hearing.
These are what the love arranges in the form of its affections,
and these forms exist in great variety; but they resemble
one another by virtue of their common form, which is the
human; all these forms are beautiful and lovely i in its sight,
but the rest are ugly and unattractive. This shows that love
unites with the understanding, and not the converse, and
that the reciprocal union also arises from love. This is what
is meant by the statement that love, or the will, causes the
reciprocal union of wisdom, or the understanding.

%
200 Divine Love and Wisdom

412. These truths may be seen typified and may be con-
firmed, by the correspondence of the heart with the love and
of the lungs’ with the understanding, concerning which see
above. For if the heart corresponds to the love, then its
extensions, which are the arteries and veins, correspond to
the affections, and in the lungs to the affections of truth; and
as in the lungs there are also air-vessels by which the respira-
tion is carried on, these correspond to perceptions. Of course
the arteries and veins in the lungs are not affections, and the
respirations are not perceptions and thoughts, but they are
their correspondents, for they act correspondingly or con-
currently. So too the heart and lungs are not love and under-
standing, but are correspondents of these, and being so, each
serves as an illustration of the other. Any one well acquainted
with the structure of the lungs, who compares it with the
understanding, may see clearly that this does .nothing of
itself, neither perceives nor thinks from itself, but that it acts
entirely from the affections of its love; and these in the
understanding are the love of knowing, ‘understanding, and
seeing truth; which affections were treated of above. For
all the states of the lungs depend on the blood from the heart,
the vena cava, and the aorta; and the respirations i in the
bronchial tubes take place according to the state’of these
blood-vessels; for if the influx of the blood ceases, the
respiration also ceases.

Much more may be discovered by comparing the structure
of the lungs with the understanding to which it corresponds ;
but as few have studied anatomy, and an explanation or
confirmation by something unknown is merely confusing, I
will say no more on this subject. My knowledge of the
structure of the lungs has fully convinced me that love, by
affection, unites with the understanding, and that the under-
standing does not unite itself to any affection of the love, but
that its union is effected by love, to the end that love may
have sensitive and active life. But it must be constantly
borne in mind that man has a twofold respiration, that of
his spirit and that of his body, and that the respiration of the
spirit depends on the nerves from the brain , and that of the
body on the blood-vessels from the heart, the vena cava, and
the aorta. Moreover it is evident that thought causes respira-
tion, and also that the affection belonging to love gives rise
to thought; for thought without affection would be like

Divine Love and Wisdom 201

respiration without the heart, which is impossible. It is
therefore plain that the affection of the love unites with the
thought of the understanding, as was said above, just as the
heart unites with the lungs.

413. XIII. Wisdom, or the understanding, is capable of
being elevated by a power derived from love, or the will, so as to
receive and understand the truths revealed by the light of heaven.
It has been shown above in many places that man is capable
of understanding the arcana of wisdom when he hears them.
This is the faculty of rationality which every man has by
creation. It is this faculty of penetrating more deeply into
the causes of things, and of deciding what is just and right
and what is good and true, that distinguishes man from the
beasts. This, therefore, is what is meant by the understand-
ing being elevated to receive and understand the truths
revealed by the light of heaven. This may also be seen
typified in the lungs, because they correspond to the under-
standing. It may be seen from the cellular substance of the
lungs which consists of the bronchial tubes continued down
to the minute vesicles which receive the air during respiration:
these correspond with the thoughts. The substance of these
vesicles is such that it can be expanded and contracted in
two ways, in one way with the heart, and in the other almost
independently of the heart. When acting with the heart, it is
expanded and contracted by means of the pulmonary arteries
and veins, which spring directly from the heart; but when
acting almost independently, by means of the bronchial
arteries which spring from the aorta, and the bronchial veins
which pass into the vena cava, both of which are external to
the heart. It is thus with the lungs because the understand-
ing can be raised above its own love which corresponds to
the heart and can receive light from heaven; but when the
understanding is so raised above its own love, it does not
recede from the self-love, but derives thence what is called
the love of knowing and understanding, with a view to some
kind of honour, glory, or gain in the world; this forms the
external boundary of every love, and so the love only shines
forth from the outside, but with the wise it shines through it.
These facts about the lungs are mentioned to show that the
understanding can be elevated to receive and perceive the
truths revealed by the light of heaven, for the correspondence
is complete. From that correspondence it is easy to see that

e e ° ®
202 Divine Love and Wisdom

the understanding is typified by the lungs, and vtce versa,
and thus to have proof of both at once.
414. XIV.-Love, or the will, in like manner can be elevated,
so as to receive the good conveyed by the warmth of heaven, tf it
loves wisdom, 1ts consort, in a corresponding degree. That the
understanding can be elevated into the light of heaven and
draw wisdom thence, has been shown in the preceding article
and in many places above; and that love, or the will, can be
equally elevated, if it loves the truths revealed by the light
of heaven or wisdom, has also been shown in many places.
But love, or the will, cannot be elevated by anything which
regards honour, glory, or gain as an end, but only by the
unselfish love of use for the sake of the neighbour; and as
this love is imparted only by the Lord from heaven, and is
given by Him when man shuns evils as sins, love, or the will,
can in this way and in no other be elevated. Love, or the
will, is elevated into the warmth of heaven and the under-
standing into the light of heaven, and when both are elevated
there results a marriage between them which is called the
heavenly marriage, because it is the marriage of heavenly love
with wisdom; and therefore it is said that love also is
elevated if it loves wisdom, its consort, in a corresponding
degree. Love of the neighbour derived from the Lord is the
love of wisdom, or the true love characteristic of the human
understanding. The case of natural light and heat is similar.
There is light with or without heat; light is without heat in
winter and with heat in summer; and when heat is associated
with light, then all things flourish. The light in man.corre-
sponding to the light of winter is wisdom without any love
for it, and light in man corresponding to the light of summer,
is wisdom conjoined with love for it. '
415. This union and separation of wisdom and love may
be seen typified in the union of the lungs and heart; for the
heart is connected with the clustering vesicles of the bronchial
tubes by means of blood emitted directly from itself, and also
by means of blood emitted not directly from itself, but by
way of the vena cava and aorta. By this means the respira-
tion of the body can be separated from that of the spirit.
But when blood flows only direct from the heart, then no such
respiration is possible. Now as by correspondence thought
makes one with the breathing, it is plain from the two-fold
conditions of respiration by the lungs that a man can think,

‘Divine Love and Wisdom 203

and consequently speak and act, in one way when in company
with others, and in a different way when he is alone and there-
fore fears no loss of reputation. For he can then think and
speak against God, the neighbour, the spiritual things of the
Church, and moral and civil laws, and he can also act against
them by committing theft, murder, blasphemy, and adultery.
But in company, when he is afraid of losing his reputation,
he can speak, preach, and act as a spiritual, moral, and law-
abiding man. This shows that love, or the will, like the
understanding, can be elevated to receive the good contained
in the warmth or love of heaven, if only it loves wisdom in
a corresponding degree; and that even if it does not, it can,
as it were, be separated.

416. XV. Unless love, or the will, ts thus elevated, it draws
down wisdom, or the understanding, from tts elevation, so that it
may act in unison with itself. Natural love is one thing and
spiritual love another. He whose love is both natural and
spiritual is a rational man, but he whose love is merely natural
can indeed think rationally like a spiritual man, yet he is not
rational; for he raises his understanding into the light of
heaven, and even to wisdom, but nevertheless the truths of
wisdom, or the light of heaven, are not the objects of his
love. His love, indeed, causes the elevation, but only from
a desire for honour, glory, or gain. But when a man is aware
that there is nothing of this kind to be acquired by such
elevation, as is the case when he is thinking to himself under
the influence of his natural love, then he feels no love for the
truths of the light of heaven, or wisdom, and therefore he
withdraws his understanding from its elevation to make it
subservient to himself. For example, when the understand-
ing owing to its elevation is wise, his love sees the nature of
justice, sincerity, chastity, and even of genuine love. His
natural love can see all this by its faculty of understanding
and viewing things in the light of heaven; nay, it can describe
them in conversation or in sermons as both moral and spiritual
virtues. But when the understanding is not raised, merely
natural love cannot see these virtues, but for justice sub-
stitutes injustice, for sincerity fraud, for chastity licentious-
ness, and so forth. If such a man then remembers what he
said during the elevation of his understanding, he laughs at
it, and considers only that .it was a useful way of deceiving
other people. This shows the meaning of the statement that

204 Divine Love and Wisdom

love, unless it loves wisdom, its consort, in a corresponding
degree, ‘withdraws it from its elevation in order that it may
act in unison with itself. That love can be elevated if it
loves wisdom in a corresponding degree may be seen above
(no. 414).

417. Now as love corresponds to the heart, and the under-
standing to the lungs, the above statements may be supported
by their correspondence; for instance, that the understand-
ing can be elevated above its own love into wisdom, and that
the understanding is withdrawn from its elevation by that
love, if it be merely natural. Man has a twofold respiration,
one of his body and the other of his spirit. These two
respirations can either be separated or conjoined. They are
separated in merely natural men, especially hypocrites, but
rarely in spiritual and upright men. A merely natural
man, or a hypocrite, whose understanding is elevated, and
whose memory therefore contains many truths;}.can talk
wisely in company by means of thought aided by his memory ;
but when he is alone he does not think from his memory
but from his spirit, thus from his love. He also breathes in
a similar manner, because thought and respiration a aR
That the structure of the lungs is such that they can respire
by means of blood drawn either directly or indirectly from
the heart, was shown above.

418. It is a common opinion that wisdom makes a man;
and therefore when people hear any one talking or teaching
wisely they believe him to be wise; and he believes it himself
at the time, because when speaking to or teaching others he
thinks from his memory, and being a merely natural man he
is animated by an external love or desire for honour, reputa-
tion, or gain; but the same man, when alone, thinks from
the more inward love of his spirit, and then not wisely, but
sometimes insanely. From this it is evident that a man is
not to be judged by the wisdom of his words, but by his life;
that is, not by wise words apart from deeds, but by wise
words and a life according. By life is here meant love,
because love is life, as was shown above.

419. XVI. Love, or the will, ts purified by wisdom in the
understanding, if they are elevated together. Man by birth
loves nothing but himself and the world, for he sees and
therefore thinks about nothing else. This love is natural
and corporeal, and may be called material. Moreover it has

Divine Love and Wisdom _ 205

become impure by reason of its separation from heavenly
love in parents. It could not be cleansed of its impurity
unless man had the faculty of raising the understanding into
the light of heaven, and of seeing how he ought to live, in
order that his love together with his understanding might be
elevated into wisdom. By means of the understanding, love,
or the man, sees the evils that pollute and defile the love, and
he also sees that if he shuns and abhors those evils as sins, he
then loves the things which are opposite to those evils, all of
which are heavenly; and he also sees the means by which he
may shun and abhor those evils as sins. Love, or the man,
sees this by using his power of raising the understanding into
the light of heaven, whence wisdom proceeds. Then, so far
as love puts heaven in the first place and the world in the
second and at the same time puts the Lord in the first place
and himself in the second, so far love is purged of its unclean-
ness and is purified; that is, so far it is raised into the
warmth of heaven and conjoined with the light of heaven
which enlightens the understanding, and there results a
marriage of good and truth, that is, of love and wisdom.
Every man can understand and rationally see that so far
as he shuns and abhors theft and cheating, he loves sincerity,
rectitude, and justice; that so far as he shuns and abhors
revenge and hatred, he loves his neighbour; and that so far
as he shuns and abhors adultery, he loves chastity, and so
forth. But scarcely any one knows how heaven and the
Lord are present in sincerity, rectitude, justice, love of the
neighbour, chastity, and the rest of the affections of heavenly
love, until he has removed their opposites. Then only does
he acquire those affections, and so recognise and see them.
Otherwise there is, as it were, a veil interposed, which indeed
transmits heavenly light to the love, but because this does
not love wisdom, its consort, in a corresponding degree, it
does not receive that light, but even rejects and extinguishes
it as soon as the understanding descends from its elevation;
still the man flatters himself with the thought that the wisdom
of his understanding will serve as a means of acquiring
honour, reputation, or gain; and then he puts himself and
the world in the first place, and the Lord and heaven in the
second; and what is put in the second place is loved only as
a means to an end; and if it proves useless, it is abandoned
and rejected—after death if not before. The truth is now

206 Divine Love and Wisdom

evident that love, or the will, is purified in the understanding
if they are elevated together.

420. The same thing is typified in the lungs, whose arteries
and veins correspond to the affections of love, and whose
respirations correspond to the perceptions and thoughts of
the understanding as was said above. That the blood of the
heart purifies itself of undigested matter in the lungs, and
nourishes itself with suitable matter from the air inhaled, is
well known.

That the blood purifies itself of undigested matter in the
lungs is evident not only from the inflowing blood—which is
venous and therefore filled with chyle collected from the food
and. drink—but also from the moisture of the outgoing
breath, and its perceptible odour, as well as from the
diminished quantity of blood flowing back into the left
ventricle of the heart.

That the blood nourishes itself with suitable matter from
the inhaled air, is evident from the immense quantity of
odours and exhalations continually issuing from fields,
gardens, and woods; from the immense quantity of salts of
various kinds contained in vapour rising from the ground
and from rivers and lakes; and from the immense‘quantity
of exhalations given off by human beings and animals, with
which the air is impregnated. That all these enter the lungs
with the air they inhale is undeniable, and this being the case,
it cannot be doubted that the blood assimilates from them
whatever it requires, namely, whatever corresponds,to the
affections of its love. This is why the vesicles or inmost
recesses of the lungs contain great multitudes of minuté veins
with tiny mouths, which absorb what they require; and
therefore the blood flowing back into the left ventricle of
the heart is changed into arterial blood of a brilliant hue.

These facts prove that the blood purifies itself from foreign
and nourishes itself with congenial substances. That the
mode by which the blood in the lungs purifies and nourishes
itself corresponds to that by which the affections of the mind
do, has not hitherto been known, but it is very well known
in the spiritual world, for the angels of heaven are delighted
only by those odours which correspond to the love of their
wisdom; but the spirits of hell are delighted only. by those
which correspond to a love contrary to wisdom; these are
stenches, but the former are perfumes. It follows that the

Divine Love and Wisdom 207

blood of men in the world becomes impregnated with similar
matters corresponding to the affections of their love; for
what the spirit of a man loves, his blood according to corre-
spondence craves for and attracts by respiration. From this
correspondence it follows that a man’s love is purified if he
loves wisdom, and defiled if he does not. Moreover the whole
purification of man is effected by the truths of wisdom, and
all his defilement by the opposite falsities.

421. XVII. Love, or the will, ts defiled in and by the under-
standing, unless both are elevated together. For if love is not
elevated, it remains impure (nos. 419, 420); and when it
remains impure, it loves impure things, such as revenge,
hatred, fraud, blasphemy, and adultery. These are then its
affections which are called lusts, and it rejects everything
relating to charity, justice, sincerity, truth, and chastity.
It has been stated above that love is defiled im the under-
standing and by it. It is defiled in the understanding when it
is affected by these impurities, and by the understanding
when it makes the truths of wisdom its servants, and still more
when it perverts, falsifies, and adulterates them. Respecting
the corresponding state of the heart, or its blood in the lungs,
there is no need to say more than was said above (no. 420);
except that instead of the blood being purified, it is corrupted,
and instead of being nourished by aromas, it is nourished by
stenches, just as it is in heaven and hell respectively.

422. XVIII. Love purified by wisdom tn the understanding
becomes spiritual and celestial. Manis born natural, but in the
proportion that his understanding and his love are raised
together into the light and warmth of heaven, he becomes
spiritual and celestial; he is then like a garden of Eden,
bathed in the light and warmth of spring. It is not the
understanding that becomes spiritual and celestial, but the
love; and then it makes its consort, the understanding,
spiritual and celestial also. Love becomes spiritual and
celestial by a life according to the truths of wisdom which the
understanding points out and teaches. Love absorbs these
truths by means of the understanding, and not by itself; for
love cannot be elevated unless it is acquainted with truths,
and this is done by means of an elevated and enlightened
understanding; and then so far as it shows its love for these
truths by practising them, it too is elevated. It is one thing
to understand:and another to will; and it is one thing to say

a

208 Divine Love and Wisdom

and another _to do. Some men understand and utter the
truths of wisdom and yet neither will nor practise them.
When, therefore, love practises the truths of light which it
understands and utters, it is then elevated. That this is so,
a man may see by the mere light of reason; for what is a man
who understands and speaks the truths of wisdom while his
life contradicts them, that is, while he wills and acts against
them? Love, purified by wisdom, becomes spiritual and
celestial, because man has the three degrees of life, called
natural, spiritual, and celestial which are treated of in Part III
of this work; and he can be elevated from one degree to
another. But he is not elevated by wisdom alone, but by a
life according to wisdom; for a man’s life is his love. And
therefore he loves wisdom so far as he lives according to it,
and he lives according to it, so far as he cleanses himself
from the impurity of sin, and so far as he does this he loves
wisdom. .

423. That love, purified by wisdom in the understanding,
becomes spiritual and celestial cannot indeed be seen by their —
correspondence with the heart and lungs, because np one can .
see the condition of the blood by which the caer of the
lungs is maintained. The blood may be full of impurities,
and yet be indistinguishable from pure blood; and, the re-
spiration of a merely natural man appears similar to, that of
a spiritual man. But the difference is clearly seen in heaven,
for every one there breathes according to the marriage of love
and wisdom in him. Wherefore as the angels are kndwn by
that marriage, they are also known by their respiration.
Hence if any one in whom this marriage does not exist is
admitted to heaven, he feels anguish in his heart, and gasps
and struggles for breath, like one in the agony of death.
Such persons therefore cast themselves down headlong, and
never rest until they are among those whose breathing is
similar to their own; for then bycorrespondence their affection
and therefore their thought are like theirs. These facts
show that with the spiritual man it is the purer blood, called
by some the animal spirit, which is purified; and this takes
place according to the marriage of love and wisdom existing
inhim. It is this purer blood which most nearly corresponds
to that marriage, and because it permeates the blood of the
body, it follows that the latter is thereby purified. The
contrary is true of those whose love is defiled in the under-

Divine Love and Wisdom 209

standing. But, as was said, no one can examine this experi-
mentally in the blood, but he may study it in the affections of
love, since these correspond to the blood.

424. XIX. Love defiled in and by the understanding becomes
natural, sensual, and corporeal. Natural love when separated
from spiritual love, is opposed to it, because natural love is
the love of self and the world, and spiritual love is the love of
the Lord and the neighbour, and because the love of self and
the world looks downwards and outwards, and the love of the
Lord looks upwards and inwards. When, therefore, natural
love is separated from spiritual love, it cannot possibly be
elevated above the man’s selfhood, but remains immersed in
it, and cleaves to it in the degree that it loves it. And then
if the understanding ascends and sees the truths of wisdom
in the light of heaven, his love draws back his wisdom and
unites with it in its selfhood, where these truths are either
rejected, falsified, or stored up in the memory as a means of
gaining favour.

As natural loveis capable of ascending through degrees and of
becoming spiritual and celestial, so also it is capable of descend-
ing through degrees, and of becoming sensual and corporeal;
and it descends deeper in proportion as its love of dominion
comes from no love of use, but from the love of self alone. It
is this love which is called the devil. Men whose love is of
this kind can speak and act like those whose love is spiritual,
but only from the memory, or because their understanding
has raised itself by its own power into the light of heaven.
Nevertheless their words and deeds are like fruits, beautiful
on the surface, but quite rotten at the core, or like nuts,
whose shells appear sound, but whose kernels are worm-
eaten. Such things in the spiritual world are called phantasies,
and are used by the harlots there, called sirens, to make
themselves appear beautiful and to adorn themselves with
fine clothing; but when the phantasy is dispelled, these
sirens appear like spectres, for they are like the devils which
assume the appearance of angels of light. When corporeal
love draws down the understanding from its elevation, as is
done when a man is alone and is thinking from his own love,
he then rejects God in favour of nature, heaven in favour of
the world, and the truths and goods of the church in favour
of the falsities and evils of hell, and, therefore, he also rejects
wisdom,

0 635

210 Divine Love and Wisdom

This shows what is the character of those whom I have
called corporeal: They are not so as to their understanding,
when they are talking in company, but as to their love; that
is, not when they are speaking to other people, but when
they are thinking to themselves. And being so in spirit, they
become after death what are called corporeal spirits as
regards both their love and their understanding. Then
those who on earth have been in the highest degree addicted
to the love of ruling for the sake of self, and whose under-
standing was at the same time exceptionally enlightened,
have bodies that look like Egyptian mummies, and dull and
stupid minds. Who at the present day is aware that such
love is intrinsically of this nature? Still there does exist a
love of ruling arising from love of use, but a love of use not
for the sake of self, but for the sake of the commgn welfare.
Men, however, can hardly distinguish the one love from the
other, although they are as different as heaven is from hell.
The difference between these two loves of ruling may be seen
in the work on Heaven and Hell (nos. 551-565).

425. XX. Rationality, or the faculty of understanding, and
freedom, or the faculty of acting, still remain. These two
faculties of man were treated of above (nos. 264-267). ‘He has
these two faculties to enable him to become spiritual\instead
of natural, that is, to be regenerated. For as stated above,
it is man’s love which becomes spiritual and is regentrated,
and he cannot become spiritual or regenerate unless he knows
by means of his understanding what evil and good are, and
consequently what truth and falsity are. When he knows
this, he can choose the one or the other. And if he choses
good, his understanding instructs him as to the means by
which he may attain good; for all the means necessary to
enable man to attain good are provided. To know and
understand these means is the part of Rationality, and to will
and act accordingly is the part of Liberty. Liberty also
implies a willingness to know, understand, and think about
these means.

Those who believe the doctrine of the church, that spiritual
or theological matters transcend the understanding and must
therefore be believed without being understood, know
nothing of these faculties of rationality and liberty; in fact,
they cannot but deny the existence of rationality. And those
who believe according to the doctrine of the church that no

Divine Love and Wisdom 211

one can do good of himself, and that therefore no good must
be done with a view to salvation, cannot but deny on religious
grounds the existence of both these human faculties. Those,
therefore, who have confirmed themselves in these beliefs, are
deprived of both faculties after death, according to the nature
of their faith; and instead of attaining heavenly freedom as
they might have done, they come into the freedom of hell;
and instead of attaining angelic wisdom from true rationality,
as they might have done, they come into the insane delusions
of hell. And what is wonderful, they believe that both these
faculties are displayed in doing evil and thinking falsity, not
knowing that freedom to do evil is slavery, and reason
employed in thinking falsity is irrational.

Remember always that both these faculties, freedom and
rationality, are not man’s, but the Lord’s in man, and that
they cannot possibly be appropriated to man as his own;
also that they cannot possibly be given to man as his own,
but are continually the Lord’s in him; yet they are never
taken away from him, because without them he could not be
saved or regenerated, as was said above. The Church, there-
fore, teaches that man can think nothing true and do nothing
good by any power of hisown. But as man has an instinctive
feeling that he thinks what is true and does what is good by
his own power, it is evident that he ought to believe that he
does this as if by his own power. For if he does not believe
this, either he does not think what is true nor do what is good,
and so has no religion, or he claims these faculties as his own,
and so appropriates to himself what is divine. That men
ought to think the truth and do good as if by their own power,
may be seen in The Doctrine of life for the New Jerusalem,
from beginning to end.

426. XXI. Spiritual and celestial love is the love of the
neighbour and of the Lord; and natural and sensual love ts the
love of the world and of self. By love of the neighbour is meant
the love of uses, and by love of the Lord is meant the love
of performing uses, as was shown above. These loves are
spiritual and celestial, because the love of uses and the per-
formance of them out of love for them are severed from the
love of man’s selfhood. For he who spiritually loves uses
has no selfish object in view, but thinks of others whose good
he seeks. The opposite loves to these are those of self and
the world, for these do not care to perform uses for the sake

212 Divine Love and Wisdom

of others, but only for their own sake; and those who act
from this motive invert divine order by putting themselves
in the place of the Lord, and the world in the place of heaven;
consequently they look away from the Lord and heaven, and
to look away from these is to look towards hell; more con-
cerning these loves may be seen above (no. 424). But man
does not feel and perceive the love of performing uses for their
own sake as he does the love of performing them for his own
sake; he is therefore not aware whilst he is performing uses
whether he does them for their own sake or for his own. But
let him know that he performs uses for their own sake so far
as he shuns evils, for so far as he does that, he performs uses,
not from himself but from the Lord.

Evil and good are opposites, and therefore so far as any one
is not in evil so far he is in good. No one can be in evil and
‘in good at the same time, because no one can serve two
masters at once. These statements are made tg show that
although a man has no sensible perception as to whether the
uses which he performs are spiritual and done for their own
sake, or merely natural and done from a selfish motive, yet
he can decide the matter by asking himself this, question,
“Do I regard evils as sins or not?” If he does regard them
as sinful, and for that reason abstains from doing them, then
the uses which he performs are spiritual. And if only he
shuns sins with abhorrence, he begins to have a sensible per-
ception of the love of uses for their own sake, for = feels a
spiritual delight in performing then.

427. XXII. Charity and faith are related to and ted with
each other just as are the will and understanding. There are
two loves according to which the heavens are ‘distinguished
one from another, celestial love and spiritual love; celestial
‘love is love to the Lord, and spiritual love is love to the neigh-
bour. The difference between them is this, that celestial love
is the love of good, and spiritual love is the love of truth; for
those whose love is celestial perform uses from the love of
good, and those whose love is spiritual perform them from the
love of truth. The marriage of celestial love is with wisdom,
and that of spiritual love with intelligence; for it is charac-
teristic of wisdom to do good from good, and it is charac-
teristic of intelligence to do good from truth; wherefore
celestial love does what is good, and spiritual love what is
true. The difference between these two loves cannot be

f Divine Love and Wisdom 2m

expressed otherwise than by saying that those whose love is
celestial have wisdom inscribed on their life, and not in their
memory, and therefore they do not discuss divine truths but
do them. But those whose love is spiritual have wisdom
inscribed in their memory, and therefore they discuss divine
truths, and act according to them from principles which they
have stored in their memory:

Because those whose love is celestial have wisdom inscribed
on their life, they at once perceive whether what they hear is
true or not; and when they are asked if it is true, they answer
only that it is, or that it is not. Such as these are described
by the words of the Lord, “‘ Let your communication be Yea,
yea, and Nay, nay ”’ (Matt. v. 37); and being of this character
they are unwilling to hear any mention of faith, saying,
“What is faith? Is it not wisdom? What is charity? Is
it not acting rightly?’ And when told that faith is believing
something that is not understood, they turn away, saying,
“This man is out of his mind.” These are in the third
heaven, and are the wisest of all. Such do those become in
the world who at once apply to life the divine things which
they hear, abhorring evils as hellish, and worshipping the
Lord alone. These being in innocence appear to others like
infants; and because they do not discuss the truths of wisdom
and there is no ostentation in their speech, they also seem to
be simple. Nevertheless, when they hear any one speak,
they know from the tone of his voice all about his love, and
from his words all about his intelligence. In such as these
the Lord has brought about the marriage of love and wisdom,
and they represent the cardiac kingdom of heaven mentioned
above.

428. But those whose love is spiritual, that is, who love
their neighbour, have not wisdom inscribed on their life, but
they possess intelligence; for it is the part of wisdom to do
good from the love of good, and of intelligence to do good from
the love of truth, as was said above. Neither do these know
what faith is. If faith is mentioned, they think of truth,
and when charity is mentioned, they think of acting accord-
ing to the truth; and when they are told that they must
believe, they say this is idle talk, for who does not believe the
truth? They say this because they see truth in the light ot
their heaven, and therefore they call it simplicity or foolish-
ness to believe what they do not see to be true. These are

a
214 Divine Love and Wisdom

they who constitute the pulmonic kingdom of heaven, also
mentioned above.

429. But those whose love is natural-spiritual have neither
wisdom nor intelligence, but they have something of faith
derived from the Word inscribed on their life, in so far as
this faith is united with charity. These, not knowing what
charity is, or whether faith be truth, cannot be among those
in heaven who possess wisdom and intelligence, but are among
those who possess knowledge only. Yet those of them who
have shunned evils as sins are in the lowest heaven, and there
have a light resembling that of the moon by night. But
those who have not confirmed themselves in a blind faith, and
who have to some extent loved the truth, are instructed by
angels, and according as they receive truths and live accord-
ing to them, are raised into the communities of those who
possess spiritual love and consequently intelligerice; these
become spiritual, but the rest remain natural-spiritual. On
the other hand those who have lived in faith without charity
are separated and sent away into desert places, because they
possess no good, and therefore there is no marriage of good
and truth in them, such as there is in all the inhabitants of
heaven. 4

430. All the things stated in this Part concerning a
and wisdom may also be stated of charity and faith, i
instead of charity, spiritual love be understood, and aie
of faith, truth as the source of intelligence. It is the same
thing whether you speak of the will and the understanding or
of love and intelligence, since the will is the receptacle of
love and the understanding is the receptacle of intelligence.

431. To the above I will add this memorable fact.’ In
heaven all who perform uses from the love of use derive from
the community in which they dwell greater wisdom and
happiness than others. To perform uses there means to act
sincerely, rightly, justly, and faithfully in the work proper
to the employment of each. This they call charity, and the
acts of devotion which constitute worship, they call signs of
charity, and other things they call duties and favours; they
say that when every one does the work of his own calling
sincerely, rightly, justly, and faithfully, the welfare of the
community is maintained unimpaired in its good, and that to
do this is to be in the Lord, because all that flows from the
Lord is use, and it flows from the parts into the whole, and

. 8, - ;
-& Divine Love and Wisdom 215

from the whole into the parts. The parts there are the
angels, and the community is their association together.

432. THE INITIAMENT OF MAN AS IT IS BY CONCEPTION.
The initiament or first beginning of man in the womb after
conception can be known to no one because it cannot be seen;
for it is composed of spiritual substance which cannot be
seen in natural light. Now because there are men in the
world who are eager to investigate even the first beginning of
man, which is the seed from the father and whichcauses concep-
tion to take place, and because many of these have fallen into
the error of supposing that man is complete at the time of his
first conception, which is only his first state, and that he is
afterwards perfected by mere increase of size, therefore the
form of that imperfect or first state has been made known to
me. It was disclosed to me by angels to whom it was revealed
by the Lord. They had made this the subject of their study,
and as it is the joy of their wisdom to communicate to others
whatever they know, they were permitted to present before
my eyes in heavenly light, an effigy of the rudimentary form of
man. It was as follows. I saw as it were a minute image
of a brain, with a subtle delineation of something resembling
a face in front, but with nothing appended to it. This
primitive form in the upper protuberant part was an aggre-
gation of contiguous globules or spherules, and every spherule
was composed of others still more minute, and each of these
similarly of the most minute spherules of all; thus it was of
three degrees. In front, in the flat part, there appeared
something resembling a face. The protuberant part was
invested with a very fine transparent membrane or meninx.
_ This protuberant part, in form like a miniature brain, was
also divided into two beds, as it were, as the brain as a whole
_ is divided into two hemispheres, and I was told that the right
_ bed was the receptacle of love, and the left the receptacle of
- wisdom, and that by marvellous connections these were, as it
were, consorts and intimates. Moreover I was shown in the
light of heaven which shone most brightly, that the inner
structure of this minute brain, as to its arrangement and
the changes it underwent, was in the order and form of
heaven, and that its outer structure was in direct opposition

to that order and form. After these things had been seen
_and explained, the angels said that the two interior degrees,

216 * Divine Love and Wisdom »» es
ee
which were in the order and form of mains were the re-
ceptacles of love and wisdom from the Lord; and that the
exterior degree, which was in direct opposition to the order
and form of heaven, was the receptacle of hellish love and
insanity, because man owing to hereditary corruption is born.
with evil tendencies of every kind; and that these evils reside
there in the outmost parts, and that this blemish is not.
removed unless the higher degrees are opened, which, as
stated above, are the receptacles of love and wisdom from
the Lord. And because love and wisdom are very Man, for
Love and Wisdom in their essence are the Lord , and this
primitive form of man is a receptacle, it follows*that in it.
there is a continual effort to acquire the human form, which

also it gradually assumes.

ad

en

Mave At THE
Temple PRESS ai. LetcHwertH
SWILAD th GREAT BRITAIN

eat 5
Srepieea tigre

iS:
mee

is

i t she
iH :
niet an
wey . i
Hiatus
s in

a
ot

iL

ae i