The Works of Thomas Sydenham, Vol. 1 (Thomas Sydenham (R. G. Latham, trans.), 1848)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b33098682_0001). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

“TOPLAS T SUNT NEUE SE 
H ISSUE 


Cor 


LLG E 


puo wr ar AP p pomo o 


LN ot T6 V nen. 


FM aar STAT 


LS PEL DOLLS 


PO PALA MTA 


vue 


7 
PAA IS 


mu re d Ir 
wr 


MAE 


Pp: 


Ap nee o Bor sr AE ae 


CES SF ot te Me 
ow wor en 
a 
"t 
"ft 


ee 


LE 
inv 


VETUS 
pus 
bod 
ere 


AE RENS P SESE, 
VINAAT 


te Ng a 
OOP COM SR AIT 


ise 


"vi 


Pup: up a Se 


SE xpo ep rS 


x 
T 


NULL UL Ne Sd d S Net M 
LY 
way 
boo uPA 
"i 


NS 
ve 


ANS 
Ge 


Ne Or NEN ry & 


191 S Ove NEE re Se 


> 
> 
3 
2 


LA ENS 


X X SC NEL 
wee ae 
COVES 
Ne 


VS NE 


we 


MgO NE NO 
ONIS 
NESSUN SO ANS 


ROS 
MOISE SE ENE SENS NC NONO NESE 


WENN WE 
SPN Ne Ne SÉ NONE NIC eS NONO NENNEN 


NNI NE ENE NE ENE NONE NE ee SEE SEBO 
PETE TE M NS 


AE NOE NOE NE ENE SNE OSE WOW AEE 


V REN S ENSE NECNON 
NEN 
se 


VPM ee 


NUM 


NS 


VO RNS 


Ae S 


NOM Nena 


L3 


OM OMM MeV wey © Oe VEN 


WE USOS NC NE NEON wr VN VINE 


meses 


V SCNC SEN 
NNW 


Sw LN SE 


D 
VRS SAN NN NNI 


Me Ne CN 
dew m eos ew Sees 


wA 


MON US VIAL e£ AR 


Jt Pht SPOR I 


UAT MSN SOM SEN 


a 


SV PVE SAA 


PSEA E 


Ad tN Wh nee SP 


Pw SY 


bi 


NS 


INNQNIWONS NE vw NONO VOS SO V 


S 


UNE AG EN 


x 
CNN. 


BJ 


VED 


NON SESE Ys 


7 
gr: 


SILLS IS FS 


ane 
we 


VY SANE 
UAE New 


thon 


wey 


one 


NEY AON Nene 


SPN ne NON M 


EAE ANE Se NENA SC Oe NOY 
E : 


ASESOR 


* 


MM 


we 


AROSE SP AS Saree 


Store tass es 
CF PART 


e, 


oF SF ey 


Lp p 
p ger 


Ke 
VF Nr ur 
f p. 


SIersh rSh piaPS NS 
(See. 

SePP PII 

ACH Eee 


Sobrorerere er ecbs 
inrreje 
VELO PLE, 
PIS 
Seatoz> 


Are 


SEN 
SPP MENT Xi 


taé 
OS 


242€ 
Ee 


Wn A A 


[a 
lA 


VW WA 


SISDDIPE 
NINOS 


Oe IGS 


PLES ELS 


baseses 


A 


WM v 


SSPRPSISIDO. 
Mis oeres 
SOpPorazsc5e 


DN 


MN 
M 
pc 


Zo! CREE YOM SENE 


Oe 
MAY 


ae y Ri 


M 


5 


Te. 
kes? 
24 


t2 
P 
s 


* 
* 


x 
Kee 


T5757. 


na 


NOME Nn s 


b 


OREN 


NOS WEN: 


d 


MOM M 
SM 


ae 


M 


V 
MOG 


RM 
SOS 


MY 
VN 
i ee ^ 
NS WM 
MN NON NT 
NN uw V 
WX i 
3 


MN SCA 
CM EVV KGS 


* 


NS. x 
PENS VV NONE 
NAM YG Va 


bs 


wi IANNN 
Loa 
ry "elas e 4 


d XN 
* 


A NF NT 
NONAS AES 


eves 
wo : 


VN 


Te 
V 


S 


I 


pose 


i 


NE? 
ISSRINER 


SSPE SEIN: 


Cr 26 2 


SEMPIMOM 
SISPPSPNIE 
PS PEPCUPOTN 


21S 


PL 
iat 


f 
NEZ 


^ N 
* "s 2 
UNS hh het 
WANS A 
SEONG 
VUV VEY VV 


NA 


B 


es 


* 
WI 


SN 


H 
"e VN M 


"sts 


PL 


T. 


b 


NS 
sae 
Hie 


D . 


Roy casey 


AURIS 


rris PEPRyATE 
pera 
SES MEE S 


qs 
urs: 
det 
TW 


zd 


ES 
ENS 


C a e cll ati s 


RUE 


Ue 
WS 


M > 
2 
See 


POE 


EU 
SERENA 
E Peder LP A TET rie 
AR CSI fI on 


SERGE 
2 PPM PREPARED ORE 


MN 
QU 


e 


Se 
eee 
TD 


en pa 
de eS 


x H e ri 
Sasececta vegsesakaey Sasqsasa ces 


a 
CIS REGS 
feDpPIPU OU 
CONES : 
TOMUS NUES 


PC 
PERS 
Pet. 
d 


hae se 
Saati 
PORPIR 
tro] 


pee P 


x 


SCH 
IMPIIS 
pr PS o os 
: 
(fuf 
CEG 


FACIES 46 
ESSO RSUSE 
ete meatetaeenee: 


ag ve 


1 2 PS 
nono 
NEC A 


DEI WO 
Poo ee 
erste Uap rece 


f 
CA 
e. 


Os 


is 


LN 


UN 
AW 


* 
x 
P 
* 
x 


x 
SN 
x * 


E 
S 
nf 

^ 

WV 

AN 
^ 


NN 
MN 
x 
EN: ^ 
d 
m 
a 


^. Ms 
NS i 
x 


M 
NN 
S 


Aer ais Ie 
eo 


e 
26€ 


sre NH AM 7T 


s THE 


SYDENHAM SOCIETY 


INSTITUTED 


MDCCCXLIII 


// 
mmm — 


LONDON 


MDCCCXT. 


THE WORKS 


OF 


THOMAS SYDENHAM, M.D. 


TRANSLATED FROM THE 
LATIN EDITION OF DR. GREENHILL 


WITH 


A LIPPE OF THE. AUTHOR 


BY 


R. G. LATHAM, M.D. 


ETC. ETC. ETC. 


IN TWO VOLUMES 


VOL. I. 


LONDON 
PRINTED FOR THE SYDENHAM SOCIETY 


MDCCCXLVIIIÍ. 


MIBTORICÁL 
MEDICAL 


epee 


^ an | 
à 


- 


(€. AND J. ADLARD, PRINTERS, ume eg 
BARTHULOMBW CLOSE. "EZ- 


" Y 944 9 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


— 


THe present translation is from the text of Dr. GREENHILL’s 
edition; a work of great care and accuracy, and one from 
which the notes and indices have supplied the present writer 
with an amount of information that has materially lightened 
his labour. 

The latitude that he has allowed himself in rendering the 
Latin of the original into equivalent English may, to some, 
appear considerable: nevertheless, it is considered not to exceed 
the average latitude recognised by the translators of long works. 
This permits the breaking up of long and compound periods, 
the fusion of many simple sentences into a few complex ones, 
the conversion of parenthetic observations into independent sen- 
tences, transpositions, and similar licences. But it does not 
admit misrepresentations, omissions, or additions. 


It may be necessary to suggest to the reader that, although 
the Latin style of the works of Sydenham is highly valued, and, 
with the single fault of being somewhat too studiously idiomatic, 
is altogether worthy both of its subject and its author, it is far 
from improbable that the English equivalent may disappoint 
such readers as are prepared, or over-prepared, with their 
admiration. Now the responsibility for any difference between 
the merits of our author in his original garb and his English 
dress lies only partially with the translator. That some of it 
hes with him, it is unnecessary to affirm. Some, however, is 
attributable to another cause. ‘There is one style for the Latin 
writer of Rome, and another for the English writer of Great 

b 


vi TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. 


Britain. Neither of them, however, is the style of the English- 
man who writes Latin. In this latter case the sense is almost 
always, in some degree, sacrificed to the expression ; the question 
being not so much what to say, as how to say it. Hence unim- 
portant matters are expanded into well-rounded sentences, ideas 
are introduced simply for the sake of the metaphor, quotation, 
or idiom, that shall embody them, and words, and clauses, find 
their way into sentences, not because they are wanted, but be- 
cause they are classical. Sydenham, for instance,is rarely content 
to say that his patient died. He says, ivit ad plures ; literally, 
he went over to the majority. Expressions like these can rarely 
be rendered by exact equivalents; yet it is to expressions like 
these that the original Latin owes much of its Latinity. 

The main difficulty, however, is this:—viz. that when the 
idea of a writer of modern Latin has been expanded into its 
Latin form, it often shrinks and looks small when retranslated 
into English. Any one may verify this by translating a 
sentence of any classical modern antique, e. g. Parr's Preface to 
Bellendenus. Virtually, the present work is the re-translation 
(or rather retro-translation) of a translation ; a fact of which the 
. reader should be reminded, since the version of bulky works in 
modern Latin, sufficiently modern to suggest the sacrifice of 
matter to manner, and sufficiently classical to claim attention 
on the score of style only, has been too unfrequent to make the 
necessary allowances in the matter of criticism fairly under- 
stood, and generally admitted. 

At first sight all this may appear to constitute a reason for de- 
parting somewhat widely from the original, and for not following 
it in its sacrifices to a classical form of expression; for keeping to 
the exposition of the matter only, and being satisfied with giving 
the observations and opinions of Sydenham irrespective of the 
form in which they are embodied. Now, if the publication 
of an English Sydenham, by a Society bearing his name, and 
with which he is pre-eminently c/assical, had been undertaken 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. vii 


with no other view than that of giving the results of his expe- 
rience and reflection in a simply historical form, a mere general 
accuracy would have been sufficient, and the translator might 
have looked only to putting his book in the most readable form 
possible. I fear, however, that, in the present instance, scholars, 
at least, will (subject to the latitude indicated above) expect 
verbal as well as material closeness; since Sydenham in an 
English dress is a fact, not merely in medicine, but in medical 
literature as well. It was a decided opinion upon this point, 
combined with the fact of the previous versions of Peachey and 
Swann, representing in point of style and language neither the 
English of Sydenham’s time, nor that of our own (whilst they 
were as little remarkable for beauty of style, as for fidelity of 
representation), that determined the Society upon preferring a 
full and fresh translation in toto, to a modification of either of the 
earlier English ones. 


In respect to the translation of the names of the different 
articles of Sydenham’s Pharmacopeeia, I have generally taken 
the English synonyms from Lewis’s translation of an old Edin- 
burgh Pharmacopeia, and from Peachey’s English translation, 
checked by reference to either Gerard’s Herbal, or Nemnich’s 
Polyglot Vocabulary of the Terms used in Natural History. 
All four sources, however, must be used with caution, and that 
for the following reason. The tendency of writers who under- 
take to render into their own tongue the specific and scientific 
names of such botanical, mineralogical, or zoological objects as 
occur in their original authors, to translate the Latin term 
verbally rather than really, is almost universal. Yet the difference 
is broad; and a little consideration may show that a name in 
English is frequently a very different thing from an English 
name. Out of the four English species of the genus Bupleurum, 
three are more or less narrow-leaved, and, as such, with leaves 
capable of being compared to a hare’s ear. Indeed (some or 


viii TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


all) they are so compared, and the term hare’s ear has really been 
given to one (or more) of the species, viz. odontites, lenuissi- 
mum, and falcatum. But the botanical translation of 
Bupleurum odontites, as narrow-leaved hare's ear ; 
H tenuissimum, as slender hare’s ear ; 
" falcatum, as falcate hare's ear, 

constitutes terms that were, perhaps, never applied to any one 
of the three species, except as renderings of the name in Latin, 
and are anything but English names in the common accepta- 
tion of the word. Furthermore, the fourth species, Bupleurum 
rotundifoliwn, is also called common hare’s ear; and here the 
name is not only no name, but an impossible one. The round- 
leaved óupleurum has, in the very fact which makes its Latin 
name (rotundifolium) applicable, a condition incompatible with 
the term hare’s ear. With this view, I have given the proper 
current idiomatic English name whenever I have been able to 
discover what it was; and when I have not done so, I have 
preferred letting the Latin stand, to rendering it by a mere 
verbal translation. This is only an extension of the principle 
by which we say aqua vite, or lignum vite, instead of water 
of life, or wood of life. In other words, the Latin term is 
naturalized. 


What has just preceded applies to the identification of the 
English name of ihe particular species of plant or animal with 
the Latin one. ‘The identification of the species itself is a 
different question. It is one thing to know that the Artemisia 
abrotanum of Linnzus is the southernwood of the common 
people of England. It is another thing to know that the abrota- 
num of Sydenham is the Artemisia abrotanum of Linnzus. Now, 
in respect to all such questions as the last, I have taken the 
genera and species as I found them in Dr. Greenhill's Index, 
and that with an additional confidence, from the fact of its 
having been benefited by the assistance of Drs. Pereira and Royle. 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. ix 


The plan of the preliminary explanations headed Materia 
Medica and Therapeutics is as follows:— where a simple term of 
Sydenham’s occurs in the present Pharmacopceia no notice is 
taken of it at all, e. g., chamomile, aniseed, dill, cloves, bark, &c. 
Nor yet is any notice taken of those preparations of which the 
chief constituent is denoted by the name, e. g., strawberry-water, 
emplastrum de minio. This rule is held to even where the 
preparations are exceedingly compound. On the other hand, 
where a simple term does nof occur in the present pharmacopoeia, 
its scientific botanical, zoological, or mineralogical synonym 
is supplied, (e. g., adderstongue, anagallis, &c.) ; whilst in respect 
to preparations of which the composition is not at all indicated 
by the name, the formula from one of the Pharmacopoeias 
of the time is given in detail; the arrangement of the whole 
being strictly alphabetic. 

To have gone farther, and, by a second series of notices, to 
have explained all the new terms that were thus added from 
the Pharmacopoeias to the list found in Sydenham, would have 
carried me beyond the prescribed limits of my work. In some 
cases, too, I have been obliged to sacrifice absolute accuracy to 
precision, e. g., the white sandal-wood, or the young wood, the 
yellow sandal-wood, or the o/d wood of the Santalum myrti- 
folium, and the red sanders-wood of the Pterocarpus draco, are 
occasionally spoken of as the sandal-wood of the three kinds 
(santalum trium generum). It is better to take expressions 
like these as we find them, than to refine upon them by over- 
accuracy. 


In respect to the extent to which I have remembered that 
the original Sydenham was written in the seventeenth, rather 
than that the translator is writing in the nineteenth century, 
in other words, the degree whereto I have thought myself 
bound to attempt, by any archaic forms of expression, the dif- 
ficult task of reconstituting Sydenham in what may be supposed 


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. 


to have been the form in which he would have originally ap- 
peared (had it appeared in English at all), during the lifetime 
of the author, I have only to state that I have limited myself 
to the avoidance of impossible words, i. e., of words which, 
under no circumstances whatever, could have been used in the 
time of Charles II. This, whilst it leaves me at liberty to 
render coctio by the word digestion, forbids me to translate 
calomelas by such a term as chloride of mercury. That good 
reasons for going farther in this direction, and reviving much 
antiquated phraseology, with the view of exhibiting Sydenham, 
not as he was, but as he might have been, may be given, is a 
fact that neither the Society nor the translator have attempted 
to conceal from themselves ; on the other hand, they remember 
that the style of the seventeenth century in general is by no 
means necessarily equivalent to the style of Sydenham in par- 
ticular, and that the dest authors contemporary with Sydenham 
write whole pages together without exhibiting any material 
points of difference between their style and the style of the 
present half century, except, perhaps, as with the magnificent 
prose of Dryden, in being better compositions. 


THE 


LIFE OF SYDENHA M. 


Nor only is the name of Sydenham better known than his 
writings, but his writings are better known than the events of 
his life; indeed, we may safely say, that concerning no author, 
equally eminent and equally recent, is the personal information 
so fragmentary, so apocryphal, and so unsatisfactory, as that 
concerning the so-called Father of English Medicine. To judge 
from his printed works, from the early influence of his name, from 
the continuous character of his reputation, and from his pro- 
minence in the history of medicine, we should pronounce him 
not so much to have belonged to the number of those skilful 
and sagacious men whose authority is recognised without being 
ostensibly proclaimed, whose opinions work their way gradually 
and clandestinely, although with certainty, and who, after 
passing a life of useful obscurity, emerge into the posthumous 
splendour of a late reputation, as to have found his place in 
that different order of innovators who attract attention during 
their lifetimes as much as they command imitation after their 
deaths, who stand conspicuous by salient points of individual 
character, and who run far greater risk of having the smallest 
details of their conduct or misconduct recorded with officious 
minuteness, than of leaving the world, hke the great men who 
lived before Agamemnon, unchronicled and unknown. 

Yet such is far from being the case. The dearth of facts 
connected with the life of Sydenham has been the complaint 
of each and all his biographers ; and when Dr. Lettsom remarks 


xii LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


that Sydenham's biography “ scarcely enlarges beyond the in- 
formation that he was a soldier; that he told Sir R. Blackmore, 
who inquired of him the best books to study in order to acquire 
medical knowledge, to peruse Don Quixote; that he pursued 
some short studies; and that he died a martyr to the gout," 
we have, contained in a single sentence, not only the expres- 
sion of regret on the part of the writer, but wellnigh the whole 
biography itself. 

Generally speaking, however, this scantiness of personal his- 
tory is a matter of regret rather than of surprise; being too com- 
mon a phenomenon in literary history to excite astonishment. 
Biographies, after the type and fashion of Boswell, where an 
unreasonable admiration is superadded to an indiscriminate 
appetite for anecdote, and where the result is the production 
of an excellent book by an indifferent author, constitute the 
green and pleasant spots in the vast area of biographical investi- 
gation. But in opposition to these abundant and overflowing 
sources, there is the other extreme of absolute sterility ; and 
there is, of course, every intermediate degree. There are insignifi- 
cant works whose authors are known to us even to the folds of 
their garment, and there are imperishable and gigantic monu- 
ments of genius, whose creators have yet to be delineated, even 
in a dim and indistinct outline. As little is known of the per- 
sonality of Shakespeare as of Sydenham, and as little of 
Sydenham's as of Shakespeare's. Both agree in speaking to 
posterity through their writings only, and of being measured 
by posterity by the influence of those writings. With few and 
unimportant exceptions, all that is known in the present cen- 
tury concerning Shakespeare, was known to his earliest com- 
mentators. The life by Rowe is like the single sentence of 
Dr. Lettsom. It is a short story, but it is the whole story. 

Magne stant nominis umbre. ‘This oft-applied quotation 
is generally attached to the names of the doers of great 
deeds, or the thinkers of great thoughts, who have lived and 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xiii 


died in some remote age, and in the infancy of history ; in 
times anterior to the biographer that describes, or to the 
poet that immortalises. Nevertheless, in the two cases before 
us, it applies to prominent characters in a late period, to 
men who were the centres of observant circles, within a few 
generations of the present time, within a period that we may 
call not only historical but recent. At times, indeed, the 
nature of the subject has the same effect with length of time 
in throwing the veil of uncertainty over the acts and motives 
of individuals. Events that occur clandestinely at a late period, 
are as much mysteries to posterity as are the events that take 
place openly at an over-early one. It is unfortunate, how- 
ever, for the biographer when the two elements of uncertainty 
combine. And they do so in the object of the present memoir. 
Of the real Sydenham, who all his life lived in the open light 
of day, and in places as little retired as Oxford and London, we 
know as little as if he had been a recluse in an age of litera- 
ture, or a prominent character in an incurious one. 

The Sydenhams, an ancient family, divided into many 
branches, were originally, 1. e. in the time of King John, seated 
at Sydenham, near Bridgewater. Hence descended the prin- 
cipal branch of Comb Sydenham and Brimpton, which was ex- 
tinct in Sir Philip Sydenham, Bart., who alienated his estate, 
and died in 1739. 

From one of the earlier members of this branch issued 
the families of the Sydenhams of Badelton, Comb, Orchard, 
Chellworth, Leigh, Adler, Langford, Whetstow, and Dulverton, 
all in the county of Somerset. Richard de Sydenham, of Comb 
Sydenham, was Justice of the Common Pleas in the eleventh 
year of Richard the Second. His second son, Simon, was 
Archdeacon of Sarum and Berks, then Dean of Sarum, and, 
finally, Bishop of Chichester, in 1403.' Such is the pedigree 


! Hutchins’s History of Dorsetshire. 


xiv LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


of the family in its earlier history, as drawn up by William 
Riley Norroy, about 1656, from the registers in the Office of 
Arms, and documents in the Tower. 

It was, however, the Dorsetshire branch of which the physi- 
cian and his brother were the most remarkable scions ; and the 
founder of this was Thomas, the third son of Richard Sydenham 
of Aller. Inthethirty-sixth year of Henry VIII, he purchased 
an estate and manorial rights in Winford Eagle, Dorsetshire, of 
John Zouch, of the family of the Zouches of Harringworth, in 
Northamptonshire, into whose hands it had come, in the reign 
of Henry V, from the St. Maurs. The next year he purchased, 
for £4 3s., a farm and manor belonging to the Abbey of Cerne, 
which had been granted the previous year to Richard Buckland, 
and Robert Horner. He is mentioned again, in the reign of. 
Queen Elizabeth, as being the possessor of a park called Winford, 
or Sydenhams, to the extent of 160 acres, and also as being the 
grantee of 600 acres of sheep-pasture. On the other hand, he 
has a licence to alienate the lands called Shapcomb, Dyers, 
and Little Westwood, to Bernard Golde and his heirs; value 
£7 5s. 44d. 

From this, Thomas Sydenham, the physician, was the fourth 
in descent. His paternal grandmother was Elizabeth, daughter 
of Thomas Fulford, of the Fulfords of Devonshire, but pos- 
sessed of property in Dorsetshire also. His mother was Mary, 
daughter of John Geffery of Catherstone. 'lhree sisters, Mary, 
Elizabeth, and Martha, and two brothers, William and Francis, 
are named in the pedigree ; but, besides these, I find from the 
Register of Baptisms, the following entries of (apparently) other 
sons of William Sydenham: John, 1621; John, 1626 ; George, 
1629; Nathaniel, 1630; Richard, 1634. The marriage of 
Sydenham's father took place in 1611. 

Such are the illustrations of Sydenham's extraction as taken 
from Hutchins’s History of Dorsetshire, and which have been 
checked by the comparison of a MS. pedigree with which I 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. XV 


have been favoured by the courtesy of the Rev. B. Byam, and 
by a MS. from the Library of Caius College, sent to me by 
Dr. Paget. Nevertheless, they are by no means free from 
numerous, although unimportant, elements of confusion, arising, 
in some cases, from the identity of Christian names, in others, 
from discrepancies in date, between the genealogy in its tabular 
form and the parish registers, as extracted in the County His- 
tory. The most that can be said of them, as biographical 
data, is, that they supply an expansion and verification of the 
statement which appears so regularly at the head of all the 
biographies of Sydenham, viz. that he was of a good family. 
He was so: but he was, at the same time, with the exception 
of his brother, the first member of it who was known beyond 
the pale of its provincial respectability. The same neigh- 
bourhood that produced Sydenham had, a few years before, 
produced Glisson, who was born at Rampisham, near Winford 
Eagle. 

Sydenham himself was born at Winford Eagle, in 1624, and 
this is all that is known of him for the next eighteen years. 
Where he was educated, and what mental characteristics he 
exhibited, either as boy or youth, yet remain to be discovered. 
It may, however, clear our views for certain forthcoming inves- 
tigations to remember that, from the condition of the family, on 
the one side, and from the ability of Sydenham, on the other, 
there is every reason for believing that he had a good educa- 
tion, and that, in one way or other, he availed himself of it. 

The external evidence respecting the extent to which 
Sydenham is entitled to the reputation of a good Latin writer, 
as well to that of a sagacious and independent observer of 
Nature, is so scanty and unsatisfactory, that when we come 
to the consideration of the authorship in their Latin form of the 
Opera Sydenhami, we must eke out our argument with à priori 
probabilities as to his opportunities for acquiring classical learn- 
ing, and the likelihood of his not neglecting them. Hence it is 


xvi LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


right to inquire how far it is as likely that Sydenham went to 
Oxford with the elements of a good Latin style, as that he did 
not. The absolute fact, however, remains to be determined ; so 
does the name of the master or tutor under—or in spite of— 
whose instructions his mind developed its sagacious and charac- 
teristic activity. 

In 1642, at the age of eighteen, he was entered as a com- 
moner of Magdalen Hall, Oxford. 

That he left Oxford very soon after his entrance, is cer- 
tain. It is also nearly certain that he left it for military 
service ; and that on the side of the Parliamentarians. Here, 
however, there are elements of doubt ; first, as to the extent to 
which Sydenham served as a Parliamentarian soldier ; secondly, 
as to the fact of his having served at all. 

I shall first notice the evidence that creates a presumption 
in favour of his having done so. 

The general temper of his native neighbourhood and county 
was Parliamentarian. Clarendon speaks in strong terms of the 
disaffection of Dorsetshire. 

His brothers were both Parliamentarians. The position of 
William Sydenham, both as a Parliamentarian soldier, and a 
Parliamentarian commissioner, is of a sufficient importance to 
have given him an historical prominence, and numerous notices 
of his services to the Commonwealth are to be found in 
Whitelock. When his brother entered at Magdalen Hall, 
Willham was a gentleman commoner at Trinity College, in the 
same University. 

Of Francis Sydenham, a Parliamentarian soldier also, the 
career was less conspicuous. He is mentioned by Hutchins as 
having been killed in the year 1644. 

In the same year with her son Francis, the mother of 
Sydenham was killed. In November 1644, Sir Lewis Dives 
was beaten, at Poole, by Major Sydenham.  * At the third 
charge, seeing at the head of the King's troops Major Williams, 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xvil 


who had formerly killed his (Sydenham's) mother, he came up 
to him, slew him, and put his men to flight, driving them 
through the town." By Major Sydenham is meant Francis, 
William Sydenham having, at the time in question, the rank 
of Colonel. The word /formerly means a few months be- 
fore. That she and her son Francis died within the same 
year, is proved from the Register of Burials at Winford Eagle, 
where we have the following entries: * Mary, wife of William 
Sydenham, Esq., 1644, and Major Francis Sydenham, son of 
Willham Sydenham, Esq., killed in the civil wars." Francis 
Sydenham is also, most probably, the Captain Sydenham who 
was active 1n preventing the relief of Wareham towards the end 
of 1643. Inthe July of 1644, both the brothers are mentioned, 
i. e. as Colonel and Major Sydenham, who relieved Wareham, 
then besieged by the king's troops ; who took sixty horse, and 
one hundred and sixty prisoners, and who hanged seven Irish- 
men. Although it is difficult to conjecture the exact nature of the 
casualty by which a female, in the condition of Mrs. Sydenham, 
could lose her life at the hands of soldiers, it is easy to believe, 
from the disturbed state of the whole of Dorsetshire, and from 
the activity of at least two of her sons, that the occasions of 
such casualties were frequent; and it is very likely that the 
hanging of the seven Irishmen had some connexion with the 
one in question. 

In the way of cumulative evidence as to the activity of the 
Sydenham connexion in the cause of the Parliament, it may be 
added, that the family into which William Sydenham had mar- 
ried, the Trenchards of Warmwell, were also Parliamentarian. 
On August 10, 1642, there was borrowed for the service of 
the Parliament, the sum of £1300, at 8 per cent., of John 
Fitzjames, Esq., for which sum Sir Thomas Trenchard was 
one of the securities. As it is the opinion of the present 
writer that the exclusion of Sydenham from the honours of a 
Fellowship of the College of Physicians, the subject of many 


xviil LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


ill-considered remarks, is quite as referable to his republican 
politics as to the jealousy of his professional brethren, the above- 
mentioned facts have been put forward in prominent relief. 

In regard to the fact of Sydenham having served as a 
soldier, they constitute only a presumptive kind of evidence. 
The particular statements that strengthen the inference which 
they originate, are as follows: 

1. Sydenham’s mention of himself.—This is, that in the year 
1646 he was on his way to Oxford, from which place he had 
been kept away some years by the calamities of the civil war— 
a quo (Oxonio sc.) primi belli calamitas me aliquot annos dis- 
tinuerat. Upon the principle of taking all expressions and 
sentences as we find them, that is, according to their plain, 
literal, and grammatical sense, the words aliquot annos must 
mean more than two years, and fewer than three and a half, in 
other words, some space of time between the Midsummer of 
1642, when he entered at Oxford, and the end of 1646, the 
latest period at which he could have revisited it. 

2. The expression of Sir Richard Blackmore.—Sir Richard 
Blackmore writes, that Sydenham “ became an able and emi- 
nent physician, though he never designed to take up the pro- 
fession till the civil wars were composed; and then, being a 
disbanded officer, he entered upon it for a maintenance, and 
without any learning properly preparatory for the undertaking 
of it.” Now, this statement must be considered as a sepa- 
rate substantive assertion of Sir Richard’s, and not as a mere 
expansion of a passage, which will hereafter be given in full, of 
Sydenham’s own. All that is there said by Sydenham is, that 
his studies had been interrupted, and that he had grown to 
man’s estate without having fixed on a profession. 

3. The statement of Antony Wood.—This is, that Sydenham 
“left Oxon, whilst it was a garrison for his Majesty’s use, 
and did not bear arms for him as the other scholars then 


and there did." Upon this statement, however, it should be 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Xlx 


observed, that it is something more than merely negative, and 
that it tells the other way. Had Wood known that Sydenham 
had borne arms for the Commonwealth, he would, I think, have 
mentioned it. 

4. Dr. Lettsom’s anecdote.—The following anecdote of 
Sydenham the soldier was communicated to the Gentleman’s 
Magazine, of August 1801, by Dr. Lettsom. It was copied 
from the fly-leaf of a copy of the Methodus curandi febres, 
which had been in the possession of Dr. Sherson's! family for 
upwards of fifty years—“ Dr. Thos. Sydenham was an actor 
in the late civil war, and discharged the office of captain. 
He being in his lodgings in London, and going to bed at 
night with his clothes loosed, a mad drunken fellow, a soldier, 
likewise in the same lodging, entered his room, with one hand 
eriping him by the breast of his shirt, with the other discharged 
a loaded pistol into his bosom; yet, O strange! without any 
hurt to him. Most wonderful, indeed! by such a narrow shield 
as the edge of the soldier’s hand, was his breast defended. For 
the admirable providence of God placed and fixed the tottering 
hand that griped the shirt into that place and posture, that the 
edge thereof and all the bones of the metacarpus were situate 
in a right line betwixt the mouth of the pistol and his breast ; 
and so the bullet discharged neither declining to the one side 
or the other, but keeping its way through all the bones, in 
crushing them lost its force, and fell at his feet. So wonderful 
a situation of the hand, and more wonderful course of the bullet, 
by any industry or art never again imaginable! The soldier 
died soon after. Surely Providence does not bring forth such 
stupendous miracles but for some great and equivalent end.” 

The whole, however, of the scanty evidence relating to this 
portion of Sydenham’s life, will not have been exhausted until 
we have considered the account which he gives of himself for 
A.D. 1645. For this year we have a few sentences from the 


1 Gentleman’s Magazine, Dec. 1801. 


xx LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


Dedication of the third edition of Sydenham’s Methodus 
(now called Observationes Mediez), from which we collect 
the few fragments of definite biography which we possess. It 
is from these sentences that the previous extract, respecting 
the interruption of Sydenham's Oxford studies, was taken. 
Premising that the date of the Dedication is 1675, I give the 
extract in full: 

“ Tricesimus jam agitur annus a quo Londinum petens ut 
inde Oxonium denuo proficiscerer, (a quo primi belli calamitas 
me ad annos aliquot distinuerat,) in virum doctissimum et 
maxime ingenuum Dominum Doctorem Thomam Coxe, (qui per 
eos etiam annos, atque ad hunc usque diem medicinam magna 
cum celebritate factitavit,) fratri meo tunc sgrotanti consu- 
lentem, auspicato inciderem ; qui quidem vir, pro nota sua 
humanitate suavitateque morum, me percontatus est, cui me 
demum arti; intercisa jam repetens studia, sumptaque toga 
virili, pararem addicere. Ego vero, incertus adhue animi, et 
de medica arte ne vel somnians quidem, tanti vir hortatu 
atque authoritate permotus, nescio quo fato meo, me ad eam 
serio accinxi. Et sane, si quando hsc nostra conamina vel 
minimum in publica commoda cesserint, illi grato animo accepta 
referenda erunt, quo promotore atque auspice et studia primum 
sum aggressus. Post annos aliquot in palestra Academica 
insumptos, Londinum reversus, ad praxim medicam accessi." 

A comment upon this passage may be collected from 
Whitelock's Memoirs. On the 18th of June, 1643, William 
Sydenham, the elder brother, had three troops of dragoons 
put under his command, and was ordered to take care of 
Weymouth. The next duty in which we find him engaged, 
is that of Governor of the Isle of Wight, to which he was ap- 
pointed in 1649. Hence it was, in the interval between these 
last two appointments, that he fell sick, was attended by Dr. 
Thomas Coxe, and was visited by his brother. 

On Wednesday, and Midsummer Day, the garrison of Oxford 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xxi 


surrendered. Then it was, when Antony Wood, upon “ returning 
to the house of his nativity, found Oxford empty as to scholars, 
but pretty well replenished with Parliamentary soldiers.” Then, 
too, began the Parhamentary visitation which fell hard upon 
the more staunch royalists of that seat of learning, but proved 
tolerable to the trimmers, and favorable to the supporters of 
the Commonwealth. 

We can easily understand that, for certain forms of specula- 
tion and research, this was an unfavorable combination of cir- 
cumstances. For the solid results of solitary, uninterrupted, 
and continuous application, for prodigious specimens of either 
special or miscellaneous erudition, the proper conditions are, 
the appliances of ease, leisure, and opportunity, the certainty of 
prospective competence, and the regular routine of uninterrupted 
tranquillity. Nevertheless, for all those results of thought and 
observation that require the stimulus of agitation or interrup- 
tion, the times that succeeded the surrender of the Oxford gar- 
rison were more favorable than unpropitious. The violent 
revolution, which had unsettled the minds of the students in 
each of the Universities, and in Oxford most, had produced a 
change in the character of the studies as well as in the dis- 
cipline and government of the colleges. Nor was this change 
unmixed with good. There was little love of old doctrines, simply 
on the score of their antiquity, and there was also less tendency 
to acquiesce in authority than to test, observe, and criticise ; 
for the ferment that had affected men's mind, in respect to the 
higher matters of theology and politics, had extended itself over 
the whole domain of scholarship, and philosophy. Men thought 
for themselves, and they did so, not because any modern method 
of investigation had supplanted an ancient one, nor yet because 
the new philosophy of Bacon was displacing the old philosophy of 
the schools, but because the spirit of investigation was aroused, 
and because there were more minds excited to a greater state 
of activity. I believe that at the time in question, there was, 

7 


xxi LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


in Oxford, more activity of thought than there has been either 
before or since ; at least, it is certain that the number of philo- 
sophical thinkers was as great as it ever has been, and that the 
contact or collision of the University with the world at large, 
along with the stimulus that such collision developes, was 
greater. The troubles which disarranged the system of Oxford 
were a disturbance rather than a desolation. 

In such a state of things Sydenham was a favoured man. 
Even if he had but little to show, on his own account, in the 
way of service to the Parliament, he had, on the part of his 
family, a mother and one brother who had fallen in the cause, 
and another brother who was one of their most useful and in- 
fluential servants. 

This was the year that determined the remainder of his 
career. Whatever he may have been before, he 1s from hence- 
forward Sydenham the Physician. As to the previous service 
in the army, the evidence and presumptions are in favour 
of it. At the same time, the negative character of Antony 
Wood's evidence must be borne in mind, and so must the pos- 
sibility of the services of Captain Francis Sydenham having 
been mistaken by Blackmore, or his authorities, for those of 
Thomas. The non-mention of anything of the sort in the 
dedication to Dr. Mapletoft goes for nothing. Good service 
done to the regicides is what a physician, in the reign of 
Charles II, would pass over as lightly as he could. 

As for the Dr. Thomas Coxe, whose name is made thus pro- 
minent by the scantiness of other facts, whose skill saved the 
Parliament a soldier, and whose advice gave the world a phy- 
sician, we have the following notice of him in Wood. Having 
taken the degree of Doctor of Medicine at Padua, he took it 
afresh at Oxford in 1646, (the year he met Sydenham,) was 
* Physician to the Parliamentary Army, afterwards Fellow of 
the College of Physicians, and President thereof, but being 
whiggishly inclined, was deprived of that office in 1683, for Dr. 


. LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xxiii 


Whistler." Furthermore, he put himself in prison to compound 
for his debts. The influence of political prejudice here illustrated, 
verifies (indeed it partially suggested) the previous observations. 

In returning to his University, Sydenham returned to his 
College also. This we learn from Wood: * After the said 
garrison was delivered to the Parliament forces, he (Sydenham) 
returned again to Magdalen Hall." 

He soon afterwards changed to All Souls, where he was 
elected Fellow in place of an expelled Royalist. We must here 
remember the extent of Sydenham's influence with the Parlia- 
ment party, and also that a Parliamentary visitation was now 
sitting in Oxford. The following passage of Sydenham’s 
refers to his fellowship at All Souls :—‘“ Medicus doctissimus 
candidissimusque Dn. Doctor Millington, ejusdem mecum 
Collegii Socius." (Obs. Med. iv, 6, 11.) 

He has now taken up his future profession, and I think that 
the preliminary knowledge, whether little or much, with which 
Sydenham began the practice of medicine, was acquired at 
Oxford. It was certainly acquired between the years 1646 and 
1661. In 1648 he took the degree of M.B. These prelimi- 
nary studies were begun upon and immediately after the re- 
commendation of Dr. Coxe. These were begun, too, at Oxford. 
Lastly, it was some years before he went to London—post 
aliquot annos in palestra academica insumptos; Londinum 
reversus, ad praxim medicam accessi. ‘This is the direction 
of the evidence. His fellowship of All Souls (for fellowships 
then were of little value to non-residents) is a reason for his 
being at Oxford; whilst there is no equivalent reason for his 
being elsewhere. 

It is stated, however, on the authority of Desault, that 
Sydenham visited Montpellier. If he did so, it was probably 
about this time, perhaps during a long vacation. The best ac- 
count of the Montpellier School of Medicine with which I am 


! See the Latin Life of Sydenham in Dr. Greenhill’s edition. 


XX1V LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


acquainted, is an attack made against it by Riolanus' in the 
year 1651, as likely atime as any for Sydenham to have visited 
it. At this period there was a strong feeling of exasperation 
on the part of the Parisian Faculty of Medicine against the 
Southern School. And there was a great distrust, either real 
or pretended, of Montpellier practice. Respecting this it may 
be said, that it was more expectant than heroic, and more 
tonic than evacuant. Bloodletting and purging it left to the 
Parisian physicians, and to whom it made the frequency of the 
application of such remedies a reproach. On the other hand, the 
Paris Faculty derided the cordials of the doctors of Mont- 
pellier; and, in respect to their organization and discipline, 
accused them of neglecting their lectures, selling their degrees, 
giving pro forma examinations, and uniting themselves with 
each other in a dishonest spirit of partisanship and exclusive- 
ness. What Sydenham would have found, had he visited 
Montpellier, is (according to the younger Riolanus) as follows : 
—the single faculty of medicine absorbing the other two facul- 
ties of theology and civil law, with a medical professor conferring 
degrees in each; proportionate jealousy on the part of the 
divines and civilians; a medical faculty of six professors, 
and two doctores aggregati, one of which was absent; quarrels 
amongst the seven residents, statutes appealed to, neglected, 
interpolated, or forged, as the case might be; one professor 
non-resident; another engaged equally in vexatious lawsuits, 
and the cultivation of patent nostrums; Professor Courtant 
neglecting his lectures; Professor De Lort in pursuit of the 
philosopher's stone; and, finally, Professor Sharpe, who seems to 
have been a reformer amongst his brethren, as well as the only 
man who had a class, agitating for alterations, and, as such, hated 
accordingly. Besides which, if he had been inclined to avail him- 
self of the privileges of the place, three months’ residence, and 


' Curieuses Recherches sur les Escholes en Médecine de Paris et de Montpellier. 
Paris, 1651. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. XXV 


the keeping of an act and opponency, would have made him a 
Bachelor of Medicine. So say the enemies of Montpellier. On 
the other hand, he might have learned the exhibition of 
calomel and antimony better there than elsewhere, have found 
more Protestants than in any University in France, and, very 
probably, have been enabled to avail himself of museums, 
libraries, and the observation of good clinical practice, just as 
well as if the discipline and learning of the place had never been 
attacked at all! 

The book to which I have referred is a good commentary 
upon Haller's characteristies of the chemical school of medi- 
cine in opposition to that founded upon the authority of Galen, 
* Ejus (chemice sectz) asseclze, venesectionis osores, et Galenicee 
purgationis, calidis fere medicamentis indulgebant, atque sudo- 
riferis." 

A. D. 1648.— In this year Sydenham took the degree of 
Bachelor of Medicine, and he took it irregularly, i. e. without 
having taken a degree in Arts first. Antony Wood makes a 
passing remark on this slight academical anomaly. 

The real, or supposed, studies of Sydenham at Montpel- 
lier, the amount of medical acquirements necessary for the 
degree of Bachelor of Medicine, and the internal evidence 
derivable from Sydenham’s writings, are the three facts in 
favour of the regularity of his professional education that 
can be set against the current report as to the fragmentary and 
insufficient character of his preliminary studies. I cannot, for 
my own part, lay much stress upon any of them; nor have I 
any wish to disturb the common notions on the subject. 
Indeed, the question is a mere question of degree. The reasons 
for believing that Sydenham was a man of a fair education, 
both general and professional, are as sufficient as the reasons for 
not placing. him amongst the physicians of his time, who were 
pre-eminently distinguished by either learning or science. It is 


1 Letter of the Bishop of Montpellier, Curieuses Recherches, p. 283. 


xxvi LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


equally unreasonable to consider him as either wholly untaught 
or fully instructed. In respect to his scholarship, I should be 
sorry to think that his admiration of Hippocrates was either 
mere lip-worship or taken at second-hand. His references to 
other writers on medicine are few; so that if we suppose that 
he quoted all that he read, we should form but a low opinion of 
his erudition. The only passage in his works that indicates 
any range of professional reading is in the chapter on the 
Plague. (Obs. Med. II, 2, 27.) 

I am not able to fix the year when Sydenham established 
himself in London, or, more properly speaking, Westminster. 
It was certainly before the year 1661; probably several years 
before. 

A. D. 1649.-—This was about the time when Sydenham first 
began to suffer from gout, and from symptoms of stone. In 
1679 he writes,—e?t a podagrá jam ab annis plus minus triginta, 
et calculo diu male multatus. | (Epistola Responsoria, I, p. 1.) 

A. D. 1661. —'The earliest epidemics upon which Sydenham 
has written, are the epidemics of this year. Furthermore, there 
were the epidemics of London. That city, therefore, or in 
Westminster, he must now be practising. 

A. D. 1663.—In this year Sydenham became a Licentiate of 
the College of Physicians. 

First examination, April 24, 1663. 

Second examination, May 8, 1663. 

Third examination, June 5, 1663. 

Admission, June 25, 1663. 

J. E. ArsroN, President, 
Dr. Ew, 

Dr. MickrETHWAITHE, 

Dr. WnisTLER, oy 
Dr. Merrett, 

A. D. 1666.—In this year was published the first edition of 
the first medical work of Sydenham. It consisted of four 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xxvil 


sections, upon (1) continued fevers, (2) the symptoms of con- 
tinued fever, (3) intermittent fevers, and (4) smallpox: and it 
was entitled, Methodus Curandi Febres, Propriis Observationibus 
Superstructa. It is convenient to call this the First Edition of 
the Methodus. 

The following is the notice of it, in full, from the Philoso- 
phical Transactions, i. e. from the Transactions of what became 
afterwards the Royal Society, then in the second year of its 
existence. Date, Monday, May 7, 1666. 


* An Account of Dr. Sydenham’s Book, entitled, Methodus 
Curandi Febres, Propriis observationibus superstructa. 


“This Book undertakes to deliver a more certain and more 
genuine method of curing fevers and agues than has obtained 
hitherto. And it being premised, Firs/, that a fever is Nature's 
engine which she brings into the field to remove her enemy, or 
her handmaid, either for evacuating the impurities of the blood, 
or for reducing it into a new state. Secondly, that the true and 
genuine cure of this sickness consists in such a tempering of 
the commotion of the blood, that it may neither exceed nor be 
too languid. This I say being premised by the author, he in- 
forms the reader, 

* [n the First Section, of the different methods to be em- 
ployed in the cure of fevers, not only in respect of the differing 
seasons of one and the same year, but of the difference of one 
year from another. 

* As to the former, he shows in what sorts of patients, and 
at what time of the fever, phlebotomy, or vomiting, or both, are 
to be used; and when and where not; in what space of time 
the depuration, if Nature be not disturbed or hindered in her 
work, will be performed; when purgatives are to be administered; 
how that diarrheeas happen, if the patient had in the beginning 
of the fever an inclination to vomit, but no vomit was given; 
and that those symptoms, which commonly are imputed to a 


xxviii LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


malignity, do, for the most part, proceed from the relaxation in 
the tone of the blood, caused by medicines too refrigerating, 
or, by the unseasonable use of clysters in the declination of the 
disease. 

* As to the /atter, he observes, that one of the chief causes, 
rendering the cure of fevers so uncertain and unsuccessful is, 
that practitioners, do accommodate their observations, they 
take from the successful cure of some fevers in one season of 
the year, or in some one year, to that of all fevers in any 
season, or in any year whatsoever. And here he observes, 
first, how vigorous the blood is 1n the spring, and how dispirited 
in autumn; and thence regulates the letting of blood, vomit- 
ing, and giving of clysters. Newt, how difficult it is to assign 
the cause of the difference between the fevers of several years; 
and to prognosticate of the salubrity or insalubrity of the 
following part of the year; where yet he insinuates, that when 
insecís do swarm extraordinarily, and when fevers and agues 
(especially quartans) appear very early, as about Midsummer, 
then autumn, commonly proves very sickly. Lastly, what 
method and cautions are to be used in the cure of epidemical 
fevers. 

* [n the Second Section, he treats of the symptoms ac- 
companying continued fevers, as phrensies, pleurisies, couyhs, 
hiccoughs, fluxes, &c.; showing both whence they are caused, 
and how they are to be cured. Where, having inserted a con- 
siderable paragraph, touching a certain symptomatical fever in 
the spring, to be cured like pleurisies, he mentions, among 
many observables, this as a chief one, that laudanum, or any 
other narcotic, given against the phrensy, in the beginning, 
progress, or height of a fever, does rather hurt than good; but 
in the declination thereof, is used with good success. 

«No all which he subjoins a particular account of the iliac 
passion (esteemed by him to be sometimes a symptom also of 
fevers) ; not only discoursing of its cause (a preposterous inver- 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. XX1X 


sion of the intestines, proceeding either from obstruction or 
irritation), but adding also a very plain way of curing the same, 
and that not by the use of quicksilver, or bullets (judged by 
him to be frequently noxious), but only by mint-water, and the 
application of a whelp to the patient’s stomach, to strengthen 
the same, and to reduce it again to its natural motion. 

“In the Third Section, he treats intermittent fevers, or of 
agues. Where he discourses of the times of the cold and hot 
fits, and of that separation of the subdued aguish matter ; finds 
difficulty in giving a satisfactory account of the return of fits; 
distinguishes agues into vernal and autumnal; takes notice, that 
as there are few continued fevers, so there are only quotidians 
and ¢ertians, in the spring; and only Zertians and quartans in 
autumn, of which, having offered reasons that seem considerable, 
he proceeds to his method of curing them, and laying much 
weight on the said difference, he prescribes and urges different 
ways to be used in that cure, intersecting, among other things, 
these notes.  Pirst, that the period of fermentation in fevers, 
both continued and intermittent, is (if left to Nature's own con- 
duct, and well regulated, if need be, by art) performed in about 
three hundred and thirty-six hours, or fourteen days, subduct- 
ing, in intermittent ones, the hours of intermission, and count- 
ing five and a half hours for every paroxysm, and imputing the 
excursion beyond that time to the disturbance given to Nature 
by the error of practitioners. Secondly, that whoever hath had 
a quartan formerly, though many years be passed, shall, if he 
chance to have another, be soon freed from it; and that a phy- 
sician knowing that, may confidently predict this. 

“Tn the Fourth Section, the author, in conformity to the 
custom of those that write of fevers, discourses of the smallpox ; 
and, first, examining the cause of this sickness, and its univer- 
sality, delivers his peculiar opinion of the blood’s endeavouring a 
renovation or a new texture (once at least in a man’s life), and 
is inclined to prefer the same to the received doctrine of its 


XXX LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


malignity. Then, having laid down, for a foundation of the 
cure, the two times of separation and expulsion, he argues as 
well against too high an ebullition, or too hasty a separation 
(by a hot diet or high cordials), as against too languid a one, 
(by blooding, purges, and cooling medicines). The like he does 
to the time of expulsion, forbidding both immoderate heat 
(whereby Nature's expelling operation is disturbed by a preci- 
pitated and too thick a crowd of the protruded pustules), and 
too much cooling, whereby true expulsion is hindered. In 
short, he advises, to permit Nature to do her own work, requir- 
ing nothing of the physician, but to regulate her when she is 
exorbitant, and to fortify her when she is too weak. He con- 
cludes all with delivering a model of the method he would use 
for his own only son, if he should fall into this sickness." 


I have given this notice, as I shall give another, in full, for 
several reasons. In the first place, they have a literary value, 
as being amongst the earliest specimens of reviewing, and speci- 
mens of a favorable sort, coming from the pen of either Hooke 
or Oldenburg, the first two secretaries of the Royal Society. 
Secondly, they are abstracts of Sydenham’s works, upon which 
I would not venture to improve, and which I am glad to lay 
before the reader in the form in which I find them. Thirdly, 
they are evidence as to the position which Sydenham held at 
the time of their publication, and representatives of the criticism 
of his contemporaries. 

The dedication is a dedication of the age of Dryden, highly 
seasoned with encomium. This is the fault of the time; not 
of the author. In the particular case before us, the praise has 
the merit of being appropriate and deserved. Its object is 
Robert Boyle, who, much as he has done for chemical and 
physical science, is, nevertheless, not a man who singly equals 
the most celebrated men of previous age—decantatissima anterio- 
rum etatum nomina unus exequas. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. XXXI 


In this dedication, two observations deserve remark. Boyle 
had given Sydenham personal reasons for warm expressions of 
gratitude. He had also visited sick beds with him. 

Respecting the first of these points, I have been unable to 
collect information. The second has been noticed repeatedly, 
both by the historians of chemistry, and by Boyle himself, from 
whose work on Specific Medicines the following is an extract. 

** To illustrate this, but with a not 1gnoble instance, give me 
leave to tell you, that when that Peruvian bark, that now begins 
to be somewhat taken notice of, under the name of the Jesuits’ 
Powder, had scarce been so much as heard of in this part of 
Europe, I went to visit a Virtuoso, who had been for some 
months afflicted with a quartan ague, so violent and stubborn, 
that it had frustrated the skill, and almost tired the endeavours 
of the most eminent doctors of this nation, of one, of which 
who was then accidentally with his learned patient, I inquired 
how my friend did, and was answered, that he hoped he would 
recover when the season would give him leave, but in the winter 
he knew no quartans cured. Yet the gentleman acquainted 
with his having procured some of the American bark against 
agues, which we mentioned in a former essay, and I (after 
having tasted and considered it) having encouraged him, as I 
haveo thers, to make trial of it, as the strange effects I have 
observed of it, hath divers times invited me to do; the candid 
and learned doctor, not only opposed not my persuasions, but 
added his own to them. And my friend taking two doses of this 
powdered bark, though it were at the unhopeful season of the 
year (the winter solstice), and though he scarce found any sen- 
sible operation (unless a little by sweat) of the Peruvian medi- 
cine, had, by a first dose, his fit very much lessened, and by 
the second, quite removed. And though, through some irre- 
gularities of diet (to which that keen appetite, like that of 
recovering persons, which I have observed this powder to be 
wont to produce, tempted him,) he did, as I then foretold him 


XXX LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


he would, after missing eight or ten fits, relapse; yet, by the 
repeated use of the same remedy, he again recovered, and hath 
continued so ever since. Having also lately persuaded the use 
of the same medicine, in the same disease, to one of the greatest 
ladies in this nation, she told me the other day, that it imme- 
diately, and in unlikely weather, freed her from those fits from 
whence she despaired to be delivered till the spring. 

* Having likewise sent some of it to a couple of gentlemen, 
sick of the like malady, I had word brought me, that one had 
missed his fits for a month, though in the midst of winter ; and 
the other was by the first dose cured, and continues so. And 
divers physicians to whom I have commended the specific, have 
used it with such success, that one of the severest of them, though 
he had formerly despised it, confessed to me, that in a short 
time he tried it, upon eight or nine several persons, without 
finding it to fail in any, though one of them especially were, 
before he was called, judged irrecoverable, the obstinate quartan 
being complicated with other almost as dangerous distempers. 
And I confess I somewhat wonder that men have not the 
curiosity to try the efficacy of this powerful bark in other diseases 
than agues ; it being highly probable, that a medicine, capable 
to prevail so strongly against so obstinate a disease as a quartan 
(wherein most commonly divers of the considerable parts of the 
body are affected), cannot be useless to several other distempers. 
I deny not that those who have taken this powder have divers 
of them, after having missed six or seven fits, relapsed into them 
(as it likewise happened to one of the gentlemen I sent it to), 
yet (as I have elsewhere told you,) it is much and more than any 
common remedy does, to stop the fit solong. Nor is it a small 
matter to be able to give the patient so much breathing time, 
and allow the physician the opportunity of employing other 
remedies. And the relapses we speak of are commonly cured 
by the same powder ; and we have known them prevented, when 
the medicine hath been administered, not by unskilful persons, 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xxxiii 


but by a prudent physician, who knows how to assist it, by open- 
ing and gently purging physic.” 

Itis matter of regret that the name of the candid and learned 
doctor here indicated is omitted. It may or may not have been 
Sydenham. Such, however, was Boyle’s usual method of 
quoting his medical authorities ; sometimes in the form of an 
anonymous encomium, sometimes with the mere initials. And 
this seems to be done intentionally. <A letter to him from 
Sydenham will appear in the sequel. 

In this year (1666) was printed a Dutch edition of the 
Methodus Medendi. 

A. D. 1667.—The following letter from Oldenburg to Boyle 
was written towards the end of 1667. I have no means of sup- 
plying a comment. 

“ Dec. 24, 1667. 

* S1R, —1 must beg your excuse for not seeing Dr. Sydenham, 
who has been the only man that I hear of, who, when I was 
shut up, thought fit (God knows without cause) to rail against 
me, and that was such a coward as afterwards to disown, though 
undeniable. I confess that with so mean and immoral a spirit 
I cannot well associate." 

(Birch’s Edition of Boyle’s Works, vol. vi, p. 258.) 

A. p. 1668.—In this year was published a second edition of 
the Methodus ; with general improvements, and with the parti- 
cular addition of a chapter on the plague. This was the great 
plague of London of the years 1645 and 1646. 

À copy of commendatory verses, in Latin elegiaes, that 
accoimpanies this edition, and which is not found in the edition 
of 1566, introduces from amongst the names of the wise and 
learned men by whom Sydenham was loved and respected, 
a greater name than even that of Boyle. When Locke praises 
Sydenham, he speaks with the authority of a brother of the 
profession. ‘The medical studies of Locke were first indi- 
cated by Le Clere, and upon Le Clerc’s statement, Dugald 


XXXlV LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


Stewart makes the following commentary.—* The merit of 
the method, therefore, which still continues to be regarded 
as a model by the most competent judges, may be presumed 
to have belonged in part to Mr. Locke; a circumstance which 
deserves to be noticed, as an additional confirmation of what 
Bacon has so sagaciously taught, concerning the dependence 
of all the sciences relating to the phenomena either of matter 
or of mind on principles and rules derived from the resources 
of a higher philosophy: on the other hand, no science could 
have been chosen more happily calculated than medicine to 
prepare such a mind as that of Locke for the prosecution of 
those speculations which have immortalised his name ; the com- 
plicated and fugitive, and often equivocal phenomena of disease 
requiring in the observer a far greater portion of discriminating 
sagacity than those of physics properly so called; resembling, in 
this respect, much more nearly, the phenomena about which 
metaphysics, ethics, and politics, are conversant.” (Dissertation 
of the Progress of Philosophy since the Revival of Letters.) 
The extent of Locke’s strictly professional attention to medi- 
cine has been better investigated by Lord Grenville than by any 
other writer. In his treatise, entitled Oxford and Locke, he 
shows that, during the year of the plague, 1665, he attended Sir 
W. Vane in Germany, and that in a medical capacity. In 1666, 
he was found by Lord Shaftesbury practising at Oxford. in 
1667, we shall again find him bearing testimony to the medical 
merits of Sydenham. His latest biographer, however, Lord 
King, expresses doubt as to the extent to which he made medi- 
cine a profession. His evidence, however, as to Locke’s habit of 
taking cases, and being consulted by his friends, are more con- 
clusive to a professional reader, in favour of his having been in 
boná fide practice, than they seem to have been to a lay 
biographer. ‘“‘ Whether Locke had, at any time, serious 
thoughts of engaging in any profession is uncertain ; his incli- 
nations led him strongly to the study of medicine, which seems 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. XXXV 


very much to have occupied his thoughts to the end of his life, 
as appears from the frequent memoranda of curious cases that 
are to be found in his diary; and from the correspondence of 
his friends, who occasionally consulted him to a very late 
period, and from the number of medical books that he collected." 
(Life of Locke, Vol. i, 16.) 

The merit of treating the plague as an inflammatory disease, 
and of applying to its cure free venesection, is shared between 
Sydenham and an army surgeon whose name is unknown,— 
indeed, as the disease so combated was an epidemic anterior 
to the great plague of London, the original practice is, per- 
haps, due to this unnamed practitioner. The disease was a 
disease of the time of the civil wars; the surgeon who treated 
it having seen it so treated in foreign countries. The account 
of this method is to be found in the Observationes Medice, 
i3. 39. 

A. D. 1674.—For this year a curious letter from Sydenham's 
nephew is preserved in Aubrey. Both the father and elder 
brother of Sydenham were now dead, and his nephew was the 
present owner of the family estates. On one of these was an 
old £umwulus or barrow; which the nephew was archeologist 
enough to have opened and examined. ‘The account he gives 
his uncle is marvellous. A Roman oven was found in it; and 
it was hot enough, when taken out, to bake bread, just as if it 
had been freshly heated. So it is described by the credulous 
landowner to the sagacious physician. But the whole was a 
hoax. The genius of the Sydenhams had not gone with the 
estates. Hutchins was informed “ by the Reverend Mr. Birket, 
rector of West Compton, that several people then living had 
assured him, that what related to the oven and the heat in it 
was aa invention of one Paul Salisbury, who was employed in 
the work, in order to please Mr. Sydenham, pick his pocket, 
and diver, himself by laughing at him for recording it in a 
great book After Mr. Sydenham’s misfortune, he constantly 


XXXVI LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


made a jest of his credulity, and declared in all companies that 
this story was invented by him. An old man told Mr. Birkett 
that he and all present were amazed at the impudence of the 
fellow, and the weakness of the gentleman. Mr. Sydenham 
was a weak man, and easily imposed upon; and Salisbury an 
arch, 1mpudent, lying fellow." 

A. D. 1676.—The first edition of the Observationes M ediccze.— 
Of this, a continental edition was published, within the year, 
at Strasburg. Notwithstanding the alteration of the title, and 
its very copious additions, the author considers this work as 
the third edition of his Methodus. In the dedication to 
Dr. Mapletoft we meet those brief notices of his own previous 
life that the scantiness of other evidence has made so valuable 
in the eyes of the biographer. We meet, also, with a reference 
to the testimony of Locke; meaning, thereby, the commenda- 
tory verses of the edition. of 1668. When this work reached 
Locke he was on the continent. ‘The following is the postscript 
of one of his letters to Dr. Mapletoft; with whom, as with 
Sydenham, there was a strong mutual intimacy :—“ My service, 
I beseech you, to all my friends in. your walks, particularly to 
Dr. Sydenham: the spell held till I had left Montpellier ; for 
by all the art and industry I could use, I could not get a book 
of his to Montpellier till the week after I had left it. I shall 
be glad to hear that it every day gains ground, though that be 
not always the fate of useful truth, especially at first setting 
out. I shall, perhaps, be able to give him an account of what 
some ingenious men think of it here; though I imagine he is 
too well satisfied with the truth in it, and the design that made 
him publish it, that it matters not much what men think; ret 
there is usually a great and allowable pleasure to sce the tree 
take and thrive in our time which we ourselves have planted.— 
Paris; June 22, 1677." (p. 82.) 

In this year Sydenham took the degree of Doctor of Medicine; 
not, however, at Oxford, but at Cambridge. His college was 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. XXXV 


Pembroke. The entrance is as follows :— Maii 17, 1676.— 
* Thomas Sydenham ex Aula Magdal. infra Universitat. 
Oxoniensem admissus ad gradum Baccalaurn in Mediciná in 
predictá Universitate 14° die mensis Aprilis a. n. 1648, in 
collegium nostrum admissus est die et anno supra scriptis. 
Eodem die concessa est illa gratia ad incipiendum in medicina." 

The diploma of Sydenham's M.D. degree 1s in the College 
of Physicians, signed by Barrow. 

A communication from Mr. Mills, Fellow of Pembroke, supplies 
a reason for Sydenham’s taking his degree at Cambridge, which 
I have not met with elsewhere. His eldest son was admitted 
a pensioner at that college, two years before, 1. e. 1n 1674. 

A. D. 1677.—For the first three months of the year, Sydenham 
was prevented practising by a severe attack of gout, and hema- 
turia. The three next months he passed in the country for 
the sake of recruiting. In autumn he returned to London.— 
Epistola Responsoria, 1. 10. 

A. D. 1680.—In this year appeared the first edition of the 
Epistola Responsoria. Of these— 

The first is to Dr. Brady, and is a continuation of that 
portion of the Observationes Medica, which treats of the 
epidemics, and concludes with the year 1678. The first Epistola 
Responsoria brings down the Observations to 1680. Dr. Brady 
was Regius Professor of Medicine in the University of Cambridge. 

The second is to Dr. Paman, on the History and Treatment 
of the Venereal Disease. 

A. p. 1682.— Publication of the first edition of the Dis- 
sertatio Epistolaris, to Dr. Cole, upon the treatment of the 
confluent smallpox, and upon hysteria. 

A. D. 1683.— Publication of a Geneva edition of the Obser- 
vationes Medicz, and of the Epistole Besponsorie. Publi- 
cation of a Frankfort edition of the Dissertatio Epistolaris. 
Publication of an Amsterdam edition of all Sydenham's works 


hitherto published. 
'd 


xxxviii LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


Publication of the first edition of the Tractatus de Podagra 
et Hydrope. The notice of this work in the Transactions of 
the Royal Society, is as follows— 


* Tractatus de Podagra et Hydrope, per Thos. Sydenham, m.p. 
Lond. 1683. 


“The account this treatise gives us of the gout, is grounded 
upon the author's many years’ experience, both of the disease 
itself, and of the method of cure. He is very exact in his 
description of the rise, progress, causes, and symptoms of it, 
and tells us those men are most commonly attacked by it in 
their age, whose youth was pampered with spirituous wines, 
and high diet ; whom, though they perceived no inconveniences 
but what their exercises then carried off, yet the necessary 
inactiveness of old age made them suffer what an active and 
vigorous youth permitted them not to feel. Not that the young 
or lean are totally exempt from it, inheritance and excess of 
venery, often bringing it upon those whose years and constitu- 
tion might else have been privileged. And among all mankind, 
he observes, those most liable and made for it, whose large 
heads, and moist, lax, and full habit of body, mark them out, 
and dispose for its reception. 

* But if any man is so happy as to escape it till he is old, 
he is never so often or so much afflicted, as he who is seized 
in his youth, either death preventing the full growth of the 
disease, or the native heat being not strong enough to throw 
off the materia morbifica upon the joints. 

“The regular time of its invasion he assigns to the latter end 
of January, or the beginning of February, the chief time of its 
fury is at night, with which the pain proportionally declines, a 
series of which short fits constitute the general one, which 
sometimes lasts two or three months, and those who are in 
years, or weakened by other distempers, it seldom leaves till 
the summer drives it away. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. XXXlX 


“Among the other sad attendants of this distemper, he 
brings in the stone, which happens to most, either from their 
long lying on their backs, or from the intermission of the usual 
secretions, or else because both distempers may probably spring 
from one and the same matter. 

* Neither is the body alone thus afflicted, but the torments 
reach the mind, so that every parovysm is as much a fit of 
anger, as of the gout. Upon contemplation of all the symptoms, 
he imputes the whole distempers to the defect of concoction in the 
parts and humours of the body, which the want of animal spirits, 
many other ways formerly wasted, necessarily infers, by the great 
decay of the ferments, whose force depends chiefly upon these. 

* As for the cure, he designs, antecedently, the digestion of 
the humours, and in the fit, the allaying of the heat and edui- 
lition of them arising from their putrefaction, to the great op- 
position of which intentions he attributes the great difficulty 
commonly met with in endeavouring to remove this distemper. 

“The Dropsy he makes universal, extending to all ages and 
sexes, though women are more liable to it than men, and are 
most commonly exposed to it, either when they are barren, or 
when age hath rendered them incapable of child-bearing. 

“The true symptoms of it, are difficulty of breathing, little 
urine, and much thirst, the consumption of the other parts 
likewise, in proportion to the increase of the hydropical, con- 
stantly happens. The general cause he supposes the weakness 
of the blood, which, not being able to assimilate the chyle, lets 
it fall into the pendulous parts of the body, till at last it enters 
the abdomen, where, while the quantity of it is small, Nature 
forms little bladders to contain it, till at last, exceeding all 
measure, it knows no bounds but those of the peritoneum. 

“The causes which weaken the blood, he takes to be the 
excess of venesection, or of any other evacuation, any long dis- 
temper, or a constant abuse of spirituous drinks. 

* His indications are to evacuate the water, and to strengthen 
the blood, for both of which he gives particular directions, and 


xl LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


among his remedies, these two especially he commends, viz. 
elaterium and crocus metallorum. 

* Discoursing of the hidden conveyances Nature carries off 
these waters by, he infers the great use of anatomy in physic, 
as being that without which it is impossible to form clear ideas, 
either of the nature or causes of the diseases; and does not in 
the least doubt the success of his method, unless the viscera, by 
long lying in the waters, are corrupted. 

* He does not much commend the paracentesis or the acu- 
punctura, they being as likely to cause a gangrene as blisters 
themselves; by the way, he takes notice of the burning with 
moxa, which he will not allow to have a specific quality im its 
flame, any more than another actual fire; and although we 
owe this medicine to the Indians, yet it was not unknown to 
the ancients, for Hippocrates directs cauterizing with raw flax 
in the very case of the gout.” 

The treatment of diseases by moxa was introduced into 
England from Holland, and into Holland from Japan. Ina 
Guide to the Practical Physician, translated from the Latin of 
Bonet, and published in 1684, we find the following —** We 
have given you an epitome of Ten Rhijne of the moxa, we give 
you also much of Dr. Sydenham’s Tracts that came out since the 
publishing of Bonetus. Besides, we have added much out of 
Willis on the scurvy, much out of Glisson and his partners, and 
Whistler on the rickets, none of which, except Willis, were ever 
in English.” (Translator’s Preface.) 

Ten Rhijne was the great patron of the moxa in Holland ; 
indeed, it is with his name that the practice was particularly 
associated. He is not, however, mentioned by Sir William 
Temple, who, in 1677, had written a letter to Monsieur de 
Zulichem, upon the cure of the gout by moxa ; relating, in his 
gossiping way, his own afflictions, and the extent to which they 
were relieved, by what he calls the Indian remedy. 

A. D. 1684.— Publication of a Geneva edition of the Disser- 
tatio Epistolaris. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xli 


Publication of an Amsterdam edition of the Tractatus. 

Publication of a Leyden edition of ditto. The title-page 
speaks of the book as being Practici Londinensis celeberrimi. 

A. D. 1685.—In this year was published what may be called 
the standard edition of Sydenham’s works:— Thom:e Sydenham, 
M.D., Opera Universa, &c. This edition does not contain either 
the Schedula Monitoria, nor the Processus Integri; the first being 
published in the following year, the latter after Sydenham's death. 

A. D. 1686.— Publication of a Geneva edition of the Tractatus. 

Publication of the Schedula Monitoria. 

A. D. 1687.— Publication of an Amsterdam edition of the 
Schedula Monitoria.—English Letter to Boyle. Vid. infr. 

A, D. 1688.—- Publication of the second London edition of the 
Schedula Monitoria. 

A.D 1689.— Publication of a Geneva edition of the Schedula 
Monitoria. 

In reviewing the notices of the ten years of Sydenham's life, 
just enumerated, I cannot conceal from myself the fact of what 
I have written being the history of a book rather than of a man. 
Nevertheless, a list of editions, both English and foreign, with 
date and place, has one element of value even in the way of 
biography ; it supplies us with the means of determining two 
things : the rate at which a reputation spreads, and the influence 
which a work exerts. I must add, that the whole of the biblio- 
graphy of Sydenham’s works is taken from Dr. Greenhill. 

As no life of Sydenham ever omits his answer to Sir Richard 
Blackmore, I conform with the usual custom, and find room for 
it here. It stands in the words of Dr. Johnson; when Sir 
Richard Blackmore “ first engaged in the study of physic, he 
inquired, as he says, of Dr. Sydenham, what authors he should 
read, and was directed by Dr. Sydenham to Don Quixote, which 
said he, is a very good book, I read it still. The perverseness of 
mankind makes it often mischievous in men of eminence to give 
way to merriment. The idle and the illiterate will long shelter 


xli LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


themselves under this foolish apophthegm." Perhaps these reflec- 
tions are misplaced. No one isin danger of taking Sydenham's 
advice literally. As to the interpretation of it according to its 
spirit, there are two views. Sydenham might have meant to 
say a rude thing to Sir Richard Blackmore, and to suggest that 
for a person of his intelligence, one book was as good as another, 
or he might merely have meant that medicine was not to be 
learned by reading. Of these two interpretations, the latter is 
both most hkely, and most reasonable. 

Another off-hand saying attributed to Sydenham is to be 
found in the Allgemeines Gelehrte Lexicon (published 1751), 
in the life of Sydenham. When asked by Harris, why he wrote 
nothing concerning the diseases of the head, he answered that 
he did not undertake to write upon diseases that he was 
unable to cure. For all that, however, he wrote upon phthisis. 

As the present point is a sort of resting-place in our biogra- 
phy, where we may pause, and discuss any question connected 
with the life of Sydenham in general, without being referable to 
any particular year of it, a fact upon which some little specu- 
lation has been wasted, may here be noticed. Although 
Sydenham was a licentiate of the College of Physicians, he was 
not a fellow. 

This is mentioned in an invidious manner by Dr. Lettsom in 
the year 1804; and, I am not aware, that it has been similarly 
alluded. to by any earlier writer.—‘‘ The great Sydenham, 
for all his labours, only gained the sad and unjust recom- 
pense of calumny and ignominy; and that, from emulation of 
some of his collegiate brethren and others, whose indigna- 
tion at length arose to that height, that they endeavoured 
to banish him, as guilty of medicinal heresy, out of that 
illustrious society; and by the whispering of others was 
baulked the employment of the royal family, where before 
he was called among the first physicians. Yet some patrons 
this great and good man had among his brethren, as Goodall, 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xlii 


Brady, Paman, and Dr. Cole, of Worcester, as may be seen by 
their epistles in his works. Dr. Micklethwaite, a little before his 
death, did profess, notwithstanding all the attempts of several 
against the methods of Sydenham, that these would prevail, and 
triumph over all other methods ; and the event has fully verified 
this prediction of Dr. Micklethwaite.” 

It would have been well if Dr. Lettsom had mentioned an 
instance of the sort alluded to, accompanied with the proper 
evidence. As itis, the envy and uncharitableness of the pro- 
fession may or may not have been the case. I am as unwilling 
to acquit as to accuse mixed bodies of men of being actuated by 
unworthy personal motives, or of being influenced by individuals 
who are so actuated ; on the other hand, it is not reasonable to 
multiply causes unnecessarily. Under the Restoration, the 
pressure of an arbitrary government lay as heavy upon bodies 
like the College of Physicians, as upon the parliament and the 
courts of justice. That there was a special interference on the 
part of the court in the case of Talbor, who, by royal mandate, 
was permitted to practise in London, without a license from the 
college, and in spite of its opposition, we learn from a letter of 
the secretary of state (Arlington)! to the president. That 
Dr. Coxe was expelled from the presidency for whiggism, we 
have already stated ; and that Sydenham's non-election should 
be referred to the memory of his republicanism, is of a piece 
with the history and spirit of the times in question. 

The year 1689 was the last year of Sydenham's active and 
useful life. He had long suffered from gout. Latterly he had 
suffered from the superadded torment of a renal calculus, which 
caused copious hematuria. He died at his house in Pall 
Mall, on the 29th day of December, 1689, He lies buried 
in the church of St. James's, Westminster, with the follow- 


ing mural tablet as a memorial : — 


! Sir George Baker's Works—On the Cinchona. 


xliv LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


PROPE HUNC LOCUM SEPULTUS EST 
THOMAS SYDENHAM, 
MEDICUS IN OMNE JEVUM NOBILIS. 
NATUS BRAT A.D. 1024. 

VIXIT ANNOS 65. 


DELETIS VETERIS SEPULCHRI VESTIGIIS, 
NE REI MEMORIA INTERIRET, 
HOC MARMOR PONI JUSSIT COLLEGIUM 
REGALE MEDICORUM LONDINENSE A.D. 1810. 


OPTIME MERITO. 


That in 1666 Sydenham was the father of a single son, we 
learn from the first edition of the Methodus : “ Si filius meus, 
unicus, eujus ego salutem et vitam vel ipsis Indiarum opibus 
longe przepono, ex hoc morbo zegrotaret, hoc fere modo eundem 
tractare juberem.” 

That the son's name was Wiliiam Sydenham, we learn from 
the edition of 1668——“ filiolum meum Gulielmum Sydenham.” 

That he was living in 1670, having recovered from the small- 
pox, we learn from the Observationes Mediee, iv, 6, 12: 
* Hae sola methodo charissimus mihi filius, Gulielmus Sydenham, 
distincto hujuscemodi variolarum genere laborans, mense Decem- 
bri, 1670, favente numine, restitutus est." 

That in 1685 he (Sydenham) was the father of children, we 
learn from the Observationes Mediez—* Liberos meos, ac 
amicitia mihi conjunetissimos, curavi. (Obs. Med. v, 2, 14.) 
We also learn the same from the Dissertatio Epistolaris— 
* Hac ego methodo ipsius liberos, curavi." (p. 24.) 

Further and more precise information we collect from 
Sydenham's will. 

This was made on the 27th of November, 1688, and a codicil 
was attached to it on the 29th of the same month, of the 
following year, only a few days before his death. It directs 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xlv 


that his executor shall be Mr. Malthus,’ an apothecary of Pall 
Mall, and that his remains shall be interred with a careful 
abstinence from all ostentatious funereal pomp. It supplies, 
also, in addition to that of William Sydenham, his firstborn, 
the names of Henry and James, the two other sons of the 
physician. Upon the first of these three the estate is left, 
entailed, and this is described as consisting of lands in Herts 
and Leicestershire. It is charged, however, with one payment 
of £200, to Henry Sydenham (then in Spain), with another of 
the same amount to James, and with the annual payment of 
£25 to Mrs. Catherine Gee, Sydenham’s mother-in-law. Thirty 
pounds are also left for the sake of supplying a professional 
education to James, the son of Mary Thornhill, Sydenham’s 
eldest sister. This nephew was, afterwards, the well known 
artist, Sir James Thornhill, the father-in-law of Hogarth. 
Three grandchildren, Barbara, Henrietta Maria, and Thomas, 
the children of Wiliam Sydenham, where living when their 
grandfather died. The codicil subtracts £50 from the £200 
of Henry Sydenham, that sum having been forwarded to him 
in Spain, subsequent to the bequest of the will. 

The entrance of William Sydenham at Pembroke Hall, Cam- 
bridge, has already been mentioned. 

For the use of the son, who followed his father’s profession, the 
* Processus. Integri in morbis fere omnibus curandis" were drawn 
up by the father. The MS. was intrusted to Dr. Monfort, who 
printed twenty copies for private circulation. They appeared 
soon after this, in an inconvenient form, in the Nuremberg 
Miscellanea Curiosa. This caused the publication of them, in 
a full edition, as a posthumous work of Sydenham’s in 1698 ; 
Dr. Monfort being the editor. Along with them we have a 
fragment of a treatise on phthisis, the composition of which 


! In 1712, Apothecary to the Queen. Father to Sydenham Malthus, the grand- 
father of the Reverend Robert Malthus, the Professor.—Communication from the 
Rev. R. Holt, of Eton, and Reginald Bray, Esq., from private papers in the family of 
Malthus. 


xlvi LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 
was interrupted by disease, and, finally, broken altogether by 
death. 

Subjoined, as an appendix to the second volume, will be 
found the fragment of an English work, entitled "Theologia 
Rationalis. It is the transcript of a MS. in the public 
library of the University of Cambridge, and is headed ** Theo- 
logia Rationalis, by the famous physician Dr. Sydenham.” 
As this heading, as far as it goes, is evidence on the side of 
the authenticity of the MS., whilst there is no evidence against 
it being Sydenham’s, the fragment must be considered to have 
come from the author to whom it is ascribed, until reasons be 
shown to the contrary. 

For some interesting extracts from a MS. in the Bodleian 
Library, headed “ Extracts of Sydenham’s Physick Books, and 
some good letters on various subjects,’ the reader is referred 
to Dr. Greenhill’s Anecdota Sydenhamiana. 

Did Sydenham ever visit the Canary Isles, and ascend the 
peak of Teneriffe? This question is suggested by a reference 
with which I have been courteously favoured by Dr. Kennedy, 
of Woodhouse, in Leicestershire, to a passage in Boyle’s Works, 
vol. v, p. 706, Dr. Birch’s edition. 

I think he did not. The Sydenham mentioned by Boyle 
is a Mr. (not a Dr.) Sydenham. He was also sufficiently a 
loyalist to drink the king’s health on the top of the peak ; 
whereas the physician was more likely to have drunk to the 
memory of the Protector. Thirdly, he is mentioned as a person 
who was in the Aadit of seeing either the peak itself, or persons 
who lived under its shadow. Lastly, the time of the observa- 
tions is one, at which a physician like Sydenham was more 
likely to be either prescribing or drinking Canary wine, than 
visiting the Canary Islands. However, that it was his son 
Henry who (in 1688, 1689, and perhaps at other times) was in 
Spain, is by no means improbable. 

* x % E x 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xlvii 


I should be glad to be able to follow the career of the son of 
Sydenham, but am destitute of materials. 

The fortunes of the collateral descendants of Sydenham, and 
of the family estate, are neither satisfactory nor creditable. 
Sydenham's nephew, the son of Colonel Sydenham, and the 
William Sydenham, who was deceived on the subject of the 
oven, was Esquire of the Body to William III, and the last of 
the family, his sons having died during his lifetime. He “ put 
up the estate at a private lottery. It was generally supposed 
that there was some trick designed, for it was contrived, or at 
least hoped, that the fortunate ticket would fall to the share of 
a confidant of the family, who they imagined would have been 
prevailed upon to return the estate for a small consideration. 
That ticket happened to be hers; but to their great disappoint- 
ment she immediately married Doily Mitchel, Esquire, who 
sold it to George Richards, of Longbredy, Esquire. But it 
being necessary that Mr. Sydenham and his two daughters 
should make a formal surrender of the estate to the vendee, on 
their refusal, they were committed to Dorchester prison, about 
1709, where they ended their days." 

It is from a portrait in the College of Physicians that we 
must collect our ideas of the personal appearance of Sydenham. 
From this, the bust belonging to the same institution is most 
probably taken; at any rate, it is a later production— Sept. 30, 
1757. “The college agreed to erect a busto of Doctor 
Sydenham in their ccnaculum, the expense not to exceed 
one hundred pounds, and appointed a committee to take care 
of this business. The committee to be the president, treasurer, 
register, Dr. Askew, and Dr. Akenside."! (Vol. xii, p. 61.) 
Of engravings, I find none within half a century after his death ; 
and these seem copies of one another, but not of the particular 
picture just noticed. This was presented October 19, 1747, by 
Sydenham's grandson, and was painted by Mrs. Mary Beale. 


! The drawing for the vignette woodcut, which stands in the general title to the 
Society's publications, was taken from this bust. 


xlvii LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


The descendants of the physician are in possession of no portrait 
with equal claims to originality, neither is any such known else- 
where. November 6,1818,the College of All Souls applied for 
permission to purchase, or copy it, and were permitted to do the 
latter. Two other portraits, belonging also to the College of 
Physicians, are evidently late as well as inferior productions. 

I now approach a question which, although it cannot be said 
either that much has been written upon it, or that the evidence 
was originally so conclusive as to supersede any subsequent in- 
vestigation, is still a point whereon, aecording to my own ob- 
servation, the opinion, both of good and bad judges, is equally 
decided ; I mean the language in which the works of Sydenham 
were originally written. I have never met any one who did not, 
more or less, adopt the current notion, that the present form 
under which the Opera Sydenhami appear, was not the ori- 
einal one ; that they were first written 1n English by Sydenham 
and afterwards translated into Latin by some one else, i. e. by 
either Dr. Mapletoft alone, or by Dr. Mapletoft and Gilbert 
Havers conjointly. | 

Now, upon the absolute fact as to the form, language, and au- 
thorship of the original Sydenham, I am not prepared to venture 
an opinion, being equally unwilling to either affirm or deny 
anything positive upon the question. Instead of this, I will 
submit to the reader an exhibition of the general principles 
upon which the criticism ought to rest, and the particular de- 
tails, in the way of evidence, to which it has to be applied. 

In the first place, there is no a priori improbability in the 
fact of Sydenham having been both able and willing to com- 
pose a Latin work of the merits and magnitude of the one under 
consideration. ‘The condition of his family, his Oxford educa- 
tion and degrees, and the statement of his friend Sir Hans 
Sloane, who, especially, states that Cicero, of whom he had a 
fine busto in his study, was his favorite author, equally decide 
this portion of the question. Some Latin he must have had; 
and much Latin he may have had. And it is to those who 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xlix 


prescribe the exact limit of his scholarship, and venture upon 
asserting that whilst he had Latinity enough for keeping an act, 
he had not enough to write a book with, that the onus probandi 
should be allotted. We must not, therefore, in the case of 
Sydenham, argue as we might on a Latin edition of the work of 
some writer known to have been uneducated. In such a case 
as this last, the Latin dress must be ascribed either to the hand 
of a second person or to a miracle. Where, however, there is 
nothing that necessanly excludes the question of the author's 
capability, the work itself is prima facie evidence of such capa- 
bility. This is an universal rule of criticism. 

Secondly. It is also an established rule of criticism, that who- 
ever maintains the opinion that any particular work isa transla- 
tion, must do one of two things—he must either point out the 
original, or else give a plausible reason for its non-existence. This 
was the principle upon which Dr. Johnson disposed, off-hand, 
with M‘Pherson’s Ossian. — It is the principle, too, upon which 
the French critics meet those over-patriotic Spaniards, who, on 
the strength of the accuracy of its descriptions of Spanish life, 
assume a Spanish original for the novel of Gil Blas. 

A comparison of the ascertained facts will show (what it is 
always necessary to show in cases like the present,) the side 
upon which the burden of proof les. This is with those who 
deny the original Latinity of Sydenham, a fact upon which I 
cannot too decidedly insist. It is perfectly allowable for the 
supporter of the contrary doctrine to rest simply on the case as 
it stands, and require reasons against the authenticity of the 
Latin Sydenham, rather than to supply them for it. JI am no 
such supporter ; and, consequently, have no wish to claim even 
the whole legitimate extension of the rule affirmantis est probare; 
at the same time, I consider that three out of four of the mate- 
rial and admitted facts are all on one side, and all on the side 
which those who impugn are bound to disprove, rather that 
which those who defend are bound to prove. 


| LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


1. It is a material and admitted fact, that the Opera 
Sydenhami are at present in a Latin form. 

2. It is a material and admitted fact, that no undoubted 
English original has been produced. 

3. Itisa material and admitted fact, that the disappearance of 
such an English original, providing that it ever existed, has never 
been plausibly explained. 

4. On the other hand, it is a material admitted fact, that the 
general belief of medical scholars is against the original 
Sydenham bemg in Latin. 

Now, if the grounds for this last fact be not sufficient to 
counterbalance the three previous ones, it must be admitted 
that the case against the original Latinity of our author has yet 
to be made out. This narrows the question; since it is not 
asked whether Sydenham wrote in Latin or English, but whether 
the evidence for believing that what he wrote in English some 
one else translated into Latin be sufficient ; and, be it remem- 
bered, that it is quite as important for medical scholars to know 
whether their opinions upon such a subject be logical or illo- 
gical, in the way of critical reasoning, as to know whether they 
are right or wrong as a matter of fact; the former question 
having the additional advantage of being what the latter is not, 
capable of determination, whilst the latter is, after all, a matter 
of uncertainty ; since itis very easy for the fact to be one way, 
and the evidence another, just as events may occur, even whilst 
the chances are against them doing so. 

Of course, the fourth fact enumerated above, viz. the current 
belief that Sydenham was originally written 1n English, is a com- 
plex one, and one capable of being resolved into such other facts 
as it is founded upon, and out of which it originated. These are— 

1, The MS. of the College of Physicians. 

2. The statement of Dr. Mapletoft’s grandson. 

3. The evidence of the style. 

A. The MS. of the College of Physicians.—In the year 1795, 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. hi 


a MS. volume, in folio, was presented to the College of Physi- 
cians by Mr. P. Le Vaillant. The title-page is— 


“MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS, 


BY 
THOMAS SYDENHAM. 


Whatsoever thy hand findeth to doe, doe it with all thy might ; 
for there is no work, nor devises, nor knowledge, nor wisdom 
in the grave, whither thou goest. (Eccles; 9°, 10°.) 


LONDON, MARTIJ 26°, 1669. 
Di. THOMAS SYDENHAM, HIS BOOK, 


684, ANNO DOMNO.” 


This last sentence (“ D'. Thomas Sydenham,” &c.) is in a 
different and a younger hand from the rest. Then follows, in 
the next page, 

* THE PREFACE. 

“Thus I think I have my being upon this terrestrial orb, 
which, is both situate, and, as it were, thrust out at a vast dis- 
tance from the glorious region of light and life, and likewise in 
a continual flux and reflux, in all and every of its parts—nor 
do I only live upon it, but wear also a body which is made up 
of the gross and vile parts thereof, and of necessity determined 
to that sudden change and dissolution whereunto the laws of 
its constitution have subjected the whole. But, nevertheless, 
I have an intellectual nature, which incessantly aspires after 
another, and that a more happy state of being ; and, besides, its 
knowledge of a future happiness, is furnished with faculties 
suited to the attainment thereof. If, in compliance with the 
revealed will of God in Christ, and the innate laws of its own 
original purity, it shall vanquish the irregular suggestions of 
my body, to which, for a while, it is coupled; and managing 
both itself, and that under a due obedience to the will and 
those laws, shall employ the utmost faculty of both in adoring 
the supreme and ineffable Being in the practising of virtue and 
doing good to men. This being so, I find it highly imports me 


as a physician, not only with all my might to buckle to an 
* 


liv LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


This is, apparently, in the same hand with the words “ D'. 
Thomas Sydenham, &c.,” except that it is firmer, and more formed. 
At any rate, it is different from either of the other two. 

What follows is the equivalent (translation, or original, as 
the case may be) of the first sentence of the second chapter of 
the first book. 

In the Latin this runs as follows— 


“CARAT, 
* De Morbis Epidemicis. 


“ Nihil quicquam (opinor) animum universe qua patet medi- 
cine pomeeria perlustrantem, tanta admiratione percellet, quam 
discolor illa et sui plane dissimilis morborum epidemicorum 
facies; non tam qua varias ejusdem anni tempestates, quam 
qua discrepantes diversorum ab invicem annorum constitu- 
tiones referunt, ab isque dependent." 

In English—* There is nothing in the whole art of medi- 
cine that deserves more admiration than the great diversity 
which is to be observed in continued fevers; not so much in 
respect to the general seasons of the year (for, as to those, in- 
termitting fevers chiefly have their differences,) as in respect of 
the different constitution of one year from another, &c." 

Now, although this is not close in the way of translation, 
the next sentence is looser still, and, by the time we come to 
the end of the page, it is no longer possible to compare sentence 
with sentence at all; indeed, the remainder is scarcely suffi- 
ciently parallel with our present Sydenham to be considered 
even as an abstract. 

This applies to pp. 13 and 14 of the MS. 

Page 15 of the MS. coincides with chapter iv, p. 6, of the 
present edition ; and what continues, is the paraphrase of the 
same chapter, down to p. 50. 

Pages 24— 29 of the MS. contain remarks on the pesti- 
lential fever and inflammatory fever, ending, * And this is the 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. lv 


substance of whatever I know, or at least am able to reduce to 
rules, concerning this sort of continued fever; and indeed, when 
I first published my Methodus Medendi Febres, 1 knew no other 
sort but the depuratory fever only, which there I handled." 

The remainder is equally disjointed. At p. 49 the hand 
changes; and at p. 67 it changes again to the original one. 
This paraphrase (or translation) is no longer to be explained 
from the Observationes Medice, but from the Epistola 
Responsoria de Lue Venerea. It begins at p. 4. 

In p. 77 we find a commentary headed ‘ Paroxismus (sic) 
Nephriticus ;’ in p. 82, ‘Epidemical Diseases of the year 1670; 
in p. 101, ‘Epidemical Diseases of the year 1673.’ Thirteen 
pages after this comes the concluding sentence of the whole 
MS., which is,—* All this, at least that which contains the 
history and cure of acute diseases, I have brought into my late 
book, entitled, * Observationes Medice, &e.; in which book, 
my observations are more perfect than in this manuscript." 
The history of this MS., in respect to its outward form, is com- 
pleted by the additional statements—that 1t has the appearance 
of being a careful copy, rather than a rough draft ; that here and 
there there are occasional erasures ; that there is for the begin- 
ning a few marginal notes in the way of index; and that, in 
some places, there are figures 1n the margin, denoting the page 
of the printed edition which is translated, paraphrased, or 
abstracted. 

Now a very little consideration will show that, whatever else 
this MS. may be, it is not the original English of what was 
afterwards Sydenham in Latin. 

l. It is of later date than the Methodus Medendi, and 
consequently is no English original to 2. This is shown by 
the first chapter, of which the Latin equivalent is found for the 
first time in the edition of 1686. 

2. It is of later date than even the Observationes Medicz, 
and the Epistolae Responsoriz, as may be seen from the con- 
cluding sentence. 


lvi LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


9. It has the appearance of being a translation from the 
Latin, rather than an original basis from which a Latin trans- 
lation might be made. 

This last position rests upon the following argument. Every 
page contains sentences which are so Latin in their character 
and phraseology, as to exhibit internal evidence of being trans- 
lations. Such a sentence (and there are hundreds of them) is 
the following :—‘ This fever began to be grassant at the end 
of the spring, contrary to the indoles of the fever preceding, &c.^? 
Now, whilst it is hard to mistake this for original English, 
it is very easy to consider it as a translation. At the same 
time, the converse phenomenon sometimes occurs, i. e., the 
English is plain. and vernacular, whilst the Latin exhibits an 
attempt at being an over-idiomatic expansion of it— e. g., the 


* whole art of medicine,” 


in the Latin, is, * universe qua patet 
medicine pomeria.” ‘This, however, is the exception rather than 
the rule. 

Assuming, however, that the MS. is by Sydenham, we are 
reduced to the following dilemma. Hither the English is the 
basis of the Latin, or the Latin the basis of the English. If 
the latter, what was the inducement which made Sydenham 
translate a work which, whether his own or not, in its Latin 
form, had appeared under his name? If the former, how came 
a man, whose Latinity was sufficient to Latmize his English 
style, to require the scholarship of any second person ? 

One of the alternatives in this dilemma forces us upon the 
reconsideration of the questions involved in the handwriting, 
and the concluding sentence. This last is evidence of so plain 
and straightforward a nature, that I know of nothing equally 
positive to set against it. ‘To assume that it is a forgery, is to 
take upon one’s self the burden of proof. Nevertheless, without 
doing this, I put a high value, as evidence on the other side, 
upon the unlikelihood of a man translating himself. But this 
introduces another point, viz., the identification of the hand- 
writing, To those who believe that one of the hands of the MS. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. lvii 


is the same with the autograph of Sydenham, of which we have 
a specimen in the library of Caius College, Cambridge, on the 
fly-leaf of the Epistle to Brady, there can be neither doubt nor 
shadow of doubt upon this matter. Unlikely as itis that a man 
should translate himself, it is still more unlikely that he should 
transcribe the translation of another man. Hence the author- 
ship of the MS. is unequivocally Sydenham’s, if the handwriting 
be so. But this is an open question ; in other words, a question 
liable to doubt. For my own part, I doubt the identity of the 
handwritings, but then I also doubt the value of my opinion on 
such a matter. 

B. The statement of Dr. Mapletoft’s grandson.—The following 
quotation from the Gentleman's Magazine, (vol. xiij, p. 528,) 
gives the grounds of Dr. Ward's statement respecting the 
authorship of Sydenham; that being the one which has influ- 
enced the opinion of the medical world ever since. The extract 
tells its own story. Dr. Ward, in his Lives of the Gresham 
Professors, asserts that Dr. Mapletoft helped Sydenham 1n his 
Latin. Dr. Swan censures the assertion, on the score of its 
being unsupported by argument. Dr. Ward rejoins, bringing 
forward his authority, and showing that his statement had been 
extended beyond what its expressions warranted. 


Dr. Ward's reasons for having asserted, in his Lives of the 
Professors of Gresham College, that the works of Dr. 
Sydenham were translated into Latin by Dr. Mapletoft 
and Mr. Havers. 


* [t is now a considerable time since Dr. Swan published a 
new translation of the works of Dr. Sydenham, with his Life 
prefixed to it, which was afterwards printed separately in the 
Gentleman’s Magazine for December last; and among other 
reports there taken notice of, as having commonly prevailed to 
the prejudice of Dr. Sydenham, one is this: ‘That his works 
were composed by him in English, and translated into Latin 
by Dr. Mapletoft ;’ the truth of which fact he thought not 


lvii LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


sufficiently evident, and therefore, as I had mentioned it in 
the Lives of the Professors of Gresham College (p. 275), he 
was pleased to call upon me for my vouchers. But having the 
works of Dr. Sydenham by me in Latin, my curiosity did not 
lead me to look into the translation ; and, being in the country 
when the Life was republished in the Magazine, did not come 
to the knowledge of it till, upon my return home, it was told 
me by some of my friends. I endeavoured in my history to 
use all proper care in producing authorities for such facts as 
seemed to require them, but chose not to swell it unnecessarily 
where things were generally known, as I apprehended this to 
be, having often heard it affirmed, as well by gentlemen of the 
faculty as others. However, lest my silence should weaken 
the credit of what I have said, not only as to that particular, 
but likewise any others, for which I did not think it requisite 
to cite my authors; I shall, for the satisfaction both of the in- 
quirer and the publie, acquaint them with the proofs of what 
is there related; and also take this opportunity to rectify a 
mistake, which I now find I have been guilty of, in one cir- 
cumstance concerning that fact. For I said, as Dr. Swan re- 
marks, *'That Dr. Mapletoft translated the Observationes Medice, 
&c. of Dr. Sydenham into Latin at the desire of the author; and 
that the other pieces of that excellent physician were afterwards 
translated into that language by Mr. Gilbert Havers.’ This 
was agreeable to the account I had then received. But having 
since applied myself to the Rev. John Mapletoft, rector of 
Byfield, in Northamptonshire, the Doctor’s son, for more certain 
information in that affair, he has been so obliging as to acquaint 
me, that he has reason to think his father translated all those 
pieces of Dr. Sydenham which were printed together in the 
year 1688, and contain the whole of what has been published 
as his works in later editions, except the * Schedula Monitoria.’ 
What induces him to think so is, that he had not only heard 
his father say he translated the first volume, but likewise, 
though he never heard him name the particular pieces done 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. lix 


by him, yet he sometimes used to speak as if the whole, in a 
manner, was so done. And that he translated the treatise 
‘De Hydrope,’ which is the last piece contained in the edition of 
1683, is very certain from a particular circumstance, which his 
father would frequently relate with some pleasantry, both to his 
friends and likewise to himself, in order to caution him against 
inadvertency and over-hastiness in doing things with which he 
was well acquainted. The Doctor, it seems, after he had trans- 
lated that discourse, sent his manuscript to Dr. Sydenham, who, 
in return, rallied him in a jocose and friendly manner, for having 
used the word hydrops always in the feminine gender. It not 
a little surprised him, how he could possibly have run into such 
a repeated mistake merely from mattention; and furnished 
him with a useful lesson for his son, to avoid the like. This 
translation must have been made about the time that Dr. 
Mapletoft took orders. And as he then bid farewell to physic, 
it is not to be wondered at that the ‘Sehedula Monitoria,’ 
which Dr. Sydenham did not write till the year 1686, was 
translated by another hand. And that Mr. Havers was the 
person who did it, I have lately been assured, by two very 
eminent gentlemen of the profession, who were pleased to tell 
me that they had often heard it from Dr. Monfort, an intimate 
friend of Dr. Sydenham, and who published his ‘ Processus 
Integri, after his decease. 

* [| have nowhere said that Dr. Sydenham was not sufficiently 
acquainted with the Latin tongue to have written his works in 
that language himself, without calling in the assistance of his 
friends. In the year 1666, he published a small treatise in 
Latin, entitled * Methodus Curandi Febres Proprius Observa- 
tionibus Superstructa,’ which was printed at London, in octavo, 
and dedicated to the Honorable Robert Boyle. And the same 
year came out another edition of it, in duodecimo, at Amsterdam. 
This book consisted of four sections—* De Febribus Continuis,’ 
‘De Symptomatibus Febres Continuas Comitantibus,’ ‘De 


Ix LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


Variolis.—And a second edition of it was published at London 
in 1668, corrected and enlarged with the addition of a fifth section, 
* De Peste sive Febre Pestilentiali;” and at the end, a Latin poem, 
by the celebrated Mr. Locke, which has since accompanied the 
several editions of his works. After this, in the year 1676, the 
Doctor published his «Observationes Medicz circa morborum acu- 
torum historiam et curationem, dedicated to Dr. Mapletoft, for 
which he gives the following reasons: **'Tum ob mutuam qua nos 
invicem complectimur, amicitiam benevolentiamque ; tum etiam 
quia nemo te melius judicare valeat, siquo in loco aut precio 
habendz sint, quas hie trado observationes ; cum per septen- 
nium, quod jam ultimo excurrit, plura e praecipuis atque insig- 
nioribus, que sequentes exhibent pagelle, tute etiam oculis 


usurpaveris." 


And it is not improbable, that gratitude for his 
trouble and pains in the translation, might be an additional 
reason to those here mentioned, by which it seems as if their: 
friendship had then continued about seven years, which was a 
year short of the time when the second edition of the * Methodus 
Curandi febres! was published. There is no reason, therefore, to 
imagine that that piece was translated into Latin by Dr. Mapletoft, 
who did not take his doctor's degree till 1667, which was before 
his acquaintance with Dr. Sydenham. Nor have I ever 
heard of any other person who translated any treatise of Dr. 
Sydenham, besides Dr. Mapletoft and Mr. Havers. And as 
the greatest part of that last mentioned was afterwards inserted 
into the * Observationes Medicz, under the proper chapters, 
what has been said of Dr. Mapletoft's translating these, must 
be understood with that exception. No one will question what 
Dr. Swan informs us of, from Sir Hans Sloane: “ That Dr. 
Sydenham, with whom he was familarly acquainted, was par- 
ticularly versed in the writings of the great Roman orator and 
philosopher. But this, however, must have been in some of 
the last years of his life. For Mr. Mapletoft acquaints me, he 
had often heard his father say, that having presented Dr. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. lxi 


Sydenham with Tully’s works, he soon after saw written in one 
of the volumes, in the Doctor's own hand, * How unhappy am I 
never to have read Tully till after I was sixty years old" As 
to the Processus integri, which is a posthumous piece, Dr. 
Monfort, who published it, tells us in his preface, that the 
manuscript was in Dr. Sydenham's own hand; so that very 
probably he took it himself out of his own works, it being gene- 
rally pretty near in the same words. 

* There seems to be no great difficulty either to suppose that 
Dr. Sydenham might desire the assistance of his friends to 
translate the several treatises, which compose his works, as he 
wrote them; or to accept of it when offered. The constant 
attendance on his practice, with the infirm state of his health, 
accompanied with the racking tortures of the gout, might easily 
induce him to this, though never so well qualified for it him- 
self in other respects. And the reasons why Dr. Mapletoft 
should particularly be engaged in that friendly office, seem very 
obvious, as he was intimately acquainted with his method of 
practice, and much esteemed at that time for the elegancy of 
his Latin style. Several instances of the like nature, done by 
other persons, both to serve their friends, and at the same time 
benefit the public, might easily be produced, if necessary. I shall 
add no more, but to acquaint the reader that my only reasons 
for deferring this publication solong have been owing partly to 
other necessary avocations, and partly to my absence from home. 


* Joon WARD. 
* G, C., Oct. 8, 1743." 


The fullest extension that can be given to the assertion of 
Ward is, that part of Sydenham was translated by Dr. Mapletoft, 
and this is all that the fullest extension of the evidence of the 
MS. of the College of Physicians will supply. 

c. The style.— Here we have. the same want of some unequi- 
vocal and indubitable fact, as the groundwork of our reasoning, 


which has been so prominent a desideratum throughout. An 


Ixu LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


unequivocal and indubitable Latin work of Sydenham's would 
be a standard by which we might ascertain the extent to which 
his disputed Latin compositions bore internal evidence of iden- 
tity of composition. But we have no such specimen ; whilst to 
argue from the disputed work itself, is to argue in a circle. Then 
as to the English style of Sydenham. The Theologia Rationalis 
is not beyond the reach of scepticism, whilst the MS. of the 
College of Physicians is in the same predicament with the Latin 
forms of his works in general. 

In this case, our nearest resource les in a reference to the 
works of Dr. Mapletoft. Are these like or unlike the form 
which is taken by the Latin Sydenham? In my own mind, 
there is a great resemblance between the style of the Observa- 
tiones Medice, and the Gresham Lectures of Dr. Mapletoft. 
Sydenham was stated, by Sir Hans Sloane, to have been an 
admirer of Cicero; yet the style of the Latin Sydenham is not 
Ciceronian, at least not wholly so. It attempts to be Ciceronian 
in the fulness, rotundity, and cadence of the sentences, but the 
idioms are the idioms of Terence or Plautus, if taken first-hand 
from the study of the original authors, and of Erasmus's Adages 
if taken second-hand. Now this over-idiomatic Latinity is 
characteristic both of the Latin Sydenham and of Dr. Mapletoft’s 
Orations. This similarity is in one case, at least, more than 
merely verbal. Whilst Sydenham takes pains to distinguish the 
Egyptian from the Grecian Z7Esculapius, Mapletoft does the 
same (or vice versd) :—'* A multis jam seculis ante natum non 
Grecum modo, sed (qui mille annis hune antecesset) gyptium 
JEsculapium." (Pref. edit. tert. p. 1.) This is from Sydenham. 
Then from one of Mapletoft’s orations comes— 

* Msculapium Memphitem (non Grecorum illum qui multis 
post seeculis natus est) Tosorthum etiam dictum, filium Ham 
(qui Grecis Zeve " Auuev, Romanis Jupiter fuit) et ipsius Noz 
nepotem, primum medicine autorem fuisse habitum et prisci 
cvi hominibus, ex antiquissimorum scriptorum monumentis, 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. lxi 


conjectura, saltem verisimile jam pridem confecimus." Again, 
“et primum artis medie: inventorem non Grecum illum qui 
millesimo przter propter anno post hunc nostrum floruit, sed 
Memphitieum, Tosorthum etiam dictum, fiium Ham (quem 
Jovem nuncupatum fuisse superius ostendimus) et ipsius Noz 
denique nepotem." 

Putting these facts together, we find a complicated case of 
that sort of reasoning called cumulative, and which will probably 
affect no two readers exactly alike. 

Those who believe that the evidence of Dr. Mapletoft’s 
grandson as to his grandfather's share in the Sydenhami 
Opera, is of so positive a nature, that nothing equally peremp- 
tory has been set against it, will incline to the current doctrine. 
Those, on the other hand, who are aware of the extent to which 
one man may believe that he has written another person's work, 
and of the frequency, in literary history, of such hallucinations, 
will put it (as long as it stands unsupported by other facts) at 
a very low value indeed. 

Then again, as to the reality of such facts, and as to their 
value as evidence, there is much room for a latitude of opinion. 
The similarity of the two styles is, in my own mind, the most 
important of them. Were it not for this, I should, for my own 
part, have laid so little stress upon the statement of the younger 
Mapletoft, as to have denied that a primá facie case had been 
made out against the common-sense inference that arises from 
the existence of a Sydenham in Latin, and the non-existence 
of a Sydenham in English. Yet this similarity is by no means 
conclusive. Sydenham may have written, and Dr. Mapletoft 
have revised, and in revising have thrown in the idioms that are 
most characteristic. Without expressing any opinion as to the 
fact itself, I consider this latter view as an hypothesis which 
reconciles nearly all the statements, and is in itself intrinsically 
probable. At any rate the original Methodus was Sydenham's. 

I cannot leave this portion of the subject without declaring 


lxiv LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


the extent to which, in the case in question, the wish is father 
to the thought. For two reasons, it would be gratifying to the 
admirer of Sydenham to be sure that he was the author of the 
works that bear his name, and that in the strictest and fullest 
sense of the word. 

l. The style is the man.—The certainty that we were reading 
thoughts of Sydenham in the language of Sydenham (even 
though not in his mother tongue), would be, in some degree, 
a compensation for the scantiness of his personal history. 

9. Joint authorship should be acknowledged.—The merits of 
the Latinity, if not Sydenham’s, should either have been attri- 
buted to the real author, or have been disclaimed on the part of 
Sydenham. It is not right for a man to take the credit of 
both medical skill and good Latin scholarship, unless he possess 
both. If Mapletoft wrote the work, Sydenham allows himself 
to appear a better Latinist than he is; an inference which 
should have been precluded by an acknowledgment. 

x se x E * E 

The reputation of Sydenham grew rapidly, and he had him- 
self the satisfaction of enjoying a considerable share of it during 
his lifetime. This we may discover by referring to the biblio- 
graphical portion of the present memoir, where we find an 
enumeration of the earlier editions both English and foreign. 
Of his contemporaries, I find the language to be generally that 
of courteous encomium, even upon points where they differ with 
him; language, of which the following extract from Morton 
is a fair specimen: * Dolet quidem me in hac dissertatione a 
sententiáà magni Sydenhamii discrepasse; sed rationibus in 
capite septimo hujus exercitatione pensitatis constabit me multo 
usu fretum atque experientià edoctum non rixandi vel certandi 
gratià verum reluctante animo contradixisse. Pace igitur 
magni viri mihi etiam liceat liberali philosophia ubique pro- 
fesso, pro modulo meo, saluti humani generi hoc pacti prospi- 


cere et consulere."—IlvperoAo*ta, 1694. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixv 


However, that there was a tone of detraction, which every 
lover of science must perceive with regret, in the way in which 
Lister speaks of Sydenham, is remarked by Sir G. Baker: 
* satis constat falsum esse, quod aliqui vehementer volunt ; 
nempe antidotum illud mirabile (ipse autem inter primos quantum 
scio, illud medicamentum olim in antidotis posui) multo 
minoris efficaciz esse nunc quam aliquot viginti retro annis, 
mercatoresque ac pharmacopolas nostros (ut quidam volunt) 
injuriz fraudisque insimilando ; cum tamen non in medicamenti 
bonitate, sed in exhibitionis tempore et modo discrimen sit. 
De hae autem re provoco ad Badum qui elegantissimum ac 
doctissimum tractatum ante triginti annos de Cortice Peruviano 
edidit, unde Sydenhamius aliique nuperi scriptores nostri, omnia 
sua habuerunt, preter unum illud, de corticis exhibendi, modo 
inepto, ne pejus dicam, et intempestivo, authore suo, misero illo 
agyrtà 'albor dignum inventum." — Ewercitationes Medicinales, 
1694. 

Again he speaks of Sydenham ejusque sectatores. | Con- 
cerning Talbor, the best account is to be found in Sir George 
Baker’s treatise on the Cinchona Bark. At present it is suffi- 
cient to say, that Lister should have abstained from his abuse, 
and that it would have been better for even Sydenham to have 
mentioned him with praise. 

The following verses, addressed to Morton, and consequently 
not long after Sydenham's death, are of Parisian composition ; 
and they are verses of which it may be fairly said that the object 
is quite as praiseworthy as the panegyric. 


* Plaudant Britanni, teque superstite 
Jam nullus illum lugeat amplius, 
Qui sanguinis motum relexit 
Aut Sydenham, Willisiumve magnum. 
Oblita belli Gallia te canat 
Et qui benignum Peruviz librum 
Talborus ostendit, sed omnes 
Non potuit numerare vires." 
J. A. BLONDEL PARISIENSIS, M.D. 


Ixvi LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


Of praise tempered with discrimination, I have extracted the 
following passage from Kreil, a writer of the school that im- 
mediately succeeded to the school of the contemporaries of 
Sydenham, and which was, to a certain extent, antagonistic 
to it—the Iatro-mathematical School of Borelli, of which 
Meade was the chief representative in England. “ But the 
method of curing diseases by drawing indications from the 
evident and conjunct causes, has always been approved by the 
best, and generality of physicians. The knowledge of these 
causes is not to be attained by reason, but by a close and 
assiduous observation of all the appearances in the several stages 
of a distemper. ‘The first that excelled in this knowledge was 
the divine Hippocrates, whose delineations of diseases are truly 
charming. In this method several of the ancients have followed 
him, but none ever came so near him as the deservedly renowned 
Dr. Sydenham and Mr. Morton, whose histories of diseases, for 
a full, exact, and nice enumeration and description of evident 
signs, causes, and symptoms,—for ajudicious distinguishing of 
the several species of the same diseases, and for just prognostics, 
founded upon a careful observation of the common effects of 
such appearances, have surpassed all histories of the modern 
physician. And I may venture to say that there is no man that 
practises, but who does it upon some knowledge of the animal 
economy, or some notions of his own, which are more or less 
clear, according to his skill in natural philosophy. And for the 
truth of this I appeal to Dr. Sydenham's own writings, who by 
his philosophising has evidently shown us the necessity of that 
science he so much decried, and so little understood. He was 
undoubtedly a great man, and the world will always be obliged 
to him for his accurate histories of diseases; but there is no 
man without errors, and where one of his deserved character 
falls into a mistake, it does a great deal more hurt than if 
hundreds of others of lesser note had been guilty of the same.” 

Wider and more miscellaneous reading than my own amongst 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixvil 


the writers of the reign of William III and Anne, will probably 
illustrate in a satisfactory manner the rate of the rise of the 
posthumous reputation of Sydenham, and show how it has come 
to pass that he is so pre-eminently and exclusively the represen- 
tative of English practical medicine; and that with such contem- 
poraries as Glisson and Willis in scientific and speculative medical 
knowledge, and as Morton in his own special department of 
rational empiricism. At present I have little to lay before the 
reader. The Harveian Orations have been examined by me in the 
order of time, for the sake of elucidating the growth of opinion 
in this respect ; but the search has been unsatisfactory. As far 
as a negative statement may be made with safety, Arbuthnot, 
who delivered the Oration in 1727, is the first who mentions 
Sydenham, either with or without an encomium: “Sydenhamum, 
Hippocratis emulum, qui plurimis, atque utilissimis inventis, 
ad morborum historiam, et curam pertinentibus artem nostram 
locupletavit.” Henceforward the mention of Sydenham appears 
pretty regularly, and after the manner of an edictum tralaticium, 
with much the same epithets, and in nearly the same place. 
He is generally either divine or the rival of Hippocrates ; his 
niche in the Harveian temple of Fame being between Glisson, 
Wharton, Lower, and Willis, on the one side; and Radcliffe 
on the other. 
x E & x E 

"The notice of the more particular and prominent points from 
the details of such a practice as Sydenham's, precedes the more 
general criticism of his method and principles at large. With 
this view, I follow the example that is often set for me by 
Sydenham himself; who, without discussing the importance of 
the subject to which he alludes, gives it a certain amount of 
consideration, simply and solely on the ground of its having 
been usually noticed, in similar stages of their different inves- 
tigations, by writers who have gone before him. Now, the 
current statements of the common brief biographies of Sydenham 


Ixvin LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


are, that he was famous for (a) his laudanum, (4) his cooling 
treatment of the smallpox, and (c) his administration of the 
Peruvian bark in agues. 

Upon either the pharmacy or the therapeutic applications of 
the liquid laudanum of Sydenham Y have neither occasion nor 
intention to refine. 

In respect to the treatment of variola, those who love the 
contrasts of good and bad, or of hot and cold, may compare 
the present rational treatment of our contemporary practitioners 
with the treatment of the Rosa Anglica. After bleeding, 
and stimulants, the patient was not only sweated, but sweated 
in scarlet cloth.  * Deinde capiatur scarletum rubrum et 
involvatur variolosus totaliter, vel in panno alio rubro, sicut 
ego feci de filio nobilissimi regis Anglize quando patiebatur istos 
morbos, et feci omnia circum lectum esse rubra. Et est bona 
cura. Et curavi eum in sequente sine vestigiis variolarum.” 
(Rosa Anglica, p. 41. With this strange example of ignorance 
and superstition before us as the type and samples of what was 
considered the hot regimen, and with the expression of a sin- 
cere hope that John of Gaddesden, its author, stood alone in 
the fiery character of his methodus medendi, the extent of 
Sydenham's improvement upon the practice of his time may be 
noticed; and, along with this, the extent to which he was the 
first to so improve it. 

Upon this first point I refer the reader to Appendix B, 
wherein is contained the proof of the following statement, viz., 
that the change that Sydenham introduced was not the change 
from one extreme to (comparatively speaking) another; but 
rather a media via between two contrasting methods,—the 
method of promoting the eruption by blankets and brandy, 
and the method of replacing it by bloodletting and purging. 
Sydenham’s method was really, in the eyes of its author, a 
golden mean between the cordial system and the evacuant 
system. In the eyes of his biographers it has been an extreme 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixix 


instance of opposition. Nevertheless, the following extract 
from Sir Richard Blackmore’s Treatise on the Smallpox, over 
and above the suggestion that it supplies as to the exceeding 
likelihood of Sydenham having been (with all his undenied 
candour and liberality of character), a man of a somewhat 
polemic temperament, supplies us also with a proof that, even 
in his own generation, it was the cooling treatment rather than 
the evacuant that was considered as the opposite to the hot 
regimen. Speaking of the two methods (Sydenham’s and the 
one that it replaced), Sir Richard writes: ‘It is true that our 
most celebrated physicians, before Dr. Sydenham, declared for 
the last, but that the Doctor, having taken a resolution before 
his entering upon the practice of physic, as he himself assured 
me in conversation, to act directly contrary, in all cases, to the 
common method then in fashion among the most eminent phy- 
sicians (and he told me his reasons for it), in conformity to the 
design, did, in the management of this disease, as well as others, 
oppose the common method of the physicians of the court and 
city.” 

This is concerning the nature of the innovation. Upon the 
question as to its origimator, or upon the extent to which 
Sydenham was the first who changed a bad practice into a 
good one, I subjoin the following extract, indicated by Dr. 
Kennedy, from the Gentleman’s Magazine of July, 1790: 

“In Hutchins’s History of the County of Dorset there is 
an account given that when the town of Blandford was burnt 
down, in the year 1731, many persons in the smallpox took 
refuge under the arches of the bridge on each side of the river, 
all of whom recovered without any bad symptoms, though the 
disease had proved fatal to great numbers of those who had 
been closely shut up in their houses before the fire broke out. 
Many people have taken occasion to date the origin of the cool 
treatment of the smallpox from this well-authenticated fact, and 
would be angry with any one who should entertain the least 


» 


lxx LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


doubt of it. All this may do very well with those so little 
conversant with medical biography as scarcely ever to have 
heard of the celebrated Dr. Sydenham (though this county 
gave him birth), and can still less be supposed to have read his 
Dissertation on the Smallpox, wherein rules for following the 
cool regimen are laid down as indispensably necessary, in most 
cases, for the well-doing of those afflicted with this disease. 
Dr. Sydenhanm's letter on this subject (addressed to Dr. William 
Cole, of Worcester, is dated in 1682, seven years before his 
death, which event took place at his house in Pall Mall, in 1689. 

* Now, I shall take leave to go further back, and affirm that, 
even Dr. Sydenham was not the first who pointed out the cool 
regimen in the smallpox, but that this mode of treating the 
disease was known to, and practised by, an ancestor of mine, 
born fifty-three years before Sydenham, of whom some mention 
is made in the Life of Lord Clarendon. This person, by name 
John Crane, was my great, great, great grandfather, and prac- 
tised at Cambridge, where he died, in 1652, aged eighty-one 
years. 

‘Mr. Edw. Hyde being with his uncle, Sir Nicholas, on 
the Norfolk circuit, and lodging with the judges in Trinity 
College, was seized with the smallpox, and being removed to 
the Sun Inn, opposite the College, was placed under the care 
of the above-mentioned John Crane, a medical practitioner of 
considerable reputation in the general line of his profession, but 
more particularly distinguished for his uncommon success in 
the smallpox by following the cool regimen, on which account 
the management of Mr. Hyde was intrusted to him rather than 
to the professor of physick, and another physician at that time 
in high repute in the University. It was by this method of 
treatment (under God), assisted by the great skill and ex- 
perience of my ancestor, that this then promising young man 
lived to become afterwards the great Earl of Clarendon, and 
father to the Queen of James the Second. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixxi 


*'To preserve the claim of my reverend forefather to the 
merit of being the first who systematically pursued the cool 
regimen in the smallpox, I request your insertion of this in 
your valuable repository; for though tradition has handed down 
the fact, it will otherwise insensibly fall into oblivion, as there 
are no printed documents extant to prevent its sharing that 
common fate. 


x 3 * E * 
** Lineal descendants from John Crane, of Cambridge : 
Nat. Ob. 
JOHN CRANE... 1620 1685. 
JOHN CRANE... 1655 1770. 


JOHN CRANE . . . 1681 1734. 
JoguN CRANE . . . 1712 1766. 


* 'The last-mentioned person had the livings of Great Saling 
and of Saffron Walden, m Essex; was eldest brother of 
Stafford Crane, who died in Red Lion Square in 1784, and 
father of, yours, &c. 

(Signed) J, CRANE, M.D, 


Dated at Dorchester, 
Dorsetshire, June 4, 1790.”’ 


Whatever might have been the case a generation ago, the 
present biographer of Sydenham can allow such a letter as the 
preceding to stand without comment or exception. Not even 
the most professed panegyrist is, now, bound to prove, that the 
eredit of innovations, or discoveries, is limited to the single 
individual who first practised the one or hit upon the other. 
To appreciate the importance of an important doctrine, to let 
such appreciation generate the resolution to develope it before 
the world, and to earn such influence as shall convert a spe- 
culative theory into a practical benefit, or a single precedent 
into an example for unnumbered imitators—these are those true 
elements of originality that stand before the isolated fact of 
mere unappreciated priority of observation. If it were not so, 


Ixxil LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


some unknown Oriental, and not Jenner, were the discoverer 
of vaccination. Nevertheless, it is right to know, that there 
were sensible men in England before Sydenham, and that 
Dr. Crane was one of them. 

The opposition of the medical world, and the spirit in which 
Sydenham met it, may be collected from the following letter, 
the only undoubted English composition of Sydenham’s. 


* Dg. SypeENHAM TO Mr. Rospert Boyte. 
* Pall Mall, April 2, 1688. 

“Sir,— It had becomed me to have begged your acceptance, 
when I took the boldness to tender to you the second edition 
of my book; but partly business, and partly an unwillingness 
in me to give you two troubles at once, diverted me from 
writing. But now that you are pleased to give yourself the 
pains of a thanks, which I never thought myself capable of 
deserving from you, I hold myself obliged to return you my 
humble thanks, that you take in good part my weak endea- 
vours, and are pleased to have a concern (as you always have 
done) for me. I perceive my friend Mr. Locke hath troubled 
you with an account of my practice, as he hath done himself in 
visiting with me very many of my variolous patients especially. 
It is a disease, wherein, as I have been more exercised this year 
than ever I thought I could have been, so I have discovered 
more of its days than ever I thought I should have done. It 
would be too large for a letter, to give you an account of its 
history ; only in general I find no variolis, but do regret greatly, 
that I did not say, that, considering the practices that obtain, 
both amongst learned and ignorant physicians, it had been happy 
for mankind, that either the art of physic had never been exer- 
cised, or the notion of malignity never stumbled upon. As itis 
palpable to all the world, how fatal that disease proves to many 
of all ages, so it is most clear to me, from all the observations 
that I can possibly make, that if no mischief be done, either by 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xxii 


physician or nurse, it is the most slight and safe of all other 
diseases. If it shall be your hap to be seized of that disease 
(as probably you never may), I should recommend to you, upon 
the word of a friend, the practice mentioned in the 155th page 
of my book. I confess, some accidents there are incident to 
that disease, which I never was able to master, till towards the 
end of last summer, and which, therefore, could not be men- 
tioned by me, as a phrenitis coming on the eighth day, where 
the patient is in the vigour of his youth, hath not been blooded, 
and hath been kept in a dose from the first decumbiture; as 
likewise (which is wont to be no less fatal) a great dosing, accom- 
panied with a choaking respiration, coming on from the tenth 
day (reckoning from the rigour and horror, which is my way 
of accounting), and occasioned by the matter of a ptyalism in a 
flux-pox, baking and growing thick, as it declines and comes to 
a concoction in those days; but, which is observable, the small- 
pox never fluxes or runs together, but it hath been thrust out 
before the fourth day; and where you see any eruption the 
first, second, or third day from the decumbiture, you may 
safely pronounce it will be a flux-pox or a measle, for that sort, 
in its first appearance, is like it; and, which is likewise ob- 
servable in the highest flux of all, as that which comes out the 
first or second day, it is in vain to endeavour the raising them 
to an height, for it is both impossible and unsafe to attempt, but 
all the discharge that can be, must be either from a ptyalism, in 
a grown person, or a diarrhoea, in an infant, to whom the same 
is no more dangerous than the other to the former. And 
wherever they flux, their discharge must be made one of those 
two ways. But of these things I shall discourse to you more 
at large, when I shall have the happiness to see you, which I 
hope may be suddenly. The town stands well in health, and at 
our end not anybody sick, that I hear, of the smallpox. I 
have much business about other things, and more than I can 
do, who yet am not idle. I have the happiness of curing my 


Ixxiv LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


patients, at least of having it said concerning me, that few mis- 
carry under me; but cannot brag of my correspondency with 
some other of my faculty, who, notwithstanding my profound- 
ness in palmistry and chemistry, impeach me of great insuf- 
ficiency, as I shall likewise do my taylor, when he makes my 
doublet like a hop-sack, and not before, let him adhere to what 
hypothesis he will. Though, yet in taking fire at my attempts 
to reduce practice to a greater easiness, plainness, and in the 
mean time letting the mountebank at Charing-cross pass un- 
railed at, they contradict themselves, and would make the world 
believe I may prove more considerable than they would have me. 
But, to let these men alone to their books, I have again taken 
breath, and am pursuing my design of specifics, which, if but 
a delusion, so closely haunts me, that I could not but indulge 
the spending of a little money and time at it once more. I 
have made a great progress in the thing, and have reason to 
hope not to be disappointed. My occasions will not suffer me 
to give you more trouble, and therefore be pleased to accept of 
the tender of those very unfeigned thanks, which I here make 
you, for all the singular kindnesses and favours whereby you 
have obliged me to be very uncomplimentary. 
* Sir, your most humble servant, 
*'T, SYDENHAM." 


Upon what may be called Sydenham's practice of adminis- 
tering Peruvian bark, I am induced, by some remarks of Sir 
George Baker’s, to make a comment. It is done, however, 
without subscribing to either his inference concerning the dis- 
credit that the slow reception of so valuable a medicine reflects 
upon the medical profession, or to his praise of Talbor, whose 
reputation, in my mind, is of a suspicious character,’ 


1 The imperfect sketch of history, which I have attempted to delineate, presents 
to the mind reflections a little humiliating to our profession. Had it not been for 
the casual experience of an uncivilized people, it might never have been discovered, 
that there existed, in the stores of Nature, a specific febrifuge. Had not the in- 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. E 


^. D. 1632.— Cinchona bark, first introduced into Spain, and, 
between then and the year 1639, tried as a remedy, under the 
auspices of the Conde de! Cinchon. Its consumption was slow. 
Tested and approved by the Spanish Jesuits. 

A. D. 1643.— John de Lugo, a Spanish Jesuit, and one of its 
warmest advocates, made a cardinal. By him it is introduced 
into Italy, and reported upon by the Pope's physician in favor- 
able terms. 

A. D. 1649.—A large supply brought to Rome, by the Father 
Provincial, by whom it was given to the Jesuits in general, who 
came to the Jubilee, for distribution in their respective countries. 

A. D. 1652.— Unsuccessful trial of the bark on Leopold, Arch- 
duke of Austria, when ill of a double quartan. 

A. D. 1653.— The publication of the ‘Pulvis Febrifugus 
orbis Americani, ventilatus a Joanne Jacobo Chifletio, Equite, 
Regio Archiatrorum Comite, et Archiducali Medico primario. 
This was written by order of the only Aa/f-cured Archduke, in 
order to invalidate the credit of the new medicine, and to warn 
the world against its ill effects. At first it succeeded. It was 
soon, however, answered by Fabre, a French Jesuit, under the 
name of Antimus Conygius. 

A. D. 1655.—In this year it appears to have been first intro- 
duced into England. 

A. D. 1658.—This was the year of a violent epidemic re- 
mittent fever, recorded both by Willis and Morton, and which 
destroyed Oliver Cromwell, who “ died of a sickness of fourteen 
days, which had appeared an ague at the beginning." A Mr. 
Underwood, Alderman of London, also dies of the same re- 
mittent; and being supposed to have fallen a victim to the 


fluence of a great religious society, unconnected with the practice of physic, counter- 
acted prevailing prejudices, at an early period, this medicine, though brought into 
Europe, might have long remained in obscurity, unknown and useless. And lastly, 
had not physicians been taught by a man, whom they, both abroad and at home, 
vilified as an ignorant empiric, we might, at this day, have had a powerful instrument 
in our hands, without knowing how to use it in the most effectual manner. 


]xxvi LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


bark which was used as the remedy, discredits the practice of 
administering it. In this year, too, we find it advertised — 
“The fever bark, commonly called Jesuites powder, which is 
so famous for the cure of all manner of agues, brought over by 
James Thompson, merchant of Antwerp, is to be had either at 
his own lodgings, at the Black Spread Eagle, in the Old 
Bailey, over against Black and White Court, or at Mr. John 
Crooks, bookseller, at the Ship, in St. Paul's churchyard, with 
directions for the use. Which bark, or powder, is attested to 
be perfectly true by Dr. Prujean, and other eminent doctors 
and physicians, who have made experience of it."— (Mercurius 
Politicus, from Thursday, Dec. 9, to Thursday, Dec. 16, 1658.) 

A. D. 1659.— Subject to objections on the score of interpret- 
ing too closely a loose expression of Dr. Brady's, that physician 
began, about this time, to employ the bark. This may be 
collected from his letter to Sydenham, prefixed to the first 
Epistola Responsoria—*' Ego quidem per viginti, plus minus, 
annos dictum corticem varià forma et multiplici preparatione 
maximo cum successu exhibendum curavi," — Cambridge, 
Dec. 30, 1679. 

A. D. —1663.— This is a year of much importance in the 
history of opinion in respect to the remedy in question. 

It is the year fixed by Morton! as the year of the establish- 
ment of the general use of the Peruvian bark 1n Great Britain. 
That it was partially known a few years before, is seen in the 
preceding notices. 

It is the year wherein was written, on the Continent, the 
standard, classical, and elaborate defence of the bark by Badius, 
against Chifletius,and Vopiscus Fortunatus Plempius, of Louvain; 
the latter having attacked the bark under the name Melippus 
Protimus, the former word being an anagram of the name 
Plempius. 

Sydenham has now begun, and more than begun, to practise. 


! Pyretologia, p. 136. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixxvii 


Within three years from the present time, he will have pub- 
lished the first edition of his Methodus. 

Talbor is admitted a sizar of St. John’s College, Cambridge. 

As a general rule, the statement on the part of the historians 
of medicine, has been that it was Sydenham to whom is due 
the credit for having been the first of Englishmen who used the 
Peruvian bark in the cure of agues successfully, and for having, 
by either precept or example, or by both means, conquered the 
prejudice against it. Sometimes this 1s made without the in- 
troduction of any second name at all. Sometimes the name 
of Talbor (or Talbot) is mtroduced. When this is the case, it 
is brought in (with few exceptions) for the sake of being placed 
in a disparaging juxtaposition with that of Sydenham ; in other 
words (with few exceptions), Talbor is rarely named, or if 
named, mentioned unfavorably. 

In his own time, his praise, or blame, was in extremes. 
There were those who panegyrised him as warmly as he 
panegyrised himself—and that is saying a great deal. There 
were, also, those who, like Lister, could call him a miserable 
quack, and, like Gideon Harvey, speak of him as a debauched 
apothecary’s apprentice. 

The main facts of his life are as follows: 

1. That, as said before, he was a scholar of St. John’s College, 
Cambridge, in 1663. 

2. 'That, about the same time (a httle before, or a little after), 
he was an apothecary’s apprentice at Cambridge. 

3. That he practiced successively in Essex, Paris, and London. 

4. That he cured agues by means of bark, but that the 
method of its administration was a secret. 

5. That, partially by his successful practice, and partially by 
the sale of his secret to the dauphin of France, he made a 
fortune. 

6. That a little before his death (which happened in 1681), 
he erected a monument in Trinity Church, Cambridge, in 


Ixxviii LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


memory of his family, with the following inscription: ** Dignis- 
simus Dominus Robertus Talbor, Eques Auratus, ac medicus 
singularis, unicus febrium malleus, Carolo II. ac Ludivoco XIV. 
ilh M. Brittanie, huic Gallize, serenissimo Galliarum Delphino, 
plurimisque principibus, necnon minorum gentium ducibus ac 
Dominis probatissimis, sic suis parentavit." &c. 

7. That he was hated and opposed in Paris by the regular 
practitioners, in the way that it is considered right and proper, 
that men who make fortunes by secret remedies, should be 
hated and opposed.—' The following is a notice of him from 
Madame Sevigné’s Letters :—“ L'Anglois a promis au roi, sur 
sa téte et si positivement, de guérir Monseigneur dans quatre 
jours, et de la fiévre et du devoiment, que s'il n'y réussit, je 
crois qu'on le jettera par les fenétres; mais si ses prophéties 
sont aussi véritables qu'elles l'ont été pour toutes les maladies 
qu'il a traité je dirai qu'il lui faut un temple comme à Esculape. 
C'est dommage que Moliére soit mort ; il feroit une scéne mer- 
veilleuse de D'Aquin, qui est enragé de n'avoir pas le bon 
reméde, et de tous les autres médecins, qui sont accablés par 
les expériences, par le succés, et par les prophéties, comme 
divines, de ce petit homme. Le roi lui fait composer son reméde 
devant lui, et lui confie la santé de Monseigneur. Madame la 
Dauphine, elle est déjà mieux," &c. (Lettres de Sevigné, tom. 
vi, p. 233, 8 Nov. 1.) 

8. That he was similarly treated and opposed in London.— 
In 1678, he was practising without a licence from the College 
of Physicians, and was supported by the court in so doing; a 
special injunction from the Secretary of State being forwarded 
to that effect. 

9. That after his death his secret was published under the 
name of the English Remedy. 

Now, of later writers, Sir George Baker is the only one who 
has claimed the lion's share of the credit in the administration 
of bark for Talbor. Of the earlier ones, I have hitherto found 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixxix 


only Colbatch, who has been, at one and the same time, an 
admirer of Sydenham, and a supporter of the originality of 
Talbor.—** Dr. Sydenham, that honest and fair man, to whom 
all the world is beholden for his ingenious and candid way of 
writing."—* When Sir R. Talbor first began to use the cortex 
Peruvianus for the cure of agues, everybody cried out against 
it as the most pernicious medicine in the world.” (Treatise on 
Gout, a. n. 1699.) 

A. D. 1666,—First edition of the Methodus Curandi Febres. 
Here all that is said of the Peruvian bark is as follows: 

* However much the use of the Jesuit’s bark may check the 
fermentation for the time being, the residue of matter that 
requires to be dissipated by fermentation recovers its strength 
in a short time, and renews its war against Nature. I have 
known a quartan ague last some years, being only occasionally 
interrupted by the repeated use of this powder. Sometimes, 
indeed, when given just before the fit, it has killed the patient. 
Nevertheless, I will not deny that, in the decline of these fevers, 
Peruvian bark, cautiously given, has sometimes done good, and 
removed the fits altogether. This is most especially the case 
when the season is not particularly epidemic."— This is the 
note alluded to in Appendix A, as finding place in p. 81 of 
Dr. Greenhill's edition. 

In this same year Talbor had begun his practice in Essex, 
and was using bark successfully in the marshes of that county. 

A. D. 1668. —Second edition of the Methodus. No expression 
of greater confidence as to the value of bark in agues. 

A. D. 1676.— Third edition of the Methodus, under the title 
of Observationes Mediez. Here we find a modification of the 
opinions of 1666 and 1668. Spring agues he leaves to cure 
themselves. For the tertians of autumn, he prescribes a method 
in which bark takes no part. For quartans, he trusts to bark 
more than to anything else. The duration, however, of their 


Ixxx LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


good effects he thinks doubtful, and their administration during 
the fit dangerous. Nevertheless, in the preface, he makes 
Peruvian bark the type of specific remedies; more so than 
either mercury or sarsaparila in syphilis. (Med. Obs. i, 5, 
$$ 38-85; preface, $ 23.) Talbor in London. 

A. D. 1680.— First edition of the Epistole Responsorie. In 
the first, addressed to Brady, he declares his belief in both its 
innocence and efficacy.  Explaims his method of overcoming 
ihe two great objections to its use, viz. the sudden deaths of 
patients in cases where it had been administered a little before 
the fits, and the danger of relapses. (Epist. Resp. I, $$ 17-38.) 

This was the year before the death of Talbor, who was now 
a wealthy man and a knight. 

A. D. 1681.— Death of Talbor. 

A. D. 1685.— Second edition of the Epistole Responsorie. 
Confirmation of his previous opinion, with an exception as to 
the safety of its use in scorbutic rheumatism. Alterations in 
the formule for its administration. 


With hardly a single exception, I owe all the above-given 
facts to Sir George Baker; and it would be ungracious of me 
not to go with him as far as I can with his argument. 

1. That Talbor used bark with success and confidence, when 
Sydenham used it partially and with hesitation (i. e. in the 
years 1666, 1668, and 1676) is certain. 

2. That the known success of Talbor’s practice might sug- 
gest to Sydenham the likelihood of bark being a more power- 
ful remedy than he had himself found it in his own hands, and 
that, provided the conditions of its administration were better 
known, it might cure more cases than he had hitherto cured 
with it, is probable. 

3. That at any given period the reliance of Talbor upon 
bark was greater than Sydenham's, is undoubted. 


i — 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. xxxi 


4. That any improvements in Sydenham's method of admi- 
nistration, and any increase of confidence in bark as a remedy, 
prior to 1681, were due, to any knowledge of either the details 
or the principles of Talbor's practice (further than what was 
suggested by the fact of Talbor’s successful treatment), is an 
unnecessary assumption. 

Perhaps this is no further, in the way of inference, than Sir 
George Baker goes, the following being the words he uses 
towards the end of his argument :'— “ Whether Sydenham (as 
has been confidently affirmed) had the secret communicated to 
him by Talbor, or whether he discovered it by any other 
means, cannot, perhaps, be ascertained. But it is an indis- 
putable fact, that in 1668, whilst Talbor was administering the 
Jesuit’s bark in Essex, Sydenham, then in the height of his re- 
putation, had still strong prejudices against it; and that in 
1679 (Talbor being then established 1n London) Sydenham had 
become acquainted with the principle with respect to the right 
use of the powder; but had hardly carried the principle fully 
into practice even in 1680, Talbor having then received his re- 
ward from Lewis XIV for his secret." At the same time the 
general tone of his dissertation is so favorable to Talbor, that I 
cannot help thinking the words confidently affirmed express an 
affirmation in which he believes. 

Whether Talbor or Sydenham was the most sagacious physi- 
cian, is an open question. Which of the two possessed most 
of that liberality that becomes his profession, is a settled one. 
What Sydenham gave away, Talbor sold. 


But it is not in the details of his practice that we are to look 
for the strength of Sydenham. It was not by means of these 
that he commanded the admiration of foreign physicians like 
Hoffmann and Boerhaave ; that he gave his name to one of the 


! Sir George Baker’s Works, p. 755. 


]Ixxxii LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


epochs of Haller; and that he now stands out, at nearly the end 
of a second century from the publication of his earliest writings, 
as the great representative of the practical medicine of practical 
England. In one of the newest works! on the Parisian thera- 
peuties, I find the name of Sydenham mentioned as often as 
that of Broussais, whilst one of the best modern monographs on 
medical literature is a Swedish work” on his practice and his 
influence. Facts like these are the measures of both the extent 
and the permanence of reputations. 

When Haller prefixed to one of his epochs the name of 
Sydenham, he recognised in that name the influence by which 
two schools of practical medicine were superseded by a third. 
The extent to which nearly all the methods of nearly all the prac- 
titioners were divided between these two schools, is one of the 
best known facts in medical history. There was the so-called 
school of Hippocrates, and the so-called school of the chemists : 
and between these the whole domain of medicine was divided ; 
unequally, indeed, in different countries, and in different parts 
of the same country, but still divided. That Paris should be 
more Hippocratic than chemical was natural. The Sorbonne 
was the great mainstay of the established order of thought and 
practice. That Germany and Switzerland should hold by the 
doctrine of the chemists was also natural. The great innovator, 
Paracelsus, had been the teacher of an antagonistic system 
throughout the whole extent of the German language. Such 
were the two schools in their more extreme types, and in their 
respective national distributions. Such, too, is the classification 
of the different forms of medical investigation which, for the 
sake of a general expression of the characteristics of the two 
opposite schools, it is safe and convenient to adopt. But the 


! Traité de Thérapeutique, par MM. Trousseau et Pidoux. Paris. 

? Sydenham—Ett bidrag till Medicins Culturhistorie, af Israel Hwasser. (Syden- 
ham—A Contribution to the History of the Progress of Medicine, by I. Hwasser.) 
Upsala, 1845. 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixxxiil 


real details of the therapeutics of the seventeenth century are 
not thus definitely distinguished. The duality of the two schools 
is not so evident in fact asin writing. The lines of demarcation 
are less trenchant than they are described. The school to which 
Hippocrates was the great master was not exclusively Hippo- 
cratic. There was the interfering influence of Galen, and, in 
many cases, a division of allegiance between these two authori- 
ties. "Then there was the superadded influence of the Arabian 
writers, an influence which determined the differential charac- 
teristics of a school like Montpellier, as opposed to a school like 
Paris. There was difference and there was affinity; but the 
leading feature of the school in question, under all its modi- 
fications, was the deference to authority, rather than the appeal 
to observation. 

The so-called chemical school, wholly or partially, consist- 
ently or inconsistently, logically or loosely, skilfully or unskil- 
fully, was essentially inductive. lt threw over the influences of 
opinion, precedent, and tradition. Now, it is this difference 
between the recognition of observation and authority, that con- 
stitutes the best general distinction between the two separate 
substantive schools that are spoken of as being the schools of 
the generation of Sydenham. Yet the unity of the chemical 
school was only real, so far as it stood in contrast to that of 
the Greco-Arabian physicians. In and of itself, it fell into a 
multiplicity of divisions and subdivisions; at times, to the 
utter loss of its so-called chemical characteristics. No follower 
of Paracelsus allowed himself to be so implicit a believer as to 
forego the indulgence of separate speculations of his own; and 
these speculations overlaid the creed of the original. 

I have taken the names of Paracelsus and Hippocrates as 
those of the two eponymi of the two systems, and I believe that 
as long as the two schools preserve their separate substantive 
character, this designation is a true one. 


But it was only in some cases that the two schools kept 


Ixxxiv LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


what has been called their separate substantive character; and 
it is only for the sake of giving precision to our illustrations 
that two extreme, unmixed forms of medical philosophy have 
been put forward. It is a true and undoubted fact, that such 
extreme and unmixed forms really existed ; but it is also true 
that such extreme and unmixed examples were rare. 

No two facts are more necessary to be remembered by the 
biographer of Sydenham, than that, some years before he began 
to write, an eclectic school had placed itself between the classies 
and the chemists; and that during his lifetime, great sections 
of all the schools with which he was contemporary were trans- 
forming themselves into a fourth class—that of the 2afro- 
mathematicians. Here it is, where the general historian of 
medicine determines the influence of the non-professional upon 
the professional philosophies, and asks how much the biological 
elements of medical speculation were influenced by the philo- 
sophy of Des Cartes, and how much mechanics affected physiology 
through the dazzling splendour of the generalizations of Newton; 
and here it is where he finds that the true induction of medicine 
has suffered both from physics and metaphysics. 

Sydenham lived to see chemistry proper, as a substan- 
tive science, evolved out of what had hitherto been zatro- 
chemistry, or chemiatria. It was the latter rather than the 
former; in other words, it was chemical medicine rather than 
medical chemistry. Such was most truly the case during the 
whole period between the teaching of Paracelsus and the 
teaching of Boyle. Something better than alchemy, but at 
the same time something lower than medicine—this was the 
germ of the chemistry of which Sydenham witnessed the evo- 
lution. Every chemist before Boyle was a practitioner in 
medicine, and chemistry was only known as far it was sub- 
ordinate to the last-named art. Agricola, the metallurgist, 
and Glauber, the nearest approach to a pure chemist, each 
collected the elements of their science as the preliminaries to 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixxxv 


the practice of medicine. Hence, whilst physicians talk of the 
chemical school in medicine, chemists talk of the medical school 
in chemistry. 

Sydenham lived, too, to see the remnants of the chemiatria, 
along with other forms of physie, develope themselves into 
tatro-mechanics. 

But it was not to the iatro-mechanics that he lent his 
sympathies ; and it was not upon the chemical physiology that 
he put his main hope and trust. 

Nor yet was he eclectic in his philosophy. Whilst writers 
as early as Libavius believed that although no existing 
system, by itself, might contain the true method of medicine, 
yet that, nevertheless, a combination of the true portions of 
the two great systems might supply it, Sydenham looked 
beyond the pale of both. The friend of Boyle and the admirer 
of Hippocrates knew of much within these limits. He knew 
of much ; but, what he wanted, was a logic, that neither system 
contained. 

If this logic be the true induction of medicine, and if 
Sydenham be the first who applied it, his fame (great as it is), 
is still disproportioned to his deserts. But neither is exactly 
the case. His method was amongst the nearest approaches to 
the true one; and his recognition and exhibition of it one of 
the earhest. 

It may fairly be claimed for Sydenham, that, less than most 
of his contemporaries—less, perhaps, than any— did he permit 
preconceived notions of disease or treatment, and, still less, 
merely authoritative opinions, to step in between the disease 
and the observation. He took cases as he found them, and 
asked what they taught, not what they proved. This simple 
recognition of the priority of direct observation, and its para- 
mount supremacy to everything else, was the proclamation of 
what is now an old truth, of what was then a new one, and of 
what is always a great one. 


4g 


Ixxxvi LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


With the next fundamental principle,——the principle upon 
which all rational empiricism rests—viz. that what will act 
remedially upon one instance of disease, will act remedially 
upon all identical ones,—he took the evidence of individual 
cases for the basis of his method. After the admission of the 
principle of observation, this assumption of the uniformity of 
action under identical (or, within certain limits, similar) con- 
ditions is the first process in the medical induction of all men ; 
and it must have been the first in. Sydenham’s. It is one of 
the elements of his superiority, that he looked out for cases 
more watchfully, looked into them more closely, and appreciated 
the facts that they disclosed better, than his fellows. 

The second process in pure medical induction is the second 
process all the world over, and it must have been the second 
process with Sydenham. ‘This is the process of ascertaining how 
far a second case is identical with a previous one; or, if not 
identical, whether sufficiently similar to be similarly treated ; 
or, if not sufficiently similar, what are its differential elements, 
and how are they illustrated by the results of previous ex- 
perience. Here come in, over and above the simple power 
of observation, the powers of analysis and comparison. In 
these operations, too, Sydenham was subtle amongst the subtle, 
and accurate amongst the accurate. Perhaps, too, his judg- 
ment was more on its guard against the misleading influences 
of loose analogies than most men’s. Perhaps, no man’s is 
wholly beyond them. 

For practice, these two processes were all that Sydenham 
wanted. For the development of a system, he wanted a third. 
This was the reduction of his observations, both on disease 
and treatment, to laws, more or less general. The intellectual 
powers here requisite were less, undoubtedly, the peculiar 
powers of Sydenham’s mind, than the powers of observation, 
analysis, and comparison. 

With those who take delight in discovering (what is easily 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixxxvii 


discovered) the frequent and innumerable discrepancies that 
occur both in the world of morals and in the world of action in 
general, between the premise and the consequence, between the 
word and the act, between the theory and practice, the ac- 
credited opinions concerning the difference between the specu- 
lations of Sydenham as a medical philosopher, and the practice 
of Sydenham as a successful physician, afford an ample fund 
of illustration. A bad theory and a good practice is the common 
contrast in the criticism of the history of Sydenham ; and itis 
a contrast that gives a fine light-and-shadow effect in his bio- 
graphers. The system was worthless—this was the fault of 
Sydenham. The practice was good—this was his merit. The 
bad system was never allowed to regulate the good practice— 
this was a greater merit than the last. 

I am free to admit that, in those matters where the system 
of Sydenham was antagonistic to his practice, the practice 
generally took precedence, the theory generally went to the 
wall. Without, however, asking the reader to share in my 
eriticism upon the current notions, I lay before him, as the 
results of my study of Sydenham, the following opinions: 


1. That there are many instances where Sydenham’s theory 
has modified not only his treatment, but his observations as 
well; unless, indeed, we admit one of two things ; either— 

a, That certain diseases have changed character; or, 

b, That Sydenham’s observation has surpassed, not only that 
of all who lived in his generation, but that of all who have 
succeeded him. 

The over-accuracy of the correspondence between the 
character of particular fevers and the epidemic character of 
particular years, has not been verified to the extent that it is 
laid down by Sydenham ; and the difference must be put down 
to the influence of a theory upon an observation. Let any who 


Ixxxvin LIFE OF SYDENHAM. 


doubt this, read the Recapitulation of the Fifth Book, or 
criticise his analogy between a continued fever and a quartan 


ague. 


2. That his system and practice were not, as a general rule, 
in any remarkable antagonism with each. The belief that fever 
is an effort of Nature to expel morbid elements, and that 
critical evacuations are the means she uses, may possibly be an 
error. Nevertheless, it is an error that half the physicians of 
the whole world have shared with Sydenham. Neither is the 
method of promoting, by the aid of art, the particular evacua- 
tion of Nature (real or supposed), any sample of a contrasted 
practice. Yet it wasthe practice of Sydenham. Good or bad, 
his treatment and his system were nearly on a level. I trust 
to the study of the text of Sydenham for the verification of 
these suggestions. . 

I believe that the moral element of a liberal and candid 
spirit went hand in hand with the intellectual qualifications 
of observation, analysis, and comparison in the medical induc- 
tion of Sydenham. This was remarkable, but not faultless ; 
and it should be observed, that if, in a spirit of exaggerated 
admiration, we allow ourselves to assume that diseases were 
in Sydenham’s time exactly as Sydenham described them, 
because he was so accurate a delineator, and then suggest, in 
favour of the accuracy of his delineations, the correspondence 
between the description and the disease, we argue in a vicious 
circle, and adopt a fallacy fraught with illogical consequences for 
the history of medicine and diseases. Suppose that Sydenham 
never overlooked important symptoms, and he practised for 
half his lifetime without seeing a single case of malignant 
scarlet fever. 

Let it not either be thought, that he has owed his past or 
present prominence to the stinted dimensions of his contempo- 


LIFE OF SYDENHAM. Ixxxor 


raries. For the general domain of Science, and for the special 
domain of anatomy and physiology, the early Transactions of 
the Royal Society, and the pages of Portal, give us abundant 
proofs to the contrary. | Add to these, the great names supplied 
by Hallam for general and speculative literature, and we find, 
that, the Elizabethan age not excepted, the generation of 
Sydenham was the generation of the strongest and most active 
intellects that England has produced. It is the age wherein 
we find the germs of almost all the sciences that have since 
taken form and development. Geology, botany, the micro- 
scope, zoology, anatomy in allits branches, and chemistry, were 
cultivated by Hooke, by Morrison, by Grew, by Ray, by Willis, 
and by Boyle, respectively. It was the age of great scholars, 
like Bentley and Gataker ; of great mathematicians, like Barrow; 
of great speculative philosophers, like Locke. — It was the age of 
men like these in England; and of Redi, and Asellius, and 
Pecquet, and Borelli, and Swammerdam, and Von Graaf, and 
Leuwenhoek, and Bartholinus, on the Continent. 


a - 
muU: 


E s 
- 
ico 
"1$ JT PES 
L4 
11 


? Ld 
HE 
, » 
pnr 


‘or 
LI 


a d 


2» 
Ira 1 


d o 3 


oom i ee s i BAT 
"m E Apud i A M JL 


Send cin d À jme un Ua 


NN ry "x n E 


ye = =e 
hara: c: her | ea: aide "X 


a Nu “Ge -— E 
nipine wi WO ae: DM X 


ound T SI Ir uer a 
Rie “Suh LAV LÀ ENS Li UNS "j 
piv jing tu - e 


~ CHER TI MI , A) Pa 
xS Os Ji 
. P LU 
? CIA uU 
P zm é 


MATERIA MEDICA ann PREPARATIONS. 


ADDER’S-TONGUE, Ophioglossum vulgatum ; Linn. 

Agaric, Boletus Pini Laricis; Linn. 

Agrimony, Agrimonia Eupatorium ; Linn. 

Alkanet, Anchusa officinalis ; Linn. 

Anagallis, Anagallis arvensis ; Linn. 

Angelica, Angelica Archangelica ; Linn. 

Aqua epileptica, or Aqua anti-epileptica, or Aqua epileptica Langit. 
From Moses Charras’s ‘‘Royal Pharmacopeia.’ ‘Translated into 
English. London, 1678. Page 225, Part IIII, Book III :— 


** 4 corrected Anti-Epileptick Water of Langius.—' Take shavings of man's scull, 
misletoe of the oak, roots of piony, and white dittany, of each two ounces; 
fresh flowers of lilly convally, two handfuls; of lavender, rosemary, and tilet, 
of each three handfuls; cinnamon, six drams; nutmeg, half an ounce; cloves, 
mace, and cubebs, of each two drams; being all bruised, put them into a 
matras close stopp’d, in eight pints of malmsey ; let them macerate for a week 
over a very gentle fire; then distill them on a moderate sand-bath, and keep 
the water for use.”’* 


Aqua celestis.—Formula of the Pharmacopceia Londinensis, A.D. 1682. 


K Best cinnamon, 3); 
Ginger, 3ss ; 
Sanders-wood (the three kinds), aa 3vj; 
Cloves, 
Galangale, 
Nutmeg, aa 3ij; 
Mace, 
Cubebs, aa 3]; 
Cardamoms (of each kind), aa 3iij; 
Zedoary, 3ss. 
Seeds of melanthium, 3iij; 
, aniseed, 
» Sweet fennel, ^ 
» wild carrot, 
»  Ocymum, aa 3ss; 
Root of angelica, 
»  Clove.gilliflower, 
5,  Nquorie, 
» lesser valerian, 
»  Sweet-flag, 
Leaves of horminium, 
» thyme, 
5 calamint, 
»  pennyroyal, 
» Bin 
» A wild thyme, 
j marjoram, aa 3i); 
Flowers of red roses, 
n. SÜge, 
» rosemary, 
betony, 


* [ have been favoured with this formula by Dr. Pereira. 


xcli MATERIA MEDICA, 


Flowers of French lavender, 
" bugloss, 
is borage, aa 3); 
Rind of citron, 3iij ; 

Of these, pound such as should be pounded (ferenda terantur), and macerate, for 
fifteen days, in a glass vessel well closed, in twelve pounds of the best spirits 
of wine. Then distil in a water-bath. Add to the distilled liquors of the 

Powder (species) of diambra, 
Aromatic powder of roses, 
Diamoschus dulcis, 

Diamargaritis frigidi, 

Diarrhodon albatis, 

Electuarium de Gemmis, aa 3iij; 
Yellow sanders-wood (pounded), 3ij ; 
Musk, 

Ambergris, aa 9j; 

Clarified julep of roses, Ib. j. 

Shake well together, so as to mix the julep thoroughly with the water. Then 
lay by the mixture, in a vessel kept tightly closed by parchment and resin, 
until the dregs are deposited, and the liquor has become clear. 


Aqua epidemica.— Formula of the PharmacopceiaLondinensis, A.D. 1677. 
Ix Of the roots of angelica, 


» masterwort, 

2 butterburr, 

» poeony, aa lb.ss ; 

» meu, 

» scorzonera, àà Ziv; 


Virginian snakeweed, 3ij; 
Of the leaves of rue, 


rosemary, 
vs balm, 

‘3 carduus Benedictus, 
germander, 

» marigold (and flower), 
» dragon-wort, 

» galega, 


mint, aà iv handfuls. 

Pour upon these four gallons of spring water and two of the best spirits of wine. 
Macerate, at the heat of a warm bath, in a covered vessel, for three days. 
Distil, by means of a water-bath, four gallons. Suspend in the mixture half 
an ounce of saffron. Add to each pound of this liquor half an ounce of the 
best white sugar. Strain through a jelly-bag (manica Hippocratis). 


Aqua mirabilis.—Formula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 


RK Cloves, 
Galangale, 
Cubebs, 
Mace, 
Cardamoms, 
Nutmegs, 
Ginger, aa 3); 
Celandine juice, 1b.ss ; 
Spirits of wine, 
White wine, aa lb.iij ; 
Infuse for twenty-four hours. Distil off 15.3j in an alembic. 


Archangel, Lamium purpureum; Linn. 
Asparagus, Asparagus officinalis ; Linn. 
Avens, Geum urbanum; Linn. 


AND PREPARATIONS. xcii 


Baum or GrnEgaAD, Balsamodendron Gileadense ; De Candolle. 
Balsam of Lucatelli.—Vormula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 


1677. 


Melt one pound of the best bees-wax over a moderate fire in a like quantity of 
canary wine. Add, of the best olive oil and Venice turpentine, washed to 
whiteness in rose-water, aa half a pound. Evaporate the wine by boiling at 
a gentle heat. Remove the mixture from the fire, and add two ounces of red 
sanders-wood, finely powdered. Stir till itis cool. Fiat balsamum. 


Bank-cress, Sisymbrium officinale ; Linn. 
Basilicon.—Formula for unguentum basilicon majus of the Pharmacopceia 
Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 
EK White wax, 
Resin, 
Mutton suet, 
Greek pitch, 
Turpentine, 
Olibanum, 
Myrrh, aa 3); 
Oil, 2v. 
Reduce the myrrh and olibanum to powder, and throw them among the other 
ingredients when melted. 


Bastard balm, Melittis Melissa ; Linn. 
Bear's-breech, Acanthus mollis ; Linn. 
Berberry, Berberis vulgaris; Linn. 
Benedicta lawativa.—Formula of the Pharmacopesa Londinensis, 
A.D. 1650. 
ER Picked turpeth, 5x ; 
Scammony, 
Bark of spurge-root, 
Hermodactyle, 
Red roses, àà 5v; 
Cloves, 
Spikenard, 
Ginger, 
Saffron, 
Long pepper, 
Amomum (or else sweet-flag), 
Lesser cardamom, 
Seeds of smallage, 
» parsley, 
», caraway, 
» fennel, 
, asparagus, 
»  butcher's-broom, 
»  Saxifrage, 
» gromwell, 
Sal gemme, 
Galangale, 
Mace, aa 3}. 
Three times the quantity of clarified honey. at elect. sec. art. 
Betony, Betonica officinalis ; Linn. 
Bezoar of the East, Concretions from the stomach of Asiatic mammatia. 
Generally resinous. 


Bezoar of the West, Concretions from the stomach of European mam- 
malia. Generally earthy. 


Xclv MATERIA MEDICA, 


Birthwort, Aristolochia longa ; Linn. 
Bistort, Polygonum Bistorta ; Linn. 
Bitter decoction.— Formula of the Pharmacopceia Londinensis, 
AD 1677. 
Ix Of the tops of the lesser centaury, 
» flowers of chamomile, aa one handful ; 

Gentian, 9ss; 

Senna, 

Of the seeds of Carduus Benedictus, aà 5j. 

Boil down to four ounces. 

Black cherry, Prunus Avium ; linn. 
Bloodstone, Fibrous red iron-stone. 
Borage, Borago officinalis ; Linn. 
Brooklime, Veronica Beccabunga ; Linn. 
Bryony, Bryonia dioica ; Jacq. 
Bugle, Ajuga reptans ; Linn. 
Bugloss, Lycopsis arvensis ; Linn. 
Butcher’s-broom, Ruscus aculeatus ; Linn. 
Butter-bur, Tussilago Petasites ; Linn. 


CALAMINT, Melissa Calamintha; Linn. 

Carduus Benedictus, Centaurea Benedicta ; fain, 
Catmint, Nepeta Cataria ; Linn. 

Ceterach, Asplenium Ceterach ; Linn. 
Chicory.—See Succory. 

China, Smilax China ; Linn. 

Cinquefoil, Potentilla reptans ; Linn. 

Coltsfoot, Tussilago Farfara ; Linn. 

Comfrey, Symphytum officinale ; Linn. 

Common bluebottle, Centaurea Cyanus ; linn. 
Common decoction for clysters.—NSee Decoction. 
Confection of hyacinth.—Formula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, 


4.0. 1077: 
kK Broken* hyacinth, 

Red coral, 
Bole armeniac, 
Terra Lemnia, aa 3ss ; 
Kermes, 
Tormentil (the root), 
Dittany (the root), 
Lime seeds, 
Sorrel seeds, 
Purslane seeds, 
Saffron, 
Myrrh, 
Red roses (without the claws), 
Sanders-wood (each kind), 
Stag-heart-bones, 
Hartshorn, 
Ivory scraping, aa iv; 
Sapphire, 
Emerald, 
Topaz, 


* The mineral hyacinth, 7. v. 


AND PREPARATIONS. xcv 


Fiat confectio. 


Pearl, 

Gold-leaf, 
Silver-leaf, aa 9ij. 
Camphor, 

Musk, 

Ambergris, aa gr. v. 
Syrup of lemons. 


Couch grass, T'ritficum repens ; Linn. 

Crocus of antimony. Composed of sulphate of potash, teroxide of 
antimony combined with potash, oxysulphuret of antimony, and 
tersulphuret of antimony combined with sulphuret of potassium. 

Cuckoo-pint, drum maculatum ; Linn. 


DEAD-NETTLE, Lamium album; Linn. 
Decoction—Common for a clyster.—Formula of the Pharmacopceia 


Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 


kK Of the leaves of mallow, 


” 


?? 


” 


violet, 

pellitory of the wall, 
beet, 

mercury, 


Of the flowers of chamomile, 4a one handful ; 
Of the seeds of fennel, Zss 


2» 


Boil down to a pound. 


flax, 3ij; 


Decoctum vulnerarium.—Decoction for wounds.—Formula of the Phar- 
macopeeia Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 
K Of the leaves of agrimony, 


mugwort, 

wild angelica, 

St. John's wort, 

pilosella, 4a two handfuls; 
wormwood, one half-handful ; 
southernwood, 

betony, 

bugle, 

comfrey (each sort, with the root), 
avens, 

plantain (each sort), 

tormentil (with the root), 


Of the buds of raspberry, 


oak, aa one handful. 


Gather in May or J une, dry, cut up, and store in leathern or paper bags. When 
required for use, take three handfuls to four pounds of spring water, and two 
of white wine. Boil down to half over a slow fire. Strain. Add a pound 


of the best honey. 


Skim, and set by for use. 


Devil's-bit, Seabiosa succisa ; Linn. 
Diacatholicon.—Formula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 
Ix Pulp of cassia, 
Tamarinds, 
Senna-leaves, aa 3ij; 
Polvpody, 


Violets, 


Rhubarb, aa 3]; 
Aniseed, 
Barley-sugar, 


xcvi MATERIA MEDICA, 


Sugar-candy, 
Scraped liquorice, 
Seeds of gourd, 

»  Colocynth, 

» cucumber, 

» Melon, aa 5ij. 

Pound all that is not already powdered, and mix. Then take of fresh polypody 
of fennel-seeds, aa 5v]; boil, in Ib. iv of rain- or common water, down to two 
thirds. Strain. Add to the strained liquor two pounds of the best sugar. 
Boil a second time to the consistency of a syrup, with the pulps of cassia and 
tamarinds, and add in those ingredients which were in the form of powders. 


Diacorrallion.—YVormula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 
E Red coral, 
White coral, 
Bole armeniac (true), 
Dragon's blood, 44 5j ; 
Pearls, 5ss ; 
Lignum aloes, 
Red roses, 
Gum tragacanth, 
Cinnamon, 4a 9ij; 
White sanders-wood, 
Red sanders-wood, aa 9ij. 
Add four times the weight of sugar dissolved in weak cinnamon-water. Mix, 
and make into an electuary, secundum artem. 


Diagrydiun, Scammony and quince-seeds. 
Diambra.—Formula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 1677, for 
species Diambree. 

kK Cinnamon, 
Angelica-root, 
Cloves, 
Mace, 
Nutmeg, 
Indian leaf, 
Galangale, aa 51ij; 
Spica indica, 
Greater cardamom, 
Lesser cardamom, aa 5j ; 
Ginger, 3iss ; 
Lignum aloes, 
Yellow sanders-wood, 
Long pepper, aa 5i) ; 
Ambergris, 5153 ; 
Musk, 5ss. 

Mix. Fiat pulvis. 


Diaphenicén.—F ormula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, a.p. 1650. 


Take of the pulp of dates, boiled in hydromel, and strained, and of fresh barley- 
sugar, 4a lb.ss; of sweet almonds, Ziiiss. Pound and mix. Add of clarified 
honey, lb.ij Boil for a short time, and add 

Ginger, 
Long pepper, 
Mace, 
Cinnamon, 
Dried rue-leaves, 
Fennel-seed, 
Carrot-seed, àà 5ij ; 
Finely-powdered turbith, Ziv; 
Scammony, Ziss. 

Ft. elect. secund, art. 


AND PREPARATIONS. xevil 


Diascordium.—Formula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 1682. 

RK Cinnamon, 
Cassia-wood, Zss; 
True scordium, 3} ; 
Dittany of Crete, 
Tormentil, 
Bistort, 
Galbanum, 
Gum-arabic, aa Zss ; 
Storax, 5ivss ; 
Seeds of sorrel, 
Opium, aa 3); 
Gentian, Zss ; 
Bole armeniac, Ziss ; 
Terra Lemnia, 3ss ; 
Long pepper, 
Ginger, àà 5i]; 
Clarified honey, lb.iiss ; 
Sugar of roses, 1b.j ; 
Good canary wine, 5viij. 

Fiat electuarium secundum artem. 


Dodder of the thyme, Cuscuta Epithymum ; Linn. 
Dragon's-blood, Juice of Pterocarpus Draco; Linn. 


Emplastrum Diachalcites.—F¥ormula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, 
A.D. 1682. 
K  Hogslard (well kept, unsalted, and free from membrane), lb.ij ; 
Old olive oil, 
Oxide of lead, 
Litharge of gold (ground and sifted), aa lb.iij ; 
White vitriol (burnt and powdered), Ziv. 

Boil together, over a slow fire, the litharge, oil, and lard, with a dash of plan- 
tain-water, stirring up the mixture with a spoon until of the consistency of a 
plaster. Upon removal from the fire, add in the vitriol, and make up into a 
mass. 


Emplastrum ad herniam.—Formula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, 
A.D. 1650. 
K Galls, 
Cypress-cones, 
Rind of pomegranates, 
Flower of pomegranates, 
Acacia, 
Seeds of plantain, 
» lousewort, 
5 cress, 
Acorn-cups, 
Parched beans, 
Aristolochia (each kind), 
Bilberries, aa $ss. 
Reduce to powder, and soak in vinegar of roses for four days. Roast and dry. 
Then add of 
, Comfrey (each kind), 
Horsetail, 
Woad, 
Ceterach, 
Root of osmund royal, 
» fern, àà 2j; 
Frankincense, 


xcviil MATERIA MEDICA, 


Myrrh, 
Aloes, 
Mastich, 
Mummy, aa £i); 
Bole armeniac (washed in vinegar), 
Calamine, 
Litharge of gold, 
Dragon's-blood, aa 3iij ; 
Tar, 
Turpentine, Zvj, or quant. suff. 
Fiat emplastrum sec. art. 
Endive, Cichorea Endivia ; Linn. 
Epidemic water. See Aqua Hpidemica. 
Eryngo, root of Eryngium campestre ; Linn. 
Euphrasy, Luphrasia officinalis ; Linn. 


Feverrew, Pyrethrum Parthenium, Sm.; Matricaria Parthenium, Linn. 
Flos unguentorum.—Formula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 
1650. 
EK Resin, ^ 
Resin of the pine, 
Bees-wax, 
Mutton suet, aa lb.ss ; 
Olibanum, Ziv; 
Turpentine, Ziiss ; 
Myrrh, 
Mastich, aa 3} ; 
Camphor, £ij ; 
White wine, 5ss. 
Boil. Fiat empl. 
French lavender, Lavandula Stechas ; Linn. 
Friar’s balsam, Tinctura Benzoini composita. 
Fumitory, Pumaria officinalis ; Linn. 
Funigreek, Trigonella Foenum Grecum ; Linn. 


GARDEN ANGELICA, Angelica Archangelica ; Linn. 
Garden scurvy-grass, Cochlearia officinalis ; Linn. 
Gascoigne's powder— Pulvis e chelis cancrorum compositus.— Formula 
of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 
K Prepared pearls, 
Crabs' eyes, 
Red coral, 
Pale amber, 
Hartshorn (philosophically prepared), 
Bezoar of the east, aa Zss ; 
Powder of the black tips of crabs’ claws, Ziij. 
Reduce to powder, and make up with the jelly of the sloughs of British vipers. 
Germander, Teucrium Chamedrys ; Linn. 
Golden-rod, Solidago Virgaurea; Linn. 
Gourd, Cucurbita Pepo ; Linn. 
Great bluebottle, Centaurea Scabiosa ; Linn. 
Greater celandine, Chelidonium magus ; Linn. 
Gromwell, Lithospermum officinale ; Linn. 
Ground-ivy, Glechoma hederacea ; Linn. 
Ground-pine, Ajuga Chamepitys ; Linn. 


AND PREPARATIONS. XCLX 


HAREBELLS, Hyacinthus non-scriptus ; Linn. 

Hart's-tongue, Asplenium Scolopendrium ; Linn. 

Hepatica, dnemone Hepatica ; Linn. 

Hermodactyle, Colchicum autumnale (T) ; Linn. 

Hiera Picra.—Formula of the Pbarmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 


kK Cinnamon, 
Lignum aloes, 
Asarum-root, 
Spikenard, 
Mastich, 
Saffron, aa 5v] ; 
Aloes (unwashed), £xijss ; 
Clarified honey, Ib.iv. Ziij ; 
Mix. Ft. elect. sec. art. 


Hungarian vitriol—Solution of nitrate of copper. 
Hyacinth, silicate of zirconia. Also zircon and jargon. 


JUJUBES, inspissated juice of Zizyphus vulgaris ; De Candolle. 
KERMES, Coccus ilicis ; Linn. 


LzssER CENTAURY, Erythrea Centaureum ; Persoon. 

Lilly of the valley, Convallaria majalis ; Linn. 

Liquid laudanum— Liquid laudanum of Sydenham, of the Pharmacopoeia 
Londinensis, 1721, the tinctura thebaica of 1746, the present vinum 
opti. Sydenham's formula is as follows: 

I Sherry-wine, 1b.j ; 
Opium, Sij ; 
Saffron, 2j; 
Powder of cinnamon, 
$5 cloves, aa 3). 


Lohoch sanum.—Formula of Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, 4.5. 1650 


Fk Garden hyssop (dried), 
Calamint, aa Zss ; 
Jujubes, 
Assyrian plums (without the stones), aa Ix ; 
Raisins (without the stones), 
Figs, 
Linseed, 
Seed of fenugreek, aa 3v ; 
Maidenhair, j handful ; 
Aniseed, 
Fennel-seed, 
Iris-root (sliced in circles), 
Liquorice, 
Cinnamon, aa Zss. 

Boil down to half in lb.iv of clear water. Add lb.ij of barley-sugar, and make 
into a syrup. Then, cut very finely, and pound. 


Pine-cones (cleansed), 5v ; 
Sweet almonds (without the skins), 
Liquorice, 
Gum tragacanth, 
, arabic, 


e MATERIA MEDICA, 


Starch, aa 3iij; 
Orris-root, 3ij. 
Take the syrup off the fire and pour it upon the above. Stir with a wooden 
pestle until the mixture becomes white. 


Lovage, Ligusticum Levisticum ; Linn. 


Mapper, Rubia tinctorum; Linn. 

Maidenhair, Adiantum capillus Veneris; Linn. 

Masterwort, Imperatoria ostruthium ; Linn. 

Maudelein, Achillea Ageratum ; Linn. 

Meadow-saxifrage, Saaifraga granulata ; Linn. 

Meadow-sweet, Spirea ulmaria ; Linn. 

Melilot, Melilotus officinalis ; Linn. 

Melon, Cucumis Melo; Linn. 

Mithridate.—Formula of the Pharmacopceia Londinensis, A.D. 1782. 


K Arabian myrrh, 
Saffron, 
Agaric, 
Ginger, 
Cinnamon, 
Spikenard, 
Frankincense, 
Seeds of penny-cress, aa 3x ; 
Cicely, 
Opobalsamum (or else oil of nutmeg by expression), 
Sweet rush, 
French lavender, 
Costum, 
Galbanum, 
Cyprian turpentine, 
Long pepper, 
Castor, 
Juice of hypocistis, 
Storax, 
Opoponax, 
Indian leaf (fresh), (or else mace), aa 3); 
True cassia-wood, 
Poly of the mountain, 
White pepper, 
Scordium, 
Seeds of the Cretan carrot, 
Carpobalsamum (or else cubebs), 
Lozenges of cyphus, 
Bdellium, aa 3vij; 
Celtic nard (purified), 
Gum arabic, 
Seeds of the Macedonian stone-parsley, 
Opium, 
Lesser cardamoms, 
Fennel-seeds, 
Gentian, 
Flowers of the red rose, 
Dittany of Crete, aa 3v; 
Seeds of anise, 
Asarum, 
Sweet-flag, 
Orris-root, 


AND PREPARATIONS. ci 


Phu, 

Sagapenum, aa 3ii) ; 

Meu, 

Acacia, 

Skunk-bellies, 

St. John's-wort tops, 

Canary-wine, enough to dissolve the gums and juices, 7. e. 
Zxxvj (there or thereabouts); 

Clarified honey, three times the weight of all the rest, 
excepting the wine. 

Fiat elect. sec. art. 


Monk’s rhubarb, Rumew alpinus ; Linn. 
Mousear, Hieracium pilosella ; Linn. 

Mullein, Verbascum Thapsus ; Linn. 
Myrobalan, Terminalia Chebula ; De Candolle. 


Onnris-nooT, Root of Iris Florentina ; Linn. 
Ox-eye, Chysanthemum Leucanthemum ; Linn. 


Proxy, Peonia officinalis ; Linn. 


Pectoral decoction.—Formula of the Pharmacopceia Londinensis, A.D. 
1650. 
K Raisins, 5j ; 
Assyrian plums, 
Jujubes, xv of each; 
Dates, vi ; 
Figs, iv; 
Pearl-barley, 3j; 
Liquorice, Zss ; 
Leaves of maidenhair, 
— hyssop, 
s coltsfoot, 4a one handful. 
Boil down to two thirds in iij pounds of spring-water. 


Pellitory of the wall, Parietaria officinalis; Linn. 
Penny-cress, Thlaspi arvense ; Linn. 
Persicaria, Polygonum Persicaria ; Linn. 
Phlegma vitriolicum.—Dilute sulphuric acid. 
Pilule cochie majores.—Formula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, 
A.D. 1650. 

French hiera picra, 3x ; 

Lozenges of alhandal, Siiiss ; 

Scammony, 3iiss ; 

Gummy turbeth, 

French lavender, aa 3v; 

Syrup of French lavender, q. s. 

Fiat massa sec. artem. 


Pilule e duobus.—Vormula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D. 
1650. 


IX Colocynth, 
Scammony, aa 5j ; 
Oil of cloves, q. s. 
Knead together until the mass softens. Add syrup of buckthorn. Fiat massa 
sec. art. 


*h 


cii MATERIA MEDICA, 


Pilule macri.—Formula of the Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, A.D . 1682. 


EK  Aloes (best), Xij; 
Mastich, 3ss ; 
Marjoram-leaves (dried), 3ij; 
Salts of wormwood, 3j. 
Reduce to powder, and make up into a mass, with the juice of sugared stalks 
(caules saccharati). 


Pilule rudii.—Formula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, A.D. 1682. 


Ix  Colocynth, 3vj; 
Agaric, 
Scammony, 
Root of black hellebore, 
Turpeth, 4a 33s ; 
Socotrine aloes, 2j; 
Cinnamon, 
Mace, 
Cloves, aa Div. 

The colocynth must be cleansed of its seeds, and cut into small pieces; the 
agaric rasped ; the hellebore, the turpeth, and the aromatics coarsely pounded. 
Cover these to the depth of six fingers with the best spirits of wine. Macerate 
at a gentle heat for a fortnight. Strain, and squeeze strongly. Then dissolve 
the aloes and scammony; each being previously well cleansed. Pour the 
liquor into a glass alembic, and distil off the moisture until there remain 
a mass of the consistency of honey. Make into a mass. 


Pulvis Comitisse.—The Pulvis Cometisse and the Schedula Romana 
are the oldest formulee for the administration of Peruvian Dark. 

Pimpinella, Pimpinella Saxifraga ; Linn. 

Plague-water, see 4qua epidemica. 

Plantain, Plantago major ; Linn. 

Polypody of the oak, Polypodium vuigare ; Linn. 

Purslane, Portulaca oleracea; Linn. 


RED saNDERS-WOOD, Pterocarpus Santalinus ; Linn. 
Rhodium, Genista Canariensis ; Linn. 
Roman wormwood, Artemisia Pontica; Linn. 


SAL PRUNELLA, Fused nitrate of potass. 

Salts of wormwood, Carbonate of potass. 

Sanicle, Sanicula Europea; Linn. 

Savory, Cunila sativa; Linn. 

Saxony-water — Aqua cordialis frigida Saxonica.— Formula of the 
Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, a.p. 1650. 


K Of the juice of borage, 
T bugloss, 
» balm, 
5s bistort, 
» tormentil, 
» scordium, 
" verbena, 
» sharp dock, 
» sorrel, 
5 goat's-rue, 
5 cicely, 
» cornflower (both sorts) 


AND PREPARATIONS. ciii 


Of the juice of roses, 


» marygold, 

* lemon, 

2 citron, aa $vj. 
» pimpinella, 


Pr cinquefoil, aa Ziij; 
White-wine vinegar, 1b.j; 
Seeds of purslane, 3ij ; 
s - Cleran, 
»  carduus, aa Zss; 
Flowers of water-lily, $ij ; 
» borage, 
T bugloss, 
» violet, 
- sweet William, aa 2); 
Powder of the three sanders-woods, 3vj. 
Mix, and let stand for three days. Then distil in a glass vessel. Add to the 
distilled liquor of 
Terra Lemnia, 
,» silesiaca, 
» Samia, aa Ziss. 
Pearls prepared in lemon-juice, Ziij. 
Mix well, and keep for use. 


Scabious, Seabiosa arvensis ; Linn. 

Scordium, Teucrium Scordium ; Linn. 

Sharp-dock, Rwmev acutus, Linn. 

Smallage, Apium graveolens; Linn.: Synon., wild celery. 

Sir Walter Raleigh's powder.—The confectio aromatica of the present 
Pharmacopeeia. 

Solutive syrup of roses.— Formula of the Pharmacopceia Londinensis, 
A.D. 1650. 


EK Take of boiling spring-water four pounds. Infuse therein as much of the 
fresh leaves of the damask-rose as the liquor will take. Cover up, and soak 
for twelve hours. Squeeze out strongly. Boil the liquor again, and add an 
equal quantity of fresh rose-leaves for a second maceration. Repeat this nine 
times, increasing the quantity of water each time by one third, and increasing 
the quantity of rose-leaves in proportion. Add four parts of white sugar to 
six of the liquor. fiat syrupus secundum artem. 


Sovereign. syrup for melancholy.— Formula of the Pharmacopeceia 
Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 


Take of the juice and water of sweet-scented apples, aa lb.jss; of the juice and 
water of borage, aa Zix ; of the leaves of oriental senna, cleansed, lb.ss; of 

Aniseed, 
Fennel-seed, aa 3iij ; 
Thyme of Candy, aa Ziij ; 
Agaric (whitest sort), 
Rhubarb (best quality), aa Zss ; 
Cinnamon, Div; 
Saffron, 3ss. 

Steep the rhubarb and cinnamon by themselves in 
White wine, 
Apple-juice, aa 2i]; 

Soak all, except the saffon, in the above-named waters. The next day pour in 
the juices. Boil over a slow fire, skim, and strain through a jelly-bag. Add 
four pounds of the best white sugar. Boil to a syrup. Hang the saffron in 
a linen bag, and squeeze it over the mixture. Lastly, add the infusion of 
rhubarb. Boil gently down to the consistency of a syrup. 


civ MATERIA MEDICA, 


Southernwood, Artemisia Abrotanum ; Linn. 

Speedwell, Veronica officinalis ; Linn. 

St. John's wort, Hypericum perforatum ; Linn. 

Succory, Cichorium Intybus ; Linn. 

Syrup of the balm of Fernelius.—A variation of the following formula 
in the Pharmacopceia Londinensis, A.D. 1650. 


Ix  Root-bark of bugloss, 3]; 
Root of white dittany, 
»  Cinquefoil, 
»  scorzonera, aa $ss; 
Leaves of balm, 
5, scabious, 
= devil’s-bit, 
Flowers of bugloss (each kind), 
” rosemary, aa one handful ; 
Seeds of wood-sorrel, 
5 lime, 
»  fennel, 
»  carduus Benedictus, 
» basil aa 3Snjs 
Boil in four pounds of water to half. Squeeze out the liquor, and add 
White sugar, lb. iij ; 
Juice of bastard balm, 
Rose-water, aa lb.ss. 
Boil to a syrup, and flavour with 
Cinnamon, 
Yellow sanders-wood, aa Zss. 


Syrup of the five roots, i. e. of smallage, asparagus, bearsbreach, 
fennel, and parsley [Greenhill]. 


TacaMAHACK, Icica Taccamahacca ; Kunth. 
Tamarisk, Tamariscus Gallica; Linn. 
Tansy, Tanacetum vulgare; Linn. 

Tutty, Impure oxide of zinc. 


Unguentum mnervinum.—Formula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, 


A.D. 1677. 
Ik Cowslips (leaf and flower), 

Sage, 
Ground-pine, 
Rosemary, 
Lavender, 
Laurel (leaf and berry), 
Chamomile, 
Rue, 
Smallage, 
Melilot (leaf and flower), 
Wormwood, aa one handful ; 
Mint, 
Betony, 
Pennyroyal, 
Parsley, 
Lesser centaury, 
St. John’s wort, àà one half-handful ; 
Sheep’s-foot (or neat’s-foot) oil, lb.v ; 
Mutton (or beef) suet, Ib.ij ; 
Oleum de spica, Zss. 

Mash and boil. Fiat unguentum secundum artem. 


AND PREPARATIONS. cv 


Unguentum pectorale.— Formula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, 
A.D, 1650. 


Ix Fresh butter (washed in violet-water), $vj ; 

Oil of sweet almonds, Ziv; 
5 chamomile, 
violets, 

Fat of fowls, 

,, ducks, aà 2173 
Orris-root, 5i] ; 
Saffron, 5ss. 
Reduce the last two to a very fine powder. Melt the rest. Wash several times 
in barley-water or hyssop-water. Fiat unguentum sec. art. 


Unguentum. pomatum.—Formula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, 


AD. 1077. 
IX Fresh hogslard, 1b.iij ; 
». Mutton suet, Zix; 
Pomewater apples (peeled and sliced), Ib.j Six ; 
Red rose-water, 5vj ; 
Orris-root (coarsely powdered), 5vj. 


Boil together in a water-bath, until the apples break down. Strain without 
squeezing, and keep for use. As the mixture gets warm, sprinkle in a little 
fresh rose-water, and add to every pound of the ointment twelve drops of the 
oil of rhodium. 


VENICE TREACLE, Theriaca Andromacht.—Formula of the Pharmacopocia 
Londinensis, A.D. 1682. 


Fk Squill lozenges, 51viij ; 
Lozenges of vipers (flesh and broth), 
Long pepper, 

Opium, 

Lozenges of hedychroum, àà 5xxv; 
Red roses (without the claws), 
Illyrian orris-root, 
Liquorice-juice, 

Navew seeds, 

Shoots of scordium, 

Balm of Gilead, 

Cinnamon, 

Agaric in lozenges, aa 5xij; 
Myrrh, 

Spikenard, or zedoary, 
Saffron, 

Wood of the true cassia, 
Indian nard, 

Camel’s-hay, 

White pepper, 

Black pepper, 
Frankincense, 

Dittany of Crete, 

Rhubarb, 

French lavender, 
Horehound, 

Parsley, 

Macedonian stone-parsley, 
Parsley-seed, 

Calamint (dried), 
Cinquefoil-root, 

Ginger, aa IExv) ; 


cvi MATERIA MEDICA, ETC. 


Young shoots of the carrot of Crete, 
js » ground pine, 

Root of the Celtic nard, 

Amomum, 

Storax, 

Root of meu, 

Young shoots of germander, 

Roots of Pontic valerian, 

Terra Lemnia, 

Indian leaf, 

Green vitriol (calcined), 

Gentian-root, 

Gum arabic, 

Juice of hypocistis, 

Carpobalsamum (or else nutmegs or else cubebs), 

Seeds of anise (dried), 


» cardamoms, 
5 fennel, 
js cicely, 


Gum acacia (or else plum-tree gum), 

Seeds of penny-cress, 

Tops of St. John's wort, 

Seeds of bishop's-weed, 

Sagapenum, aa 5iv ; 

Castor, 

Root of the long birth wort, 

Jews' pitch (or amber), 

Seeds of the carrot of Crete, 

Opoponax, 

Lesser centaury, 

Thick galbanum, aa 3ij ; 

Canary wine (old), 3x1 (i. e. sufficient to dissolve the gums 

and juices) ; 

Clarified honey (triple the weight of the powders). 

Mix, and make into an electuary, sec. art. 


Vervain, Verbena officinalis ; Linn. 
Vinum Benedictum.—Formula of the Pharmacopeeia Londinensis, 
Ap. 1650. 
K Saffron, 2j; 
Mace, 5j; 
Sherry-wine, lb.iss. 
Soak. 


Viper's bugloss, Lchium viperinum ; Linn. 


WaTER-LILY, Nymphea alba; Linn. 

White sandal-wood, Santalum myrtifolium; Sprengel. The young wood. 
Wild thyme, Thymus serpyllum; Linn. 

Wood-sorrel, Oxalis acetosella ; Linn. 


Yarrow, Achillea millefolia ; Linn. 
Yellow sandal-wood, Santalum myrtifolium ; Sprengel. The old wood. 


ZEDOARY, Curcuma Zedoaria ; Roxburgh. 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE HISTORY AND 


CURE OF ACUTE DISEASES. 


Epistle Dedicatory to the Third Edition 
Epistle Dedicatory to the First Edition 
Preface to the Third Edition 

Preface to the First Edition 

Latin Poem, by J. Locke 


SECTION I. 
Cuaprer I.—On Acute Diseases in general 
Cuap. II.—On Epidemic Diseases 


Cuap. III.—The Epidemic Constitution of the Years 1661, 1662, 1663, 
1664, in London 


Cuapv. IV.—The Continued Fever of the Years 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664, in 


London 


Cuna». V.—The Intermittent Fevers of the Years 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664, 


in London 


SECTION II. 


Cuap. I.—The Epidemic Constitution of the Years 1665, 1666, in London 
Cuap. II.—The Pestilential Fever and Plague of the Years 1665, 1666 


SECTION III. 
Cuap. I.—The Epidemic Constitution of the Years 1667, 1668, and part 
of 1669, in London 
Cua». IL—The Regular Smallpox during the Years 1667 1668, and part of 
1669 
Cua». III.—The Continued Fever of the Years 1667, 1668, and part of 
1669 


44 


97 
98 


121 


123 


151 


CHAP 


CONTENTS. 


SECTION IV. 


. I.—The Epidemic Constitution of part of the Year 1669, and of the 
whole of 1670, 1671, and 1672, in London 


Cuap. II.—The Cholera Morbus of the Year 1669 


CHAP 


CHAP 


CHAP 


. HI.—The Dysentery of part of 1669, and of the whole of 1670, 
1671, and 1672 


. IV.—The Continued Fever of part of the Year 1669, and the whole 
of 1670, 1671, and 1672 


. V.—The Measles of the Year 1670 


Cuap. VI.—The Anomalous Smallpox of the Years 1670, 1671, 1672 


Cuap. VII.—The Bilious Colic of the Years 1670, 1671, and 1672 


SECTION V. 


Cuape. I.—The Epidemic Constitutions of part of the Year 1673, and of the 


CHAP 


whole Years 1674, 1675 
. II.—The Continued Fever of the Years 1673, 1674, 1675 


Cuap. III.—The Measles of the Year 1674 


Cuap. IV.—The Irregular Smallpox of the Years 1674, 1675 


CuaAP 


CHAP 


CHAP 


CHAP 


. V.—The Epidemic Coughs of the Year 1675, with the Pleurisy and 
Peripneumony that supervened 


. VI.—Recapitulation 


SECTION VI. 
. I.—Intercurrent Fevers 


. II.—Searlet Fever 


Cuap. III.—Pleurisy 


CuaAP 
CHAP 


CHAP 


. IV.— Bastard Peripneumony 
. V.— Rheumatism 


. VI.—Erysipelatous Fever 


Cuar. VII. —Quinsy 


PAGE 


159 


203 
206 
216 
218 


226 
234 


239 
243 
244 
251 
2954 
260 
264 


MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS 


CONCERNING 


THE HISTORY AND THE CURE 


OF 


ACUTE DISEASES. 


Opinionum Commenta delet dies: Nature judicia confirmat. 
Cicero, de Nat. Deor, 


Sry, re ul 
1 Mte edes Misi: V, ames oa "" rM ME 
pF 2 Bois. i " ! n or 


LI ' - DEN n2 T , "i 7 » Fee [] TN E 
P 
m I ! » - 3-9. - nola uo 
a 
! ! — 
> 
Es T a » PF Lu 
! 


: , E- v pid - s Dc E 


"mue na itte e 
| ope: RET. 
y. 4 ay VIVI : 2" : 
te WHEN qu e - Sd 
guru uie quoe «xe 2 
yey TRI trait x fi tYa bd 2 : ew EM * Jis 
uL 2 bs XB JA ap us d GE 
* n TER Y Vati: h E TAM « d n ny ta aad " 
Ait ir > J ! ; - - 
ane ! erin 


ABO TO amies sal) dash sten ee 


LX 


EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE THIRD EDITION, 


TO MY DEAR FRIEND 


MASTER JOHN MAPLETOTT, 


DOCTOR OF MEDICINE; 
PROFESSOR IN GRESHAM COLLEGE, LONDON; AND FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY. 


Mosr LEARNED FRIEND,— 


I have two matters whereon I must now address you. 
Firstly, I must explain the motives which have induced me to 
publish the present Treatise. Secondly, I must show reason 
for inscribing it with your name. 

In respect to the first. It is now thirty years since I had 
the good fortune to fall in with the learned and ingenuous 
Master Thomas Coxe, Doctor, who was then attending my brother 
during a sickness; and who, from that time until the present, 
has followed his profession with success. I myself was on my 
way to London, with the intention of going thence to Oxford ; 
the breaking out of the war having kept me away for some 
years. With his well-known kindness and condescension, Dr. 
Coxe asked me what pursuit I was prepared to make my pro- 
fession ; since I was now returning to my studies, which had 
been interrupted, and was also arrived at years of discretion. 
Upon this point my mind was unfixed, whilst I had not so 
much as dreamed of medicine. Stimulated, however, by the 
recommendation and encouragement of so high an authority, I 
prepared myself seriously for that pursuit. Hence, all the little 
merit that my works may have earned in the eyes of the public, 
is to be thankfully referred to him who was the patron and 
promoter of my first endeavours. After a few years spent in 
the arena of the University, I returned to London for the 
practice of medicine. The more I observed the facts of this 
science with an attentive eye, and the more I studied them with 
due and proper diligence, the more I became confirmed in the 


4 EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO 


opinion which I have held to up to the present hour, viz., that 
the art of medicine was to be properly learned only from its 
practice and its exercise; and that, in all probability, he would 
be the best skilled in the detection of the true and genuine in- 
dications of treatment, who had the most diligently and the most 
accurately attended to the natural phenomena of disease. To 
this, then, I wholly devoted myself; being fully sure that, 
although I might say with Lucretius, — 


* Avia terrarum peragro loca, nullius ante 
Trita solo,"! 


yet, that with Nature for my guide, I should swerve not a 
nail’s breadth from the true way. With this clue, I directed 
my attention to the close observation of Fevers; and, after 
getting over no few anxieties, and after many troublesome 
agitations of spirit, wherewith I allowed myself during my first 
years to be distressed, I, at length, hit upon a mode of curing 
them. This, owing to the request of my friends, I was per- 
suaded to publish some time ago. After that, however, I 
observed that new forms of fever, hitherto unknown to me, suc- 
ceeded each other regularly. Hereupon I resolved to apply all 
the care I was master of in collecting together the charac- 
teristics and the complications of each, hoping thus to make up 
for the scantiness and deficiencies of my earlier work by a closer 
and a more absolute history of the diseases in question. Now, 
whilst I was reflecting upon these things, whilst I was hard at 
work in my investigations, and whilst I was wholly absorbed 
in the grand operation of forging a Delphie sword? in the shape 
of some methodus medendi which should meet all cases, from 
amidst the multiformities and the versatihties of Nature, I 


! Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, i, 928; iv, 1.— Terrarum, rectius Pieridum. 

? 'The phrase Delphic sword was applied to anything that could be accommodated 
to a variety of purposes. (Erasmus, Adag., chil. ii, cent. 3, prov. 69.) Compare 
Infr., iv, 3, 14.—[G.] Sydenham evidently uses the phrase in a good sense, applying 
it to a remedy, which was (or was supposed to be) equally fit for a variety of diseases. 
Without venturing upon the negative statement, that this is never the classical use 
of the expression, I may observe that it is a slight deviation from the power given to 
it by Aristotle: Nature makes nothing, as the armourers make Delphic swords, 
meanly ; but one instrument for one purpose.—Ov0ey yap $vctc wOLEL rotovrov SLO 
Oe xarybrorot paxydipay AeXótkgv, wevixows, dAXa £v wpdg év. (Vide Erasm. Adag., 
loc. cit.) 


THE THIRD EDITION. 9 


made the following discovery, viz., that I had opened my eyes 
only to get them filled with dust—no Olympic! dust either. On 
the one side, I had no guide whatsoever ; on the other, only the 
fancies of my own brain. Much, therefore, as I could have 
wished that these lucubrations of mine should have been 
increased and confirmed by the experience of years, I was, never- 
theless, so fretted by the sneers and insults of pretenders, that 
lat length considered what was due to myself, and undertook 
my defence accordingly. In doing this, I was prevailed on by 
my friends, amongst whom I must name with honour, the saga- 
cious Master Walter Needham, Doctor of Medicine, an orna- 
ment both to his profession and to literature. I trust that the 
facts which I record and publish will ensure me the candid part 
of mankind as partisans. In respect to the rest, I apply to them 
the acute saying of Seneca: “ Haxpectabo scilicet ut quicquam 
calumnie sit sacrum cui nec Rutilius sacer fuit nee Cato ?"? 

If, however, men be still found in whom the lust of abuse 
has been engrafted upon a natural discourtesy, and savageness 
of temper; if such men neglect to consider fairly whether I 
have written rightly or wrongly; and, finally, if they deem 
themselves injured when others proclaim new facts, of which 
they themselves had no previous knowledge—if such, I say, be 
found, I hope and trust that I shall endure them with a patient 
spirit. At any rate, I shall not reciprocate the asperities of 
their abuse, I shall oppose to them only what Titus Tacitus? 
opposed to the abuse of Metellus, a sentence which would have 
become even a Christian, “ Facile est in me dicere, cum non 
sim responsurus : tu didicisti maledicere; ego, conscientia teste, 
didici maledicta contemnere. St tu lingue tue dominus es, ut 
quicquid lubet effutias ; ego aurium. mearum sum dominus, ut 
quicquid obvenerit audiant inoffense,” 


! “Sunt quos curriculo pulverem Olympicum 
Collegisse juvat." Horat.,O0d. 1,1. à. [G.] 

2 De Vita Beata, c. 18... .[G.] 

? [ have not found this passage in any of the ancient writers. Refer, however, to 
Beyerlinck, Magn. Theatr. Vit. Human., tom. vi, p. 60, H. (Lugd. 1666, fol.) —[G.) 
The quotation in Beyerlinck is as follows: Tacitus Lucio Metello ei in Senatu male- 
dicenti respondit, “facile est in me dicere; quia non responsurus sum, potentia ergo 
tua non mea patientia est accusanda.” The classical author referred to by Beyerlinck 
is Seneca. I have not succeeded, however, in finding the passage in any of the 
common editions of that classic. 


6 EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO 


And these are the grounds upon which I have been induced 
to conceive that this book should be published. 

That so dear a friend as yourself should be the one to whom 
it was dedicated I desired, both on the grounds of our mutual 
affection and good-will, and for the reason that no one better 
than yourself could form a judgment as to the value and esti- 
mation of the Observations which I purpose to record. During 
the last seven years you have seen with your own eyes many 
of the leading and most important cases that will occur in 
the forthcoming pages. But as your known probity and integrity 
make it a point of conscience with you to draw no man into 
error under false pretences, (especially in matters of life and 
death,) so also would your learning and wisdom ensure you 
thoroughly against any deception on my part, were I foolish 
enough to contemplate it. Least of all would you deceive 
yourself in testing (as you have sometimes done in the cases of 
your own patients) the truth of any point asserted by me here, 
or stated before you elsewhere. 

You know also how thoroughly an intimate and common 
friend, and one who has closely and exhaustively examined the 
question, agrees with me as to the method that I am speaking 
of; a man who, in the acuteness of his intellect, in the steadi- 
ness of his judgment, in the simplicity (and by simplicity I 
mean excellence) of his manners, has, amongst the present 
generation, few equals and no superiors. This praise I may 
confidently attach to the name of Joun Locks. 

There is no occasion, however, to go further in soliciting 
your confidence: I have long felt assured of it. In respect to 
the rest, I must cast the die. Fall as it may, I shall bear my 
chance with equanimity. lI am now old. By the kindness of 
Providence, I have the wherewithal for the remainder of life. 
I aim only at the measure of happiness so beautifully described 
by Politian :! 

* Felix ille animi, Divisque simillimus ipsis, 
Quem non mendaci resplendens gloria fuco 
Sollicitat, non fastosi mala gaudia luxus. 


Sed tacitos sinit ire dies, et paupere cultu 
Exigit innocuz tranquilla silentia vitz." 


May I do this without vexing either myself or my neighbour ! 


t Rustic. 17, sq. [G.] 


THE THIRD EDITION. 7 


I only now add the entreaty that you may take in good 
part the present pledge of my good-will towards you, and of 
the honour in which I hold you. Jor the errors and inadver- 
tencies of the work you have no share whatsoever in the 
blame. All the responsibilities are mine; nor will my folly 
cause your punishment. Of one gain, at least, I am sure, I 
shall not lose the fruit of my labour, if, even from my blunders 
and hallucinations, I can draw an opportunity of proclaiming 
to the world the extent of my friendship for you, and the 
degree to which, in all truth and sincerity, I am most devotedly 
yours, 


THOMAS SYDENHAM. 


* * Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi."—lIIor. Ep. 1,2, 14. (G.] 


T€ Vie ident ^ i lua: T ¥ » imou fond th 
| gus MeL bars od} su "n TA OU 
RAL, ahi aa dx ar Ves ve H T are atu FJ 4 22 


Jd? v iu M a v di* 4 n HT. Arce Alv ux yt te 

Hd Ze Das P. oss d go : j = 

, » M E EE Poe - " n 9 LM mE ] Kee ve qe: 
"2 a) j 

Mapa Ww ‘+ LA LE "mp 2E * :20b P5 ul ahi | | ay E TM | 


Pty) i PGMA er, au vw 


EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


TO THE 


MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND MOST EXCELLENT 


MASTER ROBERT BOYES. 


Most TRULY NOBLE SIR,— 


To such a degree does anything, in any way appertaining 
to a person so truly and wholly noble as yourself, awaken the 
immediate attention of good and learned men, that I can at 
once foresee the avidity with which they will inquire into the 
grounds and reasons, whereon I have relied in venturing to crave 
the authority of a name so greatly celebrated as your own, as a 
warrantto this, my work. Neither do I overlook the common 
and customary forms of speech that are generally adopted by 
those who are in a like predicament with myself. It is most 
true, that I, like the rest, might make an open and public procla- 
mation of many and great favours conferred upon me by your 
goodness, and also that I might announce myself as the architect 
of some durable monument, the exponent of my gratitude, 
wherein the fulness of my language should be the measure of 
my respect and reverence. To speak the truth, I have no such 
thoughts as these in my present address. It is no part of my 
intention to descend into the details of your praise, or to enlarge 
upon the transcendency of your parts; although these last are so 
great as to raise you to the level of the most famous names of 
foregone ages, such indeed, as would have enriched any author 
with an exuberant supply of subject-matter, and have honoured 
any book whereof they stood at the head. All this, however, 
is shown in full by your own published Treatises ; having which, 
you require no second herald, whose subsidiary voice should 
swell the loud note of your celebrity. These trite and common- 


10 EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


place arguments I discard, and I profess to have placed my 
work under your patronage for the two following reasons: It 
was on your persuasion and recommendation that I undertook 
the subject; and itis by your own experience that the truth 
and efficacy of some of the matters delivered in the Treatise, 
have occasionally been tested. Hence you are made a sufficient 
witness; since in the fulness of your humanity you have gone 
so far as to accompany me in the visiting of the sick. Herein 
you have exhibited a kind spirit, descending to offices, which, 
however honorable, are little recognised by the spirit of the 
age we live in. 

Upon these grounds I earnestly request you to look upon 
my little work with a favorable eye, and to lend it the 
ornament of your name; and as no one knows better than 
yourself the difference between things swollen out, and things 
really great, I hope that will not find less favour for being 
neither vast in bulk, nor stuffed out with the spoils of former 
authors: I have no wish to disturb their ashes. 

Over and above the fevers which will here be considered, 
there are many other diseases, whereof the treatment is 
insufficient, and (according to my principles) the method 
irrational. 'To have kept my faith, I ought to have written 
upon these as well. However, in an age where subtle specula- 
tions are of higher value, and give more pleasure than genuine 
practice, I preferred to try the fortune of a smaller work, 
before I rashly ventured upon a fuller one. 

As to what remains, I must add, most illustrious Sir, that 
the object of the present epistle will be fully attained, if I 
succeed in craving pardon for my boldness in the use of your 
name, and in making a most grateful acknowledgment of your 
many services towards me. In all cases I shall owe you a 
debt of gratitude for manifold kindnesses, and never cease to 
be your most obliged and humble servant, 


THoMAS SYDENHAM. 


(1666.) 


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. 


1. Inasmuch as the structure of the human frame has 
been so set together by Nature, that it 1s unable, from the 
continuous flux of particles, to remain unchanged; whilst, 
from the action of external causes, it is subjected to influences 
beyond its own: and since, for these reasons, a numerous 
train of diseases has pressed upon the earth since the beginning 
of time ;! so without doubt the necessity of investigations into 
the Art of Healing has exercised the wit of mankind for many 
ages before the birth, not only of the Greek but of the Egyp- 
tian Esculapius, the latter being earlier by a thousand years 
than the former. 

2. And, indeed, as no man can say who it was that first 
invented the use of clothes and houses against the inclemency 
of the weather, so also can no investigator point out the origin 
of Medicine—mysterious as the sources of the Nile. There 
has never been a time when it was not. Like other arts, 
however, it has been zealously or remissly cultivated, according 
to the differences of time and place. 

3. How much the ancients, and pre-eminently amongst 
these Hippocrates, performed is known to all. It is to these, 
and to the compilers from their writings, that we owe the 
greater part of our skill in therapeutics. 

Besides these, however, in the succeeding ages, others have 
been conspicuous for their industry: men who, by attending to 
anatomy, to pharmacy, to the methodus medendi, have done 
their best towards enlarging the boundaries of medicine. Nor 
have there been wanting those who, in our own time, and in 
our own island, have done good work in each kind of science 
that advances medicine. The praises of these I leave to better 
pens than my own. 

SOE ty hed * nova Febrium : 
Terris incubuit cohors." (Hor. 1.) 


12 PREFACE TO THE 


4. Nevertheless, how great soever the efforts of others may 
have been, I, for my own part, have always considered that the 
breath of life would have been to me a vain gift, unless I, 
working in the same mine with them, contributed my mite to 
the treasury of physic. Wherefore, after long meditation, and 
the diligent and faithful observations of many years, I at length 
determined—firstly, to state my opinion as to the means by 
which the science of medicine was to be advanced ; secondly, 
to publish a sample of my endeavours in that department. 

5. I conceive that the advancement of medicine lies in the 
following conditions: 

There must be, in the first place, a history of the disease ; 
in other words, a description that shall be at once graphic and 
natural. 

There must be, in the second place, a Praxis, or Methodus, 
respecting the same, and this must be regular and exact. 

To draw a disease in gross is an easy matter. To describe’ 
it in its history, so as to escape the censure of the great Bacon, 
is far more difficult. Against some pretenders in this way, he 
launches the following censure—“ We are well aware that there 
existeth such a thing as a Natural History ; full in bulk, pleasant 
From its variety, often curious from its diligence. Notwith- 
standing, whoever would take away from the same the citations 
of authors, the empty discussions, and, finally, the book-learning 
and ornaments, which are fitter for the convivial meetings of 
learned men than for the establishment of a Philosophy, would 
find. that it dwindled into nothing. Such a natural history is 
jar distant from the one we contemplate.”* 

In like manner it is exceedingly easy to propound some 
common-place cure for a complaint. It is far harder, however, 
to translate your words into actions, and to square your results 
with your promises. This is well known to those who have 
learned that there occur in practical writers numerous dis- 
eases, which neither the authors themselves, nor any persons 
else besides, have been able to cure. 


1 “ Satis scimus haberi Historiam Naturalem, mole amplam, varietate gratam, dili- 
gentia ssepius curiosam: attamen si quis ex ea fabulas, et authorum citationes, et 
inanes controversias, philologiam denique et ornamenta eximat (que ad convivales 
sermones hominumque doctorum noctes potius quam ad instituendam Philosophiam 
sunt accommodata) ad nil magni res recidet. Longe profecto abest ab ea historia 
quam animo metimur.”—Descript. Glob. Intellect., c. iii, vol. xi, p. 8. [G.] 


THIRD EDITION. 13 


6. In respect to the histories of a disease, any one who looks 
at the case carefully, will see at once that an author must direct 
his attention to many more points than are usually thought of. 
A few of these are all that need be noticed at present. 

7. In the first place, it 1s necessary that all diseases be 
reduced to definite and certain species, and that, with the 
same care which we see exhibited by botanists in their phyto- 
logies; since it happens, at present, that many diseases, 
although included in the same genus, mentioned with a com- 
mon nomenclature, and resembling one another in several 
symptoms, are, notwithstanding, different in their natures, and 
require a different medical treatment. 

We all know that the term ¢histle is applied to a variety of 
plants; nevertheless, he would be a careless botanist, indeed, 
who contented himself with the general description of a thiséle ; 
who only exhibited the marks by which the class was iden- 
tified ; who neglected the proper and peculiar signs of the 
species, and who overlooked the characters by which they were 
distinguished from each other. On the same principle, it is 
not enough for a writer to merely note down the common 
phenomena of some multiform disease ; for, although it may be 
true that all complaints are not liable to the same amount of 
variety, there are still many which authors treat alike, under 
the same heads, and without the shadows of a distinction, 
whilst they are in their nature as dissimilar as possible. This I 
hope to prove in the forthcoming pages. 

8. More than this—ait generally happens that even where 
we find a specific distribution, it has been done in subservi- 
ence to some favorite hypothesis which hes at the bottom 
of the true phenomena; so that the distinction has been 
adapted not tothe nature of the complaint, but to the views of 
the author and the character of his philosophy. Many in- 
stances prove the extent to which medicine has been injured 
by a want of accuracy upon this point. We should have 
known the cures of many diseases before this time if phy- 
sicians, whilst with all due good-will they communicated their 
experiments and observations, had not been deceived in their 
disease, and had not mistaken one species for another. And 
this, I think, is one reason why the Materia Medica has 
grown so much and produced so little. 


14 PREFACE TO THE 


9. In writing the history of a disease, every philosophical 
hypothesis whatsoever, that has previously occupied the mind 
of the author, should lie in abeyance. ‘This being done, the 
clear and natural phenomena of the disease should be noted 
—these, and these only. They should be noted accurately, 
and in all their minuteness; in imitation of the exquisite 
industry of those painters who represent in their portraits the 
smallest moles and the faintest spots. No man can state the 
errors that have been occasioned by these physiological hypo- 
theses. Writers, whose minds have taken a false colour under 
their influence, have saddled diseases with phenomena which 
existed in their own brains only ; but which would have been 
clear and visible to the whole world had the assumed hypo- 
thesis been true. Add to this, that if by chance some symptom 
really coincide accurately with their hypothesis, and occur in 
the disease whereof they would describe the character, they 
magnify it beyond all measure and moderation; they make it 
all and in all; the molehill becomes a mountain; whilst, if it 
fail to tally with the said hypothesis, they pass it over either 
m perfect silence or with only an incidental mention, unless, 
by means of some philosophical subtlety, they can enlist it in 
their service, or else, by fair means or foul, accommodate it in 
some way or other to their doctrines. 

10. Thirdly; it is necessary, in describing any disease, to 
enumerate the peculiar and constant phenomena apart from 
the accidental and adventitious ones: these last-named being 
those that arise from the age or temperament of the patient, 
and from the different forms of medical treatment. It often 
happens that the character of the complaint varies with the 
nature of the remedies, and that symptoms may be referred 
less to the disease than to the doctor. Hence two patients 
with the same ailment, but under different treatment, may 
suffer from different symptoms. Without caution, therefore, 
our judgment concerning the symptoms of disease is, of neces- 
sity, vague and uncertain. Outlying forms of disease, and 
cases of exceeding rarity, | take no notice of. They do not 
properly belong to the histories of disease. No botanist takes 
the bites of a caterpillar as a characteristic of a leaf of sage. 

11. Finally, the particular seasons of the year which favour 
particular complaints are carefully to be observed. I am 


THIRD EDITION. 15 


ready to grant that many diseases are good for all seasons. 
On the other hand, there is an equal number that, through 
some mysterious instinct of Nature, follow the seasons as truly 
as plants and birds of passage. I have often wondered that 
this disposition on the part of several diseases, obvious as it is, 
has been so little observed ; the more so, as there 1s no lack of 
curious observations upon the planets under which plants grow 
and beasts propagate. But whatever may be the cause of this 
supineness, I lay it down as a confirmed rule, that the know- 
ledge of the seasons wherein diseases occur is of equal value to 
the physician in determining their species and in effecting 
their extirpation; and that both these results are less satis- 
factory when this observation is neglected. 

12. These, although not the only, are the main points to 
be attended to in drawing up the history of a disease. The 
practical value of such a history is above all calculation. By 
the side thereof, the subtle discussions, and the minute refine- 
ments wherewith the books of our new school are stuffed full, 
even ad nauseam, are of no account. What short way—what 
way at all—is there towards either the detection of the morbific 
cause that we must fight against, or towards the indications of 
treatment which we must discover, except the sure and distinct 
perception of peculiar symptoms? Upon each of these points 
the slightest and most unimportant circumstances have their 
proper bearings. Something in the way of variety we may 
refer to the particular temperament of individuals; something 
also to the difference of treatment. Notwithstanding this, 
Nature, in the production of disease, is uniform and consistent ; 
so much so, that for the same disease in different persons the 
symptoms are for the most part the same; and the selfsame 
phenomena that you would observe in the sickness of a 
Socrates you would observe in the sickness of a simpleton. 
Just so the universal characters of a plant are extended to 
every individual of the species; and whoever (I speak in the 
way of illustration) should accurately describe the colour, the 
taste, the smell, the figure, &c., of one single violet, would find 
that his description held good, there or thereabouts, for all the 
violets of that particular species upon the face of the earth. 

13, For my own part, I think that we have lived thus long 
without an accurate history of diseases, for this especial reason ; 


16 PREFACE TO THE 


viz. that the generality have considered that disease is but a 
confused and disordered effort of Nature thrown down from her 
proper state, and defending herself in vain ; so that they have 
classed the attempts at a just description with the attempts 
to wash blackamoors white. 

14. To return, however, to our business. As truly as the 
physician may collect points of diagnosis from the minutest 
circumstances of the disease, so truly may he also elicit indica- 
tions in the way of therapeutics. So much does this statement 
hold good, that I have often thought, that provided with a 
thorough insight into the history of any disease whatsoever, I 
could invariably apply an equivalent remedy; a clear path being 
thus marked out for me by the different phenomena of the 
complaint. These phenomena, if carefully collated with each 
other, lead us, as it were, by the hand to those palpable indi- 
cations of treatment which are drawn, not from the hallucina- 
tions of our fancy, but from the innermost penetralia of Nature. 

15. By this ladder, and by this scaffold, did Hippocrates 
ascend his lofty sphere—the Romulus of medicine, whose heaven 
was the empyrean of his art. Heit is whom we can never duly 
praise. He it was who then laid the solid and immoveable foun- 
dation for the whole superstructure of medicine, when he taught 
that our natures are the physicians of our diseases.) By this 
he ensured a clear record of the phenomena of each disease, 
pressing into his service no hypothesis, and doing no violence 
to his description ; as may be seen in his books * De Morbis? 
‘De Affectionibus, &c. Besides this, he has left us certain 
rules, founded on the observation of the processes of Nature, 
both in inducing and removing disease. Of this sort are the 
* Coacze Preenotiones,’ the ‘ Aphorisms,’ &c. Herein consisted 
the theory of that divine old man. It exhibited the legitimate 
operations of Nature, put forth in the diseases of humanity. 
The vain efforts of a wild fancy, the dreams of a sick man, it 
did not exhibit. 

Now, as the said theory was neither more nor less than an 
exquisite picture of Nature, it was natural that the practice 
should coincide with it. This aimed at one point only—it strove 
to help Nature in her struggles as it best could. With this 
view, it limited the province of medical art to the support of 

! Novowy gboveg (nroot.—Epid. vi, 5, 1. t, iii, p. 606. [G.] 


THIRD EDITION. I7 


Nature when she was enfeebled, and to the coercion of her when 
she was outrageous; the attempt on either side being determined 
by the rate and method whereby she herself attempted the re- 
moval and the expulsion of disease. The great sagacity of this 
man had discovered that Nature by herself determines diseases, 
and is of herself sufficient in all things against all of them. 
This she is, being aided by the fewest and the simplest forms 
of medicine. At times she is independent of even these. 

16. The other method whereby, in my opinion, the art of 
medicine may be advanced, turns chiefly upon what follows, 
viz. that there must be some fixed, definite, and consummate 
methodus medendi, of which the commonweal may have the ad- 
vantage. By fixed, definite, and consummate, I mean a line of 
practice which has been based and built upon a sufficient 
number of experiments, and has in that manner been proved 
competent to the cure of this or that disease. I by no means 
am satisfied with the record of a few successful operations, 
either of the doctor or the drug. I require that they be shown 
to succeed universally, or at least under such and such circum- 
stances. For I contend that we ought to be equally sure of 
overcoming such and such diseases by satisfying such and such 
intentions, as we are of satisfying those same intentions by the 
application of such and such sorts of remedies; a matter in 
which we generally (although not, perhaps, always) can succeed. 
To speak in the way of illustration, we attain our ends when 
we produce stools by senna, or sleep by opium. 

I am far from denying that a physician ought to attend 
dihgently to particular cases in respect to the results both of 
the method and of the remedies which he employs in the cure 
of disease. I grant, too, that he may lay up his experiences 
for use, both in the way of easing his memory and of seizing 
suggestions. By so doing he may gradually increase in medical 
skill, so that eventually, by a long continuance and a frequent 
repetition of his experiments, he may lay down and prescribe 
for himself a methodus medendi, from which, in the cure of this 
or that disease, he need not deviate a single straw’s breadth. 

17. Nevertheless, the publication of particular observations 
is, in my mind, of no great advantage. Where is the particular 
importance in just telling us that once, twice, or even oftener, 


! Tác voboove kpivel, kai £&£apkéec rà závra vüow.—De Aliment., t. ii, p. 19. [G.] 
aD) 


i 


18 PREFACE TO THE 


this disease has yielded to that remedy ? We are overwhelmed 
as it is, with an infinite abundance of vaunted medicaments, 
and here they add a new one. Now, if I repudiate the rest 
of my formule, and restrict myself to this medicine only, I 
must try its efficacy by innumerable experiments, and I must 
weigh, in respect to both the patient and the practice, 
innumerable circumstances, before I can derive any benefit 
from such a solitary observation. 

But if the medicine never fails in the hands of the observer, 
why does he confine himself to particular cases? He must 
either distrust himself, or he must desire to impose upon the 
world in detail, rather than in gross. How easy a matter it is 
to write thick volumes upon these points is known even to 
beginners. It is also known that the foundation and erection 
of a perfect and definite methodus medendi is a work of 
exceeding difficulty. lf,in each age of the world, a single person 
only had properly treated upon one single disease, the province 
of the physician, or the art of healing, would long ago have 
reached its height; and would have been as complete and 
perfect as the lot of humanity admits. It is ruin of our 
prospects to have departed from our oldest and best guide, 
Hippocrates, and to have forsaken the original methodus medendi. 
This was built upon the knowledge of immediate and conjunct 
causes, things of which the evidence is certain. Our modern 
doctrine is a contrivance of the word-catchers ; the art of talking 
rather than the art of healing. 

That I may not seem to speak these things rashly, I must 
be allowed to make a brief digression; and to prove that 
those remote and ultimate causes in the determination and 
exhibition of which the vain speculations of curious and busy 
men are solely engaged, are altogether incomprehensible and 
inscrutable ; and that the only causes that can be known to 
us, and the only ones from which we may draw our indications 
of treatment, are those which are proximate, immediate, and 
conjunct. 

18. We must begin with noticing that humours may be 
retained in the body longer than is proper; Nature being 
unable to begin with their concoction, and to end with their 
expulsion. They may also contract a morbific disposition 
from the existing atmospheric constitution. Finally, they may 


THIRD EDITION. 19 


act the part of poisons from the influence of some venomous 
contagion. From any one of these causes, or from any cause 
akin to them, the said humours become exalted into a substantial 
form or species ; and these substantial forms or species manifest 
themselves in disorders coincident with their respective essences. 
Of these disorders the symptoms, in the eyes of the unwary, 
originate either in the nature of the part which the humour 
has attacked, or else in the character of the humour itself 
anterior to its specific metamorphosis. Nevertheless, in their 
true nature, they are the disorders that depend upon the 
essence of the said species recently exalted to the particular 
degree in question. Hence every specific disease is a disorder 
that originates from this or that specific exaltation, or (changing 
the phrase) from the specification of some juice in the living 
body. Under this head may be comprised the greatest part of 
those diseases that are reducible to some given form or type, 
in the production and maturation whereof Nature binds herself 
to a certain method as stringently as she does with plants and 
even animals. Hach plant and animal has its proper and 
peculiar disorders. In like manner, each juice has its exalta-_ 
tions as soon as it has broken out into a species. Of this we 
have a clear, visible, and daily proof in the different species of 
excrescences, which trees and fruit exhibit in the shape of 
moss, and mistletoe, and fungi, and the hke. Whether arising 
from a perversion and depravation of the nutritive juice, or 
from any other cause, these excrescences are, each and all, 
essences or species wholly distinct and different from the parent 
stock, whether tree or shrub. 

19. Let a person seriously and accurately consider the 
phenomena which accompany such a fever as a quartan ague. 
It begins almost always in autumn ; it keeps to a regular course 
of succession ; it preserves a definite type; its periodical revo- 
lutions, occurring on the fourth day, if undisturbed by external 
influences, are as regular as those of a watch or any other piece of 
machinery ; it sets in with shivers and a notable feeling of 
cold, which are succeeded by an equally decided sensation of 
heat, and it is terminated by a most profuse perspiration. 
Whoever is attacked must bear with his complaint till the vernal 
equinox, there or thereabouts. 

Now putting all this carefully together, we find reasons for 


20 PREFACE TO THE 


believing that this disease is a species equally cogent with those 
that we have for believing a plant to be a species. The plant 
springs from the earth ; the plant blooms ; the plant dies: the 
plant does all this with equal regularity. All its other affections 
are those of its essence. 1t cannot easily be comprehended how 
the disease in question can arise from a combination of either 
principles or evident qualities, whilst a plant is universally 
recognised as a substance, and as a distinct species in nature. 
Nevertheless, I cannot deny that whereas all species, both of 
plants and animals, with the exception of a very few, subsist 
by themselves, the species of disease depend upon the humours 
that engender them. 

20. Now, although it appears, from what has been el 
that we have shown reason for considering the causes of the 
majority of diseases as inscrutable and inexplicable, the question 
as to how they may be cured is, nevertheless, capable of solution. 

All that we have just dealt with has been the case of the 
remote causes. Here it is evident to every one, that curious 
speculators lose their labour; since the investigation and 
illustration of primary and ultimate causes is a neglect of our 
capabilities, and a violation of nature. Hand in hand with 
this is the contempt for those causes that ought to be, and 
which can be understood; which he before our feet; which 
require no rotten supports ; which appeal to the understanding 
at once; which are revealed by either the testimony of our 
senses, or by anatomical observations of long standing. Such 
are the causes which we call conjunct and immediate. As it 
is clearly impossible that a physician should discover those 
causes of disease that are not cognisable by the senses, so also 
it is unnecessary that he should attempt it. It is quite 
sufficient for him to know whence the mischief immediately 
arises, and for him to be able to distinguish with accuracy 
between the effects and symptoms of the complaint which he 
has in hand, and those of some similar one. In a pleurisy, 
for instance, a man may work much, and work in vain, before he 
will understand the vicious crasis, and the incoherent texture 
of blood which is the primary cause of the disease; yet, if he 
know rightly the cause by which it is tmmediately produced, 
and if he can rightly discriminate between it and other diseases, 
he will be as certain to succeed in his attempts at a cure, as 


THIRD EDITION. 21 


if he had attended to idle and unprofitable searches into remote 
causes. This, however, is a digression. 

21. Now if any one ask whether, in addition to the two 
aforesaid desiderata in medical science (viz., the true and 
genuine history of diseases, and the regular and definite methodus 
medendi), a third may not also be enumerated, viz., the disco- 
very of specific remedies, he will find that I agree with, and 
that I second his doctrine. For the cure of acute diseases the 
method seems the best; since, inasmuch as in these Nature 
herself establishes some process of evacuation, whatever method 
promotes such evacuation, and thereby helps Nature, conduces, 
of necessity, towards the cure of the disease. Nevertheless, by 
the help of specifics, if such could be found, the patient might 
find a shorter way to his recovery. And such is desirable. He 
might also (which is more important still) be placed beyond the 
pale of those dangers which follow the aberrations of Nature ; 
for into such, during the expulsion of morbific causes, and in 
spite of the best and most powerful assistance from the phy- 
sician, she frequently and unwillingly has fallen. 

22. In respect to the cure of chronic diseases, although I 
have no doubt but that a greater progress in it than is ex- 
pected at the first glance may be hoped for from the method 
alone, I am still convinced that, in the cure of many of the 
most important that afflict humanity, our method is unavail- 
ing. This happens because in chronic diseases the method of 
Nature herself for the ejection of the morbific matter is less 
efficacious than in the acute ones; whilst it is by joining hands 
with Nature, and by aiming properly at the same mark, that 
we are enabled to destroy the disease. In overcoming a chronic 
disease, he has the best and truest claim to the name of phy- 
sician, who is in possession of the medicine that shall destroy the 
species of the disease, not he who merely substitutes one 
primary or secondary quality for another. This he can do with- 
out extinguishing the species at all; i. e., a gouty patient may 
be cooled or heated as the case may be, and his gout continue 
unconquered. This method of merely introducing different 
qualities can no more effect the direct destruction of specific 
diseases, than a sword can quench a flame. What can be done 
by cold, or heat, or wet, or dry, or by any of the secondary 
qualities that depend upon them, against a disease whose essence 
consists in none of them ? 


22 PREFACE TO THE 


23, Any one who objects to me that a sufficiency of specific 
remedies is already known to the world, will, upon a due con- 
sideration of the subject, take the same view with myself. I 
am sure of this, since the only medicine that supports his doc- 
trine is the Peruvian bark. Medicines that specifically answer 
to the indications of treatment, and medicines that specifically 
cure diseases, are as wide as the poles asunder. In the first 
case, we satisfy the curative indications, and drive away the 
ailment: in the second, we take no cognisance of the indi- 
cation or intention at all, whilst we destroy the disease directly 
and immediately. For instance, mercury and sarsaparilla are 
commonly called specifies in syphilis. Nevertheless, they are 
no proper and direct specifics at all; nor will they be consi- 
dered as such, untilit be shown by cogent and irrefragable 
proofs that the one produces its beneficial effects without sali- 
vation, and the other without diaphoresis. In this way many 
different diseases are cured by their different appropriate evacu- 
ations ; but it is the evacuation that performs the cure, the medi- 
cine being specific to the evacuation. To the disease itself, 
self-sufficiently and directly, they are no more specific than a 
lancet is specific to a pleurisy. 

24. Specifie medicines, in the restricted sense of the word, 
are by no means of every-day occurrence. They do not fall to 
every man’s lot. Nevertheless, I have no doubt, but that out 
of that abundant plenitude of provision for the preservation of 
all things wherewith Nature burgeons and overflows (and that, 
under the command of the Great and Most Excellent Creator), 
provision also has been made for the cure of the more serious 
diseases which afflict humanity, and that near at hand and in 
every country. It is to be lamented, indeed, that the nature 
of plants is not more thoroughly understood by us. In my 
mind, they bear off the palm from all the rest of the Materia 
Medica. 'They offer also the most reasonable hopes for the 
discovery of remedies of the sort in question. The parts of 
animals are too like those of the human body : minerals are too 
unlike. That minerals, however, are more energetic in satis- 
fying indications than either of the two other classes of reme- 
dies, and that the difference in character is the reason for their 
doing so, I freely confess. Still they are not specific remedies 
in the sense and manner explained above. 

For my own part, I can claim nothing beyond the credit of 


THIRD EDITION. 23 


having undergone the labour and trouble of considering these 
matters carefully, and that for many years past. Nevertheless, 
I have not yet been so successful as to venture upon the publie 
with my ideas upon these things at once with prudence and 
confidence. 

25. Although, however, the vegetable world is my favorite 
source for medicines, I am far from despising those excellent 
remedies which we procure from the other two kingdoms ; and 
which having been discovered, in either this or any other age, 
by human labour and human industry, are found to satisfy the 
intentions of treatment. Amongst these, the place of honour 
is due to what are called Dr. Goddard’s drops. They are pre- 
pared by Dr. Goodhall, a learned man, and a skilful investi- 
gator both of methods and remedies. I give these a just pre- 
ference over all other volatile spirits whatsoever for energetically 
and efficaciously attaining the end for which they are applied. 

26. To conclude—-having in this introduction promised that 
I would give a sample of those improvements which I have 
done my best to effect for medicine, I here attempt to fulfil 
my promise by publishing ‘ A History and Cure of the Acute 
Diseases? In doing this I am well aware that I shall exhibit 
for the benefit of the idle and ignorant the labour of the best 
years of my life, and the results of much toil both of mind and 
body. I know, too, the bad temper of the age I live in. I 
shall reap only a harvest of abuse. Better would it have been 
for my present fame to have continued some vain and use- 
less speculation. Beit so. I wait for my reward elsewhere. 

27. Now if any one object that men as conversant with 
medicine as myself differ from my doctrines, I can only answer 
that my business has been to support my own observations, 
not to discuss the opinions of others. In doing this, I beg the 
reader’s patience, not his favour. ‘The facts themselves will 
shortly speak for themselves ; and they alone will show whether 
on the one side I act with truth and honesty, or whether, on 
the other, like a profligate and immoral and wicked man, I am 
to become a murderer even in the grave. I ask pardon where 
the history is less careful than I meant it to be, since I wish 
less to exhaust my subject than to encourage those who have 
better parts than myself to undertake hereafter what I now 
attempt imperfectly. 


24 PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. 


38. One point still remains to be indicated to the reader. 
I have no intention of swelling out the following pages with 
an infinite number of particular cases, under the idea of claim- 
ing credit for the method that they embody. It would be 
vain and wearisome to repeat in detail the points which I have 
reduced to a general expression. I consider it sufficient to 
append here and there, at the conclusion of the general state- 
ment, some particular observation containing the substance of 
the method preceding; and I do this more especially for the 
last few years. In the mean time I warrant my general 
methods. Each has been established and confirmed by re- 
iterated experiments. 

29. Whoever expects a great mass of remedies and formule 
in the following pages will be disappointed. The physician 
must apply these according to circumstances and his discretion. 
I only mention the indications he must satisfy, and that in 
respect to their order and their time. True medicine consists 
in the discovery of the real indications rather than in the 
excogitation of remedies. ‘Those who have neglected this have 
put arms into the hands of the empiric, and taught him to 
imitate the physician. 

90. One objection against me will be made by the vulgar 
and unthinking only, viz. that of having renounced the proper 
pomp of physic, and of having recommended medicines so plain 
and simple as not to be reducible to the * Materia Medica.’ 
Wise men know this—whatever is useful is good. They know, 
also, that Hippocrates recommended bellows! for the colic, and 
nothing at all for the cancer.” They know, too, that similar 
treatment is to be discovered in almost every page of his 
writings; and withal that his merits in medicine are as great 
as if he had loaded his pages with the most pompous formule. 

31. I also intended to have written a history of Chronic 
Diseases, or at least one on those that I had most frequently 
treated. Asthis, however, isa work of great labour, and as the 
present lucubrations are experimental, I waive the subject 
for the present. 

! De Morbis, iii, tom. ii, p. 305. [G.] 
? Aphor. vi, 38; tom. iii, p. 754. [G.] 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


WmnuorvzR takes up medicine should seriously consider the 
following points: firstly, that he must one day render to the 
Supreme Judge an account of the lives of those sick men who 
have been intrusted to his care. Secondly, that such skill and 
science as, by the blessing of Almighty God, he has attained, 
are to be specially directed towards the honour of his Maker, and 
the welfare of his fellow-creatures ; since it is a base thing for 
the great gifts of Heaven to become the servants of avarice or 
ambition. Thirdly, he must remember that it is no mean or 
ignoble animal that he deals with. We may ascertain the 
worth of the human race, since for its sake God’s Only-begotten 
Son became man, and thereby ennobled the nature that he 
took upon him. Lastly, he must remember that he himself 
hath no exemption from the common lot, but that he is bound 
by the same laws of mortality, and hable to the same ailments 
and afflictions with his fellows. For these and lke reasons let 
him strive to render aid to the distressed with the greater care, 
with the kindlier spirit, and with the stronger fellow-feeling. 

3. Many, however, willin no wise allow themselves to be 
regulated by these considerations, as is clearly manifest both 
from their practice and their way of life. Some are swollen 
up with pride, and puffed out with the vain conceit of their 
knowledge; so that these matters seem small in their eyes. 
They can only come down to them negligently and contemptu- 
ously. They care nothing for the unfortunates committed to 
their charge. The Supreme Being they either disown or dis- 
regard. The others either gape and grow greedy for gain, or 
else are borne away by the hopes of some small celebrity ; in 
either case looking to their purses or to their fame. 

In all cases it behoves each and all of those physicians, who 
have the desire not only to seem but to be prudent and honest, 


26 PREFACE TO THE 


to acknowledge and entreat the Divine Goodness, that from 
this they may look for wisdom and good fortune ; and they 
ought not to be satisfied with simply giving health to the sick, 
but they should strive to add greater certainty to the art that 
they administer; and they should so direct their experiments, 
that the science of medicine may grow day by day more clear 
and more efficient. In this way the human race may reap the 
advantages thereof generally, and with safety, even after they 
themselves have been laid in their graves. 

3. In full consciousness of my high duty do I lay before 
the world this my method of treating fevers, founded upon my 
own observations. For since, through the blessing of God, 
which has favoured my unworthy efforts, I may have appeared 
to have discovered surer and more genuine principles of treat- 
ment than such as are afloat amongst the generality, I consider 
that I serve the cause of those who study true medicine in 
making them public. This I now attempt to do in a liberal 
spirit, and with an honest mind. ‘To some it may appear that 
the method which I adopt is based upon insecure foundations. 
I am, however, on my own part, fully convinced, and I truly 
affirm, that it is altogether proved by a manifold experience. 

4. Now clearly as I foresee that there will be many who, 
from the desire of finding fault, or from a feeling of pride, which 
teaches them to spurn and despise all beside themselves, will rise 
up and lay to my charge either the affectation of novelty or the 
support of absurdities; foreseeing, also, that even where my 
practice has been tried, and its results been recognised, it will 
be asserted that wv statements are anything but new, and 
that the world has long known them. I have, notwith- 
standing, never allowed myself to be deterred from communi- 
cating the following pages to those of my fellow-creatures who 
unite the love of truth with the love of their kind. It is my 
temper and disposition to be careless of both the sayings and 
the doings of the over-proud and the over-critical. To the 
wise, however, and the honest I wish to say thus much :—I 
have in no wise whatever distorted either fact or experiment ; 
I told the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth ; 
and I have little fear but that they also, if they will make 
similar observations, will add their voices to mine. In the 
meanwhile I ask the pardon, and submit to the arguments, of 


FIRST EDITION. 27 


better judges than myself for all errors of theory. Perhaps I 
may myself hereafter on many points change my mind of my 
own accord. As I have no lack of charity for the errors of 
others, I have no love of obstinately persisting in my own. 


AUTHORI 


IN 


TRACTATUM EJUS DE FEBRIBUS. 


‘“‘ Febriles eestus, victumque ardoribus orbem 
Flevit, non tantis par Medicina malis ; 
Nam post mille artes, medice tentamina cure, 
Ardet adhuc Febris, nec velit arte regi. 
Prada sumus flammis ; solum hoc speramus ab igne, 
Ut restet paucus, quem capit urna, cinis. 

Dum querit Medicus Febris causamque modumque, 
Flammarum et tenebras, et sine luce faces ; 
Quas tractat patitur flammas, et Febre calescens, 

Corruit ipse suis victima rapta focis : 
Qui tardos potuit morbos, artusque trementes 
Sistere, Febrili se videt igne rapi. 
Sic faber exesos fulsit tibicine muros, 
Dum trahit antiquas lenta ruina domos ; 
Sed si flamma vorax miseras incenderit zedes, 
Unica flagrantes tunc sepelire salus. 
Fit fuga, tectonicas nemo tunc invocat artes, 
Cum perit artificis non minus usta domus. 
Se tandem Sydenham Febrisque scholzque furori 
Opponens, morbi quzrit et artis opem. 

Non temere incusat tectze putredinis ignes ; 
Nec fictus, Febres qui fovet, humor erit ; 
Non bilem ille movet, nulla hic pituita: salutis 

Que spes, si fallax ardeat intus aqua? 
Nec doctas magno rixas ostentat hiatu, 
Queis ipsis major Febribus ardor inest. 
Innocuas placide corpus jubet urere flammas, 
Et justo rapidos temperat igne focos. 
Quid Febrim extinguat, varius quid postulat usus, 
Solari egrotos qua potes arte, docet. 


28 


(1668.) 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


Hactenus ipsa suum timuit Natura calorem, 
. Dum sepe incerto, quo calet, igne perit : 

Dum reparat tacitos male provida sanguinis ignes, 
Prelusit busto, fit calor iste rogus. 

Jam secura suas foveant precordia flammas, 
Quem Natura negat, dat Medicina modum. 

Nec solum faciles compescit sanguinis zstus, 
Dum dubia est inter spemque metumque salus ; 

Sed fatale malum domuit, quodque astra malignum 
Credimus, iratum vel genuisse Stygem. 

Extorsit Lachesi cultros, Pestique venenum 
Abstulit, et tantos non sinit esse metus. 

Quis tandem arte nova domitam mitescere Pestem 
Credat, et antiquas ponere posse minas ? 

Post tot mille neces, cumulataque funera busto, 
Victa jacet, parvo vulnere, dira lues. 

ZEtherie quanquam spargant contagia flamme, 
Quicquid inest istis ignibus, ignis erit. 

Delapse ccelo flamme licet acrius urant, 
Has gelida extingui non nisi morte putas ? 

Tu meliora paras, victrix Medicina; tuusque, 
Pestis que superat cuncta, triumphus erit. 

Vive, Liber, victis Febrilibus ignibus; unus 
Te simul et mundum qui manet, ignis erit." 


J. LOCK, A.M. 


Exo de Christi Oxon. 


MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS 


CONCERNING THE 


HISTORY AND CURE OF ACUTE DISEASES. 


SECTION I. 


CHAPTER I. 
ON ACUTE DISEASES IN GENERAL. 


l. As far as I am capable of a judgment, the dictates of 
reason are as follows, namely, that a disease, however much its 
cause may be adverse to the human body, is nothing more 
than an effort of Nature, who strives with might and main to 
restore the health of the patient by the elimination of the 
morbific matter. For, since it is the will of God, the Supreme 
Arbiter and Regulator of all things, that the human frame be,: 
by nature, adapted to the reception of impressions from with- 
out, it follows that it must also be hable to a variety of 
maladies. These arise partly from the particles of the atmo- 
sphere, partly from the different fermentations and putrefac- 
tions of the humours. ‘The first insinuate themselves amongst 
the juices of the body, disagree with them, mix themselves up 
with the blood ; and, finally, taint the whole frame with the 
contagion of disease. 'lhe second are confined within the body 
longer than they ought to be, its powers having proved incom- 
petent, first to their digestion, afterwards to their excretion. 
This may arise from either their bulk, or the incongruity of 
their qualities. 

2. Such are the conditions complicating and interwoven 
with the very essence of humanity, and that so closely that no 
one can succeed in wholly making himself independent of 
them. Hence Nature, in the concatenation of symptoms, has 
provided a method for the elimination and exclusion of the 


30 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


peccant and foreign matter, which, otherwise, would undo the 
whole fabric of our frame; and infinitely oftener than we find 
to be the case would she gain her end, and attain the restora- 
tion that she aims at in these ungrateful remedies, if she were 
not diverted by ignorant men from the straight way that, of her- 
self, she holdeth. When left, indeed, to herself, she may do 
too much or too little, and, in either case, kil the patient. 
This, however, is only her obedience to the iron and indis- 
soluble laws of mortality — 

* Debemur morti nos nostraque," ! 


or, as Boethius writes, in full consonance with the truth and 
nature— 
** Constat eterna positumque lege est, 
Constet ut genitum nihil."? 

3. Now, just for the sake of proving the truth of the above- 
made statement by one or two examples, let us ask what 1s the 
nature of plague? Is it aught else than a complication of 
symptoms which Nature puts in play, in order that, through 
the natural eliminations, either in the way of abscesses, or by 
the help of some other form of eruption, she may expel from 
the body those infectious particles that we have taken in along 
with the air that we breathe? And what is gout? It is a 
provision of Nature to purify the blood of old men, and to 
purge the deep parts of the body. Such, at least, is the 
language of Hippocrates. The same may be said of all other 
diseases, fully formed. 

4. This undertaking Nature performs at different rates; 
quickly or slowly, accordiug to the different processes by which 
she strives to expel the morbid influence. 

As often as she calls in the aid of fevers for the isolation of 
the tainted particles from the remainder of the blood; and 
when, by a further process, either by diaphoresis or diarrhoea, 
by eruptions, or some other evacuation, she expels the particles 
thus isolate; and when whatsoever is done at all is done 
amidst the subtile and spirituous constituents of the volume of 
the blood, and that with a corresponding disturbance ; when 
this, I say, takes place, it becomes a matter of absolute neces- 
sity, not only that the recovery or death of the patient be 

' Horat., Epistol. ad Pison., 63. [G.] 
? De Consolat. Philosoph., ii, 3. [G.] 


ACUTE DISEASES. 91 


determined with rapidity, but that grave and terrible symptoms 
be associated with such an effort of Nature; for she is trying 
her strength, and must either expel the mischief by a crisis, or 
herself faint in the struggle. 

This is the sort to which the diseases which we called acute 
belong, since it is with rapidity, with commotion, and with 
danger, that they advance to their proper status. 

To speak, however, with less precision, but with equal 
truth, those diseases also are to be considered acute which, 
although, in regard to the whole of their paroxysms, taken 
collectively, they may be said to move slowly, yet in respect to 
any particular paroxysm, have a rapid progress, and terminate 
quickly in a crisis. Such are all intermittent fevers. 

5. Occasionally, however, the parts that contain the disease 
are, by their nature, incompetent to determine a fever towards 
them, and, so, unable to effect a full separation of the morbific 
matter. Occasionally, also, it fastens upon a part wholly 
unable to get rid of it at all; and this may arise either from the 
particular conformation of the part itself, as is the case with 
the morbid matter impacted m the nerves of paralytics, and 
with the pus in the cavities of a thoracic empyema, or else 
from a deficiency of the natural heat and animal spirits, as is 
the case with the phlegm falling upon the lungs of old men 
worn with coughs. Lastly, 1t may be referred to a continuous 
afflux of new matter. By this the blood becomes vitiated ; and, 
from its excessive disposition to eliminate the same, distresses 
and overwhelms the parts. 

Now, in all these cases, the morbific matter either never 
attains its proper coction at all, or else attains it slowly, and 
the diseases which originate therein are properly called chronic 
diseases. 

Classified, therefore, according to the two opposing prin- 
ciples mentioned above, diseases fall into the two classes of 
acute and chronic. 

6. Of acute diseases—and it is these only that I mean at 
present to deal with— some are engendered through occult and 
inexplicable changes of the atmosphere. These taint the 
human frame; but they depend upon the peculiar crases of 
our blood and humours, only so far as these occult atmo- 
spheric influences have made an impression on them. Such 


92 MEDICAL ODSERVATIONS. 


maladies continue their devastation during the continuance of 
the mysterious skiey influences in question, but not longer. 
Neither do they appear at other periods. These diseases are 
called epidemics. 

7. Of acute diseases, others originate from the particular 
anomalies of particular bodies. There is no general cause for 
their existence, and they attack but few at a time. Again; 
with the exception of some which will be treated under their 
appropriate classes, they occur during any year, and at any 
period of the year, indifferently. These I call zn£ercurrent or 
sporadic ; inasmuch as they may occur at any time whatsoever 
during the presence of an epidemic. It is with the epidemics 
that I mean to begin, and I shall start with exhibiting their 
general history. 


CHAPTER II. 


ON EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 


1. NorHine, in my opinion, strikes the mind that contem- 
plates the whole and open domain of medicine with greater 
wonder than the well-known varied and inconsistent character 
of those diseases which we call epidemic. It is not so much 
that they reflect and depend upon different conditions of climate 
in one and the same year, as that they represent different and 
dissimilar constitutions of different and dissimilar years. 

2. The evident diversity of diseases is palpably shown, both 
by the difference and the peculiarities of their symptoms, and 
the variety of treatment that they require. From all which it 
is perfectly clear that, although the disorders in question may, 
to a certain degree, both in their external characters and in 
several symptoms common to many of them, appear to the 
careless observer to coincide, they are in reality, if we attend 
closely, of wholly different characters, as little like one another 
as coin and counters. J am not prepared to say that a very 
careful examination (such a one, however, as the brief life of a 
single mortal would be insufficient for) would not give us the 
fact of certain epidemics succeeding each other regularly and 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 33 


in series, forming as it were a circle. On the other hand, they 
may attack us indiscriminately, irrespective of any regular 
order, dependent only upon the inscrutable constitutions of the 
atmosphere, and the mysterious successions of time. 

3. This, at least, on the strength of a multiplicity of accurate 
observations, I am convinced of; viz. that diseases of the cha- 
racter alluded to, and more especially continued fevers, differ 
from one another like north and south, and that the remedy which 
would cure a patient at the beginning of a year, will kill him 
perhaps at the close. Again; that when once, by good fortune, 
I have hit upon the true and proper line of practice that this 
or that fever requires, I can (with the assistance of the 
Almighty), by taking my aim in the same direction, generally 
succeed in my results, respect being always had to the age and 
temperament of the patient, and to the other matters of the 
same sort. This lasts until the first form of epidemic becomes 
extinct, and until a fresh one sets in. Then I am again in a 
quandary, and am puzzled to think how I can give relief. 
And now, unless I use exceeding caution, and unless I exert 
the full energies of my mind, it is as much as (nay, it is more 
than) I can do to avoid risking the lives of one or two of the 
first who apply to me as patients. At length, however, I 
steadily investigate the disease, I comprehend its character, 
and I proceed straight ahead, and in full confidence, towards 
its annihilation. 

4. Now much, and diligently, and to the best of my powers, 
as I have observed the different characters, in respect to the 
more manifest atmospheric changes of different years, and tha* 
with the view of detecting therein the reasons for this dis- 
crepancy amongst the epidemic diseases, I am free to confess 
that I cannot find out that I have proceeded one single inch 
in my way. The years that undoubtedly coincide in their 
appreciable atmospheric characters, differ in the diseases by 
which they are infested, and vice versd. 

9. This is how it is. There are different constitutions in 
different years. They originate neither in their heat nor their 
cold, their wet nor their drought; but they depend upon 
certain hidden and inexplicable changes within the bowels of 
the earth. By the effluvia from these the atmosphere becomes 


contaminate, and the bodies of men are predisposed and deter- 
' 


34 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


mined, as the case may be, to this or that complaint. This 
continues during the influence of this or that constitution, 
which, after the cycle ofa few years, gives ground, and makes 
way for another. Each and all of these general constitutions 
take the melancholy characteristic of some proper and peculiar 
form of fever ; a form that appears at no other period.  Fevers 
of this sort we call stationary fevers. 

6. I may also add that there exist different and peculiar 
temperaments or crases of the same year.  lHerein the fevers 
that occur are determined by the manifest qualities of the air, 
follow the general constitution of the year, come on sooner or 
later, and take more or less the character of epidemics. Besides 
this, however, the fevers which I have called intercurrent, and 
which occur in any or all years promiscuously, originate most 
especially in this or that manifest atmospheric temperament. 
Thus (to speak for the sake of illustration) pleurisies, quinsies, 
and other like ailments, generally prevail when long and severe 
cold is rapidly succeeded by sudden heat. Hence, it becomes 
possible that the sensible and appreciable qualities of the atmo- 
sphere may produce such fevers as appear under all constitu- 
tions indifferently ; but not those which are proper and peculiar 
to certain particular ones. Nevertheless, we must admit that 
even the sensible qualities of the atmosphere have a predisposing 
effect upon our bodies even in the development of epidemics. 
The same may be said concerning any error as to the six 
non-naturals.! 

7. We must observe, however, that some epidemics in this 
or that year are regular and uniform, with the same pheno- 
mena, and accompanied with a general conformity of symptoms, 
in the cases of those whom they attack ; and that they take 
their leave and go off much in the same manner. In these, 
as being the most perfect of their genus, the true and authentic 
history of epidemic diseases is to be studied and illustrated. 

8. There are also other diseases of other years, which we 
may call, if we choose, epidemics. They are, however, irregular, 
and anomalous to a great degree ; referable to no certain type, 


1 <The non-naturals are six in number, viz., air, meat and drink, motion and rest, 
sleep and wakefulness, mental emotions, and, lastly, the secreta and retenta. They 
are called non-natural because any excess in respect to them occasions disorder,"— 


[Greenhill, from Blancard’s Lex. Med.] 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 35 


and truly ill-conditioned, both on account of the uncertain 
variety of their symptoms, and their certain inconsistency, as 
well as from the processes by which they clear themselves off, 
and work themselves out. This excessive inconsistency arises 
from the fact of each constitution. engendering diseases that 
depart from the character of those of the same sort that have 
occurred at another time; a fact that holds good with fever, 
and holds good with the generality of epidemics. 

9. Nor is this the whole of the story. I have a nicer doctrine 
to exhibit— a specimen as it were, of Nature playing tricks. 
One and the same disease shall, in a year of one and the same 
constitution, exhibit itself with various and dissimilar aspects, 
as to its origin, its formation, its decline. And of such import- 
ance shall these differences be, that our indications of treatment 
must be adopted or laid aside according to the disposition of 
the disease. 

10. Furthermore, we must remark that all epidemics are 
referable to one of two classes. They are either vernal or 
autumnal. Even when they originate during some other period 
of the year, they must be referred to one of these divisions, 
spring or autumn, whichever they are nearest to, just as the 
case may be. For it happens occasionally that the atmospheric 
influences may so coincide with an epidemic, as to forward 
its development, and to precipitate it, as it were, prematurely 
upon its victims. On the other hand, there is, at times, so 
little correspondence, that its proper time passes by before it 
lays hold of the patients that are predisposed for it. Hence, 
in using the words spring and autumn, I am not speaking 
absolutely and by the card: so that I do not mean the precise 
times of their respective equinoxes. 

11. Of the epidemics that show themselves in the spring, 
there are some that set in quite early. They begin as soon as 
January ; they increase gradually ; they reach their height about 
the twenty-fourth of March; they then gradually decline, so 
that, with the exception of a few that may attack isolated 
individuals, they disappear by Midsummer. To this last belong 
the measles. So do the spring tertians. These last, although 
they may set in as late, perhaps, as February, nevertheless, 
decline and disappear just as Midsummer approaches. 

Others begin in the spring, increase daily, and reach their 


36 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


climax about the autumnal equinox. When this is over, they 
gradually decline, and as the cold weather sets in, they turn 
their back upon the winter. Of this sort are the smallpox 
and plague; in those years at least where either has the 
ascendency over other diseases. 

12. Cholera morbus belongs to the autumnal group. lt 
begins in August, and within the limited barriers of one single 
month runs its course. Other epidemics, however, although 
they take their birth in the same season, run into the winter ; 
for instance, dysentery, quartan agues, and autumnal tertians. 
Each of these, however much it may make a prolonged attack 
against those upon whom it fastens, will still, for the most part, 
within a couple of months, have lost both the name and features 
of an epidemic. 

13. Now in regard to the special class of fevers, it must be 
observed that the majority of those which are continued, have, 
up to the present time, had no name founded upon the 
character of the general constitution. Such names as they 
are known by are taken from marked changes impressed upon 
the blood, or else from some other palpable symptom. On 
this principle they are called putrid, petechial, malignant, &c. 
Considering, however, that almost every constitution, over and 
above the fevers that it engenders, has also a tendency to 
propagate, along with it, some second disease from the class of 
proper and the typical epidemics, such as plague, smallpox, 
dysentery &c., I see, for my own part, no reason why fevers 
of the kind in question should not take their names from 
the character of the constitution prevalent at the time of 
their appearance (that being determined by the particular 
disease which they usher in) rather than from any alteration 
of the blood, or from any particular symptom; points which 
may hold good in the cases of fever of very different 
characters. 

14. Intermittents take their name from the interval that 
lies between the paroxysms. This character is sufficient to 
distinguish them, providing always that we bear also in mind 
the seasons of the year when they occur, viz. the spring and 
fall. No objection les to this nomenclature from the circum- 
stance of some of them occasionally partaking of the true 
intermittent character, without the accompaniment of any 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 37 


palpable symptom. Yet this is the case when the autumnal 
intermittents set in, and wax rife prematurely ; for instance, in 
the month of July, when they do not at once put on the 
intermittent type (which 1s particularly the case with the spring 
ones), and when they so closely simulate the character of 
continued fever, that, without the nicest examination and 
comparison, you cannot discriminate between the one and the 
other. By degrees, however, as the ascendancy of the particular 
constitution declines, and as its influence becomes restrained, 
they change towards the usual type; so that, by the end of 
autumn, they lay aside (so to say) their mask, and appear 
openly as what they really were from the first, viz. intermittents, 
tertian or quartan, as the case may be. ‘These are points, 
which if we, as physicians, overlook, we shall blunder, to the 
great prejudice of our patients; in treating as true continued 
fevers, fevers like those in question, which are not continued 
but intermittent. 

15. Moreover—and to this we must carefully attend— when 
several of these fevers infest the same year, one has an 
ascendency over the others; they being, as it were, reduced to 
its supremacy, and raging all the more moderately. "When 
the paramount complaint increases, these decrease; when it 
loses ground, they make way. ‘Thus they vex humanity in 
complement, as the character of the year and the sensible tem- 
perament of the atmosphere favour either the one or the other. 
That disease, however, which at the autumnal equinox rages 
worst, and devastates most fearfully, determines the name for 
the constitution of the whole year; and whatsoever the ailment 
may be which at that period takes the lead of the rest, it is 
the one which will easily be found to have done so for the 
whole year, to have swayed, as it were, the others, and to 
have accommodated to its own character (as much as their re- 
spective natures would allow) the whole of its contemporary 
epidemics. 

16. To illustrate this we may state, that when smallpox 
is most prevalent, such fevers as occur, sporadically, during 
the whole year, partake of the variolous inflammation. Hach 
disease originates in the same manner. Between the most 
characteristic symptoms of each there is a close affinity—ex- 
cepting only the eruption of smallpox, and the accessories that 


38 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


depend upon it. "There is abundant proof of this in the ex- 
cessive tendency to spontaneous diaphoresis, and to salivation, 
common to the two diseases. 

Similarly—when dysenteries are prevalent, the fever that 
sets in during the year closely resembles them. The attacks 
of the two diseases are similar. In either case the patients 
are exceedingly liable to aphthe and similar symptoms. Such 
is the proof. The dysentery, however, eliminates its morbid 
matter by means of stools; and from this there arise a few 
peculiar symptoms. Nay, the dysentery which we are speaking 
of is neither more nor less than a fever, with this difference 
only, viz. that it determines itself towards the viscera, unloads 
itself by the intestines, and through them makes its escape 
outwards. 

17. It must, however, be remarked, that such leading epi- 
demics as at the autumnal equinox devastate all things like 
torrents which have broken their banks, at the approach of the 
colds of winter retire within their channels. Whilst, on the 
other hand, the secondary maladies, that serve like soldiers 
under them, take that very time for their development; and 
then they wax strong, and they take their lead until the para- 
mount epidemic of the next year weakens their vigour, and 
abolishes their name. 

18. Finally, I must remark, that where any particular con- 
stitution engenders any species of epidemic, that this species is 
generically different from the species of any other constitution, 
however much one name may be current for all; whilst all the 
peculiar species which set in under one and the same constitu- 
tion, agree with each other in being referable to one common 
and general producing cause; this being the peculiar atmo- 
spheric diathesis. Consequently, however much they may 
differ from each other in their form and specific type, the 
common constitution forms and modifies their respective sub- 
ject-matter into a common status and condition. Hence, the 
chief symptoms, so far as they have nothing to do with the 
particular form of the evacuation, are alike in all. They all, 
too, agree in this—they increase and remit in their severity 
at similar periods. Furthermore, in those years wherein dif- 
ferent species set in at the same time, they all agree, both in 
the manner of their first attack, and the symptoms of their 
accession. 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 39 


19. It is from these things that we may learn the nice and 
varied method which Nature recognises in the development of 
diseases ; a point which I think no man has hitherto studied 
with the accuracy that its importance demands. Still, from 
the little that has been done——seeing that the specific differences 
between our common diseases, viz. fevers, are based upon some 
unknown constitution of the atmosphere—enough is shown to 
prove that those labour in vain who refer the origin of fevers 
to some morbid cause accumulated in the human frame.  Itis 
clear as the sun at noon that a man might be as strong as a 
wrestler, but that if he went to certain parts of the country 
where fever was raging, he would sicken within a day or two. 
Yet it is hardly credible that any appreciable change could be 
impressed by the air upon the humour of the man in question 
in a time so short. 

20. It is just as difficult, too, to lay down any general rules 
for treating these fevers; rules 


* Quos ultra citráque nequit consistere rectum." 


Hence, in darkness so dense, I prefer nothing, upon the 
breaking out of a new fever, to a little delay ; and I proceed, 
especially towards the greater remedies, with a slow foot, and 
with circumspection. In the mean time I diligently observe 
the course and character of the disease, and look out for those 
kinds of treatment that do good or harm. The latter I make 
haste to abandon, the former to adopt. 

21. I may state at once, that to reduce into classes all the 
species of epidemics, to arrange them according to their phe- 
nomena, to work out their several idiopathic characteristics, to 
determine in detail the proper method of treatment for each of 
them, is a work so difficult, an arrangement requiring so much 
leisure and opportunity, a cycle so little coincident with any 
recognised sequence of years, that the lifetime of no single 
physician would suffice for the collection of a sufficiency of data. 
Great, however, as such an undertaking may be, it must be 
got through, before we can venture to state that in so complex 
a series of diseases we have done any good work worthy of 
mention. 

22. How, however, are we to describe those distinct species 
of epidemie disease that not only (as far, at least, as we can 


40 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


judge) occur accidentally, but which also shall, at one time, 
keep the same for a year or for a series of years, and at another 
assume specific differences within a single twelvemonth ? To 
my mind there is no better plan than the following, viz.: to 
take the range of a sufficient number of years, and to describe 
the diseases in the order of their sequence and succession. To 
do this upon my own principles, I shall now lay before the 
learned world the history and the treatment of the epidemics 
of fifteen years, or of those which raged between the years 1661 
and 1676. These I have founded upon the most accurate ob- 
servations that I have had an opportunity of making; but it is 
more than I could do if I referred their origin to causes de- 
pendent upon any perceptible quality of the atmosphere; and 
still more so, if I derived them from any particular dyscracy of 
the blood, and humours— except, indeed, so far as this last might 
originate in any occult atmospheric influences. Still more 
impossible Gf I may use so strong an expression) would it be 
for me to describe specific forms of epidemics as arising out of 
specific changes of the atmosphere; easy as such a proceeding 
may appear to those who can theorise about fevers, and christen 
the disease accordingly—speculating laxly upon those altera- 
tions which can take place in our blood and humours through 
the degeneration of this or that principle. Upon principles 
like these, where we lose sight of our best guide, Nature, and 
give ourselves up to the luxury of guesswork, we may have as 
many species of ailments as we choose to devise. We must 
claim, however, in doing so, a license which no one would allow 
to a botanist, from whom, in his descriptions and histories, we 
require the evidence and confirmation of our senses. The 
speculations of reason, in and of themselves of paramount 
greatness and transcendency, is what we do not require. 

23. Il am far from taking upon myself the credit of ex- 
hausting my subject in the present observations. It is highly 
probable that I may fail even in the full enumeration of the 
epidemics. Still less do I warrant that the diseases which, 
during the years in question, have succeeded each other in the 
sequence about to be exhibited, shall remain the same in all 
future years. One thing most especially do I aim at. It is 
my wish to state how things have gone lately; how they have 
been in this country, and how they have been in this the city 


EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION. 4] 


which we live in. The observations of some years form my 
groundwork. It is thus that I would add my mite, such as it 
is, towards the foundation of a work that, in my humble judg- 
ment, shall be beneficial to the human race.  Posterity will 
complete it; since to them it shall be given to take the full 
view of the whole cycle of epidemics in their mutual sequences 
for years yet to come. 


CHAPTER III. 


THE EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION OF THE YEARS 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664, 
IN LONDON. 


l. IN the year 1661 the autumnal intermittents, which, 
durmg the last few years, had been gaining ground, broke out 
afresh, about the beginning of July. They gathered strength 
daily: by the month of August they were doing fearful mis- 
chief. In many places the mortality was excessive, and whole 
families fell victims. The form was an ill-conditioned tertian. 
Soon after they gradually decreased. Few were attacked 
during October. The colds of winter wholly dispelled them. 
The symptoms that accompanied the present tertian differed 
from those of the tertian intermittents of other years, chiefly 
in the following particulars. The paroxysm was severer ; the 
tongue of the patient blacker and dryer; the apyrectic inter- 
vals were less defined ; the prostration of strength was greater; 
the appetite was more affected ; the fits had a greater tendency 
to repeat themselves. In one word, the symptoms were more 
formidable, and the disease in general was deadly, beyond the 
degree of an intermittent. If it attacked old men, or cachectic 
subjects, or patients who had been weakened by bleeding or 
other evacuations, it was not got rid of within two or three 
months. 

2. A few instances of the quartan intermittent accompanied 
the fever which we have described. Neither form, however, 
stood their ground against the approach of winter; and no 
one, during that season, who had not previously been a sufferer 
was attacked by them. There then followed a continued 
fever; which differed in its character from these autumnal 


42 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


intermittents only in being permanent rather than periodic. 
Each disease made its attack in the same way. Patients 
suffered alike under each ; retching, with parched skins, thirst- 
ing mouths, and blackened tongues. In either case, also, 
towards the close of the disease, it was by sweatings that the 
morbifie matter was most readily expelled. 

9. It is clear, from the forthcoming fact, that this fever be- 
longs to the class of the autumnal intermittents. It very rarely 
showed itself in the beginning of the year. Now, in my eyes, 
this continued fever was a sort of miniature of the intermit- 
tent; whilst each particular paroxysm of the intermittent was 
a miniature of the continued fever ; and the main difference lay 
only in the following circumstance. The continued fevers set 
up an effervescence, and kept it uninterruptedly, and at the 
same rate. The intermittents did the same; but they got 
through their work at intervals and by instalments. 

4. How long a continued fever of this character had pre- 
vailed in the year 1661 I am unable to state. Up to that 
time I had found enough to do in observing the general sym- 
ptoms of fever. I had not become aware that they were dis- 
tinguished from one another according to the different crases 
of different years, or according to the seasons of one and the 
same year. This, however, I do know, namely, that up to 1665 
A.D., the character of the continued fever was one and the 
same; and that the autumnal intermittents which, up to that 
year, had been frequent, from that time forwards were of 
exceeding rarity. 

5. To return, however, to the subject: the tertian fever 
which, during the last-named year, had spread its ravages far 
and wide, as soon as it was over, confined itself within narrower 
bounds; whilst, for the autumn that came after, under a 
similar atmospheric constitution, it was quartans that took the . 
lead amongst the epidemics. When autumn is over the quar- 
tans invariably diminish ; and continued fever, which, during 
the sway of the quartans, sparingly mixes itself up with them, 
rages violently until spring, at which season the vernal inter- 
mittent succeed. — By the first of May these latter have abated ; 
and smallpox shows itself here and there. "These continue 
till the autumnal epidemics (quartan or continued) show their 
faces. Upon these they turn tail and leave them a clear 


EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION. 43 


field. In this order did the epidemic diseases pervade the 
constitution that I have spoken of; and thus did they succeed 
each other. Upon each of these I mean to write in detail; 
and most particularly upon the continued fever and the inter- 
mittents, vernal or autumnal, as the case may be, by which so 
bad a stamp was given to the constitution of these years. 

6. I shall take, as a starting-point, continued fever ; I look 
upon this as the leader of the band. In this, more than in 
any of the others, does Nature, with the greatest uniformity, 
and most in accordance with a set law, both bring the febrile 
matter towards its due concoction, and expel and eliminate it, 
so concocted, within a fixed and definite period. 

I must add that, inasmuch as those annual constitutions which 
develop the autumnal intermittents recur, upon an average of 
years, much oftener than those which promote any other form 
of epidemic, it follows of necessity that the continued fever, 
which goes along with them, must also be more frequent. 

7. Besides the symptoms that accompany other fevers, the 
present one was aggravated by the following: the patient was 
all but dead; he retched ; his tongue was parched and black ; 
there was violent and sudden prostration of strength; the 
surface was dry; the urine was sometimes thick, sometimes 
thin, either character being equally an indication of crudity. As 
the disease declined, diarrhoea (unless checked at the beginning 
by the physician) set in. This added obstinacy to the disease, 
and protracted its evils. Still, if left to itself, and on its own 
bottom, it was rarely prolonged beyond either the fourteenth 
or the twenty-first day ; after which, through the medium of a 
sweat, or rather that of a gentle perspiration, it was resolved. 
Within this period the urine showed no signs of concoction. 
When it was over it generally did so forthwith. 

8. Other symptoms were superadded when the disease was 
unskilfully treated. These, however, as well as the whole 
character of the complaint, will best be illustrated by an exhi- 
bition of the particular principles that I applied, some time 
back, to this fever. The points that particularly bear upon 
the present question I shall transfer to the present publication 
from one that was printed some time ago; at which time I 


had no notion that any second form of fever was to be found in 
rerum natura, 


44 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER IV. 


THE CONTINUED FEVER OF THE YEARS 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664. 


l. I begin with observing, that the inordinate commotion of 
the volume of the blood, whether cause or concomitant of this 
fever, is excited by Nature in order that either some hetero- 
geneous matter, incorporated with our humours, and inimical to 
them, may be eliminated, or else that the blood itself may be 
transmuted towards a better diathesis. 

2. With this view, I prefer the broad and general term com- 
motion, to either fermentation or ebullition. I so cut off the 
occasion of a mere dispute about words, against which the use 
of the other two terms, although admitting a fair explanation, 
would not sufficiently ensure me. To some they might appear 
harsh, to others inappropriate. However much a febrile com- 
motion of the blood may resemble either the fermentation or 
the ebullition of vegetable juices, there are many who consider 
that it differs widely, and in many respects, from either the one 
or the other. 

In respect to the term fermentation, we will mention one or 
two of their instances-— 

Although fluids, when they begin to ferment, acquire a 
vinous character, so that ardent spirit may be elicited from them 
by distillation, and although they easily degenerate into vine- 
gar, which, in itself, is remarkably acid, and yields to distil- 
lation an acid spirit, neither of these changes have hitherto been 
observed in the blood. 

Although in vinous liquors the fermentation and the 
depuration go hand in hand, and keep pace with each other, 
the depuration of the blood in fever does by no means go along 
with its sestuation ; but, on the contrary, follows it. Of this 
we may have ocular demonstration in the clear cases of febrile 
paroxysms carried off by sweatings. 

3. In respect to the term ebullition, they object still more to 
the analogy. They argue, that experience makes against it, and 
that in many cases the erethism of humours is far from being 


CONTINUED FEVER. 45 


so uncontrolled as to deserve the name of ebullition. Ihave no 
desire to mix myself up with such controversies as these. Be 
the matter as it may, I shall, now and then, use the words 
JSermentation and ebullition, imasmuch as they have been cur- 
rently adopted by medical men of late years; provided only, 
that, from what has been said upon the subject, it 1s now clear 
to the reader, that the terms are used in the present treatise, 
solely for the sake of illustration. 

That this febrile commotion of the blood is excited by 
Nature in order to separate from the humours some heteroge- 
neous matter, antagonistic to herself, 1s a view supported by the 
evidence of the whole family of eruptive fevers. In these the 
benefit derived from the ebullition of the blood is the elimi- 
nation by means of the skin of some excrementitious matter 
lurking in the blood, and endued with deleterious qualities. 

4. In my mind also it is equally clear, that the febrile com- 
motion of the blood has often (I may say very often) no other 
aim and end than that of changing itself into some other state 
and diathesis, and that a man of even pure and untainted blood 
may be stricken with fever. This has, by frequent observation, 
been shown to be the case with many healthy constitutions ; 
constitutions wherein we search in vain for the means and the 
appliances of disease, wherein there is nothing plethoric, nothing 
cachectic ; finally, where no unhealthy atmospheric anomalies 
have paved the way to fever. Nevertheless men thus healthy 
have, at sundry times and divers places, after some important 
alteration in the way of air, food, or any of the other (so-called) 
non-naturals, been seized by fever; and the reason thereof is 
this,—their blood has been making efforts to endue itself with 
a new state and condition, adapted to the new state and con- 
dition of its food or air. The irritation of vicious particles, 
nestling in the blood, and evolving fever, has nothing to do in 
the matter. Now I by no means deny that, after the com- 
motion of a fever, and the despumation of the blood, the matter 
that is thus naturally excreted may be vicious, whilst the blood 
itself shall have been well-disposed, and of a laudable diathesis: 
but I am no more surprised at such being the case, than I am 
at some part of our food coming out stinking and corrupt, after 


1 See note; p. 34. 


46 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


it has undergone notable changes within our body, and taken 
the character of excretions. 

5. In the second place, I consider that the true and proper 
indications that present themselves in this disease, must deal 
with this same commotion of the blood. We must keep it 
within its limits, so that it coincide with the intentions of 
Nature. If, on the one hand, it rage too much, perilous sym- 
ptoms will set in. If, on the other, it slacken into insufficiency, 
either the expulsion of the morbific matter will be hindered, or 
the efforts of the blood to reduce itself to a better state will be 
weakened. So that, whether it be the irritation of hetero- 
geneous matter, or whether it be the nisus of the blood towards 
anew diathesis, to which the origin of fever 1s referred, the in- 
dications are the same. Upon these fundamental principles I 
institute the following system of therapeutics. 

6. Whenever I have to deal with a patient whose blood is 
in itself of a weak character (as it is for the most part with 
children), or else deficient in animal spirits (as it is with men 
in the decline of life, and youths that have long been invalids), 
I keep my fingers from the lancet. If I order venesection, the 
blood, weak enough even without being diminished, would be 
rendered incompetent to the work of despumation. Thence 
would arise the degeneration of its whole volume, whilst the 
death of the patient would probably come next. It 1s just so 
when you interfere with fermentation of beer or any other 
liquor. It gets spoiled. Now, when Nature has once taken 
in hand the expulsion of certain particles, which can keep 
themselves pure as long as they are equably mixed up with the 
remainder of the circulating fluids, but which, when separate, 
take on ill-conditioned forms of putridity, along with disposi- 
tions to taint with the worst sort of corruption the remainder 
of the humours, she cannot abide their contact. In stating 
this, I am aware that there are patients upon whom rash blood- 
lettings have been inflicted; that, by the help of proper cor- 
dials, have over-lived the treatment, and that their blood has 
been restored to a condition competent to the necessary de- 
fecation. I know all this, and I can only say, that prevention 
as better than cure. 

7. Whenever, on the other hand, the state of the blood is 
of a different description (such as I find it amongst youths of 


CONTINUED FEVER. 47 


an athletic habit and a sanguine temperament), venesection is 
my leading remedy. Except in certain cases which will be 
stated in the sequel, it cannot with safety be omitted. Neglect 
it, and you run the risk of frenzies, pleurisies, and such lke 
inflammations, which originate in the preternatural ebullition 
of the blood. More than this—from the excess of the blood, 
the circulation 1s impeded : you smother it. 

8. As to the quantity, it is my practice to take away just so 
much blood as I consider will relieve the patient of the 
distress, to which this violent commotion makes him liable. 
The subsequent estuation I regulate and restrict by venesection, 
hot cordials, and attention to the bowels. "These I repeat or 
omit, I exhibit or withhold, encourage or check respectively, 
just as I perceive that the commotion increases or subsides. 

9. After the bleeding, presuming such to have been necessary, 
I anxiously and carefully inquire whether the patient at the 
onset of the fever has been distressed by either vomiting or 
ineffectual efforts to vomit. If he have, I prescribe an emetic 
at once, unless, indeed, extreme youth or evident debility 
counter-indicate. Very necessary is an emetic, where there 
has been this previous tendency to vomit; since, unless the 
offending matter be cleared away, it will serve as a sink for all 
sorts of mischief. These will embarrass the physician during 
the whole of his attendance, and add greatly to the dangers of 
the patient. Of these, the most important as well as the most 
usual, is diarrhoea. It comes on during the defervescence of 
the fever, as often as emetics have been indicated and omitted. 
How should it be otherwise? As Nature partially corrects the 
malignant humours in the stomach, she passes them on to the 
intestines, and these become corroded by the continuous flow 
of acrid humours which the belly serves as source to. Diarrhoea 
must follow. Nevertheless, I have observed that in the inflam- 
matory fever, which goes by the common name of malignant, the 
omission of an emetic, even when nausea has preceded, does not, 
as in the present disease, necessarily ensure a diarrhea. Of this, 
however, more hereafter. 

10. Now the danger of the diarrhea lies in this. The 
patient, weakened by the disease, grows weaker still. More- 
over (and this is pre-eminently a cause of mischief), as the 
disease is declining, the blood should be drawing itself up, and 


48 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


it should be getting ready with its full strength to carry on 
the work of despumation. Now, by this evacuation, it is 
disabled altogether. 

1l. There is not even the shadow of a doubt but that a 
peccant humour lodges on the stomach, unless expelled by a 
vomit; that it may be latent for a time, but that afterwards 1t 
will give rise to this tragedy (for so I callit) of a diarrhoea. 
You will find, if you inquire, in almost all cases when fever 
and diarrhoea have gone together, that at the beginning of the 
disease the patient was inclined to vomit, and that the physician 
withheld an emetic. Again, you will discover that even when 
the tendency to vomit shall have long ago gone over, the diar- 
rhoa will generally stop if an emetic be administered, provided 
always that the strength of the patient will bear one. With 
respect to astringents, I have often noticed, that when once 
diarrhoea has set in, they have little control over it, whether 
taken inwardly, or applied externally. 

12. The emetic which I generally prescribe is as follows: 

Antimonial infusion, 3vj ; 

Oxymel of squills, 

Compound syrup of scabious, aa Zss. 
Mix, and make into an emetic. 

I advise it to be taken in the afternoon, two hours after a 
light dinner. In order that the retching may be less, I 
recommend that six or eight pints of posset be kept in readiness. 
Emetics are dangerous unless diluted. As often as the patient 
either vomits or goes to stool, he takes a draught immediately. 
So doing, he escapes ineffectual tormina, and the efforts to vomit 
go on well. 

13. I have often wondered, after eyeing curiously (as I fre- 
quently have done) the matters brought up by the emetic, and 
finding them neither remarkable for their quantity, nor notably 
bad in their quality, that patients have been so much, and so 
suddenly relieved; inasmuch as when the vomit has been over, 
the severer symptoms, that both distress the patient, and terrify 
his friends, the retching, the anxiety, the tossing, the heavy 
sighs, the blackness of the tongue, are mitigated and 
relieved ; the remainder of disease being such as a stout heart 
may bear up against. 

14. It must not be omitted, that if the condition of the 


CONTINUED FEVER. 49 


patient require the double remedy of venesection and vomits ; 
the exhibition of the emetic should precede the opening of the 
vein, otherwise the veins become distended with blood, and 
there is imminent danger lest the violent strainings to vomit 
break either a blood-vessel in the lungs, or do an injury to the 
brain, since the blood pours both 1n and out with violence, and 
the patient may be taken off by a fit of apoplexy. I could 
relate more than one example of this. I prefer, however, to put 
better statements in their place, and to content myself with 
the hint that in matters of this sort our caution must be 
exceeding. 

15. Now if any one ask, during what stage of the fever I 
would order the emetic to be exhibited, my answer is, that, 
whenever I have the choice, I order it at the very beginning. 
By so domg, we can ensure the patient against all those 
formidable symptoms which originate in the mass of impurities 
that le lodged within the stomach, and in the parts around 
it. Moreover, it is just possible that we may quash the disease 
at its onset, whereas it would, otherwise, wax mighty, last long, 
and jeopardise the patient. For it thrives upon the humours 
that we have spoken of, and these either transmit themselves 
in substance to the innermost recesses of the frame, and com- 
mingle with the volume of the blood, or else they stand still 
and grow from bad to worse, get tainted with a venomous 
depravity, and finally, from their respective foci, impress an 
infectious influence upon the continuous streams of blood that 
flow by them. Of this, to go no further, the cholera morbus 
gives an instance. Very frequently, either by the aid of 
laudanum or some astringent, the attempt is made to restrain 
the vomiting that accompanies. Such skill is mischievous ; 
stop the vomiting, and you replace it with a worse series of 
symptoms. All those acrid and corrupt humours which should 
have been left alone to be got rid of, and for which a full 
evacuation should have been procured, are thus driven inwards. 
Here they extend their pernicious influence to the blood, and 
light up fevers of a malignant disposition, and with grave 
symptoms. It is then as much as we can do to cure them by 
means of an emetic. This, however, we must give, whether the 
patient, at the time in question, be inclined to vomit or not. 

16. If, however, as is often the case, we are sent for too late, 

zi 


20 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


so that we cannot take advantage of the first stage of the fever 
for the administration of an emetic, I still consider that at 
any stage whatsoever, provided only that the malady has not 
too much prostrated the strength of the patient, and disabled 
him from bearing one, an emetic should be given. I have, 
for my own part, prescribed one on the twelfth day of the 
disease, and that without hesitation, and with benefit. By 
such an emetic I have swept away the diarrhoea, which was 
impeding the blood in its proper business of despumation. I 
have prescribed one even later than the twelfth day, and have 
hesitated only where the prostration of strength has been 
excessive. 

17. In the evening, when the vomiting 1s over, I invariably 
endeavour to allay the tumult that it has raised amongst the 
humours, and to solicit sleep. 'To this end, latein the evening, 
or at bedtime, I order an anodyne draught, e. g. : 


Red poppy water, Zij ; 
Aqua mirabilis, 3ij ; 

Syrup of white poppy, 
Syrup of red poppy, aa Zss. 


18. If, however, through the free loss of blood that the patient 
has sustained during the course of the disease, from the fre- 
quent vomiting or purging induced by the action of the 
emetic, from the general character of the apyretic symptoms, 
from his individual weakness, or, finally, from the date of the 
fever, now upon its decline, there be no longer any risk of 
exciting any excessive ebullition, I have no hesitation in sub- 
stituting, for the anodyne above mentioned, a full dose of 
diascordium, either by itself, or conjoined with a cordial. 
There is no better medicine than this, if you only suit the 
dose to the symptoms rather than to the formularies. 

19. Here, however, previous to concluding my observations 
upon emetics, Í must remark that (in the present fever at 
least) antimonial emetics are not fit for children, or for youths 
under fourteen, even in the smallest doses. I wish, with all 
my heart, that instead of them something more safe, and 
equally efficacious, could be discovered; something that would 
thoroughly expel those vicious humours, which, in the decline 
of fever, induce diarrhea. At least, I wish that, by means of 


CONTINUED FEVER. 51 


some suitable medicine, we could so far alter and transform 
the corrosive character of this acrid matter as to stop it from 
being the cause of these loosenesses. It has often happened, 
to my great annoyance, that when called in to infants and 
children suffering under the fever in question, I have observed in- 
dications which have called for the exhibition of medicines which 
I have not ventured to prescribe. If I could have applied them, 
the patient would have been out of danger; if I had applied 
them, I should have trembled for the event. In adults, how- 
ever, I have observed no such danger, as long as the emetic 
has been administered with the cautions above stated. 

20. The business of vomiting being got through, I proceed 
to consider whether, notwithstanding the foregoing evacuations, 
the blood may not still be in such a state of sstuation as to 
require further limitations to its effervescence, and further 
checks; or whether it may not so far have grown slack as to 
: need a fillip; finally, whether the fermentation be brought to a 
fit and proper pitch, so that the patient can safely be left to 
himself. Upon each of these points I have something to say. 

21. If the blood so exeestuate that we may fairly suspect that 
the patient is liable to a frenzy, or to any other troublesome 
symptom proceeding from excessive ebullition, I prescribe, the 
day after the emetic, an enema of the following formula, and 
recommend it to be repeated as occasion may require: 


Common decoction for clysters, 
Syrup of violets, 


-—— "mes 


It often happens that this ventilates and cools the blood, 
controlling its effervescence. At times, too, it happens that 
venesection must be repeated several times. Such is the case 
in very sanguine temperaments, with men in the prime of 
life, and with those high livers, who, by the free use of wine, 
have impressed upon their blood an inflammatory diathesis. 
Generally, however, there is no occasion for so heroic a remedy, 
—for such, truly, is the repetition of venesections. Besides 
this, with the few above-named exceptions, we can sufficiently 
control the effervescence by the administration of enemata. 
Wherefore, if the blood still continue to boil and effervesce 
more than it ought to do, I order the injection of an enema, 


59 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


either every day or every other day, as the case requires. And 
this I continue to the tenth day of the disease, there or there- 
abouts. 

22. However, if a vast deal of blood have been lost, or if the 
patient be advanced in years, I order no enemata, even though 
the blood may go on boiling. In such cases there is no fear 
that by omitting clysters we shall allow the ebullition to pro- 
ceed to dangerous lengths. On the contrary, nothing is more 
certain that the use of them relaxes the strength, the fulness, 
and (if I may use an equivocal expression) the zone of the 
blood; so much so, that with old men, with whom enemata 
never succeed so well as with the young, the work of nature 
is disturbed and interrupted. | Now, if a vein has been opened, 
and not much blood been taken, clysters may be ordered ; and 
that up to the tenth day, more or less. Sometimes they may 
be continued to the twelfth, a practice which holds good in 
those cases where we are afraid of bloodletting. 

There are those, who, after the autumnal intermittents 
(whether tertian or quartan), are seized with continued fever; 
and this because, at the fag end of the disease that went be- 
fore, they were not purged as they should have been. Now, if 
you bleed these, there is the danger of the residue and sedi- 
ment, the deposit (as it were) of the previous fermentation 
being again taken up into the volume of the blood, and en- 
gcendering fresh commotions. Instead, therefore, of blood- 
letting, I use, in cases like these, enemata; and I keep them 
on to the twelfth day, whenever the patient be young, and fer- 
mentation run high. 

23. On the other hand, whether you have or have not had 
recourse to venesection, provided that the effervescence of the 
blood be below par, and that it require a stimulus to enable it 
to second the efforts of nature, you must abstain from clysters. 
You must abstain from them during even the first ten days, 
and a fortiori you must abstain from them afterwards. For 
why should we endeavour to control any further, and to re- 
press the fermentation? It already has grown faint, and is 
exhausted. After the twelfth day, and during the decline of 
the disease, to use clysters is irrational and absurd. It is just 


like making a huge over-sized vent for beer whilst it is fer- - 


menting. Such is a clog upon Nature; and it prevents her 


Te 


CONTINUED FEVER. 53 


from acting with her full energies, and with her united force 
against the morbific matter. 

24. As soon as, from the effect of well-timed and suitable 
evacuations, the patient is out of harm’s way, and as soon as 
he has nothing more to fear from the symptoms that arise out 
of excessive ebullition, in other words, when the disease 1s on 
its decline, I consider him out of danger just in proportion as 
I can keep his bowels in proper order; for, under such con- 
ditions, the fever most mildly and benignly proceeds towards 
its concoction. Wherefore, if the preceding evacuations have 
engendered any laxity of blood, or if they seem likely to do so, 
or if the patient get quit of the fever before its time, or, 
finally, if the fever have run its full length, I not only discard 
enemata, but I have recourse to the help of cordials ; and I gird 
up my loins for dealing with the looseness of the bowels. 

25. In regard to cordials, I am cautious in their exhibition, 
since I have found out by experience that no little mischief 
comes from exhibiting them too soon, e. g., before the opening 
of a vein; since, in such a case, the crude matter may fall 
upon the brain, the pleura, or elsewhere. Hence I never 
administer them when little or no blood has been previously 
taken, when, combined with this, no notable evacuation has 
taken place, and, lastly, when the patient has not passed the 
prime of life; for I see no reason why such blood as is already 
richer than it ought to be, should be further and perniciously 
over fed. It has all the fulness and the fire which it requires, 
and it wants nothing new to light it up as long as its natural 
heat is unimpaired by the effect of violent evacuations. Patients 
of this sort have cordials at their own doors, and whatever they 
introduce from without is either superfluous or prejudicial. For 
this reason I allow nothing of the sort, or if I do, I admit it 
under the mildest forms. 

26. Meanwhile, if the patient have grown weak, and if he 
be pulled down by the profuseness of the evacuations, or if he 
be advanced in years, I make a point of prescribing cordials, 
even at the commencement of the malady; and on the twelfth 
day, when the process of elimination is setting in, | indulge 
him liberally in the warmer drinks. I do so even earlier, 
guarding against the sudden retrocession of the febrile matter 


54 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


towards the principal parts. At this stage, the more I heat 
the more I accelerate concoction. 


27. I cannot bring my brain to comprehend the meaning . 


of those physicians that are continually talking about the ad- 
ministration of remedies that promote the concoction of the 
febrile matter,—points which they insist upon when called in at 
the beginning of the disease. At the same time, they have no 
hesitation in recommending medicines that are intended to 
control the fever. Why! the fever itself is Nature's instru- 
ment. By this she separates the pure parts from the tainted 
ones. At the beginning, or even at the height of diseases, 
she does her work imperceptibly; during, however, their de- 
clines, she shows us at once, clearly and palpably, what she is 
about. This we may see by looking at the urine. The con- 
coction of the matter offever simply means the separation of 
the sound from the unsound. ‘To accelerate this we are not to 
meddle with attemperants, and I know not what; but we are 
to let the effervescence go on as long as the condition of the 
patient can bear with it ; we are to watch for its crisis and de- 
clension ; and when we discover that separation is taking place, 
we are to back it up with warm remedies, and to bring it to a 
sure and speedy termination. This is the true way of pro- 
moting febrile concoction. Your evacuants and refrigerants 
are but hinderances ; they procrastinate recoveries; and, when 
health is coming of its own accord, they frighten it away. 
This I have seen often. If the fermentation proceed properly, 
the despumation will be completed by the fourteenth day, but 
if you attempt to control it by the exhibition of refrigerants you 
must not wonder if it go on to the twentieth. In worn-out con- 
stitutions, where the treatment has been unskilful, it is further 
protracted. | 

28. It is worthy of observation that occasionally the patient, 
at the decline of the disease, and after the ill-timed adminis- 
tration of clysters, and other cathartics, may appear to have 
been slightly benefited ; nay, at times there is a perfect ces- 
sation of the fever. Wait, however, for a day or two. It 
will then be seen, of that the original fever has taken strength, 
but that a fresh one is lit up. Chills and shivers will set in 
suddenly. Heats will follow. The fever itself (unless, per- 


CONTINUED FEVER. 55 


chance, it proves to be an intermittent), will run through the 
stages of the former one. When such is the case, treat the 
patient as if he had not been ill before; go over the ground a 
second time. The despumation that this ebullition is driving 
at will not be completed within its due complement of days, 
viz. fourteen, much as it may be distressing to the patient, 
who is sufficiently weakened by what has gone before, to wait 
so long for his recovery. 

29. The cordials which I am in the habit of using are those 
that I will give a short notice of by and by. I prescribe the 
gentlest at the commencement of a disease, that is, when the 
ferment is most active. I proceed gradually to the stronger 
ones, according to the progress of the malady and the character 
of the ebullition; always remembering that when the blood 
has been drawn, or the patient is old, I can increase their 
strength. Not so when the subject is young, and the lancet 
has never been employed. 

90. The cordials I call moderate are made out of the distilled 
waters, e. g., borage, lemon, strawberry, treacle, the aqua scordà 
comp., &c., combined with the syrup of balm of Fernelius, the 
syrup of cloves, the syrup of lemon-juice, &c. 

The cordials I call strong are made from Gascoigne’s powder, 
bezoar, confection of hyacinth, Venice treacle, and the like. 

The following formule are in frequent use: 


I  Borage-water, 
Citron-water, 
Aqua scordii comp., 
Black-cherry-water, àà ij; 
Cinnamon-water with barley, 2j; 
Prepared pearls, 3ij ; 
Loaf sugar, q. s. 

Mix, and take iv spoonfuls several times a day, especially during the 
faintnesses. 


ER Water of the whole citron, 
Strawberry-water, aa Ziij; 
Saxony-water, 3); 
Treacle-water, 
Syrup of balm of Fernelius, 
Syrup of cloves, 
Syrup of lemon-juice, aa Zss. 
Mix, and make into a julep; to be taken frequently. 


26 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


K  Gascoigne's power, 
Bezoar of the East, 
Bezoar of the West, 
Contrayerva, aà 9j; 
One gold leaf. 
Mix, and make into a very fine powder ; of which take twelve grains, 
as often as is necessary, out of 
Syrup of lemon-juice, 
Syrup of cloves, aa 3ij. 
Drink after it a few spoonfuls of the above-mentioned julep. 
EK Treacle-water, Ziv; 
Lemon seeds, 5ij. 
Crush, and make into an emulsion. Strain and add sufficient pearled 
sugar to flavour it. Two spoonfuls a day. 


I consider it superfluous to go through a longer list of for- 
mule. They either are or can be made innumerable ; and they 
should be varied during the course of the illness according to 
its different stages, and its varied symptoms. 

9l. But if the fermentation be neither too active nor too 
languid, I leave it to itself, and I use no remedies, unless pre- 
vailed upon, against my will, by the importunity of either the 
sick man or the friends about him, to order something that 
may please the patient without interfering with the scope and 
method of my treatment. 

92. And here I may mention that several times when I 
have been called in to persons in indifferent circumstances, 
whose purses would ill bear to be drawn upon for a long 
charge of physic, I have done nothing after the bleeding and 
the emetic (in such cases as they were required), beyond en- 
joining them to keep their beds closely during the whole of 
the disease, and to drink oatmeal-gruel, barley-broth, or some- 
thing of that sort. "lo quench their thirst, they were allowed a 
little small beer with the chill off. They were to inject, every, 
or every other day, an enema of milk and sugar; they were 
to continue this until the tenth or eleventh day ; and towards 
the termination of the fever, when the separation began to set 
in, they were permitted to take some strong drink, in the way 
of a cordial, in order to forward the elimination. In this 
manner, without any further complication of practice, beyond 
the mere addition of a purge towards the conclusion of the 
complaint, I sent them out of hand safe and sound. 

33. To return, however, to the business. If the preceding 


CONTINUED FEVER. 57 


regimen has been accurately attended to, I generally discover 
about the fifteenth day that the time has come when a pur- 
gative draught may be administered with advantage. I judge 
of this both from the signs in the urine of a laudable separation, 
and from the palpable remission of the other symptoms. This 
purge draws off the miscellaneous sediment of the preceding 
fermentation. Miss the opportunity of this, and the chances 
are that they return to the blood, and produce a relapse ; or 
else, by its prolonged lodgement in the parts that it belongs to, 
becomes a fruitful source of obstinate mischief in the frame ; 
since, the separation being over, the impure humours flow back 
from the arteries to the veins, creating obstacles and ferments. 

94. But here I must remark, that the administration of 
purgatives is less essential after the spring fevers than after 
the autumnal ones. The sediment that is left behind by the 
former yields to that of the latter both in quantity and quality. 
It is less earthy and malignant. The same is the case in 
smallpox, and many other of the diseases that make their in- 
cursions during the spring. In all these the omission of pur- 
gatives 1s, as far as my observation has extended itself, ac- 
companied with less danger than it is in the cases above 
mentioned. A man would not be far from wrong who stated 
that, upon this single cause, viz. the omission of purgatives after 
autumnal diseases, a greater heap of disease was dependent 
than upon any other cause whatsoever. 

35. If the patient be exceedingly weak, or if the depuration 
be incomplete, and I am afraid of purging on the fifteenth day, 
I put it off to the seventeenth. I then prescribe either the 
following draught or something like it, adapted to the strength 
of the subject : 


Tamarinds, 3ss ; 
Senna leaves, 5i] ; 
Rhubarb, 5ss. 
Boil with a sufficient quantity of water; strainto three ounces; 
add of manna and the solutive syrup of roses, 4a 2j. Mix, and 
make a draught, to be taken in the morning. 


36. When the purging is over, the patient, who up to the 
present has been kept to his bed by my order, is told to get 
up, and to return by degrees to his usual manner of living. 
The diet that he has hitherto been recommended is of the kind 


98 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


which I have just alluded to—barley-broth, oatmeal-gruel, 
panadoes, made with the yelk of an egg, with bread, sugar, and 
water; then chicken-broth, and small beer well hopped. — Here- 
with, at the times when the fever rages highest, we may mix 
up a little orange-juice, fresh squeezed, and held over the fire 
just long enough to take off its sharpness. Such and such like 
Tallow. However, oatmeal-gruel is worth all of them put to- 
gether. To deny small beer to be taken now and then, and 
in small quantities, is an unnecessary severity, and one which 
frequently does harm.! 

97. It happens sometimes (chiefly with old men) that when 
the patient has got better, and the body has been purged or 
over-purged, he still continues very weak; and that he often 
throws up, either by coughing or hawking, a vast quantity of 
viscid and glutinous phlegm. This symptom not only frightens 
the patient, but also imposes on the physician. Unless he be 
very wary, he will be induced to imagine that the disease has 
paved the way for a consumption. Now I have noticed that 
there is not this amount of danger. In such a case I order 
the patient to drink some old Malaga wine, some Falernian, 
or some Muscatell, with a toast in it. This restores the crasis 
of the blood, which the violence of the previous ferment had 
impaired, and which is incompetent to the assimilation of the 
juices of the ingesta. Frequent experience tells me that such 
treatment dispels these symptoms within a few days. 

388. By the method that I have laid down we may ensure 
the patient from a variety of symptoms and affections which 
are usually attributed to the so-called malignity of his complaint ; 
since nothing is more usual than for ill-taught practitioners to 
shift the blame from their own misdoings to malignity. Thus, 
when they give medicines too cooling, and use enemata at the 
wrong time, and by so doing weaken the crasis of the blood ; 


1 Here follow, in the editions of 1566 and 1568, the subjoined remarks upon the 
use of blisters [G.]: ‘In regard to blisters, which are so much in use, I neither see 
my way as to how they draw off the ichorous fluids from the muscular parts wherein 
they lodge, or how they can in anywise free the blood from the febrile matter that 
disturbs it; over and above which, they irritate the patient by the sore which they 
produce upon the skin, and add to the lowering effects of the disease. Although I 
have often used them, and have found that my patients have done well, I cannot 
refer any good to their action, I believe that they have as much to do with the 
recovery of those to whom they are applied, as the feather-bed itself. Luck has 
ennobled many a worthless medicine.” 


CONTINUED FEVER. 59 


and when Nature is overdone by its work of depuration, and 
when the natural consequences of these artificial impediments 
occur, and when the patient faints, and when worse symptoms 
follow —it is the malignity, forsooth, that isin fault. Perhaps, 
however, the disease becomes protracted, and so escapes so harsh 
an appellation; whilst, nevertheless, there is something that 
obstructs the cure of it. This must then be scorbutus. Now, 
in sober truth, the symptoms during the activity of disease are 
no more the effects of malignity than those of its decline are 
of scorbutus. Both come of bad treatment, as I have abun- 
dantly observed. Not that either I or any one else who has 
ever even skimmed the history of Medicine, need be told that 
there are such things as fevers, truly malignant in their quality, 
as well as those that originate in a bad temperament, or from 
putrid heat. Proofs of this cannot be concealed where there 
is sickness. Neither do I deny that occasionally scorbutus, as 
well as other diseases, may complicate fever. I only say that 
these affections are often unjustly blamed. 

99. If the fermentation of the blood has gone on properly, 
a thorough despumation of the morbific matter will have taken 
place within the above-mentioned period ; but if clysters or 
refrigerants have been used too late, the disease will run on 
much longer, especially with old men who have been badly 
treated. I have been sent for to these after they had been 
labouring of the fever for as much as forty days, and I have 
tried everything that I could think of in order to promote the 
despumation of the blood. It has, however, partly from old 
age, partly from the use of enemata and refrigerants, been so 
attenuated, that neither cordials nor corroborants would help 
me. The fever either continued obstinate and undiminished, or 
else there seemed to be an apyrexy ; the strength of the patient 
was prostrated, and he became all but dead. 

40. Having had recourse to other remedies without success, 
l was compelled to turn my thoughts towards new quarters, 
and to apply to the patients the lively and vigorous warmth of 
young people. Let no one wonder at the strangeness of this 
method, when he hears that so much has the sick man been 
restored by it, and so much has debilitated nature been reno- 
vated, that it has unloaded itself of the remnants of the matter 
that it secretes and eliminates; since it is very credible that a 


60 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


notable supply of fresh effluvia from a sound and athletic body 
may be transfused into a sick and exhausted one. I have never 
found that the repeated application of warm flannels has ever had 
the effect of the plan I have described. In this the warmth 
is of a kind congenial to the human frame, and it is, at the 
same time, bland, humid, equal, and permanent. 

Now this principle of transfusing into the body of the patient 
effluvia and exhalations, which perhaps may be of a balsamic 
nature, although at first it may seem strange, has been applied, 
from the time that I first adopted it, by others as well as my- 
self, and that with good results; and I am by no means ashamed 
of it, even although some few from amongst the arrogant, im- 
pertinent, and supercilious despisers of everything common 
may sneer at me by reason of it. I put the well-doing of my 
neighbour far above the vain opinions of the like of such men 
as these. 

41. The method that I have thus far laid down will, if rigidly 
followed and properly adhered to, relieve the patient, if not from 
all, at least from the most distressing of the symptoms which 
are the concomitants of the sequelz of the fever, which trouble 
the physician with doubt, and which often, during the progress 
of the disease, bring him to despair; which (worse than this) 
often kill the patient outright, and that when his disease seems 
anything rather than deadly. 

Now since, either from the fault of the sick man who sends 
for a doctor at the wrong time, or from want of skill and caution 
on the part of the doctor that has been sent for, accidents of the 
kind in question are often observed to arise, I have no hesita- 
tion in treating briefly of the peculiar treatment of the same. 
I shall confine myself, however, to those symptoms which re- 
quire, when they occur, a separate and peculiar hne of treat- 
ment, but which could generally have been guarded against by 
attention to the rules and methods laid down. 

42. I begin with the cases where, either from having taken 
heating remedies too soon and too indiscreetly, or from the 
natural tendencies of a hot constitution, the patient falls into 
a brain fever, or into what is next door to it. He gets no 
sleep, he utters frequent exclamations, he uses incoherent 
language, he looks and talks wildly, he gulps down his medi- 
cines and food with avidity and by snatches; finally, he has a 


CONTINUED FEVER. 61 


suppression of urine. In these cases I bleed more freely than 
I would otherwise, and I am readier with my clysters and re- 
frigerants. In spring time I am particularly bold ; at that 
time, independent of the above symptoms, the young and san- 
guine safely bear strong remedies. 

43. By this treatment I endeavour to sustain the patient 
until the disease takes a certain duration, when it becomes an 
easy matter to remove at once both the malady and the sym- 
ptoms. This is done by the exhibition of a narcotic in a full 
dose. However true it may be, that during the height of the 
fever narcotic medicines are of no avail, and that they miss 
their mark, it is no less true that, during its decline, their 
effects are most marked. ‘They do no good before, for two 
reasons: firstly, they are insufficient, even when administered 
in the largest doses, to stop the fermentation when it has got 
its head, and is in its full career: secondly (and this is the 
more important circumstance) they stop the desired depu- 
ration, the effect of their exhibition being to do violence to 
the processes by which the morbid matter is separated. At 
the height of a fever it is mixed equally with the whole volume 
of the blood, and has not as yet shown any tendency towards 
isolation. Whether this theory be the right one, or whether 
something more abstruse must be substituted for it, I leave to 
the decision of those who have time, taste, and temper for the 
necessary speculations. 

44. Meanwhile, after an honest and fair induction from many 
observations, I pronounce this as an undoubted truth, and as a 
thing most certain, viz., that during the increase and crisis of 
the fever, neither laudanum nor any other narcotic alleviates 
the symptoms that we have spoken of ; on the contrary, it often 
does harm; but that during its decline, even moderate doses 
are beneficial. Once in my life J prescribed a  narcotic 
as early as the twelfth day, and good came of the prescription. 
Never, however, do I give one earlier without mischief. 
Defer it till the fourteenth day, and proportionate benefits will 
result, since, by that time, the separation will be all the for- 
warder. This delay is not immediately fatal, however much 
the formidable nature of the symptoms may terrify the looker- 
on. I have frequently noticed that they both could and would 
bear a respite until narcotics could be had recourse to. Herein, 


62 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


however, we must be especially careful against heightening the 
fermentation that has set in. This we may do by adminis- 
tering heating medicines and cordials. If so, the patient will 
die outright. 

The narcotics which I am in the habit of using are either 
the London laudanum, to the amount of a grain and a half, or 
the following: 

kK Cowslip flowers, one handful. 
Boil in a sufficient quantity of water of black cherries; strain to 
three ounces. Dissolve 
Syrup of white poppies, $ss ; 
Lemon-juice, half a spoonful. 
. Mix. 
Or 
K Black cherry-water, 3ss ; 
Aqua epidemica, 5i) ; 
Liquid laudanum, 1.xvj; 
Syrup of cloves, 3j. 
Mix. 


45. 'This one point I have still to add, since it has a clear 
bearing upon the subject, viz., that if the symptoms will so far 
admit of a respite, and if the disease will so far put on a pro- 
tracted character as to allow the patient to be purged before 
the opiate, the effect of the latter medicine will be all the 
more advantageous. Hence I am in the habit of prescribing 
two scruples of the pil. coch. mag., dissolved in betony water. 
These I order ten or twelve hours before the exhibition of the 
narcotic. Nothing need be feared from the commotion that 
so active a purge would otherwise occasion. The effect of the 
subsequent narcotic will neutralize it, and a sweet and gentle 
sleep will be induced. 

If wakefulness continue after the fever has gone away, and 
if the other symptoms have departed, I have observed that rag 
dipped in rose-water, and applied cold to the forehead, does 
more good than any narcotics whatsoever. 

46. It often happens that the patient is harassed by a 
troublesome cough during the whole course of the disease. No 
wonder; the volume of the blood is in vehement commotion; 
it has grown tumultuous; there is a faction, and sedition, and 
rebellion amongst its elements ; its humours are let loose ; they 
take leave of the general mass; they ooze through the vessels 


CONTINUED FEVER. 63 


of the lungs; they spring out upon the membranes of the 
trachea, and these membranes are very delicate, and exquisitely 
sensitive. Hence comes cough. It is dry at first, because 
the matter is subtle, and escapes the efforts to expel it. It 
afterwards brings up thickened sputa, the expectoration whereof 
is difficult, inasmuch as the fever has taken its time to bake 1t 
hard, and to parch it dry. And now the patient fears that he 
will be suffocated, for his strength is gone, and the tough and 
viscid phlegm is more than he can hawk up. In cases like 
these I rarely use anything beyond the oil of sweet almonds, 
newly drawn; except when it happens, as it sometimes does, 
that the patient has an aversion to it. I then do the best I 
can with the usual pectorals. I prefer the oil of almonds, in 
the cases were I can use it, to the other cough medicines, 
chiefly for the following reason: these last we must give in 
large doses, and in great quantities, if we wish to do any good. 
Now, the stomach is already weak enough, and sufficiently 
inclined to vomit. These overload it still further. Other 
matters, also, which we may have to despatch at the same time, 
are interfered with. 

47. Neither my reason nor my experience have hitherto ex- 
plained to me upon what grounds the fact of oil being inflam- 
mable is an objection to the use of it in fevers. It increases (they 
say) the febrile action; its nature is heating. Be it so; it has 
not, surely, more heat than its other qualities will make up 
for. It is pre-eminently and manifestly pectorai; it opens and 
smooths the passages; it thus promotes expectoration. Now, 
expectoration on its part (especially when copious) unburdens 
the blood of the humours that distress it, and which now are 
properly secreted. It cools it as well. Hence I never am con- 
cerned at the intervention of this symptom, since the patient 
is often much relieved by it. This one point must be borne 
in mind, it is unsafe to give the oil in whole spoonfuls at one 
time, since there is danger of bringing on sickness of the sto- 
mach, or looseness of the bowels. We must administer, 
sparingly and frequently, by night as well as by day; this will 
promote expectoration, and ease the cough; it will do more 
than this, it will act as a bland nutriment, and restore, in 
some degree, the impaired powers of the patient. 

48. Hemorrhage from the nose occurs occasionally ; some- 


64 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


times because heating medicines have been given at the be- 
ginning of the disease; sometimes because the ebullition has 
not been sufficiently controlled ; sometimes because the patient 
is in the full vigour of life; and sometimes because the season 
of the year encourages it. When such takes place the usual 
styptics are unavailing, e. g., bleedings and ligatures, and 
astringents, and agglutinants, and contemperants to the acri- 
mony of the blood, &c. "These, and the like of these, the 
practitioner may use according to his choice and discretion. 
The real business is to discover the treatment that will control 
the ebullition of the blood; that will regulate its course, and 
will stop and check its headlong and precipitous career. Now, 
it is perfectly true that, taking this symptom by itself, and 
looking at it independently, the remedies on the preceding list 
(bloodletting in particular) are the right. . Nor would I, for 
my own part, object to employing them. Still, with the ex- 
ception of bloodletting, they meet the symptom without meet- 
ing its cause. To oppose them to /his, is to put out a fire with 
a sword. I therefore, in such cases, having tried other plans 
in vain, apply something like what follows: 
ER  Purslane water, 

Red poppy-water, aa Ziss ; 

Syrup of white poppies, 5v]; 

Syrup of cowslips, Zss. 

Mix, and make into a draught. 


49. Now this must not be taken as if I recommended every 
hemorrhage to be cured in this off-hand manner. At times it 
must be left alone altogether; since it may help the patient 
considerably, both by controlling the excessive ebullition, and 
by carrying off the disease critically. In reality, it does little 
good to check this symptom at all; unless it has either gone on 
for some little time, or blood has been drawn from the arm. 
This must be remembered. It is the peculiar characteristic 
of this, as of all other irregular hemorrhages, to require, im- 
mediately after their suppression, the exhibition of a mild 
purgative; otherwise the patient runs the risk of a relapse. 
On the strength of this we must purge ; and that, when other- 
wise, respect only being had to the stage of the fever, and 
without any such symptom, we should hold our hand. 

50. Hiccup.—This symptom generally occurs with old 


CONTINUED FEVERS. 65 


men after copious evacuations, either in the way of stools and 
diarrhea, or the way of vomitings: this last is the common 
cause. Hiccup is often the forerunner of death. I must 
candidly own that I cannot satisfy myself m my speculations 
upon the cause of hiccup. — Nevertheless, I have noticed that 
it has originated in disturbances and commotions of the stomach 
and the parts about it, excited by the use of violent medicines. 
Nature has not strength enough to allay them ; nor can she 
bring them back to their former quietude. Hence arises great 
danger. With these views, I consider that the direction of our 
cure lies in the way that Nature takes; so that what she 
cannot do of herself, art must support and help her out in. 
Diascordium, therefore, in full doses, to the amount of two 
drachms, has fulfilled my intentions. Dill, and the rest of 
the vaunted specifics, I have used without any advantage what- 
soever. 

51. If, during the progress of this disease, we find that 
diarrhoea has set in (and in our ninth section we have shown 
that, at the commencement of the disease, when emetics have 
been indicated but have not been given, such is usually the 
case), I repeat the statement, that, with such a symptom, an 
emetic may be given during any stage of fever, even (as afore- 
said) after the tendency to vomit has gone by ; provided always, 
that the weakness of the patient does not contra-indicate one. 
Upon this subject, however, I think that enough has been said 
in the preceding pages. I can only in this place say what is 
to be done when an emetic has been given, and the diarrhea 
still persists,——a state of things that very rarely occurs, except 
in inflammatory fever; in which complaint it 1s remarkable 
that an emetic, instead of stopping a diarrhoea, will create one. 
However, im the regular cases I administer the following clyster ; 
and I prefer it to any kind of astringent : 


Ix Pomegranate bark, Zss ; 
Red roses, two handfuls. 
Boil in a sufficiency of milk from the cow; strain to half a pound. 
Dissolve in the mixture 
Diascordium, Zss. 
Mix, and make into an enema. 


I would not recommend too large an injection of this enema. 


In and of itself it promises to bind the bowels. Its volume, 


5 


66 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


however, may distress them ; in which case it encourages the 
looseness which it was meant to check. 

52. Here there is room for an objection—it is better for a 
diarrhoea that has once set in, especially at the turn of the 
disease, to take its course than to suffer check ; inasmuch as 
fluxes of this kind are frequently critical, and carry off the 
disease. In answer to this, I by no means deny that such is 
the outlet through which fevers frequently find their passage, 
and make an exit. It happens, however, too rarely for us to 
calculate on. 

Moreover, the principle upon which, when we spoke in 
general concerning the cure of fevers, we strove to show the 
necessity of stopping such a flux as the one in question, is here 
in full force; to which I must add a statement of what (in 
my mind) is a weighty fact. To the full depuration of the 
blood, it is essential not only that there be a separation of some 
of its parts in the way of separation as dregs, but that there 
also be the separation of some of them as flowers. This is 
what we see every day in rich and heterogeneous fluids of all 
sorts. Hence, if you act too much by the way of a diarrhea, 
you will succeed only in obtaining, with all your trouble, a 
middle depuration ; whilst it is very likely that the excretion 
which ought to have come last will be the first. I admit that 
when the separation in the way of flowers has already taken 
place (and this, by the by, is usually performed slowly and in- 
sensibly; rather by a fuller and more abundant transpiration 
than by any manifest sweat), the diarrhoea, even if it really set 
in, is not a very threatening symptom. Nevertheless, we ought 
to know that such arises only from the fact of the purgation, 
dedicated to the removal of the fzeces, not having been duly 
brought on. ‘These feces are retained beyond their time. 
They take upon themselves the character of a malignant fer- 
ment; they then stimulate and irritate the bowels to excretion. 
I say nothing of the watery character of the excrement; such 
is generally its character; and it proves that it is anything 
rather than a critical solution of the disease. 

53. Perhaps we may enumerate ileus, as the last of the 
symptoms which supervene upon fever; since the violent 
vomitings which occur in its early stages frequently give rise 
to it. 


CONTINUED FEVER. 67 


Very formidable is this affection ; and deadly does it appear 
to almost all who have contemplated it. How should it be 
otherwise? ‘The fibres of the mtestines, which ought to con- 
tract from above downwards, reverse the action; so that the 
contents of the bowels are passed on into the belly, and not 
towards the rectum. They make towards the throat, and re- 
gurgitate.  Purgatives taken by the mouth are suddenly dis- 
gorged by vomitings, and sharp clysters become emetics. In 
my mind, too, that exquisite and intolerable anguish which super- 
venes upon an attack of ileus has no other cause than the same 
inverted action of the bowels, the manifold circumvolutions 
of which are intended by Nature as a winding passage for 
the regular descent of. the feces; and when these are con- 
strained to act against the proper motion of their fibres, the 
torments of colic are the result. These become circumscribed 
to a single part, with a boring pain, when either the valve at 
the head of the colon, which prevents the regress of the ex- 
crements to the ileum, or any other membrane of any of the 
circumvolutions, has to bear single-handed against the force of 
this inverted impulse. ‘To this inversion, as the cause of the 
pain, we may assign two causes, viz. obstruction and irritation. 

54. Obstruction. Itis anecessary consequence and a known 
fact, that whatever greatly obstructs the intestines, so that 
nothing can pass downwards, produces an inverted motion 
of the bowels. In the list of such obstructions authors place 
hardened fzeces, gross volumes of flatus, intestinal knots, stran- 
gulated hernia, inflammations, and tumours in the diameter of 
the bowels. Now, as it is undeniable that inverted motions, 
referable to these causes, are motions of the ingesta rather than 
of the intestines ; and as the inversion is one, not of the whole 
intestinal canal, but only of the parts above the seat of the 
obstruction, I shall call the affection to which it gives rise bastard 
ileus. 

55. Irritation, I consider that in ileus the cause of the in- 
verted peristaltic movement of the bowels is generally as follows: 

There is a fresh attack of fever, and a commotion of the 
blood; and acrid and malignant humours are lodged in the 
stomach, and in those parts of the intestinal canal that lie 
nearest to it. The stomach is first to invert its action. It 
contains matter that frets it. It is constrained to cast it up; 


68 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


violently and through the throat. Its action is strong. The 
small intestines are debilitated ; they are continuous with the 
stomach, and they yield to its influence. The large intestines 
are the last to give in. The stomach vomits; it leads, and 
the other intestines follow suit. Now this is the true ileus ; 
and this is one for our present purpose. For this no method 
of cure is yet known, whatever may be said about bullets and 
quicksilver ; things which, whilst they can effect but little good, 
can do much harm. I have adopted the following method with 
success : 

56. When it is clear, from the fact of clysters being thrown 
up though the throat, and from other undoubted signs, that the 
case is one of true ileus, I labour hard for these three points: 

a. To stop the inverted action of the stomach; the cause of 
that of the bowels. | 

6. To strengthen the intestines that have been weakened by 
the acridity of the humours. 

€. To relieve both the stomach and the intestines of these 
same humours. 

To meet these indications, I take the following line of treat- 
ment : 

57. I begin with prescribing one scruple of salts of wormwood 
out of one spoonful of lemon-juice, to be taken night and 
morning. I order, for the time between, a few spoonfuls of 
mint-water, without either sugar or any other addition, to be 
taken twice every hour. By this alone, used repeatedly, both 
the vomiting and the pain that it brings on will suddenly cease. 
I order, too, that meanwhile a live kitten be kept continually 
lying on the naked belly. After this, two or three days after 
the pain from the vomiting has wholly ceased, I give one drachm 
of the pil. coch. maj. dissolved in mint-water. This last, too, 
I order to be taken during the whole working of the pills, in 
order to guard more surely against a return of the vomiting. 
The kitten is not to be taken off before the patient begins with 
the pills. 

58. I have observed that it is to no purpose to give either 
these pills, or any other cathartic medicine (no matter how 
strong), until the stomach has been strengthened, and restored 
to its natural movement ; and until, along with it, the intestines 
have been similarly restored ; otherwise, the purgatives become 


4 
n 
H 
F 
> 
$ 
X 
= 
1 


CONTINUED FEVER. 69 


emetics, and do more harm than good. Hence, I defer all 
operations with purgative medicines until I have for some time 
employed those medicines which act upon and fortify the 
stomach. 

59. I prescribe a very low diet; allowing the patient only a 
few spoonfuls of chicken broth twice or thrice a day. I keep 
him also to his bed during the whole illness, and until signs of 
a perfect cure have appeared. Even after this I advise him to 
continue for a long time the use of the aforesaid draught, and 
to guard against the cold by means of doubles of flannel on 
his belly. I thus ensure him against a relapse; to which the 
disease is preeminently liable. 

60. These few observations embody the whole of my method 
in the treatment of this disease. I trust that no good judge 
will despise them on account of their simplicity, nor yet for 
their want of ostentation in respect to either my language or 
my medicines. 

61. These, too, are the symptoms which occur in this fever. 
There are others, besides, which I may omit to mention at 
present; partly because they are of no moment, and partly be. 
cause they require no peculiar treatment. Treat the fevers 
properly, and they will go away of themselves. 

Thus much concerning the continued fever of this constitu- 
tion and its symptoms.' 


! For certain extracts from the earlier editions, see Appendix A of the present 


volume. 


70 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER V. 


THE INTERMITTENT FEVERS OF THE YEARS 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664. 


1. I starep in my third chapter that the constitution which 
pervaded all the aforesaid years was preeminently favorable to 
the production of intermittents of all sorts; and I will now 
impart to the reader such observations as were carefully made 
upon them. I will add to these a few remarks upon those inter- 
mittents (few in number) which since that period have occurred 
sporadically. I shall thus avoid the necessity of breaking the 
thread of my discourse when I come to the history of the time 
succeeding. 

2. In the first place, if we mean to get even a conjectural 
glimpse as to the nature and character of intermittents, we 
must bear in mind three points of time in these paroxysms: 
—l, the stage of exhorrescence; 2, the stage of ebulhtion ; 
3, the stage of despumation. To give a brief opinion concerning 
the first of these states, I conceive that it arises from the following 
cause: The febrile matter, which before its regular turgescence 
has been imperfectly assimilated with the volume of the blood, 
has become, not only useless, but inimical to Nature, whom it 
frets and vexes. She, on her part, stirred up by what we may 
call a natural sense, and planning, asit were, an escape, creates 
a shivering and a shaking throughout the body, as the evidence 
and the measure of her aversion. Just in this way will 
purging draughts cause shiverings and the lke in delicate people. 
So also will poisons, when swallowed unawares. 

3. Now Nature thus irritated (to pass to the stage of ebul- 
lition), in order that she may best shake this foe from off her 
shoulders, has recourse to fermentation ; such being her usual 
instrument in fevers and certain other acute diseases. By this 
she endeavours to rid the volume of the blood of its intestine 
enemies. By the means of such ferments those elements of 
peccant matter, which had hitherto been mixed intimately with 
the blood, are disconnected fromit. They also begin, in some 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. it 


sort, to collect among themselves; they are more easily to be 
acted on; and they come out all the clearer for their despumation. 
That this is really the case is strongly supported by the fact, that 
those who die of intermittents, if they die during the fit at all, 
go off in the first stage. If they hold through to the second, 
they are safe for that attack at least. These two stages are 
each distressing to the patient; but when they are over, the 
one that comes next (the third) has succeeded, and the work of 
despumation is in hand. The symptoms begin with being 
alleviated, and end with disappearing altogether. By the term 
despumation, I mean one thing only, viz. the expulsion or sepa- 
ration of the febrile matter, previously modified and subdued. 
Now that which is separated comes off partially as flowers and 
partially as dregs. We may see this in other fluids beside the 
blood. 

4. With these premises we may see why the fit returns when 
the patient seems out of danger. The febrile matter still hangs 
about him. Like broods of bees that grow gradually at stated 
times, the latent matter, regulated by the character of its type, 
presents itself anew. It provides fresh work for Nature; and 
runs the same course that it did before. Now, if any one ask 
why such a secret fomes has not been sufficiently reduced by 
the previous effervescence ; why it has not been eliminated at 
once with the rest of the peccant matter; why it gives rise to 
a new tragedy; and why, instead of taking one, two, or three 
days to come to maturity, and to excite a second paroxysm, its 
progress varies with the nature of the intermittent—3if any one, 
I say, requires answers upon all these points, I am ready to 
confess my ignorance. No one, that I know of, has hitherto 
gone far enough in such matters to flatter himself for having 
solved these problems of Nature. | 

5. For my own part, I am not ambitious of the name of a 
philosopher, and those who think themselves so, may, per- 
haps, consider me blameable on the score of my not having 
attempted to pierce into these penetralia. Now writers like 
these I would just recommend, before they blame others, to 
try their hand upon some common phenomena of nature 
that meet us at every turn. For instance, I would fain 
know why a horse attains its prime at seven, and a man 
at one and twenty years? Why, in the vegetable kingdom, 


/2 MEDICAL ODSERVATIONS. 


some plants blow in May and others in June? There are 
numberless questions of this sort. Hence, if many men of con- 
summate wisdom are not ashamed to proclaim their ignorance 
in these matters, I cannot see why I am to be called in ques- 
tion for doing the same. Etiology is a difficult, and, perhaps, 
an inexplicable affair ; and I choose to keep my hands clear of it. 
lam convinced, however, that Nature here, as elsewhere, moves 
in a regular and orderly manner; since the matter of tertians 
and the matter of quartans obey her laws, and are determined 
by them, just like the matter of aught else. 

6. All agues begin with shiverings and rigors, succeeded by 
heat, and terminated by sweats. In each of the first two 
paroxysms (the cold and the hot) the patient has a strong 
desire to vomit. He is thirsty, has a dry tongue, &c. These 
symptoms decline in proportion as the sweats come on. When 
these have broken out copiously, the fit seems to have gone off. 
He that was but just now sick has become a healthy man. 
Soon or late, however, the paroxysm repeats its attack; the 
intervals being as follows :—for the quotidian twenty-fours ; 
for the tertian eight and forty; for the quartan sixty-two ; 
calculating from the beginning of one fit to the beginning of 
the next. The two latter forms frequently become double ; 
i. e. a tertian comes every day, and a quartan, after attacking 
the patient for two days running, leaves him free during the 
third. It may, however, fall on each of the three days (three 
times in all), in which case it is called a triple quartan. It 
takes its name from the type that it first assumes. 

7. This doubling of the fits is sometimes produced by the 
excess and activity of the febrile matter. In this case, the 
superadded paroxysm precedes the primary. But it may also 
proceed from an unnatural prostration and dejection of strength 
on the part of the patient, from a want of vigour on the part 
of the paroxysm, from rapid cooling, and from the effect of in- 
ordinate evacuations. In these cases the primary fit comes first, 
the superadded one being at once milder, less distressing, and 
of shorter duration. 

In the first form, the turgescence or orgasm of the febrile 
matter is so great that it cannot wait its due time. The 
period seems too long. It commences the work of despuma- 
tion prematurely. 


-——g. ed te - 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 73 


In the second, the blood is too weak; it wants strength to 
shake off the febrile matter at once; it calls in a paroxysm 
extraordinary. By the aid of this, it rids itself of the last 
remnants. 

In these two conflicting principles we must, perhaps, seck 
the solution of the anticipation and of the procrastination of 
paroxysms in the ordinary and regular intermittents. Hach 
occurs in these fevers frequently: but it may be a whole 
twenty hours beforehand or behindhand with the fits. 

8. Intermittents are of two kinds, vernal and autumnal. 
They may occur, indeed, during any intermediate period of the 
year. "They do so, however, but rarely, and when they do, 
can be referred to the season which is nearest. Hence, I 
shall embrace them all under these two heads. The particular 
dates to which they may for the most part be referred are the 
months of February and August. They may come sooner; or 
they may come later. This depends upon the atmosphere. he 
influences that develope or retard them may be sparing or 
abundant. Consequent, also, upon this, is the extent of their 
epidemic character. A palpable instance of an early autumnal 
intermittent is the case of a lady, in the year 1661, who lived 
in my neighbourhood. She was seized with the first fit of a 
quartan ague as early as the 24th of June. Many others were 
seized at an equally over-early period. Now these fevers be- 
came pre-eminently epidemic; a proof that in the atmospheric 
constitution that then prevailed there was an excessive disposi- 
tion towards diseases of this sort. As the year advanced they 
increased in frequency. 

9. So necessary to good practice j is this distinction between 
the intermittents, that unless we steadily bear it in view we 
shall pronounce no sure prognosis as to their duration; and 
we shall adopt no proper regimen for the well-doing of our 
patients. The time of the year and the character of the fever 
must be kept in mind. True it is that the fevers of the two 
seasons have some common characters between them. Look at 
the form of their accession: it begins with shiverings; heats 
break out next; sweats carry off the paroxysm. Look, too, at 
the difference in their type. In respect to this, there are 
tertians both in spring and autumn. In the meanwhile I am 


74 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


quite sure that the two fevers wholly differ from one another in 
their respective natures, or (changing the term) essentially. 

10. To begin with the vernal ones. They are almost always 
either quotidian or tertian; and they set in early or late, 
according to the influence of the season. 

Now during the cold of winter the animal spirits become 
strong and concentrate from their recess. But the sun comes 
on with its warmth, and calls them forth in all their fresh- 
ness. In the meanwhile, viscid humours (less viscid, how- 
ever, than those that the heat of the previous autumn had 
wrought up even to seething and to boiling) have been accu- 
mulated by nature during the whole winter in the volume of 
the blood. Against these the animal spirits struggle. They 
try to fly off; but they get entangled and netted in, and held 
back. This it is that excites the vernal ebulhtions. Exactly 
in this manner do full beer barrels that have lain long in cool 
cellars or in the sand, begin to work as soon as they are set 
near a fire, when their liquor becomes ready to fly. The blood 
does the same. Similarly affected, it tries to clear itself; and it 
does its work quickly when the volatile spirits second it. But 
too full a supply of viscid juices retards the fermentation that 
has begun. Now, although this happen, the vernal effer- 
vescence is rarely continuous, permanent, and consistent. It 
rather goes on by fits and starts, and distributes itself amongst 
a multitude of paroxysms. The blood is choke-full of these rich 
spirits, and nature sets about her business in a hurry. Partial 
separations (after the manner of perfect solutions) by particular 
paroxysms she prefers to the general separation of the whole. 

This seems to me to give a fair reason why, during the 
season of spring, and most especially in that portion of 1t which 
is nearest to summer, continued fevers are rarely met with; 
unless, indeed, the constitution of the year be epidemic ; inas- 
much as fermentations that set in at such periods are either 
suddenly allayed or else hasten towards an intermission. 
Finally, that part of the humours which is over prone to sepa- 
ration may transfer itself elsewhere, and that violently and 
prematurely. Whereby quinsies, and peripneumonies, and 
pleurisies, and similar scourges, presently increase and multiply. 
All these more especially show themselves at the latter end of 
Spring. 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS, 79 


11. I observe that spring intermittents are neither long nor 
dangerous, and that they are always beneficial A patient 
shall be both old and weak, and that to any amount ; he shall 
have been tampered with by the pernicious and officious inter- 
ference of the most ignorant of practitioners; yet, providing 
that foul means have not been used, he shall escape death. I 
have seen, however, spring tertians so maltreated by undue 
bloodletting, by undue purging, and by unsuitable regimen, that 
they have spun out their existence until the period of the 
autumnal ones; and then as the time of the year is diametrically 
opposed to the genius of the disease in question, it annihilates 
it at once. The patient, nevertheless, has in the interim been 
so worn out by the repetition of the fits, and the protraction 
of his ailment, that he seems to be in the last extremity. So 
far, however, as I have hitherto observed, he always eventually 
struggles through. 

12. Never yet, during this disease, has it been my for- 
tune to observe those formidable symptoms which, as I shall 
mention in my forty-sixth section, come in the wake of the 
autumnal intermittents; I mean by these the deadly inflam- 
mation of the tonsils, the hardened belly, the dropsical swellings, 
&c. More than once, however, I have observed that, partly 
from the length of the disease, partly from the repetition of 
the fits, and partly from evacuations, patients have, in their ex- 
treme debility, been seized with mania; which has gone off at 
the same rate that their strength has been recruited. 

13. Autumnal intermittents are very different. An au- 
tumnal tertian, in a year when it is not epidemic, and in a case 
where it attacks a healthy subject, may occasionally clear itself 
off in as short a time, and with as slight a group of symptoms, 
as ever a vernal one may. But, when it setsin as an epidemic ; 
when it attacks a man advanced in years; when it lays hold 
of a weakly frame ; it is never freefrom danger. Besides this, 
it may tyrannize over the patient for two months, for three 
months—even until the next spring. And a quartan is more 
dangerous than a tertian ; it is also more obstinate. When it 
attacks a man advanced in hfe, it may kill him before he has 
suffered many paroxysms. ‘Those that die thus, die, for the 
most part, as I have stated before, during the shaking fit, and 


76 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


consequently in the first stage of the paroxysm. If the patient 
be not so much old, as just upon the limits of old age, if he 
have not passed the threshold, he runs less danger of being 
carried off in the beginning of a paroxysm. At the same time, 
lic will find it hard to shake off the fever much before that 
part of the next year that corresponds with his first seizure in 
the present. Sometimes, also, there is that left behind which 
death only will cure— 


“heeret lateri lethalis arundo." ! 


14. A quartan may at any time change its type. It may 
also engender a multiplicity of symptoms; e. g. scurvies, in- 
durated belles, dropsies, &c. 

Young men can bear against this disease. They sometimes 
get rid of it by the middle of winter. It oftener lasts until 
the vernal equinox ; sometimes even until the autumn following. 
This is the case when they have been purged and bled. |I have 
often been surprised at infants. I have seen the tenderest of 
them struggle with this disease for six whole months continu- 
ously. I have seen them keep their ground againstit. Ihave 
seen them, lke so many little Herculeses, triumph over it in 
their cradles. 

15. Here I must observe, that whatsoever be the age or 
temperament of a patient with a quartan ague, if ever in his 
whole previous life—no matter how long back—he has suffered 
from it before, a second attack will give him but little trouble. 
After a few fits it will go off of its own accord. ‘This is worth 
knowing. 

16. In regard to the treatment of spring agues, I consider 
that they should always be left to themselves, and that they 
should not be meddled with. No one that I know has ever 
died of one; whilst those, on the other hand, who have busied 
themselves to get quit of them (especially by the use of evacu- 
ants), have only made the disease more confirmed, more obsti- 
nate, and more refractory. If, however, the importunate 
impatience of the sufferer earnestly insist upon the interference 
of his physician, he may find a variety of methods which he 


voVirg, En 3v, Fo. PGs] 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. " 


NI 


may apply to the cure of spring agues with good results. I 
am satisfied of this from abundant observation. 

17. Occasionally an emetic, opportunely administered, so 
that it may finish its work before the beginning of the fit, has 
succeeded wonderfully; especially if you give a moderate 
quantity of the syrup of white poppies, or some other narcotic, 
after the emetic has acted, and before the paroxysm has begun. 

Occasionally you may witness a restoration to health, brought 
about by means of diaphoretics. These forward the perspira- 
tion that should come with the third stage. For this the 
patient must be covered close with bed-clothes; covered as 
close, and kept as long as his strength will bear. This succeeds 
most especially with the vernal quotidians. At this season the 
humours are not over gross; so that their solution, which 
would otherwise be incomplete, is fully consummated. In au- 
tumn this is never the case. 

I have in my lifetime cured tertians by clysters, given during 
the days of intermission, with intervals of three or four days 
between each.! 

18. Meanwhile, if either the free use of the lancet—a prac- 
tice to which the season itself inclines the incautious—or the 
previous debility of the patient, have impoverished the spirits 
that have thus suddenly undertaken the office of despumation, 
it is very likely that vernal fevers of the kind we speak of, 
despite of all remedies that we may have recourse to, will take 
upon themselves the protracted character of autumnal ones. 
Still, if even they do so, they are not usually so obstinate. 
They either go off of themselves, or can be put to flight by the 
aid of gentle remedies. 

19. Autumnal intermittents are not so lghtly removed. 
Upon these I make a few statements. If the autumnal con- 
stitution be epidemic, they set in about the middle of June ; 
if it be not so, they wait for August and the beginning of 
September. In months later than these they rarely occur. 

When a great number set in at the same time, we have an 


1 The following passage occurs in the edition of 1668.—[G.] ‘Against spring 
tertians I have hitherto found nothing more simple and more effectual than low diet 
without meat, a mild purge on the days of intermission, and a narcotic a little before 
the next fit. This treatment has even cured autumnal agues.” 


78 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


opportunity of observing that the paroxysms occur, for the 
most part, at one and the same hour of the day, sometimes 
sooner, sometimes later; that they take place in the same 
manner; that they move at the same rate; except only in those 
cases where the exhibition of medicines, with the power of 
accelerating or of retarding their progress, has, in certain con- 
stitutions, modified or perverted the order. 

20. It must also be observed, that in the beginning of in- 
termittent fevers (especially when they are at once epidemic 
and autumnal) it is no easy matter to detect their intermittent 
character within the first few days of their accession, since they 
may commence with the super-addition of continued fever. 
It is also difficult at first, unless you observe with great 
minuteness to detect anything beyond a slight re-mission of 
the disease. By degrees, however, they end in perfect énter- 
missions, and take the type that answers to the season of the 
year. 

21. In regard to their type, they are either tertian or 
quartan. Of quartans, we may fairly say that they are the 
true brood of autumn. Hach kind of this season is so con- 
nected by a sort of affinity with the other, that the two often 
appear (for a time at least) to change natures. ‘They soon, 
however, return to their original type. 

But vernal tertians never take the type of quartans at all. 
The two sorts differ from one another tofo celo. Nor have I 
ever observed that, during the spring, quotidians have ever 
occurred ; unless, by a laxity of language, we call double ter- 
tians or triple quartans by that name. 

22. I conceive that these intermittent fevers originate m the 
following manner. Atthe beginning, and during the advance 
of the year, the blood is proportionably exalted until it finally - 
reaches its full height and vigour. 

The same is the case with vegetables. They exhibit, in 
their growth and decay, the periods of the year. 

From its high acme, as the season wanes, the blood, moving 
in parallels with the year, gradually declines; and it does so 
with increased rapidity when any accidental circumstance, such 
as immoderate losses of blood, cold, crude and exerementitious 
ingesta, the unseasonable use of baths, or any other cause has 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. /9 


conspired to promoteit. In this state of decline the constitu- 
tion of the blood! is liable to morbid impressions of all sorts ; 
and these are supplied by that particular constitution of the 
atmosphere which is epidemic at the time in point, and that in 
the way of intermittents. The evidence of the ebullition goes 
this way. It is brought on and it lays hold of the humours 
of the blood; and these are often very degenerate ; and the 
fever that arises from them is of a bad character, and replete 
with formidable symptoms. In all cases the blood is in a 
great measure stripped of its spirits; it is parched up by the 
preceding summer; it gets through its ebullition with a slow 
movement ; and it requires a long period for its despumation. 

23. Now in order to make it clear that the cure of an 
autumnal ague is really a matter of difficulty, I must insist 
upon the difference between the continued and intermittent 
fevers of that period. It lies chiefly in the manner of getting 
through their effervescence. Continued fevers do it uninter- 
ruptedly and at an even rate ; intermittents at different periods 
and by instalments. In each, however, nature works out the 
fermentation in nearly the same time,i. e. 336 hours, there 
or thereabouts ; nor more nor less, if you leave it to her, is the 
ordinary period required for a thorough purification of the 
volume of the blood of a human body. Just so cider has its 
time, wine and beer theirs, as the proper period of their re- 
spective depurations. 

24. However true it may be that in intermittent fevers, 
(as 1s the case with quartans,) the blood may be six months at 
work upon its despumation before it accomplishes it, the time 
taken is in reality no longer than that of a natural continued 
fever. Calculate rightly, and you find that fourteen days of 
twenty-four hours each make 336 hours; whilst by allowing 
five hours and a half to each paroxysm of a quartan, you find 
in one full attack fourteen days, or 336 hours. 


! [n the editions of 1666 and 1668, the following passage stands in the place of 
the present sentence.—[G.] “ Now if the blood, thus reduced to a state of decline, 
becomes so impaired as to lose its powers of resistance, and to sink before the in- 
fluences that attack it, Nature devises a new method: she prepares a fresh texture 
for the worn-out mass, and remodels it; she aims at separating with the least pos- 
sible disturbance those elements which most especially favour the degeneration." 


80 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


Now if any one object that a quartan (and, as the same 
reasoning applies to all other intermittents, I name this only 
in the way of illustration) may sometimes run on beyond a 
period of six months before it completes its career, I answer 
that the same takes place not unfrequently with the continued 
fevers of the constitution. These often last more than fourteen 
days. In either case, if you allow the effervescence (especially 
towards the end of a fever) to run its course naturally and in 
due form, if you take care that it is kept up in its proper 
vigour, the despumation will be completed within the aforesaid 
space of fourteen days or 336 hours. If, however, during the 
same period, (that is, at the decline of the fever,) you put any 
untimely check upon this same effervescence or fermentation, 
either by means of refrigerants or enemata, and if you curb it 
(as 1t were) in its natural career, you must not wonder if, when 
the order of nature is disturbed, the disease becomes indefi- 
nitely protracted. By all this the tone of the human blood is 
relaxed, so that it cannot prepare itself for its effectual des- 
pumation. In weak and worn-out frames the same takes 
place spontaneously, unless, by the aid of cordials, you can 
assist the flagging efforts of Nature, and render her competent 
to the despumation of the blood. 

29. Now, all this which I have written concerning the 
period and the continuation of the fermenting processes, ap- 
plies to those fevers only that have attained a stated habit and 
character. I am by no means ignorant that there are certain 
fevers, continued as well as intermittent, which are of a transi- 
tory and indefinite character, and which, in their fermentation, 
do not attain their proper period. Of this sort, are those that 
arise out of slight errors in regard to the six’ (so called) non- 
naturals, i. e. the irregularities of food, drink, air, &c. Such 
as are thus seized soon recover. They occur, occasionally, in 
young subjects, full of pure blood, and endued with many 
animal spirits. Fevers of this sort have a very spirituous, 
subtile, and rare matter to rely on. They manage their for- 
mentations quickly: they clear the ground they have to run 
over at a great rate, and rapidly disappear. 


! See note in p. 34. 


| 
| 
| 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 8l 


26. All this they do on the strength of the conditions re- 
quired for fermentation ; and herein the first point requisite is 
as follows: the matter susceptible of fermentation (whether 
wine, blood, or any other fluid) must be of such a tenacity 
aud viscidity as to be able to detain the spirits within it. 
These are in a manner netted in, and entangled. They can, 
however, move about, and bestir themselves in the mass of the 
liquor. Just so are birds fixed by birdlime, and flies and bees by 
honey ; they can buzz and struggle, but they cannot fly away. 
It is only necessary to remark in passing, that the liquor must 
not be too clammy; it must not clog and oppress the spirits 
to the degree that they are unable to stir. 

27. Upon these principles as a groundwork— principles which 
to me, and I hope to others, seem based upon fair reasons— it 
is not surprising if I erect as a superstructure of practice little 
beyond the method which I employ in bringing continued 
fevers towards the full completion of the due work of despu- 
mation. It is by means of an effervescence limited to a defi- 
nite period that Nature expels the matter of continued fevers. 
Consider this process, and you will find that those of intermit- 
tents accurately coincide with it. In other points connected 
with their species and peculiar natures, I confess that these 
last differ broadly from continued fevers, as well as from one 
another. 

Hence we must do one of two things: we must by careful and 
anxious observation of the processes by which Nature relieves 
herself of this disease, draw indications as to the manner by 
which the incipient fermentation may be promoted, and the 
patient be restored to health ; or else we must discover a specific. 
By this we may march against the malady with effectual re- 
medies, having previously penetrated into its specific cause. 

28. Upon one of these two ppnciples should be based our 
indications of treatment. I have, for my own part, tried both ; 
and I may say, without boasting, that I have done so with 
great care and with unwearied attention. Nevertheless, I 
have not yet been fortunate enough to cure autumnal inter- 
mittents by any sure practice, and upon any methodus medendi, 
before they have completed those stated fermentations which I 
have spoken of above. Such is the case, sad as it may seem 

6 


82 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


to the sufferers who are constrained against their wills to wait 
thus long for a recovery. 

In sober sooth, I consider that any man, if such there be 
amongst mortals, who, either by any sure line of treatment, or 
by the application of any specific remedy, can not only control 
the course of these intermittents, but cut it short altogether, 
is bound by every possible bond to reveal to the world in gene- 
ralso great a blessing to his race. If he withhold it, pro- 
nounce him at once a bad citizen, and an unwise man ; since 
no good citizen monopolises for himself a general benefit for 
his kind; and no wise man divests himself of the blessing 
that he may reasonably expect from his Maker, when he girds 
his loins for the welfare of the world. Honours and riches 
are less in the eyes of good men than virtue and wisdom. 

29. Difficult, however, as it may be to cure these autumnal 
intermittents,! I will state what I have found to be of any par- 
ticular service in the treatment of them. 

I have long taught that (except in the manner that I shall 
mention by and by) the attempt to cure autumnal intermit- 
tents by catharsis is highly dangerous; the worst form of 
catharsis being bloodletting. . Frequent experience has told me 
this. In the tertians in question (especially if the constitu- 
tion be epidemic) that we attempt to cure by bleeding, your 


! The following passage stands in the editions of 1666 and 1668, in place of 
pp. 29-35.—[G.] ‘In the meanwhile I consider the point difficult, and pronounce 
the result to be dangerous. A clear proof of this may be found in the use of the 
so-called Jesuit’s bark. However much its application may allay the present 
ferment, there still remains behind a residuum of matter, which ought to have been 
got rid of by fermentation. This soon renews its strength, and challenges Nature to 
a fresh struggle. I know an instance where a quartan lasted for years, bark having 
served only to interrupt it. Some have been killed by having it given just before 
the fit. Nevertheless, I will admit that, in the decline of fevers, the prudent and 
guarded use of remedies of this sort has occasionally done good, and has removed 
the fits altogether, especially when the epidemic character of the season has been 
other than intermittent. However, although from the present remarks we show 
no gleam of hope as to the chance of any quick method of restoring health, we still 
leave much to the learned and sagacious physician. He may still regulate the de- 
puration of the blood by the limits of nature. He may still meet the symptoms 
that occur and supervene in the disorder. Upon these points, then, I will treat as 
briefly as the nature of the question allows me, embracing in the same remarks both 
the tertian and quartan forms of ague, the same treatment applying to both.” 


VY. T A—MTM, €-w—c—c» t 


wp unom 


1 
| 
1 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 83 


lancet must cut the throat of the fever with the same stroke that 
pierces the sides of the vein ; otherwise, even with the youthful 
and athletic, it resists for a great length of time. In old sub- 
jects, also, the disease distresses and continues. With these last, 
however, it is death that succeeds to it: the immediate fore- 
runner being deadly inflammation of the tonsils, described above. 
Besides this, venesection hastens those other symptoms which 
have been spoken of as either the concomitants of autumnal 
intermittents during the period of their decline, or as the 
sequele after their termination ; whilst in quartans it is so pre- 
eminently prejudicial, that youths, who might otherwise have got 
rid of the disease within the first six months, have been kept 
ill half a year longer by the bleeding. As for old men, who 
without venesection might have been cured within the year, 
they run the risk, not only of keeping their complaint for a 
still longer period, but also of, eventually, dying of it. 

What has been said concerning venesection applies, mutatis 
mutandis, to purging, only that the last, unless exceedingly re- 
peated, is rather less mischievous than the former. 

90. Autumnal tertians I attack thus: I confine the patient 
to his bed, cover him with blankets, and sweat him with a sage 
posset about four hours before the fit. When the perspiration 
begins, I give him two scruples of the pil. coch. mag. dissolved 
in an ounce of the following mixture : 


EK Aqua vite, Oj; 
Venice treacle, Ziij; 
English saffron, 5j. 

Mix, and let stand for use. 


Having taken this, he keeps on at his sweating until some 
hours after the time for the paroxysm to begin, carefully 
guarding against those interruptions of the diaphoresis which 
the motions from the purgative may give rise to. 

3l. I have succeeded better, with this treatment, in getting 
rid of a fit of tertian ague, than with the usual decoction of 
gentian root, centaury tops, senna, and agaric ;—a receipt for 
a similar purpose. Hach excites the contrary actions of sweat- 
ing and purging at the same time ; by which means they break 
and interrupt the regular course of the paroxysm. Mine acts 


84 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


like the other in this respect. It acts, however, more effec- 
tually, and quite as safely. By this treatment I have driven 
away many autumnal tertians; neither have I, during these 
last years, been fortunate enough to improve on it. 

32. In double tertians, where the patient has been weakened 
by evacuations, or by other causes, and where the fever has 
changed its type, perspiration must be provoked, as before, within 
the same number of hours previous to the expected paroxysm, 
and by either the same medicine, or by some stronger and 
more active diaphoretic. This may be repeated when the 
genuine paroxysm next following sets in. The pil. coch. mag., 
however, must be omitted. It is neither safe nor serviceable to 
weaken the patient with further purges ;—so administering to 
the doubling of the fits. When this doubling of them has 
weakened the patient in any very great degree, I prescribe the 
following electuary : 


K Conserve of borage flowers, 
Conserve of bugloss flowers, aa 5j ; 
Conserve of rosemary, 38s ; 
Candied lemon-peel, 

Candied nutmeg, 
Venice treacle, aa 3iij ; 
Confection of kermes, 3ij. 

Mix, and make into an opiate; of which take a portion of the 
size of a hazel-nut night and morning. Drink upon it six 
spoonfuls of the following julep : 

kK Meadow-sweet water, 
Treacle-water, aa Zi) ; 
Syrup of cloves, 3). 

Mix. 


Or, instead of this, I give some simple epidemic water, sweetened 
with sugar ; I forbid the use of clysters, and I allow the patient 
chicken-broth, oatmeal-gruel, &c. &oc. 

33. In regard to the cure of quartans, those who are in the 
least degree conversant with medicine know how unsatisfactory 
are all those methods which have been designed for the cure 
of this opprobrium medicorum, Peruvian bark only excepted. 
Even this checks rather than conquers them. They lie in 
abeyance for a fortnight or three weeks; and the patient who 
has been severely distressed by them has the great advantage 


| 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 85 


of their delitescence ; he gains a breathing time. They break 
out, however, afresh; are as harassing as before, and, for the 
most part, however often the bark may be repeated, require a 
long time before they are wholly dislodged from the system. 
I will state, however, what I have ascertained concerning the 
manner of exhibiting this medicine. 

34, The first thing to look to is this—we must not lay it 
on too soon, 1. e. before the disease has, in some measure, ex- 
hausted itself by its own action ; certain cases, however, in an 
exhausted and debilitated condition of the patient, may indi- 
cate an earlier adoption of it. In giving it too soon, we have 
not only to fear lest its premature exhibition may render its 
action nugatory, and so disappoint our hopes, but we must 
consider that the very life of the patient may be endangered, 
if we suddenly stop that despumation of the blood which the 
whole effort of fermentation is aiming at. 

In the next place, no part of the febrile matter must be 
withdrawn from the system by purging, and much less by ve- 
nesection, with the notion of promoting the action of the bark. 
With the corporeal economy weakened on both sides, the pa- 
roxysms return all the more readily, and all the more certainly, 
when the virtues of the powders have once for all been expended. 
To me it seems better to imbue the blood with the aforesaid 
drug moderately, gradually, and at long intervals before the 
fits, than to attempt, by a single blow, to cut short the paroxysm 
at its accession ; since, by so doing, we give the remedy a longer 
time to do its work in; and we avoid all those risks which 
might arise to the patient from any sudden and unseasonable 
check, whereby we attempt to suppress the paroxysm during 
its full development, and during the putting forth of all its 
activity. 

Finally, the powder must be repeated at short intervals, so 
that the first dose may not have lost its effect before the ex- 
hibition of a second. By it a frequent and good habit of body 
will be recovered, and the disease be wholly dispelled. 

99, Upon this ground I prefer the following form to any 
other: Mix one ounce of Peruvian bark with two of the syrup 
of red roses, of which the patient must take a bolus, of the size 
of a nutmeg, night and morning, every day when there is no 


86 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


genuine paroxysm ; he must continue to do so until the whole 
of the confection has been taken. He must repeat this once 
a fortnight, three times. 

96. Perhaps this bark may be used as advantageously in 
tertians (vernal and autumnal) as it is in autumnal agues. To 
speak the truth, however, and to speak also to the purpose, my 
experience tells me thus much, viz. that if the patient who has 
been seized with either the one or the other of these forms of 
fever be either a child or a youth, it is best not to meddle at 
all,—neither in the way of medicines of any sort, nor yet in 
that of air or diet, inasmuch as I never yet have known harm 
come where Nature has been wholly left to herself. I have 
observed this more especially in infants, and have been sur- 
prised at it. The blood does its work of depuration, and the 
fevers spontaneously decline. 

If, however, on the. contrary, you order a strict diet ; if you 
administer every now and then purging medicines (and this is 
generally done on the plea of clearing away obstructions, and 
expelling the humours that are lodged in the prime vie) ; or, 
if (as is often done) you prescribe bloodletting during an 
epidemic constitution, the result will be, that the disease will 
run on for a length of time, and that the patient will be ex- 
posed to a thousand symptoms, all dangerous. 

97. If the patients be advanced in years, there is great 
danger in either disease (autumnal tertian or autumnal quar- 
tan), not only of a protracted duration, but of death itself; so 
that the physician who has done good neither with Peruvian 
bark nor with any other remedy, must, at least, support Nature, 
and help her as he best can, with those aids that she requires in 
the work which she has undertaken. In worn-out constitutions, 
the fermentation must be supported by the help of cordials 
(such as wormwood wine) and strengthening diet; otherwise, 
it will be the fate of the patient to be harassed with uncertain 
and fruitless paroxysms, and to grow weaker and weaker. The 
disease will keep its ground, until Nature, previously weakened, 
becomes unable to resist some stronger paroxysm, and sinks 
before she reaches the period of ebullition: in which case 
the patient dies during the cold fit. This is frequently the 
case with old men, weakened by a long use of purgatives. I 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 87 


have sometimes thought that they have gone off during the 
cold fits of even the first paroxysms, when, by the use of some 
sufficiently strong cordial, they might, for a time at least, have 
been kept up. 

98. After the blood has been allowed the time necessary for 
despumation, it 1s requisite for those patients who are advanced 
in years to be removed, either at the very time, or a little be- 
fore, for change of air. The best they can do is to visit some 
warm spot; the least they can do is to leave the place where 
they were taken ill. It is extraordinary how much this change 
of air conduces towards a thorough recovery. Meanwhile, 
change of air, before the time in question, is not only of no 
avail in the restoration of health, but is prejudicial. Even if 
the patient were to visit some warm southern region, his blood 
(when the morbid movements had once been established) would 
still have to go through the work of depuration. In vain, 
therefore, would he expect the benefits of a new and unusual 
air until the motion of the blood, having taken its course and 
grown its growth, was capable of recovering health. This 
change of air, then, must be sought when the patient first gets 
rid of his fits; thus, in a quartan which began in the com- 
mencement of autumn, we must change our air about the 
beginning of February, and no earlier. 

39. If, however, the patient either will not, or cannot with 
convenience, be removed, he must use instead, at the time in 
question, some powerful medicine, the effects of which may be 
such as to promote, powerfully, and at once, the flagging pro- 
cesses of depuration, and, if possible, complete it. To effect 
this I recommend— 


K Egg electuary, 
Venice treacle, aa 5iss. 
Dissolve in two ounces of aqua vite, or aqua celestis, and give 
the mixture two hours before the fit. 


I have prescribed this with success during the decline of this 
disease. Nevertheless, I must admit that medicines thus 
heating may either double the paroxysms or change the inter- 
mittent into a continued fever. This, Galen’ has long ago 


! Ad Glauc. de Meth. Med., 1, 12, tom. xi, p. 40. [G.] 


88 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


observed. The same practice may be extended to young per- 
sons, due care being taken with it. With children, however, 
it is not only out of place, but absolutely dangerous. This I 
have long noticed.! 

40. Before I come to the close of this discussion, I must 
notice that whatever has been said concerning the duration of 
autumnal intermittents, and whatever has been said concerning 
the time required for the despumation of the blood, apply only 
to the recorded operations of Nature, under the influence, and 
with the support of the common-place and usual medicines. 
By no means do I wish to express myself as if wise and learned 
physicians were to despair, as if they were to think out no 
better modes of treatment, and as if they were to throw away 
the hope of discovering nobler and more potent medicines for 
accelerating the cure of this disease. So far I am from this, 
that I do not despair of finding out, even myself, some such 
medicine, and some such methodus medendi. 

41. The disease being removed, the patient must be freely 
purged, since the number of diseases that may occur as the 
sequele of autumnal intermittents, where purging has been 
omitted, is beyond belief. I wonder that practitioners are so 


' The following passage stands in the editions of 1666 and 1668.—[G.] “We 
must remember that, in the earlier stages of these diseases (especially in those of 
tertians), it sometimes happens that, with young and robust subjects, the effervescence 
runs to such a length, as to make it safer to meet the coming storm than to leave all 
to Nature. This is best done by prescribing an emetic on the days of intermission, 
—emetics being particularly suitable to autumnal disorders in general, and admirably 
ensuring us against those symptoms that, in their full vigour, they are most liable 
to; as soon, however, as this has been done, all the rest must be left to Nature. I 
am slow to believe that the violence and severity of the accessions of effervescence, 
which usher in the first fits of a tertian ague, are referable to any particular form of 
malignity, rather than to the strength and vigour of the disease itself. Each fit is 
the equivalent and miniature of a continued fever. Hence it attacks the patient 
with a fiercer onslaught than continued fever, until such time as the recurrence of 
one or more paroxysms shall have taken off the edge of its severity. Be this as it 
may, it sometimes happens that, through the violence of this same effervescence, an 
autumnal tertian (especially in young subjects) may get through the work of de- 
puration before its time; and so, after a few fits, wholly disappear. Here Nature 
precipitates her work. A quartan, however, runs its course more slowly, except in 
second attacks. Im this case, in spite of the recurrence of a few fits, the physician, 
who is aware of the fact, may confidently predict the sudden disappearance of the 
disease. This is worth knowing." 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 89 


little on their guard against this. I wonder, too, that they are 
so rarely told of it. Whenever I see either an autumnal 
tertian or an autumnal quartan attack a man advanced in 
years, after purging has been omitted, I can boldly prophesy 
that some dangerous disease will succeed, however little he 
may have dreamed of such, and however much he may have 
considered himself perfectly cured. 

49. Nevertheless, we must be careful not to purge before the 
disease is wholly expelled. It is true, indeed, that by so doing, 
the natural parts may appear to have been relieved of the foul 
humours that the fever has heaped upon them. Nevertheless, 
fresh matter is introduced, and they gradually increase. The 
fever supplies it ; the action of the cathartics and the agitation 
of the humours having recalled the fever. Hence, all that we 
have done by our purging, is to render the disease more 
obstinate; daily examples tell us this. In deference to the 
vulgar theory, that a melancholy humour is the source and origin 
of the disease, and that in the removal of obstructions, and in 
the evacuation of this same humour, consists the chances of 
cure, patients are harassed during the decline of their 
complaint with repeated and punishing purges. Now be the 
humours that are thus worked out and eliminated what they 
may, it is certain that their effect upon the fever is to make it 
root itself more deeply, and hold its ground more resolutely 
than if it had never been meddled with. 

43. For this reason, it is, with me, a matter of conscience 
ever to prescribe a purge before each and all of those slight 
alterations, which are discernible upon the days when the fits 
used to come, as well as when every sign of the fits themselves 
has wholly disappeared; and then I wait a month. At the 
end of which time, I prescribe some common lenitive draught, 
and order it to be repeated once a week for the next two or three 
months. To this I add an anodyne at bedtime, to be taken 
after each purgative, when its action isover. By this Lremove 
the opportunities for a fresh accession of the fits, occasions for 
which arise out of tumult and commotion of even the mildest 
cathartics. 

44. lI allow, therefore, full time between the purges, in 
order that the patient may be ensured against a relapse; an 


90 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


occurrence easily brought on by too frequent and too repeated 
an agitation of the blood and humours. When this danger, 
however, is over, the following apozem may frequently be 
used :— 


EK  Monk's rhubarb, Zij; 
Asparagus root, 
Butcher's broom root, 
Parsley root, 
Root of polypody of the oak, aa 2); 
Middle bark of the ash, 
Middle bark of the tamarisk, aa 3ss ; 
Ceterach leaves, 
Maidenhair, a handful of each ; 
Cleansed senna, Ziss (moisten this with ‘three ounces of 
white wine) ; 
Dodder of the thyme, 
Agaric lozenges, aa 5ij ; 
Fennel seeds, Div. 
Boil in spring water to half a pint. Towards the end add three 
ounces of orange juice ; strain, and dissolve in the mixture. 
Syrup of succory with rhubarb, 
Sovereign syrup for melancholy, aa Ziss. 
Make into an apozem; of which half a pint is to be taken every 
morning for three days. Repeat the same as often as required. 


45. And now that I may at length enumerate the symptoms 
which accompany the decline of intermittents, I must remark 
that very few belong to the spring agues, as compared with 
the autumnal, both because these former are not so lasting, 
and because their essence is more earthy and less malignant. 

46. The first place amongst these symptoms must be given 
to dropsy. The legs swell first, then the belly. This arises 
from the state of the blood. The disease has lasted long; the 
fermentations that it engenders have been frequent ; the animal 
spirits are squandered away, as it were, by handfuls; the 
blood misses them, and being exceedingly stinted in their 
supply, is unable to assimilate the juices of the ingesta. Of 
these the crude and undigested mass is at length deposited in 


1 In the editions of 1666 and 1668, instead of pp. 45, 46, we find the following. — 
[G.] * We must, however, carefully bear in mind that by having recourse to pur- 
gatives too soon after the cessation of the paroxysms, we run the risk of their re- 
turning. This arises from the disturbance that even a slight evacuation makes in 
the humours." . 


eee we eT ee Ee SN P s 


E 


bac tr 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 91 


the legs. These become distended; they can hold no more ; 
the deposit then goes to the belly, and true dropsy is the 
result. Old men suffer most from this. Young ones escape 
this catalogue of ills, unless, indeed, they have been repeatedly 
purged during the decline of the fever. This brings it on 
where it was never meant. 

47. Now dropsy that supervenes on the aforesaid causes is 
easily cured by aperients and catharties, provided always that 
it be of recent standing. It gives me no concern when I hear 
of it proceeding from these causes ; I expect a favorable upshot. 
I have cured patients with the above-mentioned apozem alone, 
and that thoroughly, and without the admixture of any dropsical 
remedies at all. 

On the other hand, I have observed, that to attempt the 
cure of a dropsy, by means of purgatives, whilst the fever lasts, 
is labour in vain. The dropsy will stay as it was, and the 
fever will take deeper root. We must wait till the fever is 
banished, and then we may undertake the business successfully. 

48. But if the dropsy be so very distressing, and so very 
serious that its cure cannot be put off until the recess of the 
fever permit the use of cathartics, it must be attacked with the 
vinous infusions of horseradish, wormwood tops, lesser centaury, 
juniper berries, and broom ashes. These not only resist the 
symptoms and restore the blood, but also help Nature at the 
right time, just as she is about to triumph over the disease. 

49. Infants, after autumnal fevers, whether continued or 
intermittent, occasionally become hectic. Their bellies are 
blown out and swell. They become indurated; very often cough, 
and the signs of consumption arise, and resemble rickets. 
These I treat in the following manner : I prescribe the cathartic 
draught that I recommend during the decline of continued 
fevers.| Of this the infant must take one or two spoonfuls 
(more or less according to his age) every morning for nine 
days, omitting a day or two if necessary. The purging should 
be so regulated and controlled, by increasing or diminishing 
the dose, that the number of stools must not exceed five or six 
in a single day. When the purging is over, the whole belly 


! Chap. IV.—[G.] 


92 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


is to be rubbed with an opening liniment for some days. The 
following is what I use: 


EK Oil of lilies, 


-—— mes 


Juice of bryony root, 
Juice of smallage root, aa 2j. 
Boil until the juices are gone. Add 
Ointment of marsh-mallows, 
Fresh butter, aa 2j; 
Gum ammoniac dissolved in vinegar, 3ss ; 
Beeswax, q. s. 
Make a liniment. 

Many infants have thus been cured by me of even true 
rickets, 

But, as I have said already, we must take particular care 
not to attempt purging before the complete departure of the 
fever, because, although a portion of the humours may reasonably 
appear to have been passed over to the natural parts, and by 
that means evacuated, there will still be a supply of new 
peccant matter to the fever, which will not only render the 
purging ineffectual, but, for the reasons given above, will make 
the disease itself more protracted. 

50. It is worth observing, that when these autumnal agues 
have for a long time afflicted children, there is no hope of 
dispelling them until the abdominal region, especially in the 
neighbourhood of the spleen, has begun to swell and harden, 
whilst in proportion as this symptom increases the ague goes 
off. Perhaps there is no better symptom whereon we may 
form afavorable prognosis as to speedytermination of the disease, 
than the one in question. Observe it watchfully. The same 
holds good with the swellings in the legs of adults. 

51. In those years where the atmospheric constitution has an 
epidemic determination towards the development of autumnal 
intermittents, this swelling of the belly, which occurs in children 
who have had agues, feels, if you touch it with your finger, as 
if the viscera contained some hardened scirrhous matter. In 
other years, although arising from a similar cause, it feels 
merely like the tension of the hypochondres from flatus. 
Hence, except in those years where autumnal intermittents 
are paramount, true rickets rarely occur. This is worth noting. 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 93 


52. Pain and inflammation of the tonsils, following fevers, 
either continued or intermittent, accompanied with distress and 
difficulty of swallowing, and followed by hoarseness, sinking 
under the eyes, and the facies Hippocratica, are certain signs 
of imminent death. They cut off all hope of recovery. I 
have observed that the protraction of the fever, and excessive 
evacuations on the part of the patient, already prostrated by 
the disease, have generally lent a hand towards the production 
of this fatal symptom. 

53. There are many accidents which are wont to follow 
these diseases, either from purging having been neglected, or 
from its having been resorted to at the wrong time. I will waive 
mention of them, however, for the present, the principles of 
the cure being the same forall. It consists in the repurgation 
of the sediment deposited by the previous effervescence, which, 
by its retention, supplies the pabulum to these evils. One sort 
of symptom, however, and that an important one, it. may be 
proper to mention in this place; it yields neither to purges 
nor evacuants of any kind, least of all to bloodletting. In 
defiance of these, it even takes strength from their adminis- 
tration. It is a form of mania’ peculiar, and swi generis. It 
occasionally follows long agues, especially if they be quartan ; 
it stands beyond the reach of all the usual remedies. From 
the exhibition of strong evacuants, it degenerates into fatuity, 
and ends only with the life of the patient. 

54. I have often wondered that no notice has been taken 
by authors of this symptom, as l have observed it not unfre- 
quently. The other forms of madness are mostly cured by 
means of copious evacnations, bloodletting, and catharsis. 
This can bear none of them. Even when the patient is 
recovering, and on the very threshold of health, the single 
injection of an enema of sugar and milk will bring 1t on afresh ; 
whilst to fight against it by means of reiterated purges and 


! In the editions of 1666 and 1668 we find, * perhaps upon due consideration 
we shall determine that there are several kinds of mania," &c. And a little below, 
Sydenham writes thus: ** Concerning the treatment, I shall at present say nothing, 
although many know that I have dealt with it successfully ; nevertheless, I do not 
feel that my attention has been proportionate to the importance of the disease. 
Hence I cannot, with proper confidence, publish any doctrines concerning its cure." 


94 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


venesections, is to mitigate, indeed, the violence of the disease, 
but to reduce the patient to a state of incurable fatuity. At 
this no one will wonder who considers that, whilst one form 
of madness arises from an exalted and over-vivid crasis of the 
blood, this is produced by its debility, and (if I may use the 
term) its vapidity. "The fever has introduced a protracted 
fermentation, and the protracted fermentation has disabled the 
spirits from the performance of their animal functions. 

55. This symptom I manage in the following manner: I 
give the patient a full dose of a generous cordial three times a 
day, e. g. Venice treacle, egg electuary, the Countess's powder, 
Raleigh’s powder, &c., out of epidemic water or treacle water. 
Other cordials may also be given, according to other formule. 
The patient’s strength must be kept up by moderate analeptic 
diet, and somewhat generous drink. He must not go out of 
doors. He must keep muchin bed. The bowels, under this 
regimen, will be somewhat confined. This and the use of 
the heating medicines may raise fears of a fever. These are 
vain. The animal spirits, almost exhausted by the previous 
disease, are unable to kindle one. After a few weeks he will 
gradually improve. ‘The cordials may then be omitted for a 
few days. ‘The analeptic diet, however, must regularly be ad- 
hered to; and, after a short intermission, the use of the 
cordials also. He must persist in this until he enjoys his ori- 
ginal health. 

56. The aforesaid treatment has cured forms of mania 
which have originated otherwise than in ague, viz. in cold and 
infirm temperaments. Last year I was called to Salisbury to 
consult with my learned and dear friend Dr. Thomas upon the 
case of a lady whose faculties were seriously impaired. Although 
she was pregnant, I used the above-mentioned remedies, and 
she recovered altogether. 

57. However, the common sort of madness which befals 
healthy men, and which is not preceded by any fever, is 
wholly of a different breed from the present; and, in respect 
to the use of evacuants, is to be treated upon wholly different 
principles. Nevertheless, even here, it is not right to omit 
those remedies which are restorative to the brain and animal 
spirits. The cure of this has no place here. I am willing, 


INTERMITTENT FEVERS. 95 


however, to append a notice of it to the preceding description, 
simply for the sake of guarding against those errors, that the 
likeness between the two diseases may lead to. 

58. With young subjects, and with those of a sanguine 
habit, eight or nine ounces of blood must be taken twice or 
thrice from the arm, with three days between eacn bleeding. 
After this, blood must be drawn once from the jugulars. 
Beyond this, the use of the lancet will promote idiocy rather 
than recovery. The patient must then proceed to a course of the 
pil. ee duobus. Of this he must take half a drachm or two 
scruples, according to its effects, on a stated. day, once a 
week. ‘Thus, if he begins with them on a Monday, he must 
repeat them that day week exactly; he must not take them 
oftener ; and he must go on week after week for a long time 
until he has perfectly recovered. By this method, the humours, 
that in this disease would invade the citadel of the brain, are 
gradually drawn off towards the lower parts, a fresh bias being 
given to them. 

59. On the days when the patient does not purge, let him 
take either the following electuary or some other medicine of 
similar power; and let him persist in dog so during the 
whole course of the complaint : 


[x Conserve of monk's rhubarb, 

Conserve of rosemary, 

Venice treacle, aa £j ; 

Conserve of orange-peel, 

Candied angelica, 

Candied nutmeg, aa Zss ; 

Syrup of cloves, q. s. 

Make into an electuary ; of which a portion, the size of nutmeg, 

must be taken twice a day. Drink upon it a small draught 
of canary wine, with cowslip flowers infused cold. 


60. The continued fever and the intermittents which I have 
just described were nearly the only prominent epidemics 
under the constitution of 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664. At what 
earlier period they first attained their predominance J am 
unable to say. I only know that from 1664 to 1667 they 
very rarely appeared in London. 

61. I meant to have written upon the smallpox of these 


96 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


years, respect being had to the character that it took from 
their peculiar constitution, inasmuch as (according to a remark 
made above) this disease undoubtedly varies with the variations 
of the atmospheric constitutions. I omit it, however, for the 
following reason : at the time in question, I had not sufficiently 
attended to it. I may say, however, that it had this pecu- 
harity—during the whole four years, although it set in with 
exceeding violence at the beginnimg of May, it declined 
as the autumnal diseases (continued and intermittent fevers) 
supervened. The tops of the pustules were pitted with de- 
pressions about the size of a small pin’s head. In the discrete 
forms of the disease, the patient was in greatest danger on the 
eighth day. At this period such sweat or moisture as had 
hitherto appeared on the surface was checked suddenly. 
The skin became dry. No cordials would recall the perspira- 
tion. The sufferer was seized with delirium and great 
anxiety. There was much pain and distress. His urine was 
voided frequently, but in small quantities. Within a few 
hours he died. Quantdé de spe decidit ! 


SECTION II. 


CHAPTER I. 


THE EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION OF THE YEARS 1665 AND 1666. 
IN LONDON. 


l. ArrER an extremely cold winter, and after a dry frost 
that lasted without intermission until spring, and which then 
(i. e. at the end of March) unexpectedly broke up, in the early 
part of the year 1665, peripneumonies, pleurisies, quinsies, and 
all such inflammatory diseases, suddenly caused a great mor- 
tality. At the same time an epidemic (continued fever) ap- 
peared, which was wholly different in character from the 
continued fevers that prevailed during the preceding constitu- 
tion. Of these, scarcely any were in the habit of setting in 
at such a time of the year. j 

The pain of the head was more intense than in the previous 
epidemic: the vomiting was even severer. The diarrhoea, that 
in the former cases, as stated above, could be guarded against 
by emetics, was now aggravated by them; yet the vomiting 
continued. As in the preceding fevers, the external parts 
were dry. After bleeding (more than after aught else), the 
patient could sweat; and when he could do so, the symptoms 
abated. This would take place during all stages of the 
disease ; whereas, in the former ones, it was not safe to at- 
tempt it before the thirteenth or fourteenth day, and then it 
would not easily succeed. The colour of the blood was often 
that of pleurisy and rheumatism, but less coated with a white 
jelly. 

2. At first these were the diagnostic phenomena of the 
disease; but as the year advanced, the plague itself broke 
out, with its full train of pathognomonic symptoms, e. g. car- 
buncles, buboes, &c. The plague increased day by day, and 
about the time of the autumnal equinox reached its height. 

d 


98 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


At this period it destroyed eight thousand men (more or less) 
in the space of a single week, although two thirds of the 
citizens had retired into the country for fear of contagion. 
From this time forward, it began to sound a retreat, and when 
the cold of winter came, it all but disappeared. Only here and 
there it struck isolated patients. This, however, it did 
throughout the winter and during the early part of the follow- 
ing spring. When this had set in it was wholly gone. ‘The 
fever, however, remained; and lasted till the end of the next 
year, and even till the spring of 1667. It was, however, less 
epidemic. Upon this I subjoin my remarks. 


CHAPTER II. 


THE PESTILENTIAL FEVER, AND THE PLAGUE OF THE YEARS 
1665 AND 1666. 


1. In a previous passage I have incidentally remarked that 
several sorts of fever are arranged under the class of malig- 
nant, the appalling severity of their symptoms being the 
ground for this classification. Frequently, however, it is less 
from the character of the morbific virus than from the effects 
of unskilful treatment that such severity has occurred. We 
often attend too httle to the intentions of Nature in the cure 
of disease, and set up on insufficient grounds some different 
method of cure. From this arises a perturbation of the whole 
bodily economy, and, this being upset, a melancholy state of 
things, worse than that of the original disease, is induced. 
More than this, the disease itself, changing its character, is ac- 
companied with a multitude of anomalous accidents. It is 
like a monarch with a body-guard of foreigners. Fever, how- 
ever, of the true malignant character, is anything but an 
every-day disease; and from those other forms of fever which 
are called malignant only on the strength of the severity of 
their symptoms, it differs both in kind and character. Its true 
affinities are with plague, nor more nor less; and from the true 
plague it is distinguished only by its difference in degree. For 


f 
| 
3 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 99 


this reason I shall embrace, in one and the same chapter, the 
origin and treatment of these two diseases. 

That some obscure atmospheric change, either in crasis or 
texture, is the cause and occasion of different maladies at 
different periods, can be a matter of doubt to no one who has 
observed that one and the same disease shall at one period 
sweep away an infinitude of human life, and establish itself as 
an epidemic, whilst at another, it shall cease after a short course, 
as if contented with the sacrifice of but a few lives. | Concern- 
ing the smallpox, and concerning the plague, the special sub- 
ject of the present chapter, this doctrine may be looked upon 
as established. 

9. On the other hand, the kind and character of the atmo- 
spheric constitution in which these morbific influences are de- 
veloped, are points upon which we must be content to plead 
ignorance. They are matters, hike many others, upon which 
vain and arrogant philosophy speculates to no purpose. Be it 
what it may, for one reason at least, we may with the fullest 
propriety thank the mercy and goodness of the supreme God. 
He hath willed that the constitutio Xouuoenc of the atmosphere 
(or that state which introduces the most terrible and the most 
destructive of all the scourges of humanity, viz. the plague) 
shall occur at distant intervals, and less frequently than those 
which usher in the milder and less fatal diseases. Upon these 
grounds the plague visits Britain no oftener than once in thirty 
or forty years. As often, however, as it has done so, its 
attack has been one of more than average severity, and with 
its full complement of terrors. Such deaths from plague as 
sporadically occur during the few years following those of the 
great plague, and which gradually decrease and finally vanish 
altogether, are to be attributed to a partial persistence of the 
pestiferous disposition of the atmosphere, which has not yet 
undergone its full change from foul to healthy. Deaths in years 
like these are only the gleanings of the harvest that has gone 
before; and it is from traces of former infection that the fevers 
of the first year or two after great plagues take a pestilential 
character: of true plague, indeed, they want some of the 
characteristics. Notwithstanding this, they resemble it ex- 
ceedingly in character and disposition, and, as shown below, 
demand a similar line of treatment. 


190 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


4. Over and above, however, this constitution of the atmo- 
sphere and these general influences, there must be an additional 
determination in the form of a susception of the miasma. 
This means the admission of the morbid principle from some 
pestiferous body, either immediately and by close contact, or 
mediately from the transmission of a fomes. When these con- 
ditions coincide with the disposition of the atmosphere which 
we described, a small spark gives origin to a fearful conflagra- 
tion. Death presses upon death ; and, partly from the exhala- 
tions of those who have sickened, and partly from the corpses 
of those who have died, disease and contagion are propagated 
through the whole atmosphere of the affected area. And now 
both the existence of fomites and the presence of the stricken 
have ceased to be the conditions of its propagation. The 
simple atmosphere drawn in as we breathe is, in itself and of 
itself, sufficient to destroy; and it destroys even those who 
have been removed with all care from the infected, provided 
only, that their bodies be impregnated with the humours 
adapted to the receipt of the influence. 

5. Although this disease, when it exists only sporadically, at- 
tacks the few that it lays hold of without respect to the time or 
seasons of the year (the contagion being handed on as it were 
from patient to patient), this is not the case where it is epi- 
demic and constitutional in the atmosphere. Then it begins 
when spring passes into summer; a period of the year pre- 
eminently favorable and accommodated to the production of 
those ailments whose essence more especially consists in the 
inflammation and proywotc of the humours. This will be 
seen in § 16. Like everything else, too, in Nature, it has 
its proper periods of increase and decline ; it takes birth at the 
period given above, and it rises towards maturity as the year 
advances: with the decline of the year it declines also. Finally, 
the frosts of winter transform the atmosphere into a state un- 
propitious to its existence. 

6. Now, if the changes and the seasons of the year had 
nothing to do with the character of the disease in question,— 
if the pestilential virus, unmodified by atmospheric variations, 
were transmitted from man to man by a continuous series of 
propagations, it would of necessity follow that from the very 
moment that the plague had found its way into some popu- 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 101 


lous city, deaths would succeed deaths in one continuous and 
indefinite series, until at last no one would be left upon whom 
the murderous masma might fasten itself. But it has been 
observed that the contrary to this has often taken place. The 
number of dead that in the single month of September amounted 
to some thousands, by the end of November diminished, and 
was reduced to almost nothing. 

I am far from denying that a statement made by several 
authors, as to the plague having originated during periods of 
the year other than that mentioned above, may be possible. 
The fact, however, is a rare one, and when it takes place, the 
ravages of the disease are less. 

7. On the other hand, I have grave suspicions that the 
mere atmospheric constitution, however much Aomwdne, is by 
no means sufficient, in and of itself, to originate plague. 
Hither the disease itself must continue to survive in some 
secret quarter, or else, either from some omes, or from the 
introduction from pestilential localities of an infected person, 
it must have become extended. And even in these cases it 
cannot become epidemic, except with the conditions of a 
favorable atmospheric diathesis. Except upon this principle, 
I cannot comprehend how, of two towns near each other, and 
under the same conditions of climate, the one shall be grievously 
afflicted with the plague, the other be wholly free, and that 
by merely cutting off all communication between itself and 
the place infected. Yet this was done not many years ago, 
through the care and foresight of the Grand Duke Ferdinand II, 
who effectually stopped on the borders of Tuscany a plague 
that devastated nearly the whole of the remaining parts of 
Italy. 

8. The first attack 1s almost invariably ushered in by chills 
and rigors (such being also the accession of intermittent fevers) 
which are followed by violent vomiting, by pain in the region 
of the stomach, like that of the pressure of a screw, burning 
fever, and its usual crowd of concurrent symptoms. These 
affect the patient without intermission, until either death itself, 
or else the favorable breaking out of buboes or of parotid 
abscesses. Hereby the morbific matter becomes eliminated, and 
relieves them from the appalling erisis. Occasionally it happens 


102 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


that the disease lights upon the patient without any premoni- 
tory signs of fever whatsoever, so that, even whilst engaged in 
his common business, a man may be suddenly struck down, — 
an eruption of crimson blotches being the only forerunner of 
his quickly-coming death. It is important, however, to remark 
that death thus sudden rarely happens, except during the 
beginning of epidemics of more than ordinary severity. In 
years where the disease has been sporadic, and during its 
remissions and decline, they have never been observed. It 
happens also that, at times, tumours may break out, without 
either fever or any other important symptom as their precursors ; 
although I suspect, for my own part, that chills or shivers, in 
some slight degree or other, and more or less perceptible, 
invariably precede. Those to whom this happens may walk 
about in public as usual, and attend to the common duties of 
life like healthy men, taking no thought of regimen. 

9. Now the essence of this disease I will not take upon 
myself to define with precision; and a wise man may perhaps 
think that he who questions me as to what constitutes this or 
that species of sickness, puts as unfair a question to me as 
I should put to him, if (I speak in the way of illustration) I 
wanted to know the essence of the horse as an animal, or of 
the betony as a plant. It is in accordance with immutable 
laws, and by a scheme known to herself only, that Parent 
Nature accomplishes the generations of all things; and many 
things as she may bring forward from the abyss of cause into 
the open daylight of effect, it 1s in the deepest darkness that 
she veils their essences, their constituent differentia, their 
quiddities ; and hence it is, that each species of malady, even 
as each species of animal, and each species of vegetable, hath 
taken as its portion its own proper affections, —proper, perma- 
nent, unequivocal, derivative from its essence. Meanwhile, 
the question as to how we can cure diseases, whilst we know 
nothing of their causes, gives us no trouble. It is not by the 
knowledge of causes, but by that of methods at once suitable 
and approved by experience, that the cure of the majority of 
diseases is accomplished. 

10. To return, however, to our business, all that we can 
do, in our present ignorance, is to deduce the origin of all 


OT €e€-—9Ó 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 105 


similar diseases from some fault of either the primary or the 
secondary qualities. Hence, I am almost of the opinion that 
plague is a peculiar fever su? generis, originating in the inflam- 
mation of the more spirituous particles of the blood ; inasmuch 
as it is these that, from the subtilty of their nature and their 
tenuity, seem most appropriate and adequate. Now, if by 
means of this exceeding subtilty (a process which we may 
observe during the commencement and development of an 
epidemic constitution) it suddenly and unexpectedly dissipates 
all the natural heat, and thereby kills the patient, the bodies 
of those whom its violence has so suddenly destroyed are 
covered all over and marked with crimson blotches; the fibres 
of the blood being torn asunder by the stress of the intestine 
struggle, and the structure of its tissues being wholly dissolved. 

11. These sad events are brought about without any febrile 
ebullition of the blood, or any premonitory feelings of disorder. 
The subtilty of the morbific matter is that of flame. Where 
it is less subtle this rarely occurs. It then attacks life with 
blunter weapons. A rough example may illustrate the difference. 
Place a needle, or some sharp-pointed instrument, under a 
cushion, press it; the cushion is not raised, but pierced. The 
converse would take place with a blunt instrument. 

12. Deaths, however, thus sudden rarely occur; when they 
do, it is, as stated above, at the beginning or during the 
development of a plague. Generally, as with other fevers, 
rigors and shivers usher it in. Heat succeeds; this increases 
until the inflamed particles of blood, under the provident 
direction of Nature, are remanded to their emunctories; there, 
like common abscesses, they become pus. A lower degree of 
inflammation produces the so-called pestilential fever. This 
often appears at the end of a pestilential constitution, and 
occasionally, for a year or two afterwards, until that particular 
species of fever has wholly disappeared. 

13. In my own mind, I can find in the disease which is 
called in Latin the ignis sacer a plain picture of the plague. 
The best physicians describe it as “a continued fever, originat- 
ing from a corruption and inflammation of the thinner parts of 
the blood. "To rid herself of this, Nature drives it to some 
external part of the body. Here arises a tumour, or rather 
(since a notable swelling is often not apparent, a red, broad, 


104 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


irregular blotch, which they call the rose.”' Now this fever, 


after harassing the patient two days, goes off. Forthwith 
there sets in a glandular pain, either under the armpits, or on 
the groin, just as in the plague. 

14. “Generally, this complaint sets in like plague, that is, 
with shivers and a subsequent febrile heat, so that those who are 
attacked for the first time, fancy that it is the plague that has 
taken them, until either in the legs, or somewhere else, the 
true character of the disease show itself."? To these extracts 
it may be added, that many authors attribute to the disease in 
question a malignant character, and look for its cure in the 
exhibition of sudorifics and alexipharmics. A flame like this 
goes out of its own accord. It determines the ebullition, by 
the effects of which those particles of blood that we may call 
singed, and, as it were, scorched, are quickly eliminated, and 
having effected thus much, it does no further mischief. 

15. The flame, however, that we now treat of, is not merely 
sacred, it is divine ; inasmuch as its strength lies in an excessive 
tenuity of substance, and as its nature is adapted to ransack 
the most secret recesses of our frame, even as the lightning 
does. The spirits of the blood are instantaneously dispelled ; 
its tissue is dissolved; Nature is overwhelmed by a headlong 
attack ; the febrile ebullition, which is her usual instrument 
for the elimination of whatever is deleterious to the blood, she 
is unable to excite. 

16. Now, if any one quarrels with me on the doctrine of 
this disease having its origin in inflammation, he should 
consider that the presence of fever, as well as many other points, 
support my view. The colour of the blood which is drawn 
has the character of that of pleurisy and rheumatism. The 
burning hue of the anthraces is that of the actual cautery. 
The buboes themselves become inflamed as regularly and in the 


' “Est enim morbus hic febris continua a sanguinis parte tenuiore corrupta ac 
inflammatá originem ducens; qua ut Natura se liberet, eam in corporis aliquam 
partem externam expellit, in qua tumor, aut potius (cum tumor adeo notabilis sepe 
non appareat) macula rubra, lata, dispersa, quam rosam appellant, oritur." 

? “Et fere invadit hoc malum ut pestilentia, cum horrore et insequenti calore 
febrili; ita ut qui ipsum ante non sunt passi, existiment lue pestiferá se corripi; 
donec tandem in crure aut alio loco sese affectus prodat."— Sennert., De Febr., ij, 
16; De Febr. Sympt. Contin.—Sennerti Opera, tom. vi, pp. 407-8. [G.] 


-— M A P——X— RT 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 105 


same way as tumours of any other kind do, and, just like any 
other inflammations, terminate for the most part in abscesses. 

Besides this, the season of the year when epidemic plague, 
for the most part originates, adds strength to the argument 
that I have adopted. It is just that time, viz. the mid-line 
between spring and summer, when pleurisies, quinsies, and 
other ailments arising from inflammation of the blood, are 
wont to wax rife. These I never found commoner than 
during the few weeks that immediately preceded the late plague 
of London.  Itis also remarkable that this selfsame year, so 
deadly with the funerals of thousands, was in other respects 
most mild and healthy ; so that all who kept clear of the plague 
never were better than then; whilst those who had recovered from 
it, were, for the remainder of their lives, less liable than other 
people to cachexies and other affections, the usual sequele 
derived from the mischief of previous disease. To this it may 
be added that, let the size of the carbuncles and imposthumes 
have been what it might, the moment that the inflamed particles 
had been eliminated and discharged, they were cured offhand 
by surgical means, and those of a simple sort. 

17. Some one now may perhaps put the following question : 
if plague be inflammatory, how 1s it that medicines of a heat- 
ing character, as is the case with the majority of the alexi- 
pharmies, are used with such great advantage both 1n the thera- 
peutics and the prophylaxis of the complaint? ‘To this I reply, 
that it is only as an accident that they do good, i. e. by their 
good effects as diaphoretics ; whereby the particles of inflamed 
blood are dispersed and eliminated. If (as is often the case) 
the exhibition of these be ineffectual im promoting perspira- 
tion, their mischievousness is soon proclaimed. ‘The ardour of 
the blood is aggravated by the superadded heat. 

To speak one word upon the prophylaxis of plague. I am 
well aware that the use of hot antidotes is much vaunted. 
What good they can do still remains to be proved. Certain it 
is, that the free use of wine, and other strong preservatives, taken 
at stated hours, and in the way of regimen, has brought the 
disease upon many persons who, in all probability, would have 
remained safe and sound otherwise. 

18. In respect to the therapeutics of the fevers in question, 
I may possibly lay myself open to the charge of arrogance and 


106 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


temerity in venturing upon a dissertation upon this subject ; 
inasmuch as, during the inroads of the late plague, I was, during 
the greater part of the time, many miles distant from London, 
and, as such, unfurnished with a multiplicity of cases. Those 
physicians, however, of far greater skill than myself, who, 
throughout all the stages of that scourging calamity, with 
danger all around them, and with the thousand shapes of deaths 
before their eyes, had heart and soul to stand at their posts, 
have hitherto shown no intention of laying before the world 
those observations upon the nature of this disease which their 
greater practice may have supplied them with. Hence it is 
that I crave of good men a mild judgment upon my under- 
taking, having laid before the world my own notions con- 
cerning a very deadly disease, as asuperstructure to a limited 
number of my own individual observations. 

19. Our first attention must be paid to the indications of 
treatment. These follow one of two general lines. Either we 
must accurately follow the way taken by Nature in the annihi- 
lation of the disease, and be contented with lending subsidiary 
aids, or we must substitute for it a method of our own from 
our own resources, safer than that of Nature's, and different 
from it, putting no faith in the former mode of warfare against 
our intestine enemy. ‘This is the alternative; unless, indeed, 
it be objected that good can be done by means of pestifuges 
and antidotes, of which we may find our fill in the hands of 
the empirics. And even with these, it is a matter of great 
doubt whether the good they do be not rather referable to 
their known power of acting as strong sudorifics (so opening a 
valve for the matter of the disease), than to any occult power 
against the malign influences of the plague with which Nature 
can be supposed to have invested them. 

20. Concerning all other alexipharmics, as well as concern- 
ing these, we may fairly doubt whether they benefit the patient 
through any specific virtue rather than by the simple stimulus 
to evacuations.  Those—1 am speaking for the sake of illus- 
tration only—who argue that m the venereal disease either 
mercury or sarsaparilla may be brought forward as examples of 
alexipharmics against that particular poison, must refer me to 
cures which have been effected by the first without either sali- 
vation or secretion, or by the second without sweating ; and 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 107 


this I, for my part, believe to be no easy matter. To me it 
seems most likely that the proper remedy of plague, and the 
peculiar alexipharmic to its mischief, is still hidden in the 
bosom of Nature, and that it is only by methods more or less 
mechanical that the disease is to be removed. 

21. We come now to the fuller consideration of the first of 
our two alternatives, viz. our efforts to second Nature in the 
elimination of the morbific matter in her own way, and after 
her own fashion. The first point to notice is this—that in the 
true plague, as long as Nature neither swerves of her own 
accord nor is warped by influences from without, she does her 
work through the emunctories : in these an abscess breaks, and 
the matter finds an outlet. In fever, however, of the sort 
called pestilential, the same effect is brought about by means 
of a general diaphoresis over the whole surface of the body. 
From this difference we infer, that for the two lines of conduct 
indicated by Nature in the two diseases we must institute two 
principles of cure. For instance, he who, in a case of true 
plague, would attack the virus with sudorifics, takes a line in 
opposition to that of Nature; since she does her work with 
abscesses. On the other hand, to attempt the expulsion of 
the matter of pestilential fever, and to attempt it otherwise 
than by means of diaphoresis—this, again, is the setting up of 
processes antagonistic to her guidance and inclination. 

22. Whether or not, in true plague, there be any fit and 
certain sort of remedy whereby the natural ejection of the 
morbific matter, in other words, the formation of abscesses, 
may be promoted, is a moot point. Some consider that 
strengthening diet and the administration of cordials tend that 
way. This, however, I much doubt. The patient is already 
‘more hot than he ought to be, and these make him hotter 
still. That sweating is wholly useless, I am thoroughly con- 
vinced ; although I do not deny that after copious perspira- 
tions continued for three or four hours, and then checked, I 
have observed the appearance of tumours. ‘These, however, 
I by no means refer to the sweating. During its continuance I 
have never seen the signs of an eruption. It comes on at its 
termination, and that as an accident. The diaphoresis has 
partially lightened the burden that oppressed Nature, and 
the body has generally increased in heat, from the cordials that 


108 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


were given to promote it. I invoke the fatal catastrophes of 
those who have thus been treated, as evidence to the fallacious- 
ness and uncertainty of this method of eliminating the pec- 
cant matter, viz. by abscesses promoted by diaphoresis. I 
speak within compass. Not one in three has resisted both the 
malady and the medicine. On the contrary, many, with 
whom the tumours have broken out in a laudable manner, 
even whilst they have been engaged in their usual pursuits, 
have rapidly recovered their health; nothing perceptible in the 
way of a lesion having occurred to any organ whatsoever, 
natural, vital, or animal. "The only exceptions to this have 
been made by those few who, through their own evil genius, 
have fallen in with some quack, and, at his recommendation, 
although otherwise sound both in mind and body, have taken 
to their beds and sweated. From that very moment they have 
grown worse, and at last, their ailment having become despe- 
rate, have sealed by their deaths the evidence to the ill-omened 
mischief of the advice. 

23. That the prognosis, however, in this disease, even where 
tumours have appeared, 1s slippery and hazardous—periculose 
plenum opus alee—may be shown from the fact that buboes 
have at first swollen out in a laudable manner, have been 
accompanied with a remission of the symptoms, and have after- 
wards suddenly disappeared. In the place of these, purple 
blotches succeed. There are no surer signs of death than 
these. The cause of this retrocession may fairly be laid at 
the doors of the excessive diaphoresis, brought on with the view 
of promoting the eruption. It is this that acts as a derivative 
to those elements which should fill out and support the mass 
of tumour. Of these they distract a great portion towards 
other parts of the body, as well as dissipate it externally. 

24. Be this, however, as it may, it is an undoubted truth 
that whilst it has pleased the mercy of Almighty God to attach 
to other diseases some sure process for the elimination of the 
morbific matter, there are for this (the scourge for the enor- 
mity of our sins) none but uncertain and equivocal ones; and 
this, rather than its vaunted malignity, may be the true cause 
and reason for the desperate destructiveness of the disease. 
Even in gout, and the diseases that are but slightly suspected 
of malignity, the striking-in of the morbific matter is fatal. 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 109 


From all this it clearly follows, that the physician who, in 
the cure of other diseases is bound carefully and closely to 
follow the path and conduct of Nature, must here renounce her 
guidance. This is an axiom of which very few have hitherto 
seen the full truth; and hence the number of those whom the 
plague has conducted to the grave has been largely increased. 

25. We have, then, here a disease, in the extermination 
whereof it is unsafe to follow the path of Nature. The next 
question, therefore, that arises 1s the process by which we may 
satisfy what we call the second intention, and this is nothing 
less than a new and independent method, different from that 
of Nature. Of this there are two forms, bloodletting and 
diaphoresis. 

In respect to bloodletting (bleeding in plague), I am well 
aware that 1t 1s generally held in horror. I care, however, but 
little for the prejudices of the vulgar, and therefore will pause 
to weigh, with due and proper candour, the arguments on each 
side of the question. 

26. And, first, I appeal to all those physicians who remained 
in London during the ravages of the late plague, and ask if 
any one of them ever observed that large bleedings, often re- 
peated before the protuberance of any tumour, was ever fatal 
to patients with the plague? That the loss of even a little 
blood after the tumour has begun to appear should always 
be prejudicial, is no wonder at all; since a moderate bloodlet- 
ting just serves to take the administration out of the hands of 
Nature, who is doing her best towards the development of the 
tumour, without the substitution of any other form of evacua- 
tion sufficiently efficacious against the morbific matter; whilst 
bleeding, after the tumour has appeared, as it draws from the 
circumference to the centre, induces a motion quite contrary 
to that of Nature: she draws from the centre to the circum- 
ference. Nevertheless, nothing is more common than to find 
the mischiefs which have arisen from this perverse form of 
phlebotomy twisted by the opposite side into the shape of a 
strong argument against the use of bleeding in plague gene- 
rally. This you may see in Diemerbroek,’ and other writers 
of observations. For my own part, I am not prepared to 

! De Peste, iii, 3.—[G.] 


110 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


agree in their arguments, until I am informed as to their 
answer to the questions indicated above. 

27. In truth, many authors (and those good ones) have all 
along perceived that bleeding is proper in the plague. The chief 
of these are, Ludovicus Mercatus, Johannes Costzeus, Nicolaus 
Massa, Ludovicus Septalius, Trincavellius, Forestus, Mercurialis, 
Altomarus, Paschalius, Andernachus, Pereda, Zacutus Lusitanus, 
Fonseca, and others. The only writer, however, who, to my 
knowledge, has made bleeding, to the extent that I require, his 
sheet-anchor in this disease, is Leonardus Botallus, one of the 
most famous physicians of the last century. Lest I be thought 
singular in my practice, I will quote his very words: 

28. “Ego ut uno verbo dicam, nullam pestem esse puto, 
cui hee non possit esse salutaris supra omnia remedia, modo 
opportune et quantitate convenienti usurpata sit, ratus eam 
aliquando inutilem inventam fuisse propterea quod aut tardius 
aut parcius quam opus esset, aut quod utroque modo circa eam 
usurpandam peccatum sit." And shortly after he adds: ** At 
in tanta timiditate et parcá detractione qui fieri potest ut 
quis recte possit judicare quantum ea in pestilenti morbo pro- 
desse valeat aut obesse? Non enim morbus, pro cujus cura- 
tione requirebatur detractio librarum quatuor sanguinis, in quo 
una tantum detrahitur, si hominem interficiat, ideo interficit, 
quia sanguis est missus, sed quia non justo modo missus est, 
nec forte etiam opportune. Verum nebulones nequissimi et 
ignavissimi in id semper culpam convertere satagunt, non 
quod nocuit, sed quod per nefas a cunctis vituperari exoptant ; 
aut si id nequitià non faciant, ignorantiá tamen pravee disposi- 
tionis efficiunt, utráque certe perniciosa, sed illá magis." 

With the view of proving all this from experience, he sub- 
joins, a little further on: “ His observatis nemo rationis capax 
jure in his morbis vituperare missionem sanguinis potest, sed 
mirifice et tanquam divinum auxilium commendare extollere et 
confidenter usurpare, quod ipse profecto ab annis quindecim 
facio. Ideo in morbis pestilentibus in obsidione Rupellarum, et 
montibus Hannonie abhine quadriennium, et Parisiis toto 
hoe biennio, et Cameraci anno proximo acto, in omnibus meis 
segrotis, (qui innumeri fuerunt) nullam presentius ae salutarius 
reperi ipsá larga et tempestivà sanguinis missione. He pro- 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 111 


ceeds, from these statements, to instance some of his cures. 
These, however, I omit, for the sake of brevity. I will relate, 
however, in their place, a fact that occurred in our own island, 
a few years ago; it is one of great rarity and not foreign to 
my subject. 

29. Amongst the other calamities of the civil war which 
afflicted our unhappy country, the plague made, in many places, 
its ravages. Amongst others, it attacked Dunster, in the 
county of Somerset. It had been introduced from without ; 
some of the common soldiers it killed at once; plague-spots 
having suddenly broken out. Others also it attacked. There 
was a certain surgeon who had returned from a long travel in 
foreign parts. He was then serving as a common soldier; he 
earnestly entreated the governor to let him do his best for the 
relief of his fellow-soldiers who were seized with this terrible 
disease; the governor gave him leave. He bled the patients 
straight off, the moment the disease seized them, and before any 
tumour appeared. He took an enormous quantity of blood, 
keeping on until they were unable to stand on their feet ; they 
stood whilst they were bled: it was done in the open air. 
There were no vessels to catch or measure the blood; the soil 
served for basin. He sent them, after this, to lie down in 
their tents; he used no remedy beyond bleeding. He treated 
a great number in this manner ; strange to say, not one died. 
I had this from a man of equal probity and truth; Mr. Francis 
Wyndham, captain in the army, and governor of the castle, 
being my informant. He is still alive, and I am sure that 
he will courteously confirm my statement to any one who 
doubts it. My own observations, so far as they are special 
and worthy of mention, and such as I had the good fortune 
to make, I will lay before the reader below. I shall there 
exhibit the little which I learned from experience and observa- 
tion, during the ravages of the late London plague. 

380. Now although I have not only weighed and considered 
the advantages of this practice in my own mind, but have 
also ascertained it by real cases and experience, I still consider 
that the dissipation of the ferment of the plague, by the way 
of diaphoresis, is, in many respects, preferable to its evacuation 
by the means of bloodletting. It is neither so debilitating 
to the patient, nor yet so hazardous to the physician. It has, 


112 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


however, its difficulties ; in the first place, it is often difficult 
to promote perspiration, especially when the patient is young, 
or of a hot temperament. With such subjects, the more you 
try to sweat them by drinks, and the more you load them with 
bedclothes, the more you expose them to the risk of a brain 
fever ; or, worse still, after feeding yourself with a delusive hope 
that you are bringing out a perspiration, you find that you 
bring out plague-spots instead. 

31. For since it is in the more spirituous part of the mass 
of the blood that the germ of the disease lies, so that the 
agitation of the more viscid particles is less active in this 
than in other inflammations, it follows that those same subtler 
portions of blood, when over-excited by any new access of 
heat, must rush with violence upon the overstrained fibres of 
the blood, and altogether break down their tissue. It is 
from the dissolution of the fibres of the blood that I derive 
the origin of the plague-spots ; just as from a-sharp blow on 
any part of the muscular substance there is first a deep red 
efflorescence on the skin, and then, soon afterwards, a change 
to black or livid. 

32. In cases were there is sufficient disposition to dia- 
phoresis, it may be checked too soon, i. e. before the whole of 
the morbific matter is thoroughly dispersed. When such 
happens, the character of the buboes, which towards the end 
of the sweat had begun to come out well, changes for the 
worse. That portion of the matter which ought to raise them 
to their proper size is withdrawn, whereby they either strike 
in at once, or else fail in being developed into legitimate 
abscesses. This admits the deadly enemy within the walls. A 
commotion of the blood is excited; the commotion acts in 
the way described above, and throws off upon the surface the 
tokens of an imminent death, in the shape of ecthymata. The 
same striking-in of the eruption happens in smallpox, whenever 
the patient has been over-sweated during the first days of the 
disease. 

33. In order, however, that it may more clearly appear how 
both these and other difficulties may be obviated, I will relate 
with great faithfulness my treatment and observations, begin- 
ning with the beginning of the late plague. 

94. At the beginning of May, in the year 1665, I visited a 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 113 


noble lady, about 21 years of age, and of a sanguine tem- 
perament. Over and above the burning fever which had at- 
tacked her but a little time before, obstinate vomitings and 
other febrile symptoms aggravated her distress. Having 
begun my treatment with venesection, I ordered an emetic on 
the following day. It was given to guard against diarrhoea ; 
for I have stated in the beginning of this Treatise, that such 
supervenes during the decline of the fever, whenever the exhi- 
bition of an emetic, which was called for by the disposition to 
vomit, has been omitted. What I prescribed cleared the stomach 
well and sufficiently. The next morning, when I visited my 
patient, I found that she was purged. This gave me great un- 
easiness, as the experience of several vears had taught me that 
it was unusual. I decided at once that the fever was not of 
the common sort, and the event verified my statement. I also 
saw that it required a fresh method of treatment, and one dif- 
ferent from that which I have exhibited above, and which I 
had up to that time used so constantly, so continuously, and 
so successfully. On these grounds, I called in a physician of 
older standing than myself, and as we both agreed that her age, 
temperament, and the inordinate ebullition of her blood called 
for bloodletting, we bled her a second time. Besides this, 
moderately cool cordials were ordered; and, lastly, clysters 
were thrown up every other day. Towards the end of her 
illness, certain anomalous and unusual symptoms set in, 
such as are vulgarly accounted signs of malignity, and here- 
upon we ordered some of the stronger alexipharmies. Nothing, 
however, did good, and the patient died about the fourteenth 
day. 

85. The unusual character of this fever perplexed my mind 
for some days: at last I recollected that, in the previous case, 
there had been, even after the second bleeding, exceeding heat ; 
that the cheeks were red; that drops of blood issued from the 
nostrils a httle before death; that the blood, when in the 
basins, and when cooled, was lke the blood of pleurisy; that 
there was a slight cough ; that there were obscure pains in the 
vital parts; that the time of the year was intermediate to the 
end of spring and the beginning of summer ; that this period 
was not the season for continued fevers; and, finally, that it 
was the season for pleurisies : since continued fevers, about this 

8 


114 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


time of year, disperse of their own accord, and pass into either 
intermittents or pleurisies. | 

Upon the strength of all the circumstances I inferred that, 
although the fever in question was destitute of the pathognomonic 
signs of pleurisy, or even of pneumonia, it had, nevertheless, 
the signs of an inflammation lurking about the vital parts ; and 
that though there was no pain in the side, nor yet any notable 
difficulty on breathing: in short, I came to the conclusion 
that I might treat the case by precisely the same method that 
I had often applied, with singular success, in pleurisy. This I 
did, and succeeded. Soon afterwards, I was called in to a 
man similarly suffering. I reiterated the bloodlettings, and 
by the treatment above mentioned (i. e. the treatment of 
pleurisy) completed the cure of my patient. Towards the end 
of the month in question, and during the first part of June, 
many who sought my advice were cured from the fever, which 
was now raging far and wide, by this treatment; from which 
time began the ravages of the dreadful plague of London, and so 
great were they, that within the space of seven days seven thou- 
sand persons died in London alone. 

36. I will not definitely pronounce whether the name of 
plague be properly given to the fever which I have spoken of. 
This, however, I am certain of, viz. that every patient in my 
neighbourhood who, at the time in question, and for some time 
after, was attacked by the true and undoubted plague, presented 
the same concurrence of symptoms, both during the accession 
of the disease and its decline. But, 

‘Tua res agitur paries quum proximus ardet." 

The danger came to my own doors, and I was persuaded by my 
friends to add myself to the increasing list of fugitives. I and 
my family retired a few miles from London. I returned, how- 
ever, earlier than my neighbours; and, as the calamitous violence 
of the disease still. continued, I was necessarily called in, for 
the want of a better practitioner, to the relief of the sufferers. 
Within a short period I had seen several cases; and it was with 
no small surprise that I discovered that this fever simulated 
the character and genius of the fever that I had, before my de- 
parture, so successfully treated. This enabled me to prefer my 
own experience to any theoretical precepts ; and relying upon it, 
I had no hesitation in bleeding as before. 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 115 


97. In this practice of taking blood freely (recommending 
at the same time the use of ptisans and a cooling diet), I con- 
tinued, and I thereby wonderfully benefited many patients. At 
last, however, I found a great drawback to my endeavours in 
the prejudices of the bystanders. Taken up with their vain 
conceits, they would not allow me to draw the proper quantity 
of blood; hence I missed my usual success in several cases. All 
this was bad for the patient. The whole gist of the treatment 
lay in taking either no blood at all, or else a sufficient quantity. 

Owing to these objections, I considered that some mode of 
obviating the disease, independent of venesection, would be 
highly advantageous. 

38. I will here give an instance of the mischief that I inno- 
cently committed, not from having taken blood, but from being 
hindered of taking it as I wished. I was called in to a young | 
man of sanguine temperament and athletic habit, who had 
been seized with a violent fever. There was vertigo and pain 
in the head, violent vomiting, and similar symptoms. These 
had lasted two days. He told me, however, upon inquiry, that 
no signs of a tumour had appeared. I immediately ordered 
free bleeding, with a ptisan and cooling broths and juleps. The 
blood, upon cooling, had the pus-like surface of pleurisy. In 
the afternoon he was again bled to the same amount; and 
again the next morning. Towards the close of the day I 
visited him, and found him much better; his friends being 
strongly opposed to any further loss of blood, in favour of 
which I as strongly contended. I explained to them that one 
more bleeding alone was wanted, and that that would place 
him out of danger; that if this were opposed it would have 
been better for him not to have been bled at all, but for the 
cure to have been affected by diaphoresis. In one word, I 
said that he must either be bled or die. The event con- 
firmed my prophecy. ‘The altercation upon the point per- 
mitted the opportunity to pass by, and crimson blotches ap- 
peared the next day. The remains of the peccant matter which 
ought to have been wholly eradicated, were retained in the 
blood, to the perversion of its whole mass, whilst their exces- 
sive subtilty broke up the tissues. The previous phlebotomy 
had precluded the evacuation in the way of abscesses. The 
patient died a few hours after. 


116 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


99. Opposition of this sort met me so often, that I spent 
much thought upon the discovery of a method equally effica- 
cious and less liable to objection. After a long consideration, 
I fell upon the following ; and I have invariably found it bene- 
ficial, and in all respects unexceptionable. 

40. In the first place, provided that the tumour had not 
protruded, I drew blood according to the strength and tem- 
perament of the patient. After this the diaphoresis came 
quickly and easily. Otherwise it was exceedingly difficult to 
elicit, and, 1n some constitutions, engendered the risk of an in- 
creased inflammation, and of crimson ecthymata. The benefits 
of so immediate a diaphoresis well made up for the loss of blood, 
which, under other conditions, would, however trifling, have 
caused much mischief. For the sake of having everything at 
hand for the perspiration, I ordered the bleeding to be per- 
formed upon the patient in bed, and the instant it was over, 
I covered him up with the bedclothes, and laid a woollen cloth 
upon his forehead. A cover of this kind promotes sweat far 
more than one would think. After this, and if there was no 
vomiting, I prescribed sudorifies of the follwing character: 


ER Venice treacle, 58s; 
Egg electuary, 9j ; 
Compound powder of crabs' eyes, gr. xij; 
Cochineal, gr. viij ; 
Saffron, gr. iv; 
Kermes juice, q. s. 

Make into a bolus; to be taken every six hours. Drink after it six 
spoonfuls of the following julep: 


EK Aqua Cardui Benedicti, 


—— ore 


Treacle-water, Zi; 
Syrup of cloves, 3j. 
Mix, and make into a julep. 


41. It often, however, happens, both in plague and pestilen- 
tial fever, that vomiting occurs. In this case, I defer the 
administration of a sudorific until the mere weight of the bed- 
clothes has brought on the commencement of a sweat. To 
promote this, I draw a part of the sheet over the patient’s face 
and collect the steam of his breath. It is well worthy of ob- 
servation, that as soon as the rays of the morbific matter extend 
themselves towards the surface of the body, the flux and vomit- 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 117 


ing cease of themselves. These had originated from the inward 
reflection of the same morbific radii, and from their lodgement 
in the inner parts. However great may have been the pre- 
vious irritability of the stomach, medicines that are taken when 
a perspiration has once begun, are kept down without difficulty, 
and these procure as much more diaphoresis as can be wished 
for. 

42. I remember being called in by an apothecary to attend 
his brother who was dangerously ill of the pestilential fever, 
and that as soon as I spoke about sudorifics, I was told that 
several of the strongest had already been tried to no purpose; 
that they had all been cast up again. To this I replied, 
“ Bring me the strongest and the most nauseous of all that 
you have given, and see if I will not prevent its being re- 
jected.” I kept my word. The moment the patient had begun 
to perspire slightly under the mere weight of the bedclothes, 
he swallowed and kept down a bolus of Venice treacle. This 
procured him a free sweat, and he recovered. 

43. To return, however, to my subject. I order the dia- 
phoresis, when it has once begun, to be kept up by draughts 
of sage posset, or warm beer with mace, taken occasionally, and 
continued during the whole twenty-four hours; all abstersion 
being religiously interdicted. So far do I carry this last point, 
that I forbid the patient to change his shirt, foul or wet as it 
may be, within twenty-four hours after the conclusion of the 
sweats. Upon great caution in this matter I especially insist, 
since, if the sweating be confined to a narrower limit of time, 
the severity of the symptoms is instantly renewed, and the 
safety of the patient, which a longer sweat would have put be- 
yond a doubt, is now exceedingly problematic. 

44. And here I cannot but express my surprise at Diemerbroek! 
and others, who allow themselves to be swayed by such slight 
considerations as the strength of the patient, and, on such 
grounds, interrupt the diaphoresis. In the first place, it is 
well known, even to the novices in the treatment of plague, 
that the patient has never before been so strong as he is during 
the height of his perspiration. I have no hesitation in openly 
stating, and in. defending the results of my practice and expe- 


' De Peste, iii, 6.—[G. ] 


118 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


rience upon this point. A great many who, at my recommenda- 
tion, have been plunged into a sweat of twenty-four hours, have 
been so far from complaining of being weakened thereby, that 
they have asserted that they felt accessions of fresh strength 
just in proportion as they sweated out their superfluous 
humours. Several times, however, I have noticed, and that 
not without surprise, that a few hours after the diaphoresis had 
been brought about by medicine, a second has broken out, 
more natural, more genuine, and more abundant than its pre- 
decessor; one, also, that relieved the patient much more, and 
seemed to be critical and eradicative to the disease. I may 
add also, that during the height of the sweat, I see no reason 
against supporting the patient with restoratives, in the way of 
broths and soups, so that the objection concerning the insuffi- 
ciency of his strength to bear a protracted diaphoresis falls to 
the ground. Hence, if there appear any flagging towards the 
conclusion of the sweat, I allow a little chicken-broth, the yelk 
of an egg, or something of the kind. These, in conjunction 
with the cordials and the proper sudorifies, abundantly ensure 
against prostration. In a matter, however, so plain as the pre- 
sent, there is no need of further arguments. The fact that 
plainly proclaims the advantage of the practice 1s the following: 
as long as the patient sweats profusely, he seems to do well, 
and even the lookers-on consider him wholly out of danger. 
On the contrary, from the moment that the body begins to get 
dry, and as soon as the sweat is interrupted, all things go from 
bad to worse, and death comes upon him with a back-stroke. 

45. I give orders against exposure to cold during the whole 
twenty-four hours that follow the conclusion of the sweat. The 
shirt must dry on the body. All drinks must be taken warm. 
The use of the sage posset must be continued. The next morn- 
ing I order the common purge of senna leaves, infusion of 
tamarinds, rhubarb, manna, and the solutive syrup of roses. By 
this treatment I cured many patients of pestilential fever in the 
year after the plague. Indeed, from the time that I adopted it, 
Inever lost one. 

46. When the tumour has shown itself, I am afraid of bleed- 
ing, even when the patient is ever so indisposed to sweat ; I am 
afraid lest the morbific matter rush in a heap towards the 
emptied vessels, when the sudden death of the patient would 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 119 


anticipate the wished-for diaphoresis. Nevertheless, it may 
possibly be safe to adopt bleeding when we can ensure a dia- 
phoresis immediately and directly after it, and when, by con- 
tinuing the same through the period above mentioned, we may 
gradually dissipate and disperse the whole mass of the tumour. 
All this may, perhaps, be safer than to continue waiting for the 
regular maturation of the abscess, which, in so over-acute a 
disease, is both uncertain and fallacious. 

47. Finally, and to conclude, in all points of theory where 
the reader finds me in error, I ask his pardon. In all points 
of practice I state that I speak nothing but the truth ; and that 
I have propounded nothing except what I have properly tried. 
Verily, I am sure that, when the last day of my life shall have 
come upon me, I shall carry in my heart a willing witness that 
shall speak, not only to the care and honesty with which I 
have laboured for the health of both rich and poor who have 
intrusted themselves to my care, but also to those efforts 
which I have made, to the best of my power, and with all the 
energies of mind, to give certainty to the treatment of diseases 
even after my death, if such may be. In the first place, no 
patient has been treated by me otherwise than I would myself 
wish to be treated under the same complaint. In the second, 
I have ever held that any accession whatever to the art of 
healing, even if it went no further than the cutting of corns, 
or the curing of toothaches, was of far higher value than all the 
knowledge of fine points, and all the pomp of subtle specula- 
tions; matters which are as useful to physicians in driving 
away diseases, as music is to masons in laying bricks. 

48. One concluding observation I have yet to add, and I 
do so lest any one twist my meaning by an improper interpre- 
tation; or at any rate lest he misunderstand it. In the fore- 
going discourse, I often use the word Nature, and attribute to 
it various effects ; just as if I pictured to myself under this 
name something universally diffused throughout the whole 
framework of the world ; something that ruled, as it were, and 
regulated all substances reasonably and with intelligence ; some- 
thing, in short, like the animus mundi in the ideas of some 
philosophers. Now, for my own part, I dislike innovation, both 
in fact and language ; so that throughout my pages I have used 
the term Nature as an old word with a limited meaning: a 


120 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


meaning which I believe all understand, and some adopt. 
Hence as often as I apply it, I mean the whole complication 
of natural causes; causes which in themselves are brute and 
irrational, but which, nevertheless, are regulated by the highest 
reason, and which, under its guidance, perform their functions, 
and exhibit their operations. The Supreme Deity, by whose 
power all things are produced, and upon whose nod they depend, 
hath in his infinite wisdom, so disposed all things, that they 
betake themselves to their appointed works after a certain order 
and method; they do nothing in vain; they execute only that 
which is the most excellent, and that which is the best fitted for 
the universal fabric, and for their own proper natures. They 
are engines that are moved, not by any skill of their own, but 
by that of a higher artificer. 


SECTION III. 


CHAPTER I. 


THE EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION OF THE YEARS 1667, 1668, AND PART 
. OF 1669, IN LONDON. 


1. In the year 1667, at the approach of the vernal equinox, 
the smallpox, which, during the pestilential constitution of 
the years immediately preceding, had either wholly lain in 
abeyance, or else had appeared very rarely, began to show itself, 
increased day by day, and by autumn had become thoroughly 
epidemic. From that time forth its vigour declined, and as 
the winter approached its ravages became less. With the 
beginning of the ensuing spring it returned from its retreat, 
. took strength, and spread itself until it became restrained, as 
in the year before, by the frosts of winter; these checked its 
attacks. After this it came a third time, and showed itself 
strong in the early part of the spring. It soon, however, 
began to flag, and became crippled ; extended itself less than 
in the two preceding summers ; and finally, in the month of 
August, 1669, died away altogether, making way for an 
epidemic dysentery. However, during the two first years that 
this constitution prevailed, smallpox attacked more persons in 
London than ever I remember it to have done either before or 
since. Nevertheless, as the disease of this period was normal 
in character, and of a mild sort, it killed but few compared 
with the enormous number of sufferers from it. 

2. At the same time that the smallpox began to show itself 
a new form of fever arose. With the exception of the eruption 
of pustules, and the symptoms that depend thereon, it was not 
much unlike smallpox: of this we shall speak in the sequel. 
This fever did by no means attack so many as the smallpox, 
yet it lasted just as long. Moreover, it prevailed during the 
winter, the time when the smallpox receded ; whilst during the 


122 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


spring, when the smallpox took strength, it kept back. It 
thus left the epidemic predominance under this constitution to 
the smallpox. Nevertheless, it never wholly ceased ; until in 
the month of August, 1669, it took flight for good, and that 
in company with the smallpox. 

3. A third disease accompanied these two epidemics, especially 
during the summer of the last year; this was diarrhea. At 
that particular time the atmospheric constitution was inclining 
towards the subsequent dysentery. Be this, however, as it 
may, it was certain that the diarrhoea was so closely akin to 
the fever that it came in contact with, that it looked like a 
fever turned inwards, and attacking the viscera. 

4. Concerning these three diseases, the only ones which 
under the present constitution claimed the title of epidemics, I 
now proceed to speak separately. I begin with the smallpox, 
and mean to treat it somewhat fully. As it prevailed during 
the years in question, it appeared to me to be pre-eminently 
genuine, and remarkably regular; it generally exhibited the 
same phenomena; those whom it seized, it everywhere attacked 
with a similar series of symptoms. As it seems the most 
typical of its genus, it is from it that the true history of the 
disease and the proper methodus medendi axe to be taken. 

5. It must be remarked that not only in the case of fevers 
does each peculiar constitution determine a proper and peculiar 
form, but that smallpox also has its peculiar kinds, which take 
one form during one series of years, and another during 
another, much as each may seem to agree with the other in 
certain common phenomena. So much does Nature sport in 
the generation of epidemics. 

To return, I shall thoroughly, and in the first place, exhibit 
the history of the smallpox of the kind in question. This I 
shall denote by the term regular, in order that I may distin- 
euish them from the anomalous smallpox of the succeeding 
years; afterwards I shall subjoin the methodus medendi which 
best succeeded in my treatment of them. 


SMALLPOX. 123 


CHAPTER II. 


REGULAR SMALLPOX DURING THE YEARS 1667, 1668, AND PART 
OF 1669. 


l. IN those years when smallpox appears as an epidemic, 
and when it is mild and regular, it sets m lke the disease I 
am now speaking of, as late as the month of March. 

In those years when, besides being epidemic it is dangerous 
and irregular, it sets in as early as the month of January. 

It attacks whole families with its contagion, sparing no one, 
whatsoever may be his age, unless he has before been ill of it. 
Nor do they escape who have only had a spurious form of the 
disease. 

There are two sorts of the epidemic as well as of the 
sporadic smallpox, viz., the distinct and the confluent. Between 
these two forms there 1s not what we call an essential difference ; 
still, as several marked symptoms aecompany the one, without 
appearing in the other, they are easily distinguished from one 
another. 

2. Distinct or discrete smallpox sets m with rigors and 
shivers; to these an intense heat succeeds, accompanied with 
severe pain in the head and back, inclination to vomit, great 
tendency to sweats, sense of pain upon pressure in the pit of 
the stomach, stupor, and drowsiness, especially with infants, 
and occasionally epileptic fits. When these seize infants who 
have just done teething, I always suspect that smallpox is on 
the road, and generally its eruption verifies and confirms my 
prophecy by breaking out within a very few hours, so closely, 
that if an infant, as is generally the case, has a fit of convulsions 
in the evening of one day, smallpox will have shown itself by 
the morning of the next. I have also noticed that the small- 
pox which attacks infants immediately after fits of this sort, 
presents full-sized pustules, which are rarely confluent, the 
disease being mild and ofa good sort. The tendency, however, 
to perspiration I have never observed in infants, either before 
the eruption or after; it seems limited to adults. 

Such are, for the most part, the symptoms by which small- 
pox is accompanied at its commencement, and which generally 


124 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


precede the eruption of pustules. The present, however, may 
be a proper place for suggesting that where the blood is of a 
lax tissue, and liable to the influences that change it, the period 
of separation may be got over gradually and imperceptibly, 
without any notable disorder, during the time that precedes the 
eruption of pustules. 

9. Counting the first as one, discrete smallpox generally 
shows its pustules on the fourth day of its invasion, sometimes 
rather later, rarely sooner. At this time the symptoms are 
either greatly diminished (and this is generally the case), or 
wholly vanish ; the disease then appears to go on well, except 
in the case of adults preternaturally disposed to diaphoresis. 
This goes on even when the coverings are of the hghtest sort, 
and the tendency remains until the pustules approach their 
maturation ; they then depart of themselves. Asto the eruption, 
it comes out thus: pustules of a pale red colour, the size of the 
finest pins’ heads, present themselves promiscuously over the 
body ; first on the face and neck and breast, afterwards over 
the whole body. At the same time there is a distressing pain 
about the jaws ; this increases as the pustules rise. These grow 
greater every day, rise more and more to a head, and extend a 
redness and inflammation over the skin and the neighbouring 
tissues. 

4. About the eighth day from the first accession (and in 
this disease we must always keep a reckoning), the spaces 
between the pustules, which were at first pale, begin to grow 
red in proportion to the number of pustules that stand about 
them; they also swell, and the swelling is attended with 
tension and lancination of the parts around; this increases 
every hour, and occasions the inflammation and swelling men- 
tioned above. As the disease advances, the eyelids become so 
stretched and swollen, that the patient is unable to see; the 
eyelids themselves being no bad representations of an inflated 
and translucent bladder drawn across the eyes. Occasionally, 
so great a mass of pustules may have spread itself, during the 
beginning of the eruption, over the eyes as to blind the patient. 
Next to the face the hands begin to swell, and the fingers are 
puffed out in proportion to the amount of the pustules. Up to 
this time the pustules on the face have been smooth, and have 
felt level when you touched them with the hand. They now 


SMALLPOX. 195 


become elevated, and this is the earliest sign of their incipient 
maturation. They also become paler. Gradually they give 
out a yellow juice of the colour of honey. Meanwhile the 
inflammation of the face and hands has reached its height, and 
it exhibits in the interspaces of the pustules a florid colour, 
like that of the damask rose. In truth, the more regular and 
the more genuine the disease is, the more do the pustules and 
the interspaces accurately exhibit the colour I have just 
illustrated. Just, however, as the pustules on the face become 
day by day rougher and yellower in proportion to the stage of 
their maturation, so, on the other hand, do the hands and the 
rest of the body become day by day less rough, and more pale. 

9. On the eleventh day the swelling of the face and the 
inflanmation evidently go down, and the pustules both of the 
face and the rest of the body attain both their full ripeness 
and proper size; this latter being for the years in question that 
of a large pea. They then dry up, and fall off. In smallpox 
of this kind they have generally disappeared by the fourteenth 
or fifteenth day. The pustules, however, of the hands, and of 
the other parts that generally retain them longer, still remain 
fresh and white, and outlast the others by a day or two. The 
pustules of the face and the rest of the body, except the hands, 
desquamate ; those of the hands break and run off. The pustules 
of the face are succeeded by branny scales, and these again are 
often succeeded by pits or depressions of the skin. When the 
pustule first comes off, no inequality can be seen in the skin. 
Afterwards, however, when scales of the sort in question rise 
up, and get given off in succession, depressions are excavated, 
and these are the marks which we see on the faces of con- 
valescents long after their recovery. Still it 1s very rarely the 
case that the distinct smallpox leaves its mark. When it does, 
the disease has generally occurred during the latter half of the 
year. Smallpox within the first six months, unless, as will be 
stated in $ 10, it has been confluent, never makes pits. 
During all the stages of the disease the patient is either quite 
costive, or passes but few motions. Thus much concerning 
the distinct smallpox. 

6. That species of smallpox which we call confluent has its 
symptoms common with those of the species we call discrete, 
except that they are all more violent. "The fever, the anxiety, 


126 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the depression, the disposition to vomit, are all more distressing, 
—so much so, that by intensity of these alone, the sagacious 
physician can prognosticate before the appearance of the 
eruption, that the disease will be confluent. Nevertheless, the 
patient is not so ready to fall into a sweat as in the distinct 
form. When this disposition is excessive, it serves as a sign 
to show that the forthcoming pustules will be anything rather 
than confluent. In confluent smallpox, diarrhoea both precedes 
the eruption by a day or two, and continues for a day or two 
after its appearance. ‘This is what I have never yet observed 
in the discrete form. 

7. The confluent smallpox generally breaks out on the third 
day, sometimes before, hardly ever after; whereas the distinct 
form either appears on the fourth day (inclusive from the 
first accession of the disease) or after; rarely before. The 
more the eruption shows itself before the fourth day, the more 
sure itis to become confluent. Nevertheless, however much, it 
may be the case that, generally speaking, confluent smallpox 
rarely waits for the fourth day before it shows itself, it some- 
times happens (although very rarely indeed) that, owing to the 
effect of some formidable symptom, the pustules are kept back 
to the fourth or even the fifth day. Illustrative of the character 
of these symptoms, I may mention acute pain, either in the 
lumbar region and hike a nephritic paroxysm, or else in the side 
and like the pains of pleurisy. Or it may come in the limbs 
like rheumatism, or it may settle in the stomach; in which 
case the patient is harassed, and afilicted with great distress, 
and violent vomiting up to the time of the breaking out. In 
cases like these, rare as they may be, I have noticed that the 
eruption comes later than usual; being coerced and hindered 
by the violence of the aforesaid symptoms. When such like 
symptoms usher in the disease, I am quite satisfied that it will 
be confluent, and that danger will attend it. 

8. In the next place I must inform you that, although (as 
aforesaid) in the discrete smallpox the symptoms that ushered 
in the disease give no trouble after the eruption has once 
appeared, the case is very different in respect to the confluent 
form. Herein both the fever and the other symptoms afflict 
the patient for many days after the eruption of the pustules. 

9. The aforesaid smallpox breaks out sometimes after the 


SMALLPOX. 127 


fashion of erysipelas, sometimes like measles. From these they 
are difficult to be distinguished even by the practised physician, 
provided that he goes by the external appearance only. How- 
ever, by carefully considering the difference between the dates 
ofthe eruptions, and the other marked points of distinction 
which the respective histories of the diseases present, we may 
easily discriminate. As the disease goes on, the pustules (and 
more especially those that envelope the face) are not, as in the 
discrete kind, elevated to any appreciable size. They press 
upon one another. ‘They look at first like a red bladder 
covering the whole face. They also swell up the face earlier 
than discrete ones. Lastly, they glue themselves to the face 
hke a white skin, without rising much above the surface. 

10. After the eighth day the white skin becomes every day 
gradually more uneven; at least so it seems, if we feel it with 
the finger. Moreover it turns brown ; not yellow, as in the dis- 
crete species. Day by day this unevenness increases ; day by day 
the colour of the skin becomes darker. Finally,the aforesaid skin 
peels off in broad laminz. In parts of the face, when the disease 
has been severe, this will not take place before the twentieth 
day. In proportion to the severity of the disease, the ripening 
pustules put on a dusky hue. In proportion also to the severity 
of the disease, they are, if left to themselves, slow in going 
away. On the other hand, the less they are confluent, the 
quicker they go off, and the yellower they look. The skin, 
when it first falls off, leaves no roughness behind ; it has been 
one universal scab. However, it is soon followed by a branny 
scurf, of a very corrosive character; and this not only digs 
deeper pits than is done by the discrete pustules, but also 
deforms the face with hideous scars. In the confluent small- 
pox, provided that the case has been exceedingly severe, the 
skin of the back and shoulders is sometimes taken off, to the 
exposure of parts beneath. 

11. We must bear in mind that this disease is to be held 
dangerous, not in proportion to the thickness of the pustules 
on the trunk and extremities, but according to the number 
that show themselves on the face. If upon the face they lie as 
thick as sand, it is no advantage to have them few and far 
between on the rest of the body. The danger is as great as if 
every limb was beset with them. On the other hand, the trunk 


198 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


and extremities may be crowded with them to excess. If the 
face, however, be comparatively free, all is safe. Now what 
applies to the number of the pustules applies also to their cha- 
racter. It is the face that determines whether it be good or bad. 

12. In confluent smallpox I have ever observed that on the 
hands and feet the pustules were larger than on the rest of the 
body ; and that in proportion as they ascended from the ex- 
tremities to the trunk, they grew less and less, as well as more 
contracted. Thus much concerning the pustules. 

18. There are two other symptoms which occur with con- 
fluent smallpox, and which are of equal importance with either 
the pustules themselves or the swelling that goes along with them. 
Indeed, they are as important as any symptom whatsoever. 
These are—l, salivation with adults; 2, diarrhoea with infants. 
The first of these 1s so regular an attendant, that I only know 
one patient who had the confluent smallpox without it. The 
second, or the diarrhoea, is less uniform; and does not so 
certainly attack infants labouring under the species of disease 
in question. Now whether the providence of Nature has sub- 
stituted these evacuations because the pustules of confluent 
smallpox, being undersized and depressed, are less able to 
eradicate and expel the morbifie matter than the well-developed 
and acuminate pustules of the distinct species, I cannot take 
upon myself to decide. I am writing histories, not solving 
problems. But this I know for certain, they generally accom- 
pany confluent smallpox; and, besides this, the clearance they 
effect is just as necessary as either the eruption of the pustules, 
or the swelling of the hands and face. 

14. The aforesaid salivation sometimes shows itself on the 
first day of the eruption ; sometimes on the second ; occasionally 
on the third. The spit is at first thin, and is easily brought 
away. The patient will dirty many handkerchiefs during a 
single night. Except that it 1s less offensive to the smell, the 
ptyalism is the ptyalism of mercury. But about the eleventh 
day the saliva becomes more viscid, and is spit away with greater 
difficulty. The patient becomes thirsty ; he coughs during his 
drink ; whilst the liquid returns through the nostrils. From 
this day the salivation generally ceases. Occasionally, however, 
although rarely, after having ceased for a day or two, and that 
completely, it returns to set in afresh. On the eleventh day, 


SMALLPOX. 129 


however, the salivation and the swelling of the face alike begin 
to abate; and from that time forwards the hands either begin 
to swell, or ought to do so. 

15. Diarrhea does not begin with infants so early in the 
disease as salivation does with adults. At whatsoever time, 
however, it sets in, it will continue throughout its stages, unless 
checked by medicine. 

16. In both forms of smallpox the fever most prevails between 
the time of the first accession and the eruption. When this 
last has taken place, it generally abates until the ripening of 
the pustules, and the period for the formation of pus. When 
this 1s over, it ceases altogether. 

17. I have invariably noticed that, in the severer cases of 
smallpox, the patient has, as 1t were, a fit in the evening ; and 
that, at that time, the more serious symptoms show themselves 
in an aggravated form. 

18. This is the true history of this kind of smallpox ; and it 
embraces the real and genuine phenomena of the disease as 
they appear in Nature. I will now discuss the accidents and 
irregular symptoms that supervene upon improper treatment. 

19. It must be remembered that those irregular symptoms 
which occur in distinct smallpox on the eighth, and in confluent 
smallpox on the eleventh day (reckoning always from the first 
accession of the disease), are of paramount importance in the 
way of life or death; and that it is these which must most 
accurately be considered. It is an undoubted fact, that the 
greater part of such as die of either of the two diseases, die 
upon one of these two days. 

20. In the first place, in a case of discrete smallpox, the 
patient thinks that because he sweats freely, as (according to a 
previous statement) adults generally do sweat, all is going 
well; he believes that the virus of the disease is passing off 
through the pores of the skin; he keeps up this same sweat 
by taking cordials inwardly, and by heating diet; he does this 
all the more readily because he seems at first to mend upon 
it, and because it tallies with the unfounded judgments of his 
friends. Now that which is eliminated by this diaphoresis is, in 
reality, the particles which should supply the elevation of the 
pustules, and the swelling of the face; so that, on the eighth 
day, the face, which ought properly to begin to swell, and to 

:9 


130 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


become inflamed in the pustular interspaces becomes flaccid ; 
whilst the interspaces become pale. Meanwhile the pustules 
themselves may keep their colour and elevation, but this they 
may do when the patient is dead. Moreover, the sweat, which up 
to this time had flowed freely, now suddenly and spontaneously 
checks itself: the warmest cordials being unable to bring it 
back. In the meanwhile the patient becomes delirious, anxious, 
restless, distressed. He passes his urine frequently, and in 
small quantities. Within a few hours, he disappoints the hopes 
of his friends, and expires. Here, however, I may remark 
that, provided that the pustules be few in number, that the 
season be the winter season, that the patient be advanced in 
years, or that the lancet has been used, the hot regimen which 
has just been alluded to is not so certainly mischievous, does 
not so certainly prevent the swelling of the face, and is not so 
sure a precursor of death, as it is when the disease is confluent, 
when the season is that of spring or summer, when the patient 
is in the prime of life, or when blood has not been drawn. 

21. In confluent smallpox the patients run the most risk, 
and most generally die on the eleventh day. This is the day 
whereon the salivation, which has hitherto been a safeguard to 
the patient, generally ceases of itself; so that, unless either 
the swelling of the face which is still kept on slightly, and that 
of the hands which should now begin notably, supply its place, 
the patient must necessarily die. For we must ever remember 
that in.this form of smallpox, where the pustules are undersized, 
not only is the salivation required for the due elimination of 
the morbific matter, but the swelling of the face as well; so 
that if either of these be wholly absent, or disappear before its 
time, death must ensue forthwith. Now it too often happens 
in a disease of so hot a nature as the present, that the crasis 
of the blood may be impaired and undone by too hot a regimen ; 
and that it may be so heightened as to be incompetent to the 
gradual expulsion of the inflamed particles. When this happens 
—to say nothing concerning the mischief that arises from 
forced sweats—one of two things occurs. — Either the face and 
hands do not swell at all, or the swelling disappears with the 
salivation. That on the same day when the salivation ceases, the 
swelling of the face should slightly abate is quite true : but it 
ought by no means to disappear altogether until a day or two 


SMALLPOX. 131 


afterwards; and even then the hands must keep on swelling 
as before. Than this there is no surer sign of convalescence ; 
than the contrary there is no surer sign of death. 

22. Be this, however, asit may, the sputa, which up to this 
day have been crude, thin, and easily got rid of, become now 
viscid and tenacious, and threaten the patient with suffocation. 
Whatever he drinks generally goes down into his lungs ; whence 
it is rejected through the nostrils, with a violent coughing. 
His voice becomes hoarse. He lies oppressed with a heavy 
drowsiness and stupor. The weight of the disease wholly 
overwhelms him. In an agony of this kind he generally dies 
on the above-named day. 

23. There are also other symptoms which may occur during 
any stage of the disease, and are common to the distinct and 
confluent varieties. 

Brain fever, for instance, may originate from the excessive 
ebullition of the blood. The patient will then become so impatient 
of heat, that he will strive with all his force, and with furious 
struggles, to disengage himself from the hands of those friends 
who confine him to his place in bed. 

Occasionally a different effect arises from the same cause, 
viz. comatose stupor. The patient will never keep awake unless 
roused by repeated shakings.! 

24, Sometimes in this disease, as in plague, the tissue of the 
blood being broken down by the force of the inflammation, 
crimson spots show themselves amongst the pustules, the almost 
invariable forerunners of death. This happens oftenest when 
the atmospheric constitution is pre-eminently favorable to the 
epidemic development of that disease. Sometimes little black 
specks, scarcely so large as a small pin’s head, and sunken on 
the centre, show themselves, in different places, on the tops of 
the pustules. These originate in too great heat. An improved 
regimen changes them to dusk. Afterwards they gradually take 
the pale-yellow hue, which is natural to genuine and regular 
smallpox. That this is the true colour, may be clearly seen in 
the practice for the disease. Every symptom becomes more 
favorable in proportion as the ripe pustules approach it, and 
vice versa. 

25. With youths, and with men in the prime of life, espe- 


| In the original, nisi continuo pulsu excitatus. 


132 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


cially if they have filled themselves with wine or spirituous 
liquors, the blood sometimes rages to such a height as to force 
its way through the arteries, and through the bladder— 


* Quá data porta ruit." 


—In the whole catalogue of evils incident to this disease, you 
will find no more ill-favored and ill-omened symptom than this 
same hematuria. 

26. From a similar cause (although more rarely) blood is 
ejected from the lungs. 

Each, however, of these hemorrhages occurs, for the most 
part, during the beginning of the complaint, and before the erup- 
tion of pustules; or at any rate whilst they lie, for the greater 
part of the body, huddled close under the skin, however much 
they may have shown themselves in a few places. Such pus- 
tules are of the sort, that when they ripen become preeminently 
confluent, unless, indeed, the symptom we have just spoken of 
prevent their development by killing the patient. 

27. Sometimes, to crown all, there is a total suppression of 
urine. This is commonest with youths; and that at the height 
or even during the decline of the distinct species. 

28. There are, besides these, other symptoms which origi- 
nate in causes different from any hitherto mentioned. The 
patient may have taken harm from having been improperly ex- 
posed to cold, or he may have been bled haphazard, and to a 
great extent; or the bowels may have been over-purged. From 
all, or from any of these causes, the pustules may suddenly 
flatten and sink in; or diarrhoea may supervene. There is great 
danger from this (as stated in $ 183) whenever the patient is an 
adult ; inasmuch as the variolous matter is turned inwards, and 
Nature becomes wholly unable to eliminate it as she ought to 
do through the pores of the skin. To this we may add, that 
the swelling of the hands and face is put back,—a point which 
is to be counted amongst the good chances of the patient as 
truly as the eruption itself, unless, indeed, the pustules have 
been wonderfully few. 

29. The mischief, however, that arises from the taking of 
cold, is of very rare occurrence, compared with the evils which 
arise from the contrary treatment, or from too heating a regi- 
men. The disease itself is so properly classed amongst the 


SMALLPOX. 133 


hottest of the hot, that errors on the side of coolness are far 
rarer than their opposites. 

30. As to what may be the essence of smallpox, I am, for 
my own part, free to confess that I am wholly ignorant ; this 
intellectual deficiency bemg the misfortune of human nature, 
and common to myself and the world at large. Nevertheless, 
when I carefully weigh the evidence derived from the above- 
named symptoms, it suggests to me the idea of inflammation ; of 
an inflammation specifically different from all others ; of an in- 
flammation both of the blood and humours. In clearing herself of 
this, Nature is at work during the first two or three days, striving 
at the digestion and concoction of the inflamed particles, with 
the intention of afterwards discharging them upon the surface 
of the body, for the sake of maturation, and finally of expelling 
them from her boundaries under the form of httle abscesses. 

We must, then, if we wish to make our methodus medendi the 
superstructure to a foundation in principles, recognise two 
periods in this disease; lst, the period of separation; 2d, the 
period of expulsion. 

91. The first of these two periods is generally passed in a 
febrile ebullition, which usually is completed within the first three 
or four days. During this stage, Nature is employed upon pick- 
ing out and gathering together those inflamed elements which 
fret the blood, in making them over to the fleshy parts of the 
body, and in depositing them therein. This being accomplished, 
she returns to her former repose, having allayed the tumult 
which was excited, during her operations, in the blood. 

When the ebulhtion has thus brought about the separation, 
the process of expulsion begins, and this continues during the 
remainder of the disease, by means of the little abscesses in the 
solid parts. These, inasmuch as they agree with a true abscess 
in character, pass through all the stages, viz. those of crudity, 
maturation, and exarescence. If all this is done properly, mat- 
ters are safe. Upon its being done properly, however, all the 
chance of cure depends. Everything goes wrong when this is 
faulty. Now, this last-named process, or that of expulsion, 
takes up more time than the other. It has to do its work in 
a thicker and denser medium, and on one more remote from 
the fountain of life. Whereas the separation takes place in a 
subtile and fluid body, and in the very focus of Nature. 


134 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


32. With these premises, two indications of treatment pre- 
sent themselves. 1. The ebullition of the blood must be kept 
to a regular rate, so that it neither hurry over the work of 
separation too quickly and too violently; nor yet check it by any 
torpidity of movement. Still less must it work it out insuffi- 
ciently. 2. The little abscesses, or pustules, must be carefully 
kept up, so that they may go through their proper stages, 
void the matter that they contain, and, finally, themselves 
disappear. 

99. I will say a few words on the first point. We must 
take especial care, lest the ebullition rise too high. This it 
may do under the weight of blankets, under the over-heated 
state of the air in the apartment of the patient, or under the 
use of heating medicines and cordials. All these must more 
particularly be guarded against when the patient is in the prime 
of life, when he has raised the natural heat of his blood by 
generous liquors, and, lastly, when the season of the year is 
early, i. e. spring or the beginning of summer. ‘The effect 1s 
as follows: the separation, which ought to take its time and be 
performed gradually, and which ought to go forward to a gene- 
ral despumation, is urged on headlong; so that the particles 
are not gathered together in a sufficient number. Or else, 
on the other hand, it may happen that other particles, which 
Nature, had she not been forced beyond her limits, and con- 
strained to do violence to herself, never meant to part with, be 
condemned to expulsion. Now, when there is a separation of 
particles, where separation is out of place, the admixture does 
mischief, since other particles, whose movement is really in that 
direction, are thereby obstructed. And this makes them all 
the more unfit for expulsion. 

94. To me it has ever seemed most reasonable that (provided 
the ebullition do not altogether fall asleep), Nature should be 
supposed to effect a certain and universal separation, just in 
proportion as she allows herself time for the transaction ; that 
the chances of successful treatment especially and necessarily 
depend upon a separation of this leisurely sort; and that the con- 
trary method gives us a contrary prognosis. From an over-hot 
regimen, good never came, any more than from over-hasty fruit 
any profit. On the contrary, it often happens that the patient 
runs headlong into a brain fever; or, that (worse still) violent 


SMALLPOX. 195 


sweats arise. Such sweats eliminate particles that are unfit for 
secretion, and which have none of the characters of true pus, 
pus being the proper product of this secretion. Finally, from 
the use of your vaunted cordials, and from your hot treatment, 
the pustules may be crowded together and rendered. confluent. 
Here we have a sad sight, if not the signs of an inauspicious 
upshot. 

35. Such and such-like mischief comes of such and such-like 
blunders. With the other method I have seen nothing of the 
sort. Nature, left to herself, does her own work at her own 
rate; both secreting and expelling the morbific matter in due 
course and time; acting best when she acts on her own re- 
sources; being best supplied when she relies on her own ways 
and means; best instructed when she trusts to own mother- 
wit; wholly independent of all our arts, all our aids, and all 
our contrivances. This power of Nature tells most in young 
patients, and vigorous constitutions. JI have never yet either 
seen myself, or heard from others, of a single case where the 
patient died because the pustules did not come out at fist, 
although too many have done so after they had come out laud- 
ably and auspiciously. "They afterwards, however, sunk down 
and struck in before their time. 

96. Just as it is rash and perilous to raise the ebullition of 
the blood to too great a height by the means of cordials and 
a hot regimen, so, on the other hand, there is no little danger 
in checking it by means of venesection, clysters, emeties, cathar- 
tics, &c. By all such means as these, the proper secretion of 
the separable particles is impeded. Upon this question, the 
vulgar and common-place argument against bleeding and other 
evacuations has no bearing. The statement that it is improper 
to transfer the humours from the circumference to the centre, 
in a disease like the smallpox, where Nature is transferring them 
from the centre to the circumference, is met by the fact, that 
experience teaches us to the contrary, inasmuch as it has fre- 
quently been observed that a sudden evolution of the eruption 
has been consequent upon evacuations. The true reasons are 
of another sort. These teach us that where we can avoid it 
we must keep our hands clean of such practice. 

To deal briefly with some of the chief of these reasons, I 
may remark, that the evacuations in question not only lower 


136 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the character of the ebullition by the means whereof the par- 
ticles that are intended for despumation are carefully separated 
from the rest, but also withdraw the very food and fuel which 
were constantly to have been supplied to the secretion. Hence 
it has happened that pustules have begun with breaking out 
in a laudable manner, perhaps all the better for a previous 
evacuation, and have ended with sinking down and striking 1n; 
and that after a brief appearance, and with sudden rapidity. 
The reason has been, that the matter, which should supply the 
place of what had been got rid of, and which should close, as it 
were, the procession of the morbid particles, has not been forth- 
coming. 

Nevertheless, in spite of all these objections, if at any time 
we have the slightest reason to imagine that the smallpox, of 
which we await the eruption, will be of the confluent kind, we 
shall find it proper not only to bleed without loss of time, but 
also to prescribe an emetic. — Reasons for this will be given at 
length hereafter. 

97. 'To proceed to the second indication, viz. the time of the 
expulsion. As soon as the separate matter of the little abscesses, 
or pustules, is to be discharged and expelled through their 
medium, we must do our best to support them properly, so that 
they may attain their appointed period duly and in order. 

38. It has been shown above, that it 1s particularly danger- 
ous for the patient to be over-heated during the period of secre- 
tion, whilst the fever is going on, and before the appearance 
of the pustules. It is no less dangerous for it to happen during 
any other stage of the complaint; more especially, however, 1s 
it mischievous at the approach of the expulsive epoch, whilst 
the pustules are yet crude. However much the blood, after 
finishing the business of separation, and after the discharge of 
the morbific matter upon the fleshy parts may have rid itself 
of its intestine commotions, it is still young and delicate, has 
still to be supplied with a new status and texture, is highly sus- 
ceptible of all influences, and, above all, is easily affected by 
any immoderate heat from any quarter, so much so, that under 
the slightest encouragement it takes fire, and is ready for a fresh 
ebullition. Now this secondary ebullition is not like its pre- 
decessor. The separation is over and done with; so that the 
ebullition has nothing to do with the separation. In place 


SMALLPOX. 137 


thereof, it causes the above-named symptoms; adding to this, 
an interruption to the expulsive function of the pustules. It 
does mischief by disturbing the matter that they contain. 
Hence one of two things happens. Either the parts already 
secreted, and deposited on the surface of the body, are torn 
away from thence by the vehement and rapid ebullition of the 
blood, and taken up afresh into its volume; or else the fleshy 
parts, heated beyond the proper suppurative temperature, do 
their work imperfectly. Lastly, a new disorder sets in, in the 
shape of a perversion of the whole economy of the blood, and 
of the tone of the solid parts. These become unable to cope 
with the secreted matter, and to concoct it by the normal pro- 
cess of abscesses. 

39. In the meanwhile we must not be so intent upon 
ensuring against an over-heated state of the blood, as to expose 
our patient to any injury from cold, and by so doing arrest 
the eruption of the pustules. The natural degree of heat is 
that which is best fitted for the development of such pustules. 
It is this, too, which best suits the temperature of the solid 
parts. Excess and deficiency are equally dangerous. 

40. From what has been said, it is clear that the disease 
and practice are equally uncertain. Hereupon, I venture to 
assert that the physician who has much to do with smallpox 
runs many risks with his reputation. The vulgar are ever in 
the habit of ascribing deaths to the officiousness of the 
attendant; whilst physicians themselves catch greedily at 
opportunities for slander. They make out their case before 
incompetent judges, and procure most uncharitable verdicts. 
They act thus in order that they may build up a name for 
themselves upon the ruined reputations of others; a proceed- 
ing disgraceful to even honest artizans, doubly disgraceful to 
scholars. 

The aforesaid difficulties explain why over-active and officious 
nurses so often cause failures. It is a hard problem, and above 
the capacity of females, to determine the precise degree of the 
requisite heat, especially when other things have also to be 
considered, e. g. the age of the patient, his manner of life, the 
season of the year, &c. These are points for the sagacious and 
prudent physician. 

4l. If it happen, either from the unseasonable use of the 


138 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


lancet or from exposure to cold, that the pustules flatten, or 
that the hands and face sink from their swelling, cordials must 
be administered. Nevertheless, we must be cautious in our 
use of them. However much blood may have been lost, it 
may still turn out that in our exceeding fear for the strength 
of the patient, we may use such strong cordials, or may repeat 
them so often as to set up a fresh ebullition. "The blood is 
still delicate and easily susceptible to the influence of any 
heating stimulus. Hence a repetition of ebulhtions often 
occurs in the same patient. To these, rather than to the 
preceding venesection, the death of the majority of patients is 
to be attributed. 

Thus much concerning the primary indications in general. 

42. I must now go over part of the ground again, and 
come more closely to our practice. The moment that undoubted 
signs of smallpox have shown themselves, I forbid the patient 
wine, meat, and the open air. His ordinary drink is weak 
small beer, with a toast put in to take the chill off. His food 
is oatmeal porridge, barley broth, roasted apples, and the like ; 
articles which are neither hot nor cold, and which give no 
trouble to the digestion. I have no objection to a form of 
diet that is common in the country, and which consists of a 
roasted apple mashed with milk, only it must be taken at 
intervals, moderately, and with the chill off the milk. Hot 
regimen I forbid altogether. I forbid also all such cordials as 
are used by some under the rash notion of propelling the 
pustules towards the skin before the fourth day, or the proper one 
for the eruption ; since I hold as an undoubted truth that just 
in proportion as the pustules take their time in coming out, 
the separation of the variolous matter will be complete, and the 
better will be our security in favour of their proper maturation 
and against their striking in; whilst by being pushed out before 
their due time the matter is precipitated whilst it is yet crude 
and unconcocted. This deceives our hopes like over-hasty fruit. 

43. Besides this, there is the further danger that any unsea- 
sonable diligence, especially with hot and sanguine tempera- 
ments, wherein the active principles themselves are equivalent to 
cordials, should so act upon Nature as to force and excite her 
over-much. In such a case she might go near to reduce the 
whole substance of the body to pustules, and these would of 


SMALLPOX. 139 


course become confluent. Had they been left to their own 
pace they would merely have been discrete, and the chances 
would have been better. It must not beimagined that simply 
because the sick man suffers much pain and distress before the 
eruption, the pustules are to be forced forwards to the surface, 
from the first moment that we suspect the existence of small- 
pox. No single case can be shown of any one, however sick, 
having died on account of the pustules not having appeared at 
once, or on account of Nature having been found wanting to 
their extrusion sooner or later, excepting only those instances 
where she was hampered with a hot regimen, and the premature 
supply of cordials; since I have observed more than once in 
young subjects and sanguine temperaments, that a heating 
regimen and the use of cordials, adopted with the view of 
pushing out the pustules prematurely, have been so far from 
accelerating the eruption, that they have, on the contrary, 
arrested it. They have so heated the blood that it has been 
excited to a movement too violent for the proper separation of 
the variolous matter, whereupon the pustules have lain latent 
under the skin, and have resisted the influence of every sort of 
cordial in the attempts to bring them out ; all that has shown 
itself being some other symptoms of the disease. This has 
been the case until by reducing the blood to a moderate and 
proper temperature, by unloading a part of the hot blankets, 
and by allowing only weak small beer, I have so far paved the 
way for the pustules, that, under Divine Providence, I have saved 
the patient. 

44. Those who, previous to the fourth day, without being 
satisfied with keeping the patient within his sleeping-room, 
must also confine him to his bed, are, in my mind, just as 
unreasonable as the hasty and unseasonable pourers-in of 
cordials ; since both the hematuria and the ecthymata, as well 
as the other deadly symptoms which I have spoken of above, 
originate only in this premature confinement. When persons 
are in the prime of life, this is preeminently the case. On 
the fourth day, however, I do order the patient to keep his bed, 
and at the same time, if the eruption be unsatisfactory, I allow 
a gentle cordial, which may be given, atleast, once, with the 
view of promoting the pustules. Amongst the medicines 
that have this effect, the so-called paregorics (such as the liquid 


140 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


laudanum, diascordium, &c.), mixed with a small quantity of the 
proper cordial waters, bear the bell. They check the zestuation 
of the blood, whilst Nature rids herself all the more easily and 
seasonably of the morbific matter. Still I would not recommend 
cordials before the fourth day, even if there were diarrhoea, a 
symptom which may seem to call for them. For although, as 
stated at $ 6, diarrhoea may precede the eruption of the confluent 
smallpox (a diarrhoea that arises from the discharge into the 
intestines of those inflammatory vapours and humours eliminated 
by the turmoil and commotion of the blood during the first 
days of the disease), Nature will not be found wanting. She 
wil no more fail m propelling these same variolous vapours 
towards the surface of the body, than she fails in expelling and 
eliminating those other vapours, which, by striking in upon 
the stomach during the commencement of the disease, cause 
vomiting. 

Now, as soon as the variolous matter is determined to the 
surface, the diarrhoea stops of itself. 

45. I must remark, that when I am called in to a young 
patient, and one who has lent a hand to the disease by the free 
use of wine or any other fermented liquor, I am not satisfied 
with attempting to restrain the ebullition of his blood, by the 
mere abstinence from his bed and from cordials. I go so far as 
to bleed him from the arm. If the prejudices of his friends forbid 
this, I at least urge it. To the intense heat natural to the 
humours in this disease, the inflammation consequent upon the 
impression of the spirituous liquors is superadded. Hence the 
blood rages with such violence as to be carried by the vessels 
into the bladder. Or else it may produce purple spots, and all 
those other symptoms which so much perplex the practitioner 
throughout the disease, and which so certainly kill the patient. 

Thus much concerning what is to be done ‘before the breaking 
out of the pustules. 

46. When the pustules have once appeared, I consider care- 
fully whether they belong to the distinct or confluent species, 
since these two forms widely differ from each other, although 
several symptoms are common to the two. If from the size 
and fewness of the pustules, from their late eruption, from the 
disappearance of the distress and the other grave symptoms (all 
of which in the confluent form, continue after the eruption), 


SMALLPOX. 141 


I satisfy myself that the disease is discrete, I adopt the restora- 
tive treatment described in § 42, and which consists of weak 
smal] beer, oatmeal-porridge, barley-broth, &c. Moreover, if 
the season be summer, and the weather be hot, even for that 
time of the year, and if the pustules be few, I, for one, see no 
good in keeping the patient continually stifled in his bed. I 
like him better to get up for a few hours every day, provided 
only that the places he goes to and the clothes he puts on, 
ensure him against any harm in the way of either cold or heat. 
Give your patient a holiday from his bed, and his ailment will 
run its course in a shorter time and with less trouble than if 
he had continually been nailed down to it. 

To do this last is to increase the tediousness of the disease, 
to encourage the febrile estuation of the blood, and thirdly, 
to ensure a painful inflammation for the vesicles when they 
come out. 

If, however, either the coldness of the season or the presence 
of a multitude of pocks, impose upon the patient the necessity 
of keeping to his bed, I take care that he do not lie warmer, 
or be more overloaded with blankets, than was his wont when 
well. A moderate fire I allow only during the approach of 
winter, and that only in the morning and evening. Neither 
do I confine him to one spot and posture, lest he break out 1n 
a sweat; since I can confidently affirm, both from experience 
and on the grounds adduced above, that such cannot be 
encouraged without great danger. 

47. When the disease is going off, and when the free eruption 
of the vapours that proceed from the matter which has been 
converted into pus, is liable to be hindered by the hardness 
and crustiness of the pustules, it is proper to administer five or 
six spoonfuls of Canary wine, half boiled, or, in place of this, 
some temperate cordial, so that the putrid vapours may not 
return back to the mass of the blood. Now, and not till now, 
is the time for cordials. At the same time the diet may be of 
a somewhat warmer and more cordial nature. It may be sops 
of bread and beer with sugar, or it may be oatmeal gruel with 
beer and sugar. More than this will not be wanted as long as 
the disease be of the distinct and gentle sort, provided that the 
patient will allow of a treatment and diet so moderate. If, 
however, there be restlessness, or wakefulness, or any other 


142 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


similar symptoms that threaten a brain fever, the occasional 
use of a paregoric is recommended. 

48. This is the true and genuine method of treating this 
sort of smallpox, and however much it may be opposed by the 
great and unfounded prejudice of the partisans of an opposite 
practice, it is the method which will prevail when I am dead. 
I will not deny that many have been treated on a different 
principle, and that under such treatment they have recovered. 
On the other hand, it must be confessed that many have died 
under it, And this, when we consider that the disease of the 
distinct sort is in no wise dangerous of itself, is a sad reflection. 
Many die as it is, and more would do so were it not for the 
coldness of the weather at some of the seasons when the 
disease sets in, or from the practice of bleeding, otherwise 
unnecessary, which has lately come in fashion. Upon this 
principle, if either the obstinacy of friends, or the distrust of the 
patient interfere with the aforesaid regimen, I look upon it as 
safe to draw blood. In and of itself, this 1s bad practice, since 
it disturbs and confounds the necessary separation, and also 
withdraws the sustenance which was destined for the swelling 
and pustules. Yet it is a partial counterpoise to the hot 
regimen which is to succeed. Hence it renders this method, 
which we should not resort to, except upon compulsion, less 
dangerous and doubtful than it would be otherwise. 

49. From these statements it 1s easy to answer the common 
question, as to why so many of the poor survive, and so many 
of the rich sink under an attack of smallpox: that is, compara- 
tively speaking. This can be referred to one cause only, viz., 
the want of opportunity on the part of the poor man for hurting 
himself by a nice and delicate regimen. Their res augusta 
domi, as well as their more countrified manner of life ensures 
this. Still, even amongst the vulgar, many more have died of 
smallpox, since they learned the use of mithridate, diascordium, 
decoction of hartshorn, &c., than there did during the previous 
ages—ages less learned but more wise. Now-a-days, every 
house has its old woman ,—a practitioner in an art which she 
never learnt, to the killing of mankind. Thus much concerning 
the treatment of the so-called variole interstincte. 

50. But the pocks become confluent, and then there is much 
danger.  Periculose plenum opus alee. I consider that the 


SMALLPOX. 143 


confluent smallpox is as different a disease from the distinct, as 
the plague is from the confluent. Yet, with the generality of 
mankind, words are mistaken for things, and the treatment of 
the two diseases is the same. In this species of disease we 
have the result of a more intense inflammation of the blood. 
Hence, there is greater need for guarding the patient against 
being over-heated. 

Now, however much this species of smallpox, from the great 
heat of its nature, may require a regimen even cooler than that 
of the last-named disease, yet, in order to promote the swelling 
of the hands and face, without which it is all over with the 
patient, and for the sake of the elevation and sustenance of the 
pustules, and lastly, because from the very pain of the ulcera- 
tions, the patient cannot but be confined, it is best for him 
both to keep his bed, and to keep his hands in bed. At the 
same time he must be but lightly covered with clothes, and 
may be allowed to change his posture from one part of the bed 
to another, just as he was allowed to do in the distinct forms 
of the complaint, especially towards the end of the disease. 
At that time, when the fever of maturation is coming on, he must 
not only be left free to turn about, but he must be advised to 
do so. Indeed he must be turned, and that very often, night 
and day. So doing, the great heat 1s allayed, and those sweats, 
by which the mild humour, which is necessary for diluting 
and ripening the pocks, would be carried off, are avoided. 

51. It has been stated above, that ptyalism invariably attends 
this species. Now ptyalism is one of the main evacuations of 
Nature, and in this case stands in the room of the evacuation 
by the way of pustules. This last goes on worse in a low and 
weak disease like confluent smallpox, than in the discrete form. 
Hence, we must use our best endeavours to keep up the saliva- 
tion, and to preserve it in its full force; neither must it be 
arrested before its proper time, either by the use of hot remedies, 
or by forbidding the patient to drink freely of small beer, and 
such like thin liquors. Now as it is the habit of this same 
ptyalism, when it follows the bent of its nature, to set in with 
the first eruption, to decrease on the eleventh day, and not to 
cease altogether until the twelfth or thirteenth, it is a bad 
symptom for it to disappear before the first-named of these 
days, inasmuch as since the swelling of the face, through which 


144 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


a share of the morbific matter is evacuated, always disappears 
on the same day, the simultaneous arrest of the salvation 
poisons the patient with the venom of the putrescent variolous 
matter, and as there is no other passage for its expulsion, the 
patient is brought to the threshold of the grave; his only 
remaining hope being that the swelling of the hands may be of 
such an amount, as to save him from the jaws of death. 
This sometimes takes place. The swelling of the hands sets 
in later than that of the face, and consequently lasts longer. 

The salivation which is here of such importance and necessity, 
is much promoted by the patient taking free draughts of weak 
small beer, or of any other liquor which neither heats nor 
sweats. | 

52. But besides this, the vehement ebullition of the blood 
wherein the present disease far surpasses the last, must be 
allayed, and the ptyalism must be kept up; this sort of evacua- 
tion being necessary for the complaint. ‘To this end narcotic 
medicines are preferable to any other whatsoever. They appear, 
indeed, from their power of thickening the fluids, to be opposed 
to the necessary salivation : but from this prejudice I have long 
been disabused. I have used narcoties in the confluent small- 
pox, and in every instance, provided that the patient had 
arrived to puberty, I have found the event justify the practice. 
As to the blood of infants and of children, who, for the most 
part, sleep well throughout all the stages of the disease, it is 
less hot, and less requires a check of the sort in question. 
Besides which, by the use of narcotics, the diarrhoea is stopped. 
This hurts the patient, since a diarrhoea is the particular 
evacuation which Nature sets up with young subjects. 

53. With grown-up persons, paregoric remedies, if used 
frequently, have this advantage. In the first place, they bring 
on a gentle sleep, by doing which they restrain and guard 
against the violent ebullition of the blood, and the chances of 
a fever in the brain. Secondly, the swelling of the hands and 
face, the pre-eminent evacuation which Nature uses in this 
disease, proceeds more regularly. Thirdly (and this is a 
point which tends much towards the security of the patient), 
instead of the swelling of the face subsiding prematurely, and 
so endangering life, it is frequently, by the action of narcotics, 
sustained properly and kept up until the due time that Nature 


SMALLPOX. 145 


requires. The fervour of the blood is mitigated, and the in- 
flammation radiates towards the hands and face, indeed towards 
the whole surface of the body, according to the character of the 
disease, and with benefit to the sufferer. Lastly, the ptyalism 
itself is promoted. In some cases, indeed, from the effects of 
so thickening a medicine as opium, it may be delayed for a few 
hours. Nevertheless, as if Nature had taken fresh strength 
from the delay, she eventually rouses her energics, and carries 
the matter through successfully. 

I have also observed, that a salivation, which has decreased 
about the eleventh day, or even earlier, and which by doing so 
has put the patient in great peril, may be reproduced by the 
repeated administration of paregorics, and may be so kept 
up by them, as not to cease before the fourteenth day, and 
sometimes not so early as then. Hence, I generally prescribe 
fourteen drops of liquid laudanum, there or thereabouts, or 
else an ounce of syrup of poppies, dissolved 1n cowslip water, 
or in some similar distilled water. This may be taken by 
adults, after the full eruption of the pustules, every night, until 
the end of the disease, not only without their being at all 
harmed by it, but, on the contrary, to their great advantage. 
This I have learned from frequent experience. It is, I think, 
a good plan to give this same paregoric a little earlier in the 
day than usual, since it is easy to see that in the worse sort of 
smallpox, it is towards the evening that what may be called 
the hot paroxysm generally comes upon the patient, distressing 
him with restlessness, anxiety, and other symptoms. Now, by 
taking a paregoric about six or seven o’clock in the evening, 
this can be, in some degree, guarded against. 

54. In the confluent smallpox, diarrhoea is as constant a 
symptom with infants, as ptyalism with adults; these two 
evacuations being the methods that Nature adopts respectively, 
in eliminating the morbific matter. Now, to stop the diarrhea 
in one case, is as absurd as to check the ptyalism in the other. 
The misplaced endeavours of misguided women in stopping 
such diarrheeas, have caused the deaths of many thousands of 
infants. It is a wrong notion to imagine that because a loose- 
ness 1s dangerous in the distinct smallpox, it is dangerous in 
the confluent sort as well. It should be known that it is only 


prejudicial where the evacuation is through pustules. This it 
10 


146 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


is in the distinct disease; in the confluent the bowels are the 
natural outlet by which Nature seeks rehef. I leave, then, the 
diarrhoea to take its course. I assist Nature as Hippocrates 
bids me. I recommend the infant to be sometimes left in its 
cradle, sometimes taken out of it. If it have been weaned, I 
allow 1t the same diet as I have already allowed adults. 

55. During the last days of the disease, when the face 1s 
well nigh stiffened with dry, hard, and crusted pustules, I 
smear it over pretty frequently with the oil of sweet almonds. 
This is for the sake of letting the hot effluvia exhale freely, as 
well as to alleviate the pain caused by the stiffness. 

As to guarding the face against being disfigured by the scars, 
I try nothing at all. ‘The only effect of oils, liniments, and 
the like, is to make the white scurfs slower in coming off. 
These it is that, after the patient has left his bed, and whilst 
he is beginning to gain a little strength, by succeeding and 
displacing each other, leave behind the foul marks of the disease. 
These however, are not much to be feared, when, by reason of 
a moderate regimen, the pustules have not been much exaspe- 
rated, and no causticity has been contracted. 

56. Now, although this method, if prudently applied and 
accommodated to the particular circumstances of the case, will 
prevent all irregular and dangerous symptoms, and render the 
disease safe and mild, yet I am forced to proceed in a different 
manner with certain symptoms which I shall now relate, and 
which, whatever may be the cause from which they may have 
arisen previous to my being called in, I must remove and 
conquer. 

57. In the first place, then, if in the distinct sort the regimen 
has been so hot, and the sweats have been so continuous, that 
the face of the patient has not begun to swell by the eighth day 
(the pustules being sufficiently thick; only flaccid, and with 
the interspaces of a pale colour)—in such a case I strive with 
might and main for a more temperate regimen, and to restrain 
the orgasm of the blood. With this view I order a narcotic at 
once. Unless the brain be overheated, this will procure a gentle 
sleep, and temper the uncurbed violence of the blood. By doing 
this, it will determine the blood and heat to the face, a result 
which is both seasonable and natural to the disease. 

58. But if the mischief that has been thus caused be gone 


SMALLPOX. 147 


so far, as for the sweat which has hitherto flowed profusely, to 
stop of itself, for the patient to be seized with a frenzy, for him 
to complain of an excessive sickness, for him to pass httle though 
frequent urine; when matters are thus far gone, and death is 
at hand, I expect help from no remedy whatever, except only 
from either the free exhibition of narcotics, or from a large blood- 
letting, the body of the patient being exposed to the air. And 
this which I here propose will not appear so very rash and impro- 
bable, if we consider how many, even within the iron clutches 
of death, have been saved by sudden and abundant hemorrhages 
from the nostrils. This, too, must be remembered, that in this 
extreme agony, it is not because the pustules strike in (they 
often are both red and prominent at the last gasp), that death 
comes on apace, but because the face fails to swell. Now I 
suppose that no one will deny that venesection and moderate 
cooling will temper the blood, whilst whatever tempers the blood 
will promote the swelling of the face. Narcotics do the same, 
and they do it on the same principle. 

59. I do not say that in every case of brain fever, the most 
frequent symptom in smallpox, venesection is to be recommended 
at once. It is only proper when it comes on because the face 
has not swollen, and this in the distinct sort, and when the 
pustules are pretty abundant. It is also proper when, on ac- 
count of a hot regimen and cordial treatment, the blood is so 
angered and uncontrollable as to be wholly out of rule. In 
such cases it may be brought down to its proper temperature 
by paregorics and the other medicines of the same intention. 
When matters are thus far gone, the physician must think 
more of what is due to his conscience than of the peril to his 
credit ; must make up his mind to bleed in the manner afore- 
said; and must order his patient to be restored by fresh air. 
To effect this fully, I have often, in such fits of frenzy, thought 
it fit for the patient to be got out of his bed for a little while ; 
and, by so doing, I have freed many from death. Over and 
above what I have seen with my own eyes, there are number- 
less instances of this on record—of men snatched from the very 
jaws of the grave. Sometimes a patient thus frenzied has, 
with the extraordinary cunning of persons so afflicted, escaped 
the charge of his nurses, slipped out of bed, and exposed himself 
to the cold air, and that even during the night. Sometimes 


148 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


he has got cold water, either clandestinely or by earnest en- 
treaty to the nurse, and drank it off. In either case, by a 
happy error, a life that had been despaired of has been saved. 

60. I will trouble the reader with a single instance, which 
I got from the person concerned in it. He went to Bristol 
whilst in the flower of his youth, and was seized about the 
middle of summer by smallpox. Brain fever came on after- 
wards. The nurse went out into the town and left him to the 
charge of others, saying that she would soon be back. How- 
ever, she stayed beyond her time; and the man (as seemed to 
the lookers-on) died in the interim. The bystanders, being 
afraid that the corpse would soon become putrid, and looking 
both to the heat of the weather and the stout corpulent make 
of the supposed dead man, raised it from the bed, and laid it 
on a table, with nothing over it but a sheet. Soon after, the 
nurse came back, heard what had happened, and went into the 
chamber as the assistant at a sad ceremony. When, however, 
she raised the sheet, and saw the man's face, she fancied that 
there were some faint signs of hfe; and so put him back to 
bed. Following some device of her own, she brought him back 
to life, and within a few days saw him a sound man. 

61. To return, however, to the question—if, from the previous 
heat, the saliva be so viscid and feverish as almost to suffocate 
the patient (and this, about the eleventh day, is often the 
case) a gargle becomes necessary. This must be thrown into 
the mouth and fauces several times, both night and day, by 
means of a syringe. It may be made of either thin small 
beer, or barley-water with the honey of roses. Or it may be 


as follows: 
IX  Elm-bark, 5vj; 
Liquorice-root, 5ss; 
Raisins (stoned), xx ; 
Red rose-leaves, two handfuls. 
Boil down to half a pound in a sufficient quantity of water. 
Then dissolve in the strained liquor, 
Simple oxymel, 
Honey of roses, aa 3). 
Mix, and make into a gargle. 


If, however, the patient have been treated properly, the 
ptyalism, even though it have begun to be diminished, will do 
its work properly, and there will be no need of this remedy. 


SMALLPOX. 149 


And, in truth, when matters are so far gone as for the patient 
to be in danger of instantaneous suffocation, when he is over- 
whelmed with stupor, and when his breathing is stopped on 
every side, the remedy itself cannot safely be relied on—the 
patient is at the last gasp. In this case, I have sometimes 
given an emetic of the crocus metallorum. This must be done 
in large doses of an ounce and a half; inasmuch as, from the 
stupor of the patient, a smaller one would not act. Instead, 
however, of so acting, it might just agitate the humours that 


the patient is unable to get rid of, and so endanger his life, . 


And even this remedy is uncertain. It is a sad thing to say ; 
but so severe is the symptom, and so generally does it take off 
all who thus die on the eleventh day, that a remedy to meet it 
has yet to be discovered. 

62. The other symptoms that occur in smallpox, inasmuch 
as they can be guarded against by a moderate regimen, can be 
removed by the same. ‘Thus, the aforesaid frenzies, which 
arise from the over-heating of the brain, are cured by anything 
that cools the blood; whilst the same method relieves coma 
also, opposite as the two diseases may appear. Coma arises 
from an obstruction in the cortex of the brain, when the hot 
steams of the blood are driven thither violently and abundantly 
by the heat of the regimen and medicines. 

63. By this same cooling of the blood I have also seen the 
crimson spots removed ; but neither by this, nor by any other 
line of treatment whatsoever, have I ever seen either hematuria 
or violent eruptions of blood from the lungs at all arrested. 
Each of these two forms of hemorrhage (as far as my observa- 
tions have hitherto extended) is an undoubted presage of death. 

64. In the suppression of urine which sometimes occurs in 
young and vigorous subjects, and which arises from a great 
confusion and disorder of the animal spirits (these being sub- 
servient to its secretion, and partaking in the agitation of the 
heated blood and humours), I have had recourse to the whole 
tribe of diuretics in vain. Nothing has answered so well as 
to take the patient from his bed, to support him on the arms 
of the bystanders, and to walk him two or three times round 
the chamber. Do this, and he will speedily pass his water 
abundantly, and be much relieved by doing so. I can call, as 
evidence to this, many of my medical friends, who have been 


150 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


recommended by me to make the same experiment, and who 
have found it succeed. 

65. All the symptoms that arise from the striking-in of the 
variolous matter, either from excessive cold or from undue 
evacuations, are to be removed by the use of cordials and by 
proper regimen. Neither, however, must be continued beyond 
the continuance of the symptoms. The chief of these are the 
flattening or falling-in of the pustules, and the occurrence of 
diarrhoea ; and that in the discrete species. In the confluent 
form they mean nothing, being in the nature of the complaint. 
Neither is the diarrhoea of infants serious; since it brings 
relief rather than danger. In each of these cases we may give 
a cordial draught of the distilled waters with diascordium, liquid 
laudanum, or the like. This we may do, not only for the re- 
moval of the symptoms, but during any period of the disease ; 
provided that the patient complain of pain and distress in the 
stomach. However, to speak the plain truth, symptoms arising 
from the cold treatment are very rare indeed, compared with 
those that are due to the opposite practice—a practice which does 
much more mischief, and takes much less blame. It 1s my own 
opinion, that the common talk about the frequency of the re- 
trocession of the pustules in the confluent smallpox arises from 
a false view of their depressed character. ‘This is attributed 
to the resorption of the variolous matter; and the resorption 
of the variolous matter is laid to the charge of the cold. Now, 
the depression in question is nothing but the nature of the 
disease. In the distinct smallpox the same notions are abroad. 
Here, however, men fail to remember that Nature requires time 
for the ripening of her fruit, and they look for the eruption 
and development of the pustules before they are due. 

66. When the patient is convalescent, when the pustules 
are falling off, and a few days after he has been allowed meat, 
i. e. about the one-and-twentieth day, I deem it requisite to 
draw blood from the arm in those cases where the disease has 
been violent. The inflammation that has been impressed upon 
the humours of the patient (man or child) requires bloodletting, 
just as the colluvies of the intestines of similar origin requires a 
purge. This is clearly shown both by the character of the blood, 
which, when the disease has been strong, is pleuritie, and by 
the violent inflammations which settle in the eye. Nor are 


CONTINUED FEVER. Lol 


these all. "There are other dire effects from the over-heat and 
depravation of the blood. Men who were heretofore of athletic 
strength have been constrained during the remainder of their 
days to struggle against complaints in the chest and elsewhere ; 
parts upon which the hot and acrid humours have showered 
down like rain. 

If the pustules have been few, bleeding is unnecessary. 
After bleeding I order a purge, to be repeated three or four 
times. 

67. When the patient has recovered from an attack of the 
confluent smallpox, and when he leaves his bed every day, he 
sometimes suffers from a troublesome and painful swelling of 
the legs. This either goes off of itself after bleeding and 
purging, or is easily removed by the application of emollient 
and discutient herbs ; e. g. mallows, mullein-leaves, elder-leaves, 
laurel-leaves, chamomile-flowers, or melilot-flowers boiled in 
milk. 

Thus much concerning the history and treatment of the 
smallpox of these two years. In order to distinguish it from 
that which succeeded, I shall call it the Variole legitime. 


CHAPTER III. 


THE CONTINUED FEVER OF THE YEARS 1667, 1668, AND PART OF 1669. 


l. I Now speak of the fever which predominated during 
the variolous constitution which I have just written on. It 
set in along with the smallpox, and stood and fell with it. 
The character of the complaint was as follows. The patient 
suffered pain about the pit of the stomach, and was unable to 
bear the pressure of the hand upon that part, a symptom 
which I remember to have noted only in the present disease, 
and in smallpox. Headache, heat over the whole body, and 
petechiz supervened. On the other hand, there was no 
thirst. ‘The tongue was like that of a healthy person, except 
that it was sometimes white, rarely dry, never black. From 
the very beginning of the disease the patient broke out into 
profuse spontaneous sweats, but without being relieved by them. 


152 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


Whenever these were the results of heating remedies and a 
stimulant regimen, there was danger of a brain fever. Besides 
this, the number of petechiz increased, and all the other 
symptoms became aggravated. The secretion of urine was 
natural from the first, and this passed for a favorable sign. 
Nevertheless, it was, in reality, as little beneficial as the sweats 
which have just been noticed. With unskilful treatment the 
disease generally became exceedingly protracted. Unlike other 
fevers, it neither ceased of itself, nor went off by means of a 
crisis, On the contrary, it distressed the patient (unless he 
died first) with the severity of its symptoms for seven or eight 
weeks together. Occasionally, however, and towards the close, 
ptyalism would set in, and that freely. This, unless arrested by 
either other evacuations, or by over-stimulant remedies, would 
carry off the disease. A consummation so wholly beyond our 
hopes most usually took place when no notable evacuations 
had previously taken place, and when refrigerant medicines had 
not been administered. 

2. This fever originated in that particular epidemic consti- 
tution of the atmosphere, which, at the time im question, 
produced the smallpox. Hence, with the exception only of 
those symptoms which were the necessary effects and conse- 
quences of the eruptions, it was, if not identical, at least closely 
akin to the smallpox. Each disease set in similarly. In each 
there was the same pain upon pressure over the pit of the 
stomach. The colour of the tongue and the colour of the urine 
were alike in the two complaints. The profuseness and spon- 
taneity of the sweats occurred equally at the commencement 
of both maladies. The common tendency to salvation was 
also equal. It occurred during the fever, when its heat and 
violence reached beyond a certain intensity. It occurred during 
the smallpox, when the pustules became confluent. Finally, as 
the fever was most rife at that particular time when the ravages 
of smallpox were greater in these parts, than at any other 
time within the limits of my own observation, there can be but 
little doubt as to the identity of character between the two 
diseases. Of this I am certain—all those practical phenomena 
which determine treatment were the same for the two diseases, 
with the single exception of the eruption of the smallpox, and 
of its effects. There was, of course, no parallel to this in the 


CONTINUED FEVER. 153 


fever. Of this I satisfied myself by very accurate observations 
which I made during the treatment of the two disorders. For 
this reason, although no man dislikes the coining of new names 
more than myself, I may, perhaps, be allowed to designate the 
present fever as the variolous fever, from its likeness to the 
smallpox or variola. 

3. Much, however, as the fever might resemble variola, no 
man in his senses believes that it 1s to be cured by exactly the 
treatment of variola. In the smallpox, the inflamed particles 
are ejected and eliminated by means of small abscesses. In 
the fever, by means of salivation exclusively. As for the sweats, 
which, at the beginning of the disease, flowed profusely, they 
were symptomatic rather than critical. Nature intended nothing 
but salvation. Sometimes, indeed, she perverted even this 
salivation into either a looseness or a sweating; into a looseness, 
which arose when the inflammatory rays were carried down 
along the mesenteric arteries into the intestines, and there 
solicited them to excretion (a process which occurs in pleurisy 
and other inflammatory fevers, through the orgasm of the heated 
particles of the blood, and their efforts to become cooled), and 
into inordinate sweatings, when such accompanied the present 
fever, just as they accompanied the variola, and in both cases 
in accordance with Nature. By such evacuations, symptomatic 
as they really were, the salivation which was not symptomatic, 
but which was meant to be critical, was diverted elsewhere, so 
that unless Art could suggest some other evacuation, the disease 
would run on for some months, instead of being like other 
fevers, and undergoing concoction. 

4. In order, however, to go farther into the subject, for the 
sake of rightly understanding the nature of this fever, and 
with the view of placing on an immoveable foundation a super- 
structure of curative indications, it must be remarked, that in 
that fever which was rife and common during the constitution 
wherein intermittents were epidemic, the matter which had to 
be separated from the blood was so thick, that it could not be 
separated without previous digestion. This disposed it for a due 
evacuation at a due time, and for one which took place either in 
the way of increased perspiration, or critical dejections. Hence, 
all that the physician had to do was to accommodate his treat- 
ment to the disease in such a manner that there should be, on 


154 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the one hand, no such ebullition as might give rise to dangerous 
symptoms, nor yet, on the other, so little effervescence as to be 
unable to expel the morbific matter; since fevers are the in- 
struments which Nature has framed for such secretions. 

5. Again. In the plague there is a matter to be separated 
from the blood. But this is of such subtile and inflammable 
parts, that when in their highest degree of intensity, they pass 
through the blood, they do it in the twinkling of an eye, with 
the quickness of lightning, and too suddenly for ebulhtion to 
take place. Then it is only in some gland, or some external 
part, that they are caught and stopped. When this takes place, 
they are entangled, and so draw the parts around them first 
into inflammation, and afterwards into an aposteme. And an 
aposteme is Nature's contrivance for ridding the flesh of things 
that are hostile to it; even as a fever is a corresponding con- 
trivance for dissipating the bad part of the blood. 

In the case of an aposteme, it is the duty of the physician 
to regulate the evacuation of the pestilential matter through 
the proper outlets that Nature has contrived. And this he does; 
unless, indeed, he believe that he can substitute for the outlet 
of Nature some other evacuation over which he shall have a 
better control, and which shall be his own rather than Nature's. 
Now, just in the same way does Nature proceed in expelling 
the matter of smallpox. Notwithstanding its thicker and grosser 
nature, it is evacuated by means of pustules scattered all over 
the body, these doing the work of buboes and carbuncles. 
Here also, as in the plague, the curative indications are to be 
directed towards the regulation of the evacuation according to 
its natural outlet. 

6. In the present sort of inflammatory fever, the gross matter 
of the fever described above, which could only be expelled after 
previous digestion, is not found; so that we waste our labour 
when we strive to obtain such a digestion by promoting 
effervescence. Nay more, there 1s great danger in so doing. 
We may stimulate a disease of which the essence is already 
too violent an inflammation. Furthermore, as Nature has 
constituted for the present fever no evacuation in the way of an 
eruption,—much as it may resemble smallpox (where, as in the 
plague, there 7s an eruptive evacuation),—it follows, of neces- 
sity, that our whole object must be to allay the inflammation 


CONTINUED FEVER. 155 


by means of evacuations and cooling medicines. Upon this 
principle, I attack the disease, and I attack it successfully. 

7. As soon as I am sent for, I bleed from the arm, unless 
there be great weakness, or the patient be old. I repeat the 
bleeding twice, at intervals of two days, unless I see signs of 
convalescence. ‘The intermediate days I order an injection of 
milk and sugar (or something of the kind), and, also, the fol- 
lowing julep. ‘This last is to be taken frequently throughout 
the whole course of the disease. 


EK Purslain-water, 
Lettuce-water, 
Cowslip flower-water, àà Ziv; 
Syrup of lemons, Ziss ; 
Syrup of violets, 3). 
Three or four ounces to be taken several times a day, ad libitum. 


Whey, barley-water, and similar light drinks, are what I allow 
in ordinary; barley-broth, oatmeal-gruel, panadoes, roasted 
apples, &c., being the solid food. All meat-broths, even chicken- 
broth, I forbid. 

8. Above everything else, I order that the patient be not con- 
fined to his bed for the whole time. He must be up for a great 
part of every day. In this fever, as in pleurisy, rheumatism, and 
all those inflammatory diseases which are best combated by 
venesection and refrigerants, I have found that even the coolest 
of the one and the freest of the other are of no worth at 
all, if the patient be kept continually to his bed. The heat 
burns him up, especially in the summer time. Hence the 
sweatings, that were occasionally profuse, deterred me neither 
from this cooling method, nor from cooling medicines combined 
with removal from the bed; for although a man may fairly por- 
mise himself great advantage by taking his indications from 
those things which generally do good, experience is, in the pre- 
sent case, against him; and it is by experience that I have been 
taught that the patient not only gets no good from his sweats, 
but that, on the contrary, he is over-heated ; so much so, that 
often pleurisies, petechiz, and other symptoms of the worst 
sort succeed. And these arise less from the malignity of the 
disease, than from the badness of the treatment. 

9. If it be argued against me that the present method of 
treating fevers is altogether opposed to the theory of those writers 


156 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


who, with one voice, proclaim aloud that it is by diaphoresis 
that fevers are most properly and most naturally got rid of, I 
have, over and above the evidence of constant experience in this 
particular fever, thus much, besides, in my favour. I assume 
that all those learned men who call out for diaphoresis as the 
remedy to fever, mean that diaphoresis where the sweats are 
a secretion of some humour lurking in the blood previously 
digested; and that in the elaboration and preparation of this 
same humour, so that it may be eliminated by diaphoresis, 
Nature is employed for a definite and determined period. The 
fact, however, is far different. It is at the very onset of the 
malady that the sick man is dissolved in sweat, and this alone 
is a great part of the disease. Indeed, if we are to put any 
faith in the phenomena, this disease appears to depend more 
upon the mere heat and fervour of the blood, than upon any 
humours lurking in the blood, and requiring to be expelled, 
after due concoction, by sweatings. If, on the other hand, we 
suppose that in this fever, as in others, there 7s some humour 
which digestion has to ripen, why are we to humour Nature 
with cordials and a hot regimen, so provocative of diaphoresis? 
She is over busy already; and it is our duty to reduce her irre- 
gular efforts. The old axiom apples as well to sweats as to 
stools—cocta, non cruda, sunt medicanda. 

10. During this constitution I was called in to Dr. Morrice, 
who then practised medicine in London with the same credit 
that he now does at Petworth. He had this fever, with sweats 
and spots. By the consent of other physicians, mutual friends, 
he was bled, and then got up, having first wiped away the sweat. 
He used a cooling diet and medicines, and was presently re- 
heved. The violent symptoms soon went off. Continuing in 
the same treatment, he was well within a few days. 

1l. But to return to the question. The looseness, which 
often accompanies this fever, does not divert me a single hair's 
breadth from my plan. I have even found that nothing is so 
effectual a check as venesection and cool drinks, like whey, 
barley-water, &c.; since it is caused. by inflammatory vapours 
passing from the blood, through the mesenteric arteries, into 
the intestine, and there causing irritation. 

12. This method has succeeded admirably in the cure of this 
disease; andit seems the method thatis pre-eminently appro- 


CONTINUED FEVER. 157 


priate to it. I cannot, however, gainsay the cures from a 
treatment wholly opposite. Cordials and a hot regimen have 
been applied, and the patient has been freed from his disease. 
Still, I think that there was unnecessary risk. The petechia, 
which otherwise were very few, came out by this means very 
numerous. ‘The thirst, which generally gave little or no trouble, 
became distressing. The tongue, which was otherwise moist, 
and, except in being a little paler, much the same as the tongue 
of a healthy person, grew dry under the regimen, and often 
even black. Lastly, those very sweats, which were so anxiously 
forced by means of cordials, were driven in by the cordials 
themselves, and stopped. ‘Too much serum was given out at 
first; so that at length the blood failed in its supply of it. 
What should have been diluted grew thick; and then the 
patient withered up, shrunk at the surface, and, indeed, suffered 
everything that he should not suffer from the fever. At last, 
after the blood had been replenished with moisture from the 
ingesía, partly under the effect of medicines, and partly from 
the nature of the fever itself, it threw out, at one and the same 
time, the fresh serum and the disease. Now a crisis like this 
is a forced crisis, and, as such, hazardous. But the worst of 
all is, that it rarely takes place at all. 

19. It has been stated above, that this fever, and its twin 
sister the smallpox, may go off in salvation. ‘This is always 
a good sign. I have seen with my own eyes the fever go off 
as the salivation came on, and even true purple spots disappear. 
When such a salivation has set in, no other evacuation must 
be attempted, either in the way of bleeding or in the way of 
clysters. This may divert the humour elsewhere. Whey, and 
similar refrigerants, are the best promoters of the salivation ; 
just as, on the other hand, cordials, and similar heating medi- 
cines, thicken the matter, and obstruct its elimination. 

14. Whilst this fever still survived, a diarrhea, unaccom- 
panied by any manifest febrile symptoms, was prevalent. It 
was worst in ^68. At that time the constitution was tending 
towards the dysenteric constitution, which I shall describe as 
the character of the next-coming years. Nevertheless, I con- 
sider this to be the same fever with the variolous fever now rife; 
although it took another form, and exhibited itself with a fresh 
symptom. It was clear to me that chills and rigors preceded 


158 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the diarrhoea. It was also clear, that the diarrhoea itself de- 
pended on the same origin with the fever. Hence I think it 
probable, that this fever arose from the inflammatory rays turn- 
ing inwards towards the intestines, and so provoking them to 
expulsion. The blood, in the meanwhile, was freed, by this 
. diversion, from those disorders which otherwise would have been 
caused by such rays. Hence it remained free and unhurt, and 
exhibited no outward signs of fever. Besides this, the patient 
could not bear the pit of the stomach to be touched by the hand 
—a symptom common to both the fever and the smallpox of 
this constitution. This we have already stated. The same pain 
and the same tenderness would sometimes extend itself out- 
wardly to the epigastrium, and this would end in an aposteme, 
and kill the patient. All this made it as clear as the light of 
_ day that diarrhoea was of the same nature and essence with 
the dominant fever; and this opinion is confirmed by the effect 
of venesection, and the cooling medicine, regimen, and diet, 
which I found so advantageous in the fever. They cured the 
diarrhoea as well; whilst, if treated upon a different principle, 
with rhubarb or lenitive cathartics (given with the view of 
expelling those acrid juices which were supposed to irritate the 
bowels to such secretions), or even astringents, it changed its 
character from a mild disease to a deadly one, a fact that is 
sufficiently proved by the bills of mortality for the year. And 
so much for the epidemic diseases which depended on this 
constitution. 


SECTION IV. 


CHAPTER I. 


THE EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION OF PART OF THE YEAR 1699, AND OF 
THE WHOLE OF 1670, 1671, 1672, IN LONDON. 


1. Ar the beginning of the year 1669, the cholera morbus, and 
the gripes without stools, as well as dysentery, having appeared 
but sparingly during the last ten years, began to set 1n sharply. 
The cholera morbus I had never known to be so epidemic. Never- 
theless, during the very year when it was prevalent, it was limited 
to the month of August. There were few cases in September. 
However, the gripes without stools, lasted till the end of autumn. 
They accompanied the dysentery. Indeed, of the two, they 
were the most rife. - When the winter came, the gripes disap- 
peared, and never came back during the remainder of the years 
of the present constitution, however severely the dysentery might 
continue to rage, and however truly it was epidemic. The reason 
for this I consider to be as follows. The constitution had not 
yet become fully and perfectly a dysenteric constitution, so as 
to produce all the symptoms of dysentery in all instances alike. 
Next autumn, when the gripes came, they were no longer the 
gripes without stools. They had all the concomitant pathogno- 
monic symptoms of dysentery. 

2. Between these gripes without stools and the aforesaid 
fluxes, which were each so general, there was a new form of 
fever, associated with both the diseases, which attacked not 
only those who had suffered from either, but even those who 
had withstood the two. In a few cases, perhaps, there were 
slight gripes superadded, sometimes dry, sometimes with mo- 
tions. ‘This fever was, up to a certain point, the fever that 
not unfrequently accompanied the two diseases, and hence we 


160 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


may call it by the distinctive name of the dysenteric fever. It 
chiefly, as will be shown hereafter, differed from dysentery, 
in respect to its character, in being without the continued 
evacuations of that complaint, and in not possessing those 
symptoms necessarily dependent upon such evacuations. As 
the cold of winter approached, the dysentery accommodated 
itself to the season, and withdrew. The dysenteric fever, how- 
ever, raged all the more. Smallpox, too, appeared in some few 
places, but in a mild and manageable form. 

9. Quite at the beginning of the next year, as early as the 
first month of it, the measles set in. These increased day by 
day. Few familes, and almost no children, were unattacked. 
They increased gradually until the vernal equinox. Then they 
retreated just as gradually also. By June they were quite 
gone, and were never again seen during the whole of the years 
of the present constitution, with a few exceptions. In the very 
next, and exactly at the same time, they appeared here and 
there in a few isolated cases. 

4. Now, these measles prepared the way for a form of small- 
pox, which was hitherto new to me. Its phenomena were 
wholly irregular, utterly unlike those of any of my former ob- 
servations, and far distant in character from the smallpox of 
the preceding constitution. This will be shown 1n the forth- 
coming account of it. At preseut I shall call it the anomalous 
smallpox of the dysenteric constitution. 'This form of small- 
pox, although, during the first year, far less frequent than the 
measles, still attacked numerous individuals, occurring epidemi- 
cally until the month of June. Then was the time for the 
dysenteric fevers. As autumn approached (by the approach of 
autumn I mean August), the dysenteries returned upon us, 
raged far and wide, and were more destructive than they were 
even the year before. However, as in that year, they gave way 
to the cold of the winter, and asthey gave way, the dysenterie 
fever and the smallpox raged throughout the season. 

5. But about the begimning of the February of the next 
year, each disease decreased; but then there came a tertian ague 
to make up for them. This, without being exactly epidemic, was 
still more common than I found it to be at any other period 
within my recollection, since the date of that constitution which 


EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION. 161 


1 have mentioned above as being so favorable to it. Like other 
spring intermittents, it had disappeared by Midsummer. At the 
beginning of June the dysenteric fevers took their place as before. 
As the autumn advanced, the dysentery for a third time re- 
turned. When winter had come, it made way for the dysenteric 
fever and for the smallpox. These did havoc during the whole 
season. The dysentery, however, of that autumn was more 
limited than of the previous one. That seems to have been the 
time of its height. 

6. We have already stated, that, at the beginning of each 
particular year, some disease or other raged as an epidemic— 
measles in the beginning of 1670, and tertian agues in the be- 
ginning of 1671. We have also remarked that, by the predomi- 
nance of these complaints, the activity of the’ smallpox for the 
first months of the year was limited, so that it never broke its 
boundaries. But now, at the beginning of 1672, these barriers 
were removed. The smallpox was predominant and exclusive ; 
and, by consequence, it was epidemic as well. This was till about 
the beginning of July. Then set in dysenteric fevers. In August 
came the dysentery, for a fourth time, and the fevers gave 
way. Now the dysentery of this fourth year was not only less 
common than the dysenteries of the years before, but it was also 
milder in its symptoms: indeed, as there were occasional cases 
of smallpox, it was difficult to tell which of the two diseases pre- 
dominated. My own view is, that the atmospheric constitution 
was unfavorable to dysenteries, but that it was sufficiently 
favorable to smallpox to put the two complaints on a level; so 
standing in contrast with the constitutions of those years 
wherein, during the month of August, dysenteries had made 
general havoc. The winter, as was its wont, banished the 
dysenteries ; but not either the fever or the smallpox. This 
last disease, when the dysentery was gone, was paramount, and 
kept so throughout the winter. Nay more; next spring, and 
even at the beginning of summer, it was to be found here 
and there, although in a far milder form than the former of its 
kind. 

7. Now, when I say that just as one nail drives out another, 
so does epidemic drive out epidemic, I do not mean that the 
disease which is expelled and which retreats disappears alto- 


gether; I only mean that it decreases in frequency. During 
EU 


162 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


this constitution both diseases were to be found, each beyond 
the season that it was suited to. "Thus, dysentery is a disease 
of autumn. Nevertheless, a few persons—very few—suffered 
from dysentery during the spring. 

8. We have, then, sufficiently proved, that throughout the 
whole of this constitution dysenteric fevers set in about the 
beginning of July; July being to fevers what February is to 
agues. Next, that as the autumn advanced, the dysenteries— 
diseases truly autumnal— succeeded ; that these were dispersed 
by the winter, and that then came dysenteric fever and small- 
pox ; that this smallpox not only wore out the winter, but that 
it extended itself into the subsequent spring and the succeed- 
ing summer ; and that, lastly, the second July brought in the 
epidemic fever, and excluded the variola. This was the sequence 
of the changes under the constitution m question. 

9. I may further observe that, just as an individual case of 
an epidemic has its proper periods, its stages of increase, crisis, 
and decline, so also has the constitution in general, which 
determines the epidemic: that is, proportionally to the time 
of its predominance, it has definite periods; it increases from 
day to day in its epidemic extension ; it reaches its height ; it 
then decreases at the rate of its increase; and, lastly, it dies 
away altogether, making room for a fresh constitution. The 
symptoms are, each and all, severest at the beginning ; they then 
gradually decline; whilst at the end of the constitution they 
have become as mild and tolerable as is compatible with the 
nature of the disease to which they are referred. This is shown 
by the fluxes ahd the variole of this constitution ; and it will 
be shown still better in the sequel. I now proceed to describe 
in detail the diseases of this constitution, taking them in the 
order of their occurrence. 


CHOLERA MORBUS. 163 


CHAPTER II. 


CHOLERA MORBUS OF THE YEAR 1669. 


1. Tuts disease, which, as is said before, had, in the year 
1669, spread itself at large more than in any previous one, seems 
partial to a particular part of the year. It sets in at the end 
of the summer and the beginning of autumn, as truly as the 
swallow comes in spring, or the cuckoo sings in summer. In 
the character of its symptoms it is not altogether unlike the 
common cholera of intemperance and drunkenness, which may 
occur at any season. Neither is its treatment very dissimilar. 
Still it is a disease of another family. Its presence is under- 
stood at once. There is vomiting toa great degree; and there 
are also foul, difficult, and straining motions from the bowels. 
There is intense pain in the belly, there is wind, and there are 
distension, heartburn, and thirst. The pulse is quick and fre- 
quent, at times small and unequal. The feeling of sickness is 
most distressing; and is accompanied with heat and disquiet. 
The perspiration sometimes amounts to absolute sweating. 
The legs and arms are cramped, and the extremities cold. To 
these symptoms, and to others of a hke stamp, we may add 
faintness. ‘The disease terrifies the lookers-on ; and sometimes 
proves fatal within twenty-four hours. Besides this, there is 
dry cholera, characterised by flatus from both above and below, 
but without either vomiting or purging. Of this, however, I 
remember only a single case, and that was at the beginning of 
the autumn of the year in question, a time when the common 
sort was most common, and presented itself in the shape of a 
whole host of diseases. 

2. By careful reflection, by observation, and by the results of 
a manifold experience, I have thoroughly convinced myself that 
to expel the acrid humours, the focus of the malady, by ca- 
thartics, is just to add fuel to flame. The mildest operation of 
the mildest purge disturbs the whole system, and induces fresh 
commotions. On the other hand, by checking the impetus of 
the disease at its onset, I should wear out the patient by an 
intestine war; since I should just confine the enemy to his seat 


164 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


in the bowels, should impede the natural evacuations, and de- 
tain those humours which were seeking for an outlet. For 
these reasons I keep a middle course. In part I evacuate the 
humours; in part I dilute them. By these means I reduce 
the disease to a manageable form. I have done so as often as 
it has occurred; and the plan of treatment has been tried by 
me for many years, and, as such, approved. 

3. Boil a tender chicken in about three gallons of spring 
water, so that there be little or no relish of the flesh. Of this 
let the patient take several basinfuls whilst warm; or, if this 
cannot be had, posset drink. At the same time, inject a good 
quantity of it up the bowels by successive injections ; so that 
partly from above and partly from below the whole may be taken 
in; and after that, thrown out. Mix with both the draughts 
and the clysters about an ounce of the syrup of lettuce, violets, 
purslane, or water-hly. Yet this is not absolutely necessary. 
The draughts and clysters will do their work single-handed. 
By means of these the belly is filled, and, as it were, turned 
topsy-turvy, by a vast bulk of liquor; and hence the acrid 
humours are ejected, or, if not ejected, are brought down to a 
due temperature. 

4. This washing-out takes three or four hours. When it is 
done, the following draught finishes the cure : 


EK Cowslip-water, 3); 
Aqua mirabilis, 3ij ; 
Liquid laudanum, mxvj. 
Mix. 


Instead of this, any common narcotic may be substituted. 

5. Now this method of diluting the humours is much safer 
and shorter than the common practice of evacuants and astrin- 
gents. These are fraught with danger. They make the in- 
testine turmoil both sharper and fiercer. They turn things 
upside down. They keep the enemy to his quarters; and they 
change him from a visitor to a denizen. Besides this, the 
disease is prolonged, and there is danger in the delay. Vicious 
humours creep into the blood.  Ill-conditioned fever is excited ; 
and the patient suffers not only a severe disease, but a long 
one also. 

6. If the physician has not been called until after the patient 


CHOLERA MORBUS. 165 


has been purged, and vomited for some hours— say ten or 
twelve—so that he is exhausted, and cold at the extremities, 
the remedies aforesaid must be laid aside. Laudanum must 
be his sheet-anchor, and it must be resorted to at once ; it must 
be given whilst the symptoms are urgent, and it must be given 
when the symptoms have abated; it must be given night and 
morning, until the patient has recovered his full health and 
strength. 

7. This disease, however much it may be epidemic, very 
rarely occurs beyond the limits of the month of August, the 
month in whichit begins. This makes me admire the beautiful 
and subtle mechanism of Nature in the determination of the 
origin and the decline of epidemics; since even, although the 
same causes, viz. the abundance of fruit, are common to the 
months of September and August, the effect 1s different. 

Now, whoever carefully studies the phenomena of the true 
and legitimate cholera morbus, the only form with which we 
now have to deal, will certainly own that, although produced 
by the same causes, and accompanied by the same symptoms, 
it differs from that sort of common cholera which may occur at 
any time of the year. The two diseases are as far as the poles 
asunder. It seems as if, 1n the air of the particular month of 
August, there were some hidden and peculiar property, which 
impressed, either on the blood or on the bowels, some specific 
alteration, adapted to this disease, and to none other. 


166 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER III. 


THE DYSENTERY OF PART OF 1669, AND OF THE WHOLE OF 
1670, 1671, AND 1672. 


1. Gmirzs without stools (dry gripes) set in at the beginning 
of August 1669, and they were quite as common as, if not 
commoner than, the dysentery of the same autumn. Sometimes 
they were attended with fever; sometimes not. The gripings 
of the dysentery of the season answered to the gripings of the 
present diseases. Both sorts were most severe; both sorts came 
on at intervals, and both sorts were unaccompanied by motions, 
either slimy or stercoraceous. 'lhe dry gripes went along with 
dysentery throughout the whole autumn, and at the same 
rate; but, as stated above, they were not present during the 
remaining years of the present constitution. Now, as this 
form of gripes differed but little from the dysentery, either in 
its nature or treatment, I confine myself to the last-named 
disease. 

2. I observed that, now as ever, the epidemic dysentery set 
in at the beginning of autumn, and declined at the approach 
of winter. When, however, the character of the year was of 
pre-eminently dysenteric constitution, it attacked a few patients 
at any time ; most, perhaps, at the beginning of the spring, or 
even earlier, if there was a sudden thaw. Few indeed suffered; 
yet those few have convinced me that, in a season so little 
dysenteric of itself, the state of things most conducive to the 
disease was the state just mentioned. So it was during the 
years of the predominance of the dysentery. At odd times, 
men were attacked even at the end of winter, or the beginning 
of spring. 

3. The disease sets in with chills and shivers. After these 
come the heat of fever, then gripings of the belly, and, lastly, 
stools. Occasionally there is no fever; in which case, the 
gripes lead the way, and the purging follows soon after. Great 
torment of the belly, and sinking of the intestines, whenever 
motions are passed, are constant ; and these motions are frequent, 
as well as distressing, the bowels coming down as they take 


DYSENTERY. 167 


place. They are always more slimy than stercoraceous, feces 
being rarely present, and when present, causing but little pain. 
With these slimy motions appear streaks of blood, though not 
always. Sometimes, indeed, there is no passage of any blood 
whatever from first to last. Notwithstanding, provided that 
the motions be frequent, slimy, and attended with griping, the 
disease is a true bloody flux, or dysentery. In the meantime 
the patient, if a young man, or if heated by cordials, is feverish. 
His tongue is whitish, and coated with thick mucous fur; if 
the disease be violent, it is dry and black. The strength is 
depressed, the spirits are low, all the symptoms of an ill-con- 
ditioned fever are present. And there are not only great pain 
and distress, but there is danger also. Unless the treatment be 
skilful, hfe 1sin peril. The vital warmth, and the due spirits may 
be impaired by the frequency of the evacuations before the 
peccant matter can be ejected from the blood; hands and feet 
may turn cold ; the patient may die as quickly as from an acute 
disease ; and even if he escape the fate this once, he may be ex- 
posed to numerous and distressing symptoms of different sorts. 
For instance, when the disease has made certain progress, there 
will appear in his motions, instead of the mere bloody filaments 
which were at first mixed up with the feces, pure blood, in 
large quantities, free from even mucus, and in every evacua- 
tion. This indicates the corrosion of some of the larger vessels 
that spread over the intestines, and it threatens death. At 
times the intestines, from the force of the inflammation which 
has been produced by the over-abundant afflux of hot and acrid 
matters upon the affected parts, have been struck with in- 
curable gangrene. Aphthe, too, towards the close of the disease, 
beset the inner parts of the mouth and the fauces, particularly 
when the body has been long overheated, and when the eva- 
cuation of the peccant matter has been checked by astringent 
remedies, administered before the application of catharties. 
These are generally signs of imminent dissolution. 

4. If the patient get over the aforesaid symptoms, and if the 
disease be protracted, the intestines become affected successively 
downwards, until the whole mischief is forced down to the 
reetum, and ends 1n tenesmus. "Then the effect of stercoraceous 
feces is wholly different from what it was in dysentery. It is 


168 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


intensely painful. The fzces, as they pass, scrape the bowels 
in their tender state ; whereas, the slimy dejections only irritate 
the rectum, whilst the matter which 1s there, and there alone, en- 
gendered is evacuated. This disease, although not unfrequently 
fatal to adults, and still more so to old men, is nevertheless 
exceedingly harmless with infants. They will bear it for months 
together without suffering, provided only that Nature be left 
to herseif. 

5. I cannot say how far the dysentery of Ireland agrees 
or disagrees with the dysentery which I have just described ; 
inasmuch as it has not come under my notice. Neither can I 
say how this present dysentery may stand in eomparison with 
the English dysenteries of other years. Just as there are various 
forms of smallpox, and of other epidemies, one for one consti- 
tution and another for another, one for one mode of treatment 
and another for another, so may there be divers forms of dysen- 
tery. Nor is this any wonderful /usus nature. All own that 
the more we look deeply into the ways of Nature, the more 
does there shine forth before us her wonderful variety, as well 
as the divine machinery of her operations. And these things 
are so far above our comprehension, that the man who shall 
take upon himself to measure them all by his mind, searching 
into the details of the manifold operations of Nature, will fail 
and fall—fall hke Phaeton. 


* Magnis excidet ausis." 


Still he will fall. And more than this; even if he inquire rightly, 
all that he will get as reward for his best discoveries will be 
a measure of abuse, and that because he 1s the first inventor. 
6. Furthermore, it must be observed, that all epidemics, when 
they first leap into life, emerging from the lap of Nature, as far, 
atleast, as their essence is discoverable in their phenomena, are 
combined with a principle more spirituous and more subtile than 
that which they possess when they have grown their growth: 
and that, just as they decline from their strength, they become 
thick and humoral. Whatever may be those particles which 
are mixed with the atmosphere, which war against health, and 
which determine the epidemic constitution, it is certain that they 
have a greater power of action at the time of their first outbreak 


DYSENTERY. 169 


than at any time afterwards. During the first months of the 
prevalence of the plague, scarcely a day passed without some 
one being attacked by the contagion, being taken suddenly in 
the streets, being stricken wholly without warning, and dying at 
once: whilst, when the disease had come to maturity, no one was 
ever so suddenly prostrated, but what fever, and other sym- 
ptoms, gave him warning. From this it is abundantly clear, that 
the disease was more violent and acute in its infancy, than it was 
at a later stage. It killed, to be sure, fewer ; but then it killed 
them by means of a more violent influence on the system. 

7. It was the same with the flux. The earlier the stage the 
worse the symptoms. Looking, indeed, to the numder of per- 
sons afflicted, hat increased as the disease approached its climax, 
or status, and, for that reason, more d:ed of it than at its begin- 
ning. But looking at the severity of the symptoms, /hey were 
the worst at the onset; worse, then, than at the status; and 
worse, then, than during the decline. So that other things 
being equal, the proportion of those whom 


"EAXafie vo0óvpsoc 0&varoc kai Moipa kparaur, 


was greatest at first. Moreover, the longer the disease lasted, 
the more it became humoral. Thus; during the first autumn, 
many patients had no purging at all; whilst, in respect to the 
severity of the gripings, the intensity of the fever, and the 
sudden prostration of strength, the flux of that year was, by a 
long way, ahead of the fluxes of the following ones. Even 
when the dysenteries of the early years were accompanied by 
purging, they appeared to be of a more subtile and spirituous 
character than their followers; the straining and pains when 
at stool were greater and more frequent; and the dejections 
themselves, especially when feecal, were strange and scanty. 
Just in proportion as the disease developed itself, the gripings 
generally decreased, and the dejections were more sterco- 
raceous. At last, when the constitution itself was on the wane, 
the gripes were scarcely felt, and the motions were more fzecal 
than slimy. 

8. To come, however, to the curative indications. After I 
had diligently and maturely weighed in my mind the various 
symptoms which occur during this disease, I discovered that it 
was a fever—a fever, indeed, of a kind of its own— turned 


170 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


inwardly upon the bowels. By means of this fever, the hot and 
acrid humours contained in the mass of the blood, and irritating 
it accordingly, are deposited in the aforesaid parts through the 
meseraic arteries. Hence, the vehement rush of blood and 
humours striving for the same outlet ; hence the enlargement 
of the orifices of the vessels ; and, hence, the passing of blood 
by stools. In the meanwhile, there is a constant effort on the 
part of the intestines towards the expulsion of the irritating 
humours; and, thence, the mucus with which they are naturally 
coated is carried off by the different motions—sometimes freely, 
sometimes sparingly. The indications, then, were plain; and 
I had nothing else to do but to cause, as soon as possible, a 
revulsion of the acrid humours by venesection, by which I 
tempered the remaining volume of blood, and, then, to draw off 
the aforesaid humours by purging. 

9. This, then, was my method. As soon as I was sent for, 
I bled from the arm, and ordered a paregoric for that night, 
and my usual lenitive cathartic for the next day. 


Ix Tamarinds, 3ss ; 
Senna-leaves, 5ij ; 
Rhubarb, 5ss. 
Boil with water quant. suff. Add to three ounces of the strained 
mixture, 
Manna, 
Solutive syrup of roses, aa 4]. 
Mix, and make into a draught; to be taken the first thing in the 
morning. 


I prefer this potion to any electuary made of rhubarb, where 
the rhubarb is in small quantity. Although rhubarb is par- 
ticularly adapted for cholera, and for the evacuation of any acrid 
humours, nevertheless, unless, by being mixed up with a little 
manna, syrup of roses, or something of the sort, it be of a 
sufficient quantity to ensure a free catharsis, it is not worth 
much in fluxes. Yet, since it is clear that even the mildest 
laxative, mere eccoprotic medicines, increase the cramps of the 
belly, and cause both dejection of spirits and general disorders 
to the patient, (and that through the additional commotion 
which they excite, during their operation, in the blood and 
humours,) I am in the habit, in cases of dysentery, of following 
the purgative with an anodyne rather earlier than is done in 


DYSENTERY. 171 


other cases. So I give it at any hour during the afternoon, 
provided that the purge have done its work ; and so I check the 
commotion that I had originally excited. I order, however, 
the cathartic to be taken every other day, twice more; the 
anodyne being given after it. And this anodyne I use on the 
days where there is no purging. It breaks the violence of the 
symptoms, and gives me time for the elimination of the peccant 
humour. It generally consists of the liquid laudanum, in doses 
of sixteen or eighteen drops, out of some cordial liquid. 

10. After the first venesection and catharsis, I recommend, 
throughout all the stages of the disease, a mild cordial; either 
plague-water, or the compound water of scordium, or else 
something similar; e. g.: 

Water of black cherries, 

Water of strawberries, 

Plague-water, 

Compound scordium-water, 

Cinnamon water with barley, aa 3j ; 
Prepared pearls, 5iss ; 

Crystalline sugar, q. s. 

Water of damask-roses, 3ss (for flavour). 


Mix, and make into a julep. Take four or five spoonfuls when 
faint, or ad libitum. 


This is best used with old or phlegmatic subjects. It raises, 
to a certain degree, their spirits, which are pulled down by the 
violent purging of the disease. It patches them up. The 
drink is milk with three parts water, or else the so-called 
white decoction, and sometimes posset. "The white decoction 
consists of two ounces of calcined hartshorn, and crumbs of white 
bread, respectively. These are boiled in spring water, from 
three pints to two, and afterwards sweetened with the finest 
white sugar. If the strength is so much pulled down as to 
require more than this, half a pint of canary wine, boiled along 
with a quart of water, and cooled, may be taken as the ordinary 
drink. Sometimes, too, they may be dieted with panado, and 
sometimes with lean mutton-broth. The older the patient, the 
more I kept him to his bed; and the more freely I allowed 
him cordial drinks. This treatment is by far the best I have 
hitherto met with for this disease, which very rarely lasts be- 
yond the third purge. 


172 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


1l. Now, if the disease wil not yield to these remedies, I 
give the above-mentioned anodyne every day, night and morning, 
until recovery ; nay, frequently to make things doubly sure, I 
give it every eight hours, 1. e. three times in the twenty-four ; 
and that in a dose as large as five-and-twenty drops— provided 
that the previous doses have been insufficient. Besides which, 
I give a clyster of half a pint of cow’s milk, and half an 
ounce of Venice treacle. This is thrown up every day, and 1s of 
wonderful efficacy in checking the motions. Whatever may be 
the fears of inexperienced practitioners, I, for my own part, have 
never yet seen any mischief arise from the repetition of so many 
opiates ; although I have known cases where it has been con- 
tinued for weeks. I may remark, however, that when the flux 
amounts only to a diarrhoea, a dose of rhubarb, given every 
morning, will suffice; the bloodletting and the strong purging 
being dispensed with. The dose must be, half a drachm (more 
or less, according to the strength of the patient) of the powder, 
made into a bolus, with a sufficient quantity of diascordium, 
and with the addition of two drops of the essential oil of cin- 
namon.  Lvery night after this an opiate must be taken, 
consisting of fourteen drops of the liquid laudanum, and one 
ounce of barley-water and cinnamon. ‘The diet is to be the 
diet ordered for dysentery ; and, if wanted, a clyster is to be 
thrown up every day. But these observations are incidental. 

12. I will quote a single case as verifying this treatment ; 
sparing the readers many others. ‘The learned and pious 
Dr. Thomas Belke, one of the domestic chaplams of the 
Karl of St. Albans, was afflicted with the acute dysentery which 
has just been described, and was cured by the remedy just re- 
commended. 

13. Infants suffering from this disease are to be treated on 
the same principle as adults; only with differences of degree 
in the amount of the bloodletting, the activity of the cathartics, 
and the strength of the anodyne. These must be regulated by 
the age. To speak in the way of illustration, two drops of 
laudanum are enough for a child one year old. 

14. The liquid laudanum, which I have mentioned as being 
given in daily draughts, is prepared in the following plain 
manner : 


DYSENTERY. 173 


Sherry wine, O ij; 
Opium, ^ij; 
"Saffron, 5j; 
Cinnamon in powder, 
Cloves in powder, àà 5j. 
Mix, and put into a vapour-bath, for two or three days, until the 
liquor become of a proper consistency. Strain, and lay by for 
use. 


I do not profess to consider that this form of laudanum has any 
advantage over the solid opium in point of strength. Its merit 
consists in being of a more convenient form, and more uniform 
in the action of its doses. It can be given with wine, distilled 
water, or any other liquid. And here I cannot but break out 
in praise of the great God, the Giver of all good things, who 
hath granted to the human race, as a comfort in their afflictions, 
no medicine of the value of opium, either in regard to the number 
of diseases that it can control, or its efficiency in extirpating 
them. As all forms of opium come alike from the poppy, it is 
an attempt upon our credulity to pretend that the virtues of 
narcotics in general, and of opium in particular, are due to any 
artificial or peculiar process on the part of the preparer.  Who- 
ever will be guided by experience, and will diligently and fre- 
quently compare the effects of the natural juice with the effects 
of its artificial preparations, will discover that there is no 
difference between them; and will be well assured that the 
wonderful effects of the remedy are the effects of its own natural 
virtue and excellence, and not due to any skill of any clever 
artificer whatever. So necessary an instrument is opium in the 
hand of a skilful man, that medicine would be a cripple without 
it; and whoever understands it well, will do more with it alone 
than he could well hope to do from any single medicine. To 
know it only as a means of procuring sleep, or of allaying pain, 
or of checking diarrhea, is to know it only by halves. Like 
a Deiphie sword, it can be used for many purposes besides. 
Of cordials, it is the best that has hitherto been discovered in 
Nature. I had nearly said it was the only one. 

15. In this manner was the dysentery to he treated generally. 
Jt must, however, be remembered, that I have said that, during 
the first year of its prevalence, it was of a more subtile character 
than afterwards. For this reason it was not so amenable to 
purgatives, as to remedies which acted on the blood by diluting, 


174 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


and tempering both it and those acrid humours which are thrown 
by it upon the intestinal canal. Hence, during the first autumn, 
when the dysentery was in combination with the dry gripes, I 
applied the following treatment in both cases. I applied it 
steadily, and the event in both cases justified me. But, as the 
cold set in, I found the treatment less efficacious; and the next 
and following years, when the disease had departed from the 
original subtilty of its character, it was wholly useless. 

16. I proceeded thus. If the patient was in the flower of 
his age, and had fever, I bled from the arm, and, after an hour 
or two, I drenched him abundantly with liquids, as I was wont 
to do in cholera ; not however, as then, with chicken-broth, or 
posset, but with whey. This was to be drunk cold, but to be 
thrown as a clyster warm, without either sugar or aught else, 
and in the same quantities, both ways, as in cholera. I always 
observed that, with the return of the fourth enema, the gripes 
and the bloody motions had gone. When this was finished, 
and the whey was used up, which was generally the case in two 
or three hours, provided that the patient bore the treatment, I 
ordered him to his bed. Here he would soon break out spon- 
taneously in a sweat. This I refer to the whey which has been 
taken up in the blood, and I keep it on for twenty-four hours, 
but I do not force it. In the meantime, I allowed nothing but 
a little raw milk, which was, indeed, all that I allowed for three 
or four days after leaving his bed. If, from leaving off either 
the bed or the milk too soon, the patient suffered a relapse, the 
treatment was gone over afresh. Now, if this method be both 
sure and quick, no sensible man will reject it, because it is not 
recommended by a pompous apparatus of remedies. 

17. That a fever, attended with such symptoms as have been 
described, is found in those places, and at those seasons, where 
and when dysentery is epidemic; and also that this method is 
adapted to the cure thereof, is proved by the evidence of the 
faithful and learned Dr. Butter, who accompanied the Honorable 
Henry Howard, in his embassy from the King of Great Britain 
to the Emperor of Morocco. In that country he observed (as 
he has himself told me) that dysentery was, as it always was, an 
epidemic disease, and also that the fever with which it was joined 
was the fever that I have described. This he treated both in 
the city of Fez and elsewhere, and he treated it just as I did 


DYSENTERY. 175 


in England, always successfully, and with blacks and Europeans 
alike. Now, neither of us borrowed our practice of the other. 
In distant countries we hit upon the same. He, however, de- 
clared that, in his hands, and in those countries, the method of 
deluging the dysentery by liquids was the best, and I, for my 
own part, can easily believe, that in a hot climate, such treat- 
ment may be much more successful than in England. 

18. During the first autumn of this constitution, the most 
excellent and learned Daniel Coxe, Doctor of Physic, suffered 
from a severe dysentery, and, being called in, I attended. He 
was cured by the treatment aforesaid. The gripes and bloody 
motions ceased after the fourth clyster. He was kept to his 
bed, limited to milk diet, and this was all that was necessary 
in order to restore him to perfect health. This was done in 
his own case, cito, tute, ac jucunde; and, so he himself after- 
wards cured others, and that within the current autumn. Next 
year, however, the very same treatment failed. 

19. It has been stated already, that very often the disease, 
if it become protracted, affects the intestines from above down- 
wards, each and all, in their order, so that, finally, it comes 
down with its whole force upon the rectum. This produces the 
continual desire of going to stool, when nothing is passed 
beyond some slight matters of slime and blood. When this has 
taken place, treatment like the aforesaid will be thrown away, 
so will all abstergent, conglutinating, or adstringent injections, 
which people are given to throw up according to the various stages 
of some supposed ulcer. Fomentations, hip-baths, fumigations, 
and suppositories, administered with like intentions, are alike 
useless. In simple truth, there is no ulcer in the rectum at all. 
The bowels, however, in proportion as they regain their strength, 
use it in thrusting the morbific matter downwards. ‘This, to 
the rectum, is a continued source of irritation; and hence that 
gut is continually squeezing out that mucous matter with which 
the wisdom of Nature has lined it. This is the reason for giving 
it strength; so that, like the upper bowels, it may eliminate 
the relics of the disease. Now, this can only be done by 
remedies that give strength generally. Topical applications, of 
whatever sort, produce weakness rather than strength, since 
they are foreign to the parts with which they come in contact, 


176 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


and they distress and irritate accordingly. Hence the patient 
must bear up, until his strength can be renewed by restorative 
diet, and by cordial drinks, taken freely, and in a palatable 
form. As this returns, the tenesmus will depart of itself, and 
that pari passu with the returning strength. 

20. Sometimes, though very rarely, it happens that a dysen- 
tery, not rightly cured originally, shall afflict a particular 
patient for many years, the whole mass of his hlood having 
taken, as it were, a dysenteric crasis. This creates a continuous 
supply of acrid and hot humours to be thrown upon the bowels ; 
the sick man, in the meanwhile, being enabled to attend 
to his usual pursuit in a tolerable manner. An instance of 
this presented itself lately, in the case of a woman, who 
lived but a few doors from my own. She was afflicted with 
the flux throughout the last three years of the constitution. 
Many remedies had been tried before I saw her. I then ordered 
venesection, and nothing beyond. ‘This I repeated, but re- 
peated at intervals. I was encouraged by the blood being 
pleuritic, and also by the circumstance of relief being felt after 
each bleeding. I therefore went on with it, and restored the 
patient to her original health. 

21. Before concluding, I must remark that, although during 
the years when the fluxes were thus prevalent, the aforesaid eva- 
cuations, previous to the administration of laudanum, were indis- 
pensable; in any other constitution less decidedly favorable 
to the disease than the present, they might safely be omitted. 
Then the disease could be disposed of at once by laudanum 
alone. Thus much for dysentery. 


CONTINUED FEVER. 17 


NI 


CHAPTER IV. 


THE CONTINUED FEVER OF PART OF THE YEAR 1669, AND THE 
WHOLE OF 1670, 1671, 1672. 


1. At the time when the dysenteries were raging, there arose 
a fever like that of the dysenteries. Now this attacked not 
only those who had been stricken by the dysentery, but those 
who, except that they occasionally, and very rarely, suffered 
from purging and dry gripes, were otherwise healthy. This 
fever had the same manifest and apparent causes as the flux. 
Its symptoms, also, were those of the dysenteric fever. Hence, 
if you take the evacuations by stool, and the symptoms depen- 
dent thereon, from the dysentery, the fever in question was, 
in its nature, a dysentery. Furthermore, during the whole 
course of the constitution, the alteration of the respective 
symptoms were the same, and so were the differential circum- 
stances which determined the increase, the status, and the 
‘decline of the symptoms. For this reason I called the fever 
the dysenteric fever. 

2. The fever in question sometimes (chiefly during the first 
years of its prevalence) set in with gripes, in which case they 
were a mild sort. Sometimes these gripes followed the fever ; 
sometimes (and this generally) there were none at all. The 
sweatings, which were so copious in the previous fever, were 
here rare and scanty. The headache, however, was worse. 
The tongue, although moist and pale, as in the other kind of 
fever, was covered with a thick fur; this being an additional 
symptom. This disease rarely went off by ptyalism. The other 
did so frequently. Aphthze, also, which occurred towards the 
departure of the complaint, were commoner now than before ; 
indeed, they were commoner than lI have ever seen them. 
Nothing was commoner, during the present epidemic, than the 
deposition of the foul and acrid matters of the blood upon the 
mouth and gullet, especially towards the end of the fever. 
This gave rise to the aforesaid symptom, which was the most 
constant in those cases where the disease had been obstinate 
and prolonged, and where the regimen had been over-heating. 

12 


178 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


It was also a symptom common to the present fever, and to the 
fever of the dysenteries. 

These aphthe were engendered precisely in the same way with 
the aphthze which were invariably engendered during the fever 
which complicated the more obstinate cases of dysentery. They 
were the surest to appear, if, over and above the use of a hot 
regimen, the evacuations from the bowels had been checked by 
astringent medicines before the fomes of the disease had been 
carried off by bleeding and purging. 

3. These were the most constant characteristics of the fever. 
The other symptoms changed with the year, being dependent 
on certain manifest qualities of the atmosphere, which varied 
with the season ; also coinciding with the general progress, and 
the different stages of the dysentery. In order to make this 
clear, and in order to set in a strong light the wonderful 
mechanism of Nature, in the production of epidemics, I must 
go somewhat deeply into the matter. It must be observed, that, 
although the manifest qualities of the atmosphere may not 
impress the same influence upon all constitutions alike, so as to 
originate all those epidemics which are referred to it, as to 
their proper productive cause, they can, nevertheless, influence 
them for a time, so that epidemies are admitted or excluded, 
as the manifest qualities of the air oppose or favour them. 
What they originate in, is the same hidden and inexplicable 
condition ; and here the universal constitution remains the 
same, whether promoted or retarded, as far as such causes are 
concerned. 

4. Hence, it happens that when various epidemics fall within 
the same constitution, this or that disease raises itself above the 
rest, at that particular season, for which the sensible qualities 
of the air have ordained it. It then gives way to some other 
form, which the different conditions of a different season evoke. 
From this reason, the stationary fever, be it what 1t may, which 
is referable to the ruling epidemic of the year, is the most rife 
in the month of July. At that time it attacks men in whole 
masses. However, as the autumn approaches, it gives place to 
the great epidemic which is now gaining strength, and which 
characterises the year. At this season, the fever becomes 
rarer; a fact which every year verifies. The summer that has 
just passed heats the bodies of men, whereon the fevers that 


CONTINUED FEVER. 179 


are proper to the constitution fix themselves upon them the 
more readily. But as autumn approaches, the predominant 
epidemic again takes the reins of empire, and the fevers with- 
draw themselves from its influence. 

5. Just as the fevers in question must refer their appearance 
in one month rather than another, to the particular sensible 
qualities of the atmosphere, so also do several symptoms, which, 
as far as they depend upon the general constitution of the 
year, are of an opposite nature, borrow some of their manifest 
qualities from the fever of the month; and this is the reason 
why, in those years where the said fevers attack many at a time, 
they are attended with various new symptoms, besides those 
which are proper to them, as proceeding from the same consti- 
tution. Nevertheless, they continue true to their original 
nature, notwithstanding the language of the generality. Here, 
by reason of the difference of the phenomena, a fresh fever is 
attributed to every fresh year. But such pre-eminently peculiar 
symptoms continue for a few weeks only. These being over, for 
the remainder of the year there is nothing beyond the proper 
symptoms, referable to the stationary fever of the particular 
constitution. 

6. This was made clear for fever in general, and for the dysen- 
teric fever in particular, by the July of 1671 and 1672. In the 
former month there were violent sickness, bile like verdigris, and 
a great inclination to diarrhoea throughout the whole disease. In 
the latter there was pain in the muscular parts of the body— 
especially at the joints—like the pain of rheumatism. Besides 
this, there was an inflammation of the fauces ; like (but milder 
than) a quinsy. Yet both these symptoms met in the same specific 
fever, and each required the same treatment. They differed only 
in respect to their sensible qualities, and these arose from the 
time at which they happened. Yet their sudden and unforeseen 
breaking out, about the beginning of these months, and the new 
complexion of certain symptoms for a certain time, although 
they neither differed in kind, nor in the treatment required, from 
the fever which ran through the whole year, are strong proofs 
of the difficulty of distinguishing by its phenomena alone all the 
different forms of fever at different times. By looking, how- 
ever, carefully to the other diseases of the same year, as well as 
to the proper symptoms of the fever, and its tendency towards 


180 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


this or that evacuation, it may be done. "The consideration, too, 
of the method or medicine, whereby it is most easily cured, con- 
duces much toward the same investigation. 

7. As to the other differences of the symptoms which accom- 
pany stationary fevers, they only have reference to the different 
periods of the constitution. Hence, they are either intense or 
remiss, as the symptoms of the other epidemics to which they 
belong are heightened or depressed. 

8. To return to the question. This fever, which, as afore- 
said, began with the bloody flux, kept pace with it, except for 
a short time, when it withdrew a little during the prevalence of 
the other epidemics of the year. Yet it continued during the 
whole constitution—attackmg few or many, as the case 
might be. 

9. Now as to the cure. T had observed that the phenomena 
of many of the sufferers from the flux were plainly the pheno- 
mena of the solitary fevers of the year. Hence, it was reasonable 
to attempt the cure, by an imitation, in some sort, of that evacua- 
tion, by which Nature was wont to expel those sharp and cor- 
rosive matters, which was the containing cause both of the flux 
and the fever that went with it. So that I proceeded with the 
fever even as with the flux, in respect to both the bleeding and 
the repetition of the purging. The only exception was in the 
use of paregorics. In the cases of fever these, when exhibited 
between the purgings, did mischief; whereas they did good in 
the dysentery. In the fever, they retained what should have 
been expelled. 

On the first days the patient fed on barley and oatmeal broths, 
panado, and the like. His drink was small beer, slightly 
warmed. After having been once or twice purged, there was 
no necessity for denying him a little chicken, or some similar 
digestible meat. "The purging treatment gave us a latitude in 
this respect which we should not have had without it. The 
third purge—a day between each— generally cured the disease. 
But not always. Sometimes fresh ones were required. If, after 
the fever, the strength of the patient was broken, and worn out 
(and this was commonly the case with hysterical women), I tried 
to call back the spirits by a small dose of laudanum. ‘This 
remedy, however, I seldom repeated, and I never prescribed it 
at all until two or three days had elapsed from the last purge. 


CONTINUED FEVER. 181 


Nothing, however, was so refreshing and restorative as the free 
use of the air, as soon as the fever had receded. 

10. The hint to this practice was taken at the beginning of 
the constitution. Whilst I was very thoughtfully and anxiously 
turning over in my mind the nature of this new fever, I was called 
to a young woman, who lived near me; she had a pain 1n the 
forepart of her head, which much distressed her, and besides 
this, the other symptoms by which dysenteric fever is overloaded. 
On inquiring of her how the fever had come on, and how long 
she had had it, I learned that a fortnight before she had suffered 
from the dysentery which was then so common, that this went 
off, either of its own accord, or from the effect of medicines, and 
that, after it had so gone off, the fever, with pain in the head, 
came on. Hereupon I conjectured that the best way of meet- 
ing these symptoms was by substituting for the flux, that had 
been checked, some similar evacuation. I cured her accordingly. 
This was treatment suited to the fevers of the constitution, and 
in general they yielded easily. I always consider that, in acute 
diseases, it is not sufficient to do what is done by the rashest 
of old women-— prove that the treatment is good from the 
event being favorable. More than this is required. ‘The dis- 
ease must be conquered easily, and, as far as its nature will 
allow, must go off of its own accord. This, however, is by the 
way. 

ll. At the beginning of June 1672, the most noble and 
learned Lord Salisbury suffered from this fever, and from gripes, 
his belly being, nevertheless, bound. He sent for me, and was 
cured by the method proposed. And I needed none other as 
long as the fever lasted. 

12. In young people, and sometimes in others a little older, 
this fever would affect the head. In such cases the patient was 
delirious; yet it was not the delirium of fever in general, viz. 
delirium of the nature of a frenzy. It was a sort of stupor, 
and more akin to a carus, or lethargy. This happened chiefly 
to those who, at the onset of the disease, were unlucky enough 
to have resorted to all sorts of means to force sweats. Nor was 
I lucky enough, at that time, to know how to relieve them ; 
yet I tried all the noted medicines, and left no stone unturned. 
And so much for the fever of this constitution. 


182 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER V. 


MEASLES IN THE YEAR 1670. 


1. Tug measles set in early as usual; i. e. at the beginning of 
January. They gained strength every day, until they reached 
their height, about the vernal equinox. After this they gra- 
dually decreased at the same rate; and by the month of July 
were wholly gone. As far as I have hitherto seen, I believe 
these measles to be the most perfect disease of their genus, for 
which reason I shall record their history with all the care and 
minuteness that the observations which I then made will 
warrant. 

2. This disease begins and ends within the above-named 
period. It generally attacks infants, and, with them, runs 
through the whole family. It begins with shiverings and 
shakings, and with an inequality of heat and cold, which, 
during the first day, mutually succeed each other. By the 
second day, this has terminated in a genuine fever, accom- 
panied with general disorder, thirst, want of appetite, white 
(but not dry) tongue, slight cough, heaviness of the head and 
eyes, and continued drowsiness. Generally there is a weeping 
from the eyes and nostrils; and this epiphora passes for one of 
the surest signs of the accession of the complaint. But to this 
may be added another sign equally sure; viz. the character of 
the eruption. Although measles usually shows itself by an 
exanthema upon the face, there appears upon the breast a 
second sort of breaking-out. This consists in broad red patches 
on a level with the skin, rather than true exanthemata. The 
patient sneezes as if from cold, his eyelids (a little before 
the eruption) become puffy ; sometimes he vomits: oftener he 
has a looseness ; the stools being greenish. This last symptom 
is commonest with infants teething, who also are more cross 
than usual. The symptoms increase till the fourth day. At 
that period (although sometimes a day later) little red spots, 
just like flea-bites, begin to come out on the forehead and the 
rest of the face. These increase both in size and number, group 
themselves in clusters, and mark the face with largish red spots 


MEASLES. 183 


of different figures. These red spots are formed by small red 
papule, thick set, and just raised above the level of the skin. 
The fact that they really protrude, can scarcely be deter- 
mined by the eye. It can, however, be ascertained by feeling 
the surface with the fingers. From the face—where they first 
appear—these spots spread downwards to the breast and belly; 
afterwards to the thighs and legs. Upon all these parts, how- 
ever, they appear as red marks only. There is no sensible pro- 
tuberance by which they show themselves above the level of the 
skin. 

3. In measles, the eruption has not the same effect in allay- 
ing the previous symptoms as it has in smallpox. The cough 
and fever still continue, so does the difficulty of breathing. The 
defluxion and the weakness still remain in the eyes. The con- 
tinued drowsiness and want of appetite all keep on as before. 
The continuance, however, of the vomiting I have never yet 
observed. On the sixth day—there or thereabouts—the fore- 
. head and face grow rough, the cnticle being broken, and the 
pustules' dying off. At the same time, the spots upon the rest 
of the body attain their greatest breadth and redness.. By the 
eighth day the spots have disappeared from the face, and show 
but faintly elsewhere. On the ninth day there are no spots 
anywhere. In place thereof, the face, trunk, and limbs are all 
covered with particles of loosened cuticle, so that they look as 
if they had been powdered over with flour, since the particles 
of broken cuticle are slightly raised, scarcely hold together, 
and, as the disease goes off, peel off in small particles, and fall 
from the whole of the body in the form of scales. 

4. The measles most usually disappear about the eighth day, 
at which time, the vulgar (deceived by their reckoning in cases 
of smallpox) insist that they have struck in. In reality, how- 
ever, they have finished their course. Thus it is believed that 
those symptoms which come on as the measles go off, are oc- 
casioned by their being struck in too soon; for it must be noted, 
that just at the time in question, the fever and the difficulty 
in breathing increase, and the cough becomes so harassing, 
that the patient can sleep neither night nor day. Infants, 
especially when they have been subjected to the hot regimen, 


! Pustules—so in the text of Dr. Greenhill. 


184 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


and patients generally who have had recourse to hot remedies 
for the sake of promoting the eruption, are liable to these 
symptoms— symptoms which show themselves just as the measles 
give way. Hence, they may be thrown into a peripneumony, 
and this kills more patients than either the smallpox itself, or 
any symptom connected therewith. Yet, provided that the 
measles are properly treated, they are free from danger. <A 
diarrhoea is a frequent symptom. This may succeed the disease, 
and run on for weeks, after every other symptom has departed ; 
and it is of great danger to the patient, from the loss of spirits 
referable to the profuseness of the evacuation. Sometimes, 
too, after the more intense kinds of the hot regimen, the erup- 
tion grows first livid, and afterwards black. This happens to 
adults only; and when it does happen, all is over with the 
patient, unless, immediately upon the blackness, he be assisted 
by means of bloodletting and the cooling effects of a more tem- 
perate method. 

5. The treatment of measles, like their nature, is nearly the 
treatment of smallpox. Hot medicines and the hot regimen 
are full of danger, however much they may be used by igno- 
rant old women, with the intention of removing the disease as 
far as possible from the heart. This method, above others, has 
been most successful with me. The patient is kept to his bed for 
no more than two or three days after the measles have come out. 
In this way the blood may gently, and in its own way, breathe 
out, through the pores of the skin, those inflamed particles 
which are easily separable, but which offend it. He has, there- 
fore, neither more blankets nor more fire than he would if well. 
All meats I forbid ; but I allow oatmeal-gruel, and barley-broth, 
and the like; sometimes a roasted apple. His drink is either 
small beer, or milk boiled with three parts of water. I often 
ease the cough, which is constant in this disease, with a pectoral 
decoction, taken now and then, or with linctus, given with the 
same view. Above everything else, I take care to give diaco- 
dium every night throughout the disease. 


Kk Pectoral decoction, lb.ss ; 
Syrup of violets, 
Syrup of maidenhair, aa Ziss. 
Mix, and make into an apozem. Take three or four ounces three 
or four times a day. 


MEASLES. 185 


IX Oil of sweet almonds, 3j ; 
Syrup of violets, 
Syrup of maidenhair, aa 2j; 
White sugar-candy, q. s. 
Mix, and make into a linctus. To be taken frequently; especially 
when the cough is distressing. 
Ix Black-cherry-water, Ziij ; 
Syrup of white poppy, 3). 
Mix, and make into a draught; to be taken every night. 

If the patient be an infant, the dose of the pectoral and 
anodyne must be lessened according to his age. 

6. He that uses this remedy rarely dies; nor, with the ex- 
ception of the necessary and inevitable symptoms of the disease, 
is he afflicted with any superadded disorders. It is the cough 
which is the most distressing. However, it is not dangerous, 
unless it continue after the disease is gone. And even then, 
if it last a week or a fortnight, by the use of fresh air, and the 
proper pectoral remedies, it is got rid of with no great difficulty. 
Nay, it may go off of its own accord. 

7. But if, however, the patient, from the use of cordials, or 
from a hot regimen, be in a condition which is by no means 
unfrequent after the departure of the measles; 1. e. if his life 
be endangered from the violence of a fever, from difficulty of 
breathing, or from any other symptom of a peripneumony, I 
take blood from the arm, and I do it with remarkable success. 
The bleeding is proportionate to the age; but it can be applied 
even to infants. At times I have even repeated it. Under 
Divine Providence, I have saved many infants in this way, and 
I know of no other. The symptoms themselves occur with 
infants at the recession of the eruption ; and they are so fatal, 
that they do more to fill Charon’s boat than the smallpox itself. 
Further—the diarrhoea, which has been stated to follow the 
measles, is equally cured by bloodletting. It arises (as in 
pleurisies, peripneumonies, and other inflammatory diseases) 
from the vapours of inflamed blood rushing upon the bowels, 
and so forcing them to the secretion. Nothing but venesection 
allays this. It makes a revulsion of the sharp humours, and 
reduces the blood to its proper temperature. 

8. Let no one wonder that I recommend bleeding with tender 
infants. As far as I have observed, it is as safe with them as 
with adults. Indeed, so necessary is it in some cases, that, in 


186 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


respect to these particular symptoms, and in respect to some 
others as well, infants cannot be cured without it. For instance, 
how could we ease the convulsions of the teething-time of in- 
fants—which take place about the ninth or tenth month, and 
are accompanied with pain and swelling of the gums, com- 
pression and irritation of the nerves, and paroxysms that arise 
therefrom——without venesection ? In such cases it is better 
by far than all the most vaunted specifies; be they what they 
may. Some of these, indeed, add to heat, and do mischief ; 
and, however much they may have the credit of arresting the 
disorder by means of some occult property, frequently kill the 
little sufferer. At present, too, I say nothing about the im- 
mense relief afforded in the pertussis—or the hooping-cough— 
of infants by venesection. Here it leaves far behind it all 
pectoral remedies whatsoever. 

9. What has been said concerning the cure of those symptoms 
which occur during the going-off of measles, occasionally applies 
to the treatment of them at their height. It does so when 
they are occasioned by an adscititious and artificial heat. In 
1670, I was called in to see a maid servant of the Lady Anne 
Barrington’s, suffering under this disease, together with a fever 
and difficulty of breathing, with purple spots discolouring the 
whole of her body, and with other symptoms of the most dan- 
gerous kind. I put down all this to the hot regimen, and the 
abundant hot medicines which she had used ; and so I bled 
her at the arm, and ordered a cooling pectoral ptisan to be 
taken frequently. By the help of this, and by a more at- 
tempered regimen, the purple spots and the other bad symptoms 
gradually disappeared. 

10. This disease, as stated above, began in the month of 
January, and increased every day until the vernal equinox. 
From that time forwards it decreased, and wholly disappeared 
in July. With the exception of a few places, where it showed 
itself in the following spring, it never returned during any of 
the years in which the present constitution prevailed. So much 
for the measles. 


ANOMALOUS SMALLPOX. l 


(os) 
"E 


CHAPTER VI. 


ANOMALOUS SMALLPOX OF THE YEARS 1670, 1671, 1672. 


1. We have already said that the measles last described intro- 
duced another sort of smallpox, different from the one of which 
we have previously treated; a sort which broke out about the same 
time with the measles, viz. at the beginning of January 1669, 
This, although less epidemic than the measles, accompanied 
them throughout the time they were predominant; and when 
the measles ceased, the smallpox continued to the end of the 
constitution. Nevertheless, it gave way to the bloody flux. 
This was paramount. Theautumn favouredit. In the winter, 
however, as the flux was suppressed by the cold, which was 
unfavorable to it, the smallpox returned. And this was the 
order throughout all the years of the constitution ; except that 
during the last autumn thereof (that of ’72) the constitution 
was fading; so that whilst it was slow to promote the dysen- 
teries, which were then growing old, the smallpox, contrary to 
custom, was particularly rife. Hence, it divided this part of 
the constitution with the flux. And it was not easy to say 
which disease attacked the most persons. As far as I may 
guess, it was the flux which was the most prevalent. 

Furthermore, just like epidemics in general, the smallpox 
was very severe at its first approach; and it increased day by 
day until it reached its height. Having passed this, it decreased 
gradually, both as to the violence of the symptoms, and the 
number of the sufferers. 

2. But now I must come to the particular phenomena of the 
present sort. The first appearance was contrary to my previous 
expectation. There were considerable points of difference be- 
tween the symptoms of this smallpox and that of the last con- 
stitution which I had so diligently observed. At present, 
however, I shall only treat of those appearances which differed 
from those of the other sort; omitting all that was common to 
that disease which I have already so largely described. 

3. The distinct kind differed from the common distinct kind: 
of the previous constitution in the following points : 


188 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


Firstly. The distinct eruption had hitherto rarely come out 
before the first day. It now came out generally on the third. 
This, also, is the case with the confluent sort. 

Secondly. The present pustules rose to a less size than the 
last, but they were more angry; and during the last days of the 
disease, when they came to maturity, were often black. 

Thirdly. "Phe patient was sometimes (though not often) at- 
tacked by salivation, as in the confluent smallpox, even when 
the pustules were few. 

From all this it is proved that the distinct smallpox of the 
present year came close to the nature of the confluent, and that 
it partook of a more intense inflammation than is generally the 
case where it is so distinct. | 

4. As to the confluent sort, it differed from other forms ob- 
served by me in other years in many points. These I shall 
enumerate. The eruption appeared either on the second or 
on the third day. It appeared, also, in the shape of a reddish 
uniform swelling, covering the whole face, thicker than the 
swelling of erysipelas, and with no visible space between the 
pustules. The remainder of the body was disguised by a mass 
of innumerable pustules, red, angry, running together, and lke 
a broad band. Upon this ground were scattered several vesicles, 
just like the vesicles of a burn, conspicuous enough in respect 
to size, and distended with clear serum, which flowed out plen- 
tifully when the skin was broken, the flesh underneath being 
black, and, as it were, mortified. This terrible symptom was 
rare, and, indeed, it was only during the first month of the 
predominance of the disease that it appeared. 

5. At that time, an honest man, named Collins, a brewer, 
in St. Giles’s parish, was one among many other sufferers, and 
sent for me, at the beginning of January ’69. Mr. Collins’s 
son, who was an infant, had bladders on his thighs as big as a 
walnut, filled with clear serum. When the skin broke, the 
underlying flesh looked all mortified. Soon after, the child 
died, and death was the lot of all those whom I ever saw with 
this fatal symptom. 

6. On the eleventh day—there or thereabouts—a white shin- 
ing pellicle covered the reddish swelling in many parts of the 
face, and at length became spread over the whole. Soon after- 
wards, this pellicle threw out a crusty shining matter, the colour 


ANOMALOUS SMALLPOX. 189 


whereof was neither yellow nor brown (the colours in the usual 
sorts of smallpox), but of a deep red, like clotted blood. "This, 
as the pustules ripened, waxed dark, till the whole face became - 
steeped black, as with soot. In the other kind of confluent 
smallpox, the patient was im the greatest danger on the eleventh 
day, a day that to most of them was the last. In this kind, 
however, unless from immoderate heat of the regimen he 
could only find coolness in the grave, he commonly lived on 
till the fourteenth, fifteenth, and even to the seventeenth day, 
and if this was got over, he recovered. It must be remarked, 
however, that those who were marked for death by that fatal 
symptom of vesicles and mortification which have been described 
as occurring during the first month of the constitution, died 
within a few days of the eruption. 

7. Both the fever and the symptoms in general which pre- 
ceded or accompanied this kind of smallpox, were more violent 
than in the former, and indicated a greater inflammation. The 
patients were more inclined to ptyalism. The pustules were 
angrier, as well as much smaller; so much so, that, on their 
first appearance, one could hardly distinguish them from erysi- 
pelas, or from measles, if the last-named disease had not been 
clearly known by the day of the eruption, and by other signs 
enumerated in the history of measles. When the pustules 
fell off, the scurf stuck on for a longer time than before, 
and imprinted fouler marks on the skin. It is fit to be noted, 
that during the whole of this constitution, wherein dysentery 
raged as an epidemic, when the smallpox was exasperated by a 
hot regimen, it sometimes made its way out by means of a flux. 
This I had never before observed. 

8. But I may remark, that this smallpox was not accom- 
panied by symptoms thus dreadful throughout its whole course. 
After the second year, there was a change. The smallpox of 
the third year, 1672, began to grow mild, put off its blackness, 
and grew, by degrees, yellow, like a honeycomb, this being the 
hue natural to the legitimate smallpox during the period of its 
maturity. Hence, during the last year of the constitution, it 
was altogether as benign and favorable as the nature of the 
disease allows. Nevertheless, it was quite manifest that it was 
to be referred to a fresh class, both from the small size of the 
pustules and from the salivation, as well as from other matters. 


190 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


9. However much, by reason of that ignorance of the causes 
of every specific difference in which we are involved, it may be 
impossible for us to draw up a formal reason for the differences 
between the present smallpox and those of other constitutions, 
I, nevertheless, am certain, from the several phenomena, that 
the inflammation was much more violent in the present than 
in the previous sort of variola. Hence the whole principle of 
treatment was to regulate, by as many checks as possible, the 
unbridled ebullition of the blood. Now, after the exhibition of 
hypnoties, as explained above, this was best done by the cool 
regimen, by allowing the patient the free use of such drinks as 
would not heat him, but would rather allay that violent heat, 
which in this disease, at the ripening of the pustules, harasses 
and dries up the patient more than in any other. Now, the white 
decoction, which is made of bread, a small quantity of calcined 
hartshorn, and a large quantity of water, sweetened with sugar, 
is good; but milk and water (one part milk to three of water) 
boiled is better. It is more palatable to the patient, as well 
as more cooling. And it is not only by allaying the violent 
heat which attends the fever of maturation that free draughts 
of liquid do good. ‘They do good, also, by promoting the sali- 
vation, and by protracting it to a period beyond what would be 
the case if the patient were overheated. ^ Besides this, I have 
often observed, that liquors, thus freely drunk, have succeeded 
so well, that by their use the smallpox, which began with the 
signs of the confluent sort, became, during its progress, distinct ; 
that the pustules, which would otherwise, as they ripened, have 
thrown off a matter which was at first red, and afterwards 
black, became yellow; and, lastly, that instead of being small 
and angry, they were just as should be. 

10. With women who have the smallpox, menstruation is 
frequently present. This in nowise contraindicates the free use 
of diluents. Indeed, if the courses do not appear at their proper 
times, such drinks are indicated. There is only one reason 
why women areendangered. The blood is over-attenuated by 
the heat of the disease. Qud data porta ruit. It follows the 
guidance of Nature. It does this all the more violently when 
the ill-placed care of female doctors has added fuel to fire, in 
the shape of a hot regimen, decoctions of hartshorn, marigold 
flowers, and the like. On the other hand, whatever is a potent 


ANOMALOUS SMALLPOX. 191 


diluent to the blood, and whatever tempers it, helps to keep 
in its proper state both the pustules and the swelling of the 
hands and face. It does not, perhaps, do this immediately ; 
but it does check confluence. Heating remedies do the con- 
trary. However much they may appear to have such a ten- 
dency, they are wide of the mark, inasmuch as they promote 
the continued flux of the blood. I have no doubt but that 
many women have died through this error. Their attendants have 
feared lest the pustules should flatten by reason of the flux of 
the blood, and have, consequently, tried to meet the danger by 
cordials and a hot regimen; and by so doing, they have de- 
stroyed the poor women. By mixing up various astringents 
with their cordials, they have been over busy about stopping the 
hemorrhage, and keeping up the pustules and the swelling to 
their due height. 

1l. Not long ago I treated a lady, equally eminent for her 
birth and virtues, who was labouring under an ill-conditioned 
black smallpox. Now, however much I forbid, at the beginning 
of the disease, all things by which the blood may be agitated, and 
that in this case, because the patient was in the flower of her 
youth, was of a sanguine temperament, and was suffering at the 
very hottest time of year, she was suddenly taken, on the third 
day of the eruption, with so profuse a flow of the courses, and that 
at an unusual time, that the women about her fancied that she 
must have miscarried. And this symptom lasted violently for 
several days. Nevertheless, I did not think fit to intermit the 
drinks of milk and water that I had at first prescribed. I even 
ordered them to be taken more freely. This I did throughout 
the disease, and more especially when the fever of maturation 
was coming on. At that time, that very learned and candid 
physician, Dr. Millington, formerly a fellow of the same college 
with myself, and now my very good friend, joined in consulta- 
tion; and he, perceiving that, considering the nature of the 
disease, all things went well, readily consented that our patient 
should go on drinking the aforesaid liquors, and that freely; 
since she frequently declared that they were both cooling and 
agreeable to her; that they refreshed her, and that they pro- 
moted the spitting. When, however, the face began to harden, 
and to be covered with a crust, we feared lest our patient should 
be hurt by reason of putrid vapours from the purulent matter 


192 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


(which in this pre-eminently bad sort of smallpox smelt ill), 
and accordingly allowed a few teaspoonfuls of mulled canary 
wine to be taken once a day, or as often as she felt sick 
at stomach. With these few things—along with a pare- 
goric draught taken every night—she recovered; having been 
threatened neither with delirium nor any other grave symptom 
saving and excepting only the hemorrhage aforesaid. The 
face and hands swelled as they ought to do. The pustules 
were as large as the nature of the disease admitted, The sali- 
vation was easy from first to last. Lastly, however much the 
pustules which beset the face might, as they ripened, take a 
dark hue; they were, for the other parts in general, more 
yellow than black. 

12. However great might be the degrees of heat and inflam- 
mation whereby the smallpox peculiar to this constitution might 
surpass the smallpox of other constitutions, experience taught 
me this—viz. that as long as the pustules were distinct, or even 
few 1n number, there was no need of throwing in so great a 
quantity of the aforesaid drinks. It was enough for the patient 
to drink small beer according to his thirst; and to take also 
oatmeal gruel, panado, and now and then a roasted apple. If 
he were past fourteen, he took a paregoric of diacodium, in 
case he either was sick, or began to grow light-headed from 
lying awake. This—with the exception of keeping the patient 
in bed— was all I did whenever the pustules were few. And 
by this method alone my dear son, William Sydenham, was, 
under God's blessing, recovered from the smallpox of the dis- 
tinct sort, of which he was ill, in the December of 1670. 

13. I have nothing more to add concerning the smallpox of 
this constitution. It differs from the sort which I have de- 
scribed at large, only in being hotter and more inflammatory. 
This made it the more necessary to restrain the intense heat 
which was natural to it, and which threatened to burn up the 
patient. 


BILIOUS COLIC. 193 


CHAPTER VII. 


THE BILIOUS COLIC OF THE YEARS 1670, 1671, 1672. 


l. TunovcnovT the whole of these years the constitution 
determined the blood towards the deposition of hot and choleric 
humours in the bowels. Hence the bilious colic attacked 
more than usual. Now, although this disease, being chronic 
rather than acute, apparently lies beyond the scope of my pre- 
sent work, it, nevertheless, can be treated under the class that 
I am dealing with. It depended upon the same disposition of 
the blood, and coincided in time with the mass of epidemics 
which were then rife. I observed that the same febrile sym- 
ptoms which preceded the dysentery of the years in question, 
preceded this disease also. Besides which, as has been already 
remarked, it occasionally trod on the heels of the dysentery of 
the time, even after that disease had apparently finished its 
work, in afflicting the patient, and apparently wound-up with 
taking leave of him. Furthermore, where such was not the 
case, and the disease which it followed was not an obstinate 
dysentery, it was generally a fever ; a fever which, having lasted 
for a few hours only, terminated in bilious colic. 

2. Those whom it generally attacked were youths of a hot 
or bilious temperament; and these it attacked chiefly during 
the summer. The pain of the intestines was intense, into- 
lerable beyond the worst sufferings that the most wretched of 
men have to struggle with. Sometimes it constricted the in- 
testines like a bandage; sometimes it concentrated its force, 
and was like the boring of an auger. At times, the pain re- 
mitted ; at times it came on in paroxysms. Of these the patient 
was aware beforehand, and showed, both by voice and look, that 
his pains and fears were equal. Nevertheless, at the beginning 
of the disease the pain was less fixed to a given point than it 
became during its progress; neither was the sense of sickness 
so constant, nor yet were the bowels so pertinaciously resistent 
to cathartics. The more, however, that the pain increased, the 
more it fixed itself to a point. And then the vomiting became 

:13 


194 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


more frequent, and the constipation more obstinate. And this 
last symptom proceeded until its violence (unless arrested by 
remedies) determined a total inversion of the peristaltic motion, 
and ileus. ‘Then are cathartics transformed into emetics, and 
even enemata are carried upwards through the whole tract of 
the intestine, and expelled by the mouth, feeces and all. The 
matters thus ejected, if unmixed and natural, are either green 
or yellow, or of some other irregular and unusual colour. 

8. Each and all of the phenomena of this disease evidently 
show that it originates in the elimination upon the intestines 
of some acridity, either as a humour or as an exhalation. Hence 
the primary indication for its cure is the evacuation of that 
humour; of that which is antecedently in the veins, as well as 
of that which, as the containing cause of the disease, 1s shut up 
in the intestines: whilst the next in order is the coercion of 
the rush of the humours thitherward, along with the assuage- 
ment of the intolerable agony, by means of anodynes. 

4. Upon these grounds, I order a free bleeding, and, three 
or four hours after, the exhibition of an anodyne. The next 
day I prescribe a lenitive cathartic. This I repeat two days 
after. Sometimes a third is required, but this is regulated by 
the amount of the humours that is left. Now, it must be ob- 
served, that in those cases where the disease has originated 
in either an improper indulgence in the fruits of the season, or 
in any other form of indigestible food, the stomach is the first 
thing to be dealt with. This must be washed out with posset, 
which posset will be again thrown up by vomiting. This 
having been done, an anodyne must be taken. The next day a 
vein must be breathed. The remainder of the treatment must 
proceed in the order I have already explained. 

5. The violence, however, of the pain, and the extent to 
which the action of the bowels is inverted by vomiting, may 
resist the action of cathartics. In this case, we must put out 
our whole strength. Half measures will be hurtful. Mild cathar- 
tics will go for nothing, except with very tractable bowels. For 
these we must look out. Medicines which will not pass through 
the intestines do more harm than good. They disturb to no 
purpose. The vomiting and pain increase. The best'cathar- 
tic in such cases, is a lenitive infusion of tamarinds, senna, and 
rhubarb, with a little manna and syrup of roses. This creates 


BILIOUS COLIC. 195 


least commotion amongst the humours. Now, when, either 
on account of the patient's aversion to medicine in a liquid 
form, or from a tendency to vomit, a draught cannot be kept 
on the stomach, we must have recourse to pills. |. Of these, the 
pilule cochie are the ones that I like best. Both in the pre- 
sent case, and in all others, they act, and act steadily. When, 
however, the weakness of stomach is so great that even pills 
are thrown up, I order an anodyne in the first instance, and, 
a few hours afterwards, a cathartic, the interval being sufficient 
to allow it to hie in the belly long enough to communicate its 
purgative effect, and not to be overruled by the anodyne. Then, 
when the effect of the one is over, that of the other begins; 
although the purge (if it could be done) is best given a long 
time after the anodyne. For twelve hours after taking it (the 
anodyne) the patient's bowels are slow to move, and answer but 
sluggishly to the cathartic. 

6. In this, as in most other diseases where narcotics are indi- 
cated, a purge always increases the pain. It does so, at least, when 
its operation is over; for whilst it is in effect, it often goes easier 
with the patient. Hence it is my practice to throw in an ano- 
dyne as soon as the activity of the cathartic has ceased. This 
l order to be taken night and morning every day, at mid-time 
between the purges. And this is done for the sake of more 
surely assuaging the pain, until the purging shall have done its 
work fully and effectually. 

7. As soon as the purging is over I administer an anodyne, 
the night and morning following. This does all that is now 
left to do—it restrains the orgasm of the humours. Some- 
times I have to repeat it, and that oftener than once. Indeed, 
when the pains are of a more violent nature, nothing but a full 
dose, repeated, will do. Mischief of a certain amount is more 
than a match for a medium dose. As long, therefore, as such 
pain continues, so long is it safe to repeat the anodyne. When 
the pain has ceased, the case is altered. Hence I regulate my 
practice by the pain, and repeat the narcotic until it either 
ceases or grows mild, allowing, however, time between the doses 
sufficient to determine the effect of each, and looking to the 
probable effects of a first before the superaddition of a second. 
Generally, however, unless the pain be excessive, a paregoric, 
night and morning, is enough. My usual formula is that of 


196 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the liquid laudanum above mentioned.’ Of these, sixteen 
drops in a cordial distilled water is a dose, and it may be in- 
creased in case the pain 1s immoderate. 

8. This is both the simplest method, and the one which, with 
me, has succeeded the best. The peccant humour is first got rid 
of by bleeding and purging, and then rest 1s insured by an ano- 
dyne. Your carminative enemata are merely so much fresh 
irritation. Instead of accomplishing their object, and elimi- 
nating the humours, they prolong the disease by disturbing 
them. Nevertheless, I must make one observation of import- 
ance. Much as I have insisted upon the necessity of both 
bleeding and purging preceding the application of sedatives, 
there are cases, occasionally, where both must be omitted, and 
where we must start with a narcotic. ‘Thus, in cases where 
free evacuations, referable to some previous ailment, have im- 
mediately preceded the colie, further catharsis is not only 
superfluous but prejudicial. It creates new commotions, and 
disturbs things afresh. And that such previous purging is not 
rare, we may collect from the extent to which debility of intes- 
tines, caused by either an access of heat, or an immoderate 
draught of fermented liquors, has subjected the convalescent 
from some other disease to an attack of colic. Of those cases 
where the patient has drenched himself with clysters before 
he sent for the physician, I say nothing. Either on these grounds, 
or on account of the advanced stage of the disease, narcotics are 
the starting-point. 

9. In the month of August, 1671, the most noble Baron 
Annesly, who was suffering some days from bilious colic, ac- 
companied with intolerable pain, and frequent desire to vomit, 
sent for me to see him at Belvoir Castle. He had already tried 
all kinds of clysters, and other remedies to boot ; and these had 
been ordered him, by the most learned medical men of the parts 
around. JI made no difficulty in prescribing the repeated 
exhibition of narcotics after the plan described. By the use 
whereof he mended every day, and returned along with me to 
London a healthy man. 

10. Since, however, the pain has pre-eminently a tendency to 
return, all occasions for its so doing must be cut off by the exhi- 
bition of an anodyne, twice a day, for some days. And if, as 

! Chap. HII, § 14. [G.] 


BILIOUS COLIC. 197 


is sometimes the case, as often as the narcotic is omitted, the 
pain come on afresh, there 1s nothing that I have hitherto been 
able to think of that is so certain a means of effecting a 
thorough cure as riding on horseback, or in a carriage, in the 
case of long journeys. In the meanwhile, an anodyne must be 
taken regularly, night and morning. By exercise of this kind, 
the matter that sets up the disease is brought down to the 
habit of the body, and the blood, being comminuted by the per- 
petual agitation, is depurated, as it were, afresh; whilst the 
bowels themselves, by the excitation of the native heat, are not 
a little strengthened and restored. I am not ashamed to own 
that, by calling in to my aid this sort of exercise, I have, more 
than once, thoroughly cured the disease, when I had been unable 
to cure it otherwise. It must not, however, be tried before the 
patient has been duly and sufficiently purged, and it must not 
be given up until after several days. 

11, A poor neighbour of my own, who is still living, was, during 
the years in question, afflicted with a most violent bilious colic, 
which he had tried in vain to subdue by purges, clysters, and 
by swallowing leaden bullets. I ordered him to use narcotics 
frequently. This he did, and as often as he did so, found him- 
self relieved. The disease, however, was only palliated, not 
cured. It returned when the virtue of the anodyne was spent. 
So I took pity on the poor man, and lent him a horse out of my 
own stable, in order that he might take a journey after the 
manner prescribed. After having travelled a few days, his 
bowels grew strong enough to enable him to throw off the relics 
of the disorder. In this way he was thoroughly cured without 
the use of anodynes. 

12. To speak of things as they really are, I found that this sort 
of exercise has been used with good success in most other chronic 
diseases. The patient, however, must persevere in it resolutely. 
If we consider that the lower belly, wherein le the organs of 
secretion is shaken up by it, to the extent of some thousand suc- 
cussions a day, we may easily conceive how it may be enabled 
thereby to shake off any of the recrementitious juices there 
impacted; and also that it may be so strengthened by that 
powerful excitation of the native heat, that it shall duly do 
its work in the office which Nature has assigned it—the 
depuration of the blood. 


198 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


13. If the patient be young, and of a hot temperament, 
I order a cooling thickening diet, such as pulp of barley, 
panado, and the hke, and every third day, if the stomach be 
craving, I allow a tender young chicken, or a boiled whiting. 
I also allow no other drink than small beer, or milk-and-water. 
More than this I rarely do, unless the riding, which is so 
necessary in restoring health, demand a fuller diet, and more 
generous drinks, for the sake of making good the loss from the 
exhaustion of the spirits by reason of the exercise. 

14. Furthermore, observation proves that when the disease, 
from bad treatment, has harassed the patient for a length of 
time, so that the bowels become languid, and the body be all 
but worn out by extreme loss of flesh and debihty, the free use 
of plague-water, of aqua mirabilis, or of any other water which 
the patient preferred when in health, will benefit him beyond 
all expectation. For by such means the scanty relics of the 
native heat and spirits are stirred up; whilst the preternatural 
ferment that sticks to the bowels, and that, from time to time, 
supplies fuel to fresh fits, 1s extinguished by liquors more 
spirituous than itself. 

15. As inthe cure of the disease, so it is when the disease is 
over. The thin diet, of which we have spoken, should be kept 
to for some time. The present disease has a greater tendency 
to relapse than any other. Its seat is the seat of the organs 
of concoction, the bowels. These are already weakened, so that 
even the smallest error of diet will bring back mischief at once. 
Hence, in this, as in all affections of the bowels, indigestible 
foods are to be avoided as the worst of evils; whilst even those 
that pass for digestible must be taken in quantities sufficient to 
support life, and not more. 

16. An hysteric disease very like the bilious colic, both in 
respect to the violence and situation of the pain, affects some 
women. The humours also, which are vomited up, are of a yellow 
and green colour. I here take the opportunity of treating of 
this distemper lest any one take it for the bilious colic. 

17. Such women as are of a lax and crude frame of body 
are most liable toit. So are those who have long suffered from 
hysteric indispositions of any other sort. Most of all, however, 
are those mothers who have had difficult labours, which they 
have but just escaped, the child having been too large for their 


BILIOUS COLIC. 199 


strength and constitution. <A pain almost as violent as the pain 
of colic, or of ileus, seizes the region of the stomach. Some- 
times it goes a little lower down. Then violent vomitings 
follow ; the matter cast up being sometimes yellow, sometimes 
green. Furthermore,—-I have often observed that there is a 
greater dejection of spirits, and more despair, than in any other 
disease whatsoever. After a day or two, the pain passes off, 
but a few weeks after returns as violent as ever. Sometimes it 
is attended with marked jaundice, which goes off of its own 
accord in a few days. When all the symptoms are gone, and 
when the patient seems to have recovered, the slightest mental 
disturbance, whether caused by anger or grief—and to this 
females are very liable—will bring the pain back again. The 
same will be the case after walking, or any sort of exercise taken 
too soon. From these and the like causes, in lax and weak 
frames, arise the vapours : by which word I mean, just what the 
vulgar mean. Be they real vapours, or be they convulsions of 
particular parts, the phenomena are the same. 

18. These vapours (or these convulsions), when they have 
invaded any particular part of the body, produce symptoms 
coincident with the symptoms of the part affected. The disease 
which they produce is one and the same in all cases. Yet it 
imitates in a masterly manner each and all of the diseases of 
humanity. This is shown by the particular affection before us. 
If it settle in the parts near the colon, it imitates, to a nicety, 
the bilious colic. And so in respect to other parts. It may 
affect one of the kidneys, and there shall be violent vomiting. 
It may follow the course of the ureters, and look like a calculus; 
and this may be exasperated by clysters, and by lithontriptics, 
and by other remedies used for forcing away the stone. At times, 
contrary to its usual habit (it being for the most part free from 
danger), it may kill the patient. I have seen symptoms of 
hysteria that were exactly the symptoms of stone in the bladder ; 
indeed, it is not long since I was called up in the night to visit 
a countess, who lived near me, and who was suddenly seized with 
a violent pain in the region of the bladder, and with a sup- 
pression of urine. Having discovered that she was subject to 
a variety of hysteric ailments, I thought that the disorder might 
be other than what it seemed to be. I therefore stopped her 
maid from throwing up a clyster that she had prepared, lest 


200 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the disease should be increased. Instead of which, and instead 
of the emollients, such as the syrup of marsh-mallows, and the 
like, which the apothecary had brought with him, I ordered an 
anodyne. ‘This soon removed the symptom. Indeed, there is 
no single part of the body, either inward or outward, which is 
wholly beyond the attacks of this disease. ‘The jaws, the hips, 
the legs, may each suffer. In all cases it excites violent pain, 
and, when it goes off, it leaves a tenderness behind it, which 
will not bear touching, and which is just asif the flesh had been 
bruised by a sharp beating. 

19. Now as I have said something in the way of a digression, 
relating to the history of the hysteric colic, with the view that 
it may not be mistaken for the bilious colic, I will also, in the 
way of a digression, touch on some points connected with the 
cure of the pain, which is its concomitant symptom. As for the 
radical cure, which removes the disease by removing the cause, 
it is a question for a different speculation in a different place. 

20. Venesection and repeated purges, which are plainly in- 
dicated in the beginning of bilious colic, find no place in this 
disease, except in the case which will be mentioned below. Ex- 
perience tells us, that the pain is exasperated, and that all the 
symptoms are increased by the tumult that such remedies create. 
Hence I have, more than once, remarked, that the repetition 
of even the mildest clysters has introduced a continuous series 
of fresh symptoms; and common sense confirms experience. 
The disease in question is referred to an ataxy, and an inordi- 
nate motion of the humours, rather than to any corruptiou 
of them ; a fact which becomes clear, when we consider the 
several circumstances to which it generally owes its origin. 
These are large and undue losses of blood, violent emotions of 
either the mind or body, and the like. All this indicates that 
those remedies should be proscribed by which the perturbation 
of the spirits may be excited ; and that, in their stead, ano- 
dynes should be exhibited, however much the green and dis- 
orderly matters of the vomit may appear to indicate the contrary. 
The colour of vomited matters is too subtle a matter to serve as 
the grounds of any speculation in favour of the propriety of eva- 
cuations which are naturally prejudicial. I have not a shadow 
of doubt but that, by blunders of this sort, the disease, which, 
notwithstanding the pain it creates, does not endanger life, has 


BILIOUS COLIC. 201 


frequently proved fatal. Add to this, that if the strongest 
emetic be taken one day, with the view of clearing off the foul 
matter of the stomach, whether green or of any other colour, 
there will be just as much vomiting the next day, of just the 
same matter, of the same colour, as before. 

21. Nevertheless, it must be observed, that sometimes there 
is So great an abundance of blood and humours as to resist the 
influence of narcoties, (however frequently administered,) in 
allaying the orgasm of the system, unless, previous to their ex- 
hibition, either a vein have been breathed, or a motion procured. 
This I have observed to be commonest in women of a hot, and 
in women of a masculine habit ; and as often as it is observed, 
we must prepare the way for the anodyne, by either bleeding or 
purging, or both. When each, or either, of these preliminaries 
has been tried, a moderate narcotic will dothe work. Without 
them, a large one will be thrown away. This, however, rarely 
happens. If it do, the medicines must not be repeated. When 
the bleeding and purging have been duly used in the way of 
preparation, the anodynes are to be given after the method 
that has been prescribed in bilious colic ; that is, they must be 
given rarely or frequently, according to the persistence or the 
recession of the pain. This method has reference only to the 
present and instant relief of the excessive pain. As to the 
removal of the cause of the disease, I do not undertake to treat 
upon it in the present place. 

22. Now since this disease, both in hypochondriasis and in 
hysteria—diseases of which (as will be shown elsewhere) the 
principle is the same—very often ends in jaundice, and, besides 
this, departs just in proportion as the jaundice advances, it 
strikes me as a proper remark to observe that, in the treatment 
of this sort of jaundice, cathartics must be wholly omitted. If 
used at all, they must be in the shape of rhubarb, or something 
equally mild. There is danger lest purging excite new tumults. 
If so, all the symptoms may return. In this case, then, there 
is nothing whatever to be done. ‘The jaundice depends on the 
hysteria. As such it will go away of itself, and, within a short 
time, wholly disappear. If, however, the jaundice be slow to 
move off, we must have recourse to remedies. This is what I 
am wont to use: 


202 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


IX  Madder-root, 
Turmeric-root, aa 2j ; 
Greater celandine, 
Tops of the lesser centaury, àà one handful. 
Boil, in equal parts of Rhenish wine and spring-water, down to 
two pounds. Strain, and dissolve in the strained liquor 
Syrup of the five roots, 3ij. 
Mix, and make into an apozem ; of which take half a pound warm, 
night and morning, until recovery. 


23. When jaundice comes on of itself, without being pre- 
ceded by colie, we must order, in addition to the aforesaid 
alteratives, cholagogues, i. e. medicines which bring away the 
bile in stools. These must be given once or twice before the 
patient begins with the preceding apozem. Afterwards, too, 
he must take the same once a week during their use. 'Thus— 


Electuary of rose-juice, 51j ; 
Rhubarb, finely powdered, 5ss ; 
Cream of tartar, 9j ; 
.. Syrup of chicory and rhubarb, q. s. 
Make into a bolus; to be taken the first thing in the morniug, 
and to be washed down with a draught of Rhenish wine. 


Now if, after continuing these medicines for some time, the 
disease still remain obstinate, recourse must be had to chalybeate 
waters, such as those of Tunbridge. These must be drunk 
fresh from the spring every morning until the patient recover. 
Thus much concerning the diseases of this constitution. 


SECTION V. 


CHAPTER I. 


THE EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION OF PART OF THE YEAR 1673, AND OF 
THE WHOLE YEARS 1674, 1675. 


l. AnaovT the beginning of July, 1673, a fresh species of 
fever set in. Nevertheless, as the constitution was not yet so 
exclusively disposed to its propagation as to shut out altogether 
the diseases of the constitution preceding, the fever in question 
was not very epidemic. Indeed, that form of smallpox which 
began during the year 1670 had not ceased; although its oc- 
currence was less frequent, and its symptoms more mild. The 
two maladies went together pari passu: neither being excessive. 
A. few cases of dysentery still showed themselves; so that the 
old constitution was not so far abolished as to supply no in- 
stance of the old forms of disease, and the new one was not 
sufficiently confirmed to exterminate such instances as stood 
over. 

2. Throughout the present autumn, and throughout the 
whole of the winter, the smallpox went hand-in-hand with the 
fever; neither being excessive, and the fluxes being all but 
gone. Nevertheless, during the month of November, there was 
a sharp frost that lasted a few days, followed bya more sudden and 
unexpected return of warmer weather than I ever remember at 
that time of the year. There then appeared a few cases of 
dysentery. And so there did, here and there, about Christmas 
time. These were the last flashes of an expiring lamp. With 
them the disease (so far, at least, as it was of the species in 
question) died away altogether. 

3. The next years the measles appeared, and that prema- 
turely ; as early, indeed, as the month of January. They were 
fully as epidemic as the measles of 1670; these last beginning 


204 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


in January also. They found their way into every family, at- 
tacking children most. Still they were less regular, and less 
in accordance with the typical forms of the particular disease, 
than the measles of the year preceding ; upon which points of 
difference I shall treat more at large in the proper place. They 
kept on increasing until the vernal equinox ; after which time 
they gradually decreased. By Midsummer-day they had dis- 
appeared. 

- 4. Just as the epidemic measles, which set in during the 
year 1670, introduced the black smallpox, which has been de- 
scribed above, so did the measles of the present year introduce 
a smallpox of a similar sort also. The preceding smallpox, 
after the second year of its constitution, produced pustules 
hghter and less black in colour, and fuller in size. Becoming 
more and more regular as the constitution proceeded, they were, 
by the year 1673, quite natural, 1. e. considering the nature of 
the disease, mild and favorable. Now, however, the disease was 
as virulent as ever, and the accompanying symptoms of the 
worst kind. ‘This sort of smallpox gained ground during the 
following autumn ; indeed, it run into the winter ; and as that 
season was much warmer than the previous one, the disease was 
encouraged. As a colder season approached, it gave way, and 
made room for the fever. 

5. This fever, which had lasted throughout the whole year, 
spread its ravages far and wide in the July of 1676. As the 
autumn approached, it attacked the bowels, and exhibited the 
symptoms of either dysentery or diarrhoea. At times, it was 
unaccompanied by any such symptom. It then attacked the 
head, rendering the patient heavy and dull. The smallpox, in 
the meanwhile, which had affected a few here and there, had 
wholly disappeared by the autumnal equinox, attacking scarcely 
a single individual. Now it was that the fever had the predo- 
minance, taking the lead of the other maladies of the year. It 
must be observed, nevertheless, that as this fever was more 
inclined to throw off the morbific matter on the bowels, and as 
it often excited dysentery, and, oftener still, diarrhoea, it gave 
rise to the notion that the gripings which did so much mischief 
arose from these two diseases ; whereas, in reality, they were to 
be imputed to the fever. Every one, however, who had any 
practice among the sick, knew the predominance of the fever, 


EPIDEMIC CONSTITUTION. 205 


and knew also that the aforesaid dysentery and diarrhoea were 
symptoms rather than essential and primary diseases. 

6. This was the course which was held by the fever, through- 
out the autumn. Sometimes it attacked the head, sometimes 
the bowels. It everywhere put on the symptoms of the parti- 
cular part affected. Such was the case till the end of October. 
At that time, the weather, which had been as warm and as mild 
as summer, suddenly changed to wet and cold. This brought 
on coughs and catarrhs, which were more numerous then than 
ever I remember them to have been. What, however, is of 
more importance, 1s the fact, that upon these coughs supervened 
the stationary fever of the year ; and this, having once taken its 
hold, increased, and varied in some of its symptoms from the 
fever of the previous part of the year. The attack of the pre- 
vious fever had been chiefly determined towards the head and 
bowels. That of the present was towards the lungs and pleura, 
and, as such, gave rise to the svmptoms of pneumonia and 
pleurisy. "This was the case, although the fever of the July 
preceding had never changed its symptoms at all until such time 
as the catarrhs above mentioned made their appearance. 

7. These catarrhs and coughs continued till the end of 
November; and when November had elapsed, suddenly de- 
creased. The fever, however, remained as before, just as it was 
before the catarrhs. Nevertheless, it was less of an epidemic, 
and its symptoms were different, these having been dependent 
on the catarrhs. Furthermore, as the catarrhs receded, the 
smallpox appeared here and there sporadically ; and it was, in 
kind, of the same virulent sort as the form that had gone before. 
Yet the symptoms—at least by the end of the second year—- 
were less violent than at its first onset. How long this consti- 
tution will last is more than I can say. All that I know is what 
I know well; viz., that, up to the present time, it has been ex- 
ceedingly anomalous and irregular, and that all the diseases 
which have originated from it have been the same. 

I will now treat of the epidemics of this constitution in the 
order in which they succeeded each other. 


206 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER II. 


THE CONTINUED FEVER OF THE YEARS 1673, 1674, 1675. 


1, Tuts, like the other epidemics, manifestly showed that those 
symptoms, with which it was associated at its onset, were the signs 
of a greater amount of inflammation, and of an inflammation of 
a more spirituous kind than was the case after the disease had 
made progress. During the first years of its attack, and during 
the following spring, there supervened upon the fever the 
symptoms of pleurisy, and the blood which was drawn from the 
veins resembled (at least for the first or second drawing) that 
of pleurisy. Yet, as the disease became more advanced, these 
symptoms of a more intense inflammation abated. 

2. Over and above the symptoms which are common to fevers 
of all sorts, the following occurred in the present. Generally, 
the patient was afflicted with severe pain of the head and back, 
with stupor, with pain, and a sense of tension in the limbs, 
joints, and whole body, like that in rheumatism, but somewhat 
milder. During the first days there were alternations of heat 
and cold. At times, at the commencement of the disease, there 
was a tendency to slight sweats. When the fever took its 
natural course, the tongue was neither dry nor very different from 
its usual colour, except in being rather whiter. Nor was 
there much thirst. If, however, the patient was heated beyond. 
the usual amount of fever, the tongue became dry to a great 
degree, and yellowish-brown in colour. The thirst also became 
intense, and the urine, which otherwise was natural, became 
deep red. 

A fever with these symptoms, if skilfully treated, left the 
patient about the fourteenth day; if very obstinate, it lasted 
till the twenty-first. 

3. Amongst the symptoms of this fever, the most conspicuous 
was an affection akin to coma. Patients who were attacked by 
it were stupid or delirious, dozed for weeks together, and were 
awakened only by the loudest noises. When roused, they just 
opened their eyes, took their food or medicine, according to 
custom, dozed again, and, sometimes, sunk into a complete loss 
of voice. 


CONTINUED FEVER. 207 


4. Recovery, when the patient returned to himself, began to 
take place about the twenty-eighth or thirtieth day; the first 
sign of which was an unnatural longing for some sort of strange 
and unusual food or drink. The head remained unsteady for 
some days, nodding this way or that. This, along with other 
signs, proved that it had been much affected ; however, as the 
strength returned, the symptoms abated. 

5. Sometimes 1t was less of a sleep than an incongruous and 
unmeaning muttering, just as if the patient was angry or dis- 
turbed. It never, however, arose to such a pitch of delirium 
and furor as is the case with smallpox and the brain fever. 
From such symptoms, moreover, the present differed in allow- 
ing the patient occasionally snatches of sudden sleep, when he 
snored loudly. Again, it was less acute, but more lasting. 
Lastly, it was commonest with boys and young persons; whereas 
the sopor of frenzy and smallpox is a symptom which is com- 
monest with adults. Both agreed on one point. By the appli- 
cation of heating remedies, and by the promotion of perspiration, 
the mischief was transferred to the head, and the above-men- 
tioned symptom followed accordingly. 

6. When the head was unaffected, that is, when the fore- 
going complication neither came of itself, nor was brought on 
by the doctor, the disease generally terminated within the fort- 
night. I have sometimes seen it go off within the third or 
fourth day. 

7. In the autumn of 1675, as stated above, this fever went 
off with the symptoms of either dysentery or diarrhoea. Of 
these, the latter was often prolonged; and with it the stupor. 
Each, however, was but a symptom of the fever. 

8. Now as to the treatment. Immediately upon its appear- 
ance, I discovered that it was of a different class from the ones 
preceding. It differed in respect to many of its phenomena, 
and it differed in being less amenable to cathartics,—remedies 
which I had previously applied with great success. I hesitated 
more than is my wont in fixing its nature; and I was propor- 
tionally anxious about the principles of my treatment. When 
it first broke out,it stood alone. There was no other epidemic 
synchronous with it. Hence I had no analogy to direct my 
conjectures. The smallpox was the black smallpox of the year 
1670, of which it was a remnant, mild, and all but extinct. 


208 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


All therefore that remained to me was the examination of the 
disease in an isolated point of view. This I did to the best of 
my power, feeling my way, and keeping my eye on the juvantia 
and ledentia. 

9. The racking pain in the head, and the tendency on the 
part of the disease to cause a pain in the side as well, taken 
along with the character of the blood, which was that of pleurisy, 
showed me at once that the inflammation was of no moderate 
kind; at the same time I discovered that it would not bear the 
same free evacuations as pleurisy. After the first or second 
bleeding, the blood lost the glutinous colour of its surface, and 
the patient received but little relief, except in those cases where 
the disease had passed into a true pleurisy. This it did when 
the treatment had been overheating; and it did so oftenest 
during the first spring of the constitution, the spring of 1664. 
At that time it approached the character of a peripneumony ; 
being favoured by the warmth of the weather, even although it 
had not attained its full maturity, and was of a more spirituous 
nature than afterwards. Experience, however, as well as ex- 
ample, deterred me from free bloodletting ; although it was as 
clear as the noon-day sun that the fever was inflammatory in its 
kind. Hence nothing was left, whereby its heat might be abated, 
except the frequent use of clysters and refrigerant medicines. 
Then there was, over and above the inflammatory affections, 
the phenomenon of stupor, so much more common in the pre- 
sent fever than in others. This indicated the repetition and 
continuance of the clysters, as a means of diverting the febrile 
matter from the quarter to which it was so readily determined, 
viz. the head. ‘Therefore, as repeated bleedings were borne 
but badly by the disease, I had recourse to the above-named 
substitutes. These made up for the want of it; tempered the 
heat of blood, quietly and gradually ; and eliminated the mor- 
bific causes. 

10. Moreover, I judged that large blisters, applied to the 
back of the neck, were likely to be more advantageous in this 
fever than in fevers where the symptoms were less determined 
to the brain; inasmuch as the heat and pain of a blister acts 
as a derivative to the matters which would otherwise mount to 
the head, and brings them to the blistered parts. By these 
means, and by means of refrigerant regimen, the disease would 


CONTINUED FEVER. 209 


go off of itself; whilst, if treated differently, it would rage with 
great violence. This was made clear to me by very many ob- 
servations. 

1l. This, then, was the course I took. I began with taking 
as much blood from the arm as was suited to the age and 
strength of the patient, and to other circumstances. At the 
same time, I applied a large blister to the nape of the neck. 
The next day I ordered a lenitive clyster. This was to be given 
early enough for its effects to have worked off by bedtime, 
i.e. at two or three o'clock. It was repeated every day, until 
the force of the disease was broken. I then omitted it ; indeed, 
in all cases where the fever had gone beyond the fourteenth 
day, without amendment, I omitted it earlier. In this case, 
although the complaint had not been subdued by the previous 
clysters, no good was to be done by any subsequent ones. The 
edge was already taken off the disease, the patient was out of 
danger, the more violent symptoms had ceased to wear a 
threatening aspect, and all that remained to be done was to 
let the malady take its own course, and burn itself out by de- 
grees—swis viribus ruit. This plan, at this time, always answered 
better than any violent evacuations. In the way of diet, the 
patient was forbidden meat, but allowed small beer. 

12. Another fact still stands over for notice. Manifold ex- 
perience has convinced me, that it is a point of good practice 
for the patient; and, consequently, it is not to be omitted in 
the consideration of the treatment of this disease. The patient 
must be out of bed for a few hours every day, and, if too weak 
to get up, he must put on his clothes, and lie upon it, with his 
head raised a little. In observing the extent to which this 
fever attacked the head, and 1n observing the inflammatory dis- 
position of the blood, it struck me that the patient might be 
benefited by that position of the body which should prevent 
the heat from being increased by the contact of anything from 
without, and, at the same time, retard the impetus of the blood 
towards the head. Now, confinement to the bed encourages 
the increase of heat; whilst, from the intensity of the affection 
of the brain, the animal spirits become hot and tumultuous, and 
there arises, from thence, vehement action of the heart, and an 
increase of the fever. 

13. Now, however much, in this, and all other cases of fever 

:14 


210 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


where the inflammation is intense, it may benefit the patient to 
avoid continual confinement to the bed, it must also be re- 
marked, that if he keep up too long at a time, he will be hable 
to irregular pains that will terminate in rheumatism, particu- 
larly if he do so at the decline of his disease. Sometimes, too, 
his skin will be discoloured by jaundice. If this happen, he 
must be remanded to his bed, and kept there, so that the par- 
ticles which supply the fuel to the disease (jaundice or rheu- 
matism, as the case may be,) may be dissipated through the 
open pores of the skin. ‘The bed must be kept one or two 
days, not longer; and the perspiration must not amount to 
sweating. Accidents, however, of this kind occur very rarely, 
and never except towards the end of the complaint ; and as the 
disease is then much abated, the patient may be left in bed 
more safely than either at its status or its commencement. At 
each of these periods, it is necessary to be a little out of bed, 
in order to digest the febrile matter; since if the patient be 
too closely confined, the disease will be exasperated and in- 
creased. 

14. An objection may be made against this method. It 
may be admitted to be well adapted towards determining the 
impetus of the blood from the head, and also towards relieving 
the patient. Yet it may be urged, that it is not the proper 
treatment for the full elimination of the febrile matter. This, 
it may be said, should be first concocted, and then expelled by 
means of sweating. To this objection I answer, that it proves 
nothing unless it can be shown that all fever is so carried off, 
and this is no easy matter. Reasoning will not tell us what 
fevers are to be destroyed by diaphoresis, and what by cathar- 
sis; but what reason will not do, experience will. More than 
this, we have good reason for believing, that there are certain 
sorts of fever which Nature cures by a way of her own, and 
despatches without any visible evacuation; doing this by the re- 
duction of the morbific matter, and by its assimilation with the 
mass of the blood at large, with which it has previously dis- 
agreed. Relying on this, I have, in both the present fevers, and 
in others (provided always that they are not intermittents,) im- 
mediately at their onset, and before the whole blood becomes 
tainted, reduced them to order, by merely ordering small beer 
to be drunk, as often and as largely as the patient wishes, 


CONTINUED FEVER. 211 


and by forbidding all broths, and all similar sorts of meat and 
drink whatever. At the same time, I have allowed the patient 
his usual exercise and fresh air; never so often as once using 
an evacuation. By this treatment, and after the abstinence of 
two or three days, I have cured both my own children and my 
dearest friends. The treatment, however, is suitable only for 
young persons, and for patients of a sanguine temperament. 

15. If we admit, at all, that Nature cures fever by sweats only, 
we must mean those which break out just as the disease takes 
a turn, and those which are the result of a previous digestion, 
not those which are forced forth during the first days of the 
disease, and which arise from the interruption of the regular 
economy of Nature. Sweats of this latter sort are, in my mind, 
not to be encouraged. The tumult which gives rise to them 
should be restrained. Sweats, too, of this sort attend many 
sorts of fever, but not all. Some fevers, I am well aware, are of 
a character which requires them, and that in the way of a crisis 
when they are at their turning point. Such are the particular 
paroxysms of intermittents ; such, also, is the frequent and im- 
portant fever which depends upon the same constitution with 
the intermittents. In each of these cases, all treatment which 
does not go at once towards the previous digestion, and the sub- 
sequent elimination, through sweating, of the morbific matter, 
increases the disease. Hence, no evacuations have place in the 
treatment of fever, except those that check the violence of the 
disease within the first few days from its attack. If they be re- 
sorted to, the patient will die of his doctor. The cause of the 
fever of plague being exceedingly fine and subtile, may be dis- 
sipated, in the way of sweats, during the first days of the disease. 
This is shown by the experience of all. 

16. But with those fevers, where the symptoms have an or- 
dinary course, where the disease takes its own line, where we 
find no definite time for the preparation of the morbific matter, 
and no efforts on the part of Nature to expel it, then I con- 
sider it over-boldness to force perspirations, to do violence to 
the disease, and to trust to this alone for the restoration of 
the patient. The “divine old man” teaches differently —rine 
pvcEwe QVTLTOATTOVENC Ksvea wavta. That such is the case with 
the particular fever in question, I am fully convinced; and 
that by manifold experience. It can not only be cured 


212 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


without sweatings, but the patient may be endangered by pro- 
voking them. There is no necessity for doing so; and there 
is danger of the morbific matter being carried upwards to the 
head. Nevertheless, both in this fever and in all others, even 
in the case of those which are the least liable to pass off by 
means of critical sweats, as often as such sweat come of its 
own accord, come at a time when the violence of the 
disease has been abated, and come as the result of a proper 
concoction indicated by the remission of the symptoms, it is a 
sign which no wise physician will overlook. But, if it be not 
of its own accord thatit makes its appearance, who shall say 
that we may not kill a man by our attempts to dispose his 
humours to sweats of the sort we want, by means of a hot regi- 
men and cordial drinks? A man who finds a treasure lying on 
the ground before him, is a fool if he do not stoop and pick it 
up; but he is a greater one who, on the strength of such a sin- 
gle piece of luck, wastes labour and risks life for the chance of 
another. Be the matter as it may, of this I am certain, viz. 
that the fever has heat enough of its own, and that it brings 
with itself all that is wanted for the preparation and concoc- 
tion of the febrile matter, so that there is no call for fuel 
from without in the shape of a heating regimen. 

17. The preceding method of treatment by means of clysters 
and venesection, has been successful. The treatment by dia- 
phoresis has ever been doubtful. It has harassed the patient, 
and caused anomalous and ill-conditioned symptoms. The 
most prominent of such symptoms has been a silent sort of 
delirium, which is more of a comatose stupor than of a wild 
loquacity, and which has been stated above to be a common 
attendant on this disease. Occasionally, I have seen this com- 
plication arise of its own accord; generally, however, it has 
been provoked by the over-officiousness of the nurse, who has 
misplaced her attention, and tried to force a sweat. By this, 
the morbific matter, which, in the present fever, is not amenable 
to such a kind of evacuation, is violently agitated, and becomes 
transferred to the brain, greatly to the peril of the patient. 

18. I have already mentioned, in speaking upon the treat- 
ment of a fever of a preceding constitution, that during its last 
years, it was occasionally attended with a stupor like the one 
in question ; that this stupor affected more especially children 


CONTINUED FEVER. 213 


and youths; that it was less profound, as well as less epidemic, 
than the present form ; that at the beginning of the disease I 
could not subdue the milder (much less the stronger) sort at 
all; that I left no stone unturned to do so; that I repeated 
venesections; that I tried them not only from the arm, but 
from the neck and foot; and that I did the same with blisters, 
cuppings, clysters, and diaphoreties, of all kinds, under all 
forms, and with all the parts where they could be applied. At 
length I determined, after having bled from the arm, blistered 
on the nape of the neck, and thrown up, during the first days 
of the disease, two or three clysters of sugar and milk, to do 
nothing whatever beyond forbidding the patient meat and fer- 
mented liquors. Meanwhile, I watched what method Nature 
might take, with the intention of subduing the symptom by 
treading in her footsteps. Now whilst I so watched the disease, 
it departed ; slowly and safely— still it departed. From thence, 
therefore, I considered that this method should be applied to 
all such other cases as I might thenceforward have to treat; a 
fact of no small magnitude, if we considered either the gravity 
of the symptom, or the uniform success of the treatment, 

19. I often think that we forget the good rule festina lente ; 
that we move more quickly than we ought to do; and that 
more could be left to Nature than we are at present in the 
habit of leaving her. To imagine that she always wants the 
aid of art, is an error—and an unlearned error, too. If it were 
so, she would have provided for the human race less than 
its preservation demands. ‘There is no proportion between 
the multitude of diseases and the means of cure. There is none 
now; and there was none in the days when medicine was most 
honoured in its cultivation. What may be done in other dis- 
eases I know not. Llonly know, from careful observation, that 
in the fever which we now treat of, the aforesaid symptom after 
resisting such general evacuants as bloodletting and enemata, 
was generally brought to a successful issue by time alone. 

20. It has been stated that the signs of convalescence are 
sometimes deferred till the thirtieth day. This takes place in 
cases of protracted stupor, accompanied, at times, by loss of 
speech. At the end of such time the patient will earnestly ask 
for some odd or unusual meat or drink, the ferment of the 
stomach being vitiated by the continuance of the disease. In 


214 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


this case, I consider the exhaustion of strength, and the need 
for refreshment ; so that I readily allow the patient to take what 
might otherwise be unfit for him, but which here is recom- 
mended by being palatable. 

21. In the September of 1674 I attended the son of a book- 
seller who lived near me. The boy was nine years old, named 
Not. Ue suffered from the fever, and from the aforesaid sym- 
ptom. I first bled him from the arm; then administered, daily, 
clysters during the commencement of the disease. I resisted the 
importunities of the mother, who wished to see her son cured 
more quickly than his safety would allow. I then held my 
hand for awhile, and ordered nothing beyond a common julep, 
for the satisfaction of the mother rather than for the benefit of 
the boy. About the 30th he mended; became greedy after 
strange meats, some of which I allowed him to take, although 
in any other case I should have denied them. So with this 
treatment he at length recovered perfectly. 

22. Now, although this stupor, of a comatose kind, is the 
stupor which most regularly attends the present fever, it some- 
times (although rarely,) 1s replaced by a frenzy without stupor. 
The patient keeps awake for days together, is wholly un- 
manageable, and suffers from the symptoms which accompany 
the frenzies originating in either fever or smallpox. Unlike 
the stupor, this delirium admitted of no delays. Instead of 
waiting for the morbid matters to become digested, it killed 
the patient within a few days, unless the inflammation were 
previously checked. Here it was that I found the value of 
spirits of vitriol, which, after a single bleeding, and the injec- 
tion of one or two clysters, | ordered to be dropped in small 
beer, and to be used as an ordinary drink. This, within a 
few days, procured sleep, subdued the symptoms, and restored 
the patient to health; an effect which I could never procure 
otherwise. This also I have proved by abundant experience. 

23. In the Autumn of 1675 both dysenteric dejections and 
occasional diarrhoea were superadded to the fever. I discovered, 
at once, that these were but symptoms, and not, as before, 
primary and original diseases. Notwithstanding this, when 
the cause of the disease was confined within the mass of the 
blood, venesection was indicated. This, with the addition of 
a narcotic, taken twice afterwards, was enough for the cure of 
the complaint. 


CONTINUED FEVER. 215 


24. In the September of 1675 I was sent for by Mrs. 
Conysby, near the King's Mews. She had suffered from the 
fever, and had been suddenly taken with gripings, followed, 
immediately, by mucous and bloody motions. Although her 
strength was prostrated by the fact of the disease being some 
days old, and still more by the frequency of the motions, which 
had been exceedingly distressing the night before, I, neverthe- 
less, bled her at once from the arm, and ordered a narcotic to 
be taken soon after. This being done, that very night the 
motions became fecal. "The morning and evening following I 
repeated the narcotic, and prescribed, besides, a mild cordial to 
raise her spirits. She recovered forthwith. 

25. As for the diarrhoea, it gave me but little trouble. As 
far as I could see, whether there was stupor, or whether there 
was none, it neither hurt nor helped. Hence I took no in- 
dications of treatment from its presence, provided always that 
it kept within certain limits, and did not, from its own proper 
violence, endanger the life of the patient. If it did, I gave a 
narcotic without hesitation ; and I remark that this is the only 
case, during the whole course of the disease, in which the use 
of anodynes is admissible. The great tendency towards stupor 
is increased by their administration. Hence, unless in cases 
of urgent necessity, they are not to be resorted to. 

26. It must be remarked that it frequently happens that 
convalescents from this, as from other fevers, especially when 
they have been protracted 1n duration, and have distressed the 
patient by large and continued evacuations, are liable, whilst 
lying in bed, to a fit of heat, followed by profuse sweats, 
This weakens them so much, that they are slow in recovering 
their strength, and, occasionally, fallinto adecline. As I con- 
sider that this symptom arises from no other cause than from 
the obstinacy of the disease, the weakness, and the impoverished 
condition of the blood, its mability to assimilate its newly- 
introduced juices, and its consequent efforts to eliminate thein 
by the way of perspiration, I recommend the patient to take, 
morning and evening, five or six tablespoonfuls of old Malaga 
wine. ‘This restores the strength of the patient, and as his 
strength returns, his sweats go off. Thus much concerning 
the continuous fever of this constitution. From the remarkable 
stupor which attended it I called it the comatose fever. 


216 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER III. 


ON THE MEASLES OF THE YEAR 1674. 


l. At the beginning of the years 1673 and 1674, 1. e. in 
the month of January, a form of measles set in, which differed 
from the measles of the years 1669 and 1670. They were 
equally epidemic, but less regular, and adhering less to their 
proper type. At one time the eruption came too soon, at others 
too late; whereas, in the former species, it regularly appeared 
on the fourth day. Besides this, they first possessed them- 
selves of the shoulders and the trunk in general, whilst the other 
sort began upon the face and spread gradually over the rest 
of the body. Neither in this species, except very rarely, did I 
observe those desquamations of the cuticle that looked hike fine 
bran, and which in the other form disappeared after the depar- 
ture of the eruption, as regularly as they appear at the end of 
scarlatina. Moreover, the disease was more fatal than its pre- 
decessor, killing a greater proportion of such as had been un- 
skilfully treated. The fever and dyspnoa that accompanied 
the departure of the complaint, were more violent and ap- 
proached closely to pneumonia. However, notwithstanding 
these anomalies and irregularities in respect to the aforesaid 
symptoms, the history of the measles of 1670 will serve for 
those of 1674, at least in respect to the leading phenomena. 
Hence I shall not repeat it. These last, like the earlier ones, 
increased up to the vernal equinox, decreased from that time 
forwards, and disappeared either just before, or not long after 
the summer solstice. 

2. The treatment was as before. I refer my reader to the 
pages where it is recorded in full. I shall here content myself 
with my usual practice, of giving a single case, as a sample of 
my method of dealing with the disease in question. 

3. In the month of February, 4. n. 1674, I was sent for to 
a lady, who is a model of all virtues, and a pattern for her kind, 
the Countess of Salisbury. At that time only one of her 
children was il. The rest, however, sickened afterwards. 
There were five or six, and I treated them all alike. I ordered 
them to keep their bed for two or three days before the erup- 


MEASLES. 217 


tion, in order that the blood might follow its natural bent, and 
eliminate, through the pores of the skin, the more separable 
particles that were causing the disease. I allowed neither fire 
nor bedclothes beyond what they had been used to in health. 
I forbid meat, permitting only oatmeal porridge, barley-broth, 
and now and then a roasted apple. Their drink was weak 
small beer, or milk mixed with three parts of water. The cough, 
as usual, distressed them. For this I ordered a pectoral ptisan 
to be taken frequently. Under this treatment they wholly re- 
covered within the usual short duration of the disease, suffering 
neither during its course, nor after its decline from any extraor- 
dinary symptom. 

4. During the first months of the appearance of this form of 
measles, there intervened, in a sporadic or intercurrent manner, 
a measly fever (febris morbillosa). It exhibited ecthymata of 
the trunk, especially on the back of the neck, and on the 
shoulders, hike the ecthymata of measles. From these, how- 
ever, they differed, in being limited to the parts aforesaid, not 
distributed generally and equally over the body. But the fever 
(although evidently of the same sort) was much more serious, 
lasting to the fourteenth day, and often beyond it. It bore 
neither bleeding or clysters; on the contrary, it was aggravated 
by each, whilst it yielded readily to the treatment of measles, 
as given above. ‘This is what I have to say about measles. 


218 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER IV. 


IRREGULAR SMALLPOX OF THE YEARS 1674, 1675. 


l. Jusr as the epidemic measles which set in at the begin- 
ning of the year 1670, introduced a black smallpox, which we 
have described in its place,’ so did the measles of the beginning 
of the present year introduce a species of smallpox of similar 
character; so similar, that we might almost say that the old 
disease had broken out afresh, rather than that a new one had 
originated. It has been stated above,” that with the former 
species of smallpox, after the lapse of the first two years, the 
pustules grew every day less black, that they also grew gradually 
larger, and that by the end of 1673, the disease, considering 
its character, had become mild and moderate. It now returned 
with all its former violence, and with the same attendance 
of inauspicious symptoms. The pustules, when they had be- 
come confluent, and when the patient had not died before they 
ripened, were as black as soot; the immature ones were only 
brown. Moreover, whenever they were numerous, they were 
also small; whilst, whenever they were few, they were of the 
usual size, and rarely black. In one word, they were closely 
allied to the pocks of 1670; with which, however, they did 
not wholly coincide. The few points wherein they differed, in- 
dicated a greater amount of putridity in these last; they also 
showed that they were of a thicker and less concoctile nature. 
They began to throw out a bad smell earlier, and this was so 
bad that when a patient suffered very severely, I could hardly 
approach him for the feetor. Moreover, they reached their full 
period more slowly, and hung about the patient longer than 
any form of smallpox which it has ever been my lot to witness. 

2. In the meanwhile it is worthy to be remarked, that just 
in proportion as the species of smallpox is mild, so do the pus- 
tules arrive at maturity the sooner, whilst the disease is brought 
to a conclusion. Hence, in that regular kind of confluent 
variola, which set in in 1667, it was the eleventh day which 


! Sect. IV, Chap. VI.—[G-] ? Sect. V, Chap. L—[G.] 


SMALLPOX. 219 


brought the most danger to life; and when that was past, the 
patient had rarely much to fear. In the form of variola that 
immediately succeeded, the day of the greatest danger was the 
fourteenth, or, at latest, the seventeenth. After getting over 
these, the patient was safe. I never saw an instance of one 
dying after the last of the two periods. With the present kind 
of variola, the patient was afflicted till the twentieth day; and 
this he rarely survived. If he did, not only did the ankles 
swell, as they do commonly enough, in confluent smallpox, but 
the arms swelled as well. So did the shoulders, legs, and other 
parts of the body. The excessive pain of these tumours was 
the pain of rheumatism; and these it was that were the fore- 
runners of future mischief. They went on, afterwards, to sup- 
puration, and terminated in the formation of vast sinuses, and 
abscesses of the muscular parts; the patient remaining with his 
life in danger for many days after the disappearance of the 
pustules. From these facts I have formed a clear opinion con- 
cerning the degrees of the three epidemics of the three consti- 
tutions. The last was the worst; and that both in respect to 
its greater putridity, and in respeet to the more difficult con- 
coctibility of the morbific matter. 

3. Now the kind of smallpox which I am now considering 
is, in my mind, a new sort, and one which arises out of the 
previous species in its declining form. However much the 
black smallpox, which first showed itself in the beginning of the 
year 1670, was in accordance with the particular epidemic dis- 
position of the atmosphere, which produced it, and, however 
much it both reached and passed its height, it, nevertheless, 
hike a disease, wherein the fresh fermentation of the original 
matter had caused a relapse, was renewed, took strength, revived, 
and grew young again; the air having become again disposed 
to the production of smallpox, and having, as it were, fetched 
it afresh from its old stores. And just in proportion as the 
matter from which the new disease was generated was thicker, 
and more feculent than the matter which gave origin to the 
previous one, so was the pox itself irregular, and so did it savour 
of an intense putrefaction. To make this clear, we must con- 
sider, not that any particular diathesis is to be assumed from 
the atmosphere itself, by which, whilst we have one epidemic 
propagated in one place, we may have another, wholly different, 


220 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


elsewhere, and at no great distance—if such were the case, 
every movement of wind would (as it sometimes does) invariably 
diffuse a constitution—but that each particular tract of the 
atmosphere 1s filled with the effluvia of some mineral fermenta- 
tion, that these contaminate the air through which they pass 
by their particles, that these particles are differently destructive 
to different animals, and that they propagate diseases appro- 
priate to the different affections of the soil, until the whole 
mine of such subterraneous vapours be exhausted. This, again, 
(as in the instance aforesaid) may be brought to a fresh fermen- 
tation from the relics of the imperfectly-exhausted matter. 

4. With me, however, who do not venture to speculate be- 
yond what I am taught by the facts themselves, it is immaterial 
whether this or any other hypothesis best explain the pheno- 
mena. Of one thing I am certain, viz. that the smallpox, 
which I have already considered, is exceedingly like the small- 
pox of the preceding constitution, except in the single fact of 
its grosser nature, and more intense putrefaction. Further- 
more, from these two causes, whenever it was exceedingly 
confluent, it destroyed more than any other species which it 
has been my lot to observe. Indeed, if my opinion on the 
matter be of any value, I may venture to affirm, that in regard 
to the number of patients that 1t attacked, it was on a level with 
the plague itself. Yet, when the pustules were distinct, the 
malady was no worse than any other; and, besides this, ex- 
hibited a favorable character in the size of the pustules, 1n the 
colour of them, and in all other circumstances. 

5. Respecting the treatment, I have for many years wondered 
at the unequivocally contradictory nature of the indications 
suggested by this disease. On the one side we see, as clearly 
as the sun at noon, that fevers, frenzies, crimson spots, and all 
those other symptoms to which this disease is preeminently 
liable (symptoms which depend upon an excess of inflammation) 
are produced off-hand. On the other, there are the dangers 
of an over-cool regimen; and there are also the tendencies to 
obstruct the swelling of the hands (a matter of transcendent 
importance), and to render the pustules more flaccid. After con- 
sidering, long and steadily, these difficulties, and after having 
made myself much anxiety on account of them, I discovered 
that there was a way of obviating both difficulties at once. 


SMALLPOX. 22] 


By allowing the use of boiled milk and water, thin small beer, 
or some other mildly generous drink, I had still the power of 
controlling the internal orgasm of the blood; whilst, on the 
other hand, by keeping the patient strictly to his bed, and for- 
bidding him to expose even so much as his arm, I was provided 
with a bland and genial heat, which promoted the elevation of 
the pustules, and the swelling of the hands and face. These 
methods are by no means inconsistent with each other; the doc- 
trine being that, after the completion of the eruption, the blood 
throws out the inflamed particles upon the surface of the body, 
and (so doing) is in no need of any further stimulus to any 
further secretion. Hence the whole matter turns upon the 
maturation of the abscesses upon the surface, a fact which leaves 
us only two considerations. 

On the part of the blood we have to guard it against the hot 
vapours that might arise from the retrocession of the matter of 
the pustuliferous flesh. 

On the part of the pustules, we must look to supplying them 
with the bland warmth proper for their maturation. 

6. Now, however much the plan which I have described! 
above succeeded in the confluent smallpox of the preceding 
constitution, in the disease of the present one it disappointed 
me. Indeed, in the present form of the malady, the majority, 
of those who had it badly, died ; and that, whether they were 
treated by me as before, or by means of hot cordials. This 
suggested to me the notion, that what was now wanted was 
something over and above the mere security against excessive 
ebullition of the blood, and over and above the mere method 
ensuring the elevation of the pustules, and the swelling of the 
hands and feet. What characterised the irregular smallpox was 
an intense degree of putrefaction ; and what was wanted, as a 
remedy, were means of checking it. Now spirits of vitriol came 
in mind under the two requisite conditions. They would allay 
the heat, and they would check the putrescency. On this prin- 
ciple I left the patient to himself until the pain and vomiting 
which precede the eruption had subsided, and until the eruption 
itself had broken out in full; then, on the fifth or sixth day, I 
allowed him, as his ordinary drink, thin small beer, just acidu- 


' Sect. III, Chap. II, § 50.—[G.] 


222 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


lated with the aforesaid spirits. This he was to take ad libitum 
always, and more freely still as the fever of maturation was at 
hand. 'This drink I ordered to be used every day, until he became 
fully convalescent. 

7. This spirit looks like a real specific to the disease ; so 
miraculously does it check all its symptoms. The face swelled 
both higher and earlier; the interspaces between the pustules 
were of a better red, and more of the colour of the damask 
rose; the smaller pustules enlarged themselves to the utmost 
size that the ailment admitted; some which would otherwise 
have been black, showed a true yellow and honey-like matter ; 
the face, instead of being black, was a deep yellow; and, lastly, 
the pocks ripened sooner, and got through all their stages a 
day or two before their usual time. — But for all this to happen, 
the hquor had to be taken freely. Hence, whenever I found 
the patient refuse to take the proper quantity in the aforesaid 
form, I gave it him with a little syrup in a spoon, or else with 
a little syrup and distilled water. This was to make up for the 
insufficient amount of the liquor in its proper form. 

8. I have enumerated the various merits of this medicine. 
Of mischief arising from its use I have hitherto seen no signs. 
Although it may check the salivation about the tenth or eleventh 
day, in place of which dejections will take place (and that about 
the same time), the latter will endanger the patient much less 
than the former. I have already said that sufferers from the 
confluent smallpox are jeopardised chiefly through the circum- 
stance of the saliva becoming, at the time in question, so viscid 
as to choke the fauces. Now this symptom is relieved by a 
diarrhea; whilst the diarrhoea itself will either stop of its own 
accord, or, at least, as soon as the danger from the pocks is 
over, be checked by a little milk and water, taken along with 
a narcotic. 

9. Now the sick during this treatment keeps his bed; and 
he even keeps his arms under the bedclothes Nevertheless, 
I do not allow more blankets than usual. Furthermore, I allow 
him to turn and move himself to different parts of the bed, and 
that for the sake of keeping off such over-perspirations as, not- 
withstanding the remedy, heisinclined to. His diet is barley- 
broth and oatmeal-gruel, with, now and then, a roasted apple. 
During the last days of the sickness, if the stomach grew weak, 


SMALLPOX. 223 


or the strength wane, I indulge him with three or four spoonfuls 
of canary wine. Every evening, too, from the fifth or sixth 
day onwards, I prescribe (except in the case of infants) a pare- 
goric, to he taken early. This is fourteen drops of liquid 
laudanum in cowslip-flower water. 

10. On the fourteenth day I allow the patient to get out 
of bed; and on the twenty-first I take care to bleed from the 
arm. I then exhibit a purge, and repeat it once or twice. 
The colour of the face now begins to improve, which is not 
the case where the disease has been severely afflicting. Fur- 
thermore, the method in question prevents the scarring, which 
so frequently disfigures the features, and which arises from the 
erosion of the skin by the hot acrid humours. 

11. On the 26th of July, 1675, a nobleman, and a friend of 
my own, Lord Elliot, one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber, 
intrusted to my care one of his servants, who was on the eve 
of an attack of the confluent smallpox. He was about eighteen 
years of age, of an exceedingly sanguine temperament, and had 
brought on his disease by a recent fit of extreme drunkenness. 
The pustules were confluent, and in a thicker crop than I had 
ever before seen them; so much so, that there was scarcely a per- 
ceptible space between them. So much, in this case, did I trust 
to the energies of the medicine in question that I forebore bleed- 
ing; although sent for at a time when I was free to employ it. 
Nay, more, I ought to have done so; since it was from an over- 
draught of wine that the ailment had been evoked. However, 
after the completion of the eruption, and on the fifth or sixth 
day, I ordered some spirits of vitriol to be dropped into a jug 
of small beer, and allowed him the same, to be taken as freely 
as he chose, for his ordinary drink. On the eighth day he had 
such a bleeding at the nose, that his nurse was frightened, and 
ordered me to be sent for in a hurry. I came, found that the 
bleeding arose from an immoderate overflow of blood, and 
ordered him to go on with his drink. 'The bleeding was stayed 
at once. Salvation then set in freely; the hands and face 
swelled ; the pustules filled and increased; and the disease pro. 
ceeded favorably ; except that towards the end there was the 
interruption of a few slimy and bloody motions; and even these, 
perhaps, would not have occurred had I opened the vein, as I 
might have done. Nevertheless, I attacked this dysentery with 


224 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


neither more nor less than the common narcotic draught that I 
should have used in a common case, had no such symptom inter- 
vened. This was to be taken every night, until the pustules dis- 
appeared. Then I bled freely from the arm ; and after drinking 
abundantly of milk and water, he suddenly recovered. 

12. About the same time, one of my neighbours, Mr. Clench, 
intrusted me with the cure of two of his children. One was 
four years old, the other unweaned, and under six months. In 
each case, the pustules were very small, very confluent, like 
erysipelas, and of the sort called black. Notwithstanding the 
tender years of the two (especially of the suckling), I gave 
them some drops of spirits of vitriol in their drink. They took 
it kindly, and recovered without any bad symptoms. My dear 
friend, Dr. Mapletoft, who attended them with me, found the 
elder convalescent, but the younger still sick 1n his cradle. 

13. I must observe, however, that as the smallpox of this 
constitution was so far from being necessarily confluent that it 
was generally benign, so there was not often occasion for the 
the above-mentioned remedy. lt was sufficient to treat 1t ac- 
cording to the method for the distinct smallpox. This I have 
already described. 

14. Courteous reader, you have now heard all that I have 
had to say about smallpox. I know the temper of the times 
too well to suppose that there will be wanting men who will 
disparage what I have taught. Nevertheless, it is the fruit of 
much care, labour, and industry; neither would I have published 
it, had I not thought more of the charity due to my neighbour 
than of my own private reputation. This will be endangered 
by the novelty of my doctrine. Yet there is no good reason 
why a new method should not be applied to a new disease ; in- 
asmuch as (unless we distort a single passage by a forced inter- 
pretation) smallpox is mentioned neither by Hippocrates nor 
Galen. As to the treatment instituted by modern physicians, 
and not instituted by those two great luminaries of medicine, it 
is neglected by some as justly as it is valued by others. 

15. By a parity of reasoning, I have changed the treatment 
of the fevers that depend upon the variolous constitution. If 
the smallpox be new, the fevers that it determines must be 
new also. I think it not over-bold to believe, that smallpox, 
in the time of the ancients, was non-existent in rerum naturá. 


SMALLPOX. 225 


Had it been as common in the days of Hippocrates as it is now, 
so unrivalled an historian of disease would, undoubtedly, have 
left us as genuine and simple a description of it, as he has done 
of other diseases. 

16. For these reasons, I may be allowed to think, that diseases 
have certain periods for their remarkable, and hitherto undis- 
covered, changes—changes which take place in the very bowels 
of the earth, according to its age and duration. Moreover, 
just as other diseases have existed long ago, yet have already 
either wholly been extinguished or else have become well-nigh 
worn out from age (leprosy, for instance, and probably others), 
so, shall those diseases which now prevail, some time or other, 
sooner or later, become extinct, and in their extinction, give 
way to new species, the natures whereof are beyond even our 
conjectures. This may be the truth, whatever may be the 
notions of the short-lived mortals who are born to-day and 
perish to-morrow. Nor are the accounts which even the most 
ancient authors that have written on disease of a much longer 
date, provided that they be compared with the duration of the 
world at large. 


226 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER V. 


THE EPIDEMIC COUGHS OF THE YEAR 1675, WITH THE PLEURISY 
AND PERIPNEUMONY THAT SUPERVENED. 


1, In the year 1675, warm and mild weather (indeed sum- 
mer weather) lasted longer than usual, even to the end of 
October. However, it was succeeded by weather very different, 
viz. sudden cold and moisture. Then it was that coughs pre- 
vailed in greater number than at any other time within my 
remembrance. No one escaped them, whatever might be 
his age or temperament; and they ran through whole families at 
once. Nor were they only remarkable for their frequency : 
this being the case every winter. They were remarkable on 
account of the accidental dangers which they brought upon those 
they affected. The constitution of both the present time, and 
the whole of the previous autumn, exerted itself to the utmost 
in the production of the epidemic fever already described ; and, 
besides this, there was no other epidemic disease by the anta- 
gonism whereof the activity of the present one might be 
traversed in even the least degree. Hence the coughs paved 
the way to fever, and passed, without difficulty, into it. Mean- 
while, just as the coughs helped the constitution in producing 
the fever, so also was the fever determined by the cough to the 
lungs and pleura. These it attacked just as, a week before, 
it had attacked the head. This sudden change inclined the un- 
thinking to consider the fever as either an essential pleurisy, or 
an essential peripneumony. Yet it was neither more nor less 
than what it had been throughout. 

2. Now as before, it attacked with pain in the head, back, 
and limbs; and this was the symptom of the fever of the con- 
stitution. Doubtless, the febrile matter fell heavily on the 
lungs and pleura ; but this was the stimulus of the cough. That 
the fever, however, was the fever that committed all the pre- 
vious havoc, is proved by the effects of the remedies. Both 
forms yielded to the same. Bad as might be the stitch of the 


EPIDEMIC COUGHS. 227 


side, or the difficulty of breathing—and pleuritic as might be the 
character of the blood, the treatment was the treatment which 
squared with pleuritic fever, and not the treatment which 
squared with true pleurisy. This will be seen in the sequel. 
Then as to the season, primary and essential pleurisy is a 
disease that comes between the spring and the summer, and 
links the two divisions of the year. The secondary pleurisy in 
question was born under another star, and was nothing beyond 
the symptom of the proper fever of the year, and an accidental 
offspring of the cough that accompanied it. 

3. kh order that I may proceed to the method which has 
been dictated by experience for the treatment of the coughs of 
this year, and of other years, where the cause is the same, I 
must start with a remark upon those effluvia which are usually 
got rid of by the means of insensible perspiration. Now, these 
may be checked by the effects of cold, for cold contracts the 
pores of the skin and throws the transpiration inwards. So 
thrown in, it falls upon the lungs. These it irritates; and 
hence cough is speedily excited. Furthermore, when the hot 
and recrementitious exhalations of the blood are prevented from 
escaping from the skin, fever is lit up, for so great may be such 
abundance of these same vapours, that the lungs may be insuf- 
ficient for their elimination. Or the natural heat may be in- 
creased by the adventitious heat of either the regimen or the 
remedies; so that fuel may be added to the flame, and the 
patient, who was already inclined towards fever, may be thrown 
into it at once. Now, whatever may be the character of the 
stationary fever which rages during the year in question, the 
same will be the character of this secondary fever that originates 
in the cough. Dependent upon this cough, it may present 
certain peculiar symptoms. Its general character, however, 
will be that of the family into which it is adopted. Now, itis 
clear that whatever may be the origin of the cough, it is not 
the cough alone that must be attended to. The fever must be 
looked to as well. 

4. On this principle I treated my patients as follows. If 
the cough had not yet brought in the usually concomitant 
fever, I was satisfied with forbidding animal food, and fermented 
liquors. I recommended moderate exercise, fresh air, and 
occasional draughts of a cooling pectoral ptisan. This was 


228 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


sufficient for checking the cough and anticipating the fever. 
The abstinence from meat and wine, and the refrigerant draught, 
tempered the blood and made it less ready for the febrile 1m- 
pressions, whilst the exercise opened the pores of the skin, and 
supplied the natural and genuine passage for the exhalations. 
These were dispersed, and the patient was the better for their 
dispersion. 

5. As to the allaying of the cough, the application of 
narcotics and anodynes was not wholly safe. And just as 
dangerous was the use of spirituous liquors and hot cordials. 
Both modes acted alike. They entangled and hardened the 
matter of the cough, so that those exhalations which, by de- 
parting quietly and gradually from the blood, should vanish 
into the atmosphere at large, were now denied an exit, corked 
up in the mass of the blood, and became, thereby, sources of 
fever. This was most frequently the case with such of the 
common people as thought, by means of burnt brandy and 
other hot liquors, to check the cough. Instead of this, they 
brought on pleurisies and peripneumonies, and by their unwise 
wisdom transformed a disease, which, in and of itself, was un- 
important and curable, into a disease both dangerous and deadly. 
Just as insensible (although with a greater show of sense) were 
they who would force a sweat, and so think to exterminate the 
cause of the disease. 

Nevertheless, it must be owned that spontaneous sweats often 
did good— more, indeed, than aught else. These, however, 
are very different things from forced ones. ‘The latter can only 
be extorted by incensing the blood, and by endangering the 
patient that we would save. 

6. Sometimes, however, there supervene upon the cough the 
following symptoms: a succession of chill and flushes; pains 
in the head, back, and limbs ; an occasional tendency to sweats 
(especially night sweats); sometimes the addition of pain in 
the side; sometimes a constriction and tightness at the chest ; 
and, as the result of this last, difficulty of breathing, tightness 
in the cough, and violent fever. Now all this might happen, 
not only after the disease had been badly treated, but spon- 
taneously ; and this was really the case, more especially with 
infants and children. Sometimes it began immediately, some- 
times a day or two after the cough had left. 


EPIDEMIC COUGHS. 229 


7. As far as very careful observation has informed me, the 
best treatment for the fever and its worst symptoms were— 
bleeding at the arm, a blister to the nape of the neck, and a 
daily clyster. The patient, meanwhile, was ordered to be out 
of bed a few hours every day, to abstain from animal food, and 
to take, as his drink, small beer, milk and water, or a cooling 
lenitive ptisan, as the case might be. If by the end of two or 
three days the stitch in the side were not removed, I repeated 
the bleeding, and went on with the clysters. In respect to 
these last, I must remark, that (in this fever, as in others) when, 
by their use, the neck of the disease has been broken, and its 
edge taken off, they should not be too continuously repeated, 
especially in the case of women who are hysterical,or men who 
are hypochondriaes. The blood and humours of such patients 
are endowed with great mobility. A little makes them boil 
and ferment. This disturbs the economy; and febrile sym- 
ptoms, extended beyond their due time, harass the patient. 

8. To return to our subject. By this method we allow time 
to the disease, and this time allows the blood to throw off, by 
degrees, those hot particles which had fixed themselves upon 
the lungs and pleura. Hence, all the symptoms will quietly 
disappear. If, on the other hand, you attack the disease fiercely 
and with a hostile hand, waging war against it with a whole 
armament of remedies, you will either lose your patient, or else 
have to redeem his life by bleeding him beyond both the genius 
of the disease and the bounds of safety. I say the genius of 
the disease, because, in the true pleurisy, repeated venesections 
are right and proper; and, provided that overheating remedies 
and regimen have not stood in the way, cure the complaint 
single handed; whereas, with the symptom in question, it is 
quite sufficient to bleed once only—twice at most; provided 
always that the patient be allowed to leave his bed, and use 
cool drinks. There is no need to bleed oftener, unless the fever 
be increased by heat from without. Even then a repetition is 
not always safe. 

9. I will now take occasion to say a few words concerning 
a very current opinion, viz. that in some years pleurisy 1s found 
so malignant as not to bear its usual bleedings. My own 
doctrine is, that the true and essential pleurisy, which, as will 


230 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


be stated hereafter, runs rife under all constitutions of all 
years, will tolerate a repetition of venesections. When, how- 
ever, it happens, as it sometimes does, that the proper epi- 
demic fever of the year, from some sudden alteration in the 
manifest qualities of the atmosphere, deposits the morbific 
matter of the lungs or pleura (the fever remaining, nevertheless, 
the same)—in such a case, I say, that, although venesection 
may be allowed in an extreme form of the symptom in question, 
the general rule must be, that the bleeding be apportioned to 
the fever that generates the symptom, rather than to the sym- 
ptom itself. Hence, if the fever require bloodletting, the 
pleuritic symptom will require it also; if not, bleeding will be 
either unnecessary or mischievous; since it is with the fever 
that the pleurisy either stands or falls. In my mind, this was 
the case with the symptomatic pleurisy accompanying the fever 
that prevailed at the time when the coughs came in, viz. the 
winter of 1675. And here I must again remark, that, in the 
treatment of fevers, the physician who does not keep continually 
before his eyes the constitution of the year, the extent to which 
it favours the epidemic production of this or that disease, and 
the power it has of twisting to its own proper shape and like- 
ness all the other concurrent diseases of the time, wanders 
wildly in a maze without a clue. 

10. In the November of the aforesaid year, I attended 
Mr. Thomas Windham, the eldest son of Sir Francis Windham, 
knight. The patient was sick of the fever in question, and com- 
plained of pain in the side, and the other symptoms of the 
malady. I bled once (and no oftener), blistered the nape of the 
neck, threw up daily clysters, ordered, one day, ptisan and 
refrigerant emulsions, another, milk and water (sometimes, thin 
‘small beer), and recommended him to be out of bed a few hours 
every day. This set him up within a few days, and after a free 
purge he was thoroughly cured. 

1l. I must remark that although these symptoms, which 
were wont to supervene upon the cough, were nearly those that 
did so much mischief during the winter in question, the cough 
itself, single and unaccompanied, was, at the same time, parti- 
cularly predominant. In treating this, there was occasion for 
neither bleeding nor clysters, provided that the fever was not 


EPIDEMIC COUGHS. 231 


increased by heating diet. It was sufficient to recommend fresh 
air, and to forbid meat and wine. Furthermore, I ordered the 
following lozenges, the best I know for checking such coughs as 
arise from cold : 
K Sugar-candy, lb. ijss. 
Boil in a sufficiency of pump-water, until it stick to the ends of 
the fingers. Then add 
Liquorice-powder, 
Elecampane, 
Aniseed, 
Angelica-seed, aa 38s; 
Orris-powder, 
Flowers of brimstone, aa 3)ij ; 
Essential oil of anise, 91]. 
Fiant tabella s. art. 


These, the patient should always have about him, and take 
frequently. 

12. Before I take leave of my subject, I must anticipate an 
objection which I foresee may be made against some of my 
remarks on epidemic diseases. It may be said that I do not 
sufficiently deal with the malignity so inherent to many of the 
maladies in question. Now I am not the man to either be able 
or wiling to uproot the received opinion of learned men 
concerning this same malignity. It stands proved by too 
many facts. My own practice is that of the most learned 
Scaliger— 


** Non mihi, sed rationi, aut que ratio esse videtur, 
Milito, securus quid mordicus hic tenet aut hic." 


My view of malignity is as follows. 

13. I consider that all forms of malignity that occur in epi- 
demie diseases (be its specific nature what it may), consist and 
terminate in the excessive heat and spirituousness of the over- 
strained humours of the human blood, which are, more or less, 
adverse to nature: since it 1s only humours of this sort, that are 
competent to produce the sudden changes of those diseases which 
are called malignant. I believe, too, that these act chiefly by a 
process of assimilation, for it is a law of Nature that every active 
principle busies itself in the further procreation of something simi- 
lar to itself, and deflects and accommodates to its own character 
whatsoever may be an obstacle in its way. Thus fire generates 


232 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


fire, and the victims of malignant diseases infect their fellows. 
This they do by the emission of those spirits which infect the 
humours, assimilate them to themselves, and draw them into a 
participation of their own nature. 

14. With these premises, it would seem to follow, that the 
first thing to be done is to procure the elimination of these par- 
ticles by sweatings, by which means the disease would be extir- 
pated at once. Against this, however, we have the voice of 
experience, whereby we are told that this cannot be done in each 
and every case of malignity, indifferently. However much it 
may be the case that, in the plague, the pestilential particles 
are of such excessive subtilty, and are so thoroughly seated in 
the spirituous parts of the blood, and are, for such reasons, so 
capable of dissipation as to be ejected from the body by the 
excitation, rather than by the interruption, of a diaphoresis, in 
other fevers there is a different condition of the assimilating 
particles. There, they are at a less degree of subtilty, less in- 
corporated with the finer humours, and less adapted for being 
dissipated by sweats. In some cases, indeed, they are likely to 
be increased by them : since, just in proportion as such hot and 
spirituous particles are actuated by heating and spirituous reme- 
dies, their power of assimilation takes intensity, and just in pro- 
portion as those humours upon which they work become 
inflamed, the tendency to assimilate is increased, and the liability 
to impressions is facilitated. — Meanwhile, reason tells us that 
those medicines which are of a contrary nature to that of the 
hot particles in question, are not only competent to check their 
violence, but also to condense and strengthen those humours 
which should thereby bear, or even break, the impetus of such 
morbific spirits. And herein I can callin the evidence of expe- 
rience, since I have learned that both the purple spots of fever 
and the black pustules of smallpox have taken intensity all the 
more readily from the patient having been heated. The same 
symptoms decrease in proportion as the regimen is (as it ought 
to be) cool and moderate. 

15. Now, if any one ask me, how it is that, since malignity 
consists in the presence of hot and spirituous particles, it often 
happens, that even in diseases of the greatest malignity, so few 
signs of fever are discovered; my answer to his question is as 
follows :—first, that even in the plague, the chief and most 


EPIDEMIC COUGHS. 233 


remarkable sample of malignity, it is clear that the morbific par- 
ticles (especially at the commencement of their prevalence) are 
so immeasurably subtile, and sharp, that they pervade the. blood 
like a blast ; and from the animal spirits being, as it were, star- 
struck, they fail in raising the blood to any ebullition at all. 
Hence the sick man dies without fever. 

16. As to that smaller degree of malignity, which is found in 
other epidemics, the febrile symptoms are rendered incon- 
spicuous by the confusion in the blood and humours, excited by 
hostile particles shut up within their bosom. ‘This oppresses 
Nature so that she is unable to exert those more regular 
symptoms which should be natural to the disease, and the phe- 
nomena, that appear at all, appear as anomalies arising from an 
economy which has been pulled down and wholly upset. This 
depresses the fever, which, under a true guidance of Nature, 
would otherwise have existed. 

At times, there occur fewer signs of fever than the genius of 
the disease indicates. This arises from the metastasis of themalig- 
nant humour, and from its transfer to either the nerves or to some 
other part of the body. During the turgescence of the matter 
that determines the disease, this metastasis may take place to 
even those humours that lie beyond the limits of the blood. 

17. Be this as it may, I cannot even guess at any other 
method for meeting this malignity beyond that which is proper 
for the epidemic that originates it. Hence, whether the epi- 
demic belong to that sort where the febrile matter requires 
sweatings for its concoction, in the first mstance, and sweating 
for its dissipation, in the second; or whether it be of that other . 
kind that of itself finds a way out for itself by an eruption ; or, 
finally, of that third species which waits for the help of art for 
the opening of an outlet; in each, and all of these forms, the 
malignity, which 1s the accompaniment of the disease, will stand 
or fall with the disease, take its turns along with the disease, 
and recede at the same pace, with the disease. Consequently, 
whatever be the evacuations which will do our work with the 
fever, they will do it with the malignity also, no matter how 
opposite to one another they may be in themselves. So that, 
for the malignity of the autumnal intermittents, and of the con- 
tinued fever that went with them, the cure was the diaphoresis, 


234 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


that follows either concoction or the effects of concoction ; whilst 
for the malignity of smallpox,the cure was the seasonable matura- 
tion of little abscesses. And so on throughout. The species 
of malignity peculiar to each malady is best met by the method 
which best meets the peculiar disease to which such malignity 
appertains—be this what it may. Common sense tells us this. 
Experience does the same. All else is shadow more than 
substance. 


CHAPTER VI. 


THE RECAPITULATION. 


1. Ax» now we have shown that that period of years, wherein 
the preceding observations are included, has produced, in all, 
five sorts of constitutions, or five peculiar dispositions of the at- 
mosphere, and as many peculiar species of epidemies, viz. fevers. 
However, it is only the first of these five, the fever which was 
rife and common at the time when the autumnal intermittents 
held their sway, wherein, to my mind, Nature so moderated all 
the symptoms as to dispose the febrile matter by a proper pre- 
paration, though a regular coction, for its proper outlet; either 
by the way of due diaphoresis, or a free transpiration (Gtamvoqv). 
For this reason I call it the depuratory fever. Indeed, I am 
easily brought to believe that this is the principal and standard 
fever of Nature; both on account of the regularity of the 
method which it employs in promoting the morbific matter 
(digesting it at its assigned time), and from the fact of it being 
of all fevers the commonest 1n respect to its occurrence. 

9. It is highly probable that intermittent fevers spread 
themselves as epidemics oftener than any others—at least so 
runs the evidence of the numerous authors who have written 
numerous works upon the frequency of their appearance in 
times past. Why they have shown themselves so rarely since 
the breaking-out of the great plague is more than I can tell; 
unless it be that the pestilential fever in question was the leader 
and forerunner to all the inflammatory fevers which have since 
set; 1n. 


RECAPITULATION. 235 


Now, either I am mistaken, or the same primary fever is the 
fever to whieh Hippocrates dedicated his admirable and necessary 
axioms; and it is this same primary fever upon which the other 
great physicians of antiquity have commented. These are the 
teachers who tell us how to regulate it, and that in such a 
manner, that the febrile matter shall be prepared for its due 
crisis in the way of sweats. Indeed, I do not see how the 
aforesaid aphorisms are applicable to the subsequent forms 
of fever. Their character is wholly different. Their treatment 
different also. They are rarely cured by the method which, 
properly applied and fairly carried out, cures the fever in 
question. 

Be this as it may, one thing is certain, viz. that whilst the 
fever which ran parallel to the intermittents easily became con- 
verted into an intermittent (either from simple continuance or 
from excessive evacuations), the fevers of the years that came 
next, long as they might harass the patient, rarely became such. 
This is a clear proof that the character of the continued and 
the intermittent fever is either identical or similar. 

3. Now, if any one ask how he is to fish out the species of 
a continued fever by means of the signs that I have given in 
the preceding descriptions of fevers, considering that (generally 
speaking) they are, each and all, involved in the symptoms com- 
mon to all fevers alike ; these being heat, thirst, restlessness, &c., 
I reply that the operation, although difficult, is not impossible. 
Let him accurately weigh all the circumstances which I have 
set down in the foregoing history; and let him choose for his 
field of observation some large and populous place. Supposea 
physician called into one whois thus sick. Hither from his own 
observation, or from the evidence of his brethren in medicine, he 
is sure of having one fact to rest upon. He may ascertain 
what other diseases, besides the fevers that he has in hand, are 
common, and what is their genus as epidemics. This being 
known, he easily tells the genus of the one particular specimen, 
for he knows the leading epidemic, and he knows there is but 
one family for the two. However much it may be the case that a 
fever shows itself only in those symptoms which are common 
to fevers in general, other epidemics will speak out more openly 
as to their proper natures and their real characters. As to the 


236 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


obscurity that may invest a fever, nothing conduces to it more 
than the confused and atactic character which it may put on 
under a treatment foreign to its genus. 

4. For instance, a man who has seen a case of smallpox 
(provided that he thoroughly know the history of the disease) 
will easily guess, either from the day on which the pustules 
break out, or from their size and colour, to what particular sort 
of smallpox they are to be referred ; and when he has once 
ascertained what such species of smallpox really is, which at 
such time, and place prevails, he will have a clear notion as to 
the character of the fever similarly prevalent. Indeed, if I could 
take credit for (what I do not profess) an absolute knowledge 
of the history of diseases, I could from the knowledge of the 
epidemic determine, without seeing a case, the nature of the 
fever; and, similarly, from the nature of the fever, I could pre- 
dicate the concomitant disease, stating whether it were small- 
pox, measles, dysentery, &c. Some peculiar sort of these 
diseases attend each constitution, even as some peculiar fever 
does. 

5. In the second place, over and above the evidence which 
is supplied by the concurrent prevalence of epidemics, each in- 
dividual fever has certain particular symptoms of its own that 
lend us light in detecting its nature. However much (as 
stated above) certain symptoms are common to the class of 
fevers at large, others exist as definite marks of distinction, 
stamped by Nature upon each several species. Subtle and 
refined as these may be, they are still within the view of the 
truly cautious investigator, and of the inquirer who carefully 
weighs and ponders over the minutest details. Amongst these 
distinctive signs, I have always given the first place to the state 
of the skin at a given stage of the disease; provided always 
that no incongruous treatment have deflected the malady from its 
proper method. This is clear throughout the epidemics em- 
braced in the present observations. 

6. For example, in those fevers which raged during the de- 
cline of the autumnal intermittents, the skin of the patient 
kept dry; and there were no signs of perspiration before the 
concoction of the febrile matter,an event that generally oc- 
curred on the fourteenth day. Nay, more, sweat could not be 


RECAPITULATION. 237 


procured artificially without great danger to the sick man, who, 
from such forced diaphoresis, was exposed to frenzies and 
other such deadly symptoms. In the pestilential fever which 
followed that of the intermittents, and which led the way with 
the inflammatory ones, there was no spontaneous sweating at 
all. Sudorifies, however, would bring it on; and that during 
even the first days of the disease, and to the great relief of all 
the symptoms. ‘Then, as to the fever of the regular smallpox, 
the patient sweated profusely from the first. If, however, he 
encouraged such sweating, his symptoms, instead of improving, 
became worse. In the two fevers that accompanied the dysen- 
tery and the anomalous smallpox, the sweats were also anoma- 
lous, those of the first of the two being somewhat more copious 
than those of the second. Neither, however, benefited the 
patient ; being excited by the confused motion of the particles, 
rather than being the results of a previous concoction. 

7. lt seems to me a difficult thing to ascertain the species of 
a new sort of fever, at the turn of a constitution, and before 
any one has seeu a sample of it, before, too, we can observe 
what kind of epidemics are to come ; since the fever, for the most 
part, takes the start of them. It would be a tedious matter 
to enumerate the points which occurred in the years of which 
I have treated, and from which it would appear, that even 1n 
this case, we are supplied by Nature with various palpable hints. 
Yet it is from a scrupulous and exact observation of all such cir- 
cumstances that such knowledge necessarily depends. 

8. Now, however high we may put the difficulty—even if 
we rank it amongst the impossibilities—of accurately distin- 
guishing the character of a new fever, immediately upon its ap- 
pearance, we may still take indications as to the treatment from 
the juvantia and ledentia. By watching these, we may feel 
our way; so that, provided that we are slow enough, we can 
save the patent. There is nothing more destructive than pre- 
cipitancy, which has destroyed more lives of fever-patients than 
any other cause. 

9. This is, within a little, the result of my observations 
hitherto. At least, this is what I have been able to reduce to 
rule. I have treated of the different species of the epidemics, 
and also of the order in which they have occurred, from 1661 


238 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


to 1675.  Atthe present time, the smallpox and the continued 
fever have prevailed for nearly two years. However, they have 
become milder, and seem to be wearing themselves out. What 
diseases will come next in turn, He only knoweth who knoweth 
all things. 


SBETION- VE 


—— 


CHAPTER I. 
INTERCURRENT FEVERS. 


1. Tus observations upon the years, which I have described 
in the preceding part of my work, are conclusive as to the pro- 
priety of the term stationary fever—at least as applied to some 
kinds of that disease. These are the forms which depend upon 
some particular, but hitherto undiscovered, condition of the 
constitution of the particular year; which first set in, then 
rage up to a certain point, and finally, preponderate over others 
throughout the continuous series of their own proper years. 
Whether there be other species besides those enumerated, or 
whether, within a certain cycle of years, they succeed each other 
in a certain and constant order of succession, has yet to be 
ascertained. 

There are, however, other continued fevers, which, although 
they may spread their mischief in different degrees at different 
periods, may yet, within one and the same year, be intermixed 
with the stationary kinds, or, even with each other, and that in- 
differently. For this reason I determine to call them ?nfercur- 
rent; so that, whatever I have learned concerning either their 
nature, or their treatment, will appear in what follows. 

They are scarlatina, pleurisy, bastard peripneumony, rheu- 
matism, erysipelatous fever, angina, with the addition, perhaps, 
of a few more. 

3. Now each and all of these diseases are accompanied by 
fever; either wholly or up to a certain point, viz. until the 
elimination of the febrile matter has taken place. ‘This varies 
with the disease. Sometimes it discharges itself in one part, 
sometimes in another. Hence, I have no hesitation in consi- 
dering the fever itself as the primary disease, and that all those 
other affections, from the character of which the diseases, re- 
spectively, take their names, are symptoms referable to one of 


240 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


two things—to either peculiar character of the crisis, or to the 
part to which the disease attaches itself. ^ Nevertheless, pro- 
vided that we can agree about the facts, the name may be left 
to itself. I hold myself free to describe the disease under the 
one name as well as the other. 

9. It must be remarked that, just as those stationary fevers 
concerning which I have already written, take more or less of 
an epidemic character according to the constitution of the years, 
and according to the degree in which the mysterious and inexpli- 
cable conditions of the atmosphere influence them, so do these in- 
tercurrent fevers take an epidemic character also; not to the same 
extent with the others, but still they take one. However much 
they may, in certain cases, originate in some particular anomaly 
of some particular bodies, whereby, in some manner or other, 
the blood and humours take a taint, they still, at times, are in- 
directly due to some general atmospheric influence. This it is 
which acts upon the human body by certain of its sensible quali- 
ties, and this it is which disposes it towards the generation of 
such and such forms of dyscrasy in the blood; these being the 
immediate causes of the fevers in question. For instance, when 
the frost lasts too long; and when winter, often encroaching 
upon spring, is followed by a sudden change from hot to cold, 
pleurisies, anginse, and similar diseases set in ; and this they do, 
irrespective of the general constitution of the year. Now, since 
they occasionally become epidemic, just as much as the epide- 
mics of the true sort, I shall keep the two kinds separate, by 
calling those which, instead of being determined by a certain 
series of years, are common to all years alike, fevers of the 
intercurrent species. 

4. Much as these two forms may differ from one another in 
respect to their origin in atmospheric influences, they agree in 
respect to several of their external and predisposing causes. 
Laying contagion out of the account, which occasionally gives 
origin to the stationary form of fever, and laying also out of 
the account intemperance, which is the mother of both forms, 
the commonest external and evident cause of most fevers is 
either premature change of dress, or exposure to cold after 
exercise. This closes the pores suddenly, and causes the re- 
tention of those exhalations which escape through the breathing- 
holes of the skin: so that those forms of fever are kindled in 


INTERCURRENT FEVERS. 241 


the blood, which the general constitution of the atmosphere, or 
the particular febrile dyscrasy, particularly and potentially, deter- 
mines. For my own part, I think that more die from this than 
from plague, war, and hunger, put together. Let a medical 
man only inquire carefully as to the origin of an acute disease. 
Nine times out of ten, he will hear that the patient has either 
changed his usual warm dress for a cold one, or exposed his body 
to sudden cold after he has heated it by exercise. For this 
reason I invariably recommend my friends never to change any 
part of their dress to which they have grown accustomed until a 
month before the summer-solstice ; and, for the same reason, I 
press upon them with equal energy the necessity of carefully 
avoiding cold when heated by exercise. 

9. Here I must carefully remark, that although most, 1f not 
all, of the diseases, which I here call intercurrent, be real and 
essential diseases, there are several affections resembling them 
in their symptoms, and bearing the same names, which are 
neither more nor less than mere symptoms superadded to the 
stationary fevers. With these, we must follow a different method 
from the one appropriated to an essential disease, viz., the treat- 
ment of the particular fever present, or the fever whereof these 
are the symptoms—the symptoms themselves being but lightly 
treated. As a general rule, we must look to the constitution of 
the year, and see what is the best way of subduing it, whether 
by venesection, or sudorifies, or by any other method. Act 
hap-hazard, in this respect, and you blunder, to the jeopardy of 
your patient. 

Now, if any one object that these very affections, which I 
call essential, are, nevertheless, nothing more than symptoms, 
I answer, that they may, perhaps, be symptoms in respect to the 
fever to which they particularly appertain, but that they are at 
least, symptoms of those fevers which invariably and necessarily 
produce them. For instance, the fever of essential pleurisy is 
of the sort which always falls upon the pleurz, and the fever of 
quinsy one which always falls upon the fauces. So on with 
the rest: whereas, when any of the above-named affections super- 
vene upon a fever which is referable to a peculiar constitution 
of the year, depending upon this, the connexion is an accident, 
and by no means a matter of necessity. This is a broad line of 


demarcation between the two. 
:16 


242 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


6. In order to duly distinguish more clearly between the 
essential and symptomatie diseases, the best way we can do is 
to remember, that whatever may be the symptoms which accom- 
pany the access of any stationary fever, they are exactly those 
which follow the attacks of pleurisy or angina as long as they 
are the accidents only of such a fever. This could be clearly 
seen in the symptomatic pleurisy above mentioned, or the 
pleurisy which, in 1675, supervened upon the fever of the pre- 
vious winter.  Allthat suffered, suffered first in the head, back, 
and limbs; these being the symptoms which were most constant 
to the non-pleuritic fevers which preceded, and which charac- 
terised them to their close. On the other hand, whenever any 
of these intercurrent diseases is essential, it comes on in the 
same manner, in all years, having nothing in common with the 
prevailing stationary fever of the period. Furthermore, just in 
proportion as there is no admixture of the phenomena of other 
fevers, their symptoms come out clearer, and are less liable to 
either obscurity or confusion. Again, the time of the year 
wherein some (not all) of the essential intercurrents appear, 
occasionally suggests the class to which they belong. 

The diagnosis of these, and other diseases, comes easiest to 
him who has, by the most diligent and assiduous observation, 
so closely investigated their phenomena that he can tell, at 
sight, to what genus they belong; and this he can do when 
the characteristie distinctions are too delicate to be expressed 
in words to a second person. 

7. Now, since the different species of these fevers originate 
in peculiar inflammations of the blood, different for different 
diseases, I make my whole practice turn upon its regulation 
and moderation ; I vary my method with the ailment, and apply 
to the elimination of the morbific matter that treatment which 
experience has appropriated to each kind of disease. "The full 
and perfect practitioner is he who knows how the febrile matter 
enters the system and how itis to be ejected ; whether by bleed- 
ing, by sweating, or by purging. "This is the result of careful 
consideration to the phenomena of the disease itself, and to the 
phenomena of its therapeutics. 


SCARLATINA. 243 


CHAPTER II. 


SCARLET FEVER. 


1. ScaARLET-FEVER (Scarlatina) may appear at any season. 
Nevertheless, it oftenest breaks out towards the end of sum- 
mer, when it attacks whole families at once, and more especially 
the infant part of them. The patients feel rigors and shiver- 
ings, just as they do in other fevers. The symptoms, however, 
are moderate. Afterwards, however, the whole skin becomes 
covered with small red macule, thicker than those of measles, 
as well as broader, redder, and less uniform. These last for 
two or three days, and then disappear. The cuticle peels off ; 
and branny scales, remain, lying upon the surface like meal. 
They appear and disappear two or three times. 

2. As the disease is, in my mind, neither more nor less than 
a moderate effervescence of the blood, arising from the heat of 
the preceding summer, or from some other exciting cause, I 
leave the blood as much as possible to its own despumation, and 
to the elimination of the peccant materials through the pores 
of the skin. With this view, I am chary both of bloodletting and 
of clysters. By such remedies, I hold that a revulsion is created, 
that the particles inimical to the blood become more intimately 
mixed therewith, and, finally, that the proper movement of 
Nature is checked. On the other hand, I am cautious in the 
use of cordials. By them, the blood may be over-agitated, and 
so unfitted for the regular and equable separation in which it is 
engrossed. Besides which, they may act as fuel to fever. 

I hold it, then, sufficient for the patient to abstain wholly 
from animal food and from fermented liquors; to keep always 
indoors, and not to keep always to his bed. When the desqua- 
mation is complete, and when the symptoms are departing, I 
consider it proper to purge the patient with some mild laxative, 
accommodated to his age and strength. By treatment thus 
simple and natural, this ailment—we can hardly call it more— 
is dispelled without either trouble or danger: whereas, if, on 
the other hand, we overtreat the patient by confining him to 
his bed, or by throwing in cordials, and other superfluous and 


244 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


over-learned medicines, the disease is aggravated, and the sick 
man dies of his doctor. 

8. This, however, must be borne in mind. If there occur at 
the beginning of the eruption either epileptic fits, or coma—as 
they often do occur with children or young patients—a large 
blister must be placed at the back of the neck, and a paregoric 
draught of syrup of poppies must be administered at once. 
This last must be repeated every night until he recover. The 
ordinary drink must be warm milk with three parts water, and 
animal food must be abstained from. 


CHAPTER III. 


PLEURISY. 


1. No disease is more frequent than this: besides which, it 
is a disease of all seasons. Nevertheless, it is commonest about 
the change from spring to summer. |. Atthat time, the blood is 
heated by the fresh vicinity of the sun, breaking out into inor- 
dinate action, and effervescing without stop or check. Pleurisy 
affects sanguine temperaments, labouring men from the 
country, 

* duro jam fractos membra labore." ! 
Chills and rigors usher it in. These are succeeded by heat, 
thirst, inquietude, and the other too-well known symptoms 
of fever. 

Generally, after a few hours—though frequently much later 
—the patient is seized with a sharp, pricking pain, in the side 
or in the region of the ribs, which shoots sometimes towards the 
shoulder-blades, sometimes towards the spine, sometimes towards 
the front of the chest. The cough is frequent and distressing. 
It arises from the tension of the inflamed parts, and is accom- 
panied with so much pain, that the patient holds his breath, and 
checks the first inclinations towards it. The matter brought up 
by expectoration is, at the onset of the disease, scanty and thin, 
and, frequently, streaked with particles of blood: but, as the 


1 Horat., Sat. i, 1, 5.—[G.] 


PLEURISY. 245 


disease proceeds, it becomes more copious, and more concocted ; 
still, however, mixed with blood. The fever proceeds pari passu: 
indeed, it takes strength from the symptoms to which it gives 
origin. And this fever as well as its concomitant evils, its cough, 
its bloody sputum, and its pain, decreases gradually, and de- 
creases just in proportion to the free expectoration of the mor- 
bific matter. 

2. This same morbific matter, however, does not always, 
during the progress of the disease, attain that degree of con- 
coction which is necessary for expectoration. It frequently 
happens that the thin and scanty sputum of the beginning of 
the disease is coughed up throughout: in which case, neither 
the fever nor its symptoms receive one iota of amendment, and 
the patient dies. Sometimes the bowels are confined, sometimes 
too open, the dejections being frequent and very watery. At 
times the disease gains strength (venesection having been omit- 
ted), so that the patient cannot even cough, suffers from a terrible 
dyspnoea, and is all but suffocated by the violence of the inflam- 
mation. This is sometimes so great, that the chest cannot be 
expanded to the dimensions of a natural respiration without the 
most exquisite pain. At times—and this, again, from the 
omission of the proper venesection—suppuration takes place, 
and pus is effused in the cavity of the thorax. In this case, 
however much the primary fever may abate, (and it may abate 
altogether,) the patient is stillin danger. He may die miserably, 
worn down by the empyema and the hectic fever that succeeded 
the original disease. 

3. Now, although pleurisy naturally originates in a proper 
and specific inflammation of blood, an inflammation which engen- 
ders it as a primary disease; it may, nevertheless, supervene 
as an accident to other fevers, whatever be their kind; the 
febrile matter being precipitated upon the pleurz or the inter- 
costal muscles. When this happens, it happens at the beginning 
of the disease, and arises from the crude state of the febrile 
matter. This ought to be tempered by appropriate ebulhtion, 
and to be prepared for its due separation through more appro- 
priate passages. Generally, however, this form of mischief arises 
from the unseasonable and preposterous use of over-heating medi- 
cines ; medicines which are the favorite prescription of certain 
women of rank, whose charity and benevolence would be better 


246 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


employed in feeding the poor than in physicking them. As 
far as these ladies act upon any plan at all, they act with the 
view of promoting perspiration at the onset of the fever, little 
thinking of the temerity and inefficiency of the attempt. They 
just disturb Nature, who is constrained to the expulsion of the 
peccant matters during their state of crudity, 


“Qua data porta ruunt." 


This throws them on the meninges of the brain, and thence 
comes a frenzy; or it throws them on the pleurz of the ribs, 
and thence comes a pleurisy. The more the season of the year, 
i. e. the turn from spring to summer, and the age and tempera- 
ment of the patient favour this last-named state of things, the 
more likely is the disease to be pleuritic. It is an undeniable 
fact, that, at the season in question, fevers have a tendency to 
become pleurisies. 

4. Now if a pleurisy has been, as it were, precipitated after 
the fashion noticed above, we can make a shrewd guess as to the 
fact by the colour of the blood of our venesections. This blood, 
at least that of the second and following bleedings, as soon as it 
has grown cool, looks like melted suet in regard to its con- 
sistency, whilst its upper layer looks like true pus. Yet it is 
no true pus, notwithstanding. It is fibre; the fibre of the rest 
of the blood ; fibre forming a close tissue. It is not separable 
like pus. If removed from the remaining mass, it looks like 
tenacious and fibrous cuticle. It is, probably, neither more nor 
less than the fibres of the blood, deprived by precipitation of 
their natural red investment, and coagulated by the contact of 
the cold atmosphere into a whitish membrane. 

I must remark, by the way—if the blood, instead of being 
projected from the vein in a horizontal line, flows downwards 
along the skin of the patient, however freely it may flow, it will 
not take the appearance that I have described. Why this is I 
know not. Neither is the patient relieved by a bloodletting of 
the kind in question. Finally, even when the other conditions 
occur, if the blood be prevented, either by the smallness of the 
opening, or by any other obstacle, from being let out in a full 
free stream, it will not be the true blood of pleurisy, and it will 
not be a benefit to the patient. I have also observed, that, let 
the blood be let out as it may, if, whilst fresh drawn, you stir it 


PLEURISY. 247 


with your finger, it will be red and florid at the surface, just as 
it is in other diseases. 

Be the blood, however, what it may, the disease, although 
it has a bad name, may be treated with success, if it be treated 
with skill. Medicine can save as many men from the jaws of 
death, in cases of pleurisy, as it can in any others. 

5. After attentively considering the various phenomena of 
this disease, I think that it is a fever originating in a proper 
and peculiar inflammation of the blood ;—an inflammation by 
means of which Nature deposits the peccant matter on the 
pleure. Sometimes she lays it on the lung itself, and then 
there comes a peripneumony. 

Peripneumonies differ from pleurisies in degree only. They 
exhibit the results of the same cause with greater intensity. 

6. In my treatment I have the following aim in view,—to 
repress the inflammation of the blood, and to divert those 
inflamed particles, which have made an onset upon the lining 
membrane of the ribs (and have there lit up so much mischief) 
into their proper outlets. 

For this reason, my sheet-anchoris venesection. As soon as 
I am sent for, I bleed from the arm to ten ounces or more. 
Immediately after the bloodletting, the following draught is to 
be taken : 

Ix Poppy-water, Ziv; 
Sal prunella, 5j ; 
Syrup of violets, 2j. 
Mix, and make into a draught. 


At the same time I prescrihe the following emulsion : 


Seven sweet almonds; 
Melon-seeds, 
Gourd-seeds, aa ss ; 
White poppy-seeds, 3ij. 
Pound together in a marble mortar, and pour in gradually— 
Barley-water, half a pound; 
Rose-water, 5ij ; 
Sugar-candy, Zss. 
Mix, and make into an emulsion ; of which four ounces are to 
be taken every four hours. 


I also order pectoral medicines to be taken frequently. ‘The 
following are samples :— 


248 » MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


Ix Pectoral decoction, lb. ij; 
Syrup of violets, 
Syrup of Maidenhair, aa Zss. 
Mix, and make into an apozem; of which take half a pound 
three times a day. 


Ix Oil of sweet almonds, Zij; 
Syrup of violets, 
Syrup of Maidenhair, aa 2j; 
Sugar-candy, 3ss. 

Mix, and make into an eclegma, secundum artem. 'To be taken 
frequently during the day. 

Oil of sweet almonds, alone, or linseed oil, providing it be 
fresh drawn, is often very useful. 

7. As to diet, I forbid meat altogether; and at the same 
time, meat-hroths, however weak. The patient is allowed only 
barley- and oatmeal-gruel, and panado. His drink is a ptisan 
of barley-water, with the root of the wood-sorrel, or liquorice- 
root. Sometimes he has a little well-hopped small beer. 

Besides this, I order the following ointment : 

EK Oil of sweet almonds, 33) ; 
Pomade ointment, 
Marshmallow ointment, aa £j. 

Mix, and make into a liniment ; to be rubbed on the side affected 
night and morning. Cover the parts so rubbed with a cab- 
bage-leaf. 

To this treatment I adhere throughout the whole course 
of the disease. 

8. The day on which I am called in, in case I find that the 
pain be oppressive, I order the same quantity of blood to be 
drawn; the same again the next day, and the same again 
on the third day. I even go on to the fourth, so that, unless 
the patient previously recover, he has, in cases where the pain 
and other symptoms are very violent, four continuous bleedings. 
If, however, either a less intense and a less dangerous form of 
the disease be present, whereby I am allowed to go at an easier 
rate with my remedies, or a dejection of strength on the part 
of the patient, will not bear bloodletting in such quick sucession, 
I remain satisfied with the second venesection, without caring 
to repeat it, except after the interval of a day or two, between 
each. In all this, I take for my rule the contra-indications, 
and these are, on the one side, the mildness of the disease, on 
the other, the diminished strength of the patient. 


PLEURISY. 249 


Now, although I like, in the treatment of diseases, to leave 
myself free to take away more or less in the way of bloodletting, 
according to the circumstances of the case, I have, nevertheless, 
rarely observed that a confirmed pleurisy, in an adult subject, 
has been cured with the loss of much less than forty ounces of 
blood. In boys, however, one or two bleedings has generally 
been enough. As to the diarrhea that sometimes supervenes, 
it not only is no bar to the bleeding, but it sometimes stops it. 

9. Enemata I either wholly omit, or else give at long intervals 
between the bleedings, and at most, of only sugar and milk. 

10. During the disease, I look that the patient be not over- 
heated, and I allow him at once to get up every day from his 
bed, and that for a few hours, just as his strength inclines him. 
In this sort of disease, it is of great importance that he be not 
continually bound down to his bed. If he be, neither free 
evacuations of blood, nor any other remedies, however cooling, 
will tell at all upon the aforesaid symptoms. 

11. Soon after the last bleeding, if not before, all the 
symptoms improve, and the patient, who, for some days longer, 
must still be forbidden spirituous liquors, and heavy food, will 
soon resume his strength. At this time it is not out of place 
to solicit the bowels by a mild cathartic. 

12. Now if any one be surprised that this method fails in 
even touching upon the expectoration, and much more in giving 
the details by which it should, at different times be promoted, 
he may be informed that the omission is not referable to neglect. 
The point has been well considered, and has been passed over 
designedly. It has ever been my opinion, that those who will 
intrust the elimination of the disease to expectoration, play 
a dangerous game.  Periculose plenum opus alee—There is 
danger, and there is delay. Oftentimes the morbific matter 
may have been partially concocted, and may have been rejected 
by the way of an anacatharsis, whilst the remaining may remain 
crude; and that in succession, and after the use of even the 
best expectorants, since expectoration is a process that may at 
one time go on well, at another, be wholly suppressed: the 
sick man being meanwhile endangered, and, as far as my 
control, which is none, over the expectoration is concerned, 
being either for life or death. On the other hand, by means 
of bleeding, the morbific matter becomes my subject, and 


250 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


opening in the arm does the work of a windpipe. Moreover, 
I constantly insist, that whilst a pleurisy, if treated after the 
manner that I have just condemned, is one of the broadest and 
easiest of the ways to death, it is, under its proper method, as 
certainly and as safely destroyed as any other ailment, to say 
nothing about the short time taken up in destroying it. Never 
have I known any mischief from the large detraction of blood, 
though unskilful men may think otherwise. 

13. I have often tried to think out some plan of cure for 
pleurisy, without such an expense of blood, either by means of 
resolving the humours, or of promoting expectoration. I have, 
however, failed in finding any treatment like the aforesaid. As 
for that, notwithstanding the unfavorable prognosis of Hippo- 
crates, in the case where the pleurisy is of the dry sort,’ I can 
always make it save the patient, independently of expectoration, 
so that the same bleedings shall let out the disease, and let in 
convalescence. 

14. But as the chief cure in this disease consists in an 
operation which is too much in the hands of unskilful barber- 
surgeons (especially in country places remote from towns), 
there is frequently the danger to the unhappy patient, of the 
loss of a limb, or even of life from the pricking of a tendon. 
To meet this accident, I subjoin the following line of treatment. 

15. When a patient is thus pricked he does not feel the pain 
till about twelve hours after the bleeding ; and that, not in the 
parts about the opening, but in the tract between it and the 
axille. This pain is most felt when the arm is extended. The 
immediate locality of the injury swells to about the size of a 
hazel-nut, and lets out a dribbling ichorous fluid, the discharge 
of which is preeminently diagnostic of a punctured tendon. I 
have seen with my own eyes that the proper treatment is as 


follows :— 
EK Roots of white lilies, Ziv. 
Boil to softness in two pounds of milk from the cow. Then take of 
Linseed, 
Oatmeal, aa ii). 
Strain the milk in which the roots were boiled, and boil therein 
the two sorts of meal, to the consistency of a cataplasm. Apply 
this night and morning to the affected parts. 


1 At Enpat roy m Aevpir(iówv kai AnTvoTOL Xaderwrarat.—Coac, Pren., iii. [G.] 


BASTARD PERIPNEUMONY, 


r2 
Ct 
— 


CHAPTER IV. 


BASTARD PERIPNEUMONY. 


l. As the winter comes on, and oftener still as it is going 
off, and as spring 1s approaching, there comes to light, every 
year, a fever marked with numerous peripneumonic symptoms. 
lt attacks, by preference, the stout and fat, those who have 
reached, or passed, the heyday of life, and those who are over-ad- 
dicted to spirituous liquors, brandy more especially. The blood 
of these men becomes loaded, during the winter, with an accu- 
mulation of phlegmatic humours; whilst, as spring approaches, 
it is excited to a new motion. Then cough takes occasion to 
set in, and administers to these same phlegmatic humours, and 
determines them to fall upon the lungs. And now, if the patient 
shall have lived carelessly, and if he still keep on drinking freely, 
the matter which has excited the cough grows gross, blocks up 
the passages to the lungs, and preys upon the whole mass of the 
blood in the shape of fever. 

2. At the first attack, the patient is hot and cold by turns, 
is giddy, and complains of a shooting pain in the head, as 
often as the coughing becomes importunate. He vomits up 
what he drinks, sometimes coughing, sometimes not. The 
urine is turbid and intensely red, the blood the blood of 
pleurisy. He pants for wind, and draws his breath frequently 
and by jerks. If he be inclined to cough, his head feels as if 
it would split, and so he describes the feeling. The whole chest 
is in pain, and the wheezing of the lungs may be heard by the 
bystanders as often as the sick man coughs, since the lung is 
unable to dilate itself sufficiently, and its intumescences shuts up 
the vital passages. This intercepts the circulation ; and the blood 
being, as it were, smothered, there shall be (as there often is 
with stout people), an absence of the signs of fever. This same 
absence of the signs of fever may also arise from the excess of 
phlegmatic matter, which must so clog the blood as to disable 
it from rising to a full and sufficient ebullition. 

3. In treating this fever, I make it my business to divert 
from the lungs, by means of venesection, the blood which creates 


252 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the suffocation, and which lights up the inflammation. The 
lungs themselves I clear and cool with pectoral remedies ; and 
by the help of a cooling diet I moderate the heat of the body 
at large. Now when it happens, on the one hand, that this 
sink of phlegm is lodged in the veins, is day by day supplying 
fuel to the fire of inflammation, and is, in consequence, appear- 
ing to indicate a frequent repetition of venesections, whilst, on 
the other hand, the most careful observations that I have been 
able to make, have taught me that such repetitions, with 
patients of gross habits, and with patients who have passed the 
prime of life, are the origin of much mischief, and when this 
latter fact dissuades me from bloodletting no less than the former 
conditions may indicate it, I say that in such cases I purge 
freely, and make such purging supplementary to the venesection; 
a substitute which is rightly applied in those cases that will not 
bear a large and repeated loss of blood. 

4. Hence, I proceeded as follows: I kept my patient to his 
bed, bled him as he lay im it, and forbid him to get up for two 
or three hours. This I insisted upon, because, whilst all losses 
of blood to a certain extent, shake and weaken the frame at 
large, this is the method for making them most tolerable. 
The patient who lies in bed, will suffer less from a ten ounce 
bleeding, than one who is up, from a bleeding of only six or 
seven ounces. The next morning the following draught must 
be taken : 


Ix Extract of cassia, 2j; 
Liquorice, 5ij; 
Fat figs, iv; 
Senna-leaves, 5iiss ; 
Agaric lozenges, 5j. 
Boil in water q. s. Strain to four ounces. Dissolve in the strained 
liquor, 
Manna, 3); 
Solutive syrup of roses, Zss. 
Mix, and make into a draught. 


5. The next day I bleed again, then miss a day, and repeat 
the aforesaid purging drink. And so I bleed and purge, and 
purge and bleed, till the patient get well. Such days as I do 
not purge, I recommend the pectoral decoction, sweet oil of 
almonds, and the hke. Meat, and meat-broths I forbid, and, 
still more strongly, spirituous liquors ; in the place of which, I 


BASTARD PERIPNEUMONY. 253 


allow the patient, as his usual drink, a ptisan of barley-water 
and liquorice, and, if he particularly request it, a little thin 
small beer. 

6. By this method can we overcome that bastard peripneu- 
mony, which originates in the over-abundant collection of 
phlegm, accumulated during the winter, and breaking out upon 
the lungs; a disease wherein we must purge as well as bleed. 
In the true peripneumony we must not do this. The trué 
peripneumony is of the same nature as a pleurisy, except that 
it affects the lungs more universally. The true peripneumony 
and the true pleurisy are treated alike, that is, by bloodletting; 
by bloodletting in preference to cooling medicines, and to 
medicines of any other sort whatsoever. 

7. This bastard peripneumony, although it somewhat ap- 
proaches a dry asthma, and that in regard to the difficulty of 
breathing, as well as other symptoms, is. still easily to be 
distinguished. The bastard peripneumony has fever, the asthma 
none. Yet the fever of the bastard peripneumony is far less 
than the fever of the true. 

8. Now this must be carefully noticed, viz. that when the 
patents who are struggling with the disease have been addicted 
to brandy and such like liquors, it will be unsafe to deprive 
them of the same too suddenly. It must be done by degrees. 
By this means there is less likelihood of the abrupt change 
paving the way to a dropsy. The same applies to all diseases 
thus originating. And now, as I am speaking of brandy, I 
will make a remark by the way. It were well if that spirit 
were either wholly banished, or limited to the restoration (not 
the extinction) of the vital spirits. Some may go farther, and 
propose the entire abandonment of it for internal uses, con- 
fining it to surgical cases; 1. e. as a dressing for the digestion 
of sores, or as an application in burns. For these, it bears the 
bell from all other remedies. It defends the underlying skin 
from putrefaction, and, so doing, effects a quick cure, so quick 
as not to wait for the naturally slow and leisurely process of 
digestion, and the stages of digestion. Lint dipped in brandy, 
and applied, immediately after the injury, to any part of the 
body that shall have been scalded with hot water, or singed 
by gunpowder, will do this, provided that, as long as the pain 
last, the spirit be renewed. After it has fairly ceased, once or 
twice a day will be sufficient. 


204 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER V. 


RHEUMATISM. 


l. Tus disease may come on at any time. It is commonest, 
however, during the autumn, chiefly attacking the young and 
vigorous—ore yovv yAwoov.' It generally originates in some 
such cause as the following. ‘The patient has been heated 
by either some over-violent exercise, or by some other means, 
and has taken cold upon it. The sad list of symptoms begins 
with chills and shivers ; these are followed immediately by heat, 
disquietude, thirst, and the other concomitants of fever. One 
or two days after this (sometimes sooner) the patient is attacked 
by severe pains in the joints, sometimes in one and sometimes 
in another, sometimes in his wrist, sometimes in his shoulder, 
sometimes in the knee—1in this last joint oftenest. This pain 
changes its place from time to time, takes the joints in turns, 
and affects the one that it attacks last with redness and swelling. 
Sometimes during the first days the fever and the above-named 
symptoms go hand in hand; the fever, however, gradually goes 
off whilst the pain only remains ; sometimes, however, it grows 
worse. The febrile matter has, in that case, been transferred 
to the joints. This is clearly proved from the fact of the fever 
being frequently lit up afresh after the driving in of the mor- 
bific matter by the unseasonable use of external remedies. 

2. This disease, when separate from the fever, is often called 
arthritis (gout). Nevertheless, it differs essentially from that 
disease, as every one knows who knows the two diseases well. 
This confusion may perhaps explain why it is that medical 
writers have passed so lightly over rheumatism; unless, indeed, 
we chose to suppose that the long list of human ailments has 
lately been increased by a fresh addition, Be this as it may, 
there is plenty of the disease now-a-days ; and, although it very 
rarely, when once the fever has been driven off, kill the patient, 
it is still, from the vehemence of the pain, and from its pro- 
tracted duration, no contemptible distemper. Treat it badly, 


! Theocrat., Idyll. xiv, 70.—[G.] 


RHEUMATISM. 255 


and it will last for months and years; nay, it will torment a 
patient throughout his miserable lifetime. 

Its violence, indeed, may vary ; so that, after the fashion of 
gout, it may come on at odd times, and in periodic fits. This, 
too, may happen after the aforesaid pains have been long, vio- 
lent, and afflicting. Then they may cease of their own accord: 
the patient, however, shall be a eripple to the day of his death, 
and wholly lose the use of his limbs ; whilst the knuckles of his 
fingers shall become knotty and protuberant (as in gout), with 
the knots showing most on the 1nside. 

With all this, the stomach shall be strong, and the patient be 
sound in other respects. 

3. There is another species (although it is not generally so 
considered) of rheumatism. This may well be called rheumatic 
lumbago. Rheumatic lumbago consists in a violent fixed pain 
in the lumbar region, sometimes stretching as low as the sacrum. 
Except that the patient is not sick, an attack of lumbago simu- 
lates an attack of the kidneys. Over and above the violent and 
almost intolerable pain about the kidneys themselves, the course 
of the ureters from the kidney, even to the bladder, is painful 
as well; the pain, however, being milder. This course of the 
pains originally deceived me, for I used to think that it de- 
pended on some gravelly matter adherent to the parts. Never- 
theless, it was neither more nor less than the inflammatory and 
peccant matter of rheumatism, which had left the other parts of 
the body and afflicted these alone. This pain, unless got rid of, 
like the pain of the common rheumatism, is equally excru- 
ciating, equally persistent. The miserable patient cannot he his 
length ; but either leaps from his bed, or sits in it upright, rock- 
ing his body to and fro, now backwards and now forwards, 
sometimes bent, sometimes drawn up, but always rocking him- 
self painfully. 

4. Now both the sorts of rheumatism arise from inflamma- 
tion. No one doubts the inflammatory nature of pleurisy, and 
the blood of rheumatism is as like the blood of pleurisy, as one 
egg is like another. Hence, the cure is to be sought in blood- 
letting. Meanwhile the blood is to be tempered, and its 
fervour is to be repressed, by cooling and thickening medicines, 
and by proper regimen. 

5. As soon as I am sent for, I draw blood from the arm of 


256 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the side affected, to ten ounces, and then prescribe the following 
julep : 
kK Water of water-lilies, 

Purslain-water, 

Lettuce-water, aa Ziv; 

Syrup of lemons, Zss; 

Syrup of violets, 3). 

Mix, and make into a julep; to be taken ad libitum. 


Sometimes I order the emulsion for pleurisy' instead. 

To allay the pain, I take care to apply a white bread-poultice, 
made with milk and saffron, or else a cabbage leaf to the part 
affected. As to the diet, I forbid, equally, meat, and meat- 
broths, however weak and thin; substituting in their stead, 
barley-broth, oatmeal-gruel, panado, and the like. For ordi- 
nary drink, I allow nothing stronger than a little thin small 
beer, or (what is better), a ptisan of barley, flavoured with 
liquorice or sorrel. I also like the patient to be out of bed for 
a few hours every day, since the heat of a continual confine- 
ment will promote and aggravate the disease. 

6. The following day I order the same amount of blood to 
be drawn, and a day or two after, according to the strength of 
the patient, I bleed again. Three or four days after this, I 
bleed for the fourth time, and this fourth bleeding (respect being 
had to the strength, age, constitution, and other conditions of 
the patient) is generally the last. I rarely bleed a fifth time, 
unless there have gone before, either too hot a regimen, or too 
hot medicines. Now anodynes and paregorics require to be 
accompanied by very free bleedings indeed ; hence, if I mean 
to cure the disease by bleeding alone, I abstain, during all 
the stages of a rheumatism, from their use. ‘They fix the 
disease, and render it less amenable to bleeding ; an operation 
which the over-officious use of anodynes renders necessary, 
oftener than would be the case otherwise. Besides this, they 
by no means always make good their title of anodyne. 

7. During the careful application of the aforesaid remedies 
and diet, I now and then throw up a clyster of sugar and milk, 
on the day when the patient is not let blood. I even insist 
upon all these points being attended to, for eight days at least, 


! Chap. IIT, § 6.—[G.] 


RHEUMATISM. 257 


after the last bleeding. Afterwards, I order a mild cathartic 
draught to be taken in the morning, and a full dose of syrup 
of white poppies, out of cowslip-water, the evening after. This 
restrains the orgasm of the blood, and guards against a relapse. 
All this being properly attended to, I allow the patient to 
return, by slow degrees, to his usual way of living, in respect to 
air, exercise, and food, cautioning him, nevertheless, against 
wine, spices, salt meat, and all indigestible aliments. These 
he may not touch for a long time afterwards, 

8. After the bleedings, to the number aforesaid, the pains 
will be much lessened. They will not, however, wholly go off. 
They will only do this when the strength, that has been lost 
along with the loss of blood, shall be made good again. ‘This 
recovery will take place quickest at the approach of the next 
season of the year—a season which conduces more to the resto- 
ration of the patient, than the one in which he sickened. 
Under these conditions, the symptoms will one and all disappear, 
and the convalescent grow as strong as a wrestler. 

9. Now, although the foregoing method, or one like it, will, 
if applied at the beginning of the disease, determine a favorable 
conclusion, it still happens, and that frequently, that, where 
the patient has been badly treated, and treated after a wholly 
contrary fashion, he will be troubled during the remainder of 
his life with wandering pains, sometimes mild, sometimes severe ; 
which pains easily deceive the incautious, and pass for the 
symptoms of scurvy. Now upon this point I will speak by 
the way, and I will speak freely. That scurvy is rife and 
common in the northern countries, I admit; that it is so common 
as is generally believed, I doubt. Many of the cases of the so- 
called scurvy are cases of disease in the process of formation ; 
many of disease imperfectly subdued. The first have yet to 
take their type and character; the latter have yet to cease 
contaminating the blood. For instance, the fresh matter that 
is about to generate gout, until such time as it has fallen upon 
the joints, shows itself in symptoms, that pass for the symptoms 
of scurvy. Yet when once gout has been formed, and has 
exhibited itself by act and deed, no one mistakes it for anything 
but itself. 

10. I know, too, that many symptoms, like the symptoms of 
scurvy, attack really gouty patients, after they have rid them- 

EX 


258 MEDICAL ODSERVATIONS. 


selves of the gouty fits. This may arise from the unseasonable 
use of evacuants, from the effects of old age, or from any other 
cause that may have interrupted Nature in her attempt to un- 
load the arthritic matter, in its full entirety, upon the joints. 
Such matter, retained, yet useless, corrupts the whole mass of 
the blood, and distresses the patient with bad symptoms upon 
bad symptoms. 

This applies to incipient dropsy as well as to departing gout. 
The saying of the vulgar is as follows: when scurvy ends, dropsy 
begins. Now this only means that when a dropsy has fairly 
shown itself by clear signs, the preconceived notion of a scurvy 
falls to the ground. The same applies to many other chronic 
diseases ; whether they be yet in a state of growth, and waiting 
to take their type and character, or partially dispersed, yet not 
wholly subdued and exterminated. Unless we admit this, the 
term scurvy will take an undue extension (as it really does 
nowadays), and comprise nearly every sort of disease. If, 
however, we carefully exert ourselves in the close investigation 
of diseases, follow them to their secret hiding-places, lift up the 
veil that disguises their symptoms, and see them in their own 
true forms, there will be no difficulty in distributing them 
according to their proper families: always remembering, that 
the method of cure is the method for the disease as it exists in 
its full and perfect form, and in its real acts and deeds, and 
not the method of any adulterate and counterfeit symptoms. 

11. And here I may remark, that when the rheumatism has 
taken deep root, and is of some years’ standing, it is not so well 
to bleed at short intervals, as it was at the onset of the malady. 
It is better to separate the venesections by intervals of a few 
weeks. ‘This will be enough to drive away the disease, or, at 
least, bring it to the point when issues in either leg, or draughts 
of any volatile spirit, taken morning and evening out of canary 
wine, will extirpate its relics. 

12. Now, however great may be the difference between true 
rheumatism and true scurvy, there is a sort of the former dis- 
ease which cannot be denied to approach, both in respect to its 
symptoms and its cure, the latter. And this I shall call scorbutic 
rheumatism. The pains come sometimes in one part, sometimes 
in another; they seldom occasion much suffering, seldom are at- 
tended with fevers. ‘They are less fixed to one spot, are more 


RHEUMATISM. 259 


erratic, and more uncertain; their accompanying symptoms being 
anomalous, and disorderly also. At times it afflicts this or that 
joint; at times the inward parts only. Here it produces suf- 
fering, which suffering goes off when the pain again transfers 
itself outwardly. Thus it harasses the patient by turns, and 
prolongs itself to the duration of the most chronic amongst the 
chronic diseases. It seizes chiefly women and weakly men ; 
so much so that, were it not for its resistance to hysteric reme- 
dies, it might pass for a sort of hysteria. 

18. Those who have used the Jesuit’s bark for a long time 
together are liable to this affection ; and I may state, by the 
way, that it is the only mischief I have seen arise therefrom. 
Whether, however, this or any other cause have given rise to 
the scurvy in question, the following recipes will easily cure it ; 
recipes of which I would have made a secret, had I not thought 
more of the publie good than of my own private emolument. 
By means of these alone I have cured many whom bleedings, 
frequently repeated, had failed to cure; and with whom purges, 
and milk diets, and testaceous powders, had been just as use- 
less, Here they are— 


IX Conserve of garden scurvy-grass (fresh), $ij ; 
Conserve of wood-sorrel, 5j ; 
Compound powder of cuckoo-pint, 5v) ; 
Syrup of oranges, q. s. 
Fiat electuar. Of this take two drachms three times a day for a whole 
month, washing it down with three ounces of the following water : 


Ix Leaves of garden scurvy-grass, eight handfuls ; 
Leaves of brooklime, 
Leaves of water-cress, 
Leaves of sage, 
Leaves of mint, aa four handfuls ; 
The peel of six oranges ; 
Bruised nutmeg. 
Steep in twelve pounds of Brunswick mum, and distil off in à common 
still six pounds. 


The dose of the compound powder of cuckoo-pint must be 
strictly observed; at any rate, it must not be diminished. 


260 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER VI. 
ERYSIPELATOUS FEVER. 


1. Tuts disease attacks any and all parts of the body, at any 
and all seasons of the year. The face, however, is its more 
particular part, and the summer its chief season. The patient 
is taken whilst out of doors. His face swells suddenly; and 
the swelling is accompanied with exceeding pain and red- 
ness. It 1salso marked by thick patches of very small pustules. 
These enlarge from inflammation, and gradually become vesi- 
cular, spread along the brow and head, elose up the eyes through 
their puffiness and magnitude, and, with the exception of the 
presence of pustules, are not very unlike the swellings which are 
left by the stings of wasps or bees. This is the common and 
usual form of erysipelas. The country people call it a blight. 

2. Whatever be the part of the body, and whatever be the time 
of year, there 1s generally the combination of chills and shivers. 
These attend the inflammation, unless, indeed, they have pre- 
ceded it, which they sometimes do by two or three days. 
Besides these, there are thirst, inquietude, and the other 
symptoms of fever. As the disease goes on, the fever produces 
pain, swelling, and other symptoms, which day by day increase, 
and sometimes terminate in gangrene. These, in their turn, 
react upon the fever, until restrained by appropriate remedies. 

3. There is another form of this disease, although one of rare 
occurrence. It comes on at any season of the year, but is chiefly 
referable to the circumstance of the patient having over-indulged 
in the use of the more thin and fiery wines, or else in some 
similar spirituous liquor. The fever leads the way. A crop 
of pustules follows, and covers the whole body. "These are like 
the stings of nettles. At times they rise to vesicles. At times 
they recede under the skin, like tubercles ; in which case they 
itch intolerably, and show themselves afresh as often as they are 
scratched, be the scratching ever so slight. 

4. I consider that, in this disease, peccant matter is mixed with 


> 


ERYSIPELATOUS FEVER. 261 


the blood, and that it must be evacuated. Also, that the ebul- 
lition of the blood must be regulated by cooling remedies ; also 
that matter which has become impacted in the parts must be 
discussed and eliminated. 

To do this I bleed from the arm forthwith, and I find the 
blood like the blood of pleurisy. The next day I exhibit my 
usual mild cathartic, and, at bedtime, in case the patient has 
passed too many motions, a paregoric draught, such as syrup 
of poppies, out of cowslip-water, or something of the sort. The 
purging being over, I foment the part with the following 
decoction : 


E Marshmallow root, 
Mallow-leaves, 
Elder-leaves, 
Mullein-leaves, each two handfuls ; 
Melilote-flowers, 
St. John's-wort-tops, 
Tops of the lesser centaury, each a handful ; 
Linseed, 
Funigreek-seeds, aa Zss. 

Boil down, in a sufficient quantity of water,to three pounds. Strain 
the liquor. Add, when wanted for use, two ounces of spirits of 
wine to every pound of the decoction. Apply stupes of warm 
light flannel, soaked in the mixture, and well wrung, twice a day 
to the part affected. After the fomentation, anoint with 


EK Spirits of wine, lb.ss; 
Venice treacle, 3ij ; 
Long pepper (powdered), 
Cloves (powdered), aa 5ij. 
Mix. Apply on blotting-paper to the part affected. 


5. In the meanwhile, the patient must live on barley-broth, 
oatmeal-gruel, and roasted apples. He may, moreover, take a 
little of the smallest beer, and leave his bed for a few hours 
daily. To this method the fever, with its symptoms, will gene- 
rally give way in a short time. If not, I bleed a second time, 
and sometimes even a third time. This I do at the interval of 
a day ; provided, also, that the blood remain in a bad diathesis, 
and that the fever be kept up. On the day when I omit the 
venesection, I order an enema of milk and syrup of violets, and 
cooling juleps of lily-water, as in rheumatism, the juleps being 
taken every hour. Generally, however, the single bleeding, 


262 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


and the subsequent purgation, if applied in time, carry off 
the complaint. 

The erysipelas which looks like nettle-stings may be simi- 
larly treated, except that it requires less in the way of external 
applications. 

6. I may now make a remark by the way. Although the 
affections of which we are speaking, as well as the generality of 
those which attack the skin, and are accompanied with an erup- 
tion, provided that they be chronic, easily give way to this treat- 
ment, and take themselves off after the repetition of a purge 
and venesection, there are others, of the same kind, which must be 
treated in a manner wholly opposite. With them, there is no good 
in repeated evacuations, and no hope in testaceous powders for 
the sweetening of the blood ; inasmuch as certain recrementi- 
tious matters, of a bad diathesis, are attached so closely to the 
skin, that they are attacked and removed only by those medi- 
cines which give strength and tone to the blood, and which have 
the property of acting as deobstruents upon the pores of the 
skin. In virulent pruritus, and in cutaneous eruptions akin to 
it, I resort to the following treatment, and I derive from it no 
common success : 


K Venice-treacle, 585 ; 
Egg electuary, Dj; 
Virginian snakeroot (finely powdered), gr. xv; 
Oriental bezoar, gr. v; 
Syrup of candied citron, q. s. 
Make into a bolus; to be taken every day, night and morning, for 
three weeks. 


Along with this drink, six spoonfuls of the following julep : 


Ke Aque cardui Benedicti, $vj ; 
Plague-water, 
Treacle-water, aa 3ij ; 
Syrup of gilliflower cloves, 3). 
Mix, and make into a julep. 


7. Every morning, after his physic, the patient must sweat 
for an hour or two, or, what is better, let him be in bed, cover 
himself with extra blankets, and perspire moderately. After 
this, if the pustules still remain, the following liniment must 
be applied to the parts affected : 


ERYSIPELATOUS FEVER. 263 


IX Ointment of the water-dock, 2ij ; 
Pomatum ointment, 3); 
Flowers of sulphur, 3iij ; 
Oil of rhodium, mix. 
Fiat linimentum. 


These medicines must not be used, except after bleeding and 
purging, operations which, although they do not, by themselves, 
effect the full and perfect cure, still protect the patient against 
the fever that would, otherwise, arise from the use of heating 
medicines. 

8. There is another form of eruption, which is less frequent 
than the present ones, and wholly unassailable by evacuations. 
It may appear anywhere. Generally, however, it appears on 
the breast, fixes itself on some particular part, just, or hardly, 
rises above the skin, spreads in a broad patch, is sometimes 
porriginous, sometimes furfuraceous, and has its squamule of a 
colour approaching to yellow. Whether this be a macula or 
an impetigo, a spot or a tetter, the patient does well as long as 
itis out. When, however, it goes in, as it often does, he suffers 
a slight degree of disorder, and his urine becomes turbid, and 
of a red, or rather reddish-yellow, colour. In treating this, we 
follow the treatment of virulent scabies—the same remedies, 
the same general evacuations, and the same order of exhi- 
bition. Besides this, wine and digestible animal food are 
allowable; indeed, the use of refrigerants is more bad than 
good. Thus is this last form of disease cured. At times, how- 
ever, nothing will cure it, except the prolonged use of chalybeate 
waters. 


264 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


CHAPTER VII. 


QUINSY. 


1. TTurs comes on at all seasons of the year, but most during 
the transition from spring to summer. It attacks young 
persons most, especially if they be of a sanguine temperament, 
and (an observation I have often made) have red hair. Chills 
and shivers usher it in. Fever follows. Next come pain and 
inflammation of the fauces, and unless these last symptoms be 
speedily relieved, the patient becomes unable to either swallow 
his food or breathe through his nostrils; whilst the fauces are 
closed with a feeling of strangulation, the uvula, the tonsils, 
and the larynx all being swollen, and all but suffocation being 
induced. Great is the danger of this ailment. At times it 
kills within a few hours. In such cases an excess of febrile 
matter has been thrown upon the above-named parts, and the 
impending storm has been insufficiently met by appropriate 
management. 

2. I bleed freely from the arm, and also from each side of 
the tongue. I then touch the parts inflamed with the honey 
of roses, made as sharp as possible with spirits of sulphur. 
Besides this, I order the following gargle, and I order it after 
a manner different from the one in common use, by recom- 
mending it to be kept quietly in the mouth until it grow warm, 
when it is to be spit out, and renewed: 


kK Plantain-water, 
Red rose-water, 
Frog-spawn-water, aa Ziv; 
White of egg beaten upon water, Ziij ; 
White sugar-candy, 3iij. 
Fiat gavgarisma. 
Finally, I add the daily use of the emulsion for pleurisy, 
or of some similar one. 
9. The next day, unless the fever and pain in swallowing 
have, in some degree, abated, I bleed again from the arm, post- 
poning the purgative for the day following, If, however, there 


QUINSY. 265. 


be a diminution of both symptoms, I order a lenitive electuary 
at once. This, after venesection, is of pre-eminent value, and, 
as I have ascertained by manifold experience, of paramount 
necessity. Very rarely, indeed, do the fever and other sym- 
ptoms cause alarm after this. If they do, they are to be 
arrested by bleeding, and a strong large blister to the nape of 
the neck. Throughout the whole course of this disease, an 
emollient and cooling enema is to be thrown up every morning 
on those days when no purgatives are given. In this way is 
the patient to be supported. 

4. Meat of all sorts is forbidden ; and so are all meat broths. 
Barley-broth, oatmeal-gruel, and roasted apples are allowed. 
So are ptisans and barley, and so is the smallest of small beer. 
The bed may be left for a few hours every day; since the 
warmth of it helps the fever, and helps those other inflammatory 
symptoms which I take so much trouble to allay. In respect, how- 
ever, to the angina (quinsy) which is a symptom of the stationary 
fever, it must be treated 1n the same way as the fever itself is 
treated, either by diaphoresis and action through the pores of 
the skin, or by any other form of treatment adapted to the 
primary fever. This I have verified by careful observation. 

5. Besides these, there are other fevers of the class of infer- 
currents ; but as these go off directly in some different manner, 
and terminate in some particular symptom, they are not com- 
monly termed fevers. Nevertheless, they are such in origin. 
The affection from which the disease takes its name is only a 
symptom of some fever terminating therein. Two of these are 
all that I shall at present mention, and that slightly; viz. 
hemorrhage from the nostrils, and hemoptysis. 

6, Bleeding from the nose comes on at any and all times of 
the year. It attacks subjects of hot blood and a weak tem- 
perament, and that more in the decline of life than in its 
spring. At the first attack, it shows like fever. This makes 
its way through the nostrils— 


** Quà data porta ruit." 


During its escape there are pain and heat, and distress in 
the front of the head. The blood flows on for some hours ; 
stops for a while; breaks out afresh; stops and breaks out 
again. At length it leaves off of itself altogether, either under 


266 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


the effects of remedies, or else from having become diminished 
and exhausted. The patient, however, may expect an annual 
relapse, as often as his system becomes inflamed by either 
spirituous liqours, or any other exciting causes. 

7. This is what I aim at. The heat and ebullition of the 
blood are too great. From this arises unnatural extravasation, 
and for this reason it is to be restrained, and its impetus is to 
be diverted elsewhere. With this view, I bleed frequently, and 
freely, and I find that the blood is the blood of pleurisy. The 
diet I order is refrigerant and inspissating—three parts water 
to one of milk, boiled, and drunken cool, boiled apples, barley- 
broths, and other vegetable forms of food; cooling and thick- 
ening juleps, and those emulsions which have already been 
described as remedial to inflammation. The bed may be left 
for a short time every day. A lenitive and cooling enema 
must be thrown up every day ; never, by any chance, omitted. 
Finally, by a draught of the paregoric of diacodium, the fury 
of the blood may be kept within limits, as by a chain. When, 
however, as is often the case, hemorrhages of the sort in ques- 
tion are accompanied by an acrid lymph, which mixes itself up 
with the blood, and opens the orifices of the veins, over and 
above the revulsive and refrigerative treatment, I prescribe a 
mild cathartic, and that even at the height of the disease. 
When this has done acting, I follow it up with an anodyne of 
full strength, and somewhat more. When the symptom has 
wholly vanished, I give a cathartic again. 

8. In respect to external applications, the best are linen rags, 
doubled twice, steeped in cold water with sal prunella, and 
afterwards lightly wrung out, to be applied to the nape, and to 
both sides of the neck, several times a day. After the evacua- 
tions are completed, the following mixture should be applied : 


IX Hungarian vitriol, 
Alum, aa Zj; 
Plegma vitriolicum, lb.ss. 

Boil until all the matters are dissolved. Cool, and filter. Sepa- 
rate the crystals. Add to the remaining liquor a twelfth part 
of the oil of vitriol. Wet a plug of lint in the solution, and 
place it in the nostril from whence the blood comes. Leave it 
there for two days. 


Rags steeped in this liquor stay blood from all parts of the 
body equally. 


QUINSY. 207 


9. Heemoptysis attacks subjects of warm but weak tempera- 
ment—subjects whose lungs are weak, young men rather than 
old ; and it attacks them most between spring and summer. It 
has most of the characters of the last-named hemorrhage. Both 
are fevers, and both throw off their name and essence under 
the influence of the crisis by which they are resolved. The 
chief difference lies in the difference of the parts to which the 
blood is determined. In the former disease, they are the nos- 
trils; in the latter, the lungs. In the one case, the head is 
the seat of the pain; the lungs suffer in the other. Heat and 
pain characterise the bleeding from the nose; weakness of the 
chest attends the pulmonary hemorrhage. The method is nearly 
the same in both cases, except that the lung-affection admits 
of less purging than the other, since hyper-catharsis may throw 
the patient into a decline. Instead of this, however, we may 
bleed frequently, may throw up daily injections, may prescribe 
an opiate at bedtime, and may support the patient by means of 
an inspissating and refrigerant regimen, both in regard to his 
medicine and his diet. 

10. And this is what I have, up to this time, observed 
concerning that numerous tribe of diseases, which, falling into 
many families, is called fever. These are my observations upon 
fever and its symptoms. In stating them I have seriously 
been on the guard against any imaginations of my own. I 
have dealt in no fancies. In a candid and sincere spirit, in a 
spirit free and unrestrained by hypotheses, have I published their 
natural history and their symptoms; and, if I have added their 
treatment, I have added it in a similar spirit of good faith and 
caution. And if the ardent desire of first discovering and then 
establishing some methods of protecting human life, more cer- 
tain and less unsteady than the methods hitherto applied, shall 
have drawn me forward into fresh paths, and into paths that 
none before have trodden, I hope and trust that men of true 
learning will impute to me neither the contempt for the better 
judgments of other men, nor the love of new fashions in prac- 
tice. I take great courage from the results that have, as yet, 
confirmed my investigations; and I trust to posterity as a wit- 
ness for the future. 

A murderous array of disease has to be fought against, 
and the battle is not a battle for the sluggard. Day by day 


268 MEDICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


is there the combat against the life of man, and there is neither 
truce nor quarter. Many die by violent deaths; but, with the 
exception of these, two thirds of our race die of fevers. Con- 
tinuous attacks, and daily victories over strong men in the 
flower of their age, on the part of the disease ; inefficient re- 
sistance, and specious, though confident, speculation on the 
part of the physician—these it was that dissatisfied my reflec- 
tions, and showed me the worthlessness of the vain crotchets 
of fanciful men, when the question was a question of lost health 
seeking restoration ; and when, in the face of the promises of 
braggart dogmatists, those patients who had recourse to such 
assistance, fared neither better nor worse than if the resources 
of art had been neglected altogether, and their trust had been 
put in Nature alone. 

Now, if I shall have done anything towards diminishing 
the risk, or even towards lightening the difficulties which occur 
in the treatment of these diseases-—and I allow myself to hope 
that something has so been done—I have gained the object that 
I had in view. My hard labours are rewarded by the good that 
l have done my neighbour. 

These are—there or thereabouts—the chief points which I 
have made good concerning the fevers, and the symptoms that 
arise out of them, up to the present date, 1. e. December 30, 
1675: at any rate, they are the chief points that I have been 
able to reduce to any method. 


Ao£a ro ev vpiorore OEQu. 


APPENDICES. 


In the editions of 1666 and 1668 there are several passages which 
are omitted in the improved edition of 1685. These are given with 
great care in Dr. Greenhill’s Latin text. Sometimes the propositions 
contained in such passages are merely verbal, whilst sometimes they 
have a value as illustrations of the history of Sydenham’s opinions. 
Where they are of this latter character, they will be found translated, 
more or less closely, and more or less fully, in the following Appendices. 
For the more minute purposes of bibliography, reference to the original 
text 1s necessary. i: 


APPENDIX À. 


Section I, Chapter IV, $ 40; pp. 56 and 65 of Dr. Greenhill’s edition.— 
« What I have hitherto laid down in the way of therapeutic admonitions, 
are more especially adapted to that species of fever which is more 
especially general and familiar. Besides this, there are other species 
mutually differing from each “other, with various points of difference 
generated by the irregular constitutions of certain years. To reduce 
these into classes according to the variety of their phenomena, to work 
out their idiopathic characters, to accommodate to each in detail its 
proper method of cure—this is a work requiring much opportunity, a 
work of great difficulty, and the work for whieh the life of a single 
physician might possibly be insufficient; since the accumulation of 
observations must needs be large, and the order of years for the ap- 
pearance of the same epidemics is uncertain. Within my own experi- 
ence, the more remarkable forms of fever, and the forms requiring any 
notable difference of treatment, are two 1n number: one the commoner 
sort, which we have just dealt with; the other the pestilential fever, 
which we shall deal with anon. 

* In my mind the diversities of treatment, which arise from the diver- 
sities of season in different and sometimes even in identical years, are 
just as worthy of notice as the diversities which arise from the different 
temperaments of different patients. I have even thought that among 
the chief reasons for the fluctuations in the treatment of fevers, and 
for the failure of efforts of learned men, this was one, viz. that practi- 
tioners have applied observations grounded upon the successful treat- 
ment of one or more fevers, of this or that season, to all the fevers of 


2/0 APPENDIX A. 


all seasons of all years indifferently. Now this I believe to be just as 
dangerous as it would be dangerous to treat the peculiar temperaments 
of different patients similarly and promiscuously. 

** [n the first place, I must treat upon the various modes of cure which 
apply to the various fevers of various years. Here we must weigh 
steadily the following fact, viz. that, however much we may allow of 
other differences from other causes between fever and fever, their 
chief difference consists in the difference between the subject matter 
to which the febrile commotion is inherent; whilst this difference 
itself coincides with the different diatheses of the blood, according as 
such diatheses are induced by the season of the year. "The febrile 
commotion of a spring fever is the febrile commotion of blood in 
its full freshness ; that of an autumn fever, the commotion of blood 
in its decline, and of blood impoverished by the heat of the preceding 
season. Now, just as the invasion of a fever is regulated by the 
nearness or distance in time between these two seasons, so does the 
fermentation that it engenders coincide with the fermentation of this 
or that part of the year. Now this agrees with what I have observed 
in practice, viz. that autumnal fevers are more dangerous and of a 
worse character than spring fevers. Autumnal fevers are the fevers of 
an impoverished blood, and for this reason will ill bear evacuations— 
especially in the way of bloodletting. No matter how beneficial such 
evacuations might have been in spring, autumn forbids them. 

** Perhaps this degeneration, originating as it does in poverty of blood, 
and occurring along with autumnal fevers, may give rise to a general 
depravation of the humours at large. This, too, may beget the symptoms 
of ill-conditioned fevers; nay, even ill-conditioned fever itself. Now, 
in such cases, Nature becomes excited to action, exerts herself against 
the disease, and undertakes its elimination by the means of a fresh 
ebullition. Now this ebullition the physician must sustain by cordials, 
rather than depress by evacuations and refrigerants. It is the instru- 
ment of Nature. Be the corruption of the blood what it may, if the 
necessary ebullition cannot be both got up and kept up, the disease will 
be either protracted or deadly. 

«To return to the subject. In autumnal fever, blood must be drawn 
charily ; and in all cases where the patient is either below the age of 
adolescence or beyond the heyday of life, not at all. Except in cases 
of excessive heat or robust youth, refrigerants are dangerous; whilst 
vomiting (especially if there have been nausea) is necessary. 

* [n spring fevers, blood may always be drawn, and, with young sub- 
jects, freely. Clysters and refrigerants, too, are very useful in all cases 
where the patient is young, the fever obstinate, and the previous vene- 
section has not been over frequent. Hard bellies and swollen feet have 
never been observed by me as the sequelee of spring fever, whether con- 
tinued or intermittent. Both, however, are common with autumnal 
ones ; and more particularly where blood has been overdrawn, or where 
the patient has been too young or too old. The swelling of children is 
generally that of the belly. With adults it is the feet that swell first. 
‘Then, as the case may be, the belly follows, and dropsy sets in. 

“Proceeding from the difference between fever so determined by the 


APPENDIX A. 2/1 


difference of years, and the difference of treatment as determined by 
the difference of the fever, we come to the causes of such differences. 
Now these cannot be laid down. A year may be epidemic, not only in 
respect to plagues, but also 1n respect to fevers of only ordinary ma- 
lignity ; the reasons being referable to neither depraved aliments nor 
putrescent exhalations of the lower atmosphere, nor yet to inordinate 
and unequal changes from hot to cold, or from cold to hot. In such 
cases, we must confess our ignorance, and admit only a blind, inex- 
plicable, and malignant constitution of the atmosphere. 

** Now, just as we have no principles by which we can explain the dif- 
ference between the fevers of different years, so we have no means of 
judging from the healthiness or unhealthiness of a past season as to 
the healthiness or unhealthiness of a coming one. The winters of 1662 
and of 1663 differed from each other, in the fact of the one being ex- 
traordinarily mild, and the other being wonderfully cold. Yet each 
followed a mild autumn, preceded by a mild summer. 

** From my own practice, I know of only two observations by which 
we can, during the current summer, prognosticate the healthiness or 
unhealthiness of the autumn that is to follow — of the healthiness or 
unhealthiness 1n respect to fevers. 

“Tf fevers, continued or intermittent, appear unnaturally early, the 
season that follows will be exceedingly favorable to the development of 
epidemics. By early I mean on or before Midsummer-day. If the 
fever be of the quartan kind (1. e. of the kind which is the true blood 
of autumn), this will be the case all the more. In 1661, when, over 
and above the continued fevers, malignant tertians took off whole 
families, a female neighbour of my own was taken with her first 
quartan ague-fit on the 24th of June. Many more were similarly and 
prematurely attacked by the same fevers, that afterwards prevailed so 
epidemically; a proof that, in the temperature of the atmosphere of 
that time, there were the preliminaries of the diseases that set in so 
thickly the year after. 

“T have remarked that, if swarms of insects, especially house- 
flies, were abundant in the summer, the succeeding autumn was un- 
healthy. This I observed to be the case during the whole summer of 
the aforesaid year (1661) ; whilst in the summers of the two following 
years, which were very healthy, the insects were very few. Still I must 
remark, that at the approach of even so severe a disease as the plague 
itself, they were not observed to be very abundant. 

*«* With these two exceptions, I have observed that all prognostics are 
fallacious, so that the foreknowledge of the character of a coming 
epidemic constitution is very difficult, and not marked by any con- 
spicuous signs. 

** Nor is it less difficult to propose any certain and determinate prin- 
ciple of treatment, which shall accurately answer to the difference of 
fevers dependent upon the different temperament of the year, than it is, 
as aforesaid, to explain the causes of the annual differences themselves; 
or even to predict, by means of any previous prognostic, the difference 
between this year or that in the matter of healthiness or unhealthiness. 
However, I shall not think it too much trouble to explain, in a few 


272 APPENDIX A. 


words, those things which have presented themselves to my attentive 
observation. 

“In such autumnal fevers, as occur at an over-early period, under a 
constitution particularly epidemic (i. e. in quartans or malignant tertians 
that show themselves as soon as Midsummer-day), bleeding is dangerous. 
The autumn of the year aforesaid proved this. Unless the patient were 
of an age and vigour to bear it easily, bleeding did mischief, especially 
at the beginning of the season. It might not indeed cause death ; but 
it did cause a protraction of the distemper. Other evacuations were 
not equally dangerous ; emetics, in particular, being useful then, as they 
were useful in other similarly malignant constitutions. All which has 
taught me the importance of the physician being ready and willing to 
adapt himself to the very varied circumstances of a very changing scene. 
I allow myself, however, to add that, in the way of a-general method of 
treatment, what has preceded is of sufficient scope and latitude—not- 
withstanding the extent to which changes of years and season forbid 
the exhibition of over-stringent rules 


* Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.’ 


The best that can be done, when a fever first sets in, is to observe the 
character of its access, and the juvantia and ledentza in the way of treat- 
ment. Dothis, and I think that the aforesaid method will not be found 
far from the mark. In my own hands there has been but little devi- 
ation from it, at least in such fevers as 1t best suits; 1. e. 1n fevers 
where a due fermentation is Nature's best instrument, and wherein such 
due fermentation, in order to expel the latent peccant matters, must 
duly be kept up.” 


Section I, Chap. V, $ 29.— The substance of a statement contained in 
the editions of 1666 and 1668, and not occurring in the edition of 1685, 
will be found in that portion of the Life of Sydenham which contains 
the account of the use of cinchona bark in intermittents. See p. 80 of 
Dr. Greenhill’s edition. 


APPENDIX B. 273 


APPENDIX B. 


Section III, Chap. II, § 33. In the editions of 1666 and 1668.—* I 
have no hesitation in saying, that from this source originates a whole 
catalogue of ills. The ebullition at the beginning of the disease sets in 
with violence; and the nurses are over-handy with their cordials, with 
Gascoigne’s powder, diascordium, and the like. With these they hope 
(God willing) to expel the smallpox at once, and to remove the poison 
from the heart. They use with equal hardihood another remedy, of great 
fame, and (as they think) safe—I mean posset, with hartshorn and 
marigolds. More mischief is done every year by this heating regimen 
than by any medical treatment, however apparently dangerous, and 
however abhorrent from the principles of reason, meaning thereby their 
own views." (Page 131 of Dr. Greenhill's edition.) 


Section III, Chap. IT, § 36. In the editions of 1666 and 1668.—** In 
the next place, if the effervescence of the blood shall have become so 
sluggish as to give just reason for fearing that it may be incompetent to 
a due separation, we may promote it by cordials. "These are fittest 
under the following conditions: excessive previous depletion, a fat 
plethorie habit, previous disease, present evacuations, present gonor- 
rhoea. In any such cases as these, the secretion will fall short, unless 
held up by cordials. Hence the eruption of pustules will fail, and the 
patient die. I believe, for my own part, that such an upshot is not to 
be referred to any malignity whatever. It is simply the inability of 
the blood to carry out the change and renovation of itself that it has 
taken in hand. Its state is morbid; its position precarious. It can- 
not go back to its first state. It cannot make good its attempt at a new 
one—magnis excidit ausis. I admit, however, that at the very time of 
expulsion, when the secreted matter comes to suppuration, if, from any 
reason, the same be thrown inwards, the recession causes certain death. 
Now this does arise from corruption, viz. the corruption of the secre- 
tion itself." (Page 132 of Dr. Greenhill’s edition.) 


Section III, Chap. II, $ 59.—** If bleeding cannot be resorted to, 
either from hesitation on the part of the physician, or from the youth 
or age of the patient, the heat of the distemper must by no means be 
increased. For this reason, the patient must be as much out of bed as he 
would be when in health, and (weather permitting) there must be no fire 
in the room. Small beer, warm, with a toast in it, oatmeal gruel, 
roasted apples, and the like, must be his meat and drink. Anything 
stronger, even hartshorn posset, I forbid. Thus the ebullition will 
gradually, and spontaneously subside, and the symptoms decrease before 
mischief sets in, provided always, that the blood be but moderately 
exasperated, and tolerant of the respite required." (Dr. Greenhill's 
edition, p. 145.) 

| 18 


274 APPENDIX BD. 


Section IIT, Chap. II. Extracts from the editions of 1666 and 
1668. See Dr. Greenhill’s edition, pp. 149-152.—**Now, as it is usual 
in writing upon fever to touch upon measles and smallpox also, I will 
tread in the steps of my predecessors. I shall, however, include both 
diseases under the head of smallpox, partly for the sake of brevity, 
partly because the treatment is alike. This is the case, notwithstand- 
ing the difference of their nature, a point upon which I shall say 
nothing for the present. 

**T think the smallpox is a disease superinduced upon the blood during 
an attempt at a new status. Human blood is a rich and luxuriant 
liquor containing many rich juices, and remaining unchanged for no 
long time together. Now, once during a lifetime, this liquor throws 
off, like a slough, its native habit and texture, adapts itself for under- 
going so notable a change, and (so to say) puts on a new form. I think 
that I see a reason why blood, not so changed already, changes easily. 
A slight impulse determines it—the effluvia from sick men—even 
as ripe apples ripen the apples that hang next to them. The same 
happens with other bodies, whether their surfaces touch, or whether 
they influence one another from a distance. The case is the same with 
the blood; indeed, the other bodies just mentioned are less prone to 
change than the pre-eminently changeable blood. This principle ac- 
counts for the contagion of smallpox, as well as any doctrine founded 
upon its malignity. Nay, it involves fewer complications than are in- 
volved in the idea of a malignant and poisonous matter, lurking in the 
blood, and expelled from the same. I cannot see how, as it were, in a 
single moment of time, any man’s blood can, by simple contagion, be 
supplied with that large amount of purulent matter that is secreted in 
smallpox. Neither can I understand, upon the notion of malignity, 
how it is that a patient, once affected, can mix with other patients sick 
of the smallpox with impunity. This is not what we see in other 
diseases. Connexion with a diseased female infects with dues those 
who have previously been diseased, and those who have not ; the liability 
being the same on both sides. 

*[ am not ignorant that persons have been attacked twice with small- 
pox. The fact, however, is too rare to affect the general statement, 
that one attack ensures against another. 

** As for theimpurity and foulness of the excreted matters in all forms 
of smallpox (and in autumnal poxes most), it proves no more than 
is proved by the fact of contagion. "The blood, having taken in hand 
a change and renovation, selects a certain amount of particles belong- 
ing to its mass, and these, although pure enough whilst mixed with the 
blood at large, become, by aggregation, and the adoption of a new tex- 
ture, depraved and corrupt, after a depraved and corrupt fashion. This 
is the case of parts of the food taken into the stomach—they undergo 
a change. 

**'The depressions of the pock-marks (autumnal and winter ones more 
especially) prove as little. All ulcers leave deep marks behind them. 

**As a further proof that the true cause of smallpox is no pre-exist- 
ence in the blood of poisonous particles, and no irritation creating the 


APPENDIX B. 2/9 


expulsion of the same, but that it is the effort of the blood to bring 
about a certain change, I adduce the following observation :—I have 
seen persons, not deeply marked, nor yet deformed by the pock-marks, 
but yet changed in the whole character of their features, lineaments, 
and bodily frame. This looks as if the intervention of the smallpox 
had effected that full and perfect renovation which Nature designed. 

“Now as to whether this be the origin of smallpox, or whether it be 
capable of any better explanation, I will not enter into further contro- 
versy. The treatment rests on the following principles : —viz. that there 
is a matter for separation and expulsion, and, unless separation and ex- 
pulsion take place, death takes place instead. 

“If ptyalism supervene, which it often does with grown-up people, 
and after the use of cordials and a hot regimen, our chances improve. 
Previous bad treatment has been made good by this symptom. The 
disease, deflected from its natural outlet, escapes thus. Hence, if we 
keep up the salvation, we may be easier about the pustules. ‘This, 
however, we must bring about in a laudable manner. Beware of 
checking or disturbing it. Abstain from gargles, for gargles have 
checked the spit, and killed the patient. All that I allow him is, that 
he may, if necessary, rinse his mouth with a little warm small beer, 

* As the pustules dry up and fall off, the patient must be "d purged ; 
more especially after an autumnal smallpox. 


3e * * * 


** Let no one blame me for writing thus at large when the two simple 
words do nothing would suffice. I would fain spare myself the trouble 
of a long exposition, were it not that I find my opinion to lie at equal 
distances from the two opinions that have hitherto prevailed among 
men. ‘The first considers bleeding as imperative; and follows up the 
bleeding by such refrigerant medicines as may repress the ebullition of 
the blood. "The other vehemently inculcates the use of a hot and cordial 
regimen, under the notion that such is the guidance of Nature, and that 
such is the proper effort for forcing the malignity of the disease from 
the centre to the circumference of the frame. Now an opinion without 
grounds would have been absurd, whilst the concealment of my senti- 
ments would have been dishonest; since each of the other modes of 
practice has killed enormous quantities of patients." 


276 | APPENDIX C. 


APPENDIX C. 


Section VI, Chap. III, $ 1. In the editions of 1666 and 1668.—**Tam 
aware that it is a received opinion that that kind of continued fever 
which accompanies pleurisy is considered to originate from inflammation 
falling upon the lining membrane of the chest, and the parts of the heart. 
Hence, in respect to the pleurisy, it is a symptom rather than a sub- 
stantive disease. I find no fault with this view. Meanwhile, I also 
believe that the pleurisy itself is sometimes a symptom; and that in 
respect to the original fever by which the patient was first seized, 
anterior to the supervention of the pleurisy. After this, the fever lays 
aside its original character, and becomes converted into a pleurisy ; 
whilst the pleurisy, from the access of fresh inflammation, generates, 
as its accompaniment, a new fever. This goes pari passu, and stands 
or falls with the pleurisy. I believe that, after a due examination, it 
would be a hard matter to find a single instance of that undoubted sign 
of pleurisy, viz. pain in the side, having set in without some fever or 
other, little or much, having preceded it. True as it is that the pain 
occurs, it occurs after the fever, sometimes sooner, sometimes later, — 
but still after the fever. Perhaps, in doing so, I may be humoring my 
own peculiar doctrine ; nevertheless, as far as I may rely on my obser- 
vations, I consider the pleurisy as an accident and a consequent to the 
fever.” (Page 276 of Dr. Greenhill’s edition.) 


END OF VOL. I. 


PRINTED BY C. AND J. ADLARD, 
BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE, LONDON. 


=) 
2T 


EC 
Tee 


A 
nee 
Hes : 


a 
ae Psp 


po 


AN 


ae 

u P" 

n. 
E 


sd. "». 
eh 


tet 


[e t. M iK gi DL 
M » Y D Jy 
DIU 


ay 
b » ? = 
EN 
, " 4 
ae 
J Le 
2 4 
ve — 
* 
, 
E ^ 
WM. og 


id LU M TE — "S L T4 E ? " N 3 
X2 CO. TS Bt SOS ME ee en ee eee ee ee ee ee ee 


ee er ris o Sao Je PY ot 


PLE DOT EEE a 
174110747 404 104 AA i as IA IA LE 


nre nr f ty is UA. 47.4 “Jf r ,F 
d * 


f. 4 
P M 

RIG, 

“4 


ENS 


cy 
“ia 


^ 


CIE 


DEPT 
As 


fea s 
NA Red 


Ace 


211 
uada etat 

D 
na uf. 


AA 


OLE 


28. 


AUN RN 
PACA TL Re 
x Ge 


EX 


262€ 26 ad. 
aC ata a. 
424 47€ 


4d atas 


Bhs 
*, 
B UEM 
dU RU PEERS 


e 
5412 
es 


cr. 


DPCP Voy 
PL 


^ 
RONAN. 


^ 
ae WANS. 


COENEN 
A ANI 
S V 

4 NI PAIN S NON ON 


SEN 


SUN 
MN 


"i b c eom d 
dt A ATI Uie 


Oxo Ld dada oh che 
DUM 


aes 


? 
SP ER 


S 


es 
x 


PURPA WISIN INN NN 
ROWAN AR AAD 


ARORA A 
NUN UN NC AAAS A INIA 


AAI, 


SOCORRO RR ENS AO ORIN, 


ee ans 


RORY 
DE 


I 


S 
CN 


PTS 
Maecen 
P 


RICO 


n 
NL, Oi es 
TX eM d RN 


a a 
de dod 
Seejetes 


ACA DA AN A 


39 ANÁN, 


£56 
a 2 
py 28 
(4 4626 6462€ 


NNNM I 


ee : 
ADU ACE 


CA OCA 


i* 


PUN OIN 
EN teen 


NS y A d 
NON NN 


P. 

a a Cu 
ene 

M I A IC an 


aS atat, 
P peg. 


Pd 
LM 


i 
AINA, 
X 


LARA 


AAR 


ORONO 


DIACAP RRA on 


VS HN ANDA US 
PA ADA ANS VON DA PS B * 
ANAL DS PRIN IN ANN 


Y 


23425 
6942€ hae 


WOK SA HA ACA PAN A AN AC 


Se 


VINCI PN AUN EN AAD ABRAAR RA C C NOAA 


aa ues $ $452 
aS aC AS ao. < P 2 SP 
e ietet cc ade el natae. rays 


€ 
4 


TON ON JN 


PP 
$2 


teed 
CSc 


AN UN AN A 
VIN y CON P 


a date each 
$ Tea 
eei eara » e) t. A AS Caf 
» 
D E Sats 
BE ELEC EERE EE 


KAA KR AAAA 
CAS 


t a 
dede dede edd 
dae eee a Ide tuo ut aa 
2 PASSES 42644754 
» 


(a. S Cota e a ese eate 


Os 
NII AAS 


NOON 
PON 
A 


CLINIC AN EN 


P Cy 
died inde 


o 


Te £v s PS PS PR NN 


A 
SE 


dede 


Tre 


A 
x 


LS, 4» d NMR 
A ALAVA 


Nr e 
AVI 
XA IN 


fn 
STE AA 


2. 
asy 
UR eri a 


E 


Py ce d deck 
OOO e CIS IN P 


be P n ot 
e Ay S IN AS 


SORTA EIA 8 P as 


RAIA 
RRRARRARA BARA IS 


AAA 


VES Pe PN PN 


OR I I^ AN 
LAS IAN P s s 


» 
A 
z 
< 
< 


Te IO s SS 
NX PSI Pea 
NGA IN S 


MORS 
X as Ze de s 
YO. 


eee 
20524 
2*4 


ce 


SE 
aaa 


PEOR 

x 

SOR S 

í RAN ES FN S 
XN EIN 


NUN 


ON 


os 


LEO 
NI. 


CS 


pd 


D 
CPI SP 


Ps 


OS ANUS 
MUNDUS 


Ü 


un 
[3 " 


" 

or 

Ay 
e 


AX a Ke Le d e S 2 


OR e a A a ede I 


Ade 
wee 
di d 
^ 
CY ZA 
CAS ASA 
s ENT Iv T a S a di 
A I x 


"c 
MIT 
Cete 


AL 
an 


d e d. a 


Ss 
« Eos) 
DOE 
Seseess 


Lay sy S 


i^ dy d 
a. 
A 


A d ATA AC 


UN SES et 
NT REedeITS 
QC IRIS 


27 
AA 


aes 


RA ES IS BL 
MS KS P Hs Pei 
* 

A 


PE SIADASTMN SE IECIT Mn 


247 
QR 


^ 
KES 
M A ACA 


A AS s 
ALI td 


Y 
TN 
Ke wA 


MINIS 


ek 
V oru drap 
pr e dr 
4 
ay, 
re 
Py dc d S Oy A 
^ 
7 CUR 
NOST 
st A 


4 


PALA Sd 


EATS, 


MW ot are 
^ 


E 
E dde de 


rr We 
ane 
Worse 
ee 


[j 


(NC, 
d 


4 X 
Ch M uA 


^ 
SP PS 
Gace 


ae 
a e a a 
PD 
£ 
Teh 


"s 
« 
ne 


Is o do d 
PAP SP 


e 


C dC Je. de JA A. d^ Js IV 99 Oe YS 


WS 
SSeS: 

SM 
Nodes Seid 
"E 
X. 
e 


» 


P AA 
af 
PS 


AA Lif hahie 
d La d 
ren 

P 

ee 

Ss al 


st 


D 


4 


TIS 


AG 


"wr 


Ff 
At 
"3 


GOP DATA INS AS PSP 


4 4 4 d 


PP
